The World of Synchrotrons∗

Sameen Ahmed KHAN
12-2-/830/25/2, Alapati Nagar, Mehdipatnam, Hyderabad 500028
http://www.imsc.ernet.in/∼jagan/khan-cv.html
khan@pd.infn.it

Abstract: A summary of results on synchrotron radiation is presented along with notes on its properties and
applications. Quantum aspects are brieﬂy mentioned. Synchrotron radiation facilities are described brieﬂy with a
detailed coverage to the accelerator programmes in India. The relocated and other upcoming synchrotrons are also
described in some detail.

I. INTRODUCTION TO SYNCHROTRON RADIATION

Charged-particles when accelerated radiate electromagnetic energy. This interesting physical phenomenon, now
known by the name synchrotron radiation had its theoretical beginnings a long time ago at the time of classical
electrodynamics. At that time, only the very basic features of this physical phenomenon were studied and expressions
were derived for several quantities such as the total radiation intensity, spectral distribution and angular distribution [1].
These theoretical studies had to wait for about half a century till the development of charged-particle accelerator
technology for a direct observation and experimental veriﬁcation. It was experimentally observed for the ﬁrst time
in 1947 in the 70M eV electron synchrotron and hence the name synchrotron radiation. This observation generated
a renewed interest in synchrotron theory. Synchrotron radiation was an irritant in early electron synchrotrons and
storage rings. But it was soon realized that synchrotron radiation was a very valuable product in itself for research
applications requiring intense and bright sources of light over a wide range of wavelengths. Electrons loose a large
amount of energy in the form of synchrotron radiation putting a limit on the maximum attainable energy in a given
type of accelerator. Let us ﬁrst consider the case of the betatron. The betatron is a cyclic electron accelerator with a
circular orbit of approximately constant radius which provides acceleration through magnetic induction. As the beam
energy rises synchrotron radiation losses rise and begin to compete with the energy gained due to magnetic induction.
In practice, the synchrotron radiation begins to become important at about 100M eV and limits beam energies to
about 300M eV . This challenge of the synchrotron radiation stimulated the development of accelerator technology
and further increased the energy of the accelerated particles.

Here, it would be relevant and interesting to mention the very exceptional case of the charged-particles under
uniform acceleration, i.e., a constant force. This constant force can be produced, for example, by a constant uniform
electrostatic ﬁeld. From the special theory of relativity we know that a particle under a constant force executes
hyperbolic motion. Does a charged-particle under uniform acceleration (hyperbolic motion) radiate? The answer to
this question is not yet completely resolved! This topic is listed as one of the several surprises in theoretical physics
in the compilation due to Peierls [2].

One of the characteristics of the synchrotron radiation is its intensity (energy emitted per unit time). Let us ﬁrst
consider the motion of a charged-particle of rest mass m0 and charge q in a uniform magnetic ﬁeld of strength B with
the simpliﬁcation that there is no component of the velocity along the ﬁeld direction. We further decide to neglect
the changes in the trajectory due to the radiation losses. In such a conﬁguration the particle moves in a circle. The
radius R of this circle is given by the well-known relation

where the total energy E = γm0c2, c is the velocity of light, β = v/c and the relativistic factor γ =

√1−β2 . In 1898
Li´enard derived the expression for the total radiation intensity P for a charged-particle moving in circular motion [3]

1

1
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
8
0
2
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

(1)

(2)

∗In Resonance, 6, No. 11, pp. 77–86 (November 2001).
A monthly Publishon of the Indian Academy of Sciences, http://www.ias.ac.in/resonance/

R = βγ

m0c
qB

=

β
c

E
qB

P =

2
3

q2c
4πǫ0R2 β4

E
m0c2 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

4

1

The radiated power depends on the rest mass of the radiating particle like 1/m4
same total energy E the ratio of the radiated powers is

0. For protons and electrons of the

4

Pp
Pe

=

me
mp (cid:19)

(cid:18)

= 8.80

−14

10

×

(3)

(4)

(5)

Synchrotron radiation is the dominant factor in the design of high energy electron synchrotrons and is an obstacle to
exceeding 100GeV or so in this type of accelerator. Only now synchrotron radiation is becoming a design consideration
for proton synchrotrons.
In the proton case, single-particle motion, to a very good approximation, exempliﬁes a
Hamiltonian system. Particle motion in electron synchrotrons, on the other hand, is inherently dissipative.

II. QUANTUM EFFECTS IN SYNCHROTRON RADIATION

Synchrotron radiation was experimentally observed in a period when there was a very keen interest in analyzing the
quantum corrections to the prescriptions based on the classical theories. The need of such studies also arose from the
desire to achieve higher beam energies with the evolving accelerator technology. A quantum mechanical expression
for the radiation intensity was derived by Schwinger [4] which is:

P Quantum = P Classical

1
(cid:18)

−

55
8√3

ǫ
E

+

· · ·(cid:19)

2 γ3 ¯hc

where the critical energy of the radiated photon ǫ = ¯hωc = 3
R . For an electron the quantum contributions become
eﬀective only at about 104GeV . There have been also studies to assess the eﬀect of spin and the anomalous magnetic
moment on the radiation intensity. These eﬀects are also noticeable only at very high energies. As far as the radiation
intensity is concerned the quantum contributions are of no consequence in any realizable accelerator. However, there
are several other ways by which quantum eﬀects manifest at energies realizable in many of the accelerators. The
quantum radiation ﬂuctuations start having an appreciable eﬀect on the motion of the particles at energies exceeding
Ec = m0c2
which for an electron is about 500M eV [5]. Quantum ﬂuctuations of the radiation have to be
taken into account in the engineering calculations of the particle motion. In passing it is to be noted that the quantum
corrections to the beam optics are related to the powers of the de Broglie wavelength of the charged-particle. Hence
the quantum corrections to the beam optics are more noticeable at lower energies [6]. One practical aplication of the
quantum formalism of charged-particle beam optics would be to get a deeper understanding of the polarized beams.

m0cR
¯h

1/5

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

It has been conﬁrmed that the synchrotron radiation is responsible for the directional orientation of the particle
spin i.e., it leads to radiation self-polarization of the beam. As a result of the quantum ﬂuctuations of the synchrotron
radiation, the particle spin achieves a state whose orientation direction is opposite to that of the magnetic ﬁeld. The
particle beam becomes 92% polarized in a time τ given by

1
τ

=

5√3
8

¯h
m0cR

γ5

q2
4πǫ0m0cR2 .

For many realizable accelerators this time turns out to be about few hours and hence it is possible to observe (and
utilize) radiation self-polarization in numerous storage rings. The radiation self-polarization is currently the only
method of obtaining relativistic beams with an oriented spin. A novel proposal to produce polarized beams using the
proposed spin-splitter devices based on the Stern-Gerlach kicks has been presented recently [7]. Polarized beams are
very essential for many of the experiments in particle physics.

Some of the many important properties of the synchrotron radiation are summarized below:

1. The angular distribution of the synchrotron radiation is very sharply peaked in the direction of the particle’s
velocity vector within an angular width of 1/γ. The radiation is plane-polarized on the plane of the particle’s
orbit, and elliptically-polarized outside this plane.

2. The radiation spans a continuous spectrum. The power spectrum produced by a high energy particle extends

to a critical frequency ωc = 3

2 γ3ωR where the cyclotron frequency ωR = c

R = qB

γm0

2

These results imply that the synchrotron radiation is extremely intense over a broad range of wavelengths from
the infrared through the visible and ultraviolet range and into the vacuum ultraviolet and soft and hard X-rays parts
of the electromagnetic spectrum. The high intensity over a very broad spectrum range and certain other properties
(including, collimation, polarization, pulsed-time structure, partial coherence, high-vacuum environment, ...) make
synchrotron radiation a very powerful tool for a variety of applications in basic and applied research and technology.
It is particularly important in those parts of the electromagnetic spectrum where laser sources are (presently) not
available such as the vacuum ultraviolet, soft and hard X-rays, parts of the infrared, etc.,. The applications of
the synchrotron light span a wide range of domains in fundamental science (chemistry, physics, biology, molecular
medicine, etc.,) applied research (materials science, medical imaging, pharmaceutical R & D, advanced radiology,
etc.,) and industrial technology (micro-fabrication, micro-analysis, photo-chemistry, etc.,).

III. NUMERICAL ESTIMATES

Using Equation (2) let us estimate the energy radiated by a single particle in one revolution. The time, T of one

revolution is 2πR/βc and the energy

lost is

(6)

(7)

(8)

E

≫

E

= P
1
3

=

T
×
q2
ǫ0R

β3γ4 .

≈

γ =

1
β (cid:20)

3m0c2 ǫ0R
q2 (cid:21)

1
3

.

Ke = 20R
Kp = 5

×

1
3 GeV ,
1
105R
3 GeV ,

The maximum energy a particle can loose by radiation is all its kinetic energy, K = (γ
only at ultrarelativistic energies (γ

1). The required γ is found by equating

1 and β

1)m0c2. This can happen
to K. Then one gets

−
E

In the particular cases of an electron and a proton one gets

where R is in meters. In any realizable accelerator R is about several km which limits the energy to several 100’s
GeV for an electron-synchrotron and to about a thousand T eV for a proton-synchrotron. So one needs to explore
other types of machines. For high-energy e+e− colliders, linear accelerators become a very attractive option. This
is why all p¯p colliders are circular and all future high-energy e+e− colliders will likely be linear. In the high-energy
machines several megawatts of power is dissipated in the form of synchrotron radiation around the ring. This power
loss is comparable to the power requirements of a small town.

IV. SYNCHROTRON FACILITIES

A synchrotron radiation facility is based on the technology of charged-particle accelerators. Bunches of charged-
particles (usually, electrons) are made to circulate for several hours inside a ring-shaped, long tube under high vacuum.
These rings have several beam lines with experimental stations and serve several sets of users simultaneously. Contrary
to the expectation there are not very many synchrotron facilities to meet the huge demands of numerous users. This
is due to the high costs (about a hundred million US $) and the required optimum technological expertise. Currently,
around the world there are about ﬁfty storage rings in operation as synchrotron radiation sources, located in twenty-
three countries. About a dozen are under construction and another dozen or so are being planned. In Asia there are
about twenty synchrotrons laboratories in nine countries: Armenia, China, India, Japan, Jordan, Korea, Singapore,
Taiwan and Thailand. This small list leaves out not only many countries but the regions (such as the Continents of
Africa and Australia) without a single synchrotron facility. India has the expertise and the experience of indigenously
building two synchrotrons at the Centre of Advanced Technology (CAT) in Indore. Indus-I is a 450M eV synchrotron
and Indus-II is a very energetic 2.0GeV synchrotron.

Storage rings are very ﬂexible devices. By reusing most of the major components their performance can be upgraded
at an incremental cost that is small as compared with the cost of construction of a new synchrotron. In recent years
this ﬂexibility is being innovatively exploited to relocate the very generously donated synchrotrons to those locations
which are under-represented in the World Synchrotron Map [8].

3

V. THE MOST POWERFUL SYNCHROTRONS

The 8.0GeV SPring-8 synchrotron is the largest synchrotron radiation source in the world and was completed
in 1997 in Hyogo prefecture of Japan. Japan is one of the leading countries along with the United States and the
European Union in accelerator-based science research. The SPring-8 belongs to the category of hard X-rays machines,
along with the 7.0GeV Advanced Photon Source (APS) in Argonne, USA and the 6.0GeV European Synchrotron
Radiation Facility (ESRF) in Grenoble, France. Owing to their extremely high energy these synchrotrons have their
speciﬁc problems, and have forced the development of new techniques and new devices in the ﬁeld of optics and
detectors to ensure the required high stability of the electron beam. In view of the very unique challenges arising due
to the very high energy the three most powerful synchrotron laboratories have signed a Framework of Agreement for
Collaboration [9].

VI. ACCELERATOR PROGRAMMES IN INDIA

The accelerator programmes in India have a very long history.

It had an early beginning in 1940 when Prof.
Meghnad Saha developed a 37inch cyclotron at the Calcutta based Institute of Nuclear Physics, which is now called
Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics (SINP). In 1950, a 1.0M eV cyclotron was commissioned at the Tata Institute
In 1960, a 5.5M eV Van-de-Graﬀ accelerator was installed at the
of Fundamental Research (TIFR) in Mumbai.
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) in Mumbai. In 1978, an indigenously designed and built 224cm diameter
Variable Energy Cyclotron was made operational at the Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre (VECC) in Calcutta.
Now, there are several Pelletrons such as the 6.0M eV Pelletron at the Institute of Physics (IOP) in Bhubaneshwar
and the 14.0M eV Pelletron at TIFR. The Nuclear Science Centre (NSC) in New Delhi has a very energetic 150M eV
Pelletron, which can accelerate very heavy ions to high energies. Very recently a beam of the radioactive isotope
beryllium-7 was produced at the NSC. This marks India’s entry into an elite group of nations which are doing
research with radioactive-ion beams [10]. India has the expertise and the experience of indigenously building the two
synchrotrons at the Centre of Advanced Technology (CAT) in Indore. Indus-I is a 450M eV machine and Indus-II
is a very energetic 2.0GeV machine [11].

VII. ACCELERATOR MEETINGS IN INDIA

India, one of the very few countries which very regularly holds Accelerator and Beam Physics Meetings. For several
years the Centre for Advanced Technology (CAT) at Indore has been holding a series of Schools on the Physics of
Beams every year in December–January. This series of Schools is funded by the Department of Science and Technology
(DST), with the aim of dissemination more widely in India, knowledge of, and interest in, beam physics. The School
attracts several speakers from the premiere accelerator laboratories around the world. The Schools are very well-
structured with tutorials and a few laboratory experiments. The participants of the School are further attracted to
the Summer Research Programme conducted at CAT (see the very detailed School Reports in Ref. [12]). For over a
decade the IUC-DAEF Calcutta Centre has been holding the tri-annual National Seminars on Physics and Technology
of Particle Accelerators and their Applications. This series of National Seminars known by the acronym PATPAA
provide a forum where all the accelerator physicists and technical personnel can meet and exchange their ideas and
new developments. These PATPAA conferences, conducted once in three three years, attract a large participation
from across the entire nation and some from abroad with enthusiasm and interest [13].

The above Schools are extremely signiﬁcant since, the Accelerator & Beam Physics and associated technologies are
not yet part of the regular university curriculum in most parts of the world! The learning of such an important
interdisciplinary science is done to a very large extent individually and through the very few Schools when and where
available [14]. We need to include accelerator & beam physics in the regular university curriculum. In passing it is to
be noted that, there is yet to be an Accelerator & Beam Physics Association/Society of India. The Japanese
Beam Physics Club [15] and the Particle Accelerator Society of China [16] provide the required Forums in
their respective countries. When created, such an Association/Society will provide the much awaited Forum [14],
strengthening the accelerator & beam physics community nation-wide. This has been the case in various other areas
of Physics, for a very long time. Then, why should accelerator & beam physics continue to make an exception?

4

VIII. THE RELOCATED SYNCHROTRONS

Siam Photon Source: Recently the Japanese donated a 1.0GeV synchrotron to Thailand [17]. Thus, Asia-Paciﬁc
region became the birth-place for the Era of the Relocated Synchrotrons. Located 250km northeast of Bangkok in the
city of Nakhon Ratchasima, the “Siam Photon Source” is Thailand’s ﬁrst synchrotron light facility and is intended
to serve scientists throughout Southeast Asia. The original synchrotron light source, called SORTEC, was located
in Tsukuba Science City, near KEK, Japan’s High Energy Accelerator Research Organization. Thailand’s Ministry
of Science, Technology, and Environment got the machine gratis and is investing about US $ 15 million to move and
upgrade it. This includes the doubling of the circumference to 81m and tailoring the machine to produce narrow
bright beams of soft X-rays and ultraviolet radiation. Scientists from the KEK have helped in the redesign and are
training the scientists from Thailand to operate their new facility. Professor Tokehiko Ishii, the retired Director of the
Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory at University of Tokyo is the key ﬁgure in orchestrating the donation. He is also
overseeing the technical and scientiﬁc aspects of the transfer and upgrading of the synchrotron. The plan is to use the
Siam Photon Source for physics and chemistry research, with some industrial research in semiconductors, medicine,
pharmaceuticals, and agriculture. Siam Photon Source is scheduled to go on-line in 2001 [18].

SESAME: Jordan is the ﬁrst country from the Middle East to join the elite group of countries possessing a syn-
chrotron light source [19]. This became possible as Germany decided to generously gift the BESSY-I, a 800M eV
synchrotron, fully functioning since 1982 in Berlin, to the region of Middle East. BESSY stands for Berliner
Elektronen-Spiecherring f¨ur Synchrotronstrahlung. BESSY-I is to be replaced by the more powerful BESSY-II, a
1.9GeV synchrotron located in another part of Berlin. Germans are well-known for their environmentally responsible
attitude towards reusing and recycling, and now they have very successfully extended that attitude to the large-scale
research facilities! The idea of donating the BESSY-I Synchrotron came from Herman Winick of the Stanford Linear
Accelerator Center (SLAC) in California, a member of the Machine Advisory Committee of BESSY-II, and the fellow
committee member Gustav-Adolf Voss, a former director of Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron (DESY) in Hamburg,
Germany. The Project is known by the acronym SESAME (Synchrotron-light for Experimental Science and Ap-
plications in the Middle East) [20]. The SESAME Project reached a major milestone with the selection of a site in
Jordan at a Meeting of the SESAME Interim Council in Amman, Jordan during 21-22 June 2000. SESAME will
be the upgraded reincarnation of BESSY-I. The upcoming joint synchrotron radiation facility, which would be the
ﬁrst regional centre for cooperation in basic research in the Middle East will also serve as a seed for an International
Centre built around the facility. SESAME will be located at the Al-Balqa’ Applied University in Al-Salt and will be
open to scientists from any country in the region or elsewhere. Because of this openness, organizers see its potential
as not only a world-class research centre, but also as a politically important example of scientiﬁc cooperation in the
region. Such a centre has been long overdue and it shall be the ﬁrst of its kind in the region. The Centre will be
operated and supported by its eleven member countries (Armenia, Cyprus, Egypt, Greece, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Mo-
rocco, Oman, Palestine and Turkey) with support from countries including, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia,
Sweden, Switzerland and USA. Other countries which have expressed an interest to join this new fount of science
It is hoped that the new centre
and medium of international cooperation include, Bahrain, Tunisia and Yemen.
will be able to mirror the CERN in stimulating regional research collaboration. Very much like CERN, SESAME is
under the very valuable political umbrella of UNESCO and is expected to promote science and foster international
cooperation [21]. A broad-spectrum of planned research programmes include, structural molecular biology, molecular
environmental science, surface and interface science, micro-electromechanical devices, X-ray imaging, archaeologi-
cal microanalysis, materials characterization, and medical applications. A detailed account of events leading to the
SESAME are available in [22,23].

DELSY: A Dutch accelerator and storage ring used for nuclear physics is being moved to Dubna, to add to Russia’s
Synchrotron capability [24]. The original facility, was located at the Institute of Nuclear Physics and High Energy
Physics (NIKHEF) in Amsterdam, The Netherlands. This shall be the 1.2GeV “Dubna Synchrotron Radiation Source
(DELSY)”, located at the Joint Institute of Nuclear Research (JINR) in Dubna.

IX. ASIAN COMMITTEE FOR FUTURE ACCELERATORS

The pace of development and the increasing role of accelerator-based science in Asia has led to the establishment of
a forum, the Asian Committee for Future Accelerators (ACFA), to discuss and implement plans for further promoting
collaborative accelerator-based science in Asia. The primary purpose of ACFA is to strengthen regional collaboration
in accelerator-based science, to encourage future projects in Asia, and to make recommendations to governments.
This organization was formed in 1996 and its members now include, China, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia,

5

Pakistan, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam. The continent of Australia is also a member [25]. The First
Asian Particle Accelerator Conference (APAC-1998) was held at the Japanese High Energy Accelerator Organization
(KEK) under the auspices of the ACFA, stressing the importance of regional collaboration among Asian regions in
the ﬁeld of accelerator science and technology as well as accelerator-based science. The “Next APAC” is scheduled
to be held during 17-21 September 2001 at Beijing, China [26]. Globally speaking, the International Committee for
Future Accelerators (ICFA) [27], would provide an excellent framework for collaborations and forums. ACFA closely
collaborates with ICFA, a longstanding organization of the world community. It is noteworthy to see how the ICFA
Beam Dynamics Panel has contributed to the accelerator & beam physics. The well-attended and very regularly held
ICFA Beam Dynamics Workshops are one of the proofs of its grand success.

X. CONCLUDING REMARKS

We have brieﬂy discussed the synchrotron radiation and the synchrotron facilities, with a coverage to accelerator
programmes in India. Siam, SESAME and DELSY are very unique facilities as they are being built by relocating
the very generously donated synchrotrons. There are several countries which are in the process of building their
own synchrotrons. Armenia is planning to build the 3.2GeV CANDLE: Center for the Advancement of Natural
Discoveries using Light Emission [28]. There is the proposal to build the 3.0GeV BOOMERANG [29] under the
Australian Synchrotron Research Programme (ASRP) [30]. Spain has the project for a 2.5GeV National Synchrotron
Laboratory (LLS) at Barcelona [31]. The upcoming synchrotron facilities will be able to bridge the gap in several
of the under-represented regions of the World Synchrotron Map [8]. These, when built, will immensely beneﬁt the
scientiﬁc community in the concerned regions by enhancing international cooperation and providing them the latest
technological expertise. Among the upcoming synchrotrons, SESAME is the most international project and oﬀers an
excellent opportunity for participation and active international collaboration. India could have participated and can
still get involved and play a signiﬁcant role [32].

[1] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, Third Edition, (Wiley, New York, 1999).
[2] Rudolf Peierls, Radiation in hyperbolic motion, pp. 160-166, in Surprises in Theoretical Physics, (Princeton University

[3] Handbook of Accelerator Physics and Engineering, Editors, A. W. Chao and M. Tigner, (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1999).
[4] J. Schwinger, The quantum correction in the radiation by energetic accelerated electrons, Proc. Nat. Acad.

Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1979).

Sci., 40, 132-136 (1954).

[5] A. A. Sokolov and I. M. Ternov, Radiation from Relativistic Electrons, (American Institute of Physics, New York, 1986).
[6] R. Jagannathan and S. A. Khan, Quantum theory of the optics of charged particles, Advances in Imaging and
Electron Physics, Editors P. W. Hawkes, B. Kazan and T. Mulvey, (Academic Press, San Diego, 1996) Vol. 97, pp. 257-358
(1996).

[7] M. Conte, A. Penzo and M. Pusterla, Spin splitting due to longitudinal Stern-Gerlach kicks, Il Nuovo Cimento,

A 108, 127-136 (1995).

[8] World Synchrotron Map Website: http://www-ssrl.slac.stanford.edu/sr sources.html
[9] Y. Petroﬀ, Major sources collaborate, Europhysics News, 27 (2), 66-67 (March/April 1996).
[10] Editor, New ion beam for India, AAPPS Bulletin, 10 (2), 47 (December 2000).

(AAPPS: Association of Asia Paciﬁc Physical Societies).

[11] CAT Websites: http://www.cat.gov.in/ and http://www.cat.ernet.in/
[12] Srinivas Krishnagopal, The School on the Physics of Beams, ICFA Beam Dynamics Newsletter, 13, 54 (April 1997);
ICFA Beam Dynamics Newsletter, 19, 13-54 (April 1999); ICFA Beam Dynamics Newsletter, 21, 104-105 (April 2000).
(ICFA: International Committee for Future Accelerators).
Synchrotron Radiation News, (1997).

[13] Proceedings of the 4th National Seminar on Physics and Technology of Particle Accelerators and their Applications, (Nov.

26–29, 1996, Calcutta), Editor S. N. Chintalapudi (IUC-DAEF, Kolkata (Calcutta)).

[14] Sameen Ahmed Khan, Call for creation of accelerator & beam physics forums, ICFA Beam Dynamics Newsletter,

17, 5-6 (August 1998).

[15] Hiromi Okamoto, The Japanese beam physics club and its recent activities, ICFA Beam Dynamics Newsletter,

12, 10-12 (December 1996); JBPC Website: http://www-acc-theory.kek.jp/BP/BPclub.html

6

[16] Zhang Chuang, Particle accelerator society of China, ICFA Beam Dynamics Newsletter, 12, 12 (December 1996).
[17] Toni Feder, Thailand recycles Japanese synchrotron light source, Physics Today, 52, 55 (August 1999); AAPPS

Bulletin, 9, 44-45 (December 1999).

[18] Siam Website: http://nsrc.sut.ac.th/
[19] Heather McCabe, Jordan chosen to open SESAME, Nature, 406, 221 (20 July 2000).
[20] SESAME Website: http://www.sesame.org.jo/ and BESSY Website: http://www.bessy.de/
[21] Herwig Schopper, SESAME: a mini CERN for the Middle East, CERN Courier, 40, 17-18 (March 2000).
[22] Sameen Ahmed Khan, Jordan to host Middle East synchrotron, ICFA Beam Dynamics Newsletter, 22, 6-7 (August

[23] Sameen Ahmed Khan, SESAME: The ﬁrst synchrotron facility in the Middle East, AAPPS Bulletin, 10 (2),

2000).

pp. 36-39 (December 2000).

[24] Oliver Morton, Finding a new home for BESSY in the Middle East, Science, 284, 2077-2099 (25 June 1999)..
[25] ACFA Websites: http://www.acfa-forum.net/acfa/ and http://ccwww.kek.jp/acfa/index.html
[26] APAC-2001 Website: http://apac01.ihep.ac.cn/
[27] ICFA Website: http://www-acc-theory.kek.jp/ICFA/icfa.html
[28] CANDLE Website: http://www.candle.am/
[29] BOOMERANG Website: http://ansto.gov.au/natfac/boomerang.html
[30] J. W. White, A Synchrotron for Australia?, ICFA Beam Dynamics Newsletter, 22, 10-11 (August 2000).
[31] LLS Website: http://www.lls.ifae.es/
[32] Sameen Ahmed Khan, The Middle East Synchrotron Laboratory and India, Current Science, 80 (2), pp. 130-132

(25 January 2001).

7

