2
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
7
0
5
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

EFFECT OF DENSITY CORRELATIONS ON
THE COHERENCY OF RELATIVISTIC
BUNCH RADIATION

Report at NATO Workshop Nor-Hamberd, Yerevan, Armenia, 25-29 June, Ed. by H. Wiedemann,

R. V. Tumanian ∗, L. A. Gevorgian , Yerevan Ph

July 18, 2011

Abstract

The coherent radiation of the electron beam with account of particle
position correlations because of strong Coulomb interaction is considered.
For the ﬁrst time it is shown that the coherency of the radiation of the
bunch with account of correlations depend on the mean inter particle
distance (mean density of the bunch). The conditions of coherency are
found. The inﬂuence of deviations from mean distance on the radiation
coherency is considered.

1

Introduction

In recent years very high density or small size bunches become to possible to
obtain [1, 2]. It is clear that in such dense bunches the self space charge forces
of the bunch particles (electrons) play signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the bunch pa-
rameters and particles motion. However, in this paper we investigate the useful
eﬀects of the space charge instead of deleterious eﬀects of that. In the last two
decades very important experimental [9, 10] and theoretical [?] results have been
achieved in investigations of the ordered or crystalline beams. The possibility of
such new and interesting state of matter is become real in the storage rings of
charged particles and as we show below in linear accelerators with high density
beams too. The case of real storage ring lattice was considered in [15], where
it was shown that strong cooling is necessary for attaining crystalline beams in
the storage rings. In diﬀerence from storage rings in the [18]it was shown that
energy spread,sizes and particles motion of the linac’s beams at high energies
are not sensitive to longitudinal space charge eﬀects for existing beam currents.

∗raphael@star.yerphi.am

1

The crystalline or ordered beam have of course many interesting and important
properties and applications. A few properties and one very important appli-
cation is considered in this paper. It is clear that particles of dense bunches
may be arranged in the certain orders. In these ordered bunches particles form
transverse planes, which are same spacing in the longitudinal direction. The
conditions and properties of such ordering are considered in the next section
of this paper. Such bunches are radiate coherently at the wavelengths integer
times smaller than interplane distances, as shown in section 3 of this report.
The importance of tunable and powerful sources of the coherent radiation of
XUV wavelengths has stipulated several projects of FEL in recent years [1, 2].
Those FEL’s operate in the Self Ampliﬁed Spontaneous Emission (SASE) mode,
i.e. starting from noise in the initial distribution of the electron beam longitu-
dinal density. This evolution determines the undulator length needed to reach
saturation practically to be very long (about hundred meters). The necessary
power of laser radiation is possible to obtain by using ordered bunches. This
radiation calls superradiant regime of FEL radiation [?] or coherent spontaneous
emission (CSE). As shown in above references it is possible in two cases. First,
for short bunches and second for modulated bunches. The superradiant regime
due to self bunching of the beam in the FEL is considered by Bonifacio [6, 7]. In
diﬀerence from above references where is considered the coherency of long wave-
length radiation (the wavelength much more than mean distance between bunch
electrons), in this report is considered the coherent radiation of the relativistic
bunch when the radiation wavelength is about or less than distance between
particles. In this case it is important the discreteness of beam and correlations
between beam particles positions, because of strong Coulomb interaction of the
beam particles.

2 Correlations and Ordering of the Relativistic

Bunches

2.1 Introduction

The requirement of bunch uniformity assumes, that electrons of the bunch with
1/3 from each other.
density n are placed on the same mean distance a = n−
Such a placement is possible only when each three of particles compose equilat-
eral triangle as a result of strong correlation between particles positions. This is
connected with approximately hexagonal structure of the disordered medium [8]
as the most probable. Each particle in a such medium have 14 nearest neighbors,
but numerical calculations show that the mean number of nearest neighbors is
about 15 with mean deviation about 10 percents. For medium with the long
distance interparticle interaction such as beam or bunch the vertices of triangles
are equilibrium points of the particle positions. Particles which are not placed
in their equilibrium points oscillate as shown below around their equilibrium

2

positions with amplitudes equal to deviations from equilibrium points. It is well
known that properties of any medium depend on Madelung energy - dimension-
less parameter Γ, which is the ratio of the depth of the interparticle potential
well and medium temperature. For neutral and one component plasma (OCP)
due to the Debay screening interparticle potential is about bare two particle
Coulomb potential e2/a [14]. The numerical Molecular Dynamics (MD) cal-
culations show that for Γ ≥ 172 OCP is crystallize with body centered cube
(bcc) lattice [13]. Detailed MD calculations [11] for ﬁnite full charged Coulomb
systems with number of particles about thousand was show that in this case
crystallization takes place at low values of Γ, but this result has not been ex-
plained theoretically yet. We show in this report that for Coulomb systems of
high energy charges the potential well of each particle is for about Nt (number
of particles in the one transverse plane of the bunch) times deeper than that
of the bare two particle Coulomb potential. In contrast to crystalline beams
in the storage rings, where strong cooling is necessary for attaining crystalline
state [15], as shown in the [18] a such beam optics may be designed that energy
spread, particle dynamics and sizes of the bunch in the Final Focus of the linac
are sensitive to longitudinal space charge eﬀects only for bunches with N (cid:23) 1011.
Calculations show that the beam of the SLAC in the Final Focus have Γ for
about a few hundreds that means that bunch may be crystallized. Note, that
in this case resonances with betatron oscillations are not important because of
longitudinal ordering of the bunch and disordering in the transverse directions.
Classical consideration is valid, when ¯hΩ ≪ T = mc2δ2, with δ = ∆E
E relative
energy spread.This condition is equal to ε = λc√Γ
aδγ3/2 ≪ 1, which is satisﬁed for
γ ∼ 104. In this case bunch become longitudinal ordered as considered in the
section 2.3. When the condition ε ≤ 1 satisﬁed the quantum eﬀects should be
taken in the account and results of the [16, 17] can be used for bunch electrons
correlation function. This case is considered in the section 2.2.

2.2 Correlations of the Strong Interacting Charges En-

sembles

The statistical properties of N particle ensemble are described by N-particle dis-
tribution function fN , which is depend generally on positions and momentums
of all N particles of the ensemble. As seen below for calculating of the radiation
coherency the two particle distribution function

f2 =

Z

dN

−

2xdN

2pfN

−

, or the correlation function is necessary

f2 = g2(x1, x2) + f1(x1)f1(x2)

. Charges in the bunches are strong correlated because of strong Coulomb in-
teraction. As considered above, quantum eﬀects should be taken into account,

3

when ε do not much less than unity. In this case we can use the density corre-
lation functions obtained in the [16, 17] for strong correlated electrons

h̺(x)̺(0)i ≈ cos(2π

)exp[−b

ln(x)]

x
a

where b = ε
Γ , m is eﬀective mass,in the units ¯h = 1.It is clear that b ≪ 1
and one can obtain from this correlation function the approximate two particle
distribution function

g2(x1, x2) = (1 + cos 2π

)/l

where l is the bunch length.This is true in the liquid or partially ordered state of
the bunch. Such state is possible to obtain at energies of the electrons for about
tens Mev, if the bunch have energy spread for about percents and number of
particles about 1010, which is about ten times greater than that in SUNSHINE
[19]

p

x
a

2.3 Ordering of the Charges in the Relativistic Bunch

After expanding of the full force between particles with charge e and ﬁxed
distance R moving along longitudinal z direction with velocity v = βc and angle
θ between R and z directions,

around equilibrium points of the bcc lattice,one can ﬁnd that potential wells in
the longitudinal and transverse directions are

Fz =

e2
R2

(1 − β2)cosθ
(1 − β2(sinθ)2)3/2
(1 − β2)sinθ
e2
R2
(1 − β2sin2θ)3/2

=

F

⊥

= U0

= U0

U0
k

U

⊥

Nt
4γ2 Sl
γ
al
St
4
at

, Sl =

, St =

1
n3

X

X

n1
1 + n2

2)2

(n2

where U0 = e2/a is the bare Coulomb potential,Nt is the number of particles
on each transverse plane.The sum in the Sl is carrying out over number of trans-
verse planes (n3 denotes the plane number),and the sum in the St over n1, n2
which numerate particles in x, y directions respectively on the each plane.Here is
assumed that self space charge forces of the bunch are compensated by external
restoring forces [11, 12]. In this case particles oscillate in the potential

Such deepening of the potential well in the bunches in comparison with known
potential well in the OCP means that crystallization or ordering of bunch is

Uz = U0
k

z2
a2

4

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

possible at comparable higher temperatures than of OCP. This we proof by
consideration of the canonical partition function of the Gibb’s canonical ensem-
ble with hamiltonian HN and inverse temperature in energy units β = 1/kT :

QN (Ω, β) =

drN dpN exp(−βHN (rN , pN ; Ω))

(8)

1
h3N N ! Z

for a system of N charges enclosed in a volume Ω; here h is Planck’s constant. In
the approach used by us hamiltonian HN of N relativistic charges is represented
in the usual classical form as a sum of kynetic EN and potential UN energies
HN = EN + UN . Total potential energy UN equal to the sum of one particle
potentials 7.
In this approach the usual Helmholtz free energy FN (Ω, β) as
thermodynamic potential

QN (Ω, β) = exp(−βFN (Ω, β))

and dimensionless conﬁguration integral

ZN (Ω, β) =

drN
ΩN exp(−βUN (rN , Ω, ))

Z

It is easily seen from this equation that ZN depends on β and on interactions
only through the dimensionless combination U0
β, which is the usual OCP Γ
multiplied by Nt/γ2. So, the Γ for dense enough ensemble of relativistic charges
k
(bunch), can be greater than Γ for OCP. Particle of the bunch in this potential
well is oscillate with frequency

where a is the mean interparticle distance in correspondence direction, m is
the eﬀective mass of bunch particle equal to mγ3 for linacs . This formula is
obtained from equation of particle motion in the longitudinal potential 7

m¨z +

U0
a2 z = 0
k
The case of real storage ring lattice was considered in [15]. If the crystal-
lization time which equal few oscillation periods less than period of betatron
oscillation of the accelerator the bunch becomes ordered. In the harmonic ap-
proach the potential in the longitudinal direction is equal

(12)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(13)

This formula show that the decreasing of the a means increasing of the potential
well. Such decreasing of the interparticle distance take place in the linacs due
to adiabatic decreasing of the bunch sizes or bunch compression. Notice, that

Ω2 =

U
2ma2

U

k

= U0
k

z2
2a2

5

since magnetic compression do not change full energy, the bunch temperature
(mean kinetic energy in the rest frame) must be decreases due to ensemble
full potential energy (which is positive for the ensemble of one sign charges)
increasing because of compression. More detailed analyze show that during
acceleration in the linac Γ is changes in correspondence with dependence

Γ ∼ γ

1/2

1/2

l

Such result is obtained from the assumption of adiabatic changing of the energy
γ and bunch longitudinal size l. This is possible in the case large Ω, which may
be obtained after suﬃcient compression of the bunch.

3 Coherence Radiation of the Bunch

3.1 Introduction

Radiation of the ensemble of N electrons moving along identical trajectories but
with arbitrary spatial placement may be written in the form [3]

I = I0N (1 + (N − 1)F )

(14)

where I0 is the intensity of single electron radiation,N is the number of the
electrons in the bunch,F is the factor of coherency of the bunch and may be
written in the follow form [3]

F =

1
N 2

ei~k ~rj

i~k ~rj

e−

X

X

(15)

The position of the j-th electron ~rj can be written as a sum of transverse and
longitudinal parts ~rj = ~rjtr + zj. For longitudinal waves the transverse part
of the F is equal to N 2
r . This is right because of transverse coherency of the
radiation [3]. Note, that generally this expression must be averaged over all
possible ensembles, or over N-particle distribution function. But as seen from
above formulae for coherency formfactor this one depend on two particle coordi-
nates, so we can use for averaging the two particle distribution function. After
such calculations formfactor in our notation is equal to

where F0 is the usual formfactor [3] and F1 is the additional term due of averag-
ing over correlation function g. This term describe the eﬀect of correlations on
the bunch coherency. For known correlation function formfactor of correlations
can be calculated by averaging of the general formulae by correlation function.

F = F0 + F1,

6

3.2 Coherent Radiation of the Strong Correlated Uniform

Bunch

When the condition of crystallization or full ordering of the bunch is not sat-
isﬁes,but the interparticle interaction is strong enough, the bunch becomes or-
dered with correlation function (1). In more simple notation we can write for
factor b

b =

λc
Γ(γ)3

aδ
where λc-Compton wavelength,δ = ∆E
E -mean energy deviation. It is not dif-
ﬁcult to see, that for physical interesting range of parameters b is less than
λc/a, and much less than unity. Consequently, we can the neglect exponential
dependence in this formula and use (2) for two particle distribution function.
In this approach the longitudinal coherency formfactor is equal

p

F =

N 2
r
N 2

2
sin

N x

x2

(16)

3.3 Coherent Radiation of the Ordered Bunch

Consider now radiation of the ordered bunch. For Nz planes with Nr electrons
on each plane the coherency factor is may be written in the following form

F =

N 2
r
N X

eikj˜a

ikj˜a

e−

X
-means sum over planes in longitudinal direction. It is not diﬃcult to

where
obtain that

P

F =

N 2
r
N

2
sin

Nzx
2
x
sin

and when the value x = ka is approach to nπ (resonance condition) the co-
herency factor or laser gain becomes about N . This consideration is true for
bunch with step function for longitudinal density distribution (for homogeneous
or uniform bunch)

3.4 The Inﬂuence of ﬂuctuations

Now consider the inﬂuence of ﬂuctuations or deviations of the particle positions
from hexagonal model above on the coherence short wave length radiation of
the bunch. Let us assume that particle is on the mean distance, but not in the
z-direction. In this case the particle position is ﬂuctuated on the value aθ2/2,
and if xθ2/4 ≪ 1 we may neglect this ﬂuctuation. Notice, that in important
practical cases this condition is satisﬁed. It is not satisﬁed only for very short
radiation when x ≫ 1. The second source of ﬂuctuations from our model is
possible, when the particle is replaced on the z-direction but not in the distance

7

In this case F multiplied by the factor e−

, where b is the dispersion
a.
of the ﬂuctuation.
It is clear that if b/λ ≪ 1, this ﬂuctuations not disturb
the radiation coherency.Executed numerical calculations show that ﬂuctuations
about ten times smaller than inter particle distance a.

2

2
b

k

4 Conclusions

So, in this paper the inﬂuence of bunch particle position correlations on the
bunch undulator radiation are investigated. Additional term in the radiation
coherency formfactor was found. The correlations in the relativistic charge
bunches are considered and are found the crystallization or ordering conditions
of dense relativistic bunches or beams, which may be satisﬁed much easier than
those for OCP. This very exotic and interesting state of matter can be obtained
at existing linac beams. We show that ordered bunches can radiate coherently
,i.e. much powerful than spontaneous one. In dependence of beam energy and
density this radiation may have wavelength at XUV range also.

References

[1] Pellegrini,C. et. al., Nucl.Inst. and Methods, 341(1994)326

[2] J. Rossbach,Nucl.Instr.and Methods,A 393(1997)86

[3] Korkhmazian,N.A. et.al., Zh.Tekh.Fiz. 47(1977)1583, Gevorgian,L.A., Zhe-

vago,N.K., Sov.Phys.Dokl., 27(1982)946, in Russian

[4] Y.Pinhasi,A.Gover,Nucl.Instr. and Methods, A393(1997)343

[5] A.Gover et. al.,Phys.Rev.Lett.,72(1994)1192

[6] R.Bonifacio,B.W.J.McNeil,P.Pierini, Phys.Rev.A40(1989)4467

[7] R.Bonifacio,C.Maroli,N.Piovella, Optics Comm., 68(1988)369

[8] J.M.Ziman,’Models of disorder’, Cambridge University Press,1979

[9] E.N.Dementiev,N.S.Dikansky,A.S.Medvedko,

V.V.Parkhomchuk
and D.V.Pestrikov, Zh.Tekh.Fiz. 50(1980)1717 [Sov.Phys.Tech.Phys.
25(1980)1001].

[10] A.V.Aleksandrov et al., Europhys.lett. 18(1992)151; M.Steck et al.,Electron
Cooling at ESR, Workshop on Crystalline Beams and Related Issues, Erice,
Sicily, 11-21 nov.1995,eds. D.M. Maletic and A.V.Ruggiero(World Scien-
tiﬁc).

8

[11] J.P.Schiﬀer and P.Kienle, Z.Phys. A321(1985)181; A.Rahman and
J.P.Schiﬀer, Phys.Rev.Lett. 57(1986)1133; J.P.Schiﬀer, Phys.Rev.Lett.
61(1988)1843

[12] A.G.Ruggiero,Proceedings of the PAC93,p.3530

[13] W.L.Slattery,G.D.Dooley, and H.E.deWitt, Phys.rev. A21(1980)2087

[14] S.Ichimaru,H.Iyetomi,and S.Tanaka, Phys.Rep. 149(1987)93

[15] X.-P.Li,A.M.Sessler,and J.Wei, in Proceedings of the EPAC’04, p.1379.

J.Wei,H.Okamoto,and A.M.Sessler, Phys.Rev.Lett., 80(1998)2606.

[16] H.J.Schulz,Phys.Rev.Lett.,71(1992)1864, E-print, cond-mat/9301007,1993.

[17] Q.P.Li and S.D.Sarma, Phys.Rev, B43(1991)11768.

[18] F.Zimmermann and T.O.Raubenheimer, SLAC-PUB-7139, June 1996

[19] Ch. Settakorn, M. Hernandez, K. Woods, and H. Wiedemann, SLAC-PUB-

7813,1998

9

