2
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
0
6
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Nonlinear Motion in Electromagnetic

Fields via Multiscale Expansions

Antonina N. Fedorova, Michael G. Zeitlin

Mathematical Methods in Mechanics Group
Institute of Problems of Mechanical Engineering (IPME RAS)
Russian Academy of Sciences
Russia, 199178, St. Petersburg, V.O., Bolshoj pr., 61
zeitlin@math.ipme.ru, anton@math.ipme.ru
http://www.ipme.ru/zeitlin.html
http://www.ipme.nw.ru/zeitlin.html

Abstract

The consideration of dynamics of relativistic beams/particles is
based on variational approach to rational (in dynamical variables)
approximation for equations of motions. It allows to control con-
tribution from each scale of underlying multiscales and represent
solutions via exact nonlinear eigenmodes expansions. Our ap-
proach is based on methods provided possibility to work with
well-localized bases in phase space and good convergence proper-
ties of the corresponding expansions.

Presented: GAMM Meeting, February, 2001, ETH, Z¨urich

Published: PAMM, Volume 1, Issue 1, pp. 432-433, Wiley-VCH,
2002

2

Fedorova, A.; Zeitlin M.

Nonlinear Motion in Electromagnetic Fields via Multiscale Expansions

The consideration of dynamics of relativistic beams/particles is based on variational approach to rational (in dy-
namical variables) approximation for equations of motions.
It allows to control contribution from each scale of
underlying multiscales and represent solutions via exact nonlinear eigenmodes expansions. Our approach is based on
methods provided possibility to work with well-localized bases in phase space and good convergence properties of the
corresponding expansions.

We consider as the main example the particle motion in storage rings in standard approach based on consideration in
[1]. Starting from Hamiltonian, which describes classical dynamics in storage rings H(~r, ~P , t) = c{π2 + m2
0c2}1/2 + eφ
and using Serret–Frenet parametrization, we have after standard manipulations with truncation of power series
expansion of square root the rational approximation (up to n-poles) for Hamiltonian of orbital motion in machine
coordinates. So, our problems may be formulated as the systems of ordinary diﬀerential equations

Qi(x)

= Pi(x, t),

x = (x1, ..., xn),

i = 1, ..., n, max

deg Pi = p, max

deg Qi = q

(1)

i

i

dxi
dt

with initial (or boundary) conditions xi(0), xi(T ) and Pi, Qi are not more than polynomial functions of dynamical
variables xj and have arbitrary dependence on time. Of course, we consider such Qi(x) which do not lead to the
singular problem with Qi(x), when t = 0 or t = T , i.e. Qi(x(0)), Qi(x(T )) 6= ∞, 0. We’ll consider these equations as
the following operator equation. Let L be an arbitrary nonlinear (rational) matrix diﬀerential operator of the ﬁrst
order with matrix dimension d corresponding to the system of equations (1), which acts on some set of functions
Ψ ≡ Ψ(t) =

t ∈ Ω ⊂ R from L2(Ω):

,

Ψ1(t), . . . , Ψd(t)
(cid:17)
(cid:16)

LΨ ≡ L(R, t)Ψ(t) = 0,

R ≡ R(t, ∂/∂t, Ψ).

Let us consider now the N mode approximation for solution as the following ansatz (in the same way we may consider
diﬀerent ansatzes):

ΨN (t) =

aN
r ψr(t)

N

Xr=1

LN

k ≡

Z

(LΨN )ψk(t)dt = 0

We shall determine the coeﬃcients of expansion from the following variational conditions (diﬀerent related variational
approaches are considered in [1]-[4]):

We have exactly dN algebraical equations for dN unknowns ar. So, variational approach reduced the initial problem
(1) to the problem of solution of functional equations at the ﬁrst stage and some algebraical problems at the second
stage. Here ψk(t) are useful basis functions of some functional space (L2, Lp, Sobolev, etc) corresponding to concrete
problem. As result we have the following reduced algebraical system of equations (RSAE) on the set of unknown
coeﬃcients aN

i of expansions (3):

L(Qij, aN

i , αI ) = M (Pij, aN

i , βJ ),

where operators L and M are algebraization of RHS and LHS of initial problem (1). Qij are the coeﬃcients (with
possible time dependence) of LHS of initial system of diﬀerential equations (1) and as consequence are coeﬃcients
of RSAE. Pij are the coeﬃcients (with possible time dependence) of RHS of initial system of diﬀerential equations
(1) and as consequence are the coeﬃcients of RSAE. I = (i1, ..., iq+2), J = (j1, ..., jp+1) are multiindexes, by which
are labelled αI and βI , the other coeﬃcients of RSAE (5):

βJ = {βj1...jp+1} =

ψjk ,

αI = {αi1...αiq+2 } =

ψi1 ... ˙ψis ...ψiq+2 ,

(6)

Z Y1≤jk≤p+1

Xi1,...,iq+2

Z

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

˙ψis = dψis/dt. According to [1]-[4] we
where p (q) is the degree of polynomial operator P(Q) (1), iℓ = (1, ..., q + 2),
may extend our approach to the case when we have additional constraints on the set of our dynamical variables Ψ
or x. In this case by using the method of Lagrangian multipliers we again may apply the same approach but for the
extended set of variables. As result we receive the expanded system of algebraical equations analogous to the system
(5). Then, after reduction we again can extract from its solution the coeﬃcients of expansion (3). Now, when we
solve RSAE (5) and determine unknown coeﬃcients from formal expansion (3) we therefore obtain the solution of
our initial problem. It should be noted if we consider only truncated expansion (3) with N terms then we have from
(5) the system of N × d algebraical equations with degree ℓ = max{p, q} and the degree of this algebraical system
coincides with the degree of initial diﬀerential system. So, we have the solution of the initial nonlinear (rational)
problem in the form

x(t) = x(0) +

aN
k ψk(t),

N

Xk=1

where coeﬃcients aN
k are roots of the corresponding reduced algebraical (polynomial) problem RSAE (5). Conse-
quently, we have a parametrization of solution of initial problem by solution of reduced algebraical problem (5).
The problem of computations of coeﬃcients αI , βJ (6) of reduced algebraical system may be explicitly solved
in wavelet approach. The obtained solutions are given in the form (7), where ψk(t) are wavelet basis functions.
In our case ψk(t) are obtained via multiresolution expansions and represented by compactly supported wavelets.
Because aﬃne group of translation and dilations is inside the approach, this method resembles the action of a mi-
croscope. We have contribution to ﬁnal result from each scale of resolution from the whole inﬁnite scale of spaces:
...V−2 ⊂ V−1 ⊂ V0 ⊂ V1 ⊂ V2 ⊂ ..., where the closed subspace Vj(j ∈ Z) corresponds to level j of resolution,
or to scale j. This multiresolution functional space decomposition corresponds to exact nonlinear eigenmode de-
compositions (7). It should be noted that such representations give the best possible localization properties in the
corresponding (phase)space/time coordinates. In contrast with diﬀerent approaches formulae (7) do not use pertur-
bation technique or linearization procedures and represent dynamics via generalized nonlinear localized eigenmodes
expansion. So, by using wavelet bases with their good (phase)space/time localization properties we can construct
high-localized (coherent) structures in nonlinear systems with collective/complex behaviour. As a result our N mode
construction (7) gives the following representation for solution of equations (1):

x(t) = xslow

N (t) +

xi(ωit), ωi ∼ 2i

Xi≥N

where xr(t) may be represented by some family of (nonlinear) eigenmodes and gives as a result the multiresolu-
tion/multiscale representation in the high-localized wavelet bases.

3

(7)

(8)

We would like to thank ETH, Zurich for hospitality and support, which gave us the possibility to present our two papers during
GAMM 2001 Annual Meeting in Zurich and Prof. Martin Gutknecht for permanent help and encouragement.

Acknowledgements

1. References

1 Fedorova, A., Zeitlin M.: Symmetry, Hamiltonian Problems and Wavelets in Accelerator Physics, American Institute

of Physics, CP, 468, Nonlinear and Collective Phenomena in Beam Physics (1999), 69–93.

2 Fedorova, A., Zeitlin M.: Wavelets in Optimization and Approximations; Math. and Comp.

in Simulation, 46

3 Fedorova, A., Zeitlin M.: Variational-Wavelet Approach to RMS Envelope Equations; The Physics of High Brightness

(1998), 527–534.

Beams, World Scientiﬁc (2000), 235–254.

4 Fedorova, A.; Zeitlin M..: Quasiclassical Calculations for Wigner Functions via Multiresolution, Quantum Aspects

of Beam Physics, World Scientiﬁc (2001); Los Alamos preprint, physics/0101006.

Dr. Michael Zeitlin, Russian Academy of Sciences, Institute of Problems of Mechanical Engineering,
V.O., Bolshoj pr., 61, 199178, St. Petersburg, Russia
email: zeitlin@math.ipme.ru, http://www.ipme.ru/zeitlin.html, http://www.ipme.nw.ru/zeitlin.html

