2
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
1
0
1
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

IIT-HEP-02/3

Progress in Muon Cooling Research and
Development∗

Daniel M Kaplan

for the MuCool Collaboration

† ‡ ¶

†

‡
Illinois, 60616 USA

Physics Division, Illinois Institute of Technology, 3101 S. Dearborn Street, Chicago,

Abstract. The MuCool R&D program is described. The aim of MuCool is to develop
all key pieces of hardware required for ionization cooling of a muon beam. This eﬀort
will lead to a more detailed understanding of the construction and operating costs of
such hardware, as well as to optimized designs that can be used to build a Neutrino
Factory or Muon Collider. This work is being undertaken by a broad collaboration
including physicists and engineers from many national laboratories and universities in
the U.S. and abroad. The intended schedule of work will lead to ionization cooling
being well enough established that a construction decision for a Neutrino Factory could
be taken before the end of this decade based on a solid technical foundation.

1. Introduction

The MuCool Collaboration is pursuing a research and development program on hardware
that can be used for cooling of muon beams [1]. Our recent work [2] focuses on muon
ionization cooling [3] for a possible Neutrino Factory [4], in which an intense, pure, and
collimated neutrino beam is produced via decay of a muon beam circulating in a storage
1021 neutrinos/year (requiring a similar number of
ring. The goal for such a facility is
muons/year stored in the ring), to exploit the recently established discovery of neutrino
oscillations [5].

∼

Muon beams at the required intensity can only be produced into a large phase
space, but aﬀordable existing acceleration technologies require a small input beam.
large-aperture, acceleration
This mismatch could be alleviated by developing new,
techniques [6], by “cooling” the muon beam to reduce its size, or both. Given the 2.2-µs
muon lifetime, only one cooling technique is fast enough: ionization cooling, in which
muons repeatedly traverse an energy-absorbing medium, alternating with accelerating
devices, within a strongly focusing magnetic lattice [3, 7].

* To appear in Proc. 4th Workshop on Neutrino Factories based on Muon Storage Rings (NuFact’02),
Imperial College, London, United Kingdom, 1–6 July 2002.

E-mail: kaplan@fnal.gov

¶

2

(1)

2. Principle of ionization cooling

In an ionization-cooling channel, ionization of the energy-absorbing medium decreases all
three muon-momentum components without aﬀecting the beam size. By the deﬁnition
of normalized transverse beam emittance,+ ǫn ≈
√σxσyσpxσpy/mc (where σx, σpx, etc.
denote the r.m.s. deviations of the beam in position and momentum coordinates, m
is the particle mass, and c the speed of light), this constitutes cooling, i.e., reduction
of normalized emittance. This is so since the reduction of each particle’s momentum
results in a reduced transverse-momentum spread of the beam as a whole.

At the same time, multiple Coulomb scattering of the muons increases the beam
divergence, heating the beam. The equilibrium between these heating and cooling eﬀects
is expressed in the following approximate equation for the dependence of ǫn on the
distance s traveled through an absorber [8, 9]:

dǫn
ds ≈ −

1
β2

dEµ
ds +

ǫn
Eµ

*

+

1
β3

β⊥(0.014)2
2EµmµLR

.

Here, angle brackets denote mean value, β is the muon velocity in units of c, muon
energy Eµ is in GeV, β⊥ is the lattice beta function evaluated at the location of the
absorber, mµ is the muon mass in GeV/c2, and LR is the radiation length of the absorber
medium. (Eq. 1 is derived for the cylindrically-symmetric case of solenoidal focusing,
β⊥, by diﬀerentiating the expression for ǫn given above.) The ﬁrst term
where βx = βy ≡
in Eq. 1 is the cooling term and the second is the heating term. To minimize the heating
term, which is proportional to the beta function and inversely proportional to radiation
length, it has been proposed [10] to use liquid hydrogen (LH2) as the energy-absorbing
30 MeV/m and LR = 8.7 m [11], with superconducting-
medium, giving
h
solenoid focusing to give small β⊥
(Other possible absorber materials are
discussed below.)

dEµ/ds

10 cm.

i ≈

∼

Between absorbers, high-gradient acceleration of the muons must be provided
to replace the lost longitudinal momentum, so that the ionization-cooling process
can be repeated many times.
Ideally, the acceleration should exceed the minimum
required for momentum replacement, allowing “oﬀ-crest” operation. This gives continual
rebunching, so that even a beam with large momentum spread remains captured in the
rf bucket. Even though it is the absorbers that actually cool the beam, for typical
accelerating gradients (
10 MeV/m), the rf cavities dominate the length of the cooling
channel (see e.g. Fig. 1). The achievable rf gradient thus determines how much cooling
is practical before an appreciable fraction of the muons have decayed or drifted out of
the bucket.

∼

We see from Eq. 1 that the percentage decrease in normalized emittance is
proportional to the percentage energy loss, hence cooling in one transverse dimension
by a factor 1/e requires 100% momentum loss and replacement. Low beam momentum

+ In this expression, for expositional clarity, the eﬀects of possible correlations among the components
have been neglected; more rigorously, the normalized transverse emittance is proportional to the square-
root of the 4-dimensional covariance matrix of the coordinates (x, y, px, py) for all particles in the beam.

3

Figure 1. Engineering drawing of a section of an “SFOFO” ionization-cooling lattice
(from U.S. Neutrino Factory Feasibility Study II [12]). Shown in cross section are
three liquid-hydrogen absorbers, each enclosed within a pair of “focusing” solenoids,
interspersed with two 4-cell 201-MHz rf cavities, each encircled by a “coupling”
solenoid.

is thus favored, because it requires less accelerating voltage and because of the increase
of dE/ds for momenta below the ionization minimum [11]. Most Neutrino Factory
and Muon Collider beam-cooling designs and simulations to date have therefore used
400 MeV/c. (This is also the momentum range in which
momenta in the range 150
the pion-production cross section oﬀ of thick targets tends to peak and is thus optimal
for muon production as well as cooling.) The cooling channel of Fig. 1 is optimized for
a mean muon momentum of 200 MeV/c.

−

As a muon beam passes through a transverse ionization-cooling lattice,
its
longitudinal emittance tends to grow, due to such eﬀects as energy-loss straggling.
The six-dimensional emittance (approximately the square of the transverse emittance
times the longitudinal emittance) typically is reduced despite this longitudinal heating.
if not controlled, the longitudinal heating leads to beam losses and thus
However,
limits the degree of transverse cooling that is practical to achieve. Cooling lattices
with longitudinal–transverse emittance exchange (which can cool in all six dimensions
simultaneously) have been receiving increasing attention and are discussed in detail
elsewhere in these Proceedings [13]. They have the potential to increase Neutrino
Factory performance and decrease cost, and are essential to achieving suﬃcient cooling
for a Muon Collider.

4

3. Muon-cooling technology development

An eﬀective ionization-cooling channel must include low-Z absorbers with (if an intense
muon beam is to be cooled) high power-handling capability. To achieve low beta at the
absorbers requires either high solenoidal magnetic ﬁeld or high ﬁeld gradient [14]. To
pack as much cooling as possible into the shortest distance requires the highest practical
accelerating gradient. The MuCool Collaboration has embarked on R&D on all three
of these technologies.

3.1. High-gradient normal-conducting rf cavities

An ionization-cooling channel requires insertion of high-gradient rf cavities into a lattice
employing strong solenoidal magnetic ﬁelds. This precludes the use of superconducting
cavities. The lattice of Fig. 1 employs normal-conducting 201-MHz cavities, but R&D
is more readily carried out with smaller, higher-frequency devices. Having already
embarked on the development of 805-MHz cavities (aimed at a cooling channel for a
Muon Collider [10]), we have continued to pursue their development, while working out
the details of the 201-MHz design in parallel [15].

Radio-frequency cavities normally contain a minimum of material in the path of
the beam. However, the penetrating character of the muon allows the use of closed-cell
(“pillbox”) cavities, provided that the cell closures are constructed of thin material of
long radiation length. Eq. 1 implies that this material will have little eﬀect on cooling
performance as long as its thickness L per cooling cell (at the β⊥ of its location in
the lattice) has β⊥L/LR small compared to that of an absorber. Closing the rf cells
approximately doubles the on-axis accelerating gradient for a given maximum surface
electric ﬁeld, allowing operation with less rf power and suppressing ﬁeld emission. Two
alternatives have been considered for the design of the cell closures: thin beryllium foils
and grids of gas-cooled, thin-walled aluminum tubing. As a fall-back, an open-cell cavity
design was also pursued.

So far we have prototyped and tested a 6-cell open-cell cavity, designed at Fermilab,
and a single-cell closed-cell cavity, designed at LBNL, both at 805 MHz. The tests are
carried out in Fermilab’s Laboratory G, where we have installed a high-power 805-
MHz klystron transmitter (12-MW peak pulsed power with pulse length of 50 µs and
repetition rate of 15 Hz), an x-ray-shielded cave, remote-readout test probes, safety-
interlock systems, and a control room and workshop area for setup of experiments. The
cave also contains a high-vacuum pumping system and water cooling for the cavity. To
allow tests of the cooling-channel rf cavities and absorbers in a high magnetic ﬁeld or
high ﬁeld gradient, a superconducting 5-T solenoid with a room-temperature bore of
44 cm was constructed by LBNL and installed in Lab G, with two separate coils that
can be run in “solenoid” mode (currents ﬂowing in the same direction) or “gradient”
mode (currents in opposite directions).

The open-cell cavity (Fig. 2) was conditioned up to a surface electric ﬁeld of
54 MV/m (on-axis accelerating gradient up to 25 MV/m). Electron dark currents and

5

Waveguide RF Input
                        Power

      Solenoid

Vacuum System

            Cavity Stand

Open Cell Cavity

33 cm

Figure 2. 6-cell open-cell 805-MHz cavity inserted in Lab G solenoid.

Figure 3, Layout of Equipment Inside of Cave Lab G

≈

x-ray backgrounds were found to be large and to scale as a high power of the surface
E10 [16]. With a 2.5-T solenoidal ﬁeld applied, at 54-MV/m surface ﬁeld,
ﬁeld,
axially focused dark currents ultimately burned a hole in the cavity’s titanium vacuum
window. This level of background emission would preclude cavity operation in the
required solenoidal ﬁeld. However, for the same accelerating gradient, the pillbox
cavity should operate at approximately half the surface ﬁeld, corresponding to lower
background emission by a factor of order 103. Furthermore, an analysis of the observed
emission rate in terms of the Fowler-Nordheim formalism [17] implies an enhancement
of the emission probability by a factor of order 103 compared to that of a smooth, clean
surface [16]. This suggests that an R&D program focused on improving the surface
preparation and treatment might reap large improvements.

≈

Tests of the closed-cell prototype have begun. Initial tests up to the design gradient
of
30 MV/m were carried out successfully with no applied magnetic ﬁeld. Upon
disassembly, no damage to the windows was observed. The thickness of the cavity’s
vacuum windows precluded measurement of low-energy backgrounds. As of July 2002,
a thin window has been installed and reconditioning of the cavity for high-gradient
operation has started. So far, the gradients are low and x rays and dark currents have not
been seen. Our planned program includes tests of the pillbox cavity with solenoidal ﬁeld,
followed by tests of a variety of surface coatings and cleaning and polishing techniques
to identify an optimal approach to building high-gradient normal-conducting cavities
for operation in high magnetic ﬁelds. In parallel, design studies and prototype tests of
beryllium foils and aluminum-tube grids will continue.

6

Table 1.
Neutrino Factory Feasibility Study II [12]).

Speciﬁcations of SFOFO-cooling-channel energy absorbers (from U.S.

Absorber

SFOFO 1
SFOFO 2

Length Radius Number Power
(kW)
0.3
0.1

needed
16
36

(cm)
35
21

(cm)
18
11

Al window
thickness (µm)
360
220

≈
≈

3.2. High-power liquid-hydrogen absorbers

The development of high-power liquid-hydrogen (LH2) absorbers with thin windows has
been a key goal of the MuCool R&D program [18, 19]. Simulations as well as theory
show that scattering in absorber windows degrades muon-cooling performance. To keep
this eﬀect to a minimum, the Neutrino Factory Feasibility Study II design [12] calls for
aluminum absorber windows of thicknesses given in Table 1.

The power dissipated per absorber as given in Table 1 is within the bounds
of high-power liquid-hydrogen targets developed for, and operated in, a variety of
experiments [20]. However, the highly turbulent ﬂuid dynamics involved in the heat-
exchange process necessarily requires R&D for each new conﬁguration. We have
identiﬁed two possible approaches: a “conventional” ﬂow-through design with external
heat exchanger, similar to that used for high-power LH2 targets, and a convection-cooled
design, with internal heat exchanger built into the absorber vessel. The convection
design has desirable mechanical simplicity and minimizes the total hydrogen volume in
the cooling channel (a signiﬁcant safety concern), but is expected to be limited to lower
power dissipation than the ﬂow-through design.

Various scenarios have been discussed involving substantially higher absorber power
dissipation: 1) a Neutrino Factory with a more ambitious Proton Driver (4 MW proton-
beam power on the pion-production target instead of the 1 MW assumed in Study-II) is
a relatively straightforward and cost-eﬀective design upgrade [2], 2) the “bunched-beam
phase rotation” scenario of Neuﬀer [21] captures µ+ and µ− simultaneously, doubling
the absorber power dissipation, and 3) a ring cooler [13] would entail multiple traversals
of each absorber by each muon, potentially increasing absorber power dissipation by
an order of magnitude. If all three of these design upgrades are implemented, power
dissipations of tens of kilowatts per absorber will result. The large heat capacity of
hydrogen means that such levels of instantaneous power dissipation are in principle
supportable, but much higher average heat transfer would be needed, possibly requiring
higher pressure and thicker windows. More work is needed to assess the muon-cooling
performance implications.

The large transverse dimensions of the muon beam require large apertures and
correspondingly wide absorbers, while the large energy spread of the beam demands
frequent rebunching via rf cavities, favoring thin absorbers. These two requirements lead
to the oblate shapes of the SFOFO-cooling-channel absorbers indicated in Table 1 and
shown in Fig. 1. Since these shapes are wider than they are long, hemispherical windows

7

(which would be thinnest at a given pressure) are ruled out, and we are led to the
“torispherical” window shape. Aluminum alloy is a suitable window material, combining
long radiation length with good machinability, weldability, and thermal properties.
For an ASME-standard torispherical window [22], the required minimum thickness is
(essentially) t = 0.885P D/ES, with P the maximum pressure diﬀerential, D the window
diameter, E the weld eﬃciency, and S the maximum allowable stress, in this case 25% of
the 289-MPa ultimate strength of the 6061-T6 aluminum alloy [22] (the standard alloy
for cryogenic and vacuum applications). Taking into account Fermilab’s requirement
of safe operation at 25-psi (0.17-MPa) diﬀerential pressure [23], the minimum window
thickness is 760 µm of 6061-T6 for the SFOFO 1 absorber (460 µm for SFOFO 2), far
exceeding the thicknesses called for by the Study-II simulation. To meet the Study-
II speciﬁcations, we devised a new approach to the design and fabrication of thin
windows [19], in which windows of a custom shape and tapered thickness proﬁle are
machined out of a solid disk of material using a numerically-controlled lathe, with an
integral ﬂange so that no welds are required and E = 1. We also devised means to test
these nonstandard windows and demonstrate that they meet their speciﬁcations and
satisfy the applicable safety requirements [24].

Over the past year, as work has continued towards a realistic absorber design,
it has become clear that the Fermilab safety code will require external containment
of each absorber, to guard against such possibilities as spark damage to a window
due to occasional rf-cavity discharges. This doubles the number of windows per
absorber, though the containment windows need not be as strong as the absorber
windows themselves. We have now developed designs for yet thinner∗ windows that
will allow the Study-II speciﬁcation to be met even with the additional set of windows
per absorber [25]. The old and new window shapes are compared in Fig. 3. We are
also exploring the use of new (lithium–aluminum) alloys, such as the 2195 alloy used in
the Space Shuttle (80% stronger than 6061-T6); the resulting thinness of the window
may challenge our fabrication techniques, and we will need to certify the new alloy for
machinability and high-radiation application.

3.3. Other absorber materials

Other candidate absorber materials include helium, lithium, lithium hydride, methane,
and beryllium. All other things being equal,
in principle these would all give
worse cooling performance than hydrogen. For ﬁxed β⊥, a possible ﬁgure of merit
min)2 (proportional to the four-dimensional transverse-cooling rate),
is (LR h
normalized to that of liquid hydrogen. Table 2 shows that hydrogen is best by a
2, although its advantage could be vitiated if thick windows are necessary.
factor
Furthermore, for suﬃciently high focusing-current density, lithium lenses could provide

dE/ds

≈

i

∗ That is, thinner at the window center, where the beam is concentrated. Simulation studies have
shown that towards the edges, where the new window design is considerably thicker than the old, the
muon rate is suﬃciently low that the additional window thickness does not degrade cooling performance
appreciably.

8

 µm

 
µm

Figure 3.
window design.

(Left) ﬁrst and (right) second iteration of custom-shaped and -tapered

Table 2. Comparison of ionization-cooling merit factor (see text) for various possible
absorber materials [11].

Material

GH2
LH2
He
LiH
Li
CH4
Be

dE/ds
h

min
i

(MeV g−1cm2)
4.103
4.034
1.937
1.94
1.639
2.417
1.594

LR
(g cm−2)
61.28
61.28
94.32
86.9
82.76
46.22
65.19

Merit

1.03
1
0.55
0.47
0.30
0.20
0.18

substantially lower β⊥ than is practical with solenoids, perhaps suﬃcient to overcome
lithium’s disadvantageous merit factor. Liquids provide high power-handling capability,
since the warmed liquid can be moved to a heat exchanger. On the other hand, the
higher densities of solids allow the absorber to be located more precisely at the low-beta
point of the lattice. Lithium hydride may be usable with no windows, but means would
have to be devised to prevent combustion due to contact with moisture, as well as to
avoid melting at high power levels. More work will be required to assess these issues in
detail.

It has been pointed out [18, 26] that gaseous hydrogen (GH2) at high pressure could
provide the energy absorption needed for ionization cooling, with signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
technical challenges than those of a liquid or solid absorber. Table 2 shows that GH2
is actually a slightly better ionization-cooling medium than LH2.
In addition, if the
hydrogen is allowed to ﬁll the rf cavities, the number of windows in the cooling channel
could be substantially reduced, and the length of the channel signiﬁcantly shortened.
Moreover, ﬁlling the cavities with a dense gas can suppress breakdown and ﬁeld emission,
via the Paschen eﬀect [27]. A small business [28] has been formed to pursue this
idea, with funding from the U.S. Dept. of Energy’s Small Business Technology Transfer
program [29]. Phase I, which includes tests of breakdown in gaseous helium at 805 MHz,

9

80 K temperature, and pressures from 1 to 100 atm, has been approved. If approved, a
follow-on Phase II will explore operation with hydrogen at lower frequency. Successful
completion of this program could lead to construction of a prototype gaseous-absorber
cooling cell, to be tested at the MuCool Test Area (described next) and perhaps in a
future phase of the Muon Ionization Cooling Experiment (MICE) [30].

3.4. Test facilities

To augment the Lab G facility described above, we are building a MuCool Test Area at
the end of the Fermilab Linac. This location combines availability of multi-megawatt rf
power at both 805 and 201 MHz and 400-MeV proton beam at high intensity. Cryogenic
facilities will be provided for liquid-hydrogen-absorber and superconducting-magnet
operation. The underground enclosure under construction will provide the radiation
shielding needed for beam tests of absorber power handling and for high-gradient cavity
testing, with the added capability of exploring possible eﬀects on cavity breakdown due
to beam irradiation of the cavity walls in a solenoidal magnetic ﬁeld.

The MuCool program includes engineering tests of ionization-cooling components
and systems, but not an actual experimental demonstration of ionization cooling with a
muon beam. Such a cooling demonstration (MICE) has been proposed and is discussed
elsewhere in these Proceedings [30].

This work was supported in part by the U.S. Dept. of Energy, the National Science
Foundation, the Illinois Board of Higher Education, and the Illinois Dept. of Commerce
and Community Aﬀairs.

Acknowledgements

References

[1] See http://www.fnal.gov/projects/muon collider/.
[2] M. M. Alsharo’a et al., “Status of Neutrino Factory and Muon Collider Research and Development
and Future Plans,” FNAL-PUB-02/149-E (July 19, 2002), submitted to Phys. Rev. ST Accel.
Beams, arXiv:hep-ex/0207031.

[3] A. N. Skrinsky and V. V. Parkhomchuk, Sov. J. Part. Nucl. 12, 223 (1981);

D. Neuﬀer, Part. Acc. 14, 75 (1983);
E. A. Perevedentsev and A. N. Skrinsky, in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. on High Energy Accelerators, F.

T. Cole and R. Donaldson, eds. (Fermilab, 1984), p 485;
R. Palmer et al., Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 51A, 61 (1996).

[4] S. Geer, Phys. Rev. D 57, 6989 (1998);

earlier versions of a Neutrino Factory, considered by e.g.
D. G. Koshkarev, report CERN/ISR-DI/74-62 (1974),
S. Wojicki (unpublished, 1974),
D. Cline and D. Neuﬀer, AIP Conf. Proc. 68, 846 (1981), and
D. Neuﬀer, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 28, 2034 (1981), were based on pion injection into a storage

ring and had substantially less sensitivity.

10

[5] Q. R. Ahmad et al. (SNO Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 011301 (2002), Phys. Rev. Lett.

89, 011302 (2002), and Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 071301 (2001);

Y. Fukuda et al. (Super-Kamiokande Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 1562 (1998) and Phys.

Rev. Lett. 86, 5651 (2001);

B. T. Cleveland et al. (Homestake Collaboration), Astrophys. J. 496, 505 (1998);
R. Davis, D. S. Harmer, and K. C. Hoﬀman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 20, 1205 (1968).

[6] “A Feasibility Study of A Neutrino Factory in Japan,” Y. Kuno, ed., available from http://www-

prism.kek.jp/nufactj/index.html;

Y. Mori, “Review of Japanese Neutrino Factory R&D,”
A. Sato, “Beam dynamics studies of FFAG,”
D. Neuﬀer, “Recent FFAG studies,”
S. Machida, “Muon Acceleration with FFAGs,” and
C. Johnstone, “FFAG with high frequency RF for rapid acceleration,” all presented at this

Workshop.

[7] An introductory discussion of muon ionization cooling may be found in

D. M. Kaplan, “Introduction to muon cooling,” in Proc. APS/DPF/DPB Summer Study on the

Future of Particle Physics (Snowmass 2001), N. Graf, ed., arXiv:physics/0109061 (2002).

More detailed treatments may be found in
D. Neuﬀer, “µ+µ− Colliders,” CERN yellow report CERN-99-12 (1999),
K. J. Kim and C. X. Wang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 760 (2000), and
C. X. Wang and K. J. Kim, “Linear theory of 6-D ionization cooling,” in Proc. Snowmass 2001,

op. cit., SNOWMASS-2001-T502 (2001).

[8] D. Neuﬀer,

in Advanced Accelerator Concepts, F. E. Mills, ed., AIP Conf. Proc. 156

(American Institute of Physics, New York, 1987), p 201.
[9] R. C. Fernow and J. C. Gallardo, Phys. Rev. E 52, 1039 (1995).
[10] C. Ankenbrandt et al., Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 2, 081001 (1999).
[11] K. Hagiwara et al. (Particle Data Group), Phys. Rev. D 66, 010001 (2002).
[12] “Feasibility
M.
http://www.cap.bnl.gov/mumu/studyii/FS2-report.html.

a Muon-Based Neutrino

Study-II
and

J. Gallardo,

BNL-52623,

Source,”

Zisman,

June

eds.,

of

[13] R. Palmer, “Ring Coolers: status and prospects” and “Ring cooler studies,”

S. Ozaki, R. Palmer,
at

available

2001,

S. Kahn, “Simulation of Balbekov ring with realistic ﬁelds,”
D. Cline, “Progress in the development of a quadrupole ring cooler and possible use for neutrino

factories and muon colliders,” all presented at this Workshop.

[14] An eﬀort to design quadrupole-focused cooling channels is in progress, but their applicability
appears to be limited to the early part of the cooling channel, where relatively large beta
functions are appropriate (C. Johnstone, “Quadrupole channel for muon cooling,” presented at
this Workshop).

[15] D. Li, “201 and 805 MHz cavity developments in MUCOOL,” presented at this Workshop.
[16] J. Norem et al., “Dark Current Measurements of a Multicell, 805 MHz Cavity,” submitted to Phys.

Rev. ST Accel. Beams (2002);

J. Norem, “RF induced backgrounds at MICE,” presented at this Workshop.
[17] R. H. Fowler and L. W. Nordheim, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A119, 173 (1928).
[18] D. M. Kaplan et al., “Progress in Absorber R&D for Muon Cooling,” to appear in Proc. 3rd
International Workshop on Neutrino Factory based on Muon Storage Rings (NuFACT’01),
Tsukuba, Japan, 24–30 May 2001, arXiv:physics/0108027.

[19] D. M. Kaplan et al., “Progress in Absorber R&D 2: Windows,” in Proc. 2001 Particle
Accelerator Conference, P. Lucas and S. Webber, eds. (IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 2001), p 3888
(arXiv:physics/0108028).

[20] R. W. Carr et al., SLAC-Proposal-E-158, July 1997, and E-158 Liquid Hydrogen Target Milestone
Report, http://www.slac.stanford.edu/exp/e158/documents/target.ps.gz (April 21, 1999);

11

E. J. Beise et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 378, 383 (1996);
D. J. Margaziotis, in Proc. CEBAF Summer 1992 Workshop, F. Gross and R. Holt, eds., AIP

Conf. Proc. 269 (American Institute of Physics, New York, 1993), p 531;

J. W. Mark, SLAC-PUB-3169 (1984) and references therein.

[21] D. Neuﬀer, “High frequency buncher and phase rotation,” presented at this Workshop.
[22] “ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code,” ANSI/ASME BPV-VIII-1 (American Society of

Mechanical Engineers, New York, 1980), part UG-32.

[23] “Guidelines for the Design, Fabrication, Testing, Installation and Operation of Liquid Hydrogen

Targets,” Fermilab, Rev. May 20, 1997.

[24] M. A. Cummings, “Absorber R&D in MUCOOL,” presented at this Workshop.
[25] W. Lau, “Hydrogen Absorber Window Design,” presented at this Workshop.
[26] R. Johnson and D. M. Kaplan, MuCool Note 195, March 2001 (see http://www-

[27] J. M. Meek and J. D. Craggs, Electrical Breakdown in Gases (John Wiley & Sons, 1978),

mucool.fnal.gov/notes/notes.html).

p 557.

[28] Muons, Inc., R. Johnson, Principal Investigator, Batavia, Illinois.
[29] See http://sbir.er.doe.gov/SBIR/.
[30] R. Edgecock, “International Muon Ionisation Cooling Experiment: Status and plans,” presented

at this Workshop; see also http://hep04.phys.iit.edu/cooldemo/.

