DEUTSCHES ELEKTRONEN-SYNCHROTRON

DESY 02-201
November 2002

On energy and momentum of an ultrarelativistic unstable system

Gianluca Geloni

Department of Applied Physics, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven,
P.O. Box 513, 5600MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands

Evgeni Saldin

Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY,
Notkestrasse 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany

2
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
9
0
1
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On energy and momentum of an ultrarelativistic unstable system

Gianluca Geloni∗
Department of Applied Physics, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven,
P.O. Box 513, 5600MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands

Evgeni Saldin
Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY,
Notkestrasse 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany

We study an electron bunch together with its self-ﬁelds from the viewpoint of basic dynamical
quantities. This leads to a methodological discussion about the deﬁnition of energy and momentum
for fully electromagnetic systems and about the relation between covariance of the energy-momentum
pair and stability. We show here that, in the case of unstable systems, there is no mean to deﬁne,
in a physically meaningful way, a total energy-momentum four-vector: covariance of the energy-
momentum pair follows from the stability of the system and viceversa, as originally pointed out by
Henry Poincar´e.

PACS numbers:

I.

INTRODUCTION

Nearly one hundred years have passed since Abra-
ham and Lorentz calculated their famous expressions for
the energy and momentum of a purely electromagnetic,
spherically symmetrical distribution of charges [1], [2].
This distribution constitutes an attempt to build a clas-
sical model of the electron: according to Lorentz’s initial
idea, mass, energy and momentum of the electron could,
indeed, be of completely elecromagnetic nature.

Nevertheless, the energy (divided by the speed of light
in vacuum, as we will understand through this paper) and
momentum of such an electromagnetic electron do not
constitute a four-vector. In fact (as Abraham [3] pointed
out already in 1904 probably, at that time, without a
clear understanding of what a four-vector is), in a frame
moving with velocity v with respect to the system rest
frame, we have

and

and

Pe = 4/3γvU

′

/c2,

(2)

and

where the index e indicates the electromagnetic nature of
the energy Ee and momentum Pe, γ is the usual Lorentz
factor, β is the velocity v/c (normalized to the speed of
light in vacuum c), and U ′ indicates the electromagnetic
energy in the electron rest frame [4],

′

U

= ǫ0/2

E′2

dV

′

,

Z

(3)

∗Electronic address: g.a.geloni@tue.nl

where ǫ0 is the free space permittivity. U ′ is purely an
electrostatic quantity (in this paper the prime will always
indicate quantities calculated in the rest frame; therefore
E′ and dV ′ are, respectively, the electric ﬁeld and the
volume element in the rest frame of the system).

It is worth to mention here that the factor 4/3 in Eq.
(2) and the term proportional to 1/3β2 in Eq. (1) depend
on the choice of spherical symmetry made on the charge
distribution: had we chosen, for instance, an inﬁnitely
long line distribution in the direction of v, we would have
found

Ee2 = γU

′

(1 + β2)

Pe2 = 2γvU

′

/c2,

Ee3 = γU

′

Pe3 = γvU

′

/c2,

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

which only incidentally, due to the particular choice of
the distribution, behaves as a four-vector.

Henry Poincar´e solved the problem of the lack of co-
variance shown in Eq. (1) and Eq. (2) by introducing,
in the electron model, energies and momenta of non-
electromagnetic nature [5]. These are actually due to
non-electomagnetic interactions which keep the electron
together. By doing so he strongly related the covariance
of energy and momentum with the stability of the sys-
tem: the electomagnetic energy-momentum pair alone is

Ee = γU

′

(1 + 1/3β2)

while, in the case of a line charge oriented perpendicularly
to the direction of v,

(1)

not a four-vector, but the total energy-momenum pair,
accounting for the non-electromagnetic interaction, is a
regular four-quantity.

In 1922, Enrico Fermi developed an original, early rela-
tivistic approach to the 4/3 problem [6]; about forty years
later a redeﬁnition of the energy-momentum pair related
to Fermi’s work was proposed by Rohrlich [7], which
leaves untouched the total energy-momentum vector, but
splits it into electromagnetic and non-electromagnetic
contribution in such a way that covariance is granted
for both the electromagnetic and the non-electromagnetic
part of the energy-momentum pair.

It is possible to show [8], [9] that the treatments by

Poincar´e and Rohrlich are not in contradiction.

Nevertheless, the approach by Rohrlich [7] was some-
times taken (see e.g. [10]) as the proof that stability and
covariance are unrelated matters since, upon redeﬁnition,
the electromagnetic part alone is a four-vector.

We will show here, that such a conclusion is incorrect.
The stability of the system is related to the covariance of
the total energy-momentum vector, according to the orig-
inal work by Poincar´e: the redeﬁnition procedure men-
tioned above is indeed acceptable only in the case one
is interested in the total energy-momentum vector of a
stable system (i.e. a system whose constituents are and
stay at rest in a particularly chosen frame), and not in the
separate electromagnetic and non-electromagnetic part.
Only in that case the arbitrariness included in the re-
combination of these two contributions does not aﬀect
the equation of motion for the system (which deals, in
fact, with the total energy-momentum vector).

Some time ago, we were addressing the problem of de-
scribing the transverse self-ﬁelds originating within an
ultrarelativistic electron bunch moving in a ﬁxed trajec-
tory [11].

This is a particularly relevant problem in modern par-
ticle accelerator physics, in view of the need for very
high-peak current, low emittance beams to be used, for
example, in self-ampliﬁed spontaneous emission (SASE)-
free-electron lasers operating in the x-ray regime (see for
example [12], [13]): in fact, the good quality of the beam
may be spoiled by self-interaction occurring within the
bunch.

Besides practical relevance (which stresses how, after
one hundred years, pure academical problems become rel-
evant also to applied physics), an electron bunch is also
a very good example of an unstable system subject to
purely electromagnetic interactions. For such a system,
the total energy and the total momentum in any frame,
are just of electrodynamical nature. We will show that
(according to our previous statement about the relation
between stability and covariance) there is no way, in this
case, to deﬁne the total energy-momentum pair in a co-
variant way.
In fact, in contrast to what happens for
stable systems, there is no way to describe the evolution
of an unstable system without the knowledge of the (elec-
tromagnetic) ﬁeld theory governing the (self-)interactions
between its constituents.

3

II. A PARADOX AND ITS SOLUTION

Let us consider a short electron bunch moving, in a
given laboratory frame, in a circular orbit. We can sim-
plify the description of this system accounting only for
two electrons which will represent the head and the tail
of our bunch.

Imagine that the two particles are moving, initially
with the same Lorentz factor γ ≫ 1, in a circular orbit
of radius R, and separated by a (curvilinear) distance
∆s ≪ R/γ3.

In this situation the two electrons are near enough to
be considered travelling with the same velocity vector:
indeed it can be shown [14], that they radiate as a single
particle of charge 2e (e being the electron charge) up to
frequencies much above the synchrotron radiation critical
frequency (note that, from a quantitative viewpoint, the
expression ”much above” is trivially connected to ”how
much” ∆s ≪ R/γ3). The requirements speciﬁed before
consist, from a geometrical viewpoint, in assuming that,
at the beginning of the evolution, the two particles world-
lines are very close: actually, considering our resolution
in space equal to R/γ3, they initially coincide.

This assumption justiﬁes the presence of an inertial
frame in which both particles are, with good approxi-
mation, at rest during the initial part of their evolution.
We will refer to it simply as the rest frame. A quantita-
tive deﬁnition of the initial part of the evolution may be
given when a choice is made about close to zero are the
velocities of the particles in the rest frame. Note that
the existence of the rest frame is central for our study
because, referring to it, one can easily analyze the en-
ergy and momentum of the system constituted by the
two particles together with their electromagnetic ﬁelds.
By means of a Lorentz transformation, then, we can

recover the same quantities in the laboratory frame.

Starting with the study in the rest frame we will refer,
separately, to mechanical and electromagnetic quantities.
Obviously, in the rest frame, the mechanical momen-
ne, is zero, and the mechanical en-
ne, is just equal to 2mc2, where m is the electron

tum of the system, P ′
ergy, E′
rest mass.

The study of the electromagnetic contributions to en-
ergy and momentum is also trivial. Since the electrons
are at rest they produce electric ﬁeld only. Therefore
the Poynting vector vanishes and P ′
e = 0. On the other
hand, Ee is given, simply, by the work U ′ done against
the ﬁeld to bring the two particles together (quasistati-
cally) from a situation in which they are separated by an
inﬁnite distance.

By doing so, of course, we are neglecting, in both P ′
e
e, the contributions from the acceleration (self-

and E′
)ﬁelds generated by the system.

This approximation is justiﬁed by the fact that we are
discussing the asymptotic behavior for the two particles
separated by a very small distance: then, as it will be
clear from Eq. (16) and Eq. (25), we may assume that
the acceleration ﬁeld contribution are unimportant, when

4

567QA

6

D V
7

b 7

6¶

b 6¶

5

2

compared with the Coulomb one. In fact acceleration ef-
fects saturate in the asymptotic limit of small distance
between the two particles [14], while Coulomb ones are
singular; once again it must be clear that we are dis-
cussing the asymptotic case for small distance between
the two particles. Therefore we have:

E

′
e = U

′

= e2/(4πǫ0γ∆s)

P ′

e = 0.

(8)

(9)

and

and

Summing up the electromagnetic and mechanical contri-
butions one gets the total energy and momentum for the
system:

E

′
tot = E

′
ne + E

′
e = 2mc2 + U

′

(10)

FIG. 1: Geometry for the two-particle system in the steady
state situation, with the test particle ahead of the source.
Here T is the present position of the test particle, S is the
present position of the source, while S’ indicates the retarded
position of the source.

tot = P ′
P ′

ne + P ′

e = 0.

(11)

As already said one may, now, use a Lorentz transfor-
mation in order to calculate these quantities in the lab-
oratory frame. Again, since we are interested at the be-
ginning of the evolution, it follows from our assumptions
that the two particles evolve with the same four-velocity
vector. Therefore a direction of motion (which we will
designate with z) is well deﬁned for the system in the
laboratory frame and the Lorentz transformation from
the rest frame is, indeed, a simple boost in the −z di-
rection (note that a good deﬁnition of the z direction is
equivalent to a good deﬁnition of the rest frame). We will
represent this boost with a matrix with components Λµ
ν
with µ, ν = 0...3 (where the third component corresponds
to the z direction):

γ 0 0 βγ
0 1 0 0
0 0 1 0
βγ 0 0 γ

.



Λµ

ν = 


The use one makes of Λµ
ν is a critical point in our deriva-
tion. If one (erroneously) assumes that energy and mo-
mentum constitute a four-vector, then he gets, straight-
forwardly:

(12)




(Etot/c, Ptot)µ = Λµ

ν(E

′

tot/c, P ′

tot)ν

(13)

and, therefore,

Etot/c = γ

2mc2 + U
(cid:0)

′

,

(cid:1)

(14)

and

Ptot = γ

′

/c2

βc ,

2m + U
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(15)

where Ptot is a scalar quantity, since we understand that
Ptot is oriented along the z direction.

We can now project the equation of motion, Fsyst =
dPtot/dt, onto the transverse direction (perpendicular to
z and lying on the orbital plane) thus getting, within our
approximations:

F⊥syst = 2eBβc +

(16)

e2
4πε0R∆s

As already mentioned in Section I (with in mind the ap-
plications in the physics of particle accelerators and the
one of SASE-FELs, see [12], [13]) we addressed the de-
scription of the transverse self-ﬁelds originating within an
electron bunch moving in a circle in [11]. In that paper
an approach has been proposed which involves purely
electrodynamical considerations, based on the retarded
Green function solution of Maxwell equations.

In particular, in part of [11] we treated the case of
two particles separated by a distance ∆s (non necessarily
much smaller than R/γ3), moving rigidly in a circle (see
Fig. 1) of radius R. Our results disagree with Eq. (16).
Let us brieﬂy justify the latter statement. The total
transverse force (orthogonal to its velocity and lying on
the orbital plane) felt by the head electron and due to
the tail electron source turned out to be (see, again [11]):

F⊥ ≃

e2γ3
4πε0R2 Φ( ˆφ) ,

(17)

f
(cid:20)

(cid:21)

(cid:22)

(cid:23)

(cid:24)

D VA

∆s = Rφ − 2βR sin

,

(19)

FIG. 2: Plot of Φ(∆ˆs)∆ˆs (solid line) and comparison with
the asymptotic values, 1 and 1/3. The dashed line shows the
contribution from the acceleration ﬁeld, ΦR(∆ˆs)∆ˆs, alone.

where Φ is deﬁned by

Φ( ˆφ) =

2 + ˆφ4/8
ˆφ(1 + ˆφ2/4)3

,

(18)

Here ˆφ is the retarded angle φ (which expresses the angu-
lar distance between the retarded position of the source
the present position of the test electron, see Fig. 1, nor-
malized to the synchrotron radiation formation angle at
the critical frequency, 1/γ, i.e. ˆφ = γφ. Eq.
(18) is
completely independent of the parameters of the system.
It is straightforward to study the asymptotic behaviors
of Φ. In order to do so, just remember that the retar-
dation condition linking ∆s and φ is given by (see [11],
[14]):

φ
2

Rφ3
24

.

or by its approximated form

∆s = (1 − β)Rφ +

(20)

It is now evident that Φ(∆ˆs) → 1/(3∆ˆs) when ˆφ ≫ 1
and Φ(∆ˆs) → 1/(∆ˆs) when ˆφ ≪ 1, having introduced
the normalized quantity ∆ˆs = (γ3/R)∆s. This normal-
ization choice is, again, linked with the fact that the crit-
ical synchrotron radiation wavelength, R/γ3, is also the
minimal characteristic distance of our system: as we said
before, two particles nearer than such a distance can be
considered as a single one radiating, up to the critical
frequency, with charge 2e (see [11], [14]).

The asymptotic behavior above suggests to study the
function Φ(∆ˆs)∆ˆs. We plotted such a function in Fig. 2
(and the contribution from the acceleration ﬁeld alone)
for values of ∆ˆs running from 0 to 5.

As it is seen from the ﬁgure, the contribution from the
velocity ﬁeld is not important in the asymptotic limit for
particles very nearby (our case) or very far away. When,
in particular, ∆s ≪ Rγ3 we can approximate Eq. (17)
by

F⊥ ≃

e2
4πε0R∆s

.

(21)

On the other hand, as regards the force felt by the tail
particle (see Fig. 3), it is easily seen that (see [11], [14])
the test electron, which now is the tail particle, ”runs
against” the electromagnetic signal emitted by the source
(while in the previous case it just ”runs away” from it).
Therefore the relative velocity between the signal and the
test electron is equal to (1+β)c (instead of (1−β)c in the
other situation). Hence the retardation condition reads

5

D VA A
D V))D
((D

(cid:20)

(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:27)

(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:25)

(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:23)

(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:21)

S’

βS’

S

T

βT

R

∆s

^
RSTn

φ

O

FIG. 3: Geometry for the two-particle system in the steady
state situation, with the source particle ahead of the test one.
Here T is the present position of the test particle, S is the
present position of the source, while S’ indicates the retarded
position of the source.

or, solved for φ in its approximated form,

φ ≃

∆s
R(1 + β)

.

In this situation, βS is almost parallel (and equal) to βT
and antiparallel to ˆn (which is the unit vector oriented as
the line connecting the retarded source to the present test
particle): it turns out that the only important contribu-
tion to the transverse force results from the acceleration
ﬁeld and reads:

(23)

(24)

∆s = Rφ + 2βR sin

(22)

φ
2

,

F⊥ ≃

e2
4πε0R∆s

.

F
F
D
In the case under study, since ∆s ≪ R/γ3, the total self-
force acting on the system is given by the sum of Eq.
(21) and Eq. (24):

Then, since the mechanical energy-momentum pair of

a single particle is a 4-vector, one gets:

F⊥ ≃ 2

e2
4πε0R∆s

,

(25)

hence

(Ene/c, Pne)µ = Λµ

ν(E

′
ne/c, P

′
ne)ν ,

(28)

6

which is in disagreement of a factor 2 with respect to the
self-force term in Eq. (16). In other words, had we erro-
neously assumed covariance, we would have encountered
a paradox. Again, note that we are treating the asymp-
totic limit of a small distance between the two electrons:
in this limit we can neglect the contribution from the
acceleration ﬁeld in the equation of motion Eq.
(16).
In fact this contribution saturates for small distance be-
tween the two particles (see [14]), while the term missing
by comparison between Eq. (16) and Eq. (25) is singular
(and, therefore, dominating) in the limit when ∆s goes
to zero.

This situation should not be too much surprising for
the reader familiar with the works [1]... [3] which led to
Eq. (1) and (2): the derivation of Eq. (16) is, in fact,
performed under the explicit assumption that energy and
momentum constitute a four-vector.

As we will immediately see, in the case of unstable
systems (like the one we deal with), the use of correct
transformation laws for the electromagnetic stress ten-
sor solves the problem but spoils the covariance of the
energy-momentum pair.

The energy and momentum of an electromagnetic sys-

tem in the laboratory frame is given by

E =

Z

′µνΛ0

T

µΛ0
ν

dV ′
γ

P i =

1
c Z

′µνΛi

T

µΛ0
ν

dV ′
γ

,

(26)

(27)

where T µν are the components (in the rest frame) of the
electromagnetic stress tensor of the system, which con-
tains all the information about the (electromagnetic) ﬁeld
theory governing the interactions between the particles.
The process of lowering and raising indexes is governed
in the usual way by the metric tensor. Here the latin in-
dex i runs from 1 to 3 and, as already said, the quantities
with prime refer to the rest frame. In our case we will
consider the only important component, i.e.
the third
(along z).

Note that the integrals in Eq. (26) and Eq. (27) in-
clude both a single-particle term and an interaction term
(compare also [9]). Here we are interested in the inter-
action term alone: in fact we will treat the (trivial) me-
chanical contributions to the energy-momentum pair sep-
arately and, once again, we will neglect the acceleration-
ﬁeld contributions. Therefore, in the following, we will
understand that T ′ refers to the interaction term alone.

Ene = 2γmc2

(29)

Pne = 2βγmc.

(30)

and

while

Ee = β2γ

′33dV

T

′

+ γU

′

,

(31)

Z

Pe = γβU

/c + γβ/c

′

′33dV

′

,

T

(32)

Z

We should note, here (but this is a valid methodological
remark also as regards the previous, incorrect approach),
that the particles are subject to a long-range interaction
(the electromagnetic interaction) and, therefore, a covari-
ant deﬁnition of the total energy and momentum is not
straightforward even when one is considering the two par-
ticles alone, without including (as we did, instead) the
electromagnetic ﬁelds in the system. Therefore, strictly
speaking, one may object that Eq. (28) does not make
any sense at all.

Indeed, if the interaction occurred at a single point in
space-time (short-range scattering case), the particle ve-
locities would have been constant, in the view of any
inertial observer, before and after the scattering took
place. Then if two observers related by a Lorentz boost
compared their judgments about the particles velocities,
they would have found that these are linked by a Lorentz
transformation, the same which transforms from one ob-
server to the other. Nevertheless, this is a particular
case. We must remember that, in general, according to
the Theory of Relativity, the concept of simultaneity de-
pends on the observer. Therefore, when (as in the situa-
tion under study) one deals with a long-range interaction,
the velocities of the particles, in the judgment of the two
observers above, are not related by a Lorentz transfor-
mation anymore (see [15]): the objection about the cor-
rect deﬁnition of the mechanical energy-momentum vec-
tor follows directly from this observation. A good deﬁni-
tion of the energy-momentum vector of the two-particle
system alone (without their ﬁelds!) can, in fact, be re-
covered using more subtle geometrical methods only, like
a regular correlated representation of the world lines (see
[15]).

However this objection does not concern us, here,
since, as already implicit in the deﬁnition of the z di-
rection, we discuss about that region of space-time in
which the two particles world lines are very close and are
roughly characterized by the same Lorentz factor, that
is, once again, at the beginning of the evolution.

Then we can use Eq. (28)... Eq. (32) to get, by sum-
mation, the total energy and momentum of the system
in the laboratory frame and in the direction of motion
(see also [4] and [16]):

Etot = γ

2mc2 + U

+ β2

′

′33 dV

T

′

(cid:18)

Z

,

(cid:19)

(33)

and

Ptot = γ

2m + U

′

/c2 +

′33 dV

T

′

βc .

(34)

1
c2 Z

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

Note that Eq. (33) and Eq. (34) can be used to obtain
Eq. (1) and Eq. (2), as well as Eq. (4)... Eq. (7): diﬀer-
ent distributions of charge give diﬀerent expressions for
the electromagnetic stress tensor and for the electromag-
netic energy.

In our case of two electrons we already know the ex-
plicit expression for U ′. In fact we remind that, as has
already been said, the electromagnetic interaction energy
is simply given by the work done against the ﬁeld to bring
the two particles together, quasistatically, from a situa-
tion in which they are separated by an inﬁnite distance:

7

(38)

(39)

The equations for the energy and momentum of the

system in the laboratory frame now read:

Etot = γ

2mc2 + U

′

(cid:2)

(1 + β2)
(cid:3)

and

Ptot = γ

′

/c2

βc ,

2m + 2U
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

whose electromagnetic parts are the same of Eq. (4) and
Eq. (5).

From the transverse component of the equation of mo-

tion for the system one gets

F⊥syst ≃ 2eBβc + 2

(40)

e2
4πε0R∆s

Eq. (40) is now in perfect agreement with our result

in Eq. (25).

Both the terms on the right hand side of Eq. (40) are
centripetal as well as in Eq. (16) (although, of course,
Eq. (16) and Eq. (40) are in disagreement as concerns
the magnitude of the self-interaction term); the ﬁrst de-
scribes the motion of the system under a magnetic ﬁeld,
while the second is linked with the presence, in the sys-
tem, of electromagnetic ﬁelds: an extra centripetal (ex-
ternal) force is needed, if one wants to keep the system
moving in a circle of radius R, compensating for the cen-
trifugal self-ﬁeld contributions calculated in [11].

′ ≃

U

e2
4πε0γ∆s

.

(35)

III. DISCUSSION

On the other hand it is easy to calculate T ′33 (in the
rest frame, since we need to integrate over V ′). To this
purpose we remind that, in the rest frame (and at short
distance γ∆s ≪ R/γ2, so that the acceleration ﬁeld con-
tributions are unimportant), the space-space components
of the total (comprehensive of both single particle and in-
teraction part) symmetric energy-momentum tensor read
(see [4]):

′ij
tot = −ε0(E

′
iE

′
j − δij E

T

′2/2) ,

(36)

where, here, i, j = 1.. 3. The discussion above shows
that, for us, the only interesting component is T ′
It
33.
can be proven that the interaction part alone is just

′33 dV

T

′

′

= U

.

Z

(37)

Note that Eq. (37) describes also the case of a charged
line distribution oriented in the direction of motion (in
the case of a charged line, of course, the single-particle
term is not present at all).

In order to reach the agreement between Eq. (40) and
Eq. (25), one has to give up the covariance of the energy-
momentum pair of our system, as it is seen directly from
Eq. (38) and Eq. (39).

We can sum up the discussion in Section II by saying
that the assumption of covariance for the transforma-
tion of the energy-momentum pair of an unstable system
leads to a paradox. Such a paradox can be solved intro-
ducing the correct transformation laws for the energy-
momentum tensor. In this way, it is seen that the energy-
momentum pair for an unstable system (particles and
electromagnetic ﬁeld) is not a four-vector. We already
mentioned in Section I, that the non-covariant character
of energy and momentum is also present when one dis-
cusses some classical problems which involve the relativis-
tic dynamics of a charged particles stable system. Never-
theless, in these cases, covariance can be always restored
by introducing non-electromagnetic stresses which keep
the system together or, equivalently, by redeﬁnition (see
[7]) of the energy-momentum pair. In particular we can
refer to the 4/3 problem in the classical electron model
(as done above in Section I) but also to other problems
like, for example, the explanation of the Trouton-Noble

paradox, which has been treated extensively in literature
(see [8], [17].. [20]) all over the last century.

As we already said in Section I, there is one major
diﬀerence with respect to our case, though: our system,
in contrast with the latter ones, is, by nature, unstable;
there is no reference frame such that its components are
and stay at rest. This fact leads to a major diﬀerence in
the treatment of the total energy and momentum.

In the case of a stable system, the total energy and
momentum of the system (including non-electromagnetic
binding forces) constitute a four-vector, a well-deﬁned
geometrical entity.

On the contrary, in the case of an unstable system, this
pair of quantities has no geometrical meaning, although it
is possible to give, of course, separate deﬁnitions of total
energy and momentum in the judgment of any observer.
In the situation discussed in Section II this is a direct
consequence of the fact that we deal with a fully electro-
dynamical system and there is no way to introduce, in
a straightforward way, an analogue of Poincar´e stresses.
As a result we must conclude that stability of the system
and covariance of the energy-momentum pair are bound
together.

Let us discuss the latter statements in detail, starting
with a review of well-known arguments for stable sys-
tems.

Stable systems are characterized by a zero (total self-
) four-force density. When the four-force density can be
derived from an energy-momentum tensor T µν, the latter
property is equivalent to:

T µν

;µ = 0 ,

(41)

which is the requirement for a zero-divergency energy-
momentum tensor.
However, Eq.

(41) refers to the total energy-
momentum tensor, while the electromagnetic part of it
is not divergenceless at all (its divergence is, simply, the
Lorentz four-force density).

On the other hand, since stability is characterized by a
zero total four-force density, non-electromagnetic stresses
must be present (Poincar´e stresses), which balance the
Lorentz four-force density, thus insuring stability for the
system. Poincar´e stresses also insure covariance for the
energy-momentum pair which is, therefore, a well-deﬁned
four-vector: to prove this, one can remember the deﬁni-
tion of the total energy-momentum pair (see [4], [8]):

P µ =

T µνdσν

1
c Zσ

(42)

where the integration is carried out over any hypersurface
at t = constant (actually σ may be, more generally, any
spacelike surface, see [8]) for any inertial observer.

It can be easily proved (see [8]) that Eq. (42) is inde-
pendent from the choice of the integration hypesurface.
Such a proof is based on Eq. (41).

8

The choice of diﬀerent inertial observers is equivalent
to the choice, on the space-time manifold, of diﬀerent
time-like unit vectors. The diﬀerent families of hypersur-
faces orthogonal to these vectors represent the physical
space at a certain time in the judgement of diﬀerent ob-
servers. From the independence of the deﬁnition in Eq.
(42) of the choice of the integration hypersurface follows,
therefore, the independence of P µ on the reference frame
used to evaluate it, and this constitutes the proof that
P µ is a well-deﬁned four-vector.

Since P µ is independent from the choice of the inte-
gration hypersurface, one is free to choose the one which
helps better in solving problems. Historically, two choices
have been used in explaining, for example, the Trouton-
Noble paradox. The ﬁrst (see [8]) consists in considering
the surface at t = constant for any observer. This leads
to the usual expressions for the electromagnetic energy
and momentum in a given frame:

Ee
c

= P 0

e =

1
2c Z (cid:18)

ǫ0E2 +

B2
µ0 (cid:19)

dV

(43)

and

and

Pe =

1
µ0c2 Z

(E × B) dV,

(44)

where µ0 is the free space permeability.

While Eq. (43) and Eq. (44) do not constitute a four-
vector, one can straightforwardly solve the problem of
the lack of covariance by introducing Poincar´e stresses.
The second choice consists in selecting t = constant in

the rest frame of the system:

Ee
c

= P 0

e =

1
c Z (cid:20)

1
2 (cid:18)

ǫ0E2 +

B2
µ0 (cid:19)

− v ·

E × B
µ0c2 (cid:21)

dV

(45)

Pe =

γ
c Z h

E × B
µ0c

−

v
2

·

(cid:18)

ǫ0E2 +

+

+ǫ0(v · E)E + (v · B)

dV

(46)

B2
µ0 (cid:19)
B
µ0 i

In this case it can be easily shown (see [7], [8]) that the
electromagnetic part of the total energy-momentum pair
is, actually, a four-vector. This is, in fact, the same re-
deﬁnition of the four-momentum that Rohrlich used to
deal with the electron problem [7]. One can easily check
(see [8]) that, in this case, the non-electromagnetic part
of the total energy-momentum pair is zero.

All this illustrates the well-known fact that the in-
troduction of Poincar´e stresses or the Rohrlich redeﬁni-
tion of energy and momentum are, in fact, equivalent in
essence. The choice of the integration hypersurface is a

matter of taste for stable systems, since the only impor-
tant quantity from a geometrical viewpoint is the total
energy-momentum four-vector, given by the sum of the
electromagnetic and the non-electromagnetic part; this
sum, by deﬁnition, is independent from such a choice.
In other words, diﬀerent choices of the hypersurface just
split the same, total quantity onto two parts (electromag-
netic and non-electromagnetic) in two distinct ways but,
as quoted from [8] : ”The split into electromagnetic and
non-electromagnetic parts is quite arbitrary”.

Our point is that this situation is completely diﬀerent
in the case of unstable systems, where only electromag-
netic forces are present and Poincar´e stresses are not.

In the case of unstable systems there is no way one
can deﬁne the total energy-momentum four-vector. This
statement is justiﬁed, from a mathematical viewpoint, by
the fact that

T µν
tot ;µ = T µν
e

;µ 6= 0 ;

(47)

in fact, from the previous discussion, we know that diver-
genceless is an essential ingredient for the independence
of the total energy-momentum pair from the choice of
the integration hypersurface.

Note that Eq. (47) means that there is a non-vanishing
four-force density ﬁeld over the space-time. In the case
discussed in Section II we gave a practical example of the
latter statements.

Of course, also for unstable systems, we may consider
an observer and ﬁnd out the energy and momentum of
the system with respect to that observer, but this quan-
tities will not be covariant, nor we can recover covariance
by integrating the energy-momentum tensor over a suit-
able hypersurface (as done with stable systems), since the
electromagnetic energy-momentum pair (which coincides
now with the total energy-momentum pair) would change
Eq. (38) and Eq. (39), thus giving an unphysical result
on the second term of Eq. (40), when compared with Eq.
(25). The latter discrepancy, to the authors view, is sim-
ilar to the one encountered in [9]. In that paper a system
composed by two electron is studied too and a compar-
ison is proposed between energy-derived mass mu (elec-
trostatic energy divided by c2), momentum derived mass
mp (momentum divided by γv, being v the system veloc-
ity) and self-force-derived mass ms (self-force divided by
γ3a, a being the system acceleration). The authors of [9]
point out that ms = mp 6= mu and that the inequality be-
tween mp and mu can be solved by redeﬁning, following
Rohrlich (see [7]) the energy-momentum pair. Neverthe-
less, in this case, one is left with a discrepancy between
ms and mu. This fact is perceived by the authors of
[9] as an unsolved paradox. Actually the derivation of
Eq. (16) (or equivalently, of mu, treated with Rohrlich’s
method) is performed under the explicit assumption that
energy and momentum constitute a four-vector which is
true only in the case of a stable system. As a result, by
comparing Eq. (16) and Eq. (25) or, which is the same,
mu (treated by Rohrlich’s method or, equivalently, by in-

9

troducing Poincar´e stresses) with ms, one is comparing
quantities which refer to a stable system with quantities
which refer to an unstable one, thus giving a paradoxical
result.

Consider, as a last example, an unstable system formed
by diﬀerent subsystems initially at rest in a certain frame
(as in the case discussed in Section II). In general, while
dealing with unstable systems, the knowledge of dynam-
ical quantities for the subsystems cannot bring any in-
formation about the behavior of the system as a whole,
unless we have knowledge of the (electromagnetic) ﬁeld
theory governing the interactions (which make the sys-
tem unstable).

In our example of Section II, even if we can measure, in
a certain frame, the particle velocities when they are far
away from each other (thus no more interacting) and if
we know their rest masses, we cannot say anything about
energy and momentum of the total system without the
knowledge of the stress tensor, and the reason for that is
the presence of a non-zero four-force density ﬁeld (which
we can account for only knowing the stress tensor, i.e. the
interaction theory) on that part of the four-dimensional
manifold on which we want to have information.

Suppose our system was stable (think about an ideal
”rope” responsible for Poincar´e stresses, or think, instead
of the case of two electrons, about a nuclear ﬁssion pro-
cess in which electromagnetic ﬁelds are, before the ﬁssion
event, balanced by the strong interaction). Put ourselves
in the laboratory frame, and imagine that, at a certain
moment, for a certain reason (a collision with a neutron,
for example) the Poincar´e stresses are not present any-
more. Thus the system becomes unstable, it breaks in
two subsystems and the electromagnetic interaction (if
you’re thinking about the nucleus imagine we are talking
about a charged ion) takes over. If we wait for enough
time the two particles will get far away from each other
and we can consider them no more interacting.

At this point, the kinetic energy of the particles is equal
to the energy previously stored in the electromagnetic
ﬁeld when the system was stable: thus we are able to
get information about the total energy-momentum vector
of the stable system even if we do not know anything
about the stress tensor and the theory of the interaction
between the subsystems. In fact, the sum of the momenta
of the two free particles and the sum of their energies will
give us, respectively, the energy and the momentum of
the stable system, which form a four-vector again.

The reason is, simply, that there is no four-force den-
sity ﬁeld in that part of the space time on which we want
from a general viewpoint we can
to have information:
conclude that the presence of a four-force density, which
characterizes unstable systems, spoils without remedy
the covariance of the energy-momentum pair. The only
way to recover such covariance would be to introduce a
balancing four-force density, i.e. to make the system sta-
ble.

In other words, in agreement with Poincar´e, from the
stability of the system follows the covariance of the sys-

tem and, vice versa, from covariance follows stability:
the energy-momentum pair of an unstable system does
not constitute a four-vector. This conclusion may seem,
at ﬁrst glance, of academical importance only.
It has,
indeed, very practical consequences in modern electron
beam physics. Energy and momentum of an electron
bunch are physically measurable quantities and an elec-
tron bunch itself is a practical example of an unstable
system. Nowadays, technology allows the production
of ultra high-brightness, intense electron beams (to be
used, for example, in self-ampliﬁed spontaneous emis-
sion (SASE)-free-electron lasers operating in the x-ray
regime). The production of such bunches is one of the
most challenging activities for particle accelerators physi-
cists. The description of these systems would be com-
pletely incorrect without accounting for self-interactions
in the right way. We can conclude that, for example, sim-
ulation codes (as well as analytical considerations: ac-
tually, as already reminded, we wrote this paper after
studying the self-interactions within an electron bunch)
which rely on the covariance of the energy-momentum
pair would give, a priori, wrong results which may be im-

mediately confuted by experimental control. Technologi-
cal developments often transform, as in this case, purely
methodological issues into very practical ones.

10

IV. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors acknowledge Reinhard Brinkmann, Georg
Hoﬀstaetter, Martin Dohlus, Helmut Mais and Evgeni
Schneidmiller (DESY), Yaroslav Derbenev, Rui Li and
Yuhong Zhang (Jeﬀerson Lab), Mikhail Yurkov (JINR),
Jan Botman, Jom Luiten and Marnix van der Wiel (Tech-
nische Universiteit Eindhoven) with useful discussions.
Moreover G.G. greatly appreciates ﬁnancial support from
the Centrum voor Plasmafysica en Stralingstechnologie
(CPS, the Dutch Centre for Plasma Physics and Radi-
ation Technology) and both ﬁnancial support and hos-
pitality granted by the Center for Advanced Studies of
Accelerators (CASA) at Thomas Jeﬀerson National Lab-
oratory during his work on this paper.

[1] M. Abraham, Theorie der Elektrizitat, vol II: Elek-
tromagnetische Theorie der Stralung, Teubner, Leipzig,
1905

[2] H.A. Lorentz, The Theory of electrons, Leipzig, Teubner,

1909

[3] M. Abraham, Phys. Z., 5, 1904
[4] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, Wiley, N.Y.
[5] H. Poincar´e, On the dynamics of the electron, Rendiconti

submitted to Phys. Rev. E

[12] TESLA Technical Design Report, DESY 2001-011,
edited by F. Richard et al. and http://tesla.desy.de/
[13] The LCLS Design Study Group, LCLS Design Study Re-
port, SLAC reports SLAC -R521, Stanford (1998)
and http://www-ssrl.slac.stanford.edu/lcls/CDR

[14] E. L. Saldin, E. A. Schneidmiller and M. V. Yurkov, Nucl.

Instr. Methods A 398, 373 (1997)

del Circolo Matematico di Palerma 21, 129, 1906

[15] M.A. Trump at al., Classical Relativistic Many-Body Dy-

[6] E. Fermi, Il Nuovo Cimento, 25, 159-170, 1923
[7] F. Rohrlich, Classical Charged Particles
Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1965), Sec. 6-3

[8] S. A. Teukolsky, Am. J. Phys. 64 (9), 1104, 1996
[9] D. J. Griﬃths and R. E. Owen, Am. J. Phys. 51 (12),

1120, 1983

[10] M. H. Mac Gregor, The enigmatic electron (Kluwer Aca-
demic Publishers, Dordrecht /Boston/London, edited by
Alwyn van der Merwe), pp. 19-24

[11] G. Geloni et al., DESY 02-048, May 2002; also, to be

(Addison-

[16] C. M¨oller, The theory of relativity, second edition, Chap-

namics, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1999

ter 7, Clarendon press, Oxford (1972)
[17] M. v. Laue, Ann. Phys. 35, 524, 1911
[18] W. Pauli, The thory of relativity, (Pergamon, New York,

1958)

[19] A. K. Singal, Am. J. Phys. 61, 428, 1993
[20] J. W. Butler, Am. J. Phys. 36, 936, 1968

