3
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
9
0
4
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SLAC–PUB–9704
August 2002

Microfabrication of Laser-Driven Accelerator Structures∗

B. Cowan
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94309

Abstract

We discuss the potential for using microfabrication techniques for laser-driven accelerator construc-
tion. We introduce microfabrication processes in general, and then describe our investigation of a par-
ticular trial process. We conclude by considering the issues microfabrication raises for possible future
structures.

Submitted to Tenth Advanced Accelerator Concepts Workshop (AAC 2002), June 23–28, 2002,
Mandalay Beach, California (AIP Conference Proceedings)

1 Introduction

Experiments to demonstrate laser-driven charged particle acceleration in vacuum have thus far relied largely
on macroscopic structures, that is, structures large enough to be assembed by hand and many optical wave-
lengths in size. For instance, in the LEAP experiment conducted at Stanford University [1], the accelerator
cell is approximately 1 cm long in each dimension compared to a laser wavelength of 800 nm, and is assem-
bled by manually gluing together high-reﬂection coated quartz prisms.

Such accelerator structures are not designed to be candidates for use in a real accelerator, and indeed
their capabilities are clearly not close to what would be needed in a functioning machine. For instance,
the LEAP cell has a maximum accelerating gradient of 10 MeV/m, and with acceleration of 1 pC bunches
over a distance of 1.5 mm using 36 µJ laser pulses at the LEAP cell, the structure has an electron-to-photon
efﬁciency of 4.2 × 10−4. With just one cell, the overall wall-plug efﬁciency of the setup is much less, close
to 10−10.

These performance parameters can be traced fundamentally to the large size of the structure; for effective
accelerator cells a much smaller structure is required. Consider a laser ﬁeld propagating in free space, which
largely describes the ﬁeld in the LEAP cell. The peak longitudinal ﬁeld Ez on axis obeys the general scaling
law Ez/Ex ∼ λ/w0, where Ex is the peak transverse ﬁeld, λ is the wavelength, and w0 is the transverse
mode size. This relation is exact for the case of a Gaussian TEM10 mode, but even approximately this
scaling law serves to illustrate the dependence of Ez on the mode size. At the same time, the maximum
ﬁeld amplitude |E| is ﬁxed by the damage threshold of the optics, so higher gradients cannot be obtained
by arbitrarily increasing the laser intensity. Therefore, for optimum gradient the laser mode size must be
comparable to the wavelength, as is the case with RF structures.

Attaining good shunt impedance in a laser-driven structure also constrains possible designs. For rea-
sonable efﬁciency a structure must accelerate particles continuously over a distance large compared to a
wavelength. Therefore simply focusing a low-intensity laser pulse down to a very narrow waist to avoid
∗Work supported by Department of Energy contract DE-AC03-76SF00515 (SLAC) and by DOE grant no. DE-FG03-

97ER41043-II.

1

optical damage will not be effective, since the small spot will diffract quickly and will not accelerate for any
appreciable distance. Also, a structure may need to store laser energy for the next electron bunch. Therefore,
a structure with both high gradient and good efﬁciency must be small, with feature sizes on the order of an
optical wavelength. Fortunately, technology now exists or is rapidly being developed to fabricate such small
structures, even for wavelengths in the visible or near-infrared.

2 Microfabrication Overview

We refer to microfabrication, in general, as a type of process using a set of techniques and equipment
commonly used to manufacture integrated circuits (IC’s) and microelectromechanical devices (MEMS).
Such a process typically starts with a bare wafer, usually of silicon. Processing of the wafer involves several
types of procedures, which we describe brieﬂy below; detailed discussions can be found in references on IC
or MEMS techniques, for instance [2] or [3].

Photolithography, perhaps the most important process step, deﬁnes the structure by transferring a pattern
from a mask onto an organic photoresist on the wafer surface. This is usually followed by etching, in
which material is selectively removed from the wafer. Thin ﬁlm deposition procedures allow many different
materials to be deposited in layers on the wafer, and a thin ﬁlm of SiO2 can be grown directly on a silicon
surface by the process of thermal oxidation. Ion implantation allows dopants to be added to the structure,
which diffuse through the material during subsequent high-temperature process steps. In IC manufacturing
this is primarily used to control electrical properties of materials, but it can be used to control chemical
and possibly optical properties as well. Chemical-mechanical polishing has recently become a common
procedure for planarizing the topography of a wafer at certain points in a process. Finally, the importance of
cleaning cannot be ignored. Usually involving immersion in chemical baths, each followed by a deionized
water rinse, as well as adherence to cleanroom procedures, removing particulates and chemical contaminants
to suppress defects is critical to IC manufacturing and will probably be equally important in accererator
microstructure fabrication.

Microfabrication has great potential for accurately making small accelerator structures. Not only are
highly precise procedures available now, but continued rapid improvement is driven by the extraordinary
market forces in the IC industry. For instance, control of certain feature sizes is expected to reach 0.5 nm
RMS by 2010 [4]. That silicon processes are so well established can be exploited for optically-driven
accelerators, since silicon transmits in the telecommunications band at 1.5 µm wavelength, where many
optical components are available and continue to be improved. For research purposes, there is an advanced
fabrication facility at Stanford [5] where the procedures mentioned above are available. Finally, subsequent
mass production using microfabrication techniques is inexpensive; this is critical since, for instance, an
accelerator the length of the SLAC linac would use 10,000 300-mm wafers, the current state-of-the-art
wafer size.

3 Trial Process

We have explored a trial microfabrication process for a replacement LEAP cell. While the purpose of this
project was primarily to explore microfabrication procedures, it was motivated by the current LEAP cell
design. As described in [1], the LEAP accelerator structure consists of two pairs of dielectric surfaces
oriented at 45° to each other, with a slit in the middle for electron beam passage. Each surface has a high-
reﬂector dielectric coating. The microfabricated cell is designed to form the e-beam slits by etching them
through a silicon wafer. The etch pattern on the wafer is shown in Figure 1. Up to four reﬂecting rectangles
would be etched from a 4-inch wafer, and each surface would have several slits. The rectangles would

2

Figure 1: The mask pattern for the trial process. The dark area corresponds to the region to be etched. The
wafer ﬂat is in a {111} crystal plane. T. Plettner contributed to this ﬁgure.

3

mask

resist

develop

Figure 2: Patterning the photoresist.

then be aligned in pairs at a 45° angle. Unlike the current LEAP cell, the slits would not be individually
adjustable, but there would be slits of several widths in each rectangle. In addition, having several slits
would allow a new slit to be moved into place easily should one be damaged during the experiment.

The process of etching a pattern in a silicon wafer can be summarized simply as follows: We deposit
layers of material on the wafer, and then selectively remove the areas to be etched from each layer, with
each deposited layer protecting the regions not to be etched of the layer beneath. However, each step of the
process involves a different procedure using different equipment. We now describe in some detail each step
of the process.

The ﬁnal step of the process will be to etch the silicon in a potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution. While
the pattern will initially be imprinted in photoresist, the resist cannot be used directly to mask the KOH since
the KOH will eat it away as it etches the silicon. Therefore an intermediate layer is required to mask the
silicon. Silicon nitride (Si3N4) provides a good masking material, as it etches negligibly slowly in KOH [6].
Therefore, the ﬁrst step of the process is to deposit a thin ﬁlm of Si3N4 on the silicon substrate.

We deposit a 200 nm ﬁlm of Si3N4using low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD). In this
procedure dichlorosilane and ammonia gases are run through a furnace containing the wafers at about 1 torr
and 700°C. These gases react on the wafer surface to produce Si3N4. One hour of deposition is sufﬁcient to
give a 200 nm ﬁlm.

One the nitride is deposited we spin on a layer of photoresist. This is accomplished by dropping a small
puddle of the liquid resist compound on the wafer and then spinning the wafer at 3000–5000 RPM for about
60 s. After the ﬁrst few seconds of spinning the resist coats the wafer uniformly; the rest of the spinning
serves to dry the resist. The resist is then baked to harden it to prevent ﬂow during the development step,
discussed below.

The pattern is transferred to the photoresist by placing a chome-on-glass mask over the wafer, with
chrome absent from regions corresponding to etched regions on the wafer. The wafer is then brought into
contact with the mask and the mask is exposed from above to 365-nm UV light from a mercury lamp. This
exposes only the regions of photoresist to be removed, causing a chemical reaction in the resist. The resist

4

Plasma 
etch

resist

nitride

silicon

KOH 
etch

Figure 3: Etching the slit pattern in the wafer.

compound was deliberately chosen to be thin to avoid diffraction effects; this is a concern because the slits
in the mask are as thin as 1 µm. After a bake, the wafer is immersed in a developer solution, removing the
exposed regions of photoresist. This procedure is shown schematically in Figure 2.

Once the photoresist is patterned, the wafer is plasma etched using CF4 and O2 gases. This removes
the nitride not protected by photoresist. Once the plasma etch is complete, the resist can be removed using
chemical solvents plus a quick plasma etch in O2, oten called a plasma “ash,” to remove any remaining
organic residues.

Finally, the wafer is etched in KOH solution. The etch is highly anisotropic, proceeding much faster
in the h110i direction than in the h111i direction. In fact, etch ratios of greater than 600 to 1 have been
obtained [6]. This is why the wafer ﬂat in Figure 1 is oriented in the {111} plane, and it also requires that
the wafer surface be a {110} plane. We have found that ultrasonically agitating the KOH solution improves
the etch rate considerably. Once the KOH etches entirely through the wafer, the nitride can be removed
using the same plasma etch used above or in a hot phosphoric acid solution, and then the optical coating can
be applied. The etch process is shown schematically in Figure 3.

So far, we have obtained a 1 µm slit in the nitride coating, and etched all the way through a 500 µm-
thick wafer. However, the narrowest slit we have been able to obtain is still 40–50 µm wide, and better
alignment between the mask and the {111} crystal plane will likely be able to improve upon this. The slit
walls appear vertical under an optical microscope but proper observation of the structure requires an SEM
scan. Depositing the dielectric coating without clogging the slits may prove difﬁcult, especially because
high-reﬂector coatings require many layers. As described in [2], thin ﬁlm deposition geometry is highly
nontrivial and an appropriate simulation would be required.

5

4 Microfabrication Possibilities

The use of microfabrication presents possibilities for laser-driven accelerator structures well beyond those
available through bulk machining. One possibility is to use a photonic crystal structure, for instance as
proposed by Lin [7]. However, the available procedures in a microfabrication process do impose constraints
on the type of structure used.

The structure material must be lossless at a convenient laser wavelength, radiation hard, and the substrate
material must have high thermal conductivity. Also, the structure material must be easily etched, and if the
structure is made of more than one material there must be processes available to selectively etch them
independently. Therefore a glass photonic crystal ﬁber as proposed in [7] is not viable because SiO2 is not
radiation hard, and ﬁbers do not release heat easily.

However, other materials may be used for a similar structure. Silicon, as mentioned above, transmits
at the 1.5 µm wavelength, and is possibly is even better suited for use at a 2.5 µm wavelength. There is an
immense microfabrication technology base for silicon, and it may be used as a substrate, even if it is not
suited for a structure, because of its wide availability and good thermal conductivity. Quartz and sapphire
are also possible materials, as is diamond. Photonic crystal structures might use these materials, and in fact
a mid-infrared photonic bandgap structure has been microfabricated in silicon [8].

It is worth noting that there are several differences in fabrication considerations between IC and op-
tical structure fabrication, and that the task of optical structure fabrication may in fact be easier than IC
manufacturing for these reasons. For instance, laser-driven accelerator structures are unlikely to depend on
particular doping proﬁles, whereas maintaining precise dopant concentrations is critical in the IC industry.
Therefore IC manufacturers have a limited thermal budget for their processes, while we are free to use
high-temperature procedues at will during an accelerator structure process. Also, IC’s involve quite a few
materials of different chemical properties and many mask geometries. By contrast, accelerator structures
will likely have much greater symmetry or regularity. In fact, the structure described in [8] uses only one ma-
terial and just one mask in a repetitive process which is quite simple compared to a typical IC manufacturing
process.

All of these considerations give microfabrication techniques great potential for producing laser-driven
accelerator structures. The variety of techniques and equipment is vast, and we look forward to exploring
further their use as we investigate possible accelerator structures.

5 Acknowledgements

Thanks to J. Mansell for valuable input on the trial process and N. Latta, M. Mansourpour, and U. Thumser
of SNF for helpful guidance on using the equipment. Work supported in part by Department of Energy
contract DE-AC03-76SF00515 (SLAC) and by DOE grant no. DE-FG03-97ER41043-II.

References

[1] T. Plettner et. al., “Progress of the Laser Electron Accelerator Project at Stanford University,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 2001 Particle Accelerator Conference, edited by P. Lucas and S. Webber, pp. 108–110

[2] Plummer, J. D., Deal, M. D., and Grifﬁn, P. B., Silicon VLSI Technology: Fundamentals, Practice, and

Modeling, Prentice Hall, 2000

2002

[3] Madou, M. J., Fundamentals of Microfabrication: The Science of Miniaturization, 2nd ed., CRC Press,

6

[4] “International

Technology
http://www.semi.org/.

Roadmap

for

Semiconductors”,

SIA

2001.

See

[5] The Stanford Nanofabrication Facility; see http://snf.stanford.edu.

[6] Bean, K. E., IEEE Trans. Electron. Devices 25 1185–93 (1978)

[7] Lin, X. E., Phys. Rev. Special Topics, Accelerators and Beams 4 051301 (2001)

[8] S. Y. Lin et. al., Nature 394 251–253 (1998)

7

