3
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
3
1
6
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Muon Cooling Research and Development ⋆

IIT-HEP-03/2

Daniel M Kaplan 1

Physics Division, Illinois Institute of Technology, 3101 S. Dearborn Street,
Chicago, Illinois, 60616 USA

for the MuCool Collaboration

D R A F T 27 September 2013

Abstract

The MuCool R&D program is described. The aim of MuCool is to develop all key
pieces of hardware required for ionization cooling of a muon beam. This eﬀort will
lead to a more detailed understanding of the construction and operating costs of
such hardware, as well as to optimized designs that can be used to build a Neutrino
Factory or Muon Collider. This work is being undertaken by a broad collaboration
including physicists and engineers from many national laboratories and universities
in the U.S. and abroad. The intended schedule of work will lead to ionization cooling
being well enough established that a construction decision for a Neutrino Factory
could be taken before the end of this decade based on a solid technical foundation.

1 Introduction

The possibility of building a muon accelerator has received much attention in
recent years [1,2,3,4]. In particular, decay neutrinos from a stored high-energy
muon beam [5] may well provide the ultimate tool for the study of neutrino
oscillations [6] and their possible role in baryogenesis via CP-violating neutrino
mixing [7]. The goal for such a Neutrino Factory is ∼ 1021 neutrinos/year
(requiring a similar number of muons/year stored in the ring).

⋆ Presented at the International Workshop on Beam Cooling and Related Topics
(COOL03), May 19–23, 2001, Lake Yamanaka, Japan.
1 E-mail: kaplan@fnal.gov

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

27 September 2013

Muon beams at the required intensity can only be produced into a large phase
space, but aﬀordable existing acceleration technologies require a small input
beam. This mismatch could be alleviated by developing new, large-aperture,
acceleration techniques [8], by “cooling” the muon beam to reduce its size,
or both. Given the 2.2-µs muon lifetime, only one cooling technique is fast
enough: ionization cooling, in which muons repeatedly traverse an energy-
absorbing medium, alternating with accelerating devices, within a strongly
focusing magnetic lattice [9,10,11,12]. The main focus of the MuCool Collab-
oration [13] has been development of hardware devices and systems that can
be used for ionization cooling of a muon beam.

2 Ionization cooling channels: design considerations

In an ionization-cooling channel, ionization of the energy-absorbing medium
decreases all three muon-momentum components without aﬀecting the beam
size. This constitutes cooling (reduction of normalized emittance) since the re-
duction of each particle’s momentum results in a reduced transverse-momentum
spread of the beam as a whole. If desired, a portion of this transverse cooling
eﬀect can be rotated into the longitudinal phase plane by inserting suitably
shaped energy absorbers into dispersive regions of the lattice (“emittance ex-
change”); longitudinal ionization cooling per se is impractical due to energy-
loss straggling [11].

Within an absorber the rate of change of normalized transverse emittance is
given approximately by [9,10,14]

dǫn
ds

≈ −

1
β2

dEµ
ds +

ǫn
Eµ

*

+

1
β3

β⊥(0.014)2
2EµmµLR

.

(1)

Here angle brackets denote mean value, β is the muon velocity in units of
c, muon energy Eµ is in GeV, β⊥ is the lattice beta function evaluated at
the location of the absorber, mµ is the muon mass in GeV/c2, and LR is the
radiation length of the absorber medium.

The two terms of Eq. 1 reﬂect the competition between multiple Coulomb
scattering of the muons within the absorber (a heating eﬀect) and ionization
energy loss. This favors low-Z absorber materials, the best being hydrogen
(see Table 1). Since the heating term is proportional to β⊥, the heating eﬀect
of multiple scattering is minimized by maximizing the focusing strength of the
lattice at the location of the absorbers. Superconducting solenoids are thus the
focusing element of choice in most design studies and can give β⊥ ∼ 10 cm.
The combined eﬀect of the heating and cooling terms sets an equilibrium

2

emittance at which the cooling rate goes to zero and beyond which a given
lattice cannot cool.

Between absorbers, high-gradient acceleration of the muons must be provided
to replace the lost longitudinal momentum, so that the ionization-cooling pro-
cess can be repeated many times. Ideally, this acceleration should exceed the
minimum required for momentum replacement, allowing “oﬀ-crest” operation.
This gives continual rebunching, so that even a beam with large momentum
spread remains captured in the rf bucket. Even though it is the absorbers that
actually cool the beam, for typical accelerating gradients (∼10 MeV/m, to be
compared with hdEµ/dsi ≈ 30 MeV/m for liquid hydrogen [15]), the rf cavities
dominate the length of the cooling channel (see e.g. Fig. 1). The achievable rf
gradient thus determines how much cooling is practical before an appreciable
fraction of the muons have decayed or drifted out of the bucket.

In spite of the relativistic increase of muon lifetime with energy, ionization
cooling favors low beam momentum, both because of the increase of dE/ds
for momenta below the ionization minimum [15] and since less accelerating
voltage is then required. Most Neutrino Factory and Muon Collider beam-
cooling designs and simulations to date have used momenta in the range 150−
400 MeV/c. (This is also the momentum range in which the pion-production
cross section oﬀ of thick targets tends to peak and is thus optimal for muon
production as well as cooling.) The cooling channel of Fig. 1 is optimized for
a mean muon momentum of 200 MeV/c.

As a muon beam passes through a transverse ionization-cooling lattice, its
longitudinal emittance tends to grow, due to such eﬀects as energy-loss strag-
gling. The six-dimensional emittance typically is reduced despite this longi-
tudinal heating. However, if not controlled, the longitudinal heating leads to
beam losses and thus limits the degree of transverse cooling that is practical
to achieve. Cooling lattices with longitudinal–transverse emittance exchange
(e.g., ring coolers), which can cool in all six dimensions simultaneously, have
been receiving increasing attention [16,17]. They have the potential to increase
Neutrino Factory performance and decrease cost, and are essential to achieving
suﬃcient cooling for a Muon Collider.

3 Muon-cooling technology development

An eﬀective ionization-cooling channel must include low-Z absorbers with
(if an intense muon beam is to be cooled) high power-handling capability. To
achieve low beta at the absorbers requires either high solenoidal magnetic ﬁeld
or high ﬁeld gradient [18]. To pack as much cooling as possible into the short-
est distance requires the highest practical accelerating gradient. The MuCool

3

Collaboration has embarked on R&D on all three of these technologies.

3.1 High-power liquid-hydrogen absorbers

The development of high-power liquid-hydrogen (LH2) absorbers with thin
windows has been a key goal of the MuCool R&D program [19,20,21]. Simu-
lations as well as theory show that scattering in absorber windows degrades
muon-cooling performance. (This is especially true for ring coolers, in which
the muons circulate until they approach the equilibrium emittance dictated
by multiple scattering.) We have therefore developed new shapes for the ends
of the hydrogen ﬂasks (Fig. 2) that allow signiﬁcant reduction in their thick-
ness (especially near the center where the beam intensity is maximum). We
have successfully fabricated such tapered, curved windows out of disks of alu-
minum alloy using a numerically controlled lathe. We have also devised novel
means [22] to test these nonstandard windows and demonstrate that they meet
their speciﬁcations and satisfy the applicable safety requirements [21]. By op-
timizing the maximum stress as a function of pressure, the “thinned bellows”
shape of Fig. 2 gives a central window thickness about one-quarter that of an
ASME-standard “torispherical” window [23].

Fabrication (and destructive testing as mandated by the Fermilab safety code [24])
of “tapered torispherical” windows (Fig. 2) was successfully accomplished pre-
viously [21], using the 6061-T6 alloy that is standard in cryogenic applications.
Fabrication of a series of “thinned bellows” windows is currently underway.
We are also exploring the use of lithium–aluminum alloys, such as the 2195
alloy used in the Space Shuttle (80% stronger than 6061-T6); the resulting
thinness of the window may challenge our fabrication techniques, and we will
need to certify the new alloy for machinability and high-radiation application.

The ∼ 100 W of power dissipated in these absorbers (in Feasibility Study II at
least) is within the bounds of high-power liquid-hydrogen targets developed
for, and operated in, a variety of experiments [25]. However, the highly turbu-
lent ﬂuid dynamics involved in the heat-exchange process necessarily requires
R&D for each new conﬁguration. We have identiﬁed two possible approaches:
a “conventional” ﬂow-through design with external heat exchanger, similar to
that used for high-power LH2 targets, and a convection-cooled design, with in-
ternal heat exchanger built into the absorber vessel. The convection design has
desirable mechanical simplicity and minimizes the total hydrogen volume in
the cooling channel (a signiﬁcant safety concern), but is expected to be limited
to lower power dissipation than the ﬂow-through design. To study and opti-
mize the ﬂuid mixing and heat transfer properties of these absorber designs,
we have been exploring ways to visualize the ﬂow patterns and temperature
distributions within the ﬂuid [26] and test the predictions of numerical ﬂow

4

simulations [27]. To keep window thicknesses to a minimum, both designs
operate just above 1 atm of pressure.

Various scenarios have been discussed involving substantially higher absorber
power dissipation: 1) a Neutrino Factory with a more ambitious Proton Driver
(4 MW proton-beam power on the pion-production target instead of the 1 MW
assumed in Study-II) is a relatively straightforward and cost-eﬀective design
upgrade [1], 2) the “bunched-beam phase rotation” scenario of Neuﬀer [28]
captures µ+ and µ− simultaneously, doubling the absorber power dissipation,
and 3) a ring cooler [16] would entail multiple traversals of each absorber by
each muon, potentially increasing absorber power dissipation by an order of
magnitude. If all three of these design upgrades are implemented, power dis-
sipations of tens of kilowatts per absorber will result. The large heat capacity
of hydrogen means that such levels of instantaneous power dissipation are in
principle supportable, but much higher average heat transfer would be needed,
possibly requiring higher operating pressure and thicker windows. More work
is needed to assess the muon-cooling performance implications.

3.2 Other absorber materials

Other candidate absorber materials include helium, lithium, lithium hydride,
methane, and beryllium. All other things being equal, in principle these would
all give worse cooling performance than hydrogen. For ﬁxed β⊥, a possi-
ble ﬁgure of merit is (LR hdE/dsimin)2 (proportional to the four-dimensional
transverse-cooling rate), normalized to that of liquid hydrogen. Table 1 shows
that hydrogen is best by a factor ≈ 2, although its advantage could be vitiated
if thick windows are necessary. Furthermore, for suﬃciently high focusing-
current density, lithium lenses could provide substantially lower β⊥ than is
practical with solenoids [10,11], perhaps suﬃcient to overcome lithium’s dis-
advantageous merit factor. Liquids provide high power-handling capability,
since the warmed liquid can be moved to a heat exchanger. On the other
hand, the higher densities of solids allow the absorber to be located more pre-
cisely at the low-beta point of the lattice. Lithium hydride may be usable with
no windows, but means would have to be devised to prevent combustion due
to possible contact with moisture, as well as to avoid melting at high power
levels. More work will be required to assess these issues in detail.

It has been pointed out [19,29] that gaseous hydrogen (GH2) at high pressure
could provide the energy absorption needed for ionization cooling, with signif-
icantly diﬀerent technical challenges than those of a liquid or solid absorber.
Table 1 shows that GH2 is actually a slightly better ionization-cooling medium
than LH2. In addition, if the hydrogen is allowed to ﬁll the rf cavities, the
number of windows in the cooling channel can be substantially reduced, and

5

the length of the channel signiﬁcantly shortened. Moreover, ﬁlling the cavities
with a dense gas can suppress breakdown and ﬁeld emission, via the Paschen
eﬀect [30]. A small business [31] has been formed to pursue this idea, with
funding from the U.S. Dept. of Energy’s Small Business Technology Transfer
program [32]. Phase I of this program has been completed and included tests
of breakdown in gaseous helium and hydrogen at 805 MHz, 77 K temperature,
and pressures from 1 to ≈50 atm; gradients as high as 50 MV/m have been
achieved [33]. If approved, a follow-on Phase II will explore operation at lower
frequency. Successful completion of this program could lead to construction
of a prototype gaseous-absorber cooling cell, to be tested at the MuCool Test
Area (described below) and perhaps in a future phase of the Muon Ionization
Cooling Experiment (MICE) [34]. Other applications for gas-ﬁlled rf cavities
have also been proposed, including rf pulse compression and six-dimensional
cooling [17].

3.3 High-gradient normal-conducting rf cavities

An ionization-cooling channel requires insertion of high-gradient rf cavities
into a lattice employing strong solenoidal magnetic ﬁelds. This precludes
the use of superconducting cavities. The lattice of Fig. 1 employs normal-
conducting 201-MHz cavities, but R&D is more readily carried out with smaller,
higher-frequency devices.

Radio-frequency cavities normally contain a minimum of material in the path
of the beam. However, the penetrating character of the muon allows the use of
closed-cell (“pillbox”) cavities, provided that the cell closures are constructed
of thin material of long radiation length. Eq. 1 implies that this material will
have little eﬀect on cooling performance as long as its thickness L per cooling
cell (at the β⊥ of its location in the lattice) has β⊥L/LR small compared
to that of an absorber. Closing the rf cells approximately doubles the on-
axis accelerating gradient for a given maximum surface electric ﬁeld, allowing
operation with less rf power and suppressing ﬁeld emission. Two alternatives
have been considered for the design of the cell closures: thin beryllium foils and
grids of gas-cooled, thin-walled aluminum tubing. As a fall-back, an open-cell
cavity design was also pursued.

So far we have prototyped and tested a 6-cell open-cell cavity, designed at Fer-
milab, and a single-cell closed-cell cavity, designed at LBNL, both at 805 MHz.
The tests are carried out in Fermilab’s Laboratory G, where we have installed
a high-power 805-MHz klystron transmitter (12-MW peak pulsed power with
pulse length of 50 µs and repetition rate of 15 Hz), an x-ray-shielded cave,
remote-readout test probes, safety-interlock systems, and a control room and
workshop area for setup of experiments. The cave also contains a high-vacuum

6

pumping system and water cooling for the cavity. To allow tests of the cooling-
channel rf cavities and absorbers in a high magnetic ﬁeld or high ﬁeld gradient,
a superconducting 5-T solenoid with a room-temperature bore of 44 cm was
constructed by LBNL and installed in Lab G, with two separate coils that
can be run in “solenoid” mode (currents ﬂowing in the same direction) or
“gradient” mode (currents in opposite directions).

>

The open-cell cavity was conditioned up to a surface electric ﬁeld of 54 MV/m
(on-axis accelerating gradient up to 25 MV/m). Electron dark currents and
x-ray backgrounds were found to be large and to scale as a high power of the
∼10 [35]. With a 2.5-T solenoidal ﬁeld applied, at 54-MV/m
surface ﬁeld, E
surface ﬁeld, axially focused dark currents ultimately burned a hole in the
cavity’s titanium vacuum window. This level of background emission would
preclude cavity operation in the required solenoidal ﬁeld. However, for the
same accelerating gradient, the pillbox cavity operates at approximately half
the surface ﬁeld, corresponding to lower background emission by a factor of
order 103. Furthermore, an analysis of the observed emission rate in terms of
the Fowler-Nordheim formalism [36] implies an enhancement of the emission
probability by a factor of order 103 compared to that of a smooth, clean
surface [35]. This suggests that an R&D program focused on improving the
surface preparation and treatment might reap large improvements.

Tests of the closed-cell prototype are in progress [37]. Initial tests with 5-
mm-thick copper windows up to the design gradient of 34 MV/m with no
applied magnetic ﬁeld were carried out successfully, with an acceptable degree
of multipactoring and little or no arcing. Upon disassembly, no damage to the
windows was observed. The thickness of the cavity’s vacuum windows (1.9 cm
of stainless steel) precluded measurement of low-energy backgrounds. Thinner
windows (380 µm of Cu plus 200 µm Ti vacuum windows) were then installed
and operated with gradients above 20 MV/m at 2.5 T, however occasional
sparking at 2.5 T gradually degraded performance. Some healing of the damage
was eﬀected by reconditioning at B = 0, but repeated cycles of damage and
reconditioning established that the highest sustainable gradient at 2.5 T was
≈15 MV/m. Measurements of x rays and dark currents during these tests are
presented in Fig. 3.

Tests were subsequently performed with TiN-coated beryllium windows. Gra-
dients up to 18 MV/m were achieved at 4 T, but again spark damage gradually
degraded performance; we also encountered some frequency instability, sug-
gesting that the windows may have been ﬂexing due to rf heating. When these
windows were removed for inspection, blobs of copper were found deposited
on the (otherwise undamaged) TiN surface. An insulating TiN coating was
also observed on the mounting ring, contrary to speciﬁcations. Tests are now
beginning with another set of TiN-coated Be windows having a clean electrical
connection at the mounting ring.

7

While our experience shows that development of closed-cell, high-gradient,
normal-conducting cavities for use in magnetic ﬁelds is not easy, there is as
yet no reason to believe we will not ultimately be successful. Exposed copper
surfaces appear to be problematic at high surface electric ﬁeld. A variety of
window and cavity surface preparations and coatings remain to be explored,
e.g., TiN-coating the copper at the locations of maximum surface ﬁeld. Alter-
natives to ﬂat, prestressed foils are receiving attention as well, and we expect
to prototype and test several possible solutions at 805 MHz. (Our 805-MHz
pillbox-cavity prototype was designed with demountable windows with such
a test program in mind.) Design studies indicate that both precurved Be foils
and grids of gas-cooled, thin-walled Al tubes should be feasible and may be
cheaper and induce less scattering than ﬂat foils.

The design of a prototype 201-MHz closed-cell cavity for muon cooling is
essentially complete [38]. Since the window R&D is not yet completed, the
cavity design accommodates a variety of cell closures. We intend to build the
ﬁrst prototype in the coming year.

3.4 Test facilities

To augment the Lab G facility described above, we are building a MuCool Test
Area at the end of the Fermilab Linac. This location combines availability of
multi-megawatt rf power at both 805 and 201 MHz and 400-MeV proton beam
at high intensity. Cryogenic facilities will be provided for liquid-hydrogen-
absorber and superconducting-magnet operation. The underground enclosure
under construction will provide the radiation shielding needed for beam tests
of absorber power handling and for high-gradient cavity testing, with the
added capability of exploring possible eﬀects on cavity breakdown due to beam
irradiation of the cavity walls in a solenoidal magnetic ﬁeld. Construction of
the MuCool Test Area has progressed well and we anticipate its utilization for
absorber tests towards the end of 2003, as well as for tests of the prototype
201-MHz cavity when it becomes available.

The MuCool program includes engineering tests of ionization-cooling compo-
nents and systems, but not an actual experimental demonstration of ionization
cooling with a muon beam. Such a cooling demonstration (MICE) has been
proposed and is discussed elsewhere in these Proceedings [34].

8

Acknowledgements

I thank the organizers for the opportunity to present this work in this remark-
able and beautiful setting. This work was supported in part by the US Dept. of
Energy, the National Science Foundation, the Illinois Board of Higher Educa-
tion, the US-Japan Agreement on High Energy Physics, and the UK Particle
Physics and Astronomy Research Council.

References

[1] M. M. Alsharo’a et al., “Status of Neutrino Factory and Muon Collider Research
and Development and Future Plans,” FNAL-PUB-02/149-E (July 19, 2002),
submitted to Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams, arXiv:hep-ex/0207031.

[2] See e.g. the Proceedings of the NuFact Workshop series: NuFact’99, B. Autin,
ed., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A451 (2000) 1-388; NuFact’00, S. Chattopadhyay,
ed., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A472 (2001) 323-666; NuFact’01, to appear in Nucl.
Instr. Meth. A (2003); NuFact’02, K. Long ed., to appear in J. Phys. G; and
many articles too numerous to list here.

[3] “Feasibility

a
Neutrino Source Based on a Muon Storage Ring,” D. Finley, N. Holtkamp,
eds. (2000), http://www.fnal.gov/projects/muon collider/reports.html.

Study

on

[4] “Feasibility Study-II of a Muon-Based Neutrino Source,” S. Ozaki, R. Palmer,
M. Zisman, and J. Gallardo, eds., BNL-52623, June 2001, available at
http://www.cap.bnl.gov/mumu/studyii/FS2-report.html.

[5] S. Geer, Phys. Rev. D 57, 6989 (1998); earlier versions of a Neutrino Factory,
considered by e.g. D. G. Koshkarev, report CERN/ISR-DI/74-62 (1974), S.
Wojicki (unpublished, 1974), D. Cline and D. Neuﬀer, AIP Conf. Proc. 68, 846
(1981), and D. Neuﬀer, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 28, 2034 (1981), were based on
pion injection into a storage ring and had substantially less sensitivity.

[6] C. Albright et al., Fermilab-FN-692 (May, 2000), hep-ex/0008064; M.
Apollonio et al., CERN-TH-2002-208 (Oct. 2002.), hep-ph/021019; M. Lindner,
hep-ph/0209083 (2002).

[7] See e.g. M. Pluemacher, to appear in Proc. NuFact’02, op. cit., and references

therein.

[8] “A Feasibility Study of A Neutrino Factory in Japan,” Y. Kuno, ed.,
available from http://www-prism.kek.jp/nufactj/index.html; Y. Mori, “Review
of Japanese Neutrino Factory R&D,” A. Sato, “Beam dynamics studies of
FFAG,” D. Neuﬀer, “Recent FFAG studies,” S. Machida, “Muon Acceleration
with FFAGs,” and C. Johnstone, “FFAG with high frequency RF for rapid
acceleration,” to appear in Proc. NuFact’02, op. cit.

9

[9] A. N. Skrinsky and V. V. Parkhomchuk, Sov. J. Part. Nucl. 12, 223 (1981); E.
A. Perevedentsev and A. N. Skrinsky, in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. on High Energy
Accelerators, F. T. Cole and R. Donaldson, eds. (Fermilab, 1984), p 485; R.
Palmer et al., Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 51A, 61 (1996).

[10] D. Neuﬀer, Part. Acc. 14, 75 (1983).

[11] D. Neuﬀer, this Workshop.

[12] Introductory discussions of muon ionization cooling may be found in [11] and
D. M. Kaplan, in Proc. APS/DPF/DPB Summer Study on the Future of
Particle Physics (Snowmass 2001), N. Graf, ed., arXiv:physics/0109061 (2002).
More detailed treatments may be found in D. Neuﬀer, “µ+µ− Colliders,” CERN
yellow report CERN-99-12 (1999), K. J. Kim and C. X. Wang, Phys. Rev. Lett.
85, 760 (2000), and C. X. Wang and K. J. Kim, “Linear theory of 6-D ionization
cooling,” in Proc. Snowmass 2001, op. cit., SNOWMASS-2001-T502 (2001).

[13] See http://www.fnal.gov/projects/muon collider/.

[14] R. C. Fernow and J. C. Gallardo, Phys. Rev. E 52, 1039 (1995).

[15] K. Hagiwara et al. (Particle Data Group), Phys. Rev. D 66, 010001 (2002).

[16] R. Palmer, this Workshop; R. Palmer, to appear in Proc. NuFact’02, op. cit.

[17] Ya. Derbenev and R. P. Johnson, “Six-dimensional muon beam cooling in a

continuous, homogeneous, gaseous hydrogen absorber,” this Workshop.

[19] D. M. Kaplan et al., “Progress in Absorber R&D for Muon Cooling,” to
appear in Proc. 3rd International Workshop on Neutrino Factory based
on Muon Storage Rings (NuFACT’01), Tsukuba, Japan, 24–30 May 2001,
arXiv:physics/0108027.

[20] D. M. Kaplan et al., “Progress in Absorber R&D 2: Windows,” in Proc.
2001 Particle Accelerator Conference, P. Lucas and S. Webber, eds. (IEEE,
Piscataway, NJ, 2001), p 3888 (arXiv:physics/0108028).

[21] M. A. C. Cummings et al., “Absorber R&D in MUCOOL,” to appear in Proc.

NuFact’02, op. cit.

[22] D. Kubik et al., “Development of photogrammetric methods of stress analysis

and quality control,” to be submitted to Nucl. Instrum. Meth.

[23] “ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code,” ANSI/ASME BPV-VIII-1
(American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York, 1980), part UG-32.

[24] “Guidelines for the Design, Fabrication, Testing, Installation and Operation of

Liquid Hydrogen Targets,” Fermilab, Rev. May 20, 1997.

10

[18] An eﬀort to design quadrupole-focused cooling channels is in progress, but their
applicability
to
be limited to the early part of the cooling channel, where relatively large beta
functions are appropriate (C. Johnstone, presented at the NuFact’02 Workshop,
http://www.hep.ph.ic.ac.uk/NuFact02/Scientiﬁc-programme/ﬁles/Wednesday/wg1/A04 johnstone.ppt).

appears

[25] R. W. Carr et al., SLAC-Proposal-E-158, July 1997, and E-158 Liquid Hydrogen
Report,
Target
http://www.slac.stanford.edu/exp/e158/documents/target.ps.gz
(April
21, 1999); E. J. Beise et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 378, 383 (1996); D. J.
Margaziotis, in Proc. CEBAF Summer 1992 Workshop, F. Gross and R. Holt,
eds., AIP Conf. Proc. 269 (American Institute of Physics, New York, 1993),
p 531; J. W. Mark, SLAC-PUB-3169 (1984) and references therein.

Milestone

[26] J. Norem et al., “Measurement of Beam Driven Hydrodynamic Turbulence,”
submitted to Proc. 2003 Particle Accelerator Conference, Portland, OR (2003).

[27] A. V. Obabko, E. A. Almasri and K. W. Cassel, “Unsteady Natural Convection
in a Horizontal Cylinder with Internal Heat Generation,” Proc. 2003 ASME
Fluids Engineering Division Summer Meeting, Honolulu, Hawaii, July 6–10,
2003.

[28] D. Neuﬀer, “High frequency buncher and phase rotation,” presented at the

NuFact’02 Workshop.

[29] R. Johnson and D. M. Kaplan, MuCool Note 195, March 2001 (see
http://www-mucool.fnal.gov/notes/notes.html); R. Johnson et al.,
in Int.
Workshop on Hydrogen in Materials and Vacuum Systems, AIP Conf. Proc.
671 (2003).

[30] J. M. Meek and J. D. Craggs, Electrical Breakdown in Gases (John Wiley

& Sons, 1978), p. 557.

[31] Muons, Inc., R. P. Johnson, Principal Investigator, Batavia, Illinois.

[32] See http://sbir.er.doe.gov/SBIR/.

[33] R. P. Johnson et al., “Gaseous Hydrogen for Muon Beam Cooling”, submitted

to Proc. 2003 Particle Accelerator Conference, Portland, OR (2003).

[34] A.

Blondel,

at
http://hep04.phys.iit.edu/cooldemo/.

presented

this

Workshop;

see

also

[35] J. Norem et al., “RF Induced Backgrounds in MICE,” to appear in Proc.

NuFact’02, op. cit.

[36] R. H. Fowler and L. W. Nordheim, Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A119, 173 (1928).

[37] J. Norem et al., “Dark Current and X Ray Measurements of an 805 MHz Pillbox
Cavity,” submitted to Proc. 2003 Particle Accelerator Conference, Portland, OR
(2003).

[38] D. Li et al., to appear in Proc. NuFact’02, op. cit.

11

Fig. 1. Engineering drawing of a section of an “SFOFO” ionization-cooling lattice
(from U.S. Neutrino Factory Feasibility Study II [4]). Shown in cross section are
three liquid-hydrogen absorbers, each enclosed within a pair of “focusing” solenoids,
interspersed with two 4-cavity 201-MHz rf assemblies, each encircled by a “coupling”
solenoid.

Fig. 2. (Left) ﬁrst (“tapered torispherical”), (center) second (“bellows”), and (right)
third (“thinned bellows”) iterations of custom-shaped and -tapered thin window
design.

12

Fig. 3. Dark-current and x-ray rates with the 805-MHz pillbox cavity measured
under a variety of conditions with a variety of detectors as indicated.

Table 1
Comparison of ionization-cooling merit factor (see text) for various possible absorber
materials [15].

Material

hdE/dsimin
(MeV g−1cm2)

LR
(g cm−2)

Merit

GH2

LH2

He

LiH

Li

CH4

Be

4.103

4.034

1.937

1.94

1.639

2.417

1.594

61.28

61.28

94.32

86.9

82.76

46.22

65.19

1.03

1

0.55

0.47

0.30

0.20

0.18

13

