Fluctuations Do Matter: Large Noise-Enhanced Halos in

Charged-Particle Beams

Courtlandt L. Bohn1,2 and Ioannis V. Sideris1
1Northern Illinois University,

DeKalb, IL 60115
2Fermilab, Batavia, IL 60115

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Abstract

The formation of beam halos has customarily been described in terms of a particle-core model in

which the space-charge ﬁeld of the oscillating core drives particles to large amplitudes. This model

involves parametric resonance and predicts a hard upper bound to the orbital amplitude of the

halo particles. We show that the presence of colored noise due to space-charge ﬂuctuations and/or

machine imperfections can eject particles to much larger amplitudes than would be inferred from

parametric resonance alone.

PACS numbers: 29.17.+w, 29.27.Bd, 41.75.-i

3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
0
6
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Beam loss is a major concern for high-current light-ion accelerators such as are needed to
1 nA m−1GeV−1,

drive high-intensity spallation neutron sources. Just a tiny impingement,

∼

could generate radioactivation that would preclude routine, hands-on maintenance [1]. For

a 1 mA, 1 GeV light-ion beam, i.e., for baseline beam parameters of the Spallation Neutron
Source (SNS) presently under construction [2], this criterion translates to just 1 in 106 par-

ticles lost per meter, a quantity that scales linearly with average beam current. Accordingly,

a comprehensive understanding of beam-halo formation is imperative.

Early eﬀorts to identify the fundamental mechanisms of halo formation centered on the

use of a ‘particle-core’ model [3, 4, 5]. The basic recognition was that if a uniform-density

core is made to pulsate, particles that initially lay outside the core and that resonate with

its pulsations could reach large amplitudes and form a ‘halo’. This led to the identiﬁcation

of parametric resonance as the essential mechanism of halo formation. A key feature of

parametric resonance in the context of the particle-core model is a hard upper bound to the

amplitude that a halo particle can reach [4]. Because the particle’s orbital frequency is a

function of its amplitude, at suﬃciently large amplitude the particle falls out of resonance

with the core and thereby its amplitude ceases from growing further. The prospect that

the beam halo is ‘self-collimating’ has led to hope that aperture requirements for beamline

components might be modest. Smaller apertures are preferred in that, for example, they

favor higher-eﬃciency operation of the accelerating cavities.

In turn, a wealth of studies

and a large body of literature has developed over the past ten years that has centered on

deciphering the maximum halo amplitude. Refs. [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] constitute a small

sample; Ref. [13] documents a recent halo experiment and alludes to a maximum amplitude,

though that amplitude could not be measured.

An urgent question is whether there is any physics not included in the particle-core

model that could signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the maximum particle amplitude. One feature that

is unavoidable in real accelerators but is commonly overlooked in simulations is the presence

of noise. The noise will manifest itself by way of the electromagnetic ﬁelds external to

the beam, which then self-consistently inﬂuence the beam’s evolving space-charge potential.

Noise sources could include hardware irregularities that establish ﬂuctuating image-charge

forces, jitter in power supplies, misalignments and/or asymmetries of beamline components,

etc. In the context of simulations, it could also include details in the space-charge potential

that the simulation cannot model precisely. A charged particle will experience all of the noise

2

inherent to the total potential. Moreover, the noise will generally comprise a superposition

of ‘colored’ noise, i.e., that for which the autocorrelation time is nonzero. For example, the

autocorrelation time of noise in the collective space-charge potential could be short, say of

the order of a plasma period, whereas for hardware irregularities/misalignments it could

be long, say several betatron (orbital) periods. Herein, by generalizing simple particle-core

models to include noise, we show that the presence of colored noise can potentially boost

statistically rare particles to ever-growing amplitudes by continually kicking them back into

phase with the core oscillation.

Following the ground-breaking work that introduced the particle-core model [4, 5], we

consider particles on radial orbits through an inﬁnitely long, axially symmetric, uniform-

density beam ‘core’ that pulsates at a single frequency due to an imbalance, i.e., mismatch,

between the repulsive, collective space-charge force and the conﬁning external focusing force.

The core radius oscillates according to an equation of motion for the beam envelope. Upon

linearizing the envelope equation in terms of the core-oscillation amplitude, one ﬁnds the

solution R(t) = R [1 + (M

1) cos ωt], wherein ω is the core-oscillation angular frequency

−

and M = R(0)/R is the mismatch parameter, i.e., the ratio of initial-to-matched core radii.

For the uniform-density core, i.e., zero-temperature beam, the core-oscillation frequency is

ω = √2Ω, where Ω denotes the external focusing angular frequency. The particle orbits are

governed by the dimensionless equation of motion

x
)
|
1) cos ωt]
the transverse coordinate x is normalized to the radius R of the matched, hence stationary,

x
| −
x2

− |
−

[1 + (M

Θ(
|

¨x + x

2 −

= 0;

Θ(1

(1)

1)

−

1

"

#

beam; time is multiplied by Ω which means all frequencies are expressed as multiples of Ω;

and Θ(u) is the Heaviside step function. The second and third terms in square brackets

govern the motion of the particle when it is inside and outside the core, respectively. This

model will henceforth be called “Model I”.

Because Model I is strictly one-dimensional and contains a discontinuity in the form of

a step function, we shall also study a second model for which the unperturbed beam is a

spherically symmetric conﬁguration of thermal equilibrium (TE) computed in Ref. [14]. The

dimensionless equation of motion for this model, henceforth called “Model II”, is

¨x =

Ψ; Ψ = Ψ0 + Ψ1;

Ψ0 =

Ω2r2 + Φ(r), Ψ1 = µΦ(r1) sin ωt,

−∇
1
2

3

r =

x2 + y2 + z2, r1 =

0.8(x2 + y2) + z2;

(2)

q

q

in which the external focusing angular frequency is Ω = 1.0001/√3. As explained in Ref. [14],

the coordinates and time are measured in units of Debye length and inverse plasma angular

frequency, so the normalization diﬀers from that of Model I. The self-potential Φ(r) cor-

responds to “intermediate space charge”; the associated density drops with radius over a

length scale comparable to that of the quasi-uniform core. The potential Ψ1 is a prolate

spheroidal perturbation whose strength corresponds to the parameter µ.

To Models I and II we add ﬂuctuations in the form of Gaussian colored noise such that

ω

ω(t) = ω0 + δω(t), with δω(t) sampling an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. Its ﬁrst two

→

moments fully determine the statistical properties of the noise:

δω(t)

= 0,

δω(t)δω(t1)

h

i

h

exp(

t

t1

/tc),

−|

−

|

i ∝

(3)

in which tc denotes the autocorrelation time. To keep the models simple, we are choosing to

add the noise to the core-oscillation frequency; however, we have also conﬁrmed that adding

colored noise to the external focusing frequency does not signiﬁcantly change the results.

After generating a colored-noise signal using an algorithm ﬁrst presented in Ref. [15], we

calculate

δω

which becomes a measure of the noise strength. The inﬂuence of noise on halo

h|

|i

formation should in principle depend on its strength and its autocorrelation time. For two

choices of autocorrelation time, tc = 1.5τ and 12τ , τ denoting the orbital period of a typical
halo particle, we investigated a broad range of strengths, speciﬁcally 10−5

1, with

δω

≤ h|

|i ≤

the goal of ascertaining to what extent the results may be regarded as generic. Manifestations

of colored noise that a particle might see are illustrated in Fig. 1, which is provided as an

aid toward conceptualizing the physical meaning of the noise parameters. Shown there are

manifestations of noise for a ﬁxed strength

δω

= 0.01 with tc = 1.5τ and 12τ , and for

h|

|i

δω

= 0.1 with tc = 12τ .

h|

|i

In a real beam each individual particle will have its own distinct initial conditions and

thus experience a manifestation of the noise that diﬀers from that seen by each of the other

particles. For example, in the axisymmetric Model I, each particle initially occupying a thin

annulus centered at radius x(0) will experience noise diﬀering from that seen by each of

the other particles initially in that annulus because the particles start at diﬀerent angular

coordinates. The same is true for particles initially occupying a spherical shell centered

4

on radius r(0) in Model II. Accordingly, we adopted a ‘survey strategy’. Upon choosing

initial conditions x(0) and r(0) for Eqs. (1) and (2), respectively, and for a speciﬁc choice

of noise parameters, we sequentially computed 10,000 orbits, each experiencing its own

random manifestation of the colored noise, and we catalogued the maximum amplitudes of

these orbits. We set the initial conditions of the orbit in Model I at x(0) = 1.20, ˙x(0) = 0,

and in Model II at r(0) = 1.23, ˙r(0) = 0. In the unperturbed TE sphere of Model II, and

for realistic proton beam parameters, there are

nC [16]. There are

104 particles in the range r = 1.23

(0.5

3

∼

×

4

∼

×

109 particles per bunch, i.e.,

0.6
10−4), a thin spherical

∼

±

×

shell centered on r(0) and located well into the Debye tail of the bunch. Accordingly, the

chosen sample size is realistic.

For Model I, we examine three values of the mismatch parameter: M = 1.5, 1.3, 1.1.

Orbits are computed from Eq. (1) ﬁrst without, then with, the noise of Eq. (3) using a

variable-time-step integrator. For zero noise, the maximum orbital amplitude

xmax|

|

does

have a hard upper bound in keeping with parametric-resonance arguments, and the upper

bound depends on the core-oscillation frequency ω0. As Fig. 2 shows, the particle can reach

relatively large amplitudes for a wide range of frequencies ω0, a consideration that can be

important in the context of higher-order space-charge modes and harmonics. For nonzero

colored noise, we present results for which the core-oscillation frequency is ﬁxed at ω0 = √2,

the value obtained from the linearized equation for the motion of the beam envelope. By

design, then, Model I is a direct generalization of the particle-core model introduced in

Ref. [4]; we found that diﬀerent choices of ω0 do not change the essential ﬁndings.

For speciﬁed noise parameters, we consider the one particle out of the sample of 10,000

that reaches the largest amplitude during the integration time of 80τ , a time that is repre-

sentative of the transit time through a 1 GeV proton linac. Results for M = 1.5 and ﬁxed

tc = 12τ are provided in the top panel of Fig. 3, in which

is plotted;
xmax|
reached by particles in the sample. One sees that over a broad range of noise strengths,

results for M = 1.3, 1.1 are qualitatively similar. The ﬁgure also shows the average

xmax|

versus

δω

|i

h|

|

|

rare particles are ejected to larger amplitudes relative to the parametric resonance alone.

For example, a mere 1% ﬂuctuation in the core-oscillation frequency more than doubles the

maximum amplitude reached compared to the case of zero noise. Interestingly, we found for

tc = 1.5τ that the results are very similar.

For the analysis of Model II, we ﬁx the perturbation parameter at µ = 0.5. Just as

5

in Model I, with zero noise the particle can reach relatively large amplitudes for a wide

range of frequencies ω0, as Fig. 2 shows. For speciﬁed noise parameters, we present in the

bottom panel of Fig. 3 results for which ω0 = 1.7, a completely arbitrary choice of driving

frequency; diﬀerent choices of ω0 do not change the essential ﬁndings. Models I and II

are distinctly much diﬀerent, yet the results make clear that the inﬂuence of the noise on

the maximum orbital amplitudes in these models is nearly identical. This is a remarkable

ﬁnding in that we constructed Model II ad hoc, with no predisposition toward matching

the results of Model I. Accordingly, the inﬂuence of colored noise on particle orbits, and in

particular its role in generating large distended halos in time-dependent potentials, appears

to be generic. Moreover, the collection of ﬁndings suggests that the formation of these halos

is not particularly sensitive to details in either the governing potential or the noise.

If the number of particles in the sample is increased with all else being the same, then the

largest amplitude reached by the single special particle increases. As Fig. 4 indicates, once

the sample size is suﬃciently large, the maximum amplitude grows quasi-logarithmically

with increasing sample size. Only in this restricted sense, and for ﬁxed noise parameters

and ﬁxed integration time, may it safely be said that there is an upper bound to the halo

dimension. This particular point has actually been observed, but heretofore unexplained,

in massive parallelized beam-dynamics simulations of an earlier design of the SNS linear
accelerator that included a number of machine imperfections [17]. In runs involving 104,
then 105, then 106, then 107 simulation particles, the maximum extent of the halo increased,
but it seemed to approach a limiting value with runs above 108 particles, a large number

whose value generally depends on the details of the potential. Inasmuch as these runs were

self-consistent, the phenomenology they reﬂect is suggestive of the inﬂuence of increasingly

ﬁne resolution of details in the potential that are beyond the scope of a simple particle-core

model. They also exemplify that a large number of particles is needed to discern the impact

of these details on halo formation and structure.

If the integration time is extended indeﬁnitely, as might be physically representative of

a storage ring, for example, then there are statistically rare orbits that continue to grow

to seemingly unlimited amplitudes. Examples of such orbits in Models I and II appear in

Fig. 5. These long-time orbits exemplify that there is in principle no upper bound to the

halo amplitude in the presence of colored noise.

It remains, of course, to explore further the extent to which this phenomenology applies

6

in real machines. Doing so will involve further simulations of beams in real beamlines;

as we have seen, machine imperfections will matter. One possibly fruitful approach is to

extract the coarse-grained, time-dependent potential from the simulations and then add

noise and pursue a statistical analysis of test particles in parallel to what we have done here.

Alternatively, the colored noise may be built directly into the simulation itself, although the

simulation will then need to incorporate a suﬃciently large number of particles to garnish

enough statistics on the halo population. A realistic manifestation of the colored noise would

need to reﬂect the machine design, i.e., by properly including imperfections in the ﬁelds and

hardware alignment, and details of the evolving space-charge potential such as a suﬃciently

detailed mode spectrum. Of course, as the beam is accelerated and becomes relativistic,

space charge and its attendant parametric resonance will become decreasingly important,

and growth of the halo will thereby be curtailed.

As a relevant aside, we also analyzed this mechanism in the context of a self-gravitating

stellar system for which environmental noise from surrounding galaxies will self-consistently

inﬂuence the dynamics. Speciﬁcally, we considered a perturbed Plummer model, a conﬁg-
uration for which the unperturbed collective potential scales as (1 + r2/3)−1/2 [18], and we

applied the same procedure described herein for Model II. Though it is a restoring force,

gravity is so weak that, combined with the noise, only a relatively tiny oscillatory perturba-

tion suﬃces to pump stars to very large amplitudes. The main point, the generality of which

is highlighted by the addition of this ‘gravitational’ example, is that colored noise combined

with parametric resonance will drive a statistically small number of particles to much larger

amplitudes than parametric resonance can do on its own. The formation of distended halos

is thus a general byproduct of collective relaxation of nonequilibrium Coulomb systems.

This work was supported by the Department of Education under Grant G1A62056.

[1] R. Jameson, Fus. Eng. Design 32-33, 149 (1996).

[2] Spallation Neutron Source Report No. 100000000-PL0001-R09, May 2003 (unpublished).

[3] Y.-J. Chen, et al., in Proceedings of the 1991 Particle Accelerator Conference, edited by L.

Lazema and J. Chew (IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 1991), p. 3100.

[4] J.S. O’Connell, T.P. Wangler, R.S. Mills, and K.R. Crandell, in Proceedings of the 1993

7

Particle Accelerator Conference, edited by S.T. Corneliussen (IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 1993),

p. 3657.

[5] R.L. Gluckstern, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1247 (1994).

[6] H. Okamoto and M. Ikegami, Phys. Rev. E 55, 4694 (1997).

[7] R. L. Gluckstern, A. V. Fedotov, S. Kurennoy, and R. Ryne, Phys. Rev. E 58, 4977 (1998).

[8] M. Ikegami, S. Machida, and T. Uesugi, Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 2, 124201 (1999).

[9] M. Ikegami, Phys. Rev. E 59, 2330 (1999).

[10] J. Qiang and R. Ryne, Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 3, 064201 (2000).

[11] T.-S. F. Wang, Phys. Rev. E 61, 855 (2000).

[12] D. Jeon, et al., Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 5, 094201 (2002).

[13] C.K. Allen, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 214802 (2002).

[14] C.L. Bohn and I.V. Sideris, Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 6, 034203(2003); the unperturbed

potential of Model II is the spherically symmetric ‘case 5’ potential of this reference. In the

dimensionless units of Eq. (2), a representative value for the size of the matched beam is

R = 10; thus we divide all values of r(t) for Model II by 10 to facilitate comparing results

with those of Model I.

[15] I.V. Pogorelov and H.E. Kandrup, Phys. Rev. E 60, 1567 (1999).

[16] H.E. Kandrup, I.V. Sideris, and C.L. Bohn, Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams (submitted).

[17] J. Qiang, et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A457, 1 (2001).

[18] J. Binney and S. Tremaine, Galactic Dynamics (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, 1987), pp.

223-225.

8

FIG. 1: Example manifestations of colored noise along an orbit for

= 0.01 and for which

δω

h|

|i

tc = 1.5τ (top) and 12τ (center), and for

= 0.1 with tc = 12τ (bottom).

δω

h|

|i

9

FIG. 2: (top 3 panels) Maximum orbital amplitude vs. core-oscillation frequency ω0 with zero

noise in Model I for mismatch parameters M = 1.5, 1.3, 1.1; the horizontal line denotes the initial

condition x(0) = 1.20 and the vertical line denotes the frequency choice ω0 = √2. (bottom panel)

Same for Model II for perturbation parameter µ = 0.5; the horizontal line denotes the initial

condition r(0) = 1.23 and the vertical line denotes the frequency choice ω0 = 1.7.

10

FIG. 3: (top) For the 10,000-particle sample in the potential of Model I with mismatch parameter

M = 1.5 and tc = 12τ , largest amplitude reached by any particle (triangles) and mean maximum

amplitude of all particles (diamonds) vs.

; the dashed line denotes

for zero noise.

δω

h|

|i

xmax|
|

(bottom) Same for Model II with perturbation parameter µ = 0.5.

11

FIG. 4: Maximum halo dimension vs. sample size N for Model I (top) and Model II (bottom).

12

FIG. 5: Long-time evolution of a large-amplitude orbit given noise with

δω

h|

|i

= 0.01, tc = 12τ for

Model I (top) and Model II (bottom).

13

