3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
3
1
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

DEUTSCHES ELEKTRONEN-SYNCHROTRON

DESY 03-165

October 2003

Misconceptions regarding the cancellation of
self-forces in the transverse equation of
motion for an electron in a bunch

Gianluca Geloni

Department of Applied Physics, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven,
P.O. Box 513, 5600MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands

Evgeni Saldin and Evgeni Schneidmiller

Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY,
Notkestrasse 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany

Mikhail Yurkov

Particle Physics Laboratory (LSVE), Joint Institute for Nuclear Research,
141980 Dubna, Moscow Region, Russia

Misconceptions regarding the cancellation of
self-forces in the transverse equation of
motion for an electron in a bunch

G. Geloni a E. L. Saldin b E. A. Schneidmiller b M. V. Yurkov c

aDepartment of Applied Physics, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, The
Netherlands
bDeutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron (DESY), Hamburg, Germany
cJoint Institute for Nuclear Research, Dubna, 141980 Moskow region, Russia

Abstract

As a consequence of motions driven by external forces, self-ﬁelds originate within
an electron bunch, which are diﬀerent from the static case. In the case of magnetic
external forces acting on an ultrarelativistic beam, the longitudinal self-interactions
are responsible for CSR (Coherent Synchrotron Radiation)-related phenomena, which
have been studied extensively. On the other hand, transverse self-interactions are
present too. At the time being, several existing theoretical analysis of transverse
dynamics rely on the so-called cancellation eﬀect, which has been around for more
than ten years. In this paper we explain why in our view such an eﬀect is not of
practical nor of theoretical importance.

Preprint submitted to

7 August 2013

1 Introduction

Electron bunches with, among other characteristics, very small transverse
emittance and high peak current are needed for the operation of XFELs [1,2].
The bunch length for XFEL applications is of the order of 100 femtoseconds.
This is achieved using a two-step strategy: ﬁrst generate beams with small
transverse emittance by means of a RF photocathode and, second, apply
longitudinal compression at high energy using a magnetic compressor. Self-
interactions may spoil the bunch characteristics, so that, in the last few years,
simulation codes have been developed in order to solve the self-consistent
problem of an electron bunch moving under the action of external magnetic
ﬁelds and its own self-ﬁelds. These codes show that, in the case under exami-
nation, the bunching process can be treated in the zeroth order approximation
by the single-particle dynamical theory: in fact we cannot neglect the CSR-
induced energy spread and other wake-ﬁelds when we calculate the transverse
emittance, but we can neglect them when it comes to the characterization
of the longitudinal current distribution because their contribution to the lon-
gitudinal dynamics, in the high-γ limit, is small. As actual calculations are
left to simulations, the understanding of the physics of self-interactions is left
to analytical studies, which are usually based on a perturbative approach:
the particles move, in the zeroth order, under the inﬂuence of external guiding
ﬁelds and the zeroth order motion is used to calculate the ﬁrst order perturba-
tion to the trajectory due to the self-interactions. Of course, the perturbative
approach will, in the most general case, give diﬀerent answers with respect to
the self-consistent approach as self-interaction eﬀects get more and more im-
portant. Nevertheless the method behind the two approaches is the same: the
only diﬀerence is due to the fact that the computational power is enough to
break the particle trajectories in suﬃciently small parts so that the ﬁrst order
perturbation theory gives a satisfactory description of the bunch evolution
within a given trajectory-slice. Moreover it should be noted that perturba-
tion techniques are important from a practical viewpoint too. In fact, when it
comes to facility design, one has to ﬁnd a range of parameters such that the
emittance dilution is small, i.e. that the self-consistent approach can be eﬀec-
tively substituted, from a practical viewpoint, by the perturbative one. Partial
analytical studies have been performed, in the last twenty years, on transverse
self-ﬁelds, and a particular eﬀect, called cancellation, has become on fashion
in the last few years [3–6]. Analytical results obtained in those papers led part
of the community to believe that such an eﬀect is very fundamental and of
great practical importance. We disagree with this viewpoint. In this paper we
explain our reasons. In Section 2 we trace a short, conceptual history of the
cancellation eﬀect. Then we move to the description of the current state of
the theory of this eﬀect in Section 3. After this, in Section 4, we explain our
arguments against the fact that the cancellation eﬀect is of any practical and
theoretical interest. Finally, in Section 5, we come to conclusions.

1

2 Twenty years of history

The history of the so called cancellation eﬀect is a long-dated one. A short
summing up can be of interest here since on the one hand it gives the reader
a more thorough overview of the issue, while on the other it constitutes a
self-contained example of how scientiﬁc progress works in time, by trial and
error and, sometimes, misconception and misunderstanding.

The story begins about twenty years ago with [7]. In that pioneering work
the transverse self-force, i.e. the Lorentz self-force in the transverse direction
lying on the orbital plane, is calculated for a test particle in front of a beam
of zero transverse extent moving in a circle 1 , showing a singular result for
θmin = (smin/R) → 0, smin being the minimal arc length from the nearest
retarded source point to the test particle and R being the radius of the circle
(see Eq. (8) in [7]). The singularity has a logarithmic character arising from
the particular model selected, ”is due to ’nearby’ charges and is removed as
the beam is given a transverse size” (quoted from [7]). This force constituted,
in the late 80s, a reason for serious concern for the beam dynamics in electron
storage rings. In Eq. (42) of [8], a particle oﬀ axis of a quantity x with respect
to the design orbit feels a total centrifugal Lorentz force with logarithmic
dependence on x from an ”unshielded ring of charge of vanishing height and
thickness” (cited from [8], i.e. the same beam with zero transverse extent
analyzed in [7]) :

F =

2λ
R (cid:20)

ln

x
8R (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:21)

+ 1

+ O(x/R) ,

λ being the constant bunch linear density.

(1)

It should be underlined that the logarithmic singularity in x comes from
the choice of a particular density distribution. Not all distribution choices
give singular behavior as x → 0. For example, in [7], a singularity is ﬁrst
found as smin → 0; we found a similar result in [9]. This is also linked to the
particular choice of the distribution, that is a line bunch. The singularity for
smin → 0 has actually the same reason to be as the one for x → 0 when an
horizontally oﬀ-axis particle is considered. Simply, if we start from a line bunch
case, and we consider a test particle with x = 0, then the singular character
of the ﬁeld comes into play when smin → 0; when x 6= 0, one is allowed
to put smin = 0 and then a singularity is present in the limit for x → 0.
However, this is due to the choice of the density distribution and nothing
else. There are many choices (for example a gaussian 2D or 3D bunch) which

1 We will refer to it with the name ”tail-head interaction”, since electromagnetic
signals form the bunch tail interact with the head.

2

do not give singular ﬁelds. As a matter of fact, macroparticle simulations
are based on these kind of simpliﬁed distributions, because they avoid the
problem of singularities. From a practical viewpoint then, when dealing with
computational problem, one should remind that macroparticle simulation do
not have to cope necessarily with singularities, which arise only in the case
of particular particle distribution choices: this fact should be kept in mind
throughout the reading of this paper.

As we read in [8], the transverse force was ”the subject of serious concern
for its eﬀect on dynamics in electron storage ring”, in that it spoils the can-
cellation between the electric ﬁeld term and the magnetic ﬁeld, which one
usually has in pure space-charge problems for the ultrarelativistic regime: the
gradient of F in the radial direction is, in fact, singular as ∂F/∂r ∼ λ/x 2 . In
the same paper, it is pointed out that this force is cancelled for long beams un-
dergoing a circular motion. In fact ”a particle undergoing betatron oscillations
has simultaneous oscillation of its kinetic energy [...] in curved geometry the
kinetic-energy oscillation results in a ﬁrst-order dynamical term in the hori-
zontal equation of motion, which shifts the betatron frequency. For a highly
relativistic beam this additional term nearly cancels a term proportional to
the gradient of the CFSC” (quoted from [8]), where the CFSC, here, is just
the Lorentz force: ”we deﬁne the CSFC with an overall minus sign to agree
with the conventions of other authors: F = −(Er + Bz)b” (quoted from [8]), r
and z referring to a cylindrical coordinate system (r, θ, z) and the subscript b
indicating ”beam-induced components of ﬁelds”.

3 The ”cancellation eﬀect” today

With the development of SASE FEL technology and the need of magnetic
chicanes for bunch compression, the scientiﬁc community began to analyze this
kind of eﬀects in the case of short beams moving in ﬁnite arc of circles as in
the bends of magnetic chicanes. The aim was to end up with a generalization
of the results in [8] which was valid under more generic assumptions: not only
for coasting beams in storage rings, but also for bunched beams in generic
magnetic systems. A ﬁrst step in that direction was claimed in [3] and in [5],
to end up with a ﬁnal formulation [6].

Let us brieﬂy describe the arguments in [3]. We track the electron bunch in
cylindrical coordinates with respect to the center of a designed circular orbit
of radius R as in [3] or [4]: ~r = r~er + rθ~es. Following the Hamilton-Lagrange
formulation in [3] or [4] one can write the transverse equation of motion for a

2 This is just another way to say that the transverse force exhibit a logarithmic
singularity for x → 0.

3

test particle:

d
dt  

γm

dr
dt !

− γ0mc2

β2
s
r

 

−

βsβ0

R !

= F⊥(t) +

β2
s ∆E(t)
r

.

(2)

This is a well-known starting point for the study of the transverse dynamical
problem, and it is used in theoretical studies as well as by codes like TraFiC4.
In order to solve the equation of motion one should specify initial conditions
for the particle positions and velocities at the magnet entrance, for which
there is freedom of choice, from a general viewpoint. All treatments must use
Eq. (2) as a starting point. Then, if the initial conditions are the same, the
results must be the same: our discussion is not centered on wether it is allowed
to make certain manipulations of Eq. (2) using the cancellation scheme but
simply on whether it is useful or not to do so, both from a theoretical and
computational viewpoint.

The two terms on the right hand side of Eq. (2) are simply the Lorentz force
in the transverse direction of motion, and the deviation of the particle energy
at time t, γ(t)mc2, from the design energy γ0mc2. Note that the latter term
can be also expressed as

∆E(t) = (γ(0) − γ0)mc2 + ec

~Fs · ~βdt′ ,

(3)

t

Z0

where ~Fs is the self-force. By using vector and scalar potential instead of the
expressions for the electromagnetic ﬁelds and then adding and subtracting the
total derivative of the scalar potential dΦ/dt from the integrand in Eq. (3)
one gets:

∆E(t) = (γ(0) − γ0)mc2 − e(Φ(t) − Φ(0)) + e

t

Z0

∂(Φ − ~β · ~A)
∂t′

dt′.

(4)

Note that the ﬁrst term on the right hand side of Eq. (4) is simply the initial
kinetic energy deviation from the design kinetic energy, the second is due to
space charge while the third is due to longitudinal self-interactions others than
space-charge.

On the other hand, using the same formalism:

F⊥ = −e

∂(Φ − ~β · ~A)
∂r

− e

+ e

dAr
cdt

βsAs
r

(5)

The terms in Eq. (4) and Eq. (5) are rearranged in [3] thus resulting in the

4

following expression for Eq. (2)

d
dt  

γm

dr
dt !

− γ0mc2

β2
s
r

 

−

βsβ0

R !

= G0 + Gk + Gr + Gc

(6)

where

G0 = β2
s

(γ(0) − γ0)mc2 + eΦ(0)
r

Gk =

eβ2
s
r

t

Z0

∂(Φ − ~β · ~A)
∂t′

dt′

Gr = −e

∂(Φ − ~β · ~A)
∂r

− e

dAr
cdt

Gc = eβs

As − βsΦ
r

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

According to the deﬁnition in [3,4,6], the cancellation eﬀect consists in the
recognition that Gc ≃ 0 and can be therefore neglected in simulations. Note
that this is obvious in the steady state case in the zeroth perturbation order
in the self-ﬁelds, when As = βsΦ strictly. In Fig. 2 of [3] it is shown, by means
of macroparticle simulations, that Gc is ”always” 3 negligible. The importance
of this ﬁnding, in the view of the authors of [3,4,6], is that the last term of
Eq. (6), i.e. the expression in Eq. (10), is negligible and free from logarithmic
singularity in x, while F⊥ is singular (again, when a speciﬁc distribution which
allows singularities is selected to describe the particle beam). A proof of the
independence of Eq. (10) on the logarithm of x in spite of the dependence of
the total force is given in [3], in that this term does not share the same spread
as a function of the position inside the bunch with the total force (see [3],
Fig. 1). This fact is seen as full of deep physical meaning and it is reported
to be of great practical interest since it would permit major simpliﬁcations
when taken into account in a computational scheme [3,4,6]. Moreover, it has
been said that the cancellation eﬀect ”opens new possibility for theoretical
investigations such as two-dimensional analysis based on Vlasov’s equation”
(quoted from [4]).

3 The simulation results in [3] show indeed the results for a beam in an arc of a
circle.

5

4 Our arguments against the relevance of the cancellation eﬀects

While we agree with the ﬁndings in [8] concerning the tail-head interaction
within a coasting beam in a circular motion, we disagree on the fact that such
results can be extended in an useful way in the more generic situation of a
bunched beam moving in an arc of a circle. Moreover, it must be underlined
that the ﬁndings in [8] do not account for the head-tail part of the interac-
tion, arising from electrons in front of the test particle. In the following we
show that the cancellation eﬀect is indeed artiﬁcial and it has no important
physical meaning. Furthermore we show that, from a practical viewpoint, in
building a simulation, there is no reason to prefer the cancellation approach
to the standard approach of calculating, separately, the Lorenz force and the
kinetic energy deviation. The latter approach is used today by TraFiC4, a
macroparticle simulation code devoted to XFEL simulation and internation-
ally recognized (DESY, where it has been developed, SLAC and SPRING-8).

A feature of self-interaction which has always been forgotten in analytical
calculations and interpretation of numerical results, is constituted by the head-
tail interaction, that is that part of the self interaction coming from particles
which are situated in front of the test particle. CSR theory (see [11]) tells that
in the case of longitudinal self-ﬁelds (linked to CSR phenomena) the head-tail
part is simply related to Coulomb repulsion, and it can be regularized away
when one wants to account for pure radiative phenomena, since this part of
the interaction is non-dissipative and linked with the space-charge forces in a
straight trajectory. The situation is completely diﬀerent when one is dealing
with transverse interactions. As we showed in [9], it turns out that all the
non-negligible contribution to the head-tail interaction is, in this case, due
to a term in the acceleration ﬁeld and that there is no similar regularization
mechanism which can be used as in the longitudinal case; note that (besides
the fact the head-tail term is of accelerative nature) in the transverse case we
cannot distinguish between dissipative and non-dissipative phenomena, since
no radiation is associated to the transverse forces, at the ﬁrst order in the
electromagnetic ﬁelds.

The characteristics of head-tail interactions are somehow surprising. The
magnitude of the eﬀect turns out to be of the same order of magnitude of the
tail-head interaction. For example, in the simple case of two particles on-orbit
in a circular motion, the tail-head interaction can be expressed as (see [9]):

F⊥ ≃

e2γ3
4πε0R2 Ψ( ˆφ) ,

(11)

where R is the circle radius, ˆφ = γφ, φ being the retarded angle while Ψ is

6

(12)

(13)

(14)

deﬁned by

Ψ( ˆφ) =

2 + ˆφ4/8
ˆφ(1 + ˆφ2/4)3 ,

and the retardation condition reads:

∆s = (1 − β)Rφ +

Rφ3
24

.

where ∆s is the (curvilinear) distance between the two particles. On the other
hand, the only non-negligible term in the head-tail acceleration is of pure
accelerative origin and it is given by (see [9]):

F⊥ ≃

e2
4πε0R∆s

,

It is easy to see, by comparison of Eq. (11) and Eq. (14), that the tail-head
and the head-tail contributions are of the same order of magnitude. In practical
situations, the head-tail force has been proven to be about two times larger
than the tail-head contribution: this can be seen by direct inspection of Fig. 1
and Fig. 2, taken from [10], which show, respectively the tail-head and the
head-tail interaction exerted by a line bunch entering a bending magnet on a
particle with vertical 4 displacement h. In the ﬁgures a normalized parameter
ˆh = hγ2/R is used, where R is the circle radius. Note that the plots show the
normalized transverse force in the radial direction, ˆF = F⊥/[e2λ/(4πε0R)], λ
being the bunch density distribution.

Let us spend some words to describe the head-tail interaction (an exhaustive
treatment can be found in [9,10]). On the one hand it is evident that, when
∆s < 0, the source particle is ahead of the test electron at any time; on the
other hand it is not true that the retarded position of the source particle
is, in general, ahead of the present position of the test particle. If ∆s <
0 and, approximatively, |∆s| < h the test particle overtakes the retarded
position of the source before the electromagnetic signal reaches it. In this
case, although we may still talk about head-tail interaction, since ∆s < 0,
its real character is very much similar to the case ∆s > 0, in which the
electromagnetic signal has to catch up with the test particle. In the case of
head-tail interactions with |∆s| > h, the retardation condition has unique
features since the electromagnetic signal runs against the test particle, and
not viceversa, as in the tail-head case (or in the head-tail case with |∆s| < h,
when the electromagnetic is running after it. The fact that the electromagnetic

4 i.e. orthogonal to the bending plane

7

10

8

6

4

2

0

 

^F

^
h = 10-2

^
h = 10-1

^
h = 1

^
h = 10

^
h = 102

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

Position after injection (m)

Fig. 1. Normalized radial force from the head of the bunch (∆s < 0) to the tail as
the bunch progresses inside the bend (z = 0 corresponds to the injection of the test
particle in the magnet). Here R = 1 m and γ = 100. Here we plot the results from
TraFiC4 for several values of ˆh = hγ2/R, h being the vertical displacement of the
test particle. The bunch length is 200µm. The test particle is located in the middle
of the bunch.

signal and the test particle approach on a head-on collision is the reason
why the character of this interaction is local, in the sense that the distance
which the test particle travels between the emission of the electromagnetic
signal by a source and its reception by the test particle is about half of the
distance between the test particle and the source, while the usual tail-head
interaction has a formation length about γ2 times longer. This can be seen
directly comparing Fig. 1 and Fig. 2.

It is somehow surprising that, although simulations automatically take care
of this term, this has been overlooked for a long time in theoretical analysis
or in the interpretation of simulation results, starting from [7], continuing
with [8], [5] and ﬁnally [3]. This important term is responsible for sudden
jumps of ˆF at the magnet entrance. Consider for example the plot in Fig.
3, obtained by using the electromagnetic solver of TraFiC4. The ﬁgure shows
(solid line) the normalized radial force ˆF felt by a test particle (this is just
the sum of Fig. 1 and Fig. 2) in the middle of the bunch and the normalized
potential ˆΦ = Φ/[e2λ/(4πε0)] (dashed line) at the test particle position. The
sudden jumps at the magnet entrance are due to head-tail interaction with
|∆s| > h. Yet, before [9,10], there was no theoretical explanation for this
behavior. Although Fig. 3 refers to displacement in the vertical plane, it is

8

^

F

4

8

6

2

0

^
h = 10-2

^
h = 10-1

^
h = 1

^
h = 10
^
h = 102

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

Position after injection (m)

Fig. 2. Normalized radial force acting on a test particle from a bunch with rect-
angular density distribution entering a hard-edge bending magnet as a function of
the position of the test particle inside the magnet. The solid lines show analytical
results; the circles describe the outcome from TraFiC4. We chose γ = 100, R = 1
m; graphs are plotted for several values of the parameter ˆh = hγ2/R, h being the
vertical displacement of the test particle. The bunch length is 200µ m. The test
particle is located in the middle of the bunch.

obvious that a similar displacement would be found in the horizontal one too,
signifying a logarithmic dependence on x.

Now that the head-tail interaction has been introduced, it is possible to give
a very simple argument against the meaningfulness of the cancellation scheme.
In [3] attention is drawn only on Gr and Gc, while no word is spent about G0
and Gk. As already said, in Fig 3 we also plotted (dashed lines) the normalized
potential ˆΦ in the center of the bunch for diﬀerent vertical displacements h
as calculated by TraFiC4. As it is seen, the potential does not share the same
formation length of the head-tail force, which clearly demonstrates that no
eﬀective cancellation can take place between F⊥ and ∆E. This fact can be
shown in the same terminology used in [3]. Even if Gc is negligible and Gr
is centripetal, there is a huge, dominant centrifugal contribution on the right
hand side of Eq. (6): this is G0 which includes the term Φ(0)/R. Since the head-
tail interaction has local nature, we can say that, due to the rearrangement
proposed in [3], G0 now includes all the head-tail interaction part (the sharp
time dependence of the head-tail interaction being masked in the other terms
of Eq. (5), i.e. in the terms Gk, Gr (and Gc)).

9

h = 1 µ m

h = 10 µ m

h = 100 µ m

h = 1 mm

h = 10 mm

20

15

10

5

0

)
d
e
h
s
a
d
(
 

)
d

i
l

o
s
(
 
F

^

Φ
^

h = 1 µ m

h = 10 µ m

h = 100 µ m

h = 1 mm

h = 10 mm

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

Position after injection

Fig. 3. Normalized radial force (solid line) and normalized potential (dashed line) in
the center of a 200 µm bunch as a function of the injection position. The parameter
on the curves refers to the vertical displacement h of the test particle.

Actually our result shows that Gc ∼ 0, alone, is uninteresting, that is, the
cancellation eﬀect as deﬁned in [3] is uninteresting. There will be anyway a
strong head-tail contribution which is accounted in the ﬁrst term G0. Since
this term depends on the position of the test particle inside the bunch it
will lead to emittance growth both in the transient and in the steady state
case. This term has not been taken into account in [7] nor in [8]; it has been
automatically included in the simulations in [3], because the computational
scheme is correct, although unnecessarily complicated, but then it has been
disregarded in the analysis of the results. Note that the ﬁrst term G0 would
give a spread similar to that of F⊥ in Fig. 1 of reference [3] if plotted for a
bunch with a given energy spread, since it depends logarithmically on x (at
least in the 1D model with the test particle displaced horizontally). In other
words, if there is a ﬁeld singularity, it is there also in the right hand side
of the equation of motion and it cannot be cancelled away. Note that there
is no possibility of cancelling G0 by choosing a certain initial condition for
the bunch. In fact the freedom of choice of the initial condition refers to the
kinetic energy deviation from the design energy, and not to the deviation of
the total energy (kinetic energy summed to the potential energy) from the
design kinetic energy.

This shows that there is no theoretical nor practical reason for adopting
the cancellation scheme as a preferred one with respect to the usual scheme of
calculating separately F⊥ and ∆E. In fact, from a practical viewpoint one will

10

encounter the same computational diﬃculties and from a theoretical viewpoint
two easily understandable terms are mixed up into four terms (of which three
survive and one is approximately cancelled) with a more involved physical
interpretation. Not to mention that the cancellation method can be extremely
confusing. The latter is a statement, not an opinion; in the LCLS Design
Study Report [2] we read that all contributions to the the transverse emittance
growth are due to the centripetal force ”which originates from radiation of
trailing particles and depends on the local charge density along the bunch.
The maximum force takes place at the center of the bunch and its eﬀect on
the transverse emittance is estimated in the reference.”; the reference in the
quoted passage is the work by Derbenev and Shiltsev [5]. Here the head-
tail contributions are completely neglected, because of the confusion coming
form the cancellation issue: in fact the (centripetal) force in the quote is the
third term in Li’s treatment (Gr, the only one considered) while the ﬁrst
term G0, containing the (centrifugal) head-tail interaction and the second,
Gk, are completely neglected. This is an example where on the one hand the
code TraFiC4 was correctly used giving correct results, but where, on the
other hand, its results were completely misunderstood. Nevertheless, as we
already said, the head-tail interaction is a few times larger than the tail-head
interaction, and, since it depends on the position of the test particle along the
bunch, it is obviously responsible for normalized emittance growth.

The cancellation scheme as in [3,4,6], actually reduces to the following: get
a quantity A + B and express A = A1 + A2, B = B1 + B2 where A2 ≃ −B2,
leaving large part of A (and even singular quantities) in A1, complicate the
situation furthermore breaking A1 + B1 in several parts and then claim that
the cancellation A2 + B2 ≃ 0 is an important ﬁnding. This can be done with
any pair of quantities A and B, and it is, in our view, completely trivial and
uninteresting. As a ﬁnal remark, one could have foreseen that the cancellation
eﬀect cannot be of any use since the transverse head-tail force, which has
local character cannot be eﬀectively cancelled by the energy deviation, which
depends upon all the trajectory.

5 Conclusions

In this paper we proved that the cancellation eﬀect is an artiﬁcial one. In
the right hand side of the transverse equation of motion the Lorentz force
and the kinetic energy deviation from the design energy, which are clearly
physically meaningful quantities, are combined together to give four diﬀerent
terms of diﬃcult physical interpretation. The cancellation eﬀect deals only
with one of these terms, still leaving other three important contributions to
be evaluated. We found in [9,10] that the head-tail interaction is, in prac-
tical situations, a few times larger than the tail-head interaction. This fact,

11

automatically included in computer simulation, has always been forgotten in
analytical considerations, starting from [7] on. The formation length of the
head-tail interaction with |∆s| > h is approximately half of the bunch length,
which means that, for practical purposes, the head-tail interaction has a local
nature. This explains the sudden ”jump” in the total Lorentz force seen as a
bunch enters a bending magnet. On the other hand, the kinetic energy devia-
tion from the design energy has much a larger formation length. This fact alone
is suﬃcient to prove that the cancellation eﬀect is an artiﬁcial one, in that an
important contribution (the head-tail interaction) cannot be compensated by
the potential term in the kinetic energy deviation.

When we state that the cancellation eﬀect is artiﬁcial, we do not mean
that it is, strictly speaking, wrong; we simply state that it is not useful at all
and that there is no theoretical nor practical reason to prefer this method to
the more straightforward approach of calculating, separately, the transverse
Lorentz force and the kinetic energy deviation term (as, for example, by means
of the code TraFiC4). In fact, from a practical viewpoint one will encounter
the same computational diﬃculties and from a theoretical viewpoint two easily
understandable terms are mixed up into four terms (of which three survive and
one is approximately cancelled) with a more involved physical interpretation.

We wish to thank Martin Dohlus for providing numerical calculations using
the code TraFiC4. Also, thanks to Joerg Rossbach and Marnix van der Wiel
for their interest in this work.

6 Acknowledgements

References

[1] TESLA Technical Design Report, DESY 2001-011, edited by F. Richard et al.,

and http://tesla.desy.de/

[2] The LCLS Design Study Group, LCLS DEsign Study Report, SLAC reports

SLAC- R521, Stanford (1998) and http:
www-ssrl.slacstanford.edu/lcls/CDR

[3] R. Li, in Proceeding of the EPAC2002 Conference, Paris

[4] C. Bohn, FERMILAB-Conf-02/138-T, 2002

[5] Y. Derbenev and V. Shiltsev, in Fermilab-TM-1974 (1996)

[6] R.Li, Y. Derbenev, JLAB-TN-02-054

12

[7] R. Talman, Phys. Rev. Letters, 56, 14, p. 1429 (1986)

[8] E. P. Lee, Particle Accelerators, 25, 241 (1990)

[9] G.Geloni, J. Botman, J. Luiten, M. v.d. Wiel, M. Dohlus, E.Saldin,

E.Schneidmiller, M.Yurkov, DESY 02-48 (2002)

[10] G.Geloni, J. Botman, M. v.d. Wiel, M. Dohlus, E.Saldin, E.Schneidmiller,

M.Yurkov, DESY 03-44 (2002)

[11] E. L. Saldin, E. A. Schneidmiller and M. V. Yurkov, Nucl. Instr. Methods A

398, 373 (1997)

13

