3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
1
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Direct reconstruction of the eﬀective atomic number of materials
by the method of multi-energy radiography

Sergey V. Naydenov and Vladimir D. Ryzhikov

Institute of Single Crystals

60 Lenin Avenue, Kharkov, 61001 Ukraine

Craig F. Smith

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

PO Box 808, Livermore, CA 94556 USA

A direct method is proposed for reconstruction of the eﬀective atomic
number by means of multi-energy radiography of the material. The accuracy
of the method is up to 95% . Advantages over conventional radiographic
methods, which ensure accuracy of just about 50% , are discussed. A physi-
cal model has been constructed, and general expressions have been obtained
for description of the eﬀective atomic number in a two-energy monitoring
scheme. A universal dependence has been predicted for the eﬀective atomic
number as a function of relative (two-energy) radiographic reﬂex. The es-
tablished theoretical law is conﬁrmed by the experimental data presented.
The proposed development can ﬁnd multiple applications in non-destructive
testing and related ﬁelds, including those in the civil sphere as well as anti-
terrorist activities.

07.85.-m ,78.20.Bh ,81.70.-q, 81.70.Fy ,87.59.Hp

1

1. Introduction

Non-destructive testing (NDT) of diﬀerent unknown materials, objects
and media, including complex micro- and macro-structures, is an important
ﬁeld in modern applied physics [1]. Physical methods of NDT ﬁnd multiple
applications in a wide variety of technical areas, including quality control of
industrial products, inspection of welded joints and connections, and con-
ﬁrmation of building construction, pipelines, etc. An important role is also
played by NDT in radioactive materials control [2], security protection in avi-
ation [3], [4], railway and automobile transport, and customs inspection of
goods and luggage. In addition, broad applications related to the use of new
NDT technologies in medicine [5], [6], [7], [8], including separate diagnostics
of tissues and organs, can be expected. Among the promising directions of
NDT, one should note digital (computer) radiography. In it, digital recon-
struction of an image of an object examined by X-ray or gamma-radiation
is prepared based on the data collected in real-time detection. The most
widely used radiation detectors for such applications are solid-state 1D and
2D scintillation systems [9], [10], [11], [12], [13].

The main task of digital radiography, as well as of other NDT methods,
is reconstruction of the physical parameters that determine technical char-
acteristics and properties of the controlled objects being examined. This is
traditionally carried out by reconstruction of the spatial conﬁguration, ob-
serving small details and defects of the image, and determining constitutive
components and dimensions (thickness). In recent times, strong interest has
been emerging in the development of direct methods for reconstruction of
the overall composition of the object, i.e., quantitative determination of the
eﬀective atomic number, density, chemical composition, etc. To a large ex-
tent, this is due to improvements in technical capabilities for detection and
image processing and is driven by the desire for additional detail in the im-
age resulting from the collected data. Often it is not suﬃcient to know just
the geometrical structure of an object to ensure its complete identiﬁcation
for decision-making purposes. For example, fully reliable detection of ex-
plosives is not possible without discrimination of materials by their eﬀective
atomic number (organics and inorganics), density, content of predominant
chemical elements, etc. The importance of such enhanced monitoring cannot
be overestimated. It is vitally necessary not only to provide enhanced tools
for scientiﬁc and technological investigations, but to meet current needs for
improved protection against terrorist threats to the safety and health of civil

2

populations. An important milestone on the way to solving this problem is
the implementation of two-, and in general, of multi-energy radiography [14],
[15], [16], [17].

2. Eﬀective atomic number

Among the parameters determining the constitutive structure of an un-
known object or material, one should especially note the eﬀective atomic
number Zeﬀ. In fact, this measure can provide an initial estimation of the
chemical composition of the material. A large Zeﬀ generally corresponds to
inorganic compounds and metals, while a small Zeﬀ ≤ 10 is an indicator
of organic substances. For many applications, e.g., radioisotope monitoring,
cross-section studies of absorption, scattering and attenuation of electromag-
netic radiation, testing of multi-component, heterogeneous and composite
materials, etc., this parameter is of principal signiﬁcance. It is very impor-
tant to obtain its quantitative evaluation from the data provided by radio-
graphic measurements. With the aim of making this possible, in the present
work we have developed a physical model for two-energy radiography as a
particular case of the multi-energy radiography. We show that a multiplicity
of M = 2 is suﬃcient for direct determination of Zeﬀ. General theoretical
expressions are provided for determining the eﬀective atomic number with
respect to the photo and pair generation eﬀects.

P

N
k=1 pkZk, where

The method proposed here for determination of Zeﬀ is substantially dif-
ferent from the approaches used previously. In these procedures, the eﬀective
atomic number is comprised of a linear superposition of several reference val-
k pk = 1,
ues, i.e., it is expressed in the form of Zeﬀ =
and N = 2, 3, ... corresponds to the multiplicity of the radiography used.
Such “synthesis” of Zeﬀ is quite similar to the formation of light of arbitrary
color from several basic colors (Fig.1). Weights pk, or the relative content of
the components (lightZL, heavyZH , intermediateZM ), are determined from
the data of radiographic measurements. Theoretically, this corresponds to
the solution of systems of linear equations of the form Ri =
k µik dk (where
dk is the layer thickness of the k-th element phantom in the studied object),
but with attenuation coeﬃcients µik = µ (Ei; Zk, ρk) that are a priori pre-set
at several ﬁxed energy values Ei for the basic elements, each with its selected
k dk depend not
atomic number Zk and density ρk. The values of pk = dk/
only on reﬂexes Ri, but also on the basis chosen. Therefore, such radiogra-
phy is, in fact, “indirect”. Erroneous or inaccurate choice of the basis leads

P

P

P

3

to mistakes (artifacts) in determination of Zeﬀ. For example, a sample with
low content of a heavy element (low ZH) can be mistakenly identiﬁed as a
sample with a thick layer of a low ZL element. It is clear that, expanding the
basis and increasing the multiplicity, one can substantially reduce the errors.
However, even then, errors can be as high as tens of percent. The accuracy
of traditional methods in 2- and 3-energy radiography allows distinction of
materials with diﬀerence in Zeﬀ by about 50% . So, it is possible to distin-
guish iron alloys (Z ≈ 26) from wood (Z ≈ 6) and even from light aluminum
alloys (Z ≈ 13), but it is not possible to reliably discern the diﬀerence be-
tween water (Z ≈ 8) and organic materials (Z ≈ 6 − 7), iron and many other
metals, calcium minerals (Z ≈ 17) and sand (Z ≈ 12), etc. To distinguish
among these materials requires accuracy that should be higher by an order
of magnitude (i.e., not worse than 95% ).

For a chemical compound with the known formula of the form [X] =

N

=

ZiX Ai

Zeﬀ X Aeﬀ
h
with atomic number Zi and atomic mass Ai in the complex molecule [X]; N
is the full number of simple components), Zeﬀ and Aeﬀ are determined from
the expressions

(here ni is the number of atoms of the i-th kind

ni
i

(cid:26)h

i=1

(cid:27)

i

Zeﬀ =

niAiZ p+1

i

niAiZi

; Aeﬀ =

niAi

ni,

(1)

N

"

i=1
X

N

,

i=1
X

1/p

#

N

i=1
X

N

,

i=1
X

where p is an index depending upon the chosen absorption mechanism of
gamma-quanta. The expression (1) for determination of Zeﬀ is derived from
the balance of the absorbed energy per each atomic electron of the sub-
stance. Absorption over all possible physical channels and by all simple
components of the complex compound is accounted for. Parameter p is
related to the characteristic dependence of the electron coeﬃcient of lin-
ear absorption, µe = µm/Z = µ/ρZ (here µm is the mass attenuation co-
eﬃcient), on the atomic numbers of simple constituents of the substance
studied. The choice of p values corresponds to the predominant absorption
channels at speciﬁed radiation energies, i.e. µe ∝ Z p
eﬀ. In the photo eﬀect
theory, (µe)photo ∝ Z 3. In the pair formation theory (µe)pairs ∝ Z. For the
Compton scattering weakly depending upon atomic properties of the mate-
rial (µm)compt ∝ Z 0 ⇒ (µe)compt ∝ Z −1. In the experiments, such absorption
character is also well conﬁrmed. Besides this, the parameter p can be consid-
ered as a ﬁtting parameter giving the best approximation of the absorption

4

cross-section in a speciﬁed energy range and for a speciﬁed class of sub-
stances. E.g., in the photo eﬀect energy range intermediate values p = 2 ÷ 4
are used. We use for the photo eﬀect p = 3, while for the pair formation
eﬀect, p = 1, i.e.

N

N

1/3

Zphoto =

niAiZ 4
i

niAiZi

; Zpairs =

N

N

niAiZ 2
i

niAiZi

.

"

i=1
X

#
(2)
For the Compton scattering, which normally accompanies one of the for-

i=1
X

i=1
X

i=1
X

,

,

"

#

mer mechanisms, it should be assumed by deﬁnition that p = −1 and

Zcompt =

niAiZi

niAi

,

(3)

N

i=1
X

N

,

i=1
X

as the Compton eﬀect cross-section does not depend upon properties of the
material, but only upon its average electron density. The molar mass MX =
i niAi. In practice, relative concentrations ci of the simple components of
i ni (where 0 ≤ ci ≤ 1),

the material are often also known. Then, as ci = ni/
P
instead of (1)-(2) we obtain

P

Zeﬀ =

ciAiZ p+1

i

ciAiZi

; Aeﬀ =

ciAi

.

(4)

N

"

i=1
X

N

,

i=1
X

1/p

#

N

i=1
X

In Table 1, data are presented on the eﬀective atomic number of selected
substances that comprise many materials in practical use. The data were cal-
culated using formulas (1)-(4). It should be noted that the eﬀective atomic
number is dependent upon the energy range of the ionizing radiation used.
Its value corresponds to the predominant absorption channel. Using elemen-
tary inequalities from expressions (1)-(3), one can easily obtain the general
relationship valid for chemical compounds:

Zcompt ≤ Zpairs ≤ Zphoto

,

(5)

which is substantiated by the data of Table 1. For homogeneous mixtures
(solid, liquid, gaseous), including alloys, these inequalities (5) can be violated
at certain concentration ratios of the mixture components. This feature
(inversion) can be used, for example, in identiﬁcation of substitution alloys
or composites.

5

3. Theory and physical model of two-radiography

Let us consider a simple basic model of two-energy radiography used for
direct qualitative determination (monitoring) of the eﬀective atomic number
of a material. A general scheme of such radiography is presented in Fig. 1.
X-ray and gamma-radiation is attenuated exponentially with linear coeﬃ-
cient µ = µ (E; ρ; [X]). The latter depends upon the radiation energy E,
the density of the material ρ, and its chemical (atomic) composition. Zeﬀ
is considered as a direct characteristic of the atomic composition. For sim-
plicity, we assume that: 1) the radiation is monochromatic at the two ﬁxed
energies E1 and E2; 2) its spectrum is not changed when passing through
the object, and 3) scattered radiation can be neglected. By the appropriate
choice of energy ﬁlters, or by using radioactive isotopes as radiation sources
and subsequent collimation of the radiation in a suﬃciently narrow beam,
rather good approximation of these conditions can be realized in the exper-
iment. Corrections for these factors can be also accounted for theoretically.
The non-monochromatic character of the emitted and detected radiation, as
well as its accumulation due to scattering inside the object (and/or detector),
generally lower the monitoring eﬃciency and relative sensitivity.

Let us write down the (digitized) signal as recorded by detectors in the

form

Vi = V (Ei) = V0 (Ei) exp [−µ (Ei) d]

;

i = 1, 2 ,

(6)

where V0 is the background signal (without an object); dis thickness of local
cross-section of the object in the direction of ray propagation. One should
note that the value of V0i = V0 (Ei) depends upon full conversion eﬃciency
of the system (i.e., the ratio of the energy of the useful electron signal to
the energy of the initial photon) and upon the radiation source power. Let
us separate the dependence on the eﬀective atomic number Zeﬀ ≡ Z in the
attenuation coeﬃcient

µ (Ei) =

τ (Ei) Z 4 + σ (Ei) Z + χ (Ei) Z 2
h

ρ ,
i

(7)

where the functions τ (E) , σ (E) , χ (E) deﬁne the energy dependence (as-
sumed to be universal) of the actual absorption cross-sections for the photo
eﬀect, Compton eﬀect, and pair formation eﬀect, respectively. It should be
noted that theoretical determination of Zeﬀ for a complex material using for-
mulas (1)-(4) is based just on the absorption structure as given by (7). Let

6

us deﬁne the reﬂex as Ri = R (Ei) = ln [V0i/Vi] and go from the system of
equation (6) to the following linear equations:

Ri/(ρd) = µmi ≡ [αiZ p + βi]Z .

(8)

Here, we have introduced the mass attenuation coeﬃcient µm = µ/ρ and
the monitoring constants α, β, which depend only upon the radiation energy,
but not on the properties of the tested material. It is taken into account that
the normal energy ranges of the photo eﬀect (E ≤ 0.6MeV ) and the pair
formation eﬀect (E ≥ 1.2MeV ), are, as a rule, suﬃciently far from each
other on the energy scale. Hereafter, we will consider just the two-channel
absorption mechanism, i.e., either of the photo eﬀect/Compton eﬀect type
(p = 3) or pair generation/Compton type (p = 1). Monitoring using only
the inverse Compton scattering corresponds to p = −1. In all cases, it is the
relative reﬂex of 2-radiography that plays the principal role:

X = R 1/R 2 ≡

ln [V0 (E1)/V (E1)]
ln [V0 (E2)/V (E2)]

.

(9)

As it follows from equations (8), this value is related to the relative at-
tenuation coeﬃcient, X ≡ µm (E1)/µm (E2) = µ (E1)/µ (E2). Therefore X
does not depend upon the geometry (thickness) or the density of the material
nor does it depend on its other physico-chemical properties, except its eﬀec-
tive atomic number. In the energy range where total absorption coeﬃcient
varies monotonically, we have 0 < X < 1, if µ (E1) < µ (E2), or X > 1, if
µ (E1) > µ (E2).

Solving the system of equations (8) with respect to unknown variables Z
and θ ≡ (ρ d) leads, after reconstruction of the monitoring constants, to the
expression

Z p+1
2
(cid:16)

Z p =

Z p+1
1

θ1

r1 −

θ2

r2

[(Z1 θ1) r1 − (Z2 θ2) r2] ,

(10)

h(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

i.

where r1 = c12R 2 −c22R 1;r2 = c11R 2 −c21R 1; θj ≡ ρj dj is the surface density
(its dimensionality [θ] = g/cm2) of the j-th reference. Formula (10) involves
only the radiography data R 1,2 and the calibration data for measurements
with two reference samples with known (Zj; ρj) and ﬁxed thickness dj. The
calibration data are represented by the matrix ci j = R (Ei; Zj, θj), where
i, j = 1, 2. In calibration, one should account for the solubility conditions
of system (8), which are, in fact, conditions on the monitoring feasibility.

7

Hence, it follows that the choice of the radiation range and the references
should comply with the requirements det cij = c11c22 − c12c21 6= 0; Z1 6= Z2.
There are no limitations imposed on θ1,2, i.e., there is no limiting relationship
between density and thickness of the samples.

Let us present equation (10) in the following more convenient form:

,

(11)

Zeﬀ = [(k1 X + k2)/(k3 X + k4)] 1/p
where the new constants k1, k2, k3, k4 are related to the old constants from
(10) by certain relationships. As the formulations appear to be rather
bulky, we do not write them down explicitly. The dependence (11) is a
fraction-rational, non-linear, though monotonic, function. Expression (11)
will not be changed under a uniform scaling transformation k1, k2, k3, k4 →
Mk1, Mk2, Mk3, Mk4 (M = const). Therefore, only three of the introduced
constants are independent. They are determined by calibration using two
samples of given composition, i.e., by the matrix cij. However, there could be
another approach to determination of k1, k2, k3, k4. We use, from the begin-
ning, the functional relationship (11). The fraction-rational function is unam-
biguously reconstructed from three reference points. Having carried out the
measurements for three reference materials with pre-set values of Z1, Z2, Z3
(note that the density and thickness of the samples are completely arbi-
trary), we obtain three relationships of the form Z p
j = fj (Xj; k1, k2, k3, k4).
The constants are then readily determined from these relationships:

k1 = Z p

1 Z p

2 (X1 − X2) − Z p

1 Z p

3 (X1 − X3) + Z p

2 Z p

3 (X2 − X3) ;

k2 = X1X2 Z p

3 (Z p

1 − Z p

2 ) − X1X3 Z p

2 (Z p

1 − Z p

3 ) + X2X3 Z p

1 (Z p

2 − Z p

3 ) ;

k3 = X1 (Z p

2 − Z p

3 ) − X2 (Z p

1 − Z p

3 ) + X3 (Z p

1 − Z p

2 ) ;

k4 = X1X2 (Z p

1 − Z p

2 ) − X1X3 (Z p

1 − Z p

3 ) + X2X3 (Z p

2 − Z p

3 ) ,

(12)

where Xj = R1j/R2j is the relative reﬂex (9) for radiography of the j-th
reference (j = 1, 2, 3) at ﬁxed energies of 2-radiography. Unlike the case of
cij-calibration for expression (10), three, and not two, reference samples are to
be used here. This is related to the fact that density and size (dimensions) of

8

the reference samples are not ﬁxed. Obviously, such a calibration procedure
is more convenient for experiments and practical applications.

It is convenient to consider parameter p in Eq. (11) as ﬁxed. Earlier, it
was noted that p = 3 for energies in the photo eﬀect range, and p = 1 for the
pair formation eﬀect. At the same time, p can be considered as one more un-
determined constant, especially, if it is not known beforehand which absorp-
tion mechanisms prevail, or if the energies are used at which all these mech-
anisms are essential. Than the value of p can be determined numerically by
one of the approximation methods. It can minimize in the best way the set of
mean square deviations ∆n (p) = Z p
n −[k1 (p) Xn + k2 (p)]/[k3 (p) Xn + k4 (p)]
for a certain basis of calibration measurements for substances with known
atomic number values Zn (n = 1, 2, . . .). It should be noted that in the same
way it is possible to substantially increase the accuracy of eﬀective atomic
number determination in a class of objects with close Zeﬀvalues, for instance,
to increase the accuracy of distinction between organic substances, etc.

4. Discussion and experiment data

The proposed method of “direct” reconstruction of Zeﬀ is free from the
above-discussed disadvantages related to the monitoring being dependent
upon the chosen basis. The “direct” method ensures up to 95% accuracy
for Zeﬀ determination. In fact, using expressions (6)-(12) to determine the
relative sensitivity SZ , we obtain an estimate

SZ = (∆Z/Z) ∝ 2 (∆d/d)

,

(13)

where ∆Z is the minimum detectable change in the eﬀective atomic num-
ber, and ∆d are the smallest detectable variations of the object thickness.
Sensitivity with respect to defect detection Sd = (∆d/d) for multi-energy
radiography corresponds to the sensitivity of conventional radiography (sep-
arately for each of the assembly detectors) and is normally of the order of
several percent. The numerical factor 2 in the expression (13) is related to
the two-energy nature of the monitoring (i.e., sensitivity is assumed to be
equal for all detectors, Sd,1 = Sd,2). Consequently, SZ ∝ 5%, if Sd ∝ 2.5%.
This requires spatial resolution of 4 pl/mm .

The relationship (13) determines the accuracy of the proposed method.
It can be seen that 95% reconstruction of the eﬀective atomic number can
be achieved for an unknown material. Below, this conclusion is conﬁrmed

9

by experimental data. As noted before, the reason for such dramatic in-
crease in accuracy is related to the direct reconstruction of from radiography
measurements without using a ﬁtting procedure by choosing the “basic” ma-
terials. A formal representation (“replacement”) of an arbitrary material by
superposition of two speciﬁed materials with known absorption coeﬃcients
leads to large errors in determination of Zeﬀ. The existing materials are too
numerous for such rough approximation for absorption of electromagnetic ra-
diation. On the contrary, the direct eﬀective atomic number using only the
relative radiographic reﬂex (9) for the inspected material allows us to avoid
this mistake. It is of an order of (∆Z)indirect ∝ Z/M (M is the order of mul-
tiplicity), i.e., for indirect reconstruction of Zeﬀ in two-energy radiography
the errors can reach 50% . Many industrial radiographic installations using
indirect methods have such accuracy, ∆Z = ±0.5Zeﬀ. This is quite suﬃcient
to discern organics from inorganics, e.g., to see the diﬀerence between heavy
alloys, Zeﬀ = 26 ± 13, and plastics Zeﬀ = 6 ± 3, but is clearly not enough
for more accurate measurements in many applications. The direct method
of Zeﬀ reconstruction opens here many new possibilities.

In general, unlike the “synthesis” of Zeﬀ, the direct method is based upon
“analysis” of the atomic composition. Moreover, in the new approach it is
possible to limit oneself to the use of just the 2-radiography. This is im-
portant, because passing over to radiography with higher multiplicity is a
technically diﬃcult task. To verify the theory, we compared the obtained
theoretical dependence (11)-(12) with known experimental data on gamma-
radiation absorption in a large range of various materials, starting from car-
bon (Z = 6) and ending with uranium (Z = 92). These results are shown
in Fig. 2-4. In constructing the theoretical curves, three points were chosen
as reference ones (deﬁning a fraction-rational function), which corresponded
to materials with large, small and intermediate Zeﬀ values. Three character-
istic regions of the energy spectrum were considered – i.e., low, middle and
high energies, corresponding, respectively, to the photo eﬀect, the Compton
eﬀect and the pair production eﬀect. The data presented are in a very good
agreement with theory.

The choice of absorption mechanisms depends upon the radiation energies
used. The gamma-quanta energy range is mainly determined by the exper-
iment conditions of character of applications. E.g., in security and customs
inspection of luggage, medium energies from several tens to several hundreds
keV are used. This corresponds to the region of combined eﬀects of photo
absorption and Compton scattering of gamma-quanta in the substance (Figs.

10

2-3). Discarding any of these mechanisms in the medium energy range can
lead to substantial errors in determination of the eﬀective atomic number.
Thus, in Fig. 3 a theoretical approximation neglecting the photo eﬀect gives
much worse results. For inspection of large objects, such as trucks or con-
tainers, accelerator energies of several MeV are needed.
In this case, for
determination of the eﬀective atomic number one should use a model where
the pair formation eﬀect and Compton eﬀect are predominant It should be
stressed that the proposed method can be used with any choice of the ra-
diation energies. For the data presented in Figs. 2-4, we used only several
ﬁxed radiation energy values. We have checked that with any other choice
of these energies the principal law (11) remains valid. For the experimental
data used, deviations from the theoretical dependence did not exceed 5-10%
, which corresponds to 90-95% accuracy in Zeﬀ determination.

Detailed analysis of the optimal design for 2-radiography, completion of
direct experiments, reconstruction of the atomic composition of diﬀerent ob-
jects and complex materials, micro- and macro-structures, etc. are the sub-
jects of our further studies. The approach presented in this paper allows the
most complete extraction of the information on physical properties of the
material studied by multi-energy radiography. The number of parameters
reconstructed corresponds to the radiography multiplicity. (This is a general
principle of multi-energeticity). This direct analytical approach uses only ab-
sorption data, showing up the amplitude contrast induced by ionizing radi-
ation of photons (as monochromatic electromagnetic waves). Together with
new X-ray analysis methods, including those using synchrotron (coherent)
radiation exposing the phase contrast, as well as multi-energy holography
[18], [19], [20], micro-focusing and computer tomography [21], [22], etc., the
proposed approach to monitoring of materials structure widely broadens the
ﬁeld of NDT possibilities. This direction is similar to new directions in stud-
ies of semiconductor and other ﬁlms. Also, certain prospects are opened for
application of NDT in development of various microstructures, as well as in
studies of the distribution proﬁle of implanted nano-clusters of alien atoms
in the “host” crystal lattice.

Thus, a direct approach has been proposed to reconstruction of the atomic
structure of materials by means of multi-energy radiography. The general ex-
pressions (10)-(12) obtained for the eﬀective atomic number in 2-monitoring,

5. Summary

11

are closed and convenient for development of computer data processing al-
gorithms. These formulas can be also used for reconstruction of the struc-
ture of mixtures, composites, multi-component objects, micro- and macro-
structures, systems with variable chemical composition, etc. The validity of
a universal law (fraction-rational dependence with calibration over three ref-
erence points) in the atomic number radiography is experimentally conﬁrmed
in diﬀerent energy ranges of X-ray and gamma-radiation. An essential feature
of multi-energy radiography is direct extraction of additional information on
physico-chemical structure of the object under study. This opens new possi-
bilities in materials science, non-destructive testing and other applied ﬁelds
of science and technology.

Acknowledgements

The research described in this publication was made possible in part by
Award No. UE2-2484-KH-02 of the U.S. Civilian Research & Development
Foundation for the Independent States of the Former Soviet Union (CRDF).

References

[1] 15th World Conference on Non-Destructive Testing, Session of Methods
and Instrumentation, Rome, Italy, Abstracts Book, p. 1-800 (2000).

[2] C. Robert-Coutant, V. Moulin, R. Sauze, P. Rizo and J. M. Casagrande,

Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A442, 949-956 (2003).

[3] National Research Council, Airline Passenger Security Screening: New
Technologies and Implementation Issues (National Advisory Board, Na-
tional Academy Press, Washington, D.C. (1996).

[4] L. Grodzins, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B36/37, 829 (1991).

[5] G. T. Barnes, R. A. Sones, M.M. Tesic, D. R. Morgan and J. N. Saun-

ders, Radiology 156, 537 (1985).

[6] L. A. Feldkamp, S. A. Goldsteine, A. M. Parﬁtt, G. Jesion, M.
Kleerekoper, Journal of Bone and Mineral Research 1, 3-11 (1989).

12

[7] F. Inanc, J. N. Gray, T. Jensen, J. Xu, Proceedings of SPIE Conference

on Physics of Medical Imaging, Vol. 3336, 830-837 (1998).

[8] M. Marziani, A. Taibi, A. Tuﬀanelli, M. Gambaccini, Phys. Med. Biol.,

47, 305-313 (2002).

ences therein.

[9] R. M. Harrison, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A310, 24-34 (1991), and refer-

[10] Rapiscan, Prospects, USA, 2003, http://www.rapiscan.com .

[11] Heimann, Prospects, Germany, 2003, http://www.heimannsystems.com

.

[12] YXLON International, Prospects, 2002, http://www.yxlon.com .

[13] Poliscan, Prospects, http://www.isc.kharkov.com/STCRI.

[14] R. E. Alvarez, A. Macovski, Phys. Med. Biol., 21, 733-744 (1976).

[15] J. C. G. Coenen, J. G. Maas, “Material classiﬁcation by dual energy
computerized X-ray tomography”, International Symposium on com-
puterized tomography for industrial applications, 120-127 (1994).

[16] C. Rizescu, C. Beliu and A. Jipa, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A465, 584-599

(2001), and references therein.

[17] S. V. Naydenov, V. D. Ryzhikov, B. V. Grinyov, E. K. Liset-
skaya, A. D. Opolonin, D. N. Kozin, Los Alamos Archives
(http://xxx.lanl.gov), physics/0206014.

[18] S. W. Wilkins, T. E. Gureyev, D. Gao, A. Pogany, A. W. Stevenson,

Nature 384, 335 (1996).

[19] T. Gog, P. M. Len, G. Materic, D. Bahr, C. S. Fadly, C. Sanches-Hanke,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 30-33 (1996).

[20] P. Cloetens, W. Ludwig, J. Baruchel, D. Van Dyck, J. Van Landuyt,
J.P. Guiday, M. Schenker, Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 2912-2914 (1999).

[21] M. Van Geet, R. Swennen and M. Wevers, Sed. Geol. 132, 25-26 (2000).

[22] See, for example, X-ray tomography in Material Science (Hermes Science

Publications, Paris, 2000, ed. by J. Baruchel et al.).

13

Material
Inorganic substances
Stainless steel

Black steel
Calcium phosphate; bone
tissue (med.)
Table salt
Quartz glass; sand
Aluminum and light al-
loys
Glass
Water
Air
Organic substances
Polyvinyl chloride
Soft tissue (med.)

Glucose
Saccharose
Cellulose (wood, fabrics)
Organic glass
Polyamide (nylon)
Polystyrene
Polyethylene (plastics)

Chemical formula

Zphoto Zpairs Zcompt

Fe 66% ; Cr 10% ; Ni
16% ; Ti 8%
Fe 92% ; C 8%
Ca(PO4)2

NaCl
SiO2
Al2O3

Na2SiO3
H2O
mixture O2; N2 etc.

(C2H3Cl)n
CNO-organics;
H2O 90%
C6H12O6
C12H22O11
(C6H10O5)n
(C5H8O2)n
(C6H11NO2)n
(C8H9)n
(C2H4)n

26.57

27.58

27.80

25.97
17.38

25.94
16.11

25.76
11.05

15.66
12.30
11.70

11.49
7.98
7.6

15.21
11.63
11.23

11.02
7.89
7.4

14.62
10.80
10.65

10.51
7.22
6.9

15.85
7.8

14.80
7.2

11.97
6.8

7.37
7.38
7.31
6.96
6.85
5.95
5.94

7.22
7.18
7.14
6.76
6.70
5.92
5.86

6.73
6.71
6.68
6.24
6.18
5.57
5.29

Table 1. Eﬀective atomic number of various substances with
respect to the photo eﬀect, Zphoto, pair formation eﬀect, Zpairs, and
Compton scattering, Zcompt.

14

Figure captions

FIG. 1. General scheme of two-energy radiography with reconstruction
of the eﬀective atomic number of the material. Synthesis consists in mix-
ing of the ﬁtting basic elements with L – ”light”, M – ”middle” and
H – ”heavy” atomic mass. Analysis is unambiguous reconstruction of
Zef f . “Black-and-white” synthesis corresponds to the two-energy radiog-
raphy, “three-color” scheme (R – ”red”, G – green, and B – ”blue”) cor-
responds to 3-radiography, etc. For the direct method (analysis) proposed in
this work, 2-radiography is suﬃcient.

FIG. 2. Dependence of the eﬀective atomic number upon 2-radiography
reﬂexes in the regions of photo eﬀect and Compton scattering. Theoreti-
cal dependence (solid line) and experimental points for materials of known
composition are indicated. Geometry (dimensions) of samples is arbitrary.

FIG. 3. Dependence of the eﬀective atomic number upon 2-radiography
reﬂexes in the region of intermediate ionizing radiation energies. Theoretical
curves are presented modeling the predominant role of one of two possible
absorption channels. The best agreement with experimental data is obtained
when a mixed absorption mechanism (photo eﬀect/Compton eﬀect) is chosen.
FIG. 4. Dependence of the eﬀective atomic number upon 2-radiography
reﬂexes in the region of Compton scattering and the pair formation eﬀect.
When the detected energy ranges are moved apart, sensitivity of the method
is not worsened.

15

Figure 1:

16

Figure 2:

17

Figure 3:

18

Figure 4:

19

