3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
5
0
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

AS-WeP21

1

Surface Analysis of OFE-Copper X-Band Accelerating
Structures and Possible Correlation to RF Breakdown
Events

S.E. Harvey∗, F. Le Pimpec, R.E. Kirby, F.Marcelja, K. Adamson, E.L. Garwin
SLAC, 2575 Sand Hill Rd, Menlo Park, CA, 94025

10th January 2014

Abstract

X-band accelerator structures meeting the Next Linear Collider (NLC) design
requirements have been found to suﬀer vacuum surface damage caused by radio
frequency (RF) breakdown, when processed to high electric-ﬁeld gradients.
Im-
proved understanding of these breakdown events is desirable for the development
of structure designs, fabrication procedures, and processing techniques that mini-
mize structure damage. RF reﬂected wave analysis and acoustic sensor pickup have
provided breakdowns localization in RF structures [1] [2]. Particle contaminations
found following clean autopsy of four RF-processed travelling wave structures, have
been catalogued and analyzed. Their inﬂuence on RF breakdown, as well as that of
several other material-based properties, will be discussed.

1 Introduction

RF breakdown rates in Next Linear Collider (NLC) X-band (11.424 GHz) travelling wave

structures currently exceed the design limits (i.e. one breakdown per 10 hours at an

electric ﬁeld of 65MV/m with a 400ns pulse length). In addition to excessive breakdown

rates, a high degree of variability in performance among identically manufactured and

processed RF structures has been observed.

In the late 1990s NLC structure prototype testing began with the availability of more

powerful RF sources; initial tests revealed catastrophic RF breakdown surface damage

and phase shift (detuning) beginning at an average gradient of 50MV/m [3] [4]. As RF

breakdown performance has become one of several critical factors deﬁning the limit of

∗Corresponding Author: stef@slac.stanford.edu

the operating gradient of an accelerating structure, greater eﬀorts have been made in

characterizing, understanding, and reducing RF breakdowns. A key question which needs

to be addressed in depth is the limiting factors on the use of copper as an accelerator

material, as accelerating gradients move toward 100MV/m.

This paper explores the possible correlation between the location and frequency of

occurrence of breakdown events (Fig.1(a and b) and Fig.2) and their connection to copper

surface morphology or contamination in travelling wave structures. The goal of this

ongoing work is to identify the cause of the breakdown events and to diminish their

occurrence, hence reducing operational variation among structures.

The universally accepted starting point for the initiation of RF or DC breakdown is

ﬁeld emission. RF breakdown events take place when the local ﬁeld emission current

density at a given site causes ohmic-heating suﬃcient to locally release gas, leading to

ionization and ion back-bombardment that leads to further heating, plasma formation

and, occasionally, catastrophic breakdown [5] [6].

2 Accelerator Structures

The accelerator structure is manufactured from 99.99% pure OFE copper that has been

evaluated as Class 1 material per ASTM-B66. To form a cell, Fig.3, the copper is machined

either with a poly- or a mono-crystal diamond tool. Chemical cleaning and etching is

performed after the ﬁnal machining step to remove machining-related damaged material

from the surface. An iris and a half cup side forms a half cell, Fig.3. After cleaning,

the two half cells are diﬀusion bonded together in a dry hydrogen furnace to form a full

accelerator cell. Several braze cycles are required for RF couplers and water lines and

a wet/dry hydrogen cleanup furnace cycle follows the brazing steps. The structure is

then vacuum ﬁred at 650oC for two weeks to outgas dissolved dissolved gases, primarily

hydrogen, which can be available for breakdown plasma formation. Vacuum-ﬁring also

reduces contaminant concentration on the structure surface. Desorption of surface/bulk

gas contributes to the RF breakdown mechanism [5].

2

Following electrical ﬁeld mapping of the completed structure and installation in the

NLC test accelerator, the structure is vacuum-baked, in-situ, for approximately one week

prior to RF processing. RF processing is required to “season” the structure – remove large

particle contaminants, desorb gas from the surface and vaporize any asperities by ﬁeld

emission. RF processing takes place as a series of increasing pulse lengths and energies

until breakdown events at the desired operational gradient and pulse duration cease.

The objective of processing is to apply suﬃcient power to physically alter potential ﬁeld

emitters without causing damage, manifested as a phase shift, to the structure surface.

A typical RF processing procedure is as follows: Initial processing takes place with 50ns

pulses and the gradient is increased to 70 – 75 MV/m. Once the structure operates

without frequent breakdown at that pulse width, the pulses are increased in length –

100, 170, 240, and ﬁnally 400ns. After increasing the pulse length the gradient is reset

to a lower value and increased until consistent RF performance is achieved at 75MV/m.

Table 1 shows the variation in RF Breakdown performance, for a steady operation, among

several structures at a lower gradient than the maximum gradient achieved. RF processing

times for similar structures have varied as much as an order of magnitude with the range

100 to 1000 hours. Structures that take less time to process tend to have better ﬁnal

performance (fewer RF breakdowns.) This suggests two possibilities: (1) Structures that

required less RF processing had fewer mechanical defects or surface/bulk contaminations

responsible for ﬁeld emission or, (2) structures that require longer processing times (due

to outgassing or contamination) undergo material changes that can subsequently produce

ﬁeld emitters during operation.

3 RF Breakdown Measurements and Structure Au-

topsy

During catastrophic RF breakdown events, RF transmitted energy is negligible [7]. Energy

is partially reﬂected and partially absorbed by the material surface. Hence, breakdown

events can be characterized by changes in the reﬂected RF power. Approximate break-

3

down position in the structure is calculated by the measurement of the the phase and

timing of the reﬂected signal. A complementary acoustic detection method, which takes

advantage of the conversion of the breakdown energy into phonons, is also used to localize

the breakdown events [1].

RF-processed sections were cleanly autopsied (sectioned without adding chemical con-

tamination or physical debris). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to obtain

topographical images of the surface and electron dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) was used

to determine the chemical composition of the surface and any particle(s) that may be on

or embedded into the surface.

Particle analysis was performed using ZepT M automated searching software from

ASPEXLLC. Four strips per cell side, each oriented azimuthally 90◦ apart and having

1.4 mm width by

∼
Search conditions were set for feature size and chemical composition. Any feature, which

4.3 mm radial length from the edge of the iris, were searched.

∼

met the search criteria, was detected by backscattered electrons during an initial survey of

the surface, then automatically magniﬁed and imaged at 500x using secondary electrons.

Each imaged particle was also analyzed by EDS.

4 RF Breakdown in Travelling Wave Structures: Ob-

servations

The site for enhanced ﬁeld emission is some type of surface feature, either intrinsic (grain

boundaries, cracks, inclusions, slip lines) or extrinsic (contamination particles, oxides,

organic residues). Contaminants, inclusions, and residues can be metal or dielectric (ﬁeld

emission enhancement is known to occur, via separate mechanisms,

in both types of

material.)

The defect dissipates some of the RF energy. Melting at the breakdown site creates

craters that, due to their irregular geometry, can act as further sites for enhanced ﬁeld

emission and breakdown. The observed physical morphology of the craters falls into two

distinct groups: irregular edges and softened edges. Fig.1(a) shows a crater with irreg-

4

ular edges; in Fig.1(b) a second type of crater is observed where there are few sharp

edges and repeated melting appears to have taken place. The softened-edge craters of-

ten appear in close proximity with one another; irregularly edged craters are frequently

spaced further apart. This suggests that the softened-edged craters may have started out

irregularly edged, but have changed morphology due to repeated melting or plasma-ion

bombardment.

grain to grain.

In general the density of craters increases along the cell radius toward the center,

where electric ﬁelds (E) are highest, Fig.2. It is important to note that not every grain

near the aperture exhibited craters and that the crater density varied substantially from

Craters were also seen at grain boundaries and at inclusions, Fig.4. Grain boundaries

and inclusions are logical ﬁeld emitters considering a Fowler-Nordheim model, equation.1.

Both of these defect types have irregular geometries that increase the value of β (ﬁeld-

enhancement factor); simultaneously these defects indicate an area of high stress within

the material, which could decrease the work function Φ, increasing the ﬁeld emission:

J[A.m−2] =

e3 (β E)2
8 h π Φ t2(y)

4 √2 m Φ3/2
3 ~ e (β E)

exp

"−

ν(y)

#

(1)

Changes in work function could explain the occurrence of RF breakdown without

the characteristic sharp edges and/or tall asperities typically associated with high β.

Preliminary measurements of the local energy barrier height of the surface of (111) OFE

Copper via UHV-STM by Mizuno [8] reveal a value of 4.1eV, 18% less than macroscopic

work function value of 5.0eV.

Of particular interest is the role of copper surface plasticity in RF breakdown. Local

heating, as well as the presence of high magnetic and electric ﬁelds, are known to create

mass movement in copper [9].

Inclusions emerging at grain boundaries and micropro-

trusions (slip lines), created by local stresses due to mass movement, can act as ﬁeld

emitters. So, there can be a suﬃciently high ﬁeld or local heating that could induce mass

movement in copper, thus resulting in RF breakdown. Fig.4 does present mass move-

5

ment inside a grain, and a crater with no traces of contaminant. However, we have not

correlated systematic mass movement in a grain with breakdown events.

Mechanical deformation is known to change the local work function in copper [10]. This

change in work function may enhance Fowler-Nordheim ﬁeld emission without increasing

β.

5 T-Series Structure Autopsies: Input Coupler De-

sign and Anomalous Chemistry

The ﬁrst autopsies and SEM/EDS analysis took place on two test structures, T53VG3R

and T53VG3RA. The structures were nearly identically manufactured; their diﬀerence

being the ﬁnal chemical cleaning step. Prior to assembly, parts of the R-structure were

etched for 60 seconds; the RA-structure parts were etched for 30 seconds. This corresponds

to the removal of 3 microns and 1.5 microns of surface material, respectively [11]. The etch

step removes material damaged by machining, to some extent. The RA breakdown rate

was twice that of the R structure in the interior cells and 7 times greater when including

the breakdown attributed to the input coupler, Table 1.

Both structures exhibited high breakdown rates in their very ﬁrst cells due to break-

down events in the RF input coupler [12]. The input coupler design had sharp corners that

ampliﬁed local heating and has since been redesigned. It is speculated that breakdown

events in the input coupler create a shower of particles that travel into the structure and

created more breakdown events in subsequent cells. Breakdown rates in the center cells

of the structures were signiﬁcantly lower.

SEM autopsies of input, center, and output cells revealed numerous craters. Craters

were located at grain boundaries and in the interior part of the grain. Inclusions were

also observed. The inclusions were metal-sulﬁde particles, particularly manganese sulﬁde

(MnS). The high number of MnS particles found in both T53VG3R and RA are anoma-

lous; the most commonly found particles are copper, furnace insulation (silicon, calcium),

aluminum, carbon, and stainless steel (iron, chromium). MnS signal was observed most

6

frequently in cells close to the RF input coupler. Normalized particle data is listed in

Table 2 and Table 3. The total area scanned per cell was

25 mm2. The average particle

∼

size in the interior cells was less than 1 micron. Particles greater than 5 microns were

seen most frequently in the cell closest to the input coupler.

While greater particle counts were associated with the breakdown events at the input

coupler, there was little correlation between particle density and breakdown events in a

particular cell despite the occurrence of MnS clusters in some cells. No correlation was

observed in autopsies of other systems.

6 H-Series Structure Autopsies: ”Hot” Cells due to

Large Particles

Two processed structures, H90VG5 and H90VG3N, did exhibit high RF breakdown in a

localized region within the structure. At the bottom of the cell 13, between iris 12 and

iris 13, of H90VG5, an aluminum sliver (mm length) was found, Fig.5. In cell 35-36 of

H90VG3N a large (> 100 microns) stainless steel (S/S) particle, Fig.6 was found embedded

in the sidewall of the cell. A high density of craters was found near the S/S particle,

Fig.7. The aluminium sliver was likely introduced to the structure during assembly in

the NLTCA. The process by which the S/S particle was introduced inside the structure

is not so clear because the particle is now actually embedded into the copper.

Using RF design simulation software the intensity of the magnetic or electric ﬁeld inside

a structure or a cell can be determined. At the location of the cup side the magnetic ﬁeld

(H) of the RF wave is maximal 0.3MA/m, on the iris it can be up to 5 times less . The

surface electric ﬁeld on the iris is 150MV/m and is 7MV/m at the location of the S/S

particle. The pattern of the melting at the base of this particle is consistent with a high

current induced by H [13].

H90VG3N was ﬁtted with a new type of input coupler having rounded edges; break-

down rates were high in cells nearest to the front of the structure. Analysis of those cells

shows particle densities slightly lower than those in cells with signiﬁcantly fewer break-

7

down events, Table 4. Following the design change, the highest number of breakdowns is

concentrated at the entrance of the ﬁrst accelerating cells.

7 Conclusion

The ﬁeld emission from particles and defects on accelerator RF component surfaces can

initiate irreversible breakdown damage in high surface electric ﬁelds. Past electron micro-

scopical analysis of breakdowns at copper grain boundaries demonstrated the importance

of a sub-surface gas source for the breakdown plasma creation, showing that vacuum

bakeout of the ﬁnished structure is useful in reducing this contributor to the breakdown

process.

We focused in this work on the autopsy and SEM examination of three fully RF-tested

NLC structures, in order to determine whether the large number of breakdowns seen in

RF structures is directly correlated with the particle load. The structure autopsies show

that near clean-room technique in fabricating structures is essential to reducing gross

particle loads that can lead to breakdowns. Further, careful attention must be paid to the

structure vacuum bake environment in order to prevent adding non-native contamination

(for example, the evaporation of manganese from the S/S vacuum components) to the last

steps of structure preparation. The autopsies, however, show that most RF breakdowns

have no visible particle residue or defect in the resulting craters and that most particles

do not, in fact, breakdown. Therefore, most breakdown events must have some not-

yet-identiﬁed cause (presumably sub-surface) for the onset of ﬁeld emission. Studies of

correlation between mass movement inside a grain, hardness of grains with breakdown

position, and (E,H) ﬁeld are ongoing.

8 Acknowledgments

We would like to thank C. Adolphsen and V. Dolgashev for useful discussion, and G.

Collet for developing the clean autopsy process for structures.

8

References

[1] J. Nelson et al. Use of Acoustic Emission to Diagnose Breakdown in Accelerator RF

Structures. In PAC, Portland USA, 2003.

[2] C. Adolphsen et al. Normal-Conducting RF Structure Test Facilities and Results. In

PAC, Portland USA, 2003.

In LINAC, Monterey USA, 2000.

[3] C. Adolphsen et al. RF Processing of X-Band Accelerator Structures at the NLCTA.

[4] C. Adolphsen et al. Processing studies of X-band accelerator structures at the

NLCTA. In PAC, Chicago USA, 2001.

[5] L.L Laurent. High Gradient RF Breakdown Studies. PhD thesis, University of Cali-

fornia Davis, 2002.

[6] P.B Wilson. Gradient Limitation in Accelerating Structures Imposed by Surface

Melting. In PAC, Portland, Or, USA, 2003.

[7] V. Dolgashev. Experiments on Gradient Limits for Normal Conducting Accelerators.

In LINAC 2002, Korea, 2002.

[8] Mizuno and Garwin, SLAC private communication.

[9] E.V Vorob’ev. Deformation of Copper under the Action of Strong Magnetic Fields

and Cryogenic Temperatures. Problemy Prochnosti, 21(12):32–36, 1989.

[10] Chow and Tiller. Deformation-Induced Work Function Changes in Cu Single Crystals

I. Experiment. J. Appl. Phys., 55(5):1339, 1984.

[11] R.E. Kirby et al. Impact of Surface Preparation on RF Breakdown Performance in

NLCTA Accelerating Structures. Technical report, SLAC LCC-0081, 2002.

[12] F. Le Pimpec et al. Autopsy on an RF-Processed X-band Travelling Wave Structure.

In LINAC 2002, Korea, 2002. SLAC-PUB-9526 .

9

[13] V. Dolgashev, SLAC private communication.

10

Figure 1: (a) sharp-edged craters (left); (b) smoothed-edged craters (right)

11

Figure 2: Average percentage area damaged by craters versus radial distance from center
of aperture (30thCell T53VG3RA)

12

Figure 3: Damped Round and Detuned Structure Cells

13

Figure 4: Breakdown on Grain Boundary

14

Figure 5: Aluminum particle (melted due to RF breakdown?) found on cell 13 of H90VG5

15

Figure 6: Stainless steel particle embedded in wall of H90VG3N

16

Figure 7: High density of RF breakdown events near stainless steel mushroom

17

Table 1:  RF Breakdown Performance for various structures

Structure

T53VG3R
T53VG3RA
T53VG3MC
H90VG5

H90VG3N
H60VG3
H60VG3 (6C)

Gradient
MV/m
70
73
90
65

65
65
65

Breakdown rate
including input couplers
0.7/hr
5.2/hr
0.4/hr
coupler breakdown
limited full processing
1/hr coupler redesigned
< 0.1/hr
0.21/hr

18

