4
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
0
3
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SLAC–PUB–10353
IPBI TN–2004–1
February, 2004

Luminosity, Energy and Polarization Studies for the Linear Collider:
Comparing e+e− and e−e− for NLC and TESLA

M. Woods, K.C. Moﬀeit, T.O. Raubenheimer, A. Seryi, C. Sramek∗
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309

A. Florimonte
Santa Cruz Institute for Particle Physics
University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064

Abstract

We present results from luminosity, energy and polarization studies at a
future Linear Collider. We compare e+e− and e−e− modes of operation and
consider both NLC and TESLA beam parameter speciﬁcations at a center-
of-mass energy of 500 GeV. Realistic colliding beam distributions are used,
which include dynamic eﬀects of the beam transport from the Damping Rings
to the Interaction Point. Beam-beam deﬂections scans and their impact for
beam-based feedbacks are considered. A transverse kink instability is studied,
including its impact on determining the luminosity-weighted center-of-mass
energy. Polarimetry in the extraction line from the IP is presented, including
results on beam distributions at the Compton IP and at the Compton detector.
Keywords: linear collider; luminosity spectrum; polarimetry.

5th International Workshop on Electron-Electron Interactions at TeV Energies
December 12-14, 2003
UC Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA

∗Supported by the Department of Energy, Contract DE-AC03-76SF00515.

Presented at

1

1. Introduction

We perform simulations of collisions at the Linear Collider (LC) Interaction
Point (IP), and also of transport of the disrupted beams after collision from the IP
to the beam dumps. We compare e+e− and e−e− modes of operation and consider
both NLC and TESLA beam parameter speciﬁcations at a center-of-mass energy of
500 GeV. We use input ﬁles of the colliding beam distributions that were generated
for the recent TRC study,1 which compares the NLC and TESLA technical designs
for a future Linear Collider. The TRC beam parameter ﬁles were generated using a
full beam transport simulation from the Damping Rings to the IP to achieve realistic
colliding beam distributions. These TRC ﬁles were used to create electron.ini and
positron.ini ﬁles, which we use as input for a GUINEA-PIG2 simulation of beam-
beam collisions. The GUINEA-PIG (G-P) simulation is used to generate ﬁles of
the outgoing beam distributions (beam1.dat and beam2.dat) to the extraction line.
It is also used to generate ﬁles (lumi.dat) of the luminosity-weighted beam energy
distributions. We use the same incoming beam parameters (the TRC distributions)
for e+e− and e−e− collider modes. These parameters are summarized in Table 1.

The NLC extraction line design3,4 is used for beam transport from the IP to the
beam dumps. The extraction line performs two main functions, which are to provide
beam diagnostics and to cleanly transport the disrupted beams (and secondary
particles) to the beam dumps. The diagnostics include a Compton polarimeter
with the Compton Interaction Point (CIP) located in the middle of a chicane,
approximately 60 meters downstream of the Linear Collider IP.5,6 A GEANT-3
simulation of the extraction line7 is used; its results have been checked against a
DIMAD simulation4 and found to agree.

Many studies on the physics impact of beam-beam collisions exist for both the
NLC and TESLA beam parameters at a 500-GeV Linear Collider. But for the
large majority of these, only one machine design is studied; and the studies do not
include realistic colliding beam distributions. Typically, gaussian beam distribu-
tions are assumed with no correlations between the beam parameters. Our study
uses more realistic colliding beam distributions, including eﬀects from Linac wake-
ﬁelds and beam component misalignments. (The TRC study, that generated our
input colliding beam distributions, applied a set of misalignment errors to the Linac
and then used simple Linac steering and a model of IP feedback to optimize the
beam transport, center the colliding beams and optimize luminosity.) Our studies
consider several diﬀerent machines (with diﬀerent sets of initial misalignments) by
using several sets of TRC beam ﬁles. We directly compare the baseline NLC and
TESLA beam parameters, for both e+e− and e−e− collider modes.

2. Luminosity Studies

The geometric luminosity, L0, at the Linear Collider is given by

L0 =

frepN 2
4πσxσy

,

(1)

where frep is the number of colliding bunches per second; N is the bunch charge;
and σx, σy are the horizontal and vertical beam sizes. Beam-beam focusing eﬀects

2

Table 1: NLC and TESLA beam parameters for a 500 GeV Linear Collider.

Beam Parameter
Beam Energy
Repetition Rate
Bunch Charge
Bunches per rf pulse
Bunch spacing
γǫx, γǫy
βx, βy
σx, σy
σz
σE
E electrons
σE
E positrons
Geometric Luminosity

NLC-500
250 GeV
120 Hz
0.75 · 1010
192
1.4 ns
(360, 4.0) · 10−8 m-rad
(8,0.11) mm
(243,3.0) nm
110 µm
0.30%
0.30%
1.4 · 1034cm−2s−1

TESLA-500
250 GeV
5 Hz
2.0 · 1010
2820
337 ns
(1000, 3.0) · 10−8 m-rad
(15, 0.40) mm
(554,5.0) nm
300 µm
0.14%
0.07%
1.6 · 1034cm−2s−1

can enhance L0 for e+e− collisions. For e−e− collisions, however, there is an anti-
pinch eﬀect and the luminosity is reduced. This pinch (or anti-pinch) eﬀect can be
expressed as

L = L0 · HD,

(2)

where HD is the pinch enhancement factor. For the NLC-500 and TESLA-500 beam
parameters the horizontal pinch is negligible, while the vertical pinch is signiﬁcant.
The pinch eﬀect also results in decreased (increased) sensitivity of the luminosity,
L, to vertical oﬀsets of the e+e− (e−e− ) colliding beams.

The luminosity as a function of the vertical oﬀset between the colliding beams
at a 500 GeV Linear Collider is plotted in Figure 1, for one set of TRC ﬁles.
(The detailed results vary with the ﬁles used, but the plots shown in Figure 1
give a good representation of the general features observed.) We observe higher
luminosity with TESLA parameters for e+e− collisions, while NLC parameters give
higher luminosity for e−e− collisions. The geometric luminosity, L0, is roughly
equal in the two designs. But the TESLA beam parameters give HD = 2.1 for
e+e− collisions and HD = 0.3 for e−e− collisions, while NLC beam parameters give
HD = 1.5 for e+e− and HD = 0.4 for e−e− .

One feature we observe in Figure 1 is that the maximum luminosity may not
occur at zero oﬀset. This eﬀect is more enhanced for e−e− collisions. To examine
this further, we plot in Figure 2 the average beam-beam deﬂection angle as a func-
tion of vertical oﬀset. (The same TRC ﬁles are used here as for the results shown
in Figure 1. Again, the detailed results vary with the input TRC ﬁles used, but the
plots shown give a good representation of the general features observed.) We ﬁnd
that the deﬂection angles can also be non-zero at zero oﬀset, and again the eﬀect
is enhanced for e−e− collisions. We observe, however, that maximum luminosity is
achieved when the outgoing deﬂection angles are approximately zero, rather than
when the colliding beams have zero oﬀset. Thus beam-beam deﬂection feedbacks,
which are planned to optimize and stabilize luminosity at both NLC and TESLA,
should still work.

3

Figure 1: The luminosity versus vertical oﬀset is plotted for a) e+e− collisions and
b) e−e− collisions, for one set of TRC ﬁles. The TESLA beam parameters result in
a higher luminosity for e+e− , but lower luminosity for e−e− .

Figure 2: The vertical deﬂection angles are plotted versus vertical oﬀset for
a)e+e− and b) e−e− collisions, for one set of TRC ﬁles. The NLC beam param-
eters result in larger vertical deﬂection angles.

The source of reduced luminosity and signiﬁcant deﬂection angles when the
beams are centered can be traced to a vertical kink instability8,9 and the use of
realistic colliding beam distributions at the IP.10 When we simulate collisions of
beams with gaussian beam parameter distributions and no correlations among the
beam parameters, we ﬁnd that maximum luminosity and zero deﬂection angles
both occur when the beam oﬀsets are zero. The kink instability is discussed in more
detail in the following section, where we consider its impact on determining the
luminosity-weighted center-of-mass energy.

We also observe that the luminosity and deﬂection angle curves in Figures 1
and 2 are signiﬁcantly narrower for e−e− collisions than for e+e− collisions. This
presents a signiﬁcant diﬃculty for beam-based feedbacks to stabilize collisions and
optimize luminosity. One study for the TESLA-500 machine design has considered
the narrow e−e− deﬂection curve and how well a fast intra-train feedback can be

4

expected to work to keep the beams centered.11 This feedback takes advantage of
the long (0.95 ms) bunch train and uses the observed deﬂection angles at the head
of the train to make corrections to bring the rest of the train into collision. If the
bunch-to-bunch jitter within a train is suﬃciently small, the study showed that this
feedback can work with only a small loss in luminosity. For the NLC machine design,
however, the bunch train is short (270 ns) and the expected latency of the feedback
(less than 60 ns)12 would constitute a non-negligible fraction of the train. An intra-
train deﬂection feedback for e+e− collisions with the NLC-500 parameters can still
be expected to work reasonably well if needed (with residual train-to-train jitter
oﬀsets of 5-10 nm or less). A slower inter-train feedback is signiﬁcantly easier and
will work well for NLC-500 e+e− collisions. It is easier than the TESLA intra-train
feedback because of the larger deﬂection angles, the more well-behaved deﬂection
curve and the larger 8-ms sampling interval to calculate and apply correction signals.
The inter-train sampling rate of 120 Hz for NLC is much better than the 5 Hz inter-
train sampling rate for TESLA; it is lower, though, than TESLA′s average 14 kHz
sampling rate (3 MHz instantaneous sampling rate) that is possible if TESLA intra-
train sampling works well.

For e−e− collisions, the NLC deﬂection curve shown in Figure 2b may be too
narrow to expect either intra-train or inter-train beam-beam deﬂection feedbacks
to perform well. One recent study13 considered this and suggested increasing the
vertical spotsize (by increasing the vertical beta function) for e−e− collisions by a
factor 7 to achieve a deﬂection curve similar to that for e+e− collisions. The resulting
luminosity (for NLC) was only about 10% of the e+e− luminosity. As experience
is gained in machine operation, however, narrower deﬂection curves than the one
plotted in Figure 2a for NLC-500 may be tolerated.
In the case of the TESLA
beam parameters, the e−e− luminosity is observed in our study to be ≈ 15% of
the e+e− luminosity before considering the diﬃculties the narrow deﬂection scans
present to the beam-based feedbacks.

Realistic colliding beam parameters and beam-based feedbacks are likely to yield
e−e− luminosities of order 10 − 20% of e+e− luminosities. This range of results
should be similar for the NLC and TESLA designs. This reduced e−e− luminosity
is signiﬁcantly lower than the canonical factor of 1/3 that typically appears in the
literature.

3. Energy Studies

Energy and luminosity are the most important parameters characterizing a fu-
ture Linear Collider and determining its reach for new physics. In addition, the
LC has the capability for many precision measurements, which further extend this
reach. Electron(-positron) colliders can have a distinct advantage over proton
colliders because of the well deﬁned initial state. However, beam energy spread,
beamsstrahlung and beam disruption angles make the colliding beam parameters
less precise. This can reduce the achievable precision for some measurements. In
this paper we consider the eﬀect of the beam energy spread on the precision with
which one can determine the average luminosity-weighted center-of-mass energy,
hElum−wt
CM
The LC will precisely measure the top quark mass and the Higgs boson mass (if

i.

5

the Higgs boson exists). These measurements motivate determining hElum−wt
i to
200 parts per million (ppm) or better.14 Improving the current W mass measure-
ment or performing a very precise ALR measurement in a Giga-Z program motivate
determining hElum−wt

i to 50 ppm or better.14

CM

CM

The beam energy spectrometers measure the average beam energy, hEi, which
can diﬀer from hElum−wti due to eﬀects from beam energy spread and beamsstrahlung.
The 50-200 ppm desired precision for hElum−wt
i is well below the 3000 (1000) ppm
CM
rms energy spread for NLC-500 (TESLA-500). Beam parameter correlations and
aberrations can cause the luminosity to vary over the phase space of the incoming
beam parameters, and can lead to

CM

(3)

hEi 6= hElum−wti.
In this section we consider one eﬀect that causes a bias to the hElum−wt
i de-
termination, which arises from three ingredients: beam energy spread, energy-z
correlation within a bunch and a y-z kink instability. The bias assumes a certain
analysis technique, which is currently favored for determining hElum−wt
i. This anal-
ysis uses beam energy spectrometer measurements to measure the average incident
beam energies per bunch and it uses the acollinearity in Bhabha events to infer
the eﬀects from beam energy spread and beamsstrahlung.15 We do not consider
here the potentially larger eﬀect from beamsstrahlung. (Beamsstrahlung induces
an energy spread in hElum−wt
i greater than the incoming beam energy spread does.
Our study eﬀectively assumes that beamsstrahlung eﬀects can be corrected for ex-
actly using the Bhabha acollinearity analysis.) The y-z kink instability has been
considered in previous studies10,16,17 for its eﬀect on the luminosity at TESLA. We
present results here for its eﬀect on the hElum−wt

CM
We use the G-P simulation of beam-beam eﬀects with the ﬂags for beamsstrahlung
i and the bias in deter-

and initial state radiation turned oﬀ. We deﬁne hElum−wt
mining it by,

i determination.

CM

CM

CM

i = hElum−wt
hElum−wt
CM
CM = hElum−wt
Ebias

CM

1

i + hElum−wt
2
hEini
i −
(cid:0)

i
1 i + hEini
2 i
(cid:1)

,

(4)

(5)

1 i and hEini

i and hElum−wt
2

where hEini
2 i are the average energies of the incoming beam distributions
in the G-P ﬁles electron.ini and positron.ini; and hElum−wt
i are the
1
average energies of colliding particles that make luminosity, taken from the G-P ﬁle
lumi.dat. The energy spread and energy-z correlations of the incoming bunches to
the IP are plotted in Figure 3a) for NLC-500 electrons and in Figure 3b) for TESLA-
500 positrons. NLC-500 has similar distributions for electrons and positrons, while
the electron energy distribution for TESLA-500 has additional broadening (com-
pared to TESLA-500 positrons) due to the undulator used for positron production.
The beam energy spread consists of two components: an uncorrelated contribution
from the bunch compressors and the positron source undulator, and a correlated
contribution from the residual of the BNS-damping energy spread.18 The energy-z
correlation arises from the need for BNS damping to prevent jitter ampliﬁcation
due to the transverse wakeﬁelds. Because of the weaker wakeﬁelds in the supercon-
ducting TESLA design, the required BNS energy spread is about a factor of ﬁve
smaller than in the normal conducting NLC design.

6

Figure 3: The energy-z correlation incoming beams at the IP for a) electrons at
NLC, and b) positrons at TESLA.

Figure 4: The incident beam energy distribution (a) and the luminosity-weighted
center-of-mass energy (b) for e+e− collisions at NLC, for one set of TRC ﬁles.

CM

For e+e− collisions, histograms of the incident beam energy distributions and
the G-P results for the hElum−wt
i distribution are shown in Figure 4 for NLC-500
and in Figure 5 for TESLA-500. The NLC-500 hElum−wt
i distribution is clearly
asymmetric. This results from a kink instability that causes the heads of the bunches
to have higher luminosity than the tails. The colliding bunches can be viewed as
long thin ribbons a few nanometers high, a few hundred nanometers wide and over
100 microns long.
Ideally the transverse distortions of these colliding ribbons is
small along their longitudinal z-axis. However, there can be small distortions in
the incoming beams and additional distortions from beam-beam eﬀects. These are
dynamic and evolve during the beam-beam collision. When the vertical disruption
gets large enough, a kink instability develops which can cause luminosity loss and,
if there is an energy-z correlation, a signiﬁcant (> 100 ppm) Ebias

CM

CM as well.

The Ebias

CM corresponding to the NLC-500 distributions shown in Figure 4 is

7

Figure 5: The incident beam energy distribution (a) and the luminosity-weighted
center-of-mass energy (b) for e+e− collisions at TESLA, for one set of TRC ﬁles.

+550 ppm, and for the TESLA-500 distributions shown in Figure 5 it is +95 ppm.
These results correspond to just one of the TRC ﬁles generated for each of NLC-500
and TESLA-500. We have repeated this analysis for 6 diﬀerent (electron.ini and
positron.ini) TRC ﬁles for each of NLC-500 and TESLA-500. These correspond
to 6 sets of (random) misalignments, which, when combined with simple beam
tuning algorithms, achieve nominal luminosity with centered colliding beams. (This
mimics eﬀects of larger errors that may be encountered, but also corrected with more
sophisticated beam tuning algorithms.) The variations in Ebias
CM observed for 6 sets
of TRC input ﬁles are summarized in Table 2.

We have also examined the magnitude of Ebias

CM due to the kink instability for
e−e− collisions. Figure 6 shows the luminosity-weighted ECM distribution for both
e+e− and e−e− collisions, using the NLC-500 simulation ﬁle which exhibited the
largest Ebias
CM =
+720 ppm, and for e−e− collisions Ebias
CM = +690 ppm. The variations in Ebias
CM
observed for e−e− collisions are also summarized in Table 2.

CM for e+e− collisions. In this case, we ﬁnd for e+e− collisions Ebias

We have investigated how Ebias

CM may have additional dependence on aberrations
at the IP due to residual beam position oﬀsets, waist oﬀsets and dispersion. The
results for vertical position oﬀsets are shown in Figure 7 for one of the NLC-500
and TESLA-500 simulations for both e+e− and e−e− collision modes. (The details
observed in these plots vary for diﬀerent TRC ﬁles, but the results shown indicate
the relevant features.) The maximum size of eﬀects we see for Ebias
CM from these
studies are summarized in Table 2.

We note that the Ebias

CM considered in this paper is due to one eﬀect (energy
spread and kink instability) and assuming one analysis technique (energy spectrom-
eters and Bhabha acollinearity). The study of other eﬀects, such as beamstrahlung
Incorporating realistic colliding beam
and disruption angles, is still in progress.
distributions and investigating eﬀects from asymmetric beamsstrahlung emission of
the two colliding beams have not yet been done.

We are pursuing other physics analyses14 (ex. γZ, ZZ and WW events), where

8

Figure 6: The luminosity-weighted center-of-mass energy for one set of the NLC
beam parameters, for both a) e+e− and b) e−e− collisions.

Figure 7: The bias in the luminosity-weighted center-of-mass energy is plotted versus
the vertical oﬀset of the colliding beams for a) e+e− collisions and b) e−e− collisions.
The bias is larger for NLC than for TESLA.

CM

we can utilize existing measurements of the Z and W masses. We expect these anal-
yses will resolve the Ebias
CM (apparent in the Bhabha acollinearity analysis method)
to achieve < 200 ppm precision in hElum−wt
i for both NLC-500 and TESLA-500
machines. However, the energy spread/kink instability eﬀect we have discussed in
this paper is a signiﬁcant issue for achieving < 50 ppm precision on hElum−wt
i as
desired for improved W-mass measurements, and also for achieving the best pos-
sible ALR measurement at Giga-Z (if polarized positrons or sub-0.1% polarimetery
are available). This is an important issue for both the NLC-500 and TESLA-500
machine designs; the only solution may be a reduction in the bunch charge, and
thus the luminosity, to reduce both the kink instability and the energy-z correlation
for these measurements.

CM

9

Table 2: Summary of Ebias
and TESLA-500 for both e+e− and e−e− collider modes.
LC Machine Design Collider Mode

CM , due to energy spread and kink instability, at NLC-500

NLC-500
NLC-500
TESLA-500
TESLA-500

e+e−
e−e−
e+e−
e−e−

CM ) Max(Ebias
CM )

σ(Ebias
Ebias
CM
(∆y = 0)
(∆y = 0)
+520 ppm 170 ppm +1000 ppm
+710 ppm 400 ppm +2000 ppm
+50 ppm
+250 ppm
30 ppm
+230 ppm 120 ppm +500 ppm

4. Polarization Studies

The NLC extraction line design3,4 takes advantage of the large 20-mrad crossing
angle and allows capability for beam diagnostics, including a Compton polarimeter.
Extraction line beam diagnostics are highly desirable at the LC. There is much more
ﬂexibility in the beam optics design downstream of the IP compared to upstream
to accommodate beam diagnostics. One need not worry about emittance dilution
or creating backgrounds that are problematic for the machine protection system
or for the LC Detector at the IP. The energy spectrometer and polarimeter can
be closer to the LC IP with less extrapolation error from their measurements to
the relevant beam quantities at the IP. Given the high precision desired for both
energy and polarization measurements, it is also very desirable to have redundant
measurements of these quantities by independent techniques. Extraction line di-
agnostics are needed to provide this. For beam energy measurements, we plan to
implement both an upstream BPM energy spectrometer (as was done for LEP-II)
and a downstream extraction line synchrotron stripe energy spectrometer (as was
done at SLC). An extraction line polarimeter measurement can be compared to an
upstream polarimeter measurement.
In addition, the extraction line more easily
accommodates a back-scattered Compton gamma measurement to complement the
back-scattered Compton electron measurement. Beam-beam collision eﬀects can
be directly measured with extraction line diagnostics by comparing measurements
with and without collisions. The extraction line environment is diﬃcult, though,
due to the disrupted primary beams and secondary particles from collisions, espe-
cially the intense beamsstrahlung photons. It is therefore necessary to demonstrate
that meaningful extraction line diagnostics are feasible. Here we present a feasible
extraction line polarimeter design which has much more capability than a polarime-
ter upstream of the LC IP.

The NLC extraction line design achieves an 80% energy bandpass for transport-
ing the disrupted electron beam to the beam dump.4 In this study we simulate
transport of (realistic) disrupted NLC-500 beams, using the input TRC ﬁles de-
scribed in the previous section, from the IP to the Compton IP. Less than 0.3%
of the disrupted beam particles are lost. These losses should be tolerable for ex-
traction line beam diagnostics, if suitable collimators and detector shielding are
implemented.

The NLC group is working on detailed designs for polarization and energy mea-
surements in the extraction line.14,19 Extraction line polarimetry is feasible for both

10

Figure 8: One design option being studied for the extraction line chicane, with a
Compton IP at mid-chicane for polarimetry.

e+e− and e−e− collider modes and we present some studies for this below. The en-
ergy spectrometer design study is ongoing, including its impact on polarimetry. One
concept for the extraction line chicane that could be used for both a polarimeter
and an energy spectrometer is shown in Figure 8.

For polarimetery, a 532-nm circularly polarized laser beam collides with the elec-
tron beam in the middle of a vertical chicane with a horizontal crossing angle of 11.5
mrad.20 The laser pulse energy at the Compton IP is 100 mJ in a 2-ns FWHM pulse.
Compton-scattered electrons near the kinematic edge at 25.1 GeV are detected in
a segmented detector, and the scattering rate asymmetry for electron and photon
spins aligned versus anti-aligned can be used to determine the beam polarization.5
We are also investigating the possibility of a pair spectrometer to measure the beam
polarization from a (counting mode) measurement of the back-scattered Compton
gamma asymmetry. The detectors for back-scattered Compton electrons and gam-
mas are outside of a 1-mrad stayclear, which is needed to accommodate the intense
beamsstrahlung photon ﬂux. The converter for the Compton gammas is inside the
1-mrad stayclear, though, and this is likely only possible during dedicated polarime-
try studies with no collisions.

Using the existing extraction line design,4 whose chicane diﬀers slightly from
that shown in Figure 8, we use a GEANT-3 simulation to transport beams from
the LC IP to the Compton IP and to determine the disrupted beam proﬁle there.
The vertical proﬁle of the disrupted electron beam (for NLC-500 e+e− collisions)
at the Compton IP is shown in Figure 9. The vertical dispersion of 20 mm and
the beam energy spread are responsible for the double-peaked structure visible at
y = −2cm in Figure 9b). The laser beam at the Compton IP is expected to have

11

Figure 9: The disrupted vertical beam distribution at the Compton IP for NLC-500
e+e− collisions: a) full distribution on a log scale and b) zooming in on the core of
the beam

an rms width of ≈ 100µm, which is roughly matched to the size of the core of the
disrupted electron beam.

The angular distributions of the disrupted electron beam at the Compton IP
are shown in Figures 10 and 11 for both e+e− and e−e− collider modes. Above
225 GeV (90% of the beam energy) the angular distributions are well behaved for
both e+e− and e−e− collider modes at NLC and TESLA. In addition to providing
polarization measurements for disrupted electrons near the endpoint beam energy,
meaningful polarization measurements may be achievable for disrupted electrons
in the region from 225-250 GeV. Angular spread in the electron beam leads to a
spread in the spin precession (spin diﬀusion) and an eﬀective depolarization. Spin
precession and depolarization and their impact on polarimetry is discussed further
in Appendices A and B. Table 3 summarizes parameters for the disrupted beams in
the extraction line, including beam losses in transport to the mid-chicane point for
the NLC extraction line. Beam losses are well below 0.1% except for e−e− collisions
at NLC-500, where they are ≈ 0.3%.

We have simulated the transport of Compton-scattered electrons at the endpoint
energy of 25.1 GeV to a detector plane 90 meters downstream of the LC IP, to
investigate the separation of the Compton signal from the disrupted electron beam
distribution and from the beamsstrahlung photons. Distributions for the Compton
endpoint electrons and the beam electrons at this location are shown in Figure 12
for one set of NLC-500 ﬁles with e+e− collisions, both with and without disruption.
Even with collisions, there is very good separation between the Compton signal and
the disrupted electron beam. The Compton endpoint is 18 cm from the beam axis
and is well outside the 1-mrad stayclear of 9 cm. The expected Compton scattering
rate at the 25.1 GeV endpoint is 500 Compton electrons per GeV (or 600 Compton
electrons per cm at the detector plane) per pulse for the NLC-500 design.20

12

Table 3: Extraction Line Beam Properities: angular divergences of the disrupted
beams at the Linear Collider IP; luminosity-weighted depolarization; average beam-
strahlung energy loss; and % beam loss in transport from the IP to mid-chicane of
the NLC extraction line. Results are averaged over 6 TRC ﬁles.

Parameter NLC-500 TESLA-500 NLC-500 TESLA-500
e+e−
275 µrad
56 µrad
0.32%
4.2%
< 0.1%

σ(θx)
σ(θy)
∆P lum−wt
IP
∆E
Chicane losses

e−e−
182 µrad
185 µrad
0.36%
5.2%
0.3%

e−e−
198 µrad
236 µrad
0.45%
3.5%
< 0.1%

e+e−
228 µrad
85 µrad
0.24%
6.2%
< 0.1%

Figure 10: The disrupted beam angles at the Compton IP for a) e+e− and b)
e−e− collisions, for one set of NLC-500 TRC ﬁles.

Figure 11: The disrupted beam angles at the Compton IP for a) e+e− and b)
e−e− collisions, for one set of TESLA-500 TRC ﬁles.

13

Figure 12: The vertical beam distribution at the Compton detector plane for the
NLC-500 e+e− collider mode, a) with collisions (ie. disrupted outgoing beam) and
b) without collisions (no disruption).

5. Summary

We have presented results from luminosity, energy and polarization studies for a
500 GeV Linear Collider. We compared NLC and TESLA beam parameters for both
e+e− and e−e− modes of operation, using realistic colliding beam distributions. We
ﬁnd that the narrow deﬂection scan for e−e− collisions creates signiﬁcant diﬃculties
for a beam-based feedback to stabilize collisions, and that a realistic e−e− luminosity
may only be 10 − 20% of the e+e− luminosity. We ﬁnd that the combined eﬀect of
beam energy spread, energy-z correlations within a bunch, and a kink instability
result in a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the average ECM measured by energy
spectrometers and the luminosity-weighted ECM . This diﬀerence results in a bias,
Ebias
CM , if the luminosity spectrum is being determined from energy spectrometer and
CM is a factor two larger for e−e− collisions
Bhabha acollinearity measurements. Ebias
than for e+e− collisions, and it is a factor 3-10 larger for the NLC beam parameters
than for the TESLA beam parameters. New analyses, utilizing γZ, ZZ and W W
events and making use of existing Z and W mass measurements, are needed to
provide more robust determinations of Ebias
CM ; they should be able to achieve less than
200 ppm uncertainty on hElum−wt
i for both NLC and TESLA designs at nominal
luminosity. But this kink instability eﬀect may prevent achieving 50 ppm precision
or better on hElum−wt
i (for both NLC and TESLA designs), which is desired for
improved W mass or (ultimate) Giga-Z ALR measurements. For polarimetry, we
have shown that an extraction line Compton polarimeter is feasible, if the collider
IP has a 20-mrad crossing angle. It has much more capability than an upstream
polarimeter to achieve the best precision for determining the luminosity-weighted
beam polarization.

CM

CM

14

(A.1)

(A.2)

(A.3)

(A.4)

(A.5)

Appendix A. Depolarization eﬀects and Polarimetry

(BMT) Spin precession with respect to the electron momentum vector is given

by

Depolarization resulting from spin diﬀusion is given by

θspin =

· θbend.

E(GeV )
0.44065

∆P BMT = 1 − cos [σ (θspin)] ,

where σ(θspin) is the rms of the spin precession distribution. At the IP, the incoming
beams have small enough angular divergence (< 50µrad rms) that the resulting
∆P BMT
is negligible. However, the outgoing angular divergences are signiﬁcantly
IP
larger (see Table 3), which results in ∆P BMT
≈ (1.0 − 1.8)% for the outgoing
beams to the extraction line. Depolarization of the outgoing beams at the IP can
result both from BMT spin precession and from Sokolov-Ternov spin ﬂips from
beam-beam eﬀects,21

IP

∆PIP = ∆P BMT

IP + ∆P ST
IP

The luminosity-weighted depolarization is smaller, however, and is typically about
1/4 of the outgoing beam depolarization22 (whether due to BMT spin precession or
due to ST spin ﬂips),

∆P lum−wt
IP
∆P lum−wt
IP

= ∆P lum−wt,BMT

+ ∆P lum−wt,ST

IP

IP

≈

(∆P BMT

IP + ∆P ST
IP )

1
4

The Compton polarimeter in the extraction line can measure the diﬀerence in
polarization between collisions and no collisions, which has contributions from both
BMT spin precession and Sokolov-Ternov spin ﬂips:

∆P meas

CIP = ∆P BMT

CIP + ∆P ST
IP .

(A.6)

IP

IP

IP

can diﬀer from ∆P BMT

∆P BMT
due to the R-Transport matrix from the IP to
CIP
the Compton IP. This matrix should be well known from the beam optics. (The
current NLC extraction line has an angular magniﬁcation from the IP to the CIP
of ≈ 0.5, so that ∆P BMT
.) If the disrupted beam angles can be
determined (from simulations or from extraction line measurements) then one can
infer both ∆P BMT
and ∆P BMT
CIP can
then be used to determine ∆P ST
IP .

CIP . The extraction line measurement of ∆P meas

CIP ≈ ∆P lum−wt,BMT

As an example, we ﬁnd for one of the (TRC) NLC-500 ﬁles that e+e− collisions
give ∆P lum−wt,BMT
= 0.22%. The R-Transport matrix to the Compton IP then
predicts that ∆P BMT
CIP = 0.31%. Using the GEANT-3 simulation to transport the
disrupted electron beam to the CIP and applying a weighting for the collision with
the Compton laser beam we would expect to measure ∆P BMT
CIP = 0.28%, in very
good agreement with the predicted value. For these NLC-500 beam parameters we
expect ∆P ST

IP ≈ 0.4% and ∆P lum−wt,ST

≈ 0.1%.22

IP

IP

15

Appendix B. Spin Precession from an IP Crossing Angle

In the NLC-500 design, the beams collide at the IP with a 20-mrad crossing
angle. The beam trajectories are therefore mis-aligned by 10 mrad with the detector
solenoid ﬁeld. This results in a vertical kick to the beams. The vertical kick from
the solenoid in the barrel region of the LC detector is partially cancelled by a
compensating kick in the endcap fringe ﬁeld. In one study of this eﬀect for NLC-
500,23 the deﬂection angle with respect to the incoming beam trajectory would be
68 µrad at the LC IP and 136 µrad for the outgoing beam to the extraction line.
These deﬂection angles are energy dependent,

θIP
y

= 68µrad ·

θextraction
y

= 136µrad ·

(cid:18)

250GeV
E
250GeV
E

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

.

(cid:19)

(B.1)

(B.2)

Three problems result if these vertical kicks are not compensated:

• The extraction line must be realigned when the beam energy is changed.
• There will be a 136 µrad vertical crossing angle for e−e− collisions. (e+e− still
collide head-on, but at an angle of 68µrad with respect to the incoming beam
trajectories or the solenoid ﬁeld.) This reduces the luminosity to nearly zero.

• There is a net band angle of 68 µrad between the beam trajectory at the (up-
stream or downstream) polarimeters and the IP. This angle is small compared
to the rms divergence of the disrupted beams, but nonetheless is undesirable.

Given the above problems, it is clear that the vertical kicks from the solenoid in
the crossing angle geometry must be compensated. It should be straight forward
to compensate for the vertical kick downstream of the IP. More care is needed for
compensating the upstream kick because of the stringent requirements for emit-
tance preservation and beam alignment. Design studies are in progress and should
include a solution with no net bend angles between the Linear Collider IP and the
polarimeter Compton IP.

References

1. International Technical Review Committee Second Report, SLAC-R-606 (2003).
2. D. Schulte, Ph.D. thesis (unpublished). D. Schulte, eConf C980914:127-131,1998; also

in *Monterey 1998, Computational accelerator physics* 127-131.

3. Y. Nosochkov, T.O. Raubenheimer, K.A. Thompson, and M. Woods, SLAC-PUB-8096

(1999); e-Print Archive: physics/0106062.

4. Y.M. Nosochkov, T.O. Raubenheimer, SLAC-PUB-8313 (1999); e-Print Archive:

5. M. Woods, SLAC-PUB-7744 (1998); published in Int. J. Mod. Phys. A13 2517 (1998).
6. P.C. Rowson and M. Woods SLAC-PUB-8745 (2000); e-Print Archive: hep-

7. T. Maruyama, private communication.
8. R.J. Hollebeek SLAC-PUB-2535 (1980); published in Nucl. Instrum. Meth. 184 333

physics/0106065.

ex/0012055.

(1981).

16

9. P. Chen, SLAC-PUB-4822 (1988).
10. R. Brinkman, O. Napoly, D. Schulte, CLIC-Note-505 (2002).
11. I. Reyzl and S. Schreiber, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A15 2495 (2000).
12. P.N. Burrows, SNOWMASS-2001-T105 (2001); e-Print Archive: physics/0112080;

also see descriptions for the FONT and FEATHER projects at
http://hepwww.ph.qmul.ac.uk/∼white/FONT/default.htm and
http://acfahep.kek.jp/subg/ir/feather/index.html.

13. C. Sramek et al., SLAC LCC-Note-125 (2003).
14. D. Cinabro, E. Torrence and M. Woods, SLAC ALCPG IPBI TN-2003-1 (2003); also

available as SLAC ALCPG Note LCD-ALCPG-03-0001 (2003).

15. M.N. Frary and D.J. Miller, DESY-92-123A p. 379;

http://www.hep.ucl.ac.uk/lc/documents/frarymiller.pdf.

16. D. Schulte, N. Walker and G. White, DESY-M-03-01R (2003).
17. D. Schulte, CERN-AB-2003-026-ABP (2003).
18. See Section 7.3.2.1 of Reference 1.
19. The American Linear Collider Physics Group (ALCPG) has a Working Group
on IP Beam Instrumentation (IPBI), which is addressing (among other top-
ics) polarization and energy measurements
see
http://www.slac.stanford.edu/xorg/lcd/ipbi/.

in the NLC extraction line;

20. K. Moﬀeit and M. Woods, SLAC ALCPG IPBI TN-2003-2.
21. K. Yokoya and P. Chen, SLAC-PUB-4692 (1988); published in Minneapolis Spin

22. By K.A. Thompson SLAC-PUB-8716 (2001); published in *Capri 2000, Quantum

Conf.1988:938.

aspects of beam physics* 450-459.

23. P. Tenenbaum, J. Irwin, and T.O. Raubenheimer, SLAC-PUB-9631 (2003); published

in Phys.Rev.ST Accel.Beams 6:061001 (2003).

17

