4
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
8
0
3
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Channeling of Positrons through Periodically Bent
Crystals: on Feasibility of Crystalline Undulator
and Gamma-Laser

A. V. Korol

, A. V. Solov’yov

and W.Greiner

† k

‡§ ¶

§

Department of Physics, St.Petersburg State Maritime Technical University, Leninskii
†
prospect 101, St. Petersburg 198262, Russia
A.F.Ioﬀe Physical-Technical Institute of the Academy of Sciences of Russia,
‡
Polytechnicheskaya 26, St. Petersburg 194021, Russia
Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik der Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universit¨at, 60054
§
Frankfurt am Main, Germany

Abstract. The electromagnetic radiation generated by ultra-relativistic positrons
channelling in a crystalline undulator is discussed. The crystalline undulator is a crystal
whose planes are bent periodically with the amplitude much larger than the interplanar
spacing. Various conditions and criteria to be fulﬁlled for the crystalline undulator
operation are established. Diﬀerent methods of the crystal bending are described. We
present the results of numeric calculations of spectral distributions of the spontaneous
radiation emitted in the crystalline undulator and discuss the possibility to create the
stimulated emission in such a system in analogy with the free electron laser. A careful
literature survey covering the formulation of all essential ideas in this ﬁeld is given.
Our investigation shows that the proposed mechanism provides an eﬃcient source for
high energy photons, which is worth to study experimentally.

1.

Introduction

We discuss a new mechanism of generation of high energy photons by means of a
planar channeling of ultra-relativistic positrons through a periodically bent crystal. The
feasibility of this scheme was explicitly demonstrated in [1, 2]. In these papers as well as
in our subsequent publications [3]-[13] the idea of this new type of radiation, all essential
conditions and limitations which must be fulﬁlled to make possible the observation of
the eﬀect and a crystalline undulator operation were formulated in a complete and
adequate form for the ﬁrst time. A number of corresponding novel numerical results

E-mail: korol@rpro.ioﬀe.rssi.ru
E-mail: solovyov@rpro.ioﬀe.rssi.ru

k
¶

2

were presented to illustrate the developed theory, including, in particular, the calculation
of the spectral and angular characteristics of the new type of radiation.

The aim of this paper is to review the results obtained so far in this newly arisen ﬁeld
as well as to carry out a historical survey of the development of all principal ideas and
related phenomena. The necessity of this is motivated by the fact that the importance
of the ideas suggested and discussed in [1]-[13] has been also realized by other authors
resulting in a signiﬁcant increase of the number of publications in the ﬁeld within the
last 3-5 years [14]-[25] but, unfortunately, often without proper citation [18]-[25]. We
review all publications known to us which are relevant to the subject of our research.

The main phenomenon to be discussed in this review is the radiation formed in
a crystalline undulator. The term ’crystalline undulator’ (introduced but not at all
elaborated clearly in [26]) stands for a system which consists of two essential parts: (a)
a crystal whose crystallographic planes are bent periodically, and (b) a bunch of ultra-
relativistic positively charged particles undergoing planar channeling in the crystal. In
such a system there appears, in addition to a well-known channeling radiation, the
radiation of an undulator type which is due to the periodic motion of channeling
particles which follow the bending of the crystallographic planes. The intensity and the
characteristic frequencies of this undulator radiation can be easily varied by changing
the energy of beam particles and the parameters of crystal bending.

spontaneous 
undulator emission

stimulated 
undulator emission

y

a

d

z

channeling
particles

λ

periodically bent
channel

Figure 1. Schematic representation of spontaneous and stimulated radiation in a
periodically bent crystal. The y- and z-scales are incompatible!

The mechanism of the photon emission by means of a crystalline undulator is
illustrated by ﬁgure 1. Short comments presented below aim to focus on the principal

3

features of the scheme relevant to the subject of the review. At the moment we do not
elaborate all the important details but do this in section 3.

The (yz)-plane in the ﬁgure is a cross section of an initially linear crystal, and
the z-axis represents the cross section of a midplane of two neighbouring non-deformed
crystallographic planes (not drawn in the ﬁgure) spaced by the interplanar distance
d. Two sets of black circles denote the nuclei which belong to the periodically bent
neighbouring planes which form a periodically bent channel. The amplitude of the
bending, a, is deﬁned as a maximum displacement of the deformed midplane (thick
solid line) from the z-axis. The quantity λ stands for a spatial period of the bending.
In principle, it is possible to consider various shapes, y(z), of the periodically bent
midplane.
In this review we will mainly discuss the harmonic form of this function,
y(z) = a sin(2πz/λ). For further referencing let us stress here that we will mainly
consider the case when the quantities d, a and λ satisfy strong double inequality:
d

a
Open circles in ﬁgure 1 denote the channeled ultra-relativistic particles. Provided
certain conditions are met, the particles,
injected into the crystal, will undergo
channeling in the periodically bent channel. Thus, the trajectory of a particle
(represented schematically by the dashed line) contains two elements. Firstly, there
are oscillations inside the channel due to the action of the interplanar potential, - the
channeling oscillations. This mode is characterized by a frequency Ωch dependent on
the projectile type, energy, and the parameters of the interplanar potential. Secondly,
there are oscillations because of the periodicity of the distorted midplane,
- the
2πc/λ (c is the velocity of light which
undulator oscillations, whose frequency is ω0 ≈
approximately is the velocity of an ultra-relativistic particle).

10 . . . 102 d, and a

10−5 . . . 10−4 λ.

λ. Typically d

10−8 cm, a

≪

≪

∼

∼

∼

Spontaneous emission of photons which appears in this system is associated with
both of these oscillations. Typical frequency of the emission due to the channeling
2γ2Ωch where γ is the relativistic Lorenz factor γ = ε/mc2. The
oscillations is ωch ≈
4γ2ω0/(2 + p2) where
undulator oscillations give rise to the photons with frequency ω
the quantity p, a so-called undulator parameter, is related to the amplitude and the
period of bending, p = 2πγ(a/λ).
If strong inequality ω0 ≪

Ωch is met than the frequencies of the channeling
radiation and the undulator radiation are also well separated, ω
In this
case the characteristics of the undulator radiation (the intensity and spectral-angular
distribution) are practically independent on the channeling oscillations but depend on
the shape of the periodically bent midplane.

ωch.

≪

≈

For ω0 ≪

Ωch the scheme presented in ﬁgure 1 leads to the possibility of generating
a stimulated undulator emission. This is due to the fact, that photons emitted at the
points of the maximum curvature of the midplane travel almost parallel to the beam
and thus, stimulate the photon generation in the vicinity of all successive maxima and

4

minima.
In [2] we demonstrated that it is feasible to consider emission stimulation
within the range of photon energies ¯hω = 10 . . . 104 keV (a Gamma-laser). These
energies correspond to the range 10−8 . . . 10−4 µm of the emission wavelength, which
is far below than the operating wavelengths in conventional free-electron lasers (both
existing and proposed) based on the action of a magnetic ﬁeld on a projectile [27, 28, 29].
However, there are essential features which distinguish a seemingly simple scheme
presented in ﬁgure 1 from a conventional undulator. In the latter the beam of particles
and the photon ﬂux move in vacuum whereas in the proposed scheme they propagate
through a crystalline media. The interaction of both beams with the crystal constituents
makes the problem much more complicated from theoretical, experimental and technical
viewpoints. Taking into consideration a number of side eﬀects which accompany the
beams dynamics, it is not at all evident a priori that the eﬀect will not be smeared out.
Therefore, to prove that the crystalline undulator as well as the radiation formed in it
both are feasible it is necessary to analyze the inﬂuence, in most cases destructive, of
various related phenomena. Only on the basis of such an analysis one can formulate
the conditions which must be met and deﬁne the ranges of parameters (which include
the bunch energy, the types of projectiles, the amplitude and the period of bendings,
the crystal length, the photon energy) within which all the criteria are fulﬁlled. In full
this accurate analysis was carried out very recently and the feasibility of the crystalline
undulator and the Gamma-laser based on it were demonstrated in an adequate form for
the ﬁrst time in [1, 2] and in [3]-[13].

¿From the viewpoint of this compulsory programme which had to be done in
order to draw a conclusion that the scheme in ﬁgure 1 can be transformed from the
stage of a purely academic idea up to an observable eﬀect and an operating device
we review critically some of the recent publications as well as the much earlier ones
[26, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36]. This is done in section 3.

Prior to start with the discussion of various aspects of the electromagnetic radiation
from a beam of charged particles channeling in a periodically bent crystal let us brieﬂy
mention the phenomena closely related to our main problem. These are: channeling in
straight and in bent crystals, channeling radiation and undulator radiation.

2. Channeling, channeling radiation, undulator radiation

We do not pretend to cover the whole range of problems concerning the channeling eﬀect,
the channeling radiation and the radiation formed in the undulators. This section is
devoted solely for a brief description of the eﬀects closely related to the main subject of
this review.

2.1. Channeling

5

The basic eﬀect of the channeling process in a straight crystal is that a charged particle
can penetrate at an anomalously large distance when traveling nearly parallel to a
crystallographic plane (the planar channeling) or an axis (the axial channeling) and
experiencing the collective action of the electrostatic ﬁeld of the lattice ions. The latter
is repulsive at small distances for positively charged particles and, therefore, they are
steered into the interatomic region, while negatively charged projectiles move in the
close vicinity of ion strings or planes.

Channeling was discovered in the early 1960s by computer simulations of ion motion
in crystals of various structure [37]. Large penetration lengths were obtained for low-
energy (up to 10 keV) ions incident along crystallographic directions of low indexes.
These calculations allowed to explain the results of earlier experiments. Later, a
comprehensive theoretical study [38] introduced the important model of continuum
potential for the interaction energetic charged projectiles and lattice atoms arranged
in strings and planes. Using this approach the criterion for a stable channeling was
formulated. According to it the beam of particles becomes trapped by the interplanar
or axial potential if the incident angle of the beam with respect to the crystal plane or
the axis is smaller than the so-called critical Lindhard angle θL. These concepts were
subsequently widely used to interprete channeling experiments for low energy projectiles
(ε < 1 GeV), see, e.g., [39], and for high energies of the particles (ε = 1 . . . 102 GeV)
[40, 41, 42, 43, 44]. In recent years channeling of charged particles in straight nano-tubes,
usually carbon nano-tubes, has been intensively investigated [45]-[52]. We mention these
papers for the sake of completeness but do not pretend to review them, since this ﬁeld
is not related directly to the main subject of our research.

Lindhard [38] was also the ﬁrst who theoretically described the dechanneling process,
- the phenomenon of a gradual increase of the transverse energy of a channeled particle
due to inelastic collisions with nuclei and electrons of the crystal. As a consequence,
initially channeled particle during its passage through the crystal gains the transverse
energy higher than the continuum potential barrier. At this point the particle leaves
the channel and is, basically, lost for the channeling process. The scale which deﬁnes
the (average) interval for a particle to penetrate into a crystal until its dechannels is
called a dechanneling length, Ld. This quantity depends on the parameters of a crystal
(these include the charge of nuclei, the interatomic spacing, the mean atomic radius, the
amplitude of thermal vibrations) and the parameters of a channeled particle, - the energy
and the charge. It is important to note that for negative and for positive projectiles the
dechanneling occurs in diﬀerent regimes. As mentioned above, the interplanar (or axial)
potential is repulsive at small distances for positively charged particles and is attractive
for negatively ones. Therefore, negatively charged particles tend to channel in the

6

regions around the nuclei whereas positive particles are pushed away. Consequently, the
number of collisions with the crystal constituents is much larger for negatively charge
particles and they dechannel faster. Typically, the dechanneling lengths of positive
charges exceed those for negative ones (of the same energy and charge modulus) by
the order of magnitude or more [16, 53]. This statement is valid, both for axial and
planar channeling, and for various pairs of positive/negative particles of the same charge
modulus: for e+/e− [54], π+/π− [55], and p/¯p [56].

2.2. Channeling radiation

Channeling of charged particles in crystals is accompanied by the channeling radiation
[57, 58]. This speciﬁc type of electromagnetic radiation arises due to the transverse
motion of the particle inside the channel under the action of the interplanar ﬁeld (the
channeling oscillations, see ﬁgure 1). The phenomena of channeling radiation of a
charged projectile in a linear crystal, see e.g.
[41, 42, 53, 59, 60, 61, 62], as well as
in a ’simple’ (i.e. non-periodic, one-arc) bent channel [63, 64, 65], are known, although
in the latter case the theoretical and experimental data are scarce, at least up to now.
For the purpose of this review it is important to mention several well-established
features of the channeling radiation. Firstly, as well as in any other radiative process
of a charge moving in an external potential (e.g. bremsstrahlung [66]), the intensity of
the channeling radiation is inversely proportional to the squared mass of the projectile.
Consequently, a channeled electron/positron emits (mp/me)2 times more intensively
than a proton with the same value of relativistic factor γ. Secondly, for both electrons
and positrons the intensity of radiation in the channeling mode greatly exceeds (by
more than an order of magnitude) that by the same projectile in an amorphous medium
[54, 67]. Finally, the radiative energy loss is of a channeled electron is noticeably higher
than that of a positron of the same energy. This is valid for all energy ranges (from
several MeV up to hundreds of GeV) of the projectile [16, 41, 67, 68, 69, 70]. Physical
reason for this is that electrons channel in vicinity of the crystal nuclei, therefore they are
accelerated stronger and radiated more energetic photons than positrons which channel
in the region of a weaker ﬁeld.

The study of the channeling radiation initially proposed for particles moving in

crystals was later extended to the case of nanotubes [45, 46, 47, 48].

2.3. Channeling in bent crystals

The channeling process in a bent crystal takes place [71] if the maximal centrifugal force,
acting on the projectile because of the channel bending, is less than the force due to the
interplanar ﬁeld [30, 65, 71, 72]:

mγv2/R < q U ′

max.

(1)

7

Here m and v are the mass and velocity of the projectile, γ is its relativistic factor and
R is a curvature radius of the bent channel, q is the charge of the projectile and the
quantity U ′

max stands for the maximum gradient of the interplanar ﬁeld.

Provided this condition is fulﬁlled, the beam of positively charged channeling
particles at each instant moves inside the channel, especially parallel to the bent crystal
midplane as it does in the case of the channeling in a straight crystal. Since it ﬁrst
theoretical prediction [71] and experimental support [73] the idea to deﬂect high-energy
beams of charged particles by means of a planar channeling in bent crystals had attracted
Indeed, the beams (in
a lot of attention worldwide and still is of a great interest.
particular, those of ultra-relativistic protons and heavy ions) can be steered by crystals
much more eﬃciently than by means of external macroscopic electric or magnetic ﬁelds.
In recent experiments with 450 GeV protons [74, 75] the eﬃciency of the particle beam
deﬂection was reported on the level of 60% [75] and of 85% for the 70-GeV protons beam
[76]. The progress in deﬂecting of heavy-ions beams was reported recently as well [77].
We refer to the reviews papers which cover state-of-the-art in this ﬁeld, and describe in
detail all the stages of the development of the idea as well as a number of phenomena
which are of current interest [40, 42, 43, 44, 78, 79, 80].

Deﬂection of the beams of negatively charged particles by planar channeling is
strongly suppressed because of the increased role of the dechanneling [43, 82]. The
deﬂection of beams of particles, both positive and negative, during axial channeling
was simulated numerically [81]. The experimental study of this eﬀect has demonstrated
small eﬃciency of extracting the beam particles [80, 82].

Another possible application of bent crystal concerns its possible use to focus beams
of ultra-relativistic heavy-ions [83] or protons [84]. To this end a crystal is needed in
which the crystal axes are no longer parallel, but are slanted more and more the farther
away they are from the axis of the beam. Then the bending angle of the particles far
away from the beam axis would be largest and a general focusing eﬀect will result. Such
a crystal can in principle be produced by varying the nickel to copper (or Sb to Bi) ratio
in a mixed crystal [83]. Similar idea was suggested also for producing periodically bent
crystals, see section 3 for more detail.

Recently, it was suggested to use bent nanotubes to steer beams of charged particle

[50, 52].

2.4. Undulator radiation

The theory and also various practical implementations of the undulator radiation, i.e.
the radiation emitted by a charge moving in spatially periodic static magnetic ﬁelds (a
magnetic undulator), or in a static macroscopic electric ﬁeld (electrostatic undulator),
or in a laser ﬁeld (a laser-based undulator), etc. have long history [85, 86] and are

8

well elaborated [28, 60, 61, 87, 88, 89]. The most important feature of the undulator
radiation, which clearly distinguishes it from other types of electromagnetic radiation
formed by a charge moving in external ﬁelds, is in a peculiar form of the spectral-angular
distribution. Namely, for each value of the emission angle θ (measured with respect to
the undulator axis) the spectral distribution consists of a set of narrow, powerful and
equally spaced peaks (harmonics). The peak intensity is proportional to the square
of total number of the undulator periods, N 2. This factor reﬂects the constructive
interference of radiation emitted from each of the undulator periods and is typical for
any system which contains N coherent emitters (e.g.
In an ideal undulator,
i.e. the one in which a particle follows either a sinusoidal periodic trajectory (a planar
undulator) or a helical one (a helical undulator) under the action of a non-dissipative
external force, and for a ﬁxed θ the widths of all peaks are the same and proportional
to 1/N. The coherence is lost if one integrates the spectral-angular distribution over
the emission angle. Indeed, although the spectral distribution as a function of photon
frequency ω contains maxima (which are noticeably widened as compared to those in
spectral-angular distribution) the intensity in which is proportional to N.

[90]).

These two features of the undulator radiation, the high intensity in the peaks of
spectral-angular distribution and the narrow widths, are important for a successful
operation of free-electron lasers (FEL), the devices which transform the spontaneous
undulator radiation into the stimulated one. Since the ﬁrst discovery of the FEL
operational principle [91] both the theory and practical implementation of FELs have
been well elaborated (see, e.g. [28, 29, 61, 88, 89, 92]).

In ideal conditions a bunch of particle undergoing channeling in a linear crystal can
be considered as an undulator (a natural undulator).
Indeed, due to the periodicity
of the trajectory the characteristics of the channeling radiation are close to those of
the undulator radiation [53]. However, the characteristics of the radiation emitted in
natural undulator are masked in experiment (e.g.
[41]) because of the distribution of
the beam particles in the transverse energy, and in the incident angle. Additionally, in
the natural undulator the emission peaks become noticeably wider due to a deviation
of an interplanar potential from a harmonic one. This leads to the dependence of the
undulator period on the amplitude of the channeling oscillations which, in turn, deﬁnes
the frequency of the emitted radiation.

3. Channeling in a periodically bent crystal: feasibility of a crystalline
undulator

In this section we describe, more thoroughly, the crystalline undulator, formulate the
conditions, which must be fulﬁlled for its operation, and present the detailed literature
survey covering the development of all essential aspects of this important idea. Also we

review theoretical methods to be used for an adequate description of this phenomenon.
The idea of a gamma-laser based on the crystalline undulator is discussed in section 5.

9

3.1. The conditions to be met in a crystalline undulator

As it was noted in section 1 in a crystalline undulator the beam of channeled particles
and the emitted photons propagate in a media. Therefore, prior to drawing a conclusion
that the scheme illustrated by ﬁgure 1 is not of academic interest but can be made
realistic and to represent a new type of an undulator, one has to understand to what
extent general characteristics of the undulator radiation (high intensity, high degree of
monochromaticity of the spectral-angular distribution) are inﬂuenced by the presence
of a crystalline media.

To fulﬁll this programme and to establish the ranges of various parameters within
which the operation of the crystalline undulator is feasible we had analyzed the following
basic problems:

Planar or axial channeling? Positive or negative particles? [1, 2]
Condition for the stable channeling in a periodically bent crystal [1, 2].
Crystalline undulator preparation: static and dynamic bending [1, 2, 10, 11].
Large and small amplitude regimes [2, 3, 4, 5, 8].
Dechanneling and photon attenuation and the length of a crystalline undulator
[2, 5, 7, 8].
Energy losses and the shape of a crystalline undulator [3, 10, 11].

•
•
•
•
•

•

3.1.1. Planar channeling of positively charged particles. Keeping in mind that
negatively charged particles are steered along crystallographic axes and planes much less
eﬃciently than positively charged ones and that the eﬀect of axial channeling in bent
crystals has not been observed so far, we focus our discussion on the planar channeling
of positively charged particles and, in particular, on the channeling of light projectiles,
positrons, in periodically bent crystals. This system is the most appropriate for the
creation of the crystalline undulator operating in the high energy photon regime. Note,
that from theoretical viewpoint the generalization of the treatment of the undulator
radiation in crystalline undulators to the case of axial channeling is straightforward.
However, small values of the dechanneling lengths of projectiles in this case make
such a discussion purely academic and bring it far beyond any realistic experimental
opportunities.

The principal diﬀerence in the behaviour of positively and negatively charged
particles in a crystalline undulator was realized for the ﬁrst time in [1, 2]. This fact
has determined, to a great extent, the main focuses of our subsequent publications [3]-
In some of the earlier publications on the subject [26, 31, 32, 36], the authors
[13].

10

did not distinguish clearly the cases of electron and positron channeling in a crystalline
undulator and often discussed channeling of electrons rather than positrons. They did
not analyze the strong condition, limiting the operation of a crystalline undulator, which
originates from the dechanneling of particles during their passage through periodically
bent crystals. Below we consider this important condition in more detail when discussing
the dechanneling process. Following our conclusions made in [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], the authors
of [14] in their later publications [18, 20] also began to focus on the channeling of
positively charged particles in crystalline undulators. This remark concerns not only
this particular issue, but rather most of the physics of the processes taking place in
crystalline undulators, which was analyzed and clariﬁed in [1, 2] and our subsequent
publications. For example, all physical conditions for the operation of a crystalline
undulator outlined on page 113 in [18] are taken from our earlier work [2] but without
any reference.

3.1.2. Stable channeling in a periodically bent crystal. The condition for channeling
in a periodically bent crystal is subject to the general criterion (1) for the channeling
process in a bent crystal [71] (see also [30, 32, 44, 65, 93]), and can be fulﬁlled by a proper
choice of the projectile energy and the maximal curvature of the channel. For the ﬁrst
time the limiting role of the channeling criterion on the parameters of the crystalline
undulator was elucidated in [1, 2, 4].
In the earlier publications on the subject this
analysis was not carried out.

Similar to the case of an one-arc bent crystal, a stable channeling of an ultra-
relativistic positively charged particle in a periodically bent crystal occurs if the
mγc2/Rmin, is less than the maximal force due to
maximum centrifugal force, Fcf ≈
the interplanar ﬁeld, Fint = qU ′
max [1, 2, 30, 32]. More speciﬁcally [2, 3, 4], the ratio
C = Fcf /Fint is better to keep smaller than 0.1. If otherwise the phase volume of the
trajectories, corresponding to the channeling mode, becomes signiﬁcantly reduced. The
1 relates the energy of an ultra-relativistic particle, ε = mγc2, the
inequality C
parameters of the bending (these deﬁne the quantity Rmin), and the characteristics of
the planar potential.

≪

Choosing a harmonic shape y(z) = a sin

for the periodically bent channel
(see ﬁgure 1), one derives Rmin = λ2/4π2 a. Thus, the decrease in Rmin and,
consequently, the increase in the maximum centrifugal acceleration of the particle in
the channel is achieved by decreasing λ and increasing a. The criterion for a stable
channeling implies the following relationship between the parameters a, λ, ε and U ′
max:

2πz/λ

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(2π)2

C

≡

ε
qU ′

max

a
λ2 ≪

1.

(2)

For the ﬁrst time, the limiting role of the channeling criterion (2) on the parameters

of the crystalline undulator was elucidated in [1, 2, 4].

11

Provided (2) is fulﬁlled, the projectile,

incident at the angle smaller than the
Lindhard angle θL with respect to the mid-plane, is trapped in the channel, see ﬁgure 1.
The passage of an ultra-relativistic particle gives rise to the emission of photons due to
the curvature of the trajectory, which becomes periodic reﬂecting the periodicity of the
channel midplane. This radiation is enhanced because of the coherent emission from
similar parts of the trajectory, and, as a result, it may dominate over the channeling
radiation [1, 2, 3, 4].

3.1.3. Large and small amplitude regimes. There are two essentially diﬀerent regimes
of the radiation formation in a periodically bent crystals. These regimes are deﬁned by
the magnitude of the ratio a/d.

It was demonstrated in [1, 2, 4, 30] that the undulator radiation and the channeling
radiation are well separated provided the condition a
d is fulﬁlled, see ﬁgure 1.
Typically, spacing between the planes, which are characterized by the low values of the
Miller indices such as the (100), (110) and (111) planes, lies within the range 0.6 . . . 2.5
˚A (see, e.g. [39, 44, 61]). Therefore, the condition is fulﬁlled for the bending amplitudes
10 ˚A. A similar separation of the two radiative mechanisms takes place in non-
a
periodically bent crystals, where the curvature of the channel leads to an additional
synchrotron-type radiation by a channeling particle [64, 65]. This component of the
emission transforms into the undulator radiation in the periodically bent channel.

≫

≥

≫

c(qU ′

max/dε)1/2,

In the limit a

d, which we call a large-amplitude regime, the separation of the
two radiative mechanisms occurs because the frequency of the channeling oscillations,
is much higher than the frequency, ω0, of the transverse
Ωch ∼
oscillations caused by the periodicity of the channel ω0 = 2πc/λ. Consequently, the
characteristic frequencies of the channeling and the undulator radiation can be estimated
u/ω2
as ωch ≈
ch
can be written in the following form

γ2ω0 = 2πcγ2/λ. Then, the ratio ω2

max/dε)1/2 and ωu ∼

γ2Ωch ∼

γ2c(qU ′

ω2
u
ω2
ch ∼

(2π)2
λ2

d ε
qU ′

max

= C

d
a ≪

1 .

(3)

≪

≫

1 and a

This relation shows that if both conditions, C
d, are fulﬁlled, then
the characteristic frequencies are well separated. Moreover, if one is only interested in
the spectral distribution of the undulator radiation, one may disregard the channeling
oscillations and assume that the projectile moves along the centerline of the bent channel
[1, 2]. Additionally, as it will be demonstrated below in the paper, in the high-amplitude
regime the intensity of the undulator radiation is higher than that of the channeling
radiation [2, 3, 4]. Therefore, we may state that the limit a
d is essential to call
the undulator-type radiation due to the periodic structure of the crystal bending as a
new phenomenon and to consider it as a new source of the emission within the X- and
γ-range.

≫

12

∼

≤

For a

10d and for C

0.1 equation (3) yields ωu/ωch ∼

0.1. Therefore, the two
spectra are well separated and the crystalline undulator radiation, both spontaneous
and stimulated, can be treated independently from the ordinary channeling radiation.
The importance of the large-amplitude regime was noted in [30] and independently
in [1, 2].
In the papers [1, 2, 4, 5] the detailed qualitative and quantitative analysis
of this condition was carried out, and the calculation of realistic spectral and angular
distribution of the undulator radiation were performed for the ﬁrst time. The ﬁrst
calculation of the total radiative spectra (i.e.
the spectra in which both ordinary
channeling radiation and the crystalline undulator radiation are taken into account)
for the ε = 500 MeV positrons channeling in the silicon along the (110) crystallographic
planes for diﬀerent a/d ratios has been carried out in [4]. These calculations have
supported the qualitative arguments, formulated above, on the possibility to separate
radiations emitted via two diﬀerent mechanisms. Calculations, performed in [1, 2, 4, 5],
have also demonstrated that the intensity of the crystalline undulator radiation can be
made much larger than that of the channeling radiation. We consider this example in
more detail in section 4.

In the large-amplitude regime, in addition to the condition (2), it is very important
to consider other conditions under which the periodically bent crystal may serve as
a crystalline undulator. These other conditions appear when one takes into account
the destructive role of the dechanneling eﬀect and the photon attenuation. The
restrictive inﬂuence of these phenomena on the parameters of the crystalline undulator
is discussed in detail in section 3.1.5. Here we want to note that a comprehensive
quantitative analysis of all the conditions, which must be met, was performed in
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5].
In contrast such a full and important discussion was omitted in the
papers [26, 30, 31, 32, 36, 59].

∼

(10 . . . 100) d

Our analysis, carried out in [2, 4, 5], has shown, in particular, that the optimal
range of the amplitude values, where all the necessary conditions can be fulﬁlled, is
(10−7 . . . 10−6) cm. We want to point out that exactly this range
a
of a was discussed in later publications [18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25] without proper
citation of our results. The values of a mentioned above are much lower than the
(10−5 . . . 10−4) cm considered in [30]. In section 3.3 we demonstrate that
interval a
the parameters, used in [30] to characterize the crystal bending, do not lead to the
emission of undulator-type radiation.

≈

∼

In the papers [2, 4, 5] we demonstrated that in the low-amplitude regime, when
a < d, the intensity of the undulator radiation is smaller than that of the channeling
radiation. Moreover, in the limit a
d the undulator radiation becomes less intensive
than the background bremsstrahlung radiation. Hence, it is highly questionable whether
the crystalline undulator radiation can be considered as a new phenomenon in the limit
of low a. However, the low-amplitude regime allows to consider a a resonant coupling

≪

13

(4)

(5)

≪

of two mechanisms of the photon emission, the channeling radiation and the undulator
radiation. Indeed, for a
d and by a proper choice of the parameter C (see (2)) it is
possible to make the frequency of the undulator radiation ωu comparable or equal to
ωch, then the intensity of the channeling
that of the channeling radiation ωch. If ωu ∼
radiation can be resonantly enhanced even in the case when the undulator radiation
is much less intensive. This very interesting phenomenon was considered in a series
of papers [31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 94, 95]. The ﬁrst two from this list discussed the
modiﬁcation of the channeling radiation spectrum in the case of an electron and/or a
positron channeling in a superlattice. In the papers [33, 34, 35, 36, 94, 95] the parametric
resonant enhancement of the channeling radiation emitted by positrons in the presence
of either transverse or longitudinal supersonic ﬁeld was considered. The authors of the
cited papers investigated neither the crystalline undulator nor the undulator radiation
formed in it. Therfore, we are not going to discuss further the results obtained in these
papers, because the subject of their research is absolutely diﬀerent from the topic of
this review.

3.1.4. Crystalline undulator preparation:
static and dynamic bending The term
’undulator’ implies that the number of periodic elements (i.e. the number of undulator
periods, N) is large. Only in this limit the radiation formed during the passage
of a bunch of relativistic particles through a periodic system bears the features of
an undulator radiation (narrow, well-separated peaks in spectral-angular distribution)
rather than those of a synchrotron radiation. Hence, the following strong inequality,
which entangles the period λ and the length of a crystal L must be met in the crystalline
undulator [1, 2]:

The parameter λ, together with the amplitude a and the energy of the particle,
deﬁne other quantities, which are called the undulator frequency ω0 and parameter p,
and which are commonly used when characterizing an undulator:

N =

L
λ ≫

1.

ω0 = 2π

p = 2π γ

c
λ

,

a
λ

.

Let us note the proportionality of the parameter p to the relativistic factor γ. This
dependence is typical for a crystalline undulator, but is absent for the undulators (both
helical and planar) based on the action of magnetic ﬁeld. In the latter case the undulator
parameter is equal to pB = qBλB/2πmc2 (see e.g. [89, 96]), where B is the amplitude
value of the magnetic induction and λB is the period of the magnetic ﬁeld.

In turn, the quantities ω0, p and N deﬁne the parameters of the spontaneous
undulator radiation, which are the characteristic frequencies ωk = k ω1, k = 1, 2, . . .
(harmonics) and the natural width, ∆ω, of the peaks. In a perfect planar undulator,

14

where the trajectory of the particle has a harmonic form y(z) = a sin
, the
frequency ω1 of the fundamental harmonic and the width are given by (see, e.g. [89]):
(cid:16)

2πz/λ

(cid:17)

ω1 =

4γ2 ω0
2 + 2 γ2ϑ2 + p2 ,

∆ω
ω1

=

2
N

.





(6)

(7)

Here ϑ is the emission angle measured with respect to the z-direction (see ﬁgure 1).
Note that the relative width, ∆ω/ω1, is inversely proportional to N.

≫

¿From the general theory of a planar undulator (see, e.g. [61, 89]) it is known, that
the magnitude of the undulator parameter, p, deﬁnes the number of the harmonics in
In the case p < 1 the radiation is mainly
which the radiation is eﬀectively emitted.
emitted into the ﬁrst harmonic. In the limit p
1 the number of harmonics increases
proportionally to p3, and, the spectrum of emission acquires the form of a synchrotron
radiation rather than an undulator radiation. In [1, 2] it was demonstrated that in a
crystalline undulator both possibilities can be realized. However, to stay away from the
synchrotron limit, p
, it is desirable to consider moderate values of the undulator
parameters p
1. This condition, accompanied with the inequality (4) ensures that the
spectrum of radiation formed in the undulator will be presented by several powerful,
narrow and well-separated peaks. Taking into account that the undulator parameter is
proportional to the relativistic factor, which in ultra-relativistic case is much larger than
one (typically, γ = 102 . . . 104 in crystalline undulators), the condition p
1 results in
a strong inequality λ
a [1, 2]. Combined with the large-amplitude regime, which is
explained in section 3.1.3, we found that three quantities, d, a and λ, which characterize
the crystalline undulator must satisfy the following strong double inequality:

→ ∞

≫

∼

∼

d

a

≪

≪

λ.

This condition, clearly stated in [1, 2] and used by us in further publications, together
with the conditions (2) and (4), are essential for the eﬀective operation of the crystalline
undulator. Let us note, that the last inequality in (7) ensures, also, the deformation of
a crystal is the elastic one and does not destroy the crystalline structure.

≫

The periodic bending of the crystal can be achieved either dynamically or statically.
In [1]-[9] the main focus of our studies was made on the dynamic bending by means of a
high-amplitude (a
d) transverse acoustic wave (AW), although the possibility of the
static bending was pointed out as well. The general formalism, developed in these papers
for the description of the crystalline undulator and the radiation formed in it, does not
depend on the method of the crystal bending. The analysis, which was performed in
the cited papers, allowed us to establish the ranges of the AW amplitude and frequency
within which the conditions (2), (4) and (7) as well as other very important conditions
(which are described below in this section) are fulﬁlled. This was done for diﬀerent

15

types of projectiles, wide ranges of their energies and for a variety of crystals. Thus, we
proved theoretically the feasibility of the construction of a micro-undulator by means of a
periodically bent crystal and the possibility of generation of spontaneous and stimulated
photon emission in such a system.

(cid:17)

2πz/λ

The monochromatic transverse AW (either standing or running) of the large
amplitude, transmitted along a crystallographic plane, allows to achieve a harmonic
shape y(z) = a sin
for the midplane. One of the possibilities which can be
used to do this is to place a piezo sample atop the crystal and to generate the radio
(cid:16)
frequency AW to excite the oscillations. The important feature of the dynamic scheme
of the crystal bending is that the time period of the AW must exceed greatly the time
of ﬂight τ = L/c of a bunch of particles through the crystal. Then, on the time scale
of τ , the shape of the crystal bending doesn’t change, so that all particles of the bunch
channel inside the same undulator. Thus, for the AW frequencies ν
100 MHz, one
gets L
70 cm, which is more than well-fulﬁlled for any realistic L-value (for more
≪
details see [2]).

≤

The idea to create an undulator by transmitting a high-amplitude transverse AW
through a crystalline structure was mentioned for the ﬁrst time in [26, 30] (see, also,
[59]). However, we state that in these papers neither the feasibility of the crystalline
undulator nor its theory were developed in a complete and adequate form, because not
all essential regimes, conditions and limitations were understood and elucidated. As a
result, few statements and estimates, made in [26, 30], turn out to be not quite correct,
as it is shown in sections 3.1.5 and 3.3. This is the reason why the idea of the crystalline
undulator based on the action of AW has not been attracting attention during the period
from 1980 till late 90’s, when our ﬁrst publications [1, 2] appeared.

There were other papers [31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36], published prior to our ﬁrst works
[1], devoted to the problem of radiation by ultra-relativistic particles (electrons and
positrons) channeled in the crystal in the presence of ultrasonic wave. However, in
all these publications the low-amplitude regime a < d (and, in some cases, the limit
a
d) was discussed. Therefore, the main focus of these studies was made on various
aspects of the inﬂuence of the additional undulator-type oscillations of the particles on
the spectrum of the channeling radiation rather than on the properties of the crystalline
undulator.

≪

The important feature of a dynamically bent crystal by means of an AW is that
it allows to consider an undulator with the parameters N and p varying over a wide
range, which is determined not only by the projectile’s energy but also by the AW
frequency and amplitude. The latter two quantities can easily be tuned resulting in the
possibility of varying signiﬁcantly the intensity and shape of the angular distribution of
the radiation (for a detailed discussion and an number of concrete examples see [1, 2]).
As demonstrated in [1, 2], the parameters of the crystalline undulator based on the

16

AW are inaccessible in conventional undulators, where the periodicity of the motion
of charged particles in achieved by applying periodic magnetic ﬁelds or the laser ﬁeld
[29, 60, 87].

The advantage of the static channel is that its parameters are ﬁxed and thus, the
projectile moves along the ﬁxed trajectory as well. To calculate the characteristics
of the emitted radiation one needs to know only the number of the periods and the
local curvature radius. The disadvantage is that when ﬁxing the number of periods the
parameters of the system can be varied only by changing the energy of the particle.
This makes the photon generation less tuneable.

For the ﬁrst time the idea of a static crystalline undulator was proposed in [31, 32]
and implied the use of a superlattice made of two constituents, which have diﬀerent,
but close, lattice spacings. However, these papers were devoted only to the study of the
low-amplitude regime a < d. As mentioned above, in this limit the intensive undulator
radiation does not appear.

It is feasible, by means of modern technology (like molecular beam epitaxy or
chemical vapor deposition, see the references in [97, 98]), to grow the crystal with
its channels been statically bent according to a particular pattern. The usage of static
d was initially suggested in
methods to produce periodically bent crystals with a
[1, 2] and later was discussed in [16], where the idea to construct a crystalline undulator
based on graded composition strained layers was proposed. Earlier, the same idea was
exploited in [83], where the possibility to create a crystalline lens for the focusing of
a beam of charged particles through a bent crystal was discussed. Experimentally,
the possibility of a 3 MeV proton beam bending by the Si1−xGex graded composition
strained layers was demonstrated in [97].

≫

In our papers [10, 11] we developed further the ideas of [16, 83, 97] and demonstrated,
for the ﬁrst time, that it is possible to obtain periodically bent channels with arbitrary
shapes y(z).

In particular, it was described in detail, that to obtain a pure sine form of the
channel proﬁle, one starts with a pure silicon substrate and adds Si1−xGex layers with
continuously increasing Ge content. This results in bending of the (110) channels in the
direction of the (100) channels. The periodicity of the shape requires the change of the
direction of the bending toward the (010) channels. This, in turn, can be achieved by
reducing x until it reaches 0. The last (within the ﬁrst period) crystal layer consists of
pure silicon, so that the second period can be built up on top of the ﬁrst in the same
manner. To be captured by the bent channel, the positron beam should be directed
towards the (110) channel of the substrate. The crystal strain is strongest after half a
period, when the germanium content reaches its maximum. The thickness of the layers
corresponding to half a period must be smaller than the critical thickness hc [97].

In [10, 11] we developed the formalism and carried out the corresponding calculations

17

which demonstrated, how one can built up a crystal, the channels of which are bent
periodically with arbitrary shapes y(z).

In the papers by Avakian et al [19, 20], published within the same time interval as
our papers [10, 11], somewhat diﬀerent approach, based on the use of graded composition
strained superlattices Si1−xGex, for constructing the sine proﬁle of crystal channels was
In the more recent publication [21] of this group the authors proceeded
described.
further with the study of the possibility to construct crystalline undulators by means of
gradient crystals. We want to point out that in this paper, which appeared after [10, 11],
Indeed, the publication
the authors completely omitted the citation of our papers.
[11] was ignored at all, whereas the citation of [10] (labeled as Ref.
[7] in [21]) was
done in an extremely negligent and misleading way which excludes any possibility for
a reader to ﬁnd our paper. Moreover, in the introductory part of their paper (p. 496)
the authors of [21], when reviewing ‘. . . a few proposals [2-5] for constructing micro-
crystalline undulators. . . ’, found it possible to include [16] and their own publications
[18, 19, 20] in the citation list but to ignore our papers [1]-[11]. This very selective
and misleading style of citation one ﬁnds in all publications of this group, see Refs.
[18, 19, 20, 21]. We ﬁnd this style as totally unacceptable, especially in the ﬁeld which
has become studied intensively after our ﬁrst papers [1, 2]. Unfortunately, this is not
the only example of a selective citation. It refers also to the papers by Bellucci et al
[22, 23, 24] and to a very recent paper [25], where the authors claimed that ‘the theory
of radiation in micro-undulators is developed’ (see the abstract).

The periodic bending of crystallographic planes can also be achieved by making
regular defects either in the crystal volume or on its surface [99]. Then, the crystalline
planes in the vicinity of the defects become periodically bent. The practical realization
of this idea was achieved in [22] by giving periodic micro-scratches to one face of a silicon
crystal by means of a diamond blade. Paying tribute to the fact that this was the ﬁrst
attempt of the actual construction of the micro-undulator, we, nevertheless, want to
point out that the introductory part of the paper [22] signiﬁcantly misinterprets the
history of the crystalline undulator idea. Moreover, at the stage of preparation of the
subsequent paper [24] one of the authors of [22] was aware of our work in this ﬁeld, but
found it possible to himself not to include our papers in the citation list.

3.1.5. Restrictions due to the dechanneling eﬀect and the photon attenuation. As was
pointed out in [1, 2, 5, 7, 8], two physical phenomena, the dechanneling eﬀect and the
photon attenuation, lead to severe limitation of the allowed values of the crystalline
undulator.

If the dechanneling eﬀect is neglected, one may unrestrictedly increase the intensity
of the undulator radiation by considering larger N-values. In reality, random scattering
of the channeling particle by the electrons and nuclei of the crystal leads to a gradual

18

increase of the particle energy associated with the transverse oscillations in the channel.
As a result, the transverse energy at some distance from the entrance point exceeds
the depth of the interplanar potential well, and the particle leaves the channel.
Consequently, the volume density n(z) of the channeled particles decreases with the
penetration distance, z, and, roughly, satisﬁes the exponential decay law [44]

n(z) = n(0) exp(

z/Ld),

−

where n(0) is the volume density at the entrance. The dechanneling length Ld(C), which
is dependent on the parameter C (see (2)), depends also on the particle energy, mass
and charge, on the parameters of the channel (its width and the distribution of electron
charge in the channel), and on the charge of the crystal nuclei.

Ld(C). Indeed, one can consider the limit L

The dechanneling phenomenon introduces a natural upper limit on the length of
a crystalline undulator: L
Ld(C).
However, as it was demonstrated in [5, 7], the intensity of the undulator radiation in
this case is not deﬁned by the expected number of the undulator periods L/λ but rather
is formed in the undulator of the eﬀective length Ld(C). Therefore, it is important to
carry out realistic estimates of the quantity Ld(C) in order to understand what are the
limitations on the parameters of the undulator imposed by dechanneling.

≫

≤

In a model approach, presented in [2], we used the following expression for the

dechanneling length in a periodically bent crystal:

where Ld(0) is the dechanneling length in a straight crystal. For a positively charged
projectile a good estimate for Ld(0) is [5, 44]:

Ld(C) = (1

C)2 Ld(0)

−

Ld(0) = γ

256
9π2

M
Z

aTF
r0

d
Λ

×

10−13 cm is the electron classical radius, Z, M are the charge and
where r0 = 2.8
the mass of a projectile measured in units of elementary charge and electron mass, aTF
is the Thomas-Fermi atomic radius. The quantity Λ stands for a ’Coulomb logarithm’
which characterizes the ionization losses of an ultra-relativistic particle in amorphous
media (see e.g. [66, 100]):

ln

ln

1

2ε
I −
√2ε
γ1/2I −

Λ = 



for a heavy projectile

23/24

for e+

with I being the mean ionization potential of an atom in the crystal.

In channeling theory it is more common [43, 44] to relate Ld(0) to the parameter
pv (p is the momentum of a projectile, and in the ultra-relativistic case pv
ε) rather
than to express it via the relativistic factor γ as in (10). However, explicit dependence

≈

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

19

of the dechanneling length on γ is more convenient when discussing the parameters of
the crystalline undulator and its radiation [2, 5].

×

The dependences Ld(0) on γ for a positron and a proton are illustrated by ﬁgure
2. It is seen that in the case of a positron (the solid curves) the quantity Ld(0) varies
10−4 . . . 0.3 cm for γ within 10 . . . 104. The dechanneling length of a positron
within 5
104) does not exceed several millimeters. For
with energy within the GeV range (γ
a proton (the dashed curves) of the same γ the magnitude of Ld(0) is enhanced by the
factor
2000 (see (10)). Some additional
correction originates from the diﬀerence of the Coulomb logarithms, equation (11). To
obtain the values of Ld(0) for a heavy ion one can multiply the dashed curves by the
factor

103. This is largely due to the factor M

A/Z

2.5.

≈

∼

≈

≈

≈

m
c
 
,
)
0
(

L

d

2
10

1
10

0
10

-1

10

-2

10

-3

10

-4

10

1
10

2
10

3
10

4
10

relativistic factor

Figure 2. Dependence of Ld(0) on relativistic factor γ calculated from (10) -(11) for
a positron (solid lines) and a proton (dashed lines) and for (110) channels in various
crystals: the black lines stand for C, the red lines - Si, the green lines - Ge, the blue
lines - W .

Using the results presented in ﬁgure 2 one can write the following estimate of the

20

dechanneling length for various projectiles [13]:

(2.5 . . . 5)

−5 cm

10

×

(0.05 . . . 0.1) cm

(0.1 . . . 0.25) cm

for e+

for p

for a heavy ion

(12)

Ld(C)

(1

∼

−

C)2 γ

×





For heavy projectiles formulae (10)-(11) are in good agreement with measured values
of Ld(0) in a wide range of γ [43, 44]. In the case of a positron channeling in [5] we
tested equations (9) and (10) against more rigorous calculation of the dechanneling
lengths based on the simulation procedure of the positron channeling in straight and
periodically bent crystals. The approach developed and described in detail in [5] is based
on the simulation of the trajectories and the dechanneling process of an ultra-relativistic
positron. This was done by solving the three-dimensional equations of motion which
account for: (i) the interplanar potential; (ii) the centrifugal potential due to the crystal
bending; (iii) the radiative damping force; (iv) the stochastic force due to the random
scattering of projectile by lattice electrons and nuclei. Note that the radiation damping
force becomes very signiﬁcant at suﬃciently large energies of positrons (see section 3.2
for more details). Simultaneously with simulating the trajectories of the channeled
particles, we calculated the total spectrum of the radiation, including its undulator and
channeling parts. This was done for all trajectories, including those which corresponded
to the over-barrier particles. Such a study was carried out for the ﬁrst time in [4, 5].
We point out that the referencing to these papers of ours was not made in the later
publications by Bellucci et al [22, 23, 24], where the development of a simular approach
was mentioned.

We analyzed the dependence of Ld on the energy of the projectile, the type of crystal
and crystallographic plane, the parameter C and the ratio a/d (see (2) and (3)). Some
results of these calculations, corresponding to 5 GeV positrons channeling along the
(110) plane in a Si crystal, are presented in ﬁgures 3 and 4.

In table 1 the results of our calculation [5] of the dechanneling lengths are compared
with those estimated from (9). It can be concluded that the approximate formula (9)
adequately reproduces the values of Ld(C) for a positron in the range C = 0 . . . 0.2.
c, and the estimated
As noted in [5], some discrepancy between the calculated, Ld
e, dechanneling lengths can be attributed to the fact that the quantity Ld(0),
Ld
deﬁned in (10), was obtained by using the Lindhard planar potential (see, e.g., [39])
and, additionally, several simplifying assumptions were made concerning the electron
charge distribution in the channel (see [44]). On the other hand, in [5] the numerical
procedure was based on the Moli`ere approximation for both the potential and the charge
distribution. More discussion on the comparison of the model (9) and the data obtained
numerically one ﬁnds in [5]. In the cited paper similar calculations were performed also
for Ge and W crystals.

21

Si, (110)
a/d = 10

C=0.00
C=0.05
C=0.10
C=0.15
C=0.20
C=0.25
C=0.30

)
0
(
n

/
)
z
(
n

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

penetration distance  z, cm

Figure 3. The calculated dependences n(z)/n(0) versus penetration distance z for
5 GeV positrons channeling along the (110) in Si crystal for various values of the
parameter C [5]. The a/d ratio equals 10. The interplanar distance is d = 1.92 ˚A.

≤

Combining conditions (2), (4), (7) and L

Ld(C) one can ﬁnd, ﬁxing a crystal and
energy ε, the allowed ranges of the parameters a and λ [2, 4, 5]. Figure 5 illustrates
this for the case of ε = 0.5 GeV positrons planar channeling in Si along the (110)
crystallographic planes. The diagonal straight lines correspond to various values of the
parameter C. The curved lines correspond to various values of the number of undulator
periods N related to the dechanneling length Ld through N = Ld/λ. The horizontal
lines mark the values of the amplitude equal to d and to 10 d, where d = 1.92 ˚A is
the interplanar spacing for the (110) planes in Si. The vertical line marks the value
10−3 cm, for which the spectra (see section 4) were calculated.
λ = 2.335

Figure 5 illustrates that the restrictions, imposed by the dechanneling eﬀect on the
length of a crystalline undulator, are very severe, especially in the case of a projectile
positron. Therefore, the inﬂuence of the dechanneling must be studied very accurately in

×

22

)
0
(
n

/
)
z
(
n

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

Si, (110)

a/d=5
a/d=10
a/d=15
a/d=20

C=0.05

C=0.15

C=0.25

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

penetration distance z, cm

Figure 4. The calculated dependences n(z)/n(0) versus penetration distance z for 5
GeV positrons channeling along the (110) plane in a Si crystal for various values of the
parameter C and of the ratio a/d [5].

order to produce realistic predictions on the parameters of the crystalline undulator and
the undulator emission. For the ﬁrst time this comprehensive analysis was performed in
[1, 2, 4, 5]. In the earlier papers the dechanneling eﬀect was either completely ignored
(see [30, 31, 32, 36]) or its role was estimated erroneously, as in [26]. In particular, in the
latter paper, where the authors did not explicitely distinguish the electron and positron
channeling, the following comment was made: ‘We recall that the channeling length in
centimeters is approximately L0 = ε (GeV). . . ’ (see page 650 in [26]). This is absolutely
incorrect. Indeed, as it is seen from ﬁgures 2-5 and table 1, the dechanneling lengths for
a positron are, at least, an order of magnitude less, not mentioning the electron case,
when the values of Ld are even more lower. As a result, the estimated values of λ, a and
ω, which were suggested in [26, 30], for a crystalline undulator based on a ε = 1 GeV
positron channeling in Si, lay far away from the regions allowed for feasible crystalline

23

Table 1. Dechanneling lengths for 5 GeV positron channeling along the (110) planes
for various crystals and for various values of the parameter C. The a/d ratio equals
presents the
10 except for the case C = 0 (the straight channel). The quantity Ld
results of our calculations published in [5]. N c
/λ is the corresponding number
is the dechanneling length estimated according to (9)-
of the undulator periods, Ld
e
(11), N e
/λ. For each C the value of λ was derived from (2). Other parameters
are: ¯hω1 is the energy of the ﬁrst harmonic of the undulator radiation for the forward
emission, p is the undulator parameter.
d N c
d

d = Ld

d = Ld

N e

C

p

e

e

c

c

c

λ
µm

-
100.9
77.1
63.0
54.5
48.8
44.5

Ld
cm

0.312
0.281
0.253
0.225
0.200
0.175
0.153

Ld
cm

0.463
0.430
0.393
0.321
0.223
0.170
0.102

0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30

ω1
MeV

-
1.38
1.42
1.37
1.31
1.24
1.18

-
1.08
1.53
1.87
2.16
2.42
2.65

-
25
32
35
36
35
34

-
39
51
51
41
35
23

Figure 5. The range of parameters a and λ for a bent Si(110) crystal at ε = 500
MeV.

24

undulators. In section 3.3 below we discuss in more detail the parameters suggested in
[26, 30].

The propagation of photons emitted in a crystalline undulator is strongly inﬂuenced
by a variety of processes occuring in a crystal. These are the atomic and the nuclear
photoeﬀects, the coherent and incoherent scattering on electrons and nuclei, the electron-
positron pair production (in the case of high energy photons). All these processes lead
to the decrease in the intensity of the photon ﬂux as it propagates through the crystal:

I(z) = I(0) exp(

z/La(ω))

−

(13)

where I(0) is the initial intensity, I(z) is that which remains after traversal of the
distance z. A quantitative parameter, which we introduced in (13) to account for all
these eﬀects, can be called the attenuation length, La(ω).
It is related to the mass
attenuation coeﬃcient µ(ω) as La(ω) = 1/µ(ω) [101, 102, 103]. Thus, La(ω) deﬁnes the
scale within which the intensity of a photon ﬂux decreases by a factor of e.

The mass attenuation coeﬃcients are tabulated for all elements and for a wide range
of photon frequencies. Figure 6 represents the dependences La(ω) for a variety of crystals
over the broad range of photon energies. For photon energies 30 eV < ¯hω < 1 keV the

102

101

100

m
c
 
,
)

ω

a

(
L

10−1

10−2

10−3

C
Al
Si
V
Ge
Mo
Rh
Ta
W

103

104

106

107

105
 ω, eV

Figure 6. Attenuation length La(ω) = 1/µ(ω) versus the photon energy for various
crystals, as indicated. The data on µ(ω) are taken from [102].

mass attenuation coeﬃcients (which are mainly due to the atomic photoeﬀect) can be

found in [101]. The corresponding values of La(ω) are lower than the minimum values in
ﬁgure 6. However, for ¯hω
I0 (where I0 is the ionization potential of the crystal atom,
and I0 ≤
10 eV for most of crystals) there is no photoabsorption and, therefore, the
attenuation is deﬁned solely by elastic photon scattering, i.e.
is comparatively weak.
Using these arguments and the data presented in ﬁgure 6 can be summarized in the
form convenient for a quick estimation of La(ω):

≪

La(ω)

≈

∞

10−2 cm
≪
= 0.01 . . . 10 cm

≪

10 eV

for ¯hω
Io ≤
for ¯hω = 10−2 . . . 10 keV
for ¯hω > 10 keV





The quantities Ld(C) and La(ω) introduced above in this section deﬁne the eﬀective
upper limit of the crystal length L which can be used to calculate the number of
undulator periods N [2]:

L < min [Ld(C), La(ω)]

25

(14)

(15)

3.2. Energy losses and shape of crystalline undulator.

The coherence of the radiation, emitted from similar parts of the trajectory of a particle
in the crystalline undulator, takes place if the energy of the channeling particle does
not change noticeably during with the penetration distance, at least, on the scale of the
dechanneling length. For ultra-relativistic projectiles the main source of energy losses
are the radiative losses [61, 66]. Therefore, it is important to establish the range of
energies of channeling particles for which the parameters of undulator radiation formed
in a perfect periodic crystalline structure are stable. For the ﬁrst time, the importance of
the restrictive role of the radiative losses was realized in [2]. Later, in [3], we carried out
a comprehensive theoretical and numerical analysis of the radiative loss of energy, ∆ε,
of ultra-relativistic positrons channeling in crystalline undulators. General formalism
described in [3] is applicable for the calculation of the total losses, which account for
the contributions of both the undulator and the channeling radiation. We analyzed
the relative importance of the two mechanisms for various values of a, λ, and ε. We
established the ranges of energies for positrons, in which relative radiative losses, ∆ε/ε,
are small (lower than 1 per cent) for a variety of crystals and crystallographic planes.
The results of these calculations are illustrated in ﬁgure 7, where the dependences ∆ε/ε
versus relativistic factor γ are presented for a positron channeling in (110) channel of
Si and for several values of the parameter C. The analysis, performed in [3] for the
crystals LiH, C, Si, Ge, Fe and W, demonstrated that for a perfectly shaped crystalline
undulator (i.e., the one in which the midplane is modulated as y(z) = a sin(2πz/λ), see
ﬁgure 7) the radiative energy losses become large if the initial energy of the positron
bunch is ε > 10 Gev. For lower energies of positrons, when the relativistic factor satisﬁes

Si, (110)

C=0.0
C=0.1
C=0.3
C=0.5
C=0.8

26

100

s
e
s
s
o
l
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r

10−1

10−2

10−3

10−4

10−5

102

103

104

105

relativistic factor γ

Figure 7. Relative energy losses for the crystal length L = Ld(C) versus relativistic
factor γ. The curves correspond to diﬀerent values of the parameter C (see (2)) [3].

the the inequality

104,

γ

≤

(16)

the radiative losses are small, ∆ε < 0.01ε.

The condition (16) establishes the upper limit of positron energies which is
meaningful to use to generate the stable undulator radiation in the ideal crystalline
undulator. In the high-energy regime, when ε > 10 Gev, the gradual decrease of the
positron energy strongly inﬂuences the stability of the parameters of the undulator
radiation. However, in [10, 11] we demonstrated, for the ﬁrst time, that the coherence
and the monochromaticity of the undulator radiation in the high-energy regime can be
maintained if the amplitude and the period of the bent channel are made dependent on
the penetration distance z, i.e. a = a(z), and λ = λ(z). We derived the equations for
these dependences and found the corresponding solutions. The method of preparation
of the crystals the midplanes of which are shaped as y(z) = a(z) sin(2πz/λ(z)) was
described in detail. This method is based on the crystal growing by means of molecular

beam epitaxy or chemical vapor deposition of a crystal with graded strained layers [97].
As an example, we considered a pure silicon substrate on which a Si1−xGex layers are
added. Here x = x(z) is the germanium content in the layer, and it is varied during the
growing process in order to achieve the desired shape of the channels.

27

3.3. Feasibility of a crystalline undulator

Let us summarize all the conditions which must be fulﬁlled in order to treat a crystalline
undulator as a feasible scheme for devising on its basis new sources of electromagnetic
radiation. These conditions are:
ε
qU ′
λ

large-amplitude regime

stable channeling

a
λ2 ≪

C = (2π)2

max



d

1

≪
N =

≪

a
L
λ ≫

1

L < min [Ld(C), La(ω)]
∆ε
ε ≪

1

large number of undulator periods

(17)

account for the dechanneling and photon attenuation

low radiative losses

As a supplement to this system one must account for the formulae (5) and (6), which
deﬁne the parameters of the undulator and the frequencies of the undulator radiation.
Provided all conditions (17) are met for a positively charged particle channeling

through a periodically bent crystal then

within the length L the particle experiences stable planar channeling between two
adjacent crystallographic planes,
the characteristic frequencies of the undulator radiation and the ordinary
channeling radiation are well separated,
the intensity of the undulator radiation is essentially higher than that of the
ordinary channeling radiation,
the emission spectrum is stable towards the radiative losses of the particle.

For each type of the projectile and its energy, for a given crystal and crystallographic
plane the analysis of the system (17) is to be carried out in order to establish the ranges
of a, λ and ω within which the operation of the crystalline undulator is possible.

Most of these important conditions were realized and carefully investigated for the
ﬁrst time in [1]-[11], where the realistic numerical calculations of the characteristics of
the radiation formed in crystalline undulator were performed as well. We consider the
set of analytical and numerical results obtained by us in the cited papers as a proof of
the statement that the scheme illustrated in ﬁgure 1 can be transformed from the stage
of a purely academic idea up to an observable eﬀect and an operating device.

For a positron channeling, in particular, we found the the optimal regime in which




•

•

•

•

28

the spontaneous undulator radiation is most stable and intensive, and demonstrated
that this regime is realistic. This regime is characterized by the following ranges of the
103, a/d = 10 . . . 50, C = 0.01 . . . 0.2, which are common
parameters: γ = (1 . . . 10)
for all the crystals which we have investigated. These ranges ensure that the energy of
the ﬁrst harmonic ω1 (see (6)) lies within the interval 50 . . . 150 keV and the length of
the undulator can be taken equal to the dechanneling length because of the inequality
Ld(C) < La(ω).

×

×

The importance of exactly this regime of operation of the crystalline undulator
In particular, in recent publications by Bellucci
was later realized by other authors.
et al [22, 23, 24], where the ﬁrst practical realization of the crystalline undulator was
reported, the parameters chosen for a Si crystal were as follows: ε = 0.5 . . . 0.8 GeV
103), a = 20 . . . 150 ˚A(i.e. a/d = 10 . . . 80),
for a positron (i.e. γ = (1 . . . 1.6)
L = Ld. These are exactly the values for which we predicted the strong undulator
eﬀect. However, in these papers, where the authors mention all the conditions (17)
Instead, our
and stress their importance, there is no proper reference to our works.
paper [2], labeled as Ref. [10] in [22], was cited as follows: ‘With a strong world-wide
attention to novel sources of radiation, there has been broad theoretical interest [4-12]
in compact crystalline undulators. . . ’ (page 034801-1 in the cited paper). This was the
only referencing to the paper [2], in which we clearly formulated, for the ﬁrst time, the
conditions (17) and carried out a detailed analysis aimed to prove why this regime is
most realistic. None of it was done in the papers [26, 30, 31, 32, 36] (labeled in [22]
as Refs. [4],[6],[7],[8] and [9], correspondingly). Moreover, we state that one will fail to
construct a crystalline undulator basing on the estimates presented in [26, 30, 31, 32, 36].
In what follows we carry out critical analysis of the statements and the estimates made
in the cited papers.

Historically, the paper by Kaplin et al [26] was the ﬁrst one, where the idea of a
crystalline undulator based on the action of the transverse acoustic wave was presented.
However, a number of ambiguous or erroneous statements makes it impossible to accept
the thesis that the concept of a crystalline undulator was correctly described in this
two-page paper. To be precise in our critics, below we use the exact citations taken
from the English edition of [26]. In the citations the italicizing is made by us.

Our ﬁrst remark concerns the type of a projectile which the authors propose to use

in the undulator. The ﬁrst paragraph of the paper contains:
‘Radiation by relativistic electrons and positrons, which occurs during channeling in
single crystals, has been observed experimentally and is being extensively studied at the
present time1−4.’
This is the only place in the text where the term ’positron’ is used. In the rest of the
paper the projectile is called either ’a particle’, or a ’relativistic electron’ as in one before
the last paragraph of the paper (page 651). Thus, it is absolutely unclear to the reader,

29

which particle is to be used. For a positron it is possible to construct an undulator,
however if an electron is considered, then the rest of the paper does not make any sense.
The concept of a periodically bent crystal and its parameters is formulated as follows

(page 650, right column):
‘Still higher intensity can be achieved by using instead of a uniformly curved crystal
one deformed in such a way that the radiation from diﬀerent portions of the particle
trajectory adds coherently. This can be accomplished by giving a crystalline plate a
wavelike shape in such a way that the sagitta A satisﬁes the relation 4Aγ/λ0 < 1 in
relation to the quarter period λ0 of the bending. For large values of the dechanneling
depth L0 this will provide a high radiated power from the crystalline undulator (wiggler).
For rather thin crystalline plates with a simple bend one can produce λ0 ∼
4 mm
. . . We recall that the channeling depth in centimeters is approximately L0 = E (GeV),
as follows from experiments.’
Note, that no citation is made when referring to the experiments which result in ‘L0
(cm) = E (GeV)’. For a positron (see section 3.1.5) this relation overestimates the
dechanneling length by more than an order of magnitude, for an electron it is even
farther from the reality. Therefore, the idea to construct an undulator for a positron
with the period λ = 4λ0 = 1.6 cm is absolutely unrealistic.

The parameters of the undulator based on the action of the acoustic wave are

−

−

0.1 µm.’

presented in the left column on page 651:
‘To obtain radiation in the optical region in a transparent crystal or to generate very
hard γ rays, it has been proposed to use ultrasonic vibrations to deform the crystal
lattice. . . For example, one can obtain γ rays with the energy up to ω = 0.14
14 MeV
for ε = 1 GeV and λ0 = 10
Note, that none of the following characteristics, - the type of the projectile, the crystal,
the acoustic wave amplitude (in our notations ’sagitta A’ is called ’amplitude a’),
are speciﬁed. Assuming that the positron channeling is implied, let us analyze the
above mentioned values from the viewpoint of the condition for a stable channeling,
equation (2) (see also (17)). The parameter C can be written in the form: C
≈
40/λ2 (ε d/qU ′
max in GeV/cm. Let us
40 µm and for (110) planes in Si
estimate the ratio a/d for the range λ = 4λ0 = 0.4
and W, for which dSi = 1.92 ˚A, dW = 2.24 ˚A, (qU ′
max)W = 57
max) (a/d),
Gev/cm [61]. For ε = 1 GeV and the lowest λ-value one gets C
which means that, for both crystals, to satisfy the condition C
1 it is necessary to
consider a
d. Thus, this is a low-amplitude regime, for which the intensity of the
undulator radiation is negligibly small. The upper limit of λ is more realistic to ensure
d. However, this analysis is not performed
the condition C
by the authors.

−
max)Si = 6.9 Gev/cm, (qU ′
250(ε d/qU ′

max) (a/d) with λ in µm, ε in GeV, d in ˚A, and qU ′

1 for the amplitudes a

≪

≫

≪

≪

≈

Our ﬁnal remark concerns the statement (the last paragraph in the left column on

30

page 651):
‘A lattice can be deformed elastically up to A = 1000 ˚A. . . ’
This is true, but when referring to the crystalline undulator with the amplitude a = 10−5
cm one has to supply the reader (and a potential experimentalist) with the estimates of
the corresponding values of λ and N. Let us carry out these estimates (note, this was
not done in the paper). The channeling condition (2) can be written as follows:

where λmin is the absolute minimum of λ (for given a, ε and a crystal) which corresponds
to C = 1 (i.e. to the case when the dechanneling length Ld(C) eﬀectively equals to zero,
see (9)). It is equal to

λ =

> λmin,

λmin
√C

λmin = 2π √a

ε
qU ′

 

max !

1/2

.

(18)

(19)

×

For a 1 GeV positron channeling in Si and W crystals along the (110) plane, which is
plane bent periodically with a = 10−5 cm, the values of λmin are: 7.6
10−3 cm for Si and
10−3 cm for W. These values already exceed the upper limit of 40 µm mentioned
7.5
by Kaplin et al . Choosing the length of the crystal to be equal to the dechanneling
length and using equation (9) to estimate Ld(C) one estimates the number of undulator
C)2Ld(0)/λmin. The largest value of N is achieved
periods N = Ld(C)/λ = C 1/2(1
when C = 0.2, giving C 1/2(1
Nmax = 0.29Ld(0)/λmin. Using
formulae (10) and (11) one calculates the dechanneling lengths in straight crystals:
10−3 cm for W. Finally, one derives that the
10−2 cm Ld(0) = 3.9
Ld(0) = 6.8
2.6 periods in the case of Si, and
‘undulator’ suggested in the cited paper contains N
N

1.5 for a tungsten crystal.

0.29. Hence, N

−
C)2

×

−

×

≤

≤

×

≈

Thus, because of the inconsistent and ambiguous character of the paper [26]
we cannot agree with the statement, the feasibility of a crystalline undulator was
demonstrated in this paper in a manner, suﬃcient to stimulate the experimental study
of the phenomenon.

≤

None of the essential conditions, summarized in (17), were analyzed in [26]. For
the ﬁrst time such an analysis was carried out in [1, 2] and developed further in
our subsequent publications. In this connection we express disagreement with utterly
negligent and unbalanced style of citation adopted by Avakian et al in [18] and other
publications [19, 20, 21] by this group, and by Bellucci et al [22, 23, 24].

Much of our critics expressed above in connection with [26] refers also to the paper
by Baryshevsky et al [30]. The main point of ours is: the concept of the crystalline
undulator based on the action of an acoustic wave was not convincely presented. ¿From
the text of the paper it is not at all clear what channeling regime, axial or planar,
should be used. The only reference to the regime is made in last part of the paper, on

31

page 63, which is devoted to the quantum description of the spectral distribution of the
undulator radiation. This part starts with the sentence: ’Let us consider, for example,
planar channeling’. The question on whether the axial channeling is also suitable for a
crystalline undulator is left unanswered by the authors. Neither is it clearly stated what
type of a projectile is considered. Indeed, in all parts of the paper, where the formalism
is presented, the projectile is called as a ’particle’. The reference to a positron is made in
the introductory paragraph, where the eﬀect of channeling radiation is mentioned, and
on page 62, where the numerical estimates of the intensity of the undulator radiation
are presented. The limitations due to the dechanneling eﬀect are not discussed. As
a consequence, the regime, for which the estimates are made, hardly can be called the
undulator one. Indeed, on page 62 the ratio of the undulator to the channeling radiation
intensities is estimated for a 1 GeV positron channeled in Si (presumably, the planar
channeling is implied). The amplitude of the acoustic wave (labeled as rs
0⊥) is chosen to
be equal to 10−5 cm. The period λ is not explicitely written by the authors. However,
they indicate the frequency of the acoustic wave, f = 107 s−1. Hence, the reader can
105 cm/s for
deduce that λ = v/f = 4.65
the sound velocity in Si [104]. The values of ε, a and λ, together with the maximal
gradient of the interplanar ﬁeld (qU ′
max)Si = 6.9 Gev/cm [61], allows one to calculate
10−2 (see (17)), and, consequently, to estimate the dechanneling length
C = 2.65
×
10−2 cm. As a result, we ﬁnd that the number of the undulator periods
Ld(C) = 6.47
in the suggested system is N = 1.4, which is not at all N
1 as it is implied by the
authors (this is explicitly accented by them in the remark in the line just below their
equation (2) on page 62). Another point of critics is that the classical formalism, used
to derive the equation (2), is applicable only for the dipole case, i.e. when the undulator
parameter is small, p2
1. However, the estimates which are made refer to a strongly
non-dipolar regime: p2 = (2πγa/λ)2 = 7.3. As a consequence, the estimate of the
energy of the largest emitted harmonic, carried out by the authors on page 62, is totally
wrong. Exactly in their regime the harmonics with low number will never emerge from
the crystal due to the photon attenuation.

10−2 cm, if taking the value v = 4.65

≪

≫

×

×

×

Papers [31, 32, 36]. considered only the case of small amplitudes, a

d, when
discussing the channeling phenomenon in periodically bent crystalline structures. As a
result, in [31, 36] the attention was paid not to the undulator radiation (the intensity of
which is negligibly small in the low-amplitude regime, see section 4), but to the inﬂuence
of the periodicity of the channel bending on the spectrum of the channeling radiation.
Similar studies were carried out in [33, 34, 35, 94, 95]. These eﬀects are irrelevant from
the viewpoint of the crystalline undulator problem discussed here. Another issue, which
we want to point out, is that the authors of [31, 36] did not distinguish between the
cases of an electron and a positron channeling. The limitations due to the dechanneling
eﬀect were not discussed. In [32] the idea of using a superlattice (or a crystal bent by

≪

32

means of a low-amplitude acoustic wave) as an undulator for a free electron laser was
explored. The main focus was made on the regime when the undulator radiation is
strongly coupled with the ordinary channeling radiation. This regime is diﬀerent from
the subject of the present discussion. The essential role of the large-amplitude regime
of the crystalline undulator was not demonstrated in these papers.

3.4. Quasi-classical description of the crystalline undulator problem

The important issue of the study of the radiation formed in a crystalline undulator
concerns the choice of the formalism used to describe the phenomenon. This point
could have been regarded as merely a technical one but it is not so. Contrary to the
case of conventional undulators, based on the action of magnetic ﬁelds, the physics
of crystalline undulators is, basically, a newly arisen ﬁeld of research. Therefore, any
theoretical study of the eﬀect, which pretends to go a bit farther than purely academic
considerations, must contain a great part of numerical analysis and numerical data on
the basis of which real experimental investigations can be envisaged. In turn, to obtain
the reliable data it is necessary to choose a theoretical tool which allows, on the one hand,
to treat adequately all principal physical phenomena involved into the problem, and, on
the other hand, to carry out numerical analysis of the obtained analytical expressions.
In the crystalline undulator problem there are three basic phenomena which must be
accurately described. These are: (i) the motion of an ultra-relativistic particle in an
external (strong) ﬁeld, (ii) the process of photon emission by the particle, (iii) the
problem of the radiative recoil, which results in the radiative losses of the projectile.

The most rigorous approach to tackle (theoretically) these problems is the one based
on quantum electrodynamics (see, e.g.
[66]), where the amplitude of the process is
described in terms of a single free-free matrix element of the photon emission taken
between the initial and ﬁnal states of an ultra-relativistic particle in the interplanar
ﬁeld. The main (technical) limitation of this approach appear due to the fact that
in the ultra-relativistic limit, when γ
1 the number of the energy levels related to
the transverse motion in the eﬀective potential increases signiﬁcantly. Consequently,
an accurate description, i.e. numerical calculations, of the particle dynamics becomes
a formidable task. It is exactly this sort of diﬃculties which resulted in the absence
of any numerical analysis and data for the emission spectra in the papers [30, 31, 36],
where the radiation formed in the crystalline undulator was treated in terms of quantum
electrodynamics.

≫

Another option is to study the problem within the framework of classical
[90]). This method was used in the early works [26, 32],
electrodynamics (see, e.g.
and was later applied in [14, 18, 25]. In connection to the crystalline undulator problem
the purely classical description is valid if (i) the characteristic energy of the projectile

33

→

in an external ﬁeld, ¯h˜ω, is much less than its total energy, ε = mγc2, and, (ii) the
radiative recoil, i.e. the change of the projectile energy due to the photon emission, is
neglected. The ﬁrst condition is well fulﬁlled in the case of the ultra-relativistic particle
channeling in a crystal. Indeed, typical values of ¯h˜ω are equal, in the order of magnitude,
to the depth of the interplanar potential well. The latter varies from several eV, for the
crystals of made of light elements (e.q. LiH crystal, see [105, 106]), up to 102 eV for
heavy crystals like W (see, e.g., [44]). Therefore, ¯h˜ω/ε
1. The role of the
radiative recoil is described by the ratio ¯hω/ε. Purely classical description implies that
¯hω
0. Although practical implementation of the classical treatment is comparatively
simple, in application to the crystalline undulator it is fully approved in the so-called
[60, 61]), when the undulator parameter is small, p < 1, and
dipole-limit (see e.g.
all the undulator emission occurs in the fundamental harmonic. Such an assumption
leads to a considerable narrowing of the parameters of the crystalline radiation and,
also, disregards the possibility to generate the emission in higher harmonics. Another
disadvantage of the approach based on classical mechanics and electrodynamics is that
it fails when the energy of the projectile becomes suﬃciently large. For a positron this
means ε
10 GeV. For this energies the probability of the emission of the gamma-
≤
ε via the mechanism of the channeling radiation cannot be
quanta of energy ¯hω
neglected.

γ−1

≪

≪

≤

The third approach, which can be used in studying of the radiative processes
occuring in external ﬁelds in ultra-relativistic domain, was developed by Baier and
Katkov in the late 1960s’ [107], and was called by the authors ‘the operator quasi-
classical method’. The details of this formalism can be found also in [61, 66].

¿From the practical viewpoint, the advantage of the quasi-classical method is that
it justiﬁes the classical description of the motion of an ultra-relativistic particle in an
external ﬁeld (i.e., the use of the trajectories rather than the wavefunctions), and,
simultaneously, takes into account the eﬀect of the radiative recoil. Thus, the quasi-
classical approach neglects the the terms ¯h˜ω/ε, but it explicitly takes into account the
quantum corrections due to the radiative recoil in the whole range of the emitted photon
energies, except for the extreme high energy tail of the spectrum. Using this method
the spectra of photons and electron-positron pairs in linear crystals were successfully
described [61].
It was also applied to the problem of a synchrotron-type radiation
emitted by an ultra-relativistic projectile channeling in a non-periodically bent crystal
[64, 65].

In [1]-[11] this general formalism of Baier and Katkov was used for theoretical
and numerical description of the spectral and angular distribution of the crystalline
undulator radiation, total photon emission spectra and the radiative energy losses of
positrons channeling through the periodically bent crystal.

34

4. Crystalline undulator radiation

To illustrate the crystalline undulator radiation phenomenon, let us consider the spectra
of spontaneous radiation emitted during the passage of positrons through periodically
bent crystals. The results presented below clearly demonstrate the validity of the
statements made in [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] and summarized in section 3.3 above, that the properties
of the undulator radiation can be investigated separately from the ordinary channeling
radiation.

a/d=0

a/d=6

0.5

1.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

0
0.0

1.5

200

150

100

50

200

150

100

50

200

150

100

50

1
−

3

r
s

0
1
 
,

>
)
0
=
θ
(
E
d
<

1
−

3

r
s

0
1
 
,

>
)
0
=
θ
(
E
d
<

1
−

3

r
s

0
1
 
,

>
)
0
=
θ
(
E
d
<

0
0.0

a/d=1

0
0.0

a/d=4

200

150

100

50

200

150

100

50

200

150

100

50

a/d=8

a/d=10

0.5

1.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

0
0.0

1.5

0
0.0

0.5

1.0

Photon energy, MeV

0
0.0

1.5

0.5

1.0

1.5

Photon energy, MeV

Figure 8. Spectral distribution of the total radiation emitted in the forward direction
(ϑ = 0◦) for ε = 0.5 GeV (γ
103) positron channeling in Si along the (110)
crystallographic planes calculated at diﬀerent a/d ratios. Other parameters are given
in the text. the crystal length is L = 3.5

10−2 cm.

≈

×

The calculated spectra of the radiation emitted in the forward direction (with respect
to the z-axis, see ﬁgure 1) in the case of ε = 0.5 GeV planar channeling in Si along

35

(110) crystallographic planes and for the photon energies from 45 keV to 1.5 MeV are
presented in ﬁgures 8 [4]. The ratio a/d was varied within the interval a/d = 0 . . . 10 (the
interplanar spacing is 1.92 ˚A). The case a/d = 0 corresponds to the straight channel.
10−3 cm. The number of
The period λ used for these calculations equals to 2.33
10−2
undulator periods and crystal length were ﬁxed at N = 15 and L = N λ = 3.5
cm. These data are in accordance with the values allowed by (17) (see also ﬁgure 5).

×

×

The spectra correspond to the total radiation, which accounts for the two
mechanisms, the undulator and the channeling. They were calculated using the quasi-
classical method [61, 107]. Brieﬂy, to evaluate the spectral distribution the following
procedure was adopted (for more details see [4, 8, 11]). First, for each a/d value
the spectrum was calculated for individual trajectories of the particles. These were
obtained by solving the relativistic equations of motion with both the interplanar and
the centrifugal potentials taken into account. We considered two frequently used [39]
analytic forms for the continuum interplanar potential, the harmonic and the Moli`ere
potentials calculated at the temperature T = 150 K to account for the thermal vibrations
of the lattice atoms. The resulting radiation spectra were obtained by averaging over
all trajectories. Figures 8 correspond to the spectra obtained by using the Moli`ere
approximation for interplanar potential.

The ﬁrst graph in ﬁgure 8 corresponds to the case of zero amplitude of the bending
(the ratio a/d = 0) and, hence, presents the spectral dependence of the ordinary
channeling radiation only. The asymmetric shape of the calculated channeling radiation
peak, which is due to the strong anharmonic character of the Moli`ere potential, bears
close resemblance with the experimentally measured spectra [108]. The spectrum starts
at ¯hω
960 keV, reaches its maximum value at 1190 keV, and steeply cuts oﬀ at 1200
keV. This peak corresponds to the radiation into the ﬁrst harmonic of the ordinary
channeling radiation (see e.g.
[53]), and there is almost no radiation into higher
harmonics.

≈

Increasing the a/d ratio leads to the modiﬁcations in the radiation spectrum. The
changes which occur are: (i) the lowering of the channeling radiation peak, (ii) the
gradual increase of the intensity of undulator radiation due to the crystal bending.

The decrease in the intensity of the channeling radiation is related to the fact that
the increase of the amplitude a of the bending leads to lowering of the allowed maximum
value of the channeling oscillations amplitude ac (this is measured with respect to the
centerline of the bent channel) [3, 44]. Hence, the more the channel is bent, the lower the
allowed values of ac are, and, consequently, the less intensive is the channeling radiation,
which is proportional to a2

c [61].

The undulator radiation related to the motion of the particle along the centerline
of the periodically bent channel is absent in the case of the straight channel (the graph
a/d = 0), and is almost invisible for comparatively small amplitudes (see the graph

36

for a/d = 1). Its intensity, which is proportional to (a/d)2, gradually increases with
the amplitude a. For large a values (a/d
10) the intensity of the ﬁrst harmonic
of the undulator radiation becomes larger than that of the channeling radiation. The
undulator peak is located at much lower energies, ¯hω(1)
90 keV, and has the width
¯h∆ω
6 keV which is almost 40 times less than the width of the peak of the channeling
radiation.

≈

∼

≈

a/d=10

Molliere potential
Harmonic potential
No potential

150

100

50

1
−

3

r
s

0
1
 
,

>
)
0
=
θ
(
E
d
<

0
0.06

0.07

0.08

0.09
photon energy, MeV

0.10

0.11

0.12

Figure 9. Comparison of diﬀerent approximations for the interplanar potentials
used to calculate the total radiative spectrum in vicinity of the ﬁrst harmonic of the
undulator radiation. The ratio a/d = 10, other parameters as in ﬁgure 8.

It is important to note that the position of sharp undulator radiation peaks, their
narrow widths, and the radiated intensity are, practically, insensitive to the choice of
the approximation used to describe the interplanar potential.
In addition, provided
the ﬁrst two conditions from (17) are fulﬁlled, these peaks are well separated (in the
photon energy scale) from the peaks of the channeling radiation. Therefore, if one is
only interested in the spectral distribution of the undulator radiation, one may disregard
the channeling oscillations and to assume that the projectile moves along the centerline
of the bent channel [1, 2]. This statement is illustrated by 9 [4] where we compare
the results of diﬀerent calculations of the radiative spectrum in vicinity of the ﬁrst
harmonic of the undulator radiation in the case a/d = 10. All parameters are the same

37

as in ﬁgure 8. The ﬁlled and open circles represent the results of evaluation of the total
spectrum of radiation accompanied by numerical solution of the equations of motion
for the projectile within the Moli`ere (ﬁlled circles) and the harmonic (open circles)
approximations for the interplanar potential. The solid line corresponds to the undulator
radiation only. For the calculation of the latter it was assumed that the trajectory of
a positron, y(z) = a sin(2πλ/z), coincides with the centerline of the bent channel (see
ﬁgure 1). It is clearly seen that the more sophisticated treatment has almost no eﬀect on
the proﬁle of the peak obtained by means of simple formulae describing purely undulator
radiation [1, 2]. Moreover, the minor changes in the position and the height of the peak
can be easily accounted for by introducing the eﬀective undulator parameter and (in
the case of the harmonic approximation) the eﬀective undulator amplitude [3].

numeric calculation
Experiment

t

n
e
m
e
c
n
a
h
n
E

55

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

0

10

20

30

40

70

80

90

100

110

60
50
−hω / MeV

Figure 10. Comparison of the experimentally measured spectrum [67, 108] and the
results of the calculation [8, 11] for 6.7 GeV positrons in Si(110).

To check the numerical method, which was developed in [4] for the calculation of
the total emission spectrum of ultra-relativistic positrons in a crystalline undulator, we
calculated the spectrum of the channeling radiation for 6.7 GeV positrons in Si(110)
integrated over the emission angles. Figure 10 shows the experimental data [67, 108]
and the results of our calculations [8, 11] normalized to the experimental data at the
right wing of the spectrum. The height of the ﬁrst harmonic is overestimated in our

38

calculations. The calculations performed in [67] gave a similar result. This disagreement
arises likely due to the neglect of multiple collisions which were accounted for neither
in [8, 11] nor in [67]. However, the shape and the location of the ﬁrst harmonic of the
channeling radiation are described quite well.

1.0

1

(a)

1

2

6

8

10

0

2

4

3

4

5

7

(b)

3

5

7

6

11

10

(c)

9

8

(d)

0.5

0.0

0

1.0

0.5

)

1
−

r
s

9

0
1
(
 
0
=
θ
 
t
a
 
>
n
Ω
d
ω
d
h
/
N
E
d
<

4

3

2

1

0

4

3

2

1

0.0

1.30

1.35

1.40

photon energy, MeV

0.88

0.89

0.90

0.91

0.92

photon energy, MeV

0
0.87

Figure 11. Spectral distribution (in 109 sr−1) of the undulator radiation at ϑ = 0
for 5 GeV positron channeling along periodically bent (110) planes in Si (ﬁgures (a)
and (b)) and W (ﬁgures (c) and (d)) crystals. The a/d ratio is equal to 10. Other
parameters used are presented in table 2. The upper ﬁgures (a) and (c) reproduce
in the wide ranges of ω and correspond to N = 4 Nd. The numbers
dEN /¯h dω dΩn
h
enumerate the harmonics (in the case of the forward emission the radiation occurs only
in odd harmonics). The proﬁles of the ﬁrst harmonic peak (ﬁgures (b) and (d)) are
plotted for N = 4 Nd (solid lines), N = 2 Nd (dotted lines), N = Nd (dashed lines),
N = Nd/2 (long-dashed lines).

i

The intensity and the proﬁle of the peaks of the undulator radiation are deﬁned, to a
great extent, by the magnitude of the dechanneling length. In [5] a more sophisticated,
than in [1, 2], theoretical and numerical analysis of this inﬂuence was presented.
In particular, we solved the following problems: (a) simple analytic expression was

evaluated for spectral-angular distribution of the undulator radiation which contains,
as a parameter, the dechanneling length Ld, (b) the simulation procedure of the
dechanneling process of a positron in periodically bent crystals was presented, (c) the
dechanneling lengths were calculated for 5 GeV positrons channeling in Si, Ge and W
crystals along the periodically bent crystallographic planes, (d) the spectral-angular and
spectral distributions of the undulator radiation formed in crystalline undulator were
calculated in a broad range of the photon energies and for various a, λ and C.

39

Table 2. The values of the parameter C (see (2)), undulator period λ, the dechanneling
length Ld(C), the number of undulator periods Nd = Ld(C)/λ within Ld(C), the
undulator parameter p (see (5)), and the fundamental harmonic energy (see (6 with
ϑ = 0◦)) used for the calculation [5] of the spectra presented in ﬁgures 11(a)-(d).

Crystal

C

λ Ld(C) Nd
cm

µm

p

0.15
Si
W 0.05

63.0
42.2

0.321
0.637

51
151

1.87
3.26

¯hω1
MeV

1.37
0.89

h

−1

dEN /dω dΩn

To illustrate the results obtained in [5],

in ﬁgures 11(a)-(d) we present the
spectral distribution of the undulator radiation emitted along the undulator axis,
¯h
iϑ=0◦, for 5 GeV positron channeling along (110) planes in Si and
W crystals. The spectra correspond to the ratio a/d, where d = 1.92 ˚A for Si and
d = 2.45 ˚A for W. The values of other parameters, used in the calculations, are given in
table 2. The values of the dechanneling lengths, Ld(C), were obtained in [5] by means of
the simulation procedure of the dechanneling process of a positron in periodically bent
crystals.

The upper ﬁgures, 11(a) and (c), illustrate the spectral distributions in Si and W
over a wide range of emitted photon energy, and corresponds to the crystal length, L,
exceeding the dechanneling length by a factor of 4: L = 4Ld(C). Each peak corresponds
to emission into the odd harmonics, the energies of which follow from the relation
ωk = k ω1, k = 1, 3, . . .. The diﬀerence in the magnitudes of the undulator parameters
for Si and W (see table 2) explains number of the harmonics visible in the spectra. It is
seen that all harmonics are well separated: the distance 2¯hω1 between two neighbouring
peaks is 2.74 MeV for Si and 1.78 MeV in the case of W, whilst the width of each peak
¯h∆ω is

8.7 keV for Si and

2.5 keV for W.

Figures 11(b) and (d) exhibit, in more detail, the structure of the ﬁrst-harmonic
peaks. For the sake of comparison we plotted the curves corresponding to diﬀerent
values of the undulator periods. It is seen that for N > Nd the intensity of the peaks
is no longer proportional to N 2, as it is in the case of the ideal undulator without the

≈

≈

40

dechanneling of the particles [60]. For both Si and W crystals, the intensities of the
radiation calculated at N
exceed those at N = 4 Nd (the thick full curves in the
ﬁgures) only by several per cent. Thus, the full curves correspond to almost saturated
intensities which are the maximal ones for the crystals used, projectile energies and the
parameters of the crystalline undulator. For a more detailed discussion see paper [5].

−→ ∞

5. Stimulated emission from a crystalline undulator

As demonstrated in [1, 2], the scheme illustrated by ﬁgure 1 allows to consider a
possibility to generate stimulated emission of high energy photons by means of a bunch of
ultra-relativistic positrons moving in a periodically bent channel. The photons, emitted
in the forward direction (ϑ = 0) at the points of the maximum curvature of the bent
channel, travel parallel to the beam and, thus, stimulate the photon generation in
the vicinity of all successive maxima and minima. This mechanism of the radiation
[92]), in which
stimulation is similar to that known for a free-electron laser (see, e.g.
the periodicity of a trajectory of an ultra-relativistic projectile is achieved by applying
a spatially periodic magnetic ﬁeld. Also from the theory of FEL it is known [91], that
the stimulation occurs at the frequencies of the harmonics of the spontaneous emission,
ωk = k ω1, k = 1, 2, . . .. The frequency of fundamental harmonic, ω1, is deﬁned in
(6). In [1, 2] and, also, in a more recent paper [13] it was shown, that it is possible to
separate the stimulated photon emission in the crystalline undulator from the ordinary
channeling radiation in the regime of large bending amplitudes a
d. This scheme
of the stimulated photon emission allows to generate high energy photons up to MeV
region and, thus, we call it as a Gamma-laser. As a further step in developing the ideas
proposed in these papers, the study, carried out in [18], was devoted to the investigation
of the inﬂuence of the beam energy spread on the characteristics of the stimulated
emission in crystalline undulators.

≫

In the regime of low amplitudes, a < d, the idea of using a periodically bent crystal
as an undulator for a free electron laser was explored in [32]. In this regime the intensity
of the undulator radiation is relatively small compared with the channeling radiation.
However, it is possible to match the undulator frequency to that of the channeling
motion. This results in a resonant coupling of the emissions via the two mechanisms,
which leads to the enhancement of the gain factor.

Let us review the results obtained in [1, 2, 13]. To do this we ﬁrst outline the
derivation of the general expression for the gain factor in an undulator, and, after
accounting for the conditions (17), estimate gain for the crystalline undulator. For the
sake of simplicity we consider the stimulated emission for the fundamental harmonic
only, and, also, consider the emission in the forward direction. In the formulae below,
we use the notation ω instead of ω1 for the fundamental harmonic frequency.

41

(20)

(21)

(22)

The gain factor, g(ω), deﬁnes the increase in the total number,

, of the emitted
photons at a frequency ω due to stimulated emission by the particles of the beam:
d

dz. The general expression for the quantity g(ω) is

= g(ω)

N

N

N

g(ω) = n [σe(ε, ε

¯hω)

σa(ε, ε + ¯hω)] ,

−

−

−

¯hω) and σa(ε, ε + ¯hω) are the cross sections of, correspondingly, the
where σe(ε, ε
spontaneous emission and absorption of the photon by a particle of the beam, n stands
for the volume density (measured in cm−3) of the beam particles. By using the known
relations between the cross sections σe,a and the spectral-angular intensity of the emitted
radiation [66], one derives the following expression for the gain:

g =

(2π)3 c2
−

ω2 n

d
dε "

dE
dω dΩ #ϑ=0

∆ω ∆Ω.

Here dE/dω dΩ is the spectral-angular intensity of the radiation, ∆ω is the width of the
ﬁrst harmonic peak, and ∆Ω is the eﬀective cone (with respect to the undulator axis)
into which the emission of the ω-photon occurs. Note that expression (21) is derived
under the assumption that the photon energy is small compared to the energy of the
particle, ¯hω

ε.

For an undulator of the length L the total increase in the number of photons is

≪

=

N0 eG(ω)L,

N

where G(ω) = g(ω)L is the total gain on the scale L. The expression for G(ω) follows
from (21) (the details of derivation one ﬁnds in [2, 61]):

Z 2
M

L3
γ3 λ · (

G(ω) = n (2π)3r0

if p2 > 1
if p2 < 1
10−13 cm is the electron classical radius, Z and M are the charge and
where r0 = 2.8
the mass of a projectile in the units of elementary charge and electron mass. Note the
strong inverse dependence on γ and M which is due to the radiative recoil, and the
proportionality of the gain to L3 and to the squared charge of the projectile Z 2.

1
p2

(23)

·

The main diﬀerence, of a principal character, between a conventional FEL and
a FEL-type device based on a crystalline undulator is that in the former the bunch of
particles and the photon ﬂux both travel in vacuum whereas in the latter they propagate
in a crystalline medium. Consequently, in a conventional FEL one can, in principle,
increase inﬁnitely the length of the undulator L. This will result in the increase of
the total gain and the number of undulator periods N, (4). The limitations on the
magnitude of L in this case are mainly of a technological nature.

The situation is diﬀerent for a crystalline undulator, where the dechanneling eﬀect
and the photon attenuation lead to the decrease of n and of the photon ﬂux density with
the penetration length and, therefore, result in the limitation of the allowed L-values.

42

The reasonable estimate of L is given by the condition (15). In turn, this condition,
together with the estimate (14), deﬁnes the ranges of photon energies for which the
operation of a crystalline undulator is realistic. These ranges are:

•
•

10 eV.

High-energy photons: ¯hω > 10 keV when La > 0.01 cm;
Low-energy photons: ¯hω < I0 ≤
In the regime of high-energy photons (the gamma-laser regime) the stimulation of
the emission must occur during a single pass of the bunch of the particles through
the crystal. Indeed, for such photon energies there are no mirrors, and, therefore, the
photon ﬂux must develop simultaneously with the bunch propagation. In the theory
of FEL this principle is called ’Self-Ampliﬁed Spontaneous Emission’ (SASE) [92, 109]
and is usually referred as the FEL operation in the high gain regime, which implies that
G(ω) > 1 to ensure that the exponential factor in (22) is large. In this case the quantity
N0 denotes the number of photons which appear due to the spontaneous emission at
the entrance part of the undulator.

For ¯hω < I0 ≤

10 eV there is no principal necessity to go beyond 1 for the magnitude
of G(ω) during a single pass. Indeed, for such photons there is a possibility to use mirrors
to reﬂect the photons. Therefore, the emitted photons, after leaving the undulator can
be returned back to the entrance point to be used for further stimulation of the emission
by the incoming projectiles.

Below we present the results of numerical calculations of the parameters of the
undulator (the ﬁrst harmonic energy and the number of periods) and of the volume
density n of the bunch particles needed to achieve G(ω) = 1. The calculations were
performed for relativistic positrons, muons, protons and heavy ions and took into
account all the conditions summarized in (17). The results presented correspond to the
cases of the lowest values of n needed to ensure G(ω) = 1 and which, simultaneously,
produce the largest available values of N.

5.1. High-energy photons: the gamma-laser regime

Detailed analysis of the conditions (17) and demonstrates, that to optimize the
parameters of the stimulated emission in the photon energy range ¯hω > 10 keV in
the case of a positron channeling in a periodically bent crystal one should consider the
103, a/d = 10 . . . 20, C = 0.1 . . . 0.3,
following ranges of parameters: γ = (1 . . . 5)
which are common for all the crystals which we have investigated. For these ranges the
energy of the ﬁrst harmonic (see (6)) lies within the interval 50 . . . 150 keV, and the
length of the undulator can be taken equal to the dechanneling length because of the
inequality Ld(C) < La(ω), valid for such ω.

×

Results of calculations are presented in ﬁgure 12, where the dependences of the ﬁrst
harmonic energy, ¯hω, the number of undulator periods, N, and the ratio G(ω)/n versus

the parameter C (see (2)) are presented for various crystals. The data correspond to
the ratio a/d = 20 except for the case of Si for which a/d = 10.

43

V
e
k
ω

,

140

120

100

80

60

40

25

15

10

N

20

10−21

10−22

3

m
c
 
,

n
/
)

(

ω
G

10−23

0

Si, (111)
V, (110)
Ge, (111)
Mo, (110)
Pd, (111)
W, (110)

0.1

0.2

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.3
parameter C

Figure 12. First harmonic energy, ω, number of undulator periods, N , and the
ratio G(ω)/n in cm3 versus C for 0.5 GeV positron channeling in various channels as
indicated.

For each crystal the curves ¯hω and G(ω)/n were truncated at those C values for
which the number of undulator periods becomes less than 10 (see the graph in the
middle). It is seen from the bottom graph, that G(ω)/n is a rapidly varying function
of C (note the log scale of the vertical axis). For all the channels this function attains
0.1. The maximum value of G(ω)/n deﬁnes
its maximum value
the magnitude of the volume density of a positron bunch needed to achieve total gain
G(ω) = 1. Then it follows from the graph that to achieve the emission stimulation within
the range ¯hω = 50 . . . 150 keV on the basis of the SASE mechanism it is necessary to
reach the value n = 1021 cm−3 for a positron bunch of the energy of several GeV.

10−21 cm3 at C

≈

≈

44

At ﬁrst glance the idea of using a crystalline undulator based on the channeling of
heavy positively charged particles looks very attractive. Indeed, as it is seen from (9),
(10) and (12), the dechanneling length for a heavy particle is M/Z
1 times larger
than that for a positron with the same value of γ. This factor, being cubed in (23),
could lead to a noticeable increase of the total gain (over-forcing, in the cases of µ+ and
p, the small multiplier Z 2/M).

≫

However, as it is seen from (2) the allowed undulator period λ increases with a
√M . In turn, this results in a decrease in the ﬁrst harmonic
projectile mass: λ > λmin ∝
1/√M (in the case of a heavy projectile the undulator parameter
energy ω
is small, and the term p2 can be disregarded when calculating ω, see (6)). For realistic
103, this results in the following restriction on the
values of relativistic factor, γ
photon energy:

4πc γ2/λ

∝

≤

≈

50 keV for µ+
10 keV for p
< 1 keV for a heavy ion

¯hω

¯hωmax ≈

≤






For a proton and an ion the range of photon energies is exactly the one where the
attenuation is very strong. Therefore, the crystal length is deﬁned by a small value of
La(ω), see ﬁgure 6. In the case of µ+ the upper limit of ¯hω is higher but, nevertheless,
it leads to a condition La(ω)
Ld(C), so that the crystal length also must be chosen
as L = La(ω). Although in such conditions it is possible to construct an undulator with
suﬃciently large number of periods, the total gain factor becomes very small:

≪

G(ω)

n

∼

· (

10−22
10−26

for µ+
for p

Therefore, it is not realistic to consider the stimulated emission from a heavy projectile
in the high-energy photon range.

5.2. Low-energy photons

For ¯hω
deﬁned by the dechanneling length of a particle.

≤

I0 the photon attenuation becomes small and the length of the undulator is

To illustrate the regime of low-energy stimulated emission during the positron
channeling, in ﬁgure 13 we present the dependences of N and G(ω)/n on the relativistic
factor. The data correspond to a ﬁxed ratio a/d = 5 and to a ﬁxed energy of the
ﬁrst harmonic, ¯hω = 5 eV, which is lower than the atomic ionization potentials for all
crystals indicated in the ﬁgures. The undulator length was chosen to be equal to the
dechanneling length, which is the minimum from Ld(C) and La(ω). Two graphs in ﬁgure
13 demonstrate, that although the number of the undulator periods is, approximately,
independent on the type of the crystal, the magnitude of the total gain is quite sensitive

N

25

20

15

10

5

0

10−21

3

m
c
 
,

n
/
)

)

ω
G

10−22

10−23

102

45

C, (111)
Si, (111)
Ge, (111)
Mo, (110)
W, (110)

ω=5 eV

a/d=5

103
γ

104

Figure 13. Values of N and G(ω)/n versus γ for a positron-based crystalline
undulators in a low-ω region calculated for various channels as indicated.

to the choice of the channel. The highest values of G(ω)/n (and, correspondingly, the
lowest densities n needed to achieve G(ω) = 1) can be achieved for heavy crystals.

Analysis of (23) together with (17) shows, that, in the case of a heavy projectile, to
obtain the largest possible values of the total gain G(ω) during a single pass through a
crystal the following regime can be considered: (a) moderate values of the relativistic
factor, γ
10 . . . 100; (b) C = 0.25 which turns out to be the optimal value of C; (c)
Z

1, i.e. the best choice is to use a bunch of heavy ions.

∼

In ﬁgure 14 we present the dependences of N and G(ω)/n on γ, lying within the
range speciﬁed above. All curves, which were obtained for diﬀerent a/d ratios, refer to
the case of U +92 channeling in W along the (110) crystallographic planes. The energy of
the emitted photon is ﬁxed at 5 eV. It is seen from the graphs that for all the crystals the
most optimal range of relativistic factor is γ
10 . . . 30 where both the number of the
undulator periods and the magnitude of G(ω)/n noticeably exceed the corresponding

∼

≫

W, (110)

ω=5 eV

a/d=10
a/d=20
a/d=30
a/d=40
a/d=50
a/d=60
a/d=70
a/d=80
a/d=90

46

N

40

80

60

20

0

n
/
)

(

ω
G

10−19

10−20

10−21

10−22

10−23

0

10

20

30

40

60

70

80

90

100

50
γ

Figure 14. Number of periods, N , and values of G(ω)/n in cm3 versus γ for an
ion-based crystalline undulator in a low-ω region calculated at diﬀerent a/d values as
indicated. The data are presented for bare U ion channeling along the (110) planes in
a tungsten crystal.

values in the case of a positron channeling, see ﬁgure 13.

Similar analysis, carried out for the case of a proton channeling, demonstrates that
for the same value of γ the magnitudes of G(ω)/n are several times higher than those
for a heavy ion.

Results presented in this section show, that the stimulated emission in the low-ω
range (¯hω < I0 ∼
10 eV) can be discussed for all types of positively-charged projectiles.
In this case to achieve the value G(ω) = 1 within the SASE mode it is necessary to
1021
consider the densities from n
cm−3 for a positron beam. However, this large numbers can be reduced by orders
of magnitudes if one considers the multi-pass mode of the FEL. Indeed, there exist the
mirrors which allow to reﬂect photons of the energy ¯hω < I0 ∼
10 eV. Thus, the emitted

1018 cm−3 for heavy ion beams up to n

≈

×

≈

×

5

5

photons can be returned back to the entrance point and used further to stimulate the
emission generated by the particles of the long bunch. The number of the passes, equal
approximately to Lbunch/L (here Lbunch is the bunch length), can be very large (up to
104). Therefore, volume density can be reduced by the factor L/Lbunch ≪

1.

47

6. Conclusions

In this paper we have discussed the feasibility of the crystalline undulator and Gamma-
laser based on it. We have presented the detailed review covering the development of
all essential aspects of these important ideas.

Firstly, we note that it is absolutely realistic to use a crystalline undulator for
generating spontaneous radiation in a wide range of photon energies. The parameters
of such an undulator, being subject to the restrictions mentioned in section 3.1, can
be easily tuned by varying the shape function, the energy and the type of a projectile
and by choosing diﬀerent channels. The large range of energies available in modern
colliders for various charged particles, both light and heavy, together with the wide
range of frequencies and bending amplitudes in crystals allow to generate the crystalline
undulator radiation with the energies from eV up to the MeV region.

≥

Secondly,

it is feasible to obtain stimulated emission by means of a crystalline
undulator. For a single-pass laser (SASE mode) high volume densities are needed: the
stimulated emission in the high-ω range (¯hω > 10 keV) demands high volume densities
1020 cm−3. For this values of n a FEL device based on a crystalline
of positrons, n
undulator can be operated in a single-pass (SASE) mode.
Stimulated emission in the low-ω range (¯hω < I0 ∼

10 eV) can be discussed for all
types of positively-charged projectiles. In this case the large values of the beam densities
required for the lasing eﬀect can be reduced by orders of magnitudes if one considers
the multi-pass mode of the FEL. Indeed, there exist the mirrors which allow to reﬂect
photons of the energy ¯hω < I0 ∼
10 eV. Thus, the emitted photons can be returned
back to the entrance point and used further to stimulate the emission generated by the
particles of the long bunch. The number of the passes, equal approximately to Lbunch/L
(here Lbunch is the bunch length), can be very large (up to 104). Therefore, beam density
at which the lasing eﬀect arises can be reduced by the factor L/Lbunch ≪

The crystalline undulators discussed in this paper can serve as a new eﬃcient source
for the coherent high energy photon emission. As we have pointed out, the present
technology is nearly suﬃcient to achieve the necessary conditions to construct not only
crystalline undulator, but also the stimulated photon emission source. The parameters
of the crystalline undulator and the Gamma-laser based on it diﬀer substantially from
what is possible to achieve with the undulators constructed on magnetic ﬁelds.

1.

This review clearly demonstrates that experimental eﬀots are needed for the

48

veriﬁcation of numerous theory predications outlined in this review. Such eﬀorts will
certainly make this ﬁeld of endevour even more facinating than as it is now and possibly
will lead to the practical development of a new type of tunable and monochromatic
radiation sources.

Finally, we mention that not at all theoretical issues for the described system have
been solved so far. Thus, the analysys of dynamics of a high-density positon beam
channeling through a periodically bent crystal in presence of an induced high intensity
photon ﬂux is to be performed in a greater detail. This and many more other interesting
theoretical problems are still open for future investigation.

References

[1] Korol A V, Solov’yov A V and Greiner W 1998 J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 24 L45-53; 1997

Institute for Theoretical Physics, Frankfurt am Main University, Preprint-UFTP467

[2] Korol A V, Solov’yov A V and Greiner W 1999 Int. J. Mod. Phys. E 8 49-100
[3] Korol A V, Solov’yov A V and Greiner W 2000 Int. J. Mod. Phys. E 9 77-105
[4] Krause W, Korol A V, Solov’yov A V and Greiner W 2000 J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 26

L87-L95

[5] Korol A V, Solov’yov A V and Greiner W 2001 J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 27 95-125
[6] Greiner W, Korol A V and Solov’yov A V 2000 Proceedings of Int. Meeting on Frontiers of Physics
(Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 26-29 October 1998), Editors S.P.Chia and D.A.Bradley, (Singapore:
World Scientiﬁc) p. 60-92

[7] Greiner W, Korol A V and Solov’yov A V 2001 16th Int. Conf. Application of Accelerators in
Research and Industry (Denton,Texas, USA, 1-5 November (2000). AIP Conference Proceedings,
editors J.L. Duggan and I.L. Morgan, v. 576, p.17-20

[8] Krause W, Korol A V, Solov’yov A V and Greiner W 2001 Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 475 441-444
[9] Krause W, Korol A V, Solov’yov A V and Greiner W 2001 Proceedings of Int. Conf. Fundamental
and Applied Aspects in Modern Physics (L¨uderitz, Namibia, November 13-17, 2000). Editors
S.H. Connell and R. Tegen (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc) p. 115-122

[10] Krause W, Korol A V, Solov’yov A V and Greiner W 2001 in ‘Electron-Photon Interaction in
Dense Media’ NATO Science Series II. Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry vol. 49, ed. H.
Wiedemann (Kluwer Acad. Publishers) p. 263-276

[11] Korol A V, Krause W, Solov’yov A V, Greiner W 2002 Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 483 455-460
[12] Korol A V, Solov’yov A V and Greiner W 2003 Proc. Symp. Channeling - Bent Crystals - Radiation
Processes (Frankfurt am Main, Germany, June 2003), eds. W. Greiner, A.V. Solov’yov, S. Misicu
(Hungary: EP Systema Bt., Debrecen) pp. 135-154

[13] Korol A V, Solov’yov A V and Greiner W 2003 Proc. Symp. Channeling - Bent Crystals - Radiation
Processes (Frankfurt am Main, Germany, June 2003), eds. W. Greiner, A.V. Solov’yov, S. Misicu
(Hungary: EP Systema Bt., Debrecen) pp. 155-169

[14] Avakian R O, Gevorgian L A, Ispirian K A and Ispirian R K 1998 Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 68

437-441 (JETP Lett. 68 467-471 (1998))

[15] Zhang Q-R 1999 Int. J. Mod. Phys. E 8 493
[16] Mikkelsen U and Uggerhøj E 2000 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 160 435-439

49

[17] Aganiants A O, Akopov N Z, Apyan A B et al 2000 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 171 577-583
[18] Avakian R O, Gevorgian L A, Ispirian K A, Ispirian R K 2001 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 173

112-120

11-13

496-499

[19] Avakian R O, Avetyan K T, Ispirian K A, Melikyan E G 2001 in ‘Electron-Photon Interaction
in Dense Media’ NATO Science Series II. Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry vol. 49, ed. H.
Wiedemann (Kluwer Acad. Publishers) p. 277

[20] Avakian R O, Avetyan K T, Ispirian K A, Melikyan E G 2002 Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 492

[21] Avakian R O, Avetyan K T, Ispirian K A, Melikyan E G 2003 Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 508

[22] Bellucci S, Bini S, Biryukov V M, Chesnokov Yu A et al 2003 Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 034801
[23] Bellucci S, Bini S, Giannini S et al 2003 Crystal undulator as a novel compact source of radiation

Electronic preprint arXiv:physics/0306152 (http://xxx.lanl.gov/)

[24] Bellucci S 2003 Proc. Symp. Channeling - Bent Crystals - Radiation Processes (Frankfurt am
Main, Germany, June 2003), eds. W. Greiner, A.V. Solov’yov, S. Misicu (Hungary: EP Systema
Bt., Debrecen) pp. 171-178

[25] Korhmazyan N A, Korhmazyan N N and Babadjanyan N E 2004 Zh. Tekh. Fiz. 74 123-125
[26] Kaplin V V, Plotnikov and Vorob’ev S V 1980 Zh. Tekh. Fiz. 50 1079-1081 (Sov. Phys. – Tech.

Phys. 25 650-651 (1980))

[27] Conceptual Design of a 500 GeV e+e− Linear Collider with Integrated X-ray Laser Facility, 1997,

eds. R. Brinkmann et al, DESY 1997-048, ECFA 1997-182 (Hamburg, DESY)

[28] Rullhusen P, Artru X and Dhez P 1998 Novel Radiation Sources using Relativistic Electrons

(Singapore: World Scientiﬁc)

[29] Colson W B 2001 Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 475 397-400
(see also http://www.physics.nps.navy.mil/table1.pdf)

[30] Baryshevsky V G, Dubovskaya I Ya and Grubich A O 1980 Phys. Lett. A 77 61-64
[31] Ikezi H, Lin-liu Y R and Ohkawa T 1984 Phys. Rev. B 30 1567-1569
[32] Bogacz S A and Ketterson J B 1986 J. Appl. Phys. 60 177-188
[33] Mkrtchyan A R, Gasparyan R A and Gabrielyan R G 1986 Phys. Lett. A 115 410-412

Mkrtchyan A R, Gasparyan R A and Gabrielyan R G 1987 Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 93 432-436 (Sov.

Phys. – JETP 66 248-250 (1987))

[34] Amatuni A T and Elbakyan S S 1988 Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 94 297-301 (Sov. Phys. – JETP 67

[35] Mkrtchyan A R, Gasparyan R H, Gabrielyan R G and Mkrtchyan A G 1988 Phys. Lett. A 126

1903-1905 (1988)

528-530

[36] Dedkov V G 1994 Phys. Status Solidi (b) 184 535-542
[37] Robinson M T and Oen O S 1963 Appl. Phys. Lett. 2 30
Robinson M T and Oen O S Phys. Rev. 132 2385-2398

[38] Lindhard J 1965 Kong. Danske Vid. Selsk. Mat.-Fys. Medd. 34 14
[39] Gemmell D S 1974 Rev. Mod. Phys. 46 129
[40] Relativistic Channeling 1987 eds. A. Carrigan and J. Ellison, (NY: Plenum)
[41] Sørensen A H and Uggerhøj E 1989 Nucl. Sci. Appl. 3 147
[42] Channeling and other crystal eﬀects at relativistic energy, topical issue of Nucl. Instrum. Methods

B119, ed. H.H. Andersen and L.E. Rehn (1996)

50

[43] Baurichter A, Biino C, Clement M, Doble N et al 2000 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 164-165 27-43
[44] Biruykov V M, Chesnokov Yu A and Kotov V I 1996 Crystal Channeling and its Application at

High-Energy Accelerators (Berlin: Springer)

[45] Klimov V V and Letokhov V S 1996 Phys. Lett. A 222 424-428
Klimov V V and Letokhov V S 1997 Phys. Lett. A 226 244-252

[46] Gevorgyan L A, Ispirian K A and Ispirian R K 1997 JETP Lett. 66 322-326

Gevorgyan L A, Ispirian K A and Ispirian R K 1988 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 145 155-159

[47] Zhevago N K and Glebov V I 1998 Phys. Lett. A 250 360-368
Zhevago N K and Glebov V I 2001 Phys. Lett. A 282 97-105
Zhevago N K and Glebov V I 2002 JETP 94 1121-1133
[48] Dedkov G V 1998 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 143 584-590
[49] Biryukov V M, Bellucci S 2002 Phys. Lett. B 542 111-115
[50] Greenenko A A and Shul’ga N F 2002 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 193 133-138
[51] Bellucci S, Biryukov V M, Chesnokov Yu A, Guidi V and Scandale W 2003 Nucl. Instrum. Methods

[52] Zhevago N K and Glebov V I 2003 Phys. Lett. A 310 301-310
[53] Kumakhov M A and Komarov F F 1989 Radiation From Charged Particles in Solids (New York:

B 202 236-241

AIP)

[54] Uggerhøj E 1980 Nucl. Instrum. Methods 170 105-113

Sørensen A H 1996 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 119 2-29

[55] Andersen S K, Fich O, Nielsen H, Schi¨o H E, Uggerh¨oj E, et al 1980 Nucl. Phys. B 67 1-40
[56] Uggerhøj E, Bluhme H, Knudsen H et al 2003 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 207 402-408
[57] Kumakhov M A 1976 Phys. Lett. A 57 17
[58] Baryshevsky V G and Dubovskaya I Ya 1977 Phys. Status Solidi (b) 82 403
[59] Baryshevsky V G 1982 Channeling, Radiation and Reactions in Crystals at High Energies (Minsk:

Buelorussian State University Press)

[60] Bazylev V A and Zhevago N K 1990 Usp. Fiz. Nauk 160 47 (Sov. Phys. – Uspekhi 33 1021)

Bazylev V A and Zhevago N K 1987 Radiation of Fast Charged Particles in Matter and External

Fields (Moscow: Nauka)

[61] Baier V N, Katkov V M and Strakhovenko V M, 1998 High Energy Electromagnetic Processes in

Oriented Single Crystals (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc)

[62] Berman B L 2002 Channeling radiation: a historical respective in ‘Electron-Photon Interaction
in Dense Media’ NATO Science Series II. Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry vol. 49, ed. H.
Wiedemann (Kluwer Acad. Publishers) p. 7

[63] Taratin A M and Vorobiev S A 1988 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 31 551
Taratin A M and Vorobiev S A 1989 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 42 41

[64] Arutyunov V A, Kudryashov N A, Samsonov V M and Strikhanov M N 1991 Zh.Tehn.Fiz. 61 1
Arutyunov V A, Kudryashov N A, Samsonov V M and Strikhanov M N 1991 Zh. Tehn. Fiz. 61

Arutyunov V A, Kudryashov N A, Samsonov V M and Strikhanov M N 1991 Nucl. Phys. B 363

[65] Solov’yov A V, Sch¨afer A and Greiner W, 1996 Phys. Rev. E 53 1129
[66] Berestetskii V B, Lifshitz E M and Pitaevskii L P 1982 Quantum Electrodynamics (Oxford:

32

283

Pergamon)

51

[67] Bak J F, Ellison J A, Marsh B et al 1985 Nucl. Phys. B 254 491-527
Bak J F, Ellison J A, Marsh B et al 1988 Nucl. Phys. B 302 525-558

[68] Andersen J U 1980 Nucl. Instrum. Methods 170 1-5
[69] Medenwaldt R, Møller S P, Tang-Petersen S, Uggerhøj E et al 1991 Phys. Lett. B 260 235-239
Medenwaldt R, Møller S P, Tang-Petersen S, Uggerhøj E et al 1992 Phys. Lett. B 281 153-158
Medenwaldt R, Møller S P, Uggerhøj E et al 1995 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 103 139-146

[70] Kirsebom K, Mikkelsen U, Uggerhøj E, Elsener K et al 2001 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 174 274-296
[71] Tsyganov E N 1976 Fermilab preprint TM-682, TM-684 (Batavia: Fermilab)
[72] Kudo H 1981 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 189 609-614

Ellison J A and Picraux S T 1981 Phys. Lett. A 83 271

[73] Vodop’yanov A S, Golovatyuk V M, Elishev A F et al 1979 Pis’ma v Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 30

474-478 (JETP Lett. 30 442-446 (1979))

Elishev A F, Filatova N A, Golovatyuk V M et al 1979 Phys. Lett. B 88 387-391

[74] Møller S P, Worm T, Clement M, Doble N et al 1994 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 84 434-442
[75] Biino C, Clement M, Doble N et al 1997 Phys. Lett. B 403 91
[76] Afonin A G, Baranov V T, Biryukov V M, Breese M B H et al 2001 Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 094802
[77] Aurdini G, Biino C, Clement M, Cornelius K et al 1997 Phys. Rev. Lett. 79 4182
[78] Taratin A.M. 1998 Fiz. Element. Chast. At. Yadra 29 1063-1118 (English translation: Phys. Part.

[79] Vodopianov A S, Ivanshin Y I, Lobanov V I, Tatarinov I I et al 2003 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B

Nucl. 29 437

201 266-275

[80] Uggerhøj E 2003 Proc. Symp. Channeling - Bent Crystals - Radiation Processes (Frankfurt am
Main, Germany, June 2003), eds. W. Greiner, A.V. Solov’yov, S. Misicu (Hungary: EP Systema
Bt., Debrecen) pp. 123-134

[81] Greenenko A A and Shul’ga N F 2001 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 173 178-183
[82] Uggerhøj E 2003 Private communication
[83] Sch¨afer A and Greiner W 1991 J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 17 L217
[84] Denisov A S, Fedin O L, Gordeeva M A et al 1992 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 69 382-384
[85] Ginzburg V L 1947 Izv. AN SSSR 11 165
[86] Motz H 1951 J. Appl. Phys. 22 2684
[87] Alferov D F, Bashmakov Yu A and Cherenkov P A 1989 Usp. Fiz. Nauk 157 389 (Sov. Phys. –

[88] Fedorov V M 1991 Electron in a Strong Light Field, (Moscow: Nauka)
[89] Bonifacio R, Casagrande F, Cerchioni G, de Salvo Souza L, Pierini P and Piovella N 1990 Rivista

Uspekhi 32 200 (1989))

del Nuovo Cimento 13 1

[90] Landau L D and Lifshitz E M 1971 The Classical Theory of Fields (Oxford: Pergamon)
[91] Madey J M J 1971 J. Appl. Phys. 42 1906
[92] Saldin E L, Schneidmiller E A and Yurkov M V 1995 Phys. Rep. 260 187
[93] Baryshevsky V G and Dubovskaya I Ya 1991 J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 3 2421-2430
[94] Grigoryan L Sh, Mkrtchyan A R, Mkrtchyan A H et al 2001 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 173 132-141
[95] Grigoryan L Sh, Mkrtchyan A R, Khachatryan H F et al 2003 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 212

51-55

[96] Colson W B, Datolli G, and Ciocci F 1985 Phys. Rev. A 31 828
[97] Breese M B H 1997 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 132 540-547

52

[98] Sterzel R 2003 Proc. Symp. Channeling - Bent Crystals - Radiation Processes (Frankfurt am Main,
Germany, June 2003), eds. W. Greiner, A.V. Solov’yov, S. Misicu (Hungary: EP Systema Bt.,
Debrecen) pp. 193-202

[99] Romanov A 2000 Private communication
[100] Sternheimer R M 1966 Phys. Rev. 145 247

Komarov F F 1979 Phys. Stat. Sol. (b) 96 555

[101] Henke B L, Gullikson E M and Davis J C 1993 Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables 54 181-342

(see also http://www-cxro.lbl.gov/optical constants/)

[102] Hubbel J H and Seltzer S M Tables of X-ray Mass Attenuation Coeﬃcients and
Mass Energy-Absorption Coeﬃcients 1 keV to 20 MeV for elements Z = 1 to 92
and 48 Additional Substances of Dosimetric Interest NISTIR 5632 - Web Version 1.02
(http://physics.nist.gov/PhysRefData/XrayMassCoef/cover.html)

[103] Hagiwara K et al 2002 Phys. Rev. D 66 010001 (see also http://dbserv.ihep.su/pdg/pdg.html)
[104] Mason W P 1972 Acoustic properties of Solids, American Institute of Physics Handbook, 3rd edn

(New York: McGraw-Hill)

[105] Berman B L, Kephart J O, Datz S, Klein R K et al 1996 Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 119 71
[106] Korhmazyan N A, Korhmazyan N N and Babadjanyan N E 2003 Zh. Tekh. Fiz. 73 1-6
[107] Baier V N and Katkov V N 1967 Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 53 1478 (Sov. Phys. – JETP 26 854 (1968))
Baier V N and Katkov V N 1968 Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 55 1542 (Sov. Phys. – JETP 28 807 (1969))

[108] Uggerhøj E 1993 Rad. Eﬀ. Def. Solids 25 3-21
[109] Bonifacio R, Pellegrini C, and Narducci L M 1984 Opt. Commun. 50 373

