4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
1
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Schottky-Enabled Photoemission in a RF Accelerator Photoinjector - Possible
Generation of Ultra-Low Transverse Thermal Emittance Electron Beam

Zikri M. Yusof, Manoel E. Conde, and Wei Gai
High Energy Physics Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439

We present a clear signature of the Schottky eﬀect in a RF photoinjector using photons with energy lower
than the Mg cathode work function. This signature is manifested by the shift in the RF phase angle for the
onset of the detection of photoelectrons via single-photon absorption and allows for a reasonable estimate of
the ﬁeld enhancement factor. This is a viable method to generate an electron beam with very low thermal
emittance and thus, a high brightness beam.

Understanding the factors that inﬂuence the produc-
tion and quality of electron beams in a photoinjector is
vital in advancing the technology of free-electron lasers
(FEL) and linear colliders. This is especially true in the
ability to obtain electron beams with high-brightness,
which is a combination of high charge and low emittance
characteristics. The latter is often limited by the thermal
emittance, εth, of the photoelectrons, which reﬂects the
distribution of the transverse electron velocities as they
emerge from the cathode, and continues to be present in
the beam even as the particles are accelerated in the axial
direction. This limits how tightly a beam can be focused
at the interaction point of a collider and degrades the
growth rate of a FEL radiation. We report on the ﬁrst
direct observation of the Schottky-enabled photoemission
from a photoinjector cathode due to a RF ﬁeld using pho-
tons with energy lower than the cathode work function.
The single-photon photoemission process is possible due
to the lowering of the eﬀective work function of a metal
by the RF electric ﬁeld (E-ﬁeld) on the cathode (Schot-
tky eﬀect). This eﬀect can be used to signiﬁcantly lower
εth of an electron beam, opening up new possibilities in
the quest for high brightness beams.

The minimum transverse emittance is limited by εth.
For a polycrystalline photocathode, εth ∝ σpEk/mc2
and the uncorrelated kinetic energy is Ek = hν − Φ0 +
bpβE(θ), where hν is the photon energy, Φ0 is the work
function, b = pe/4πǫ0, σ is the RMS laser spot size,
and β is the local ﬁeld enhancement factor that depends
on the cathode surface properties. [1–3] Here, E(θ) is the
applied ﬁeld on the cathode at the injection phase θ. The
presence of the E-ﬁeld causes the lowering of the eﬀective
work function that is deﬁned as Φef f = Φ0 − bpβE(θ).
From the above expressions, one can see that εth can be
reduced by decreasing the beam size. However, this is
limited by space-charge eﬀects. Alternatively, εth can be
reduced by decreasing Ek. This is seen clearly in Ref. [3]
where the maximum angle of emission, φmax approaches
zero as Φef f → hν. We will discuss a method of doing
this using the Schottky eﬀect.

Previous indications of the Schottky eﬀect in a pho-

toinjector gun came from the dependence of the amount
of charge detected with the RF phase on the cathode.
[1,4,5] Studies of the quantum eﬃciency (QE) of cath-
odes also indicate that this parameter changes with ap-
plied E-ﬁeld. [4,6,7] We extend these studies further by
using photons with hν < Φ0. Ordinarily, single-photon
photoemission does not occur under this condition. Here,
we show that within the settings of a RF injector, there
is a clear onset of photoemission when a certain E-ﬁeld
strength is applied to the cathode surface. This technique
allows us to make a reasonable estimate of the ﬁeld en-
hancement factor.

The Mg cathode (diameter = 2.8 cm) was made from
a solid Mg rod. The surface was polished using diamond
powder slurry up to 3 µm grit. A SEM image showed
a surface roughness of the order of 1 µm while an X-ray
spectrum indicated a clean Mg surface with no detectable
impurities. The cathode was installed in a 1 1/2 cell, 1.3
GHz standing-wave RF gun at the Argonne Wakeﬁeld
Accelerator facility (Fig. 1). The base pressure in the
gun is ∼ 5 × 10−10 Torr with an operating pressure of
∼ 8 × 10−10 Torr. Photons of hν = 3.3 eV (λ = 372
nm) were generated with 1 mJ per pulse and a pulse
width of 6 to 8 ps FWHM. The laser enters through the
input window and is reﬂected onto the Mg cathode by
the aluminum-coated face of a Ce-doped YAG crystal.
There is a similar setup at a diﬀerent input window for
the 5 eV (λ = 248 nm) laser but using a dielectric mir-
ror that is positioned slightly oﬀ axis. Photoelectrons
produced by the cathode are then accelerated by the RF
ﬁeld. The laser pulse can be injected at various phases of
the RF cycle. Varying this injection phase allows us to
vary the E-ﬁeld that is applied to the cathode when the
photoelectrons are liberated from the surface. The total
charge is then detected by an integrating charge trans-
former (ICT) at the gun exit. The transverse electron
beam proﬁle is obtained using the same YAG crystal and
is viewed by a camera. By adjusting the ﬁelds from a set
of solenoids (Fig. 1) and viewing the beam proﬁle, we
can ensure that all the generated electrons that leave the
gun passed through the ICT. The details of the beamline

1

and laser system can be found in Ref. [8].

Camera

Beam
dump

YAG

ICT

Solenoid

Mirror

5 eV

3.3 eV

Cathode

Solenoid

FIG. 1. Schematic diagram of the RF photoinjector. There
are two separate entrance windows for 5 eV and 3.3 eV laser.

Fig. 2 shows the measured charge as a function of θ, for
various RF amplitudes Emax. Since θ is the phase of the
RF when the laser pulse hits the cathode, the magnitude
of the oscillating E-ﬁeld on the cathode surface when
the photoelectrons are emitted is E(θ) = −Emax sin(θ).
One might expect to detect charge exiting the gun when
0 < θ < 180◦, since at other phases (within a cycle)
the electric force would push the electrons back into the
cathode. However, within this 180◦ range, for θ > 130◦,
even when the electrons could initially leave the cathode,
they are unable to exit the gun because the axial electric
ﬁeld switches direction before they escape the gun cavity.
Thus, the detection range is only 0 < θ < 130◦. Fig. 2a
shows several scans using the 5 eV photons, which are
above the Mg work function Φ0 = 3.7 eV. Although the
total charge diﬀers for diﬀerent Emax, each curve is qual-
itatively similar to each other, having a roughly asym-
metric bell-shaped proﬁle and approximately the same
phase range where the photoelectrons are detected. Pre-
vious studies on why such measurements do not yield the
expected “ﬂat-top” curves pointed to the Schottky ef-
fect as the dominant cause. [1,4,5] While this is certainly
plausible, other factors such as space-charge eﬀects and
transport issues may also aﬀect such phase scan results.
As will be shown, our work detects the Schottky eﬀect in
a diﬀerent and more direct manner. In the process, we
discover a viable technique to possibly generate electron
beams with low ǫth.

Figure 2b shows the same measurement done with 3.3
eV photons, which is below Φ0. The laser spot size im-
pinging on the cathode is ∼ 1 cm in diameter. Surpris-
ingly, we observe no qualitative diﬀerences between these
and the ones taken with the higher photon energy in Fig.
2a. There is a drop in the amount of charge detected,
but there are no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the range of
phase for the detection of photoelectrons. We attribute
the production of these photoelectrons to the two-photon
photoemission (2PPE) process as the dominant mecha-
nism, which we verify later. Unfortunately, this process
masks any clear signature of the Schottky eﬀect.

To reduce the eﬀects from the 2PPE, we expand the

laser spot size from 1 cm to 2 cm in diameter. This re-
duces the photon density per unit area impinging on the
cathode and lowers the occurrence of the 2PPE. A repeat
of the measurement produces a stark contrast from be-
fore, as can be seen in Fig. 2c. We now detect a change
in θ for the onset of photoemission, shifting to higher val-
ues as Emax decreases. No shift is detected for the three
highest values of Emax. This is due to a combination
of the resolution and accuracy of our detection, and also
because the E-ﬁeld changes more rapidly over a smaller
phase angle. When there is a shift in the onset θ, the
value of E0, the E-ﬁeld at the onset of photoemission, is
9.2, 8.5, and 11 MV/m for Emax =28, 17, and 14 MV/m,
respectively. This indicates that E0 is a relatively con-
stant value. The E-ﬁeld needs to be at or above this value
for photoemission to occur. This is a clear signature of
the Schottky eﬀect and the ﬁrst direct observation of this
eﬀect in an RF photoinjector using this technique.

 28 MV/m
 17
 12

  76 MV/m
 68
 60
 52
 36
 28

 92 MV/m
 77
 52
 28
 17
 14

=20o

q

0

)

C
n
(
 
e
g
r
a
h
C

)

C
n
(
 
e
g
r
a
h
C

)

C
n
(
 
e
g
r
a
h
C

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

 

0.0
0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

hn  =5 eV

(a)

 

 

hn  =3.3 eV; dia.=1 cm

(b)

hn  =3.3 eV; dia.=2 cm

(c)

=30o

q

0

=50o

q

0

 

 

 

0

20

40

60
80
RF Phase q  (deg)

100

120

FIG. 2. Charge emitted at various RF phase θ. The num-
bers in the legends are the RF amplitude Emax so that E-ﬁeld
on the cathode is E(θ) = −Emaxsin(θ). (a) Charge produced
by 5 eV photons. (b) Charge produced by 3.3 eV photons
with a 1 cm laser diameter. (c) Charge produced by 3.3 eV
photons with a 2 cm laser diameter. θ0 is the phase angle
◦
(±5

) at the onset of photoemission.

In a single-photon emission process, the total photo-
electron charge Q can be described by [1] Q ∝ (Ek)x,
where x is not precisely known. [9] Our analysis is inde-
pendent of this exponent since Ek = 0 at the photemis-
sion threshold. Using this, we obtain the value of β for

2

our cathode to be between 6 and 7. Note that there can
be a range of values for β at diﬀerent locations on the
cathode surface. The value that is obtained above repre-
sents roughly the largest values of β since it is calculated
at the initiation point of the photoemission process with
the lowest E-ﬁeld applied to the cathode. Emitters with
smaller β values are “turned on” in succession as the E-
ﬁeld increases.

Fig. 3 shows the charge produced as a function of the
laser intensity for the 1 cm and 2 cm laser spot size.
The charge emitted from the 1 cm beam clearly shows a
non-linear behavior with the laser intensity, while charge
from the 2 cm beam appears to be more linear. We verify
this by considering that for each laser pulse, the amount
of charge emitted can be written as Q = anT n, where
an is a constant coeﬃcient, T is the total laser energy
per pulse, and n is the minimum number of photons re-
quired to overcome the work function. [10] However, for
our experiment, we believe that we have a simultane-
ous combination of single-photon and 2PPE processes,
but in diﬀerent proportions for diﬀerent laser spot sizes.
Therefore, the emitted charge is Q = a1T + a2T 2, where
a1 and a2 are the coeﬃcients for the single-photon and
two-photon emissions, respectively. The relative magni-
tude of the two terms will indicate which process is more
dominant over the other. Thus, we ﬁt the data in Fig.
3 with a second order polynomial. The coeﬃcients ob-
tained from the 1 cm data show a more dominant 2PPE
process. On the other hand, the 2 cm data show that the
single-photon process is now the more dominant. This
conﬁrms the explanation of the major diﬀerences that
we observed between Fig. 2b and 2c. When the two-
photon process dominates as in Fig. 2b, the Schottky
eﬀect has no signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the onset of the pho-
toemission process. Consequently, we detect photoelec-
trons over roughly the“full” RF phase range (∼ 130◦).
However, when the majority of the photoelectrons de-
tected are due to the single-photon process as in Fig. 2c,
then the inﬂuence of the applied ﬁeld on the cathode can
be clearly seen via the shift of the onset of the photoe-
mission process. Only when the E-ﬁeld on the cathode
is above some value (E0) do we detect photoelectrons.
This is a very clear manifestation of the Schottky eﬀect.
Previous studies on various clean metal surfaces have
shown a non-linear dependence between the amount of
photocurrent emitted and the laser intensity. [11] The
non-linearity is not due to multi-photon photoemission,
but rather to the transient eﬀects of the electronic ex-
citations and occurs for laser intensities a few orders of
magnitude higher than in our work. Furthermore, similar
measurements on Mg surfaces conﬁrm that temperature
eﬀects play no signiﬁcant role in the photoemission pro-
cess within the intensity range of Fig. 3. [12] Hence, we
can rule out heating and other transient eﬀects as the
cause of the non-linearity observed in Fig. 3.

There appears to be two puzzling observations from

Fig. 3. First, the charge detected from the same laser
intensity is considerably less when the single-photon pho-
toemission dominates than when the 2PPE process dom-
inates. One expects that the ﬁrst-order single-photon
transition would produce considerably more photoelec-
trons than the second-order process [10] since the cross-
section for the single-photon photoemission is at least
three orders of magnitude larger than the 2PPE. [13] The
second puzzling observation is that the intensity measure-
ment was done at the E-ﬁeld strength of 70 MV/m on the
cathode. Even without any ﬁeld enhancement (β = 1),
at this E-ﬁeld level, simple Schottky eﬀect calculations
show that Φef f < 3.3 eV for Mg. This means that the
single-photon photoemission should dominate both data
sets of Fig. 3, and that the 2PPE should be negligible.
As can be seen in Fig. 3, the two-photon process domi-
nates for the 1 cm beam size, and it is still present, but
less dominant, for the 2 cm beam, contrary to what is
expected.

Q=a0 + a1 T + a2 T2

 

0.3

0.2

0.1

C
h
a
r
g
e
,
 

Q

 
(
n
C

)

 1 cm beam
 2 cm  beam

)

C
n
(
 

Q

 
,
e
g
r
a
h
C

2

1

0
0.0

0.5

1.0
Laser Energy Per Pulse T (mJ)

1.5

2.0

FIG. 3. Charge vs.

laser energy per pulse from the
3.3 eV photons. The solid lines are ﬁts to the equation
shown. Here, the E-ﬁeld on the cathode is 70 MV/m. For
the 1 cm laser spot diameter, the ﬁtting parameters are
a0 = 0.04, a1 = 0.14, a2 = 0.96. For the 2 cm beam,
a0 = −0.01, a1 = 0.11, a2 = 0.02.

It is highly likely that both puzzling observations were
caused by the presence of a layer of MgO on the cath-
ode surface. The Mg cathode was polished and cleaned in
air, and remained exposed for about an hour before it was
inserted into the photoinjector. Previous X-ray photoe-
mission (XPS) studies on the native oxide layer formed
on a Mg surface exposed to air for roughly this duration
showed a formation of an oxide layer of between 20 to
30 A in thickness. [14] Furthermore, the XPS spectrum
clearly revealed that a substantial portion of the photo-
electrons collected came from the oxide layer. Thus, for
the cathode used in this study, the MgO layer covers the
entire cathode surface. Since MgO single crystal has Φ0
of at least 4.2 eV, [15] Φef f of MgO never drops below
the photon energy within the E-ﬁeld range of our study.
Hence the 2PPE channel is never eliminated from our
measurement, which is why photoelectrons produced via

3

this process are always detected. It means that for the
1 cm beam, the photoelectrons in Fig. 3 could possibly
originate from two diﬀerent processes - the 2PPE from
the MgO layer and single-photon photoemission from the
Mg surface and regions of β > 1. Secondly, when the
beam size is increased to 2 cm, contribution to the pho-
toelectron charge due to the 2PPE process from the MgO
layer is no longer dominant since the lower photon den-
sity reduces the probability for this transition. The ma-
jority of the photoelectrons are now produced from the
single-photon photoemission process from Mg. The Mg
photoelectrons may come from a combination of possible
Mg protrusions due to the surface roughness that were
exposed during gun conditioning (β > 1 regions), and
from the Mg below the MgO layer. [16] Considering the
small number and area of the protrusions when compared
to the MgO surface coverage, and the possibility that the
MgO layer may have uneven thickness and may continue
to grow even under UHV, this appears to be one plau-
sible explanation on why the detected charge is smaller
when the single-photon process dominates. [17]

Our technique used in this study has an important ap-
plication - the possibility to extract electrons with very
low εth. It is well-known that if one could match Φ0 to
the photon energy, the photoelectrons are emitted “cold”
and εth is greatly minimized. [18] However, in reality,
this is not easily achievable because (i) selecting an ar-
bitrary wavelength from a high-powered laser system is
not always possible; (ii) cathode surface is typically not
ideally smooth and will have a range of β that will pro-
duce a range of Φef f ; (iii) identical material can have a
range of intrinsic Φ0 based on crystallographic orienta-
tions; [15] and (iv) thermal broadening of the conduction
electrons distribution due to the ﬁnite cathode temper-
ature will slightly shift Φef f . The technique that we
propose here to produce beams with low εth is more re-
alistic and practical. One only needs to set the photon
energy not at one exact, predetermined value, but rather
within a range of values below Φ0 of the cathode. Minor
imperfections on the cathode surface and variation in the
work function of the cathode are less important using this
technique. In fact, this technique uses any imperfections
resulting in high β regions since these will be the regions
to photoemit at the threshold. This takes into account
any thermal broadening due to the cathode temperature.
However, more importantly, we achieve the condition of
hν = Φ0 or Φef f not by tuning the photon energy, but
by raising the RF amplitude. This is more realistic for
most accelerator photoinjectors. Hence, the technique of
using photons with energy below the material’s original
work function to generate photoelectrons can be used to
produce an electron beam with very low εth.

In conclusion, we have shown the clearest indication
of the inﬂuence of the Schottky eﬀect on the charge pro-
duced in a photoinjector. This is manifested via the clear
onset of photoemission above a minimum E-ﬁeld applied

to the cathode surface. This is the ﬁrst ever detection
of Schottky-enabled photoemission in a RF photoinjec-
tor. Using this eﬀect enables us to make a reasonable
estimate of the ﬁeld enhancement factor on the cathode
surface. An important consequence of our study is the
possibility of using this technique as a viable means of
generating an electron beam with very low thermal emit-
tance. Future plans include a systematic characterization
of the emittance of the electron beam generated by this
method. We also intend to study surface treatments on
the photocathode to further reduce the 2PPE and the
ﬁeld enhancement eﬀects, and to ﬁnd a more suitable
combination of laser energy and photocathode material.
This includes using photocathodes with higher QE that
would enable the use of a lower power laser.

The authors wish to acknowledge valuable discussions
with J.G. Power, A.P. Paulikas, K.-J. Kim, and X.J.
Wang, technical assistance from R.S. Konecny, W. Liu,
and F. Franchini, and assistance with the SEM system
from J.S. Yaeger. This work was supported by ANL
LDRD funds and DOE High Energy Physics Division un-
der contract No. W-31-109-ENG-38.

[1] X.J. Wang et al., Proc. LINAC 1998, 4043 (1998).
[2] X.J. Wang et al., Proc. LINAC 2002, 142 (2002).
[3] J.E. Clendenin and G.A. Mulhollan, Quantum Aspects of
Beam Physics, ed. P. Chen, 254 (World Scientiﬁc, 1999).

[4] T. Kobayashi et al., J. Nucl. Sci. Tech. 39, 6 (2002).
[5] D.J. Gibson et al., Phys. Rev. ST 4, 090101 (2001); S.

Schreiber, Proc. EPAC 2000, 309 (2000).

[6] C. Hernandez Garcia and C. Brau, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A

483m, 273 (2002).

[7] G. Suberlucq, Free Electron Laser 1996, eds. G. Dattoli

and A. Renieri (Elsevier, 1997).

[8] M. Conde et al., Proc. PAC 2001, 2032 (2001).
[9] Previous studies have set x = 2. See Ref. [1].
[10] R. Brogle et al., Proc. PAC 1995, 1036 (1995).
[11] N.A. Papadogiannis and S.D. Moustaizis, J. Phys. D 34,

499 (2001).

[12] T. Srinivasan-Rao et al., J. Appl. Phys. 77, 1275 (1995).
[13] G. Petite et al., Phys. Rev. B 45, 12210 (1992).
[14] C. Chen et al., Surf. Sci. 382, L652 (1997); T. Do et al.,

Surf. Sci. 387, 192 (1997).

[15] J.Y. Lim et al., J. Appl. Phys. 94, 764 (2003).
[16] The electron escape depth for MgO single crystals is be-
tween 60 to 100 A. See W.S. Kim et al., Appl. Phys. Lett.
81, 1098 (2002) and references therein.

[17] We have considered an alternative scenario where all
the photoelectrons originated only from the MgO layer -
2PPE from MgO with low β while single-photon process
from MgO with very high β. Using similar calculations
but with Φ0 = 4.2 eV, we obtain β ∼ 50 to 65. Such high
enhanced ﬁeld is not very likely for our cathode surface
in this experiment.
[18] J.E. Clendenin et al., 2

ICFA Adv. Acc. Workshop

nd

(1999).

4

