4
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
3
0
8
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SLAC-TN-04-049 \ LCC-0149

1

Limitations on the Use of Acoustic Sensors in RF
Breakdown Localization

F. Le Pimpec∗
SLAC, 2575 Sand Hill Road Menlo Park CA 94025 , USA

2nd February 2008

Abstract

X-band accelerator structures, meeting the Next Linear Collider (NLC) design
requirements, have been found to suﬀer damage due to radio frequency (RF) break-
down when processed to high gradients [1]. Improved understanding of these break-
down events is desirable for the development of structure designs, fabrication proce-
dures, and processing techniques that minimize structure damage. Using an array
of acoustic sensors, we have been able to pinpoint the location of individual break-
down events. However, a more accurate localization is required to understand the
interaction between the phonon or the sound wave with the OFE copper.

1 Introduction

As part of the R&D eﬀort for the Next Linear Collider (NLC), the attainment of high
gradients (70MV/m) with a breakdown rate below 1 per 10 hours must be demonstrated
[2] [3]. In the Next Linear Collider Test Accelerator (NLCTA), at SLAC (Stanford Linear
Accelerator Center), RF travelling and standing wave copper structures, designed to meet
the needs of the NLC [4], are being tested.

To reach an NLC accelerating ﬁeld of 70MV/m with a 400ns pulse length, megawatts of
RF power are poured into the structures. Depending on the design and type of structure,
this power can vary from 73MW for a 60cm long travelling wave structure with a 3%
group velocity (H60Vg3) to 150MW for some structures 180cm long. Part of the RF
power is transformed in the copper into heat. The lost power is up to 2/3 of the input
power for a structure kept at 45◦C. The thermal expansion of the copper, as the structures
ﬁll with RF power, causes sound to occur on every RF pulse. Using extremely sensitive
piezoelectric microphones (acoustic sensors), it is possible to ”listen” to the accelerator
structure as it is running, cf Fig.1.

High gradients are obtained by exposing the structure to High Power Pulsed RF
(HPP). This technique is called RF processing. During processing, the structure occa-
sionally responds by arcing, i.e breakdown. A breakdown is characterized by a shut oﬀ of
the transmitted power with up to 80% of the incident power absorbed in the arc [5]. This

∗E-mail: lepimpec@slac.stanford.edu

Figure 1: T53VG3RA (53cm long travelling wave structure of 3% group velocity) structure
covered with acoustic sensor

extra energy is deposited in the copper, and a part of it is converted in extra phonons
(heat and acoustic) that can be picked up by our acoustic sensors. With this technique,
crude localization of a breakdown is straightforward, and complementary to the standard
RF analysis with directional RF couplers.

Getting a precise localization of where the breakdown occurs requires a short wave-
length sound wave. However, the interaction between the wave and the copper grain
structure can become troublesome, hence not allowing good spatial resolution. In order
to go forward on localizing breakdowns, we tried to identify the problem cause(s).

2 From RF Breakdown to Acoustic Sensor

The RF accelerating structure is subject to chemical degreasing and etching and thermal
treatment, this step is the pre-processing, before it is RF tested. The use of acoustic
sensors in the environment of accelerators is rather new and the way of pre-processing a
structure has an impact, not only on the performance of an RF structure, but also on the
understanding of the acoustic results obtained, cf §3. Despite the fact that detailing the
cleaning procedure is out of the scope of this paper, it is still necessary to mention the
SLAC process, as no suitable reference exists.

The NLC cleaning procedure for most of the structures built so far starts with a
perchlorethylene vapor degreasing for all single OFE copper cells, followed by a chemical
etching (up to 60s for poly-crystalline machined cells). The cells are assembled into
structures and bonded at 1020◦C in an atmosphere of hydrogen, the full structure is
”wet” and ”dry” hydrogen ﬁred at 950◦C. Ancillary couplers and water cooling tubes

2

are then brazed onto the structure. The structure is then RF tuned using a bead pull
technique [6]. Finally the hydrogen is thermally desorbed by vacuum ﬁring for two weeks
at 650◦C. The full structure is then installed at the NLCTA and baked at 220◦C, before
the beginning of an RF processing. The purpose of this extreme fabrication/processing
schedule is the removal of the contaminants, gas and particles, that contribute to ﬁeld
emission and participate in breakdown. The in-situ bakeout, at 220◦C, is now omitted.
FNAL (Fermi National Laboratory) has a similar process but the structure are brazed in
a 500 mTorr Ar atmosphere, and then vacuum ﬁred [7].

There is two ways to RF process a structure, one is to slowly apply an electric ﬁeld
with a high enough intensity to electrostatically remove a particle from a surface. The
length of the pulse has to be short enough for avoiding the fusion, by Joule heating,
of the particle to the surface. The second way, used for NLC structures, is to apply a
very intense electric ﬁeld in order to melt the emitter, without causing damage to the
accelerating structure [8] [9]. The RF processing starts with ﬁxed pulses of 50 ns, and
pedestal electric ﬁeld. The electric ﬁeld inside the structure is raised every minute by 1
to 2% until it reaches 70 to 75 MV/m, unless a breakdown happen. This sequence is then
repeated for pulses length of 100 ns, 170 ns, 240 ns and 400 ns. If a breakdown occurs
during the pulse, the RF control system shuts oﬀ for 60 s. When resuming operation the
RF control system is ramps up, ﬁrst with the power at a shorter pulse length and then
is widening the pulse. Depending on the structure, this RF processing can take from 100
to 1000 hours.

Despite such careful pre-processing, breakdown can occur during RF processing. These
breakdowns result in physical damage to the structure [1] and more troublesome, detuning,
or phase shift [10]. The particle beam, electron or positron is fully accelerated at every
cell of the RF structure only if the beam is at the right phase of the accelerating electrical
ﬁeld. The structure is designed in such a way that each cell has a geometry that insures
resonance at 11.424 GHz and appropriate phase advance. The detuning of a single cell due
to physical damage is a change in the geometry of the cell. If the phase shift is too large,
the acceleration is not only less eﬃcient but the emittance (size of the particle beam) cam
also be aﬀected. However, physical damages in the structure are irrelevant as long as the
overall structure accelerates properly. In order to avoid damages, and detuning, it is vital
to understand the breakdown mechanism.
DC breakdown mechanism studies [11] have started approximatively 50 years, long before
RF study, and so far no strong correlation have been found between the breakdown
mechanism in RF and DC [9]. Hence, we need to add new techniques to old ones to
enhance our understanding of RF breakdown.

The general hypothesis used to explain breakdown, RF or DC, is based on ﬁeld emis-
sion. The intense electric ﬁeld present at the surface of the irises of the cells draws an
electron current. This current will locally ionize residual gas as well as heat the surface,
which release more gas, and producing more ions and electrons. These processes happen
at every RF pulse, without causing a systematic arc. The formation mechanism of an arc,
due to a build up of electron and ion current, for a single pulse is not yet clear. However,
the characteristics of a breakdown are rather well understood [5]. In some cases, such as
at the input coupler of some of the NLC structures, the breakdown is not initiated by
the electric ﬁeld but by the induced current along sharp edges due to the high magnetic
ﬁeld [5] [12]. The route toward developing a stable NLC structure pass either by a change
of cell material (Mo, W, eventually stainless steel), such as the structure used at CERN

3

(Conseil Europ´een pour la Rcherche Nucl´eaire) [13], or/and by a better understanding of
breakdown itself [9] [14] [15].

One of the properties of an RF breakdown, as we deﬁne it for our application, is
characterized by the fact that 80% of the incident power is absorbed by the arc [5]. Sim-
ulations, based on plasma spot model, performed to better understand the mechanism of
breakdown, do not account for all the loss of energy. A part of this energy is converted
into an ion current. Light from excited neutral copper (Cu I) has been observed with a
spectrum analyzer at SLAC but also at CERN on similar experiments [13]. The reﬂected
RF also accelerates some electrons toward the upstream cells, this current is known as
the dark current. Finally, a part of the energy is converted to heat inside the structure,
inducing stress which produces sound waves.
Several experiments have been conducted in the NLCTA to account for the missing en-
ergy, during a breakdown, with mixed results. Those experiments included radiation
monitoring, dark current and acoustic measurements.

In order to locate breakdowns in superconducting RF accelerating cavities, thermal
sensors are used [16]. Heat deposited during arcing is recorded by thermometers. Heat is
carried by high frequencies phonons (1 GHz to 1 THz), also called optical phonons. Using
the same idea for warm (room temperature) accelerating structure, we detect sound wave
or low frequency acoustic phonons (100 KHz up to 20 MHz range).

At room temperature (RT), high frequency phonons have a mean free path smaller
than their wavelength. As a result heat is propagated in a diﬀusive way and is described
by the heat diﬀusion equation (equ.1).

∂T
∂t
where ρ is the density, Cp is the heat capacity at constant pressure, ∂T
∂t
in temperature over time, Q is the heat added, k is the thermal conductivity.

= Q + ∇.(k∇T )

ρ Cp

(1)

is the change

However, at low temperature (2K), high frequency phonons can propagate in a ballistic
way (straight line). This property might be one of the reasons why thermometry gives
not only a precise localization for the RF breakdown, but also can locate the active ﬁeld
emitter on the surface of the RF cavity [16], before breakdown. At room temperature, low
frequency acoustic phonons also propagate in a ballistic way. Their propagation follows
the wave equation (equ.2).

∇2ψ =

1
v2

∂ψ2
∂t2

(2)

where v is the speed of propagation of the wave and t the time.

Very good results are obtained for superconductivity cavities with the thermometry
method, therefore it is reasonable to try an equivalent technique. We utilized, for our
experiment, the same kind of ultrasonic sensor which is used in non-destructive testing
[17] [18].

In some cases, several breakdowns can occur on a single machine pulse. We name these
events double breakdown, and so on. Such events are diﬃcult to locate with conventional
RF techniques, using directional couplers. We will show that the use of an array of acoustic
sensors provides an easy way to account for a more accurate number of breakdown as well

4

as their localization. On the end, this is also a means toward understanding the underlying
causes of these arcs.

3 Copper and Acoustic physic

The propagation of a sound wave is described by the wave equation (equ.2 §2). The
phonons travel at the speed of sound in the medium and, if the medium is isotropic, the
wave can be easily constructed using the classical Huyghens principle: ”Every point on a
propagating wavefront serves as the source of spherical secondary wavelets, such that the
wavefront at some later time is the envelope of these wavelets. For a propagating wave of
a frequency, f, transmitted through a medium at a speed, v, the secondary wavelets will
have the same frequency and speed”. Following this principle, the wave takes a spherical
shape. If a few sensors are placed on the same plane, the sensors will respond one after
the other and a plot of the response versus time of the sensors will show a bow wave.
An example of such a response from sensors after a single RF breakdown in a travelling
wave structure of 105 cm long, 5% group velocity (VG), is displayed in Fig.2. The abscissa
is equivalent to time in arbitrary units. The time diﬀerence between 2 points is of 0.1 µs.
The left ordinate is a level of the amplitude also in arbitrary units. The right ordinate
is the sensor number. The plot is separated in 3 regions representing 2 consecutive RF
pulses and 1 after pulse. The RF breakdown happens in the second pulse and, as a result,
the RF power is shut oﬀ and no energy is present on the third pulse.

Figure 2: Acoustic bow wave in the T105VG5 accelerating structure following an RF
breakdown. Sensors are located 6 cells (∼5cm) apart on the spine of the structure, cf
Fig.1

5

However, if the medium is anisotropic, the wave vector and the group velocity vec-
tor are no more collinear. The construction of the envelope of the wave becomes more
complicated. The anisotropic propagation of elastic energy in a material having diﬀerent
crystal orientation is known as phonon focusing [19] [20].
The primary idea behind phonon focusing is that phonons are wavepackets that travel
at the group velocity. In any anisotropic media, an isotropic (in k-space) phonon distri-
bution will result in an anisotropic distribution of phonon ﬂux because of anisotropies
in the group velocity. This is seen as a concentration of thermal energy along particular
crystal directions. This concentration is easiest to observe in pure, single crystals because
inelastic scattering events can randomize the direction of travel of a wavepacket, making
the propagation appear isotropic. However, since the phonon scattering decreases with
decreasing frequency, it is possible to observe focusing of low frequency phonons, even in
imperfect crystals [21]. As a result two sensors located near each other might not receive
the same amounts of energy [19]. An example of the existence of the phonon focusing
eﬀect in single copper crystal with a 15MHz transducer is shown in [19].

Acoustic phonons are, in the ﬁrst approximation, propagating ballistically, compared
to optical phonon which propagate diﬀusively. The speed of sound in copper, associated
to the propagation of the longitudinal wave also called compression wave or pressure wave
(P-wave), is given by :

v =

= 3560m/s

E
ρ

s

E : Young modulus (Pa)
ρ = 8930 kg/m3

(3)

(cid:26)

Inside or at the surface of the copper structure, other sound waves might also prop-
agate. These other waves are shear waves or transverse waves (S-wave or T-wave), and
surface waves (Rayleigh-Lamb Wave). In a longitudinal wave, the displacement of the
medium (or atoms) is parallel to the propagation of the waves. For shear wave the dis-
placement of the medium is perpendicular to the propagation of the wave. Surface waves
propagate at the interface between two media as opposed to through a medium. Many
types of surface waves can exist and for our purpose we will consider only the Rayleigh-
Lamb waves (R-waves). Rayleigh waves have longitudinal and shear displacement coupled
together which travel at the same velocity. The medium oscillates in an elliptical path
within the vertical plane containing the direction of the wave propagation [22] [23] [24]
[25].
The copper used for building our RF structures is annealed. From the data of the speed
of sound in annealed copper [26], we can determine the Young modulus, the poisson ra-
tio (usually ν ∼0.3 for copper). Plugging those values in the following equations, we
can calculate the Transverse vS and the Rayleigh wave vR velocities. Equation (6), from
Bergmann, gives an approximate value for the Rayleigh wave velocity [17] [18] [27]

vR ≃

vs (0.86 + 1.14ν)
1 + ν

(6)

The speed of the longitudinal wave vp and the shear wave vs are respectively 4760 m/s
and 2325 m/s [26]. The determination from equations (4) and (5) gives a Rayleigh wave
speed of ∼2160 m/s. The equations written above can also be expressed as a function of

vp =

s

E (1 − ν)
ρ (1 + ν)(1 − 2ν)

vs =

E
2ρ (1 + ν)

s

(4)

(5)

6

the Lam´e coeﬃcients λ and µ

λ =

s

νE
(1 + ν)(1 − 2ν)

(7)

µ =

E
2 (1 + ν)

s

(8)

The diﬀerence in speed of these waves might in principle be used to determine the lo-
cation of a breakdown. In the same way seismologists localize earthquakes. The distances
between the breakdown and the sensors is of the order of a few cm. The time between the
front edge of the pressure wave and a shear wave is in the order of a few microseconds.
Electronics are fast enough to separate the edges in time. The problem lies in the energy
carried by the waves and the ability to separate the arrival of a successive wave from the
tail of the preceding wave. Fast arrival of successive waves might mimic a single wave
with long ringing, as in Fig.2.

Depending on the spatial resolution and the precision needed to localize the source of
an RF breakdown, going to higher frequencies might be necessary. As the frequency goes
up, ∼10-20 MHz, the wavelength of the acoustic wave might reduce to the size of a grain
(0.5 mm to 0.3 mm for the pressure waves). Grain size in our RF structures (annealed
copper) can be up to a millimeter.
Thermal processing (cf §2) and exposure to high pressure of hydrogen changes the way
the grains grow and further, the intake of hydrogen might create voids, by reaction with
oxide inclusions, at the grain boundaries and dislocations [28] [29] [30]. This intake of
hydrogen inside the bulk of the material might ultimately aﬀect the propagation of ultra-
sonic waves [31], if not properly degassed. However, even if the copper is well degassed,
the temperature of the vacuum ﬁring might not be high enough to remove the dislocation
or voids created by the intake of hydrogen. Meeting with experts did not rule out this
hypothesis [32]. An understanding of the eﬀect of dislocations and grain boundaries on
the propagation of ultrasound waves is necessary, as is the attenuation of those waves
inside a medium.

p

Geometric attenuation or attenuation due to the spread of the wave is diﬀerent for a
bulk wave or a surface wave. The bulk waves attenuate following a 1/r law where surface
wave attenuates as 1/
(r), for a detector located far from the source [17]. In addition
to the geometric attenuation, the wave can scatter and diﬀract [17] [18]. Scattering of
the sound wave will occur for inhomogeneous material. Grain boundaries and defects
like inclusions and voids are interfaces where an abrupt change of impedance for acoustic
waves occurs. This abrupt change create a reﬂected and a transmitted wave from the
initial incoming wave. As a rule of thumb, scattering of sound waves having a wavelength
a hundred to a thousand times larger than the grain size is negligible. The scattering is
important for waves having a wavelength of the dimension to 10 times the dimension of the
grain [18]. Finally, energy attenuation can be due to natural absorption by the medium
of the acoustic energy. It can happen by conversion of kinetic energy into heat, by loss of
energy through plastic deformation, interactions with dislocation motion. Losses can also
occurs by friction between surfaces that slip [17]. We have observed during autopsy of
some RF structures, cf. [1] and [33], slip bands. This matter was investigated separately.
Also in order to be complete, electron, ion, or phonon - phonon interaction can be sources
of loss of energy. These sources of losses tend to be important for phonons of much higher
frequencies than the ones with which we are working.

In order to understand how diﬀerent acoustic waves propagate in annealed copper,
a collaboration with the University of Illinois [34] on an experimental and modelling

7

program have been started. This collaboration will answer questions started by few
experiments done at SLAC [35]. In these experiments, using an un-annealed copper block
of approximatively 10 cm x 10 cm x 5 cm, we found out that high frequencies (above 1-
2 MHz) did not propagate well through the block. In the setup, a spark or a laser was shot
in one of the side of the block and the sound signal was recorded on the opposite side by
an acoustic sensor. Fig.3 shows the response of an acoustic sensor receiving an ultrasonic
signal peaked at 20MHz travelling through a copper plates of diﬀerent thicknesses.

−40

−60

−80

B
d

−100

−120

−140

−160

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1
Freq Hz (100 kHz − 20 MHz)

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2
7
x 10

0 cm
0.97 cm
5.1 cm

Figure 3: Attenuation of the acoustic response in a Copper block of 0-5 cm thickness with
a 20MHz sensor driving & 15MHz sensor receiving

So far, despite all the unknowns, coarse localization of breakdowns in structures have
been successful. Acoustic data obtained with the array of sensors placed onto the struc-
ture, like in Fig.1, are in very good agreement, Fig.4, with the data obtained by RF
analysis, Fig.5. Coarse localization, by quadrant probing, of breakdown initiator inside
a cell was also successful. A much ﬁner localization of a breakdown, or a precursor, will
require to have an answer on the propagation (attenuation and scattering) of phonons in
annealed copper.

4 Conclusion

Localizing damage, by the mean of ultrasonic waves, is commonly used in aircraft and
building industry. Applying generally this technique to localize RF breakdowns in accel-
erators is rather new, and the NLCTA team has been able to successfully demonstrate its
eﬀectiveness. A more complete demonstration of this contention will appear in another
paper.

The next step in understanding breakdown by the use of acoustic sensor is to have
a good knowledge of the propagation of acoustic waves in annealed copper. This under-

8

Position of Breakdowns in T53Vg3F (170 − 240 − 400 ns)

t
n
e
v
E
 
#

8000
7600
7200
6800
6400
6000
5600
5200
4800
4400
4000
3600
3200
2800
2400
2000
1600
1200
800
400
0

1

5

9

13

17

21

37

41

45

49

53

57

25

29

33
Cell Position

5

10

15

20

40

45

50

55

60

25

30
Cell Position

35

Figure 4: Number of single breakdown vs location of the 53 cm long RA (left) and F
(right) travelling wave structure; for RF pulses of 170ns 240 ns and 400ns length

Figure 5: Localization of RF breakdown by the use of RF analysis. 120 Hours of operation,
at 60 Hz repetition rate, 400 ns Pulse Width. Electric Field: 73 MV/m [36]

t
n
e
v
E
 
#

1900

1800

1600

1400

1200

1000

800 

600 

400 

200 

0   

0

9

standing will help on accurate localization, as is possible in superconductivity cavities
[16]. Being able to do so opens the door to knowledge about particules contamination
and the importance of surface ﬁnish in triggering breakdowns.

5 Acknowledgments

I would like to warmly thank all the NLCTA team, which I have abandon to work on
other projects.

References

[1] F. Le Pimpec et al. Autopsy on an RF-Processed X-band Travelling Wave Structure.

In LINAC 2002, Korea, 2002. SLAC-PUB-9526 .

[2] NLC collaboration. 2001 Report on the Next Linear Collider. Technical report,

SLAC-R-571, 2001.

[3] NLC ZDR Design Group. Technical report, SLAC Report-474, 1996.

[4] A.D Yeremian et al. Processing studies of X-band accelerator structures at the

NLCTA. In PAC, Vancouver Canada, 1997.

[5] V. Dolgashev. Experiments on Gradient Limits for Normal Conducting Accelerators.

In LINAC 2002, Korea, 2002.

[6] S.M. Hanna et al. Development of Characterization Techniques for X-BAND Accel-

erator Structures. In PAC, Vancouver, B.C., Canada, 1997.

[7] T. Arkan et al. Fabrication of X-band Accelerating Struxtures at Fermilab. In EPAC,

Lucerne, 2004.

[8] J. Tan. Etude de L’´emission Electronique par Eﬀet de Champ en Haute Fr´equences.

PhD thesis, Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie Paris 6, 1995.

[9] L.L Laurent. High Gradient RF Breakdown Studies. PhD thesis, University of Cali-

fornia Davis, 2002.

[10] C. Adolphsen et al. Processing studies of X-band accelerator structures at the

NLCTA. In PAC, Chicago USA, 2001.

[11] R. Latham, editor. High Voltage Vacuum Insulation. Academic Press, 1995.

[12] D. Pritzkau. RF Pulsed Heating. PhD thesis, Stanford University, 2001. SLAC-

report-577.

[13] S. D¨obert. Status of Very High-Gradient Cavity Tests. In LINAC 2002, Korea, 2002.

[14] J. Norem et al. Dark Current, Breakdown, and Magnetic Field Eﬀects in a Multicell,
805 MHZ Cavity. Phys Rev Special Topics - Accelerators and Beams, 6, 2003.

10

[15] P.B Wilson. Gradient Limitation in Accelerating Structures Imposed by Surface

Melting. In PAC, Portland, Or, USA, 2003.

[16] J. Knobloch.

ties.
PhD thesis, Cornell University, 1997.
lic/CESR/SRF/dissertations/knobloch/knobloch.html.

Advanced Thermometry Studies of Superconducting RF Cavi-
http://w4.lns.cornell.edu /pub-

[17] Nondestructive Testing Handbook : Acoustic Emission. 2nd edt, Volume 5. ASNT,

1987.

[18] J. and H. Krautkr¨amer. Ultrasonic Testing of Materials. Springer-Verlag, 1990.

[19] J.P Wolfe. Imaging Phonons Acoustic wave Propagation in Solids. Cambridge, 1998.

[20] M.R Hauser, R.L Weaver and J.P Wolfe. Internal Diﬀraction of Ultrasound in Crys-
tals : Phonon Focusing at Long wavelengths. Physical Review Letters, 68 (17):2604,
1992.

[21] M. Msall, Bowdoin College Private comunication.

[22] Robert M. Besan¸con, editor. The Encyclopedia of Physics. Van Nostrand Reinhold

Company, 1974.

Press, 2002.

[23] Schlumberger. http://www.glossary.oilﬁeld.slb.com/.

[24] J. David, N. Cheeke. Fundamentals and Applications of Ultrasonic Waves. CRC

[25] Eric W. Weisstein. http://scienceworld.wolfram.com/physics/.

[26] David R. Lide, editor. Handbook of Chemistry and Physics.

74th edition.

CRC PRESS, 1994.

[27] H. Bachmann et al. Vibrations Problems in Structures. Birkh¨auser, 1996.

[28] M.Z Butt. Eﬀect of hydrogen attack on the strength of high purity copper. Journal

of Materials Science Letters, 2:1, 1983.

[29] S. Nakahara and Y. Okinaka. The Hydrogen Eﬀect in Copper. Materials Science

and Engineering, A,101:227, 1988.

[30] S.H Brongersma et al. Grain Structure Evolution During Annealing of Electroplated
Copper. In Stress-Induced Phenomena in Metallization, 6th Int. Workshop, 2002.

[31] A. Zielinski. Ultrasonic Attenuation in Hydrogen Charged Copper Single Crystal.

Scripta Metallurgica et Materiala, 24:527, 1990.

[32] G.R. Myneni, S. Chattopadhyay, editor. Hydrogen in Materials and Vacuum Systems.

American Institute of Physics, 2003. 1st international Workshop.

[33] S. Harvey et al. Surface Analysis of OFE-Copper X-Band Accelerating Structures
and Possible Correlation to RF Breakdown Events. Journal of Vacuum Science and
Technology, A22(4), 2004.

11

[34] G. Gollin.

Investigation of acoustic localization of rf cavity breakdown. Linear

Collider Workshop 2003. http://www.hep.uiuc.edu/home/g-gollin.

[35] E.Greenwood. Generating, Detecting, and Analyzing High Frequency Acoustic Sig-

nals in Accelerator-Grade Copper. Technical report, SLAC-PUB-9383, 2002.

[36] C. Adolphsen et al. Results of High Power Tests 30. In ISG8, 2002. http://www-

project.slac.stanford.edu/lc/ilc/ ISG Meetings/ISG8/wg4.htm.

12

