4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
5
2
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

COMPARISON of WARM and COLD PHOTON COLLIDERS

V.I. TELNOV
Institute of Nuclear Physics, 630090, Novosibirsk, Russia

Photon collider based on cold and warm linear collider technologies are compared
from the point of view of attainable luminosities, technical feasibility of laser sys-
tems and experimental conditions.

1 Introduction

On August 20, 2004, ten day before the deadline for this Proceedings, the In-
ternational Committee for Future Accelerators following the recommendation
of International Technology Recommendation Panel announced that Interna-
tional Linear Collider (ILC) is to be realized in superconducting technology. So,
all discussions are ﬁnished. Nevertheless, even now it has sense to summarize
what is acquired and what is lost due to such decision. I would like also to
express my personal opinion about only one linear collider (LC) in the world.

1.1 One or two colliders?

All history of the mankind has proved that a monopoly in any ﬁeld is bad, in
economics monopolies are forbidden by law, why it should be good in science?
Competition in science is not less important than in economics. There are
many examples. In the case of linear colliders it was not necessary to create
artiﬁcially competing LC projects, they existed and were developed for 15–20
years by very strong regional collaborations and had similar readiness for the
construction.

It would be wise to launch simultaneously the construction of two linear
0.8 TeV
colliders, the superconducting, cold “TESLA-like” on the energy 0.5
and the warm “NLC/GLC-like” on the energy 0.5
1.5 TeV, then ﬁve year
later the CLIC on the maximum energy 3–5 TeV. At start ﬁrst two collider
would have similar energy and study new physics together, after that TESLA
investigates more carefully in the sub-TeV region while NLC/GLC goes to
1.5–2 times higher energies. Beside the “monopoly” reasons, the energy region
from 0.1 to 1.5 TeV is too large for one collider, also it takes long running time
for investigation of all interesting energy points and types of collisions.

→

→

This point of view I expressed at LCWS02 in Korea and privately many
people told that they have similar opinion. I believe that the “competition”
argument is very important, if possible, “global” projects should be avoided.

1

1.2 The case of the Photon Collider
The photon collider is based on the e+e− collider. High energy photons are pro-
duced by Compton scattering of laser photons on high energy electrons. The
expected number of interesting events is even higher than in e+e− collisions.
In γγ, γe collisions one can study the same particles as in e+e− collisions but in
diﬀerent reactions which is very important for understanding new phenomena.
An additional cost is mainly the cost of the laser system which is about 2-3 %
of the total LC cost (the second interaction region with the detector is planed
in any case). So, the case is obvious, paying small incremental cost we can get
new types of collision with a great physics potential.

2 Comparison of cold and warm photon colliders

Below we compare two photon colliders: cold superconducting TESLA-like
collider and warm NLC/GLC-like colliders.

2.1 Luminosities

·

P

∝

∝

∝

N ). The minimum value of the vertical β-function βy

N 2ν/pβxβyǫnxǫny. In TESLA the beam power P

At sub-TeV photon colliders beam collision eﬀects are not important and
γγ luminosities are just proportional to the geometric luminosity Lgeom =
N 2ν/(4πσxσy)
N ν is
1.65 times larger than in NLC/GLC due to 2.5 times better eﬃciency of the
energy transfer from the wall plug to the beam. Moreover, TESLA can acceler-
ate beam with larger number of particles, which is advantageous for the photon
collider (L
σz.
The minimum value of the horizontal β-function is determined by the chromo-
geometric aberrations of the ﬁnal focus system, for TESLA it is about 1.5 mm, 1
for NLC/GLC it is also quite similar, 2, 3 below we assume that they are equal.
Normalized emittances of electron beams produced in damping rings are deter-
mined by synchrotron radiation, intra-beam scattering and a tune shift due to
the beam space charge. In the TESLA case the train is much longer, therefore
the circumference CDR should be larger, in TESLA TDR it is 17 km. This
causes the problem of the tune shift which is proportional to CDRN/√ǫnxǫny.
At present conference S.Mishra told us about a new approach to the damping
ring for TESLA with three times smaller circumference and by a factor of four
smaller the horizontal emittance compared to those in the TESLA TDR for
e+e− collisions (for γγ collisions in the TESLA TDR we assumed four times
better ǫnx, but it was somewhat risky number). As the result, the normalized
transverse emittances produced by the TESLA and NLC/GLC damping rings
are almost equal. During the extraction and acceleration the emittances are

∼

2

diluted somewhat, smaller in the cold case due to smaller wake ﬁelds. The
beams parameters at the interaction point are presented in Table 1. The ratio
3 in favour of the TESLA.
of geometric luminosities LTESLA/LNLC/GLC ≈

Table 1: Beam parameters of the cold and warm colliders

ν
σz
kHz mm mm

βx/βy

ǫnx/ǫny
10−6 m

TESLA
NLC/GLC

14.1
23

0.3
0.11

1.5/0.3
1.5/0.11

3/0.03
3.5/0.035

N
1010

2
0.75

2.2 Laser systems

2820/0.001

The main diﬀerence of laser systems for TESLA and NLC/GLC is connected
with the time structures of electron trains. 4 In the TESLA: rep. rate 5 Hz ,
the number of bunches in the train 2820 with the interval 337 nsec, the train
duration is 1 msec; in NLC/GLC the corresponding parameters are: 120 Hz,
192 bunches, 1.4 nsec (we assume the same structure as for e+e−) and 270
nsec. The train duration in the TESLA is longer than the storage time of laser
media (about 0.5-1 msec). The instantaneous laser power during the train is
about 5J
14 MW for one beam, which is prohibitively large,
if each laser bunch is used only once. For NLC/GLC one can use advantage
of the medium storage time, then the eﬀective average power is about 1.5 J
×
192/0.0005
0.6 MW, which is acceptable. On the other hand, the large
distance between electron bunches in TESLA allows to use an external optical
cavity which can reduce the input laser power by a factor of 100, this make the
laser system much cheaper and more eﬃcient than for the NLC/GLC. Note,
that though the external optical cavities exist in many laboratories, but not
for so short (1 psec) and powerful pulses, while for NLC/GLC the laser system
can be based on the single pass lasers developed for fusion.

∼

×

∼

2.3 Experimentation

→

The average number of background γγ
hadron events at photon colliders is
about 1–2 per bunch crossing. At TESLA each bunch collision is seen by the
detector separately. In NLC/GLC the train is very short and the calorimeter
will integrate a whole train. However, in Si-W calorimeter, a very good timing
resolution is possible. The whole train is recoded but then the time for each
energy cluster can be determined with several nsec resolution. However, in any
case, the background situation at TESLA will be better.

3

2.4 The beam dump

High energy photon beam at the photon colliders are very narrow, powerful
and can not be deﬂected by magnets. This can cause overheating and material
stress problems. The situation is more severe for TESLA because the number
of particles in one train is 40 times larger than at NLC/GLC while the train
duration is still smaller than the thermal diﬀusion time. On the other hand,
for the thermal stress the characteristic times is ts
1 mm/5
10−7 sec which integrates the whole train in NLC/GLC and only
km/sec
one bunch in TESLA. A possible solution for TESLA beam dump is considered
in other my talk at this conferences. 5 It is important technical problem, but,
if solved, it does not inﬂuence photon collider parameters.

dheat/vsound

∼

∼

∼

2

·

3 Conclusion

The γγ luminosity at the cold LC can be higher by a factor of three for present
designs. The laser system is cheaper and more elegant for the cold LC (the
optical cavity), but one pass laser system for the warm LC is more developed.
The problem of the hadronic background is much easier for the cold LC, but
probably it can be solved for the warm LC as well. It is good that ICFA has
decided to push forward the cold linear collider. However the era of warm
linear colliders is not ﬁnished, the CLIC project is the only feasible candidate
for the multi-TeV region.

References

1. B. Badelek et al., TESLA Technical Design Report, Part VI, Ch.1. Pho-
ton collider at TESLA, DESY 2001-011, ECFA 2001-209, TESLA Report
2001-23, hep-ex/0108012.

2. Linear collider physics resource book for Snowmass 2001, By American
Linear Collider Working Group (T. Abe et al.), SLAC-R-570, May 2001.
D. Asner, J. Gronberg, J. Gunion, Phys. Rev. D 67, 035009 (2003).
3. ACFA Linear Collider Working group (K.Abe et al.) KEK-REPORT-

2001-11, hep-ph/0109166.

4. V.Telnov, Nucl. Instr. &Meth. A494:35, 2002.
5. V.Telnov, L.Shekhtman, Conception of the beam dump for the photon

collider at TESLA, these Proceedings.

4

