5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
2
0
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

For Publisher’s use

RECENT PROGRESS TOWARDS A COST-EFFECTIVE NEUTRINO
FACTORY DESIGN

DANIEL M. KAPLAN
Physics Division, Illinois Institute of Technology, 3101 S. Dearborn Street, Chicago, Illinois,
60616 USA
E-mail: kaplan@iit.edu

for the Neutrino Factory and Muon Collider Collaboration

A Neutrino Factory, sending > 1020 decay neutrinos per year from a high-energy stored muon beam
towards remote detectors, has been suggested as the ultimate tool for precision measurement of the
neutrino mixing matrix. Following two rounds of design studies that focused primarily on feasibility,
the latest such study has begun the process of cost optimization. New ideas include muon ‘phase
rotation’ using high-frequency rf cavities and rapid muon acceleration in non-scaling FFAG rings. The
world-wide Neutrino Factory R&D eﬀort is aimed at demonstrating the feasibility of the required
techniques by the end of this decade.
If this eﬀort is successful and the next round of neutrino
experiments conﬁrms the need for a Neutrino Factory, a timely decision to proceed to Neutrino Factory
construction will then be possible.

1 Introduction

It has been suggested1 that decay neutri-
nos from a stored high-energy muon beam
(in a ‘Neutrino Factory’) are the ultimate
tool2 for the study of neutrino oscillations
and their possible role in baryogenesis via
CP-violating neutrino mixing.3 An alternate
approach (‘Beta Beams’) uses decay neutri-
nos from stored high-energy beams of beta-
unstable isotopes.4 The Neutrino Factory
concept arose out of earlier work on a possible
muon collider.5 A desirable intensity goal for
such a facility is a few ×1020 neutrinos/year.
Two Neutrino Factory feasibility stu-
dies6,7 were carried out in the US dur-
ing 1999–2001 (commissioned by Fermilab
and Brookhaven National Laboratory, re-
spectively), spearheaded by members of the
Neutrino Factory and Muon Collider Col-
laboration (Muon Collaboration).8 (In par-
allel, less detailed studies were carried out
at CERN9 and in Japan.10) The US studies
each included suﬃcient engineering eﬀort to
produce a realistic cost estimate, so that the
key ‘cost drivers’ could be identiﬁed for fur-
ther R&D. Nevertheless, these studies were

focused primarily on demonstrating the fea-
sibility of a facility that could deliver the de-
sired performance; cost was viewed as a sec-
ondary consideration. While the design of
Feasibility Study I missed the above intensity
goal by about an order of magnitude,6 the im-
provements of Feasibility Study II (FS2) in-
creased the intensity per proton-on-target by
a factor of 6,7 and an additional factor of 4
can be achieved with a more powerful proton
source.11

In the fall of 2003, the American Phys-
ical Society commissioned a year-long Study
on the Physics of Neutrinos.12 In that con-
text, the Muon Collaboration re-optimized
the design, taking advantage of recent con-
ceptual advances to maintain the FS2 perfor-
mance, with reduced cost and with the pos-
sibility to utilize both muons and antimuons
simultaneously.13

2 Neutrino Factory Overview

Muon production by hadron beams is quite
eﬃcient, since charged pions decay essen-
tially 100% into muons. However, as daugh-
ters of secondary products of the initial col-

For Publisher’s use

3 Physics Reach

The key advantage of both Beta Beam and
Neutrino Factory facilities over conventional
neutrino beams is that they provide intense,
collimated, and well-understood beams of
electron neutrinos and antineutrinos. Neu-
(−−)
νµ
trino oscillation is then signalled by
charged-current interactions in the far detec-
tor, producing muons or antimuons. Back-
grounds to the identiﬁcation of muons in
large detectors are at least two orders of mag-
nitude lower than those for electron detec-
tion. The three ‘holy grails’ of neutrino-
oscillation physics — measurements of the θ13
mixing angle, the neutrino mass hierarchy,
and the CP-violating phase, δ, of the mixing
matrix — are thus achievable with a Neutrino
Factory for θ13 values below 10−4. No other
technique has this sensitivity.

The priority of a Neutrino Factory in
the world’s future High Energy Physics pro-
gram depends on measurements to be made
in upcoming experiments. If θ13 is suﬃciently
large (>∼0.05) it will be measured in currently
proposed reactor experiments. For θ13 val-
ues just below the current experimental up-
per limit (θ13 ∼ 0.1), Superbeam and Beta
Beam experiments taken together may be
able to make the three measurements men-
tioned above. Even then, for the ultimate in
precision a Neutrino Factory may eventually
>∼ 0.05, ‘medium-energy’
be needed. For θ13
Beta Beams may approach Neutrino Factory
sensitivity to δ within a factor of a few. How-
ever, determination of the neutrino mass hi-
erarchy relies on the diﬀering interactions of
neutrinos and antineutrinos with matter as
they pass through the earth, and the higher
energy and longer baselines of Neutrino Fac-
tory experiments confer a substantial advan-
tage. Moreover, by providing (from µ+ de-
cays) simultaneous beams of electron neutri-
nos and muon antineutrinos (and vice versa
for µ− decays), a Neutrino Factory will of-
fer unrivaled power to sort out systematic ef-

Figure 1. Layout of Neutrino Factory from US Fea-
sibility Study II.7

lision, muons are naturally produced into a
large phase space, while aﬀordable existing
acceleration technologies have small trans-
verse acceptances, and consequently favor in-
put beams with small transverse size and an-
gular divergence. This mismatch could in
principle be alleviated by developing new,
large-aperture, acceleration techniques10 or
by ‘cooling’ the muon beam to reduce its
size and divergence; we have in fact opted
to do both. Given the 2.2 µs muon lifetime,
only one cooling technique is fast enough:
ionization cooling, in which muons repeat-
edly traverse an energy-absorbing medium,
alternating with accelerating devices, within
a strongly focusing magnetic lattice.14,15 In
this way the transverse-momentum spread of
the beam is reduced while the average lon-
gitudinal momentum remains constant, thus
the beam’s transverse degrees of freedom are
cooled.

A Neutrino Factory thus consists of a
high-power proton source and target facil-
ity, an (optional) muon-cooling system, fast
accelerators, and ﬁnally a storage ring in
which the muons decay, with long straight
sections aimed at near and remote detectors.
A schematic layout of the FS2 design is shown
in Fig. 1. A point to note is the small foot-
print of the facility, which easily ﬁts on the
sites of existing laboratories such as Fermi-
lab, BNL, and CERN.

For Publisher’s use

fects, degeneracies, and ambiguities due to
correlations among the measurements.13

4 ‘Feasibility Study IIa’

The APS Study on the Physics of Neutrinos12
presented the opportunity for the FS2 design
to be updated. Since there were neither time
nor resources for engineering, the ‘FS2a’ de-
sign was conceived as a perturbation on that
of FS2; thus the costs of the revised compo-
nents can be estimated with some conﬁdence
by scaling the corresponding FS2 costs. The
combined performance of the ‘front end’ (ev-
erything up to the acceleration section) is the
same as that of the FS2 design: 0.170 ± 0.006
muons per proton-on-target, delivered within
the acceptance of the acceleration. This rep-
resents a doubling of the FS2 performance,
since muons of both charges are transmitted,
in opposite crests of the radio-frequency (rf)
waveform.

The components of the FS2a design are
brieﬂy summarized in the following; details
may be found in Ref. 13.

taken as

• Proton Driver: As in FS2, the pro-
ton source is
the 24 GeV
Brookhaven AGS, upgraded to 1–4 MW
of proton-beam power.
(As shown in
other studies,6,9,16 a high-power proton
accelerator of a diﬀerent design could
serve equally well.)

• Target and Capture: A high-power
mercury-jet target is immersed in a 20 T
solenoidal ﬁeld to capture charged pions
produced in proton-nucleus interactions.
The high magnetic ﬁeld at the target
(produced by a superconducting outer
coil with a resistive insert) is smoothly
tapered down to 1.75 T, which is then
maintained through the bunching and
phase-rotation sections.

• Bunching and Phase Rotation: Be-
longitudinal

fore cooling, the muons’

phase space must be matched to the ac-
ceptance of the cooling channel. This re-
quires ‘phase rotation’, in which the en-
ergy spread of the beam is reduced and
its time spread increased. In FS2, phase
rotation was done before bunching, us-
ing (expensive) induction linacs. The
new approach employs rf cavities, at fre-
quencies that decrease along the channel
from 333 to 201 MHz, to ﬁrst bunch and
then phase-rotate the muon beam. Be-
sides reduced cost, this rf phase rotation
has the advantage that it simultaneously
transports muons of both charges.

• Cooling: The FS2 cooling channel em-
ployed liquid-hydrogen energy absorbers
in a superconducting-solenoid focusing
lattice and reduced the transverse nor-
malized rms emittance of the muon
beam by a factor of about 6, from 12
to 2 mm·rad.
In FS2a, solid LiH ab-
sorbers are used instead, cooling the
transverse emittance from 17 mm·rad to
about 7 mm·rad.
(This takes place
at a central muon momentum of 220
MeV/c.) An unusual
feature of the
normal-conducting rf cavities used to re-
store the muons’ longitudinal momen-
tum between absorbers is that their
apertures are closed by low-Z windows
to reduce both the surface electric ﬁelds
and power costs. The LiH absorbers
(sandwiched by thin Be foils) in fact per-
form double duty, serving as the cavity
windows as well. Costs are reduced rel-
ative to FS2 by use of a shorter, sim-
pler cooling channel with less focusing
strength, and hence fewer, smaller super-
conducting solenoids.

• Acceleration: The muon acceleration
was the most expensive part of the FS2
design and is substantially reconceived
in Study IIa.
The FS2 design fea-
tured a superconducting linac to bring
fol-
the muon energy up to 2.5 GeV,

For Publisher’s use

lowed by a single, racetrack-shaped, su-
perconducting recirculating linear accel-
erator (RLA) that accelerated the beam
linac
to 20 GeV. In FS2a, the initial
accelerates to 1.5 GeV and is followed
by a ‘dogbone’ RLA, accelerating to
5 GeV. The muons then enter two cas-
caded non-scaling ﬁxed-ﬁeld alternating-
gradient (FFAG) rings, the ﬁrst acceler-
ating to 10 and the second to 20 GeV.
This system has twice the transverse ac-
ceptance as that of FS2 and so is well
matched to the larger emittance of the
beam emerging from the FS2a cooling
channel. As shown in Fig. 2, transfer
lines are incorporated for muons of both
charges.

• Storage Ring: The FS2 design is used
in FS2a as well: a compact, racetrack-
shaped, superconducting storage ring in
which ≈ 35% of the stored muons decay
toward a detector located some 3000 km
from the ring. Muons survive for roughly
500 turns. The muon and antimuon
bunch trains are arrayed within the ring
such that the arrival of their decay prod-
ucts at the detector can be distinguished
by timing (∆t ∼ 100 ns).

5 Cost Reduction

The hardware cost of the FS2a design is es-
timated at 67% of the FS2 cost. Both of
these costs include the Proton Driver and
Target facility. If (as is not unlikely) these are
built in support of an earlier Neutrino Super-
beam experiment, their costs should not be
attributed to the Neutrino Factory; exclud-
ing these the FS2a hardware cost is 60% of
the FS2 cost, or about $900M. If the Proton
Driver and target are included the cost rises
by about $300M. (These are preliminary, ‘un-
loaded’ ﬁgures and also depend on the ac-
counting approach used, which may diﬀer sig-
niﬁcantly among the various world regions in
which such a facility might be built.)

There is additional scope for cost reduc-
tion, possibly at some minor penalty in per-
formance. Further work is needed to optimize
the cost and performance; in a global mini-
mization the cost and performance of the de-
tector will also play a role. It would also be
desirable to do a ‘bottom-up’ cost estimate
for the new FS2a design, and for any further
variations. It is likely that this work will be-
come part of a ‘World Design Study’, whose
planning is now getting under way.

6 Crucial Demonstration

Experiments

It is evident from the above that Neutrino
Factory feasibility and performance depend
on a number of extrapolations beyond the
current state of the accelerator art. An in-
ternational R&D program is in progress to
certify the reliability of these extrapolations.

• Targetry: A mercury jet with the
needed 20 m/s jet velocity is under con-
struction, to be tested in a normal-
conducting 15 T solenoid in the nTOF
beamline at CERN.17 The instanta-
neous power deposition from the beam
(180 J/g) will match that at a 4 MW Pro-
ton Driver, but, to allow time for the
magnet to recover between pulses, the
apparatus will be pulsed only occasion-
ally. The experiment is planned for com-
pletion within the next few years.

• Muon Cooling: The ﬁrst phase of an
international Muon Ionization Cooling
Experiment (MICE) has recently been
approved for construction at the Ruther-
ford Appleton Laboratory.18 First beam
is planned for the spring of 2007.
In
the ﬁrst phase of MICE, two solenoidal
precision tracking spectrometers will be
assembled and cross-calibrated in the
muon beam.
In a subsequent (not yet
fully funded) phase, a short section (one
lattice cell) of cooling channel based on

For Publisher’s use

10–20 GeV FFAG

5–10 GeV FFAG

Linac to 1.5 GeV

1.5–5 GeV Dogbone RLA

Figure 2. FS2a acceleration layout.

the FS2 design will be built up and op-
erated between the two spectrometers.
The expected 10% emittance reduction
for
will be measured to 1% of itself,
a deﬁnitive demonstration of the fea-
sibility and performance of ionization-
cooling hardware. A variety of absorber
materials and lattice optics conﬁgura-
tions will be tested, so that performance
predictions can be made with conﬁdence
not only for the FS2 cooling lattice but
for others (e.g., that of FS2a) as well.

• Acceleration: The proposed ‘non-
scaling’ FFAG acceleration is a new
approach and entails some unconven-
tional beam dynamics.19 A scaled-down
demonstration of such a non-scaling
FFAG using an electron beam has been
discussed.20 Funding for such an eﬀort
remains to be identiﬁed, but it is hoped
that the project will progress rapidly
during the next few years.

7 Summary and Outlook

A world-wide R&D program is in progress
to establish the feasibility of a stored-muon-
beam Neutrino Factory.
If all goes as
planned, by about 2010 the demonstration
experiments and World Design Study will
have been completed. All will then be in
readiness for a construction decision to be
taken, should the coming generation of neu-
trino experiments indicate (as now seems
likely) that a Neutrino Factory is required

to answer the key questions at the heart of
neutrino mixing.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the US
Dept. of Energy, the National Science Foun-
dation, and the UK Particle Physics and As-
tronomy Research Council.

References

1. S. Geer, Phys. Rev. D 57, 6989 (1998);
ibid. 59, 039903E (1999); earlier ver-
sions of a Neutrino Factory, consid-
ered by e.g. D. G. Koshkarev, report
CERN/ISR-DI/74-62 (1974), S. Wojicki
(unpublished, 1974), D. Cline and D.
Neuﬀer, AIP Conf. Proc. 68, 846 (1981),
and D. Neuﬀer, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci.
28, 2034 (1981), were based on pion in-
jection into a storage ring and had sub-
stantially less sensitivity.

2. C. Albright et al., Fermilab-FN-692
(May, 2000), hep-ex/0008064; M. Apol-
lonio et al., CERN-TH-2002-208 (Oct.
2002.), hep-ph/0210192; M. Lindner, in
Neutrino Mass, ed. G. Altarelli and
K. Winter, Springer Tracts in Modern
Physics Vol. 190 (Springer-Verlag, Hei-
delberg, 2003), p. 209.
3. See e.g. M. Plumacher,

in Proc. Nu-
Fact’02, J. Phys. G:Nucl. Part. Phys.
29, 1561 (2003), and references therein.
4. P. Zucchelli, Phys. Lett. B 532, 166

For Publisher’s use

in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. on High En-
ergy Accelerators, ed. F. T. Cole and R.
Donaldson (Fermilab, 1984), p. 485; R.
Palmer et al., Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.
51A, 61 (1996).

15. D. Neuﬀer, Part. Acc. 14, 75 (1983).
16. UK
site:
factory/muons/uknf.html

web-
http://hepunx.rl.ac.uk/neutrino-

Neutrino

Factory

17. Muon Collider Targetry website:
http://www.hep.princeton.edu/mumu/
target/; see also H. G. Kirk et al., ‘A
High-Power Target Experiment’, sub-
mitted to the 2005 Particle Accelerator
Conference, Knoxville, TN, May 16–20,
2005.
18. MICE

Collaboration
http://hep04.phys.iit.edu/cooldemo/
19. J. S. Berg, ‘Longitudinal Acceptance in
Linear Non-Scaling FFAGs’, presented
at the 2005 Particle Accelerator Confer-
ence, Knoxville, TN, May 16–20, 2005.

website:

20. C. J. Johnstone and S.R. Koscielniak,
‘Electron Model of Linear-Field FFAG’,
presented at the 2005 Particle Accelera-
tor Conference, Knoxville, TN, May 16–
20, 2005.

(2002).

5. C. Ankenbrandt et al., Phys. Rev. ST

Accel. Beams 2, 081001 (1999).

6. Feasibility Study on a Neutrino Source
Based on a Muon Storage Ring, ed. D.
Finley and N. Holtkamp, Fermilab-Pub-
00/108-E (Fermilab, Batavia, 2000),
http://www.fnal.gov/projects/
muon collider/nu-factory/nu-
factory.html

7. Feasibility

Study-
II of a Muon-Based Neutrino Source,
ed. S. Ozaki, R. Palmer, M. Zisman,
and J. Gallardo, BNL-52623, June 2001,
http://www.cap.bnl.gov/mumu/studyii/
FS2-report.html

8. Neutrino

Factory
and Muon Collider Collaboration web-
site: http://www.cap.bnl.gov/mumu/
9. ECFA studies of a European neu-
trino factory complex,
ed. A. Blon-
et al., CERN-2004-002 (2004),
del
http://preprints.cern.ch/cernrep/2004/
; Prospective
2004-002/2004-002.html
Study of Muon Storage Rings at CERN,
ed. A. Blondel, J. R. Ellis, and B. Autin,
CERN-99-02 (1999).

10. A Feasibility Study of A Neutrino Fac-
tory
Japan,
in
ed. Y. Kuno, May 24, 2001, http://www-
prism.kek.jp/nufactj/index.html

11. M. M. Alsharo’a et al., Phys. Rev. ST

Accel. Beams 6, 081001 (2003).

12. American

the

Physical Society Multi-Divisional Study
of
Neutri-
nos, http://www.interactions.org/cms/
?pid=1009695

Physics

of

13. C. Albright et al., Neutrino Factory
and Beta Beam Experiments and Devel-
opment, BNL-72369-2004, FNAL-TM-
2259, LBNL-55478, Nov. 23, 2004,
arXiv.org:physics/0411123.

14. A. N. Skrinsky and V. V. Parkhomchuk,
Sov. J. Part. Nucl. 12, 223 (1981); E.
A. Perevedentsev and A. N. Skrinsky,

