6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
2
1
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Status of the ATF extraction line laser-wire.

Nicolas Delerue, Fred Gannaway, David Howell

John Adams Institute at the University of Oxford,

Keble Road, OX1 3RH, Oxford, United Kingdom

Grahame Blair, Gary Boorman, Chaﬁk Driouichi

John Adams Institute at Royal Holloway, University of London,

Egham, Surrey TW20 0EX, United Kingdom

Stewart Boogert

Department of Physics & Astronomy, University College London,

Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT United Kingdom

Alexander Aryshev, Pavel Karataev, Nobuhiro Terunuma, Junji Urakawa

KEK, 1-1 Oho, 305-0801 Tsukuba Science City, Japan

Axel Brachmann, Joe Frisch, Marc Ross

SLAC, 2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA

December 2005

A new laser-wire is being installed in the extraction line of the ATF at KEK.
This device aims at demonstrating that laser-wires can be used to measure
micrometre scale beam size.

1 Overview of the ATF extraction line laser-wire

The Accelerator Test Facility (ATF) at KEK oﬀers a very low emittance micrometre sized beam
of 1.28 GeV electrons close from the conditions expected at the International Linear Collider
(ILC). The ATF should soon be able to provide a bunch spacing similar to that of the ILC.
This accelerator being a test facility it is possible to have dedicated machine time with custom
beam optics for our tests. This make the ATF an ideal place to test a new beam diagnostic
device such as a laser-wire to measure micrometre sized beams.

For this laser-wire installation KEK has provided a high power green laser that can deliver

up to 1 GW at 532nm (this laser was previously used by the polarised positron experiment).

1

2 Laser system

A mode-locked seed laser (Nd:VAN) produced by Time-Bandwidth (GE-100-XHP series) is
used to deliver a 600mW train of light pulses with a wavelength of 1064 nm and a repetition
rate of 357 MHz. The Nd:VAN crystal is diode pumped and a semiconductor saturable absorber
(SESAM)[1, 2] is used to start and stabilise the pulse forming process. The SESAM mirror
forms one end of the laser cavity. It is mounted on a translation stage so that the length of the
cavity can be adjusted by a picomotor and a piezo-electric crystal to cancel the eﬀects caused
by changes in ambient conditions. A photo-diode is used to monitor the output of the cavity.
A timing stabiliser (Time Bandwidth CLX-1100)[3, 4] is used to phase-lock the signal from the
photo-diode to the ATF 357 MHz RF signal (This is achieved by adjusting the cavity length).
The pulse train produced by the seed laser is injected in a regenerative ampliﬁer custom-
built by Positive Light (model RGN). This system ampliﬁes one of the nanoJoule seed pulses to
approximately 600 milliJoules. A Faraday isolator is used to prevent reﬂected pulses damaging
the seed laser. Two Pockels cells are used to select the pulse that will be ampliﬁed. The ﬁrst
Pockels cell is located before the Faraday isolator, it is used to chop the end of the pulse. The
second Pockels cell is located inside the amplifying cavity. When this second Pockels cell is
deactivated the pulses do not reach the amplifying rod in the cavity. When this Pockels cell is
switched on, it will trap one pulse inside the cavity. This pulse is reﬂected through an Nd:YAG
amplifying rod and bounces back and forth in the cavity. After a number of pulse round trips
in the cavity (usually 10-15) a third Pockels cell is switched on, this changes the polarisation of
the pulse inside the cavity and this pulse is extracted by a polariser making a 45 degrees angle
with the beam trajectory.

After extraction the pulse passes a second Faraday isolator that protects the cavity. It is
then transmitted through a spatial ﬁlter and then through 2 Nd:YAG linear ampliﬁer that
amplify the pulse by a factor of 10 each, bringing it to more than 600 mJ. Before the exit of the
laser system a KD*P crystal doubles the frequency of the laser pulse, bringing its wavelength
to 532 nm with an eﬃciency close to 50% at full power. At this stage the pulses have a length
of 200-300 ps.

The timing of the Pockels cells is critical to ensure that one and only one pulse is ampliﬁed
and to improve the contrast ratio of the pulse by removing any pre and post pulses. This
timing is controlled by a signal and delay generator (SDG-II from Positive Light). A photo-
diode monitors the signal in the amplifying cavity. A second photo-diode, located after the
spatial ﬁlter, monitors the signal extracted from the cavity. These two photo-diodes are used
to tune the timing of the 3 Pockels cells and thus improve the extracted signal.

The amplifying rod located inside the cavity and the two linear ampliﬁers are optically
pumped by ﬂash lamps. The signal used to trigger the ﬂash is taken from the ATF extraction
kicker charge signal. The kicker ﬁre signal is used to trigger the SDG and thus the ampliﬁed
laser pulse.

3 Laser delivery optics and focusing lens

The laser system described above is located on top of the ATF shielding. A set of mirrors are
used to bring the laser light from the output of the ampliﬁer to the focusing light. The total
length travelled by the light is of the order of 10 meters. A scanning system and diagnostic
tools such as photo-diodes and camera will be installed along this path.

2

A F#/2 lens will be used to focus the laser light onto a very small spot[5]. This lens is
made of 3 elements: the ﬁrst element has an aspheric surface and a spheric one. The second
element has two spheric surfaces. The last element is ﬂat and is used as a window to allow the
laser light to enter the beam pipe. All these element are made of top-quality fused silica.

Beam dynamics and mechanical considerations require the inner side of the window to be
more than 20 mm away from the IP which must be roughly in the centre of the beam pipe,
in our design this inner surface of the window is 24 mm away from the IP. The window has
a thickness of 12.7 mm. The position of the two other elements is constrained by mechanical
and cost consideration: to allow the sealing of the window these two elements must be more
than 14 mm away from the window but they must be kept as close as possible to the window
to limit their size (and hence their cost). In our design one of these elements is located 18 mm
away from the window and has a thickness of 5.3 mm. The second element (aspheric) is located
2 mm further away and has a thickness of 7 mm. The layout of this lens is shown in ﬁgure 1.

Figure 1: Layout of the F#/2 lens designed for the ATF extraction line laser-wire

The shape of these elements has been optimised using the Optical Design Software ZEMAX[6]
to focus the beam to a spot size as close as possible from the diﬀraction limit as shown in ﬁg-
ure 2. As the laser beam will be scanning the electron beam, the optimisation has been done
for 4 diﬀerent tilt angles: 0 degree (no tilt), 0.1 degree, 0.2 degree and 0.3 degree and one of the
goals of the optimisation was to keep the size of the laser spot in each of these conﬁgurations
a identical as possible as can be seen in ﬁgure 2.

The optimisation process has also been used to reduce the aberrations. The ﬁgure 3 shows

the aberrations of the ﬁnal design.

Care has been taken to minimise the eﬀect of possible ghosts reﬂections of the focus in the
glass elements. No single bounce ghost remains in the lens but one second order ghost with a
radius of 250µm remains as shown in ﬁgure 4. As a very low reﬂectivity coating is being used
for the lens, calculations[7] have shown that this ghost should not be an issue.

This F#/2 lens will later be replaced by a F#/1 lens that is currently being designed.

3

Figure 2: Fraction of enclosed energy in a given circle as a function of the radius of this circle
from the centre of the beam spot. The upper (black) line shows the diﬀraction limit, the 4 other
lines show the real value when the incoming laser beam has a tilt of 0 degree (blue), 0.1 degree
(red), 0.2 degrees (yellow) and 0.3 degrees (green).

Figure 3: Aberrations of the F#/2 lens designed for the ATF extraction line laser-wire: Optical
path diﬀerence on the left and transverse ray fan on the right. On each ﬁgure the 4 pairs of
plots correspond to the 4 possible laser beam tilt (0.0, 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 degrees) for vertical
rays (left plot) and horizontal rays (right plot), the three rays in each plot correspond to the 3
diﬀerent wavelengths studied: 531nm (green), 532nm (blue) and 533nm (red). Each plot give
the aberration (vertical axis) as a function of the position of the ray (horizontal axis). The
horizontal axis is normalised to the size of the lens: a ray on the edge of the lens will be on the
edge of the plot whereas a central ray will be in the centre of the plot. The scale of the vertical
axis is ±5 waves for the OPD plot and ±5µm for the transverse ray fan plot.

4

Figure 4: Ghost in the lens. This ghost reﬂection of the lens focus is formed by a reﬂection on
the outer surface of the vacuum window and on the aspherical surface.

4 Interaction chamber

The interaction chamber[8] in which the collisions between the laser photons and the electrons
will take place has been manufactured in Oxford and is now installed at KEK.

Photographs of this chamber are shown in ﬁgure 5 and drawings are shown in ﬁgure 6. The
chamber has two ports on which a ﬂange with a window can be mounted. These windows,
made of fused silica, are used to allow the laser light to enter the ultra high vacuum of the
beam pipe . The tight sealing of the glass on the stainless steel ﬂange is achieved thanks to a
novel indium seal designed specially for this purpose. The aperture of these windows is wide
enough to allow the use of an F#/1 lens. Two other ports of the chamber are used to connect
the chamber to the accelerator beam pipe. The chamber has 6 other ports on which diagnostics
tools such as a wire-scanner, a screen or a knife edge can be installed.

Figure 5: Raw block of stainless steel used to build the interaction chamber before processing
(left) and the same after processing, the ﬁnished interaction chamber (right).

5

Figure 6: Drawings of the ATF extraction line laser-wire interaction chamber. In the leftmost
and rightmost drawings the electron beam direction is in the plan of the paper and the laser
beam direction is perpendicular to the paper’s plan. In the two inner drawings the laser beam
is in the plan of the paper and the electron beam is perpendicular to the plan of the paper.

6

5 Conclusion

The ATF extraction line laser-wire will allow us to demonstrate that laser-wires can be used
to measure the very small beams produced in the ILC linac. In the near future we hope that
our laser-wire will be an important diagnostic tool at the ATF2.

6 Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the ATF group at KEK for their kind support and their availability to
our requests.

Work supported in part by the Daiwa Anglo-Japanese Foudation, The Royal Society, the
PPARC LC-ABD Collaboration, and by the Commission of European Communities under the
6th Framework Programme Structuring the European Research Area, contract number RIDS-
011899.

References

[1] B. G. Kim, E. Garmire, S. G. Hummel, and P. D. Dapkus. Nonlinear Bragg reﬂector based

on saturable absorption. Appl. Phys. Lett., 54p1095–1097, (1989).

[2] U. Keller, D. A. B. Miller, G. D. Boyd, T. H. Chiu, J. F. Ferguson, and M. T. Asom.
Solid-state low-loss intracavity saturable absorber for Nd:YLF lasers: an antiresonant semi-
conductor Fabry - Perot saturable absorber. Optics Lett., 17p505–507, (1992).

[3] M.J.W. Rodwell, D.M. Bloom, and K.J. Weingarten. Subpicosecond laser liming stabiliza-

tion. IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, 25p817–827, (1989).

[4] D.R. Walker, D.W. Crust, W.E. Sleat, and W. Sibbett. Reduction of phase noise in passively

mode-locked lasers. IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, 28p289–296, (1992).

[5] Nicolas Delerue.

Laser optics

for

the ATF laser-wire.

BDIR Workshop,

https://ilcsupport.desy.de/cdsagenda/fullAgenda.php?ida=a0522&stylesheet=nicecompact&dl=talk,
(June 2005).

[6] Zemax Development Corporation. Zemax optical design Program. http://www.zemax.com,

(2005).

[7] Nicolas Delerue.

eﬀects
pnp.physics.ox.ac.uk/ delerue/laserwire/lensDesign/thermalEﬀects.ps, (2005).

laser-wire

Thermal

lens.

the

on

http://www-

[8] David Howell. ATF extraction line laser-wire infrastructure plans. BDIR Workshop,

https://ilcsupport.desy.de/cdsagenda/fullAgenda.php?ida=a0522&stylesheet=nicecompact&dl=talk,
(June 2005).

7

