6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
1
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

2005 ALCPG & ILC Workshops - Snowmass, U.S.A.

The International Linear Collider beam dumps

R. Appleby
The Cockcroft Institute, Daresbury Laboratory, Warrington, WA4 4AD, England
L. Keller, T. Markiewicz, A. Seryi, D. Walz
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA
R. Sugahara
KEK, 1-1 Oho, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0801, Japan

The ILC beam dumps are a key part of the accelerator design. At Snowmass 2005, the current status of the beam dump
designs were reviewed, and the options for the overall dump layout considered. This paper describes the available
dump options for the baseline and the alternatives and considers issues for the dumps that require resolution.

1. INTRODUCTION

The International linear collider (ILC) is a very complicated and expensive project. One aspect of key importance
is the main beam dumps, which are required to safely dispose of the high power ILC beams. The work on such
dumps was started at the SLC, albeit at much lower power, and continued as part of the TESLA project. However,
much more work is needed to obtain satisfactory beam dumps for the ILC. We shall now review the baseline and
alternative beam dumps designs.

2. THE ILC DUMP REQUIREMENTS

The baseline layout of the ILC consists of two linacs, which then branch into two interaction regions. The current
choice of crossing angle for the interactions regions are 20mrad and 2mrad. The requirement to dump the main
beam after collision then leads us to two full power beam dumps for each interaction region. Furthermore, the need
to dump the beam at the end of the linac for commissioning and fast extraction purposes adds two more full power
beam dumps to the baseline design. Note that the 500 GeV machine beam power is 11MW and the 1 TeV machine
beam power is 18MW; we always consider the dump being rated for the larger power in this paper.

There is also a need to dump the intense beamstrahlung photons generated during the beam-beam interaction at
the interaction point. This photon power is around 1MW. This photon beam dump is common for charged beam
and photons for the 20mrad interaction region layout, while for 2mrad layout the photon dump is separate.

Hence, there are separate beam dumps rated for full power for all beam lines including tune-up lines, for a total of
six beam dumps in the baseline. The tune-up dumps are required to be suﬃciently remote from the IP, so that the
collider halls can be accessed for detector maintenance while the linac is being tuned, and full beam sent to tune-up
dump.

Technically, the elimination of two full power tune-up dumps should be possible, there will be impact on availability
which may be partly mitigated by reduced power tune-up dumps ( 0.5MW), the cost saving need to be further
evaluated, detailed design would need to be made. [1]

ILCAW0514

3. THE BASELINE TECHNOLOGY - THE WATER DUMP

The water-based dump [2] is based on the design built in 1967 as the main dump for the SLAC Linac [3], where
it is still in use. This dump was designed and built to work at 2MW, but in practice was only used at 800kW. The
baseline design for the ILC beam dump is based on water vortex dump, rated for 18MW beam. The choice of a water
dump for the baseline has many advantages: the water dump has been studied in detail for accelerator projects, the
problems of the larger dump design have been noted, and the studies indicate there are no ”show-stoppers”. The
water dump for the TESLA project was studied in detail at DESY [4], with input from several industrial companies.
The basic principle of a water dump is to present the incoming beam with a region of cold, pressurized water. The
beam dumps its energy into this water, which rapidly moves away. This presents the next part of the incoming beam
with fresh water. The heat is transferred away through heat exchangers. Suﬃciently beyond shower maximum the
beam is suﬃciently large that steel or tungsten plates can be absorb the tail of the beam energy and help reduce
the overall length of the dump. There is also an outside air ﬁnal cooling stage and many metres of shielding. The
water is separated from the vacuum of the extraction line by a thin window - required to be thin enough to avoid
the window itself becoming the dump. The window design is key part of the overall dump design.

The water ﬂow velocity is required to be suﬃciently high to avoid volume boiling of the water at the tank operating
pressure when the dump is accepting the larger spot sizes of the disrupted beam. The dump window is cooled by
convection to the water so that its temperature rise during the passage of the bunch train is less than its thermal
stress limit. The spot size of the undisrupted beam must be suﬃciently large to prevent window damage. This
will be done through a combination of optical means, an increase in extraction line length after the last optical
element, and sweeping the beam across the face of the window. Beam sweeping can also help prevent volume boiling
of the water behind the window; if employed the sweeping mechanism will need to be interlocked to the machine
protection system. The water circuit consists of two closed loops and an external water circuit. The inner water loop
is pressurized to 10bar and has a volume of around 18 cubic meters. The length of the dump, including all shielding,
is about 25m longitudinally and about 15m transversely.

The control and transport of radioactive byproducts is of central importance to the dump design. Work in
ongoing in this area. For example, isotropically produced neutrons contribute to the shielding thickness and careful
computation of the neutron ﬂuence is needed. For a deep-tunnel site the forward-peaked muons are stopped in
approximately one km of earth. A shallow-tunnel site may require a small downward bend of the beam before it
enters the dump. That would necessitate a separate dump for the beamstrahlung followed by the charged beam
dump.

The required R+D items for the baseline are a study of window survivability, and the corresponding computa-
tion of radiation damage, measured in displacements per atom (DPA). A window replacement procedure, probably
incorporating remote or robotic handling, and schedule can then be developed. A prototype of the window and a
beam test are also necessary. The required test beam must give similar energy densities in the window as the full
ILC machine. Furthermore, some studies of pressure wave formation maybe necessary.

4. THE ALTERNATIVE TECHNOLOGY - THE GAS DUMP

The noble gas dump is the alternative design for the ILC beam dump [5,6]. This consists of about 1km of a
noble gas (Ar looks the most promising) enclosed in a water cooled iron jacket. The gas core acts as a scattering
target, blowing the beam up and distributing the energy into the surrounding iron. Considerable iron is required to
successfully transport the heat to the outside water cooling. As in the water dump, the ﬁnal layer of cooling is an
outside air system

This gas dump design may ease some issues such as radiolysis and tritium production, and a gas proﬁle can be
exploited to produce a uniform energy deposition along the length of the dump. However, other issues arise such
as particle beam heating of the gas and ionization eﬀects. Further studies needed to understand feasibility and
beneﬁts of the gas dump. A further possibility is a gas/water hybrid dump, involving the use of a shorter gas dump

ILCAW0514

as a passive beam expander, followed by a small water dump. This option also required further study. A further
possibility is for a rotating solid dump immersed in water, or a dump based on some kind of liquid metal.

The required R+D items for the alternative design are studies of gas heating, including ionization eﬀects, and a
study of radiation and activation eﬀects. A study of the gas dump windows is also required. A smaller scale prototype
of the dump, and some test beam, would also be required.

In this paper, we discussed the baseline and alternative designs of the ILC beam dumps. The baseline is a high
pressure water dump. Such a dump has been built before for the SLC at much lower power. This is a solid choice
for the baseline, although much work is needed. The alternative choice is a gas-based dump. This looks promising,
although many further studies and possibly a prototype will be required.

5. CONCLUSION

References

[1] Discussions
sioning
http://www-project.slac.stanford.edu/lc/bdir/Meetings/beamdelivery/2005-11-29/index.htm

end
of
post-Snowmass.

the
begun

linac
See,

dumps

power

abort

beam

lower

have

and

fast

the

on

at

for
for

commis-
example,

[2] Overview of

ILC dump issues, Rob Appleby, LC-ABD dump meetings,

14th September

2005,

http://www.astec.ac.uk/lcabd/ral.14.09.05/ral.14.09.05.htm
[3] Walz et al, in IEEE Trans.Nucl.Sci.12:367-371, 1965 (issue No.3)
[4] Bialowons et al, TESLA note 2001-04
LC
[5] Another

Albrecht

dump,

idea

of

a

http://tesla.desy.de/new pages/hamburg meeting 9 2003/pdf/wg2/gasdump talk 16sep03.pdf

[6] Some

thoughts about gas dumps,

Ilya Agapov, LC-ABD dump meeting,

14th September 2005,

http://www.astec.ac.uk/lc-abd/ral.14.09.05/Gas-Dump-14-09-05.pdf

Leuschner,

16th

September

2003,

ILCAW0514

