6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
7
1
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Space-charge transport limits of ion beams in

periodic quadrupole focusing channels

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94550, USA

Steven M. Lund

Sugreev R. Chawla

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

Abstract

It has been empirically observed in both experiments and particle-in-cell simula-

tions that space-charge-dominated beams suﬀer strong growth in statistical phase-

space area (degraded quality) and particle losses in alternating gradient quadrupole

transport channels when the undepressed phase advance σ0 increases beyond about
85◦ per lattice period. Although this criterion has been used extensively in practical

designs of strong focusing intense beam transport lattices, the origin of the limit has

not been understood. We propose a mechanism for the transport limit resulting from

classes of halo particle resonances near the core of the beam that allow near-edge

particles to rapidly increase in oscillation amplitude when the space-charge intensity

and the ﬂutter of the matched beam envelope are both suﬃciently large. When cou-

pled with a diﬀuse beam edge and/or perturbations internal to the beam core that

can drive particles outside the edge, this mechanism can result in large and rapid

halo-driven increases in the statistical phase-space area of the beam, lost particles,

and degraded transport. A core-particle model is applied to parametrically analyze

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

February 23, 2006

this process. Extensive self-consistent particle in cell simulations are employed to

better quantify space-charge limit and verify core-particle model predictions.

Key words:

intense beam, space charge, emittance growth, simulation

PACS: 29.27.Bd, 41.75.-i, 52.59.Sa, 52.27.Jt

1 Introduction

The maximum transportable current density of an ion beam with high space-

charge intensity propagating in a periodic focusing lattice is a problem of

practical importance[1,2]. Accelerator applications such as Heavy Ion Fu-

sion (HIF), High Energy Density Physics (HEDP), and transmutation of

nuclear waste demand a large ﬂux of particles on target. A limit to the

maximum current density can result from a variety of factors: instability of

low-order moments of the beam describing the centroid and envelope, insta-

bility of higher order collective modes internal to the beam, growth in sta-

tistical phase-space area (rms emittance growth), excessive halo generation,

and species contamination associated with issues such as the electron cloud

problem. Simulations were ﬁrst used to analyze the maximum current density

transportable in quadrupole channels[3,4] and provided guidance beyond ini-

tial heuristic estimates[5]. Experiments later obtained results consistent with

simulations[1,2].

The present work describes a promising new approach toward predicting the

maximum transportable current density in a periodic quadrupole lattice due

to intrinsic space-charge limits[6]. Previous studies to predict space-charge

Email address: SMLund@llnl.gov (Steven M. Lund).

2

related transport limits in the absence of focusing errors and species contam-

ination have not proved fully successful beyond a moment level description of

low-order beam instabilities. Although moment-based centroid and envelope

descriptions reliably predict regions of parametric instability where machines

cannot operate[8,7], such models are overly optimistic when compared to sim-

ulations and experiments which observe degraded transport due to emittance

growth and particle losses where the moment models predict stability[1,2,3,4].

On the other hand, higher-order collective mode theories based on the equilib-

rium KV distribution[10] predict broad parametric regions of instability where

stability is observed in simulations with more realistic distributions[3,4] and

in experiment[1,2]. The space-charge limit model proposed is based on parti-

cles oscillating outside, but near the beam edge exchanging energy with the

oscillating space-charge ﬁeld of a envelope matched beam core leading to in-

creased particle oscillation amplitude, emittance blow up, and particle losses.

This model can be applied to a wide range of matched core distributions and

does not require an equilibrium core – which circumvents the practical problem

of no smooth core equilibrium distribution being known. The increased un-

derstanding the origin of the observed limits obtained promises more reliable

design of optimal intense beam transport channels.

We denote the phase advance of particles oscillating in a periodic focusing

lattice in the presence and absence of beam space-charge by σ and σ0 (both

measured in degrees per lattice period)[7,8]. The undepressed phase-advance

σ0 provides a measure of the strength of the linear applied focusing forces

of the lattice that is relatively insensitive to the details of the lattice. σ0

is generally made as large as beam stability will allow – because stronger

focusing results in smaller beam cross-sectional area leading to smaller, more

3

economical accelerator structures. σ can be unambiguously deﬁned by an rms

equivalent, matched KV equilibrium beam[7,8] where all particles internal

to the beam have the same phase advance. The ratio σ/σ0 is a normalized

measure of relative space-charge strength with σ/σ0 →
a warm beam with zero space-charge forces and σ/σ0 →
to a cold beam with maximum space-charge forces. The maximum possible

1 corresponding to

0 corresponding

current density for a speciﬁed beam line-charge density will occur when σ/σ0

is as small as possible.

Neglecting image charge eﬀects, single particle and beam centroid oscillations
(0, 180◦) and σ/σ0 ∈
are stable if σ0 < 180◦[8]. The parameter space σ0 ∈
(0, 1) can be regarded as potential machine operating points. Envelope models

predict well understood bands of strong parametric instability when σ0 > 90◦

and σ/σ0 < 1[7]. The parameter region excluded by envelope instabilities for

FODO quadrupole transport is indicated (in blue) on Fig. 1.

Considerations beyond centroid and envelope instabilities exclude further re-

gions of σ0–σ parameter space. Transportable current limits based on preser-

vation of beam statistical emittance and suppression of particle losses for a

matched beam propagating in a periodic FODO lattice of 84 electric quadrupoles

were experimentally studied by Tiefenback at LBNL[1,2]. It was found empir-

ically that transport was stable (i.e., statistical emittance growth and particle

losses below measurement thresholds) when

σ2 <

(120◦)2.

σ2
0 −

1
2

(1)

The additional parameter region this criterion excludes for machine operation

(partially overlapping the envelope band) is indicated (in red) on Fig. 1. For

4

high space-charge intensity with σ/σ0 < 0.5, this limit is more important than

the envelope instability band because it is encountered ﬁrst when approaching

from low σ0. The stability bound (1) has been applied by simply requiring that

σ0 < 120◦/√2

85◦. It is observed that transport becomes more sensitive to

≃

errors near the boundary of stability.

Fig. 1. (color online) Beam stability regions in a FODO quadrupole lattice.

5

2 Particle-in-Cell simulations

Self-consistent electrostatic particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations have been car-

ried out for a variety of initial beam distributions launched in a FODO quadrupole

transport channel with 50% quadrupole occupancy (η = 1/2) and linear,

piecewise-constant quadrupole forces. The transverse slice module of the WARP

code[9] is employed to advance an initial transverse distribution with zero axial

velocity spread. Applied focusing forces are adjusted for speciﬁed σ0. Currents

are adjusted for speciﬁed σ/σ0 using ﬁxed rms emittances (εx = εy = 50

mm-mrad). Numerical parameters are set for high resolution (

100 radial

≥
100 residence corrected

≥

≥

zones across the beam core on a square mesh and

axial steps per lattice period) and good statistics (

400 particles per cell).

A cylindrical beam pipe is large enough to suppress particle losses and image

charge eﬀects. Simulation results are in qualitative agreement with Eq. (1) for

a wide variety of initial distribution functions. Initial distributions employed

are rms matched transforms of continuous focusing equilibrium Waterbag and

thermal distributions[8], KV, or semi-Gaussian distributions. This contrasts

earlier work where Waterbag and Gaussian loads did not include space-charge

screening eﬀects and were far from initial force-balance[4]. Only the initial

KV load employed is a true equilibrium of the periodic focusing channel. No

exact, smooth equilibrium distributions are presently known for periodic fo-

cusing channels.

Parameters to the right of the stability bound [Eq. (1)] and to the left of the

envelope instability band lead to statistical (rms) emittance growth and parti-

cle losses. x- and y-plane average emittance [(εx + εy)/2] growth can be rapid

and large as illustrated in Fig. 2(a) for a focusing channel with σ0 = 100◦

6

and three initial distributions: semi-Gaussian, waterbag “equilibrium”, and

thermal “equilibrium.” Much of this emittance growth can be traced to parti-

cles that evolve signiﬁcantly outside the beam core as evident from Fig. 2(b)

which shows the fraction of beam particles which evolve (at one or more

points) more than 1.25 and 1.5 times the statistical beam edge radius (i.e.,

x2/r2

x + y2/r2

y > 1.25, 1.5 with rx = 2

x2

1/2 and rx = 2

x2

1/2 calculated

q
from the evolving distribution). The similarity of the results for the three

h

i

h

i

very diﬀerent non-equilibrium distributions shows that processes degrading

the beam are relatively insensitive to the form of the initial distribution in

deeply unstable parameter regions. Laboratory beams are born oﬀ a source

(injector) and subsequently manipulated to match into a transport channel

and are unlikely to be any equilibrium form. More detailed analysis of the

simulation results show that initial beam distortions leading to the statistical

emittance growth are primarily near the edge of the beam and subsequently

act to strongly perturb the core. Core perturbations are observed in both the

local density and temperature proﬁles. These perturbations typically lack el-

liptical symmetry and rapidly oscillate into the core with excursions larger

near the beam edge. Beam envelope matches are not signiﬁcantly degraded in

the initial stages of instability.

A large number of PIC simulations were carried out to better quantify para-

metric regions of instability. Plane averaged emittance growth contours in σ0

and σ/σ0 are shown in Fig. 3 for an initial semi-Gaussian distribution. Irreg-

ular grid simulation points are indicated with dots. All simulations are ad-

vanced for six undepressed betatron periods, which is suﬃcient for saturation

in strongly unstable regimes. Near the stability boundary, emittance growth

slows and growth factors increase with longer propagation distance. Colors

7

Fig. 2. (color online) PIC simulations of (a) the plane-averaged emittance growth

for diﬀerent initial distributions in a FODO quadrupole channel, and (b) the fraction

of the beam distribution evolving outside the core. (σ0 = 100◦, η = 0.5, Lp = 0.5

m, σ/σ0 = 0.2, and ε = 50 mm-mrad).

show logarithmic scale emittance growth and 1% and 10% threshold contours

(dashed) are labeled separately. The extent of the envelope instability band

and Tiefenback’s stability threshold are indicated. Results for initial waterbag

and thermal distributions are similar, but the transition to instability has more

structure for the waterbag distribution. Strong growth regions in all cases are

qualitatively consistent with Tiefenback’s threshold. Emittance growth can-

not be attributed to KV-like modes internal to the beam[10,11]. Much of the

emittance growth is associated with particles that evolve signiﬁcantly outside

the core (see Fig. 2b) rendering any linear internal mode interpretation ques-

tionable. Also, many KV modes are strongly unstable (instabilities exist for

σ/σ0 < 0.3985 even in the continuous focusing limit) where no rms emittance

8

growth is observed. KV modes generally predict wrong parametric variations

of instability (thresholds bend the wrong way). Large internal modes also

possess little free energy to drive statistical emittance growth[8] and therefore

may not be dangerous if they saturate at small amplitudes.

Fig. 3.

(color online) Contours of emittance growth for an initial semi-Gaussian

distribution in a FODO quadrupole channel. (η = 0.5, Lp = 0.5 m, and ε = 50

mm-mrad).

3 Core-Particle model

Consider an unbunched beam of ions of charge q and mass m propagating

with axial velocity βbc (c is the speed of light in vacuuo) and relativistic

factor γb = 1/

1
q

−

β2
b . A linear applied focusing lattice is assumed, self-ﬁeld

interactions are electrostatic. Then the transverse orbit x(s) of a beam particle

evolves according to the paraxial equations of motion[7,8]

x′′ + κxx =

q
b β2
mγ3

b c2

∂φ
∂x

.

−

(2)

Here, s is the axial coordinate of a beam slice, primes denote derivatives with

respect to s, and κx(s) is the linear applied focusing function of the lattice

9

(speciﬁc forms can be found in Ref. [7]), and the electrostatic potential φ is

related to the number density of beam particles n by the Poisson equation

2
⊥φ =

∇

−

qn/ǫ0 in free-space. ǫ0 is the permittivity of free space.

The core of the beam is centered on-axis (x = 0 = y), and is uniform density

within an elliptical cross-section with edge radii rj (henceforth, j ranges over

both x and y) that obey the KV envelope equations

r′′
j + κjrj −

2Q

rx + ry −

ε2
j
r3
j

= 0.

(3)

Here, Q = qλ/(2πǫ0mγ3

b β2

b c2) = const is the dimensionless perveance, (λ =

qn(x = 0, y = 0)rxry = const is the beam line-charge density), and εj is the

rms edge emittance along the j-plane. We take εj ≡
focusing channel with lattice period Lp, κj(s + Lp) = κj(s), the envelope is

ε = const. For a periodic

called matched when it has the periodicity of the lattice, i.e., rj(s + Lp) =

rj(s). Undepressed particle phase advances are used to set the lattice focusing

functions κj using cos σ0 = (1/2)Tr M where M is the x or y plane transfer

map of a single particle (Q = 0) through one lattice period. We take the κj to

be piecewise constant with occupancy η

(0, 1]. The matched beam envelope

∈

ﬂutter varies only weakly with η but increases strongly with increasing σ0.

The depressed particle phase advance is calculated as σ = ε

Lp
0 ds/r2
j .
R

It can be shown that the ﬂutter of the matched beam envelope for periodic

FODO quadrupole focusing systems with piecewise constant κj(s) is given

approximately (for σ/σ0 ≪

1) by[12]

rx|max
¯rx −

1

(1

≃

−

cos σ0)1/2

(1
23/2(1

η/2)
2η/3)1/2

−
−

(4)

10

Here, η

(1/Lp)

(0, 1] is the occupancy of the quadrupoles in the lattice and ¯rx =

∈
Lp
0 ds rx. Equation (4) shows that envelope ﬂutter in a quadrupole
R

channel depends strongly on σ0 and weakly on η (the variation in rx|max/ ¯rx in
η is

13%).

∼

For a particle evolving both inside and outside the elliptical beam envelope,

Eq. (2) can be expressed as

′′
x

+ κxx =

2QFx
(rx + ry)rx

x,

(5)

with an analogous equation for the y-plane. Here, Fj are form factors satisfying

Fj = 1 inside the beam (x2/r2

x + y2/r2

1) and Fx = (rx + ry) rx

x Re[S] and

y ≤

Fy =

(rx + ry) ry

y Im[S] outside the beam (x2/r2

x + y2/r2

y > 1). S is a complex

−

variable deﬁned as S

z
−r2

y)[1

(r2
x

1
− r

−

≡

r2
−r2
x
y
z2

], where z = x+iy and i = √

1.

−

The particle equations of motion (5) are integrated numerically from initial

conditions. We typically launch particles with initial x and y coordinates out-

side the beam edge (i.e., x2/r2

y > 1) and with initial angles x′ and
y′ consistent with coherent ﬂutter motion of core particles extrapolated to

x + y2/r2

the location of the particle, i.e., with x′ = r′

xx/rx and y′ = r′

yy/ry. Di-

agnostics include particle trajectories, single particle emittances deﬁned by

ǫx =

(x/rx)2 + (xr′

x′rx)2/ε2

x (ǫx = 1 at the core distribution edge),

q

x −

stroboscopic Poincare phase space plots, and particle oscillation wavelengths

calculated from Fourier transforms of orbits. Particle trajectories and phase-

spaces analyzed in scaled units (e.g., with x–x′ projections scaled as x/rx–
(x′rx −
beam core.

r′
xx)/εx) to better illustrate oscillation extents relative to the matched

11

4 Core-Particle simulations

To illustrate the halo structure, we launch particles along the x-axis of the el-

liptical beam in speciﬁed regions outside the beam edge (e.g., x

with zero incoherent angle spreads (e.g., x′ = r′

[1.1, 1.2]rx)
xx/rx). Fig. 4 illustrates x–x′

∈

Poincare phase-spaces for particles launched with x

[1.1, 1.2]rx for ﬁxed σ0

∈

and two values of σ/σ0: (a) a high value (weak space-charge) well within the

stable region of Fig. 1, and (b) a low value (strong space charge) in the unsta-

ble region. The Poincare strobe is one lattice period. Scaled coordinates x/rx
and (x′rx −
core is plotted in red. Extrapolations of the range of initial launch conditions

x)/εx are plotted to remove envelope ﬂutter. The extent of the

xr′

are indicated in red based on the annular elliptical region formed if the initial

particle conditions evolved with constant single-particle emittance ǫx. Note

the large change in scale between the stable and unstable plots. For the stable

case, particles diving in and out of the matched envelope remain close to the

initial launch range and indicate a weak, high-order resonance. For the un-

stable case, numerous resonances near the core become stronger and overlap

causing the region immediately outside the core to break up into a stochas-

tic sea that closely approaches the core. A large, 4-lobe bounding resonance

(KAM surface) persists that ultimately limits the achievable particle oscilla-

tion amplitude. The phase advance of particles moving outside the envelope

is strongly amplitude dependent ranging from σ for amplitudes at the core

boundary to σ0 for very large amplitudes. Strong space charge (σ/σ0 ≪
and large matched envelope oscillations (large σ0) provide a strong pump at

1)

the lattice frequency. Numerous harmonics of particle orbits near the core

resonate with the lattice resulting in overlapping resonances that produce a

12

strongly chaotic region that approaches the core. This chaotic sea allows par-

ticles near the core to rapidly evolve to large amplitudes.

Fig. 4. (color online) Core-particle Poincare phase-spaces for σ0 = 100◦, σ/σ0 = 0.67

(a), and σ/σ0 = 0.2 (b). (Lp = 0.5 m, η = 0.5, ε = 50 mm-mrad).

A new stability criterion is adopted to estimate where chaotic halo orbits near

the beam core can degrade transport. When varying σ0 and σ/σ0, we deﬁne the

stability boundary to be the ﬁrst point when approached from stable regions

(low σ0) where particle groups launched near the core (e.g., x

[1.05, 1.10]rx)

∈

experience large increases in oscillation amplitude (e.g., Max[x/rx] increased to

1.5). Boundary points obtained when particles launched with x/rx ∈
increase in amplitude by factors of 1.5 (triangles) and 1.4 (squares) are plot-

[1.05, 1.10]

ted in Fig. 1. The boundary roughly tracks the region of strong emittance

growth observed in experiment and simulations until the envelope instability

band is approached. Results are relatively insensitive to the choice in initial

group radius and amplitude increase factor. Earlier work by Langiel[13] em-

ployed a core-particle model to analyze transport limits but implied overly

13

pessimistic stability criteria (σ0 < 60◦ and σ/σ0 > 0.4) seemingly based on

rough resonance overlap estimates.

Fig. 5. (color online) Beam stability boundary calculated from a core-particle model

for a FODO quadrupole channel. (Lp = 0.5 m, η = 0.5, ε = 50 mm-mrad).

Halo properties analyzed persist when particles have ﬁnite angular momen-

tum (not launched on-axis). Particles that leave the core in self-consistent

PIC simulations generate similar Poincare plots to the core-particle model for

a variety of initial distributions. Single particle emittance growths of

50

∼

are possible for particles near the beam edge that enter the halo in unstable

14

regions. If a signiﬁcant number of near-edge particles enter the halo, this can

result in strong increases in rms beam emittance and distortions in the beam

phase-space (both total and core). Particles leaving the core in unstable regions

rapidly grow in amplitude over a relatively small number of lattice periods –

consistent with PIC simulations. Moreover, as observed in simulations and ex-

periment, this halo induced mechanism for transport degradation is consistent

with increasing sensitivity to the beam distribution and edge perturbations as

the threshold region is approached. The core-particle model assumption of a

uniform density elliptical beam core is reasonable for strong space-charge due

to Debye screening and phase-mixing of initial perturbations. No periodic,

nonuniform density equilibria are known and core perturbations are observed

in PIC simulations to collectively evolve and disperse leaving smaller residual

ﬂuctuations and a rounded beam edge. Hence the uniform core model can pro-

vide a good approximation to the average impulse a halo particle experiences

while traveling through the oscillating core. If the edge of the beam distri-

bution is not sharp, as is expected for ﬁnite σ/σ0, a signiﬁcant population of

edge particles can enter the halo and be elevated to large amplitudes in unsta-

ble regions. Due to envelope ﬂutter, the spatial average temperature ¯Tx of a
beam with constant emittance εx will vary as ¯Tx ∝
beam envelope the temperature will oscillate with the period of the lattice

x. Thus, in a matched

x/r2
ε2

(360◦ phase advance), decreasing where the envelope contracts and conversely

decreasing where the envelope expands. For high σ0 these ﬂuctuations will

tend to increase leaving the edge out of force-balance. On the other hand, the

plasma response of the beam will have characteristic collective phase advance
σp = 180◦

√2Q This frequency will generally be incommensurate with and

Lp
rx

π

much slower than the temperature oscillations showing showing that the edge

of the beam will have a more diﬃcult time readapting to the focusing kicks

15

as σ0 increase and envelope ﬂutter becomes larger.

5 Conclusions

A core-particle model was used to analyze the previously unexplained ori-

gin of space-charge related transport limits of beams propagating in periodic

quadrupole focusing channels. It was shown that when matched beam enve-

lope oscillations and space-charge strength are both suﬃciently large, near-

edge particles oscillating both inside and outside the matched beam envelope

become chaotic and can experience large increases in oscillation amplitude.

This resonance halo need not be tenuous and is distinct from envelope mis-

match driven halo[14] because the driving oscillation is the fast ﬂutter of the

matched beam envelope rather than envelope mismatch modes. The matched

envelope ﬂutter becomes larger with increasing σ0, providing a strong pump

that further increases as beam space-charge forces become larger. Envelope os-

cillations also drive large temperature oscillations in the core of the matched

envelope. Because the collective response of the beam to local force imbalances

scales with the plasma frequency which is low relative to the lattice frequency,

it is unlikely that the beam edge can consistently adapt. Lack of edge self-

consistency in periodically focused beam distributions makes it plausible that

many near-edge particles can move suﬃciently outside the beam core to par-

take in the resonance. Consequently, large distortions in the beam phase-space

and large rms emittance growth can result. Stability thresholds based on this

resonance picture are in rough agreement with experimental measurements

and simulations. Analogous transport limits to the ones studied here will oc-

cur in other periodic focusing channels. Generally, unstable parameters will

16

diﬀer due to diﬀerent scaling of matched beam envelope ﬂutter. Envelope mis-

match also increases driving envelope excursions and introduces additional

frequencies – likely reducing the region of stable transport. Work is ongoing

to further clarify the processes described. Further details of this work can be

obtained on the arXiv e-print server[15] and in future publications.

B. Bukh and J. Barnard helped develop parts of the core-particle model. D.

Grote aided the WARP simulations. J. Barnard, I. Haber, E. Lee, and P. Seidl

provided useful discussions. This research was performed at LLNL and LBNL

under US DOE contact Nos. W-7405-Eng-48 and DE-AC03-76SF0098.

Acknowledgments

References

[1] M.G. Tiefenback and D. Keﬀe, IEEE Trans. Nuc. Sci., NS-32, 2483 (1985).

[2] M.G. Tiefenback, Space-Charge Limits on the Transport of Ion Beams, U.C.

Berkeley Ph. D thesis and Lawrence Berkeley Lab report LBL-22465 (1986).

[3] Simulations were carried out by Haber, Laslett, and colleagues that ﬁrst

suggested the limit. Partial results were reported in: I. Haber, IEEE Trans. Nucl.

Sci. NS-26 3090 (1979); I. Haber and A.W. Maschke, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42, 1479

(1979).

[4] J. Struckmeier, J. Klabunde, and M. Reiser, Particle Accel. 15, 47 (1984).

[5] A.W. Maschke, Heavy Ion Space Charge Limits, Technical Report BNL 20297,

Brookhaven National Laboratory, July 1975.

17

[6] S.M. Lund and S.R. Chawla, Space-Charge Transport Limits in Periodic

Channels, Proceedings of the 2005 Particle Accelerator Conference, Knoxville

TN, paper FPAP034.

[7] S.M. Lund and B. Bukh, PRSTAB 7 024801 (2004).

[8] M. Reiser, Theory and Design of Charged Particle Beams, (Wiley, 1994), and

references therein.

A 415 428 (1998).

[9] D.P. Grote, A. Friedman, I. Haber, W. Fawley, and J.-L. Vay, Nuc. Instr. Meth.

[10] I. Hofmann, L.J. Laslett, L. Smith, and I. Haber, Particle Accel. 13, 145 (1983).

[11] S.M. Lund and R.C. Davidson, Phys. Plasmas 5, 3028 (1998).

[12] E. P. Lee, Phys. Plasmas 9, 4301 (2002).

[13] J.-M. Lagniel, Nuc. Instr. Meth. A, 345 405 (1994).

[14] R.L. Gluckstern, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1247 (1994).

[15] S.M. Lund and S.R. Chawla, to be posted on http://www.arxiv.org.

18

