Flavor Physics and CP Violation Conference, Vancouver, 2006

1

Parameters for a Super-Flavor-Factory

J. T. Seeman, Y. Cai, S. Ecklund, A. Novokhatski, A. Seryi, M. Sullivan, and U. Wienands
SLAC, 2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA
M. Biagini and P. Raimondi
INFN, Frascati, Italy

6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
0
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Super Flavor Factory, an asymmetric energy e+e− collider with a luminosity of order 1036 cm−2s−1, can
provide a sensitive probe of new physics in the ﬂavor sector of the Standard Model. The success of the PEP-II
and KEKB asymmetric colliders [1, 2] in producing unprecedented luminosity above 1034 cm−2s−1 has taught
us about the accelerator physics of asymmetric e+e− colliders in a new parameter regime. Furthermore, the
success of the SLAC Linear Collider [3] and the subsequent work on the International Linear Collider [4] allow
a new Super-Flavor collider to also incorporate linear collider techniques. This note describes the parameters
of an asymmetric Flavor-Factory collider at a luminosity of order 1036 cm−2s−1at the Y(4S) resonance and
about 1035 cm−2s−1 at the τ production threshold. Such a collider would produce an integrated luminosity of
about 10,000 fb−1 (10 ab−1) in a running year (107 sec) at the Y(4S) resonance. In the following note only the
parameters relative to the Y(4S) resonance will be shown, the ones relative to the lower energy operations are
still under study.

1. Design from Past Successes

2. Design Status

The construction and operation of modern multi-
bunch e+e− colliders have brought about many ad-
vances in accelerator physics in the area of high cur-
rents, complex interaction regions, high beam-beam
tune shifts, high power RF systems, controlled beam
instabilities, rapid injection rates, and reliable upti-
mes (∼95%).

The present successful recent B-Factories have

proven that their design concepts are valid:
1) Colliders with asymmetric energies can work.
2) Beam-beam energy transparency conditions are
weak.
3) Interaction regions with two energies can work.
4) IR backgrounds can be handled successfully.
5) High current RF systems can be operated (3 A x1.8
A).
6) Beam-beam parameters can reach 0.06 to 0.09.
7) Injection rates are good and continuous injection is
done in production.
8) The electron cloud eﬀect (ECI) can be managed.
9) Bunch-by-bunch feedbacks at the 4 nsec spacing
work well.

Lessons learned from SLC and subsequent linear
collider studies (for ILC) and experiments (FFTB,
ATF, ATF2) have also shown new successful concepts:
1) Small horizontal and vertical emittances can be
produced in a damping ring with a short damping
time.
2) Very small beam spot sizes and beta functions can
be achieved at the interaction region.
3) Bunch length compression can be successfully per-
formed.

All of the above techniques can be incorporated in
the design of a future Super-Flavor Factory (Super-B)
collider.

fpcp06 121

The concept of combining linear and circular col-
lider ideas to make a linear-circular B-Factory was
discussed in the late 1980’s, although only circular B-
Factories were built in the 1990’s. Recent advances in
B-Factory performance and solid linear collider design
progress has reopened this design avenue. The design
presented here is very recent and on-going. The pa-
rameters presented here are preliminary but with the
intent to be self-consistent.

3. Luminosity

The design of a 1036 cm−2s−1 e+e− collider com-
bines extensions of the design of the present B Fac-
tories and linear collider concepts to allow improved
beam parameters to be achieved. The luminosity L in
an e+e− collider is given by the expression

L =

N +N −nbfcHd
4πσxσy

σ = pβǫ

where nb is the number of bunches, fc is the frequency
of collision of each bunch, N is the number of particles
in the positron (+) and electron (-) bunches, Hd is the
disruption enhancement factor from the collisions, σ
is the beam size in the horizontal (x) and vertical (y)
directions, ǫ is the beam emittance and β is the beta
function (cm) at the collision point for each plane.

4. Collider Concepts Studied at the First
Super-B Workshop

Schematic drawings of the Super-Flavor Factory as
initially considered at the First Super-B workshop [5]

2

Flavor Physics and CP Violation Conference, Vancouver, 2006

is shown in Figure 1. The operation is described here.
A positron bunch from a 2 GeV damping ring is ex-
tracted and accelerated to 7 GeV in a superconducting
(SC) linac. Simultaneously, an electron bunch is gen-
erated in a gun and accelerated in a separate SC linac
to 4 GeV. The two bunches are prepared to collide in a
transport line where the bunch lengths are shortened.
These bunches are focused to a small spot at the colli-
sions point and made to collide. The spent beams are
returned to their respective linacs with transport lines
where they return their energies to the SC accelera-
tor. The 2 GeV positrons are returned to the damping
ring to restore the low emittances. The spent electron
beam is discarded. The process is repeated with the
next bunch. It is expected that each bunch will col-
lide about 120 times each second and that there will be
about 10000 bunches. Thus, the collision rate is about
1.2 MHz. A small electron linac and a positron source
are used to replenish lost positrons in the colliding
process and natural beam lifetime. See Figure 1.

2 GeV e+ injection

2GeV
e+ DR

4 GeV e-

IP

7GeV e+

5GeV e+  SC Linac

4GeV e- SC Linac

e- Gun

e- Dump

 

Figure 1: Former Linearly Colliding Super-F Factory.

This scheme was necessary in order to save power
for cooling the beams that are heavily disrupted after
the collision. As shown in Fig. 2, the vertical emit-
tance growth in a single collision is about 300. Run-
ning the rings at low energy is the only mean to bring
the power requirements for the facility to the 100MW
levels.

Figure 2: Plot of the (y,y’) phase space after collision in
the earlier design. Each color refers to one longitudinal
bunch slice.

fpcp06 121

The scheme studied in [5] presents several complex-
ities and challenging requirements for several subsys-
In particular the low energy required for the
tems.
rings, in combination with the high current, low emit-
tance, small energy spread and short bunch length, is
more challenging than the already challenging solution
studied for ILC. Moreover, several technical solutions
proposed have never been tested and signiﬁcant R&D
and detailed studies, in order to ensure success, is re-
quired.

5. Design Progress Presented at the
Second Super-B Workshop

The IP parameters have been re-optimized in or-
der to minimize the disruption due to the beam-beam
forces. The proposed values, shown in Table I, do
produce a much smaller luminosity for a single pass,
but the emittance blowup for a single crossing is of
the order of a few parts in 103 and, thus, only mod-
est damping is needed between collisions. The ﬁrst
column parameters are the best found so far for the
previous scheme. The large energy spread at the IP
due to the bunch compression is compensated with
the monochromator scheme [6]. Unfortunately, the re-
quirements are extremely ambitious; the bunch charge
is much bigger than the ILC one (a factor 3.5), the
longitudinal emittance smaller (by factor 2) and the
energy spread, together with the small βy at the IP is
incompatible with the Final Focus bandwidth.

Fortunately, with the new scheme shown in Table I
column 2 and with such small blowup, it is possible
to increase the collision frequency, and collide contin-
uously in the ring with near ILC requirements. The
proposed parameters in the second column for the
DR are nearly the ones proposed for ILC except the
number of bunches is about 4 times larger. The re-
quired Final Focus is also exactly the one designed for
ILC with the energy rescaled. In Fig. 3 is shown the
schematic layout. Fig. 4 shows the optical functions
of the ILC damping ring that operates at 5GeV and
will be rescaled to 4 and 7 GeV.

6. Collision Parameters Optimization

Parameter optimization for this quasi-single pass
factory has been performed with the criteria described
in Section 4. Further studies and ideas could relax
the critical requirements, and they will continue. The
optimization for the “collisions in the ring” option is
based on the requirements to not have any need for
bunch compression and acceleration. The needs to
have small IP spot sizes, small beta functions and
tune shifts are satisﬁed with the combination of small
emittances and a crossing angle. The low emittances

Flavor Physics and CP Violation Conference, Vancouver, 2006

3

Table I Preliminary Super-F Factory collision parameters

2

−3

1st LNF Workshop 2nd LNF Workshop
Best Working Point Best Working Point
30 (1.0 σx betatron)
1.5 LER/–1.5 HER
12.6
1.25
0.080
0.100
−
2 × 10
−3
10
0.8
0.002
2.0
Optional
4.0
0.5 × 10
7.0
12000
6.7
6.0
10
50
12.0
1.5
1.1

2.67
0.0
12.6
8.9
0.080
6.0
−3
10
0.7 × 10
0.8
0.002
4.0
2*20
6.0
−3
10
2.0
12000
1.9
6.0
20
1
650
1.2
1.0

−3

σ∗
x (µm)
ηx (mm)
σ∗
y (nm)
β∗
x (mm)
β∗
y (mm)
σ∗
z (mm)
σ∗
E
σE Lum
ǫx (nm)
ǫy (nm)
ǫz (µm)
θx (mrad)
σz DR (mm)
σE DR
Npart (1010)
Nbunches
I (A)
CDR (km)
τx,y (ms)
Nturns bet. Coll.
fcoll (MHz)
Lsingleturn (1036)
Lmultiturn (1036)

reduce the beam sizes; the second one simultaneously
reduces the tune shift in both planes [7] and the lon-
gitudinal overlapping region. Since the interaction re-
gion now is short, it is possible to decrease the verti-
cal beta to very small values, further decreasing the
vertical size and tune shift. In addition, further mini-
mization of the beam-beam nonlinearities can be per-
formed [8], to greatly reduce the residual emittance
blowup due to the crossing angle.

Beam-beam studies have been performed with the
“GuineaPig” computer code by D. Schulte (CERN)
[9], which includes backgrounds calculations, pinch ef-
fect, kink instability, quantum eﬀects, energy loss, and
luminosity spectrum. This code has been intensely
used for ILC studies of beam-beam performances and
backgrounds. In addition the code has been upgraded
in order to evaluate the equilibrium parameters when
the collisions occur repeatedly in a ring. The beams
are tracked through the ring similarly to what is done
in [10], and the emittances and luminosity are eval-
uated after equilibrium is reached. Fig. 5 shows an
example of such tracking.

fpcp06 121

Figure 3: Super-Flavor Factory layout.

Figure 4: ILC Damping Ring optical functions.

Figure 5: Vertical emittance vs turn number.

4

Flavor Physics and CP Violation Conference, Vancouver, 2006

7. Interaction Region Parameters

The interaction region is being designed to leave
about the same longitudinal
free space as that
presently used by BABAR but with superconducting
quadrupole doublets as close to the interaction region
as possible [11].

Recent work at Brookhaven National Laboratory on
precision conductor placement of superconductors in
large-bore low-ﬁeld magnets has led to quadrupoles in
successful use in the interaction regions for the HERA
collider in Germany [12]. A minor redesign of these
magnets will work well for the Super F Factory.

A preliminary design of the Final Focus, similar to
the NLC/ILC ones, has been performed for the IP
parameters in Table I, second column. The total FF
length is about 70 m and the ﬁnal doublet is at 0.5m
from the IP. Such a Final Focus needs to be inserted
in one of the straight sections of the ring.

A plot of the optical functions in the incoming half
of the FF region is presented in Fig. 6, optical func-
tions in the ﬁnal doublet is in Fig. 7.

Figure 7: Optical functions in the ﬁnal doublet.

Figure 8: Plan view of a possible IR layout.

Figure 6: Optical functions in half Final Focus region.

9. Power Requirements

The need for a ﬁnite crossing angle at the IP greatly
simpliﬁes the IR design, since the two beams are now
naturally separated at the parasitic collisions. An ex-
panded view of a preliminary IR layout is shown in
Fig. 8.

The power required by a collider is the sum of a
site base and the accelerator operation. The damping
ring power (about 40 to 60 MW) to replace the syn-
chrotron radiation loss will be the dominant factor in
this Super-B Factory. Better estimates and optimiza-
tions are under study.

8. Injector Concept and Parameters

10. Synergy with ILC

The injector for the Super Flavor Collider will make
up for lost particles with the ﬁnite beam lifetime in
the damping rings and the losses from collisions. The
injector will be similar to the SLAC injector deliver-
ing about 5 x 1010 electrons or positrons per pulse at
about 40 Hz each.

There are many similarities between this linear
Super-B collider and the ILC. The project described
here will capitalize on R&D projects that have been
concluded or are on-going within the ILC collabora-
tion.

fpcp06 121

Flavor Physics and CP Violation Conference, Vancouver, 2006

5

The damping rings between the two projects are
now very similar. Main diﬀerences are the ring en-
ergies (5 GeV for the ILC-DR, 4 GeV and 7GeV for
the Super-B) and the number of bunches (3000 for
ILC, 12000 for Super-B). For the ILC the bunch num-
ber is mainly dictated by the LINAC requirements
and the need to have enough spacing for the fast ex-
traction scheme. These requirements are not needed
for the Super-F. Another critical factor is the need to
mitigate the electron cloud instabilities (ECI) in the
positron ring. This problem will be more severe in the
Super-F. ECI studies and R&D have to be performed
for both the ILC and Super-F to mitigate this eﬀect.
The interaction regions have very similar charac-
teristics with ﬂat beams and overall geometries. The
ratio of IP beta functions are similar (8-30 mm hori-
zontally and 0.08-0.5 mm vertically). The collimation
schemes are comparable. The chromatic corrections of
the ﬁnal doublets using sextupoles will be the same.
All beam bunches will need bunch-by-bunch feed-
backs to keep the beam instabilities and beam-beam
collisions under control. With the bunch spacing very
similar, the feedback kickers, digital controls, and
beam impedance remediation will have common de-
signs.

11. Other Upgrade Possibilities

The parameter optimization is continuously going
on and we hope to further reduce the criticality of
several machine constraints. In addition more care-
ful studies are needed to make sure that the current
constraints are valid.

Additional improvements are also being considered
for this design. In particular we are studying the pos-
sibility to have a moderate bunch compression in the
ring that could relax some of the parameters like emit-
tances and beta functions.

The present scheme seems very promising but, given
the rapid evolution of the concepts, it might still have
In addi-
some weak points that can jeopardize it.
tion new ideas and breakthroughs could also further
change and improve the design.

It has also to be pointed out that with the present
scheme the Super-B luminosity performance is a weak
function with respect to the total length of the ring.
It has been chosen to be 6km mainly for the synergy
with ILC, but if there are strong constrains in terms
of space and costs, it could be reduced together with
a re-optimization of the other parameters.

Acknowledgments

This document has come out of several recent
Super-B workshops, with the most recent one being
at LNF (Frascati, Italy) on March 16-18, 2006. We
appreciate very much the useful discussions with the
participants in these workshops. We also appreciate
the discussions of the parameters with members of the
ILC collaboration.

This work was supported in part by United States
Department of Energy contract DE-AC03-76SF00515.

References

[1] KEKB Status Report PAC 2005 Knoxville, TN.
[2] PEP-II Status report PAC2005 Knoxville, TN.
[3] The SLC Design Handbook, SLAC November

1984.

[4] International Linear Collider Technical Review
Committee, Second Report 2003, ICFA SLAC-
R-606.

[5] First LNF Workshop on SuperB, Frascati, Nov.

2005,
http://www.lnf.infn.it/conference/superbf05/.
[6] A. Dubrovin, A. Zholents, “A combined symmet-
ric and asymmetric B-factory with monochroma-
tization”, IEEE PAC 1991.
[7] D. Shatilov, M. Zobov,

in
Beam.Beam collisions with an arbitrary crossing
angle”, DAΦNE Tech. Note G-59, May 1003.
[8] P. Raimondi, 2nd LNF Workshop on Super-F,

“Tune

shift

Frascati, 16-18 March 2006,
http://www.lnf.infn.it/conference/superbf06/.

[9] D. Schulte,

“Study of electromagnetic and
hadronic background in the Interaction Region
of the TESLA Collider”, PhD Thesis, Hamburg,
1996.

[10] Y. Cai, A. Chao, S. Tzenov, “Simulation of the
bb eﬀects in e+e− storage ring with a method of
reduced region of mesh”, PRST, AB, Vol.4, 2001.
[11] M. Sullivan, LNF Workshop on Super-F, Frascati,

16-18 March 2006.

[12] B. Parker et al., “Superconducting Magnets for
use inside the HERA ep Interaction Regions,”
PAC 1999, New York, p. 308.

fpcp06 121

