6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
0
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ON VOLUME REFLECTION OF ULTRARELATIVISTIC PARTICLES IN
SINGLE CRYSTALS

V.A. Maisheev1
1 Institute for High Energy Physics, 142281, Protvino, Russia

Abstract

The analytical description of the volume reﬂection of the charged ultrarelativistic
particles in bent single crystals is considered. The relation describing the angle of
volume reﬂection as a function of the transversal energy is obtained. The diﬀerent
angle distributions of the scattered protons in the single crystals are found. Results of
calculations for 400 GeV protons scattered by the silicon single crystal are presented.

1 Introduction

The volume reﬂection of the charged particles in single crystals represents the coherent scat-
tering of these particles by planar or axial electric ﬁelds of bent crystallographic structures.
For the ﬁrst time, this eﬀect was predicted in Refs.[1, 2]. The angle of the volume reﬂection is
small enough (in order of the critical angle of the channeling). Because of this, it is thought
that this process did not show itself in experimental measurements. However, in the recent
reports [3, 4] the problems were discussed, which require the existing of volume reﬂection
eﬀect for explanation of proton collimation measurements. Besides, the preliminary results
of the experimental observation of the volume reﬂection were published [5, 6].

The recent meeting in CERN [7] which was devoted to problems of utilization of interac-
tions of proton beams with single crystals attract considerable interest to the phenomenon of
volume reﬂection due to new possibilities such as the collimation of collider beams [8, 9, 10],
creation of devises which can multiple the eﬀect [11] and so on. In the immediate future the
experimental study of the volume reﬂection eﬀect are scheduled on extracted proton beams
in CERN [12] and IHEP[13].

By now the main results of the theoretical investigation of the volume reﬂection are mainly
based on the Monte Carlo calculations. No doubt, this is very powerful method, however,
the analytical solution of the problem is very useful for understanding of the process and its
diﬀerent characteristics.. In this paper we consider such description of the volume reﬂection
eﬀect .

2 Motion in bent single crystals

The motion of the ultrarelativistic particles in the bent single crystals one can describe with
the help of the following equations[14, 15] :

E0β2v2

r /(2c2) + U(r) + E0β2(r − R)/r = E = const

dy/dt = vy = const
vz = rdφ/dt ≈ c(1 − (1/γ2 + v2

r + v2

y)/2)

(1)

(2)

(3)

1

These equations take place for cylindrical coordinate system (r, φ, y). Here vr is the com-
ponent of particle velocity in the radial direction, vy is the component of the velocity along
y-axis and vz is the tangential component of the velocity, R is the radius of bending of the
single crystal, E0 and γ are the particle energy and its Lorentz factor, E is the constant
value of the radial energy, U(r) is the one dimensional potential of the single crystal, c is the
velocity of light and β is the ratio of the particle velocity to velocity of light. In this paper
we consider the planar case when the scattering is due to interaction particles with the set
of the crystallographic planes located normally to (r, φ)-plane . On the practice it means
that vy/c ≫ θac but vy/c ≫ 1 for ultrarelativistic particles, where θac is the critical angle of
the axial channeling.

Eq.(1) one can transform in the following form:

E0β2v2

x/(2c2) + U(x) + E0β2x/R = E

(4)

where x is the local Cartesian coordinate which connected with the cylindrical coordinate r
through the relation x = r − R and vx = vr. We also change r-value in the denominator of
Eq.(1) on R. For real experimental situation it brings negligible mistake (in order of x/R).
In Eq.(4) E-value have a sense of the transversal energy.

The considered here equations describe the three dimensional motion of the particle in
the bent single crystal in the cylindrical coordinate system. Let us introduce the Cartesian
coordinate system in which the xy-plane is coincident with the front edge of a single crystal.
Now we can calculate x-component of the velocity in this system:

Vx = vx cos φ + vz sin φ ≈ vx + vzφ

(5)

Fig.1 illustrates the geometry of proton beam volume reﬂection and diﬀerent coordinate

systems which will be used in our consideration.

3 Angle of volume reﬂection

One can see that Eq.(4) describes one dimensional motion in the eﬀective potential Ue(x) =
U(x)+E0β2x/R. There are two diﬀerent kinds of the inﬁnite motion in the eﬀective potential.
One case corresponds to motion when particle after its entrance in single crystal move in
the direction of the increasing of potential ( in positive direction of x-axis). In this case the
velocity vx decrease and in some point xc become equal to zero and then particle begin to
move in the opposite direction. It corresponds to case when eﬀect of volume reﬂection is
possible. In the second case the particle after entrance in single crystal move in the negative
direction of the x-axis and volume reﬂection is impossible. Obviously, that the belonging
of a trajectory to some kind of events is determined by the initial conditions of particles at
entrance in the single crystal: the ﬁrst case takes place at the negative entering angles θ
relative to crystallographic planes. We also will consider below case when the absolute value
of θ is large than channeling angle θc.

The trajectory in x-direction (x0 ≤ x ≤ xc) up to point xc one can calculate as

t =

x

Z

x0

dx
2c2
E0β2 (E − U(x) − E0β2x/R)

,

q

(6)

where t is the time and t = 0 corresponds to coordinate x0 at entrance of the single crystal.
We can rewrite this equation in the following equivalent form:

t =

x

[

Z

x0

1
2c2
E0β2 (E − U(x) − E0β2x/R)

q

− F (x)]dx +

F (x)dx

(7)

x

Z

x0

2

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

where the function F (x) reads

F (x) =

1
2c2
E0β2 (E − U(xc) − E0β2x/R)

q

and the critical point xc is determined by the equation:

E − U(xc) − E0β2xc/R = 0

x
x0 F (x)dx describes the one dimension motion of a particle, which
Note that equation t =
R
do not interact with the electric ﬁeld of the single crystal. We name this case as the neutral
motion.

Taking the integral

x
x0 F (x)dx we get

R

t = T (x0, x) + R/c2(˜v(x0) − ˜v(x))

where

T (x0, x) = Z

x

[

x0

q

1
2c2
E0β2 (E − U(x) − E0β2x/R)

− F (x)]dx

and ˜v(x) is the velocity of the neutral motion in the point x of its trajectory:

˜v(x) =

2c2/(E0β2)(E − U(xc) − E0β2x/R)

q

The angle φ in Eq.(5) is approximately equal to Vzt/R ≈ V t/R ≈ ct/R For our aims the
small diﬀerence between Vz, V, c is of no signiﬁcance. We will use the relation: φ = ct/R.
Hence, Eq.(5) have the following form:

Vx = vx + vzct/R ≈ vx + c2t/R

Taking t from Eq.(10) one can get

Vx = vx + T (x0, x)c2/R + ˜v(x0) − ˜v(x)

Now we assume that the distance dvr = |xc − x0| is large enough. According to estimation
in Ref.[2] dvr ≫ θcR. Hence, Vx ≈ ˜v(x0) (vx ≈ ˜v(x), T (x0, x) ≈ 0) when the particle move
far from the critical point (near x0 point). It easy to see that in the critical point vx = 0,
˜v(x) = 0 and Vx = ˜v(x0) + T (x0, xc)c2/R. Using the obvious symmetrical properties of the
one dimensional motion we can get that for distant enough from critical point values x > xc
Vx = ˜v(x0) + 2T (x0, xc)c2/R. From here the angle of volume reﬂection α = 2T (x0, xc)c/R or
its explicit value have the following form:

α =

2c
R Z

xc

[

x0

1
2c2
E0β2 (E − U(x) − E0β2x/R)

q

− F (x)]dx

(15)

It is easy to understand the meaning of the F-function introduced in Eq.(8) . This
function allows one to eliminate the inﬂuence of the geometrical factors on the particle
motion in the cylindrical coordinate system. The visual picture of volume reﬂection may be
also observed in cylindrical coordinates r and φ. Really the trajectories of the charged and
neutral particles have the same critical radial coordinate rc but the diﬀerent values of φc.
The diﬀerence of φc-coordinates determines the angle of volume reﬂection.

3

4 Periodicity of volume reﬂection angle

Considering the volume reﬂection angle as a function of the transversal energy E one can
see that this function is periodic. The period is equal to

δE = E0β2d/R.

This fact one can get by the substitution x = x + d (d is the interplanar distance) and taking
into account the periodicity of potential U(x).

The transversal energy E have the following representation:

E = E0β2θ2/2 + U(x0) + E0β2x0/R

The replacement x0 on x0 + d corresponds to new energy E + δE. It means that the angle
α is periodic function of the initial coordinate x0.

The volume reﬂection angle is also a periodic function of the square of initial angle θ. In

this case the period is

δθ2 = 2d/R

It should be noted that periodicity of volume reﬂection angle relative to above pointed param-
eters violated if the condition dvr ≫ θcR is not satisﬁed or, in other words, at transformation
from one energy to another the distance |x0 − xc| should be large enough.

5 Particle distributions at volume reﬂection

In calculations we will assume that the distribution of the particle beam over the initial
coordinate x0 is uniform (in the limits of one period). If the function α(x0) (0 ≤ x0 ≤ d) is
known we can ﬁnd the distribution of particles over the angle of volume reﬂection with the
help of the following relation:

dN
dα

(α) =

1
d

|

dα
dx0

1

|−

Xi

where the sum over i means that the sum should be taken over every domain of the function
single-valuedness and the derivative dα/dx0 should be calculated for values x0i which satisfy
to equation α(x0i) = ˆα in which ˆα is the current (computed) value of the volume reﬂection
angle. Note Eq.(19) was obtained at the condition that the initial angle θ is ﬁxed. Besides,
in this paper we use the normalized to 1 the distribution functions.

In actual practice, the particle beam have some distribution over the initial angles. Ac-
cording to our consideration the distribution function over α dependent on the initial angle
value. On the other hand, the volume reﬂection angle is the periodic function of θ2-value. At
large enough θ-angles and small range of variation of this angle the angle α one can consider
as periodic function of the initial angle θ with the period:

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

6 − 10−
8
It easy to see that δθ is very small value. Simple estimations give values of δθ ∼ 10−
4 radian
radian for radius in the range 1- 100 m, correspondingly, for initial angle about 10−
and d about some angstroms. The real particle beams have signiﬁcantly more a broad angle
distribution. Assuming the uniform distribution of the initial angles within the angle period

δθ =

d
θR

4

δθ (at the assumption that divergence of beam satisﬁed the condition ∆θ ≪ θ) we get the
distribution averaged over its period

< dN/dα >=

δθ

1
δθ Z

0

dN
dα

dθ

(21)

This equation is obtained for physically narrow particle beam. Under this term we under-
stand the beam with the small divergence of initial angles, which in tens or more times
exceed the angle period in Eq.(20). The distribution of the beam with a valuable quantity
∆θ (however, ∆θ ≪ θ) have the following form

<

dN
dα

θ2

θ0

−

Z

θ0

θ1

−

dN
dα

(α) >∆θ=

ρb(ξ, θ0) <

(α − ξ) > dξ

(22)

where ρb(ξ, θ0) is the angle distribution of beam around the initial angle θ0, θ1 and θ2 are
minimal and maximal values of the initial angles (∆θ = θ2 − θ1). In this equation the angle
α is the planar angle relative to direction which is determined by θ0.

6 Inﬂuence of multiple scattering

The above-mentioned results of our consideration are appropriate for the ideal case only
when the dissipative processes in the body of single crystal are absent. The Monte Carlo
calculations can give detail consideration of these processes. Here we make attempt to take
into account the inﬂuence of the multiple scattering on the process of volume reﬂection in
the frame of the analytical description. However, in this case some realistic assumptions is
needed. As was said earlier the main contribution in integral describing the angle motion
of particle (see Eq. (15) ) give relatively not large a space area near the critical point xc.
Hence, we can assume that we can neglect by the myltyple scattering in this area.

The process of multiple scattering on the particle path from x0 till ∼ xc bring the variation
of the transversal energy E. Bearing in mind that the scattering can play the important role
in the small area near xc-coordinate we suppose that this factor may be taking into account
by the corresponding changing initial data (see Eq.(17)). We assume that the physically
narrow beam have the initial angle θ. Then we can consider that the initial distribution of
particles is following:

<

dN
dα

(α) >ms= Z

∞

−∞

ρ(ϕ, σ) <

(α − ϕ) > dϕ

(23)

where ρ(ϕ) = 1
√2πσ exp −(ϕ2/2σ2) is angle distribution of multiple scattering with the pa-
rameter σ depending on the distance ≈ |xc − x0|/θ. We also expect that the redistribution
of the initial coordinates is small and do not consider this factor. Here it is important that
the distribution of the particles within interplanar distance remains uniform.

Now we can obtain the angle distribution after single crystal for physically narrow beam:

<

dN
dα

∞

Z

−∞

(α) >exit=

ρ(ϕ, σ1) <

(α − ϕ) >ms dϕ

(24)

where σ1 depends on the distance ≈ |xe − xc|/θ (xe is the exit coordinate). Obviously the
similar relations one can get for more complicated distribution of the initial angles.

dN
dα

dN
dα

5

R, m ls, cm < θ > 105, radian < δθ > 106, radian Remark

25
25
25
25
10
10
10
10
5
5
5
5

0
0.125
0.25
0.5
0
0.05
0.1
0.2
0
0.025
0.05
0.1

1.52
1.52
1.51
1.45
1.39
1.38
1.38
1.38
1.14
1.14
1.14
1.14

Fig. 6, curve 1
Fig.7a, curve 1
Fig.7a, curve 2
Fig.7a, curve 3
Fig. 6, curve 2
Fig.7b, curve 1
Fig.7b, curve 2
Fig. 7b, curve 3
Fig.6, curve 3
Fig.7c curve 1
Fig.7c, curve 2
Fig.7c, curve 3

Table 1: The initial conditions for calculations of the entering angle distributions
and some results of these calculations
R is the bending radius, ls is the total length of the scattering, < θ > and < δθ > are the
mean angle and standard deviation of the distribution.

7 Calculations

In this section we demonstrate applications of obtained relations for calculations of the
speciﬁc cases volume reﬂection eﬀect. All our calculations will be done for energy of the
proton beam equal to 400 GeV, which was planned in CERN channeling experiment and for
the (110) plane of the silicon single crystal.

We start with detail consideration of calculation for proton beams, and then we also

touch the case of negative particles.

7.1 Atomic potential for calculations

In contrast to channeling regime the above-barrier particle move throughout all the points
of the potential and its inﬂuence on the motion of particle arises near critical point xc, where
the particle is located close to top of potential barrier for long time. Because of this, we
think that the correct choice of the one dimensional atomic potential is important problem.
Taking into account aforesaid we choose the one dimensional atomic potential according
to Ref.[16], where potential was calculated on the basis of the measurements of atomic form
factors with the use of x-rays [17]. For this aim we use the expansion of the potential in the
Fourier series. In a similar manner we ﬁnd the one dimensional electric ﬁeld and electron
density. All these characteristics were calculated at room temperature. It should be noted
that this potential was used for comparison of the theoretical description and experimental
results for coherent bremsstrahlung of 10 GeV positrons for the (110) plane of the silicon
single crystal [18] and in this work was shown very good agreement between theory and
measurements.

We also calculate the one dimensional potential and electric ﬁelds using the Moliere
approximation of atomic form factors. The forms of the both potentials and electric ﬁelds
are similar in between, but absolute values for the Moliere potential are larger approximately
on 10 % than for experimental one. So, the potential bariers are equal to 23.36 eV and 21.38
eV for Moliere and experimental approximations, correspondingly (see Fig. 2).

0.63
4.2
5.8
7.7
1.5
3.1
4.1
5.5
3.2
3.7
4.1
4.9

6

7.2 Calculation of volume reﬂection angle

Fig. 3 illustrates the calculated volume reﬂection angle as a function of the transversal energy
for several values of the radius. As expected, this function is periodic in accordance with
Eq.(16). However, we see that α(E) is a discontinuous function. The purpose is obvious: it
is a transition by bound from one potential cell to another. It is signiﬁcant that function
α(E) have a clear maximum and the value of the maximum decreases weakly with the radius
decreasing, We ﬁnd that the appearance of the maximum (or speciﬁcally, when derivative
dα/dE 6= 0) is connected with the form of the atomic potential. For some model potentials
(such as a parabolic or polynomial [16] (with several numbers of terms) potentials) the
maximum coincident with the point of discontinuity. For mentioned here model potentials is
typical incorrect description of the electric ﬁeld (electric ﬁeld is a discontinues function near
area of atomic location). Note that with the decreasing radius the interval of the possible
angles increases. It means that the angle divergence is small at large enough radii.

Knowledge of the function α(E) allow one to calculate the value α for given quantities
x0 and θ. Fig. 4 illustrate the volume reﬂection angle as a function of the initial coordinate.
Here the derivative dα(x0)/dx0 are also shown. There are two curves calculated at two
diﬀerent but very close in between initial angles θ within angle interval which determined
by Eq.(20). This fact shows the valuable variation of the α(x0)-function at small variations
of the initial angle.

7.3

Initial distributions of particles

Now we can ﬁnd the initial distribution over the volume reﬂection angle and at the ﬁxed
initial angle with the help of Eq.(19). Fig. 5 illustrates our calculations. As follows from
Fig.4 there are three value of angle α where the derivative dθ/dx0 is equal to zero (at ﬁxed
α+
θ). At these angles the distribution function dN/dα tends to +∞. However,
α− dN(α) = 1,
R
and α+ are the minimal and maximal values of α. Comparing the two distribution
where α
at diﬀerent values of θ-angle we see that only maximal value of α-angle is the same, but
the couples of other angles (at which the derivative are equal to zero) are diﬀerent. This
fact is explanation of a disappearance of the two peaks at the next averaging over θ-angle in
accordance with Eq.(21).

−

Our results of calculation according Eq.(19) we compared with the calculations by the

Mote Carlo method of the same distributions and got very good agreement in between.

The averaged over initial angles distributions are shown in Fig. 6 for several radii. As

expected the peak at maximum angle is conserved.

7.4 Entering angle distributions

As was considered the multiple scattering distorts the initial particle distribution. For cal-
culations of this factor we can ﬁnd the distance where particle is scattered according to
relation: lc = Rθ. Decreasing of angle θ decreases the distance lc. On the other hand, the
inequality lc ≫ Rθc should be fulﬁlled. Thus, we can ﬁnd that the optimal angle θ lies in
4 radian. It corresponds to lc = 0.125 − 0.25 cm for R = 25
the angle range 510−
m. We also should take into account the distance ld after critical point (see Fig. 1). Our
estimation (see Eqs.(23),(24)) show that the distribution form of the entering beam depends
on the total distance ls = lc + ld and practically independent of the relation between lc and
ld. Fig. 7 illustrates the results of calculations of the entering angle distributions at diﬀerent
radii. The initial (incoming) distribution we assume the physically narrow. The results of

5 − 10−

7

calculations are partially reﬂected in the table 1. From our calculations one can see that the
form of the outcoming angle distributions is close to Gaussian one.

The angle width of the incident beam in CERN experiment is expected about some micro-
radians. Then assuming its Gaussian form it is easy to ﬁnd the resulting angle distribution
after the bent single crystal. At the present time the precise Monte Carlo calculation of the
angle distributions for conditions of the future experiment in CERN were made [19]. How-
ever, we can say that our analytical description is consistent with these results and presents
the additional information.

7.5 Volume reﬂection of negatively charged particles

We carried out some calculations of parameters of volume reﬂection eﬀect for negatively
charged particles at energy 400 GeV. In particular, we calculate the angle of volume reﬂection
as a function of the transversal energy. For large enough radii ( ≈ 25m), the result is similar
as in Fig. 3 but the value of maximal angle is less in ≈ 1.8 times.

It should be noted, that one can expect some peculiarities in the volume reﬂection at
small enough radii of bending for both sorts of charged particles. Really at very small radii
the eﬀect of volume reﬂection should be disappear due to dominant value of the linear term in
eﬀective potential. Mathematically, the next condition should be satisﬁed: δE ≫ U0, where
U0 is the potential barrier of the usual one dimensional potential. For 400 GeV protons
(antiprotons) the equality δE = U0 takes place at R ≈ 3.5 m. We remind that through the
paper only the (011) plane of silicon single crystal is considered.

At the bending radii ∼ 3.5 and less the angle of reﬂection (for both sorts of charged
particles) may be of the diﬀerent signs, or, in other words, the particles may be scattered
in the opposite sides. Fig. 8 shows the angle of volume reﬂection as a function transversal
energy for R = 1 m and negatively charged particles. One can see that the particles scattered
mainly through relatively small angles, but there is the narrow range of a strong scattering
5 radian. Partially, we can explain this fact by the speciﬁc form of
through angles till 710−
the eﬀective potential (see Fig.8b). We can also explain the discontinuity of α(E)-function
(see Fig. 8a) by this reason.

Now using Eqs.(23) and (24) we ﬁnd the angle distribution after single crystal for physi-
cally narrow initial beam. For calculations we select the thickness of the single crystal ≈ 0.01
cm. Fig. 9 illustrates the results of our calculations. From here we get that ≈ 10, 3, 1
5 radians, corre-
percents of the beam scattered through angle more than 10−
spondingly.

5, 210−

5, 310−

8 Conclusions

Considered in paper analytical description of the process of volume reﬂection of charged
particles in bent single crystals allow one to ﬁnd necessary characteristic of scattered beam.
We think that suggested method may be useful at diﬀerent investigations at interactions
particles with single crystals. This method may be used as additional to Monte Carlo
calculations. Further development of our description is needed:

1) the process of the volume capture of particles in channeling regime should be included

in consideration with aim of the full description of the process;

2) the extension of the method on single crystals with the variable radius is very desirable.
We suppose that the ﬁrst point may be easy enough realized because the main cause of
the phenomenon is well-known. We believe that the second point may be also solved if take

8

into account that near the critical point the conﬁned periodicity of the volume reﬂection
angle takes place in some small volume of the bent single crystal.

9 Acknowledgements

Author would like to thank all the colleagues-participants of the CERN channeling experi-
ment for attention and fruitful discussions.

This work was partially supported by the grant INTAS-CERN 05-103-7525.

References

[1] A.M. Taratin, S.A. Vorobiev Physics Letter A, 425, (1987).

[2] A.M. Taratin, S.A. Vorobiev Nucl. Instr. Meth. B47, 247 (1990).

[3] R. P. Fliller et al., Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 9, 013501 (2006).

[4] N.V. Mokhov, et al., talk on channeling workshop, CERN, 8-9 March, 2006

[5] Yu.M.Ivanov et al., preprint PNPI-2005-2649,Gatchina,2005.

[6] W.Scandale et. al. First Observation of Proton Reﬂection from Bent Crystals. Talk on

EPAC, Edinburgh, 26-30 June 2006.

[7] CERN Channeling workshop, CERN, 8-9 March, 2006.

[8] W. Scandale, In: Proceedings of the LHC Workshop. G. Gartskog and D. Rein Editors,

Aachen, 1991, v.3, p.760.

[9] A.D. Kovalenko, A.M. Taratin, E.N. Tsyganov . Preprint JINR-E1–92-9, Jan. 1992.

[10] R.W. Assmann, S. Redaelli, W. Scandale. Optics Study for a Possible Crystal-based

Collimation System for the LHC. Talk on EPAC, Edinburgh, 26-30 June 2006.

[11] V. Guidi et. al. Characterization of Crystals for Steering of Protons through Channelling

in Hadronic Accelerator. Talk on EPAC, Edinburgh, 26-30 June 2006.

[12] M. Fiorini et. al. Experimental Study of Crystal Channeling at CERN-SPS for Beam-

halo Cleaning. Talk on EPAC, Edinburgh, 26-30 June 2006.

[13] Yu.A. Chesnokov, talk on channeling workshop, CERN, 8-9 March, 2006

[14] E.N. Tsyganov. Fermilab Preprint TM-682, TM-684 Batavia, 1976.

[15] X. Artru, S.P. Fomin, N.F. Shul’ga, K.A. Ispirian, N.K. Zhevago Physics Reports 412,

89 (2005).

[16] V.A. Maisheev, Nucl. Instr. Meth. B 119, 42, (1995).

[17] D.T. Cromer and J.T. Weber, Acta Cryst. 18, 104, (1965); ibid. 19, 224, (1965).

[18] N.K. Bulgakov et. al. Preprint JINR 1-83-621, Dubna,1983.

[19] A. M. Taratin, talk on channeling workshop, CERN, 8-9 March, 2006

9

Figure 1: Scheme of the volume reﬂection of the proton beam. XY Z is the Carte-
sian coordinate system at the entrance in single crystal, xyz is the local Cartesian
coordinate system connected with the current location of the particle. Y -axis is
directed normally to plane of ﬁgure. θ and α are the initial and volume reﬂection
angles.

enough

10

Figure 2: One dimensional potential (a) and electric ﬁeld (b) in the (110) plane
of the silicon single crystal (at room temperature). as functions of the relative
coordinate x/d, where d = 1.92 angstroms is the interplanar distance. The curves
1 and 2 correspond to calculations based on the experimental and Moliere atomic
form factors.

11

Figure 3: Angle of volume reﬂection as a function of the transversal energy for the
values of radius equal to 25 m (a), 10 m (b) and 5 m (c), respectively.

12

Figure 4: Angle of volume reﬂection (a) and its derivative (b) as functions of the
initial relative transversal coordinate x/d for radius equal to 25 m. The thick curves
4 radian and thin curves correspond to initial
correspond to initial angle θ = 10−
4 + 5.310−
angle θ = 10−

7 radian

13

Figure 5: Distribution of particles over the angle of volume reﬂection. Curves 1 and
2 calculated for the two diﬀerent initial angles (with the diﬀerence of these angles
< δθ) nearby θ = 0.0001 radian and for R = 25 m.

14

4 radian, distribu-
Figure 6: Averaged over period of initial angles nearby θ = 10−
tions of particles over the angle of volume reﬂection (a) . For visualization, the
step distributions (b) were obtained by integration of the distributions (a) in angle
7 radian. Curves 1, 2 and 3 correspond to values of radius
intervals equal to 10−
equal to 25, 15 and 10 m, respectively. For visualization, the y-coordinate for curves
2 and 3 are increased in 5 and 10 times for (a) and in 5 and 12 times for (b) cases.

15

Figure 7: Distributions of particles after volume reﬂection and multiple scattering
(at the output of single crystal) as functions ( of the deﬂection angle. Zero angle
corresponds to the initial direction of the beam. Calculation was made for diﬀerent
radii: 25 m (a), 10 m (b) and 5 m (c). For additional information see text and table.

16

Figure 8: One period of energy dependence of the volume reﬂection angle (a) and
eﬀective potential (b) for negative particles and for R = 1 m. The dotted line (in
(a)) shows the discontinuity of a function. The horizontal lines (in (b)) correspond
to energies at which the discontinuity takes place.

Figure 9: Angle.distribution of the negative particles after bent single crystal (R=
1m). The left part of the distribution are also shown with increasing of scale in 50
times. The thickness of the single crystal is equal to 0.01 cm.

17

