6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
9
2
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

August 19, 2013

11:43 Proceedings Trim Size: 9in x 6in

surrow

ERHIC - ACCELERATOR AND DETECTOR DESIGN
STUDIES

B. SURROW

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
E-mail: surrow@mit.edu

An electron-proton/ion collider facility (eRHIC) is under consideration at
Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL). An overview of the accelerator and de-
tector design concepts will be provided.

1. eRHIC accelerator design
The high energy, high intensity polarized electron/positron beam (5 −
10 GeV/10 GeV) facility (eRHIC) which is under consideration at BNL will
collide with the existing RHIC heavy ion (100 GeV per nucleon) and polar-
ized proton beam (50 − 250 GeV). This facility will allow to signiﬁcantly en-
hance the exploration of fundamental aspects of Quantum Chromodynam-
ics (QCD), the underlying quantum ﬁeld theory of strong interactions 1. A
detailed report on the accelerator and interaction region (IR) design of this
new collider facility has been completed based on studies performed jointly
by BNL and MIT-Bates in collaboration with BINP and DESY 2. The main
design option is based on the construction of a 10 GeV electron/positron
storage ring intersecting with one of the RHIC hadron beams. The electron
beam energy will be variable down to 5 GeV with minimal loss in luminos-
ity and polarization. The electron injector system will consist of linacs and
recirculators fed by a polarized electron source. A study has shown that
an ep luminosity of 4 × 1032cm−2s−1 can be achieved for the high-energy
mode (10 GeV on 250 GeV), if the electron beam facility is designed using
today’s state-of-the-art accelerator technology without an extensive R&D
program. A robust cost model has been worked out. For electron-gold ion
collisions (10 GeV on 100 GeV/u), the same design results in a luminos-
ity of 4 × 1030cm−2s−1. The potential to go to higher luminosities at the

1

August 19, 2013

11:43 Proceedings Trim Size: 9in x 6in

surrow

2

eRHIC event topology (Ee=10 GeV, Ep=250 GeV)

10 4

2

Q

10 3

10 2

10

1

-1

10

-2

10

-6

10

-5

10

-4

10

-3

10

-2

10

-1

10

1
x

Figure 1. Kinematic Q2-x plane for Ee = 10 GeV and Ep = 250 GeV showing the
direction and energy of the scattered electron and current jet. The scale is taken with
respect to the incoming electron and proton beams shown on the upper left corner.

level of 10 × 1032cm−2s−1 (high-energy ep mode) by increasing the elec-
tron beam intensity will be explored in the future. A polarized positron
beam of 10 GeV energy and high intensity will also be possible using the
process of self-polarization. A possible alternative design for eRHIC has
been presented on the basis of an energy recovery superconducting linac
(ERL) 2. This option would be restricted to electrons only. Preliminary es-
timates suggest that this design option could produce higher luminosities at
the level of 1034cm−2s−1 (high-energy ep mode). Signiﬁcant R&D eﬀorts
for the polarized electron source and for the energy recovery technology is
required. The existing RHIC heavy-ion and polarized pp collider facility
will require various additions such as the increase of the total stored beam
current by going to a 360 bunch mode. So far, only a 120 bunch mode has
been accomplished. An electron cooling system will be critical for the eA
running mode to achieve and maintain small beam emittances. An upgrade
of the beam source system (EBIS) is in preparation.

The eRHIC collider facility in comparison to other future high-energy
DIS collider based eﬀorts 3 is unique since it would allow for the ﬁrst time
to collide polarized electrons (positrons) on polarized protons as well as
electrons (positrons) on light to heavy nuclei.

August 19, 2013

11:43 Proceedings Trim Size: 9in x 6in

surrow

3

2. eRHIC detector design

The following minimal requirements on a future eRHIC detector can be
made:

• Measure precisely the energy and angle of the scattered electron

(Kinematics of DIS reaction)

• Measure hadronic ﬁnal state (Kinematics of DIS reaction, jet stud-
ies, ﬂavor tagging, fragmentation studies, particle ID system for
heavy ﬂavor physics and K/π separation)

• Missing transverse energy measurement (Events involving neutri-

nos in the ﬁnal state, electro-weak physics)

In addition to those demands on a central detector, the following forward

and rear detector systems are crucial:

• Zero-degree photon detector to control radiative corrections and
measure Bremsstrahlung photons for luminosity measurements
(absolute and relative with respect to diﬀerent ep spin combina-
tions)

• Tag electrons under small angles (< 1◦) to study the non-

perturbative and perturbative QCD transition region

• Tagging of forward particles (Diﬀraction and nuclear fragments)

Figure 1 shows the kinematic Q2-x plane for Ee = 10 GeV and Ep =
250 GeV with the direction and energy of the scattered electron and current
jet for several (Q2, x) points. In the low-Q2/low-x region both the scattered
electron and current jet are predominantly found in the rear direction with
energies well below 10 GeV. Good electron/hadron separation is essential.
Once x get larger, the current jet moves forward with larger energies and is
clearly separated from the scattered electron at low-Q2. At high-Q2/high-
x both the current jet and the scattered electron are found predominantly
in the barrel and forward direction with energies substantially larger then
10 GeV (electron) and 100 GeV (current-jet).

Optimizing all of the above requirements is a challenging task. Two
detector concepts have been considered so far. One, which focuses on
the rear/forward acceptance (Figure 1) and thus on low-x/high-x physics,
which emerges out of the HERA-III detector studies 4. This detector con-
cept is based on a compact system of tracking and central electromagnetic
calorimetry inside a magnetic dipole ﬁeld and calorimetric end-walls out-
side. Forward produced charged particles are bent into the detector volume

August 19, 2013

11:43 Proceedings Trim Size: 9in x 6in

surrow

4

which extends the rapidity coverage compared to existing detectors. A side
view of the detector arrangement is shown in Figure 2. The required ma-
chine element-free region amounts to roughly ±5m. This clearly limits the
achievable luminosity in a ring-ring conﬁguration.

Figure 2. Conceptual detector layout focusing on forward physics with a 7 m long dipole
ﬁeld and an interaction region without machine elements extending from −3.8 m to
+5.8 m.

The second design eﬀort focuses on a wide acceptance detector system
similar to the current HERA collider experiments H1 and ZEUS to allow
for the maximum possible Q2 range. The physics program demands high
luminosity and thus focusing machine elements in a ring-ring conﬁguration
have to be as close as possible to the IR while preserving good central de-
tector acceptance. This will be discussed in more detail in the next section.
A simulation and reconstruction package called ELECTRA has been devel-
oped to design a new eRHIC detector at BNL 5,6. Figure 3 shows a side
view of a GEANT detector implementation of the above requirements on a
central detector. The hermetic inner and outer tracking system including
the electromagnetic section of the barrel calorimeter is surrounded by an
axial magnetic ﬁeld. The forward calorimeter is subdivided into hadronic
and electromagnetic sections. Re-using the ZEUS uranium calorimeter is
under consideration. The rear and barrel electromagnetic calorimeter con-
sists of segmented towers, e.g. a tungsten-silicon type. This would allow
a fairly compact conﬁguration. The inner most double functioning dipole
and quadrupole magnets are located at a distance of ±3m from the IR. An
initial IR design assumed those inner most machine elements at ±1m. This
would signiﬁcantly impact the detector acceptance.

The bunch crossing frequency amounts to roughly 30 MHz. This sets
stringent requirements on the high-rate capability of the tracking system.
This makes a silicon-type detector for the inner tracking system (forward
and rear silicon disks together with several silicon barrel layers) together
with several GEM-type outer tracking layers a potential choice. The for-

August 19, 2013

11:43 Proceedings Trim Size: 9in x 6in

surrow

5

Figure 3. Side view of the GEANT detector implementation as part of the ELECTRA
simulation and reconstruction package. A deep-inelastic scattering event resulting from
a LEPTO simulation is overlayed with Q2 = 361 GeV2 and x = 0.45 which is also drawn
in Figure 1.

ward and rear detector systems have not been considered so far. The design
and location of those detector systems has to be worked out in close collab-
oration to accelerator physicists since machine magnets will be potentially
employed as spectrometer magnets and thus determine the actual detec-
tor acceptance and ultimately the ﬁnal location.
It is understood that
demands on optimizing the rear/forward detector acceptance might have
consequences on the machine layout and is therefore an iterative process.

3. Considerations on the accelerator/detector interface

The following section provides an overview of some aspects of the detec-
tor/machine interface. The speciﬁcation of those items has only recently
been started.

The direct synchrotron radiation has to pass through the entire IR be-
fore hitting a rear absorber system. This requires that the geometry of the
beam pipe is designed appropriately with changing shape along the longitu-
dinal beam direction which includes besides a simulation of the mechanical
stress also the simulation of a cooling system of the inner beam pipe. The
beam pipe design has to include in addition the requirement to maximize
the detector acceptance in the rear and forward direction. Furthermore the
amount of dead material has to be minimized in particular to limit mul-
tiple scattering (track reconstruction) and energy loss for particles under
shallow angles (energy reconstruction). The distribution of backscattered
synchrotron radiation into the actual detector volume has to be carefully

August 19, 2013

11:43 Proceedings Trim Size: 9in x 6in

surrow

6

evaluated. An installation of a collimator system has to be worked out.
Those items have been started in close contact to previous experience at
HERA 7.

The demand of a high luminosity ep/eA collider facility requires the
installaton of focusing machine elements as close as possible to the central
detector. An IR design with machine elements at ±1 m to the IR would sig-
niﬁcantly limit the achievable detector acceptance. A new scheme provides
a machine-element free region of ±3 m at the expense of approximately half
the luminosity 8. This concept is based on dipole windings as part of the
detector solenoid to also achieve an early bend of the electron beam. A
linac-ring option would not be limited by beam-beam eﬀects compared to
a ring-ring conﬁguration. Even larger luminosities could be achieved with
a machine-element free region of approximatley ±5 m.

The need for acceptance of scattered electrons beyond the central
detector acceptance is driven by the need for luminosity measurements
through ep/eA Bremsstrahlung and photo-production physics. Besides that
a calorimeter setup to tag radiated photons from initial-state radiation and
Bremsstrahlung will be necessary. The scattered electrons will pass through
the machine elements and leave the beam pipe through special exist win-
dows. The simulation of various small-angle calorimeter setups has been
started. This will require a close collaboration with the eRHIC machine
design eﬀorts to aim for an optimal detector setup.

The forward tagging system beyond the central detector will play a
crucial role in diﬀractive ep/eA physics. The design of a forward tagger
system based on forward calorimetry and Roman pot stations is foreseen.
Charged particles will be deﬂected by forward machine elements. This eﬀort
will require as well a close collaboration with the eRHIC machine design
eﬀorts to ensure the best possible forward detector acceptance.

References

1. A. Deshpande et al., Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 50 (2006) 1.
2. M. Farkhondeh et al., ‘eRHIC Zeroth-Order Design Report’, BNL internal

note, http://www.agsrhichome.bnl.gov/eRHIC/.

3. J. Dainton, these proceedings.
4. I. Abt, A. Caldwell, X. Liu and J. Sutiak, hep-ex/0407053.
5. A. Deshpande, J. Pasukonis and B. Surrow, Published contribution at PAC05,

May 2005, Knoxville.

6. J. Pasukonis and B. Surrow, http://starmac.lns.mit.edu/
7. J. Beebe-Wang et al., Published contribution at PAC05, May 2005, Knoxville.
8. C. Montag et al., Published contribution at PAC05, May 2005, Knoxville.

erhic/electra/.

∼

