Design considerations for table-top, laser-based VUV and X-ray free electron lasers

F. Gr¨uner,1, ∗ S. Becker,1 U. Schramm,1 T. Eichner,1 R. Weingartner,1 D. Habs,1 J. Meyer-ter-Vehn,2
M. Geissler,2 M. Ferrario,3 L. Seraﬁni,3 B. van der Geer,4 H. Backe,5 W. Lauth,5 and S. Reiche6
1Department of Physics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨at M¨unchen, 85748 Garching, Germany
2Max-Planck Institute of Quantum Optics, 85748 Garching, Germany
3INFN, 00044 Frascati, Italy
4Pulsar Physics, 3762 Soest, The Netherlands
5Institute of Nuclear Physics, Mainz, Germany
6University of California Los Angelos, UCLA, Los Angelos, USA
(Dated: 13.12.2006)

A recent breakthrough in laser-plasma accelerators, based upon ultrashort high-intensity lasers,
demonstrated the generation of quasi-monoenergetic GeV-electrons. With future Petawatt lasers
ultra-high beam currents of ∼ 100 kA in ∼ 10 fs can be expected, allowing for drastic reduction in
the undulator length of free-electron-lasers (FELs). We present a discussion of the key aspects of
a table-top FEL design, including energy loss and chirps induced by space-charge and wakeﬁelds.
These eﬀects become important for an optimized table-top FEL operation. A ﬁrst proof-of-principle
VUV case is considered as well as a table-top X-ray-FEL which may open a brilliant light source
also for new ways in clinical diagnostics.

PACS numbers: 41.60.Cr,52.38.Kd

INTRODUCTION

the bubble electrons form a stem that is geometrically
considerably smaller than the bubble as seen in Fig. 1.

6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
2
1
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The pursuit of table-top FELs combines two rapidly de-
veloping ﬁelds: laser-plasma accelerators, where the gen-
eration of intense quasi-monoenergetic electron bunches
up to the GeV range has been achieved [1, 2, 3, 4], and
on the other hand large-scale X-ray free-electron lasers
(XFELs) that are expected to deliver photon beams with
unprecedented peak brilliance. A prominent application
of such FEL pulses is single molecule imaging [5]. The
proposed laser-plasma accelerator-based FELs would not
only allow a greater availability due to their smaller size
and costs, but also oﬀer new features, such as pulses syn-
chronized to the phase-controlled few-cycle driver laser
[6] for pump-probe experiments. Moreover, the X-ray
energy of a table-top XFEL can be as large as required
for medical diagnostics (above 20 keV [7]).

The mechanism for the generation of

intense (nC
charge) quasi-monoenergetic electron pulses by laser-
plasma accelerators requires an ultrashort, high-intensity
laser-pulse with a length shorter than the plasma wave-
length (on the µm-scale corresponding to gas densities
of 1019 cm−3). Due to the ponderomotive force, plasma
electrons are blown out transversely, leaving an electron-
free zone - the bubble - behind the laser pulse [8]. These
electrons return to the axis after half a plasma oscillation,
thus determining the size of the bubble in the order of the
plasma wavelength. Typically about 109...1010 electrons
are captured into the bubble, as found both experimen-
tally and from scaling laws of relevant bubble param-
eters within the framework of similarity arguments [9].
Due to the inertial positive ion background, these elec-
trons experience a strong electrical ﬁeld gradient of up to
TV/m. Particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations [10] show that

FIG. 1: (Color online) Snapshot of electron density (in units
−3) from PIC simulation. The geometrical size
of 1020 cm
of the electron-free cavity (“bubble”) behind the laser spot
corresponds to the plasma period, which is about 8 µm in
−3). The stem of the high-
this case (gas density 1.8 · 1019 cm
energy electrons is much shorter than the plasma period.

For these dimensions, beam currents of the order of
10 fs) can be
1 nC charge within
100 kA (i.e.

∼
reached without the need for any bunch compressor.
For preparation of the required gas densities, either su-
personic gas-jets or capillaries [11] are used, the latter
300 µm-thin gas-ﬁlled channel with a
consisting of a

∼

∼

∼

·

∼

−

[4], utilizing a 40

parabolic radial ion density proﬁle generated by a second
laser pulse or discharge. The advantage of the capillary is
that the laser can be guided beyond the Rayleigh length
allowing longer acceleration distances and hence higher
electron energies. The very recent experiments by Lee-
mans et al.
TW laser pulse of 38 fs
1018 cm−3, clearly
duration and a gas density of 4.3
show that 1 GeV electron beams can now be produced
with capillaries. However, the measured charge of 30 pC
is signiﬁcantly below our design goal of 1 nC. In order
to further improve the resulting current, we propose the
scheme described below. The number of bubble electrons
can be increased when using plasmas with higher density
such as in Fig. 1, because the feeding process is more ef-
ﬁcient if more plasma electrons are present. An increased
gas density requires shorter laser-pulses (sub-10-fs), such
that the entire laser pulse ﬁts into one plasma period.
In this case, the entire laser pulse energy can be used,
while longer pulses lose energy during self-shortening for
entering the bubble regime. Therefore, in contrast to
all previous laser-acceleration experiments, we propose
to use a diﬀerent driver laser, namely a
5 fs-Petawatt
laser (like the Petawatt-Field-Synthesizer PFS at MPQ
[12]). Own PIC simulations show that such ultrashort
lasers can capture more than 1 nC charge inside the bub-
ble. The smaller plasma period leads to smaller bubbles,
hence shorter bubble stems and thus higher currents (1
nC in 10 fs). However, the expected ﬁnal energy in the
bubble regime is, according to the scaling laws, lower
for shorter laser pulses. To overcome this limit, we also
propose to use a capillary and suggest the following sce-
nario therein: with a longitudinal plasma density gradi-
ent, the laser pulse can be forced to gradually increase its
diameter, thus adiabatically turning from the pure bub-
ble regime into the pure blow-out regime long before the
laser is depleted. Fig. 1 shows a snapshot of a bubble
around the transition from the bubble to the blow-out
regime, where the electrons blown away from the laser
and ﬂowing around the bubble are so strongly deﬂected
by the electric ﬁeld of the captured bubble electons, that
electrons are no more scattered into the bubble (which
is not charge-neutralized yet). The number and abso-
lute energy spread of the bubble electrons is thus frozen,
but their energy is still increased due to the present bub-
ble ﬁelds. The remaining energy of the laser allows to
maintain the bubble structure for the remaining distance
inside the capillary, where the laser is then guided along
to overcome the Rayleigh limit. Only for this stage with
increased laser beam size, the capillary-induced guiding is
relevant. Note that this scheme is a two-stage approach,
but within one and the same capillary, where the laser
turns adiabatically from one stage into the other. It can
be expected that the energy spread for 100 MeV is about
1 % (as conﬁrmed by measurements [2]), but 0.1% for 1
GeV [13]. Normalized emittances are found both from
1
simulations and experiments to range between 0.1

−

2

(1)

(2)

mrad.
mm
·

TABLE-TOP FREE-ELECTRON-LASERS

An FEL requires an undulator which is an arrange-
ment of magnets with an alternating transverse magnetic
ﬁeld. Electrons in an undulator are forced on a sinusoidal
trajectory and can thus couple with a co-propagating
radiation ﬁeld. The induced energy modulation yields
a current modulation from the dispersion of the undu-
lator ﬁeld. This modulation is called micro-bunching
expressing the fact that the electrons are grouped into
small bunches separated by a ﬁxed distance. There-
fore, electrons emit coherent radiation with a wavelength
equal to the periodic length between the micro-bunches.
In a Self-Ampliﬁcation of Spontaneous Emission (SASE)
FEL, there is no initial radiation ﬁeld and the seed has
to be built up by the spontaneous (incoherent) emission
[14].
We present quantitative arguments, which are comple-
mented by SASE FEL (GENESIS 1.3 [15]) simulations.
The gain length, which is the e-folding length of the ex-
ponential ampliﬁcation of the radiation power, is

Lgain,ideal =

λu
4π√3ρ

,

with undulator period λu and the basic scaling parame-
ter ρ. This Pierce or FEL parameter describes the conver-
sion eﬃciency from the electron beam power into the FEL
radiation power and reads for the one-dimensional and
ideal case (neglecting energy spread, emittance, diﬀrac-
tion, and time-dependence) [14, 16]

ρ =

1
2γ "

I
IA (cid:18)

λuAu
2πσx (cid:19)

#

1/3

2

.

·

·

−

λu[cm]

u/(2(1 + a2

Here γ = Ebeam/mc2 is the electron beam energy, I
the beam current, IA = 17kA the Alfven-current, σx the
beam size and Au = au[J0(ζ)
J1(ζ)] (planar undula-
u = K 2/2, K the undulator parameter
tor), whereby a2
B0[T ] and B0 the magnetic ﬁeld
(K = 0.93
strength on the undulator axis), ζ = a2
u)), and
J are Bessel functions.
In presence of energy spread,
emittance, and diﬀraction, a correction factor Λ is intro-
duced for the gain length [16]: Lgain = Lgain,ideal(1 + Λ).
The saturation length Lsat is the length along the undu-
lator at which maximum micro-bunching is reached. The
power of the FEL radiation at this point is the saturation
power Psat, while the shot noise power Pn is the power
of the spontaneous undulator radiation from which the
SASE FEL starts. The coupling factor α = 1/9 describes
the eﬃciency at which the noise power couples to the FEL
gain process. The saturation length reads

3

Psat
Lsat = Lgain ·
Pn
α
where the saturation power scales as

ln(

·

),

saturation
length

20

degradation

6

4

2

L

Psat ∼

2

1
1 + Λ

(I

λu)4/3.

·

(cid:19)
The FEL-wavelength is, in case of a planar undulator,

(cid:18)

m

 
/

t
a
s
L

10

0

0

40

120 160

80
I/ kA

(3)

(4)

(5)

0

0

40

80

I/ kA

120

160

FIG. 2: Saturation lengths (Eq. 3) and (inset) degradation
factor Λ as a function of electron beam current I: DESY’s
FLASH (dashed curve, triangle) and the table-top VUV sce-
nario (solid line). The circles denote speciﬁc GENESIS runs.

sources: (i) its own space-charge, driving a Coulomb-
explosion, i.e. (transverse) space-charge expansion and
(longitudinal) debunching, and (ii) its initial divergence,
which drives a linear transverse expansion. Such ex-
pansions transform potential energy into kinetic, hence
changing the initial energy distribution and bunch form.
First, we want to discuss an extreme case, that is, an
upper limit of the charge that can be expected from a
laser-plasma accelerator at lower energies. For this study
we take a beam energy of γ0 = 260, 1.25 nC charge, and
a Gaussian bunch with sizes σx,y,z = 1µm, correspond-
ing to I = 150 kA, and an initial divergence of θ0 = 1
mrad. In the rest frame of the bunch, its length amounts
to σ′
γ0 = 260 µm. For such an aspect-ratio, the
transverse Coulomb-explosion dominates over the longi-
tudinal one (GPT [18] simulations reveal that after a time
period of 1 ps σ′
z = 268 µm). Fig. 3
shows the electron distribution in the bunch rest frame
from the GPT simulations.

x = 73 µm, while σ′

z = σz ·

λ =

λu
2γ2

K 2
2

.

(cid:21)

1 +

(cid:20)

Thus, for reaching a certain wavelength λ, a shorter
undulator period λu allows using less energetic electrons.
In the following Tab. 1 and Fig. 2, we compare the
FLASH VUV FEL (DESY) in the so-called femtosecond
mode [17] with our corresponding table-top VUV FEL as
well as a table-top XFEL operating with 1.2 GeV elec-
trons, discussed further below.

TABLE I: Parameters for the comparison between the DESY
femtosecond-mode Flash-VUV case and the corresponding
table-top VUV FEL as well as a table-top X-ray FEL (rms
values).

Parameter FLASH (fs) TT-VUV-FEL TT-XFEL
current
norm. emitt.
beam size
energy
energy spread
und. period
wavelength
Pierce par.
sat. length
pulse length
sat. power

1.3 kA
6 mm· mrad
170 µm
461.5 MeV
0.04 %
27.3 mm
30 nm
0.002
19 m
55 fs
0.8 GW

50 kA
1 mm· mrad
30 µm
150 MeV
0.5 %
5 mm
32 nm
0.01
0.8 m
4 fs
2.0 GW

160 kA
1 mm· mrad
30 µm
1.74 GeV
0.1 %
5 mm
0.25 nm
0.0015
5 m
4 fs
58 GW

The importance of the ultra-high current in the table-
top case is evident. The smaller undulator period allows
a smaller beam energy, hence decreasing the gain and
saturation lengths. The Pierce parameter gives the upper
limit of the acceptable energy spread σγ/γ. Thus, for
compensating the relatively large energy spread of laser-
plasma accelerators and for maintaining a large output
power, a beam current signiﬁcantly above
17 kA is
mandatory for keeping ρ large and Λ small.

∼

Space charge eﬀects

FIG. 3: (Color online) Projected spatial electron distribution
within the bunch rest frame in the extreme case, at τ = 0 s
(left) and τ = 4 ps (right), from a GPT run. The color code
indicates the electron energy (blue is initial kinetic energy,
red is increased energy). The transverse expansion is clearly
dominating.

Such ultra-high beam currents are subject to strong
space-charge forces. After release into vacuum, the elec-
tron bunch starts expanding, for which there are two

It can be seen that the transverse Coulomb explo-
sion dominates the longitudinal one. We want to em-

′

β

±

≈

β′ in beam direction, γ = γ0

phasize here that studies of space-charge eﬀects of such
ultra-dense relativistic bunches can be simulated most
accurately only with codes (such as GPT and CSRtrack
[19]) which utilize point-to-point interactions (a result
also found in Ref. [20]). In contrast, other codes merely
based upon Poisson-solvers cannot cope with large rela-
tive particle motions within the bunch rest frame in case
of large initial energy spreads and Coulomb explosion-
induced motion.
In comparison with the Coulomb-driven explosion, the
linear divergence-driven transverse expansion is even
larger: after a distance of 1 cm in the laboratory frame,
the beam size is increased to 10 µm, while transverse
Coulomb-explosion yields 6 µm only. Hence, even in the
extreme case the transverse bunch expansion is domi-
nated by the initial divergence and for lower charges this
dominance increases. If γ0 is the bunch energy just be-
fore release into vacuum, γ′ and β′ the energy and ve-
locity of a test electron in the bunch rest frame, γ and
1 its laboratory frame energy and velocity, then one
β
can clearly distinguish between a transverse-dominated
expansion and a longitudinal-dominated one: in the ﬁrst
case, where the electron moves in the rest frame with ve-
γ′, while
along transverse direction, γ = γ0
locity
in the latter case, where the electron moves with velocity
β′). Hence, in
±
a purely transverse expansion all electrons gain kinetic
energy, while in a purely longitudinal expansion, some
electrons lose energy. The inset of Fig. 4 shows the
absolute kinetic electron energy distribution along the
bunch at a distance of z = 3 cm after its release into
vacuum (in case of 0.6 nC). This spectrum shows that
the bunch under study undergoes mostly a transverse
expansion. The maximum energy gain lies in the middle
of the bunch, where the density is highest, i.e., where
initially the highest potential energy was stored. That
the space-charge driven transverse expansion is weaker
than the divergence-driven one is also conﬁrmed by the
fact that (even in the extreme case) the divergence is
increased only to 1.3 mrad. After passing a focusing sys-
tem (a triplet of quadrupoles, positioned at z = 4 cm,
having a length of about 10 cm), the Gaussian-like en-
ergy distribution is transformed into a quasi-linear one,
as depicted in Fig. 4. The reason is that in the result-
ing quasi-collimated low-divergence beam faster electrons
can catch up the slower ones. Note that after z = 3 cm
(inset) the fastest electrons are symmetrically distributed
around the middle of the bunch. These electrons start
overtaking the slower ones, that is, they move forward
within the bunch.
If initially longitudinal debunching
dominates, the fastest electrons are found in the head
and the slowest ones in the tail of the bunch.

γ′

(1

±

·

·

·

A key parameter for SASE to occur is the energy
spread σγ/γ, which must always be smaller than the
Pierce parameter ρ. The relevant energy spread is taken
over a bunch slice with the size of one cooperation

4

280

g

255

-2

s/ mm

2

290

300

g

260

240

-4

-2

0
s/ mm

2

FIG. 4: Energy vs. position (in co-moving frame) along the
bunch before entering the undulator (GPT simulation): the
Gaussian-like distribution after a drift of z = 3 cm behind
the gas-jet (inset), indicating a transverse-dominated bunch
expansion, is stretched into a quasi-linear one behind the fo-
cusing system. The vertical lines show the slice energy spread
σγ and the horizontal lines mark the initial energy γ0 = 260.

length, i.e.
the slippage length of the radiation along
the bunch over one gain length. As seen in Fig. 4,
a large fraction of the bunch fulﬁlls σγ/γ < ρ. Due
to the slippage of the radiation relative to the bunch,
the linear energy chirp must be compensated, because
(5) increases along the
the energy factor γ in Eq.
bunch. However,
in case of short-period undulators
the gap is correspondingly small (typically one third
of the undulator period) and such small gaps lead to
strong wakeﬁelds also causing an energy variation along
the bunch [24].
In case of ultrashort bunches, the
characteristic length of the resistive wake potential is
longer than the bunch length and, hence, the energy
change is found to be negative with a linear few-percent
variation along the bunch. This in turn implies that
the bunch as a whole is decelerated during the passage
of the undulator, whereby the head loses less energy
than the tail. It turns out that the linear energy chirp
induced by space-charge corresponds well with the
wakeﬁeld-induced slowing down of the entire electron
bunch. Therefore, the radiation slipping in forward
direction interacts with electrons of eﬀectively constant
energy, if by varying the gap the bunch energy loss is
tuned with respect to the slippage. In other words, the
space-charge eﬀects and the wakeﬁeld eﬀects cancel each
other. We have found with simulations that for a ﬁrst
proof-of-principle of a table-top FEL the comparably
low energy of 130
150 MeV is well suited to cope
with the wakeﬁelds in the undulator. In this sense the
table-top VUV case given in Tab. 1 can be regarded as
an optimal test case.
Coherent synchrotron radiation (CSR) [21] as another
source for increasing the (slice) energy spread within
the undulator was found to have negligible impact. This

−

was shown with CSRtrack simulations which take into
account that in our cases the bunches have a much larger
1 µm).
transverse size (σx,y ∼

30 µm) than length (σz ∼

Table-top XFEL

So far we have discussed a proof-of-principle scenario
at relatively low electron energies, where space-charge
eﬀects play a dominant role leading to a linear energy
chirp. The situation of the proposed table-top X-FEL
(TT-XFEL) is diﬀerent. For reaching a wavelength of
λ = 0.25 nm, an electron energy of 1.74 GeV is needed
in case of a period of λu = 5 mm. Space charge ef-
fects are much weaker here. For this less demanding sit-
uation we have conﬁrmed with four diﬀerent simulation
codes (GPT, ASTRA [22], CSRtrack, HOMDYN [23])
that above 1 GeV, with the same parameters as in the
extreme case given above, Coulomb-explosion leads to a
projected energy chirp of below 0.3% and a bunch elon-
gation with a factor below 1.1. Furthermore, CSR can be
neglected in agreement with the 1D theory. Experimen-
tally the most demanding constraint is that the Pierce
parameter is one order of magnitude smaller than in the
test case at 130 MeV, hence the electron (slice) energy
spread should be as small as 0.1%. This goal seems to be
within reach considering the bubble-transformation sce-
nario mentioned above.
Without the eﬀect of wakeﬁelds GENESIS simulations
have shown that this TT-XFEL scenario with an undula-
1011 photons/bunch within
tor length of only 5 m yields 8
·
4 fs and 0.2% bandwidth, a divergence of 10 µrad, and
∼
a beam size of 20 µm. However, the wakeﬁelds become
the dominant degrading eﬀect as the required undulator
length is larger and the Pierce parameter reduced, hence
also the tolerance with respect to variations in the elec-
tron energy. But since there is no initial space-charge-
induced energy chirp, one must ﬁnd another method for
compensating the wakeﬁeld-induced energy variation. A
suitable method for compensating the wakeﬁelds for the
TT-XFEL would be tapering, i.e., varying the undula-
tor period along the undulator. Due to the fact that the
undulator parameter K is smaller than unity, tapering
via K, i.e., by gap variation, could only be used as ﬁne-
tuning. Depending on the speciﬁc material properties of
the undulator surface, our ﬁrst wake calculations show
that the bunch center loses over the entire 5 m undulator
length about 10% of its initial energy. Due to the linear
wake ﬁeld variation along the bunch only a fraction of
it will undergo SASE. A detailed study will be further
investigated in a future paper.

Experimental Status

5

In order to demonstrate practical feasibility, we have
built and tested a miniature focusing system and un-
dulator consisting of permanent magnets. The focusing
triplet consists of mini-quadrupoles with an aperture of
just 5 mm, hence allowing for measured gradients of 530
T/m. Their focusing strength was measured with a 600
MeV electron beam (at Mainz Microtron facility MAMI,
Mainz, Germany). A ﬁrst test hybrid undulator with a
period of only 5 mm and a peak magnetic ﬁeld strength
of
1 T has been built and produced with a 855 MeV
beam (also at MAMI) an undulator radiation spectrum
as expected. These results will be published elsewhere.

∼

CONCLUSION

We have shown by means of analytical estimates and
SASE FEL simulations that laser-plasma accelerator-
based FELs can be operated with only meter-scale un-
dulators. The key parameter is the ultra-high electron
peak current, which signiﬁcantly reduces the gain length
and increases the tolerance with respect to energy spread
and emittance. The latter would also allow to increase
the TT-XFEL photon energy into the medically relevant
50 keV, because the limiting quantum ﬂuctu-
range of 20
ations in the spontaneous undulator radiation scale with
γ4 [25] and the required electron energy of the TT-XFEL
is comparatively small.

−

We thank W. Decking, M. Dohlus, K. Fl¨ottmann, T.
Limberg, and J. Rossbach (all DESY) for fruitful discus-
sions. Supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
through the DFG-Cluster of Excellence Munich-Centre
for Advanced Photonics. This work was also supported
by DFG under Contract No. TR18.

∗

Electronic address: ﬂorian.gruener@physik.uni-muenchen.de

[1] S.P.D. Mangles et al., Nature 431, 535 (2004)
[2] C.G.R. Geddes et al., Nature 431, 538 (2004)
[3] J. Faure et al.,Nature 431, 541 (2004)
[4] W.P. Leemans et al., Nature Physics 2, 696 (2006)
[5] R. Neutze et al., Nature 406, 752 (2000)
[6] A. Baltuska et al., Nature 421, 611 (2003)
[7] W. Thomlinson, P. Suortti, and D. Chapman, Nucl. In-

strum. Methods Phys. Res. A 543, 288 (2005)

[8] A. Pukhov and J. Meyer-ter-Vehn, Appl. Phys. B 74, 355

[9] A. Pukhov and S. Gordienko, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 364,

[10] M. Geissler, J. Schreiber, and J. Meyer-ter-Vehn, New J.

[11] D.J. Spence, A. Butler, and S. Hooker, J. Opt. Soc. Am.

(2002)

623 (2006)

Phys. 8 186 (2006)

B 20, 138 (2003)

[12] http://www.attoworld.de/research/PFS.html

6

[13] Note that the detector resolution in the cited GeV-
experiment did not suﬃce to resolve energy spreads below
one percent

[14] R. Bonifacio, C. Pellegrini, and L.M. Narduci, Opt.

Comm. 50, 373 (1984)

[20] G. Fubiana, J. Qiang, E. Esarey, and W.P. Leemans,

Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 9, 064402 (2006)

[21] E. Saldin, E.A. Schneidmiller, and M.V. Yurkov, Nucl.

Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 417, 158 (1998)
Astra User’s Manual,

Floettmann,

[22] K.

2000,

[15] S. Reiche, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 429, 243

http://www.desy.de∼mpyﬂo/

(1999)

(2000)
[17] Technical

[16] M. Xie, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 445, 59

Design

Report:

http://www-hasylab.desy.de/facility/fel/vuv/

[18] M.J. de Loos, S.B. van der Geer, Proc. 5th Eur. Part.

Acc. Conf., Sitges, 1241 (1996)

[23] M. Ferrario, J. E. Clendenin, D. T. Palmer, J. B. Rosen-
zweig, L. Seraﬁni, Proc. of the 2nd ICFA Adv. Acc. Work-
shop on “The Physics of High Brightness Beams”, UCLA,
Nov., 1999; see also SLAC-PUB-8400

[24] A.W. Chao, Physics of collective beam instabilities in
high energy accelerators (John Wiley & Sons, New York,
1993); K. Bane, SLAC-PUB-11829 (2006)

[19] M. Dohlus and T. Limberg, Proceedings of the FEL 2004

[25] M. Sands, Phys. Rev. 97, 470 (1955)

Conference, 18-21

