7
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
0
2
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

New electron source concept for single-shot sub-100 fs electron diﬀraction in the
100 keV range

T. van Oudheusden,1 E. F. de Jong,1 B. J. Siwick,2 S. B. van der Geer,1 W. P. E. M. Op ’t Root,1 and O. J. Luiten1, ∗
1Department of Applied Physics, Eindhoven University of Technology,
P.O Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
2Departments of Physics and Chemistry, McGill University,
3600 University St., Montreal, QC. H3A 2T8, Canada
(Dated: Received 21 January 2007; published)

APS/123-QED

We present a method for producing sub-100 fs electron bunches that are suitable for single-shot
ultrafast electron diﬀraction experiments in the 100 keV energy range. A combination of analyt-
ical results and state-of-the-art numerical simulations show that it is possible to create 100 keV,
0.1 pC, 20 fs electron bunches with a spotsize smaller than 500 µm and a transverse coherence
length of 3 nm, using established technologies in a table-top set-up. The system operates in the
space-charge dominated regime to produce energy-correlated bunches that are recompressed by es-
tablished radio-frequency techniques. With this approach we overcome the Coulomb expansion of
the bunch, providing an entirely new ultrafast electron diﬀraction source concept.

PACS numbers: 61.14.-x, 87.64Bx, 41.75.Fr, 52.59.Sa

The development of a general experimental method for
the determination of nonequilibrium structures at the
atomic level and femtosecond timescale would provide
an extraordinary new window on the microscopic world.
Such a method opens up the possibility of making ‘molec-
ular movies’ which show the sequence of atomic con-
ﬁgurations between reactant and product during bond-
making and bond-breaking events. The observation of
such transition states structures has been called one of
the holy-grails of chemistry, but is equally important for
biology and condensed matter physics [1, 2].

There are two promising approaches for complete
structural characterization on short timescales: Ultra-
fast X-ray diﬀraction and ultrafast electron diﬀraction
(UED). These methods use a stroboscopic -but so far
multi-shot- approach that can capture the atomic struc-
ture of matter at an instant in time. Typically, dynam-
ics are initiated with an ultrashort (pump) light pulse
and then -at various delay times- the sample is probed
in transmission or reﬂection with an ultrashort electron
[3, 4] or X-ray pulse [5]. By recording diﬀraction patterns
as a function of the pump-probe delay it is possible to fol-
low various aspects of the real-space atomic conﬁguration
of the sample as it evolves. Time resolution is fundamen-
tally limited by the X-ray/electron pulse duration, while
structural sensitivity depends on source properties like
the beam brightness and the nature of the samples.

Electron diﬀraction has some unique advantages com-
pared with the X-ray techniques, see e.g. Ref.
[6].
However, until recently femtosecond electron diﬀrac-
It was
tion experiments had been considered unlikely.
thought that the strong Coulombic repulsion (space-
charge) present inside of high-charge-density electron
bunches produced through photoemission with femtosec-
ond lasers fundamentally limited this technique to pi-
cosecond timescales and longer. Several recent devel-

opments, however, have resulted in a change of out-
look. Three approaches to circumvent the space-charge
problem have been attempted by several groups. The
traditional way is to accelerate the bunch to relativis-
tic energies to eﬀectively damp the Coulomb repulsion.
Bunches of several hundred femtosecond duration con-
taining high charges (several pC) are routinely available
from radio-frequency (RF) photoguns. The application
of such a device in a diﬀraction experiment was recently
demonstrated [7]. This is an exciting development; how-
ever, energies in the MeV range pose their own diﬃcul-
ties, including the very short de Broglie wavelength λ
(λ ≈ 0.002 ˚A at 5 MeV), radiation damage to samples,
reduced cross-section for elastic scattering, non-standard
detectors and general expense of the technology. Due
to these and other considerations, electron crystallogra-
phers prefer to work in the 100 − 300 keV range.
A second avenue to avoid the space-charge expansion is
by reducing the charge of a bunch to approximately one
electron, while increasing the repetition frequency to sev-
eral MHz. According to Ref. [8] by minimizing the jitter
of the RF acceleration ﬁeld the individual electrons arrive
at the sample within a time-window of a several fs (possi-
bly even sub-fs). This technique, however, requires that
the sample be reproducibly pumped and probed ∼ 106
times to obtain diﬀraction patterns of suﬃcient quality.
Third, compact electron sources have been engineered to
operate in a regime where space-charge broadening of the
electron bunch is limited. The current state-of-the-art
compact electron gun provides ∼ 400 fs electron bunches,
containing several thousand electrons per bunch at sub-
100 keV energies and with a beam divergence in the mrad
range [9]. This source represents a considerable technical
achievement, but is still limited by space-charge eﬀects
which place signiﬁcant restrictions on the applicability of
the technique.

E

t

E

E

E

t

t

t

100 kV

S1

30 fs

S2

120 W
~

TM010

sample

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 1: (color online.)
(a) Schematics of the longitudinal
phase-space distribution of the electron bunch at several “key”
points in the set-up. (b) Schematic of the proposed set-up.
The set-up is to scale, the bunches serve only as a guide to
the eye. (c) RMS bunch duration (solid line) and RMS bunch
radius (dashed line) as function of position.

The ideal source for single-shot transmission ultrafast
electron diﬀraction (UED) experiments would operate
at (several) 100 keV energies, providing bunches shorter
than 100 fs, containing & 106 electrons. The transverse
coherence length Lc should be at least a few nanometers
-or several unit cell dimension- to ensure high-quality
diﬀraction data. None of the electron source concepts
presently in use is able to combine these bunch require-
ments. Herein we present a new electron source concept
for UED experiments, based on linear space-charge ex-
pansion [10] and RF compression strategies, that is able
to obtain the ideal parameters presented above with po-
tential well beyond these numbers.

Before going into the details of the proposed set-up, it
is instructive to ﬁrst discuss single-shot UED in terms of
beam dynamics, because, as we will show, the require-
ments can only be reached by operating close to funda-
mental space-charge limits. The UED parameter Lc is
linked to the conserved beam quantity εn, the transverse
root-mean-squared (RMS) normalized emittance [11, 12],
as follows:

Lc ≡

λ
2πσθ

≤

~

mc

σx
εn

,

(1)

where σθ is the RMS angular spread, σx the RMS bunch
radius, ~ Planck’s constant, m the electron mass, and c
the speed of light in vacuum. Requiring Lc ≥ 4 nm and
σx ≤ 0.2 mm at the sample it follows from Eq. (1) that
εn ≤ 0.02 mm mrad. Such low-emittance, ultrashort,
highly charged bunches can only be created by pulsed
photo-emission [12]. The initial emittance for pulsed

2

photo-emission from metal cathodes is εn,i = 8 × 10−3σx
[12], so that a maximum initial RMS radius of 25 µm at
the photocathode is needed. Extracting 0.1 pC from such
a small spot leads to image-charge and space-charge ﬁelds
of the order of 1 MV/m, and therefore requires the accel-
eration ﬁeld to be substantially higher (about 10 MV/m).
During acceleration and the subsequent propagation
the bunch expands to millimeter sizes within a nanosec-
ond due to space-charge forces. To be able to com-
press the bunch, both transversely and longitudinally,
to the required dimension while conserving its emittance
it is necessary that this rapid expansion is reversible;
i.e.
the space-charge ﬁelds inside the bunch must be
nearly linear. This is precisely the case for a homoge-
neously charged ellipsoidal bunch, which has linear in-
ternal space-charge ﬁelds [13]. Such a bunch can be cre-
ated in practice with a “half-circle” radial laser proﬁle
[10]. The expansion in the transverse direction can be
reversed by (linear) charged-particle optics, for example
magnetic solenoid lenses, and in the longitudinal direc-
tion by, for example, (linear) RF compression [14]. We
propose a set-up, consisting of a DC gun, two solenoidal
magnetic lenses, and an RF cavity, whose performance
we have investigated by detailed particle tracking simu-
lations.

The proposed set-up is shown in Fig. 1(b). Elec-
trons are liberated from a metal photocathode by an
ultrashort laser pulse and accelerated through a diode
structure to an energy of 100 keV. By applying a DC
voltage of 100 kV between the cathode and the anode
an acceleration ﬁeld of 10 MV/m is obtained. Because
of the linear space-charge ﬁelds the photoemitted bunch
will evolve such that its phase-space distribution becomes
linearly chirped with higher energy electrons towards the
front and lower energy electrons towards the back. The
oscillating electric ﬁeld in the TM010 mode in the RF
cavity either accelerates or decelerates electrons passing
through along the axis, depending on the RF phase. By
injecting a bunch just before the ﬁeld goes through zero,
the front electrons are decelerated and the back electrons
are accelerated. In such a way the energy-correlation in
the bunch can be reversed. Fig. 1(a) shows the longitudi-
nal phase-space distribution of the bunch at several “key”
points in the set-up. During the space-charge-induced
expansion the bunch develops a linear energy-position
correlation. This correlation is then rotated by the RF
cavity leading to ballistic compression in the post-RF-
cavity region. An energy diﬀerence ∆U = 2 keV between
the most outward electrons is required for ballistic com-
pression of the bunch to 100 fs, which can be shown by
potential energy considerations for a 100 keV, 0.1 pC el-
lipsoidal bunch of 200 µm radius. The maximum energy
diﬀerence that can be introduced by the RF cavity be-
tween the most outward electrons of a bunch with dura-
tion τ is given by ∆U = eE0ωτ d, with e the elementary
charge, E0 the RF ﬁeld amplitude, ω the frequency of the

RF ﬁeld, and d the cavity length. The required energy
diﬀerence of 2 keV can thus be obtained with an RF ﬁeld
with amplitude E0 ≈ 3.5 MV/m, in a cavity with reso-
nant frequency f = 2πω = 3 GHz and a length d = 1 cm.
With the superfish code [15] we have designed an ef-
ﬁcient cavity which only requires 120 W input power to
obtain these ﬁelds. Such power can easily be delivered
by commercially available solid state RF ampliﬁers, so
klystrons are not required.

The set-up has been designed and optimized with the
aid of the General Particle Tracing (gpt) code [16]. The
bunch charge of 0.1 pC allows us to model the bunch such
that each sample particle represents a single electron.

The external ﬁelds of both the DC accelerator and the
RF-cavity have been calculated with the superfish set of
codes [15] with 10 µm precision. The solenoids are mod-
eled by a 4th order oﬀ-axis Taylor expansion from the
analytical expression for the on-axis ﬁeld. The eﬀect of
space-charge is accounted for by a Particle In Cell (PIC)
method based on a 3-dimensional anisotropic multigrid
Poisson solver, tailor made for bunches with extreme as-
pect ratio’s [17, 18]. Image charges are taken into account
by a Dirichlet boundary condition at the cathode.
The ideal initial half-circle electron density proﬁle is ap-
proximated by a Gaussian transverse proﬁle truncated at
a radius of 50 µm corresponding to the one-sigma point.
This proﬁle is experimentally much more easy to real-
ize and turns out to be suﬃcient. To simulate the pho-
toemission process gpt creates a Gaussian longitudinal
charge density proﬁle with a full-width-at-half-maximum
(FWHM) duration of 30 fs. An initial isotropic 0.4 eV
momentum distribution is used to model the initial emit-
tance.

The RF-phase of the cavity must be tuned to mini-
mize non-linear eﬀects in the longitudinal compression.
The optimized phase is a slight deceleration: 11 degrees
oﬀ the zero-crossing. To compensate for this slight RF-
deceleration the voltage of the DC accelerator has been
raised from the nominal value of 100 kV to 120 kV to en-
sure we have at least 100 keV kinetic energy at the sam-
ple. Solenoid S1 is located at z = 50 mm, and produces
an on-axis ﬁeld of 0.05 T to collimate the beam. The
amplitude of the cavity ﬁeld is E0 = 4 MV/m, in agree-
ment with the analytical estimate, resulting in less than
1% relative energy spread at the sample. The optimized
position of the RF-cavity, at z = 430 mm, is a trade-
oﬀ between desired longitudinal space-charge expansion
to a few ps before injection and unavoidable accumula-
tion of non-linear eﬀects. The position and on-axis ﬁeld
strength of solenoid S2, 334 mm and 0.03 T respectively,
have been chosen such that the beam waist at the sample
has the desired size and coincides with the time-focus.

The bunch evolution in the optimized set-up is shown
in Fig. 1(c). The transverse beam-size is mainly deter-
mined by the two solenoids, but there is also a slightly
defocusing eﬀect of the RF cavity. Longitudinally the

3

]

V
e
k
[
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

117

116

115

114

]

A

[
 
t
n
e
r
r
u
C

3

2

1

0

]

m
m

[
 
y

0.4

0.2

0.0

-0.2

-0.4

0.4

0.2

0.0

]
3
–
0
1
[
 
c
m

/
x
p

-0.2

-0.4

30 fs

-40

-20

GPT

0
20
Time [fs]

40

60

-0.5

0.0
x [mm]

0.5

FIG. 2: (color online.) Longitudinal phase-space distribution,
cross-section, current distribution, and transverse phase-space
distribution of the electron bunch at the sample.

bunch expands rapidly to several ps due to space-charge
forces, to be recompressed by the RF-cavity to below
30 fs. The current distribution at the sample is shown in
Fig. 2, together with the longitudinal phase-space distri-
bution, the cross-section, and the transverse phase-space
distribution. At the sample the 0.1 pC bunches are char-
acterized by an RMS duration σt = 20 fs, an RMS radius
σx = 0.2 mm, a transverse coherence length Lc = 3 nm,
an average energy E = 116 keV, and relative RMS energy
spread < 1%. Of all bunch parameters only the bunch
duration is strongly dependent on the longitudinal posi-
tion: over a range of 5 mm around the target position, i.e.
z = (617 ± 2.5) mm, the RMS bunch duration varies be-
tween 20 fs and 50 fs, while the other parameters do not
change signiﬁcantly. It is clear that with the presented
set-up we are able to create bunches that fulﬁll all the
requirements for single-shot UED.

For pump-probe experiments the arrival-time jitter
should be less than the bunch duration, requiring a volt-
age stability of 10−6 for the power supply of the accel-
erator. This constraint is also more than suﬃcient for
stable injection on the proper phase of the RF cavity.
Such voltage supplies are commercially available. A sec-
ond requirement is that the laser pulse is synchronized
to the RF phase, also with an accuracy of less than the
bunch duration. We have developed a synchronization
system that fulﬁlls this condition [19]. Because of its di-
rect relationship to the coherence length, see Eq. (1), the
initial spotsize is an important experimental parameter.
Simulations, however, show that a deviation of 10% in
spotsize decreases the coherence length by 0.2 nm as ex-
pected, while the bunch radius and length at the sample
do not change signiﬁcantly.

In summary, we have presented a new robust femtosec-
ond electron source concept that makes use of space-
charge driven expansion to produce the energy-correlated
bunches required for radio-frequency compression strate-

gies. This method does not try to circumvent the space-
charge problem, but instead takes advantage of these dy-
namics through transverse shaping of a femtosecond laser
pulse to ensure the bunch expands in a reversible way
[10]. Using this reversibility we propose 6-dimensional
phase-space imaging of the electron bunch, with trans-
verse imaging accomplished by regular solenoid lenses
and longitudinal imaging by RF bunch compression. Our
gpt simulations show that it is possible to create 0.1 pC,
sub-100 fs bunches at sub-relativistic energies in realistic
accelerating and focusing ﬁelds. We have designed a com-
pact set-up to create electron bunches that are suitable
for single-shot, ultrafast electron diﬀraction experiments.
With these bunches it will truly be possible for chemists,
physicists, and biologists to study atomic level structural
dynamics on the sub-100 fs timescale.

∗

Electronic address: O.J.Luiten@tue.nl

[1] R. Srinivasan, V. A. Lobastov, C.-Y. Ruan, and A. H.

Zewail, Helv. Chim. Acta 86, 1763 (2003).

[2] J. R. Dwyer, C. T. Hebeisen, R. Ernstorfer, M. Harb,
V. B. Deyirmenjian, R. E. Jordan, and R. J. D. Miller,
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 364, 741 (2006).

[3] B. J. Siwick, J. R. Dwyer, R. E. Jordan, and R. J. D.

Miller, Science 302, 1382 (2003).

[4] C.-Y. Ruan, V. A. Lobastov, F. Vigliotti, S. Chen, and

A. H. Zewail, Science 304, 80 (2004).

[5] F.Schotte, M. Lim, T. A. Jackson, A. V. Smirnov, J. So-
man, J. S. Olson, G. N. Philips Jr., M. Wulﬀ, and P. A.

4

Anﬁnrud, Science 300, 1944 (2003).

[6] B. J. Siwick, J. R. Dwyer, R. E. Jordan, and R. J. D.

Miller, J. Appl. Phys. 92, 1643 (2002).

[7] J.B. Hastings et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 184109 (2006).
[8] E. Fill, L. Veisz, A. Apolonski, and F. Krausz, New J.

Phys. 8, 272 (2006).

[9] C. T. Hebeisen, R. Ernstorfer, M. Harb, T. Dartiga-
longue, R. E. Jordan, and R. J. D. Miller, Opt. Lett. 31,
3517 (2006).

[10] O. J. Luiten, S. B. van der Geer, M. J. de Loos, F. B.
Kiewiet, and M. J. van der Wiel, Phys. Rev. Let. 93,
094802 (2004).

[11] At the beam waist εn ≡ 1
[12] Ph. Piot, in The Physics and Applications of High Bright-
ness Electron Beams, edited by J. Rosenzweig, G. Trav-
ish, L. Seraﬁni (2002), p. 127.

mc σxσpx .

[13] O. D. Kellogg,

Foundations
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1929).

of Potential Theory

[14] S. B. van der Geer, M. J. de Loos, T. van Oudheusden,
W. P. E. M. Op ’t Root, M. J. van der Wiel, and O. J.
Luiten, Phys. Rev. ST. Accel. Beams 9, 044203 (2006).
[15] J.H. Billen, and L.M. Young, Los Alamos National Lab-
oratory Report LA-UR-96-1834 (Poisson Superﬁsh).

[16] http://www.pulsar.nl/gpt.
[17] S. B. van der Geer, O. J. Luiten, M. J. de Loos, G. P¨oplau,
and U. van Rienen, in Institute of Physics Conference
Series No. 175 (2005), p. 101.

[18] G. P¨oplau, U. van Rienen, S. B. van der Geer, and M. J.

de Loos, IEEE Trans. Magn. 40, 714 (2004).

[19] F. B. Kiewiet, A. H. Kemper, O. J. Luiten, G. J. H. Brus-
saard, and M. J. van der Wiel, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
A 484, 619 (2002).

