6
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
0
0
1
6
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

FUTURE COLLIDERS

R. B. PALMER and J. C. GALLARDO

Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973-5000, USA

The high energy physics advantages, disadvantages and luminosity requirements of hadron (pp, p¯p), of lepton
(e+e−, µ+µ−) and photon-photon colliders are considered. Technical arguments for increased energy in each
type of machine are presented. Their relative size, and the implications of size on cost are discussed.

1 Physics Considerations

1.1 General

Hadron-hadron colliders (pp or p¯p) generate in-
teractions between the many constituents of the
hadrons (gluons, quarks and antiquarks); the ini-
tial states are not deﬁned and most interactions
occur at relatively low energy generating a very
large background of uninteresting events. The
rate of the highest energy events is higher for
antiproton-proton machines, but this is a small ef-
fect for colliders above a few TeV. In either case
the eﬀective individual interaction energies are a
relatively small fraction of the total center of mass
energy. Nevertheless, because high energy hadron
machines have been relatively easier and cheaper
to build, and because all ﬁnal states are accessi-
ble, many initial discoveries in Elementary Particle
Physics have been made with these machines.

In contrast,

lepton-antilepton and photon-
photon colliders generate interactions between
the fundamental point-like constituents in their
beams, the reactions generated are relatively sim-
ple to understand and there is no background of
low energy events. If the center of mass energy is
set equal to the mass of a suitable state of inter-
est, then there can be a large cross section in the
s-channel, in which a single state is generated by
the interaction. In this case, the mass and quan-
tum numbers of the state are constrained by the
initial beams. If the energy spread of the beams is
suﬃciently narrow, then precision determination
of masses and widths are possible.

A gamma-gamma collider also has well deﬁned
initial states, complementing those attainable with
lepton colliders.

For most purposes (technical considerations
aside) e+e−and µ+µ−colliders would be equiva-
lent. But in the particular case of s-channel Higgs
boson production, the cross section, being propor-

tional to the mass squared, is more than 40,000
times greater for muons than electrons. When
technical considerations are included, the situa-
tion is more complicated. Muon beams are harder
to polarize and muon colliders will have much
higher backgrounds from decay products of the
muons. On the other hand muon collider inter-
actions will require less radiative correction and
will have less energy spread from beamstrahlung.
Each type of collider has its own advantages
and disadvantages for High Energy Physics: they
are complementary.

1.2 Required Luminosity for Lepton Colliders

In lepton machines the full center of mass of the
leptons is available for the ﬁnal state of interest
and the eﬀective energy is equal to the total center
of mass energy.

Eeﬀ = Ec of m

(1)

Since fundamental cross sections fall as the
square of the center of mass energies involved, so,
for a given rate of events, the luminosity of a col-
lider must rise as the square of its energy. A rea-
sonable target luminosity is one that would give
10,000 events per unit of R per year:

Lreq. ≈ 1034 (cm

−2s

−1)

2

Eeﬀ
1 (TeV) (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(2)

Fig. 1 shows this required luminosity, together
with crosses at the approximate achieved luminosi-
ties of some lepton colliders. Target luminosities
of possible future colliders are also given as circles.

1.3 The Eﬀective Energies of Hadron Colliders

Hadrons, being composite, have their energy di-
vided between their several constituents. A typical

1

proton-proton machine, but the luminosity of an
antiproton-proton collider is limited by the con-
straints in antiprotons production. Luminosities
of 1033 cm−2s−1 may be achievable at FNAL
with antiproton-proton, but LHC, a proton-proton
machine,
is planned to have a luminosity of
1034 cm−2s−1, and might 1 be upgradable to
1035 cm−2s−1. Radiation damage to a detector
would, however, then be a severe problem. The 60
TeV Really Large Hadron Colliders (RLHC high
and low ﬁelds ) discussed at Snowmass are be-
ing designed as proton-proton machines with lu-
minosities of 1034 cm−2s−1.

The size of hadron-hadron machines is lim-
ited by the ﬁeld of the magnets used in their
arcs. A cost minimum is obtained when a bal-
ance is achieved between costs that are linear in
length, and those that rise with magnetic ﬁeld.
The optimum ﬁeld will depend on the technolo-
gies used both for the the linear components (tun-
nel, access, distribution, survey, position monitors,
mountings, magnet ends, etc) and those of the
magnets themselves, including the type of super-
conductor used.

The ﬁrst hadron collider, the 60 GeV ISR at
CERN, used conventional iron pole magnets at a
ﬁeld less than 2 T. The only current hadron col-
lider, the 2 TeV TeVatron, at FNAL, uses NbTi
superconducting magnets at approximately 4 ◦K.
The 14 TeV Large Hadron Collider (LHC), under
construction at CERN, plans to use the same ma-
terial at 1.8 ◦K.

Future colliders may use new materials allow-
ing higher magnetic ﬁelds. Fig.2 shows the critical
current densities of various superconductors as a
function of magnetic ﬁeld. The numbers in paren-
thesis refer to the temperatures in ◦ K. Good and
bad refer to the best and worst performance ac-
cording to the orientation in degree of the tape
with respect to the direction of the magnetic ﬁeld.
Model magnets have been made with Nb3Sn, and
studies are underway on the use of high Tc super-
conductor. Bi2Sr2Ca1Cu2O8 (BSCCO) material
is currently available in useful lengths as powder-
in-Ag tube processed tape. It has a higher criti-
cal temperature and ﬁeld than conventional super-
conductors, but, even at 4 ◦K, its current density
is less than Nb3Sn at all ﬁelds below 15 T. It is
thus unsuitable for high ﬁeld accelerator magnets.
In contrast YBa2Cu3O7 (YBCO) material has a
current density above that for Nb3Sn (4 ◦K ), at

Figure 1: Luminosity of lepton colliders as a function of
energy

collision of constituents will thus have signiﬁcantly
less energy than that of the initial hadrons. Stud-
ies done in Snowmass 82 and 96 suggest that given
the required luminosity (as deﬁned in Eq. 2) the
hadron machine’s eﬀective energy is about 1/10 th
of its total:

Eeﬀ (L = Lreq.) ≈ Ec of m
10

The same studies have also concluded that a factor
of 10 in luminosity is worth about a factor of 2 in
eﬀective energy, this being approximately equiva-
lent to:

Eeﬀ (L) ∝ (L/Lreq.)0.3

From which, with Eq. 2, one obtains:

Eeﬀ (T eV ) ≈

Ec of m
10(T eV ) (cid:19)

(cid:18)

0.6

L
1034(cm−2s−1) (cid:19)

(cid:18)

0.2

(3)

2 Technical Considerations

2.1 Hadron-Hadron Machines

An antiproton-proton collider requires only one
compared with the two needed for a
ring,

2

Figure 2: Critical current densities of superconductors as a
function of magnetic ﬁeld.

Figure 3: Relative costs of a collider as a function of its
bending magnetic ﬁeld, for diﬀerent superconductors and
operating temperatures

all ﬁelds and temperatures below 20 ◦K. But this
material must be deposited on specially treated
metallic substrates and is not yet available in
lengths greater than 1 m. It is reasonable to as-
sume, however, that it will be available in useful
lengths in the not too distant future.

A parametric study 2 was undertaken to learn
what the use of such materials might do for the
cost of colliders. 2-in-1 cosine theta superconduct-
ing magnet cross sections were calculated using
ﬁxed criteria for margin, packing fraction, quench
protection, support and ﬁeld return. Material
costs were taken to be linear in the weights of su-
perconductor, copper stabilizer, aluminum collars,
iron yoke and stainless steel support tube. The
cryogenic costs were taken to be inversely propor-
tional to the operating temperature, and linear in
the outer surface area of the cold mass.

The values of the cost dependencies were
scaled from LHC estimates. Results are shown
in Fig. 3. Costs were calculated assuming NbTi
at (a) 4 ◦K, and (b) 1.8 ◦K, (c) Nb3 Sn at 4.3 ◦K,
and (d) and (e) YBCO High Tc at 20 ◦K. NbTi
and Nb3 Sn costs per unit weight were taken to be
the same; YBCO was taken to be either equal to

3

NbTi (in (d)), or 4 times NbTi (in (e)).

It is seen that the optimum ﬁeld moves from
about 6 T for NbTi at 4 ◦K to about 12 T for
YBCO at 20 ◦K; while the total cost falls by al-
most a factor of 2;
i.e., the optimized cost per
unit length remains approximately constant. This
might have been expected: at the cost minimum,
the cost of linear and ﬁeld dependent terms are
matched, and the total remains about twice that
of the linear terms.

It must be noted that the above study assumes
a particular type of magnet and may not be in-
dicative of the optimization for radically diﬀerent
designs. A group at FNAL 3 is considering an iron
dominated, alternating gradient, continuous, sin-
gle turn collider magnet design (Low ﬁeld RLHC).
Its ﬁeld would be only 2 T and circumference very
large (350 km for 60 TeV), but with its simplicity
and with tunneling innovations it is hoped to make
its cost lower than the smaller high ﬁeld designs.
There are however greater problems in achieving
high luminosity with such a machine than with the
higher ﬁeld designs.

2.2 Circular Electron-Positron Machines

luminosities of most

Although the
circular
electron-positron colliders has been between 1031
and 1032 cm−2s−1 (see Fig.1), CESR is fast ap-
proaching 1033 cm−2s−1 and machines are now be-
ing constructed with even high values. Thus, at
least in principle, luminosity does not seem to be
a limitation, although it may be noted that the
0.2 TeV electron-positron collider LEP has a lu-
minosity below the above requirement.

At energies below 100 MeV, using a chosen
reasonable bending ﬁeld, the size and cost of a
circular electron machine is approximately pro-
portional to its energy. But at higher energies,
if the bending ﬁeld B is maintained, the energy
lost ∆Vturn to synchrotron radiation rises rapidly

∆Vturn ∝ E4
R m4

∝ E3 B
m4

(4)

and soon becomes excessive (R is the radius of
the ring). A cost minimum is then obtained when
the cost of the ring is balanced by the cost of the
rf needed to replace the synchrotron energy loss.
If the ring cost is proportional to its circumfer-
ence, and the rf is proportional to its voltage then
the size and cost of an optimized machine rises
as the square of its energy. This relationship is
well demonstrated by the parameters of actual ma-
chines (see Fig. 8).

The highest e+e−collider is the LEP at CERN
which has a circumference of 27 km, and will
achieve a maximum center of mass energy of about
0.2 TeV. Using the predicted scaling, a 0.5 TeV
circular collider would have to have a 170 km cir-
cumference, and would be very expensive.

2.3 Electron-Positron Linear Colliders

So, for energies much above that 0.2 TeV it is im-
practical to build a circular electron collider. The
only possibility is to build two electron linacs fac-
ing one another. Interactions occur at the center,
and the electrons, after they have interacted, must
be discarded.

If

the

linacs

conventional,

non-
are
superconducting, structures, then there may again
be a cost trade oﬀ; this time between the cost of
rf to obtain accelerating gradient, and the linear
costs of the structure, tunnel, etc. If the optimized
gradient is less than its technical maximum, then

Figure 4: Gradient values and limits in linear collider elec-
tron linacs

the cost per unit length of an optimized machine
should again be about twice the linear costs. But
this time the linear costs include the linac itself,
and these will be dependent on technology and rf
frequency.

If, however, the rf costs can be constrained, for
instance when superconducting cavities are used,
then there will be no trade oﬀ and higher gradi-
ents should be expected to lower the length and
cost. The gradients achievable in Niobium su-
perconducting cavities is theoretically limited to
about 40 MV/m and practically to 15-25 MV/m.
Nb3Sn and high Tc materials may allow higher
ﬁeld gradients in the future with no loss of lumi-
nosity.

The gradients for conventional structures have
limits that are frequency dependent. Fig. 4 shows
the gradient limits from breakdown, fatigue and
dark current capture plotted against the operating
rf frequency. Operating gradients and frequencies
of several linear collider designs 4 are also indi-
cated. One sees that the use of high frequencies
allows higher accelerating gradients, less overall
length and thus, hopefully, less cost. There are
however counterbalancing considerations from the

4

requirements of luminosity.

• the wall-power to beam-power eﬃciencies

The luminosity L of a linear collider can be

are less.

written:

L =

1
4πE

N
σx

Pbeam
σy

ncollisions

(5)

where, in this case, ncollisions = 1; σx and σy are
average beam spot sizes including any pinch ef-
fects: σx being greater than σy; E is the beam
energy and Pbeam is the total beam power. This
can also be expressed as,

L =

1
4πE

nγ
2roα

Pbeam
σy

(6)

where ro is the classical electromagnetic radius, α
is the electromagnetic constant, and nγ the num-
ber of photons emitted by one bunch as it passes
through the other.
If nγ is too large then the
beamstrahlung background of electron pairs and
other products becomes unacceptable. So, for a
ﬁxed criterion for background, we have:

L ∝ 1
E

Pbeam
σy

which may be compared to the required luminosity
that increases as the square of energy, giving the
requirement:

Pbeam
σy

∝ E3.

(7)

It is this requirement that makes it hard to design
very high energy linear colliders. The 0.1 TeV
SLC, with a relatively low energy, is still almost
an order of magnitude below its design luminosity,
and nearly four orders of magnitude less than that
speciﬁed for the various designs for 0.5 TeV linear
colliders 4.

Fig.5, using parameters from the linear col-
lider proposals 4, plots some relevant parameters
against the rf frequency. One sees that as the fre-
quencies rise,

• the machine lengths fall as higher gradients

become possible,

• greater alignment precision is required. For
instance, in the resolution of beam position
monitors; and

• despite these better alignments, the calcu-
lated emittance growth during acceleration
is greater; and

5

Thus while length and cost considerations
may favor high frequencies, yet luminosity con-
siderations demand lower frequencies.

At higher energies (as expected from Eq. 7),
obtaining the required luminosity gets harder.
Fig.6 shows the dependency of some example ma-
chine parameters with energy. SLC is taken as the
example at 0.1 TeV, NLC parameters at 0.5 and 1
TeV, and 5 and 10 TeV examples are taken from
a review paper by one of the authors 5. One sees
that:

• the assumed beam power rises approxi-

mately as E2;

E−2;

• the vertical spot sizes fall approximately as

• the vertical normalized emittances fall even

faster than E−2; and

• the momentum spread due

to beam-
strahlung has been allowed to rise approx-
imately linearly with E.

These trends are independent of the accelera-
tion method, frequency, etc, and indicate that as
the energy and required luminosity rise, so the re-
quired beam powers, eﬃciencies, emittances and
tolerances will all get harder to achieve. The use
of higher frequencies or exotic technologies that
would allow the gradient to rise, will, in general,
make the achievement of the required luminosity
even more diﬃcult.
It may well prove impracti-
cal to construct linear electron-positron colliders,
with adequate luminosity, at energies above a few
TeV.

2.4 Photon-Photon Colliders

A gamma-gamma collider 6 would use opposing
electron linacs, as in a linear electron collider, but
just prior to the collision point, laser beams would
be backscattered oﬀ the electrons to generate pho-
ton beams that would collide at the IP instead of
the electrons. If suitable geometries are used, the
mean photon-photon energy could be 80% or more
of that of the electrons, with a luminosity about
1/10th.

If the electron beams, after they have Comp-
ton backscattered the photons, are deﬂected, then

backgrounds from beamstrahlung can be elimi-
nated. The constraint on N/σx in Eq.5 is thus
removed and one might hope that higher lumi-
nosities would now be possible by raising N and
lowering σx. Unfortunately, to do this, one needs
sources of larger number of electron bunches with
smaller emittances, and one must ﬁnd ways to ac-
celerate and focus such beams without excessive
emittance growth. Conventional damping rings
will have diﬃculty doing this 8. Exotic electron
sources might be needed.

Thus, although gamma-gamma collisions can
and should be made available at any future
electron-positron linear collider, to add physics ca-
pability, they may not give higher luminosity for
a given beam power.

2.5 Muon-Muon Colliders

There are two advantages of muons, as opposed to
electrons, for a lepton collider.

• The synchrotron radiation, that forces high
energy electron colliders to be linear, is (see
Eq. 4) inversely proportional to the fourth
power of mass: It is negligible in muon col-
liders with energy less than 10 TeV. Thus
a muon collider, up to such energy, can be
In practice this means in can be
circular.
smaller. The linacs for a 0.5 TeV NLC would
be 20 km long. The ring for a muon collider
of the same energy would be only about 1.2
km circumference.

• The luminosity of a muon collider is given by
the same formula as in Eq. 5 as given above
for an electron positron collider, but there
are two signiﬁcant changes: 1) The classi-
cal radius ro is now that for the muon and
is 200 times smaller; and 2) the number of
collisions a bunch can make ncollisions is no
longer 1, but is now related to the average
bending ﬁeld in the muon collider ring, with

ncollisions ≈ 150 Bave

With an average ﬁeld of 6 Tesla, ncollisions ≈
900. Thus these two eﬀects give muons an in
principle luminosity advantage of more than
105.

The problems with the use of muons are:

6

Figure 5: Dependence of some sensitive parameters as a
function of linear collider rf frequency.

Figure 6: Dependence of some sensitive parameters on lin-
ear collider energy.

• Muons can be best obtained from the de-
cay of pions, made by higher energy protons
impinging on a target. A high intensity pro-
ton source is thus required and very eﬃcient
capture and decay of these pions is essential.

• Because the muons are made with very large
emittance, they must be cooled and this
must be done very rapidly because of their
short lifetime. Conventional synchrotron,
electron, or stochastic cooling is too slow.
Ionization cooling is the only clear possibil-
ity, but does not cool to very low emittances.

• Because of their short lifetime, conventional
synchrotron acceleration would be too slow.
Recirculating accelerators or pulsed syn-
chrotrons must be used.

• Because they decay while stored in the col-
lider, muons radiate the ring and detector
with their decay products. Shielding is es-
sential and backgrounds will certainly be sig-
niﬁcant.

Muon colliders were ﬁrst considered more than
20 years ago, many papers have been written and
many workshops held 9. A collaboration,
lead
by BNL, FNAL and LBNL, with contributions
from 18 institutions has been studying a 4 TeV,
high luminosity scenario and presented a Feasibil-
ity Study 7 to the 1996 Snowmass Workshop.

The basic parameters of this collider are
shown schematically in Fig.7 and given in Tb.1
together with those for a 0.5 TeV demonstration
machine based on the AGS as an injector.
It is
assumed that a demonstration version based on
upgrades of the FERMILAB, or CERN machines
would also be possible.

The main components are:

• A proton source with KAON like parameters
(30 GeV, 1014 protons per pulse, at 15 Hz).

• A liquid metal target surrounded by a 20 T
hybrid or high Tc superconducting solenoid
to make and capture pions.

• A 5 T solenoidal channel within a sequence
of rf cavities is used to allow the pions to
decay into muons and, at the same time, de-
celerate the fast ones that come ﬁrst, while
accelerating the lower momentum ones that

Figure 7: Overview of a 4 TeV Muon Collider

TeV
TeV
103
Hz
1012

c-of-m Energy
Beam energy
Beam γ
Repetition rate
Muons per bunch
Bunches of each sign
Norm. rms emit. ǫN
Bending Field
Circumference
Ave. ring ﬁeld B
Eﬀective turns
β∗ at intersection
rms I.P. beam size
Luminosity

Table 1: Parameters of Collider Rings
4
2
19
15
2
2
510−5
9
7
6
9
3
2.8
1035

π m rad
T
Km
T
102
mm
µm
cm−2s−1

.5
.25
2.4
2.5
4
1
910−5
9
1.2
5
8
8
17
1033

come later. Muons from pions in the 100-
500 MeV range emerge in a 6 m long bunch
at 150 ± 30 MeV bunch.

• A solenoidal snake and collimator to select
the momentum, and thus polarization, of the

7

muons.

• A sequence of 20 ionization cooling stages,
each consisting of a) lithium energy loss rod
in a strong focusing environment for trans-
verse cooling, b) linac reacceleration and c)
lithium wedges in a dispersive environment
for cooling in momentum space.

• A linac, and/or recirculating linac, pre ac-
celerator, followed by a sequence of pulsed
ﬁeld synchrotron accelerators using super-
conducting linacs for rf.

• An isochronous collider ring with locally cor-

rected low beta (β=3 mm) insertion.

For a low energy muon collider, there would
be a relatively large ﬁxed cost for the muon source,
but for a high energy machine the cost would still
be dominated by that of the ﬁnal circular acceler-
ator and collider rings. Estimates suggest that the
cost of these might be as much as a factor 3 higher
than that for a hadron machine of the same beam
energy, but, because of the advantage in colliding
point like leptons, a factor of 3 or more less than
a hadron machine of the same eﬀective energy.

2.6 Comparison of Machines

In Fig. 8, the eﬀective energies (as deﬁned by Eq.
3) of representative machines are plotted against
their total tunnel lengths. We note:

• Hadrons Colliders: It is seen that the ener-
gies of machines rise with their size, but that
this rise is faster than linear (Eeﬀ ∝ L1.3).
This slope is a reﬂection in the steady rise in
bending magnetic ﬁelds used as technologies
and materials have become available.

• Circular Electron-Positron Colliders: The
energies of these machines rise approxi-
mately as the square root of their size, as ex-
pected from the cost optimization discussed
above.

• Linear Electron-Positron Colliders: The
SLC is the only existing machine of this type
and only one example of a proposed machine
(the NLC) is plotted. The line drawn has the
same slope as for the hadron machines and
implies a similar rise in accelerating gradi-
ent, as technologies advance.

Figure 8: Eﬀective energies of colliders as a function of
their total length.

• Muon-Muon Colliders: Only the 4 TeV col-
lider, discussed above, and the 0.5 TeV
demonstration machine have been plotted.
The line drawn has the same slope as for the
hadron machines.

It is noted that the muon collider oﬀers the
greatest energy per unit length. This is also appar-
ent in Fig. 9, in which the footprints of a number
of proposed machines are given on the same scale.
But does this mean it will give the greatest energy
per unit of cost ? Fig. 10 plots the cost of a sample
of machines against their size. Before examining
this plot, be warned: the numbers you will see will
not be the ones you are familiar with. The pub-
lished numbers for diﬀerent projects use diﬀerent
accounting procedures and include diﬀerent items
in their costs. Not very exact corrections and es-
calation have been made to obtain estimates of the
costs under ﬁxed criteria: 1996 $’s, US account-
ing, no detectors or halls. The resulting numbers,
as plotted, must be considered to have errors of at
least ± 20%.

The costs are seen to be surprisingly well rep-
resented by a straight line. Circular electron ma-
lie signiﬁcantly below this
chines, as expected,

8

Figure 9: Approximate sizes of some possible future colliders.

line. The only plotted muon collider (the 0.5 TeV
demonstration machine’s very preliminary cost es-
timate) lies above the line. But the clear indica-
tion is that length is, or at least has been, a good
estimator of approximate cost. It is interesting to
note that the ﬁtted line indicates costs rising, not
linearly, but as the 0.85 th power of length. This
can be taken as a measure of economies of scale.

3 Conclusion

Our conclusions, with the caveat that they are in-
deed only our opinions, are:

• The LHC is a well optimized and appropri-
ate next step towards high eﬀective energy.

• A Very Large Hadron Collider with energy
greater than the SSC (e.g. 60 TeV c-of-m)
and cost somewhat less than the SSC, may
well be possible with the use of high Tc su-
perconductors that may soon be available.

• A “Next Linear Collider” is the only clean
way to complement the LHC with a lepton
machine, and the only way to do so soon.
But it appears that even a 0.5 TeV collider

9

Figure 10: Costs of some machines as a function of their
total lengths.

References

1. A. W. Chao, R. B. Palmer, L. Evans, J,
Gareyte, R. H. Siemann, Hadron Colliders
(SSC/LHC), Proc.1990 Summer Study on
High Energy Physics, Snowmass, (1990) p
667.

2. R. B. Palmer, to be published.
3. S. Holmes for the RLHC Group, Sum-
mary Report, presentation at the Snowmass
Workshop 1996, to be published.

4. International Linear Collider Technical Re-
view Committee Report, SLAC-R-95-471,
(1995)

5. R. B. Palmer,Prospects for High Energy
e+e−Linear Colliders, Annu. Rev. Nucl.
Part. Sci. (1990) 40, p 529-92.

6. V. Telnov, Nucl.

Instr. and Meth. A294,
(1990) 72; A Second Interaction Region
for Gamma-Gamma, Gamma-Electron and
Electron-Electron Collisions for NLC, Ed.
K-J Kim, LBNL-38985, LLNL-UCRL-ID
124182, SLAC-PUB-95-7192.

7. µ+µ− collider, A Feasibility Study, BNL-
52503,FermiLab-Conf-96/092, LBNL-38946,
submitted to the Proceedings of the Snow-
mass96 Workshop.

8. R. B. Palmer,Accelerator parameters for γ −
Inst. and Meth., A355

γ colliders; Nucl.
(1995) 150-153.

9. A. N. Skrinsky and V.V. Parkhomchuk, Sov.
J. of Nucl. Physics 12, (1981) 3; Neuf-
fer, IEEE Trans. NS-28, (1981) 2034; E.
A. Perevedentsev and A. N. Skrinsky, Proc.
12th Int. Conf. on High Energy Acceler-
ators, F. T. Cole and R. Donaldson, Eds.,
(1983) 485; 2nd Workshop, Sausalito, CA,
Ed. D. Cline, AIP Press, Woodbury, New
York, (1995).

will be more expensive than the LHC, and
it will be technically challenging: obtaining
the design luminosity may not be easy.

• Extrapolating conventional rf e+e−linear
colliders to energies above 1 or 2 TeV will be
very diﬃcult. Raising the rf frequency can
reduce length and probably cost for a given
energy, but obtaining luminosity increasing
as the square of energy, as required, may not
be feasible.

• Laser driven accelerators are becoming more
realistic and can be expected to have a sig-
niﬁcantly lower cost per TeV. But the ratio
of luminosity to wall power and the ability
to preserve very small emittances, is likely
to be signiﬁcantly worse than for conven-
tional rf driven machines. Colliders using
such technologies are thus unlikely to achieve
very high luminosities and thus unsuitable
for higher (above 2 TeV) energy physics re-
search.

• A higher gradient superconducting Linac
collider using Nb3Sn or high Tc materials, if
it becomes technically possible, could be the
only way to attain the required luminosities
in a higher energy e+e−collider.

• Gamma-gamma collisions can and should be
obtained at any future electron-positron lin-
ear collider. They would add physics capa-
bility to such a machine, but, despite their
freedom from the beamstrahlung constraint,
are unlikely to achieve higher luminosity.

• A muon Collider, being circular, could be
far smaller than a conventional electron-
positron collider of the same energy. Very
preliminary estimates suggest that it would
also be signiﬁcantly cheaper. The ratio of
luminosity to wall power for such machines,
above 2 TeV, appears to be better than
that for electron positron machines, and ex-
trapolation to a center of mass energy of
4 TeV or above does not seem unreason-
able. If research and development can show
that it is practical, then a 0.5-1 TeV muon
collider could be a useful complement to
e+e−colliders, and, at higher energies (e.g.
4 TeV), could be a viable alternative.

10

