7
9
9
1
 
b
e
F
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
0
2
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

HIGH ENERGY COLLIDERS

R. B. Palmer, J. C. Gallardo

Center for Accelerator Physics
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Upton, NY 11973-5000, USA

February 9, 2014

Abstract

We consider the high energy physics advantages, disadvantages and
luminosity requirements of hadron (pp, p¯p), lepton (e+e−, µ+µ− ) and
photon-photon colliders. Technical problems in obtaining increased
energy in each type of machine are presented. The machines relative
size are also discussed.

1 Introduction

Particle colliders are only the last evolution of a long history of devices
used to study the violent collisions of particles on one another. Earlier
versions used accelerated beams impinging on ﬁxed targets. Fig. 1
shows the equivalent beam energy of such machines, plotted versus
the year of their introduction. The early data given was taken from
the original plot by Livingston[1]. For hadron, i.e. proton or proton-
antiproton, machines (Fig. 1a), it shows an increase from around 105
eV with a rectiﬁer generator in 1930, to 1015 eV at the Tevatron (at
Fermilab near Chicago) in 1988. This represents an increase of more
than a factor of about 33 per decade (the Livingston line, shown as
the dash-line) over 6 decades. By 2005 we expect to have the Large
Hadron Collider (at CERN, Switzerland) with an equivalent beam
energy of 1017 eV, which will almost exactly continue this trend. The

1

SSC, had we built it on schedule, would, by this extrapolation, have
been a decade too early !

The rise in energy of electron machines shown (Fig. 1b) is slightly
less dramatic; but, as we shall discuss below, the relative eﬀective
physics energy of lepton machines is greater than for hadron machines,
and thus the eﬀective energy gains for the two types of machine are
comparable.

These astounding gains in energy (× 1012) have been partly bought
by greater expenditure: increasing from a few thousand dollars for the
rectiﬁer, to a few billion dollars for the LHC (× 106). The other factor
(× 106) has come from new ideas. Linear e+e−, γ − γ, and µ+µ−
colliders are new ideas that we hope will continue this trend, but it
will not be easy.

Figure 1: The Livingston Plots: Equivalent beam energy of colliders versus
the year of their introduction; (a) for Hadron Machines and (b) for Lepton
Machines.

2

2 Physics Considerations

2.1 General.

Hadron-hadron colliders (pp or p¯p) generate interactions between the
many constituents of the hadrons (gluons, quarks and antiquarks);
the initial states are not deﬁned and most interactions occur at rela-
tively low energy, generating a very large background of uninteresting
events. The rate of the highest energy events is a little higher for
antiproton-proton machines, because the antiproton contains valence
antiquarks that can annihilate on the quarks in the proton. But this
is a small eﬀect for colliders above a few TeV, when the interactions
are dominated by interactions between quarks and antiquarks in their
seas, and between the gluons. In either case the individual parton-
parton interaction energies (the energies used for physics) are a rel-
atively small fraction of the total center of mass energy. This is a
disadvantage when compared with lepton machines. An advantage,
however, is that all ﬁnal states are accessible. In addition, as we saw
in Figs. 1, hadron machines have been available with higher energies
than lepton devices, and, as a result, most initial discoveries in Ele-
mentary Particle Physics have been made with hadron machines.

In contrast,

lepton-antilepton collider generate interactions be-
tween the fundamental point-like constituents in their beams, the re-
actions produced are relatively simple to understand, the full machine
energies are available for physics and there is negligible background of
low energy events. If the center of mass energy is set equal to the mass
of a suitable state of interest, then there can be a large cross section
in the s-channel, in which a single state is generated by the interac-
tion. In this case, the mass and quantum numbers of the state are
constrained by the initial beams. If the energy spread of the beams is
suﬃciently narrow, then precision determination of masses and widths
are possible.

A gamma-gamma collider,

like the lepton-antilepton machines,
would have all the machine energy available for physics, and would
have well deﬁned initial states, but these states would be diﬀerent
from those with the lepton machines, and thus be complementary to
them.

For most purposes (technical considerations aside) e+e−and µ+µ−
colliders would be equivalent. But in the particular case of s-channel
Higgs boson production, the cross section, being proportional to the

3

mass squared, is more than 40,000 times greater for muons than elec-
trons. When technical considerations are included, the situation is
more complicated. Muon beams are harder to polarize and muon
colliders will have much higher backgrounds from decay products of
the muons. On the other hand muon collider interactions will require
less radiative correction and will have less energy spread from beam-
strahlung.

Each type of collider has its own advantages and disadvantages for

High Energy Physics: they would be complementary.

2.2 Required Luminosity for Lepton Collid-
ers.

In lepton machines the full center of mass of the leptons is available for
the ﬁnal state of interest and a “physics energy” Ephy can be deﬁned
that is equal to the total center of mass energy.

Ephy = Ec of m

(1)

Since fundamental cross sections fall as the square of the center of
mass energies involved, so, for a given rate of events, the luminosity
of a collider must rise as the square of its energy. A reasonable target
luminosity is one that would give 10,000 events per unit of R per
year (the cross section for lepton pair production is one R, the total
cross section is about 20 R, and somewhat energy dependent as new
channels open up):

Lreq. ≈ 1034 (cm

−2s

−1)

(2)

2

Ephy
1 (TeV) (cid:19)

(cid:18)

2.3 The Eﬀective Physics Energies of Hadron
Colliders.

Hadrons, being composite, have their energy divided between their
various constituents. A typical collision of constituents will thus have
signiﬁcantly less energy than that of the initial hadrons. Studies done
in Snowmass 82 and 96 suggest that, for a range of studies, and given
the required luminosity (as deﬁned in Eq. 2), then the hadron ma-
chine’s eﬀective “physics” energy is between about 1/3 and 1/10 of its
total. We will take a value of 1/7:

Ephy(L = Lreq.) ≈ Ec of m

7

4

The same studies have also concluded that a factor of 10 in luminosity
is worth about a factor of 2 in eﬀective physics energy, this being
approximately equivalent to:

Ephy(L) = Ephy(L = Lreq.)

0.3

L
Lreq !

 

From which, with Eq. 2, one obtains:

Ephy ≈

Ec of m
7(T eV ) (cid:19)

(cid:18)

0.6

L
1034(cm−2s−1) (cid:19)

(cid:18)

0.2

(T eV )

(3)

Table 1 gives some examples of this approximate “physics” energy.

Table 1: Eﬀective Physics Energy of Some Hadron Machines
Machine C of M Energy Luminosity Physics Energy

ISR
Tevatron
LHC
VLHC

TeV
.056
1.8
14
60

cm−2s−1
1032
7 × 1031
1034
1034

TeV
0.02
0.16
1.5
3.6

It must be emphasized that this eﬀective physics energy is not a well
deﬁned quantity. It should depend on the physics being studied. The
initial discovery of a new quark, like the top, can be made with a
signiﬁcantly lower “physics” energy than that given here. And the
capabilities of diﬀerent types of machines have intrinsic diﬀerences.
The above analysis is useful only in making very broad comparisons
between machine types.

3 Hadron-Hadron Machines

3.1 Luminosity.

An antiproton-proton collider requires only one ring, compared with
the two needed for a proton-proton machine (the antiproton has the
opposite charge to the proton and can thus rotate in the same magnet
ring in the opposite direction - protons going in opposite directions
require two rings with bending ﬁelds of the opposite sign), but the lu-
minosity of an antiproton- proton collider is limited by the constraints

5

in antiproton production. A luminosity of at least 1032 cm−2s−1
is expected at the antiproton-proton Tevatron; and a luminosity of
1033 cm−2s−1 may be achievable, but the LHC, a proton-proton ma-
chine, is planned to have a luminosity of 1034 cm−2s−1: an order of
magnitude higher. Since the required luminosity rises with energy,
proton-proton machines seem to be favored for future hadron collid-
ers.

The LHC and other future proton-proton machines might[2] be
upgradable to 1035 cm−2s−1, but radiation damage to a detector would
then be a severe problem. The 60 TeV Really Large Hadron Colliders
(RLHC: high and low ﬁeld versions) discussed at Snowmass are being
designed as proton-proton machines with luminosities of 1034 cm−2s−1
and it seems reasonable to assume that this is the highest practical
value.

3.2 Size and Cost.

The size of hadron-hadron machines is limited by the ﬁeld of the mag-
nets used in their arcs. A cost minimum is obtained when a balance
is achieved between costs that are linear in length, and those that rise
with magnetic ﬁeld. The optimum ﬁeld will depend on the technolo-
gies used both for the the linear components (tunnel, access, distri-
bution, survey, position monitors, mountings, magnet ends, etc) and
those of the magnets themselves, including the type of superconductor
used.

The ﬁrst hadron collider, the 60 GeV ISR at CERN, used conven-
tional iron pole magnets at a ﬁeld less than 2 T. The only current
hadron collider, the 2 TeV Tevatron, at FNAL, uses NbTi supercon-
ducting magnets at approximately 4 ◦K giving a bending ﬁeld of about
4.5 T. The 14 TeV Large Hadron Collider (LHC), under construction
at CERN, plans to use the same material at 1.8 ◦K yielding bending
ﬁelds of about 8.5 T.

Future colliders may use new materials allowing even higher mag-
netic ﬁelds. Model magnets have been made with Nb3Sn, and studies
are underway on the use of high Tc superconductor. Bi2Sr2Ca1Cu2O8
(BSCCO) material is currently available in useful lengths as powder-
in-Ag tube processed tape. It has a higher critical temperature and
ﬁeld than conventional superconductors, but, even at 4 ◦K, its current
density is less than Nb3Sn at all ﬁelds below 15 T. It is thus unsuitable
for most accelerator magnets. In contrast YBa2Cu3O7 (YBCO) ma-

6

terial has a current density above that for Nb3Sn (4 ◦K), at all ﬁelds
and temperatures below 20 ◦K. But this material must be deposited on
specially treated metallic substrates and is not yet available in lengths
greater than 1 m. It is reasonable to assume, however, that it will be
available in useful lengths in the not too distant future.
it mean for
hadron colliders.

Figure 2: Relative costs of a collider as a function of its bending magnetic
ﬁeld, for diﬀerent superconductors and operating temperatures.

A parametric study was undertaken to learn what the use of such
materials might do for the cost of colliders. 2-in-1 cosine theta su-
perconducting magnet cross sections (in which the two magnet coils
are circular in cross section, have a cosine theta current distributions
and are both enclosed in a single iron yoke) were calculated using
ﬁxed criteria for margin, packing fraction, quench protection, sup-
port and ﬁeld return. Material costs were taken to be linear in the
weights of superconductor, copper stabilizer, aluminum collars, iron

7

yoke and stainless steel support tube. The cryogenic costs were taken
to be inversely proportional to the operating temperature, and linear
in the outer surface area of the cold mass. Tunnel, access, vacuum,
alignment, focusing, and diagnostic costs were taken to be linear with
tunnel length. The relative values of the cost dependencies were scaled
from LHC estimates.

Results are shown in Fig. 2. Costs were calculated assuming NbTi
at (a) 4 ◦K, and (b) 1.8 ◦K, Nb3 Sn at (c) 4 ◦K and YBCO High Tc at
20 ◦K (d) and (e). NbTi and Nb3 Sn costs per unit weight were taken
to be the same; YBCO was taken to be either equal to NbTi (in (d)),
or 4 times NbTi (in (e)). It is seen that the optimum ﬁeld moves from
about 6 T for NbTi at 4 ◦K to about 12 T for YBCO at 20 ◦K; while
the total cost falls by almost a factor of 2.

One may note that the optimized cost per unit length remains
approximately constant. This might have been expected: at the cost
minimum, the cost of linear and ﬁeld dependent terms are matched,
and the total remains about twice that of the linear terms.

The above study assumes this particular type of magnet and may
not be indicative of the optimization for radically diﬀerent designs.
A group at FNAL[3] is considering an iron dominated, alternating
gradient, continuous, single turn collider magnet design (Low ﬁeld
RLHC). Its ﬁeld would be only 2 T and circumference very large (350
km for 60 TeV), but with its simplicity and with tunneling innovations,
it is hoped to make its cost lower than the smaller high ﬁeld designs.
There are however greater problems in achieving high luminosity with
such a machine than with the higher ﬁeld designs.

4 Circular e+e−Machines

4.1 Luminosity.

The luminosities of most circular electron-positron colliders have been
between 1031 and 1032 cm−2s−1, CESR is fast approaching 1033 cm−2s−1
and machines are now being constructed with even higher values.
Thus, at least in principle, luminosity does not seem to be a limi-
tation (although it may be noted that the 0.2 TeV electron- positron
collider LEP has a luminosity below the requirement of Eq.2).

8

4.2 Size and Cost.

At energies below 100 MeV, using a reasonable bending ﬁeld, the size
and cost of a circular electron machine is approximately proportional
to its energy. But at higher energies, if the bending ﬁeld B is main-
tained, the energy lost ∆Vturn to synchrotron radiation rises rapidly

(4)

∝ E3 B
m4

∆Vturn ∝ E4
R m4
and soon becomes excessive (R is the radius of the ring). A cost
minimum is then obtained when the cost of the ring is balanced by
the cost of the rf needed to replace the synchrotron energy loss. If the
ring cost is proportional to its circumference, and the rf is proportional
to its voltage then the size and cost of an optimized machine rises as
the square of its energy.

The highest energy circular e+e−collider is the LEP at CERN
which has a circumference of 27 km, and will achieve a maximum
center of mass energy of about 0.2 TeV. Using the predicted scaling, a
0.5 TeV circular collider would have to have a 170 km circumference,
and would be very expensive.

5 e+e−Linear Colliders

For energies much above that of LEP (0.2 TeV) it is probably imprac-
tical to build a circular electron collider. The only possibility then
is to build two electron linacs facing one another. Interactions occur
at the center, and the electrons, after they have interacted, must be
discarded. The size of such colliders is now dominated by the length
of the two linacs and is inversely proportional to the average accel-
erating gradient in those structures.
In current proposals[4] using
conventional rf, these lengths are far greater than the circumferences
of hadron machines of the same beam energy, but as noted in section
2.3, the eﬀective physics energy of a lepton machine is higher than
that of a hadron machine with the same beam energy, thus oﬀsetting
some of this disadvantage.

5.1 Luminosity.
The luminosity L of a linear collider can be written:
1
4πE

Pbeam
σy

ncollisions

L =

N
σx

(5)

9

where σx and σy are average beam spot sizes including any pinch
eﬀects, and we take σx to be much greater than σy. E is the beam
energy, Pbeam is the total beam power, and, in this case, ncollisions = 1.
This can be expressed[8] as,

L ≈ 1
4πE

nγ
2roα U(Υ)

Pbeam
σy

where the quantum correction U (Υ) is given by

U (Υ) ≈

1
1 + Υ2/3

s

(6)

(7)

with

o

(8)

N γ
σz σx

Υ ≈ 2F2r2
α
F2 ≈ 0.43, ro is the classical electromagnetic radius, α is the ﬁne-
structure constant, and σz is the rms bunch length. The quantum
correction Υ is close to unity for all proposed machines with energy
less than 2 TeV, and this term is often omitted[5]. Even in a 5 TeV
design[6], an Υ of 21 gives a suppression factor of only 3. nγ is the
number of photons emitted by one electron as it passes through the
other bunch. If nγ is signiﬁcantly greater than one, then problems are
encountered with backgrounds of electron pairs and mini-jets, or with
unacceptable beamstrahlung energy loss. Thus nγ can be taken as a
rough criterion of these eﬀects and constrained to a ﬁxed value. We
then ﬁnd:

L ∝ 1
E

Pbeam
σy U(Υ)

which may be compared to the required luminosity that increases as
the square of energy, giving the requirement:

Pbeam
σy U (Υ)

∝ E3.

(9)

It is this requirement that makes it hard to design very high energy
linear colliders. High beam power demands high eﬃciencies and heavy
wall power consumption. A small σy requires tight tolerances, low
beam emittances and strong ﬁnal focus. And a small value of U (Υ) is
hard to obtain because of its weak dependence on Υ (∝ Υ−1/3).

10

5.2 Conventional RF.

The gradients for structures have limits that are frequency dependent,
but the real limit on accelerating gradients in these designs come from
a trade oﬀ between the cost of rf power against the cost of length. The
use of high frequencies reduces the stored energy in the cavities, re-
ducing the rf costs and allowing higher accelerating gradients: the
optimized gradients being roughly proportional to the frequency up
to a limit of approximately 250 MeV/m at a frequency of the order of
100 GHz. One might thus conclude then that higher frequencies should
always be preferred. There are however counterbalancing considera-
tions from the requirements of luminosity.

Figure 3: Dependence of some sensitive parameters of 0.5 TeV proposed
linear colliders as a function of their rf frequencies.

11

Fig. 3, using parameters from current 0.5 TeV linear collider pro-
posals [4], plots some relevant parameters against the rf frequency.
One sees that as the frequencies rise,

• the required alignment tolerances get tighter;
• the resolution of beam position monitors must also be better;

and

• despite these better alignments, the calculated emittance growth

during acceleration is worse; and

• the wall-power to beam-power eﬃciencies are also less.

Thus while length and cost considerations may favor high frequencies,
yet luminosity considerations would prefer lower frequencies.

5.3 Superconducting RF.

If, however, the rf costs can be reduced, for instance when supercon-
ducting cavities are used, then there will be no trade oﬀ between rf
power cost and length and higher gradients would lower the length and
thus the cost. Unfortunately the gradients achievable in currently op-
erating niobium superconducting cavities is lower than that planned in
the higher frequency conventional rf colliders. Theoretically the limit
is about 40 MV/m, but practically 25 MV/m is as high as seems pos-
sible. Nb3Sn and high Tc materials may allow higher ﬁeld gradients
in the future.

The removal of the requirements for very high peak rf power al-
lows the choice of longer wavelengths (the TESLA collaboration is
proposing 23 cm at 1.3 GHz) thus greatly relieving the emittance re-
quirements and tolerances, for a given luminosity.

At the current 25 MeV per meter gradients, the length and cost
of a superconducting machine is probably higher than for the conven-
tional rf designs. With greater luminosity more certain, its proponents
can argue that it is worth the greater price. If, using new supercon-
ductors, higher gradients become possible, thus reducing lengths and
costs, then the advantages of a superconducting solution might be-
come overwhelming.

5.4 At Higher Energies.

At higher energies (as expected from Eq. 9), obtaining the required
luminosity gets harder. Fig.4 shows the dependency of some example

12

machine parameters with energy. SLC is taken as the example at 0.1
TeV, NLC parameters at 0.5 and 1 TeV, and 5 and 10 TeV examples
are taken from a review paper by one of the authors[6]. One sees that:

• the assumed beam power rises approximately as E;
• the vertical spot sizes fall approximately as E−2;
• the vertical normalized emittances fall even faster: E−2.5; and
• the momentum spread due to beamstrahlung has been allowed

to rise.

These trends are independent of the acceleration method, fre-
quency, etc, and indicate that as the energy and required luminosity
rise, so the required beam powers, eﬃciencies, emittances and toler-
ances will all get harder to achieve. The use of higher frequencies
or exotic technologies that would allow the gradient to rise, will, in
general, make the achievement of the required luminosity even more
diﬃcult. It may well prove impractical to construct linear electron-
positron colliders, with adequate luminosity, at energies above a few
TeV.

6 γ − γ Colliders

A gamma-gamma collider[9] would use opposing electron linacs, as in
a linear electron collider, but just prior to the collision point, laser
beams would be Compton backscattered oﬀ the electrons to generate
photon beams that would collide at the IP instead of the electrons. If
suitable geometries are used, the mean photon-photon energy could be
80% or more of that of the electrons, with a luminosity about 1/10th.
If the electron beams, after they have backscattered the photons,
are deﬂected, then backgrounds from beamstrahlung can be elimi-
nated. The constraint on N/σx in Eq.5 is thus removed and one might
hope that higher luminosities would now be possible by raising N and
lowering σx. Unfortunately, to do this, one needs sources of bunches
with larger numbers of electrons and smaller emittances, and one must
ﬁnd ways to accelerate and focus such beams without excessive emit-
tance growth. Conventional damping rings will have diﬃculty doing
this[10]. Exotic electron sources would be needed, and methods using
lasers to generate[11] or cool[12] the electrons and positrons are under
consideration.

13

Figure 4: Dependence of some sensitive parameters on linear collider energy,
with comparison of same parameters for µ+µ− colliders.

Clearly, although gamma-gamma collisions can and should be made
available at any future electron-positron linear collider, to add physics
capability, whether they can give higher luminosity for a given beam
power is less clear.

7 µ+µ− Colliders

7.1 Advantages and Disadvantages

The possibility of muon colliders was introduced by Skrinsky et al.[13]
and Neuﬀer[14] and has been aggressively developed over the past two

14

years in a series of meetings and workshops[15, 16, 17, 18, 19].

The main advantages of muons, as opposed to electrons, for a

lepton collider are:

• The synchrotron radiation, that forces high energy electron col-
liders to be linear, is (see Eq. 4) inversely proportional to the
fourth power of mass: It is negligible in muon colliders. Thus
a muon collider can be circular. In practice this means in can
be smaller. The linacs for the SLAC proposal for a 0.5 TeV
Next Linear Collider would be 20 km long. The ring for a muon
collider of the same energy would be only about 1.3 km circum-
ference.

• The luminosity of a muon collider is given by the same formula
(Eq. 5) as given above for an electron positron collider, but there
are two signiﬁcant changes: 1) The classical radius ro is now
that for the muon and is 200 times smaller; and 2) the number
of collisions a bunch can make ncollisions is no longer 1, but is
now limited only by the muon lifetime and becomes related to
the average bending ﬁeld in the muon collider ring, with

ncollisions ≈ 150 Bave

With an average ﬁeld of 6 Tesla, ncollisions ≈ 900. These two
eﬀects give muons an in principle luminosity advantage of more
than 105. As a result, for the same luminosity, the required beam
power, spot sizes, emittances and energy spread are far less in
µ+µ− colliders than in e+e−machines of the same energy. The
comparison is made in Fig. 4 above.

• The suppression of synchrotron radiation induced by the oppo-
site bunch (beamstrahlung) allows the use of beams with lower
momentum spread, and QED radiation is reduced.

• s-channel Higgs production is enhanced by a factor of (mµ/me)2 ≈
40000. This combined with the lower momentum spreads would
allow more precise determination of Higgs masses, widths and
branching ratios.

But there are problems with the use of muons:
• Muons can be obtained from the decay of pions, made by higher
energy protons impinging on a target. But in order to obtain
enough muons, a high intensity proton source is required with
very eﬃcient capture of the pions, and muons from their decay.

15

• The selection of fully polarized muons is inconsistent with the
requirements for eﬃcient collection. Polarizations only up to
50 % are practical, and some loss of luminosity is inevitable
(e+e−machines can polarize the e−’s up to ≈ 85 %).

• Because the muons are made with very large emittance, they
must be cooled, and this must be done very rapidly because
of their short lifetime. Conventional synchrotron, electron, or
stochastic cooling is too slow. Ionization cooling[20] is the only
clear possibility, but does not cool to very low emittances.

• Because of their short lifetime, conventional synchrotron accel-
eration would be too slow. Recirculating accelerators or pulsed
synchrotrons must be used.

• Because they decay while stored in the collider, muons radiate
the ring and detector with decay electrons. Shielding is essential
and backgrounds will be high.

7.2 Design Studies

A collaboration, lead by BNL, FNAL and LBNL, with contributions
from 18 institutions has been studying a 4 TeV, high luminosity sce-
nario and presented a Feasibility Study[19] to the 1996 Snowmass
Workshop. The basic parameters of this machine are shown schemat-
ically in Fig. 5 and given in Table 2. Fig. 6 shows a possible layout
of such a machine.

Table 2 also gives the parameters of a 0.5 TeV demonstration ma-
chine based on the AGS as an injector. It is assumed that a demonstra-
tion version based on upgrades of the FERMILAB, or CERN machines
would also be possible.

The main components of the 4 TeV collider would be:
• A proton source with KAON[21] like parameters (30 GeV, 1014

protons per pulse, at 15 Hz).

• A liquid metal target surrounded by a 20 T hybrid solenoid to

make and capture pions.

• A 5 T solenoidal channel to allow the pions to decay into muons,
with rf cavities to, at the same time, decelerate the fast ones
that come ﬁrst, while accelerating the slower ones that come
later. Muons from pions in the 100-500 MeV range emerge in a
6 m long bunch at 150 ± 30 MeV.

16

Figure 5: Overview of a 4 TeV Muon Collider

17

Figure 6: Layout of the collider and accelerator rings.

• A solenoidal snake and collimator to select the momentum, and

thus the polarization, of the muons.

• A sequence of 20 ionization cooling stages, each consisting of: a)
energy loss material in a strong focusing environment for trans-
verse cooling; b) linac reacceleration and c) lithium wedges in
dispersive environments for cooling in momentum space.

• A linac and/or recirculating linac pre-accelerator, followed by a
sequence of pulsed ﬁeld synchrotron accelerators using supercon-
ducting linacs for rf.

• An isochronous collider ring with locally corrected low beta (β=3

mm) insertion.

7.3 Status and Required R and D

Muon Colliders are promising, but they are in a far less developed
state than hadron or e+e−machines. No muon collider has ever been
built. Much theoretical and experimental work will be needed be-

18

Table 2: Parameters of Collider Rings

Hz

TeV
TeV

c-of-m Energy
Beam energy
Beam γ
Repetition rate
Proton driver energy GeV
Protons per pulse
Muons per bunch
Bunches of each sign
Beam power
Norm. rms emit. ǫn
Bending Fields
Circumference
Ave. Bending Fields T
Eﬀective turns
β∗ at intersection
rms bunch length
rms I.P. beam size
Chromaticity
βmax
Luminosity

mm
mm
µm

km
cm−2s−1

MW
π mm mrad
T
Km

4
2
19,000
15
30
1014
2 1012
2
38
50
9
8
6
900
3
3
2.8
2000-4000
200-400
1035

.5
.25
2,400
2.5
24
1014
4 1012
1
.7
90
9
1.3
5
800
8
8
17
40-80
10-20
1033

fore one will even know if they are possible. In particular, theoretical
work is needed on the cooling sequence, on the collider ring, and on
estimations of background in the detectors. The highest priority ex-
perimental work is:

• Demonstration of ionization cooling;
• Demonstration of liquid targets, solenoid pion capture and the

use of rf near such a source;

• Construction of model pulsed magnets for the accelerator and
large aperture superconducting quadrupoles for the intersection
region of the collider.

19

8 Comparison of Machines

In Fig. 7, the eﬀective physics energies (as deﬁned by Eq. 3) of repre-
sentative machines are plotted against their total tunnel lengths. We
note:

Figure 7: Eﬀective physics energies of colliders as a function of their total
length.

• Hadrons Colliders: It is seen that the energies of machines rise
with their size, and that this rise is faster than linear (Eeﬀ ∝
L1.3). This extra rise is a reﬂection of the increases in bend-
ing magnetic ﬁeld used, as new technologies and materials have
become available.

20

• Circular Electron-Positron Colliders: The energies of these ma-
chines rise approximately as the square root of their size, as ex-
pected from the cost optimization discussed in section 4 above.
• Linear Electron-Positron Colliders: The SLAC Linear Collider
is the only existing machine of this type. One example of a
proposed machine (the NLC) is plotted. The line drawn has the
same slope as for the hadron machines and implies a similar rise
in accelerating gradient, as technologies advance.

• Muon-Muon Colliders: Only the 4 TeV collider, discussed above,
and the 0.5 TeV demonstration machine have been plotted. The
line drawn has the same slope as for the hadron machines.

It is noted that the muon collider oﬀers the greatest energy per
unit length. This is also apparent in Fig. 8, in which the footprints of
a number of proposed machines are given on the same scale.

Figure 8: Approximate sizes of some possible future colliders.

21

9 Conclusions

Our conclusions, with the caveat that they are indeed only our opin-
ions, are:

• The LHC is a well optimized and appropriate next step towards

high eﬀective physics energy.

• A Very Large Hadron Collider with energy greater than the SSC
(e.g. 60 TeV c-of-m) and cost somewhat less than the SSC, may
well be possible with the use of high Tc superconductors that
may become available.

• A “Next Linear Collider” is the only clean way to complement
the LHC with a lepton machine, and the only way to do so
soon. But it appears that even a 0.5 TeV collider may be more
expensive than the LHC, has signiﬁcantly less eﬀective physics
energy, and will be technically challenging. Obtaining the design
luminosity may not be easy.

• Extrapolating conventional rf e+e−linear colliders to energies
above 1 or 2 TeV will be very diﬃcult. Raising the rf frequency
can reduce length and probably cost for a given energy, but ob-
taining luminosity increasing as the square of energy, as required,
may not be feasible.

• Laser driven accelerators are becoming more realistic and can be
expected to have a signiﬁcantly lower cost per TeV. But the ratio
of luminosity to wall power is likely to be signiﬁcantly worse than
for conventional rf driven machines. Colliders using such tech-
nologies are thus unlikely to achieve the very high luminosities
needed for physics research at higher energies.

• A higher gradient superconducting Linac collider using Nb3Sn
or high Tc materials, if it became technically possible, could be
the most economical way to attain the required luminosities in
a higher energy e+e−collider.

• Gamma-gamma collisions can and should be obtained at any
future electron-positron linear collider. They would add physics
capability to such a machine, but, despite their freedom from the
beamstrahlung constraint, may not achieve higher luminosity.
• A Muon Collider, being circular, could be far smaller than a
conventional rf e+e−linear collider of the same energy. Very pre-
liminary estimates suggest that it would also be signiﬁcantly

22

less expensive. The ratio of luminosity to wall power for such
machines, above 2 TeV, may be better than that for electron
positron machines, and extrapolation to a center of mass energy
of 4 TeV does not seem unreasonable. If research and develop-
ment can show that it is practical, then a 0.5 TeV muon collider
could be a useful complement to e+e−colliders, and, at higher
energies (e.g. 4 TeV), could be a viable alternative.

10 Acknowledgments

We acknowledge important contributions from many colleagues, es-
pecially those that contributed to the feasibitity study submitted to
the Snowmass Workshop 96 Proceedings[19] from which much of the
material and some text for this report, has been taken: In particular
we acknowledge the contributions of the Editors of each one of the
chapters of the µ+µ− Collider: A Feasibility Study: V. Barger, J.
Norem, R. Noble, H. Kirk, R. Fernow, D. Neuﬀer, J. Wurtele, D. Lis-
sauer, M. Murtagh, S. Geer, N. Mokhov and D. Cline. This research

was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No.
DE-ACO2-76-CH00016 and DE-AC03-76SF00515.

11 Discusion

R.Taylor: I was afraid if it was going to run over but it worked well
because we spent hardly any time on what is wrong with muon collid-
ers compared to the length of time we spent on what was wrong with
linear colliders. (laugh)
K.Henry: So what’s wrong with the muon colliders? (laugh)
Palmer: I can tell you which parts of the muon collider keep me awake
at night. That changes, of course, from week to week. Enormous
progress has been made even in last few months. The collider lattice
had been a problem, but doesn’t worry me any more. We also had
a serious diﬃculty in the transverse cooling lattices. When we ﬁrst
tried tracking particles through, some muons never came out. They
were hitting resonances. Now we understand that problem and have
tracked through transverse cooling sections that work.

But we have not done energy cooling yet. We know theoretically
how to do it, but we haven’t got a realistic lattice and tracked muons

23

through it. Having been burnt once, I will have sleepless nights until
we get past that hurdle.

The collider ring may have instability problems that are not fully
understood. We think that it will have to have BNS damping applied
by using RF quadrupoles, but we haven’t worked that out.

It would be interesting to hear about the shielding

We haven’t done many things that need to be done, but I do not
yet see any insuperable problems. I do not sleep that badly. (laugh)
Erich Vogt: Have you considered using surface muons which have been
considered at KEK as an alternative muon source?
Palmer: Yes, but we need bunches with very large numbers of muons
in order to get luminosity. It seems to be diﬃcult to get them from
surface muons. And there is a more basic problem, we need both
charges, I do not think this is possible with surface muons.
Edward Witten: What fraction of muons decay before entering the
ring?
Palmer: With the parameters we’ve considered, about three-fourths
are lost. Half decay during the cooling sequence, and half of the
remainder decay during acceleration.
Alfred Mann:
problems that arise in the muon-muon collider.
Palmer: I think I know what you’re trying to get at. (laugh) The
radiation from decay electrons in the ring itself can be shielded rela-
tively easily. Dumping 2 Tev muons is more diﬃcult because it takes
2 km of concrete to stop them, but that too is ok. The problem you
may be hinting at, which I didn’t mention because we are not yet sure
about the calculation, is radiation from neutrinos. Muons decaying in
a straight section of the collider ring produce a neutrino beam with
opening angle of 1/γ that, for a 4 TeV collider, is only a meter or
two wide 35 km away. The neutrino cross section is small, but rising
linearly with energy, and there are 20 mega-watts of power in that
beam. The resulting radiation level appears to be close to the legal
limit. You can’t shield it and it always breaks ground somewhere be-
cause unfortunately the earth is round. (laugh) It rises as the fourth
power of the energy and is only inverse with the machine depth. Thus,
even if a 4 TeV µ+µ− collider is just ok, a 10 Tev collider is probably
impractical.
Leon Lederman: Going back to the beginning of your talk on the
Livingston Plot, you said that there is a 106 rise of cost rise for a 1012
rise in energy so we are 106 cleverer.(laugh) Did you include inﬂation
in those numbers?

24

Palmer: Yes, I did, but I may not have done it right. Down the bottom
I had 100 Kev and I said to myself what I could buy that now for a
few thousand dollars. This is not fair because in 1930 you could not
buy one and it must have taken quite a bit of labor to build one. I
did not try and estimate that cost.

References

(1954).

[1] M. S. Livington, High Energy Accelerators, Interscience, NY

[2] A. W. Chao, R. B. Palmer, L. Evans, J, Gareyte, R. H. Siemann,
Hadron Colliders (SSC/LHC), Proc.1990 Summer Study on High
Energy Physics, Snowmass, (1990) p. 667.

[3] S. Holmes for the RLHC Group, Summary Report, presentation

at the Snowmass Workshop 96, to be published.

[4] International Linear Collider Technical Review Committee Re-

port, SLAC-R-95-471, (1995)

[5] See for example, H. Murayama and M. Peskin, Physics Op-
portunities of e+e− Linear Colliders, SLAC-PUB-7149/LBNL-
38808/UCB-PTH-96/18, June 1996; to appera in Annual Review
of Nuclear and Particle Physics.

[6] R. B. Palmer,Prospects for High Energy e+e−Linear Colliders,

Annu. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. (1990) 40, p 529-92.

[7] N. Akasaka, Dark current simulation in high gradient accelerating
structure EPAC96 Proceedings, pp. 483 Sitges, Barcelona, Spain,
June 1996), Institute of Physics Publishing

[8] P. Chen and K. Yokoya, Phys. Rev. D38 987 (1988); P. Chen,
SLAC-PUB-4823 (1987); K. Yokoya and P. Chen, lecture at the
US-CERN Accelerator School, Hilton Head, South Carolina, 1990
(unpublished); Report No. KeK 91-2,1991.

[9] V. Telnov, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A294, (1990) 72; A Sec-
ond Interaction Region for Gamma-Gamma, Gamma-Electron
and Electron-Electron Collisions for NLC, Ed. K-J Kim, LBNL-
38985, LLNL-UCRL-ID 124182, SLAC-PUB-95-7192.

[10] R. B. Palmer,Accelerator parameters for γ − γ colliders; Nucl.

Inst. and Meth., A355 (1995) 150-153.

25

[11] P. Chen and R. Palmer, Coherent Pair Creation as a Posittron
Source for Linear Colliders, AIP Press, ed. J. Wurtele, Confer-
ence Proceedings 279, 1993.

[12] V. Telnov, Laser Cooling of Electron Beams for linear colliders;

NSF-ITP-96-142 and SLAC-PUB 7337

[13] E. A. Perevedentsev and A. N. Skrinsky, Proc. 12th Int. Conf. on
High Energy Accelerators, F. T. Cole and R. Donaldson, Eds.,
(1983) 485; A. N. Skrinsky and V.V. Parkhomchuk, Sov. J. of
Nucl. Physics 12, (1981) 3; Early Concepts for µ+µ− Colliders
and High Energy µ Storage Rings, Physics Potential & Develop-
ment of µ+µ− Colliders. 2nd Workshop, Sausalito, CA, Ed. D.
Cline, AIP Press, Woodbury, New York, (1995).

[14] D. Neuﬀer, IEEE Trans. NS-28, (1981) 2034.
[15] Proceedings of the Mini-Workshop on µ+µ− Colliders: Parti-
cle Physics and Design, Napa CA, Nucl Inst. and Meth., A350
(1994) ; Proceedings of the Muon Collider Workshop, February
22, 1993, Los Alamos National Laboratory Report LA- UR-93-
866 (1993) and Physics Potential & Development of µ+µ− Col-
liders 2nd Workshop, Sausalito, CA, Ed. D. Cline, AIP Press,
Woodbury, New York, (1995).

[16] Transparencies at the 2 + 2 TeV µ+µ− Collider Collaboration
Meeting, Feb 6-8, 1995, BNL, compiled by Juan C. Gallardo;
transparencies at the 2 + 2 TeV µ+µ− Collider Collaboration
Meeting, July 11-13, 1995, FERMILAB, compiled by Robert No-
ble; Proceedings of the 9th Advanced ICFA Beam Dynamics
Workshop, Ed. J. C. Gallardo, AIP Press, Conference Proceed-
ings 372 (1996).

[17] D. V. Neuﬀer and R. B. Palmer, Proc. European Particle Acc.
Conf., London (1994); M. Tigner, in Advanced Accelerator Con-
cepts, Port Jeﬀerson, NY 1992, AIP Conf. Proc. 279, 1 (1993).

[18] R. B. Palmer et al., Monte Carlo Simulations of Muon Produc-
tion, Physics Potential & Development of µ+µ− Colliders 2nd
Workshop, Sausalito, CA, Ed. D. Cline, AIP Press, Woodbury,
New York, pp. 108 (1995); R. B. Palmer, et al., Muon Collider
Design, in Proceedings of the Symposium on Physics Potential
& Development of µ+µ− Colliders, Nucl. Phys B (Proc. Suppl.)
51A (1996)

26

[19] µ+µ− collider, A Feasibility Study, BNL-52503, FermiLab-Conf-
96/092, LBNL-38946, submitted to the Proceedings of the Snow-
mass96 Workshop.

[20] A. N. Skrinsky and V. V. Parkhomchuk, Methods of cooling beams
of charged particles, Sov. J. part. Nucl. 12 223 (1981); D. Neuf-
fer, Principles and Applications of Muon Cooling, Part. Acc. 14
75 (1983); R. C. Fernow and J. C. Gallardo, Muon Transverse
Ionization Cooling: Stochastic Approach, Phys. Rev. E52 1039
(1995)

[21] KAON Factory Study, Accelerator Design Study Report, TRI-

UMF, Vancouver, B.C. Canada.

27

