8
9
9
1
 
r
a

M
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
3
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A stochastic model for the semiclassical collective dynamics of
charged beams in particle accelerators1

Nicola Cufaro Petroni

Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Bari; and INFN, Sezione di Bari,
Via G. Amendola, Bari, Italia. E–Mail: cufaro@bari.infn.it

Salvatore De Martino, Silvio De Siena and Fabrizio Illuminati∗
Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Salerno; INFM, Unit`a di Salerno;
and INFN, Sezione di Napoli – Gruppo collegato di Salerno, I–84081
Baronissi (Salerno), Italia. E–Mail: demartino@physics.unisa.it
desiena@physics.unisa.it; illuminati@physics.unisa.it.
Also at Fakult¨at f¨ur Physik, Universit¨at Konstanz,
Fach M 695, D–78457 Konstanz, Deutschland

∗

Abstract

In this paper we brieﬂy review the main aspects of a recent pro-
posal to simulate semiclassical corrections to classical dynamics by
suitable classical stochastic ﬂuctuations, and we apply it to the spe-
ciﬁc instance of charged beams in particle accelerators. The resulting
picture is that the collective beam dynamics, at the leading semiclassi-
cal order in Planck constant can be described by a particular diﬀusion
process, the Nelson process, that is time–reversal invariant. Its dif-
fusion coeﬃcient √Nλc represents a semiclassical unit of emittance
(here N is the number of particles in the beam, and λc is the Comp-
ton wavelength). The stochastic dynamics of the Nelson type can be
easily recast in the form of a Schroedinger equation, with the semi-
classical unit of emittance replacing Planck constant. Therefore we
provide a physical foundation to the several quantum–like models of
beam dynamics proposed in recent years. We also brieﬂy touch upon
applications of the Nelson and Schroedinger formalisms to incorporate
the description of coherent collective eﬀects.

1To appear in the Proceedings of the International Workshop on “Quantum Aspects

of Beam Dynamics”, held in Stanford, 4–9 January 1998.

1

1 Introduction

The dynamical evolution of beams in particles accelerators is gov-
erned by external electromagnetic forces and by the interaction of the
beam particles among themselves and with the environment. Charged
beams are therefore higly nonlinear dynamical systems, and most of
the studies on colliding beams rely either on classical phenomena such
as nonlinear resonances, or they are concerned with isolated sources
of unstable behaviors as building blocks of more complicated chaotic
instabilities.

This line of inquiry has produced a general qualitative picture of
dynamical processes in particle accelerators at the classical level. How-
ever, the coherent oscillations of the beam density and proﬁle require,
to be explained, some mechanism of local correlation and loss of statis-
tical independence. This fundamental observation points towards the
need to take into account all the interactions as a whole. Moreover,
the overall interactions between charged particles and machine ele-
ments are really nonclassical in the sense that of the many sources of
noise that are present, almost all are mediated by fundamental quan-
tum processes of emission and absorbtion of photons. Therefore the
equations describing these processes must be, in principle, quantum.
Starting from the above considerations, two diﬀerent approaches
to the classical collective dynamics of charged beams have been de-
veloped, one relying on the Fokker-Planck equation [1] for the beam
density, another based on a mathematical coarse graining of Vlasov
equation leading to a quantum–like Schroedinger equation, with a
thermal unit of emittance playing the role of Planck constant [2].

The study of statistical eﬀects on the dynamics of electron (positron)

colliding beams by the Fokker–Planck equation has led to several in-
teresting results, and has become an established reference in treating
the sources of noise and dissipation in particle accelerators by standard
classical probabilistic techniques [3].

Concerning the relevance of the quantum–like approach, at this
stage we only want to point out that some recent experiments on
conﬁned classical systems subject to particular phase–space boundary
conditions seem to to be well explained by a quantum–like (Schroedinger
equation) formalism [4].

In any case, both approaches do not take into account quantum
corrections, while in principle these eﬀects should be relevant, expe-

2

cially in ﬁxing fundamental lower limits to beam emittance. In this
report we give a short summary of a recently proposed model for the
description of collective beam dynamics in the semiclassical regime.
This new approach relies on the idea of simulating semiclassical cor-
rections to classical dynamics by suitable classical stochastic ﬂuctu-
ations with long range coherent correlations, whose scale is ruled by
Planck constant [5].

The ﬂuctuative hypothesis has been introduced by simple stability
criteria, and it has been semiquantitatively tested for many stable sys-
tems, including beams. The virtue of the proposed semiclassical model
is twofold: on the one hand it can be formulated both in a probabilis-
tic (Fokker–Planck) fashion and in a quantum–like (Schroedinger) set-
ting. It thus bridges the formal gap between the two approaches. At
the same time it goes further by describing collective eﬀects beyond
the classical regime due to the semiclassical quantum corrections.

In particular, implementing the ﬂuctuative hypothesis qualitatively
by simple dimensional analysis, we derive a formula for the phase–
space unit of emittance that connects in a nontrivial way the number
of particles in the beam with Plank constant.

The ﬂuctuative scheme is then implemented quantitatively by in-
troducing a random kinematics in the form of a diﬀusion process in
conﬁguration space for a generic representative of the beam (collective
degree of freedom).

We are interested in the description of the stability regime, when
thermal dissipative eﬀects are balanced on average by the RF energy
pumping, and the overall dynamics is conservative and time–reversal
invariant in the mean. Therefore, we model the random kinematics
with a particular class of diﬀusion processes, the Nelson diﬀusions,
that are nondissipative and time–reversal invariant (We will brieﬂy
comment at the end of the last section on the extension of the present
scheme to include the treatment of dissipative eﬀects).

The diﬀusion process describes the eﬀective motion at the meso-
scopic level (interplay of thermal equilibrium, classical mechanical sta-
bility, and fundamental quantum noise) and therefore the diﬀusion
coeﬃcient is set to be the semiclassical unit of emittance provided
by qualitative dimensional analysis. In other words, we simulate the
quantum corrections to classical deterministic motion (at leading or-
der in Planck constant) with a suitably deﬁned random kinematics
replacing the classical deterministic trajectories.

3

Finally, the dynamical equations are derived via the variational
principle of classical dynamics, with the only crucial diﬀerence that the
kinematical rules and the dynamic quantities, such as the Action and
the Lagrangian, are now random. The stochastic variational principle
leads to a pair of coupled equations for the beam density and the
beam center current velocity, describing the dynamics of beam density
oscillations. It is an eﬀective description in the stability regime.

The stochastic variational principle for Nelson diﬀusions (with dif-
fusion coeﬃcient equal to Planck constant) is a well developed mathe-
matical tool that has originally been introduced to provide a stochastic
formulation of quantum mechanics. Therefore, apart from the diﬀer-
ent objects involved (beam spatial density versus Born probability
density; Planck constant versus emittance), the dynamical equations
of our model formally reproduce the equations of the Madelung ﬂuid
(hydrodynamic) representation of quantum mechanics. In this sense,
the present scheme allows for a quantum–like formulation equivalent
to the probabilistic one.

At the end of the last section we will brieﬂy discuss how the hy-
drodynamic formulation of the equations for the collective stochastic
dynamics can be used to control the beams, for instance by selecting
the form of the external potential needed to obtain coherent oscilla-
tions of the beam density.

2 Simulation of semiclassical eﬀects by
classical ﬂuctuations

Let us consider a physical system subject to a classical force law of
modulus F (r) that is attractive and conﬁning at least for some ﬁnite
space region with a characteristic linear dimension R. Given N ele-
mentary granular constituents of the system, each of mass m, let v
denote their characteristic velocity, and τ their characteristic unit of
time.

A characteristic unit of action per particle is then deﬁned as

α = mv2τ.

(1)

If the system has to be stable and conﬁned, one must impose that
the characteristic potential energy of each particle be on average equal

4

to its characteristic kinetic energy (virial theorem):

L ∼= mv2,

L

where
is the work performed by the system on a single constituent.
On the other hand, if the system extends on the characteristic length
scale R,

L ∼= N F (R)R.
By equations (2) and (3) we can express the characteristic velocity v
as

(3)

v ∼=

s

N F (R)R
m

.

associated to the system, we also
Introducing the global time scale
. Replacing this expression and equation (4) for each
have v = R/
power of v in equation (1), we obtain the following expression for the
action per particle:

T

T

α ∼=

mF (R)R3/2N 1/2 τ
T

.

q

Mechanical stability requires that the action per particle must not
depend on N , while on the other hand, the microscopic unit of time
τ must obviously depend on N and on the system’s global time scale

. Therefore we must impose

T

τ = T

.

√N

Inserting equation (6) into equation (5) we obtain the unit of action
per particle as a explicit expression in terms of the constituent’s mass,
the system’s linear dimension R, and the classical force calculated in
R:

α ∼= m1/2R3/2

F (R).

q

The scaling relation (6) can be also interpreted as a ﬂuctuative hy-
pothesis connecting the time scale of a microscopic stochastic motion
with the classical time scale of the global system. In fact, equation
(6) was ﬁrst postulated by F. Calogero in his attempt to prove that
quantum mechanics might be interpreted as a tiny chaotic component
of the individual particles’ motion in a gravitationally interacting Uni-
verse [6].

(2)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

5

In our scheme, rather than being a postulated consequence of clas-
sical gravitational chaos, the ﬂuctuative hipothesis of Calogero derives
from a condition of mechanical stability. Since the stability conditions
and the virial theorem apply to any classically stable and conﬁned sys-
tem, even with a small number of degrees of freedom, our derivation of
equations (6) and (7) is universal as it applies to any interactions, not
only gravity, and to systems composed by any number of constituents,
not necessarily large, and not necessarily classically chaotic.

We have veriﬁed that for any stable aggregate, plugging in equation
(7) the pertaining interaction F , individual constituents’ mass m and
aggregate’s linear dimension R, one has that the unit of action per
particle α is always equal, in order of magnitude, to Planck action
constant h.

Our interpretation of this remarkable result is then that the ﬂuc-
tuative relation (6) and the associated formula (7) for the Planck
quantum of action simulate (reformulate) in a classical probabilistic
language the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization condition. They provide
a classical description of quantum corrections to classical phase–space
dynamics at the leading semiclassical order h.

We here brieﬂy derive the result for the case of interest of a sta-
ble bunch of charged particles in a particle accelerator. We consider
a single electron (proton), in the reference frame comoving with the
bunch. Conﬁnement and stability of the bunch arise from the many
complicated interactions among its constituents and between the same
constituents and the external magnetic and RF ﬁelds. The net eﬀect
can be, in ﬁrst approximation, schematized by saying that the single
electron (proton) experiences an eﬀective harmonic force, the typi-
cal phenomenological law of force for beams when higher anharmonic
contributions can be neglected: F (R) ∼= KR, where K is the eﬀective
phenomenological elastic constant. We then have for beams:

α ∼= m1/2R2K 1/2.
Let us consider for instance the transverse oscillations for protons
at Hera: in this case we have K = 10−12N m−1, the linear transverse
dimension of the bunch R = 10−7m, and the proton mass. For elec-
trons in linear colliders we have instead K = 10−11N m−1, R = 10−7m,
and the electron mass. In both cases, from equation (8) we have that
the unit of action per particle α, ruling the coherence and stability of
the bunch, is in both cases h, up to at most one order of magnitude.

(8)

6

All other instances of charged bunches considered lead to the same
result, yielding our ﬁrst important conclusion: the stability of charged
beams is ruled by quantum eﬀects on a mesoscopic scale. Moreover, at
the semiclassical level, such quantum aspects can be described in terms
of suitable classical ﬂuctuations that mimick (simulate) the weak but
unavoidable presence of fundamental quantum noise.

The parameter that rules the stability of the system at the meso-
scopic scale is however not directly h, but in the case of charged beams
some characteristic unit of emittance. This is a scale of action, or of
length when divided by the Compton wavelength, that measures the
spread of the bunch in phase space, or, equivalently, in real space.

This notion is very useful in the regime of stability and of thermal
equilibrium that we explicitely consider. In this case the emittance can
be expressed as a unit of equivalent thermal action. To introduce a
characteristic unit of emittance in our ﬂuctuative semiclassical scheme
we then proceed as follows: the time scale of quantum ﬂuctuations is
deﬁned as the ratio between h and a suitable energy describing the
equilibrium state of the given system. This leads naturally to iden-
tify this energy with the equivalent thermal energy kBT , with kB the
Boltzmann constant and T the equivalent temperature. On the other
hand, in our scheme such time scale coincides with the ﬂuctuative time
τ ; we therefore have:

Using relation (6) we obtain the equivalent thermal unit of action

τ ∼=

h
kBT

.

kBT

T ∼= h√N .

(9)

(10)

E

Introducing the Compton wavelength λc = h/mc and dividing by it
both sides of equation (10) we ﬁnally obtain the characteristic unit of
emittance

:

E ∼= λc√N .
Equation (11) connects in a nontrivial way the number of par-
ticles in a given charged beam and the Compton wavelength. The
square root of N appears as a semiclassical “memory” of quantum
interference. The relation (11) seems to point out the existence of a
mesoscopic lower bound on the emittance some orders of magnitude
above the quantum limit given by the Compton wavelength. More-
over, Equation (11) yields the correct order of magnitude in for the

(11)

7

emittance in typical accelerators: for instance, with N ∼= 1011
one has
that are at the moment experimentally attainable.

10−12,
E ∼= 10−6m in excellent agreement with the lowest emittances

÷

Actually, limits and requirements on beam existence, luminosity
and statistics do not allow for beams with a number of particles ap-
1011. Thus the estimate (11) re-
preciably lower than N ∼= 1010
÷
ally provides an a priori lower bound, as it implies that the emit-
tance cannot be reduced appreciably below the mesoscopic thresholds
106λc, well above the Compton wavelength limit and only
E ∼= 105
one or two orders of magnitude below the current experimental limits.
It seems also unlikely that further quantum corrections beyond the
leading semiclassical order could somehow contribute in lowering the
mesoscopic bound (11) as a function of N .

÷

3 Stochastic collective dynamics in the
stability regime

The previous discussion can be made more quantitative by observing
that the ﬂuctuative relation (6) can be be recast with a little bit of
work in the alternative form

τ 2/3 ,

l

∼

(12)

where l is a characteristic mean free path per particle. The detailed
derivation of relation (12) from equation (6) is reported elsewhere
[5]. Relation (12) indicates that the classical ﬂcutuative simulation
of semiclassical corrections really implies a fractal space–time relation
in the mean, with a Kepler exponent associated to stable, conﬁned
and coherent dynamical systems, for instance charged beams in the
stability regime.

We therefore model the spatially coherent ﬂuctuations (6) and (12)
by a random kinematics performed by some collective degree of free-
dom q(t) representative of the beam. The most universal continuous
random kinematics that we can choose is a diﬀusion process in real
or conﬁguration space. In this way the random kinematics provides
an eﬀective description of the space–time variations of the particle
beam density ρ(x, t) as it coincides with the probability density of the
diﬀusion process performed by q(t).

8

Since it measures a collective eﬀect at the mesoscopic scale, the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient must be related to the equilibrium parameter in
the stability regime, that is to the characteristic semiclassical unit of
emittance (11) rather than to the Plank action constant.

Then, in suitable units, the basic stochastic kinematical relation is

the Ito stochastic diﬀerential equation

dq(t) = v+(q, t)dt +

1/2dw ,

E

(13)

where v+ is the deterministic drift, the square root of the characteristic
emittance (11) is the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, and dw is the time increment
of the standard δ–correlated Wiener noise.

We are concerned with the regime of stability of the beam oscil-
lation dynamics, both since it is the relevant regime in the physics of
accelerators and because the beam can be considered quasistationary
during it, until, eventually, space charge eﬀects become dominant and
the beam is lost. In such stationary regime the energy lost by photonic
emissions is regained in the RF cavities, and on average the dynamics
is still time–reversal invariant. We can therefore still deﬁne a classical
Lagrangian L(q, ˙q) for the system, however with the classical deter-
ministic kinematics replaced by the random diﬀusive kinematics (13).
The equations of dynamics can then be deduced from the classical
Lagrangian by simply modifying the variational principles of classical
mechanics into stochastic variational principles. In fact, the mathe-
matical techniques of stochastic variational principles have been de-
veloped and applied to obtain Nelson stochastic mechanics, an in-
dependet stochastic reformulation of quantum mechanics in terms of
time–reversal invariant Markov diﬀusion processes with diﬀusion coef-
ﬁcient ¯h [7]. In the context of Nelson stochastic mechanics one derives
Schroedinger equation in the form of the Madelung coupled hydrody-
namic equations for the probability density and the probability current
[7].

In the present mesoscopic context the analysis is quite similar
to that of Nelson stochastic mechanics, yielding again two coupled
nonlinear hydrodynamic equations, however, with the emittance (11)
replacing Planck constant in the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, the real space
bunch density replacing the quantum mechanical probability density,
and the bunch center velocity replacing the quantum mechanical prob-
ability current.

9

We now brieﬂy sketch the derivation of the dynamical equations.
The detailed analysis may be found elsewhere [8]. Given the stochastic
diﬀerential equation (13) for the diﬀusion process q(t) in d = 3 space
dimensions, one introduces the classical Lagrangian

L(q, ˙q) = 1/2m ˙q2

V (q) .

−

(14)

(15)

For the generic trial diﬀusion q(t) one has, respectively, the prob-
ability density ρ(x, t), the forward drift v+(x, t) and the backward
drift v−(x, t).
It is then useful to deﬁne two new variables, v(x, t)
and u(x, t), respectively the current velocity and the osmotic velocity,
deﬁned as:

v =

v+ + v−
2

; u =

v+

v−

−
2

=

ρ
∇
ρ

.

E

The mean classical action is deﬁned in strict analogy to the classical
action in the deterministic case, but for the limiting procedure that
needs to be taken in the sense of expectation values, as the sample
paths of a diﬀusion process are non diﬀerentiable:

A(t0, t1; q) =

lim∆t→0+E

t1

t0

Z

2

m
2 (cid:18)

∆q
∆t (cid:19)

"

−

V (q)

dt ,

(16)

#

where E denotes the expectation with respect to the probability den-
sity ρ. It can be shown that the mean classical action (16) associated
to the diﬀusive kinematics (13) can be cast in the following particu-
larly appealing Eulerian hydrodynamic form [7]:

A(t0, t1; q) =

t1

dt

t0

Z

Z

d3x

m
2

(cid:20)

v2

u2

−

−

V (x)
(cid:21)

(cid:16)
The stochastic variational principle now follows: the Action is sta-
tionary, δA = 0, under smooth variations of the density δρ, and of the
current velocity δv, with vanishing boundary conditions at the initial
and ﬁnal times, if and only if the current velocity is the gradient of
some scalar ﬁeld S(x, t) (the phase):

(cid:17)

ρ(x, t) .

(17)

mv =

S .

∇

(18)

With the above conditions met, the two coupled nonlinear La-
grangian equations of motion for the density ρ (or alternatively for

10

the osmotic velocity u) and for the current velocity v (or alternatively
for the phase S) are the Hamilton–Jacobi–Madelung equation:

∂tS +

v2

m
2

2m

2 ∇

−

E

2√ρ
√ρ

+ V (x) = 0 ,

(19)

and the continuity equation:

∂tρ =

[ρv].

−∇

(20)

By solving equations (19) and (20) the state of the bunch is com-
linearization of the equations can be

pletely determined. Formal
achieved through the standard De Broglie ansatz yielding the Schroedinger
equation of the quantum–like models. However, one should bear in
mind that the real hydrodynamic equations (19)–(20) are the physi-
cally fundamental objects, while linearizing them to a complex Schroedinger
equation is a bare mathematical tool that can be useful for calcula-
tional needs, but bears no physical signiﬁcance.
In particular, the
complex wave function is devoid of any physical meaning. Thus, in
the present context, the situation is just the opposite to that in quan-
tum mechanics, where instead the wave function and the Schroedinger
equation are the fundamental physical ingredients.

The observable structure is quite clear: the expectations (ﬁrst mo-
ments) of the three components of the current velocity v are the aver-
age velocities of oscillation of the bunch center along the longitudinal
and transverse directions. The expectations (ﬁrst moments) of the
three components of the process q(t) give the average coordinate of
the bunch center. The second moments of q(t) allow to determine the
dispersion (spreading) of the bunch. In the harmonic case, these are
all the moments that are needed (Gaussian probability density), and
we have coherent state solutions. In the anharmonic case the coupled
equations of dynamics may be used to achieve a controlled coherence:
given a desired state (ρ, v) the equations of motion (19) and (20) can
be solved for the external controlling potential V (x, t) that realizes
the desired state. Lack of space prevents us from commenting further
on this very important application of our formalism. A thorough and
detailed study of the controlled coherent evolutions in the framework
of our stochastic model will be presented in a forthcoming paper [9].

11

4 Aknowledgement

One of us (F.I.) gratefully aknowledges a research fellowship from the
Alexander von Humboldt Stiftung and hospitality from the LS Mlynek
at the Fak¨ult¨at f¨ur Physik of the University of Konstanz.

References

[1] F. Ruggiero, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 153, 122 (1984); J. F. Schonfeld,

Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 160, 149 (1985).

[2] R. Fedele, these proceedings; R. Fedele, G. Miele and L. Palumbo,

Phys. Lett. A 194, 113 (1994), and references therein.

[3] S. Chattopadhyay, these proceedings, and AIP Conf. Proc. 127,
444 (1983); F. Ruggiero, E. Picasso and L. A. Radicati, Ann.
Phys. (N. Y.) 197, 396 (1990).

[4] R. K. Varma, in: Quantum–like Models and Coherence Eﬀects, R.
Fedele and S. Shuckla editors (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996).

[5] S. De Martino, S. De Siena and F. Illuminati, E–Print Archive
quant–ph/9803068, and Mod. Phys. Lett. B (1998), submitted.

[6] F. Calogero, Phys. Lett. A 228, 335 (1997).

[7] E. Nelson, Quantum Fluctuations (Princeton University Press,
Princeton N. J., 1985); F. Guerra and L. M. Morato, Phys. Rev.
D 27, 1774 (1983).

[8] N. Cufaro Petroni, S. De Martino, S. De Siena and F. Illuminati,

Phys. Rev. E (1998), submitted.

[9] S. De Martino, S. De Siena, R. Fedele, F. Illuminati and S.

Tzenov, to appear.

12

