8
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
2
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Measurement of Colliding Beam Parameters with
Wide Angle Beamstrahlung

G. Bonvicini, D. Cinabro and E. Luckwald
Wayne State University, Detroit MI 48201

February 9, 2008

1

Introduction

Machine issues at particle factories are dominated by luminosity optimiza-
tion, which is the overlap of the density functions ρ of the two beams over
space and time. For a single beam crossing,

L = c

Z

dV dτ ρ1(r, τ )ρ2(r, τ ),

(1)

(2)

where dV is the volume element and τ is a time variable of order of the beam-
crossing duration. Optimal luminosity is achieved by perfect transverse
overlap of two equal and Gaussian beams squeezed to the limit allowed by
the tune shift. For a single beam crossing, that reads

dV dτ e

−(x2/σ2

x(t)+y2/σ2

y(t)+(z2+(cτ )2)/σ2

z (t))

L0(t) =

N1(t)N2(t)c
(2π)3σx(t)σy(t)σz(t) Z
N1(t)N2(t)
4πσx(t)σy(t)

,

=

where the N1,2 and σx,y,z are the beam populations and spatial dimensions
at any given time t (which is a run-time variable of order one hour).

This formula becomes rather complex over time. Particles are deﬂected
by the other beam at each crossing, signiﬁcantly aﬀecting the Twiss matrix
of the machine. The beam currents Ni(t) decrease due to beam lifetime also
causing the machine’s Twiss matrix to drift. If the machine is perfectly sym-
metric, the transverse dimensions will change but the beams will maintain
perfect overlap.

1

WSU-HE-98-01

2

(3)

(4)

(5)

Even symmetric machines have some degree of asymmetry, and beams
start moving independently in the transverse plane as soon as the run starts.
At B-Factories such as CESR, PEP-II, and KEK, beams have horizontal
dimensions σy of order several microns, with aspect ratios ǫ = σy/σx ∼
0.02 − 0.04. A drift of 5 microns is enough to spoil the luminosity.
A better description of the luminosity over time should be

L(t) = L0(t)(1 − w(t)).

w(t) is the positive-deﬁned waste parameter due to non-instantaneous opti-
mal overlap. If w(t) is known, the wasted integrated luminosity is deﬁned
as

Lw = f

dtL0(t)w(t),

Z

where f is the machine frequency. The waste parameter can be readily
derived from the convolution integrals, Equations 1 and 2. Dropping the
time dependence, one gets

w = 1 −

L
L0

.

The waste parameter is clearly of great interest, and one of the most im-
portant issues not only at B factories but also at future linear colliders. As
soon as w is non-zero, a correction should be applied to restore optimal lu-
minosity. The ability to measure and reduce w would make for a substantial
increase in the delivered luminosity of any machine.

Although w can be deﬁned mathematically from Equation 3, the beam-
beam topology cannot be measured directly. Techniques have been devel-
oped that measure the transverse displacement of the centers of gravity of
the beams by Bambade[1] and Sagan, Sikora and Henderson[2]. Both of
these techniques actively displace one of the beams, and monitor the other
In practice
beam to observe the strength of the beam-beam interaction.
these techniques are sensitive to the relative displacement of the beams cen-
ters from optimal beam-beam overlap.

Generally, a discussion of the waste parameter must include all possible
degrees of freedom in the evolution of a machine over a run. There are
seven parameters which can aﬀect optimal beam-beam overlap[3]. These
are shown in Figure 1. Brieﬂy there is a transverse displacement between
the two beam centers described by a vector (∆x, ∆y), the transverse sizes
of the two beams σx1, σy1, σx2, and σy2, and a relative rotation of the two
beams φ. The two beam currents also aﬀect the beam-beam interaction.
Currents are easily monitored and are not included in the discussion below.

WSU-HE-98-01

3

In this paper, a technique is proposed by which six of the seven pa-
rameters can be passively monitored with the observation of wide angle
beamstrahlung. In case of non-zero waste, which is called a “pathology”,
the responsible parameter is identiﬁed unambiguously, and the amount of
needed correction is measured. The seventh parameter can easily be mea-
sured in a beam scan also using the wide angle beamstrahlung signal.

Seven parameters to characterize the beam-beam collision is a large num-

ber. It is easiest to discuss the problem if it is broken into two parts.

• The machine is perfectly symmetric, that is, the machine optics is ex-
actly the same for both beams. In Figure 1, that means that the two
beams have zero oﬀsets, zero rotation, and the same transverse dimen-
sions, resulting in only two parameters. Dropping indices, they are the
transverse dimensions σx and σy. If the machine is symmetric, beams
maintain optimal overlap, but the optics is aﬀected by the varying
currents. The luminosity is determined by the transverse size of the
beam. The case of measuring the transverse beam size is discussed in
Section 3.

• The beams move independently in the transverse plane due to ma-
chine asymmetry decreasing overlap and luminosity. In section 4 the
measurements of the relative sizes of the two beams, their transverse
displacement, and the angle between them are described.

In this paper the use of large angle beamstrahlung, which is described in
detail in reference[3], is described as a beam-beam monitor that allows com-
plete control over both the beam-beam interaction strength and transverse
displacements. Large-angle beamstrahlung observables, combined in a sim-
ple 2-dimensional diagram which is called the beamstrahlung diagram, mon-
itors the wasted luminosity.

In Section 2 the information content of large angle beamstrahlung is
discussed. Section 3 covers the symmetric machine case, concentrating on
measurements of the beam size. Section 4 covers asymmetric machines, in-
troduces the beamstrahlung diagram, and shows how the waste parameter
can be measured. The use of the beamstrahlung diagram to eliminate wasted
luminosity is shown in Section 5. Three appendices are included for com-
pleteness. Appendix A derives in a simple way three crucial properties of
large angle synchrotron radiation. Appendix B provides a description of the
beam-beam simulation developed for this paper and Appendix C evaluates
the simulation’s accuracy.

WSU-HE-98-01

4

2 Large Angle Beamstrahlung

The properties of large angle radiation, emitted by a ultra-relativistic parti-
cle, diﬀer dramatically from the classical synchrotron radiation formulae[4].
Appendix A shows that the approximations used in reference [3] and in this
paper are valid at large angles for all present and proposed e+e− collid-
ers, if beamstrahlung detection is to be done at or near the “magic angle”
described in [3]. Three properties of large angle radiation are derived in
Appendix A. Of particular interest is the 100% linear polarization, either
parallel or perpendicular to the bending force, obtained at certain azimuthal
locations at large angle.

At CESR for example, it is possible to detect such radiation in vis-
ible light at a location 5 meters away from the interaction point, at a
6mrad angle. The beam-beam interaction occurs over a volume of order
300µm×7µm×7mm, and particles are typically deﬂected laterally by 10−2
mrad. Thus the light detector is seen at the same angle by all of the beam,
and throughout the dynamic beam-beam collision. These are the conditions
termed as “CESR conditions” and used for the calculations of Sections 4
and 5. A ﬁxed fraction of the beamstrahlung energy is collected at such
a location, eﬀectively measuring the total energy up to a constant. Dif-
ferent polarization components can also be easily observed, by ﬁltering the
observed light through polarimeters.

The two polarization components can be used to build the radiation
vectors U1 from one beam and U2 from the other beam, which are two-
dimensional vectors in the ﬁrst quadrant. The ﬁrst dimension is the horizon-
tal component of the polarized beamstrahlung power signal and the second
is the vertical. The total energy vector U is deﬁned as U1 + U2. At large
angles the polarization components and radiation spectrum factorize[6] and
a diﬀerent orientation of the polarimeters would simply rotate the horizontal
and vertical axes..

As mentioned in the Introduction, at present and proposed machines,
beams are very ﬂat (ǫ ∼ 0.02 − 0.04). It is convenient to develop the theory
only for ﬂat beams which leads to two simpliﬁcations. First, terms of order
ǫ and higher can be neglected in equations as needed. Second, a natural
preferred orientation exists in the transverse plane, which is adopted to
produce the results of this paper.

It should be noted that two counters on each side, each looking at a dif-
ferent polarization component, and in absence of background, are enough to
extract complete information from beamstrahlung. As an example, given the

WSU-HE-98-01

formulae in Appendix A, Ux can be measured by measuring the x−polarized
component at zero degrees in azimuth, and Uy by the x−polarized compo-
nent at 45 degrees.

3 Symmetric Machines

If a machine is perfectly symmetric, the beam currents and transverse di-
mensions of the beams will evolve, while maintaining perfect overlap. Mea-
surements of the beam sizes σx and σy, determine the luminosity. In this
case most of the interplay between machine and beam-beam interaction is
through the dynamic beta eﬀect.

The dynamic beta eﬀect is proportional to the average electric ﬁeld seen
by one particle over many beam crossings, hence it is proportional to the
charge in the other beam, times the average inverse impact parameter b
between particles of beam 1 and particles of beam 2[7],

From[6] the beamstrahlung energy is proportional to

or

The < E1 > and < E2
1 > are related through the transverse shape of
the beam, which can be taken to be Gaussian with no loss of precision.
Therefore, monitoring the dynamic beta eﬀect can be done eﬃciently by
monitoring the Ui and the Ni at the same time.

Equation 7 can be rewritten as[3, 6]

< E1 >∝ N2 <

b
b2 > .

U1 ∝ N1 < E2

1 >,

< E2

1 >∝ U1/N1.

U1 ∝

f (ǫ).

N1N 2
2
σ2
xσz

5

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

The beam length, σz, is usually constant, and will not be considered here,
but clearly a beamstrahlung detector can also be used to monitor the beam
length, for example during machine studies. The function f (ǫ) varies slowly

f (ǫ) ∼ 1 + 11.4ǫ,

(10)

and can be considered nearly constant in the following.

WSU-HE-98-01

6

The result above assumes “stiﬀ” beams. A stiﬀ beam is one where the
beam particles do not change their transverse position appreciably during
the collision. Appendix B shows that dynamic eﬀects are negligible.

In ﬂat beams most of the impact parameter is due to the distance in x be-
tween the particles, and the energy radiated is almost only dependent on σx.
For perfect overlap of stiﬀ Gaussian beams the energy U is unpolarized[6].
No information can be extracted out of polarization, and beamstrahlung
cannot monitor passively symmetric changes in σy. The total power radi-
ated is thus sensitive to σx.

However, as pointed out in references[3, 6], a scan of one beam along the
vertical axis will produce the characteristic camelback feature in the plot of
U versus the beam-beam oﬀset seen in Figure 3, which has already been used
in the detection of beamstrahlung[8]. The σy can be precisely determined
by measuring the peak-valley distance d shown in Figure 3. The relation
between d and σy is

d ∼ 3.97σy(1 − 5.4ǫ).

(11)

Currently, the CESR beams are artiﬁcially perturbed with an amplitude
of order 0.01σy to measure the beam-beam interaction by observing the
eﬀect of the perturbation on the other beam via the lock-in eﬀect[2]. It is
conceivable that this technique could ultimately be used to determine σy
without scanning. Note that a beam scan could also be used to measure σx
separating it from σz.

A beamstrahlung monitor can be very useful even when a machine is
perfectly symmetric, allowing purely passive monitoring of the beam-beam
It can be used to measure
interaction and thus the beam length or σx.
σy in a beam scan. The next Section, which deals with purely asymmetric
pathologies, shows that this method is truly valuable when beams are not
colliding head on in the transverse plane and may have diﬀerent transverse
sizes.

4 Asymmetric Machines

If a machine is asymmetric, as all real machines are to some degree, the
two beams will drift independently in the 7-dimensional space that induces
luminosity waste. For the purpose of studying asymmetric machines, a single
pass beam-beam simulation program was written. The program generates
complex beam-beam conﬁgurations involving all the pathologies shown in
Figure 1. These conﬁgurations are, in principle, computable analytically in

WSU-HE-98-01

7

Paramter
Beam Width
Beam Height
Beam Length
Bunch Charge
Relativistic Factor

Symbol
σx
σy
σz
N
γ

Value
300 µm
7 µm
1.8 cm
11 × 1010
104

Table 1: Beam parameters chosen for the simulation results presented here.

the limit of stiﬀ beams. It was important also to cross-check the eﬀects of
beam-beam dynamics, as the particles of one beam are deﬂected towards
the center of the other beam. The latter is an eﬀect that must be computed
by simulation.

The simulation program is described in Appendix B. Its precision is eval-
uated in Appendix C and is found to be between 0.1% and 0.2%, for beam-
strahlung yields, and better than 1%, for the luminosity enhancement due
to beam-beam pinching. The nominal conditions to produce results in this
paper were chosen as in Table 4 and are appropriate for B-Factories. The
measurement of the two beam sizes was discussed in the previous section.
The remaining ﬁve parameters are discussed here: two relative transverse
dimensions; two oﬀsets; and one angle. Present day beam position monitors
have spatial resolutions of order 20 µm, which is substantially less than the
σx of these beams, and should always provide adequate overlap along the
x−axis leaving four pathologies of concern. An oﬀset in x will generate a
unique conﬁguration of the beamstrahlung diagram, which mirrors the one
obtained for an oﬀset in y which is discussed below, and can be analyzed in
a completely equivalent way.

For simplicity it is assumed that only one beam is developing a pathology
at any given time. The four pathologies that lead to wasted luminosity
are shown in Figure 4. They correspond respectively to a vertical oﬀset,
imperfect vertical focusing, imperfect horizontal focusing, and a rotation of
one beam with respect to the other. All these pathologies except the third
have been observed at CESR.

The expected value of each polarization component is also assumed, for
optimal beam-beam collision, which we call U0. In practice U0 can be mea-
sured experimentally by continuous observation of colliding beams, or by
separately determining the beam currents, and σx and σy with a beam-beam

WSU-HE-98-01

8

scan as discussed in the previous section.

The beamstrahlung diagram plots U1, U2 normalized by U0.

In the
ﬁgures below the contribution from the pathological beam is represented
by the dashed arrow. The diagram has four degrees of freedom. The total
power monitors the beam-beam interaction strength, and three independent
dimensionless asymmetries can be deﬁned.

As mentioned in Section 3 if the collision is perfect and the beams are stiﬀ
the beamstrahlung radiation is unpolarized. Thus the normalized Ui’s are
equal and the vector from each beam in a perfect head-on collision are on top
each other at 45 degrees as shown in Figure 4. With the U0 normalization
one obtains the perfect collision point at (1, 1) for both beams.

The eﬀect of dynamic beams can be estimated from Table 2 in Ap-
pendix C. For example at CESR dynamic beams increase Ux by 0.9% and
Uy by 2.7%, moving the perfect collision axis 0.5 degrees above 45 degrees.
Such a small modiﬁcation is nearly invisible in Figure 4 and can be neglected.
Figure 5 shows for stiﬀ beams the beamstrahlung diagrams for each
pathology shown in Figure 3. Each has a unique pattern, which a feedback
algorithm can discern and correct. In general, if beam 1 is smaller in x(y)
than beam 2, then it will radiate less energy in x(y).

Figure 6 is the same as Figure 5, but for dynamic beams. Comparison
of the two ﬁgures shows very little diﬀerence. The eﬀect of dynamic beams
is small. Thus the beamstrahlung diagram presented in this paper is a
universal display of the pattern associated with beam-beam pathologies at
CESR, PEP-II, KEK, and in the future at a ∼1 TeV e+e− machine.

Figure 7 is the same as Figures 5 and 6, but with an oﬀset in x, 18µm,
or 0.06σx, comparable to the resolution of beam position monitors. Again
very little change is observed with respect to Figure 5 showing that small
horizontal oﬀsets have small impact.

Asymmetries corresponding to each pathology in Fig. 3 are deﬁned as

A1 = (Uy/Ux − 1)Θ(Uy/Ux − 1),
A2 = (U2y/U1y − 1)Θ(U2y/U1y − 1),
′
2 = (U2x/U1x − 1)Θ(U2x/U1x − 1),
A
A3 = | sin (U1, U2)|,

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

where Θ is the Heaviside function meaning in this case that the asymmetries
Ai are not deﬁned when the argument of the Heaviside function becomes neg-
ative. The indexing was chosen to indicate that the second, a beam bloated
vertically, and third, a beam bloated horizontally, pathologies are generated

9

(16)

(17)

(18)

WSU-HE-98-01

from both a zero dipole moment and a non-zero quadrupole moment in the
transverse charge distribution, and as such they should be equally ranked.
These asymmetries are not independent. The usefulness of these beam-
strahlung asymmetries is shown in Figure 8 which displays their dependence
on the waste parameter deﬁned in Equation 3. Each asymmetry’s contribu-
tion to the waste parameter of Section 1 is

wi ∼

∂w
∂Ai

Ai.

but they can not be summed together because they are not independent.

Evidence is provided in the next Section that the asymmetries should
be minimized strictly in the order deﬁned by Eqs. 12-15. In short, the total
waste parameter can be deﬁned as

where the hatted derivative is deﬁned as

w ∼

ˆ∂wiAi,

Xi

ˆ∂wi = (

∂w
∂Ai

)Aj=min.,j<i.

Eq. 17 represents the main result of this paper. The derivatives are com-
puted, the asymmetries are measured, and the waste parameter is obtained.
Note that if the asymmetries were completely independent, the speciﬁcations
Aj = min. would have been unneeded. Asymmetries 2 and 2’ represent both
quadrupole corrections, and can be interchanged without harm.
For horizontal oﬀsets between the two beams an asymmetry

′
1 = (Ux/Uy − 1)Θ(Ux/Uy − 1)
A

(19)

can be deﬁned.

We note that for a 10% change in luminosity, the values of the asymme-
2 and 0.05 for A3. Thus

tries change by 0.1 for A1 and A′
these asymmetries have excellent sensitivity to wasted luminosity.

1, 0.25 for A2 and A′

5 The Virtual Operator

Here examples are shown of how the beamstrahlung diagram and the asym-
metries deﬁned in Equations 12-15 and 19 can by used to eliminate wasted

WSU-HE-98-01

10

luminosity even in the presence of multiple pathologies in the beam-beam
collision.

We demonstrates this by studying the complete set of six double patholo-
gies, shown in Figure 9, which can be derived from the four single pathologies
shown in Figure 3. Figure 10 represents the beamstrahlung diagrams cor-
responding to the pathologies displayed in Figure 9. A feedback program,
dubbed the Virtual Operator, ﬁnds the highest-ranking asymmetry, mini-
mizes it by changing the appropriate collision parameter, and obtains the
beamstrahlung diagrams of Figure 11, displaying only one pathology which
is trivial to correct.

Two comments are in order. First, if the largest asymmetry were to
be corrected ﬁrst, instead of the highest-ranked, convergence would not be
achieved. To prove the point, it is enough to compare Figs. 5b, 10d and 11d.
If the sextupole correction is acted upon ﬁrst, A3 would have to increase as
opposed to being minimized.

Second, we wish to prove that minimization of a higher-ranked asym-
metry eﬀectively corrects the associated pathology. Although all the double
pathologies were tried, only Fig. 9c, which corresponds to a vertical oﬀset
plus a rotation, is presented. A1 and A3 are the two most correlated asym-
metries. The asymmetry A1 is not zeroed, and cannot be zeroed by moving
one beam. Figure 12 shows the dependence of A1 versus the vertical oﬀset,
showing that minimization of the asymetry gives the desired correction.

We did not consider horizontal oﬀsets here, but they could easily have

been included, as discussed in the previous Section.

6 Conclusion

The beamstrahlung diagram and asymmetries derived here demonstrate a
complete and rigorous method for luminosity optimization. The wasted
luminosity is for the ﬁrst time related to quantities that are instantaneously
observable, and specify the necessary correction. We have considered a
complete class of beam-beam pathologies.

If the machine is perfectly symmetric a beamstrahlung monitor is very
useful for measuring the size of the beam. In the case of asymmetric beams
a beamstrahlung monitor is extremely powerful. The study of the beam-
strahlung diagram derived from the power and polarization of the beam-
strahlung signal allows identiﬁcation of the beam-beam pathology, identiﬁ-
cation of the “bad” beam, and measures the correction that needs to be ap-

WSU-HE-98-01

11

plied. In short the wide angle beamstrahlung signal analyzed in the manner
described here is a powerful tool to eliminate wasted luminosity at present
and future e+e− colliders.

Appendix A

The properties of short magnet radiation were ﬁrst discussed by Coisson in
reference [9]. In the classical model[4], the bent electron is made to sweep
through the detector in a “searchlight” fashion, eﬀectively covering all beam-
detector angles. In the Coisson’s model the opposite extreme is adopted, and
the angle is kept constant throughout the orbit, the large angle approxima-
tion. Both models predict the same power, the same total polarization, and
the same typical angle, of order 1/γ for the emitted radiation, but they diﬀer
dramatically in the spectrum at large angles.

The Coisson model is of interest here because the detector’s angle is con-
stant throughout the collision at colliders such as CESR. At large angle the
classical model predicts a steep fall-oﬀ of the power, exponential both in the
photon energy and in the cube of the observation angle. The Coisson model
predicts three properties of large angle beamstrahlung radiation. They are:

• The cutoﬀ energy, at large angle, does not depend on γ. There is
no exponential fall-oﬀ as predicted by the “searchlight” approxima-
tion, making detection possible. In particular at 6 mrad at CESR, for
example, visible radiation is at or below the cutoﬀ frequency.

• The polarization is linear at a ﬁxed location in azimuth with an eight-
fold pattern, (cos2 2φ, sin2 2φ) around the azimuth. The angle φ is the
angle between the net transverse force experienced by the beam and
the detector location. Thus the pattern of the polarization provides
information about the beam-beam overlap.

• The large angle double diﬀerential spectrum is proportional to (γθ)−4,
and not exponential. The large angle power scales as 1/γ2. Thus
the situation at B factories is more favorable than at higher energy
machines.

These properties are re-derived here in an elementary way for constant
large angle of detection. Consider an extremely relativistic particle, γ >>
1, undergoing a vertical deﬂection, due for example to a horizontal dipole
magnet exerting a force F over a length σz. Radiation of energy k = hω

WSU-HE-98-01

is detected at an angle θ which is much larger than 1/γ. In the laboratory
frame the radiated energy is equal to [4]

U =

2
3

re
mc2 γ2F 2σz.

A simpler derivation is possible by studying the radiation in the rest frame
of the radiating particle. Note that all quantities in the particle rest frame
are starred as shown in Figure 13. The radiation will have a dipole pattern
with angular intensity proportional to the squared sine of the angle between
the direction of detection and the direction of the force. The force maintains
its vertical direction and has a modulus

The angle is very large in the laboratory frame, and the corresponding di-
rection in the rest frame is very close to the backward direction. In a pertur-
bative treatment the angle θ∗ is taken with respect to the direction opposite
the direction of motion (Fig. 13). If only small angular components along
the direction of the force are considered

The intensity is essentially constant at small angles in the rest frame.

The relation between the energies and angles in the lab and radiating

particle rest frames is given by

∗

F

= 2γF.

I(θ

∗

) ∝ cos2 θ

∗

.

k =

ω =

θ =

,

,

k∗γθ∗2
2
ω∗γθ∗2
2
2
γθ∗ .

The direction of the radiation in the radiating particle rest frame is at CESR,
for example, θ∗ ∼ 0.03 or two degrees away from the backward axis.

In the radiating particle rest frame the cutoﬀ frequency is inversely pro-
portional to the duration of the perturbation, which is σ∗
z /c. Using equations
24 and 25, and the relativistic formula length-dilation, the following relations
are obtained

∗
z = σz/γ,

σ

12

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

13

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

WSU-HE-98-01

∗
c ∼ O(

ω

ωc ∼ O(

)

c
σ∗
z
c
σzθ2 ),

which shows that the cutoﬀ frequency at large angle does not depend on γ,
the ﬁrst prediction by the Coisson model. At CESR, ωc ∼ 1016sec−1, which
is of order of the visible light frequency.

The polarization vector of the emitted radiation in the radiating particle

rest frame is given by [4]

E∗

(R) =

n∗

× (n∗

× F∗

),

e
mRc2

where n∗ is the unit vector along the direction of observation.

Using Equation 29, and the condition of orthogonality between E∗, B∗

and n∗, the three vectors are
E∗
B∗
n∗

= K(−1 + θ
∗

= K(θ

∗2 sin φ cos φ, θ

∗2/2, 0, −θ
∗

= (θ

cos φ, θ

sin φ, −1 + θ

∗2/2),

∗2 sin2 φ − 1, −θ
cos φ),

∗

∗

sin φ)

with K a constant. The polarization component along x and y in the labo-
ratory frame are

Ex = γ(E

∗
x − B

∗
y ) = +K

sin 2φ = +K

Ey = γ(E

∗
y + B

∗
x) = −K

cos 2φ = −K

γθ∗2
2
γθ∗2
2

2
γθ2 sin 2φ
2
γθ2 cos 2φ.

Thus each component has four azimuthal zeros, and information is replicated
every 45 degrees, which is the second prediction of the Coisson model.

The total energy radiated in the laboratory frame can be expressed as
an average over the boosted photon energies in the rest frame, times the
number of photons N

U =

X

∗

γ(k

+ k

∗
z ) = N < γ(k

∗

+ k

∗
z ) >= N γ < k

∗

> .

(35)

The energy ﬂowing into a detector covering a solid angle dΩ, located at
large angle, can be easily computed in the radiating particle frame. Using
I(θ∗) ∼ 1, Equations 23 and 25, and neglecting factors of order one an
expression for the large angle spectrum is obtained,

∆U ∼ N θ

∆θ

∆φ

∗

∗

γ < k∗ > θ∗2
2

=

8U
γ4θ5 ∆θ∆φ.

(36)

WSU-HE-98-01

14

The energy in the lab frame, U , contains a dependence on γ2. The angular
factor integrates to a constant (which agrees with Equation 8 in Ref. [3]),
leaving the 1/γ2 dependence. This is purely due to kinematics. At CESR,
for example, 10nW of visible beamstrahlung are available between 6 and 7
mrad.

Appendix B

A beam-beam interaction simulation was developed from the program de-
scribed in reference [10]. Gaussian beams in all three dimensions are as-
sumed. Beams are sliced in 3-dimensional cells. The cells are typically
0.25-0.5σ along each axis and extend out to 3-4σ in each direction. Thus a
total of 103 to 3 × 104 cells are simulated. The beams are then made to cross
each other. In the ﬁrst step, the ﬁrst layer of the positron beam encounters
the ﬁrst layer of the electron beam. The electric ﬁelds are purely transverse
to O(1/γ), and are computed assuming that the charge is located in a sphere
located in the center of the cell. This is the “cloud-in-cell” model. Assuming
cylindrical coordinates, a cell in beam one gets a total transverse deﬂection
[7]

∆r′

1j = −

2N2re

P2ibij
b2
ij

.

γ X

The summation runs over the cells in the opposite layer, bij is the impact
parameter between cell j in beam one and cell i in beam two, and P2i is
the fraction of charge in cell i. At the end of each layer-layer interaction
positions and velocities are updated,

j + ∆r′

j = r′
r′
rj = rj + r′

j,
j∆z.

(37)

(38)

(39)

∆z is the unit step taken along the beam direction. This allows for dynamic
beams, with each beam pinching the other as the collision progresses, and
the luminosity is computed as an overlap of the dynamic density functions.
The program of reference [10] was found to be unﬁt for the simulation
of ﬂat beams. If the lattice is chosen to have the same number of cells in
each dimension, the cells will be as ﬂat as the beam. If the charge is then
concentrated in the centers, a large force will be calculated, where in reality
the total force is small, due to the cancellations of the large x components
in the integral over the cells. Figure 14 illustrates this.

WSU-HE-98-01

To reduce this problem the number of cells in x should be enlarged to
make each cell square in the transverse plane. This solution is very CPU
time-consuming. A solution was found by replacing each cell with a line of
charge, called a “matchstick,” and computing the integral

∆r′

ij =

−2N2rePi
γ

Z

dxidxj

bij
b2
ij

.

For the purpose of improving the convergence of the program, the match-
sticks were kept horizontal throughout the interaction. Assuming matchstick
lengths Li and Lj, the solution to the integral above is

∆r′

ij =

−2N2rePi
γ

4

(
X1

4

X1

tnfn + 2bygn,

2tngn − byfn),

(41)

where

t1 = bx +

t2 = bx +

t3 = bx −

Li + Lj
2
Li − Lj
2
Lj + Li
2
Lj − Li
2

t4 = bx +
fn = (−1)n+1 log (t2
gn = (−1)n+1 tan

n + b2
y)
−1 (tn/by).

Given the deﬂection vector, r′, the total radiated energy with both x− and
y− polarization is computed using

F =

γmc2
2∆z

∆r′

.

The energy vector U for each beam is computed by summing

Ux =

∆Uxj =

Uy =

∆Uyj =

X

X

2N
3mc2 Pjreγ2F 2
2N
3mc2 Pjreγ2F 2

x ∆z,

y ∆z.

X

X

The program continues to interact the beams, layer by layer, updating
trajectories with Equations 38-39, until the beams fully cross each other. An

15

(40)

(42)

(43)

(44)

(45)

(46)

(47)

(48)

(49)

(50)

WSU-HE-98-01

16

.

Quantity
Ux(1012eV)
Uy(1012eV)
L/L0

Bin= 0.25σ Bin= 0.3σ

Analytic Dyn.beams

.4002
.4013
1.00

.3979
.3997
1.00

Fit
.4055
.4049
1.00

.4051
.4051
1.00

.4088
.4163
1.12

Table 2: Comparison between two diﬀerent binnings, the ﬁtted values, ac-
cording to Equations 51-52, and the analytic predictions, all for stiﬀ beams.
The last column shows the same quantities for dynamic beams.

option was inserted in the program to use or not to use Equations 38-39, that
is to make the beams either dynamic or stiﬀ. The reason for the option was
to compare against existing analytic predictions for beamstrahlung given in
reference [6].

Appendix C

The simulation program described above is used to make comparisons with
the analytic predictions of reference [6] which are valid only for stiﬀ beams.
A slow, quadratic convergence was found when diminishing the cell size.
When a cell of one beam overlaps with one from the other beam, the program
computes a zero ﬁeld.
In reality, the contribution of nearby particles is
important, due to the 1/b dependence of the ﬁeld. Because the emitted
power depends on the ﬁeld squared, the dominant convergence is quadratic.
To adjust for this fact using ﬁnite computer resources two diﬀerent lattice
sizes a and b were used. The “exact” emitted energy Uex was extracted using
the linear system

Ua = Uex − αa2,
Ub = Uex − αb2,

(51)

(52)

and solved for Uex and α.

The stiﬀ-beam comparison of U, with diﬀerent cell sizes and against the
analytic predictions of reference [6] using the beam parameters of Table 4
are shown in Table 2. There is agreement between analytic and simulation
at the 0.2% level. If the beams are dynamic particles will move during the
collision by about 1 micron, leaving the beam virtually unchanged in x but
generating a substantial (O(10%)) squeezing in y. The squeezing will have
two eﬀects: it will increase the luminosity and it will generate slightly more
power. There will also be a slight asymmetry between x and y and some net

WSU-HE-98-01

17

polarization. The luminosity increases by 12%. The luminosity calculation
was checked, for round beams, against the program of reference [10] and
our simulation agrees to within 1%. Figure 15 shows the analytical versus
simulation comparison of Uy/Ux when two ﬂat beams are separated by a
vertical oﬀset. We conclude that our simulation method has a precision of
order few per thousand for beamstrahlung computations.

References

62: 2949, 1989.

[1] P. Bambade, SLAC-CN-303, 1985; P. Bambade et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.

[2] D. Sagan, J. Sikora and S. Henderson, CBN-97-13.

[3] G. Bonvicini and J. Welch, CLNS-97-1523, to be published in Nuclear

Instruments and Methods.

[4] J. D. Jackson, “Classical Electrodynamics”, Chapter 14.

[5] D. Cinabro et al., Phys. Rev. E 57, 1193, 1998.

[6] M. Bassetti et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Science 30: 2182, 1983.

[7] J. D. Jackson, “Classical Electrodynamics”, Chapter 11.

[8] G. Bonvicini et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 62: 2381, 1989.

[9] R. Coisson, Phys. Rev. A 20, 524, 1979.

[10] R. Hollebeek, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 184, 331, 1981.

WSU-HE-98-01

18

Figure 1: A general beam-beam collision. Seven parameters can be seen,
corresponding to two transverse dimensions for each beam, a two dimen-
sional impact parameter vector connecting the two beam centers, and one
relative rotation in the transverse plane.

WSU-HE-98-01

19

Figure 2: Normalized power emitted in beamstrahlung, as a function of
normalized y−oﬀset. a) ǫ = 0.02. b) ǫ = 0.04. The distance from minimum
to maximum is shown, in units of σy. U0 is deﬁned in Section 4.

WSU-HE-98-01

20

Figure 3: The four beam-beam pathologies that lead to wasted luminosity;
a) a y− oﬀset; b) y− bloating; c) x− bloating; and d) a beam-beam rotation.
The pathological beam is represented by the dashed ellipse.

WSU-HE-98-01

21

Figure 4: The beamstrahlung diagram corresponding to a perfect beam-
beam collision. The two vectors are exactly equal. The dashed arrow is
slightly displaced for display purposes.

WSU-HE-98-01

22

Figure 5: Beamstrahlung diagrams corresponding to the four pathologies of
Figure 3. The tips of vectors in part a are displaced for display purposes.
Stiﬀ beams are assumed.

WSU-HE-98-01

23

Figure 6: Beamstrahlung diagrams for the same conditions as Figure 5, but
assuming dynamic beams.

WSU-HE-98-01

24

Figure 7: Beamstrahlung diagrams for the same conditions as Figure 5, but
assuming an x−oﬀset of 0.06σx.

WSU-HE-98-01

25

Figure 8: Functional dependence of the beamstrahlung asymmetries deﬁned
in the text versus the waste parameter of Equation 3.

WSU-HE-98-01

26

Figure 9: The six possible conﬁgurations arising from combinations of any
two of the pathologies of Figure 3. a) y−oﬀset and y−bloating. b) y−oﬀset
and x−bloating. c) y−oﬀset and beam-beam rotation. d) y−bloating and
beam-beam rotation. e) x−bloating and beam-beam rotation. f) y−bloating
and x−bloating.

WSU-HE-98-01

27

Figure 10: Beamstrahlung diagrams corresponding to Figure 9.

WSU-HE-98-01

28

Figure 11: Beamstrahlung diagrams, corresponding to Figures 9 and 10,
after correction of the dominant asymmetry. Compare with Figure 3.

WSU-HE-98-01

29

Figure 12: The dependence of the ﬁrst asymmetry A1, as deﬁned in the text,
versus the vertical oﬀset for the case of a vertical oﬀset plus a rotation.

WSU-HE-98-01

30

F*

Figure 13: Dipole radiation in a radiating particle’s rest frame. Indicated
are the direction of the force and the angle corresponding to the observation
angle in the laboratory frame.

b
WSU-HE-98-01

31

Figure 14: Cell-cell interaction in the simulation program. The cell has an
aspect ratio similar to the beam aspect ratio. In the “cloud-in-cell” model,
all the charge is concentrated in a point in the center of the cell.
In the
“matchstick-in-cell” model, the charge is spread over a line along the cell.

WSU-HE-98-01

32

Figure 15: Radiation polarization versus beam-beam oﬀset. The solid line
is the analytic prediction from reference [6], and the dots are from the sim-
ulation described in the text.

