8
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
2
0
2
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Large Angle Beamstrahlung as a Beam-beam
Monitoring Tool

G. Bonvicini
Wayne State University, Detroit MI 48201

J. Welch
Cornell University, Ithaca NY 14853

July 22, 2013

1

Introduction

Luminosity in high energy physics colliders is now more important than ever
before. A comparison of ‘Livingston’ charts, ﬁgure 1, shows the machine
luminosity increasing at a rate faster than the increase in machine energy.
Now and in the forseeable future extremely high luminosity is needed to
produce meaningful quantities of rare events (factories) and to cope with
the 1/s dependence of the production cross section of high mass states.

Beam alignment complexities with two independent rings, dynamic beta
eﬀects, disruption, crossing angle collisions and beamstrahlung are just some
of the new phenomena to be dealt with in modern machines running at
peak luminosity. Additionally, high luminosity machines must operate near
design luminosities in order to be useful, so there is a strong motivation
for understanding, controlling, and possibly taking advantage of some these
new high luminosity phenomena that occur at the interaction point.

Luminosity for two gaussian beams colliding head-on with equal beam

sizes is,

L =

f N1N2
4πσxσy

,

(1)

where f is the bunch collision frequency, N1(2) is number of particles per
bunch in beam 1(2), and σx(y) is the horizontal(vertical) beam size. Beams
are usually quite ﬂat, (r = σy/σx << 1), with σy being typically a few

1

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

2

microns or less. The two beam axes must be continously aligned to intersect
to much better than σy or luminosity is lost.

For high luminosity conditions, the charge per unit area is made so large
that the interaction of one beam with the electromagnetic ﬁelds of the other
beam can cause poor lifetime, beam blow-up, and other types of instabilities.
One eﬀect of the interaction is to cause the beam size to change signiﬁ-
cantly over a distance comparable to the length of the bunch. This is called
disruption. Since changing the beam size also changes the strength of the
interaction, disruption is a very complicated, non-linear phenomenon.

If the beam-beam deﬂections are signiﬁcant compared with the average
angular spread of particles in the bunch, then the target beam acts like a
short high gradient magnet and, in a storage ring, distorts the beta functions
all around the ring. This eﬀect is called the dynamic beta eﬀect and has
been observed directly at CESR [1].
It is also a highly non-linear eﬀect
because the distortion seen by small amplitude particles is largest.

In this paper we propose a method, which has never been used before, to
monitor the beam-beam collision conditions. The strength of this method,
besides its low cost, versatility, and strong signals well separated in angle
from machine backgrounds, is the direct visualization of many aspects of
the beam-beam interaction.

As in many other areas of physics research, visualization of a complex
In this case, we believe a beamstrahlung
phenomenon is at a premium.
detector looking at the interaction point might help in faster and better
diagnosis of misalignments and incongruities of beam sizes during collision.
It might also shed some light on many of the of the dynamical eﬀects which
limit the maximum tuneshift parameter and hence the luminosity for a given
current. Considering the diﬃculty in getting a machine into top performance
and keeping it there, an instrument, such as we propose, which can directly
observe the beam-beam interaction could prove to be quite valuable.

We predict that, if the ﬁrst such monitor is successfully operated, it will
be adopted by the three e+e− B-factories (CESR, PEP II, and KEK B), and
by the φ-factory in Frascati, and rapidly become the primary beam-beam
monitor at all facilities, just as a similar device became primary beam-beam
monitor at the SLC. The use of such a monitor by HERA (proton side only)
is also a possibility.

We start by discussing the physics of beamstrahlung and what might be
expected at the various high luminosity factories and the SLC. Then we go
into some detail about ‘short magnet’ radiation and what it can tell about
the collision. Detector design, backgrounds, and possible implementation

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

3

]

V
e
G

[
 

y
g
r
e
n
E

1000

100

105

104

10

1

Energy Frontier

Luminosity Frontier

?

?

?
LHC

FNAL

?

?

?

LHC

KEKB
PEPII
CESR

CESR

]

0

3
0
1
[
 

y
t
i
s
o
n
i
m
u
L

1000

100

105

104

10

1

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

Year

Year

Figure 1:
Solid point represent actual obtained peak luminosities (right
plot) and energies (left plot) in selected high energy physics accelerators.
Open points represent planned values for machines under construction.

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

4

at CESR are then discussed. Finally we address some ‘frequently asked
questions’ concerning beamstrahlung.

2 Beamstrahlung

Beamstrahlung occurs when particles of the ﬁrst beam, or radiating beam,
are deﬂected by the electromagnetic ﬁeld of the second (target) beam and
emit synchrotron radiation. Beamstrahlung was observed ﬁrst at the SLC
[2].

As long as the radiated energy is small compared to the beam energy,
most but not all the properties of beamstrahlung can be derived using the
formulae in Jackson’s “Classical Electrodynamics” [3], convoluted over the
space-time distribution of charges, and applying usual ultrarelativistic ap-
proximations. The important paper [4] calculates a number of low-energy
beamstrahlung properties, which are very relevant to this paper.

Under the conditions of Eq. 1, assuming beams of equal mass and energy,

the beamstrahlung power W1 is

W1 = f U1

= g(r)r3

e mc2γ2 f N1N 2
2
σxσyσz
e mc2γ2 LN2
σz

,

= 4πg(r)r3

where U1 is the energy radiated per collision [4]. Here re is the classical
radius of the beam particles, m their mass, and γ = E/m the relativistic
factor. g(r) is a dimensionless factor obtained in the integration over space-
time, equal to[4]

g(r) =

64√πr

3√3r4

10r2 + 3

−

arctan (

√3r4

10r2 + 3

−

3r2 + 8r + 3

).

It is maximal for round beams (r = 1), at 2.735..., and for ﬂat beams (r
small) it can be approximated as follows

∼
In the ﬂat beam limit, σy cancels in Eq. 3 and the dependence of W on
beam parameters becomes

g(r)

11.4r.

W

∝

γ2N1N 2
2
σzσ2
x

.

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

5

Table 1: Beamstrahlung parameters derived for high luminosity factories
and SLC.

Machine
[1033cm−2s−1]

Lmax
r
σz
E1
E2
N1
N2
Bσ1
Bσ2
W1
W2
θo
ν1
ν2

[mm]
[GeV ]
[GeV ]
[1010]
[1010]
[T ]
[T ]
[W ]
[W ]
[mrad]
[1010s−1]
[1010s−1]

SLC CESR 1997 PEP KEK Frascati
0.13
0.01
30
0.51
-
9
-
0.01
-
0.0008
-
5
4.6
-

0.44
0.022
18
5.3
-
14
-
0.14
-
1.6
-
6
0.34
-

10.
0.025
4
3.5
8
3.2
1.3
0.43
1.0
7.5
95
12
0.32
0.15

0.0008
0.3
0.8
50
-
3.5
-
200
-
12
-
27
10−7
-

3.
0.04
10
3.1
9
5.9
2.7
0.17
0.33
2.3
38
7
2.0
1.2

7

×

All of these parameters are well known by other means. There is little
information in the total emitted power, all of the non-trivial information is in
the asymmetries described below. On the other hand, total power becomes
a reliably predicted quantity that we use as a constant in the following
calculations.

Table 1 summarizes the beam parameters at various facilities, according
to Ref. [5] and their beamstrahlung power at design luminosity. It is surpris-
ing to discover that beamstrahlung yields at the SLC, PEP-II and KEK are
roughly the same, with the higher luminosity compensating for the lower en-
ergy and longer beams. Two of the three B-factories feature beams crossing
at an horizontal angle, and two feature unequal energy beams. The crossing
angle αx is respectively 2 and 10 mrad at CESR and KEK, and results in
changes in the total radiated power of O(α2
x). The crossing angle can be
neglected except for a trivial distortion of the small angle distributions.

The eﬀect of unequal beams on Eqs. 3 is readily derived with a simple
substitution. γ is the relativistic factor of the radiating beam, and σz the
length of the target beam, and all quantities are deﬁned in the laboratory
frame. With these substitutions, Eqs. 3 are valid for beams of unequal

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

6

energies and beam lengths, such as at PEP-II or KEK, in the limit of rigid
beams.

Current CESR conditions have to be considered the benchmark. Table 1
lists the total radiated power W , as well as other meaningful quantities. At
present day CESR, one obtains a total beamstrahlung power of 2.4 W. At
PEP-II, the radiated beamstrahlung power is respectively 4 and 80 W for
the low and high energy beams.

Beamstrahlung has been the subject of many theoretical calculations,
which are not relevant to this paper, and is a crucial issue for future linear
colliders. At the SLC it was detected and monitored primarily to monitor the
collision of two beams coming from diﬀerent beamlines, and therefore having
diﬀerent transverse dimensions and even orientations in the transverse plane.
There were seven degrees of freedom in the transverse plane at the SLC
(the four beam dimensions, the angle between the two major axes of the
transverse ellipses, and the two coordinates of the beam-beam oﬀset). We
notice that the situation at asymmetric B-factories is quite similar to the
SLC - two beams totally independent of each other. It is at those machines
that the device described here will be most useful. The situation at CESR
is somewhat more constrained by the single-ring machine.

The North and South beamstrahlung detectors described in Refs. [2] and
[6] lasted 6 and 8 years at the SLC without particular problems, delivering
instant and primary information on beam-beam overlap to the operators, via
a monitor placed directly above the operator’s desk. During their lifetime
they absorbed close to 100 GRad/year and were designed to minimize visible
radiation backgrounds, a fact relevant to this paper.

The SLC monitors worked because the eﬀective magnetic ﬁeld accompa-
nying the beams, at a typical distance of one standard deviation from the
beam center, is

Bσ ∼

2N2remc
eσzσx

(6)

which is now of order 100 T (and was of order 10 T when beamstrahlung
was ﬁrst observed [2]).

10 Tesla far exceeds all other magnetic ﬁelds along the beam line. Thus
the beamstrahlung critical energy was much higher than the beam line syn-
chrotron radiation, and although the synchrotron radiation power was one
million times higher at the time of ﬁrst observation, a detector with favorable
signal/noise could be built.

Table 1 shows that Bσ is quite low at today’s B-factories, and comparable
or lower than the beam line magnetic ﬁelds. A signal in this case is extracted

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

7

a)

b)

Figure 2: Searchlight approximation: the observation angle is smaller than
the bending angle. b) Short magnet approximation: the observation angle
is larger than the bending angle.

by noticing that the beam, considered as a magnet, is much shorter than the
other magnets. Thus the Fourier transform produces a drastically diﬀerent
radiation spectrum.

“Short magnet” (SM) radiation replaces the usual synchrotron radiation
spectrum when the observation angle (Fig. 2) is much larger than the deﬂec-
tion angle. SM extra terms contribute a fraction of the power of order 1/γ2
of the total power (that is, they integrate to a quantity that has no power
dependence on γ), and therefore are perfectly consistent with the “search-
light” approximations for synchrotron radiation [3]. The use of SM radiation
as a beam monitor was ﬁrst suggested in Ref. [4]. A practical detector was
suggested ﬁrst at the SLC in Ref. [8].

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

8

Figure 3: Eightfold polarization pattern for a particle bent in the horizontal
direction.

3 Properties of Short Magnet Radiation

The properties of SM radiation were ﬁrst investigated by Coisson [9]. SM
radiation was ﬁrst observed in Ref. [10].
In regions where SM radiation
dominates, such as at large angle (γθ >> 1), which are the only ones relevant
to this paper, three properties are of interest:

•

•

•

The large angle power is proportional to 1/γ2 (or a fraction of 1/γ4
of the total power) . One of the main points of this paper is to show
that a possible, but somewhat marginal, signal at the SLC [8] becomes
large at the lower energy factories.

the radiation spectrum is gaussian, and the cutoﬀ frequency indepen-
dent of beam energy. The spectrum extends far beyond the spectrum
calculated in a standard way.

radiation is linearly polarized parallel or perpendicular to the accel-
eration, with an eight-fold symmetry in azimuth. Fig. 3 shows the
polarization pattern for a vertical bend.

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

9

(7)

(8)

The large-angle power emitted as a function of angle and frequency is

expressed as [4]

I(θ, φ, ω) =

3σzW1
4π√πc

1
γ4θ3 exp ( −

z θ4ω2
σ2
16c2

).

×

×

1015 < ω < 6

For reasons that will become clear in the next Section, we compute the
1015s−1), that falls within 6% of
power in the visible (3
the azimuth, and one mrad upward of the optimal angle discussed below
(from 6 to 7 mrad for CESR, from 8 to 9 mrad for PEP-II). This is the
power readily available for a simple beamstrahlung monitor looking at the
beam-beam interaction by means of a few small viewports drilled through
the beam pipe. At the optimal angle the exponential factor in Eq. 6 is equal
to -2 for photons at the lower ω limit. For the purposes of this integration
the frequency upper limit can be taken to inﬁnity, the error function at -2
is equal to 0.025 and the simple ﬁnal result is

Wexp =

0.0225W1
γ4

(

1
θ4
min −

1
θ4
max

).

×

The total beamstrahlung power in the narrow phase space region deﬁned
10−9 of the total power for CESR. When divided by the
above is 0.8
average photon energy (2 eV) one gets the number of photons per second
ν1, listed in Table 1. Current CESR conditions will deliver some 3.5 billion
visible photons per second in the region under consideration, or about 1000
photons per beam-beam collision. Clearly this method will give plenty of
signal even when the luminosity is one or two orders of magnitude lower
than design.

In the case of beam-beam oﬀsets, and general beam-beam diagnostics,
things can become quite complex. A good treatise of beamstrahlung pat-
terns versus beam conditions can be found in Gero’s thesis [11]. A desired
result for a particular beam-beam conﬁguration can always be obtained with
a straightforward numerical integration over space-time. A detailed treat-
ment of all possible pathologies goes far beyond the scope of a short paper,
so we will limit ourselves to a few comments, plus the concepts outlined in
the last Section to give an idea of the power of the method.

A beam-beam oﬀset will necessarily generate a dipole moment, which
will be reﬂected in a non-zero polarization of the emitted light, as well as
a change in the total light yield. We recall only formulae for the important
case of ﬂat beams, experiencing an oﬀset along y [4]. Dividing the power

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

10

(9)

(10)

emitted into a component parallel to the oﬀset and perpendicular to the
oﬀset, the result is

I⊥(θ, φ, ω) = I(θ, φ, ω)

Ik(θ, φ, ω) = I(θ, φ, ω)

G⊥ cos2(2φ) + Gk sin2(2φ)
G
G⊥ sin2(2φ) + Gk cos2(2φ)
G

,

.

The G form factors are deﬁned as

G⊥ + Gk = G(r, v), G(r, 0) = g(r)/2.

The variable v represents the oﬀset in units of √2σy. The polarization
asymmetry is deﬁned as

A =

Gk
G⊥ −
G(r, v)

.

Fig. 4 shows the G form factors as a function of the oﬀset v. The camelback
shape is a classical feature of beamstrahlung, due to the radiating beam
sampling a region of higher ﬁeld, and has been used in the past to distinguish
beamstrahlung from the background [2].

A lot of information about beamstrahlung patterns can be summarized
as follows: the radiation will have the same multipole pattern as the beams
have in the transverse plane. If beams are centred and have the same axis,
but have diﬀerent aspect ratios, there will be also a quadrupole pattern. A
sextupole moment will develop if one of the beams is rotated with respect
to the other.

4 Design of a Short Magnet Detector.

The detector must consist of one or more transparent viewports in the beam
pipe, at a large enough angle so that synchrotron visible light at zero degrees
can be eﬃciently masked. The photons are then separated by polarization
and color and counted.

In the harsh environment surrounding a beamline photomultipliers, with
a bialkali photocathode, are known to work well [6]. Thus the frequency
acceptance is ﬁxed by the two frequencies where the bialkali eﬃciency is at
1015 ). The lower limit is loosely called “red”
half-max (3
light and the upper limit “blue” light.

1015 < ω < 6

×

×

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

11

Figure 4: The total power and the components polarized respectively par-
allel and perpendicular to the bending plane, as a function of the normalized
oﬀset.

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

12

We add an “optimal” condition for detection, that is that the exponent

in Eq. 6 for red light be equal to two, ie

θo = 25/4

c
ωσz

r

=

24 mrad
σz(mm)

.

p

The reason for such a choice is that all backgrounds (Cherenkov radiation,
direct synchrotron radiation, ﬂuorescence in materials both in the beam
pipe and in the detector) are constant within 60% across the visible spec-
trum. By choosing red, and setting the detector at an angle where the blue
light is suppressed, we establish that a measure of blue light measures the
backgrounds. In other words,

Wred = e−2Wsignal + Wbackground
Wblue = e−8Wsignal + Wbackground

(11)

(12)

The photon counter would consist of a prism splitting the red and blue com-
ponents. The blue light goes to its own photomultiplier. The red light is
separated in the horizontal and vertical polarization component. Each then
goes into a photomultiplier. This background subtraction scheme would im-
prove the sensitivity to a beamstrahlung signal by two orders of magnitude.
The exponential factor in Eq. 7 scales with ωθ2. If background conditions
demand a larger angle, the trick can still be used by using a photocathode
sensitive in the near infrared.

Timing information could be had with 0.67 GHz FADCs connected to
the PMTs, for the purpose of timing out sources of backgrounds not coming
from the interaction region. Timing would improve the sensitivity to a
beamstrahlung signal, in the presence of opposite beam backgrounds, by
one order of magnitude.

Ideally, a viewport should be located at a ﬁxed grid in azimuth, but
avoiding the eightfold pattern of Fig. 3 (every 45 degrees the same infor-
mation is replicated). Three viewports are needed to fully disentangle the
information, and a viewport every 30 degrees is a possibility. In practice, it
axis in Fig.
is best to stay out of the synchrotron radiation sweep (the x
3), to avoid premature ageing of the window and quadrupole synchrotron
radiation, and monitor six other locations, for example at 30, 60 and 90
degrees, and their opposite locations in azimuth. The radiation pattern is
symmetric under 180 degrees rotations in azimuth, and half the monitors
are redundant for perfect beam alignment. The redundancy can be used

−

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

13

to correct beam misalignments. Twelve data would be obtained for seven
possible degrees of freedom.

The cons of this proposal are, obviously, beam pipe surgery, and in-
creased heat loads and RF leaks at the viewport location. The latter two
can be minimized by drilling several smaller holes per viewport. The heat
load and RF leaks scale like 1/b4, b being the hole radius, thus replacing one
hole with three would suppress the leaks by an order of magnitude.

5 Application at CESR

A beamstrahlung monitor is being considered for installation in the CESR
storage ring to aid in understanding beam-beam eﬀects that occur at high
luminosity. CESR has both large dynamic beta eﬀects as well as sizable
disruption.

Horizontal and vertical disruption parameters are deﬁned as the bunch
length divided by the nominal thin lens focal length in the plane of interest.
For gaussian bunches they work out to

Dh/v = 4πξh/v/σz

(13)

In CESR they are often as high as 0.5 or more, which indicates that there
is substantial change in the transverse beam size during collisions.

The dynamic beta eﬀect is a distortion of beta functions seen by low
amplitude particles due to the beam-beam interaction. It is especially sig-
niﬁcant at high tune shift parameter and when the tune is near a half integer.
For example theoretical values for β∗
h/β∗
h0 < .37 for a horizontal tuneshift
parameter of 0.032 and horizontal betatron number of 0.526 [12].

These types of nonlinear beam-beam distortions aﬀect lowest amplitude
particles the most; beam tails are not aﬀected as much. But the low ampli-
tude particles are just the ones that contribute the greatest amount to the
overall luminosity, so it would seem advisable to understand their dynamics
as thoroughly as possible.

In principle synchrotron light monitors could resolve changes in the aver-
age beam proﬁle and detect how they are modiﬁed by the collision process.
But the analysis of such measurements would be diﬃcult because they are
made far from the interaction point and depend on the highly distorted beta
functions (at least for low amplitude particles) as well as the beam distri-
bution. Another technique that might address these types of beam-beam
eﬀects is to shake one beam and measure the response of the other [13].

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

14

However while such measurements can provide zeroth order and ﬁrst order
estimates for the beam density, there is no known method for interpreting
higher moments.

Given the luminosity as measured by the detector, and the beam cur-
rents, beamstrahlung measurements provide direct information about the
average vertical beam distribution during the collision. Like the other meth-
ods mentioned above, interpretation is not obvious. By scanning the vertical
oﬀset of the beams one should be able to see peaks in the beamstrahlung
radiation power, and a central minimum whose heights and depths depend
on the dynamically changing beam size. As mentioned earlier, polarization
data from the beamstrahlung might provide information about moments of
the beam distribution, particularly if there is a mismatch between the two
beams. These signals could be encorporated in feedback loops to aid in
tuning and improve the stability operation.

A proposed location for the beamstrahlung detector would be about 5
m from the interaction point. Here there is essentially no hard sychrotron
radiation from the IR quadrupoles. About 2 W/cm of soft bend dipole
radiation is deposited in this region with a critical energy of 2 keV. This
location is also favored by a small beam stay-clear in both planes which
allows more penetration into the vacuum chamber with mirrors. The average
angle for beamstrahlung radiation striking the mirror would be 6.2 mr. A
mirror with a 1 cm penetration and 1 in diameter would intercept a solid
angle of 2

10−4 sr.

Collimation can be arranged so that the only background synchrotron ra-
diation comes from the opposite side of the interaction point, which is about
10 m away, and such radiation is scattered once oﬀ the vacuum chamber.

×

6 Backgrounds.

We preliminarly study the CESR case, where the available beamstrahlung
power at the viewports is about 2 nW. As shown in Section 5, the power
deposited in the region around the detector is about 2 W/cm along the main
synchrotron sweep. Therefore a background reduction factor of order 10−9
will suﬃce. The backgrounds oﬀ the main sweep are perhaps three orders
of magnitude less. Three types of backgrounds are distinguished: radiation,
visible and irreducible backgrounds.

Radiation backgrounds are caused by radiation generating ﬂuorescence
or Cherenkov light in the beamstrahlung detector itself. Experience from

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

15

Refs. [2] and [6] is of guidance. Radiation backgrounds drop very sharply
with distance from the beam pipe, thus only the radiation hitting the pri-
mary mirror and the primary window needs to be considered. Neither the
window nor the mirror are hit by the main sweep, and both could be some-
what recessed inside the beam pipe. The conversion factor for radiation
energy into Cherenkov light in glass-like media is about 10−4 for relativistic
particles, and virtually zero for synchrotron radiation (SR) with a critical
energy of less than 10 keV. The window would be well recessed from the
beam pipe, and shielded from beam halo, further reducing the Cherenkov
backgrounds by perhaps two orders of magnitude.

The conversion factor for ﬂuorescence varies considerably from material
to material [6], but it can be conservatively estimated to be 10−6 to 10−8.
For metals only, it is strongly dependent on the energy deposition mean
depth, as only the atoms at the skin depth can emit visible radiation. The
solid angle factor to a small iris could be of order 10−5 for both window
and mirror. By multiplying all the reduction factors together one obtains
conservatively a reduction of 10−11 for Cherenkov light in the window, and
10−14 for ﬂuorescence. These source of backgrounds should be negligible by
several orders of magnitude.

Visible backgrounds (VB) are due to visible light emitted by the inner
surface of the beam pipe, either by beam pipe ﬂuorescence, reﬂection and
scattering of visible light (mostly directly produced SR), or a combination
of both. At least at CESR, one detector would image the interaction point,
and the detector on the other side. Since the last scattering would happen
on the opposite detector, a variety of methods can be used to minimize VB.
Firstly, the ﬂanges can be made somewhat rough, to insure that reﬂection
is isotropic and not forward peaked. Most important of all, if the detector
is truly symmetric in azimuth, individual viewports would be looking at
another recessed viewport, if the detector is focussed on the other detector
and not on the IP. In all cases the solid angle factor is about 10−8, and the
opposite detector is not hit by the main sweep. Thus a reduction of at least
10−11 should be possible, and this source of backgrounds is likely negligible.
Irreducible backgrounds are produced by particles in the beam tails, as
they get strongly focussed in the ﬁnal quadrupoles. At CESR, there are
perhaps 106 particles bent by more than 5 mrad in the vertical direction
in the last quadrupole. This kind of background is clearly irreducible, but
falling extremely sharply. A detailed calculation is complex, and beyond the
scope of this paper. Should it prove to be a problem, moving the detection
frequency (and therefore the optimal angle) could prove to be the solution.

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

16

7 Beamstrahlung Patterns: the FAQs

In conclusion, we have shown that accurate beam-beam monitoring is easily
achievable at all existing or planned e+e− particle factories. The preferred
method is the monitoring of large angle visible light beamstrahlung, which is
produced in abundance (Table 1), and carries information about the beam-
beam collision conditions, not only limited to luminosity but also beam-
beam oﬀsets, shape diﬀerences, and other transverse mismatches. The total
diagnostic handbook goes far beyond the scope of a short paper, but we wish
to conclude with the Frequently Asked Questions ﬁle about beamstrahlung
phenomenology [11]. Hopefully it might be of use sometime in the future.

•

•

•

•

Q. How is red light polarization used? Polarization is always set to
a minimum by initial steering, for optimal beam-beam overlap. The
onset of a non-minimal polarization during a run requires corrective
action. Stable beam conditions is obtained at a double local mini-
mum point of minimal polarization and minimal power emitted. Zero
polarization is achieved only if the two beams match perfectly in the
transverse plane.

Q. How to do the steering to minimize polarization? If the oﬀset is
purely in the x
)axis, the counters at 90 and 270 degrees will
show an excess in their respectively horizontal(vertical) polarization
counters. Remedial action is steering (say, for y misalignments) up,
and if polarization increases, down.

(y

−

−

Q. Can red light give information about optics optimization? Yes.
Successfully squeezing the target beam will always result in higher
power from the radiating beam, and lower power for the target beam,
for optimal overlap. The reverse is also true. As a general rule, in
a comparison of equal energy, equally intense beams, the wide beam
radiates more than the narrow beam, all else being equal.

Q. What if the two ﬂat beams have a non-zero angle between the major
axes? That will in principle generate a situation where the minimal
polarization is non-zero. The beam with the widest y proﬁle (in case
of ﬂat beams, the one which has rotated) will radiate the most in the
vertical polarization, all else being equal.

•

Q. What if the beams have diﬀerent aspect ratios? The rule of widest
beam radiating the most is very far reaching. The widest beam in y

CLNS 97-1523//WSU-HE-97-01

17

will radiate the most in y, the other beam will radiate the most in x,
all else being equal.

•

Q. What can be learned from measuring the frequency spectrum at
large angle? By moving, under stable beam conditions, the signal
PMT across the visible spectrum, the beam length can be measured
accurately. This is a second reason to place the detector at the optimal
angle described above. A frequency scan at a substantially lower angle
would not work, because the gaussian factor becomes ﬂat.

References

[1] D. Cinabro et al., physics/9707001.

[2] G. Bonvicini et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 62: 2381, 1989.

[3] J. D. Jackson, “Classical Electrodynamics”, Chapter 14. The “search-
light” approximation for synchrotron radiation is inserted between Eqs.
(14.76) and (14.77).

[4] M. Bassetti et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Science 30: 2182, 1983.

[5] Particle Data Book 1996, Phys. Rev. D 54, 1996, pages 129 and 130.

[6] G. Bonvicini et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 277, 297, 1989.

[7] See for example R. Hollebeek, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 184, 331, 1981.

[8] G. Bonvicini et al., SLAC-PUB-3978.

[9] R. Coisson, Phys. Rev. A 20, 524, 1979.

[10] G. Bossart et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 164, 375, 1979.

[11] E. Gero Ph. D. Thesis, University of Michigan, 1989. See also E. Gero

et al., SLAC-PUB-4930.

[12] D.C. Sagan, Dynamic Beta Eﬀect in CESR,

http://www.lns.cornell.edu/public/CBN/1994, CBN 94-05.

[13] D.C. Sagan, J.P. Sikora, S.D. Henderson, A Luminosity Monitor

Using Coherent Beam-Beam Interaction,
http://www.lns.cornell.edu/public/CBN/1997, CBN 97-13.

