9
9
9
1
 
n
a
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
0
1
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ACCELERATION AND STORAGE OF POLARIZED ELECTRON
BEAMS a

D.P. BARBER
Deutsches Elektronen–Synchrotron, DESY,
22603 Hamburg, Germany.
E-mail: mpybar@mail.desy.de

I review recent developments in spin dynamics in electron storage rings
and accelerators.

1 Introduction

This article provides an update on my review at SPIN96 [1] on activities surrounding
spin polarization in electron storage rings and accelerators. In the written versions
of previous talks at the Spin Symposia I have opened with a review of the basic
theory of radiative spin polarization, spin precession and resonance phenomena. That
background material is readily available in the proceedings of earlier Symposia and
elsewhere [1, 2, 3, 4]. So to avoid repetition I will, on this occasion, launch straight
into the main themes. Historical overviews of radiative polarization can be found in
[1, 5].

2 High energy storage rings: HERA and LEP

HERA is the e± − p collider at DESY in Hamburg. The e+ or e− beams run at about
27.5 GeV. Up to the end of 1997 the proton ring ran at 820 GeV. In 1998 it has been
running at 920 GeV. e± beams in storage rings can become vertically polarized by
the Sokolov–Ternov eﬀect (ST) [6, 3] and a key aspect of HERA is that since 1994
longitudinal spin polarization has been supplied to the HERMES experiment [7] with
the help of a pair of spin rotators [8].

The value of the polarization in an e± storage ring is the same everywhere around
the ring even with rotators running. However, at high energy, as at HERA, the
polarization is very sensitive to the size and form of closed orbit distortions. With
very careful adjustment of the vertical closed orbit distortion using harmonic closed
orbit spin matching [4], up to about 70 % polarization has been seen at HERA with
the HERMES rotators running. This is to be compared with the theoretical maximum
for that conﬁguration of 89.06 % .

The polarization at HERA can also be aﬀected by the beam–beam (b–b) forces due
to collisions with the proton beam at the H1 and ZEUS experiments where, incidently,
the polarization is vertical. Since the b–b forces are very nonlinear it is very diﬃcult
to make analytical calculations of their eﬀects on e± beams. And of course, it is
even more diﬃcult to make analytical estimates of the eﬀects on the polarization.
However, the naive expectation is that the b–b forces reduce the polarization and
aInvited plenary talk presented at the 13th International Symposium on High Energy Spin Physics
(SPIN98), Protvino, Russia, September 1998. Also as DESY report 98–182.

1

some spin–orbit tracking calculations support that view [9]. Normally is it assumed
that it is a good idea to reduce the b-b tune shift (explained below) but as usual,
there is no substitute for measurement and in 1996 even during collisions with 50
mA of protons, positron polarizations of about 70 % were observed with the rotators
running. One such run lasted ten hours. So, at least in those optics, b–b forces had
little inﬂuence.

Since a few proton bunches, which would normally be in collision with electrons
(positrons), are by intent missing, not all electron (positron) bunches come to collision
with protons. Towards the end of 1996 a second polarimeter, built by HERMES, came
into operation [10]. In contrast to the original polarimeter which measures the level
of vertical polarization in the West area by Compton scattering using the so called
single photon technique [11], the new polarimeter, which employs Compton scattering
to measure longitudinal polarization directly close to HERMES and which uses the
multi–photon technique, can collect data more quickly. It then became possible to
study the positron polarization with suﬃcient precision on a bunch–to–bunch basis.
Figure 1 summarizes a typical measurement for collisions of positrons with about
60 mA of protons and in this example, contrary to intuition, the colliding bunches

]

%

 

[
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
r
a
l
o
P

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Colliding Bunches

Non-Colliding Bunches

0

25

50

75

100

125

150

175

200

Bunch Number

Figure 1: An example of a measurement with the longitudinal polarimeter of HERMES of the
polarization of positrons colliding/not colliding with protons at HERA.

have more polarization than the non-colliding bunches. At present we interpret this
unexpected result as being due to the b–b tune shift: an oncoming proton bunch
appears to the positrons as a nonlinear lens and to a ﬁrst approximation the colliding
positron bunches have betatron tunes which diﬀer from those of the non–colliding
bunches. So, by the routine adjustment of some quadrupole strengths to get overall
betatron tunes which lead to optically stable running conditions for the colliding
bunches and to high polarization (averaged over the bunches), it is possible that the
non–colliding bunches are close to a depolarizing spin–orbit resonance (probably a
synchrotron sideband resonance of a parent resonance [4]) and likely that the colliding

2

bunches are not on such a resonance. This interpretation is supported by the fact that
on other occasions with slightly diﬀerent machine tunes, there is either little diﬀerence
between the colliding and non–colliding polarizations or the colliding bunches indeed
have less polarization than the non–colliding bunches. For the measurement of ﬁgure
1 the vertical b–b tune shift was about 0.034 for each interaction point.

Apart from the sensitivity to orbital tunes one observes that in the presence of
b–b eﬀect the rise time for the polarization after injection is sometimes larger than
that expected from standard radiative polarization theory and that the polarization
level is sometimes relatively insensitive to the settings of the closed orbit harmonics
of the harmonic closed orbit correction scheme [12]. Naturally, since the b–b eﬀect
can aﬀect the rise time it makes little sense to calibrate a polarimeter by measuring
the rise time after resonant depolarization [11] while the beam is in collision with
protons.

The electron (positron) bunches in HERA come in three groups of about sixty
bunches with gaps between the groups. This causes dynamic beam loading of the rf
cavity system needed to replace the energy lost by radiation. That in turn can cause
the synchrotron tune to vary along a group with the result that electrons (positrons)
at the beginning of a group can be closer to a depolarizing resonance than those at
the end (or vice versa). Thus we sometimes see a variation of the polarization of the
colliding bunches across a group.

In 1997 under normal running conditions with typically 80 mA of protons we had
about 50 % polarization, averaged over the bunches. Even towards the end of the
year when we ran with over 100 mA of protons (vertical b–b tune shift ≈ 0.035)
a polarization level of 50 % could still be reached. It might have been possible to
attain more with careful adjustment of the closed orbit but we must normally make
a compromise between tuning the orbit and providing stable running conditions for
the high energy physics experiments.

Electrons and positrons can also become polarized in LEP, the e± collider at
CERN in Geneva. The eﬀect of b–b forces on polarization has also been studied there
and it has been found that the polarization is very sensitive to optical parameters
[13], just as at HERA.

So far, we cannot claim that we understand in detail all the eﬀects of b–b forces
on the polarization and it has not yet been conclusively demonstrated that it is
impossible to get high polarizations in the presence of a b–b eﬀect which is large but
not large enough to disrupt the beam itself. More investigations under controlled and
reproducible conditions are needed.

In the winter shutdown 1999/2000 we plan to change the geometry of the North
and South interaction regions of HERA in order to increase the luminosity supplied
to the H1 and ZEUS experiments by a factor of about 4.7 beyond the design value of
1.5·1031 cm−2sec−1 [14]. This will be achieved by reducing the beam cross–sections at
the interaction points (IP’s) and by reaching the design currents. The smaller beam
sizes will be achieved by having smaller β functions at the IP’s and by changing
the optics in the arcs in order to decrease the horizontal emittance. These changes
have profound consequences for e± polarization: smaller β functions imply that the
focussing magnets must be moved closer to the IP’s and this in turn means that the

3

“antisolenoids” which currently compensate the H1 and ZEUS experimental solenoids
will be removed. In fact new stronger combined quadrupole and dipole magnets will
be installed on each side of the H1 and ZEUS IP’s and their ﬁelds will overlap with
the solenoid ﬁelds. At the same time additional spin rotators will be installed to
enable H1 and ZEUS to run with longitudinal polarization. We plan to run these
rotators in a slightly mistuned state designed so that they eﬀectively compensate for
the eﬀect on the equilibrium spin axis of the overlap of solenoid and dipole ﬁelds
and ensure that the spin axis is still vertical in the arcs — an essential requirement
for high polarization [4]. The absence of the antisolenoids means that the resultant
orbital coupling must be corrected away with skew quadrupoles and that the computer
programs involved in the strong spin matching [4] and calculation of polarization must
be upgraded to handle the new and complicated magnetic ﬁeld conﬁgurations near the
IP’s. Accounts of the full implications for the maintenance of radiative polarization
can be found in [14, 15].

Since the ratio: (depolarization rate/polarization rate) [4] rises strongly with en-
ergy, it was much more diﬃcult to attain high polarization in LEP at the old running
energy of about 46 GeV per beam (near the Z 0) than at HERA with 27.5 GeV. More-
over the vertical polarization of LEP (there are no spin rotators) is of little use for
high energy physics and in any case the rise time for the polarization is a few hours
compared with the twenty minutes of HERA. In spite of these diﬃculties the LEP
team recorded a polarization of about 57 % in 1993 [13, 16] — a major achievement.
Under routine running conditions at about 46 GeV, LEP ran with 5 – 10 % polariza-
tion. But this was suﬃcient for the exploitation of polarization to measure the beam
energies, and hence the Z 0 mass, by means of resonant depolarization, leading to a
precision of about 1.5 MeV [17, 16].

But now LEP runs at above 80 GeV per beam and the polarization is eﬀectively
zero; 5 % polarization was recorded at 55.3 GeV but this was down to 2 % at 60.6
GeV. However, vertical polarization can still be used for energy calibration — but
indirectly by calibrating a ﬂux loop and sixteen NMR probes in dipoles at about 41,
45, 50 and 55 GeV [18] and then using the calibrated ﬂux loop and NMR probes at
above 80 GeV. The estimated systematic error for this method is about 25 MeV per
beam but the long term aim is for a precision of about 15 MeV per beam.

3 Accelerators

Because the rise time for ST polarization is typically in the range of minutes to
many hours, extracted polarized e− beams can only be obtained from accelerators
by injecting a pre-polarized beam from a source. Modern gallium–arsenide sources
[19] deliver up to about 80 % electron polarization. But that must then be preserved
during acceleration. There are at present no suitable polarized positron sources and
therefore no extracted polarized positron beams.

When dealing with polarized beams we can distinguish two basic types of accel-
erators, namely linear accelerators where, by design, the particle velocity and the
accelerating electric ﬁeld are essentially parallel, and ring accelerators where, in addi-
tion, the beam must make many thousands or even millions of turns in the magnetic

4

guide ﬁeld on the way to full energy.
If the particle velocity and the electric ﬁeld
are almost parallel, then according to the T–BMT precession equation [4, 3] there is
very little spin precession and hence little opportunity for depolarization. The (lack
of) spin precession in the two mile long accelerating section of the SLC at SLAC in
California is the prime example of this. The SLC has regularly delivered an electron
beam of about 46 GeV with over 70 % polarization [19].

A good example of the other type is ELSA [20], the 3.5 GeV ring at Bonn, Ger-
many which accelerates vertically polarized electrons. According to the T–BMT equa-
tion, in vertical magnetic ﬁelds, spins precess aγ times per turn where a = (g − 2)/2
is the gyromagnetic anomaly and γ is the Lorentz factor. If the spin precession is in
resonance with the orbital motion: aγ = m0 + mx Qx + mz Qz + ms Qs where the m’s
are integers and the Q’s are orbital tunes, the spins can be strongly disturbed and the
polarization can be lost. Since the precession rate aγ is proportional to the energy,
and increases by unity for every 440 MeV increase in energy, several such resonances
must be crossed on the way to 3.5 GeV. A typical example is at 1.32 GeV in ELSA.
This corresponds to m0 = 3 but mx = mz = ms = 0. Spin perturbations in this
case result from the radial ﬁelds “seen” by the spins in the quadrupoles when there is
vertical closed orbit distortion. A ﬁrst approximation for the polarization surviving
the crossing of a resonance is given by the Froissart–Stora (FS) formula [21, 22]:

Pﬁnal
Pinitial

2

= 2 e− π|ǫ|

2α − 1

(1)

where ǫ is the “resonance strength”, a measure of the dominant spin perturbation
at resonance, and α expresses the rate of resonance crossing. Thus if the resonance
is crossed suﬃciently quickly (|ǫ|2/α is small) the polarization is hardly aﬀected but
2
if it is crossed suﬃciently slowly (|ǫ|
/α is large) a complete reversal of the vertical
polarization can occur without much change in the magnitude. Measurements of the
surviving polarization for a range of |ǫ|
/α values are now available from ELSA [20]
both for 1.32 GeV and for 1.76 GeV (m0 = 4). The measurements for m0 = 3 show
good agreement with the prediction of the FS formula. In particular, by running at
|ǫ|
/α ≥ 4.0 one can preserve the value of the polarization by means of complete spin
ﬂip. However, for m0 = 4 only partial spin ﬂip with a |Pﬁnal/Pinitial| ≈ 0.8 is seen even
out to |ǫ|2/α ≈ 12.0. This is probably due to the encroachment of stochastic spin
decoherence owing to synchrotron radiation emission at the higher energy. If this is
indeed the case, these measurements provide a window on what can be expected from
attempts to ﬂip e± spins in HERA [23, 24].

2

2

A good compromise between the space occupied by the SLC and the spin per-
turbation problems of ELSA, is provided by the ring at the Jeﬀerson Laboratory in
Virginia, U.S.A. This was designed to provide longitudinally polarized electrons at 4
GeV. However, it is already providing up to 77 % polarization at 5 GeV [25]. This
ring combines the best of both worlds; it consists essentially of two parallel supercon-
ducting linear accelerators connected at their ends by semicircular arcs of bending
magnets. The beam is accelerated to full energy in just ﬁve turns. In the arcs the
energy is constant so that there is no resonance crossing and in the accelerating sec-
tions, just as in the SLC, spin perturbations are negligible. In any case, with so few

5

turns and with such a large acceleration rate (large α) no depolarization is expected.
This machine is already a wonderful tool for research with spin and in the long term
with steady improvements it might even be possible to reach 12 GeV [25].

4 Kinetic polarization

At SPIN96 [1] I reported on progress towards obtaining longitudinal electron polar-
ization in the AmPs ring in Amsterdam [26]. This ring runs at up to 900 MeV.
The electron beam is injected pre–polarized and a Siberian Snake, based on a su-
perconducting solenoid, is employed to stabilize the polarization and to ensure that
the polarization is longitudinal at the internal target. A fascinating and educational
aspect of this machine is that, because the normal radiative polarization process is
eliminated owing to the fact that the equilibrium polarization lies in the horizontal
plane, a weaker polarization mechanism, “kinetic polarization”, might become ob-
servable [27]. As reported at this Symposium by Yu. Shatunov, measurements at
AmPs have now provided preliminary experimental evidence for this eﬀect [28]. Con-
ﬁrmation of these observations will vindicate eﬀorts [3, 29, 30] to put the theory of
the combined radiative polarization and radiative depolarization processes on a ﬁrm
semiclassical basis. Moreover, kinetic polarization is expected to contribute +/− a
few percent to the e± polarization at HERA when the spin rotators are running. But
since its magnitude depends sensitively on the details of the closed orbit distortion
and since that cannot be measured with suﬃcient accuracy, kinetic polarization sets
a limit to the precision with which the polarimeters can be calibrated by measuring
the polarization rise time [11, 8] with the rotators in use.

Perhaps the work at AmPs can be extended at the Bτ CF ring being planned in

Beijing [31] and at the MIT–Bates ring [32].

5 “Spinlight”

In high energy storage rings, e± polarization is normally measured using Compton
scattering. In linear accelerators Moeller [33] scattering, which is destructive, can be
used too. However, there is another possibility, namely to measure the tiny, O(¯h),
component of synchrotron radiation (“spin light”) which depends on the orientation
of the spins [34]. This causes a small diﬀerence between the spectra of very high
energy photons radiated from vertically polarized and unpolarized bunches. The
diﬀerence, which has already been detected at low energy [35], is proportional to the
polarization and therefore supplies a way of measuring the latter. Indeed, a feasibility
study for a “spin light polarimeter” at HERA is now being undertaken by physicists
from the Yerevan Physics Institute in Armenia and from DESY [36]. Furthermore,
the correlation between the radiation spectra and the spin orientation lies at the
heart of the kinetic polarization eﬀect [27] so that even apart from the question of
polarimetry, it would be of interest to make more detailed measurements and at high
energy.

6

6 Fokker–Planck theory for spin diﬀusion

Now, to conclude, I would like to mention that a way has recently been found, using
classical concepts, to write a diﬀusion equation describing stochastic spin dynamics in
storage rings. The key is to work with the density in phase space of the spin angular
momentum as a parallel to the use of particle density for orbital diﬀusion.
If the
Fokker–Planck equation for the orbital motion is known, the corresponding equation
for spin can be written immediately. More details can be found in another article in
these proceedings [37].

Conclusion

e± polarization in storage rings and accelerators is an active, developing and excit-
ing ﬁeld. Much is now routine but there are still many aspects to investigate and
challenges to meet.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank E. Gianfelice–Wendt for her valuable comments on HERA
performance; colleagues from the HERA Polarimeter Group for supplying me with
information; P. Rutt and J.S. Price for updating me on the Jeﬀerson Laboratory
machine; and C. Prescott and Yu. Shatunov for providing me with information
about their work. Finally I thank M. Berglund and M. Vogt for their careful reading
of the manuscript.

References

1. D.P. Barber, Proc. 12th Int. Symp. High Energy Spin Physics (SPIN96),

Amsterdam, Netherlands, September 1996, World Scientiﬁc (1997).

2. D.P. Barber, Proc. 11th Int. Symp. High Energy Spin Physics (SPIN94),

Bloomington, U.S.A., September 1994, AIP Proceedings 343 (1995).

3. D.P. Barber et al., articles in Proceedings of ICFA Advanced Beam Dynam-
ics Workshop: “Quantum Aspects of Beam Physics”, Monterey, U.S.A., 1998,
edited by P. Chen, (World Scientiﬁc). Also in extended form as DESY report
98-096 (1998) and at the Los Alamos archive.

4. D.P. Barber and G. Ripken, Handbook of Accelerator Physics and Engineering,

edited by A.W. Chao and M. Tigner, (World Scientiﬁc). In preparation.

5. Yu.M. Shatunov, Particle Accelerators, 32 (1990) 139.
6. A.A. Sokolov and I.M. Ternov, Sov. Phys. Dokl., 8 (1964) 1203.
7. A. Bruell, in these proceedings.
8. D.P. Barber et al., Phys. Lett., 343B (1995) 436.
9. M. Boege and T. Limberg, 1995 Part. Acc. Conf. (PAC95), Dallas, U.S.A., May

1995.

10. A. Most, SPIN96, loc.cit.
11. D.P. Barber et al., Nucl. Inst. Meth., A338 (1994) 166.
12. E. Gianfelice–Wendt, DESY HERA report 97-10 (1997).

7

13. R. Assmann et al., SPIN94, loc.cit.
14. E. Gianfelice–Wendt, 6th Euro. Part. Acc. Conf. (EPAC98), Stockholm, Swe-

den, June 1998 and DESY report M-98-06 (1998).

15. M. Berglund et al., EPAC98, loc.cit. and DESY report M-98-06 (1998).
16. A. Blondel et al., SPIN96, loc.cit.
17. R. Assmann et al., Z. f. Physik, C66 (1995) 567.
18. M. Boege et al., EPAC 98, loc.cit.
19. G. Mulhollan et al., SPIN96 and R. Prepost, SPIN96, loc.cit.
20. C. Steier et al., EPAC98, loc.cit.
21. M. Froissart and R. Stora, Nucl. Inst. Meth., 7 (1960) 297.
22. T. Roser, in these proceedings.
23. D.P. Barber et al., SPIN94, loc.cit., and in extended form with some typing
errors corrected, in D.P. Barber et al., DESY report M-94-13-Rev (1994).
24. K. Heinemann, DESY report 97-166 (1997) and Los Alamos archive:

physics/9709025.

25. P. Rutt and J.S. Price, in these proceedings and private communications.
26. C.W. de Jager, V. Ptitsin and Yu.M. Shatunov, SPIN96, loc.cit.
27. B. Montague, Physics Reports, 113 (1984).
28. Yu.M. Shatunov, in these proceeedings.
29. Ya.S. Derbenev and A.M. Kondratenko, Sov. Phys. JETP., 37 (1973) 968.
30. S.R. Mane, Phys.Rev., A36 (1987) 105–130.
31. D. Wang and Y. Yu, 14th ICFA Advanced Beam Dynamics Workshop: “Beam

Dynamics Issues for e+e− Factories”, Frascati, Italy, October 1997.

32. T . Zwart, SPIN96, loc.cit.
33. H.R. Band et al., Nucl. Inst. Meth., A400 (1997) 24.
34. G.N. Kulipanov et al., Nucl. Inst. Meth., A405 (1998) 191.
35. S.A. Belomesthnykh et al., Nucl. Inst. Meth., 227 (1984) 173.
36. A.V. Airapetian et al., SPIN96, loc.cit.
37. K. Heinemann and D.P. Barber, in these proceedings and talk at Frascati, May
1998 to be published in Nuovo Cimento A. Also as DESY report 98-145 (1998)
and at the Los Alamos archive.

8

