9
9
9
1
 
r
p
A
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
0
4
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

physics/9904063

Quantum aspects of accelerator optics ∗

Sameen Ahmed KHAN
Dipartimento di Fisica Galileo Galilei Universit`a di Padova
Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN) Sezione di Padova
Via Marzolo 8 Padova 35131 ITALY

E-mail: khan@pd.infn.it,

http://www.pd.infn.it/∼khan/

Abstract

Present understanding of accelerator optics is based mainly on clas-
sical mechanics and electrodynamics. In recent years quantum theory of
charged-particle beam optics has been under development. In this paper
the newly developed formalism is outlined.

Keywords: Beam physics, Beam optics, Accelerator optics, Spin- 1
2 particle,
Anomalous magnetic moment, Quantum mechanics, Dirac equation, Foldy-
Wouthuysen transformation, Polarization, Thomas-Bargmann-Michel-Telegdi
equation, Magnetic quadrupole lenses, Stern-Gerlach kicks, Quantum correc-
tions to the classical theory.

PACS: 29.20.-c (Cyclic accelerators and storage rings), 29.27.-a (Beams in parti-
cle accelerators), 29.27.Hj (Polarized beams), 41.75.-i (Charged-particle beams),
41.75.Ht (Relativistic electron and positron beams), 41.85.-p (Beam optics),
41.85.Ja (Beam transport), 41.85.Lc (Beam focusing and bending magnets).

∗In Proceedings of the 1999 Particle Accelerator Conference (PAC99) 29 March – 02 April

1999, New York City, Editors: A. Luccio and W. MacKay

Charged-particle beam optics, or the theory of transport of charged-particle
beams through electromagnetic systems, is traditionally dealt with using clas-
sical mechanics. This is the case in ion optics, electron microscopy, accelerator
physics etc [1]-[4]. The classical treatment of charged-particle beam optics has
been extremely successful, in the designing and working of numerous optical
devices from electron microscopes to very large particle accelerators, including
polarized beam accelerators. It is natural to look for a prescription based on the
quantum theory, since any physical system is quantum at the fundamental level!
Such a prescription is sure to explain the grand success of the classical theo-
ries and may also help towards a deeper understanding and designing of certain
charged-particle beam devices. To date the curiosity to justify the success of the
classical theories as a limit of a quantum theory has been the main motivation
to look for a quantum prescription. But, with ever increasing demand for higher
luminosities and the need for polarized beam accelerators in basic physics, we
strongly believe that the quantum theories, which up till now were an isolated
academic curiosity will have a signiﬁcant role to play in designing and working
of such devices.

It is historically very curious that the, quantum approaches to the charged-
particle beam optics have been very modest and have a very brief history as
pointed out in the third volume of the three-volume encyclopaedic text book of
Hawkes and Kasper [5]. In the context of accelerator physics the grand success
of the classical theories originates from the fact that the de Broglie wavelength
of the (high energy) beam particle is very small compared to the typical apertures
of the cavities in accelerators. This and related details have been pointed out
in the recent article of Chen [6]. A detailed account of the quantum aspects
of beam physics is to be found in the Proceedings of the recently held 15th
Advanced ICFA Beam Dynamics Workshop [7].

A beginning of a quantum formalism starting ab initio with the Dirac equa-
tion was made only recently[8]-[9]. The formalism of Jagannathanet al was
the ﬁrst one to use the Dirac equation to derive the focusing theory of elec-
tron lenses, in particular for magnetic and electrostatic axially symmetric and
quadrupole lenses respectively. This formalism further outlined the recipe to
obtain a quantum theory of aberrations. Details of these and some of the re-
lated developments in the quantum theory of charged-particle beam optics can
be found in the references [8]-[17]. I shall brieﬂy state the central theme of the
quantum formalism.

The starting point to obtain a quantum prescription is to build a theory
based on the basic equations of quantum mechanics appropriate to the situation
under study. For situations when either there is no spin or spinor eﬀects are
believed to be small and ignorable we start with the scalar Klein-Gordon and
Schr¨odinger equations for relativistic and nonrelativistic cases respectively. For
electrons, protons and other spin- 1
2 particles it is natural to start with the Dirac
equation, the equation for spin- 1
2 particles. In practice we do not have to care
about the other (higher spin) equations.

2

In many situations the electromagnetic ﬁelds are static or can reasonably
assumed to be static. In many such devices one can further ignore the times
of ﬂights which are negligible or of not direct interest as the emphasis is more
on the proﬁles of the trajectories. The idea is to analyze the evolution of the
beam parameters of the various individual charged-particle beam optical ele-
ments (quadrupoles, bending magnets, · · ·) along the optic axis of the system.
This in the language of the quantum formalism would require to know the
evolution of the wavefunction of the beam particles as a function of ‘s’, the co-
ordinate along the optic axis. Irrespective of the starting basic time-dependent
equation (Schr¨odinger, Klein-Gordon, Dirac, · · ·) the ﬁrst step is to obtain an
equation of the form

i¯h

∂
∂s

ψ (x , y ; s) = ˆH (x , y; s) ψ (x , y ; s) ,

(1)

where (x, y; s) constitute a curvilinear coordinate system, adapted to the ge-
ometry of the system. For systems with straight optic axis, as it is customary
we shall choose the optic axis to lie along the Z-axis and consequently we have
s = z and (x, y; z) constitutes a rectilinear coordinate system. Eq. (1) is the
basic equation in the quantum formalism and we call it as the beam-optical
equation; H and ψ as the beam-optical Hamiltonian and the beam wavefunction
respectively. The second step requires to obtain a relationship for any relevant
observable {hOi (s)} at the transverse-plane at s to the observable {hOi (sin)}
at the transverse plane at sin, where sin is some input reference point. This is
achieved by the integration of the beam-optical equation in (1)

ψ (x, y; s) = ˆU (s, sin) ψ (x, y; sin) ,

(2)

which gives the required transfer maps

hOi (sin) → hOi (s)

= hψ (x, y; s) |O| ψ (x, y; s)i ,

=

ψ (x, y; sin)

ˆU †O ˆU

ψ (x, y; sin)

.

(3)

D

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

E

The two-step algorithm stated above may give an over-simpliﬁed picture of
the quantum formalism than, it actually is. There are several crucial points to
be noted. The ﬁrst-step in the algorithm of obtaining the beam-optical equation
is not to be treated as a mere transformation which eliminates t in preference
to a variable s along the optic axis. A clever set of transforms are required
which not only eliminate the variable t in preference to s but also gives us
the s-dependent equation which has a close physical and mathematical analogy
with the original t-dependent equation of standard time-dependent quantum
mechanics. The imposition of this stringent requirement on the construction of
the beam-optical equation ensures the execution of the second-step of the algo-
rithm. The beam-optical equation is such, that all the required rich machinery

3

of quantum mechanics becomes applicable to compute the transfer maps char-
acterizing the optical system. This describes the essential scheme of obtaining
the quantum formalism. Rest is mostly a mathematical detail which is built
in the powerful algebraic machinery of the algorithm, accompanied with some
reasonable assumptions and approximations dictated by the physical consid-
erations. For instance, a straight optic axis is a reasonable assumption and
paraxial approximation constitute a justiﬁable approximation to describe the
ideal behaviour.

Before explicitly looking at the execution of the algorithm leading to the
quantum formalism in the spinor case, we further make note of certain other
features. Step-one of the algorithm is achieved by a set of clever transforma-
tions and an exact expression for the beam-optical Hamiltonian is obtained in
the case of Schr¨odinger, Klein-Gordon and Dirac equations respectively, with-
out resorting to any approximations! We expect this to be true even in the
case of higher-spin equations. The approximations are made only at step-two of
the algorithm, while integrating the beam-optical equation and computing the
transfer maps for averages of the beam parameters. Existence of approximations
in the description of nonlinear behaviour is not uncommon and should come as
no surprise, afterall the beam optics constitutes a nonlinear system. The nature
of these approximations can be best summarized in the optical terminology as;
a systematic procedure of expanding the beam optical Hamiltonian in a power
series of | ˆπ⊥/p0| where p0 is the design (or average) momentum of beam parti-
cles moving predominantly along the direction of the optic axis and ˆπ⊥ is the
small transverse kinetic momentum. The leading order approximation along
with | ˆπ⊥/p0| ≪ 1 constitutes the paraxial or ideal behaviour and higher order
terms in the expansion give rise to the nonlinear or aberrating behaviour. It is
seen that the paraxial and aberrating behaviour get modiﬁed by the quantum
contributions which are in powers of the de Broglie wavelength (λ0 = 2π¯h/p0).
Lastly, and importantly the question of the classical limit of the quantum for-
malism; it reproduces the well known Lie algebraic formalism of charged-particle
beam optics pioneered by Dragt et al [18].

We start with the Dirac equation in the presence of static electromagnetic

ﬁeld with potentials (φ(r), A(r))

ˆHD |ψDi = E |ψDi ,

where |ψDi is the time-independent 4-component Dirac spinor, E is the energy
of the beam particle and the Hamiltonian ˆHD, including the Pauli term in the
usual notation is

ˆHD = βm0c2 + cα · ˆp − µaβΣ · B ,

where ˆπ = ˆp − qA = −i¯h∇ − qA. After a series of transformations (see [14]
for details) we obtain the accelerator optical Hamiltonian to the leading order

(4)

(5)

4

approximation

i¯h

ψ(A)

= ˆH (A)

∂
∂z (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

E
ˆH (A) ≈

,

E

ψ(A)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

−p0 − qAz +

1
2p0

ˆπ 2
⊥(cid:19)

Ωs · S ,

(cid:18)

+

γm0
p0
1
γm0 (cid:8)

with Ωs = −

qB + ǫ

Bk + γB⊥
(cid:0)

(cid:1)(cid:9)

.

(6)

x + ˆπ2

⊥ = ˆπ2

y, ǫ = 2m0µa/¯h, γ = E/m0c2, and S = 1

where ˆπ 2
2 ¯hσ . We can
recognize ˆH (A) as the quantum mechanical, accelerator optical, version of the
well known semiclassical Derbenev-Kondratenko Hamiltonian [19] in the lead-
ing order approximation. We can obtain corrections to this by going an order
beyond the ﬁrst order calculation.

It is straightforwrd to compute the transfer maps for a speciﬁc geometry and
the detailed discussion with the quantum corrections can be found in [14]. In
the classical limit we recover the Lie algebraic formalism [18].

One practical application of the quantum formalism would be to get a deeper
understanding of the polarized beams. A proposal to produce polarized beams
using the proposed spin-splitter devices based on the classical Stern-Gerlach
kicks has been presented recently [20].

Lastly it is speculated that the quantum theory of charged-particle beam op-
tics will be able to resolve the choice of the position operator in the Dirac theory
and the related question of the form of the force experienced by a charged-particle
in external electromagnetic ﬁelds [19], [21]. This will be possible provided one
can do an extremely high precision experiment to detect the small diﬀerences
arising in the transfer maps from the diﬀerent choices of the position opera-
tors. These diﬀerences shall be very small, i.e., proportional to powers of the
de Broglie wavelength.
It is the extremely small magnitude of these minute
diﬀerences which makes the exercise so challenging and speculative!

References

[1] P.W. Hawkes and E. Kasper, Principles of Electron Optics, Vols. I and II

(Academic Press, London, 1989).

[2] M. Conte and W.W. MacKay, An Introduction to the Physics of Particle

Accelerators (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1991).

[3] H. Mais, “Some topics in beam dynamics of storage rings”, DESY 96-119

(1996).

5

[4] H. Wiedemann, Particle Accelerator Physics : Basic Principles and Linear

Beam Dynamics (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1993)
H. Wiedemann, Particle Accelerator Physics II : Nonlinear and Higher-
Order Beam Dynamics (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1995)

[5] P.W. Hawkes and E. Kasper, Principles of Electron Optics Vol.3: Wave

Optics (Academic Press, London and San Diego, 1994).

[6] P. Chen, ICFA Beam Dynamics Newsletter 12, 46 (1996);

[7] Proceedings of the 15th Advanced ICFA Beam Dynamics Workshop on
Quantum Aspects of beam Physics, Ed. P. Chen, (World Scientiﬁc, Sin-
gapore, 1999).

[8] R. Jagannathan, R. Simon, E. C. G. Sudarshan and N. Mukunda, Phys.
Lett. A 134, 457 (1989); R. Jagannathan, in Dirac and Feynman: Pioneers
in Quantum Mechanics, Ed. R. Dutt and A. K. Ray (Wiley Eastern, New
Delhi, 1993).

[9] R. Jagannathan, Phys. Rev. A 42, 6674 (1990).

[10] S.A. Khan and R. Jagannathan, “Theory of relativistic electron beam trans-
port based on the Dirac equation”, Proc. of the 3rd National Seminar on
Physics and Technology of Particle Accelerators and their Applications,
(Nov. 1993, Calcutta, India) Ed. S. N. Chintalapudi (IUC-DAEF, Calcutta)
102; S.A. Khan and R. Jagannathan, “Quantum mechanics of charged-
particle beam optics: An operator approach”, Presented at the JSPS-KEK
International Spring School on High Energy Ion Beams–Novel Beam Tech-
niques and their Applications, March 1994, Japan, Preprint: IMSc/94/11
(The Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Madras, March 1994).

[11] S.A. Khan and R. Jagannathan, Phys. Rev. E 51, 2510 (1995).

[12] R. Jagannathan and S.A. Khan, Advances in Imaging and Electron Physics,

97, Ed. P. W. Hawkes (Academic Press, San Diego) 257 (1996).

[13] S.A. Khan, Quantum Theory of Charged-Particle Beam Optics, Ph.D. The-

sis (University of Madras) (1997).

[14] M. Conte, R. Jagannathan, S.A. Khan and M. Pusterla, Part. Accel. 56,

99 (1996).

(1997).

[15] R. Jagannathan and S.A. Khan ICFA Beam Dynamics Newsletter 13, 21

[16] R. Jagannathan, “The Dirac equation approach to spin- 1

2 particle beam
optics”, in: Proceedings of the 15th Advanced ICFA Beam Dynamics Work-
shop on Quantum Aspects of beam Physics, Ed. P. Chen, (World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore, 1999), physics/9803042.

6

[17] S. A. Khan, Quantum theory of magnetic quadrupole lenses for
spin- 1
2 particles, in: Proceedings of the 15th Advanced ICFA Beam Dy-
namics Workshop on Quantum Aspects of beam Physics, Ed. P. Chen,
(World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1999), physics/9809032.

[18] A.J. Dragt and E. Forest, Adv. Electronics and Electron Phys. 67, 65
(1986); A.J. Dragt, F. Neri, G. Rangarajan, D.R. Douglas, L.M. Healy
and R.D. Ryne, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 38, 455 (1988); G. Rangarajan,
A.J. Dragt and F. Neri, Part. Accel. 28, 119 (1990); R.D. Ryne and A.J.
Dragt, Part. Accel. 35, 129 (1991); ´E. Forest and K. Hirata, A Contempo-
rary Guide to Beam Dynamics KEK Report 92-12; ´E. Forest, M. Berz and
J. Irwin, Part. Accel. 24, 91 (1989); K. Yokoya, “Calculation of the equi-
librium polarization of stored electron beams using Lie algebra”, Preprint
KEK 86-90 (1986); Yu.I. Eidelman and V.Ye. Yakimenko, Part. Accel. 45,
17 (1994); and references therein.

[19] “On Stern-Gerlach forces allowed by special relativity and the special
case of the classical spinning particle of Derbenev-Kondratenko”, e-print:
physics/9611001; D. P. Barber, K. Heinemann and G. Ripken, Z. Phys. C
64 (1994) 117; D. P. Barber, K. Heinemann and G. Ripken, Z. Phys. C 64
(1994) 143.

[20] M. Conte, A. Penzo and M. Pusterla, Il Nuovo Cimento A 108, 127
(1995); Y. Onel, A. Penzo and R. Rossmanith, AIP Conf. Proc. 150
Ed. R. G. Lernerand and D. F. Geesaman, (AIP, New York, 1986) 1229;
M. Conte, and M. Pusterla, Il Nuovo Cimento A, 103, 1087 (1990);
M. Conte, Y. Onel, A. Penzo, A. Pisent, M. Pusterla and R. Rossmanith,
The spin-splitter concept, Internal Report : INFN/TC-93/04; M. Pusterla,
“Polarized beams and Stern-Gerlach forces in classical and quantum me-
chanics”, in: Proceedings of the 15th Advanced ICFA Beam Dynamics
Workshop on Quantum Aspects of beam Physics, Ed. P. Chen, (World Sci-
entiﬁc, Singapore, 1999),

[21] A. O. Barut and R. Raczka, Theory of Group Representations and Ap-
plications (World Scientiﬁc, 1986); J. Anandan, Nature 387, 558 (1997);
M. Chaichian. R. G. Felipe and D. L. Martinez, Phys. Lett. A 236, 188
(1997); J. P. Costella and B. H. J. McKellar, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 9, 461
(1994); and references therein.

7

