Variable Field Bending Magnets for Recirculating Linacs

16 January, 1997

B. J. King

email: Bruce.King@cern.ch

Abstract

A lattice of single aperture superconducting variable ﬁeld bending magnets is

proposed as a cheap and practical way to recirculate the beams in recirculating

linear accelerators. It is shown that the VFBM’s can be conﬁgured to provide strong

focusing in both transverse planes for the full range of beam momenta transported

by the lattice.

9
9
9
1
 
l
u
J
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
0
7
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1 Introduction

Recirculating linacs, such as that at CEBAF and those proposed for future muon

colliders [1], economise on RF cavities by circulating the beam through them several

times, at increasing beam energies. This scheme transfers a large fraction of the cost

of acceleration to the magnet lattices which bend the beam around to return it to

the RF cavities, so it is important to construct the bending lattice as cheaply as

possible.

magnets.

A lattice of conventional superconducting dipole magnets, such as used in storage

rings, cannot be used for recirculating linacs, since they cannot be ramped quickly

enough to keep up with the increase in beam energy in successive passes through the

arcs. Existing schemes for the lattice include [1] multiple aperture superconducting

magnets, such as used at CEBAF, and interspersing single aperture superconducting

magnets with fast ramping warm magnets. However, both of these options are

expected to be relatively expensive compared to single aperture superconducting

This note introduces the idea of a lattice of single aperture superconducting

variable ﬁeld bending magnets (VFBM’s). The point of using a variable ﬁeld is that

successive passes of the beam, at increasing beam energies, can be deﬂected by equal

amounts by steering the beam to progressively higher ﬁeld regions of the apertures.

It will be shown that such magnets can be arranged in a bending lattice which is

strongly focusing in both transverse views.

A local coordinate frame for the magnets will be used such that the beam travels

in the z direction, the bend direction is horizontal and along the x direction, and

the y coordinate gives the vertical displacement.

Throughout the paper, small angle approximations will be used for the deﬂection

of the beam in each magnet. Also, it will be assumed that each magnet has a

constant ﬁeld along the z direction and end eﬀects due to the ﬁnite lengths of the

magnets will be neglected. These approximations should not aﬀect the general

2

validity of the concept. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, magnetic ﬁelds are given in units

of Tesla, lengths in meters, currents in Amperes and beam momenta in units of

GeV/c.

The note is organised as follows. The following section gives a general discription

of the magnetic ﬁelds in VFBM’s and their focusing properties, and introduces the

concept of a strong focusing lattice of VFBM’s with alternating gradients, in close

analogy to the conventional strong focusing lattice using quadrupole magnets. It

is noted that the strong focusing property will apply to all momenta if the magnet

focal length can be made independent of beam momentum. Section 3 gives an ex-

plicit prescription for doing this, by an appropriate choice of beam trajectories and

ﬁeld distributions. Section 4 addresses the question of how to design the coil con-

ﬁguration to produce the desired VFBM ﬁelds and section 5 provides an illustrative

set of values for the magnet and lattice parameters. Further studies that will be

needed to further assess the idea of a VFBM lattice are outlined in section 6, before

summarizing the note in the ﬁnal section.

2 Overview of Magnets and Lattice

The VFBM’s are assumed to have a ﬁeld which is independent of the coordinate

along the beam,

and there is no ﬁeld component along the beam:

~B ≡ ~B(x, y),

Bz ≡ 0.

For all beam energies, the beam center will always be assumed to pass through

the x-axis, i.e. y=0, which is a symmetry axis for the magnetic ﬁeld and which will

be referred to as the “beam plane”. This implies that the ﬁeld is vertical in the

bend plane,

(1)

(2)

(3)

~B(x, y = 0) ≡ By(x)ˆy,

3

and the horizontal component of the ﬁeld is identically zero:

A VFBM of length l will bend a beam of momentum p and position x through

In addition, since the ﬁeld gradient along the x axis is non-zero the beam will be

either focused or defocused in the bend plane with a focal length, f , given by:

Bx(x, y = 0) ≡ 0.

θ(x, p) =

0.3By(x)l
p

.

f = ±

p
0.3Gl

,

G ≡

∂By
∂x

.

an angle

where

The plus and minus signs in equation 6 imply that the beam is focused or de-

focused in the bend plane, respectively. Which of the two cases applies depends

on the beam charge sign and whether it is travelling in the positive or negative z

direction. For example, if the choice is made such that the bend direction is in the

positive x direction then it is clear that a positive ﬁeld gradient is defocusing (the

ﬁeld is stronger on the inside of the bend) and a negative gradient is focusing.

The gradients of the magnetic ﬁeld in the beam plane (y=0) are constrained by

Maxwell’s equations in vacuo. The vanishing of the divergence of B implies that

This is identically zero in the bend plane, from equation 4, which simply means that

the bending ﬁeld remains constant to ﬁrst order above and below the bend plane.

Since the ﬁeld is independent of z, the x- and y-components of Maxwell’s curl

equation are trivially zero. More important is the z-component of the curl equation:

∂By
∂y

= −

∂Bx
∂x

.

∂Bx
∂y

∂By
∂x

.

=

4

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

This is easily seen to imply that the focal length in the vertical (y) direction will

have equal magnitude and opposite sign to that in the horizontal (x) direction. In

other words, if the magnet is focusing with a given strength in the x direction then

it will be defocusing with equal strength in the y direction, and vice versa.

Of course, this focusing property is exactly the same as in a quadrupole magnet,

so a lattice of VFBM’s will have exactly the same focusing properties as a quadrupole

lattice with the same magnet focal lengths. In particular, it is obvious that a lattice

of VFBM’s with equal magnetic ﬁelds and alternating gradients at the aperture

center, (x=0, y=0), can be arranged to produce strong focusing in both planes for

a beam of some chosen momentum passing through the aperture centers, exactly as

is normally done with quadrupole magnets. We will refer to this chosen momentum

as the central momentum, p0.

The main point of this paper is to demonstrate that the strong focusing behaviour

at the central momentum can be applied identically to all the beam momenta passing

through the magnet lattice. This is achieved by arranging the beam trajectories and

variation of the on-axis magnetic ﬁeld such that the focal lengths for all momenta

are equal to those at p0, thus ensuring that the focusing properties are identical. An

explicit prescription for doing this forms the topic of the following section.

3 Calculating Beam Trajectories and On-Axis Mag-

netic Fields

The goal of this section is to ﬁnd the magnetic ﬁeld variation in the VFBM’s and
the beam positions, x±(p), which will give the correct bend angle in the lattice along
with optimal strong focusing of the beam in both views. The superscript “±” in
the x±(p) distinguishes between the two types of VFBM’s used in the lattice: the

“plus” refers to the magnets with the positive on-axis ﬁeld gradient in the positive

x direction and the “minus” to those magnets with negative ﬁeld gradient in the

5

x-view.

terms:

For deﬁniteness, we assume the bend direction to be towards the positive x-axis,

in which case the plus magnets are defocusing in the bend plane and the minus

magnets are focusing, as already mentioned.

The beam position can be solved order-by-order by expanding in a Taylor series

about the central momentum, p0. In this section we will only solve for the ﬁrst order

x±(p) = K ±.(p − p0) + ...,

where K + and K − are constants for the plus and minus magnets, respectively,

and both zeroth order terms vanish due to the deﬁnition of p0 and the choice of

coordinate system:

x±(p0) ≡ 0.

The ﬁeld-times-length of each of the magnets is conveniently deﬁned for MKSA

This deﬁnition is chosen so the bend angle of the magnet, equation 5, takes the

units as:

simple form:

b(x) ≡ 0.3By(x, y = 0)l.

θ(x, p) =

b(x)
p

.

b±(x) = b0 ± g0.x ± g±
1 .

+ ....

x2
2

The ﬁeld-times-length can also be expanded in a Taylor series:

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

In this equation the x values are understood to be those of the beams at the given
momentum, x = x±(p), and we have used the assumptions that the bending ﬁelds

at the central momentum, p0, are equal and the ﬁeld gradients are equal but with

opposite signs. The derivative of equation 14 gives the Taylor expansions for the

ﬁeld gradients:

∂b±(x)
∂x

≡ g±(x) = ±g0 ± g±

1 .x + ...

(15)

6

It is seen that equation 6, for the magnet focal lengths in the bend plane, can be

written as:

Since strong focusing would be expected to be most eﬀective for focal lengths

roughly equal to the spacing between magnet centers, L, it simpliﬁes the equations

(but is not necessary) to assume that this condition holds exactly, i.e.:

f ± = ∓

p
g± .

f ± ≡ L ≡

p0
g0

.

These equivalences use equation 16 and the key assumption that the focal length

can be chosen to be independent of beam momentum.

We are now ready to derive the displacement constants K + and K −. For non-
zero x± the bend angles in the plus and minus magnets, θ±(p) won’t be equal to the

central bend angle,

Instead, they are easily seen to be given by:

θ0 =

b0
p0

.

θ±(p) = θ0 ± 2

x+(p) − x−(p)
L

.

(The average of the two bend angles is equal to θ0, as it must be.)

On expanding these equation 19 to ﬁrst order in x± and p − p0, using equa-

tions 10, 14, 15, 16 and 17, and solving for K + and K − one easily obtains:

and

the displacements:

From the deﬁnitions of K + and K −, equation 10, this can be rewritten in terms of

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

K + = 5

b0
g0p0

K − = 3

b0
g0p0

.

x+(p) = 5

b0
g0

p − p0
p0

7

x−(p) = 3

b0
g0

p − p0
p0

.

This is the desired ﬁrst order approximation to the beam trajectories for beam

momenta diﬀerent from the central momentum, p0.

Now that the beam trajectories are known to ﬁrst order it is possible to apply

the strong focusing assumption of equation 17 to obtain the ﬁrst order change in

the ﬁeld gradient. From equation 16 we obtain:

p0
g0

=

p

g0 + g±

1 .K ±(p − p0) + ...

.

Solving these equations to the lowest nontrivial order gives, after some algebra:

and

and

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

g+
1 =

g2
0
5b0

g−
1 =

g2
0
3b0

.

The ﬁrst order coeﬃcients in the gradient of the ﬁeld that have just been derived

are also, of course, the second order coeﬃcients in the ﬁeld itself. Since the ﬁrst
order derivation of the displacements x±(p) needed only the ﬁrst order coeﬃcients

in the ﬁeld it is clear that the second order ﬁeld coeﬃcients can be used to derive the

second order correction to the displacements. In turn, the second order displacement

coeﬃcients will permit the derivation of the third order ﬁeld coeﬃcients, and so on.

In summary, alternate applications of the constraints on the bending ﬁelds and

on the focal lengths enable the Taylor expansion coeﬃents of the magnetic ﬁeld and

the beam positions to be determined to arbitrarily high orders. Hence, the ideal

beam positions for all momenta and the ideal on-axis magnetic ﬁeld throughout the

magnets can, in principle, be predicted to arbitrary accuracy.

Since the strong focusing principle would be expected to work for a range of

focal lengths about the optimal value, albeit less eﬀectively, our requirement that

that focal length takes the optimal value for all momenta is unnecessarily strict. In

8

practice, the “rigorous” solutions for x±(p) and b±(x) obtained using the method

outlined in this section could be used as a starting point for design iterations which

might compromise the strong focusing power of the lattice for some momenta in

order to improve on other features of the magnet design.

4 Layout of Magnet Coils

The preceding section speciﬁes a magnetic ﬁeld distribution, By(x, y = 0), which

is is smooth and monotonically varying but which cannot be expressed in closed

form. Obviously, the current distribution to produce this ﬁeld must be obtained by

numerical means. This section describes a general minimization procedure to obtain

a suitable layout for the conducting coils, and illustrates the method using a simple

example.

In general, the desired magnetic ﬁeld along the x axis will be produced by a

2-dimensional current distribution around the magnet aperture, J(x, y), which is

symmetric under reﬂection in the x-axis:

J(x, y) ≡ J(x, −y).

(27)

(28)

This current distribution will produce a magnetic ﬁeld on the x-axis with zero hor-

izontal component, Bx(y = 0) ≡ 0, and a vertical component given by:

B(x) ≡ By(x, y = 0) = 10−7

dx′dy′J(x′, y′)

Z

(x − x′)
(x − x′)2 + y′2 ,

using MKSA units.

The goal is to obtain an appropriate current distribution which gives an on-
axis magnetic ﬁeld closely approximating the desired ﬁeld, Btrue(x). This can be

achieved in the following steps:

1. specify the regions which can contain conductor and parameterize a sensible

current distribution in these regions in terms of a small number of adjustable

9

J(x, y) = J(x, y; Ci), i = 1, n.

(29)

2. deﬁne an error function to quantify the deviation of the on-axis ﬁeld pro-

duced by the current distribution from the desired ﬁeld. An appropriate error

parameters, Ci:

function is:

E[Ci] =

dx(

Z

Btrue(x) − B(x)
Btrue(x)

)2/(xmax − xmin),

(30)

where the magnetic ﬁeld B(x) is given by equation 28 with the current distri-

bution speciﬁed by the values of the Ci.

3. vary the Ci to minimize the error function.

To illustrate and test the procedure, an explicit current distribution was derived

for the following simple case:

the range -1 to 1.

• an exponentially varying magnetic ﬁeld along the x-axis: B(x) = ex, for x in

• B ﬁeld from surface current along wedge-shaped magnet aperture.

• no requirement that the current sum to zero. This is equivalent to assuming

that the excess current is returned at a very large distance from the aperture.

In more detail, the surface current, K(x, y(x)) was parameterized to have a

quadratic form:

K(x, y(x)) = C1 + C2.x + C3.(2x2 − 4),

for − 2 < x < 2

= 0,

otherwise.

The two y coordinates of the current for each x, symmetric about the x axis, were

speciﬁed by a linear form with one free parameter and a minimum aperture of 0.1

units at x = −2:

y(x) = ±[0.1 + C4.(x + 2)].

(31)

10

The MINUIT minimalization software package [2] was used to ﬁnd the values of

the Ci which minimized the error function of equation 30. Numerical integrations

were used to evaluate the error function and the on-axis magnetic ﬁeld of equa-

tion 28. The constant factor in front of the magnetic ﬁeld equation was neglected,

corresponding to an overall scale factor in the magnetic ﬁeld strength.

The optimal current distribution was obtained for the parameter values:

C1 = 7.228; C2 = 2.073; C3 = 1.107; C4 = 0.656.

(32)

Figure 1 displays the x distribution of this current and ﬁgure 2 illustrates the level

of agreement between the resulting magnetic ﬁeld and the exponential distribution.

The root mean square deviation of the on-axis magnetic ﬁeld from the desired ex-

ponential form, given by the square root of the error function, was found to be 1.9%

for the region between x = −1 and x = 1.

It is clear that the procedure can be modiﬁed to work for a more realistic magnet

design.

It is also obvious that inﬁnitely many conductor conﬁgurations can be

chosen to produce an acceptably good approximation to the desired ﬁeld along the

symmetry axis of the magnet. The decision between possible conﬁgurations can

therefore be based on other factors, such as good ﬁeld quality oﬀ-axis, simplicity of

production, a desirable aperture shape, cheap cost and good mechanical properties.

5 Example Lattice Parameters

Table 1 gives an illustrative example set of parameters for the VFBM lattice of the

ﬁnal recirculating linac in a muon collider with a centre of mass collision energy of

about 4 TeV. The values of these parameters should not be taken too seriously. They

have not been optimized or particularly carefully chosen and their only purpose is

to give a rough feel for the parameter values that might be expected for a more

realistic lattice.

11

The ﬁrst 4 parameters in the table, p0, B0, G0 and l, essentially deﬁne the lattice

at the central momentum value. The next three parameters, f , L and R, follow from

relations given in the preceding sections.

For a beam with position divergence < x > and angular divergence < φ > it

is assumed that a strong focusing lattice of focal length f will have a maximum

1-sigma beam envelope, S of order:

(And similarly for the y coordinate.) If the phase space in the x view,

is assumed to be ﬁxed independent of the values of the two terms, < x > and < φ >,

S ∼< x > + < φ > f.

Px ≡< x >< φ >,

S ∼< x > +

Px
< x >

f

< x >∼

Px.f ,

q

S ∼ 2

Px.f .

q

then,

and this is minimized for

at a value of

(33)

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)

This gives a numerical value of 0.6 mm at 1 TeV and using the phase space size,
Px ∼ 10−8 m.rad, of the same order as assumed in reference [1].

The maximum and minimum momenta accepted by the lattice have somewhat

arbitrarily been assumed to be factors of two greater than and less than p0, re-

spectively. The average bending ﬁeld needed for pmax is therefore twice as big as

that for p0. Presumably, almost all of the bending power will come from the “plus”

magnets, requiring another factor of two stronger ﬁeld in these magnets. Hence the

maximum ﬁeld, Bmax might be roughly four times larger than B0, and the minimum

ﬁeld close to zero. The maximum and minimum gradients, Gmax and Gmin, follow

12

from the central ﬁeld and gradient by scaling in proportion to the momentum using

equation 17.

The height, Yaperture, of the aperture at the central x value, x=0, was chosen to

be about 30 sigma wide at the maximum beam size, S0. The width of the aperture

in x, Xaperture, can be estimated simply by the dimensional argument of dividing

the maximum magnetic ﬁeld by the central gradient:

Xaperture ∼

Bmax
G0

.

(38)

6 Outlook

The following studies still need to be undertaken to conﬁrm that strong focusing

VFBM lattices are feasible and practical for recirculating linacs:

1. continue to higher order the Taylor series expansion of the on-axis magnetic

ﬁeld of the VFBM’s. This will provide a better estimate of the range of beam

momenta which can be accepted by a VFBM lattice.

2. use the procedure of section 4 to determine a realistic and appropriate magnet

coil conﬁguration that will produce the desired on-axis magnetic ﬁelds.

3. perform computer-based ray-tracing simulations of a beam through a VFBM

lattice, to check that it performs as expected.

If the bending lattice performs as hoped then it will still need to be matched

to the linacs for each pass of the beam, in beam position and direction and in the

phase of the RF cavities. This could possibly be done using a dispersive section of

superconducting magnets or, if this is found to be impractical, by using fast ramping

warm magnets.

13

parameter

value

central momentum, p0

1 TeV/c

central ﬁeld, B0

1.5 T

central ﬁeld gradient, G0

40 T/m

magnet length, l

focal length, f

lattice spacing, L

8 m

10 m

10 m

bending radius of lattice, R

2.8 km

maximum beam size at p0, S

0.6 mm

maximum momentum, pmax

2 TeV/c

minimum momentum, pmin

0.5 TeV/c

maximum ﬁeld, Bmax

minimum ﬁeld, Bmin

6 T

0 T

maximum gradient, Gmax

80 T/m

minimum gradient, Gmin

20 T/m

aperture height, Yaperture

aperture width, Xaperture

2 cm

15 cm

14

Table 1: Example parameters for the VFBM lattice of the ﬁnal recirculating

linac in a muon collider with a centre of mass collision energy of about 4 TeV.

See text for further details.

7 Conclusions

The idea of using strongly focusing lattices of VFBM’s in recirculating linear accel-

erators has been found to be quite promising and worthy of further study.

15

References

[1] The Muon Muon Collider Collaboration,

Muon Muon Collider: a Feasibility Study.

BNL-52503, Fermi Lab-Conf.-96/092, LBNL-38946.

[2] The MINUIT software package.

CERN Computer Centre Program Library.

Figure 1: The surface current distribution used to produce an approximately expo-

nential bending ﬁeld in the VFBM.

17

Figure 2: The bending ﬁeld in the VFBM (solid line) produced by the surface current

distribution of ﬁgure 1. The dashed curve is the “ideal” exponential ﬁeld that the

current distribution was tuned to reproduce.

18

