The Physics Opportunities and Technical
Challenges of a Muon Collider ∗

Bruce J. King

January 24, 1994

Abstract

We describe the physics oppportunities and technical challenges of a muon collider

as a tool for exploring high energy physics phenomena.

∗Paper submitted to Columbia University of New York in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements

for a Doctorate of Philosophy.

9
9
9
1
 
l
u
J
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
0
7
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Physics Opportunities at the High Energy Frontier

3 Luminosity, and Ionization Cooling of Muons

4 Conceptual Design of a Muon Collider

5 Detector Design Issues

6 Spin-oﬀ Physics Opportunities at a Muon Collider Facility

7 Feasibility and Cost

8 Summary

3

6

11

17

23

25

26

27

2

1 Introduction

The continued success of the standard model (SM) of elementary particle physics has

gradually but fundamentally altered the the character of experimental high energy

physics in the past decade or so. Ever more precise, expensive and time-consuming

experiments continue to agree with the predictions of the SM, and the only really

good chance for new discoveries appears to be by searching at energies higher than

previously attained (in the TeV energy range).

The high energy frontier also has its problems, as emphasized by the cancellation

of the SSC accelerator. Colliding beam facilities tend to be very large, technically

challenging and expensive.

The SSC and the proposed Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN were designed

to collide protons. Proton collisions have two main drawbacks:

Protons are complex composite particles. The hard scattering interactions that

could produce new high mass particles actually occur between the quark and

gluon constituents of the proton, and each constituent particle carries only a

fraction of the proton momentum. This lowers the actual collision energy and

means that interactions occur at a range of center of mass (CoM) energies and

rest frames. The mass reach of hadron colliders for discovering new particles is

diluted by this, by a factor of roughly 10 to 20.

The strongly interacting protons produce enormous numbers of uninteresting

•

•

3

background particles from soft collisions. This tends to obscure the rare inter-

esting processes and causes serious radiation and event triggering problems for

the particle detectors.

The problems of hadron colliders are avoided by colliding electrons (and positrons).

However, electrons have severe problems with synchrotron radiation which are specif-

ically related to their light mass (Me = 0.511 MeV):

•

•

The energy loss per revolution from synchrotron radiation for a charged particle

in a circular cyclotron accelerator of radius R is given by

∆E(MeV) = 8.85

10−2 [E(GeV)]4
R(meters)

×

(1)

This loss must be compensated for by using radio-frequency cavities to accel-

erate the beam. This quickly becomes prohibitive as the electron energy is

increased. The most powerful cyclotron accelerator for electrons will probably

be the LEP-II accelerator at the CERN laboratory in Switzerland, which will

come on-line in the next few years. The 27 kilometer ring will provide e+e−

collisions at CoM energies of 170 GeV. The only practical way of colliding elec-

trons at energies higher than this is using single-pass collisions from pairs of

opposed linear accelerators.

Even linear electron colliders have the serious problem of “beamstrahlung” at

the collision point. In future planned e+e− colliders the magnetic ﬁelds gen-

erated from the intersection of high density electron and positron beams will

4

reach thousands of Teslas, inducing the particles to emit intense synchrotron

radiation. This lowers and spreads out the CoM energies of the collisions, and

also creates a serious background of photons in the detector. In addition, the

photons can interact with either individual electrons or the macroscopic electro-

magnetic ﬁeld of the oncoming beam to produce low energy electron pairs, which

also form an experimental background. Pair production becomes a prohibitive

background when the critical synchrotron radiation energy of the magnetic ﬁelds

(equation 14.85 of Jackson[1]) approaches the electron beam energy.

The above problems and the multi-billion dollar expense of proposed e+e− and proton

colliders have provoked a pessimism in the high energy physics community about the

experimental future of the ﬁeld. Nevertheless, the importance of further experimental

progress to the advancement of the ﬁeld cannot be overstated. To quote Harvard

theorist Sidney R. Coleman[2] “Experiment is the source of imagination. All the

philosophers in the world thinking for thousands of years couldn’t come up with

quantum mechanics”. This impasse underlines the importance of novel accelerator

technologies. In the opinion of well known experimental physicist Samuel C. Ting[2]

“We need revolutionary ideas in accelerator design more than we need theory. Most

universities do not have an accelerator course. Without such a course, and an infusion

of new ideas, the ﬁeld will die.”

One idea that shows promise is to avoid the synchrotron radiation problems of

electrons by using muons instead. These “fat electrons” have 200 times the mass of

5

electrons (Mµ = 105.66 MeV, c.f. with 0.511 MeV for electrons) and, in keeping with

the idea of lepton universality, have otherwise nearly identical physics properties.

They can be produced copiously by impinging proton beams on a target to produce

pions and then letting the pions decay to muons. The one very serious drawback of

muons is that they are unstable, decaying with a rest-frame lifetime of 2.2 µs into

electrons and neutrinos:

µ−

e− + νe + νµ.

→

(2)

This fact means that muon colliders must do everything very fast. The muons must

be collected, “cooled” into small dense bunches, accelerated and collided before a

signiﬁcant fraction of them decay.

2 Physics Opportunities at the High Energy Fron-

tier

The top quark and the Higgs boson are the two undiscovered elementary particles

required to complete the original (and simplest) version of the SM – sometimes called

the Minimal Standard Model (MSM). Experiments have set lower limits on the masses

of the top quark and the Higgs particle of Mtop

130 GeV[3] and MHiggs = 48 GeV[4],

≃

respectively, while the consistency of the MSM requires Mtop to be below about 250

GeV and MHiggs to be below

1 TeV. This means that a muon collider could be used

∼

to discover and/or study the properties of either of these.

The Fermilab Tevatron pp collider, operating at either 900 GeV or 1 TeV, appears

to have a reasonable chance of discovering the top quark in the next few years, and

6

it will almost certainly be discovered if and when the LHC starts taking data around

the turn of the century. However, hadron colliders will probably only to be able to

determine Mtop to within about 5 GeV. The cleaner experimental conditions in lepton

colliders could improve this to better than 1 GeV, and provide better tests of QCD

predictions for top quark decays.

The Higgs boson is a much more diﬃcult experimental target because of its low

production cross section. The dominant production modes for lepton colliders are

shown in ﬁgures 1a–d and the production modes for hadron colliders are shown in

ﬁgures 2a and 2b.

The cross section contributions at lepton colliders from ﬁgures 1a and 1b are shown

in ﬁgure 3. Note that the higher order process of 1b actually rises with increasing

CoM energy, and this is the main Higgs production mechanism for TeV scale lepton

colliders. The cross section for ﬁgure 1c is smaller than 1b because of the smaller

NC coupling and MZ > MW , and so it hasn’t been considered seriously in the lepton

collider studies I have seen. (I am not sure how much smaller – it is reduced by a

factor of about seven at the HERA ep collider and I would guess a similar or smaller

reduction at a higher energy lepton collider.) However, it appears to give a much

cleaner signature for the Higgs particle than the corresponding W -fusion process

because MHiggs can be reconstructed from the outgoing leptons and the known beam

energies. Figure 1d is enhanced for µ+µ− colliders relative to e+e− colliders by a

factor of (Mµ/Me)2

40, 000.

It makes an insigniﬁcant contribution for electron

≃

7

Figure 1: The dominant Higgs production mechanisms for lepton colliders.

8

Figure 2: The dominant Higgs production mechanisms for hadron colliders.

9

Figure 3: Higgs production cross sections for lepton colliders.

colliders but for µ+µ− colliders and MHiggs

200 GeV there is a signiﬁcant Higgs

<
∼

production resonance at ECM = MHiggs. Once the Higgs has been discovered a “Higgs

factory” muon collider could be built to sit on this resonance.

The Higgs decays preferentially to the heaviest particle–antiparticle pair lighter

than MHiggs. At the lighter end of the expected mass range for MHiggs the decay to

bb pairs is favored, while heavier Higgs can decay to tt or W and Z bosons. Hadron

colliders have such enormous background problems for most of these decays that the

Higgs must be searched for in less common decay modes.

Another topic in the MSM that lepton colliders will be particularly useful for

studying is the triple and quartic gauge boson couplings: W W γ, W W Z, W W W W ,

10

W W ZZ, W W γγ and W W Zγ. The anticipated observation of these couplings at

LEP-II will provide the ﬁrst experimental veriﬁcation of the non-abelian nature of

the standard model, and they can be studied with greater precision at higher energy

lepton colliders.

The MSM is known to be only a good phenomenological theory that becomes

inconsistent at experimentally inaccessible energy scales. The veriﬁcation of the MSM

at the next generation of colliders is only the most conservative scenario, and many

physicists think that there is a good chance that exotic new processes will be revealed.

This might take the form of extra Higgs particles, missing energy from the new

particles predicted in various “supersymmetric” theories, or something even more

unexpected. These exciting possibilities provide some of the main motivation for

building new accelerators.

3 Luminosity, and Ionization Cooling of Muons

The production of high mass particles is expected to be a very rare process, requiring

enormous collision rates – this is motivated by the observation that point-like cross

sections fall as the inverse square of the center of momentum (CoM) energy. For

example, the production of e+e− pairs in muon collisions is given by

σ(µ+µ−

e+e−)

1R =

→

≡

4πα3
3s

=

87 f barn
CM (T eV 2)

E2

.

(3)

The number of events produced at an accelerator is given by the product of the

cross section for that process, σ, and the luminosity of the accelerator,

, integrated

L

11

over its running time

number of events = σ

dt.

Z L

(4)

Design luminosities for the next generation of planned accelerations are typically

= 1033

1034cm−2sec−1. For a canonical year of 107 seconds this corresponds to an

L

−

integrated luminosity of σ

dt = 10

100 inverse f barn. (So equation 3 predicts

R L

−

that a muon collider with 1 TeV CoM energy and

= 1034cm−2sec−1 would produce

L

around 10,000 electron pairs in a year’s running.)

The luminosity of an accelerator is given by

N 2f
A

,

=

L

(5)

where N is the number of µ+ or µ− in a bunch (assumed equal), f is the frequency

of collisions and A is the (eﬀective) cross-sectional area of the beams at the collision

point. The primary goal of accelerator design is deliver as large an

as possible at

L

the speciﬁed energy.

The cross-sectional area, A, is minimized by designing a magnet lattice to focus

strongly at the collision point and by minimizing the phase space volume of the

particle bunches so that they will come to a good focus at the collision point. The

phase space volume, P S, of the beam can be written as a 6-dimensional product of

the beam spread in coordinate and momentum space

P S = ∆x ∆px ∆y ∆py ∆z ∆pz.

(6)

The P S of the particle bunch is conserved in any interactions with macroscopic

12

external electromagnetic ﬁelds, including the time-dependent ﬁelds applied during

the acceleration and storage of the bunch in the accelerator. The product of the

momentum spread and the spatial spread in each dimension is usually also separately

conserved (with a few caveats), but momentum spread is easily traded for spatial

spread by focusing or defocusing the bunch. However, P S does tend to increase due

to the following eﬀects

in the accelerator.

1. The bunch tends to be pushed apart by its own charge – the “space-charge”

eﬀect. This tendency must be opposed by longitudinal and transverse focusing

2. Disruptions of the bunches can induced by (e.g.) interaction of the beam charge

with accelerator elements (particularly r.f. cavities). While in principle this

may not increase the true phase space volume the practical eﬀect is to cause

“ﬁlamentation” of the bunch so that it acts as though it is occupying a larger

phase space volume.

Since producing muons from pion decays gives very large values of P S it is nec-

essary to cool the muons considerably before acceleration.

Muons can be cooled by a very simple method known as ionization cooling. The

concept is illustrated in ﬁgure 4a. A bunch of muons is passed through a slab of

material to reduce the muon energies. This reduces the transverse momentum spread

by a factor equal to the fractional energy loss. The momentum in the direction of the

beam is also reduced, but this can then be restored by accelerating the bunch in r.f.

13

cavities. The net eﬀect is that the bunch ends up with the same energy but a lower

transverse momentum spread. A variation is shown in ﬁgure 4b. A wedge of matter

is placed in a dispersive region of the magnet lattice where the high energy muons

are displaced from lower energy muons. The higher energy muons pass through more

material than the lower energy ones and lose more energy. The original mean energy

is then restored with an r.f. cavity, and this time the longitudinal momentum spread

of the beam has been reduced.

This cooling mechanism is unique to muons. Electrons and hadrons such as pro-

tons would interact in the cooling material, and the only other heavy lepton – the

tau – decays far too quickly for cooling or acceleration.

There are two heating mechanisms that compete with the cooling process

The transverse momentum spread of the beam is increased by multiple coulomb

•

•

scattering (MCS)

d(∆px,y)2
dz

=

1
LR

(13.6 MeV /c)2,

where LR is the radiation length of the material.

The longitudinal momentum spread is increased by energy straggling

(7)

(8)

where I is the mean energy exchange (

12Z eV), the additional energy losses

from hard single scatters have been neglected and the approximation pz ≃
used.

E is

d(∆pz)2
dz

=

dE
dz

I,

∼

14

Figure 4: Ionization cooling of muons.

15

Cooling is optimized by

1. Using a low Z material such as beryllium to maximize the energy loss per

radiation length and reduce the energy straggling. (Beryllium has an energy

loss of 105 MeV per radiation length, compared with only 7.2 MeV for lead.)

2. Focusing the muons into a tight bunch at the material to blow up the longitudi-

nal and transverse momentum spreads to large values which can be eﬀectively

reduced by cooling.

3. Using low energy beams so that the fractional energy loss per radiation length

is maximized. The energy cannot be below about 0.3 GeV because below this

the muons are no longer relativistic minimum-ionizing particles and the energy

spread of the bunch increases quickly when passed through material.

An interesting idea that unfortunately probably won’t work is to use crystals

to cool the beam even further. Certain axes of crystals tend to channel charged

particles and hold them while they lose energy – giving cooling without MCS. Large,

high quality crytals of silicon, germanium and tungsten have been grown and used

for extensive studies of particle channeling, and bent crystals have been used to

steer particle beams. Unfortunately, the solid angle for capturing particles is very

small (

milliradians at 50 MeV, falling as 1/√E citeChen crystal)and the particles

∼

dechannel over characteristic lengths of centimeters at 10 GeV, rising in proportion to

the beam energy[6]. This appears to be too small by about two orders of magnitude

16

for net cooling.

space.

Beam cooling at a muon accelerator would be expected to consist of some tens

of slabs of beryllium or some other low Z material inside a lattice of magnets and

accelerating structures to transport the beam and manipulate its distribution in phase

4 Conceptual Design of a Muon Collider

The idea of muon storage rings has probably been around since the 1960’s or earlier,

and muon colliders have been seriously discussed at least as early as 1980[7]. A

conceptual design of a muon collider is shown in ﬁgure 5 [8]. This section discusses

each of the components of the accelerator.

The requirement of colliding bunches containing 1011

1012 muons means that the

−

hadron accelerator must deliver 1013

1014 protons into the target at a rate of 10 Hz

−

or higher. This is more than any existing accelerator, but this technology has been

studied in detail for the planned meson factories KAON and PILAC. The KAON

design calls for bunches of 6

1013 30 GeV protons at a rate of 10 Hz.

·

Possible modiﬁcations to the KAON design that might be improvements for a

muon collider are

•

protons.

The muon collider needs both charges of muons, while protons produce predom-

inantly µ+ (from π+). This could be solved by using deuterium ions instead of

17

Figure 5: Conceptual design of a muon collider.

18

There is no need to be above the energy threshold for kaon production, and

•

nucleon (proton or neutron) kinetic energies as low as 700 MeV produce pions

copiously[9]. This would be cheaper, would decrease the decay length of the

pions and would decrease the energy ﬂux onto the production target. It would

also open up the speculative possibility of using an induction linac instead of a

storage ring for accelerating the protons/deuterium ions. (Induction linacs can

produce accelerating gradients in excess of 1 MeV/m and reach good eﬃciencies

of better than 50% for short, intense particle bunches[10] – which sounds ideal

for a muon collider.)

The thermal shock on the target is a diﬃcult design problem. A bunch of 1014

1 GeV protons delivers 6000 joules onto the target spot in a nanosecond timescale,

some fraction of which will go into shock heating of the target. This load is repeated

10 times or more every second. This must be handled by maintaining a large spot

size and intensive cooling of the target. A more exotic option which has already been

tested at accelerators is using a liquid jet target of either water or a molten metal.

A schematic diagram of the pion collection and decay channel is shown in ﬁgure 6.

One speculative alternative is to use a long (

50

100 m) solenoidal magnet with a

∼

−

large aperture. The transverse momenta of the pions coming oﬀ the production target

range up to around 300 MeV/c. Almost all of these pions would be conﬁned in spiral

orbits by an iron solenoidal magnet with a 2 Tesla ﬁeld and 50 cm aperture radius,

or by a superconducting magnet with a 6 Tesla ﬁeld and a 20 cm aperture radius.

19

Figure 6: A schematic diagram of the beam-line elements used for pion collection and
decay to muons.

20

The pions would decay to muons inside the magnet, and the positive and negative

muons could be separated by including an additional transverse magnetic ﬁeld. This

idea would be much more practical if r.f. acceleration could be provided inside the

magnet (I have no idea whether this is possible). In this case the acceptance could

be a large fraction of unity for both µ+ and µ−.

The acceleration of the muons must proceed relatively quickly to avoid losing too

big a fraction to decays. The average accelerating gradient required is several MeV/m,

which is easily within today’s technology since the SLC electron linac currently op-

erates with an average gradient of 20 MeV/m. A simple numerical integration ﬁnds

that when muons are accelerated from 300 MeV to 2 TeV at a constant gradient of 5

(or 10, or 20) MeV/m the fraction surviving is 74% (or 85%, or 93%).

Figure 5 uses a linac to accelerate the muon beams. This is likely to be a very

expensive option – almost half the cost of a e+e− linear collider just for acceleration.

Bob Palmer[11] suggests using instead a recirculation linac, as shown in ﬁgure 7. The

particles pass through each of the superconducting linacs several times over, and are

transported between the linacs by the bending magnets in the recirculation loops.

The motivation for this design is that r.f. accelerating cavities are very expensive,

so it is cheaper to use the same cavities several times per bunch. This design is

basically a higher energy copy of the existing CEBAF e+e− accelerator, which also

uses superconducting r.f. cavities.

After acceleration the µ+ and µ− bunches are injected into the collider rings in

21

Figure 7: Conceptual diagram of a recirculating linac accelerator structure.

22

opposing directions. Since muons are heavy enough that synchrotron radiation is not

a problem their beam transport properties are similar to protons. For example, 1

TeV muons would require a ring of radius about 1 km, being the same energy as the

protons in the Fermilab Tevatron accelerator. The decay length of the muons in the

ring is given by

decaylength = 6233 km

Eµ (TeV).

(9)

·

This means that the number of muons in a bunch decays by a factor of 1/e in about

1000 turns – independent of energy.

One advantage for muon colliders over hadron colliders is that the storage time

required is only milliseconds rather than hours, so the requirements on beam stability

are much less demanding. Palmer suggests using an “isochronous” ring, with few r.f.

cavities to compress the bunch length.

5 Detector Design Issues

The particle detectors at the interaction point would be expected to be similar to those

at other high energy colliders, with particle tracking in a magnetized space surround-

ing the interaction point and with calorimeters enclosing this region. (One diﬀerence

might be a greater emphasis on the precise determination of muon momenta.)

The backgrounds emanating from the vertex itself would be expected to much

smaller than for hadron colliders, and probably smaller than at TeV energy electon

colliders. However, the decay of the muons to electrons will still lead to serious

23

backgrounds at the detectors. For 2 TeV muons approximately one in 107 will decay

per meter, so a bunch of 1012 muons will produce about 105 electrons per meter with

an average energy of about 2/3 TeV. All of these electrons will eventually hit the

beam pipe somewhere in the ring, initiating electromagnetic showers. This leads to

two types of backgrounds

1. The electromagnetic showers from electrons striking the ﬁnal focus magnets

close to the interaction point can leak into the detector.

2. Electromagnetic showers anywhere along the straight sections before the inter-

action point will occasionally produce a muon pair. This is suppressed relative

to e+e− pair production by a factor of (Mµ/Me)2 = 40, 000, but the muons can

pass through any shielding placed in front of the detector.

These backgrounds must be suppressed by a combination of shielding and design

of the ﬁnal focus magnets, and the detector must have enough electronic channels of

tracking and calorimetry to be able to correct for the remaining background.

A reasonable design for the beam-line[12] might include a ﬁnal focus region consist-

ing of iron quadrupole magnets many meters long with a conical aperture decreasing

from several cm at the entrance to about 1 mm at the end closest to the interaction

point. Much of the remaining 1–2 meters distance to the interaction point might

have a small aperture surrounded by a tungsten shield. The thickness of the tungsten

would be determined by a compromise between the background suppression and the

loss of angular acceptance into the detector. Such tungsten shields have also been dis-

24

cussed for TeV scale e+e− colliders, blocking up to 10 degrees of angular acceptance

about the beam-pipe.

lider Facility

6 Spin-oﬀ Physics Opportunities at a Muon Col-

A muon collider facility would provide for much useful physics research apart from

muon collisions. Further physics topics include

spallation neutron experiments

neutrino physics

muon ﬁxed target physics.

•

•

•

The short intense bunches of deuterium ions used for creating the pions are also

ideal for producing neutrons, and designs for spallation neutron sources include just

such a beam[13]. The neutrons could either be collected from the primary proton

target or from the beam dump downstream of the target. Neutrons are somewhat

complementary to x-rays as important probes for condensed matter experiments, and

the interest in neutron sources is illustrated by the plans to build the Advanced

Neutron Source in the U.S.A. at a cost of over 1 billion dollars.

Muon decays in the accelerator straight sections around the interaction points

would provide a neutrino source unique in its intensity and composition. Each cycle

of the muon bunch would produce sub-nanosecond bursts of roughly 107 νµ’s and

νe’s (or ν µ’s and νe’s for the µ+ bunch traveling in the opposite direction). These

25

would have an average energy of around 1/3 the muon beam energy, and would have

an angular divergence of only about 1/γµ ∼
muon directions along the straight section (whichever is larger). This would allow

0.1 mr or the angular spread in the

substantial improvements in both precise measurements and seaches for exotic physics

processes in neutrino-nucleon scattering. For example, the large neutrino-induced

event samples could substantially improve current measurements of nucleon structure

functions and weak mixing angle measurements from neutrino-nucleon scattering,

and the purity of the beam and the 50% component of electron neutrinos would allow

unprecedented sensitivities in detector-based searches for neutrino oscillations (a topic

which is currently popular). In fact, the neutrino beam would be strong enough to be

a radiation hazard, and it is likely that human habitation would have to be forbidden

along a line extending out from the accelerator straight sections.

7 Feasibility and Cost

parameter
luminosity (cm−2s−1)
beam energy (TeV)
proton frequency (Hz)
protons/bunch
muons/bunch
phase space (MeV3 mm3)

muon I
1033

1.3

×
2
10
1013
1011
105

×

6
×
4
×
1.0

muon II
1034
4
×
2
30
1014
1012
105

2
×
1
×
0.8

×

Table 1: Parameter choices for a muon collider [11].

The parameters of two conceptual designs for a muon collider by Palmer[11] are

given in table 1. Achieving the design luminosities given by Palmer would make such

26

muon colliders extremely attractive for exploring the TeV energy scale. It should be

stressed that a lot of work will be required before one can estimate with any conﬁdence

what are reasonable design parameters for a muon collider.

Palmer also provided an “order of magnitude” cost estimate for a 4 TeV CoM

muon collider, with the caveat that it was an extremely crude estimate which should

not be taken seriously. He obtained the proton source cost (0.5 billion) using the

KAON cost estimates, the linac cost (1.0 billion) using estimates for the Next Linear

Collider e+e− machine and the tunnel and magnet cost (0.2 billion + 0.9 billion) by

scaling to the SSC. Adding 0.5 billion dollars for the facility and 0.3 billion for the

muon cooling gives a very tentative estimate for a total cost of 3.4 billion dollars. This

is certainly a very hefty price tag, but it is competitive with and probably cheaper

than the competing technologies, and the price would be less for a lower CoM energy.

8 Summary

Muon colliders show great promise for exploring the the high energy frontier in ele-

mentary particle physics. However, it will take a lot of detailed study to determine

whether they are actually feasible or are just another good idea that won’t quite work.

27

References

(1975).

[1] J.D. Jackson, “Classical Electrodynamics”, Second edition, John Wiley and Sons

[2] Scientiﬁc American, February, 1994.

[3] The D0 and CDF collaborations report 95% conﬁdence lower limits on Mtop

of 124 GeV/c2 and 118 GeV/c2, respectively. 9th Topical Workshop on Proton-

Antiproton Collider Physics, Tsukuba, Japan (1993).

[4] “Review of Particle Properties”, Phys. Rev. D45, Number 11 (1992).

[5] Pisin Chen, SLAC-PUB-6020 (1992).

[6] R.A. Carrigan et al., NIM 194, 205 (1982).

[7] S. Krinsky, AIP Conference Proceedings, Madison (1980).

[8] D. Neuﬀer, in Mini-Workshop on Muon Colliders, sponsored by the UCLA Center

for Advanced Accelerators, Napa Valley (1992); D. Neuﬀer, in Muon Collider

Workshop, LA-UR-93-866 (1993).

[9] D.R.F. Cochran et al., Phys. Rev. D6, 3085 (1972). J. Langenbrunner et al.,

[10] D. Birx, in AIP Conference Proceedings 249, “The Physics of Particle Accelera-

NIM A325, 187 (1993).

tors” (1992).

28

[11] R.B. Palmer, in “Symposium Report on Frontier Applications of Accelerators”,

editted by Z. Parsa, BNL-49583 (1993).

[12] Private communication with R.B. Palmer.

[13] R.B. Palmer, in “Symposium Report on Frontier Applications of Accelerators”,

editted by Z. Parsa, BNL-49583 (1993).

29

