0
0
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
4
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cavity equipartition revisited

T J Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598

V Guruprasad∗

Using hindsight from Landauer’s principle and the FPU problem, I show that Planck’s law implies
a classical equipartition of antinodal lobes instead of whole modes, which makes sense because the
information of excitation is inherently replicated in each antinode of a given mode. I show that the
law could have been derived by considering merely the classical thermalisation due to wall jitter,
which is not considered in the quantum derivations. As a result, h emerges as the spectral equivalent
of kB in this context.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Ever since Planck’s discovery a hundred years ago, it has been thought that “classical theory is absolutely incapable
of describing the distribution of light from a blackbody” [1, I-41-2]. Applying classical rules of equipartition to the
wall oscillators had led to the ultra-violet divergence in Rayleigh’s law, and the correct law was achieved only after
the wall interactions were assumed to be quantised [2]. Quantisation of the radiation itself [1, III-4-5] is of course the
more precise picture we have today, but why the procedure should at all work remains a mystery. Furthermore, the
Fermi-Pasta-Ulam problem [3] [4, §5.5.1] [5] makes it possible that thermal equilibrium might not be established by
time-symmetric micro-dynamics alone, so the existing derivations cannot be relied on as the complete picture. I show
below that at least in the case of radiation, the necessity of quantum mechanics happens to be purely the result of
faulty thermodynamics, of not considering the involvement of wall thermal motion.

More particularly, I obtain Planck’s law by attributing the thermalisation to wall jitter, which overcomes the FPU
problem by indirectly involving the rest of the universe, and more importantly, aﬀects the radiation by constantly
changing the cavity dimensions, i.e. without depending on nonlinearity of wall reﬂections or photonic absorption and
emission. Thermal equilibrium is thus guaranteed within the cavity and with its environment even at frequencies well
below the atomic spectra, and the wall jitter continually changes the stationary modes of the cavity, but always in
whole numbers of antinodal lobes, assuming that the jitter motion is generally slow compared to the electromagnetic
transit times within the cavity. This is suﬃcient basis for applying equiparition over the antinodal lobes, rather than
whole modes, and directly leads to Planck’s law.

The present derivation fundamentally breaks from the past in not assuming quantisation. The fact that Planck’s
law emerges nonetheless implies that photonic transitions, which have been basis of all past work, are not essential in
the problem. Instead, the very notion of stationarity guarantees that any such transitions must likewise involve whole
numbers of antinodes, maintaining consistency with the classical quantisation. It will be shown that the condition
of equilibrium suﬃces to ensure the consistency of the transition probabilities with those of the classical exchange of
energies between the modes by Doppler spreading and uneven reﬂective scattering due to the wall jitter.

Although the derivation does not suﬃce to explain other aspects of quantum physics, such as entanglement and
wave-particle duality, for example, there is some new insight to be gained relating thermodynamics and quantum
theory, speciﬁcally that Planck’s constant h now emerges as the equivalent of kB, the Boltzmann constant, for the
spectral domain.

Furthermore, we arrive at an unsuspected degree of laxity, as the antinodal quantisation is only relevant under the
stipulations of stationarity and equilibrium, so that photonic transitions must intimately involve thermal equilibrium
as well. This is entirely consistent with the observation that the very detection of photons necessarily depends on an
irreversible change in the observing system, since every act of measurement or learning must change the macroscopic
physical state of the observer representing its state of knowledge. Correspondingly, the laxity is consistent with the
causality of undisturbed quantum systems, which is the premise of Schr¨odinger’s equation [6, §27]. By our reasoning,
at absolute zero temperature, there would be no wall jitter and therefore no mechanism to mix energies across the
modes, so that the radiation Hamiltonian becomes not only causal but also deterministic, being governed entirely by
Maxwell’s equations. Photonic interactions at the walls could violate this classical determinism, but the concern is
purely pendantic in absence of observations. Each observation would still incur photonic events, but the probabilities
involved are now clearly those arising from the thermal irreversibility of the observer’s changing state of knowledge.

∗Electronic address: prasad@watson.ibm.com

2

At ordinary temperatures, of course, the wall jitter suﬃces for randomising the energy distribution. We are thus able
to fundamentally attribute the statistical nature of quantum mechanics entirely to thermal randomisation. This is
not a contradiction of prior theory as the inherent irreversibility of learning was only discovered in 1961 [7].

II. PHYSICAL INFORMATION

Presumably, as will become clear from the following sections, the present derivation is largely a reverse-engineering of
the Planck and the Bose-Einstein derivations. The diﬀerence, as stated, is that we no longer depend on the assumption
of quantisation as in the past, but are able to deduce it on the basis of classical mechanics, viz by recognising that wall
jitter continually changes the cavity dimensions, forcing stationary modes to change by whole numbers of antinodal
lobes, and thus thermalises the radiation. The quantisation thus follows from the very notion of stationary modes,
but we need to be able to relate it to sound principles of measurement and thermodynamic information, as follows.

At least at microwave frequencies, a precise determination of the amplitude and instantaneous phase in a given
cavity mode involves measuring the induced current in a suﬃciently thin probe at the mode frequency. Depending
on the location of such a probe, the induced current j will vary as

j(x, t) = [aE0 sin φ + bωB0 cos φ] eiωt, φ ≡ 2πx/λ,

(1)

where E and B are the maximum electric and magnetic ﬁeld intensities, i.e. at the antinodal points φ = nπ + π/2,
along each coordinate x, provided that we are not too close to the walls. Eq. (1) also describes the ﬁelds acting on the
wall atoms as the latter are, like the microwave probes, much smaller than the wavelengths of interest. Importantly,
we need to measure E and B at only one location, in order to determine E0 and B0 everywhere else in the cavity, so
the information of excitation is independently available at almost every point within the cavity. This also means that
the energy of the mode must be thermodynamically active at these points, i.e. that these non-nodal points, rather
than whole modes as in the Rayleigh-Jeans theory, must be considered as the potential candidates for the correct
classical equipartition. This at ﬁrst poses a measure-theoretic diﬃculty, as the points constitute a continuum except
for the countable set of nodes, but as the notion of spectral distribution speciﬁcally concerns stationary modes, we
only need to consider whole antinodal lobes. The notion that the antinodal lobes are thermodynamically signiﬁcant
independently, is evident in the fact that the energy of a lobe,

u =

1

2Z π

(cid:2)ǫ0(E0 sin φ)2 + µ−1

0 (B0 cos φ)2(cid:3) dφ

(2)

0

=

1
4

[ǫ0|E0|2 + µ0|B0|2], where φ ≡ 2πx/λ,

is independent of the frequency. Per our ideas, we must now apply classical, i.e. Boltzmann, equipartition rules to the
antinodal lobes, obtaining

p ≡ p(U ) = e−U/kB T

(3)

for the probability of excitation of a given lobe to energy U . As the number of antinodal lobes in a mode is proportional
to its frequency, their frequency-independence leads directly to Planck’s quantisation rule

Um(f ) = U f,

(4)

U denoting the energy of any one antinodal lobe, corresponding, as will be shown, to h. The corresponding probability
of modal excitation is, accordingly,

pm(f ) = pf = e−Uf /kB T .

(5)

Eqs. (3-5) are identically applicable to ﬁxed fractions or multiples of the antinodal lobes, for which the frequency-
independence property clearly holds as well, prompting our interpretation of h as the spectral analogue of kB.

III. DYNAMIC STATIONARITY

A set of modes diﬀering by an exact number of antinodal lobes constitutes a harmonic family of the form {f , 2f ,

3f , ... }. The energy sum of the harmonic family of f is then expected to be

Uh(f ) = U (f · pf + 2f · p2f + 3f · p3f + ...)

=

U f · pf
(1 − pf )2 ,

(6)

which is spread over a total of

nh(f ) = 1 + pf + p2f + p3f + ...

=

1

1 − pf

lobes, yielding for the energy expectation of the mode

U f

p−f − 1

=

U f

eUf /kB T − 1

.

bUm(f ) =

This is identical to Planck’s law, but with the lobe energy U replacing h, showing that the form of the law does not
depend on quantum assumptions and is simply indicative of equipartition over antinodes.

The question to be examined, naturally, is why we had needed harmonic oscillators in the ﬁrst place. The oscillator
energy levels are exactly the same as the member frequencies of the harmonic families, which seems to imply that,
correspondingly, a given family may have only one member frequency active at a time. Since eqs. (6-8) do not depend
on this restriction, we need to understand why this was needed in the quantum picture.

Recall that in the quantum derivations, the cavity was assumed to have a ﬁxed set of stationary modes, which
is impossible given the thermal motion at the walls, and conversely, the premise tends to make the very occurrence
of thermalisation classically unlikely if not impossible. More importantly, however, notice that in our classical wall
jitter picture, the modes themselves are constantly changing. In fact, in absence of photonic transitions, the only way
energy can be removed from one mode and given to another is when the ﬁrst mode itself disappears and the second
gets created. Since both the initial and the ﬁnal modes contain a whole number of antinodal lobes by deﬁnition,
the change involved is always integral in the number of such lobes. Since the stationary modes are ﬁxed in Planck’s
theory, their lobes are ﬁxed as well, making it necessary to restrict the energy exchanges separately. The harmonic
oscillator indeed reproduces our notion of mode changes indirectly, because when an oscillator loses or gains energy,
it can no longer operate at its original frequency, and, as noted above, its eigenfrequencies do constitute a harmonic
family. The oscillator concept clearly is a kludge, however, and our use of the families is purely as a mathematical
tool in evaluating the modal expectation Um(f ).

IV. DETAILED BALANCE

Since we did not consider the precise eﬀects of the Doppler spreading and non-uniform scattering due to the wall
jitter, let alone the nonlinearity of the wall atoms and their quantum transitions, we need to ensure that the modal
energy expection Um(f ) would indeed be consistent with all such mechanisms. This guarantee is provided, rather
ingeniously in hindsight, by the Bose-Einstein derivation [1, III-4-5]. Consider a pair of modes containing mf and nf
antinodal lobes, whose probabilities of excitation would be related by eq. (5) as

Pr[n]
Pr[m]

= e−(n−m)U/kB T .

(9)

By eq. (4), their energies would be m · U f and n · U f , respectively. Regardless of the mechanisms responsible for the
thermalisation, the condition of equilibrium demands that the power ﬂow between the modes would be balanced, so
that

3

(7)

(8)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

which, on combining with eq. (9), yields

Pr[m] · m · U f = Pr[n] · n · U f,

m
n

= e−(n−m)Uf /kB T .

Setting n − m = 1 and solving for n produces

eUf /kB T − 1
so that the energy expectation of the n-lobe mode turns out to be

n =

1

,

bUm(f ) = n · U f =

U f

eUf /kB T − 1

,

the same as eq. (8). We have thus proved that the conditions of stationarity and equilibrium indeed suﬃce to insulate
the spectral distribution from the precise mechanisms responsible for the exchange of energy between the modes. ✷

V. CONSTANCY BY TRANSITIVITY

4

It remains to be shown that U is not speciﬁc to a given cavity and its total energy, but a universal constant
identiﬁable as h. The reasoning for this is partly contained in Landauer’s principle, as the physical states of the
observing system representative of data are necessarily stationary as well. Since Fourier theory deﬁnes a spectral
component to extend over inﬁnite time, the observation of spectral lines necessarily requires enough time for the
establishment of equilibrium between the source and the observing system. Both our conditions of stationarity and
equilibrium are thus applicable to every observer, and between every pair of cavities compared by a given observer. If
the cavities were to be observed at diﬀerent times, or with diﬀerent instruments, the value of U in each case would be
necessarily identical so long as the cavities are maintained at the same temperature; in the ﬁrst case, it is a necessary
premise that the observer’s data bearing state is maintained intact between the observations, and in the second, the
implicit act of calibration against a common referent ensures the transitivity.

Key to the transitivity argument is the fact that U appears in the exponent term in eqs. (8) and (13), so that
U f /kBT must be a pure number, which makes U computable from the shape of the spectrum and the temperature T .
Eqs. (8) and (13) thus “expose” h to direct measurement in much the same way as the mean square travel in Brownian
motion, hR2i ∝ kB [1, I-41-10], exposes the Boltzmann constant. We can thus conclude that U (h) is inherently a
thermodynamic constant speciﬁc to the spectral domain analogous to kB in the positional one.

Further support comes from Dirac’s demonstration [6, §21] that given any anti-commutating relation [., .] and four

dynamical variables u1, v1, u2 and v2, we would obtain, with no assumption of inter-dependence,

so that we must have

[u1, v1](u2v2 − v2u2) = (u1v1 − v1u1)[u2, v2]

u1v1 − v1u1 = K[u1, v1]
and u2v2 − v2u2 = K[u2, v2].

(14)

(15)

The constancy of K follows by transivity to arbitrary sets of variables. We may, for instance, choose E and B as
u1 and v1, and for u2 and v2, select the dynamical variables governing a given spectroscope; we would then get the
same value of K for its internal structure and dynamics as for the cavity radiation. We have thus established the
universality of K ≡ i¯h ∼ iU , and therefore of U ∼ h. ✷

VI. CONCLUSION

I have shown that the historical failure of classical ideas to arrive at the blackbody distribution law is not really
indicative of an intrinsic failure of classical mechanics, as hitherto believed, but of inadequate treatment of radiation
modes and their thermalisation, since the known premises of stationarity and equilibrium do suﬃce, with due attention
to the involvement of thermal wall jitter, for arriving at the correct form of the spectral law. The reason that wall
jitter was completely ignored in the previous considerations seems to be that the precise mechanism of thermalisation
was not considered important, as the principle of equipartition had apparently worked in kinetic theory without one.
The traditional intuition in the latter case, nonlinearity of the molecular interactions, is turning out to be inadequate
for the purpose, as remarked in the introduction.

In their rush to apply equipartition as a universal principle, Rayleigh and others overlooked what might in hindsight
seem a most obvious, and eminently classical, cause. Had they instead analysed the picture more carefully, they would
have discovered the frequency-independence of antinodal energy (eqs. 2-5), and thence the correct classical spectral
law, eq. (8). From the appearance of the law (§V), they would have been forced to interpret U as a universal constant,
and the transitivity argument would have followed as rationalisation. The mystery of quantum mechanics would
have been avoided, and perhaps Landauer’s principle discovered much earlier as well, in consequence. Conversely, it
should now be clear that the established quantum derivations are imperfect precisely because they assume perfectly
rigid walls when stipulating a ﬁxed set of stationary modes. There seems to be no way to take the wall motion into
account without also rendering the usual premises of photonic interactions and wall nonlinearities unnecessary for the
thermalisation and the spectral law.

It is particularly interesting that the precise cause of thermalisation, which could not be isolated by kinetic theory,
is now clearly identiﬁable, as explained in the introduction and §V, with the necessary involvement of the rest of the
universe via the irreversibility of learning, at the instants of observation. This conclusion, which in eﬀect identiﬁes
quantum randomness with the thermal, is at variance with the current notion of a priori randomness, for instance
in the jittery motion of particles (zitterbewegung) historically introduced for explaining the apparent emergence of
c as the instantaneous speed [8]. However, the mathematical solution of Dirac’s equation actually describes strictly

5

sinusoidal motion [6, eq.(29), p.263], in keeping with the premise of causality, and the indicated speed does not
necessarily contradict special relativity, as apparently now assumed [9], because it only refers to unobservable motion.
This was in fact explained by Dirac [6, p.262], so that the motion is akin to phase velocity in that respect. The further
rationalisation that the frequency, O(2mc2/¯h), would be too high for precise measurement, is also unnecessary, and
specious, considering that it is quite ﬁnite, being only about 1020 Hz for the electron. The more general case of
quantum ﬂuctuations might not present a diﬃculty either, as they are not intrinsically associable with ﬁnite, conﬁned
systems like cavity radiation at 0 K, for which causality almost amounts to determinism. However, since the Fourier
relation of coordinates and momenta, as in eq. (1), is also directly responsible for the Uncertainty Principle, consistency
of with the latter does need to be demonstrated. I believe we have achieved this recently, but as the reasoning is
considerably involved, it will have to be presented separately.

Many thanks are owed to R Landauer, C H Bennett and B M Terhal of IBM Research for valuable discussions in

the context. Note this does not imply endorsement of the ideas presented here by them or any other individual.

Acknowledgments

[1] R P Feynman, R Leighton, and M Sands. The Feynman Lectures on Physics. Addison-Wesley, 1964.
[2] R Resnick and D Halliday. Fundamentals of Physics. 2 edition.
[3] E Fermi, J Pasta, and S Ulam. In Collected papers of Enrico Fermi, volume 2, page 977. Univ of Chicago, 1965. Los Alamos

Rpt LA-1940 (1955).

[4] M Toda, R Kubo, and N Saito. Statistical Physics I: Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics. Springer-Verlag, 1992.
[5] A Fillipov et al. Energy transport between two attractors... J of Phys A, 31:7719–7728, 1998.
[6] P A M Dirac. The principles of quantum mechanics. Cambridge Univ, 4 edition, 1953.
[7] R Landauer. Irreversibility and Heat Generation in the Computing Process. IBM Journal, Jul 1961.
[8] E Schr¨odinger. Sitzungsb. d. Berlin Akad., page 418, 1930.
[9] L Brillouin. Science and information theory. Acad Press, 1962.

