0
0
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
3
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
6
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A bounded source cannot emit a unipolar

electromagnetic wave

Kwang-Je Kim

Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439

Kirk T. McDonald

Joseph Henry Laboratories, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544

Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94309

Gennady V. Stupakov

Max S. Zolotorev

Center for Beam Physics, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720

(May 1, 1999)

1 Problem

Show that a bounded source cannot produce a unipolar electromagnetic pulse.

Equivalently, show that there are no three-dimensional electromagnetic solitons in vac-

uum.

2 Solution

This problem was ﬁrst discussed by Stokes over 150 years ago [1, 2, 3, 4], who noted that
three-dimensional sound waves from a bounded source cannot be unipolar. While his ar-
gument applies to electromagnetic waves as well, this is little recognized in the literature.
One-dimensional electromagnetic (and sound) waves can be unipolar. A plane wave can have
any pulseform, but, strictly speaking, a plane wave can only be generated by an unbounded
source. A well-known pedagogic example given in sec. II-20 of [5] is based on this case.

Hence, this old problem still has a new ﬂavor. Here, we oﬀer two new solutions, followed

by discussion.

2.1 Via Conservation of Energy and Fourier Analysis

If the source is bounded, it appears pointlike when viewed from a great enough distance.
Then, energy conservation requires that the pulse energy density fall oﬀ as 1/r2, for distance
r measured from some characteristic point within the source. Since the energy density is
proportional to the square of the the electromagnetic ﬁelds, we have the well-known result
that the radiation ﬁelds from a bounded source fall oﬀ as 1/r far from the source.

This is in contrast to the static ﬁelds, which must fall oﬀ at least as quickly at 1/r2, far

from a bounded source.

Now, consider the possibility of a unipolar pulse, i.e., one for which the electric ﬁeld
components Ei(r, t) have only one sign. At a ﬁxed point t, the time integral of at least one
component of such a pulse would be nonzero:

Z Ei(r, t) dt 6= 0.

1

(1)

Then a Fourier analysis of this component,

Ei(r, ω) = Z Ei(r, t)eiωtdt,

(2)

would have a nonzero value at zero frequency, Ei(r, ω = 0) 6= 0.

However, the quantity Ei(r, ω = 0) would then be a static solution to Maxwell’s equation,
and so must fall oﬀ like 1/r2. This contradicts the hypothesis that Ei(r, t) represented an
electromagnetic pulse from a bounded source, which must fall oﬀ as 1/r.

Thus, a bounded source cannot emit a unipolar electromagnetic pulse.

2.2 Via the Fields of an Accelerated Charge

The electric ﬁeld vector radiated by a charge is opposite to the transverse component of the
acceleration.

In the case of a bounded source, the accelerations of the charges cannot impart a nonzero

average velocity to any charge; otherwise the source would not remain bounded.

Hence, any accelerations must include both positive and negative components such that

their time integral vanishes.

Therefore, the radiated electric ﬁeld must also include both positive and negative com-

ponents.

A bounded source cannot emit a unipolar electromagnetic pulse.

2.3 Three-Dimensional Unipolar Radiation from an Unbounded

Source

In the case of two nonrelativistic, unbound charged particles that interact only via the
Coulomb force q1q2/r, the component of the acceleration of one of the charges along the
axis of its hyperbolic trajectory always has the same sign. Hence, the radiated electric ﬁeld
component along that axis is unipolar, and a Fourier analysis of the ﬁeld has a zero-frequency
component (see sec. 70 of [6]). Thus, a three-dimensional unipolar pulse can be emitted by
a system whose motion is unbounded.

2.4 Unipolarlike Pulses

It is possible for a bounded system to produce an electromagnetic pulse that consists almost
entirely of a single central pulse of one sign. But according to the argument above, this pulse
must include long tails of the opposite sign so that the time integral of the ﬁelds vanish at
any point far from the source. This behavior has been observed in several recent reports on
subcycle electromagnetic pulses [7, 8, 9, 10].

3 Can the Far-Zone Radiation From a Bounded Source

Transfer Energy to a Charged Particle?

The present considerations can be extended to comment on this topical question.

2

If a unipolar electromagnetic pulse existed far from its bounded source, the corresponding
vector potential A would have diﬀerent values at asymptotically early and late times. Then,
as argued by Lai [11], an interaction with a charge e and mechanical momentum P that
conserves the canonical momentum P + eA/c could produce a net change in the magnitude
of the mechanical momentum, i.e., provided a transfer of energy between the particle and
the pulse. Such far-zone unipolar particle acceleration is desirable, but is not consistent with
Maxwell’s equations.

Near-zone particle acceleration by time-dependent electromagnetic ﬁelds can be accom-
plished by passing a particle through a bounded ﬁeld region, such as an rf cavity, during a
short interval when the ﬁelds have only one sign. While the electromagnetic ﬁelds are not
unipolar in this case, their interaction with the charged particle is eﬀectively so.

A variant on such considerations is the fact that a bounded electrostatic ﬁeld cannot
exchange net energy with a charged particle that begins and ends its history at large distances
from the source. So-called electrostatic particle accelerators all contain a nonelectrostatic
component that can move the charge to a region of nonzero electric potential and leave it
there with eﬀectively zero electrical and mechanical energy. Then, the charge can extract
energy from the ﬁeld as it is expelled to large distances.

Returning to the case of far-zone radiation, we give a brief argument based the well-
known relation for the time rate of change of energy U of a particle of charge e and velocity
v in an electromagnetic ﬁeld E (see, for example, eq. (17.7) of [6]):

dU
dt

= eE · v

(3)

This expression holds for particles of any velocity less than the speed of light. Of course, the
magnetic ﬁeld cannot change the particle’s energy.

In the approximation that the particle’s velocity is essentially unchanged by its interaction

with the electromagnetic ﬁeld, we have

∆U = ev · Z E dt.

(4)

To perform the integral, we can use Feynman’s expression for the far-zone radiated electric
ﬁeld of an accelerated charge (sec. I-34 of [5]):

Erad =

e
c2

d2ˆn
dt2 ,

(5)

in Gaussian units, where ˆn is a unit vector from the retarded position of the source charge
to the observer. Then, R Erad dt is the diﬀerence between dˆn/dt at early and late times.
Since dˆn/dt is the angular velocity of the relative motion between the source and charge,
this vanishes at both early and late times as the moving charge is then arbitrarily far from
the bounded source. Hence, in the constant-velocity approximation, the far-zone ﬁelds from
a bounded source cannot transfer energy to a particle.

While the constant-velocity approximation is not necessarily good for a particle whose
initial velocity is nonrelativistic, it is an excellent approximation for a relativistic particle.
It is possible for the far-zone ﬁelds of a bounded source (in vacuum and far from any other
material) to transfer energy to a nonrelativistic charge, as recently observed [12], but this

3

energy transfer becomes increasingly ineﬃcient as the particle’s velocity approaches that of
light.

The above considerations have ignored energy transfers due to scattering, which can be
signiﬁcant if the energy of a photon of the electromagnetic wave is large compared to the
total energy of the charged particle in the center of mass frame. In this case, a quantum
description is more appropriate. In the regime in which the energy transfer from a single
scattering process is small, the classical idea of a “radiation pressure” associated with the
Poynting vector S = (c/4π)E × H can be formalized by including the radiation reaction in
the equation of motion of the charged particle. See, for example, eq. (75.10) of [6]. However,
this eﬀect is always very small in the classical regime.

4 References

[1] G.G. Stokes, On Some Points in the Received Theory of Sound, Phil. Mag. 34, 52
(1849); Mathematical and Physical Papers (Johnson Reprint Co., New York, 1996),
pp. 82-88c.

[2] Lord Rayleigh, The Theory of Sound, (Macmillan, London, 1894; Dover, New York,

1945), sec. 279.

[3] B.B. Baker and E.T. Copson, The Mathematical Theory of Huygens’ Principle, 2nd

ed. (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1950) sec. 3.3.

[4] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, Fluid Mechanics, 2nd ed. (Pergamon Press, Oxford,

1987), sec. 70.

[5] R.P. Feynman, R.B. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics

(Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1964).

[6] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields, 2nd ed. (Pergamon

Press, Oxford, 1975).

[7] B.I. Greene et al., Interferometric characterization of 160 fs far-infrared light pulses,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 59, 893-895 (1991).

[8] D. You et al., Generation of high-power sub-single-cycle 500-fs electromagnetic pulses,

Opt. Lett. 18, 290-292 (1993).

[9] C.W. Dormier et al., Ultrashort-pulse reﬂectometry, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 66, 399-401

(1995).

[10] A. Bonvalet et al., Generation of ultrabroadband femtosecond pulses in the mid-
infrared by optical rectiﬁcation of 15 fs light pulses at 100 MHz repetition rate, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 67, 2907-2909 (1995).

[11] H.M. Lai, Particle acceleration by an intense solitary electromagnetic wave, Phys.

Fluids 23, 2373-2375 (1980).

4

[12] G. Malka et al., Experimental observation of electrons accelerated in vacuum to rela-

tivistic energies by a high-energy laser, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 3314-17 (1997).

5

