0
0
0
2

 
r
p
A
3
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
4
2
0
4
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The role of acceleration and locality in the

twin paradox

Hrvoje Nikoli´c

Theoretical Physics Division, Rudjer Boˇskovi´c Institute,

P.O.B. 180, HR-10002 Zagreb, Croatia

hrvoje@faust.irb.hr

May 13, 2013

Abstract

We study the role of acceleration in the twin paradox. From the
coordinate transformation that relates an accelerated and an inertial
observer we ﬁnd that, from the point of view of the accelerated ob-
server, the rate of the diﬀerential lapses of time depends not only on
the relative velocity, but also on the product of the acceleration and
the distance between the observers. However, this result does not
have a direct operational interpretation because an observer at a cer-
tain position can measure only physical quantities that are deﬁned at
the same position. For local measurements, the asymmetry between
the two observers can be attributed to the fact that noninertial frames,
contrary to inertial frames, can be correctly interpreted only locally.

1 Introduction

According to the special theory of relativity, all motions with a constant
velocity are relative. The twin paradox consists in the fact that a twin B
that travels around and eventually meets his brother A is younger than his
brother A. How the twin B knows that he is the one who is actually moving?
An often answer, especially in the older literature, is: “He knows, because
he accelerates and consequently feels an inertial force.” However, it has been
stressed many times in the literature1−5 that acceleration is not an essential
part of the twin paradox.

The most general explanation of the twin paradox is purely geometrical;
the proper lengths of two trajectories in spacetime, which correspond to times

1

measured by the corresponding observers, do not need to be equal. This
explanation is perfectly correct and is also the simplest one, because one does
not need an explicit coordinate transformation that relates the two observers.
Yet, such an explanation may not be completely satisfactory, because one
may want to know where and when the diﬀerent aging of the two observers
occurs. Although, strictly speaking, this question is not really meaningful,4
we show in Sec. 2 that, in a certain sense, the diﬀerent aging can be attributed
to instants of time when one of the observers accelerates. We ﬁnd that the
accelerated observer “observes” that the rate of the diﬀerential lapses of
time depends not only on the relative velocity, but also on the product of the
acceleration and the distance between the observers. This result has already
been obtained in Ref. 6, but our derivation is quite diﬀerent, and, we believe,
more elegant. However, we also emphasize that this result does not have a
direct operational interpretation because an observer at a certain position
can only measure physical quantities that are deﬁned at the same position.
Another way of posing the twin paradox is to ask what, if not acceleration,
is the source of asymmetry between the two relatively moving observers.
When spacetime is curved1 or has a nontrivial topology,3 one can obtain the
twin paradox completely without acceleration. In these two cases it is clear
that, owing to a nontrivial geometry or topology, there is no symmetry with
respect to rotations of the velocity directions. However, a ﬂat opened universe
possesses such a symmetry, so the question of the source of asymmetry for
such a case remains opened. We ﬁnd in Sec. 3 that this asymmetry can be
attributed to the fact that noninertial frames, contrary to inertial frames,
can be correctly interpreted only locally. Recently, this fact has been used
to resolve the Ehrenfest paradox,7 to give the correct interpretation of the
Sagnac eﬀect,7 and to show that the notion of radiation does not depend on
acceleration of an observer.8 In this paper we explain how this fact helps in
understanding the twin paradox.

2 The role of acceleration

Let S be the frame of an inertial observer and S ′ the frame of an observer
that moves arbitrarily along the x-axis. Let u be the velocity of the observer
in S ′ as seen by an observer in S. Let us also assume that the observers in S
and S ′ do not rotate (this makes the analysis simpler, but has no inﬂuence on
the ﬁnal results). The coordinate transformation between these two frames
is given by9,7 y = y ′, z = z′, and

x = γ(t′)x′ + Z t′

0

γ(t′)u(t′)dt′ ,

t =

1

c2 γ(t′)u(t′)x′ + Z t′

0

γ(t′)dt′ ,

2

(1)

(2)

where γ(t′) = 1/q1 − u2(t′)/c2. It was assumed in this transformation that
the space origins coincide at t = t′ = 0. The position of the observer in S ′ is
x′ = 0.

The transformation (1)-(2) is linear in x′. However,

if u(t′) is not a
constant, then this transformation is not linear in t′. Contrary to the case of
constant u, this transformation cannot be simply inverted by putting u →
−u. This is why the inertial and the noninertial observers are not equivalent.
Note, however, that acceleration does not appear explicitly in (1) and (2).

Let us now see how the clock in S ′ appears to the observer in S. Since

the clock in S ′ is at x′ = 0, from (2) we ﬁnd

t = Z t′

0

γ(t′)dt′ ,

∂t
∂t′ = γ(t′) .

(3)

(4)

Equations (3) and (4) express the fact that the observer in S sees that the
clock in S ′ is slower than the clock in S and that ∂t/∂t′ does not depend on
the acceleration, but only on the instantaneous velocity.

Let us now see how the clock in S, not necessarily at x = 0, appears to

the observer in S ′. By eliminating x′ from (1) and (2), we ﬁnd

where

t = Z t′

0

γ(t′)dt′ +

1
c2 u(t′)[x − xo(t′)] ,

xo(t′) = Z t′

0

γ(t′)u(t′)dt′ = Z t′(t)

0

u(t′(t))dt

(5)

(6)

is the position of the observer in S ′ as a function of time and t′(t) is given
by the inverse of (3). From (5) and (6) we ﬁnd

∂t
∂t′ =

1

γ(t′)

+

1
c2

du(t′)

dt′

[x − xo(t′)] .

(7)

Comparing (7) with (4), we see that the ﬁrst term in (7) corresponds to
what we expect from the relativity of motion. However, the second term in
(7) shows that acceleration has a direct inﬂuence on what the accelerated
observer will observe. Note also that the inﬂuence of acceleration does not
depend only on the acceleration itself, but also on the relative distance be-
tween the accelerated observer and the inertial clock. In particular, if the
inertial and the noninertial clocks are at the same instantaneous position,
then acceleration has no inﬂuence.

Now it seems that we understand what is the true origin of the diﬀerent
aging of the inertial and the noninertial clocks. For example, if the observer
in S ′ moves with a constant velocity and then suddenly reverses the direction

3

of motion, then, at this critical instant of time, it will appear to him that the
time of the inertial clock at x = 0 instantaneously jumps forward. There is
no such jump of the noninertial clock from the point of view of the inertial
observer. This is the reason that, when the two observers ﬁnally meet, they
have diﬀerent age. A similar conclusion, although obtained in a completely
diﬀerent way, was drawn also in Ref. 11. However, as we show in the next
section, this is not the end of the story.

3 The role of locality

The discussion of the preceding section seems to resolve the twin paradox.
However, this discussion raises a new paradox. The right-hand side of (7) can
be negative, which means that it may appear to the accelerated observer that
an inertial clock lapses backward in time. This seems to be in contradiction
with the principle of causality.

This paradox is an artefact of the tacit assumption that an observer
receives information from a distant clock instantaneously.
In that sense,
equations (3), (4), (5), and (7) do not represent what the observers will
really see, unless the clocks and the observers in S and S ′ are at the same
instantaneous position. One could caculate what the observers would really
see by assuming that the observers communicate with light signals, which
would remove the causality paradox. However, we do not want to introduce
a new entity, such as a light beam needed for communication, because such a
complication could hide the real origin of the twin paradox. Instead, we insist
on resolving the twin paradox using only the properties of the transformation
(1)-(2).

An observer at a certain position can measure only the values of physical
quantities at this same position. Therefore, equations (5) and (7) have a
direct operational interpretation only for x = xo(t′). Therefore, when the
observer in S ′ compares his clock with a clock in S at the same instantaneous
position, he sees

t = Z t′

0

γ(t′)dt′ ,

∂t
∂t′ =

1

γ(t′)

.

(8)

(9)

The apparent inconsistency of equations (8) and (9) is a new way of viewing
the twin paradox. Equations (9) and (4) correspond to the relativity of
motion; the two observers do not agree on which clock is faster. On the
other hand, equations (8) and (3) correspond to the twin paradox; the two
observers do agree that, at the same instant and the same position, the hand
of the clock in S ′ points to a smaller number than the hand of the clock in
S. But how is that possible?

4

Note ﬁrst that the apparent inconsistency of (8) and (9) has a simple
mathematical origin. One should not derive (9) directly from (8), but instead
one needs ﬁrst to calculate the derivative of (5) and then to put x = xo(t′).
However, (8) and (9) are correct equations even for a motion with a constant
velocity. What is the source of asymmetry between S and S ′?

The asymmetry lies in another tacit assumption; the condition x = xo(t′)
corresponds to an experimental arrangement in which the moving clock in S ′
is compared each time with another clock in S, that which, at this instant, is
at the same position as the clock in S ′. In other words, there is precisely one
clock in S ′, while there are many clocks in S distributed along the x-axis.

One will say: “OK, but we can arrange our experiment such that there
is only one clock in S, say at x = 0, while there are many clocks in S ′
distributed along the x′-axis.” However, now comes the essential point of
this section. It was legitimate to use many clocks at diﬀerent positions in S
and compare the clock in S ′ each time with another clock in S, because all
these clocks in S belong to the same frame of reference. On the other hand,
if, at least for a short time, S ′ is not an inertial frame, then we cannot longer
say that clocks at diﬀerent constant positions x′ belong to the same frame
of reference. Consequently, it is not legitimate to compare the inertial clock
at x = 0 each time with another noninertial clock that does not move with
respect to the noninertial clock at x′ = 0 and interpret the result as something
that tell us about the behavior of the clock at x′ = 0. In the context of the
twin paradox, a privileged role of inertial frames is not related to the fact
that inertial observers do not feel an inertial force, but rather to the fact
that inertial frames in ﬂat spacetime have a clear global interpretation, while
noninertial frames only have a clear local interpretation. This purely local
interpretation of noninertial frames has already been explained in more detail
in Refs. 7. and 8., but, for the sake of completeness, below we give a short
resume of the results of these papers.

Proper coordinates of an observer arbitrarily moving in arbitrary space-
time are the so-called Fermi coordinates.10 They are determined by the trajec-
tory of the observer, as well as by the geometry of spacetime. It is convenient
to deﬁne them such that the position of the observer is at the space origin
of the Fermi coordinates. Even if there is no relative motion between two
observers, they belong to diﬀerent Fermi frames if they are not staying at
the same position. In particular, the S-coordinates in (1)-(2) are the Fermi
coordinates of an inertial observer in ﬂat spacetime, while the S ′-coordinates
are the Fermi coordinates of an observer that moves arbitrarily (without ro-
tation) along the x-axis with respect to the inertial observer. In general, the
coordinate transformation that relates the Fermi coordinates of two diﬀerent
observers is a complicated transformation. However, the coordinate trans-
formation that relates the Fermi coordinates of two inertial observers in ﬂat
spacetime that do not move relatively to each other is a simple translation

5

of the space origin, which is a transformation that belongs to the class of
restricted internal transformations,7 i.e., it is a transformation that does not
mix space and time coordinates:

t′ = f 0(t) ,

x′i = f i(x1, x2, x3) .

(10)

If the Fermi coordinates of two observers are related by such a transforma-
tion, then they can be regarded as belonging to the same physical frame of
reference. This is why one can regard the clocks at diﬀerent positions x in
(5) as belonging to the same frame of reference.

At the end, let us also mention some measurable eﬀects related to the
local interpretation of noninertial frames. Assume that the S ′-coordinates
in (1)-(2) refer to a uniformly accelerated observer at x′ = 0. Assume also
that another observer has such a trajectory that his position is given by
x′ =constant6= 0. Then this second observer also accelerates uniformly, but
with a diﬀerent acceleration.12 If, on the other hand, two observers at dif-
ferent positions move in the same direction with equal accelerations and
initial velocities, then, as seen by these observers, the distance between them
changes with time, which also leads to a variant of the twin paradox.2

Acknowledgments

I am grateful to G. Duplanˇci´c for asking me questions that motivated the
investigation resulting in this paper. This work was supported by the Min-
istry of Science and Technology of the Republic of Croatia under Contract
No. 00980102.

1B. R. Holstein and A. R. Swift, “The Relativity Twins in Free Fall,” Am.
J. Phys. 40 (5), 746-750 (1972).
2S. P. Boughn, “The case of the identically accelerated twins,” Am. J. Phys.
57 (9), 791-793 (1989).
3T. Dray, “The Twin Paradox Revisited,” Am. J. Phys. 58 (9), 822-825
(1990).
4T. A. Debs and M. L. G. Redhead, “The twin “paradox” and the conven-
tionality of simultaneity,” Am. J. Phys. 64 (4), 384-392 (1996).
5R. P. Gruber and R. H. Price, “Zero time dilation in an accelerating rocket,”
Am. J. Phys. 65 (10), 979-980 (1997).
6R. J. Low, “When Moving Clocks Run Fast,” Eur. J. Phys. 16 (5), 228-229
(1995).
7H. Nikoli´c, “Relativistic contraction and related eﬀects in noninertial frames,”
Phys. Rev. A 61, 032109 (2000).

6

8H. Nikoli´c, “Notes on covariant quantities in noninertial frames and invari-
ance of radiation in classical and quantum ﬁeld theory,” gr-qc/9909035.
9R. A. Nelson, “Generalized Lorentz transformation for an accelerated,
rotating frame of reference,” J. Math. Phys. 28 (10), 2379-2383 (1987).
10C. W. Misner, K. S. Thorne, and J. A. Wheeler, Gravitation (W. H. Free-
man and Company, New York 1995).
11W. G. Unruh, “Parallax distance, time, and the twin “paradox”,” Am. J.
Phys. 49 (6), 589-592 (1981).
12H. Nikoli´c, “Relativistic contraction of an accelerated rod,” Am. J. Phys.
67 (11), 1007-1012 (1999).

7

