0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
5
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
4
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Axioms for Mach’s mechanics

Adonai S. Sant’Anna∗

Clovis A. S. Maia†

Dep. Matem´atica, UFPR, C.P. 019081, Curitiba, PR, 81531-990, Brazil.

Abstract

We present an axiomatic framework for what we call Mach’s mechanics,
inspired on the ideas by A. K. T. Assis and P. Graneau about relational
mechanics. We show that contrarily to what is suggested by these authors,
Mach’s principle does not need to be committed with any Weber’s like
gravitational force. Actually it is possible to settle an axiomatic framework
for non-relativistic classical particle mechanics which incorporates Mach’s
principle and is consistent with any force that obeys the newtonian action-
reaction principle. We make further criticisms concerning relational me-
chanics.

1

Introduction

Discussions about the foundations of physics seem to be endless. From Aris-
totelian mechanics to superstrings, there have been always criticisms, doubts,
writings, and discussions about the philosophical, physical, logical and mathe-
matical foundations of physics. This journal itself supports such discussions. But
if we take a look on the history of mechanics, which corresponds to just a portion
of physics, we can see how diﬃcult is to understand even classical mechanics,
which is, maybe, the most intuitive of all physical sciences. An excellent review
that illustrates these ideas is [8]. We are not only talking about the history of
classical mechanics. We are talking about the great diﬃculty to coordinate the
relations between mathematical models and physically meaningful sentences.

Probably the best way to settle a common language in order to make such
foundational discussions easier is through the correct (implicit or explicit) use of
the axiomatic method. In this paper we are focused on the problem of the origin
of inertia. We want to discuss about this subject from the axiomatic point of
view.

∗To whom correspondence should be sent.

E-mail:

adonai@scientist.com URL:

http://www.geocities.com/adonaisantanna/adonaiss.html

†E-mail: clovis@ﬁsica.ufpr.br

1

Discussions about the foundations of classical mechanics are not new. Some
late 19th century physicists, for example, considered that force was an anthro-
pomorphic or metaphysical concept that should be eliminated from mechanics.
There was a strong inﬂuence of Kantianism among several german physicists like
E. Mach, H. L. Helmholtz and H. R. Hertz, regarding the coordinating relations
of thoughts to facts. The concept of force seemed to have a hypothetical and
unobservable status. In Hertz’s Principles of Classical Mechanics [11], originaly
published in 1894 [10], the author showed to be dissatisﬁed with the obscurity
lurking in the concept of force. He presented a formulation of classical particle
mechanics where the concept of force is not primitive. In [19] we presented an
axiomatic framework for a classical particle mechanics system inspired on Hertz’s
ideas about mechanics. In the present paper we show an axiomatic framework
for classical particle mechanics systems inspired on Mach’s ideas about the origin
of inertia. As a matter of fact, our main motivation is the work by A. K. T. Assis
and P. Graneau [4], where they claim that the celebrated experience with New-
ton’s bucket could not be explained, from the physical point of view, by means
of a motion with respect to an absolute space. Matter interacts with matter
and not with space. Such an idea could be identiﬁed with a Mach’s principle of
inertia.

Rigorously speaking, there is nothing in the writings of E. Mach which could
be called Mach’s principle. But since he was one of the most inﬂuencial criticists
about the absolute newtonian space, and since many authors have suggested that
there is some sort of Mach’s principle with respect to inertia (for some reviews,
see [2], [4] [5]), we state, in this paper, as Mach’s principle the following:

The inertia of a material body is due to its interaction with other
material bodies.

We recognize that such a sentence should be made precise, in the sense that
we should present a rigorous deﬁnition of inertia, material body and interac-
tion. Nevertheless, we are very conﬁdent that the sentence given above may be
identiﬁed by many physicists as something which we could call Mach’s principle.
Besides, this principle seems to be physically meaningful in an intuitive level. It
seems to be more natural an interaction of matter with matter than matter with
(absolute) space, at least into the context of a non-relativistic theory.

In this paper we make some criticisms concerning the implementation of
Mach’s principle as proposed in [4]. Next, with the help of the axiomatic method,
we implement some sort of Mach’s principle in classical particle mechanics in
a mathematically rigorous fashion. We call our axiomatic system as Mach’s
mechanics or machian mechanics. We show, for example, that contrarily to
what is done in [4], Mach’s principle does not need to be committed with any
Weber’s like gravitational force. Besides, Mach’s mechanics is consistent with

2

any kind of force which obeys the newtonian action-reaction principle, including
Newton’s gravitational force itself.

One of the main purposes of this paper is to illustrate the methodological
power of the axiomatic method in physics. The axiomatic method is the soul of
mathematics, the synthesis of the scientiﬁc method, and a powerful language for
the scientiﬁc philosopher. The logical investigations of physical theories allows
us to discuss what can be done and what cannot be done in physics, from the
mathematical point of view. For example, can we abandon the usual notions
of space and time in physics [20]? Can we abandon the notion of force from
mechanics [19]? Can we incorporate Mach’s principle of inertia independently of
any gravitational force? In the present paper we answer this last question; and
such an answer is positive.

2 Relational Mechanics

In [4] it is presented a relational mechanics which is supposed to incorporate
Mach’s principle. According to the authors such a relational mechanics should
satisfy the following ‘axioms’:

1. Force does satisfy the standard newtonian action-reaction principle.

2. The summation of all forces over a material body is always null in all

frames.

It is quite obvious that these sentences are not axioms at all, from the logico-
mathematical point of view [17]. Nevertheless they may help us to understand
relational mechanics.

According to [4], any implementation of Mach’s principle in relational me-
chanics is not possible if we use the newtonian gravitational force and consider
that the distant material bodies, like those outside the Milky Way, may be re-
garded as an isotropical distribution of matter around any material body p in,
e.g., Earth. The resultant force on p due to this isotropical distribution of mass
should be zero, according to Newton’s gravitation law. So, the second ‘axiom’
above would never be satisﬁed if p is subject to any other force like, e.g., its
gravitational interaction with the planet Earth. One very nice solution to this
problem is presented in [4]. The authors suggest the use of a gravitational force
inspired on Weber’s electrodynamical interaction [3]:

F12 = −γm1m2

r12
r3

12  1 −

6

c2   ˙r2

12
2

− r12¨r12!! ,

(1)

where F12 is the force that particle 2 exerts on particle 1, γ may be identiﬁed
with the gravitational constant, c is the speed of light in the vacuum, m1 and m2

3

are respectively the (gravitational) masses of particles 1 and 2, r12 =k r12 k is the
norm of the position vector of particle 1 with respect to particle 2, and ˙r12 and
¨r12 are respectively the velocity and the acceleration of particle 1 with respect
to particle 2, which are coincident with the velocity and acceleration of particle
2 with respect to particle 1. A most important implication of this Mach-Weber
theory is the necessity of a large amount of uniformly distributed matter in the
universe. From now on we refer to equation (1) as Weber’s law of gravitation or
Weber’s gravitation law.

Equation (1) was inspired on Weber’s electrodynamical force:

F12 =

q1q2
4πε0

r12
r3

12  1 −

˙r2
12
2c2 +

r12¨r12

c2 ! ,

(2)

where c = (ε0µ0)−1/2, and q1 and q2 are electric charges of particles 1 and 2
respectively.

From equation (1) a straight calculation is made in order to derive the grav-
itational force on a material body (e.g., a particle) p with mass m, due to its
interaction with the isotropical part of the universe:

FmI = −Φm(cid:18)¨rmS + ωU S × (ωU S × rmS) + 2˙rmS × ωU S + rmS ×

where

dωU S

dt (cid:19) ,

(3)

Φ =

2π
3

ξ

γρ0
H 2
0

,

(4)

H0 is the Hubble’s constant, π ≈ 3.14159, ρ0 is the mean density of the universe,
rmS is the position of particle p with respect to an arbitrary coordinate system
S, ωU S is the angular velocity of the isotropical distribution of distant galaxies
with respect to S, and t is the parameter time. The constant ξ is relevant for
deriving the precession of the perihelion of the planets. For details see [4, 5].

If S′ is a coordinate system where ωU S′ is zero then:

FmI = −Φm¨rmS.

(5)

If particle p is subject to any force due to an anisotropical distribution of N

masses described by

FmA =

N

Xj=1

Fmj ,

(6)

then, according to the second ‘postulate’ of relational mechanics,

4

Fmj = m¨rmS,

(7)

N

Xj=1

where S may be any coordinate system which moves with a constant velocity
with respect to the system of distant galaxies.

j=1 Fmj)

So, Second Newton’s Law is a theorem and inertia of particle p (PN

is a consequence of its interaction with the distant galaxies.

If the whole universe does have a rotation ωU S with respect to an arbitrary
system of coordinates, then the force that the anisotropical part of the universe
exerts on particle p (with mass m) is given by:

FmI = −m(cid:18)¨rmS + ωU S × (ωU S × rmS) + 2˙rmS × ωU S + rmS ×

dωU S

dt (cid:19) .

(8)

This means that a rotating universe is capable of deforming the surface of

the water in Newton’s bucket, and so Mach’s principle is implemented.

Now, we proceed to some remarks and criticisms on this approach. Next we

present solutions to the problems that we point out.

3 First Remarks and Criticisms

We have some remarks and criticisms about the implementation of Mach’s prin-
ciple as proposed in [4]:

The ﬁrst criticism referes to the fact that relational mechanics cannot describe
the dynamics of particles without the help of Weber’s gravitation force. It is easy
to see that the gravitation `a la Weber, as presented in equation (1) is invariant
under Galilean transformations if we assume that F12 is also invariant. At a
ﬁrst sight, this looks like a redundant sentence, but that is not the case. The
invariance of Newton’s law of gravitation, for example, is easily proven if we keep
in mind that

1. force is equal to mass times acceleration (for conservative masses) and

2. force is the gradient of a potential that depends on the diference between

space coordinates.

In other words, the potential (which depends on a relational concept, namely,
the distance between particles) determines the dynamics of particles. In rela-
tional mechanics, as proposed in [4] that does not occur, since Weber’s gravita-
tional force itself does not determine any dynamics of any particle. There is no
diﬀerential equation in relational mechanics analogous to Newton’s second law

5

of mechanics. Assis and Graneau claim that Newton’s second law demands the
notion of an absolute space that interacts with matter, which contradicts Mach’s
principle. Nevertheless we should recall that Newton’s second law does have a
very important role, namely, to determine the dynamics of material bodies as
a function of the forces acting on them. Newton’s second law is a diﬀerential
equation. We understand the criticisms against Newton’s second law. But we do
not understand the absence of any diﬀerential equation in relational mechanics
that determines the dynamics of material bodies. As a matter of fact, there is
no relational mechanics at all, since the dynamics of material bodies depends on
Weber’s law of gravitation and on the use of a machian principle that postulates
an isotropical distribution of mass in the universe. Newtonian mechanics allows
us to study the dynamics of particles for any gravitational law which obeys the
action-reaction principle. In other words, newtonian mechanics is consistent with
Newton’s gravitation law, Weber’s gravitation law and a lot of possibilities that
we could imagine and propose. So, there is no relational mechanics, but there is
a gravitational theory which postulates Weber’s law of gravitation and Mach’s
principle, but without any underlying mechanics.

The second criticism is the fact that in Assis and Graneau theory that Mach’s

principle cannot be implemented if we use the newtonian force of gravitation.

These two criticisms may be summarized as it follows:

in [4] there is some

sort of confusion between mechanics and gravitation.

We have a proposal of a relational mechanics system, which we call Mach’s
mechanics or machian mechanics, that allows us to solve the dynamical problem
presented in this section, preserves some of the main ideas by Assis and Graneau
and is still consistent with a newtonian law of gravitation. We use the axiomatic
method in order to settle our language in a rigorous manner. First we present an
axiomatic framework for particle mechanics inspired into newtonian mechanics.
In section 6 we present an axiomatic framework for particle mechanics inspired on
Mach’s principle. The axiomatization allows us a comparison between newtonian
and machian mechanics.

4 Further Criticisms: Problems of Symmetry

Discussions on invariance in theoretical physics are rather important. Invariance
of physical laws is grounded on an almost ‘holy’ principle usually refered to as
the principle of symmetry. This is one of the basis of experimental physics:
there must be a manner to establish a communication channel among diﬀerent
observers. We want to focus our discussion on relational mechanics from this
point of view.

1. Webers’s gravitation law is an instantaneous action-at-a-distance force
which is invariant under Galilean transformations, as we discussed earlier

6

and the reader can easily verify. Nevertheless, no instantaneous action-at-
a-distance force can be invariant under Lorentz transformations, since the
notion of simultaneity is relative to the observer, according to the special
theory of relativity.

2. Weber’s electrodynamics is an instantaneous action-at-a-distance force too,
which contradicts well known experimental data about accelerating elec-
tric charges (like the case of the electrons in an antenna). In this situation,
there is no instantaneous interaction. Maxwell’s eletromagnetism, which is
supported by experience, stands up the existence of eletromagnetic waves
that propagate into the space with the speed of light in the vacuum. So,
Maxwell’s electromagnetism is a more appropriate theory (from the ex-
perimental point of view) than Weber’s electrodynamics. But Maxwell’s
physical laws are not invariant under Galilean transformations; they are
invariant under Lorentz transformations [13]. Besides, it has been shown
(i) that Weber’s electrodynamical force gives the wrong direction for the
radiation ﬁeld generated by an accelerating charge and (ii) that it cannot
explain the synchrotron light (widely conﬁrmed by particle accelerators)
since Weber’s force takes into account only radial accelerations. For details
see [6, 7]. Quoting Cavalleri et al. [6]:

Concluding, Weber’s expression and all its generalizations are
wrong without any hope of retrieval.

3. Hence, it is not possible to use Weber’s gravitation law and Maxwell’s
electrodynamics in the same mathematical framework, i.e., with the same
transformation group. If one insists to use Weber’s electrodynamics, some
well known and basic experimental data should be ignored. Besides, a
relational mechanics as suggested by Assis and Graneau, together with
a maxwellian eletrodynamics would send us back to the old discussions
concerning an ether in space, in order to explain the propagation of elec-
tromagnetic waves, by means of the mechanical theory of waves [9].

One possible solution to this dilema (but we are not sure) is to modify Weber’s
electrodynamics in order to get a delayed action-at-a-distance theory inspired on
the ideas presented by F. Hoyle and J. V. Narlikar in their fabulous book [12].
Gravitation should also be modiﬁed into the scope of this proposal.

Yet, in [4] Assis and Graneau make a strange comparison between actions-
at-a-distance in classical theories and nonlocal phenomena in quantum physics.
They claim that ‘physics has moved imperceptibly away from ﬁeld-contact ac-
tion’, due to the nonlocal phenomena in the microscopic world. This argument
seems to be used in order to make more plausible the acceptance of actions-at-
a-distance in classical physics. Some electrodynamical experiments are cited, in

7

order to support their ideas. For a very interesting discussion about some of
these experiments see [6, 7]. We do not think that any relationship between clas-
sical actions-at-a-distance and quantum nonlocal phenomena are so obviously
perceptible. For example, nonlocal phenomena seem to be closely related to the
problem of indistinguishability [16], which seems to demand a new mathematical
framework [14, 21]. That does not seem to be the case in classical physics. For
a proposal of a classical picture of nonlocality see [23].

There is one ﬁnal remark that we would like to do in this section. It has to
do with history. On March 19, 1845, C. F. Gauss wrote a letter to W. Weber
[12]:

... I would doubtless have published my researches long since were
it not that at the time I gave them up I had failed to ﬁnd what I
regarded as the keystone, Nil actum reputans si quid superesset agen-
dum: namely, the derivation of the additional forces – to be added
to the interaction of electrical charges at rest, when they are both
in motion – from an action which is propagated not instantaneously
but in time as is the case with light...

According to Hoyle and Narlikkar (op. cit.) both Weber and Gauss were
worry about a reformulation of action-at-a-distance. Nevertheless, when Weber
proposed in 1846 his electrodynamical force given by equation (2) [3], he did
not intend to solve this problem. He was interested on a general expression for
interaction among electric charges such that Coulomb’s force and Amp`ere’s force
were just particular cases up to appropriate approximations.

5 McKinsey-Sugar-Suppes System for Classical Par-

ticle Mechanics

This section is essentially based on the axiomatization of classical particle me-
chanics due to P. Suppes [22], which is a variant of the formulation by J. C.
C. McKinsey, A. C. Sugar and P. Suppes [18]. We call this McKinsey-Sugar-
Suppes system of classical particle mechanics and abbreviate this terminology
as MSS system. MSS system will be useful in order to allow us a compari-
son between newtonian mechanics (represented by MSS system) and relational
mechanics (represented by our Mach’s system). In other words, our axiomatic
system for Mach’s mechanics is achieved thanks to the technique previously used
by McKinsey, Sugar and Suppes.

The reader should not understand that MSS system does faithfully translate
all the ideas behind newtonian mechanics; but it translates, in an intuitive man-
ner, some of the main aspects of Newton’s ideas. An analogous comment may

8

be done with respect to relational mechanics and our machian system of particle
mechanics.

MSS system has six primitive notions: P , T , m, s, f , and g. P and T
are sets, m is a real-valued unary function deﬁned on P , s and g are vector-
valued functions deﬁned on the Cartesian product P × T , and f is a vector-
valued function deﬁned on the Cartesian product P × P × T .
Intuitivelly, P
corresponds to the set of particles and T is to be physically interpreted as a set
of real numbers measuring elapsed times (in terms of some unit of time, and
measured from some origin of time). m(p) is to be interpreted as the numerical
value of the mass of p ∈ P . sp(t), where t ∈ T , is a 3-dimensional vector which
is to be physically interpreted as the position of particle p at instant t. f (p, q, t),
where p, q ∈ P , corresponds to the internal force that particle q exerts over p,
at instant t. And ﬁnally, the function g(p, t) is to be understood as the external
force acting on particle p at instant t.

Now, we can give the axioms for MSS system.

Deﬁnition 1 P = hP, T, s, m, f , gi is a MSS system if and only if the following
axioms are satisﬁed:

P1 P is a non-empty, ﬁnite set.

P2 T is an interval of real numbers.

P3 If p ∈ P and t ∈ T , then sp(t) is a 3-dimensional vector (sp(t) ∈ ℜ3) such

that d2

s

p(t)

dt2

exists.

P4 If p ∈ P , then m(p) is a positive real number.

P5 If p, q ∈ P and t ∈ T , then f (p, q, t) = −f (q, p, t).

P6 If p, q ∈ P and t ∈ T , then [sp(t), f (p, q, t)] = −[sq(t), f (q, p, t)].

P7 If p, q ∈ P and t ∈ T , then m(p) d2

s

p(t)

dt2 = Pq∈P f (p, q, t) + g(p, t).

The brackets [,] in axiom P6 denote external product.
Axiom P5 corresponds to a weak version of Newton’s Third Law: to every
force there is always a counterforce. Axioms P6 and P5, correspond to the
strong version of Newton’s Third Law. Axiom P6 establishes that the direction
of force and counterforce is the direction of the line deﬁned by the coordinates
of particles p and q.

Axiom P7 corresponds to Newton’s Second Law.

Deﬁnition 2 Let P = hP, T, s, m, f , gi be a MSS system, let P ′ be a non-empty
subset of P , let s′, g′, and m′ be, respectively, the restrictions of functions s, g,

9

and m with their ﬁrst arguments restricted to P ′, and let f ′ be the restriction of
f with its ﬁrst two arguments restricted to P ′. Then P ′ = hP ′, T, s′, m′, f ′, g′i is
a subsystem of P if ∀p, q ∈ P ′ and ∀t ∈ T ,

m′(p)

d2s′

p(t)

dt2 = Xq∈P ′

f ′(p, q, t) + g′(p, t).

(9)

Theorem 1 Every subsystem of a MSS system is again a MSS system.1

Deﬁnition 3 Two MSS systems

and

P = hP, T, s, m, f , gi

P ′ = hP ′, T ′, s′, m′, f ′, g′i

are equivalent if and only if P = P ′, T = T ′, s = s′, and m = m′.

Deﬁnition 4 A MSS system is isolated if and only if for every p ∈ P and t ∈ T ,
g(p, t) = h0, 0, 0i.

Theorem 2 If

and

P = hP, T, s, m, f , gi

P ′ = hP ′, T ′, s′, m′, f ′, g′i

are two equivalent systems of particle mechanics, then for every p ∈ P and t ∈ T

Xq∈P

f (p, q, t) + g(p, t) = Xq∈P ′

f ′(p, q, t) + g′(p, t).

The embedding theorem is the following:

Theorem 3 Every MSS system is equivalent to a subsystem of an isolated sys-
tem of particle mechanics.

The next theorem can easily be proved by Padoa’s method:

1In the original MSS system it is presented another deﬁnition for subsystem, where this

theorem is not valid.

10

Theorem 4 Mass and internal force are each independent of the remaining
primitive notions of MSS system.

According to Suppes [22]:

Some authors have proposed that we convert the second law [of New-
ton], that is, P7, into a deﬁnition of the total force acting on a par-
ticle.
[...] It prohibits within the axiomatic framework any analysis
of the internal and external forces acting on a particle. That is, if
all notions of force are eliminated as primitive and P7 is used as
a deﬁnition, then the notions of internal and external force are not
deﬁnable within the given axiomatic framework.

6 Set-theoretical Predicate for Mach’s Mechanics

As in the previous section, our system has six primitive notions: P , T , m, s, f ,
and g. P and T are sets, m is a real-valued unary function deﬁned on P , s and
g are vector-valued functions deﬁned on the Cartesian product P × T , and f is a
vector-valued function deﬁned on the Cartesian product P × P × T . Intuitivelly,
P corresponds to the set of particles and T is to be physically interpreted as a
set of real numbers measuring elapsed times (in terms of some unit of time, and
measured from some origin of time). m(p) is to be interpreted as the numerical
value of the mass of p ∈ P . sp(t), where t ∈ T , is a 3-dimensional vector which
is to be physically interpreted as the position of particle p at instant t. f (p, q, t),
where p, q ∈ P , corresponds to the internal force that particle q exerts over p,
at instant t. And ﬁnally, the function g(p, t) is to be understood as the external
force acting on particle p at instant t.

Deﬁnition 5 M = hP, T, s, m, f , gi is a machian system of particles if and only
if the following axioms are satisﬁed:

M1 P is a non-empty, ﬁnite set.

M2 T is an interval of real numbers.

M3 If p ∈ P and t ∈ T , then sp(t) is a 3-dimensional vector (sp(t) ∈ ℜ3) such

that d2

s

p(t)

dt2

exists.

M4 If p ∈ P , then m(p) is a positive real number.

M5 If p, q ∈ P and t ∈ T , then f (p, q, t) = −f (q, p, t).

M6 If p, q ∈ P and t ∈ T , then [sp(t), f (p, q, t)] = −[sq(t), f (q, p, t)].

11

M7 If p, q ∈ P and t ∈ T , then

f (p, q, t) + g(p, t) = 0.

Xq∈P

M8 If p ∈ P and t ∈ T , then g(p, t) = −m(p) d2

s

p(t)

dt2

.

The brackets [,] in axiom M6 denote external product, like in the previous

section.

Axioms M1-M6 are in agreement with MSS system. Axioms M5-M6 are
in correspondence with the ﬁrst ‘postulate’ of relational mechanics. Axiom M7
corresponds to the second ‘postulate’ of relational mechanics and is one of the
most important aspects of the proposal presented in [4]. Notwithstanding, axiom
M8 is a new ingredient, since it is a diﬀerential equation which says that the
external force g(p, t) determines the dynamics of particle p. We advocate the
idea that this axiom incorporates Mach’s principle of inertia if, and only if, we
interpret g(p, t) as an interaction of p with other ‘material bodies’, whatever is
that supposed to mean. In our language there is no necessity to give a detailed
description of the nature of this external force. A more detailed and intuitive
meaning of g(p, t) may be done by means of the models of M. We discuss this
point in the next section. Anyway, axiom M8 seems to be not in agreement with
the relational mechanics proposed by Assis in [5]. But that does not represent
any problem for us, since we are interested on Mach’s principle as presented in
the Introduction.

If p is the only particle in P , then according to axioms M7 and M8 we have

the following diﬀerential equation:

d2sp(t)

dt2 = 0,

which corresponds to an ‘inertial’ particle.

On the other hand, if there is more than one particle p in P , then:

f (p, q, t) = m(p)

d2sp(t)

dt2

Xq∈P

(10)

(11)

which corresponds to Newton’s second law.

In other words, inspired on Mach’s ideas about inertia, we proved the exis-
tence of inertia in a particle mechanics theory, without any reference to Weber’s
law of gravitation. As a matter of fact, equation (11) is consistent with either
a newtonian gravitational law, or a Weber gravitation or any other gravitation
law which obeys the action-reaction principle given by axioms M5 and M6.

Assis and Graneau [4] say that “gravitational mass is the mass which appears
in Newton’s law of universal gravitation, in the weight of a body, and in the

12

gravitational potential energy”. If we specify the kind of internal forces f in our
system, such forces may (or not) depend on the mass m of particles. Nevertheless,
there is no distinction at all between inertial or gravitational mass in our system.
We have just mass.

7 Gravitation in Mach’s System

In this section we show that our system is consistent with Assis-Graneau proposal
with a Weber like law of gravitation as well as with Newton’s law of gravitation.
First we discuss the interpretation of our axiomatic system into the context

of Weber’s law of gravitation.

The question is: how to interpret the primitive concepts in a machian system
of particles? We show below that Assis-Graneu cosmology may be considered as
a possible interpretation of our system. The interpretation of P , T , and m are
obvious. The problem regards the interpretation of f , g, and s.

According to equations (6) and (8) and the second ‘postulate’ of relational

mechanics, we have:

N

Xj=1

Fmj − m(cid:18)¨rmS + ωU S × (ωU S × rmS) + 2˙rmS × ωU S + rmS ×

dωU S

dt (cid:19) = 0,

(12)
for the case where the whole universe does have a rotation ωU S with respect to
an arbitrary system of coordinates.

According to axioms M7 and M8, it seems clear, at least from the logico-
mathematical standpoint, that we can interpret the vectors f , g, and s as it
follows:

where m is the mass of particle p and j is the particle q itself.

f (p, q, t) = Fmj ,

where a is an acceleration given by:

g(p, t) = −ma,

a = ¨rmS + ωU S × (ωU S × rmS) + 2˙rmS × ωU S + rmS ×

The vector s is the solution of the diﬀerential equation:

d2sp(t)

dt2 = a.

13

(13)

(14)

dωU S

dt

.

(15)

(16)

It is important to remark that this last equation (which is consistent with Eq.
(12), gives us a relationship between r and s, which obviously are not the same
(r 6= s). From the logico-mathematical point of view this is sound, since we are
using Assis-Graneau theory as a model for our axiomatic framework. Eq. (12) is
derived from Weber’s law of gravitation and the relational mechanics postulates.
We interpret the position vector s of our system as the solution of the diﬀerential
equation (16). This ends our interpretation into the context of Weber’s law of
gravitation.

Next, we interpret our axiomatic system into the scope of Newton’s law of

gravitation.

The interpretation of newtonian force of gravitation is quite natural. We
interpret P , T , s, m, and g in the standard manner, i.e., set of particles, time
interval, position vector, rest mass, and external force, respectively. It should
be clear to the reader that these are the standard interpretations of P , T , s, m,
and g in MSS system, which is a formulation for newtonian classical mechanics.
Vector f is interpreted as:

f (p, q, t) = −γm(p)m(q)

sp(t) − sq(t)
|sp(t) − sq(t)|3 .

(17)

which gives, according to axioms M7 and M8, the dynamics of a particle under
the inﬂuence of the gravitational force given above.

8 Final Remarks

We do not claim that our axiomatic framework for machian mechanics does solve
the problems of symmetry pointed out in section 4. It could not be the case,
since our axiomatic framework does not make any reference to transformation
groups. One manner to deal with this problem is by means of transformation
groups that allow us to establish a relationship among diﬀerent models for our
axiomatic framework. The main purposes of our version for machian mechanics
are: (i) to show that Mach’s principle may be implemented in mechanics without
any reference to a Weber’s law of gravitation; and (ii) to prove Newton’s second
law as a theorem with the help of proper axioms.

A more satisfactory mathematical framework for relational mechanics would
be a gauge-theoretical picture by means of ﬁber bundles. That would be a
manner to classify all transformation groups that are consistent with a machian
principle for mechanics. That would be an extension of the program presented
in [1].

14

9 Acknowledgments

We acknowledge with thanks the suggestions by Newton C. A. da Costa, Andr´e
K. T. Assis, Giancarlo Cavalleri, and E. Tonni into the context of e-mail mes-
sages that we exchanged with them concerning relational mechanics, classical
electrodynamics, and the problem of inertia as well as the axiomatic method in
physics.

References

[1] Arnold, V. I., Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics (Springer-

Verlag, New York, 1989).

[2] Assis, A. K. T., ‘On Mach’s principle’ Found. Phys. Lett. 2 301-318 (1989).

[3] Assis, A. K. T., Weber’s Electrodynamics (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1994).

[4] Assis, A. K. T. and P. Graneau, ‘Nonlocal forces of inertia in cosmology’

Found. Phys. 26 271-283 (1996).

[5] Assis, A. K. T., Relational Mechanics (Apeiron, Montreal, 1999).

[6] Cavalleri, G., E. Tonni, and G. Spavieri, ‘On the rigorous force law between
current elements and some of its consequences’, Hadronic J. 21 459-478
(1998).

[7] Cavalleri, G, G. Bettoni, G. Spavieri, and E. Tonni, ‘Experimental proof of
standard electrodynamics by measuring the self-force on a part of a current
loop’, Phys. Rev. E 58 2505-2517 (1998).

[8] Dugas, R., A History of Mechanics (Dover, New York, 1955).

[9] Einstein, A., ‘On the ether’, in The Philosophy of Vacuum edited by S. Saun-
ders and H. R. Brown, 13-20, (Clarendom Press, Oxford, 1991). Translated
by S. W. Saunders and originally published as ‘ ¨Uber den ¨Ather’, Schweiz-
erische naturforschende Gesellschaft, Verhanﬂungen 105 85-93 (1924).

[10] Hertz, H. R., Die Prinzipien der Mechanik in Neuem Zusammenhange

Dargestellt (Barth, Leipzig, 1894).

[11] Hertz, H. R., The Principles of Mechanics, (Dover, New York, 1956).

[12] Hoyle, F. and Narlikar, J. V., Lectures on Cosmology and Action at a Dis-

tance Electrodynamics (World Scientiﬁc, London, 1996).

15

[13] Jackson, J. D., Classical Electrodynamics (John Wiley & Sons, New York,

1975).

[14] Krause, D., A. S. Sant’Anna, and A. G. Volkov, ‘Quasi-set theory for bosons
and fermions: quantum distributions’, Found. Phys. Lett., 12 51-66 (1999).

[15] Mach, E., The Science of Mechanics, (The Open Court Publishing Co.,

1974).

[16] Mandel, L., ‘Coherence and indistinguishability’, Optics Letters 16 1882-

1884 (1991).

[17] Mendelson, E., Introduction to Mathematical Logic (Chapman & Hall, Lon-

don, 1997).

[18] McKinsey, J. C. C., A. C. Sugar and P. Suppes, ‘Axiomatic foundations of
classical particle mechanics’, J. Rational Mechanics and Analysis, 2 253-272
(1953).

[19] Sant’Anna, A. S., ‘An axiomatic framework for classical particle mechanics

without force’, Philos. Natur. 33 187-203 (1996).

[20] Sant’Anna, A. S., ‘An axiomatic framework for classical particle mechanics

without space-time’, Philos. Natur. 36 307-319 (1999).

[21] Sant’Anna, A. S. and A. M. S. Santos, ‘Quasi-set-theoretical foundations
of statistical mechanics: a research program’, Found. Phys., 30 101-120
(2000).

[22] Suppes, P., Introduction to Logic, (Van Nostrand, Princeton, 1957).

[23] Suppes, P., J. A. de Barros, and A. S. Sant’Anna, ‘Violation of Bell’s in-
equalities with a local theory of photons’, Found. Phys. Lett. 9 551-560
(1996).

16

