Excitations of oscillations in loaded systems with internal degrees of freedom

Michael Gedalin

Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel

(Dated: January 13, 2014)

Abstract

We show that oscillations are excited in a complex system under the inﬂuence of the external force, if the

parameters of the system experience rapid change due to the changes in its internal structure. This excitation

is collision-like and does not require any phase coherence or periodicity. The change of the internal structure

may be achieved by other means which may require much lower energy expenses. The mechanism suggests

control over switching oscillations on and off and may be of practical use.

PACS numbers: 45.05.+x, 45.30.+s, 89.90.+n

0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

2
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
3
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

A complex system subjected to an external load is a quite common phenomenon in nature,

laboratory, and industry. Almost all systems experiencing the inﬂuence of external force possess

internal structure which is not affected by this force directly but may change because of intrinsic

dynamics of other external causes. The examples of such systems span all possible scales. A

planetary magnetosphere under the inﬂuence of the solar wind is in the equilibrium (deﬁned by

the stationarity of the magnetopause position) if the time-independent incident plasma pressure

is balanced by the magnetic pressure [1]. Yet the “stiffness” of the compressed magnetosphere

is determined, among others,by the magnetosphere-ionosphere-atmosphere-solid earth interaction

[2]. A muscle can be heuristically represented as a set of springs connected in parallel and in series,

the elasticity of these “springs” being dependent on chemical processes and electrical signals in

muscular ﬁbers [3].

These systems may oscillate globally (the position of the magnetopause, the length of the mus-

cle) near the equilibrium position (if not overdamped). There is a rapid growth of interest in

possible effect of the internal variation on the excitation of global modes. Tanimoto and Um

[4] suggested that interaction with dynamical atmosphere and releases of energy due to weak lo-

cal earthquakes may cause persisting global earth oscillations. Kepko and Kivelson [5] ﬁnd a

relation between magnetospheric bursty bulk ﬂows and low frequency Earth magnetic ﬁeld oscil-

lations. Recently, Chagelishvili et al. [6] proposed a mechanism of oscillation excitation in a one-

dimensional oscillatory system, based on the rapid change of the eigenfrequency. Unfortunately,

their analytical consideration was inappropriate which obscured the physics of the phenomenon

and lead them to conclusions which are too restricted.

In the present paper we investigate the excitation of oscillations in complex systems due to

rapid changes in internal parameters under quite general conditions. We show that such excitation

(and oscillation ampliﬁcation) is a quite common phenomenon and calculate its efﬁciency. This

question may be of signiﬁcant importance in applications. One can easily imagine systems where

such excitation is unwanted (like building constructions). On the other hand, the possibility of

generating oscillations by not changing external force but applying only weak forces (and energy)

to cause local rapid changes of the system parameters is rather attractive. A simple system where

both situations are possible is an LC circuit with distributed capacity and connected to a constant

emf. Excitation of oscillations at the circuit frequency is unwanted when it is used in a device

designed to measure electromagnetic spectra. On the other hand, such excitation would be useful

in sustaining certain level of the current when weak damping is present and it is difﬁcult to apply

2

periodic forcing.

In what follows we consider the systems described by the following (vector) equation of motion

M ¨X = −

∂U
∂X

+ F,

(1)

where X is the vector of external parameters of the system (position) which are subject to the

external force (position of the magnetopause under the solar wind pressure, length of the loaded

muscle, charge on the effective capacitor when the LC circuit is connected to a constant emf).

Let also x be the vector of internal parameters which are affected in a different way or vary at

a much small time scale for some reasons. The generalized mass matrix M and the potential U

depend both on the external and X and internal x coordinates, and the external force F depends on

time. When the equations governing the behavior of the internal coordinates x are not known or

are too complicated we may phenomenologically describe their inﬂuence as temporal dependence

of M and U. If the system parameters and external force do not vary with time, the system is

in the equilibrium position Xeq which is determined by the condition ∂U/∂Xeq = F. Near the
equilibrium the potential can be written as

U = 1

2K · (X − Xm) · (X − Xm),

where K is the stiffness matrix, so that one has

M ¨X = −K(X − Xm) + F,

(2)

(3)

which looks exactly as a usual oscillator equation except that now mass and stiffness are matrices.

Recently it was shown that the process of vortices generation in magnetohydrodynamic and shear

ﬂows [7] can be described by a special one-dimensional case of Eq. (3).

The equilibrium position is Xeq = Xm + K −1F, and the general solution of Eq. (3) near the

equilibrium point is

X = Xeq +Xi

aiˆei sin(ωit + φi),

(4)

where the frequencies ωi and unity vectors ˆei are the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix
W = M −1K, respectively. Since the equilibrium is assumed to be stable, the matrix W is posi-

tively determined and all frequencies are real. ai and φi are the amplitudes and initial phases of
the normal modes.

3

Mostly known channels of the energy input to the oscillating system include adiabatic change

of the natural frequency, resonance with the periodically changing external force, or parametric

resonance (see, for example, Ref. [8]). The last two imply (quasi)periodic behavior of the nat-

ural frequency or external force and are not within the scope of the present paper where only

nonperiodic changes are considered.

The motion of the system is now fully determined by M, K, Xeq, and F. If these parameters
change slowly at the typical time scale of oscillations, that is, the typical time of variation is much

larger than all 1/ωi, the equilibrium adiabatically shifts its position, while the amplitudes follow
i ≈ const. In particular, the system which was in the equilibrium
the well-known adiabatic law ωia2
in the beginning will remain in the equilibrium in the course of the parameter variation, so that no

oscillations are excited.

In the present paper we consider the case of rapid parameter changes, where the typical time

of variation T ≪ 1/ωi, for all i. We show that there this, in general, results in the excita-
tion/ampliﬁcation of oscillations in the system. A numerical example of a special type of exci-

tation in the simplest one-dimensional system was recently considered by Chagelishvili et al. [6].

Here we consider a most general case of nonadiabatic excitation of oscillations in loaded systems

near the equilibrium point.

To study quantitatively the effect let us assume that all parameters vary only within the time

interval 0 < t < T , and ωiT ≪ 1. It is convenient to deﬁne W = M −1K and f = M −1F. From
Eq. (3) one immediately has

˙X(T ) =Z T

0

[f(t) − W (t) (X(t) − Xm(t))] ,

(5)

where the time dependence of the system parameters is explicitly shown. In what follows we

denote the system parameters and variables at t = 0 and at t = T with subscripts 1 and 2,

respectively. The solutions at t ≤ 0 and t ≥ T will take the form:

Xk(t) = Xkeq +Xi

akiˆeki sin(ωkit + φki),

(6)

where k = 1 for t < 0 and k = 2 for t > T . Since ωiT ≪ 1 one can neglect the difference
between X1(T ) and X2(T ), so that one has

X1eq +Xi

a1iˆe1i sin(ω1iT + φ1i) = X2eq +Xi

a2iˆe2i sin(ω2iT + φ2i).

(7)

4

The second matching condition is obtained from Eq. (5) in the following form:

(f − f1)dt

˙X2(T ) − ˙X1(T ) =Z T
+ [Z T

(W − W1)dt]X1(T ) −Z T

0

0

0

(W Xm − W1X1m)dt.

(8)

It is convenient to deﬁne the instantaneous equilibrium position as Xeq = Xm + W −1f. Taking
into account Eq. (6) one has

Xi
ω2ia2iˆe2i cos(ω2iT + φ2i) =Xi
+ [Z T
(W − W1)dt]Xi

0

a1iˆe1i sin(ω1iT + φ1i) + [Z T

0

ω1ia1iˆe1i cos(ω1iT + φ1i)

W (X1eq − Xeq)dt].

(9)

Eqs. (7) and (9) allow one to ﬁnd a2i and φ2i knowing the initial state.

It is easily seen that even when a1i = 0 for all i, the oscillation amplitude in the ﬁnal state is,

in general, nonzero:

a2
2i = [ˆe∗

2i(X2eq − X1eq)]2 +

1
ω2
2i

[Z T

0

2iW (X − X1eq)]2.
ˆe∗

(10)

Thus, the oscillation is excited due to the (a) irreversible shift of the equilibrium position (ﬁrst

term in Eq. (10)) and (b) reversible temporal shift of the equilibrium position with subsequent

return to the same equilibrium (the second term). The nature of the energy input is different for

the two mechanisms (instantaneous change of the potential energy in the ﬁrst case, and work

done by the external force because of the excursion of the system from the equilibrium in the

second case) but in both cases the interaction is collision-like: certain amount of momentum and

energy is transferred to the system in a short time interval. The physical nature of the excitation is

quite different from the proposed earlier [6] quasi-parametric resonant interaction with a Fourier-

component of the changing eigenfrequency. It is worth noting that although (10) depends on the

change of all parameters, M, K, and Xm, the change of the mass M along does not affect the
instantaneous equilibrium position Xeq and therefore does not result in the oscillation excitation,
as could be expected.

Within the chosen approximation Eq. (10) includes all possible internal perturbations of M, K,

and Xm, and external perturbations of F, thus giving the most general description for nonadiabatic
It includes the system considered in Ref. 6 as a special one-
excitation of complex systems.

dimensional case where only K is changed. It is instructive to rewrite Eq. (10) for this case, where

5

Xm = 0, and f1 = f2, W = ω2, and ω1 = ω2. Then the excited amplitude takes the following
simple form:

Z T

0

ω2

ω1 (cid:18) f1

ω2

1

−

a2 =(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

f

ω2(cid:19) dt(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

,

(11)

from which one can easily see that the excitation occurs always and not only when the eigenfre-

quency decreases in the perturbation (cf. Ref. 6).

In what follows for simplicity of presentation we restrict ourselves with the one-dimensional

case. Multidimensional generalization is straightforward. In the one-dimensional case Eqs. (7)

and (9) immediately give

a2
2 = [(X1eq − X2eq) + a1 sin(ω1T + φ1)]2

+ ω−2

2 [a1ω1 cos(ω1T + φ1) + (Z T

0

ω2(X1eq − Xeq)dt]2.

+Z T

0

(ω2 − ω2

1)dt)a1 sin(ω1T + φ1)

(12)

In most cases the phase φ1 of the interaction beginning is unknown (unless the perturbation is

carefully prepared with some deﬁnite purpose in mind). In this case one can consider the phase φ1

as random and average over random distribution to obtain eventually:

0 (ω2 − ω2

1)dt)2

#

a2
2 = 1

2a2

1"1 +

1

ω2
ω2

2

+

+ (X1eq − X2eq)2 +

ω2

2

(R T
2 (cid:20)Z T

1
ω2

0

2

ω2(X1eq − Xeq)dt(cid:21)

.

(13)

Eq. (13) describes the ampliﬁcation (reduction) of oscillations (ﬁrst term) and excitation of os-

cillations due to the shift of the of the equilibrium position and to the work of the external force

during temporal shift of the equilibrium.

In the particular case of perturbation where after time interval T the system parameters return

to their initial values, one arrives again at

ω2

ω1 (cid:18) f1

ω2

1

−

2

f

ω2(cid:19) dt(cid:21)

,

(14)

0 (ω2 − ω2

1)dt]2/ω2

2 ≪ 1. Roughly speaking, during

the excursion of the internal parameters from their equilibrium values the energy of oscillations
0 ω2(X1eq − Xeq)dt]2 on average. If the system experiences a series of N

0

a2
2 − a2

1 =(cid:20)Z T
where we neglected the term containing [R T
increases by δE = [R T

6

such rapid variations with randomly distributed phases, the total oscillation energy increase would

be about NδE, without any necessity to arrange the phases or periodicity of the variations.

Another efﬁcient method of excitation is the rapid shift from the equilibrium position with

subsequent return to this position after time ≫ 1/ω.

In this case, neglecting the last term in

Eq. (14) and after some algebra one obtains

2 = a2
a2

2

1(cid:18)ω2

1 + ω2

2ω1ω2 (cid:19)2

+ (X2eq − X1eq)2(cid:18) 3

2

+

2

1 + ω4
ω4
4ω2
1ω2

2 (cid:19) ,

(15)

which shows that this scenario always results in the oscillation ampliﬁcation.

To conclude, we have shown that nonadiabatic changes in the system parameters and/or exter-

nal force are efﬁcient in excitation or ampliﬁcation of oscillations in driven oscillatory systems

under external load. Randomly distributed in time, short nonadiabatic pulses result in efﬁcient

transfer of energy to the system. The energy transfer manifests itself in continuously increasing

oscillation amplitude. This amplitude increase is not restricted to the periodically repeated (co-

herent) perturbations, as was suggested in [6], but occurs in quite general conditions. The energy

input effect is essentially nonresonant and more collision-like where additional momentum/energy

are transferred to the system at the time scale much smaller than the typical timescale of varia-

tions in the system. The effect may be important for the systems whose natural frequencies may

vary quickly due to the variable internal coupling. It should be emphasized that the importance

of the above analysis is well beyond the consideration of simple oscillatory systems, desribed by

the simple oscillatory potential in the form (2) (chosen here for convenience and simplicity of

presentation), but may be applied to quite general systems. The results (qualitatively) are valid for

any system capable of (generally nonlinear) oscillations near the forced equilibrium position (al-

though quantitative calculations would require knowledge of the structure of a particular system

and ability to translate it into a low-dimensional description with small number of parameters).

There is a wide spectrum of such systems, from large astrophysical scales (gravitationally bound

systems, planetary magnetospheres under solar wind inﬂuence) to usual human scale (muscles,

constructions) and down to small scales (electric circuits). Such generation of oscillations may be

unwanted in some systems, like possible excitation of internal currents in spacecraft circuits by

cosmic rays. On the other hand, the essentially nonresonant generation of oscillations might be

useful in experimental determination of the natural frequencies of the systems where it is difﬁcult

to apply periodic external force but where the internal structure can be changed relatively easily

and rapidly. Such methods can be also used to re-excite damped oscillations without changing of

7

the main load.

Finally, let us use a very simple model to see whether reconnection at the dayside magnetopause

may be responsible for excitations of global magnetospheric oscillations. The position of the
magnetopause is determined by the balance of the incident plasma pressure numpV 2
u (where nu
and Vu are the solar wind density and velocity, respectively, and mp is the proton mass) and the
magnetic pressure B 2/8π. Is the magnetopause is compressed by x, the magnetohydrodynamic

conservation of magnetic ﬂux [9] predicts that the magnetic ﬁeld increases as L/(L − x) where L

is the equilibrium standoff distance of the magnetopause. Thus, there appears the excess force of

u xA/L, where A is the effective area. This force has to accelerate the mass of about
∼ 2numpV 2
ndmpAD, where nd ≈ 5nu is the average plasma density, and D is the distance between the shock
and magnetopause. Using the typical parameters Vu ∼ 400 km/s, L ∼ 10RE, and D ∼ RE,
where RE ∼ 6, 000 km is the Earth radius [9], one ﬁnds the typical oscillation periods of the order
of ∼ 10 min. On the other hand, the typical time of reconnection should be of the order d/vn,
where d ∼ 800 km is the magnetopause width [10], while the velocity vn may be as high as 50
km/s [11]. Thus, the typical time of reconnection ∼ 10 sec and much smaller than the oscillation

period. Reconnection results in the breakdown of magnetohydrodynamics and therefore reduces

the “stiffness” of the magnetic ﬁeld, thus effectively temporarily reducing the global oscillation

frequency. Hence, the conditions of Eq. (14) are satisﬁed and excitation is possible. Of course,

quantitative calculations require that we are able to translate the reconnection process into the

change of internal parameters, so that at this stage the proposed scenario should be considered as

a speculative hypothesis.

[1] W.J. Hughes, in Introduction to space physics, (ed. M.G. Kivelson and C.T. Russell, Cambridge Uni-

versity Press, p.227,1995).

[2] A. Yoshikawa, M. Itonaga, S. Fujita, et al. J. Geophys. Res., 104, 28437 (1999).

[3] H.J. Metcalf, Topics in classical biophysics, Prentice-Hall, N. J. Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1980.

[4] T. Tanimoto and J. Um, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 28723 (1999).

[5] L. Kepko and M. Kivelson, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 25021 (1999).

[6] G.D. Chagelishvili, A.G. Tevzadze, G.T. Gogoberidze, and J.G. Lominadze, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 1619

(2000).

8

[7] G.D. Chagelishvili, A.G. Tevzadze, G. Bodo, and S.S. Moiseev, Phys. Rev. Lett., 79, 3178 (1997).

[8] V.I. Arnold, Mathematical methods of classical mechanics, (NY, Springer, 1989).

[9] T.E. Cravens, Physics of solar system plasmas, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1997.
[10] C.T.Russell, in Physics of the magnetopause, Geophysical Monograph 90, ed. P. Song, B.U. ¨O. Son-

nerup, and M.F. Thomsen, American Geophysical Union, Washington, 1995, p. 81.

[11] J. Berchem, J. Raeder, and M. Ashour-Abdala, in Physics of the magnetopause, Geophysical Mono-
graph 90, ed. P. Song, B.U. ¨O. Sonnerup, and M.F. Thomsen, American Geophysical Union, Washing-

ton, 1995, p. 205.

9

