0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

6
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
3
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Twin Paradox and Space Topology

Jean–Philippe Uzan1,2, Jean–Pierre Luminet3, Roland Lehoucq4 and Patrick Peter3,5

(1) Laboratoire de Physique Th´eorique, CNRS–UMR 8627, Bˆat. 210, Universit´e Paris XI, F-91405 Orsay cedex (France)
(2) D´epartement de Physique Th´eorique, Universit´e de Gen`eve, 24 quai E. Ansermet, CH-1211 Gen`eve 4 (Switzerland)

(3) D´epartement d’Astrophysique Relativiste et de Cosmologie, Observatoire de Paris, CNRS–UMR 8629,

(4) CE–Saclay, DSM/DAPNIA/Service d’Astrophysique, F–91191 Gif sur Yvette cedex (France).

(4) Institut d’Astrophysique de Paris, 98 bis, boulevard Arago, 75005 Paris (France)

F–92195 Meudon cedex (France)

(February 2, 2008)

If space is compact, then a traveller twin can leave Earth, travel back home without changing
direction and ﬁnd her sedentary twin older than herself. We show that the asymmetry between
their spacetime trajectories lies in a topological invariant of their spatial geodesics, namely the
homotopy class. This illustrates how the spacetime symmetry invariance group, although valid
locally, is broken down globally as soon as some points of space are identiﬁed. As a consequence, any
non–trivial space topology deﬁnes preferred inertial frames along which the proper time is longer
than along any other one.

Preprint numbers: LPT–ORSAY 00/45, UGVA–DPT 00/04–1080

I. INTRODUCTION

The twin paradox is the best known thought experi-
ment of special relativity, whose resolution provides inter-
esting insights on the structure of spacetime and on the
applicability of the Lorentz transformations. In its sem-
inal paper on special relativity, Einstein [1] pointed out
the problem of clocks synchronization between two iner-
tial frames with relative velocity v. Later on, Langevin
[2] picturesquely formulated the problem by taking the
example of twins aging diﬀerently according to their re-
spective worldlines. The keypoint for understanding the
paradox is the asymmetry between the spacetime trajec-
tories of the “sedentary twin” and of the “traveller twin”.
The subject has been widely studied for pedagogical pur-
pose [3,4], the role of acceleration was examined in details
[5–8] and a full general relativistic treatment was given
[9].

Although counter-intuitive, the twin paradox is clearly
not a logical contradiction, it merely illustrates the elas-
ticity of time in relativistic mechanics. The experiment
was actually performed in 1971 with twin atomic clocks
initially synchronized, one of them being kept at rest on
Earth and the other one being embarked on a commer-
cial ﬂight: the time shifts perfectly agreed with the fully
relativistic calculations [10]

An interesting “revisited” paradox was formulated
[11,12] in the framework of a closed space (due to cur-
vature or to topology).
In such a case, the twins can
meet again without none of them being accelerated, yet
they aged diﬀerently. Both an algebraic and a geometric
solution were given [13].

Our present goal is to extend such explanations by
adding a topological characterization of reference frames,
which allows us to solve the twin paradox whatever the
global shape of space may be. We ﬁrst brieﬂy recall, in
§ II, the classical twin paradox and its standard resolu-

tion, in § III we investigate the case of a spacetime with
compact spatial sections and in § IV, we show that the
root explanation of the twin paradox lies in the global
breakdown of the spacetime symmetry group by a non–
trivial topology.

II. THE STANDARD TWIN PARADOX

Let observers 1 and 2 be attached to inertial frames
with relative velocity v. 1 is supposed to be at rest and to
experience no acceleration. At time t = 0, the observers
synchronise their clock (thus they can be called “twins”).
Then twin 2 travels away at velocity +v with respect to
1 and comes back with velocity −v. According to special
relativity, the travel time, ∆τ2, measured by 2 (its proper
time) is related to the proper time measured by 1, ∆τ1,
by

∆τ2 = p1 − v2∆τ1.

(1)

A paradox arises if one considers that the situation is per-
fectly symmetrical about 1 and 2, since 2 sees 1 travelling
away with velocity −v and coming back with velocity +v.
If this was correct, one could reverse the reasoning to de-
duce that 1 should be younger than 2, with

∆τ1 = p1 − v2∆τ2,

(2)

and an obvious contradiction would arise.

Indeed, the previous argument holds whenever 2 is not
accelerating. As ﬁrst explained by Paul Langevin [2],
among all the worldlines that connect two spacetime
events (such as the departure and return of 2), the one
which has the longest proper time is the unaccelerated
one, i.e. the reference frame K of 1. The traveller twin 2
cannot avoid accelerating and decelerating to make its re-
turn journey; then he had to jump from an inertial frame

1

K′ moving relatively to K with velocity v to another in-
ertial frame K′′ moving with velocity −v with respect
to K. Hence the situation is not symmetrical about the
twins: a kink (inﬁnite acceleration) in the middle of the
path of twin 2 explains the diﬀerence, and there is no
contradiction in the fact that the sedentary twin 1 will
deﬁnitely be older than the traveller twin 2.

The same result holds in the framework of general rel-
ativity, dealing with a more realistic situation including
accelerations, gravitational ﬁelds and curved spacetime
(so that the kink is smoothed out):
in order to achieve
its journey, the traveller 2 necessarily experiences a ﬁnite
and variable acceleration; thus her reference frame is not
equivalent to that of 1.

Such explanations, as rephrased by Bondi [14], are
equivalent to say that there is only one way of getting
from the ﬁrst meeting point to the second without accel-
eration.

However, acceleration is not the only and essential
point of the twin paradox, as shown by the example of
non–accelerated twins in a closed space, in which there
are several ways to go from the ﬁrst meeting point to
the second one without accelerating [11–13]. The key
explanation of the twin paradox is now “some kind”
of asymmetry between the spacetime paths joining two
events. We investigate below the nature of such an asym-
metry when space topology is not trivial (i.e. simply–
connected)

III. TWINS IN A COMPACT SPACE

In a spacetime which has at least one compact space
dimension, one can actually start from one point, travel
along several straight geodesics and come back to the
same spatial position without accelerating nor deceler-
ating. Einstein’s relativity theory determines the local
properties of the spacetime M (its metrics), but gives
little information about its global properties (its topol-
ogy) [15,16], so that special relativity (in the absence of
gravitational ﬁelds) or general relativity (involving grav-
itational ﬁelds in curved spacetimes) well describe the
local physics. For instance, the Minkowski spacetime
(M, η) used in special relativity is a manifold R4 with a
ﬂat Lorentzian metric η = diag(-1,1,1,1) and Euclidean
space sections Σ. One can obain spacetimes locally iden-
tical to (M, η) but with diﬀerent large scale properties
by identifying points in M under a group of transfor-
mations, called holonomies, which preserve the metric
(thus holonomies are isometries). For instance, identify-
ing (x0, x1, x2, x4) with (x0 + L, x1, x2, x3) changes the
topology from R4 to a cylinder S1 × R3 and introduces
closed timelike lines. However, if causality is believed to
hold in the sense that no eﬀect can preceed its cause, such
an identiﬁcation is prohibited, and the study of space-
time topology is restricted so as to exclude closed time-
like curves [15]. This is achieved if spacetime can be

decomposed as the direct product

M = R × Σ

(3)

where the real axis R refers to the time direction and Σ to
the three dimensional spatial sections. Now the topology
of spacetime amounts to the study of the various shapes
of the spatial sections Σ.

The topology of a three–dimensional Riemannian
space Σ can be described in full generality by a funda-
mental polyhedron P and a holonomy group Γ whose
elements g identify the faces of the polyhedron by pairs
(see e.g. [16] for a general discussion of the topological
properties of spacetimes). It follows that Σ can be writ-
ten as

Σ = X/Γ

(4)

where X is the universal covering space [16] (simply–
connected and three dimensional) and the quotient refers
to the equivalence relation ‘≡’ deﬁned as

∀ x, y ∈ X x ≡ y ⇐⇒ (∃g ∈ Γ | x = gy) .

(5)

If Γ reduces to the identity, space is simply–connected,
in the sense that two points of space are connected
by only one geodesic. As soon as there are non–
trivial holonomies which identify points, space is multi–
connected and several geodesics connect two any distinct
points. In a cosmological context, multi–connected uni-
verse models lead to the existence of ghost images in
the observable universe when one topological length is
shorter than the horizon size. Many methods aimed to
detect the cosmic topology have been proposed [16,17],
so far with no deﬁnite answer coming from observational
data.

Returning to Minkowski space for the sake of clarity,
the holonomies of Γ that preserve the ﬂatness of the space
sections Σ are the identity, the translations, the reﬂex-
ions and the helicoidal displacements. The group clas-
siﬁcation leads to 18 Euclidean spaceforms with diﬀer-
ent topologies, all of them having as universal covering
space X the simply–connected, inﬁnite Euclidean space
R3. Six of them are compact (i.e. of ﬁnite volume) and
orientable. Their fundamental polyhedron can be a par-
allelepiped or a hexagonal prism. For the sake of visual-
ization, in the following we shall develop our reasoning in
ﬂat spacetimes with 1+2 dimensions only, i.e. whose spa-
tial sections Σ are just surfaces. In such a case there are
5 Euclidean topologies: the cylinder, the M¨obius strip,
the ﬂat torus, the Klein bottle and the Euclidean plane
[16]. For a pedagogical purpose, we select the case where
space has a torus–like topology (see ﬁgure 1). However
we emphasize that our conclusions will remain valid in
(1+3) dimensions, whatever the topology and the (con-
stant) space curvature may be.

2

Name

FD and
identifi-
cations

cylinder

Möbius
  strip

torus

Klein
bottle

a
b

a
b

a
b

a
b

a
b

b
a

a
b

a
b

c d

c d

c d

d

c

Shape

Closed Orientable

NO

YES

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO

FIG. 1. The four multi–connected topologies of the two di-
mensional Euclidean plane. They are constructed from a par-
allelogram or an inﬁnite band (fundamental domain FD), by
identiﬁcation of edges according to the allowable holonomies.
We indicate as well their compactness and orientability prop-
erties (from [14]).

Since a characteristics of multi–connected spaces is to
provide several geodesics between two any points, we
shall extend the concept of “twins” to more than two
and consider an ensemble of “twins” (strictly speaking,
initially synchronized clocks) labeled as 1,2,3 and 4 (see
ﬁgure 2 [left]). The twin 1 stays at home at point O and
her worldline can be identiﬁed with the time axis. The
twin 2 leaves O at t = 0, travels away and then turns back
to meet twin 1 in P . The twins 3 and 4 leave O in two
diﬀerent directions along non–accelerated worldlines and
travel away from 1; they respectively reach P ′ and P ′′,
where they meet twin 1∗. Due to warped space, twins
3 and 4 managed to come back without changing their
direction and inertial frame. Now, one wants to compare
the ages within the various pairs of twins when they meet
again. Whereas twin 2 undergone the standard paradox,
there seems to be a real paradox with twins 1, 3 and 4,
who all followed strictly inertial frames.

In [13] it was shown that, in the case of a cylinder, the
sedentary twin 1 is always older than any traveller be-
cause their states of motions, although non–accelerated,
are not symmetrical. Which kind of asymmetry is to be
considered? As we emphasize below, acceleration is a
local concept, and the only explanation lies in a global
breakdown of symmetry due to a non–trivial topology.

Let us consider the projection of the worldlines onto a
constant time hypersurface Σ, assumed to be a 2D ﬂat
torus (see ﬁgure 2 [right]). Each projection is a loop
γ(u, x0) at x0 which can be parametrised by u ∈ [0, 1[

∗Under very special circumstances, twins 3 and 4 could also
meet altogether with twins 1 and 2 at the same point of
spacetime!

3

if γ(0) = γ(1) = x0, where x0 is a point of Σ. Two
loops at x0, γ and δ, are said to be homotopic (γ ∼ δ)
if they can be continuously deformed into one another,
i.e.
if there exists a continuous map (called homotopy)
F : [0, 1[×[0, 1[→ X such that

∀u ∈ [0, 1[, F (s, 0) = γ(u), F (u, 1) = δ(u)

∀v ∈ [0, 1[, F (0, v) = F (1, v) = x0.

The equivalence class of homotopic loops is denoted by
[γ]. We denote γi the loop corresponding to the projec-
tion of the trajectory of twin i in Σ.

In our example (see ﬁgure 2), the twins 1 and 2 have
homotopic trajectories: since 2 does not “go around” the
universe, the loop γ2 can be continuously contracted into
the null loop γ1 = {0}, so

γ1 ∼ γ2 ∼ {0}.

However, among these two homotopic loops, only one cor-
responds to an inertial observer going from O to P : that
of twin 1, which is thus older than twin 2, as expected in
the standard paradox.

Now, the twins 3 and 4 respectively go once around the
hole and around the handle of the torus. From a topo-
logical point of view, their paths can be characterized by
a so–called winding index. In a cylinder, the winding in-
dex is just an integer which counts the number of times a
loop rolls around the surface. In the case of a 2–torus, the
winding index is a couple (m, n) of integers where m and
n respectively count the numbers of times the loop goes
around the hole and the handle. In our example, twins 1
and 2 have the same winding index (0,0), whereas twins
3 and 4 have winding indexes respectively equal to (1, 0)
and (0, 1). The winding index is a topological invariant
for each traveller: neither change of coordinates or ref-
erence frame (which ought to be continuous) can change
its value.

To summarize, we have the two situations:

1. Two twins have the same winding index (twins 1
and 2 in our example), because their loops belong
to the same homotopy class. Nevertheless only one
(twin 1) can go from the ﬁrst meeting point to the
second one without changing inertial frame. The
situation is not symmetrical about 1 and 2 due to
local acceleration, and 1 is older than 2.

2. Several twins (1, 3 and 4 in our example) can go
from the ﬁrst meeting point to a second one at a
constant speed, but travel along paths with dif-
ferent winding indexes. Their situations are not
symmetrical because their loops belong to diﬀerent
homotopy classes:

γ1 6∼ γ3 6∼ γ4.

Twin 1 is older than twins 3 and 4 because her path
has a zero winding index.

P"

e
m

i
t

4

t

O"

O'

1
P

2

P'

3

O

space

spatial section

FIG. 2. Diﬀerent twins in a (1+2) spacetime with toroidal
spatial sections. All of them leave 0 at the same time. While
1 remains at home, 2 [dash-dotted line] goes away and then
comes back to meet 1 in P (it corresponds to the standard
case), 3 [solid line] goes around the universe in a given direc-
tion from O to P ′ ≡ O′ and 4 [dashed line] goes around the
universe along another direction from O to P ′′ ≡ O′′. On the
left plot, we used the fundamental domain representation (in
which the 2–torus corresponds to a rectangle whose edges /
and // are respectively identiﬁed; see ﬁgure 1). On the right
plot, we depict the projection of their trajectory on a constant
time slice. The spacetime points O, O′, O′′, P , P ′ and P ′′ of
M are projected onto the same base point “1” in Σ.

In order to solve exhaustively the twin paradox in a
multi–connected space, one would like not only to com-
pare separately the ages of the travellers with the age of
the sedentary twin, but also to compare the ages of the
various travellers when they respectively meet each other.
It is clear that the only knowledge of the winding index
of their loops does not allow us, in general, to compare
their various proper time lapses. The only exception is
that of the cylinder, where a larger winding number al-
ways corresponds to a shorter proper time lapse. But
for a torus of unequal lengths, for instance when the di-
ameter of the hole is much larger than the diameter of
the handle, a traveller may go straight around the handle
many times with a winding index (0, n), and yet be older
than the traveller which goes straight only once around
the hole with a winding index (1,0). The situation is still
more striking with a double torus, indeed a hyperbolic
surface instead of an Euclidean one (see e.g. [16]). The
winding indexes become quadruplets of integers and, as
for the simple torus, they cannot be compared to answer
the question on the ages of the travellers. As we shall
see below, this problem can be solved only by using an
additional metric information.

IV. LANGEVIN AND POINCAR´E

We have found a topological invariant attached to each
twin’s worldline which accounts for the asymmetry be-
tween their various inertial reference frames. Why is it

4

so? In special relativity theory, two reference frames are
equivalent if there is a Lorentz transformation from one
frame of space-time coordinates to another system. The
set of all Lorentz transformations is called the Poincar´e
group – a ten dimensional group which combines trans-
lations and homogeneous Lorentz transformations called
“boosts”.

The non equivalence between the inertial frames is
due to the fact that space topology breaks globally the
Poincar´e group. Indeed, cutting and pasting to compact-
ify the spatial sections deﬁnes (i) particular directions, so
that space, even if locally isotropic, is no more invariant
under rotations, and (ii) a particular time: the one mea-
sured by an observer whose 4–velocity is perpendicular
to Σ (the twin 1 in our example). Let us call t the proper
time of such an observer; then the spacetime coordinates
p of any point P ∈ M can be decomposed in the iner-
tial frame K as p = (t, x), and the choice of a topology
reduces to the choice of the identiﬁcations

p = (t, x) ≡ (t, gx) = g(p),

g ∈ Γ.

(6)

In the inertial frame K′ of the traveller, the coordinates
of P are given by a Lorentz transformation L(p) = (t′, x′)
with

t′ = γ (t − v.x) , x′ = γ (x − vt)

(7)

where γ ≡ (1 − v2)−1/2. It is clear from (6) and (7) that

∀g 6∼ Id, ∀p,

g ◦ L(p) 6= L ◦ g(p).

(8)

The identiﬁcation (6) particularises a given foliation and
spatial sections, leading to the existence of an absolute
rest frame (the one of zero homotopy class). For any
other observers, these identiﬁcations are relations be-
tween events at diﬀerent times (and thus in diﬀerent spa-
tial sections) and not a relation between points in a given
spatial section. As pointed in [12], the observers 3 and
4 will ﬁnd that their constant time hypersurfaces do not
match in the universal covering space and that there are
points on these surfaces of simultaneity which are con-
nected by timelike curves. Moreover, the only holonomy
g such that g ◦ L(p) = L ◦ g(p) for all p is the identity
g = Id, thus the holonomy group reduces to Γ = {Id} and
Σ reduces to X. We deduce that the only topology com-
patible with the Poincar´e group is the trivial topology.
In other words, the only ﬂat spaceform invariant under
the full Poincar´e group is the original simply–connected
Minkowski spacetime, and any additional discrete iden-
tiﬁcation group is incompatible with the Lorentz trans-
formations.

In conclusion, the oldest twin will always be the one
of homotopy class {0}, and between two twins of same
homotopy class, the oldest one will be the one who does
not undergo any acceleration. We can rephrase Bondi’s
formulation of the solution by saying that “there is only
one way of a given homotopy class of getting from the
ﬁrst meeting point to the second without acceleration”.

This generalises the previous works [11–13] by adding
topological considerations which are more general and
hold whatever the shape of space is. As concluded in
[12], “it is not suﬃcient that [the] motion [of the twin]
is symmetrical in terms of acceleration felt and so on;
it must also be symmetrical in terms of the way that
their worldlines are embedded into the spacetime”; this
latter symmetry is the one we have exhibited and which
is encoded in the homotopy class.

As mentioned in the previous section, the homotopy
classes only tell us which twin is aging the fastest: the
one who follows a straight loop homotopic to {0}. It does
not provide a classiﬁcation of the ages (i.e. proper time
lengths) along all the straight loops. To do this, some
additional information is necessary, such as the various
identiﬁcation lengths. Indeed there exists a simple cri-
terion which works in all cases: a shorter spatial length
in the universal covering space will always correspond to
a longest proper time. To fully solve the question, it is
therefore suﬃcient to draw the universal covering space
as tessellated by the fundamental domains, and to mea-
sure the lengths of the various straight paths joining the
twin 1 position in the fundamental domain to its ghost
positions in the adjacent domains (see ﬁgure 3). As usual
in topology, all reasonings involving metrical measure-
ments can be solved in the simply–connected universal
covering space.

the Friedmann–Lemaˆıtre solutions – are assumed to be
globally homogeneous and isotropic. From a geometrical
point of view, this means that spacelike slices have con-
stant curvature and that space is spherically symmet-
ric about each point. In the language of group theory,
the spacetime is invariant under a six-dimensional isom-
etry group. The universal covering spaces of constant
curvature are R3, S3 or H3 according to the zero, pos-
itive or negative value of the curvature. Any identiﬁ-
cation of points in these simply-connected spaces via a
holonomy group lowers the dimension of their isometry
group†; it preserves the three–dimensional homogeneity
group (spacelike slices have still constant curvature), but
it breaks down globally the isotropy group (at a given
point there are a discrete set of preferred directions along
which the universe does not look the same).

Thus in Friedmann–Lemaˆıtre universes, (i) the expan-
sion of the universe and (ii) the existence of a non–trivial
topology for the constant time hypersurfaces both break
the Poincar´e invariance and single out the same “privi-
leged” inertial observer who will age more quickly than
any other twin: the one comoving with the cosmic ﬂuid –
although aging more quickly than all her travelling sisters
may be not a real privilege!

5

O

O

O

O

O

O

O

2

O

O

O

4

3

O

O

O

O

O

FIG. 3. Straight paths in the universal covering space of a
(2+1)–spacetime with ﬂat, torus–like spatial sections. Paths
2, 3, 4, 5 are straight loops with respective winding indexes
(0,1), (1,0, (1,1), (1,2), allowing the traveller twins to leave
and meet again the sedentary twin O without accelerating.
The inertial worldlines are clearly not equivalent: the longest
the spatial length in the universal covering space, the shortest
the proper time travel in spacetime.

In the framework of general relativity, general solu-
tions of Einstein’s ﬁeld equations are curved spacetimes
admitting no particular symmetry. However, all the ex-
act known solutions admit symmetry groups (although
less rich than the Poincar´e group). For instance, the
usual “big bang” cosmological models – described by

5

[1] A. Einstein, “Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter K¨orper”,

Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 17, 891 (1905).

[2] P. Langevin, “L’´evolution de l’espace et du temps”, Sci-

entia X, 31 (1911).

[3] R.H. Romer, “Twin paradox in special relativity”, Am.

J. Phys. 27, 131–135 (1959).

[4] E. F. Taylor and J.A. Wheeler, Spacetime Physics, Sec-

ond Edition, Freeman, 1992.

[5] W.G. Unruh, “Parallax distance, time, and the twin

paradox”, Am. J. Phys. 49 (6), 589–592 (1981).

[6] H. Nikoli´c, “Relativistic contraction of an accelerated

rod”, Am. J. Phys. 67 (11), 1007–1012 (1999).

[7] R.H. Good, “Uniformly accelerated reference frame and

twin paradox”, Am. J. Phys. 50, 232–238 (1982).

[8] S.P. Boughn, “The case of the identically accelerated

twins”, Am. J. Phys. 57 (9), 791–793 (1989).

[9] R. Perrin, “Twin paradox: a complete treatment from
the point of view of each twin”, Am. J. Phys. 44, 317–
319 (1970).

[10] J.C. Hafele and R.E. Keating, “Around-the-world atomic
clocks: Observed relativistic time gains”, Science, 177,
168-170 (1972).

[11] C.H. Brans and D.R. Stewart, “Unaccelerated returning

†There is one exception: the projective space, obtained by
identifying the antipodal points of S3

twin paradox in ﬂat spacetime”, Phys. Rev. D8, 1662–
1666 (1973).

[12] R.J. Low, “An acceleration free version of the clock para-

dox”, Eur. J. Phys. 11, 25–27 (1990).

[13] T. Dray, “The twin paradox revisited”, Am. J. Phys. 58

(9), 822-825 (1990).

[14] H. Bondi, Relativity and common sense, Doubleday and

Company Inc., N.Y. (1964).

[15] R. Geroch, “Space–time structure from a global view-
point”, in General relativity and cosmology, proceedings
of course XLVII of the international course of physics
“Enrico Fermi”, Ed. R.K. Sachs, Academic Press (New
York, 1971).

[16] M. Lachi`eze-Rey, J.-P. Luminet, “Cosmic topology”,

Phys. Rep. 254, 135 (1995).

[17] W.P. Thurston and J. Weeks, “The Mathematics of
Three-Dimensional Manifolds”, Sci. Am., 251, 108–113
(July 1984); J-P. Luminet, G.D. Starkman and J.R.
Weeks, “Is space ﬁnite?”, Sci. Am., 280, 90–97 (april
1999); J-P. Uzan, R. Lehoucq and J-P. Luminet, “New
developments in the search for the topology of the uni-
verse”, Proc. of the XIXth Texas meeting, Paris 14–18
december 1998, Eds. E. Aubourg, T. Montmerle, J. Paul
and P. Peter, article no 04/25.

6

