0
0
0
2

 

p
e
S
5
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
5
0
9
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Apparent Superluminal Behavior

in Wave Propagation

A. D. Jackson∗, A. Lande†, and B. Lautrup∗

December 13, 2013

Abstract

The apparent superluminal propagation of electromagnetic signals
seen in recent experiments is shown to be the result of simple and
robust properties of relativistic ﬁeld equations. Although the wave
front of a signal passing through a classically forbidden region can
never move faster than light, an attenuated replica of the signal is
reproduced “instantaneously” on the other side of the barrier. The
reconstructed signal, causally connected to the forerunner rather than
the bulk of the input signal, appears to move through the barrier faster
than light.

Recent experimental reports of the propagation of electromagnetic signals
with velocities larger than c in dispersive media [1], in wave guides [2], and
in electronic circuits [3] have once again focused attention on a subject of
long-standing interest. The immediate and wide-spread hostility which such
reports seem to generate among theorists is an understandable consequence
of a ﬁrm belief in the consistency of electromagnetism and relativity.
In
order to dispel such concerns at the outset, we distinguish between “true”
and “apparent” superluminal phenomena. Consider a right-moving pulse
with a wave front located at x0 at t = 0. A true superluminal phenomenon
would permit the observation of some signal at positions x > x0 + ct. True
superluminality is not predicted by either Maxwell’s equations or by the
manifestly covariant Klein-Gordon equation which we shall consider here.
Indeed, most recent experimental papers are careful to emphasize their con-
sistency with Maxwell’s equations and, hence, do not claim the observation of

∗The Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 17, 2100 Copen-

hagen,Denmark

†Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747AG

Groningen, The Netherlands

1

true superluminal eﬀects. Rather, these experiments have demonstrated the
existence of “apparent” superluminal phenomena taking place well behind
the light front. In the case of microwave experiments, observations generi-
cally involve pulses which seem to traverse a “classically forbidden” region
instantaneously. While these results illuminate an interesting and potentially
useful eﬀect, such transmission occurs well behind the light front and does
not challenge the wisdom and authority of Maxwell and Einstein. As we shall
see below, apparent superluminality is extremely general and to be expected.

Papers by Sommerfeld and Brillouin [6] represent some of the earliest and
most beautiful investigations of the question of superluminality. Their con-
cern was with unbounded, dispersive media. There were at the time abundant
examples of anomalous dispersion, i.e. substances for which phase and group
velocities were both larger than c. Since the group velocity was then be-
lieved to be identical to the velocity of energy propagation, Sommerfeld and
Brillouin understandably found the question of superluminal propagation to
be of importance. Their strategy was to write the requisite propagator us-
ing Laplace transforms and a suitable analytic form for the phase velocity,
v(ω) = ω/k. The fact that the singularities of v(ω) were restricted to the
lower half ω plane was then suﬃcient to prove that the signal was necessar-
ily zero ahead of the light front and that the light front always moves with
a velocity of c. While the eﬀorts of Sommerfeld and Brillouin would seem
to have settled the issue of true superluminal propagation deﬁnitively, the
situation is somewhat more subtle. Their work conclusively demonstrated
that Maxwell’s equations preclude superluminal propagation for media with
a causal form of v(ω). It did not, however, extend to a proof that the singu-
larities of v(ω) must lie in the lower half plane. In simple electron resonance
models of dielectrics, such behavior follows from the absorptive nature of the
material [5]. We are not, however, aware of any completely general proof of
material causality.

The present paper addresses the current issue of apparent superluminality. In
order to avoid the diﬃcult issue of modeling v(ω), we will restrict our atten-
tion to propagation in two-dimensional wave guides with constrictions. For
slow variations in the shape of the constriction, Maxwell’s equations reduce
to a one-dimensional Klein-Gordon equation, in which the non-uniformities
can be modeled through a suitable potential. A side beneﬁt of this replace-
ment is that the strict impossibility of true superluminal propagation is easily
demonstrated. We then consider the propagation of a wave form with a pre-
cise front initially to the left of a potential barrier located in the interval
0 ≤ x ≤ b. The barrier is presumed to be high relative to the dominant
wave numbers contained in the pulse but is otherwise arbitrary. Our results

2

for the incoming and transmitted waves can then be expressed simply: The
incoming wave moves with a uniform velocity of c = 1. The transmitted
wave ψ(x, t) (for x > b) is attenuated as an obvious consequence of barrier
penetration, and its amplitude is proportional to the derivative of the initial
pulse evaluated at the point (x − ct − b). The additional displacement, b,
suggests instantaneous transmission of the pulse through the barrier and is
the source of the apparent superluminality observed empirically. The fact
that the transmitted pulse is an image of the derivative of the original pulse
and not the pulse itself is an elementary consequence of the fact that trans-
mission amplitudes generally vanish in the limit ω → 0. When the signal is
a low-frequency modulation of a carrier wave, as is the case in many exper-
imental investigations, the envelopes of the incident and transmitted waves
are identical.

Some of the topics treated here have been discussed elsewhere both analyt-
ically and numerically [4, 3]. Our intention is to emphasize the generality
and extreme simplicity of this phenomenon.

The Model: We consider a scalar wave, Ψ, moving in a two-dimensional
wave guide according to the Klein-Gordon equation

∇2Ψ =

∂2Ψ
∂t2 .

(1)

The wave guide is inﬁnite in the x-direction and extends from 0 ≤ z ≤ h(x)
in the z-direction. We assume that Ψ vanishes at the transverse bounding
surfaces. If h is a slowly varying function of x, we can approximate Ψ as the
product ψ(x, t) sin (πz/h). Neglecting derivatives of h, eqn. (1) reduces to a
one-dimensional equation:

−

∂2ψ
∂x2 + V (x)ψ = −

∂2ψ
∂t2 .

(2)

The eﬀective potential is determined by the width of the wave guide so that
V (x) = π2/h(x)2 for the lowest transverse mode. For simplicity, we assume
that h(x) is large except in the vicinity of the constriction, so that V (x) can
be modeled as non-zero only in the region 0 ≤ x ≤ b.

We seek solutions to eqn. (2) which describe the motion of an initial pulse,
ψ(x, 0) = f (x), which has arbitrary shape but satisﬁes the following two
conditions. First, the pulse has a well-deﬁned wave front, x0, initially to the
left of the barrier, V (x), i.e., ψ(x, 0) 6= 0 only when x ≤ x0 < 0. Second,
at t = 0 the pulse moves uniformly to the right with a velocity of 1, so that

3

∂ψ/∂t = −∂ψ/∂x at t = 0. For any given potential, this problem can be
solved with the aid of the corresponding Green’s function.

This model has been considered in detail in ref. [7], where it was shown in
generality that the transmitted wave is given by

ψ(x, t) =Z x0

−∞ eT (x − t − x′)f (x′) dx′ ,

(3)

where T (x) is the retarded transmission kernel, which may be expressed in
terms of its Fourier transform T (ω)

eT (u) =Z ∞

−∞

T (ω)eiωu dω
2π

.

(4)

The physical interpretation of T (ω) as a transmission amplitude is elemen-
tary: An incoming plane wave exp (iωx), incident on the potential barrier
from the left, leads to a transmitted wave T (ω) exp (iωx). Since |T (ω)| → 1
for |ω| → ∞, the integration contour in eqn. (4) can be closed in the upper
half ω-plane for x > 0. If T (ω) is free of singularities in the upper half plane,

it follows that eT (x − t − x′) = 0 for x > x′ + t and thus that ψ(x, t) is strictly

zero for x > x0 + t. Nothing precedes the light front.

A Special Case: The authors of ref. [7] considered the special case where
V (x) = m2 is a positive constant and found

T (ω) =

4ωκ
D

ei(κ−ω)b

with κ = ipm2 − (ω + iǫ)2 and

D = (ω + κ)2 − (ω − κ)2e2iκb .

(5)

(6)

The singularities of T (ω) are due to the zeros of D in the ω-plane. Given the
form of κ, the zeros of D are conﬁned to the lower half plane, and T (ω) is
indeed analytic in the upper half plane. As expected, this model precludes
genuine superluminal propagation. The analytic properties of T (ω) are, of
course, dictated by those of V (ω). The general proof that any given potential
will lead to such analyticity is more challenging.1 All real, local, and bounded

1A general proof can be constructed along the following lines. Write the transmission

amplitude as a linear integral equation of the form ψ = ϕ +R G0 V ψ, where G0 is a

suitable free propagator. Singularities in ψ arise when singularities of the integrand pinch
the integration contour. Analyticity of V (ω) in the upper half plane then ensures the
desired analyticity properties of T (ω).

4

potentials which vanish suﬃciently rapidly as x → ∞ are expected to respect
these analyticity conditions, and the absence of true superluminality is thus
to be expected for all physically sensible choices of V .

Apparent Superluminal Behaviour: Conﬁdent that our Klein-Gordon
model is free of genuine acausal propagation, we turn to apparent superlumi-
nal phenomena. Consider a strong barrier (with mb >> 1) and imagine that
the initial wave form, ψ(x, 0), is dominated by low frequency components
for which |ω| << m.
In this case, the form of ψ(x, t) is both simple and
intuitive. Speciﬁcally, we need only consider ω ≈ 0 for which κ ≈ im. In
this domain, the transmission amplitude can be approximated as

T (ω) ≈ −ω

4i
m

e−iωbe−mb .

(7)

We shall see shortly that this form of the transmission amplitude is quite
general. Using eqn. (7), we see that eqn. (4) reduces to

eT (x − t − x′) = −

Thus, we ﬁnd that

4
m

e−mb ∂
∂u

δ(u − b)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)u=x−t−x′

ψ(x, t) ≈ −

4
m

e−bmf ′(x − t − b) .

(8)

(9)

When a pulse dominated by low frequencies components impinges on a
strongly repulsive barrier, the transmitted wave is a strongly attenuated
replica of the derivative of the original pulse. The transmitted pulse ap-
pears to traverse the region of the potential barrier in zero time. This is
the apparent superluminal phenomenon observed empirically. It occurs well
behind the light front of the original signal and is not an indication of true
superluminal propagation. Rather, it is an interference phenomenon which
is in no sense acausal.

There is an evident inconsistency between the present assumption that ψ(x, 0)
is dominated by low frequency components and our initial assumption that
the signal has a well-deﬁned light front (which necessarily implies the pres-
ence of high frequency components). The consideration of signals which are
the product of, e.g., a gaussian pulse (with clear low-frequency dominance)
and a step function to impose the light front makes it clear that the eﬀects
of this inconsistency can be made arbitrarily small [7].

5

Carrier Waves: Experiments frequently involve a modulated carrier wave,

f (x) = eiω0x F (x) ,

(10)

where F (x) provides a slowly-varying modulation of the carrier. Inserting
this into eqn. (9), the transmitted signal becomes

ψ(x, t) = −

4
m

e−bm (iω0F (u) + F ′(u)) eiω0u(cid:12)(cid:12)u=x−t−b

(11)

Since the Fourier transform of F (x) is presumed to have support only for
frequencies |ω| ≪ ω0, the second term may be ignored. We conclude that
the envelope of the pulse, |ψ(x, t)|, is unaltered by the transmission. Again,
the argument of the right side of eqn. (11) suggests that transmission of the
envelope through the barrier is instantaneous.

Generality of the Results: The various factors contributing to the ap-
proximate form, eqn. (7), for T (ω) are all of general origin. The factor
exp (−iωb) represents the phase diﬀerence between the free plane wave,
exp (iωx), at the boundaries of the region of non-zero potential. It will al-
ways appear. Similarly, the linear vanishing of the transmission amplitude as
ω → 0 is a feature common to all potentials which do not have a zero-energy
bound state.2

The ﬁnal barrier penetration factor is also familiar and is expected when-
ever there is strong attenuation. Consider the transmission amplitude for a
strongly repulsive but otherwise arbitrary potential using the WKB approx-
imation.3 The resulting transmission amplitude is readily calculated, and
shows that the factor exp(−mb) is replaced by

exp(cid:20)−Z b

0 pV (x) dx(cid:21) .

(12)

2Consider scattering from an arbitrary potential which is zero except in the interval
0 ≤ x ≤ b with an interior solution ϕ(x). Join this interior solution to the right-moving
plane wave, exp iω(x − b), at x = b with the usual requirement of continuity of the wave
function and its ﬁrst derivative. In the limit ω → 0, ϕ(b) = 1 and ϕ′(b) = 0. Similarly,
join the interior solution to the linear combination A exp (iωx) + B exp (−iωx) at x = 0.
If ϕ′(0) 6= 0, the coeﬃcients A and B will diverge like 1/ω. The transmission amplitude,
T (ω) = e−iωb/A, will vanish linearly with ω unless ϕ′(0) is zero. The condition that
ϕ′(0) = ϕ′(b) = 0 is precisely the condition that the potential should support a zero-
energy bound state.

3We consider a potential which is strongly repulsive for all 0 ≤ x ≤ b and zero elsewhere.
Hence, it is appropriate to match the plane wave solutions directly to the WKB wave
function.

6

A localized repulsive barrier of suﬃcient strength will transmit an instan-
taneous image of the derivative of the incoming signal according to eqn. (9)
independent of the details of both the potential barrier and the pulse. Ap-
parent superluminal behavior is a robust phenomenon.

The Time Delay: The above results can also be expressed as a time delay
of the pulse, τ , deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the time actually required
for transmission across the barrier less the time required for a free wave to
travel the same distance. In the case of the square barrier and a low frequency
pulse, τ = −b. Negative values of τ correspond to apparent superluminal
propagation. For a modulated carrier wave, eqn. (10), one may expand T (ω)
about the carrier frequency, ω0, and obtain

T (ω) ≈ |T (ω0)|eiΦ(ω0) ei(ω−ω0)Φ′(ω0) ,

(13)

where Φ(ω) is the phase of T (ω). The second exponential factor gives rise to
the time delay, τ (ω0) = Φ′(ω0), through the Fourier exponential in eqn. (4).
Familiar results from quantum mechanics for purely repulsive potentials re-
mind us that Φ(ω) is less than 0 for all ω and that Φ(0) = Φ(∞) = 0.4 The
time delay is necessarily negative for suﬃciently small ω0 and apparent su-
perluminal eﬀects can be observed for all repulsive potentials. The time delay
changes sign for some value of ω0 comparable to the height of the potential
barrier, and it approaches zero from above as ω0 tends to inﬁnity. Apparent
superluminality is a very general phenomenon.

Conclusions: Using the model of a Klein-Gordon equation with a poten-
tial, we have presented a simple description of the apparent superluminal
phenomena seen in wave guides: Low frequency waves seem to traverse such
barriers in zero time. Strongly repulsive barriers always transmit an attenu-
ated image of the spatial derivative of the incident signal. When the signal
consists of a modulated carrier wave, the envelope of this wave is transmitted
unaltered. We have attempted to demonstrate that the phenomena described
here are both extremely general and non-controversial. Their experimental
observation does not challenge received wisdom and in no sense compromises
our conﬁdence in general notions of causality. It will be interesting to see
whether this interesting and general consequence of wave theory will have
practical applications.

4This second result is a consequence of Levinson’s theorem which relates the asymptotic
behavior of the phase shift to the number of bound states supported by the potential, n,
through Φ(0) − Φ(∞) = nπ. There are no bound states for purely repulsive potentials.

7

References

[1] Wang, L. J., Kuzmich, A. & Dogariu, A., Nature 406 (2000) 277; and

references therein.

[2] D. Mugnai, A. Ranfagni, and R. Ruggeri, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 (2000)

4830; and references therein.

[3] Mitchell, M. W., and Chiao, R. Y., American Journal of Physics 66

(1998) 14.

[4] Emig, T., Phys. Rev. E54 (1996) 5780.

[5] Jackson, J. D., Classical Electrodynamics,(Wiley, New York, 1999), p.

310.

[6] A. Sommerfeld, Ann. Physik 44 (1914) 177; L. Brillouin, Ann. Physik 44
(1914) 203. See also, Stratton, J.A., Electromagnetic Theory, (McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1941).

[7] J. M. Deutch and F. E. Low, Ann. of Physics 228 (1993) 184.

8

