0
0
0
2

 
t
c
O
4
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
3
0
0
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Coulomb interaction does not spread instantaneously

Rumen I. Tzontchev, Andrew E. Chubykalo and Juan M. Rivera-Ju´arez

Escuela de F´ısica, Universidad Aut´onoma de Zacatecas
Apartado Postal C-580 Zacatecas 98068, ZAC., M´exico

e-mails: rumen@ahobon.reduaz.mx and andrew@ahobon.reduaz.mx

(February 9, 2008)

Abstract

The experiment is described which shows that Coulomb interaction spreads
with a limit velocity and thus this kind of interaction cannot be considered
as so called “instantaneous action at a distance”

I. INTRODUCTION

As shown in previous works by one of the authors of this article [1-4], instantaneous

action at a distance is the direct consequence of generally accepted classical electrody-

namics. Particularly in the aforementioned works it was shown that the Coulomb ﬁeld

(unlike a so called free ﬁeld) is spread instantaneously. On the other hand theories exist

which aﬃrm that any kind of electric ﬁeld spreads with a limited rate, but these theories

require signiﬁcant modiﬁcation within classical electrodynamics [5]. However, one cannot

choose theoretically one theory over another; it must be done through experiment. Thus,

the propose of this present work is to verify experimentally if the Coulomb ﬁeld is really

spread instantaneously or not.

In the following section we describe an experiment which provided us with appropriate

framework for verifying the instantaneous spread.

II. EXPERIMENTAL EQUIPMENT

In order to determine the velocity of the Coulomb interaction, a Coulomb electric ﬁeld

generator, which rapidly changes its magnitude, and antennas which can register this

1

electric ﬁeld, are necessary.

A. The generator

The generator consists of two hollow metallic spheres a and b, connected electrically

by means of a plasma discharger and discharge cable (ﬁg.1):

Fig1. Coulomb electric ﬁeld generator (regular conﬁguration)

The radius of each sphere is R, the distance between the centres of the spheres is equal

to l. Let us investigate the ﬁeld at point A, which is on a line which passes through the

centres of both spheres and which is at a distance L from the centre of sphere b. Let us

call this line the “experimental axis”.

Sphere b is charged electrically with a positive charge as far as the break-down voltage

of the discharger. Then, a spark ﬂies through the discharger, a spark which is a very brief

plasma cord of little electrical resistance. As we can see, both spheres are electrically

connected during the spark by means of the discharge cable alone. Thus begins a process

of discharge, during which a part of the electric charge initially accumulated on sphere b

oscillates between sphere a and sphere b with a high frequency. The distance between this

mobile part of the charge and point A changes with the same frequency. Consequently,

the electric ﬁeld at point A also oscillates according to the Coulomb law. This ﬁeld has

colinear direction at the experimental axis.

It is important to note that because of the cilindrical symmetry of the experimental

construction at point A, the electric ﬁeld is not perceived due to an electromagenetic

transversal wave, regardless of the values of the distances l and L.

In our examinations further on we will use the quasi-stationary approximation. This

approximation can be correctly applied only if the length of the discharge cable, the radius

of the spheres and all distances in our experiment are less than the wavelength of the pro-

posed ﬁeld. All our calculations will be carried out supposing that “instantaneous action”

exists, that is, the velocity of propagation of the Coulomb electric ﬁeld is inﬁnite. In this

2

case the wavelength will have an inﬁnite value. In case it turns out that the electric ﬁeld

is propagated with a ﬁnite velocity and if the use of the quasi-stationary approximation

is not correct, our calculations can only be considered as the ﬁrst aproximation in the

description of the process.

From an electric point of view, both spheres a and b are condensers. Their capacitance

is the sum of each sphere’s own capacitance and the capacitance in common with the other

sphere:

C = Cown + Ca,b

The discharge cable can be presented as an induction Ld and a resistance Rd connected in

series. When the discharger is in the state of conduction it can be substituted by a short

circuit. Consequently, the variable ﬁeld generator can be presented as a dipole (ﬁg.2):

Fig.2. Electric diagram equivalent to the electric ﬁeld generator.

qa(t) and qb(t) are the electric charges corresponding to spheres a and b and Ua(t) and Ub(t)

are the corresponding potentials. Applying the second law of Kirchoﬀ for this circuit and

taking into consideration that each sphere is in itself an equipotential surface, we obtain:

Rdi(t) + Ld

di(t)

dt

−

1
C

[qa(t) − qb(t)] = 0,

(1)

where i(t) is the current which passes through the discharge cable.

The process begins by electrically charging sphere b as far as the break-down voltage

of the discharger Ub0. Then, when the spark appears on the surface of sphere b a charge

of

has accumulated.

Q0 = CUb0

Just as during the process of discharge there is no charge leak, and the capacitance of

the discharge cable is not appreciable, it is always

qa(t) + qb(t) = Q0.

(2)

3

From equations (1) and (2), for the charge qb(t) we obtain the following diﬀerential equa-

tion:

d2qb(t)

dt

+

Rd
Ld

dqb(t)

dt

+

2

LdC

qb(t) =

Q0
LdC

with the initial conditions in the instant t = 0:

= 0;

qb(t)|t=0 = Q0.

dqb(t)

dt

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)t=0

The solution to this diﬀerential equation is:

qb(t) = qme−βt cos(ωt + α) +

Q0
2

,

where

β =

Rd
2Ld

; ω = qω2

0 − β2; ω0 = s 2

LdC

; tan α = −

β
ω

; qm =

Q0

2 cos α

.

For the electric charge of the sphere a we obtain:

qa(t) = Q0 − qb(t) =

Q0
2

− qme−βt cos(ωt + α).

The electric current discharge i(t) is given by the expression:

i(t) = −qmω0e−βt sin ωt.

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

The potential of the electric ﬁeld at point A will be the sum of the potentials generated

by the charges qa(t) and qb(t)

ϕe(L, t) =

qa(t)

4πε0(L + l)

+

qb(t)
4πε0L

=

=

Q0
8πε0

2L + l
L(L + l)

+

qm
4πε0

l

L(L + l)

e−βt cos(ωt + α).

(7)

As we pointed out earlier, in the case of the existence of a ﬁnite velocity of the propagation

of the Coulomb interaction, the application of the quasi-stationary approximation can

be not correct and the processes in the generator may only be described qualitatively.

However, the basic conclusion of the consideration made is correct: there are rapid spatial

oscillations of the electric charge along the axis of the experiment that produces a rapid

change of electric ﬁeld at the point A.

4

B. The antenna

The antenna is a metallic hollow sphere of radius r, connected by means of a cable to

the earth (ﬁg.3).

Fig.3. Electric antenna.

It is accepted that the earth has a potential equal to zero. Thus, the potential on the

surface of the antenna will always be equal to 0 due to the connection to the earth. When

there is no external electrical ﬁeld the sphere of the antenna is not electrically charged.

Let us suppose that there is an external electrical ﬁeld whose source is suﬃciently far

away from the sphere so that we can accept that the potential of the external ﬁeld is

not altered considerably in the place of the sphere. Then we can talk of the potential in

the region on the sphere of the antenna ϕe,a(t). In this case, there is charge q(t) of such

magnitude on the surface of the sphere that equation (8) is fulﬁlled:

ϕe,a(t) + ϕi,a(t) = ϕe,a(t) +

q(t)
4πε0r

= 0,

(8)

where ϕi,a(t) is the potential on the surface of the antenna originated by charge q(t),

which comes from the earth. Therefore:

q(t) = −ϕe,a(t) 4πε0r.

(9)

When the electric ﬁeld changes, charge q(t) changes. This means that the electric charge

passes through the connecting cable between the antenna and the earth, in other words,

electric current passes through the connecting cable:

ia(t) =

dq(t)

dt

= −4πε0r

dϕe,a(t)

dt

.

(10)

The current ia(t) can be recorded.

C. Experimental conﬁguration

The Coulomb electric ﬁeld generator and two antennas are at a distance F from each

other, as shown in ﬁg. 4:

5

Fig.4. The main diagram of the experimental conﬁguration.

The distance from the centre of antenna 1 to the centre of sphere b of the generator is

L.

In the cables, which connect the antennas to earth, small R50 magnitude resistors

are included, which do not aﬀect the working of the antennas. The voltage fall on these

resistors is proportional to the current and is supplied at both input points to a rapid

digital oscilloscope. In this way, the currents passing through the cables are recorded.

The discharge in the discharger gives rise to an oscillatory displacement of electric

charge along the experimental axis. For this reason, a change in the Coulomb electric

ﬁeld will be emitted from the generator through the same axis. This change, reaching

antennas 1 and 2 will cause the current to ﬂow through the R50 resistors and thus, a UR

voltage fall upon them. In the case of “instananeous action”, when the Coulomb electric

ﬁeld appears simultaneously in the whole space, this UR1(t) voltage fall for antenna 1

satisﬁes the following diﬀerential equation:

dUR,1(t)

dt

+

1

4πε0rR50

UR,1(t) =

dϕe,1(t)

dt

,

(11)

where dϕe,1(t)

dt

is the ﬁrst derivate of the potential of the Coulomb electric ﬁeld in the region

of antenna 1, originated by the generator. The inicial condition UR,1(0) = 0 gives us the

following solution of this equation:

UR,1(t) =

D

(β − B)2 + ω2 h−ωe−Bt + ωe−βt cos ωt + (β − B)e−βt sin ωti ,

(12)

where

D =

qmω0
4πε0

l

L(L + l)

;

B =

1

4πε0rR50

.

The voltage fall UR,2(t) corresponding to antenna 2 obeys the same law and the dif-

ference is only in the value of the coeﬃcient D. For antenna 2:

D =

qmω0
4πε0

l

(L + F )(L + F + l)

.

The tension UR,1(t) has been supplied to channel 1 of the oscilloscope by means of a

coaxial cable, and the tension UR,2(t) - at channel 2. Consequently, if “instantaneous

action” exists, two impulses of equal form and diﬀerent amplitude should be

6

visible on the display of the oscilloscope, which appear simultaneously and

develop in a parallel fashion in time. We assume that the air and coaxial cable are

linear structures which possess no noticeable dispersion for the frequencies used. The

other possibility is that the change in the Coulomb electric ﬁeld is propagated at a ﬁnite

velocity, that is, a wave exists. So, the front of the wave produced by the Coulomb electric

ﬁeld will arrive at antenna 1 ﬁrst and then at antenna 2 after a certain interval of time

∆t. Consequently, two impulses displaced in time ∆t will be seen on the display of the

oscilloscope, which will obey the equation:

∆t =

F
v

,

where v is the velocity of propagation of the wave. The interval can be measured experi-

mentally and the velocity of the front of the wave v can be obtained, which by its essence,

is group velocity.

III. PRACTICAL EXPERIMENTAL EQUIPMENT

The Coulomb electric ﬁeld generator consists of two standard Van de Graaf generators

with the radius of the balls equal to 10 cm. One of the generators becomes electrically

charged during the experiment, and we shall call it “active”. The other, which is only

used for receiving a part of the charge of the active generator through the discharger

and the discharge cable, we shall call “passive”. The generators are elevated on insulating

supports until the centre of the balls reaches a height of 1.7m with reference to the earth’s

surface. The distance between the centres of both balls is 3 m. The antennas are spheres

of a radius of 9.5 cm, whose centres can be found 1.7 m from the earth’s surface. The

centre of antenna 1 is to be found at a ﬁxed distance of 0.5 m from the centre of the

ball of the Van de Graaf active generator, and the distance between the centres of both

antennas varies. Fig. 5 gives an overview of the practical experimental equipment:

Fig.5. Practical experimental equipment (overview).

7

Antenna 1 is slightly displaced from the experimental axis so as not to obstruct the

direct visibility between the Van de Graaf and antenna 2 generators.

If this does not

happen, antenna 1 will behave like a screen and the signal from antenna 2 decreases

drastically. Both antennas are connected at the input of the oscilloscope by means of two

high frequency coaxial cables with the characteristic resistance of 50 Ohms. Antenna 1 is

connected to channel 1 and antenna 2 to channel 2. Each cable is impedance balanced on

both sides. The lengths of the cables are equal, with an uncertainty of 5 mm. The noise

at the input of the oscilloscope has a value of 10 mVp−p. The measurement sensitivity of

the temporal intervals is 0.3 ns. The signals which are due to the eﬀects of the apparatus

(signal penetration from one of the channels of the oscilloscope to the other, bad earth

contact, signal penetration through the power supply cables, etc.) and inductions in

the coaxial cables have already been measured. With this purpose, an experiment has

been carried out, in which antenna 1 has approached to a maximum the active Van de

Graaf generator maintaining constant the other variables of the experiment; the sphere

of antenna 2 has been disconnected from the coaxial cable. The signal in channel 2 of

the oscilloscope in the case of various distances bewteen the end of the coaxial cable

corresponding to antenna 2 and the active Van de Graaf generator has been measured.

The result is that in all cases, the signal obtained has a value below 0.5% of the useful

signal (with the sphere of antenna 2 connected). An analogous experiment has been done

with antenna 1, commuting the exploration of the oscilloscope to antenna 2. The result

was similar. This allows us to exclude corrections in order to avoid apparatus eﬀects.

The temporal symmetry of the antennas of the experimental equipment has been

veriﬁed. The defect of the aforementioned symmetry can be obtained from a diﬀerent

length of the coaxial cables or an assymetry of both channels of the oscilloscope. With

this end, both antennas are disposed symmetrically side-by-side at a distance equal to

that of the active Van de Graaf generator. The delay of the front ﬂank of the impulse

of channel 1 with reference to the front ﬂank of the impulse of channel 2 in the case of

various combinations of the sensitivity of the vertical ampliﬁers of the oscilloscope has

been determined. The result is that the delay in all cases is below 0.3 ns. For this reason

we have considered that, in the following measurements and calculations, the assymetry

shown in time is equal to 0.3 ns.

8

The experiments were carried out in the following manner: Antenna 2 is placed at a

certain distance F from antenna 1. The oscilloscope is put to work in the framework of

the exploration of single ﬁring with a sinchronization along the negative front ﬂank of the

impulse of channel 1. One waits until the moment of the spontaneous jump of the spark

between the electrodes of the discharger. The information of the impulses of antennas 1

and 2 is recorded in the memory of the oscilloscope. Then the analysis of the information

begins.

It has been predicted theoretically and demonstrated experimentally that the ﬁrst

ﬂanks of impulses from antennas 1 and 2 are negative and have the same form. For this

reason, by means of an adjustment of the sensitivity of the vertical ampliﬁers of both

channels of the oscilloscope, its parallelism is reached (ﬁg.6) and then the delay ∆t of the

impulse ﬂank of antenna 2 with reference to the impulse ﬂank of antenna 1 is measured.

Fig.6. Disposition of the antennas’ impulses on the display of the oscilloscope.

This investigation has been repeated for diﬀerent distances between antennas 1 and 2

in the interval of 0.50 m to 1.50 m spaced uniformly 0.10 m. For each value of distance the

measurement has been reiterated 20 times. With the purpose of proving what inﬂuence

the power supply cables and the oscillations (which are gradually propagated along them)

have, a complete cycle of investigations has been carried out, with the conﬁguration shown

in ﬁg.7:

Fig.7. Coulomb electric ﬁeld generator (conﬁguration with a turn of 180◦).

The Coulomb electric ﬁeld generator is turned 180◦ on the horizontal plane, and with

this the passive and active Van de Graaf generators have changed places. At the same

time, the disposition of the power supply cables and the block of antennas is unalterable.

9

According to the theoretical description, the front ﬂanks of the impulses of channels 1

and 2 in this case should invert their sign from negative to positive and the impulses of

both channels should maintain sameness of form. This is observed in practice and the re-

sults of the investigation for ∆t do not diﬀer signiﬁcantly from the results obtained using

the basic conﬁguration. A basic parasite factor is the transversal electromagnetic wave

which is emitted from the Coulomb interaction generator and is reﬂected on the earth’s

surface. It is slightly diﬀerent from the Coulomb interaction by the sign of its ﬁrst front

and by the sign of the ﬂank of the ﬁrst impulse which can be seen on the oscilloscope’s

display respectively. In the case of the basic conﬁguration (ﬁg.5), the ﬁrst front of the

Coulomb interaction is always negative, while the ﬁrst front of the transversal electromag-

netic wave is positive. This can be explained using the Electrodynamic theory in the case

of the construction shown of the Coulomb electric ﬁeld generator [6]. In order to separate

the Coulomb interaction from the signal originated by the transversal electromagnetic

wave, the delay observed from the ﬁrst front of the transversal electromagnetic wave with

respect to the ﬁrst front of the Coulomb interaction is of assistance. This additional time

is that needed by the transversal electromagnetic wave in order to arrive at the earth’s

surface and then to the antenna, while the Coulomb interaction is propagated along a

straight line. With the purpose of decreasing additively the amplitude of the transversal

electromagnetic wave, the discharge cable was electrically and magnetically screened. The

aformentioned experimental facts oblige us, in order to avoid the inﬂuence of the transver-

sal electromagnetic wave on the experimental results, to work with a maximum distance

of 1.5 m between the antennas. In the absence of ”instantaneous action”, it is necessary

to determine which part of our measuring signal is due to the transversal electromagnetic

wave and which part is due to the lonitudinal component of the electric ﬁeld. Our anten-

nas react to the potential of the electric ﬁeld and for this reason cannot distinguish both

components from the electric ﬁeld. With the purpose of separating them, screens have

been used which considerably decrease the intensity of the transversal electromagnetic

wave without altering to a relevant degree the amplitude of the longitudinal component.

Two types of screens have been used: a metallic mesh and a thin layer of aluminium. In

order to reject the inﬂuence of the waves reﬂected in the varying objects, the antenna was

placed in a thick aluminium cylinder with one end sealed and the other open, connected

10

to the earth. The opening of the cylinder was directed towards the Coulomb interaction

generator. The screens were placed covering this opening. The metallic mesh is made of

iron wire with a diameter of 1mm and the mesh measures 5 mm × 5 mm. Its eﬀectiveness

as armour for the transversal electromagnetic wave with the frequency obtained by us for

9.2 MHz is greater than 50 dB[7]. This means that the signal due to this wave decreases

considerably and now barely aﬀects the results of the experiment. In this case, we register

a decrease of our signal of just 0.5 dB. Because of this, we can conclude the practically

all of our signal comes from the logitudinal component of the electric ﬁeld generated by

the Coulomb interaction generator. We repeated the same experiment using a 0.02 mm

thick aluminium sheet as a screen. Its eﬀectiveness as armour for the transversal electro-

magnetic wave of the aformentioned frequency is greater than 80 dB[7]. The decrease in

the signal is just 1 dB, and this result conﬁrms the previous conclusion that our signal

from the antenna is only due to the longitudinal component of the electric ﬁeld.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

The results of the experiment are presented in ﬁg.8.

Fig.8. Relation between the delay ∆t between the impulses of both antennas and the distance

F between the antennas.

The distance F between antenna 1 and antenna 2 has been traced along the horizontal

axis. The delay ∆t of the signal of antenna 2 with reference to antenna 1 has been traced

on the vertical axis. The uncertainties of the measurement results have also been marked

on the distance axis and the time axis.

The straight line, which is presented in the drawing, expresses the empirical linear

relation, which relates distance F to the delay ∆t. This has been determined by means

of the minimum square method. The line, which corresponds the the speed of light
c = 3.00 × 108 m/s cannot be diﬀerentiated from the line shown by the limited exactness

of the representation on the drawing.

11

Following a statistical treatment one obtains, that with a reliable probability P = 0.95

the group velocity of the propagation of the Coulomb interaction is found in the interval

[8]:

v = (3.03 ± 0.07) × 108 m/s

We would like to call this type of ﬁeld propagation “Coulomb waves”, which, of course,

has no analogy with the usual electromagnetic waves.

V. CONCLUSIONS

P.A.M. Dirac wrote ([9], p. 32): “As long as we are dealing only with transverse

waves, we cannot bring in the Coulomb interactions between particles. To bring them in,

we have to introduce longitudinal electromagnetic waves and include them in the potentials

Aµ.” It is known, however, that generally accepted Maxwellian electrodynamics forbids

the spreading of any longitudinal electro-magnetic perturbation in vacuum. So Dirac

writes ([9], p. 32): “The longitudinal waves can be eliminated by means of a mathematical

transformation...”. But after this transformation one gets the theory in which a charge

is always accompanied by the Coulomb ﬁeld around it, i.e. ([9], p. 32) “Whenever an

electron is emitted, the Coulomb ﬁeld around it is simultaneously emitted, forming a

kind of dressing for the electron. Similarly, when an electron is absorbed, the Coulomb

ﬁeld around it is simultaneously absorbed”.

In accord with the above it was shown [1-4] that the Coulomb interaction “works”

instantaneously, if one accepts that basic equations of classical electrodynamics are right.

On the other hand our experiment shows that the Coulomb interaction, at least, does not

spread instantaneously. The proper inference from this experiment is that the Coulomb

interaction cannot be considered as so called “instantaneous action at a distance” and,

in turn, the basic equations of classical electrodynamics can be incomplete and moreover,

their application is even limited in classical electrodynamics.

12

REFERENCES

[1] A. E. Chubykalo and R. Smirnov-Rueda, Phys. Rev. E53, 5373 (1996);

[2] A. E. Chubykalo and R. Smirnov-Rueda, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 12(1), 1 (1997).

[3] A. E. Chubykalo and R. Smirnov-Rueda, Phys. Rev. E57(3), 3683 (1998).

[4] A. E. Chubykalo and S. J. Vlaev, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 14(24), 3789 (1999).

[5] V. V. Dvoeglazov, it Hadronic J. Suppl. 12, 241 (1997)

[6] E.M. Purcell, Electricity and Magnetism, Berkeley Physics Course (2nd ed., McGraw-

Hill Book Co, 1985), Vol. 2.

[7] J. Barcells, F. Daura, R. Esparza, and R. Pallas, Interferencias electromagn´eticas en

sistemas electr´onicos (Alfaomega, Mexico, 1992).

[8] M. R. L. Soto, A.O. Calzadilla and P.A. Perez, An´alisis y procesamiento de los datos

experimentales (Mes. Ciudad de la Habana, Cuba, 1999) p. 156.

[9] P.A.M. Dirac, Directions in Physics (Wiley, New York, 1978).

13

