1
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
0
4
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Prediction of Stable Walking for a Toy That Cannot Stand

Michael J. Coleman∗, Mariano Garcia∗†, Katja Mombaur+, and Andy Ruina∗
∗Department of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, Cornell Univ., Ithaca, NY, 14853-7501 USA,mjc23@cornell.edu
+IWR - Univ. Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 368, 69120 Heidelberg, D, katja.mombaur@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de
†now at Ithaca Technical Center, Borg-Warner Automotive 770 Warren Rd. Ithaca NY 14850
For submission to PRE
(Draft Aug 11, 2000, revised February 21, 2014)

Previous experiments [M. J. Coleman and A. Ruina,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3658 (1998)] showed that a gravity-
powered toy with no control and which has no statically sta-
ble near-standing conﬁgurations can walk stably. We show
here that a simple rigid-body statically-unstable mathemati-
cal model based loosely on the physical toy can predict stable
limit-cycle walking motions. These calculations add to the
repertoire of rigid-body mechanism behaviors as well as fur-
ther implicating passive-dynamics as a possible contributor to
stability of animal motions.

Introduction. For walking and other activities, people
and animals move in complex, yet stable ways. One view is
that such coordination is the action of neuromuscular con-
trol constrained by, among other things, the laws of classical
mechanics. However, one might ask how much of animal co-
ordination might be understood in purely mechanical terms.
Likewise, how much versatility of motion is possible with sim-
ple mechanical devices? This paper concerns one example
that sheds a little light on these two general questions.

McGeer’s (e.g. [1]) success with straight-legged, two-dimen-
sional uncontrolled and gravity powered walking mechanisms
highlights the possibility of pure mechanics generating coordi-
nation. McGeer found steady walking solutions (periodic gait
or limit-cycle motions) that were exponentially stable (asymp-
totically returned to the periodic motion after small distur-
bances from that motion). In his two-dimensional theory, only
fore-aft stability, and not lateral balance, is in question. In
his physical implementations side-to-side balance is enforced
by duplicate side-by-side legs (4 legs total). These machines
cannot stand fully upright, but can stand with splayed legs,
possibly contributing to their dynamic stability.

Extending McGeer’s ideas, Coleman and Ruina [2] de-
scribed an easily reproducible [3] two legged gadget built from
Tinkertoys(cid:13)R that cannot stand at all, even with both feet on
the ground, splayed or not, yet seems (slightly) dynamically
stable while walking. But where the stability of McGeer’s ma-
chines was ﬁrst predicted with rigid-body modeling, the sta-
bility of the Tinkertoy(cid:13)R device was not. As noted in [2], this
system is essentially dissipative (from collisions and possibly
from ground friction and internal dissipation) and nonholo-
nomic (the dimension of the accessible conﬁguration space is
larger than the dimension of the velocity space). Nonholo-
nomic systems can have asymptotic stability, even when con-
servative, and nonholonomicity from intermittent foot contact
might also contribute to stability [4,5].

Which properties are needed for asymptotic dynamic sta-

bility of such a statically unstable system was left unanswered
by [2]. Possible key factors include friction of the hinge, play
in the hinge joint, elastic or inelastic deformation of the struc-
ture, compliance at the foot contact, and sliding and twisting
friction at the foot contact. Could a rigid body model without
these eﬀects explain the stable motion?

Previous research. The simulation model in [2] con-
sists of two rigid bodies connected by a frictionless hinge
(Fig. 1). The feet are toroidal with principal radii r1 and r2.
The ground allows no relative motion of contacting points,
no torques at the foot contact, no bounce (restitution e = 0),
and no tension force at the foot contact (non-sticky ﬂoor).
The lengths, center of mass location, the moment of inertia
components, and the ground slope are adjustable. After non-
dimensionalizing with mass m, length l and time pl/g there
are 13 free parameters. The working Tinkertoy(cid:13)R was based
on mildly unstable simulations [2] of a simpliﬁed model with
point contact (r1 = r2 = 0) and narrow hips (w = 0).

Earlier, McGeer [6] studied the same model, allowing r1 >
0 and w > 0 but assuming that the principal moments of in-
ertia aligned with the hip hinge and leg. He found only unsta-
ble solutions where, also, the swing foot passed below ground.
Kuo [7] studied a similar model, but disallowed steer (φ) and
also only found unstable passive gaits. Dankowicz [8] found
stable solutions for a related kneed computational model.
That model has wide feet so, like the 2D models, it can stand
stably with splayed legs. The semi-3D computational model
of Wisse et al. [9] can also stand with splayed legs.

Methods. Our study was of the system in (Fig. 1) [2]
described above, but with hip spacing and disc feet (r1 6=
0, w 6= 0, r2 = 0).

The overall approach is to characterize the solution of the
rigid-body dynamics equations as a function (map) that takes
the state of the system just after one step as input and gives
the state just after the next step as output. A ﬁxed point
of this map deﬁnes a limit cycle. Stability is evaluated by
the eigenvalues of the matrix describing the linearization of
this map.
If all eigenvalues are less than one in modulus
the periodic motion is exponentially stable. The map, its
ﬁxed points and the linearization are all found from numerical
solutions of the equations of classical rigid-body dynamics.

The numerical searches were aimed at generating stable
motion and not at accurately modeling either the existent
physical toy or humans. We used the toy’s approximate pa-
rameters to seed the optimizations. Special purpose optimal
control software (see Appendix) was used to reduce the most
unstable eigenvalue while maintaining periodicity of the gait,
positive foot clearance and static instability. The resulting so-
lution was checked and improved with an independent method
and checked again with another independent simulation.

1

Results. The model of Fig. 1 has asymptotically sta-
ble limit cycle motions (Fig. 2), with the foot of the swing
leg clearing the ground, with IXX = 0.1982, IY Y = 0.0186,
IZZ = 0.1802, IXY = 0.0071, IXZ = −0.0023, IY Z = 0.0573,
α = 0.0702, Xcm = 0, Ycm = 0.6969, and Zcm = 0.3137,
W = .3624, and R1 = 0.1236 and R2 = 0. Capital letters
indicate non-dimensional variables. Tensor components IM N
and mass positions are in local left-leg coordinates with origin
at the vertically-standing contact. Note the static instability
(Zcm > R1). The largest eigenvalue modulus of the single-
step map Jacobian is 0.8391560, safely below 1.

Discussion We are claiming a qualitative theoretical
mechanics result. That is, a system described with the clas-
sic equations of rigid body mechanics has an exponentially
stable limit-cycle solution in the neighborhood of a statically
unstable conﬁguration, but with no fast spinning parts. Al-
though we have not attempted a mathematical proof, we have
attempted to do our numerics with enough checks and tests
to state the result with conﬁdence (see appendix below).

This solution can be interpreted as bipedal walking, al-
though not especially anthropomorphic. The base solution is
exactly repetitive, step after step. That the largest eigenvalue
is less than 1 in magnitude means that, if the mechanism were
slightly disrupted from this periodic motion it would asymp-
totically approach this motion again, over a number of steps.
Simple numerical probes show, as exponential stability de-
mands, a small but non-inﬁnitesimal basin of attraction. We
have not investigated the shape or size of this domain in de-
tail; we do not know exactly what set of motions eventually
settle into the periodic motion and thus cannot precisely de-
scribe what disturbances knock the walker down. However,
the success of the physical model [2] suggests that the stability
is robust enough to be physically relevant.

We do not claim to have an accurate model of the toy in
[2]. Rather we have a simple model that explains the toy’s
qualitative behavior. Accurate quantitative prediction of the
toy’s motions may well depend on physical eﬀects that are not
in our simple model (various frictions and deformations). Yet
unknown is whether the parameters presented here could be
used as a basis for a better working physical device. More
generally, we also do not know if more human-like stable
passive-dynamic designs can be made which are also stati-
cally unstable.

Conclusions. The dynamic stability of a statically un-
stable walking mechanism can be predicted with a model con-
sisting of two rigid bodies connected by an ideal hinge and
making intermittent ideal no-slip, no-bounce point contact
with the ground. We have shown that there is no need to ap-
peal to hinge-friction, hinge-play, distributed or contact defor-
mation (elastic or inelastic), or contact frictional slip in order
to qualitatively predict the interesting behavior demonstrated
by the physical model in [2].

The results further highlight the versatility of simple pas-
sive strategies for stabilization of coordination. The calcu-
lation also slightly expands the range of known rigid-body
phenomenology.

For videos and reprints about the Tinkertoy(cid:13)R and related
machines, see www.tam.cornell.edu/∼ruina/hplab/pdw.html.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by a
biomechanics grant from the National Science Foundation and
a travel grant from Heidelberg University. We thank Hans-

Georg Bock for encouraging this collaboration.

Appendix: Numerical Analysis We carried out the

numerical analysis three diﬀerent ways.

The ﬁrst stable solution (with |σmax| = 0.897) with foot
clearance was found using the approach developed by Mom-
baur et al. [10] on the basis of the optimal control code Mus-
cod by Bock et al. [11] and Leineweber [12]. In the language
of the discipline, Muscod has been written for general multi-
phase optimal control problems and is based on a multiple
shooting state discretization. Multiple shooting splits up the
original boundary value problem into a number of initial value
problems enforcing continuity conditions at the transitions
from one interval to the next. At all multiple shooting points
Muscod allows the user to impose a number of equality and
inequality constraints on the parameters and the dynamic
variables being varied in the optimization. For the tinkertoy
model described here, this permitted us to ensure periodicity,
foot clearance during the step, and to keep all state variables
and parameters within reasonable ranges. Sensitivities of the
integration end values on each interval, both to variations
in initial values and to variations in model parameters, are
eﬃciently computed by means of internal numerical diﬀeren-
tiation (IND). The basic principle of IND is to use identi-
cal, but adaptive and error-controlled discretization schemes
for integration and derivative generation. For use with actu-
ated and passive gait problems, with implicit state-dependent
phase switching points and discontinuities in the state vari-
ables, the original Muscod has been combined with an object
oriented modeling library that deals with these situations in
a uniform and complete way. Also added to Muscod were sta-
bility analysis modules which compute the linearized Poincar´e
map of a periodic solution and their eigenvalues, assembling
information from all multiple shooting intervals and taking
care of the above mentioned implicit switching point depen-
dencies. Stable solutions for the tinkertoy model were found
by varying model parameters and bounds based on coarse grid
sensitivity information gathered during the previous optimal
control problem solutions.

Second, we reproduced and improved the solution above by
4th order Runge-Kutta integration of the ODE’s in Matlab(cid:13)R ,
ﬁnding the collision time accurately using Henon’s method
(changing the independent variable near the collision time).
The impact jump transition is a matrix multiplication. The
ﬁxed points of the resulting return map were found by numer-
ical root ﬁnding. The ﬁxed point map Jacobian was found
by a central diﬀerence perturbation of the initial state. The
eigenvalue was reduced from 0.897 to 0.839 using a simulated
annealing optimization of the maximum eigenvalue modulus.
For this Matlab solution we did extensive convergence tests
on both the integration step size and the central diﬀerence
step size. These tests indicate a combined roundoﬀ and trun-
cation error of about ±10−7 in the largest eigenvalue modulus
for the parameters given. This maximum eigenvalue estimate
diﬀers from that generated by Muscod with these parameters
by 2 × 10−3.

Finally, the equations of motion were derived indepen-
dently and simulated again independently in Matlab giving
agreement to the Matlab solution above to 10−6 for the largest
eigenvalue modulus.

For reference, the state of the system just after colli-
for the parameters given, q∗ =

sion of the left foot is,

2

[φ, ψ, θst, θsw, ˙φ, ˙ψ, ˙θst, ˙θsw] = [0.09868, −0.00925, −0.16016,
3.43583, −0.13221, −0.01991, 0.47124, −0.39256] with step
period τ ∗ = 1.00711 where ˙( ) = d( )/dτ with τ the dimen-
sionless time.

0.2

foot collision

foot collision

foot collision

(a)

stance angle,
q st(t )

swing angle, 
sw(t )+q st(t )-p

[1] T. McGeer, Int. J. Robot. Res. 9, 62 (1990).
[2] M. J. Coleman and A. Ruina, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3658

(c)

heading, f (t ) 

[3] A. N. Biscardi, Eighth grade science project report 1998,

(private communication) (unpublished).

[4] A. Ruina, Reports on Mathematical Physics 42, 91

-0.05

-0.1

(t ) 

bank, y
0

(1998).

(1998).

1.5
t , non-dimensional time
FIG. 2. A gait cycle (two steps).

0.5

1

In the ﬁrst half, the
stance leg is the left leg. (a) The swing leg angle is here mea-
sured from the slope normal (θ∗
st(τ ) − π); (b) pos-
itive swing-foot clearance between collisions; (c) the motion
has more steer (yaw) than lean (bank).

sw(τ ) + θ∗

2

2.5

(b)
swing foot height

0

-0.2

-0.4

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0

0

0.1

0.05

[5] M. J. Coleman and P. Holmes, Regular and Chaotic Dy-

namics 4, 2, pp. 1-23, (1999).

[6] T. McGeer, in Proc., Experimental Robotics II: The 2nd
International Symposium, edited by R. Chatila and G.
Hirzinger (Springer–Verlag, Berlin, 1992), pp. 465–90.

[7] A. D. Kuo, Int. J. Robot. Res. 18, 917 (1999).
[8] H. Dankowicz, J. Adolfsson, and A. B. Nordmark, sub-
mitted to Journal of Biomechanical Engineering (unpub-
lished).

[9] M. Wisse, A. L. Schwab, and R. Q. vd. Linde, ROBOT-

ICA (in press).

[10] K. D. Mombaur, H. G. Bock, J. P. Schloeder, Numeri-
cal Generation and Stabilization of Periodic Gaits, IWR
Preprint, Univ. Heidelberg (2000).

[11] H. G. Bock and K.-J. Plitt, A multiple shooting algo-
rithm for direct solution of optimal control problems,
IFAC World Congress, Budapest (1984)

[12] D. B. Leineweber, The Theory of MUSCOD in a Nut-

shell, IWR Preprint, Univ. Heidelberg (1996).

w

sw

ycm

n

m, I2

G2

g

swing leg(cid:13)

(leg 2)

z

x

y

m, I1

G1

r2

l

zcm

st

xcm

r1

C

D

stance leg(cid:13)

(leg 1)

FIG. 1. The 3D rigid body model. The parameters and

state variables are described in [2].

3

a
q
q
y
f
a
q
