Addendum to “COULOMB INTERACTION DOES
NOT SPREAD INSTANTANEOUSLY”

Rumen I. Tsontchev, Andrew E. Chubykalo and Juan M.
Rivera-Ju´arez
Escuela de F´ısica, Universidad Aut´onoma de Zacatecas
Apartado Postal C-580 Zacatecas 98068, ZAC., M´exico
e-mails: rumen@ahobon.reduaz.mx and andrew@ahobon.reduaz.mx

Received

2001

Abstract

We describe the results of experimental research by conﬁgura-
tions changed with respect to the original experimental conﬁg-
uration [1]. In this way it is demonstrated that the basic part
of the signal registered is due to the Coulomb electric ﬁeld and
does not originate from the transversal electromagnetic wave.

PACS: 03.50.-z, 03.50.De

1

1
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
0
4
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The basic doubt regarding the reliability of our results is due to the fact

that it is not known which part of the signal obtained by us is due to the

Coulomb interaction, and which part is due to the presence of a regular

transversal electromagnetic wave. The theoretical consideration is diﬃcult

because of the complexity of the experimental construction.

For this reason, it is more appropriate to determine this by means of

experiment.

In our Coulomb electric ﬁeld generator (Fig. 1) there are three elements

which emit transversal electromagnetic waves:

FIG. 1. Regular experimental conﬁguration.

1. the currents which ﬂow along the surface of the spheres

of the Van de Graaf generators

2.

the spark, which jumps between the electrodes of the

discharger

3. the currents which ﬂow along the discharge cable

During our experiments, the discharge cable was electrically and mag-

netically shielded. For its construction, the discharge cable was heavy coax-

ial cable. The discharge current ﬂowed along the central conductor. As

an electric shield, its shield with a thickness of approximately 1 mm was

used, which is much greater than the depth of the skin layer (0.03 mm) for

the resonant frequency of 14 Mhz. For the magnetic shield, a 5 mm thick

iron sectioned tube was used. The coaxial cable was placed inside the iron

tube without electric connection between them. The discharger was not

shielded. The shielding of the spheres of the Van de Graaf generators is not

recommended as the signal due to the Coulomb electric ﬁeld would be lost.

Consequently, it is necessary to evaluate the contribution of the transver-

sal electromagnetic waves emitted both by the discharger and by the Van

de Graaf generator’s spheres. In practice, it is only necessary to consider

the inﬂuence of the active Van de Graaf generator as the passive generator

is considerably further away from the antenna 2. For this reason, the signal

originating from the passive Van de Graaf generator reaches antenna 2 (the

measuring antenna) with a delay greater than 60 ns. That is, the said signal

reaches antenna 2 after measuring and does not inﬂuence the experimental

result.

The general idea of the proposed experiments is simple. If the initial

direction of the currents that ﬂow through the discharger and along the

sphere’s surface changes, then the sign of the ﬁrst front of the electromag-

netic wave emitted by them must change. Consequently, if the predominant

part of the signal is due to the electromagnetic wave, the sign of the ﬁrst

ﬂank of the signal obtained by the antennas will change. The amplitude

will change simultaneously.

With this purpose, an oriﬁce will be perforated in the head of the active

Van de Graaf generator. A thick ceramic wall tube, which does not allow

electric rupture up to a voltage of 150 kV (Fig.2), is placed in the oriﬁce.

FIG. 2. Modiﬁed head of the Van de Graaf active generator.

A conductor, which is connected electrically to the other pole of the

sphere, is placed along the axis of the tube. As we will demonstrate further

on, a construction of this type allows for a reversal of the currents along the

surface of the sphere. It is important to point out that the electromagnetic

wave emitted from the current, which passes through the central conductor,

is isolated from the metallic walls of the sphere.

Experiments have been carried out with four conﬁgurations. In ﬁg.1 we

show a regular conﬁguration; in ﬁgures 3, 4 and 5, the conﬁgurations are

modiﬁed. The direction of the initial movement of the electrons is indicated

by arrows in all of the ﬁgures.

FIG. 3. Inverse direction conﬁguration of the electric current which passes

along the surface of the head of the Van de Graaf active generator.

FIG. 4. Inverse direction conﬁguration of the electric current which passes

through the discharger.

FIG. 5. Inverse direction conﬁguration of the electric current which passe

through the discharger and along the surface of the head of the Van de Graaf

active generator.

Each conﬁguration has been investigated in three regimes:

a. the discharge cable is not shielded.

b.

the discharge cable is a coaxial cable. The discharge

current passes through the central thread. The cable shield is

not connected to earth.

c. as in b., but the shield is connected to earth.

In this way we can evaluate the inﬂuence of the discharge cable screen

on the processes. As we can see from the ﬁgures, the general ﬂow of the

electrons is always in the same direction - from the passive Van de Graaf

generator towards the active Van de Graaf generator. Because of this, the

signal due to the Coulomb electric ﬁeld in the case of the four conﬁgurations

does not undergo signiﬁcant changes. Consequently, if the basic part of the

signal is due to the Coulomb interaction, we should observe, in the case of

the four conﬁgurations, an impulse with negative ﬁrst ﬂank (Fig.6).

FIG. 6. Real form of the signal obtained by all of the conﬁgurations.

At the same time, in two conﬁgurations the direction of the current in

the discharger changes in the opposite way (Fig.4, Fig.5). In an analogous

manner, the direction of the currents which ﬂow along the surface of the

sphere changes in two conﬁgurations (Fig.3, Fig.5). Consequently, if our

signal is due to the electromagnetic waves emitted, or to the discharger, or

the sphere, or both together, at least in one conﬁguration we should observe

a change in the sign of the ﬁrst ﬂank on the oscilloscope screen (Fig. 7).

FIG. 7. Supposed form of the signal generated from the transversal

electromagnetic wave by changed conﬁguration.

As the experiments are carried out we can see that ALWAYS, regardless

of the conﬁguration and measurement regime, an impulse as pointed out in

Fig.6 is obtained.

The proportion between the signal amplitudes, obtained in the conﬁgu-

rations presented in ﬁgures 3, 4 and 5, taking the signal amplitude of the

regular conﬁguration as reference point (Fig. 1), has been investigated. The

result is that the relative deviation of the amplitudes does not exceed 5%.

Consequently, we can arrive at the deﬁnite conclusion that the dominant

part of our signal is due to the Coulomb interaction. Consequently, if the

Coulomb interaction is propagated instantaneously, we should record this

fact. However, in reality we only record the propagation of a wave.

In

this manner, we can consider that it has been demonstrated experimentally

that the Coulomb electric ﬁeld is propagated like a Coulomb wave (i.e. not

instantaneously).

REFERENCES

[1] R.I.Tzonchev, A.E.Chubykalo and J.M.Riviera-Ju´arez, Hadronic Journal 23, p.

401-424 (2000).

This figure "Figgg1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0104014v1

This figure "Figgg2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0104014v1

This figure "Figgg3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0104014v1

This figure "Figgg4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0104014v1

This figure "Figgg5.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0104014v1

This figure "Figgg6.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0104014v1

This figure "Figgg7.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0104014v1

