MCTP-01-45

CERN-TH/2001-277

physics/0110060

Trialogue on the number of fundamental constants

M. J. Duﬀ∗1, L. B. Okun

3
2 and G. Veneziano
‡
†

∗Michigan Center for Theoretical Physics, Randall Laboratory, Ann Arbor, MI

ITEP, Moscow, 117218, Russia
†

Theory Division, CERN, CH-1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland
‡

and

Laboratoire de Physique Th`eorique, Universit`e Paris Sud, 91405, Orsay, France

Abstract

This paper consists of three separate articles on the number of fundamental dimen-

sionful constants in physics. We started our debate in summer 1992 on the terrace

of the famous CERN cafeteria. In the summer of 2001 we returned to the subject to

ﬁnd that our views still diverged and decided to explain our current positions. LBO

develops the traditional approach with three constants, GV argues in favor of just two,

while MJD advocates zero.

1
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
6
0
0
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1mduﬀ@umich.edu
2okun@heron.itep.ru
3Gabriele.Veneziano@cern.ch

Fundamental constants: parameters and units

L.B. Okun

Abstract

There are two kinds of fundamental constants of Nature: dimensionless (like α

≃
1/137) and dimensionful (c – velocity of light, ¯h – quantum of action and angular

momentum, and G – Newton’s gravitational constant). To clarify the discussion I

suggest to refer to the former as fundamental parameters and the latter as fundamental

(or basic) units.

It is necessary and suﬃcient to have three basic units in order to

reproduce in an experimentally meaningful way the dimensions of all physical quantities.

Theoretical equations describing the physical world deal with dimensionless quantities

and their solutions depend on dimensionless fundamental parameters. But experiments,

from which these theories are extracted and by which they could be tested, involve

measurements, i.e. comparisons with standard dimensionful scales. Without standard

dimensionful units and hence without certain conventions physics is unthinkable.

2

1

Introduction: Parameters and Units

There is no well established terminology for the fundamental constants of Nature. It seems

reasonable to consider as fundamental the dimensionless ratios, such as the famous α =
e2/¯hc

1/137 and similar gauge and Yukawa couplings in the framework of standard

≃

model of elementary particles or its extensions.

It is clear that the number of such constants depends on the theoretical model at hand

and hence depends on personal preferences and it changes of course with the evolution

of physics. At each stage of this evolution it includes those constants which cannot be

expressed in terms of more fundamental ones, because of the absence of the latter [1]. At

present this number is a few dozens, if one includes neutrino mixing angles. It blows up

with the inclusion of hypothetical new particles.

On the other hand the term “fundamental constant” is often used for such dimensionful

constants as the velocity of light c, the quantum of action (and of angular momentum) ¯h,

and the Newton gravitational coupling constant G . This article is concerned with these

dimensionful constants which I propose to call fundamental (or basic) units.

Physics consists of measurements, formulas and “words”. This article contains no new

formulas, it deals mainly with “words” because, unlike many colleagues of mine, I believe

that an adequate language is crucial in physics. The absence of accurately deﬁned terms

or the uses (i.e. actually misuses) of ill-deﬁned terms lead to confusion and proliferation of

wrong statements.

2

Stoney’s and Planck’s Units of L, T, M

The three basic physical dimensions:

length L, time T, and mass M with corresponding

metric units: cm, sec, gram, are usually associated with the name of C.F. Gauss. In spite of

tremendous changes in physics, three basic dimensions are still necessary and suﬃcient to

express the dimension of any physical quantity. The number three corresponds to the three

basic entities (notions): space, time and matter. It does not depend on the dimensionality

of space, being the same in spaces of any dimension. It does not depend on the number and

nature of fundamental interactions. For instance, in a world without gravity it still would

be three.

In the 1870’s G.J. Stoney [2], the physicist who coined the term “electron” and measured

the value of elementary charge e, introduced as universal units of Nature for L, T, M:
lS = e√G/c2, tS = e√G/c3, mS = e/√G. The expression for mS has been derived by

3

equating the Coulomb and Newton forces. The expressions for lS and tS has been derived
from mS, c and e on dimensional grounds: mSc2 = e2/lS, tS = lS/c.

When M. Planck discovered in 1899 ¯h, he introduced [3] as universal units of Nature for

L, T, M: lP = ¯h/mP c, tP = ¯h/mP c2, mP =

¯hc/G.

One can easily see that Stoney’s and Planck’s units are numerically close to each other,

p

their ratios being √α.

3 The physical meaning of units

The Gauss units were “earth-bound” and “hand-crafted”. The cm and sec are connected
with the size and rotation of the earth.4 The gram is the mass of one cubic cm of water.

An important step forward was made in the middle of XX century, when the standards

of cm and sec were deﬁned in terms of of wave-length and frequency of a certain atomic

line.

Enormously more universal and fundamental are c and ¯h given to us by Nature herself
as units of velocity [v] = [L/T ] and angular momentum [J] = [M vL] = [M L2/T ] or action
[S] = [ET ] = [M v2T ] = [M L2/T ]. (Here [ ] denotes dimension.)

3.1 The meaning of c

It is important that c is not only the speed of light in vacuum. What is much more signiﬁcant

is the fact that it is the maximal velocity of any object in Nature, the photon being only

one of such objects. The fundamental character of c would not be diminished in a world

without photons. The fact that c is the maximal v leads to new phenomena, unknown

in Newtonian physics and described by relativity. Therefore Nature herself suggests c as

fundamental unit of velocity.

In the Introduction we deﬁned as fundamental those constants which cannot be calcu-

lated at our present level of fundamental knowledge (or rather ignorance). This “negative”

deﬁnition applies equally to parameters and to units (to α and to c). At ﬁrst sight α looks

superior to c because the value of α does not depend on on the choice of units, whereas

the numerical value of c depends explicitly on the units of length and time and hence on

conventions. However c is more fundamental than α because its fundamental character has

not only a “negative” deﬁnition, but also a “positive” one: it is the basis of relativity theory

which uniﬁes space and time, as well as energy, momentum and mass.

4Metre was deﬁned in 1791 as a 1/40,000,000 part of Paris meridian.

4

By expressing v in units of c (usually it is deﬁned as β = v/c) one simpliﬁes relativistic

kinematics. On the other hand the role of c as a conversion factor between time and

distance or between mass and rest-energy is often overstated in the literature. Note that

in spite of the possibility of measuring, say, distance in light-seconds, the length does not

become identical to time, just as momentum is not identical to energy. This comes from

the pseudoeuclidian nature of four-dimensional space-time.

3.2 The meaning of ¯h

Analogously to c, the quantity ¯h is is also fundamental in the “positive” sense:

it is the

quantum of the angular momentum J and a natural unit of the action S. When J or S are

close to ¯h, the whole realm of quantum mechanical phenomena appears.

Particles with integer J (bosons) tend to be in the same state (i.e. photons in a laser,

or Rubidium atoms in a drop of Bose-Einstein condensate). Particles with half-integer J

(fermions) obey the Pauli exclusion principle which is so basic for the structure of atoms,

atomic nuclei and neutron stars.

Symmetry between fermions and bosons, dubbed supersymmetry or SUSY, is badly

broken at low energies, but many theorists believe that it is restored near the Planck mass

(in particular in superstrings and M theories).

The role of ¯h as a conversion factor between frequency and energy or between wave-

length and momentum is often overstated.

It is natural when dealing with quantum mechanical problems to use ¯h as the unit of J

and S.

3.3 The status of G

The status of G and its derivatives, mP , lP , tP , is at present diﬀerent from that of c

and ¯h, because the quantum theory of gravity is still under construction. The majority of
experts connect their hopes with superstrings and extra spatial dimensions.5 But the bridge

between superstrings and experimental physics exists at present only as wishful thinking.

Recent surge of interest to possible modiﬁcations of Newton’s potential at sub-millimeter

distances demonstrates that the position of G is not as ﬁrm as that of c and ¯h.

5The characteristic length of a superstring λs=lP /√αGU T , where αGU T =α(q2 = M 2

GU T ). (As is well

known, the fundamental parameters are “running”: their values depend on q2.)

5

4 The cube of theories

The epistemological role of c, ¯h, G units in classifying theories was ﬁrst demonstrated in

a jocular article by G. Gamov, D. Ivanenko and L. Landau [4], then quite seriously by M.

Bronshtein [5, 6], A. Zelmanov [8, 7] and others (see e.g. [9, 10]); and it is known now as

the cube of theories.

The cube is located along three orthogonal axes marked by c (actually by 1/c), ¯h, G. The

vertex (000) corresponds to non-relativistic mechanics,(c00) – to special relativity, (0¯h0) –

to non-relativistic quantum mechanics, (c¯h0) – to quantum ﬁeld theory, (c0G) – to general

relativity, (c¯hG) – to futuristic quantum gravity and the Theory of Everything, TOE. There

is a hope that in the framework of TOE the values of dimensionless fundamental parameters

will be ultimately calculated.

5 The art of putting c = 1, ¯h = 1, G = 1

The universal character of c, ¯h, G and hence of mP , lP , tP makes natural their use in dealing

with futuristic TOE. (In the case of strings the role of lP is played by the string length

λs.) In such natural units all physical quantities and variables become dimensionless. In

practice the use of these units is realized by putting c=1, ¯h=1, G (or λs)=1 in all formulas.

However one should not take these equalities too literally, because their left-hand sides are

dimensionful, while the right-hand sides are dimensionless. It would be more proper to use

arrows “

” (which mean “substituted by”) instead of equality signs “=”.

→

The absence of c, ¯h, G (or any of them) in the so obtained dimensionless equations does

not diminish the fundamental character of these units. Moreover it stresses their universality

and importance.

It is necessary to keep in mind that when comparing the theoretical predictions with ex-

perimental results one has anyway to restore (“

”) the three basic units c, ¯h, G in equations

because all measurements involve standard scales.

←

The above arguments imply what is often dubbed as a “moderate reductionism”, which

in this case means that all physical phenomena can be explained in terms of a few fun-

damental interactions of fundamental particles and thus expressed in terms of three basic

units and a certain number of fundamental dimensionless parameters.

6

6

International system of units

An approach diﬀerent from the above underlies the International System of Units (Syst´eme

Internationale d’Unit´ees – SI) [11], [12]. This System includes 7 basic units (meter, second,

kilogram, ampere, kelvin, mole, candela) and 17 derivative ones. The SI might be useful

from the point of view of technology and metrology, but from the point of view of pure

physics four out of its seven basic units are evidently derivative ones. Electric current is

number of moving electrons per second. Temperature is up to a conversion factor (Boltzman
10−23 joules/kelvin) is the average energy of an ensemble of particles.

constant k = 1.38

×

Mole is trivially connected with the number of molecules in one gram-molecule, called
1023/mole. As for unit of optical brightness or illumination

Avogadro’s number NA = 6.02

×

(candela), it is obviously expressed in terms of the ﬂux of photons.

It is interesting to compare the character of k with that of c, ¯h, mP . The Boltzmann

constant is an important conversion factor which signals the transition from a few (or one)

particle systems to many particle systems. However it radically diﬀers from c, ¯h, mP , as

there is no physical quantity with the dimension of k, for which k is a critical value. The

role of conversion factor is only a secondary one for c, ¯h, mP , whereas for k it is the only

one.

In the framework of SI vacuum is endowed with electric permittivity ε0 = 8.85

10−12
10−17 newton/(ampere)2, whereas ε0µ0 =
farad/m and magnetic permeability µ0 = 12.57
1/c2. This is caused by electrodynamic deﬁnition of charge, which in SI is secondary with

×

×

respect to the current. In electrostatic units ε0 = µ0 = 1. According to the SI standard

this deﬁnition is allowed to use in scientiﬁc literature, but not in text-books (see critical

exposition of SI in Ref. [13]).

7 Remarks on Gabriele’s accompanying article

I note with satisfaction that some of the original arguments and statements do not appear

in his part of this Trialogue [14]. Among them there are the following statements: 1. that

in string theory there is room only for two and not three dimensionful constants [15], [16];

2. that units of action are arbitrary [which means that ¯h is not a fundamental unit (LO)];

3. that masses unlike length and time intervals are not measured directly [17]. Gabriele

admits in section 6 [14] that his two units can be “pedagogically confusing” and the set

c, ¯h, λs is “most practical”, but he considers the latter “not economical” and in other parts
2 instead of ¯h.

of the text [14] he insists on using λs

7

Of course, if you forget about the pedagogical and practical sides of physics, the most

economical way is not to have fundamental units at all, like Mike, but that is a purely

theoretical approach (“hep-th”), and not physical one (“physics”, “hep-ph”).

It seems to me inconsistent to keep two units (c, λs) explicitly in the equations, while

substituting by unity the third one (¯h), as Gabriele is doing in Refs.

[14], [15], [16], [17].

According to my section 5 above, this corresponds to using ¯h as a unit of J and S, while

not using c and λs as units of velocity and length.

I also cannot agree that the electron mass, or GF are as good for the role of fundamental

unit as the Planck mass or G.

8 Remarks on Mike’s accompanying article

In section 4 of Mike’s article [18] he introduces a deﬁnition of fundamental constants with the

help of an alien with whom it is possible to exchange only dimensionless numbers. According

to Mike, only those constants are fundamental the values of which can be communicated

to the alien. Thus Mike concludes that there exist no fundamental units. According to my

section 5 above, this actually corresponds to the use of c, ¯h, G as fundamental units.

In fact, at the end of section 2 Mike writes “that the most economical choice is to use

natural units where there are no conversion factors at all.” Mike explained to me that his

natural units are c=¯h=G=1.As these equalities cannot be considered literally, I believe that

Mike uses the same three units as I do. However he concludes section 2 with a statement:

“ Consequently, none of these units or conversion factors is fundamental.”

(In response to the above paragraph Mike added a new paragraph to his section 2, in

which he ascribed to me the view that one cannot put c=1. According to my section 5, one

can (and should!) put c=1 in relativistic equations, but must understand that this means

that c is chosen as the unit of velocity.)

The “alien deﬁnition” of fundamental constants is misleading. We, theorists, commu-

nicate not with aliens, but with our experimental colleagues, students, and non-physicists.

Such communication is impossible and physics is unthinkable without standardized dimen-

sionful units,without conventions..

Concerning Mike’s criticism of my article [10],I would like to make the following remark.

The statement that only dimensionless variables, functions and constants have physical

meaning in a theory does not mean that every problem should be explicitly presented in

dimensionless form. Sometimes one can use dimensionful units and compare their ratios with

8

ratios of other dimensionful units. This approach was used in Ref. [10], where entertaining

stories by O. Volberg [19] and G. Gamov [20], were critically analyzed. In these stories,in

order to demonstrate the peculiarities of relativistic kinematics, the velocity of light was

assumed to be of the order of that of a car, or even bicycle,while the everyday life remained

the same as ours.. In Ref. [10] it was shown that if c is changed, while dimensions of atoms

are not changed (mass and charge of electron as well as ¯h, are the same as in our world ),

then electromagnetic and optical properties of atoms would change drastically because of

change of α, which is the ratio of electron velocity in hydrogen atom to that of light.

9 Conclusions

It is obvious that using proper language (terms and semantics) three fundamental units

are the only possible basis for a selfconsistent description of fundamental physics. Other

conclusions are viable only through the improper usage of terms.

Acknowledgments

I am very grateful to Gabriele and Mike for their patience in discussing their points of

view. I am indebted to Val Telegdi who critically read the draft of this article and helped

to improve it. The hospitality of the CERN Theory Division and Michigan Center of

Theoretical Physics during the completion of this article is appreciated, as well as Humboldt

Award and the grant of RFBR 00-15-96562.

References

[1] S. Weinberg, Overview of theoretical prospects for understanding the values of funda-

mental constants, in: The Constants of Physics, W. H. McCrea and M. J. Rees editors,

Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London A310 (1983) 249.

[2] G.J. Stoney. The Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 11 (1881) 381-390.

[3] M. Planck, ¨Uber irrevesible Strahlungsvorg¨ange. S.-B. Preuss Akad Wiss (1899) 440-

480; Ann. d. Phys. 1 (1900) 69-112; reprinted in: Max Planck, Physikalische Abhand-

lungen und Vortr¨age. Band I. Friedr. Vieweg. 1958, pp. 560-600, pp. 614-667.

[4] G. Gamov, D. Ivanenko, and L. Landau, Zh. Russ. Fiz. Khim. Obstva. Chast’ Fiz. 60

(1928) 13 (in Russian).

9

[5] M. Bronshtein, K voprosu o vozmozhnoy teorii mira kak tselogo ( On a possible theory

of the world as a whole ), in: Osnovnye problemy kosmicheskoy ﬁziki (Basic problems

of cosmic physics). Kiev, ONTI (1934), pp. 186-218, in particular p. 210 (in Russian).

[6] M.Bronshtein, Physikalische Zeitscrift der Sowjetunion 9 (1936) 140-157.

[7] A. Zelmanov, Kosmologia (Cosmology), in: Razvitie astronomii v SSSR (Development

of astronomy in USSR), Nauka, Moscow, 1967, pp. 320-390, in particular p. 323 (in

Russian).

[8] A. Zelmanov, Mnogoobrazie materialnogo mira i problema beskonechnosti Vselen-

noi (Diversity of the material world and the problem of inﬁnity of the Universe),

in: Beskonechnost’ i Vselennaya (Inﬁnity and Universe), Mysl’, Moscow, 1969, pp.

274-324, in particular p. 302 (in Russian).

[9] G. Gorelik, Razmernost’ prostranstva (Dimension of space), MGU, Moscow, 1983,

Chapter 5 (in Russian).

[10] L.B. Okun, Sov. Phys. Usp. 34 (1991) 818.

[11] Symbols, Units and Nomenclature in Physics: Document U.I.P. 20 (1978). International

Union of Pure and Applied Physics, S.U.N. Commission.

[12] Review of Particle properties. Phys. Rev. D45 (1992) Part II; page III.4.

[13] L.B. Okun. Particle physics: The Quest for the Substance of Substance. Harwood

academic publishers. 1985, Chur, New York. Appendix 1. On systems of physical units.

[14] G. Veneziano, accompanying article.

[15] G. Veneziano. A Stringy Nature needs just two constants. Europhysics Lett. 2 (1986)

199-204.

[16] G. Veneziano. Quantum strings and the constants of nature, in: The Challenging Ques-

tions. Ed. A. Zichichi. Proceedings of the 27th Course of International School held July

26 - August 3, 1989, Erice, Italy, Plenum Press, N.Y. (1990) 199-22?.

[17] G. Veneziano. Fundamental Constants in Field and String Theory. CERN-TH.6725/92,

talk given at the 6th session of the International Workshop of Theoretical Physics, in:

String Quantum Gravity and Physics at the Planck Scale. Erice, Sicily, 21-28 June

1992. Proceedings edited by N. Sanchez and A. Zichichi, World Sci. (1993) p. 552.

10

[18] M. Duﬀ, accompanying article.

[19] O. A. Volberg, Zanimatel’naya progulka v strane Einshteina (An entertaining trip into

Einstein’s country), in: Ya. I. Perel’man, Zanimatel’naya Mekhanika (Entertaining

Mechanics), GRN - PYuL, Leningrad - Moscow, 1935, ch.11, p. 188 (in Russian).

[20] G. Gamov, Mr. Tompkins in Paperback. Containing Mr. Tompkins in Wonderland and

Mr. Tompkins Explores the Atom, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England,

1988.

11

Fundamental Units in Physics: how many, if any?

G. Veneziano

Abstract

I will try to summarize my previous work on the question of how many fundamental

dimensionful constants (fundamental units) are needed in various theoretical frame-

works such as renormalizable QFT + GR, old-fashioned string theory, modern string/M-

theory. I will also try to underline where past and present disagreement on these issues

between Lev Okun, Mike Duﬀ, and myself appears to be originating from.

12

1

Introductory remarks

Some ﬁfteen years ago I wrote a short letter [1] on the number of (dimensionful) fundamental

constants in string theory, where I came to the somewhat surprising conclusion that two

constants, with dimensions of space and time, were both necessary and suﬃcient. Somewhat

later, I became aware of S. Weinberg’s 1983 paper [2], whose way of looking at the question

of deﬁning fundamental constants in physics I tried to incorporate in my subsequent work

on the subject [3], [4].

After reading those papers of mine once more, I still subscribe to their content, even

if I might have expressed some speciﬁc points diﬀerently these days. Here, rather than

repeating the details of my arguments, I will try to organize and summarize them stressing

where, in my opinion, the disagreement between Lev, Mike and myself arises from. I have

the impression that, in the end, the disagreement is more in the words than in the physics,

but this is what we should try to ﬁnd out.

The rest of this note is organized as follows: In Section 2 I make some trivial introductory

statements that are hopefully uncontroversial. In Sections 3, 4 and 5 I describe how I see

the emergence of fundamental units (the name I will adopt for fundamental dimensionful

constants following Lev’s suggestion) in QFT+GR, in the old Nambu-Goto formulation of

quantum string theory (QST), and in the so-called Polyakov formulation, respectively. In

Sections 6 I will try to point at the origin of disagreement between myself and Lev while,

in Section 7 the same will be done w.r.t. Mike. Section 8 brieﬂy discusses the issue of

time-varying fundamental units.

2 Three questions and one answer

Let me start with two statements on which we all seem to agree:

Physics is always dealing, in the end, with dimensionless quantities, typically repre-

senting ratios of quantities having the same dimensions, e.g.

It is customary to introduce “units”, i.e. to consider the ratio of any physical quantity

q to a ﬁxed quantity uq of the same kind so that

α =

,

,

. . .

e2
¯hc

me
mp

q = (q/uq)uq ,

13

(1)

(2)

•

•

where uq is a name (e.g. centimeter or second) and (q/uq) is a number. Obviously,

q1/q2 = (q1/uq)/(q2/uq).

Let us now ask the following three questions

•

Q1: are units arbitrary?

Q2: are there units that are more fundamental than others according to S. Weinberg’s

deﬁnition [2]?

interactions.

Q3: How many units (fundamental or not) are necessary?

and try to answer them in the context of diﬀerent theories of elementary particles and

I hope we agree that the answer to the ﬁrst question is yes, since only qi/qj matter and

these ratios do not depend on the choice of units.

I think that the answer to the other two questions depends on the framework we are

considering (Cf. Weinberg, Ref. [2]). The next three Sections therefore analyze Q2 and Q3

within three distinct frameworks, and provide, for each case, answers A2 and A3, respec-

tively.

3 Fundamental units in QFT+GR

Quantum Field Theory (QFT) (or more speciﬁcally the Standard Model (SM)) plus General

Relativity (GR) represent the state of the art in HEP before the string revolution of 1984.

Weinberg’s 1983 paper [2] reﬂects therefore the attitude about FC’s at the dawn of the

string revolution. I would summarize it brieﬂy as follows:

A2: a qualiﬁed yes.

•

At the QFT level of understanding c and ¯h appear to be more fundamental units of

speed and action than any other. In Newtonian mechanics only the ratios of various

velocities in a given problem matter. By contrast, in (special) relativity the ratio

of each velocity appearing in the problem to the (universal) speed of light, c, also

matters. Likewise, in classical mechanics only the ratios of various terms in the action

matter, the overall normalization being irrelevant while, in QM, the ratio of the total

action to the (universal) quantum of action ¯h does matter (large ratios, for instance,

correspond to a semiclassical situation). It appears therefore that both c and ¯h have

a special status as more basic units of speed and action than any others.

14

Indeed, let’s apply S. Weinberg’s criterion [2] and ask: can we compute c and ¯h in

terms of more fundamental units? Within QFT the answer appears to be an obvious

no. Had we chosen instead some other arbitrary units of speed and action, then,

within a given theory, we would be able to compute them, in principle at least, in

terms of c and ¯h, i.e. in terms of something more fundamental (and of some speciﬁed

dimensionless constants such as α).

A3: most probably three

•

It is quite clear, I think, that in QFT+GR we cannot compute everything that is

observable in terms of c, ¯h, and of dimensionless constants, without also introducing

some mass or length scale. Hence it looks that the answer to the third question is

indeed three. Unlike in the case of c and ¯h, it is much less obvious, however, which

mass or length scale, if any, is more fundamental in the sense of SW. The Planck

mass, MP , does not look like a particularly good choice since it is very hard, even

conceptually, to compute, say, me or mp in terms of MP in the SM + GR framework.

This is a bit strange: we seem to need three units, but we can only identify two

fundamental ones. So why three? Why not more? Why not less?

Why not more? This is because it looks unnecessary (and even“silly” according to

present understanding of physical phenomena) to introduce a separate unit for tem-

perature, for electric current and resistance, etc., or separate units for distances in the

x, y and z directions. I refer to Lev for a discussion about how to go from the seven

units of the International System of Units (SI) down to three [5], and for how three

fundamental units deﬁne the so-called “‘cube” of physical theories [6].

And why not less, say just two? Well because mass or energy appear as concepts that

are qualitatively diﬀerent from, say, distances or time intervals. Let us recall how

mass emerges in classical mechanics (CM). We can base CM on the action principle

and get F = ma by varying the action

S =

1
2

Z (cid:18)

m ˙x2

V (x)

dt

(cid:19)

−

⇒

ma = F

dV /dx ,

≡ −

(3)

but, as it’s well known, classically the action can be rescaled by an arbitrary factor.

If we had only one species of particles in Nature we could use, instead of S,

˜S =

˙x2

1
2

−

Z (cid:18)

V (x)/m

dt

(cid:19)

≡ Z (cid:18)

1
2

˙x2

˜V (x)

dt

(cid:19)

−

⇒

a = ˜F

1
m

≡ −

dV /dx

(4)

No physical prediction would change by using units in which masses are pure numbers

provided we redeﬁne forces accordingly! In this system of units ¯h would be replaced

15

by ¯h/m and would have dimensions of v2

t. If we have already decided for c as

×

unit of velocity, ¯h would deﬁne therefore a fundamental unit of time (the Compton

wavelength of the chosen particle divided by c). However, in the presence of many

particles of diﬀerent mass, we cannot decide which mass to divide the action by, which

choice is most fundamental.

I think there is even a deeper reason why QFT+GR needs a separate unit for mass.

QFT is aﬀected by UV divergences that need to be renormalized. This forces us

to introduce a cut-oﬀ which, in principle, has nothing to do with c, ¯h or MP , and

has to be “removed” in the end. However, remnants of the cut-oﬀ remain in the

renormalized theory. In QCD, for instance, the hadronic mass scale (say mp) originates

from a mechanism known as dimensional transmutation, and is arbitrary. Perhaps

one day, through string theory or some other uniﬁed theory of all interactions, we will

understand how mp is related to MP , but in QFT+GR it is not. We do not know

therefore which of the two, MP or mp, is more fundamental and the same is true for

the electron mass me, for GF etc. etc.

The best we can do, in QFT+GR, is to take any one of these mass scales (be it a

particle mass or a mass extracted from the strength of a force) as unit of mass and

consider the ratio of any other physical mass to the chosen unit as a pure number

that, in general, we have no way to compute, even in principle.

4 Fundamental units in old-fashioned quantum string the-

ory (QST)

A2: yes, c and λs!

•

With string theory the situation changes because it is as if there were a single particle,

hence a single mass. Indeed, a single classical parameter, the string tension T , appears

in the Nambu-Goto (NG) action:

S = T

d(Area) , S/¯h = λ

d(Area) ,

(5)

Z

−2
s Z

where the speed of light c has already been implicitly used in order to talk about

the area of a surface embedded in space-time. This fact allows us to replace ¯h by a

well deﬁned length, λs, which turns out to be fundamental both in an intuitive sense

16

and in the sense of S. Weinberg. Indeed, we should be able, in principle, to compute

any observable in terms of c and λs (see below for an example). Of course, I could

instead compute c and λs in terms of two other physical quantities deﬁning more

down-to-earth units of space and time, but this would not satisfy SW’s criterion of

having computed c and λs in terms of something more fundamental!

A3: the above two constants are also suﬃcient!

•

This was the conclusion of my 1986 paper: string theory only needs two fundamental

dimensionful constants c and λs, i.e. one fundamental unit of speed and one of length.

The apparent puzzle is clear: where has our loved ¯h disappeared? My answer was

then (and still is): it changed its dress! Having adopted new units of energy (energy

being replaced by energy divided by tension, i.e. by length), the units of action (hence

of ¯h) have also changed. And what about my reasoning in QFT+GR? Obviously it

does not hold water any more: For one, QFT and GR get uniﬁed in string theory.

Furthermore, the absence of UV divergences makes it unnecessary to introduce by

hand a cut oﬀ.

And indeed the most amazing outcome of this reasoning is that the new Planck
constant, λ2

s, is the UV cutoﬀ. Furthermore, there is deﬁnitely hope, in quantum

string theory (QST), to be able to compute both MP and mp (in the above string units,

i.e. as lengths) in terms of λs, c and of a dimensionless parameter, the string coupling,

itself dynamically determined from the VEV of the dilaton and of compactiﬁcation

moduli ﬁelds.

The situation here reminds me of that of pure quantum gravity. As noticed by Novikov

and Zeldovich [7], such a theory would only contain two fundamental units, c, and
the Planck length lP = √GN ¯hc−3, but not ¯h and GN separately. We may view string

theory as an extension of GR that allows the introduction of all elementary particles

and all fundamental forces in a geometrical way. No wonder then to ﬁnd that only

geometrical units are necessary.

Let us consider for instance, within the string theory framework, the standard example

of computing the energy levels of atoms in terms of the electron mass, its charge, and

¯h. These are given, to lowest order in α, by

1

En =

2n2 me(e2/¯h)2 =

2n2 (mec2)α2

−

−

1

(6)

17

Weinberg argues, convincingly I think, that the quantities En are less fundamental

than the electron charge, mass and ¯h. Assume now that what we are really measuring

are not energies by themselves, but either ratios of energies such as

En
mec2 =

1

2n2 α2 ,

−

(7)

(8)

or frequencies of spectral lines like

ωmn =

(Em

En) =

−

1
¯h

1
2

(

1
n2 −

1
m2 )

α2c
λs

ǫe .

In that case, clearly, only c and λs, and some in principle calculable dimensionless

ratios (such as the electron mass in string units, ǫe = me/Ms), appear in the answer

[1]. Obviously, if we follow Weinberg’s deﬁnition, λs and λs/c, and not for instance

c/ω12 and 1/ω12 (which are like the “modern” units of length, and time), play the

role of fundamental units of length and time.

5 Fundamental units in modern QST/M-theory

We now turn to the same set of questions within the context of ﬁrst-quantized string theory

in the presence of background ﬁelds. Here I will attempt to give A2 and A3 together.

The beautiful feature of this formulation is that all possible parameters of string theory,

dimensionful and dimensionless alike, are replaced by background ﬁelds whose VEV’s we

hope to be able to determine dynamically. As a prototype, consider the bosonic string in a

gravi-dilaton background. The action (divided by ¯h if conventionally normalized) reads:

S =

1
2 Z

√

−

−

γ(γαβ∂αX µ∂βX νGµν (X) + R(γ)φ(X))d2z

(9)

where X µ = X µ(σ, τ ), µ = 0, 1 . . . D

1, are the string coordinates as functions of the world-

sheet coordinates z = (σ, τ ), with respect to which the the partial derivatives are deﬁned.

Furthermore, Gµν is the so-called string metric (with respect to which the string length is

constant) and φ is the so-called dilaton, controlling the strength of all interactions. Finally,

γαβ and R(γ) are, respectively, the metric and scalar curvature of the two-dimensional

Riemann surface having coordinates σ and τ .

The expectation value of φ gives the dimensionless coupling parameter –known as the

string coupling– that controls the string-loop expansion, while the expectation value of Gµν ,

which by its deﬁnition clearly carries dimensions of inverse length (or time) square, provides

18

the fundamental units of space and time that we are after. If this latter VEV is proportional

to ηµν , the ﬂat Minkowskian metric, then it will automatically introduce the constants c

and λs of the previous Section via:

< Gµν (X) >= diag.

c2λ

−2
s , λ

−2
s , . . .

(cid:17)

(cid:16)−

(10)

The mere existence of ﬁnite values of c and λs appears to be of fundamental importance.

The crucial question however is the following: do the actual values of c and λs mean

something (in the same way in which the actual value of < φ > does)? What is, in other

words, the diﬀerence between dimensionful and dimensionless constants? The answer is a

bit subtle. String theory should allow to compute α in terms of the VEV of φ. Similarly, it
should allow to compute Gµν ∆X µ∆X ν for some physical length ∆X µ (say for the Hydrogen

atom). Calling that pure number so many centimeters would ﬁx the string length parameter

in cm but, of course, this depends on conventions while the truly invariant quantity is just
Gµν ∆X µ∆X ν . Both < φ > and Gµν ∆X µ∆X ν are pure numbers whose possible values

distinguish one theory (or one vacuum) from another.

The diﬀerence between the two kinds of constants, if any, simply stems from the fact that,

while diﬀerent values of < φ > (or α) deﬁne genuinely diﬀerent theories, values of < Gµν >

that are related by a General Coordinate Transformation (GCT) can be compensated by a
GCT on X and thus deﬁne the same theory as long as Gµν ∆X µ∆X ν remains the same. In

particular, if < Gµν >

ηµν as in the example discussed above, the actual proportionality

∼

constants c and λs appearing in (10) can be reabsorbed by a GCT. This is why it does not

make sense to talk about the absolute values of c and λs or to compare them to those of
an alien: only the dimensionless numbers Gµν ∆X µ∆X ν , i.e. the values of some physical

length or speed in those units are physically relevant and can be compared (see Section 19).

The situation would be very diﬀerent, instead, if < Gµν > would not be reducible to

ηµν via a GCT. That would mean a really diﬀerent world, like one with a diﬀerent value of

α. In Ref. [8] I gave the example of < Gµν > proportional to the de-Sitter metric, stressing

the fact that, in such a vacuum, even λs disappears in favour of a dimensionless parameter

similar to < φ >. Thus, as stressed in [3], [4], my early statement in [1] should be considered

valid if the vacuum of QST is Minkowskian, in particular in the NG formulation of QST.

To summarize, QM provides, through the string metric Gµν , a truly fundamental me-

ter/clock allowing us to reduce space-time distances to pure numbers whose absolute value
is physically meaningful. Note, incidentally, that also in Classical GR only gµν ∆X µ∆X ν

have physical meaning. However, in the classical case (and even for classical strings), only

19

ratios of quantities of this type matter while in QST, Gµν ∆X µ∆X ν is, in itself, a mean-
In a very similar way, pure numbers like Gµν PµPν deﬁne
ingful dimensionless quantity.
masses, momenta and energies as measured in string units. Since Gµν is just the inverse of
Gµν , the natural units for Pµ are just the inverse of the units of X µ. Indeed, the canoni-
cally conjugate variable to X is clearly identiﬁed from the action (9) as Gµν ˙X ν , and had

dimensions of length

−1.

In conclusion, I still stand by my remark in [3] that the fundamental constants of Nature

are, in QST, the constants of the vacuum. How many (physically distinct) choices of its

VEV’s does QST allow? We now believe that all known consistent string theories correspond

to perturbations around diﬀerent vacua of a single, yet unknown, “M-theory”. We still do

not know, however, how many physically inequivalent non-perturbative vacua M-theory

has. Until then, I do not think we can really answer the question of fundamental units in

QST but I would be very surprised if, in any consistent string vacuum, we would ﬁnd that

we need more than one unit of length and one of time.

6 The disagreement with Lev

Lev cannot accept [9] that ¯h has disappeared from the list. He claims that, without ¯h,

there is no unit of momentum, of energy, and, especially, of angular momentum. But,

as I said in the previous two Sections, ¯h has not really disappeared: it has actually been

promoted, in string theory, to a grander role, that of providing also, through QM, an UV

cutoﬀ that hopefully removes both the inﬁnities of QFT and ordinary Quantum Gravity

and the ubiquitous singularities of Classical GR.

I would concede, however, that, given the fact that momentum and energy are logically

distinct from lengths and times for ordinary objects, insisting on the use of the same (or

of reciprocal) units for both sets can be pedagogically confusing. Therefore I do agree that

the set c, ¯h, and λs deﬁne at present, within QST, the most practical (though not the most

economical) set of fundamental units.

To rephrase myself: within the NG action there seems to be no reason to introduce a

tension T or ¯h. The action is naturally the area and the Planck constant a unit of area.

However, by the standard deﬁnition of canonically conjugate variables, this would lead

to identical dimensions for momenta and lengths (or for times and energies). For strings

that’s ﬁne, since we can identify the energy of a string with its length, but when it comes

to ordinary objects, i.e. to complicated bound states of fundamental strings or branes, it

20

looks less confusing to give momentum a unit other than length. In order to do that we

introduce, somewhat artiﬁcially, a conversion factor, the string tension T , so that energies

are now measured in ergs, in GeV, or whatever we wish, the diﬀerent choices being related

by an irrelevant redeﬁnition of T .

7 The disagreement with Mike

Two issues appear to separate Mike’s position from my own:

The alien story

•

Mike quotes an example, due to Feynman, on how we could possibly tell an alien to

distinguish left from right. Then he asks: can we similarly communicate to an alien

our values for c and λs and check whether they agree with ours? I claim the answer to

be: yes, we can, and, to the same extent that the alien will be able to tell us whether
her6 α agrees with ours, she will also be able to tell us whether her c and λs agree

with ours.

In order to do that, we “simply” have to give the alien our deﬁnitions of cm. and s. in

terms of a physical system she can possibly identify (say the H atom) and ask: which

are your values of c and λs in these units? If the alien cannot even identify the system

then she lives in a diﬀerent world/string-vacuum; if she does, then she should come
1010cm/s) or else, again, her world is not like

up with the same numbers (e.g. c = 3

×

ours. It thus looks to me that the alien story supports the idea that we do have, in

our own world, some fundamental units of length and time. Mike seems to agree with

me on the alien’s reply, but then concludes that c is not a fundamental unit because

a completely rescaled world, in which both c and the velocity of the electron in the H

atom are twice as large, is indistinguishable from ours.

Incidentally, the same argument can be applied either to some ancestors (or descen-

dants) of ours, or to inequivalent string vacua. A value of c in cm/s for any of those

which diﬀers from ours would really mean diﬀerent worlds, e.g. worlds with diﬀerent

ratios of the velocity of the electron in the Hydrogen atom and the speed of light.

We may either express this by saying that, in the two diﬀerent worlds, c is diﬀerent

in atomic units, or by saying that c is the same but atomic properties diﬀer. No

6To stress that my alien’s reaction is diﬀerent from that of Mike’s alien I have also changed the alien’s

gender.

21

experimental result will be able to distinguish about these two physically equivalent

statements since a rescaling of all velocities is inessential.

Reducing fundamental units to conversion factors

•

Mike’s second point is that these units can be used as conversion factors, like kB, in

order to convert any quantity into any other and, eventually, everything into pure

numbers. However, I do insist that the point is not to convert degrees Kelvin into

MeV, centimeters into seconds, or everything into numbers. The important point is

that there are units that are arbitrary and units that are fundamental in the sense that,

when a quantity becomes O(1) in the latter units, dramatic new phenomena occur.

It makes a huge diﬀerence, for instance, having or not having a fundamental length.

Without a fundamental length, properties of physical systems would be invariant

under an overall rescaling of their size, atoms would not have a characteristic size,

and we would be unable to tell the alien which atom to use as a meter. By contrast,

with a fundamental quantum unit of length, we can meaningfully talk about short or

large distances (as compared to the fundamental length, of course).

Let us go back to my discussion at the end of Section 5. The pure number Gµν ∆X µ∆X ν

has a value per-se. In the absence of any fundamental units of length and time I would

be able to rescale this number arbitrarily (e.g by rescaling Gµν ) without changing
physics. Only ratios of two lengths in the problem, like Gµν ∆X µ
2 ∆X ν
2
would matter. Because of QM, however, only the joint rescaling of Gµν and ∆X µ
leaving each Gµν ∆X µ∆X ν invariant leaves physics invariant. There is therefore a

1 /Gµν ∆X µ

1 ∆X ν

fundamental rod (and clock) that gives, out of any single physical length or time in-

terval, a relevant (and not an arbitrary and irrelevant) pure number. This is what

distinguishes, in my opinion, fundamental units from arbitrary units and conversion

factors.

On this particular point, therefore, I tend to agree with Lev. There is, in relativity,

a fundamental unit of speed (its maximal value); there is, in QM, a fundamental

unit of action (a minimal uncertainty); there is, in string theory, a fundamental unit

of length (the characteristic size of strings). QST appears to provide the missing

third fundamental unit of the three-constants system. These three units form a very

convenient system except that, classically, the units of action are completely arbitrary

(and the same is true therefore of mass, energy etc.), while, quantum mechanically,

only S/¯h matters.

In string theory this allows us to identify the Planck constant

22

with the string length eliminating the necessity, but perhaps not the convenience, of

a third unit besides those needed to measure lengths and time intervals. I also agree

with Mike that all that matters are pure numbers: I only add to this the observation

that, in QST, we can transform any physical length into a meaningful number because

quantum mechanics gives us, in string theory, a fundamental unit of length, a preferred

meter.

An example of what I am saying, that I ﬁnd particularly instructive, is the motion of

test strings in a gravitational background. At the classical level, only the ratio of the

size of the test string and of the charateristic scale of the geometry matters: nothing

changes if they are both rescaled by a factor 10. At the quantum level the ratios of

the string size and of the geometry scale to the minimal string length also matter and,

since the latter is universal, it provides a natural unit. In both cases we only deal,

in the end, with pure numbers. However, while in the quantum case I can identify a

basic unit of length, I cannot do so in the classical theory.

8 Time variation of fundamental units?

I think that the above discussion clearly indicates that the “time variation of a fundamental

unit”, like c, has no meaning, unless we specify what else, having the same units, is kept
ﬁxed. Only the time variation of dimensionless constants, such as α or Gµν ∆X µ∆X ν for

an atom have an intrinsic physical meaning.

We do believe, for instance, that in a cosmological background the variation in time of
Gµν is accompanied by a related variation of the ∆X µ of an atom so that Gµν ∆X µ∆X ν

remains constant. The same is usually assumed to be true for α. However, this is not at all

an absolute theoretical necessity (e.g. α can depend on time, in QST, if φ does), and should
be (and indeed is being) tested. For instance, the same Gµν ∆X µ∆X ν is believed to grow
with the expansion of the Universe if ∆X µ represents the wavelength of light coming to us

from a distant galaxy. The observed red shift only checks the relative time-dependence of
Gµν ∆X µ∆X ν for an atom and for the light coming from the galaxy.

However, I claim that, in principle, the time variation of Gµν ∆X µ∆X ν has a physical

meaning for each one of the two systems separately because it represents the time variation

of some physical length w.r.t. the fundamental unit provided by string theory. For instance,

in the early Universe, this quantity for the CMBR photons was much smaller than it is today

23

(O(1030)). If it ever approached values O(1), this may have left an imprint of short-distance

physics on the CMBR spectrum.

9 Acknowledgments

I am grateful to Lev and Mike for having given their serious thoughts to this issue and for

pushing me to clarify my point of view to them, and to myself. I also wish to acknowledge

the support of a “Chaire Internationale Blaise Pascal”, administered by the “Fondation de

L’Ecole Normale Sup´erieure”, during the ﬁnal stages of this work.

References

[1] G. Veneziano, Europhysics Lett. 2 (1986) 199.

[2] S. Weinberg, Overview of theoretical prospects for understanding the values of fun-

damental constants in The Constants of Physics, W.H. Mc Crea and J. Rees editors,

Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London A310 (1983) p. 249.

[3] G. Veneziano, Quantum Strings and the Constants of Nature, in The Challenging

Questions, Erice 1989, Plenum Press N.Y. (1990).

[4] G. Veneziano, Erice 1992, Fundamental Constants in Field and String Theory, in String

Quantum Gravity and Physics at the Planck Scale, WSPC (1993) p. 552.

[5] L. Okun, Particle Physics: the Quest for the Substance of Substance, Harwood Aca-

demic Publishers, 1985, Chur, New York, Appendix 1. On systems of physical Units.

[6] L. Okun, The fundamental constants of physics, Sov. Phys. Usp. 34 (1991) 818.

[7] Ya. B. Zeldovich and I.D. Novikov, The Structure and Evolution of the Universe, Uni-

versity of Chicago press (1982), Part V, Ch. 23, par. 19.

[8] G. Veneziano, Physics with a fundamental length, in Physics and Mathematics of

Strings Vadim Knizhnik Memorial Volume, WSPC(1990), L. Brink, D. Friedan, A.

M. Polyakov editors, p. 509.

[9] L. Okun, accompanying article.

[10] M. Duﬀ, accompanying article.

24

A Party Political Broadcast on behalf of the Zero Constants Party

M. J. Duﬀ

Abstract

According to the manifesto of Okun’s Three Constants Party, there are three fun-

damental dimensionful constants in Nature: Planck’s constant, ¯h, the velocity of light,

c, and Newton’s constant, G. According to Veneziano’s Two Constants Party, there

are only two: the string length λ2 and c. Here we present the platform of the Zero

Constants Party.

25

1 The false propaganda of the Three Constants Party

As a young student of physics in high school, I was taught that there were three basic

quantities in Nature: Length, Mass and Time [1]. All other quantities, such as electric

charge or temperature, occupied a lesser status since they could all be re-expressed in terms

of these basic three. As a result, there were three basic units: centimetres, grams and

seconds, reﬂected in the three-letter name “CGS” system (or perhaps metres, kilograms

and seconds in the alternative, but still three-letter, “MKS” system).

Later, as an undergraduate student, I learned quantum mechanics, special relativity and

Newtonian gravity. In quantum mechanics, there was a minimum quantum of action given

by Planck’s constant ¯h; in special relativity there was a maximum velocity given by the

velocity of light c; in classical gravity the strength of the force between two objects was

determined by Newton’s constant of gravitation G. In terms of length, mass, and time their

dimensions are

[c] = LT

−1

[¯h] = L2M T

−1

[G] = L3M

−1T

−2

(1)

Once again, the number three seemed important and other dimensionful constants, such

as the charge of the electron e or Boltzmann’s constant k, were somehow accorded a less

fundamental role. This ﬁtted in perfectly with my high school prejudices and it seemed

entirely natural, therefore, to be told that these three dimensionful constants determined

three basic units, ﬁrst identiﬁed a century ago by Max Planck, namely the Planck length

LP , the Planck mass MP and the Planck time TP :

LP =

G¯h/c3 = 1.616

−35 m

10

MP =

¯hc/G = 2.177

−8 kg

10

×

×

q

q

q

26

TP =

G¯h/c5 = 5.390

−44 s

10

×

(2)

Yet later, researching into quantum gravity which attempts to combine quantum me-

chanics, relativity and gravitation into a coherent uniﬁed framework, I learned about the

Bronshtein-Zelmanov-Okun (BZO) cube [2], with axes ¯h, c−1 and G, which neatly sum-

marizes how classical mechanics, non-relativistic quantum mechanics, Newtonian gravity
and relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory can be regarded respectively as the (¯h, c−1, G)
(c−1, G)

0 limits of the full quantum gravity. Note, once

0, (¯h, c−1)

0, and (G)

→

0,

→

→

→

again that we are dealing with a three-dimensional cube rather than a square or some ﬁgure

of a diﬀerent dimension.

What about Kaluza-Klein theories which allow for D > 4 spacetime dimensions? Unlike

¯h and c, the dimensions of G depend on D:

and hence (dropping the P subscript), the D-dimensional Planck length LD, mass MD and

time TD are given by

[GD] = M

−1LD−1T

−2

LD

D−2 = GD¯hc

−3

MD

D−2 = GD

−1¯hD−3c5−D

TD

D−2 = GD¯hc

−1−D

≡
1
GD

=

V

1
G4

27

After compactiﬁcation to four dimensions, G

G4 then appears as

where V is the volume of the compactifying manifold. Since V has the four-dimensional

interpretation as the vacuum expectation value of scalar modulus ﬁelds coming from the

internal components of the metric tensor, it depends on the choice of vacuum but does not

introduce any more fundamental constants into the Lagrangian.

Adherents of this conventional view of the fundamental constants of Nature have been

dubbed the “Three Constants Party” by Gabriele Veneziano [5]. Lev Okun is their leader.
Until recently I was myself, I must confess, a card-carrying member7.

7It seems that the choice of length, mass and time as the three basic units is due to Gauss [12], so we could

declare him to be the founder of the Three Constants Party, although this was long before the signiﬁcance

of c and ¯h was appreciated.

(3)

(4)

(5)

λ2

2 = ¯h/cT2

S2/¯h =

2 Area

1
λ2

L10

2 = λ2

2 < eφ >

2 The false propaganda of the Two Constants Party

My faith in the dogma was shaken, however, by papers by Gabriele [3, 4, 5], self-styled

leader of the rebel Two Constants Party. As a string theorist, Gabriele begins with the

two-dimensional Nambu-Goto action of a string. He notes that, apart from the velocity of
light still needed to convert the time coordinate t to a length coordinate x0 = ct, the action

divided by ¯h requires only one dimensionful parameter, the string length λ2 (denoted λs by

Gabriele).

where T2 = 1/2πcα′ is the tension of the string and α′ is the Regge slope. This is because

the Nambu-Goto action takes the form

So if this were to describe the theory of everything (TOE), then the TOE would require

only two fundamental dimensionful constants c and λ2.

In superstring theory, the ten-

dimensional Planck length is given in terms of the string length λ2 and the vacuum expec-

tation value of the dilaton ﬁeld φ

Once again, the vev of φ will be diﬀerent in diﬀerent vacua but does not introduce any new

constants into the Lagrangian.

A similar argument for reducing the three constants h, c, G to just two was made previ-

ously by Zeldovich and Novikov [6] with regard to quantum gravity. The Einstein-Hilbert

action divided by ¯h involves G and ¯h only in the combination G¯h appearing in the square

of the Planck length, and so we need only LP and c. Of course quantum gravity does not

pretend to be the TOE and so this argument still leaves open the number of dimensionful

constants required for a TOE.

In the light of the 1995 M-theory [7] revolution, we might wish to update Gabriele’s

argument by starting with the corresponding three-dimensional action for the M2-brane,

S3/¯h =

volume)

1
λ3

3 (3d

−

where the corresponding parameter is the membrane length λ3.

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

λ3

3 = ¯h/cT3

28

and where T3 is the membrane tension. Alternatively, we could start with the six-dimensional

action of the dual M5-brane,

where the corresponding parameter is the ﬁvebrane length λ6

S6/¯h =

volume)

1
λ6

6 (6d

−

λ6

6 = ¯h/cT6

(11)

(12)

and where T6 is the ﬁvebrane tension. Eleven-dimensional M-theory is, in fact, simpler than

ten-dimensional superstring theory in this respect, since there is no dilaton. Consequently,

the three lengths: membrane length, ﬁvebrane length and eleven-dimensional Planck length

are all equal [8] up to calculable numerical factors λ3

λ6

L11. So the fundamental

∼

∼

length in M-theory is λ3 rather than λ2 and will be shorter for string coupling less than

unity [11].

However, even if we substitute λ3 for λ2, Gabriele would say that we are still left with

the number two. This also reduces the number of basic units to just two: length and time.

Gabriele’s claim led to many heated discussions in the CERN cafeteria between Lev,

Gabriele and myself. We went round and round in circles. Back at Texas A&M, I continued

these arguments at lunchtime conversations with Chris Pope and others. There at the

College Station Hilton, we eventually reached a consensus and joined what Gabriele would

call the Zero Constants Party [5].

Our attitude was basically that ¯h, c and G are nothing but conversion factors e.g mass

to length, in the formula for the Schwarzschild radius RS

or energy to frequency

energy to mass

no diﬀerent from Boltzmann’s constant, say, which relates energy to temperature

As such, you may have as many so-called “fundamental” constants as you like; the more dif-
ferent units you employ, the more diﬀerent constants you need8. Indeed, no less an authority

8In this respect, I take the the number of dimensionful fundamental constants to be synonymous with

the number of fundamental (or basic) units.

RS = 2Gm/c2,

E = ¯hω

E = mc2

E = kT

29

than the Conf´erence G´en´erale des Poids et Mesures, the international body that adminis-

ters the SI system of units, adheres to what might be called the Seven Constants Party,

decreeing that seven units are “basic”:metre(length), kilogram (mass), second (time), am-

pere (electric current), kelvin (thermodynamic temperature), mole (amount of substance),

candela (luminous intensity), while the rest are “derived” [12, 13]. The attitude of the Zero

Constants Party is that the most economical choice is to use natural units where there

are no conversion factors at all. Consequently, none of these units or conversion factors is

fundamental.

Incidentally, Lev [14] objects in his section 5 that equations such as c = 1 cannot be

taken literally because c has dimensions. In my view, this apparent contradiction arises

from trying to use two diﬀerent sets of units at the same time, and really goes to the heart

of my disagreement with Lev about what is real physics and what is mere convention. In

the units favored by members of the Three Constants Party, length and time have diﬀerent

dimensions and you cannot, therefore, put c = 1 (just as you cannot put k = 1, if you want

to follow the conventions of the Seven Constants Party). If you want to put c = 1, you

must trade in your membership card for that of (or at least adopt the habits of) the Two
Constants Party, whose favorite units do not distinguish length from time9. In these units, c

is dimensionless and you may quite literally set it equal to one. In the natural units favored

by the Zero Constants Party, there are no dimensions at all and ¯h = c = G = . . . = 1 may

be imposed literally and without contradiction. With this understanding, I will still refer

to constants which have dimensions in some units, such as ¯h, c, G, k . . ., as “dimensionful

constants” so as to distinguish them from constants such as α, which are dimensionless in

any units.

3 Three fundamental theories?

Lev and Gabriele remain unshaken in their beliefs, however. Lev [14] makes the, at ﬁrst

sight reasonable, point (echoed by Gabriele [15]) that ¯h is more than just a conversion

factor.

It embodies a fundamental physical principle of quantum mechanics that there

is a minimum non-zero angular momentum. Similarly, c embodies a fundamental physical

principle of special relativity that there is a maximum velocity c. If I could paraphrase Lev’s

point of view it might be to say that there are three “fundamental” units because there

9This (¯h, G) wing of the Two Constants Party is diﬀerent from Gabriele’s (c, λ2) wing, which prefers not

to introduce a separate unit for mass.

30

are three fundamental physical theories: quantum mechanics, special relativity and gravity.

According to this point of view, temperature, for example, should not be included as a

basic unit (or, equivalently, Boltzmann’s constant should not be included as a fundamental

constant.)

However, I think this elevation of ¯h, c and G to a special status is misleading. For
example, the appearance of c in x0 = ct is for the beneﬁt of people for whom treating time

as a fourth dimension is unfamiliar. But once you have accepted O(3, 1) as a symmetry

the conversion factor becomes irrelevant. We have become so used to accepting O(3) as a
symmetry that we would not dream of using diﬀerent units for the three space coordinates10,

but to be perverse we could do so.

To drive this point home, and inspired by the Conf´erence G´en´erale des Poids et Mesures,

let us introduce three new superﬂuous units: xylophones, yachts and zebras to measure

intervals along the x, y and z axes. This requires the introduction of three superﬂuous

“fundamental” constants, cx, cy and cz with dimensions length/xylophone, length/yacht

and length/zebra, respectively, so that the line element becomes:

ds2 =

c2dt2 + cx

2dx2 + cy

2dy2 + cz

2dz2

−

(13)

Lev’s point is that the ﬁniteness of c ensures that we have O(3, 1) symmetry rather than

merely O(3). This is certainly true. But it is equally true that the ﬁniteness of cx, say,

ensures that we have O(3, 1) rather than merely O(2, 1).
In this respect, the conversion
factors c and cx are on an equal footing11. Both are, in Gabriele’s terminology [15], equally

“silly”. Both can be set equal to unity and forgotten about

Similarly, the “fundamental” lengths λd appearing in brane actions (7), (9) and (11) can
be removed from the equations by deﬁning new dimensionless worldvolume coordinates, ξ′,
related to the old ones, ξ, by ξ = λdξ′.

So I would agree with Lev that the ﬁniteness of the conversion factors is important

(minimum angular momentum, maximum velocity) but, in my view, no signiﬁcance should

be attached to their value and you can have as many or as few of them as you like.

The reason why we have so many diﬀerent units, and hence conversion factors, in the

10I am grateful to Chris Pope for this example.
11To put this more rigorously, the Poincare group admits a Wigner-In¨on¨u contraction to the Galileo group,

obtained by taking the c

limit. However, this is by no means unique. There are other contractions

→ ∞

to other subgroups. For example, one is obtained by taking the cx

limit. Although of less historical

→ ∞

importance, these other subgroups are mathematically on the same footing as the Galileo group. So, in my

opinion, the singling out of c for special treatment has more to do with psychology than physics.

31

ﬁrst place is that, historically, physicists used diﬀerent kinds of measuring apparatus: rods,

scales, clocks, thermometers, electroscopes etc. Another way to ask what is the mimimum

number of basic units, therefore, is to ask what is, in principle, the minimum number of
basic pieces of apparatus12. Probably Lev, Gabriele and I would agree that E = kT means

that we can dispense with thermometers, that temperature is not a basic unit and that

Boltzmann’s constant is not fundamental. Let us agree with Lev that we can whittle things

down to length, mass and time or rods, scales and clocks. Can we go further? Another way

to argue that the conversion factor c should not be treated as fundamental, for example,

is to point out that once the ﬁniteness of c has been accepted, we do not need both clocks

and rulers. Clocks alone are suﬃcient since distances can be measured by the time it takes

light to travel that distance, x = ct. We are, in eﬀect, doing just that when we measure

interstellar distances in light-years. Conversely, we may do away with clocks in favor of

rulers. It is thus superﬂuous to have both length and time as basic units. Similarly, we

can do away with rulers as basic apparatus and length as a basic unit by trading distances

with masses using the formula for the Compton wavelength RC = h/mc. Indeed, particle

theorists typically express length, mass and time units as inverse mass, mass and inverse

mass, respectively. Finally, we can do away with scales by expressing particle masses as

dimensionless numbers, namely the ratio of a particle mass to that of a black hole whose

Compton wavelength equals its Schwarzschild radius. So in this sense, the black hole acts

as our rod, scale, clock, thermometer etc all at the same time. In practice, the net result is

as though we set ¯h = c = G = . . . = 1 but we need not use that language.

4 An operational deﬁnition

It seems to me that this issue of what is fundamental will continue to go round and around

until we can all agree on an operational deﬁnition of “fundamental constants”. Weinberg

[16] deﬁnes constants to be fundamental if we cannot calculate their values in terms of more

fundamental constants, not just because the calculation is too hard, but because we do not

know of anything more fundamental. This deﬁnition is ﬁne, but does not resolve the dispute

between Gabriele, Lev and me. It is the purpose of this section to propose one that does.

I will conclude that, according to this deﬁnition, the dimensionless parameters, such as the

ﬁne structure constant, are fundamental, whereas all dimensionful constants, including ¯h, c

12I am grateful to Chris Isham for this suggestion.

32

and G, are not13.

In physics, we frequently encounter ambiguities such as “left or right” and “matter

or antimatter”. Let us begin by recalling Feynman’s way of discriminating between what

are genuine diﬀerences and what are mere conventions. Feynman imagines that we can

communicate with some alien being [17]. If it were not for the violation of parity in the
weak interactions we would have no way of deciding whether what he14 calls right and left

are the same as what we call right and left. However, we can ask him to perform a cobalt

60 experiment and tell him that the spinning electrons determine a left handed thread. In

this way we can agree on what is left and right. When we eventually meet the alien, of

course, we should beware shaking hands with him if he holds out his left hand (or tentacle).

He would be made of antimatter and annihilate with us! Fortunately, after the discovery of

CP violation we could also eliminate this ambiguity.

In a similar vein, let us ask whether there are any experiments that can be performed

which would tell us whether the alien’s universe has the same or diﬀerent constants of

nature as ours.

If the answer is yes, we shall deﬁne these constants to be fundamental,

otherwise not.

In particular, we will ask whether there is in principle any experimental

diﬀerence that would allow us to conclude unambiguously that his velocity of light, his

Planck’s constant or his Newton’s constant are diﬀerent from ours. By “unambiguously” I

mean that no perceived diﬀerence could be explained away by a diﬀerence in conventions.

(Of course, even Feynman’s criterion is not devoid of theoretical assumptions. We have to

assume that the cobalt behaves the same way for the alien as for us etc. To be concrete,

we might imagine that we are both described by a TOE (perhaps M-theory) in which the

fundamental constants are given by vacuum expectation values of scalar ﬁelds. The alien

and we thus share the same lagrangian but live in possibly diﬀerent vacua. Let us further

assume that both vacua respect O(3, 1) symmetry.)

The idea of imagining a universe with diﬀerent constants is not new, but in my opinion,

the early literature is very confusing. For example, in his recent review, Lev [2] cites older

works by Vol’berg and Gamow which imagine a universe in which the velocity of light is

diﬀerent from ours, say by ten orders of magnitude, and describe all sorts of weird eﬀects

that would result. I for one am mystiﬁed by such comparisons. After all, an inhabitant of

such a universe (let us identify him with Feynman’s alien) is perfectly free to choose units

13My apologies to those readers to whom this was already blindingly obvious. A similar point of view

may be found in [19]. On the other hand, I once read a letter in Physics World from a respectable physicist

who believed that a legitimate ambition of a TOE would be to calculate the numerical value of ¯h.

14I will follow Feynman and assume that the alien is a “he”, without resolving the “he or she” ambiguity.

33

in which c = 1, just as we are. To use the equation

k = E/c

to argue that in his universe, for the same energy E, the photon emitted by an atom would

have a momentum k that is ten orders of magnitude smaller than ours is, to my mind,

meaningless. There is no experimental information that we and the alien could exchange

that would allow us to draw any conclusion.

By contrast, Lev imagines a universe in which the binding energy of an electron in a
hydrogen atom E = me4/¯h2 exceeds twice the electron rest energy 2mc2, where m and e

are the electron mass and charge respectively. In such a universe it would be energetically
H + e+. This

favorable for the decay of the proton to a hydrogen atom and a positron p

→

universe is demonstrably diﬀerent from ours. But, in my opinion, the correct conclusion

has nothing to do with the speed of light, but simply that in this universe the dimensionless
ﬁne structure constant α = e2/¯hc exceeds √2.

I believe that these two examples illustrate a general truth: no experimental information

that we and the alien could exchange can unambiguously determine a diﬀerence in dimen-

sionful quantities. No matter whether they are the ¯h, c and G sacred to the Three Constants

Party, the λ2 and c of the Two Constants Party or the seven constants of the Conf´erence

G´en´erale des Poids et Mesures. Any perceived diﬀerence are all merely diﬀerences in con-

vention rather than substance. By contrast, diﬀerences in dimensionless parameters like
the ﬁne structure constants are physically signiﬁcant and meaningful15. Of course, our

current knowledge of the TOE is insuﬃcient to tell us how many such dimensionless con-

stants Nature requires. There are 19 in the Standard model, but the aim of M-theory is

to reduce this number. Whether they are all calculable or whether some are the result of

cosmological accidents (like the ratios of distances of planets to the sun) remains one of the
top unanswered questions in fundamental physics16.

15In his section 7, Gabriele [15] claims to disagree with me on this point, but I think the ﬁrst two sentences

of his section 8 indicate that we are actually in agreement. If, for example, the alien tells us that he observes
H + e+, then we can be sure that his α is diﬀerent from ours. Choosing to attribute this eﬀect

the decay p

→

(or any other eﬀect) to a diﬀerence in c rather than ¯h or e, however, is entirely a matter of convention, just

as the diﬀerence between left and right would be a matter of convention in a world with no CP violation.

So c fails the Feynman test.

16Indeed, participants of the Strings 2000 conference placed it in the top ten [9].

34

5 What about theories with time-varying constants?

Suppose that our “alien” came not from a diﬀerent universe but from a diﬀerent epoch in

our own universe and we stumbled across his historical records. In this way of thinking,

the issue of whether ¯h, c and G are fundamental devolves upon the issue of whether the

results of any experiments could require the unambiguous conclusion that ¯h, c and G are

changing in time. According to our criterion above, any such time-dependence would be

merely convention, without physical signiﬁcance.

On the other hand, many notable physicists, starting with Dirac [10], have nevertheless

entertained the notion that G or c are changing in time. (For some reason, time-varying ¯h is

not as popular.) Indeed, papers on time-varying c are currently in vogue as as an alternative

to inﬂation. I believe that these ideas, while not necessarily wrong, are frequently presented

in a misleading way and that the time-variation in the physical laws is best described in
terms of time-varying dimensionless ratios, rather than dimensionful constants17. So, in

my opinion, one should talk about time variations in the dimensionless parameters of the

standard model but not about time variations in ¯h, c and G. For example, any observed

change in the strength of the gravitational force over cosmological times should be attributed

to changing mass ratios rather than changing G. For example, the proton is approximately
10−19 times heavier than the black hole discussed in section 3, whose Compton wavelength

equals its Schwarzschild radius. It is then sensible to ask whether this dimensionless ratio

could change over time.

Unfortunately, this point was made insuﬃciently clear in the recent paper presenting

astrophysical data suggesting a time-varying ﬁne structure constant [21]. As a result, a

front page article in the New York Times [22] announced that the speed of light might be
changing over cosmic history18.

In the context of M-theory which starts out with no parameters at all, these standard
model parameters would appear as vacuum expectation values of scalar ﬁelds19. Indeed,

replacing parameters by scalar ﬁelds is the only sensible way I know to implement time

varying constants of Nature. The role of scalar ﬁelds in determining the fundamental

17This point of view is also taken in [20].
18I am reminded of the old lady who, when questioned by the TV interviewer on whether she believed in

global warming, responded: “If you ask me, it’s all this changing from Fahrenheit to Centigrade that causing

it!”.

19The only other possibility compatible with maximal four-dimensional spacetime symmetry is the vac-

uum expectation value of a 4-index ﬁeld strength. For example, the cosmological constant can receive a

contribution from the vev of the M-theory 4-form [18].

35

constants in a TOE was also emphasized by Gabriele [3, 4, 5].

6 Conclusions

The number and values of fundamental dimensionless constants appearing in a Theory of

Everything is a legitimate subject of physical enquiry. By contrast, the number and values

of dimensionful constants, such as h, c, G,. . . is a quite arbitrary human construct, diﬀering

from one choice of units to the next. There is nothing magic about the choice of two, three

or seven. The most economical choice is zero. Consequently, none of these dimensionful

constants is fundamental.

7 Acknowledgments

My interest in this subject was ﬁred by conversations with Lev Okun and Gabriele Veneziano.

I am also grateful for discussions on fundamental constants with colleagues at Texas A&M,

especially Chris Pope, at the University of Michigan, especially Gordy Kane, and at Im-

perial College, especially Chris Isham. The hospitality of the High Energy Theory Group,

Imperial College and the Mathematical Institute, Oxford, during the preparation of this

article is gratefully acknowledged. This research was supported in part by DOE Grant

DE-FG02-95ER40899.

References

[1] Norman Feather, Mass, Length and Time, Edinburgh University Press, 1959.

[2] L. Okun, The fundamental constants of physics, Sov. Phys. Usp. 3499 (1991) 177.

[3] G. Veneziano, A stringy nature needs just two constants, Europhysics Lett. 2 (1986)

199.

[4] G. Veneziano, Quantum Strings and the Constants of Nature, in The Challenging

Questions, Erice 1989, Plenum Press N.Y. (1990).

[5] G. Veneziano, Fundamental constants in ﬁeld theory and string theory, in String Quan-

tum Gravity and Physics at the Planck Scale, (Eds Sanchez and Zichichi, World Scien-

tiﬁc,1993), CERN-TH.6725/92.

36

[6] Ya. B. Zeldovich and I. D. Novikov, The structure and the evolution of the universe,

University of Chicago Press (1982).

theory, I. O. P. Publishing (1999).

[7] M. J. Duﬀ, The world in eleven dimensions: supergravity, supermembranes and M-

[8] M. J. Duﬀ, J. T. Liu and R. Minasian, Eleven-dimensional origin of string/string

duality: A one loop test, Nucl. Phys. B452 (1995) 261.

[9] M. J. Duﬀ, The top ten questions in fundamental physics, in Strings 2000, Proceedings

of the International superstrings conference, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (Eds

Duﬀ, Liu and Lu, World Scientiﬁc, 2001).

http://feynman.physics.lsa.umich.edu/strings2000/millennium.html

[10] P. A. M. Dirac, The cosmological constants, Nature, 139 (1937).

[11] M. R. Douglas, D. Kabat, P. Pouliot and S. H. Shenker, D-branes and short distances

in string theory, Nucl. Phys. B 485, 85 (1997) [hep-th/9608024].

[12] The

NIST

reference

on

constants,

units

and

uncertainty,

http://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Units/international.html

[13] Review of Particle Properties, Phys. Rev. 45 (1992) Part II; page III.4..

[14] L. Okun, accompanying article.

[15] G. Veneziano, accompanying article.

[16] S. Weinberg, Overview of theoretical prospects for understanding the values of funda-

mental constants, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A310 (1983) 249.

[17] R.P. Feynman, The Character of Physical Law, Penguin, 1992, p 101

[18] M. J. Duﬀ and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Quantum inequivalence of diﬀerent ﬁeld repre-

sentations, Phys. Lett. 94B, 179 (1980).

[19] John Gribbin and Paul Wesson, Fickle constants of physics, New Scientist, 4 July 1992,

[20] J. D. Barrow and J. Magueijo, Varying-α theories and solutions to the cosmological

p 30.

problems, astro-ph/9811072.

37

[21] J. K. Webb et al., Further evidence for cosmological evolution of the ﬁne structure

constant, astro-ph/0012539.

[22] James Glanz and Dennis Overbye, Anything can change, it seems, even an immutable

law of nature, New York Times, August 15.

38

