2
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
7
0
3
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fundamental constants in eﬀective theory

G.E. Volovik
Low Temperature Laboratory, Helsinki University of Technology
P.O.Box 2200, FIN-02015 HUT, Finland

L.D. Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics
Kosygin Str. 2, 117940 Moscow, Russia

February 20, 2014

Abstract

There is a discussion between L. B. Okun, G. Veneziano and M. J.
Duﬀ, concerning the number of fundamental dimensionful constants in
physics [1]. They advocated correspondingly 3, 2 and 0 fundamental
constants. Here we consider this problem on example of the eﬀective
relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory, which emerges in the low energy
corner of quantum liquids and which reproduces many features of our
physics including chiral fermions, gauge ﬁelds and dynamical gravity.

1 Introduction.

The eﬀective relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory (RQFT) arising as emergent
phenomenon in quantum liquids [2], or in other condensed matter systems
[3], allows us to look at the problem of fundamental constants from the
outside, i.e.
from the point of view of an external observer who does not
belong to the low-energy world of the eﬀective RQFT. This observer knows
both the eﬀective and microscopic physics. He or she knows the origin of
the ‘constants’ which enter the eﬀective theory, and thus can judge whether
they are fundamental within the eﬀective theory, and whether they remain
fundamental at the more fundamental (i.e. more microscopic) level.

1

Inspection of the RQFT emerging in quantum liquids demonstrates that
within this scheme we have only one fundamental constant – the Planck
constant ¯h. The status of all other ‘constants’ depends on what theory is
used (eﬀective theory or the more fundamental theory at a higher energy
scale). Within the eﬀective theory the status also depends on which observer
measures them: the ‘inner’ observer who belongs to the world of the low-
energy quasiparticles, or the external observer who belongs to the world of
microphysics. This is shown in the following Table (1):

‘constant′
eﬀective (inner)

¯h EP lanck
+
eﬀective (external) +
+

microphysics

+
+

−

c α G
+

− −
− − −
− − −

(1)

Let us now discuss the status of each of 5 constants under consideration
in the Table 1: the Planck constant ¯h ; the ultraviolet energy cut-oﬀ EP lanck
(or the Planck frequency EP lanck/¯h) ; speed of light (the maximum attainable
velocity in the eﬀective theory) c ; ﬁne structure constant α ; and Newton’s
gravitational constant G.

2 ¯h

In our case ¯h is fundamental both within the eﬀective RQFT at low energy
and in the microscopic physics of the liquid (all signs in (1) are +). Quan-
tum mechanics is built in quantum liquids, which are essentially quantum
objects. It is the quantum zero point motion of atoms which gives rise to
the liquid quantum vacuum, where the low-energy fermionic and bosonic col-
lective modes behave as chiral fermions, and gauge and gravitational ﬁelds.
That is why the ¯h = 0 limit simply does not exist, since there is no vacuum
at ¯h = 0, and thus no eﬀective theory.

However, there is a classical domain:

it appears for excitations of the

vacuum: fermionic quasiparticles and eﬀective bosonic ﬁelds.

¯h is fundamental in our example of emerging eﬀective theory. But it
is not excluded that the quantum mechanics is also violated at some more
fundamental level, though this does not happen in a given case.

2

3 Planck energy cut-oﬀ

Within the eﬀective RQFT the Planck energy cut-oﬀ EP lanck is certainly
fundamental, since the ultraviolet cut-oﬀ cannot be derived within the low-
energy theory. That is why the sign + in the ﬁrst line of (1).

≪

EP lanck 2 = ∆0

0/vF pF ≪

In microscopic physics of quantum liquids there is a hierarchy of the
Planck energy scales, which reﬂects the hierarchy of the successive eﬀec-
tive/microscopic theories: EP lanck 1 = ∆2
vF pF ..., where ∆0 is the gap amplitude, pF is Fermi momentum, and vF is
Fermi velocity in liquid 3He. The ﬁrst Planck scale EP lanck 1 restricts the
applicability of the eﬀective RQFT: at this scale the Lorentz invariance of
the eﬀective theory is violated. The parameters entering the Planck scales
are fundamental at some energy scales, but are not fundamental at the next
energy scale where they can be derived from the fundamental constants at
that level. For example, pF and vF are fundamental constants for the ef-
fective Fermi liquid theory introduced by Landau, which is valid at energies
vF pF . But they can be derived from the atomic physics, and thus ac-
E
cording to Weinberg criterion [4] are not fundamental at higher scale. The
sign plus in the second line of (1) shows that, if the external observer uses
only the eﬀective low-energy theory, then the Planck energy remains funda-
mental.

≪

EP lanck 3 =

4 Speed of light

−

1, c−2

y , c−2

x , c−2

The metric of the eﬀective ‘Minkowski’ space-time, in which the quasipar-
ticles in the quantum liquids (fermions and bososns) propagate along the
geodesic curves, has the following local structure in case of anisotropic liq-
uid: gµν = diag(
z ). In anisotropic quantum liquid the ‘speed
of light’ (the maximum attainable speed for fermions and bosons) depends
on the direction of their propagation. One cannot deﬁne the unique speed
of light c on microscopoc level. Also the anisotropy of the speed of light is
determined by microscopic physics. Moreover it depends on the density of
the liquid and thus varies from place to place (which is observed as grav-
ity by the inner observer). That is why c is certainly not fundamental on
microscopic level (the sign minus in the tird line of (1)).

Now let us discuss the status of the speed of light in the eﬀective theory.

3

The ﬁrst question, which arises in case of the anisotropic speed of light: What
‘speed of light’ enters the Einstein relation M = mc2 between the rest energy
and the mass of the object? More generally: Which c enters any equation
which must explicitly contain c?

The answer to this question is rather simple: the speed of light c never
enters explicitly any physically reasonable equation if it is written in covariant
and gauge invariant form. The speed of light is hidden within the metric
tensor, which is the relevant dynamical variable. For example, the above
metric gµν = diag(
z ) enters the energy spectrum of massive
particle in the following way: E2 = M 2 + gikpipk, or gµνpµpν + M 2 = 0,
where M is the rest energy. In these equations there is no c.

x , c−2

y , c−2

1, c−2

−

Usually the mass is determined as the response of momentum to velocity:
pi = Mikvk. Since the velocity of the particle is vi = dE/dpi, one obtains
for the mass tensor: Mik = Egik. If the linear reponse of the momentum to
velocity is considered one has

Mik(linear)

Mik(v = 0) = Mgik .

(2)

≡

This equation contains the rest energy M, but does not contain c and small
m explicitly. The same is valid for any equation which is written in covariant
form: they never contain m and c separately.

The problem of the fundamenatlity of c is actually rather peculiar, be-

cause the speed of light has diﬀerent status for diﬀerent observers.

For the ‘inner’ observer living in the liquid, who uses the rods and clocks
made of low-energy quasiparticles, the speed of light does not depend on the
direction of propagation. Moreover it does not depend on the velocity of
the inner observer with respect to the liquid. This happens because of the
physical Lorentz contraction experienced by his rods made of quasiparticles;
his clock made of quasiparticles experience the retardation of time. All this
conspire to make the inner observer to believe that the speed of light is
fundamental. Such low-energy observer can savely divide the rest energy M
by his c2. He will obtain what he thinks is the mass of the object, and this
belief will be shared by all the low-energy inner observers. In this sence the
speed of light is fundamental (the plus sign in the ﬁrst line of (1)).

However, for the external observer who lives outside the quantum liquid
and uses the rigid rods and laboratory clocks in his experiments, the speed
of quasuiparticles is anisotropic even in the low-energy limit where the ef-
fective theory for quasiparticles is valid. This means that even within the

4

eﬀective theory the speed of light is not fundamental (the minus sign in the
second line of (1)). It becomes fundamental only when it is measured by the
quasiparticles obeying the same eﬀective metric as the low-energy object.

5 Fine structure constant

∼

The ﬁne structure constant is not fundamental both on microscopic and
eﬀective levels , since it logarithmically depends both on ultraviolet and on
infra-red cut-oﬀ parameters.
If the largest infrared cut-oﬀ is supplied by
temperature, one has α−1
NF ln(EP lanck/T ), where NF is the number of
chiral fermionic species. This takes place in eﬀective electrodynamics as
discussed by Zeldovich [5], and in eﬀective dynamics of the eﬀective U(1)
gauge ﬁeld arising in 3He-A [2]. Dependence on EP lanck shows that α is
not fundamental on the microscopic level; the dependence on the low-energy
scale demonstrates that it is not fundamental within the eﬀective theory too.
That is why all signs are minus in (1).

Decomposition of α into e2, ¯h and c has no meaning: e2 and c do not enter
explicitly in any covariant and gauge invariant equations. For example, the
energy levels of the electron in the hydrogen atom is determined by α and
by the rest energy Me of the electron [6]:

En,j = Me

α2
2n2 −

α4
2n4

1
"

−

n

j + 1/2 −

 

3
4 !

+ ...
#

These energy levels do not contain c explicitly. The quantities α and Me
are not fundamental since both are determined by the higher energy scales
(electroweak and Planck scales).

Another example is provided by the eﬀective eletromagnetic action arising

in quantum liquid [2]:

Sem =

1
¯h Z

dtd3x

g
√
−
16πα

F µνFµν .

It does not contain the speeds of light cx, cy and cz explicilty: these functions
are hidden in the metric ﬁeld. The anisotropic speed of light is the crucial
argument that the decomposition of the dimensionless running coupling α
into dimensionful e2, ¯h and c is meaningless. The only fundamental constant
which enters explicitly the electromagnetic action is ¯h.

(3)

(4)

5

6 Newton’s constant

It is the same situation as for ﬁne structure constant. In the semi-microscopic
– semi-eﬀective theory of gravity, such as Sakharov gravity [7], which is
obtained by integration over fermionic vacuum, the gravitational constant
G is determined by the Planck energy cut-oﬀ EP lanck and by the number of
the chiral fermionic species: G−1
NF E2
P lanck/¯h. Since G is determined by
∼
the microscopic physics, it is not fundamental on the microscopic level.

It is not fundamental even within the eﬀective theory arising in quantum
liquids. In some (very special) case [2] the action for the eﬀective gravita-
tional ﬁeld is similar to the Einstein action

SEinstein =

d4x

g
√
−
16πG R

− Z
It happens, however, that in quantum liquids the eﬀective G depends on
temperature [2], and thus is not fundamental. This dependence, G−1(T )
−
G−1(0)
NF T 2/¯h, does not contain microscopic parameters, and thus the
temperature correction to the gravitational ‘constant’ can be obtained, at
least in principle, from the eﬀective theory solely.
In this case, the linear
response dG−1/d(T 2) can be considered as fundamental; but this is reduced
to the inverse Planck constant, ¯h

, times numerical factor.

∼

−1

(5)

7 What constants are really fundamental?

Thus, in our example of the relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory arising in quan-
tum liquids, the only fundamental constant is ¯h. Since it is fundamental it
is possible to use it as conversion factor of energy to frequency as is stated
by Duﬀ in [1] (of course, with the following reservations: (i) energy is addi-
tive while frequency is not; (ii) as distinct from frequency the magnitude of
energy depends on the choice of zero energy level; (iii) the frequency can be
bounded from above due to, say, discreteness of time, while the energy is not
bounded; etc.).

However, it is not completely excluded that ¯h can arise as a result of
a more fundamental theory above the Planck scale which gives rise to the
quantum mechanics in the low-energy scale. In this case the ¯h can appear,
for example, as the linear term in the gradient expansion of energy: E =

6

t + i¯h3∂3

t + ... , where ¯h2

2
i¯h1∂t + ¯h2∂2
1/EP lanck, etc. In this case ¯h1 can be
¯h
considered as fundamental constant only within the eﬀective theory (as any
parameter of the linear response in condensed matter). However, ¯h1 is not
the fundamental constant in microscopic theory, that is why it can depend
on space and time and thus cannot serve as conversion factor.

∼

In such case the only fundamental constants which remain in the eﬀective
RQFT are the dimensionless topological quantum numbers [8, 2] which enter
the topological terms in eﬀective action. Such terms are naturally dimension-
less, since they are determined by the topological invariants in real and in
momentum spaces. In 3+1 systems they describe the chiral anomaly [9, 10],
and other anomalies.
In 2+1 systems these topological quantum numbers
lead to quantization of such physical parameters of the linear response the-
ory as Hall and spin Hall conductivities, which being written in the covariant
form are integer of rational numbers.

7

References

[1] M. J. Duﬀ, L. B. Okun, and G. Veneziano, Trialogue on the number of

fundamental constants, physics/0110060.

[2] Volovik G. E. Superﬂuid analogies of cosmological phenomena, Physics
Reports, 351, 195-348 (2001) ; Universe in a Helium Droplet, forthcom-
ing book, Oxford University Press, http://ice.hut.ﬁ/Volovik/book.pdf.

[3] Laughlin R. B. and Pines D. The Theory of Everything, Proc. Natl.

Acad. Sc. USA 97, 28-31 (2000).

[4] S. Weinberg, Overview of theoretical prospects for understanding the
values of fundamental constants, in: The Constants of Physics, W.H.
McCrea and M.J. Rees editors, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London A 310,
249 (1983).

[5] Ya.B. Zel’dovich, Interpretation of electrodynamics as a consequence of
quantum theory, Pis’ma ZhETF 6, 922 (1967); [JETP Letters, 6, 345
(1967)].

[6] Weinberg S. The Quantum Theory of Fields, Cambridge University Press

(1995).

[7] A.D. Sakharov, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 177, 70 (1967); [Sov. Phys.

Doklady 12, 1040 (1968)].

[8] Thouless D. J. Topological Quantum Numbers in Nonrelativistic Physics,

World Scientiﬁc (1998).

2426 - 2438 (1969).

[9] Adler S., Axial-vector vertex in spinor electrodynamics, Phys. Rev. 177,

[10] Bell J. S. and Jackiw R., A PCAC puzzle: π0

γγ in the σ model,

Nuovo Cim. A 60, 47–61 (1969).

→

8

