1

Is the Energy Balance Paradox Solved?

Amos Harpaz(1) and Noam Soker(2)

1. Institute of Theoretical Physics, Technion, Haifa, ISRAEL
2. Department of Physics, Oranim, Tivon 36006, ISRAEL

phr89ah@tx.technion.ac.il
soker@physics.technion.ac.il

key words: Radiation Reaction Force, Curved Electric Field

Abstract

The question of what is the source of the energy carried by radiation is discussed. The case
of a hyperbolic motion is analyzed, describing the solutions suggested in the past for the “energy
balance paradox”. The solution to the paradox is found in considering the stress force created
in the curved electric ﬁeld of the accelerated charge, that acts as a reaction force. The work
performed by the external force to overcome this stress force is the source of the energy carried
by the radiation. This stress force is the spatial component of the four-vector called “Schott
term”, that appears in Abraham four-vector. This novel approach solves the “energy balace
oaradox”.

Pacs: 41.60-m, 03.50-DE

2
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
0
7
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1. Introduction

The Energy Balance Paradox concerns the question of - what is the source of the energy
carried by radiation. This problem is complicated and demands a careful analysis of all the
factors relevant to the process. Hence, we shall concentrate here on the most simple case of
creation of radiation - a charge accelerated uniformly in its own system of reference, in which
case its motion is described in a four dimensional free space as a hyperbolic motion [1].

One expects that the energy carried by the radiation is created by a work done by the
external force against a certain force that exists in the system, where this work should be
performed in addition to the work done in creating the kinetic energy of the charged particle.
In many publications this problem is treated by using the concept of “radiation reaction force”,
where it is assumed that a reaction force created by the radiation is the force that the external
force should overcome, and the work done against the reaction force is the source of the energy
carried by the radiation. However, in the simple case of the hyperbolic motion this approach
meets diﬃculties that were named “The Energy Balance Paradox”, as no such force exists in
this motion.

The diﬃculties have two sources: one - when the accelerated charge moves with low (zero)
velocity, its radiation is symmetric with respect to the plane which is perpendicular to the
direction of motion. Thus the radiation does not impart any counter momentum to the accel-
erated charge, and no radiation reaction force exists. The second source of the diﬃculties is
that usually, it is considered that in the equation of motion of the accelerated charge, a term
called Abraham four vector is considered as representing the radiation reaction force. It comes
out that in a hyperbolic motion, this vector vanishes. This suits the fact that in this case no
radiation reaction force exists, but it leaves us with the paradox.

In the present work we shall analyze the paradox, and the solutions given to it. We shall also
show that the solution to the paradox is found when a reaction force is identiﬁed, which is not
the “radiation reaction force”, but rather a stress force that exists in the curved electric ﬁeld of
the accelerated charge. The work done by the external force to overcome the stress force, is the
source of the energy carried by the radiation.

2. The Problem.

The formula for the angular distribution of the radiation power is [2]:

dP
dΩ

=

e2a2
4πc3

sin2 θ
(1 − β cos θ)5

where e is the accelerated charge, a is the acceleration, c is the speed of light, and θ is the angle
measured from the direction of motion. Integrating eq. 1 over the angles, yields:

e2a2
c3(1 − β2)3 =
where for β → 0 (γ → 1), yields Larmor formula for the power carried by the radiation:

e2(γ3a)2
c3

P =

2
3

2
3

P =

2
3

e2a2
c3

2

(1)

(2)

(3)

3

Figure 1: The angular distribution of the radiation

In Fig. 1 we plot the angular distribution of the radiation for several values of β. It is clearly
observed that for low velocities (β ≤ 0.01), no counter momentum is imparted by the radiation
to the charge, and no radiation reaction exists.

The Dirac-Lorentz equation (or LAD as called by Rohrlich[3]) for a charged particle is:

maµ = F µ

ext + Γµ = F µ

ext +

2e2
3c3

(cid:18)

˙aµ −

1
c2 aλaλvµ

,

(cid:19)

(4)

where m is the particle mass, vµ and aµ are the velocity 4-vector and the acceleration 4-vector,
respectively, and F µ
ext is the external force 4-vector that drives the particle. Γµ is Abraham
4-vector, which was usually considered as representing the radiation reaction force.

The ﬁrst term in Γµ, ( 2
3

e2 ˙aµ
c3 ), is called the “Schott term”. In a hyperbolic motion,

˙aµ =
1
c2 aλaλvµ, and Γµ vanishes. This is in accord with the nonexistence of a radiation reaction force
in such a motion as shown in Fig. 1 (concerning the conjencture that Γµ represnts the radiation
reaction force). In the present work we follow Rohrlich[3], who argues that the reaction force
responsible for the creation of the radiation should be included in Schott term, thus showing
that the vanishing of Γµ shows that the power carried by the radiation, which is represented in
the second term of Γµ is created by the force represented in Schott term. However, this force is
not a radiation reaction force, but rather a reaction force created by the stress force the exists
in the curved electric ﬁeld of the accelerated charge. This reaction force should be overcome by
the accelerating external force, and the work performed against this force is the source of the
energy carried by the radiation (see section 4).

The presence of ˙a (the third time derivative of the position) in the equation of motion (eq.4),
demands a third initial condition for the solution of the equation of motion of an electric charge
(the initial acceleration). In section 4 we ﬁnd that a stress force, fs, which exists in the curved
electric ﬁeld of the accelerated charge, is proportional to the acceleration. Thus, the third initial
condition is needed to complement the picture of all the factors involved in such a motion. It is
also found that this force, fs, is responsible for the creation of the radiation.

3. Solutions suggested

4

One of the solutions was [4], that there exists a charged plane, whose charge is equal and
opposite in sign to the accelerated charge, and it recesses with the speed of light in a direction
opposite to the direction of the acceleration. The interaction between this charged plane and
the accelerated charge creates the energy carried by the radiation. Another suggestion was
[5, (eq. 4.9)], that in such a case the energy radiated is supplied from the self-energy of the
charge. Evidently, these suggestions are far from being satisfactory. Some people deduced that
a uniformly accelerated charge does not radiate (see Singal[6]). It should be noted that the idea
suggested in [4] resolves another diﬃculty concerned with this topic, which is the existence of
a single electric charge. As we assume that the matter in the universe is neutral, the existence
of a solitary charge is a local phenomenon, whose validity is limited to distance scales that are
much shorter than distance scales that characterize gravitational considerations. Any treatment
of this topic that carries calculations to inﬁnity, cannot be a valid treatment. The treatment
suggested by Leibovitz and Peres [4], considers a system which is neutral.

In a recently published paper, Rohrlich[3] discusses this topic, and criticizing earlier works
(including his earlier work[7]), he considers a treatment that should solve the problem. Let us
discuss here brieﬂy the treatment suggested in [3].

The equation of motion given in [3] is:

ext + F µ

m0 ˙vµ = F µ
where m0 is the physical rest mass involved in the process (m0 = m+δm, [3]), and F µ
self actually
equals Abraham 4-vector. δm represents the electromagnetic mass which will be discussed later.
Rohrlich obtained this equation by generalizing the equation of motion, and by demanding
that the constant in the generalized equation be 2e2
3c3 . Rohrlich concludes that the vanishing of
Abraham 4-vector (F µ
self in his notation) shows that the radiation energy comes from the Schott
term.

(5)

self

This argumentation makes sense but it raises a question: The terms that appear in Abraham
4-vector in this case are the zeroth components of a 4-vector (components that represent power,
and not force, see [3]). The question where is the force that does the work is still there. We
are looking for a three dimensional force that acts as a reaction force, and we do not ﬁnd it in
this treatment. The Schott term in this case represents the power performed by the force we
are looking for, but not the force itself. We discuss this point in the next section.

4. The stress force solution

When an electric charge is accelerated, its electric ﬁeld is not accelerated with the charge. It
is detached from the charge, and remains inertial. Hence the electric ﬁeld of the charge becomes
curved[8]. Fulton and Rohrlich [5] calculated the electromagnetic ﬁelds of a charge moving in
a hyperbolic motion, along the z axis, using the retarded potentials method. The equation for
the electric ﬁeld lines were calculated by Singal[6], and they are drawn in Fig. 2.

The same results were obtained by Gupta and Padmanabhan[9], where they calculate the
electric ﬁelds of an accelerated charge in the rest system of the charge, and then transform them
to the inertial frame. They also show that by using the retarded coordinates (xret, tret) for the
accelerated charge, one obtains the expressions for the electromagnetic ﬁelds as given in the
standard textbooks[2,10].

The radius of curvature of the ﬁeld lines is: Rc = c2/a sin θ, where θ is the angle between the
initial direction of the ﬁeld line and the acceleration. Now, we follow in brief the calculations

5

(6)

(7)

(8)

Figure 2: A curved electric ﬁeld of a uniformlly accelerated charge.

given in [11]. In a curved electric ﬁeld a stress force exists, whose density, fs, is given by:

fs =

E2
4πRc

,

fs =

E2
4πRc

=

a sin θ
4πc2

e2
r4

where E is the electric ﬁeld, and Rc is the radius of curvature of the ﬁeld lines. In the immediate
vicinity of the charge, the electric ﬁeld can be taken as E = e/r2, and we have:

The stress force is perpendicular to the ﬁeld lines, so that the component of this force along
the acceleration is −fs sin φ, where φ is the angle between the local ﬁeld line and the acceleration.
In the immediate vicinity of the charge (r ≪ c2/a, where the direction of the ﬁeld line did not
change much from its initial direction), φ ∼ θ, and we can write for the parallel component of
the stress force:

−fs sin φ ≃ −fs sin θ = −

a sin2 θ
4πc2

e2
r4

It is interesting to note that the angular distribution of the parallel component of the stress
force is similar to that of the radiation. We have to sum over the parallel component of the
stress force, fs, and calculate the work done against this force.

In order to sum over fs, we have to integrate over a sphere whose center is located on the
charge. Naturally, such an integration involves a divergence (at the center). To avoid such
a divergence, we take as the lower limit of the integration a small distance from the center,
r = c∆t, (where ∆t is inﬁnitesimal). We calculate the work done by the stress force in the
volume deﬁned by c∆t ≤ r ≤ rup, where rup is some large distance from the charge, satisfying
the demand: c∆t ≪ rup ≪ c2/a. These calculations are performed in a system of reference S,
which is a ﬂat system that momentarily coincides with the frame of reference of the accelerated
charge at time t = 0, at the charge location.

Since the calculations are performed in the ﬂat system S, the integration can be carried
Integration of the stress force over a

without using any terms concerning space curvature.
volume extending from r = c∆t to rup, yields the total force due to stress, Fs:

Fs = 2π

rup

π

r2dr

c∆t

Z

0
Z

sin θdθ[−fs sin θ] = −

2
3

a
c2

e2
c∆t  

1 −

c∆t
rup !

.

Clearly the second term in the parenthesis can be neglected. Fs is the reaction force. The
power supplied by the external force on acting against the electric stress is Ps = −Fsv, where v
is the velocity of the charge in system S at time t = ∆t, v = a∆t. Substituting this value for v
we get for Ps:

Ps =

2
3

a2e2
c3 .

This is the power radiated by an accelerated charged particle at zero velocity (eq. 3).

In order to include this result in the equation of motion (eq. 5), we should add the force
−Fs to the external force, which is the force needed to overcome the stress force, and we should
include Fs in the spatial part of the Schott 4-vector (Schott term in the notation of [3]), whose
zeroth component is the power created by this force. The work performed by −Fs is the source
of the energy carried by the radiation. This extended equation includes all the forces involved
in the process, including the force that performs the work that creates the energy carried by the
radiation. Rohrlich is right in his conclusion that the Schott term is the source of the power
of the radiation, but this deﬁniftion becomes complete when the stress force (Fs from eq. 9) is
included in the spatial part of the Schott term.

The expression for the force in eq. 9 (before substituting the integration limits, Fs =
− 2
3 ae2/c2r) equals the inertial force (4mea/3) of the electromagnetic mass of the charge as
[2], p. 790). However, a work performed against an inertial
calculated by Lorentz (see ref.
force cannot be the work that creates the energy carried by the radiation, because such a work
creates a kinetic energy of the electromagnetic mass me, and this leaves us with the energy
balance paradox. Actually, this electromagnetic mass is already included in the equation of
motion by Rohrlich, (eq. 5) as δm (see [3]), and the force needed to accelerate this mass is
already included in F µ

ext.

As an example, let us analyze the case of an oscillatory motion of a charge in a linear antenna

(length of 2D), in the x direction. the equations of motion are:

x = D sin ωt ; v = ωD cos ωt

a = −ω2D sin ωt = −ω2x ;

˙a = −ω3D cos ωt = −ω2v

At time ∆t (where ∆t is inﬁnitesimal), we use the approximations:
sin ωt ≃ ω∆t, and cos ωt ≃ 1:

x = ωD∆t ; v = ωD

a = −ω3D∆t ;

˙a = −ω3D

and we ﬁnd that when we start from a point at which a = 0, a(∆t) = ˙a∆t.

6

(9)

(10)

(11.a)

(11.b)

(12.a)

(12.b)

7

(13)

(14)

The motion is linear and from eq. 9 we have the reaction force Freac created in a linear

motion: Freac = Fs =

−2e2
3c3

a
∆t .

Substituting for a, we ﬁnd: Fs =

−2e2
3c3 ˙a, which is exactly Schott term. Jackson [2, eq. 17.8]
calls this expression Frad, relating it to the radiation reaction force. Since we know that in a
linear motion, at low velocities (β < 0.01), no radiation reaction force exists, we deduce that
Freac, that expresses the stress force in the curved electric ﬁeld, should replace jackson’s Frad,
the non-existing radiation reaction force.

5. Non-Zero Velocity

Equation (10) shows the power emitted by a uniformly accelerated charge calculated at zero
velocity. We can consider the case of an accelerated charge, moving with low velocity. From Fig.
1 we observe that in this case, a part of the radiation is radiated forward, and evidently, this part
of the radiation imparts a backward momentum to the radiating charge, thus creating a reaction
force. To calculate the power created by this reaction force, we follow the calculations given in
[12]. We multiply eq. 1 by cos θ/c, (to obtain the parallel component of the momentum ﬂux of
the radiation), and integrate over the angles. The integration yields for the parallel component
of the momentum ﬂux (ppar):

while the total absolute value of the momentum ﬂux, p, is found by dividing eq. 2 by c. (The
perpendicular momentum ﬂux vanishes because of the symmetry in the plane perpendicular to
the direction of motion, but we still can compare the parallel component of the momentum ﬂux
to the total absolute value of the momentum ﬂux of the radiation). By dividing ppar by p, we
ﬁnd the weight of the parallel component of the momentum ﬂux in the total absolute value of
the momentum ﬂux:

ppar =

2
3

e2(γ3a)2
c4

β,

ppar
p

= β

This fraction is the weight of the parallel component of the momentum ﬂux of the radiation,
and this fraction creates a reaction force - a radiation reaction force. To get the weight of the
work done by the radiation reaction force we should multiply this fraction by βc (the velocity of
the charge in the rest frame), and we ﬁnd that the weight of the work done in overcoming the
radiation reaction force (the reaction force created by the radiation) in the total power radiated
is β2. The other part of the energy (1 − β2 = 1/γ2), is created by the stress force that exists in
the curved electric ﬁeld. We ﬁnd that the relative weight of the work done by the stress force
in the total work done by the total reaction force decreases when γ increases.

5. Conclusions

The solution to the energy balance paradox is found when we consider the stress force that
exists in the curved electric ﬁeld of an accelerated charge. At low (zero) velocities, the work done
by the external (accelerating) force in overcoming the stress force is the source of the energy
carried by the radiation. The stress force is the spatial component of the Schott 4-vector, which
is usually called the Schott term in Abraham 4-vector. Thus, the radiation energy comes from
the Schott term, as suggested by Rohrlich[3].

8

References

1. Rindler W., Special Relativity, Sec. Ed., Oliver and Boyd, New York, (1966).
2. Jackson J.D., Classical Electrodynamics, Sec. Ed., John Wiley and Sons, New York (1975).
3. Rohrlich F., “The Self Energy and Radiation Reaction”, Amer. J. Phys., 68, (2000), 1109.
4. Leibovitz C., Peres A., “The Energy Balance Paradox”, Annals of Physics, 25, (1963), 400.
5. Fulton R., Rohrlich F., “Classical Radiation from a Uniformly Accelerated Charge”, Annals
of Physics, 9, (1960), 499.
6. Singal A. K., “The Equivalence Principle and an Electric Charge in a Gravitational Field”,
Gen. Rel. Grav., 29, (1997), 1371.
7. Rohrlich F., Classical Charged Particles, Addison-Wessley, Reading, Mass., pp 111, (1965).
8. Harpaz A., “The Nature of Fields”, Euro. J. Phys., 23, (2002), 263.
9. Gupta A., Padmanabhan T., “Radiation from a Charged Particle and Radiation Reaction
Reexamined”, Phys. Rev., D57, (1998), 7241.
10. Panofsky W.K.H., Phillips M., Classical Electricty and Magnetism, Sec. Ed., Addison
Wesley Pub. Co., Reading MA, (1964).
11. Harpaz A., Soker N., “Radiation from a Uniformly Accelerated Charge”, Gen. Rel. Grav.,
30, (1998), 1217.
12. Harpaz A., Soker N., “Radiation from an Electric Charge”, Foundations of Physics, 31,
(2001), 935.

