Equation of Motion of an Electric Charge

Amos Harpaz1,2 and Noam Soker2

1. Institute of Theoretical Physics, Technion, Haifa, ISRAEL
2. Department of Physics, Oranim, Tivon 36006, ISRAEL

phr89ah@tx.technion.ac.il
soker@physics.technion.ac.il

Abstract

The appearance of the time derivative of the acceleration in the equation of motion
(EOM) of an electric charge is studied. It is shown that when an electric charge is accelerated,
a stress force exists in the curved electric ﬁeld of the accelerated charge, and this force is
proportional to the acceleration. This stress force acts as a reaction force which is responsible
for the creation of the radiation (instead of the “radiation reaction force” that actually does
not exist at low velocities). Thus the initial acceleration should be supplied as an initial
condition for the solution of the EOM of an electric charge. It is also shown that in certain
cases, like periodic motions of an electric charge, the term that includes the time derivative
of the acceleration, represents the stress reaction force.

2
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
9
0
9
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1. Introduction

The equation of motion (EOM) for a charged particle was calculated by Schott[1] in a

three dimensional formalism, and by Dirac[2] in a four dimensional formalism:

maµ = F µ

ext + Γµ = F µ

ext +

2e2
3c3 ( ˙aµ −

1
c2 vµaαaα) .

(1)

The ﬁrst term in Γ (known as Schott term) includes the time derivative of the acceleration
(a third time derivative of the position), and this raised the question as “what is the role
of the third time derivative in the EOM”, as the presence of a third derivative in the EOM
demands the deﬁnition of three initial conditions for the solution of such an equation, where
in classical mechanics we usually need only two initial conditions for the solution of a regular
EOM. Is the appearance of the third time derivative in the EOM just a sad accident that
somehow should be bypassed, or is it a legitimate requirement that characterizes this kind of
motion? We also notice that the second term in Γ equals the power carried by the radiation
(Larmor formula). It is clear that Schott term should include the physical factors that create
this power. In certain physical situations, like a motion of an electric charge in a cyclotron,
the third derivative of the position plays an important role.
It appears as a part of the
“radiation force”, (Frad). We return to this point in more details in section 3.

One way of bypassing the question of the third derivative is described in [3]. According
to this suggestion, Schott term is isolated somehow from Γ and is adapted to the acceleration
term in the left side of the EOM (eq. 1). To solve this equation in its new form, a multipli-
cation by an integration factor (e−τ /τ0) is needed. This term, which includes the proper time
in an exponential form, leads later to divergent solutions that must be discarded. It also
causes an acceleartion that begins some time before the force that creates the acceleration
acts, and this “preacceleration” should be discarded by causality considerations. We shall
discuss in detail the question of the third derivative in section 2.

Landau and Lifshitz[4, p. 203] also obtain the third derivative using a diﬀerent approach.
They show that when a charge is accelerated by an external electric ﬁeld, in addition to the
force acting according to Lorentz formula, it is acted upon by a force f = 2e2 ˙a
3c3 , and by
multiplying this force by the velocity, and taking the average over time, they ﬁnd the power,
P , created by this force: P = 2e2a2
3c3 . They call this force “radiation damping”, and argue
that it represents the reaction of the radiation on the charge. However, as was shown in [5],
at low velocities the radiation is emitted in a plane perpendicular to the direction of motion,
and no counter momentum is imparted to the charge by the radiation, and no radiation
reaction force (or a radiation damping force) exists. The reaction force to the motion of
the accelerated charge should be found elsewhere. Later we show that the reaction force
is actually the stress force that exists in the curved electric ﬁeld of the accelerated charge.
The work performed in overcoming this reaction force is the source of energy carried by the
radiation.

Until recently, Γ term (also known as Abraham four vector) was considered as represent-
ing the radiation reaction force[6,7], and the fact that in a hyperbolic motion Γ vanishes
raised many questions, known as the “energy balance paradox”[8]. The paradox is, that the

2

vanishing of Γ, leaves no radiation reaction force and no source for a work that may create
the energy carried by the radiation.

Following ref. [9] we adopt the approach given in a recently published work of Rohrlich[10].

The equation of motion given in [10] is:

m0 ˙vµ = F µ

ext + F µ

self

,

(2)

where m0 is the physical rest mass involved in the process (m0 = m + δm, [10]), and
F µ
self actually equals Abraham 4-vector. δm represents the electromagnetic mass. Rohrlich
concludes that the fourth component of Schott term includes the power created by the
reaction force, and the vanishing of Γ in a hyperbolic motion shows that Schott term is the
source of the power carried by the radiation. However, the spatial part of Schott term (the
force that creates this power) is not found, as the radiation reaction force does not exist. In
section 3 we show that there is a reaction force, but it is not a radiation reaction force, but
it is the stress force that exists in the curved electric ﬁeld of the accelerated charge. This
reaction force should be included in the spatial part of Schott term, and the work done in
overcoming this force creates the energy carried by the radiation.

2. Initial conditions

The answer to the question about the role of the derivative of the acceleration demands
analyssis of all the factors involved in the motion of a charged particle. It comes out that an
important factor is usually overlooked - this factor is the stress force that exists in the curved
electric ﬁeld of an accelerated cahrged particle[5]. The interaction of the curved electric ﬁeld
with the accelerated charge that induced the ﬁeld appears as a reaction force that acts on
the accelerated charge, and the work performed by the external force (Fext) to overcome
this reaction force is the source of the energy carried by the radiation[5]. The stress force is
inversely proportional to the radius of curvature, Rc, of the electric ﬁeld (see eq. 9 further
on). For the simple case of a hyperbolic motion, Rc is given by:

Rc =

c2
a sin θ

,

(3)

where a is the acceleration of the charged particle , and θ is the angle between the direction
of motion and the direction of the ﬁeld line at the location of the charge. We ﬁnd that the
reaction force is proportional to the acceleration and this shows that the value of the acceler-
ation at any moment has an important role in the determination of the motion parameters,
as it determines part of the forces that aﬀect the motion. Hence the initial value of the
acceleration is needed to deﬁne the parameters of the motion, and the appearance of the
derivative of the acceleration in the EOM is not a sad mishap, but a legitimate requirement,
needed for a complete solution of the physical situation. Later it is found[9], that when this
stress force is calculated, its value should be inserted into the spatial part of Schott term,
and then, the power invested in overcoming this force, balances the radiation power that
appears in the second part of Γµ that appears in eq. 1. Thus Γµ is fully balanced as required
(see [10]), and the “energy balance paradox” is resolved. Dirac treats the ﬁrst term in eq.

3

1 (maµ) as the “source of the kinetic energy”, while Schott term is treated by him as the
“source of the acceleration energy”. This may be justiﬁed by noticing that this term includes
the power created in overcoming the stress force (the reaction force) which is proportional
to (and created by) the acceleration.

The situation described here resembles the situation in which a charge is supported
It is found[5] that this situation, which seems static is
statically in a gravitational ﬁeld.
actually not static, but it is a steady state situation - the electric ﬁeld of the charge is
detached from the charge[11], and it falls in a free fall in the gravitational ﬁeld. The electric
ﬁeld becomes curved, and a stress force exists in this ﬁeld. When the physical parameters
are calculated for such a situation, for the most simple case (an electric charge located in a
homogenous gravitational ﬁeld[12]), it is found that in the close vicinity of the charge, the
radius of curvature of the electric ﬁeld, (Rc), equals (for the ﬁrst approximation):

Rc ≃

c2
g sin θ

,

where g is the gravitational acceleration, and θ is the angle between the direction of g and
the electric ﬁeld line at the charge location. This equation is similar to eq. 3, and this fact
tempts us to deduce that there indeed exists an equivalence beween an acceleration of a
charge in a free space, and a static location of a charge in a gravitational ﬁeld, and to the
conclusion that a charge supported at rest in a gravitational ﬁeld does radiate.

3. The Stress Force

Let us calculate in detail the power created by the stress force for the case of an hyperbolic
motion. The equations for the electric ﬁeld as calculated by Fulton and Rohrlich[6] using
the retarded potentials method are given in cylindrical coordinates (z, ρ, φ), by:

Ez =

−4eα2
ξ3

[α2 + (ct)2 + ρ2 − z2]

Eρ =

8eα2ρz
ξ3

Bφ =

8eα2ρct
ξ3

where

ξ2 = [α2 + (ct)2 − ρ2 − z2]2 + (2αρ)2,
(8)
and all other ﬁeld components vanish. z = α = c2/a is the location of the charge at time
t = 0, and it is also the characteristic radius of curvature of the electric ﬁeld. The equation
for the ﬁeld lines was calculated by Singal[13], and they are drawn in Fig. 1.

As can be expected, the ﬁeld lines are curved and the radius of curvature, Rc, is inversely
proportional to the acceleration and is given in eq. 3. These equations were calculated
earlier (in a three dimensional formalism) by Schott[1]. They were also calculated by Gupta

4

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Figure 1: The ﬁeld lines of a charge moving with a constant acceleration

and Padmanabhan[14] who calculated ﬁrst the electric ﬁeld of the accelerated charge in its
own system of reference, and then performed transformations to the free space system of
reference. They also show that by using the retarded variables (xret, tret), they recover the
equations usually given in the textsbooks[15, 16].

The stress force density, fs, is given (see [17] for more details) by:

where E is the electric ﬁeld. When we substitute in eq. 9 for Rc and for E = e
correct for the close vicinity of the charge) we get for the stress force density:

r2 (which is

fs =

E2
4πRc

fs =

e2
4π

a sin θ
r4c2

The component of this force in the direction of the acceleration is −fs sin δ, where δ is the
angle between the ﬁeld line and the direction of motion. In the close vicinity of the charge,
where the direction of the ﬁeld lines did not change much, δ ≃ θ, and we ﬁnd for the parallel
component of the force density:

−fs sin δ ≃ −fs sin θ =

−e2a sin2 θ
4πc2r4

and we have to integrate this expression over a sphere around the charge. To avoid divergence
at the center (r → 0), we take for the lower limit of the integration a small distance from
the center, c∆t, where ∆t is inﬁnitesimal. As the upper limit of the integration we take
some large distance, rup, where c∆t ≪ rup ≪ c2/a. The integration is carried in the free
space system of reference, S, which momentarily coincides with the system of reference of
the charge at time t = 0. This integration yields the stress force Fs, by which the curved
electric ﬁeld acts on the accelerated charge. It acts against the acceleration, and the external

5

(9),

(10).

(11),

force that accelerates the charge, should overcome this stress force, in addition to the work
it does in creating the kinetic energy of the charged particle. This work is the source of the
energy carried by the radiation.

Fs =

Z

−fs sin θdV =
rup
−2e2a
3c2r #

"

c∆t

−e2a
4πc2

=

2π

dφ

0
Z
−2e2a
3c3∆t "

0
Z
1 −

π

sin3 θdθ
c∆t
rup #

.

rup

c∆t

Z

dr
r2 =
(12)

Certainly, the second term in the square parenthessis can be ignored. In order to ﬁnd
the power, Ps, created by this force, we multiply −Fs by the velocity of the charge at the
time t = ∆t, v = a∆t, and ﬁnd:

Ps = −Fsa∆t =

2e2a2
3c3

which is the power carried by the radiation (Larmor formula). This power should be inserted
in the fourth component of Schott term, where it balances the power carried by the radiation.

4. A charge in a periodic motion

We present here two examples in which we ﬁnd that Fs, which is responsible for the

creation of the radiation, is proportional to ˙a.

Let us study an oscillatory motion of a charge in a linear antenna whose length is 2D in

the x direction. The equations of motion for this case are:

x = D sin ωt ; v = ωD cos ωt

a = −ω2D sin ωt = −ω2x ;

˙a = −ω3D cos ωt = −ω2v .

At time t = ∆t, (where ∆t is inﬁnitesimal), we use the approximations (ignoring second
and higher powers of ∆t and assumming Dω ≪ c): sin ωt ≃ ω∆t, and cos ωt ≃ 1, and ﬁnd:

(13)

(14.a)

(14.b)

(15.a)

(15.b)

x = Dω∆t ; v = Dω

a = −Dω3∆t ;

˙a = −Dω3 .

We ﬁnd: a = ˙a∆t. (Note that in section 3 we had a → const., v → 0, while here, a → 0, v →
const. The motion is linear, and we recall from eq. 12 that the reaction force Freac created in
a linear acceleration motion at low velocity after short time ∆t is: Fs = −2e2
a
∆t. Using the
3c3
relation we found above between a and ˙a we ﬁnd Freac = Fs = −2e2
3c3 ˙a, which is the expression
used by Jackson [15, 17.8] for the radiation force Frad, which is responsible for the creation
of the radiation. However, it was already shown that no radiation reaction force exists in a
linear acceleration at low velocities, and Freac, which should replace Jackson’s Frad, is the
reaction force that exists as a stress force in the curved electric ﬁeld of the accelerated charge.
The force −Fs, should be inserted as the spatial part (three vector component) of Schott

6

Figure 2: A charge in cyclotron

term, and a term −Fs, should be added to the accelerating force Fext, which is needed to
overcome the stress force.

As a second example, consider the case in which a charge is moving in a circular motion
like in a cyclotron. When a charge moving with a uniform velocity in a free space enters into
a homogenous magnetic ﬁeld, B, which is aligned in a right angle to its direction of motion,
it will be acted upon by a force FB, which is perpendicular both to its direction of motion
and to the direction of B. Since the force is always perpendicular to the charge’s velocity,
no work is performed by FB, and the charge will perform a circular motion due to the radial
acceleration imparted to it. If in such a motion no loss of energy takes place, this motion may
continue forever. However, due to the acceleration imparted to the charge, it radiates, and
loses energy through this radiation. The central force cannot perform the work that creates
the radiation, because it is always perpendicular to the direction of motion. In the equipment
(cyclotron) in which this motion takes place, a force Fext, that acts along the direction of
motion (along the circle) should act, where the work performed by Fext, creates the energy
carried away by the radiation. Usually, this force is implemented by an oscillatory electric
ﬁeld, whose frequency equals the frequency of the cyclotron. For simplicity, we assume that
this force acts continueousely along the trajectory of the charge. It is clear that some force
exists in the system which “tries” to slow down the charge in its motion (it acts in an opposite
direction to the velocity), and this force acts as a reaction force, Freac, to the motion. Fext
should overcome Freac, and the question is: what is the source of Freac.

The usually given answer to this question is that Freac is a radiation reaction force, and it
is called by Jackson[15, eq. 17.8], Frad. However, close inspection of the equation that gives
the angular distribution of the radiation emitted from a charge moving in a circular motion
[15, eq. 14.44], shows that for low velocities of the charge in its circular motion (β ≪ 1), the
radiation is emitted in a plane perpendicular to the direction of the acceleration, and due
to the symmetry of the radiation in this plane, no counter momentum is imparted by the
radiation to the charge, and no radiation reaction force exists.

It was shown in [5], that when a charge is accelerated, its electric ﬁeld becomes curved,

7

and a stress force, Fs, exists in this curved ﬁeld. Fs actually acts as a reaction force, which
Fext has to overcome, and doing this, Fext performs the work that creates the energy carried
away by the radiation. We are interested here in the component of Fs in the counter direction
of the velocity. As shown in [5], the calculations are carried during an arbitrary inﬁnitesimaly
time interval, ∆t. In Fig. 2 we present the calculations: The ﬁgure is drawn in the x, z
plane, as shown in the ﬁgure. In this ﬁgure, the center of the circular orbit (with radius R),
is the point C. At time t = 0, the charge is located at the point P . The velocity of the charge
is V , and we analyze the situation in the system of reference B, which momentarily coincides
with the system of reference of the charge at time: t = 0. In this system the linear velocity
of the charge vanishes, and a central velocity Vz is created due to the central acceleration
a. At the end of the time interval ∆t a velocity Vz = a∆t is created. We recall from [5]
(and from eq. 12 above) that the component of the stress force parallel to the acceleration
is: Fs = − 2e2
a
∆t. We are interested in the component Ftrack of Fs, which is parallel (or
3c3
anti-parallel) to the circular velocity V , at time: t = ∆t. From trigonometric relations we
ﬁnd that at the time t = ∆t:

The ratio of Vz to V is:

and we ﬁnd for Ftrack:

Ftrack
Fs

=

Vz
V

.

Vz
V

a
V

−V
R

=

∆t =

∆t ,

Ftrack = Fs

= −Fs

∆t =

Vz
V

V
R

2e2
3c3 a

V
R

=

−2e2V 3
3c3R2

,

where the last expression is obtained by substituting a = −ω2R = −V 2
value for the acceleration, we have: −ω2V = −V 3
R2 = ˙a, and we ﬁnd that:
2e2
3c3 ˙a ,

Ftrack =

R . Using the same

which equals the expression given by Jackson for Frad, the force that causes the creation
of the radiation. What we have found is that this force is not a radiation reaction, but it
is a reaction force created by the stress force that exists in the curved electric ﬁeld of the
accelerated charge. Multiplying −Ftrack as given in eq. 16 by V, yield the power created by
this force:

−Ftrack · V =

2e2V 4
3c3R2 =

2e2a2
3c3

,

which is the power carried by the radiation. These calculations approve that also in the case
of a circular motion (at low velocities), the stress force does the main role of the reaction
force which is responsible for the creation of the radiation.

5. A Charge Supported in a Gravitational Field

The situation of a relative acceleration between a charge and its electric ﬁeld also exists
for a charge supported statically in a gravitational ﬁeld. The electric ﬁeld, which is not

8

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

supported with the charge, falls in a free fall (see [11]), and there exists a relative acceleration
between the charge and its ﬁeld. Prima facie, the situation seems static, but it is not. It is
a steady state situation. It is correct that in the lab system (the system of the supported
charge), the Poynting vector vanishes, but a Poynting vector is not an invariant, and cannot
be taken as a covariant measure for the existence of radiation. We demand that a covariant
measure for the existence of radiation, is the non-vanishing of the Poynting vector in the
system of reference deﬁned by the geodesics. Such a system is the one that falls freely parallel
to the charge, and in this system, the supported charge is accelerated upward. A magnetic
ﬁeld exists in this system, and the Poynting vector does not vanish (see Rohrlich[12]). In
this system, the electric ﬁeld is curved, a stress force exists, and calculations similar to those
carried for the accelerated charge, yield the power carried by the radiation. The power can
be calculated according to Larmor formula, where we put g for the acceleration, namely:

P =

g2e2
c3 .

2
3

As a general measure for the radiation, we take the four acceleration vector Aµ. It is

calculated by:

Aµ = D4U µ =

d
dx4 U µ + {4

µ

ν} U ν,

where D represents a covariant drivative and {γ
charge U µ =

. The regular derivative in eq. 14 vanishes, and we are left with:

µ

ν} is the Christoﬀel symbol. For a static

0
c (cid:19)

(cid:18)

Aµ = {4

µ

4} U 4

and for Larmor formula we should use: a2 = gµµAµAµ, where a is the proper acceleration.
Let us examine two cases:

(1) A homogenous static gravitational ﬁeld.
(2) A Schwarzschild ﬁeld.
(1) Consider a homegenous gravitational ﬁeld directed downward in the z(= x3) direction,

that generates an acceleration g. This ﬁeld is characterized by u(z) (a function of z):

(1 − gz)2 − 1, u′ = du/dz, and g33 = (u′/g)2 (Rohrlich[12]).

1
u = cosh

q

and

which at the charge location (z → 0), yields g2 to be introduced in Larmor formula.
(2) In a Schwarzschild ﬁeld, the only relevant coordinate is r(= x1). We have:

(13a)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

A3 =

3

4

4

n

o

U 4 = g2 u
u′

g33A3A3 = g2u2,

A1 =

1

4

4

U 4 =

n

o

m
r2 (1 −

2m
r

).

9

The charge has an outward acceleration of g(1 − 2m/r). For Larmor formula we have
to use a2 = g11A1A1 = g2(1 − 2m/r), and we ﬁnd that for a static charge in a weak ﬁeld,
Larmor formula yields a power very close to that radiated by an accelerated charge with an
acceleration g.

Let us calculate the electric ﬁeld of a supported charge in a homogenous gravitational

ﬁeld. Using equations given by Rohrlich[12], we have (in cylindrical coordinates, ρ, z, φ):

ξ2 = (α2(1 − u2) − ρ2)2 + 4α2ρ2,
(28)
where u(z) and u′ are given above, and here α = c2/g, which is the characteristic radius of
curvature of the electric ﬁeld close to the location of the charge. To calculate the ﬁelds in
a horizontal plane passing through the location of the charge, we take z = 0, which gives:
u → 1, uu′ → 1/α. These substitutions yields for the ﬁelds:

Eρ =

8eα3ρu2
ξ3

Ez =

−4eα3uu′
ξ3

(α2(1 − u2) + ρ2)

Eρ =

e
ρ2

1
[1 + ρ2
4α2 ]3/2

Ez =

−e
2αρ

1
[1 + ρ2

4α2 ]3/2 =

−eg

2ρc2[1 + ρ2

4α2 ]3/2 .

Eρ =

e
ρ2

1
[1 + ρ2

4α2 ]3/2 ,

(26)

(27)

(26a)

(27a)

(5a)

If for the case described in section 3 (a charge moving in a hyperbolic motion) we calculate

the electric ﬁelds of the charge in the plane z = α, at time t = 0, we ﬁnd:

−e
2αρ

1
[1 + ρ2

−ea
2ρc2

1
[1 + ρ2

Ez =

4α2 ]3/2 =
where here α = c2/a, and we ﬁnd that these equations are identical to eqs. 26a, 27a, except
for the fact that g is replaced by a.

4α2 ]3/2 ,

(6a)

This means that if a charge accelerating in hyperbolic motion radiates, and the radiation
in the plane perpendicular to the direction of motion is described by eqs. 5a, 6a, then the
similar equations for the ﬁeld of the charge supported in a homogenous gravitational ﬁeld
(given by eqs. 26a, 27a), show that this charge also radiates.

Usually, we consider the transverse ﬁeld (Etrans = Ez) as describing the radiation ﬁeld,
as it falls in the close vicinity of the charge like 1/distance. However, the presence of
the extra term in the denominator ([1 + ρ2
4α2 ]3/2) shows that for large distances from the
charge, the transverse ﬁeld does not fall exactly like 1/distance, as is usually found in the
equations given in the textbooks[15,16]. The diﬀerence of eqs. 5a, 6a, from the the equations

10

given in the textbooks confused people who did not notice that equations 5a, 6a describe
the electric ﬁeld in the free space system of reference, while the equations given in the
textbooks, with the nice neat dependence on 1/distance for the radiation, use the retarded
coordinates (xret, tret). (In ref [14], the authors show how the transformations between these
two sets of coordinates work.) This problem confused Boulware[7], who tried to show that
a coaccelerated observer will not observe radiation from a hyperbolically accelerated charge.
By transforming from the retarded coordinates to the free space coordinates[7, eqs. III.18
- III.20] Boulware found that the nice dependence on 1/distance is lost, and from this fact
he deduced that the coaccelerated observer cannot observe the radiation. This conclusion is
correct for any observer, coaccelerated or not, and hence cannot be accepted for the case of
a coaccelerated observer.

| = | Erad
Ecoul

We ﬁnd that the correct measure for the existence of radiation should be the ratio
| Etrans
| > 1, where Etrans and Elong are the transverse and longitudinal electric
Elong
ﬁelds respectively, and Erad and Ecoul ar the radiation ﬁeld and the coulomb ﬁeld respec-
tively. This ratio is found both in eqs. 5a, 6a, for a hyperbolically accelerated charge, and in
eqs. 26a, 27a, for a charge statically supported in a homogenous gravitational ﬁeld, at large
distances from the charge.

What is the source of the energy carried by the radiation in the gravitational ﬁeld?
The charge is supported by a solid object, which is static in the GF (Gravitational Field).
This solid objet is rigidly connected to the source of the GF. Otherwise, it will fall in the
GF, together with the “supported” charge. Actually, the supporting object is part of the
object that creates the GF.

The charge is static and no work is done on the charge. However, the electric ﬁeld of
the charge is not static, and it falls in a free fall in the GF. With no interaction between
the electric ﬁeld and the charge, the ﬁeld would follow a geodetic line and no work would
be needed to keep it following the geodetic line. But the ﬁeld is curved, and a stress force is
implied. The interaction between the curved ﬁeld and the supported charge creates a force
that contradicts the free fall. In order to overcome this force and cause the electric ﬁeld to
follow the geodetic lines, a work is done on the electric ﬁeld, and this work is done by the
GF. This work is the source of the energy carried by the radiation. The energy carried away
by the radiation is supplied by the GF, that loses this energy.

5. Conclusions

By analyzing the forces that act on an accelerating charge we found that a stress force that
exists in the curved electric ﬁeld of the accelerated charge is proportional to the acceleration.
Hence, the initial value of the acceleration is needed as an initial condition for a complete
solution of the charge’s motion, and this property justiﬁes the appearance of the third
derivative of the position ( ˙a) in the equation of motion of a charged particle. The inclusion
of the stress force as the spatial part of Schott term supplies the source of the energy
carried by the radiation, and thus the “energy balance paradox” is solved. The stress force
is calculated, and the work performed in overcoming it supplies the energy carried by the
radiation. The similarity between the electric ﬁeld of an accelerated charge, and that of a

11

charge supported statically in a gravitational ﬁeld, and the existence of relative acceleration
between the charge and its electric ﬁeld in both cases, leads to the conclusion that a charge
supported statically in a gravitational ﬁeld radiates.

references:

1. G. A. Schott, Electromagnetic Radiation, Cambridge University P., 1912.
2. P.A.M. Dirac, Proc. R. Society, A167, 148, 1938.
3. F. Rohrlich, Classical Charged Particles, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA., 1965.
4. L.D. Landau, E.M. Lifshitz, Classical Theory of Fields, Pergamon Press, 3rd Ed., 1971.
5. A. Harpaz, N. Soker, Found. of Phys., 31, 935, 2001.
6. R. Fulton, F. Rohrlich, Ann. Phys., 9, 499, 1960.
7. D.G. Boulware, Ann. Phys., 124, 169, 1980.
8. C. Leibovitz, A. Peres, Ann. Phys., 25, 400, 1963.
9. A. Harpaz, N. Soker, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A, submitted (physics/0207038).
10. F. Rohrlich, Amer. J. of Phys., 68, 1109, 2000.
11. A. Harpaz, Euro. J. of Phys., 23, 263, 2002.
12. F. Rohrlich, Annals of Phys., 22, 169, 1963.
13. A.K. Singal, Gen. Rel. Grav., 29, 1371, 1997.
14. A. Gupta, T. Padmanabhan, Phys. Rev., D57, 7241, 1998.
15. J.D., Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 2nd Ed. (New York, Wiley), 1975.
16. A.K.H. Panofsky, M. Phillips, Classical Electricity and Magnetism, 2nd Ed. (Reading,
MA., Addison-Wesley), 1964.
17. A. Harpaz, N. Soker, Gen. Rel. Grav., 30, 1217, 1998.

12

