2
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
0
9
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Experimental Consequences of Time Variations of the
Fundamental Constants

J. Rich
DAPNIA-SPP, CEA Saclay
91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

February 9, 2008

Abstract

We discuss the experimental consequences of hypothetical time variations of the
fundamental constants. We emphasize that from a purely phenomenological point
of view, only dimensionless fundamental constants have signiﬁcance. Two classes
of experiments are identiﬁed that give results that are essentially independent of
the values of all constants. Finally, we show that experiments that are generally
interpreted in terms of time variations of the dimensioned gravitional constant G
are better interpreted as giving limits on the variation of the dimensionless constant
αG = Gm2

p/¯hc.

Evidence was recently reported by Webb et al.

[1] for a time variation of the ﬁne-
structure constant α = e2/4πǫ0¯hc. The group compared the ﬁne-structure splittings of

atomic absorption lines produced by high redshift intergalactic clouds with the same

splittings produced by terrestrial atoms. They found a slight diﬀerence in the splittings
that suggests that α was lower in the past: ∆α/α = −0.72 ± 0.18 × 10−5. By “past” we
mean of order 1010 years ago when the light passed through the clouds. This result is not

conﬁrmed by limits in variations of α over shorter time scales [2] but this could simply

indicate a non-linear time variation.

The reported time variations of α have inspired a variety of theoretical speculations,

among them being theories where the speed of light, c varies with time, thus inducing a
variation of α ∝ c−1 [3, 4]. This has generated a polemic because it is often stated that

only dimensionless constants like α have “physical” signiﬁcance [5, 6, 7]. It is perhaps not

1

suﬃciently emphasized that this is due to the experimental nature of physics. Generally

speaking, experiments either count events or compare similarly dimensioned quantities.

For example, when a length is measured, one really measures the ratio between the length

in question and the length of a standard ruler. When an angle is measured, the ratio

between the lengths two sides of a triangle is converted to the angle through trigonometry.

A velocity is measured by counting the number of “ticks” of a clock as an object moves

through a standard distance. A reaction rate is given by counting the number of events

during the time that a standard clock gives a standard number of ticks.

In all these

experiments, only dimensionless numbers are measured. As such, experimental results

can only be sensitive to dimensionless combinations of fundamental constants [8].

It is the purpose of this paper, to give a few illustrations of this principle. Following

[9], the strategy will be to estimate the complete dependence of an experimental result on

the fundamental constants by including their eﬀect on the structure of the experimental

apparatus. Once this is done, we can see how the results of an experiment will change with

time if the fundamental constants change with time. One of the surprising results will be

that there are two classes of experiments that yield results that are largely independent

of the values of the fundamental constants or to their time variation.

It is most interesting to start with an experiment that would be naively expected

to be sensitive to time variations of ¯h. One role of this constant is to relate “particle”

properties like momentum to “wave” properties like wavelength. We therefore consider

the double slit (Young) interference experiment performed with non-relativistic electrons

of momentum p. The experiment is performed as in Fig. 1 with, electrons impinging upon

a wall with two narrow slits separated by a distance d. Beyond the wall, one observes an

interference pattern with the angle between interference maxima, θ, determined by p, d

and ¯h:

θ =

=

λ
d

2π¯h
pd

(1)

One is tempted to say that the angle depends on ¯h through the numerator of (1) and that

a time variation of ¯h would lead to a time variation of the measured diﬀraction angle.

This is only part of the story since the distance d is determined by the material of the

wall whose structure depends on the fundamental constants.

Interatomic spacings for

2

x

e−

d

s

θ

r

z

q=+−N  eq

Figure 1: A double slit interference experiment. Electrons are accelerated between two
charged plates of area x2 separated by a distance z. The electrons then impinge upon a
wall having two narrow slits of separation d. The angle θ between interference maxima
is determined from the ratio of the two distances r and s. As shown in the text, if the
distances x, z and d are determined by solid objects, the diﬀraction angle is essentially
independent of the fundamental constants.

2
solid materials are generally of order the Bohr radius, a0 = 4πǫ0¯h

/mee2 where me and
e are the mass and charge of the electron . This is due to the fact that a0 is the only

length that can be formed from the three fundamental constants that determine atomic
structure: ¯h, me and e2/4πǫ0. If the fundamental constants change, we can expect that
the ratio d/a0 is relatively constant. (For crystalline materials, the ratio is basically the

number of atomic sites along the distance d). We therefore write the diﬀraction angle in

the form

θ =

2π¯h
pa0

1
d/a0

=

1
p

mee2
2ǫ0¯h

1
d/a0

(2)

It is amusing to note that whereas equation (1) gives θ ∝ ¯h, equation (2) gives θ ∝ ¯h−1

.

However, we are not ﬁnished since nature does not usually provide us with electrons of

momentum p. Rather, they must be prepared which can be done by passing electrons
initially at rest through a potential diﬀerence, φ, so that p2/2me = eφ. The potential
diﬀerence can be maintained by placing a charge, ±q, on each of two square plates of
area, A = x2, separated by a distance z. This conﬁguration gives φ = Nqez/ǫ0x2 where

3

Nq = q/e is the number of fundamental charges per plate. As with the interslit distance,

x/a0 and z/a0 should we insensitive to changes in the fundamental constants so we write
the momentum in the form p2/2me = Nq(e2/ǫ0a0)(za0)/x2. Substituting this into 2 we
get the ﬁnal result:

θ =

π
2

r

d/a0

Nqz/a0

x/a0

q

(3)

To the extent that x/a0, d/a0 and z/a0 do not depend on the fundamental constants, the

interference angle does not depend on any fundamental constant but only on the number

and type of the particles used to construct the experimental apparatus.

This surprising result is, in fact, obvious since an angle is a dimensionless quantity
and there is no dimensionless combination of ¯h, e2/4πǫ0, and me . Measurements of
angles using non-relativistic electrons and performed with apparatuses whose size depend

only on atomic structure are therefore “constant-free”. Among such experiments are

the Young experiment discussed here and the Davisson-Thomson experiment on electron

diﬀraction by crystals. These quintessential quantum experiments give results that are

largely independent of the parameters of the theory (e.g. of ¯h) and depend only on the

fact that the dynamics is governed by quantum mechanics. In the distant future when

variations of the constants are routinely monitored at the N.I.S.T., these experiments

could serve are ﬁducial experiments to check systematics.

Of course relativistic (ﬁne-structure) corrections to interatomic spacings would lead to

a small dependence of the diﬀraction angles on α. We also note that the time variation of
a constant, say of e2, would introduce a new constant τe = e/ ˙e that gives the time scale
over which e2 changes be a signiﬁcant amount. With this new constant we can now form
the dimensionless quantity (e2/¯h)a0/τe which is just the fractional change in e during one
Bohr revolution. Depending on the dynamics that drives the variation of the constants,

the interference angle could conceivably depend on some power of this quantity. On the

other hand, if τe is of a cosmological scale, the parameter is tiny and we might expect

that the diﬀraction angle is practically unaﬀected.

Our experiment to search for time variations of ¯h can be criticized because the size of

the apparatus depends on ¯h. We can avoid this criticism by using the classical electron ra-
dius, re = e2/(4πǫ0mec2) = α2a0, to deﬁne the dimensions of the experimental apparatus.

4

We then write (3) as

θ =

π
2

r

α−1

d/re

Nqz/re

x/re

q

(4)

The electron diﬀraction angle now depends on α if the distances are maintained as mul-

tiples of re. Experimentally, this is diﬃcult but can be done by ﬁlling a small cube of
volume l3 with a known number N of electrons. If the cube is uniformly irradiated by
photons of energy Eγ ≪ mec2, the probability that a photon is scattered is P = NσT /l2
where σT = 8πr2
e/3 is the Thompson scattering cross section. (We take N small enough
so that P ≪ 1.) The probability P can be measured so the length l can be deﬁned as

a multiple of re. This length can then be compared with the lengths in an experimental

apparatus and an appropriate expansion-contraction scheme can insure that all lengths

remain a ﬁxed multiple of re even if the constants vary.

We now come back to the original, more practical, experimental arrangement using

solid materials to deﬁne the apparatus. The diﬀraction angle cannot depend on the

constants because there is no dimensionless combination of the relevant constants. We

can make θ depend on fundamental constants by accelerating protons instead of electrons.

In this case the angle is given by (3) multiplied by

mp/me where mp is the proton mass.

The presence of two constants with dimensions of mass leads to a new dimensionless

q

quantity mp/me upon which the angle can depend.

The interference angle can also depend on the fundamental constants if we use photons,

in which case we we introduce the speed of light, c, into the problem. For example, if we

use photons from the n = 2 to n = 1 transition of atomic hydrogen, we have a photon
momentum of pγ = (3/8)α2mec giving

θ =

16π
3

α−1 1
d/a0

(5)

A time variation of the ﬁne-structure constant would then yield a time dependence of the

diﬀraction angle.

Having shown that a quintessential quantum experiment gives results that are inde-

pendent of ¯h, we will now consider the quintessential relativistic eﬀect, the twin paradox.

Two identical clocks are needed, one in free fall, and the second departing from the ﬁrst

with velocity v, stopping, and then returning to the ﬁrst with the same velocity v. The

5

number of ticks on the two clocks, N1 and N2, counted during the time interval are related

by

N2
N1

=

1 − v2/c2 .

q

(6)

We can now ask how this ratio will change if the fundamental constants vary while main-

taining the validity of the basic formula. The problem is to give a prescription for deter-

mining the velocity v. If v is determined by comparing the velocity of the clock with c,

we will clearly never detect any eﬀect since clocks of a given v/c will always give the same

N2/N1. To detect an eﬀect, we must deﬁne the velocity diﬀerently. For instance, we can

use clocks with the same velocity as that of the electrons produced in Figure 1

v2
c2 = 8πNqα2 za0
x2
This shows that if the experiment is built from solid objects so that za0/x2 is insensi-

(7)

tive to changes in the fundamental constants, then a time variation of N2/N1 should be
interpreted as a time variation of α2. On the other hand, if we design the experiment
so that z and x are ﬁxed multiples of the classical electron radius re = α2a0, then the
ratio N2/N1 is constant-free. This is because there is no dimensionless combination of
the relevant constants, e2/4πǫ0, me and c. Just as non-relativistic quantum experiments
give results that are ¯h independent, non-quantum relativistic experiments can give results

independent of c.

Since the twin paradox experiment cannot give unambiguous information on the time

variation of c, we will now consider experiments that directly measure c. One might hope

that a time variation of c would lead to a time variation of the ratio between the ﬂight

time x/c over a distance x and the period T of a standard clock. This amounts to counting

the number of ticks = (x/c)/T that the clock makes during the time the photon travels

the distance x.

If we deﬁne the distance x by photon time-of ﬂight as is now done in SI units, we will

obviously not be able to detect a change in c. We will then go back to the old procedure

of deﬁning lengths in terms of physical rods. We therefore write

x/c
T

=

a0/c
T

x
a0

=

¯h
αmec2T

x
a0

(8)

6

and suppose that the ratio x/a0 is insensitive to changes in the constants.

The ratio x/cT will now depend only on the clock that we choose to use. Atomic

clocks based on hyperﬁne splittings of atomic lines have periods of order

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

where g is the nuclear gyromagnetic ratio. This gives

Thf ∝

¯h
α4g(me/mp)mec2

x/c
T

= gα3 (me/mp)

x
a0

If x/a0 is constant-free, this attempt to detect a change in c yields the time variation of
gα3me/mp. It is basically the technique of Turneaure and Stein [9] who, by looking for
the desychronization of a superconducting cavity oscillator and an atomic clock, set an
upper limit of 4.1 × 10−12yr−1 on the logarithmic derivative of gα3me/mp.

The use of a clock based on hyperﬁne splittings to measure variations of c can be

criticized because the clock period depends on a relativistic eﬀect and therefore explicitly

on c. It is possible to ﬁnd quantum processes that have periods that are c-independent.

The ﬁrst type gives periods that are multiples of the rotational period of an electron in a

Bohr orbit:

Te =

a0
e2/4πǫ0¯h

=

¯h
α2mec2

An example of such a clock is a mechanical vibrator. The sound speed of a crystal
consisting of nuclei of mass ∼ Amp is of order (a0/Te)(me/Amp)1/2 so a rod of length L
has a fundamental period ∝ (mp/me)1/2(L/a0)Te. The use of such a clock would give

x/c
T

= α (me/mp)1/2 x
L

Since x/L is constant-free for material objects, a variation of the measured speed of light
would then be interpreted as a variation of the quantity α(me/mp)1/2.

A second class of c-independent periods can be found by replacing e2/4πǫ0 with Gm2
p

and me by mp:

¯h
α2
Gmpc2
where αG = Gm2
p/¯hc is the gravitational equivalent of the ﬁne-structure constant. An
example of a clock whose period is a multiple of TG uses a particle revolving near the sur-

TG =

(13)

=

3
¯h
G2m5
p

face of a totally degenerate (white dwarf) star consisting of Ne electrons and Np nucleons.

7

The radius of such a star is R ∼ ¯h

2

N 5/3

e /(Gmem2

pN 2

p ) and the particle has a revolution

(14)

(15)

(16)

period of

Substituting this into (8) gives

T ∼ N −1
p

3/2

mp
me (cid:19)

(cid:18)

Ne
Np !

 

5/2

TG

x/c
T

∼ α2

G
α  

me
mp !

1/2

5/2

Np

Np
Ne (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(x/a0) .

A time variation of the measured speed of light using this clock would be interpreted as
a variation of (me/mp)1/2α2

G/α.

We end with a comment on searches for time variations of the dimensional gravitational

constant G. One way to do this is to search for anomalies in the movement of objects in

the Earth’s gravitational ﬁeld [2]. The period P of an object in a circular orbit of radius

r is given by

P 2 =

4π2r3
GM⊙

=

4π2r3
GN⊙mp

where in the second form we approximate the solar mass by N⊙mp where N⊙ is the number

of nucleons in the Sun. If G varies in time we can expect P to vary in time. Of course,

there are two problems here. First, what one would actually observe is time variation of

the ratio of P and the period T of a standard clock. Second, a time variation of G might

be expected to yield a time variation of the orbital radius.

If the radius changes, one

must extrapolate the period back to the original radius using (16). To do this, we need

to measure r, which can be done with radar, r = ct, where t is the time for a photon to

travel the distance r. (We ignore small general relativistic corrections.) The time t can

then be ﬁxed to be a given number N of periods of the standard clock, r = cNT . The

ratio of the orbital period (ﬁxed r) to the clock period is now given by
c3T
Gmp

1
αGα4g(me/mp)2 ,

4π2N 3
N⊙

4π2N 3
N⊙

P 2
T 2 =

=

(17)

where in the second form we use T = Thf appropriate for atomic clocks. An anomalous
variation of an orbital period can then be interpreted as a variation of αGα4g(me/mp)2.
While not claiming to have analysed all experiments used to limit the variations of G,

this suggests that these limits can all be interpreted as limits on the variation of αG and

some combination of α and various mass ratios and gyromagnetic ratios.

8

Since non-gravitational methods yield limits on α, me/mp and g [9, 2], that are consid-

erably stricter than the limits on time variations based on orbital anomalies, an observed

variation of an orbital period can be safely interpreted simply as a variation of αG. Tradi-

tionally, limits on orbital anomalies have been interpreted as limits on the time variation

of G with the caveat “assuming all other constants non-varying.”

In summary, we see that only dimensionless parameters have phenomenological sig-

niﬁcance. It should however be emphasized that theories are generally expressed in ways

that use dimensioned parameters.

If nature is such that the dimensionless parameters

objectively vary with time, it is conceivable that the underlying dynamics is most simply

expressed as a time variation of one or more dimensioned parameters.

I thank Michel Cribier, Jean-Louis Basdevant and Marc Lachi`eze-Rey for interesting

discussions.

References

[1] J.K. Webb et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 091301 (2001).

[2] A recent review of limits on time variations of the fundamental constants is given by

Jean-Philippe Uzan, hep-ph/0205340.

[3] J. Magueigo, J.D. Barrow and H.B.Sandvik, astro-ph/0202374.

[4] J.W. Moﬀat hep-th/0208122,hep-th/0208109.

[5] M.J. Duﬀ, L.B. Okun and G.Veneziano, physics/0110060.

[6] M.J. Duﬀ, hep-th/0208093.

[7] V.V. Flambaum, astro-ph/0208384.

[8] A. H. Cook, “Secular Changes of the Units and Constants of Physics,” Nature 180,

1194-5 (1957).

[9] J. P. Turneaure and S. R. Stein, “An Experimental Limit on the Time Variation of
the Fine Structure Constant” in Atomic Masses and Fundamental Constants 5, ed.

J.H. Sanders and A. H. Wapstra (Plenum, New York, 1976) pp. 636-642.

9

