2
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
0
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Notes on Landauer’s Principle, Reversible Computation, and Maxwell’s Demon

Charles H. Bennett
IBM Research Division, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA — bennetc@watson.ibm.com
(November 1, 2012)

Landauer’s principle, often regarded as the foundation of the thermodynamics of information pro-
cessing, holds that any logically irreversible manipulation of information, such as the erasure of a
bit or the merging of two computation paths, must be accompanied by a corresponding entropy
increase in non-information bearing degrees of freedom of the information processing apparatus or
its environment. Conversely, it is generally accepted that any logically reversible transformation
of information can in principle be accomplished by an appropriate physical mechanism operating
in a thermodynamically reversible fashion. These notions have sometimes been criticized either as
being false, or as being trivial and obvious, and therefore unhelpful for purposes such as explaining
why Maxwell’s Demon cannot violate the Second Law of thermodynamics. Here I attempt to refute
some of the arguments against Landauer’s principle, while arguing that although in a sense it is
indeed a trivial and obvious restatement of the Second Law, it still has considerable pedagogic and
explanatory power, especially in the context of other inﬂuential ideas in 19’th and 20’th century
physics. Similar arguments have been given by Jeﬀrey Bub [1]

Objections to Landauer’s Principle

Objections to Landauer’s principle are generally of

three kinds:

1. It is false or meaningless because there is no con-
nection between thermodynamic quantities like
heat and work and mathematical properties like
logical reversibility, so that comparing the two is
comparing apples and oranges;

2. It (or more precisely its converse) is false because
all data processing operations, whether logically
reversible or not, require the dissipation of at
least kT ln 2 of energy—and indeed usually much
more—to be accomplished by any actual physical
apparatus; or

3. It is false because even logically irreversible oper-
ations can in principle be accomplished in a ther-
modynamically reversible fashion.

The ﬁrst objection touches deep questions of the rela-
tion between mind and matter which are not entirely in
the province of science, although physicists have long felt
a need to address them to some extent. From its begin-
ning, the history of the Maxwell’s Demon problem has in-
volved discussions of the role of the Demon’s intelligence,
and indeed of how and whether one ought to character-
ize an ”intelligent being” physically. On this question
I will take the usual approach of physicists, and banish
questions about intelligence by substituting an automat-
ically functioning mechanism whenever an intelligent be-
ing is required. From this viewpoint the ﬁrst objection
loses much of its persuasiveness, since there appears to
be no deep conceptual problem in inquiring whether an
automatically functioning apparatus designed to process

information, ie a computer, can function in a thermody-
namically reversible fashion, and if not, how the thermo-
dynamic cost of operating the apparatus depends on the
mathematical properties of the computation it is doing.
The second objection, that even logically reversible
data-processing operations cannot be accomplished in
a thermodynamically reversible fashion, I believe has
largely been overcome by explicit models, proposed
by myself and others, of physical mechanisms, which
obey the accepted conventions of thermodynamic or me-
chanical thought experiments, and which accomplish
reversible computation at zero cost (so-called ballis-
tic computers, such as the Fredkin-Toﬀoli hard sphere
model [2]), or at a per-step cost tending to zero in the
limit of slow operation (so-called Brownian computers,
discussed at length in my review article [3]). These ques-
tions were revisited and vigorously debated in an ex-
change in Phys. Rev. Lett. [5], to which the reader
is referred. Of course in practice almost all data pro-
cessing is done on macroscopic apparatus, dissipating
macroscopic amounts of energy far in excess of what
would be required by Landauer’s principle. Neverthe-
less, some stages of biomolecular information processing,
such as transcription of DNA to RNA, appear to be ac-
complished by chemical reactions that are reversible not
only in principle but in practice.

For the remainder of this section I will focus on the
third objection, the argument that even logically irre-
versible operations can be accomplished in a thermo-
dynamically reversible fashion. This position has been
asserted in various forms by Earman and Norton [6], and
by Shenker [7].

In the context of a modiﬁed Szilard engine, similar to

ﬁgure 12 of [3], Earman and Norton argue that

“The demon follows a program of steps on a tape. In-
structions are labelled below according to the part of the

1

demon’s cycle. The tape can be run forward or backward
to get to a designated step in the program (i.e., to run
a subroutine). Steps M1-M4 connote the measurement
segment, R1-R5 connote the ”right” subroutine, L1-L5
connote the ”left” subroutine, and F1 connotes the ﬁnal
step that enables the cycle to be repeated.

“The memory state of the computer is initially neu-
tral, a state is denoted by [N]∗. Two other states, [L] and
[R] are available. We assume that transforming from a
known state [L] or [R] to [N] can be done with arbitrarily
little work and entropy generation. Such a transforma-
tion is not erasure and is not governed by Landauer’s
principle. It can be reversed logically and physically by
executing step R4 or L4 in reverse. When the gas does
work W, we assume this lifts a weight. In the following
program, the memory state is shown at the right of each
step.

M1. Insert partition [N]
M2. Observe the particle’s chamber[L] or [R]
M3. If memory bit =R, go to R1 [R]
M4. If memory bit = L, go to L1 [L]
R1. Attach pulleys so right chamber

can expand [R]

R2. Expand,doing isothermal work W [R]
R3. Remove pulleys [R]
R4. Transform known memory bit from R to N [N]
L1. Attach pulleys so left chamber

can expand [L]

L2. Expand,doing isothermal work W [L]
L3. Remove pulleys [L]
L4. Transform known memory bit from L to N [N]
F1. Go to M1

“At the culmination of step R4 or L4, both the gas
and demon are again in their initial states. Work W has
been done by removing energy Q = W from the reservoir.
It appears that the second law is violated: The Kelvin-
Planck form of the second law is violated and the entropy
of the universe has decreased. The reservoir lost energy
at constant temperature, and this energy became work.
The demon and gas have been returned to their initial
states after one cycle.”

I would argue that, while each of the routines L and R
by itself is logically reversible, the combination is not, be-
cause it includes a merging in the ﬂow of control, which
is just as much a case of logical irreversibility as the ex-
plicit erasure of data. Indeed a more detailed listing of
the program should include the return instructions from
the subroutines R and L. I adopt the common conven-
tion of programming where unless otherwise indicated
control passes to the next instruction in sequence. With

∗This state N corresponds to the standard state S in ﬁg. 12
of ref. [3]

2

this alteration, one may imagine all the instructions to
be coded consecutively in a contiguous block of memory:

[N]

M1. Insert partition
M2. Observe the particle’s chamber [L] or [R]
M3. If memory bit = R, go to R1
M4. If memory bit = L, go to L1
R1. Attach pulleys so right chamber

[R]
[L]

can expand [R]

R2. Expand, doing isothermal work W [R]
[R]
R3. Remove pulleys
R4. Transform known memory bit from R to N [N]
R5. Go to F1 [N]
L1. Attach pulleys so left chamber

can expand [L]

L2. Expand, doing isothermal work W [L]
L3. Remove pulleys [L]
L4. Transform known memory bit from L to N [N]
F1. Go to M1

[N]

The instruction F1 has two predecessors (L4 and R5).
Therefore, when executing this program, there is a two to
one mapping of the logical state as control passes from
L4 or R5 to F1. This is where the work extracted by
the demon must be paid back, according to Landauer’s
principle.

The fact that a merging of the ﬂow of control con-
stitutes logical irreversibility is also illustrated in ﬁg. 1
of ref. [3], where the ﬁnal Turing machine conﬁguration
has two predecessors not because of an explicit erasure of
data, but because the head could have arrived at its ﬁnal
location by two diﬀerent shifts, one of which corresponds
to the intended computation path, while the other corre-
sponds to an allowed transition to the ﬁnal state from an
extraneous predecessor conﬁguration which is not part of
the intended computation.

A similar objection to Landauer’s principle, this time
illustrated with an explicit gear mechanism involving a
pinion operating between two rigidly connected but op-
posing half-racks, is presented by Shenker [7] in her ﬁg-
ure 5. The accompanying text argues that a single ex-
ternal manipulation, namely a counterclockwise rotation
applied to pinion gear B, would restore a memory ele-
ment called the ”key” from either of two initial positions
labelled respectively ”R” and ”L”, to a neutral ﬁnal posi-
tion labelled ”?”, corresponding to Earman and Norton’s
”N” or Bennett’s ”S”.

While it is indeed true that the counterclockwise ro-
tation of the pinion would do this, the act of performing
that rotation is not thermodynamically reversible, as one
can see by considering in more detail the possible mo-
tions of and mutual constraints between the two relevant
mechanical degrees of freedom, namely 1) the rotation
angle of the pinion and 2) the lateral (left-right) displace-
ment of the key with its two rigidly attached half-racks,
termed ”grooves for gear B” in the ﬁgure. For any ro-
tation angle of the pinion, there will be a ﬁnite range of

backlash within which the key can rattle back and forth
before being stopped by collision with the gear teeth
on the pinion (to demand zero backlash would entail an
inﬁnite negative conﬁgurational entropy; the argument
given here in support of Landauer’s principle is indepen-
dent of the amount of backlash, requiring only that it be
nonzero). Consider the resetting action when the key is
initially in the ”L” position. The accompanying ﬁgure
shows schematically how the range of motion of the in-
formation bearing coordinate (in this case the left/right
displacement of the key) varies as a function of a con-
trolling coordinate (in this case the rotation angle of the
pinion B) whose steady increase brings about a merger
of two logically distinct paths of the information pro-
cessing apparatus (in this case the resetting of the key
to the neutral position). At stage 1, the information
bearing coordinate is conﬁned to one of the two about-
to-be-merged paths. At stage 2, the barrier separating
these paths disappears, and the information bearing co-
ordinate suddenly gains access to twice as large a range
as it had before. This is an irreversible entropy increase
of k ln 2 analogous to the N k ln 2 entropy increase when
a gas of N atoms leaks by free expansion into twice its
original volume, without doing any work. At stage 3,
the controlling coordinate (pinion) does work on the in-
formation bearing coordinate (key), eventually, by stage
4, compressing it back to its original range of motion.

Strictly speaking, a logically irreversible operation,
such as the erasure of a bit or the merging of two paths
shown in the accompanying ﬁgure, may be thermody-
namically reversible or not depending on the data to
which it is applied. If it is applied to random data—a bit
that is initially equiprobably distributed between 0 and
1, or a key that is equiprobably on the R or the L path
in the accompanying ﬁgure, it is thermodynamically re-
versible, because it increases decreases the entropy of
the data while increasing the entropy of the environ-
ment by the same amount. In terms of usual thermody-
namic thought experiments, it is analogous to isother-
mal compression, which decreases the entropy of a gas
while increasing the entropy of the environment. This
situation arises in the application of Landauer’s princi-
ple to Szilard’s engine: the data being erased (R or L)
is random; therefore its erasure represents a reversible
entropy transfer to the environment, compensating an
earlier entropy transfer from the environment during the
isothermal expansion phase, and making the total work
yield of the cycle zero, in obedience to the Second Law.
However, as Landauer and Shenker note, the data in the
usual deterministic digital computation is not random,
but on the contrary determined by the computer’s initial
state. Thus, at least in the context of knowledge of the
initial state, whenever a logically irreversible step occurs
in the course of a deterministic computation, one of the
predecessors is certain to have been on the computation
path, while the other(s) have zero chance of having been

on the path. Somewhat paradoxically, it is under these
conditions that the erasure is truly irreversible, because
it represents the wasteful application of an irreversible
manipulation to erase data that is not actually random.

FIG. 1. Merging of two computation paths.

Shenker argues (her ﬁgure 3) that the 1:1 sequence of

states actually visited in the course of a deterministic
computation means that deterministic computers are not
bound by Landauer’s principle.
In fact, by the above
argument, the performance of a 1:1 state mapping by
a manipulation that could have performed a 2:1 map-
ping is thermodynamically irreversible, the irreversibil-
ity being associated with the wasteful instant (stage 2 in
the above ﬁgure) at which a constrained degree of free-
dom is allowed to escape from its constraint without any
work being exacted in exchange. In fact, the signiﬁcance
of Shenker’s and Landauer’s observation (viz. that the
states visited in a deterministic computation comprise
an unbranched chain) is somewhat diﬀerent. It means
that it is always possible to globally reprogram any com-
putation that saves a copy of its input as a sequence of
logically reversible steps, and therefore to perform it in
a thermodynamically reversible fashion, even though the
original computation, before this reprogramming, would
not have been thermodynamically reversible. Reversible
programming techniques, and physical models which can
execute reversibly programmed computations in a ther-
modynamically reversible fashion, are reviewed in [3] and
many other places.

Landauer’s principle in the context of other other
ideas in 19’th and 20’th century physics

Earman and Norton have pointed out with some jus-
tice that Landauer’s principle appears both unnecessary
and insuﬃcient as an exorcism Maxwell’s demon, be-
cause if the Demon is a thermodynamic system already
governed by the Second Law, no further supposition
about information and entropy is needed to save the

3

[5] Porod, W., Grondin, R. O., Ferry, D. K. & Porod, G. (1984)
“Dissipation in computation”, Physical Review Letters,52,
232-235, and ensuing discussion.

[6] J. Earman and J.D. Norton, ‘Exorcist XIV: The Wrath of
Maxwell’s Demon. Part II. From Szilard to Landauer and
Beyond,’ Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics 30, 1-40 (1999).

[7] Orly R. Shenker, “Logic and Entropy”, Philosophy of Sci-

ence Archive (2000), available online at
http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/documents
/disk0/00/00/01/15/index.html

Second Law. On the other hand, if the Demon is not
assumed to obey the Second Law, no supposition about
the entropy cost of information processing can save the
Second Law from the Demon.

I would nevertheless argue that that Landauer’s prin-
ciple serves an important pedagogic purpose of helping
students avoid a misconception that many people have
fallen into during the 20’th century, including giants like
von Neumann, Gabor, and Brillouin and even, perhaps,
Szilard. This is the informal belief that there is an in-
trinsic cost of order kT for every elementary act of in-
formation processing, e.g. the acquisition of information
by measurement, or the copying of information from one
storage medium into another, regardless of the act’s logi-
cal reversibility or irreversibility. In particular, the great
success of the quantum theory of radiation in the early
20’th century led Gabor and Brillouin to seek an ex-
orcism of the Demon based on a presumed cost of in-
formation acquisition, which in turn they attributed to
the energy cost of a thermal photon, or in the case of
Gabor’s high-compression Szilard engine, to the cost of
recreating a static radiation ﬁeld localized to one end of
a long cylinder, into which the molecule would wander
to trigger the power stroke. Landauer’s principle, while
perhaps obvious in retrospect, makes it clear that in-
formation processing and acquisition have no intrinsic,
irreducible thermodynamic cost, whereas the seemingly
humble act of information destruction does have a cost,
exactly suﬃcient to save the Second Law from the De-
mon. Thus measurement and copying can be intrinsi-
cally irreversible, but only when they are conducted in
such a way as to overwrite previous information.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I acknowledge support from the US Army Research of-
ﬁce, grant DAAG55-98-C-0041 and DAAG55-98-1-0366.

[1] Jeﬀrey Bub, “Maxwell’s Demon and the Thermodynamics

of Computation” (2002), arXiv:quant-ph/0203017 .

[2] E. Fredkin and T. Toﬀoli, ‘Conservative Logic,’ Interna-

tional Journal of Theoretical Physics 21, 219 (1982).

[3] C.H.Bennett,“The Thermodynamics of Computation—A
Review,”International Journal of Theoretical Physics 21,
905-940 (1982). Reprinted in Leﬀ and Rex, pp. 213-248;
http://www.research.ibm.com/people/b/bennetc
/bennettc1982666c3d53.pdf

[4] Harvey S. Leﬀ and Andrew F. Rex, Maxwell’s Demon: En-
tropy, Information, Computing (Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1990).

4

