TAUP 2728-2002
5 December, 2002

Relativistic Brownian Motion

O. Oron and L.P. Horwitz*

School of Physics and Astronomy
Raymond and Beverly Sackler Faculty of Exact Sciences
Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv 69978, Israel

Abstract:

We solve the problem of formulating Brownian motion in a relativistically covariant
framework in 1 + 1 and 3 + 1 dimensions. We obtain covariant Fokker-Planck equations
with (for the isotropic case) a diﬀerential operator of invariant d’Alembert form. Treating
the spacelike and timelike ﬂuctuations separately, we show that it is essential to take into
account the analytic continuation of “unphysical” ﬂuctuations in order to achieve these
results.

2
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
0
2
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

* Also at Department of Physics, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan 529000, Israel

1

Introduction

Nelson1, in 1966, constructed the Schr¨odinger equation from an analysis of Brownian
motion by identifying the forward and backward average velocities of a Brownian particle
with the real and imaginary parts of a wave function. He pointed out that the basic process
involved is deﬁned nonrelativistically, and can be used if relativistic eﬀects can be safely
neglected. The development of a relativistically covariant formulation of Brownian motion
could therefore provide some insight into the structure of a relativistic quantum theory.

In recent years, Brownian motion has been applied as a mechanism for the description
of irreversible evolution of quantum mechnical states, for example, collapse of wave func-
tions as result of measurement. One ﬁnds that the wave function with a stochastic term
added to the Schr¨odinger equation (represented in the Hilbert space of states2 or in their
projective representation3) evolves to a mixed state of alternative outcomes of a measure-
ment with the same probability distribution as given by the calculation of a priori (Born)
probabilities in the framework of the standard quantum theory 2,3. One of the motivations
for the work of Adler and Horwitz3 was based on the existence of a statistical mechanics,
developed by Adler4 and Adler and Millard5 for the description of the equilibrium state
of a general class of quantum ﬁelds; in this theory, the thermal average of commutator
expressions take on the values implied by the familiar complex canonical quantum theory
and quantum ﬁeld theory. The Brownian motion corrections to the standard theories may
be thought of as arising from the ﬂuctuations around the equilibrium state. The develop-
ment of a relativistically covariant theory of Brownian motion could make an extension of
these ideas to relativistic quantum theory and quantum ﬁeld theory more accessible.

The program of stochastic quantization of Parisi and Wu6 assumes the existence of
relativistic wave equations, and applies a statistical approach closely related to path in-
tegrals. The Wiener distribution of nonrelativistic Brownian motion, as is well known, is
associated with (imaginary time) path integral formulations, and one would expect that
covariant Brownian motion would similarly be associated with Parisi-Wu stochastic quan-
tization.

Nelson has pointed out that the formulation of his stochastic mechanics in the context
of general relativity is an important open question. The Riemannian metric spaces one
can achieve, in principle, which arise due to nontrivial correlations between ﬂuctuations
in spatial directions, could, in the framework of a covariant theory of Brownian motion,
lead to spacetime pseudo-Riemannian metrics in the structure of diﬀusion and Schr¨odinger
equations.

In this paper we shall study the structure a covariant theory of Brownian motion; in
a succeeding work we shall describe a procedure parallel to that of Nelson to construct
diﬀusion and Schr¨odinger equations with pseudo-Riemannian metrics which follow from
the existence of nontrivial correlations between the coordinate random variables.

Before proceeding to formulate covariant Brownian motion, we shall give a brief review
of the essential features of the nonrelativistic derivation of the Fokker-Planck equation
describing the evolution of the spatial probability distribution of a Brownian particle in
order to point more precisely to the problems to be encountered.

The Langevin equantion describing the evolution of a nonrelativistic Brownian particle

2

with coordinate (ith component) qi(t) may be written as

dqi(t) = Ki(q(t))dt + dwi(t), dqi(t) = qi(t + dt) − qi(t),

(1.1)

where dwi(t) is a random variable, and Ki(q) is a given (deterministic) function of the
coordinates. In this process, the particle undergoes both a smooth drift and stochastic
“jumps”. It is assumed that the random process is a white-noise Wiener process, i.e.,

and

< dwi(t) >= 0

< dwi(t)dwj(t

) >=

′

0
2αδij dt

(cid:26)

t 6= t′
t = t′.

The probability distribution for ﬁnding a value of dwi in (xi, xi + dxi),associated with the
mean values calculated in (1.2) and (1.3), is given by,

Wdw(x)dx =

1

2π(2αdt)

−

exp
(cid:2)

2

xi
2(2αdt)

dxi.
(cid:3)

Yi

p

We now expand a general function of the particle’s coordinates only (such as time-
independent potential energy), keeping terms of order dt and less,

f [q(t + dt)] =f [q(t) + dq(t)] =

f [q(t)] +

Xi (cid:0)

f [q(t)] +

Xi (cid:0)

1
2Xi Xj (cid:0)

+

∂f [q]
∂qi (cid:1)
∂f [q]
∂qi (cid:1)
∂2f [q]
∂qi∂qj (cid:1)

q=q(t)dqi +

1
2Xi Xj (cid:0)

∂2f [q]
∂qi∂qj (cid:1)

q=q(t)dqidqj =

q=q(t)

(cid:2)

Ki[q(t)]dt + dwi(t)

+
(cid:3)

q=q(t)dwidwj

(1.2)

(1.3)

(1.4)

(1.5)

We now take the average of the expansion with respect to the distribution above and divide
< f [q(t + dt)] − f [q(t)] > by dt to obtain the average time derivative of f :

< f [q(t)] >=<

> Ki[q(t)] + α <

(1.6)

d
dt

∂f [q]
∂qi

Xi

∂2f [q]
∂qi

2 >

Xi

The averages can be written, introducing the distribution function D(q, t), the probability
distribution for the trajectory of the particle to be at q at the time t. In this case Eq.(1.6)
becomes;

d3q

∂D(q)
∂t

Z

f (q) =

d3q

D(q)

Ki(q) + αD(q)

(1.7)

∂f (q)
∂qi

∂2f (q)
∂qi

2

Z

Xi

3

Since the function f is arbitrary then integrating by parts yields the following equation for
D, which is the Fokker-Planck equation:

∂D(q)
∂t

=

−

∂
∂qi

Xi (cid:2)

Ki(q) + α

∂2
2
∂qi

D(q) = (−∇ · K + α∇2)D(q),
(cid:3)

(1.8)

where ∂
∂qi

operates on both Ki and D.

We now point out some of the obvious diﬃculties in reaching a covariant theory of

Brownian motion, and indicate the directions we have chosen to solve these problems.

Brownian motion, thought of as a series of “jumps” of a particle along its path, neces-
sarily involves an ordered sequence. In the nonrelativistic theory, this ordering is naturally
provided by the Newtonian time parameter. In a relativistic framework, the Einstein time
t does not provide a suitable parameter.
If we contemplate jumps in spacetime, to ac-
comodate a covariant formulation, a possible spacelike interval between two jumps may
appear in two orderings in diﬀerent Lorentz frames. We therefore adopt the invariant
parameter τ introduced by Stueckelberg8 in his construction of a relativistically covariant
classical and quantum dynamics. For the many body theory, Piron and Horwitz9 postu-
lated that this parameter is universal, as the Newtonian time in the nonrelativistic theory,
µ(τ ) (worldlines labelled i = 1, 2, 3, ....N )
and drives the classical particle trajectories xi
through equations of motion, and the evolution of the wave function in the Hilbert space
µ}) through the Stueckelberg-Schr¨odinger equation (the diﬀerential form
L2(R4N ), ψτ ({xi
of the action of a one-parameter unitary group with parameter τ ).

A second fundamental diﬃculty in formulating a covariant theory of Brownian motion
lies in the form of the correlation function of the random variables of spacetime. The
straightforward generalization of Eq. (1.3) to special relativity, i.e.,

< dwµ(τ )dwν(τ

) >=

′

0
2αηµν dτ

(cid:26)

τ 6= τ ′
τ = τ ′,

(1.9)

contains the serious problem that < dw0(τ )dw0(τ ) >< 0, which is impossible. Brownian
motion in spacetime, however, should be a generalization of the nonrelativistic problem,
constructed by observing the nonrelativistic process from a moving frame according to the
transformation laws of special relativity. Hence, as a ﬁrst step, the process taking place
in space in the nonrelativistic theory should be replaced by a spacetime process in which
the Brownian jumps are spacelike. The pure time (negative) self-correlation does therefore
not occur. In order to meet this requirement, we shall use a coordinatization in terms of
generalized polar coordinates which assure that all jumps are spacelike. In this case, one
would expect a distribution function of the form e− µ
adτ , where µ is the invariant spacelike
interval of the jump, and a is some constant. As we shall see, a Brownian motion based on
purely spacelike jumps does not yield the correct form for an invariant diﬀusion process.
We must therefore consider the possibility as well that, in the framework of relativistic
In a frame in which the timelike jumps are pure
dynamics, there are timelike jumps.
time, the construction of the Gaussian distribution from the central limit theorem can
again be applied. The distribution would be expected to be of the form e− σ
bdτ , where σ

2

2

4

is the timelike interval of these jumps, and b is some constant. By suitably weighting the
occurrence of the spacelike process (which we take for our main discussion to be “physical”,
since its nonrelativistic limit coincides with the usual Brownian motion) and an analytic
continuation of the timelike process, we show that one indeed obtains a Lorentz invariant
Fokker-Planck equation in which the d’Alembert operator appears in place of the Laplace
operator of the 3D Fokker-Planck equation. One may, alternatively, consider the timelike
process as “physical” and analytically continue the spacelike (“unphysical”) process to
achieve a d’Alembert operator with opposite sign.

2. Brownian motion in 1+1 dimensions

We consider a Brownian path in 1 + 1 dimensions of the form

dxµ(τ ) = K µ(x(τ ))dτ + dwµ(τ ).

We start by considering the second order term in the series expansion of a function of

position of the particle on the world line, f (xµ(τ ) + ∆xµ), involving the operator

O = ∆xµ∆xν ∂
∂xµ

∂
∂xν .

We have remarked that one of the diﬃculties in describing Brownian motion in spacetime
is the possible occurrence of a negative value for the second moment of some component
of the Lorentz four vector random variable. If the Brownian jump is timelike, or spacelike,
however, the components of the four vector are not independent, but must satisfy the
timelike or spacelike constraint. Such constraints can be realized by using parametrizations
for the jumps in which they are restricted geometrically to be timelike or spacelike. We
now separate the jumps into spacelike jumps and timelike jumps accordingly, i.e., for the
spacelike jumps,

∆x = µ cosh α ∆t = µ sinh α

and for the timelike jumps,

∆x = σ sinh α ∆t = σ cosh α

Here we assumed that the two sectors have the same distribution on the hyperbolic variable.
We ﬁrst look for the eﬀects of a particle experiencing spacelike jumps only. In that case
the operator O takes the following form:

O = µ2[cosh2α

∂2
∂x2 + 2 sinh α cosh α

∂2
∂x∂t

+ sinh2 α

∂2
∂t2 ]

If the particle going under timelike jumps only we ﬁnd the operator O takes the following
form:

O = σ2[sinh2 α

∂2
∂x2 + 2 sinh α cosh α

∂2
∂x∂t

+ cosh2 α

∂2
∂t2 ]

In order to obtain the relativistically invariant d’Alembert diﬀusion operator, the
expression obtained in the timelike region must be subtracted from the expression for

5

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

(2.3′)

(2.4)

(2.5)

the spacelike region, and furthermore, the amplitudes must be identiﬁed. In the physical
timelike region, the coeﬃcient σ2 is, of course, positive, and using the law of large numbers
on the random distribution, one obtains a Gaussian distribution analogous to that of the
spacelike case.

We see, however, that we can obtain the d’Alembert operator only by considering the
analytic continuation of the timelike process to the spacelike domain. This procedure is
analogous to the eﬀect, well-known in relativistic quantum scattering theory, of a physical
process in the crossed (t)channel on the observed process in the direct (s) channel. For
example, in the LSZ formulation8 of relativistic scattering in quantum ﬁeld theory, a
creation operator in the “in” state may be moved to left of the vacuum expectation value
expression for the S-matrix, and an annihilation operator for the “out” state may be moved
to the right. The resulting amplitude, identical to the original one in value, represents a
process that is unphysical; its total “energy” (the sum of four-momenta squared) now
has the wrong sign. Assuming that the S-matrix is an analytic function, one may then
analytically continue the energy-momentum variables to obtain the correct sign for the
physical process in the new channel. Although we are dealing with an apparently classical
process, as Nelson has shown, the Brownian motion problem gives rise to a Schr¨odinger
equation, and therefore contains properties of the diﬀerential equations of the quantum
theory. We thus see the remarkable fact that one must take into account the physical eﬀect
of the analytic continuation of processes occurring in a non-physical, in this case timelike,
domain, on the total observed behavior of the system.

In the timelike case, the velocity of the particle ∆x/∆t ≤ 1. We shall here use the

dynamical association of coordinate increments with energy and momentum8,11

so that

E = M

p = M

∆x
∆τ

,

σ2 =

2

(E2 − p2),

∆t
∆τ

∆τ
M

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(2.6)

(2.7)

2

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

M
∆τ

It
where M is a parameter of dimension mass associated with the Brownian particle.
σ2 > 0. For the spacelike case, where p/E > 1, we may
then follows that E2 − p2 =
consider the transformation to an imaginary representation E → iE′ and p → ip′, for E′, p′
real§, so the relation p′/E′ > 1 remains, but E2 − p2 = p′2 − E′2 > 0. In this case, we take
the analytic continuation such that the magnitude of σ2 remains unchanged, but changes
sign to become −µ2 assuring the formation of the d’Alembert operator when the timelike
and spacelike ﬂuctuations are added with equal weight (this equality is consistent with the
natural assumption, in this case, of an equal distribution between spacelike and timelike
contributions). The preservation of the magnitude of the interval reﬂects the conservation
of a mass-like property which remains, as an intrinsic property of the particle, for both
spacelike and timelike jumps. This analytic continuation may alternatively be considered
as a transformation ∆τ → i∆τ .

§ This transformation is similar to the continuation p → ip′ in nonrelativistic tunneling,

for which the analytic continuation appears as an instanton.

6

With these assumptions, the cross-term in hyperbolic functions cancels in the sum,

which now takes the form

∂2
∂x2 −
Taking into account the drift term in (2.1), one then ﬁnds the relativistic Fokker-Planck
equation

O = µ2

∂2
∂t2

(2.8)

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

∂D(x, τ )
∂τ

=

−

(cid:8)

∂
∂xµ K µ + hµ2i

∂2
∂xµ∂xµ (cid:9)

D(x, τ ),

(2.9)

where ∂/∂xµ operates on both K µ and D.

We see that the procedure we have followed, identifying σ2 = −µ2 and assuming
equal weight, permits us to construct the Lorentz invariant d’Alembertian operator, as
required for obtaining a relativistically covariant diﬀusion equation. Furthermore, since
the expectation of sinh2 α, cosh2 α could be inﬁnite (e.g., for a uniform distribution on α),
the result we obtain in this way constitutes an eﬀective regularization.

s − p2

To see this symnmetry more explicitly, let us deﬁne the invariant κ2 ≡ E2

t ≥ 0
for the timelike case; our requirement is then that E2
s = −κ2 for the spacelike case.
In the framework of a larger group that includes κ as part of a three vector (E, κ, p), the
relation for the timelike case can be considered as the invariant of the group O(1, 2), i.e.,
E2 − κ2 − p2. The change in sign for the spacelike case yields the invariant E2 + κ2 − p2,
designating the corresponding symmetry (keeping the order of E and p) as O(2, 1). These
two groups may be thought of as subgroups of O(2, 2), where there exists a transformation
which changes the sign of metric of the subgroups holding the quantity κ2 constant. The
kinematic constraints we have imposed correspond to setting these invariants to zero (the
zero interval in the 2 + 1 and 1 + 2 spaces).

t − p2

The constraint we have placed on the relation of the timelike and spacelike invariants
derives from the properties of the distribution function and the requirement of obtaining
the d’Alembert operator, i.e, Lorentz covariance of the diﬀusion equation. It appears that
in order for the Brownian motion to result in a covariant diﬀusion equation, the distribution
function has a higher symmetry reﬂecting the necessary constraints. The transformations
E → iE′ and p → ip′ used above would then correspond to analytic continuations from one
(subgroup) sector to another. We shall see a similar structure in the 3 + 1 case, where the
groups involved can be identiﬁed with the symmetries of the U (1) gauge ﬁelds associated
with the quantum Stueckelberg-Schr¨odinger equation.

3. Brownian motion in 3 + 1 dimensions

In the 3 + 1 case, we again separate the jumps into timelike and spacelike types. The

spacelike jumps may be parametrized, in a given frame, by

∆t =µ sinh α
∆x =µ cosh α cos φ sin ϑ

∆y =µ cosh α sin φ sin ϑ
∆z =µ cosh α cos ϑ

7

(3.1)

We assume the four variables µ, α, ϑ, φ are independent random variables.In addition
we demand in this frame that ϑ and φ are uniformly distributed in their ranges (0, π) and
(0, 2π), respectively. In this case, we may average over the trigonometric angles, i.e., ϑ and
φ and ﬁnd that:

µ2
3

σ2
3

< ∆x2 >φ,ϑ =< ∆y2 >φ,ϑ=< ∆z2 >φ,ϑ=

cosh2α

< ∆t2 >φ,ϑ=µ2sinh2α

We may obtain the averages over the trigonometric angles of the timelike jumps by replac-
ing everywhere in Eq.(3.2)

cosh2 α ↔ sinh2 α
µ2 → σ2

to obtain

< ∆x2 >φ,ϑ =< ∆y2 >φ,ϑ=< ∆z2 >φ,ϑ=

sinh2α

< ∆t2 >φ,ϑ=σ2cosh2α,

where σ is a real random variable, the invariant timelike interval. Assuming, as in the 1 +1
case, that the likelihood of the jumps being in either the spacelike or (virtual) timelike
phases are equal, and making an analytic continuation for which σ2 → −λ2, the total
average of the operator O, including the contributions of the remaining degrees of freedom
µ, λ and α is

< O >=

< µ2 >< sinh2α > − < λ2 >< cosh2α >
(cid:1)

< µ2 >< cosh2 α > − < λ2 >< sinh2 α >
(cid:1)

(cid:0)

(cid:0)
1
3

∂2
∂t2 +
△

If we now insist that the operator < O > is invariant under Lorentz transformations (i.e.
the d’Alembertian) we impose the condition

< µ2 >< sinh2α > − < λ2 > < cosh2α >=

−

1
3

< µ2 >< cosh2 α > − < λ2 >< sinh2 α >
(cid:1)

(cid:0)

Using the fact that < cosh2 α > − < sinh2 α >= 1, and deﬁning γ ≡< sinh2 α >, we ﬁnd
that

< λ2 >=

< µ2 >

1 + 4γ
3 + 4γ

The Fokker-Planck equation then takes on the same form as in the 1 + 1 case, i.e., the
form (2.9) We remark that for the 1 + 1 case, one ﬁnds in the corresponding expression
that the 3 in the denominator is replaced by unity, and the coeﬃcients 4 are replaced by
2; in this case the requirement reduces to < µ2 >=< λ2 > and there is no γ dependence.

8

(3.2)

(3.3)

(3.4)

(3.5)

(3.6)

We see that in the limit of a uniform distribution in α, for which γ → ∞, < λ2 >→<
µ2 >. In this case, the relativistic generalization of a nonrelativistic Gaussian distribution
of the form e− r2
dτ , which is Lorentz invariant. As in the 1 + 1
case, the result (3.6) corresponds to a regularization.

dt becomes of the form e− µ

2

The limiting case γ → 0 corresponds to a Brownian motion in which in the spacelike
case there are no ﬂuctuations in time, i.e., the process is that of a nonrelativistic Brownian
motion. For the timelike case (recall that we have assumed the same distribution function
over the hyperbolic variable) this limit implies that the ﬂuctuations are entirely in the time
direction. The limit γ → ∞ is Lorentz invariant, but the limit γ → 0 can clearly be true
only in a particular frame.

4. Conclusions and Discussion

We have constructed a relativistic generalization of Brownian motion, using an invari-
ant world-time to order the Brownian ﬂuctuations, and separated consideration of spacelike
and timelike jumps to avoid the problems of negative second moments which might other-
wise follow from the Minkowski signature. Associating the Brownian ﬂuctuations with an
underlying dynamical process, one may think of γ in the 3 + 1 case as an order parameter,
where the distribution function (over α), associated with the velocities, is determined by
the temperature of the underlying dynamical system (as we have remarked, the result for
the 1 + 1 case is independent of the distribution on the hyperbolic variable).

At equilbrium, where ∂D/∂τ = 0, the resulting diﬀusion equation turns into a classical
wave equation which, in the absence of a drift term K µ, is the wave equation for a massless
ﬁeld. An exponentially decreasing distribution in τ of the form exp −κτ would correspond
to a Klein-Gordon equation for a particle in a tachyonic state (mass squared −κ). We
have considered the spacelike jumps as “physical” since they result in the usual Brownian
motion in the nonrelativistic limit. If the timelike jumps were considered as “physical”,
one would analytically continue the “unphysical” spacelike process. The resulting diﬀusion
equation would have the opposite sign for the d’Alembert operator, and an exponentially
decreasing distribution would then result in a Klein-Gordon equation in a timelike particle
state.

Nelson1 has shown that non-relativistic Brownian motion can be associated with a
Schr¨odinger equation. Equipped with the procedures we presented here, constructing rel-
ativistic Brownian motion, Nelson’s methods can be generalized. One then can construct
relativistic equations of Schr¨odinger (Schr¨odinger-Stueckelberg) type. The eigenvalue equa-
tions for these relativistic forms are also Klein-Gordon type equations. Moreover one can
also generalize the case where the ﬂuctuations are not correlated in diﬀerent directions into
the case where correlations exist, as discussed by Nelson1 for three dimensional Riemannian
spaces. In this case the resulting equation is a quantum equation in a curved Riemannian
spacetime; as pointed out in ref.12, the eikonal approximation to the solutions of such an
equation contains the geodesic motion of classical general relativity. The medium support-
ing the Brownian motion may be identiﬁed with an “ether” 13 (Nelson1 has remarked that
the self-interaction of charged particles might play the role of the Brownian medium) for
which the problem of local Lorentz symmetry is solved. This generalization of Nelson’s
method will be discussed in a succeeding paper.

9

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Linda Reichl, W.C. Schieve and Sungyan Kim at the Ilya
Prigogine Center for Statistical Mechanics and Complex Systems at the University of
Texas at Austin for helpful and stimulating discussions.
References

1. Edward Nelson, Dynamical Theories of Brownian Motion, Princeton University Press,
Princeton (1967); Edward Nelson, Quantum Fluctuations, Princeton University Press
Princeton (1985).

2. For example, G.C. Ghirardi, P. Pearle and A. Rimini, Phys. Rev. A42, 78 (1990).
3. L.P. Hughston, Proc. Roy. Soc. London A452, 953 (1996), and references cited there;

S.L. Adler and L.P. Horwitz, Jour. Math. Phys. 41, 2485 (2000).

4. S.L. Adler, Nuc. Phys. B415, 195 (1994); S.L. Adler, Quaternionic Quantum Mechan-
ics and Quantum Fields, Oxford Univ. Press, N.Y. (1995); S.L. Adler, hep-th/0206120.

5. S.L. Adler and A.C. Millard, Nuc. Phys. B473, 199 (1996).
6. G. Parisi, Y. Wu, Sci.Sin. 24 483 ; Mikio Namiki Stochastic Quantization , (Springer-

Verlag, Heidelberg, 1992).

7. See, for example, Ph. Blanchard, Ph. Combe and W. Zheng, Mathematical and Phys-

ical Aspects of Stochastic Mechanics, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg (1987).

8. E.C.G. Stueckelberg, Helv. Phys. Acta 14, 322 (1941); 14, 588 (1941).
9. L.P. Horwitz and C. Piron, Helv. Phys. Acta 46, 316 (1973).
10. See, for example, S.S. Schweber, An Introduction to Relativistic Quantum Field The-

ory, Harper and Row, N.Y. (1961).

11. J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 82, 664 (1951); R.P. Feynman, Phys. Rev. 80, 440 (1950).
12. L.P.Horwitz , O.Oron, hep-ph/0205018
13. S. Liberati, S. Sonego and M. Visser, Ann. Phys. 167 298 (2002).

10

