3
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
2
0
2
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Note on the Topology of Space-time in
Special Relativity

S. Wickramasekara∗
Department of Physics, University of Texas at Austin
Austin, Texas 78712

Abstract

We show that a topology can be deﬁned in the four dimensional
space-time of special relativity so as to obtain a topological semigroup
for time. The Minkowski 4-vector character of space-time elements as
well as the key properties of special relativity are still the same as in
the standard theory. However, the new topological structure allows
the possibility of an intrinsic asymmetry in the time evolution of phys-
ical systems.

1 Introduction

It is the received point of view that Einstein’s special theory of relativity
In some sense, the theory “uniﬁes” space
is above all a theory of time.
and time into a single entity, a four dimensional space-time, and a physical
event is cataloged by a point (x0, x) in this space-time. The new notion of
time, though quite diﬀerent from the preceding Newtonian time, still has the
reversible, symmetric property of the latter. More precisely, time in relativity
is assumed to be modeled by the Euclidean real line, and as such is reversible
and symmetric in the sense that the Euclidean real line is a Lie group under
addition. Within its topological and algebraic structure, there is no natural

∗sujeewa@physics.utexas.edu

1

way to deﬁne a ﬂow of time in the four dimensional space-time of special
relativity.

On the other hand, the time evolution of most macroscopic systems has
an amply manifest irreversible character, often associated with the second
law of thermodynamics. Moreover, it is believed that the time evolution of
certain microphysical processes, such as resonance scattering and the decay
of elementary particles, also possesses such an irreversible nature. Various
attempts have been made to develop a quantum theory which accommodates
the time asymmetry of such phenomena [1, 2, 3], and even the asymmetry
in the time evolution of the universe as a whole [4, 5]. Perhaps the most
signiﬁcant feature common to all these developments is that the asymmetry in
time evolution is attempted to be obtained as a property of its representation
in the space of sates of the system. This is particularly notable in [1, 2, 3]
where the asymmetric time evolution of the microphysical system is realized
by way of a semigroup of continuous linear operators deﬁned in a suitably
constructed rigged Hilbert space.

What is implicitly assumed in these theories is that the time which gets
represented asymmetrically is still the time of special relativity, and as such,
has no manifest irreversibility or asymmetry at the space-time level. That is,
the evolution parameter associated with the macroscopic apparatuses which
characterize the states and observables appertaining to a quantum physical
system is still taken to be the classical time of special relativity, reversible
and static; it is the evolution parameter of the states and observables of the
quantum physical system that acquires an asymmetry.

The main technical result we present in this paper is a topological struc-
ture for the space-time of special relativity that allows for asymmetric time
evolutions. Further, this topological structure is introduced in a manner
completely consistent with the tenets of special relativity – in particular,
without contradicting any of the experimental tests conﬁrming special rela-
tivity. However, the new topology provides a better framework for the time-
asymmetric quantum theories, such as those developed in [1,2,4,5,3], in that
it endows the structure of a topological semigroup on the set of space-time
translations and consequently leads to a Poincar´e semigroup for relativistic
symmetries (and asymmetries).

2

2 A Topology for Space-time

The space-time of special relativity is assumed to be a four dimensional man-
ifold, M. It has the topology of R4, the four dimensional Euclidean space.
A metric tensor gµν is also deﬁned on M, for the “length” preserved under
Lorentz transformations is not that which is compatible with the Euclidean
topology. In fact, what is at the heart of all experimentally observable pre-
dictions of special relativity is this metric structure, and not the topological
structure of M, which is Euclidean.

It is perhaps the case that the mathematical structure of a physical theory,
especially its topology, is never completely determined by the physics of the
processes it seeks to describe. A topological structure involves such notions
as local bases at a point and inﬁnite sequences which are indeterminable
by physics alone because the totality of experimental information is never
“complete”: The number of experiments that can be performed is ﬁnite; the
experimental apparatuses allow the measurement of only ﬁnite quantities–not
inﬁnitesimals; and no measurement is without error. The theoreticians use
the freedoms resulting from this incompleteness to construct the mathemat-
ical structure of a theory in a way that is not necessarily dictated completely
by physics, and how these freedoms are utilized in a given theory is to be
valued on the grounds of its overall success.
Indeed, the absence of the
uniqueness of the topology of a physical theory is an interesting query in its
own right. A case in point is the Euclidean topology of M: since it involves
open sets (or inﬁnite sequences), just as any other topological structure, this
Euclidean topology cannot be deduced from experiments alone. In addition,
it is not the most convenient one to use when describing certain phenomena,
such as time asymmetric processes. Here, we propose to alter the topologi-
cal structure of M while leaving intact the (algebraic) properties of how an
element of M transforms under Lorentz transformations.

Before we introduce this topology, it is worthwhile to recall a few well

known deﬁnitions and notions from the theory of groups:
Groups A group is a set G with an operation G ⊗ G → G, denoted by
(a, b) → ab, such that

a) The operation is associative, i.e., (ab)c = a(bc).

b) There is an identity element e in G such that ea = ae = a for all a ∈ G.

c) For every a ∈ G, there exits its inverse a−

1 such that aa−

1 = a−

1a = e.

3

Notice that this operation, often called multiplication, imposes an algebraic
structure on the set G; it is not a topological structure.
Topological Groups A topological group is a group in which a topology is
deﬁned so as to make the above group operations continuous. That is, for
each a ∈ G, the mappings x → ax and x → xa are homeomorphisms of G
1. These continuity requirements can be
onto G. So is the mapping x → x−
more concisely stated by way of the continuity of the mapping f : G⊗G → G
deﬁned by

f (a, b) = ab−

1

(2.1)

It is clear that such a topology on G is completely determined by any local
base at the identity element e of G.
Lie Groups A topological group G is called a Lie group if its topology is
such that G is a diﬀerentiable manifold and the mapping (2.1) is C ∞. Many
symmetry transformations in physics are assumed to constitute Lie groups;
the Poincar´e group and symmetry groups of particle physics such as SU(3)
are examples. privilege Along with these well known classical concepts, we
are in need of the notion of topological semigroup. For the purposes of this
paper, we deﬁne it as follows:
Topological Semigroups A topological semigroup is a topological space S
with an internal operation S ⊗ S → S, denoted by (a, b) → ab, such that

a) The operation is continuous.

b) It is associative, i.e., (ab)c = a(bc).

c) There is an identity element e in S such that ea = ae = a for all a ∈ S.

Thus every topological group is a topological semigroup; of course, what is
of interest here is those semigroups that are not topological groups.

After these introductory remarks, we now introduce the central idea of

this paper.

Deﬁnition 2.1. Consider the collection of intervals of the form [a, b), a, b, ∈
R, where R is the real line. It is clear that these sets provide a base for a
topology for R. Let ˜R denote the set of real numbers endowed with this
topology.

It is easy to verify that the mapping ˜R⊗ ˜R → ˜R deﬁned by (t1, t2) → t1+t2
is continuous. However, the mapping t → −t is not continuous on ˜R. This

4

means ˜R is a topological semigroup –not a Lie group– under the operation
of addition. Further, in contrast to R, ˜R is not locally compact.

We want to propose ˜R as the mathematical image of time. It is interesting
to notice that ˜R is an algebraic group, and thus a notion of past can still be
deﬁned by way of the mapping t → −t. Since this mapping is not continuous,
however, ˜R does not have the reversible (i.e., Lie group) character that time
acquires when modeled by the usual Euclidean line R. Now we may deﬁne
our space-time:

Deﬁnition 2.2. Consider the direct product space ˜R ⊗ R3, where R3 is the
usual three dimensional Euclidean space. Deﬁne a topology on ˜R ⊗ R3 by
declaring sets of the form V1 ⊗ V2 open when V1 is open in ˜R and V2, in R3.
Let M be the space ˜R ⊗ R3 endowed with this product topology, and let τ
denote the topology itself.

M

2.1 The Semigroup of Space-time Translations

M can be made into (an algebraic) vector space of operators acting on itself.
To that end, let (a0, a) be an element of M. Then, for all x ≡ (x0, x) ∈ M,
the mapping

(a0, a) : (x0, x) → (x0 + a0, x + a)

deﬁnes the desired action on M. It is clear that (2.2) is τ
-continuous on
M. The multiplication on the set of operators {(a0, a)} deﬁned by means of
composition

M

is continuous with respect to τ

. Furthermore, the inverse mapping

(a0, a)(b0, b) = (a0 + b0, a + b)

(a0, a) → (a0, a)−

M
1 = (−a0, −a)

(2.2)

(2.3)

(2.4)

is not continuous in the topology τ
. Therefore, we see that M acquires
M
the structure of a topological semigroup (of operators on M itself). We shall
refer to this semigroup as the semigroup of space-time translations, or simply
as the translation semigroup, T .

5

2.2 Lorentz Transformations
Let B be the open unit ball in R3, i.e.,

B = {v : v ∈ R3, |v| < 1}

For every v ∈ B, we may deﬁne a linear operator Λ(v) on M by way of the
equality

Λ(v)

x0
x (cid:19)

=

(cid:18)

x + γ

(cid:18)

γ(x0 − v.x)
v2 (v.x)v − γvx0 (cid:19)
−

1

where γ = 1
√1
−

v2 . As a matrix, the Λ(v) has the form

Λ(v) =

γ

−γv1
1









1

−

−γv2

−γv1 1 + γ
v2 v2
1
γ
v2 v2v1
−
1
γ
v2 v3v1
−

−γv3

−γv2
1
γ
v2 v1v2
−
1
1 + γ
v2 v2
1
γ
v2 v3v2
−

−

2

−γv3
1
γ
v2 v1v3
−
1
γ
v2 v2v3
−
1
1 + γ
v2 v2

−

3









(2.5)

(2.6)

where v = (v1, v2, v3). Both (2.5) and (2.6) are well known from the standard
theory: Λ(v) is just the familiar Lorentz boost operator on the space-time
manifold M. Thus, algebraically, the boost operators (deﬁned by (2.5) or
(2.6)) on the space-time M are identical to the those on the conventional
space-time M of special relativity. However, the space-time is now endowed
, and we must verify that the operators Λ(v) are
with a diﬀerent topology τ
M
continuous with respect to τ

.

Recall that an operator A deﬁned on a topological space S is said to be
continuous if for every open set U of S there exists another W such that
A(W ) ⊂ U. Further, in the present case it is suﬃcient to consider a boost
operator of the form Λ(v1), for which (2.5) reduces to

M

Λ(v1)(x0, x) = (γ(x0 − v1x1), γ(x1 − v1x0), x2, x3) ≡ (x′0, x′

)

(2.7)

where v1 ≡ v = (v1, 0, 0). Next, let U be an open neighborhood of (x′0, x′)
of the form [x′0, x′0 + ǫ) ⊗ (x′1 − ǫ, x′1 + ǫ) ⊗ V , where V = (x′2 − ǫ, x′2 + ǫ) ⊗
(x′3 − ǫ, x′3 + ǫ). It then follows from (2.7), which shows that Λ(v1) acts on the
coordinates x2 and x3 as the identity, that any neighborhood W of (x0, x)

6

of the form [x0, x0 + δ) ⊗ (x1 − δ, x1 + δ) ⊗ V , where δ < ǫ
relation

q

v1

1
1+v1 , fulﬁlls the
−

Λ(v1)(W ) ⊂ U

(2.8)

Therefore, Λ(v1) is a continuous operator on M.

It is obvious that the rotation operators R(θ) are also continuous on

M = ˜R ⊗ R3 as they act non-trivially only on R3.

Now, let L = {Λ} be the totality of the boost operators Λ(v) and ro-
tation operators R(θ). As in the standard theory, under the multiplication
deﬁned by usual composition of operators, L is a Lie group–the well known
homogeneous Lorentz group. We have shown that it is a group of continuous
operators on the new space-time M.

2.3 Poincar´e Semigroup

Consider the semidirect product of the translation semigroup T with the
Lorentz groupL. Following the common practice, we denote elements of this
semidirect product set P by (Λ, a), where Λ ∈ L and a ∈ T . From the
considerations of Sections 2.1 and 2.2, we see that (Λ, a) is a continuous
operator on M, deﬁned by (Λ, a)x = Λx + a. As usual, we deﬁne a product
rule on P by the composition of operators:

(Λ1, a1)(Λ2, a2) = (Λ1Λ2, a1 + Λ1a2)

(2.9)

This is an associative multiplication on P under which the set remains closed.
1
Furthermore, for each (Λ, a) ∈ P, there exists an inverse element (Λ, a)−
given by,

(Λ, a)−

1 = (Λ−

1, −Λ−

1a)

(2.10)

Thus, under the product rule (2.9), P acquires the structure of an algebraic
group.

Consider now the topological properties of P. From (2.3) and (2.8), we see
that (2.9) is a continuous mapping of P ⊗ P into P. However, (2.4) implies
that (2.10) is not continuous on P. This means that the multiplication
deﬁned by (2.9) turns P into a topological semigroup with respect to the
new topology τ
we have introduced on space-time. Recall that under the
usual Euclidean topology, the multiplication (2.9) makes P a Lie group, the

M

7

very well known Poincar´e group. We still retain the algebraic structure of
the Poincar´e group, but introduce here a topology that makes P only a
semigroup. We call this topological semigroup the Poincar´e semigroup.

3 Concluding Remarks

That the set of translations and Lorentz transformations on the relativis-
tic space-time forms a Lie group is a mathematical assumption–one perhaps
intrinsically incapable of being veriﬁed by direct experiments. Among the
conclusions to which this assumption leads is the necessarily reversible, uni-
tary time evolution (in the Hilbert space representation) of quantum physi-
cal systems. However, as pointed out in the Introduction, there exist many
physical processes the time evolution of which is not unitary and reversible.
Although attempts have been made to construct quantum physical theories
to describe these phenomena, how these theories are to be reconciled with
the structure of relativistic space-time (in particular, the Lie group structure
of space-time translations) has not been studied.

This brief note investigates the possibility of endowing the four dimen-
sional space-time of special relativity with a topology which is diﬀerent from
its usual Euclidean topology. We still retain the key properties of special
relativity, all of which originate from the algebraic structure of Lorentz trans-
formations. The new topology, however, allows us to view time in way that
is quite diﬀerent from the static character it assumes in orthodox special
relativity. As immediate consequences of the new topological structure, we
have shown that space-time translations on M deﬁne a topological semi-
group, whereupon we obtained the Poincar´e semigroup for the set of rela-
tivistic transformations on M. This structure may be the one that provides
a proper context and framework for the time asymmetric quantum theories,
such as those developed in some of the works cited below. It now remains to
investigate the implications of this topology on the fundamental equations of
physics –i.e., the meaning of partial derivatives with respect to time needs to
be explored– and to construct the representations of the Poincar´e semigroup
in the space of states of quantum mechanical systems. We shall undertake
these tasks in a forthcoming paper.

8

References

[1] A. Bohm, I. Antoniou and P. Kielanowski, J. Math. Phys. 36, 2593
(1995); A. Bohm and N. L. Harshman, In Irreversibility and Causality,
A. Bohm, et al., (Eds.), Springer (Lecture notes in Physics) (1998).

[2] M. Gadella, J. Math. Phys. 24, 1462 (1983).

[3] A. Bohm et al., Phys. Lett. A 264, 425 (2000); Eur. Phys. J. C 18, 333

(2000).

[4] M. Gell-Mann and J. B. Hartle, In Physical Origins of Time Asymmetry,

J. J. Halliwell, et al., (Eds.) Cambridge University Press (1994).

[5] M. Castagnino and E. Gunzig, Int. J. Th. Phys. 36, 2545 (1997).

9

