3
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
8
0
2
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Stochastic Force Deﬁned Evolution in Dynamical Systems

Ping Ao
Institute for Systems Biology, 1441 N. 34 St., Seattle, WA 98103
Department of Physics, University of Washington, Box 351560, Seattle, WA 98195
(submitted to Physical Review Letters on Nov. 21, 2002)

Dynamics near and far away from thermal equilibrium is studied within the framework of Langevin
equations. A stochasticity-dissipation relation is proposed to emphasize the equal importance of
the stochastic and deterministic forces in describing the system’s evolution and destination.
It
is a generalization of the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem. Close to a stationary state an explicit
construction of the potential energy is given through a gauged singular decomposition. Possible
directions to extend the present study into generic situations are pointed out.

PACS numbers: 87.23.Kg,05.70.Ln,47.70.-n, 87.23.Ge

In biology, chemistry, and physics, a system under in-
vestigation can often be well modeled by a set of deter-
ministic diﬀerential equations.1 Those deterministic dif-
ferential equations, describing phenomena on a macro-
scopic level ranging from near to far from thermal equi-
librium, are usually motivated by empirical observations.
In addition, it is frequently found that adding the noise
or stochastic force into them can result in a better de-
scription of systems, or, enables investigators to get cer-
tain desired results, such as particular stationary distri-
butions. This is usually done in an ad hoc manner. The
important question arises that whether or not the noise
is an integral part of the mathematical modeling, such
that the stochastic force has a transparent role and is
directly connected to experimental observations. Ample
experimental evidence from physics to biology, particu-
larly the studies of the properties near thermal equilib-
rium in chemistry and physics2 and of the evolution of
species in biology3, suggests the aﬃrmative answer. In
attempt to address this question, our ﬁrst response may
be to resort to a microscopic derivation under appropri-
ate conditions. This would certainly be advantageous,
because it shows the coherence between the macro and
micro modeling. However, often in reality, apart from a
heuristic justiﬁcation, not only the microscopic deriva-
tion is completely missing in a reductionist’s point of
view, the very existence of the corresponding microscopic
base can be called into doubt. Even in a situation that
such a microscopic base exists, as typically believed in
physics, the derivation involves a careful consideration
of the emerging properties and can be highly nontrivial.
Therefore, granted the autonomy of the macroscopic de-
scription, can we formulate the deterministic equations
and the noise in a coherent manner? In this letter we will
present an explicit construction leading to the positive
answer. The presentation is inspired by the methodol-
ogy of Onsager4 in his classical investigation of dynam-
ics near thermal equilibrium. We have generalized On-
sager‘s results in two important directions: We elevate
the stochastic force to the position of equal importance
to that of the deterministic equation, and explicitly con-
struct the stationary distribution for the state variable

in typical situations far away from thermal equilibrium
where the detailed balance condition does not hold.

To avoid the unnecessary mathematical complication,
we will restrict the diﬀerential equations to be a set of
ﬁrst order ordinary diﬀerential equations. This corre-
sponds to the homogeneous and well-stirred situation in
a chemical reaction network widely encountered in biol-
ogy and chemistry. Let the d component state variable
be presented by xτ = (x1, ..., xd), a vector in d dimen-
sional real space, the deterministic dynamical equation
is

˙x = f (x) .

(1)

Here the superscript τ denotes the transpose, the dot over
the state variable denotes the derivative with respect to
˙x = dx/dt, and the n component force f τ (x) =
time t,
(f1(x), ..., fd(x)) with fi(x) = fi(x1, ..., xd), i = 1, ..., d is
a smooth function specifying the evolution of the state
variable in a deterministic manner. Eq.(1) is a short-
hand writing for dxi/dt = fi(x), i = 1, ..., d.The force
f is speciﬁed by a set of controlling parameters which
we will not further discuss in this letter, except we as-
sume the force is explicitly time independent. The state
variable can be the particle position in physics, or the
concentrations of reactants in chemistry, or the protein
expression levels in biology. There are two important fea-
tures diﬀer Eg.(1) from the usual Hamiltonian dynamics.
First, the divergence of the force is ﬁnite except for a few
d
isolated points: ∂ ·f 6= 0, where ∂ ·f =
i=1 ∂ifi(x), and
∂i = ∂/∂xi. The ﬁnite divergence implies that both the
energy and the volume of phase space are not conserved.
Second, the skew matrix ∂ × f generated by the skew op-
eration (∂ × f )ij = ∂ifj(x) − ∂jfi(x) is in general ﬁnite,
too: ∂ × f 6= 0. In two and three dimensions, d = 2, 3,
the skew operation reduces to the usual curl operation,
∇×, and the skew matrix can be represented by a vector.
The ﬁniteness of the skew matrix is a characteristic of the
system far away from thermal equilibrium. It is believed
that it can cause the absence of a potential5. We will,
however, present an explicitly construction of a potential
function.

P

1

To emphasize the essential idea of our method, we fur-
ther simplify our problem by considering the dynamics
near a stable point speciﬁed by zero force, f = 0. We
will choose this stable point to be the origin in our d
dimension state space. A stable point represents a sta-
ble stationary state. Its existence is evident in chemistry
and physics. In biology, where systems are believed to
operate under the condition far away from thermal equi-
librium, the existence of such a stable stationary state
has also been demonstrated.6. Hence, to the linear order
in x, the leading order close to the stable point x = 0,
d
j=1 Fij xj. Adding the noise, the
f = −F x or fi = −
stochastic force, into Eq.(1), we have

P

˙x = −F x + ζ(t) ,

(2)

(3)

where the stochastic force ζτ (t) = (ζ1(t), ..., ζd(t)), which
is chosen to be represented by a Gaussian and white
noise, with zero mean, < ζ(t) >= 0, and the variance

< ζ(t)ζτ (t

′

) >= 2Dδ(t − t

) .

′

Here δ(t) is the Dirac delta function and the constant dif-
fusion matrix D is explicitly deﬁned by < ζi(t)ζj (t′) >=
2Dijδ(t − t′). The average < ... > is carried out in the
distribution function for the noise, not in terms of distri-
bution function for the state variable. Unless explicitly
speciﬁed, whenever it can be deﬁned, the temperature in
the present letter is always set to be 1: kBT = 1. This
is equivalent to a rescale of energy. To ensure the in-
dependence of all components of the state variable near
the stable point, we will require the determinant of the
constant force matrix F to be ﬁnite: det(F ) 6= 0. We
will call Eq.(2) the standard Langevin equation, or, the
standard form of the stochastic diﬀerential equation.7–9
Now, we assert that there exists a transformation, such

that we can transform Eq.(2) into the following form:

(S + A) ˙x = −∂u(x) + ξ(t) ,

(4)

with following properties: S is a constant symmetric and
semi-positive matrix, A a constant antisymmetric ma-
trix, and u(x) a single valued scale function to be speci-
ﬁed below. The stochastic force ξτ (t) = (ξ1(t), ..., ξd(t))
is Gaussian and white and has the same origin as that
of ζ(t) . We further require that the determinant of
S + A is ﬁnite, det(A + S) 6= 0, for the same reason of
requiring det(F ) 6= 0. We will call such a transformation
from Eq.(2) to (4) the singular decomposition. Clearly,
the symmetric matrix S plays the role of friction, and
the antisymmetric matrix A the role of ‘magnetic’ ﬁeld:
˙xτ S ˙x ≥ 0,
‘Energy’ dissipation is always non-negative,
and the transverse force, a ‘Lorentz’ force, does no work,
˙xτ A ˙x = 0. The function u(x) hence acquires the meaning
of potential energy. While given Eq.(4) a unique Eq.(2)
can be obtained, we point out that if the stochastic forces
would be ignored, that is, ζ(t) = ξ(t) = 0, the singular
decomposition would not be unique. There would exist a
family of singular decompositions transforming Eq.(2) to

(4). One would be easily able to verify this observation by
multiplying an arbitrary ﬁnite constant to Eq.(4): a large
friction and a large potential has the same deterministic
dynamics of a small friction and a small potential. Thus
for the same deterministic dynamics speciﬁed by Eq.(1)
( ζ(t) = 0 in Eq.(2) ), the underlying system properties
such as the energy dissipation determined speciﬁed by
Eq.(4) with ξ(t) = 0 would be totally diﬀerent. This ob-
servation strongly indicates that the stochastic force is
an integral part of the system’s dynamics: the stochas-
tic force introduces an intrinsic scale into the problem.
Speciﬁcally, requiring the uniqueness of the singular de-
composition, we impose the following condition which
links the stochastic force to the dissipation matrix:

< ξ(t)ξτ (t

′

) >= 2Sδ(t − t

) .

′

(5)

Together with < ξ(t) >= 0, Eq.
(5) will be called
the stochasticity-dissipation relation, and Eq.(4) will be
called the normal Langevin equation, or, the normal form
of the stochastic diﬀerential equation. The singular de-
composition under this stochasticity-dissipation relation
will be called the gauged singular decomposition.

By our construction, the same dynamics is described
by either the standard Langevin equation, Eq.(2), or, the
normal Langevin equation, Eq.(4). Eliminating ˙x from
those two equations leads to

(S + A)[−F x + ζ(t)] = −∂u(x) + ξ(t) .

(6)

Because the stochastic forces come from the same source,
and their dynamics is independent of that of the state
variable, separately we have (S + A)F x = U x, where we
have set ∂u(x) = U x, and (S + A)ζ(t) = ξ(t). Since x
can be an arbitrary state vector, we have

(S + A)F = U .

(7)

Using Eq.(5) and < (S + A)ζ(t)ζτ (t′)(S − A) >=<
ξ(t)ξτ (t′) >, we obtain the following generalized Einstein
relation between the diﬀusion matrix D and the friction
matrix S:

(S + A)D(S − A) = S .

(8)

Eq.(8) suggests a duality between the standard and the
normal Langevin equations: large friction matrix implies
small diﬀusion matrix, and vice versa.

We next prove the existence and uniqueness of the
gauged singular decomposition by an explicit construc-
tion. Using the fact that the potential matrix U is sym-
metric as required by ∂ × ∂u(x) = 0, we have

(S + A)F − F τ (S − A) = 0 .

(9)

Deﬁning an auxiliary matrix G ≡ (S + A)−1, the gener-
alized Einstein relation, Eq.(8), and the above equation
lead to the following two coupled inhomogeneous linear
equations for G and its transpose:

2

∞

Xn=1






and

GF τ − F Gτ = 0 ,

G + Gτ = 2D .

(10)

(11)

The symmetric part of the auxiliary matrix G is read-
ily available from Eq.(11). Equations similar to Eq.(11)
have been discussed Before in the context of Ornstein-
Uhlenbeck process7–10 The antisymmetric part, Q ≡
(G − Gτ )/2, can be formally expressed as a series after a
straightforward matrix manipulation:

Q =

(−1)n[F

−nD(F τ )n − F nD(F τ )

−n] .

(12)

Having obtained the auxiliary matrix G in terms of the
force matrix F and the diﬀusion matrix D, G = D + Q,
the gauged singular decomposition is uniquely deter-
mined:

U = G−1F
S = [G−1 + (Gτ )−1]/2
A = [G−1 − (Gτ )−1]/2

.

(13)

The potential energy is u(x) = xτ U x/2. This completes
our proof of the existence and uniqueness of the gauged
singular decomposition.

With the energy function in the present problem as the
potential energy u(x), the stationary distribution func-
tion ρ0(x) for the state variable should be given by

ρ0(x) =

exp{−u(x)} ,

(14)

1
Z

R

ddx exp{−u(x)}. The
with the partition function Z =
normal Langevin equation, Eg.(4), allows a particular
easy identiﬁcation of the energy function. Without the
stochastic force, no energy can be uniquely deﬁned from
Eq.(1) or Eq.(2), and the singular decomposition is not
unique, too. The available volume of phase space for the
state variable would be shrank to zero, to a point deﬁned
by the stationary state.

From either the standard or the normal Langevin equa-
tions,
it is straightforward to obtain the correspond-
ing Fokker-Planck equation for the distribution function
P (x, t) of state variable8:

∂tP (x, t) + ∂ · [(f − D∂)P (x, t)] = 0 .

(15)

Here ∂t = ∂/∂t. If the probability current density is de-
ﬁned as J(x, t) ≡ (f − D∂)P (x, t), the Fokker-Planck
equation is a statement of the probability continuity:
∂tP (x, t) + ∂ · J(x, t) = 0. The stationary state corre-
sponds to the condition

∂ · J0(x) = 0 .

(16)

Particularly, the condition

J0(x) = 0

(17)
has been called the detailed balance condition.8,7,9 One
can check that the stationary distribution P0(x) in
Eq.(14) is indeed the time independent solution of the
Fokker-Planck equation: The stationary probability cur-
rent J0(x) = −GAGT U x P0(x) and ∂ · J0(x) = 0. Unless
the transverse matrix A is zero, the detailed balance con-
dition does not hold. This suggests a natural description
of a stationary cyclic motion by the normal Langevin
equation.

One comment is in order: The uniqueness of the
gauged singular decomposition is guaranteed by the con-
ditions det(F ) 6= 0 and det(S + A) 6= 0, which leads
to the Gaussian distribution for the stationary distribu-
tion for state variable. Hence near thermal equilibrium
the stochasticity-dissipation relation is equivalent to the
ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem.4,2 Nevertheless, in the
normal Langevin equation no assumption is made on the
underlying thermal dynamics. The real diﬀerence is that
by the stochasticity-dissipation relation the emphasis is
on the stochastic force, therefore on dynamics, and by the
usual ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem the emphasis is on
the stationary state distribution, therefore on statics. In
this sense one may regard the stochasticity-dissipation
relation as a generalization of the ﬂuctuation-dissipation
theorem.

To further illustrate the coherence and generality of
the present method, we discuss three aspects of the nor-
mal Langevin equation and the gauged singular decom-
position. We ﬁrst look further into the detailed balance
condition.
In order to have the stationary probability
current J0(x) = 0, the necessary and suﬃcient condition
is the transverse matrix to be zero: A = 0. This is equiv-
alent, according to Eq.(13), G = Gτ . It follows that both
the matrix U F and matrix SF are symmetric. For a sym-
metric force matrix F , this further leads to the condition
SF = F S, that is, S and F commute. This implies that,
even for a symmetric force matrix F , not every choice of
the friction matrix S, therefore the potential matrix U ,
can guarantee the detailed balance condition.

Second, we consider four examples from four diﬀer-
ent ﬁelds, where either the force matrix F is explicit
asymmetric or the transverse matrix A is ﬁnite. They
belong to two special but important classes where the di-
rect connection between the deterministic force and the
stochastic force can be established microscopically. The
ﬁrst example is well-known in physics: the charged par-
ticle moving in a magnetic ﬁeld, the magneto-transport
in solid state physics.11 The second example is the emer-
gent vortex dynamics in superﬂuids and superconductors,
whose microscopic derivation is very technical.12 When
the damping is strong enough, the equation of motions
are already in the form of normal Langevin equation. For
both cases at two dimension, d = 2, we can identify the
friction and transverse matrices as:

S + A =

η
b
−b η (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(18)

3

In both cases the friction and stochastic force can be
formulated as the results of the coupling between the
system and a reservoir. The stochastic dynamics can be
formulated within the Hamiltonian framework cherished
in physics.13 Dynamical equations already in the form of
standard Langevin equation are the Lotka-Volterra equa-
tion for species competition1, and the toggle equation for
the stability of gene switch14, our third and fourth exam-
ples. In the corresponding force matrix F

F12 6= F21 .

(19)

The Lotka-Volterra and toggle equations describe pro-
cesses belong to the generic predator-prey or growth-
decay process, where the diﬀusion matrix D can be ob-
tained based on the knowledge of the deterministic equa-
tion when large number of birth and death events occur
on the macroscopic time scale.15,7,9

In most cases, however, both the intrinsic and the ex-
trinsic noise coexist. They are equally important and
can be determined experimentally.16 The stochasticity-
dissipation relation treats them on the equal footing to
determine the gauged singular decomposition. Quanti-
tative and global predictions can be made based on the
normal Langevin equation.

Finally, we consider the classical example of a damped
harmonic particle in one dimension to illustrate the con-
sistency of our method. The celebrated equation of mo-
tion for momentum p and coordinate q is7–9

˙q = p/m
˙p = −η/m p − kq + ζ(t)

(cid:26)

(20)

Here < ζ(t) >= 0 and < ζ(t)ζ(t′) >= 2ηδ(t − t′), m
is the mass of the particle, and k the spring constant.
The equilibrium distribution function is7–9 P0(x) =
1/Z exp{−(p2/2m + kq2/2)}, because the total energy
can be readily identiﬁed as E = p2/2m + kq2/2, the sum
of kinetic energy and potential energy. Let x1 = q, x2 =
p, the force matrix F and the diﬀusion matrix D can be
easily identiﬁed as

F =

0 −1/m
k η/m (cid:19)

(cid:18)

, D =

0 0
0 η (cid:19)

.

(cid:18)

(21)

By a straightforward calculation, the gauged singular de-
composition consisting of the friction matrix S, the trans-
verse matrix A and the potential matrix U is found as,

U =

k
0
0 1/m (cid:19)

(cid:18)

, S =

η 0
0 0 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

, A =

0 1
−1 0 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

, (22)

which gives the same energy function, as it should.

In conclusion, we have explicitly constructed the nor-
mal Langevin equation from the standard Langevin
equation via a gauged singular decomposition. The
ﬂuctuation-dissipation theorem is generalized to the
stochasticity-dissipation relation to emphasize the dy-
namical nature of the stochastic force. We have obtained

4

the potential energy which determines the stationary dis-
tribution even when the detailed balance condition does
not hold. Finally, we point out that the normal Langevin
equation enables the generalization in several directions.
It is straightforward to generalize the approach to unsta-
ble ﬁx points. Taking corresponding limits of the dimen-
sion of the phase space goes to inﬁnite, t may be applied
to the stochastic partial diﬀerential equations. We note
that it is already in the form ready for the color noise case
as demonstrated in the study of the dissipative dynamics;
and if we view the present construction as a local approx-
imation, the extension to the generic nonlinear situation
is implied.

Discussions with Lee Hood, David Thouless, Lan Yin,
and Xiaomei Zhu are highly appreciated. This work was
supported in part by Institute for Systems Biology.

1 D. Kaplan and L. Glass, Understanding nonlinear dynam-

ics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1995.

2 D.G. Miller, in Foundations of continuum thermodynam-
ics, edited by J.J.D. Domingos, M.N.R. Nina, and J.H.
Whitelaw, John Wiley and sons, New York, 1973.

3 S.E. Luria and M. Delbruck, Genetics, 28 (1943) 491; L.H.
Hartwell et al., Genetics: from genes to genomes, McGraw-
Hill, Boston, 2000.

4 L. Onsager, Phys. Rev., 37 (1931) 405;

ibid, 38 (1931)
2265; L. Onsager and S. Matchlup, ibid 91 (1953) 1505;
S. Machlup and L. Onsager, ibid, 91 (1953) 1512.

5 G. Nicolis and I. Prigogine, Self-organization in nonequilib-
rium systems: from dissipative structure to order through
ﬂuctuations, John Wiley and sons, New York, 1977.

6 U. Alon et al., Nature 397 (1999) 168.
7 N.G. van Kampen, Stochastic processes in physics and

chemistry, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1992.

8 H. Risken, The Fokker-Planck equation, Springer, Berlin,

1989.

9 G.W. Gardiner, Handbook of stochastic methods for
physics, chemistry and the natural sciences, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 1983.

10 G.L. Eyink, J.L. Lebowitz, and H. Spohn, J. Stat. Phys.

83 (1996) 385.

11 J.M. Ziman, Electrons and phonons; the theory of trans-
port phenomena in solids, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1962.
12 P. Ao and D.J. Thouless, Phys. Rev. Lett.70 (1993) 2158;

P. Ao and X.-M. Zhu, Phys. Rev. B, 60 (1999) 6850.

13 A.J. Leggett, in Quantum tunnelling in condensed media,
edited by Yu. Kagan and A.J. Leggett, North-Holland, Am-
sterdam, 1992

14 T.S. Gardner et al., Nature 403 (2000) 339.
15 D.A. McQuarrie, J. Appl. Prob. 4 (1967) 413.
16 M.B. Elowitz et al., Science 297 (2002) 1183.

