Tracing a planet’s orbit with a straight hedge and a compass with

the help of the hodograph and the Hamilton vector

E. Guillaum´ın-Espa˜na and A. L. Salas-Brito

Laboratorio de Sistemas Din´amicos,

Departamento de Ciencias B´asicas,

Universidad Aut´onoma Metropolitana-Azcapotzalco,

Apartado Postal 21-267, Coyoac´an 04000 D. F., M´exico

Departamento de F´ısica, Universidad Aut´onoma Metropolitana-Iztapalapa,

Apartado Postal 55-534, Iztapalapa 09340 D. F., M´exico

H. N. N´u˜nez-Y´epez

Abstract

We describe a geometrical method for tracing a planet’s orbit using its velocity hodograph, that

is, the path of the planet’s velocity. The method requires only a straight edge, a compass, and the

help of the hodograph. We also obtain analitically the hodograph and some of the features of the

motion that can be obtained from it.

3
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
0
2
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

One way of solving the Kepler problem is to determine the path of the planet in veloc-

ity space. This path is called the hodograph.1 Although this way of solving the problem

apparently involves a detour, it ends up being one of the simplest ways of ﬁnding the

orbit.2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17. Moreover, this approach makes it straightforward to ob-

tain an additional constant of the motion, namely the Hamilton vector. A recent contribution

to using the hodograph is the interesting paper by Derbes.8 This discussion is beautifully

conducted using Euclidian geometry, but some people may be confounded by the use of such

arguments.

We discuss a diﬀerent geometrical approach for tracing a planet’s orbit that also uses the

hodograph. Our method can be cast as a series of steps starting from the initial position

and velocity of the planet. Then using the Hamilton vector and the hodograph, the method

directly leads to the points on the planetary orbit. In addition to constructing the orbits,

we discuss other features of the motion that follow naturally from our approach.

The paper is organized as follows.

In Sec. II the analytical basis of the hodographic

method is expounded. We introduce the Hamilton vector, an interesting conserved quantity

that is rarely used today. We then obtain the hodograph and some of the features of the

motion that can be obtained from it. The geometrical method for determining the orbit is

the subject of Sec. III. We describe a straight edge and compass method for ﬁnding both

the hodograph and the planet’s orbit starting from its initial position and velocity. The

technique can be made simple enough to be used to teach some of the underpinnings of

planetary motion — especially if it is used with a computer program for visualizing the

constructions.18,19 In Sec. IV we show geometrically that the orbit is indeed elliptical and

that the direction of the velocities calculated from it correspond to those directly obtained

from the hodograph. Finally, in Sec. V we make some concluding remarks and suggest some

problems that can be solved with the methods presented in the paper.

II. THE ANALYTIC APPROACH TO THE HODOGRAPH

The geometrical arguments5,8 used for establishing the circularity of the Kepler problem

hodograph can be stated analytically as follows.6,17 The equation of motion of a planet of

2

mass m in the gravitational ﬁeld of the sun is

m

dv
dt

GMm
r2

ˆer

=

−

(1)

(2)

(3)

where M is the mass of the sun, r is the distance between the sun and the planet, and ˆer is

a unit vector that points in the radial direction from the sun toward the planet. We work

ˆez.
in a polar coordinate system where the basis vectors ˆer, ˆeφ, and ˆez satisfy ˆer = ˆeφ
Hence, using the polar identity ˙ˆeφ =
˙φˆer and the conservation of angular momentum (so
that L = mr2 ˙φ is a constant), we can eliminate r and the unit vector ˆer, and replace them
by φ and ˙ˆeφ. In this way we can express Eq. (1) in the form

×

−

d
dt

−

(v

uˆeφ) =

(v

u) = 0,

d
dt

−

where we have deﬁned the constant u

GMm/L which has dimensions of velocity and the

rotating vector of constant magnitude u = uˆeφ.17,18 Equation (2) shows that the Hamilton

≡

vector,

h

v

≡

−

u = v +

u
rL

(r

L),

×

is a constant of the motion in the Kepler problem.

The constancy of h is an exclusive feature of the 1/r2 force and is related to its extraor-

dinary symmetries.20 Equation (2) shows that h is in the plane of the orbit and orthogonal

to L. Equation (3) also shows that the hodograph has a dynamical symmetry axis that is

deﬁned by h. The axis is dynamical in the sense that the constant Hamilton vector (3) is

deﬁned using the dynamical variables r, and v. Hence, the orbit also has to have a dy-

namical symmetry axis which must be orthogonal to h. The orbit’s symmetry axis can be

deﬁned by any vector constant orthogonal to h and in the orbital plane. An obvious choice

is A = h

L = v

L

r(uL/r), which is the Laplace or Runge-Lenz vector.20 Another

×

×

−

consequence of Eq. (3) is that every bounded orbit has to be not only planar but periodic.

From the deﬁnition (3) we can express the velocity as a rotating vector with ﬁxed mag-

nitude, u ˆeφ, superimposed on the constant Hamilton vector

v = h + uˆeφ.

(4)

As can be seen from Eq. (4) (by evaluating h for φ = 0), h is parallel to the velocity at the

perihelion vp. Equation (4) also shows that the hodograph is an arc of a circle of radius u

with its center located at the tip of h, that is, it is not centered at the origin in velocity

3

space. The hodograph is always concave toward the origin when the interaction is attractive

as is the case of planetary motion (see Fig. 1).

The velocity vector does not necessarily traverse the entire hodographic circle during

the motion; it may just move on a circular arc. To see this, we write Eq. (4) in cartesian

coordinates using h to deﬁne the x-axis: vx = u sin φ and vy = u cos φ + h, where φ is

the angle between u and h. These expressions for vx and vy imply that the equation of
h)2 = u2, which represents a circle of radius
the hodograph can be written as v2

x + (vy

−

u centered at the point (0, h) in velocity space. If we make a simple substitution for the
components, the speed v = qv2

y can be written as

x + v2

v = uq1 + ǫ2

2ǫ cos φ,

−

≡

≥

where ǫ

h/u. Equation (5) shows that the polar angle is limited to the interval

φ

φmax

when ǫ

1, where φmax

arccos(1/ǫ). That is, the hodograph coincides with the entire

≡

|

|

circle only when ǫ < 1. When

φmax

is approached, the velocity becomes tangent to the

hodograph and the speed reaches a limiting value v∞ = u√ǫ2

1. We conclude from this

−

expression that when ǫ > 1, the planet is unbounded and moves asymptotically (as t

toward a point in velocity space that we correspondingly call v∞.

Another interesting relation exists between the hodograph radius u and the speeds at the

perihelion vp and at the aphelion va:

(5)

|

| ≤

)

→ ∞

(6)

u =

(va + vp).

1
2

To derive Eq. (6) we need to equate the total energy evaluated at these two special positions

on the orbit, solve the resulting equation for u, and then substitute the angular momentum

evaluated at the perihelion. Moreover, h can be expressed in terms of the sum of these two

velocities: h = (vp + va)/2, and its magnitude can be expressed in terms of the diﬀerence
va)/2.21 These results are easily seen geometrically

of the corresponding speeds: h = (vp

−

from Fig. 1.

The orbit of the planet can be obtained by projecting h onto ˆeφ to obtain

r =

L/m
u + h cos φ

,

(7)

which is the polar equation of a conic with semilatus rectum L/mu and eccentricity ǫ = h/u.

The angle φ, which has the same meaning in both Eqs. (7) and (5), is usually called the

4

true anomaly in celestial mechanics. Therefore, the possible orbits are ellipses when h > u

(ǫ < 1), parabolas when h = u (ǫ = 1), and hyperbolas when h < u (ǫ > 1). If the orbit

is elliptical, the hodograph traverses the entire circle.

In any other case the hodograph

traverses just an arc of the circle — although in the parabolic case, it only misses a single

point on it.

By using Eqs. (5) and (7) in the bounded case, we can easily check that vp/va = ra/rp,

where ra and rp are, respectively, the distances to the planet at the aphelion and perihelion.

This relation also follows from angular momentum conservation. We may also write the

energy of the planet as

E =

(h2

u2).

−

m
2

(8)

From Eq. (8) we immediately see that the orbit is elliptical if E < 0, parabolic if E = 0, and

hyperbolic if E > 0. We may also see from Eq. (8) that in the hyperbolic case, we can write

h2 = u2 + v2

vector u as t

∞. That is, the limiting velocity v∞, the Hamilton vector h, and the limiting
(u∞), always form a right triangle with h as the hypotenuse. This

→ ∞

result comes in handy for deriving geometrically the Rutherford relation for the scattering

of celestial bodies oﬀ the sun,15,16 as is the case for comets moving in hyperbolic orbits.

III. TRACING THE ORBIT FROM THE INITIAL CONDITIONS

Geometrical methods are powerful and intuitive,22 although some students may ﬁnd them

unfamiliar and hence confusing. Nevertheless, these methods can be used to ﬁnd h, the

hodograph, and then to trace the orbit starting with an initial position r0 and velocity v0.

If this method is properly presented, it can be very concrete because students can draw,

point by point, any orbit by themselves.

The method can be described as follows: Given r0 and v0, we can obtain the magnitude

of the planet’s angular momentum L = mr0v0 sin δ, where δ is the angle between r0 and
v0 (see Fig. 1), or as the area spanned by these same two vectors (area V OO′C in Fig. 1).

Once L is known, the hodograph radius u = GMm/L can be calculated.

We next select a point F on the plane as the origin of the coordinates, that is, as the

position of the center of force. From this origin we draw a line segment F R (parallel to r0)

representing the initial position. The line F R can be extended to the position we choose

for the velocity space origin O. From O we also draw the segment OV corresponding to

5

the initial velocity. Then we draw, perpendicular to F R, a line segment OO′ of length

u. Using the parallelogram rule, we add the segments OV and OO′ to obtain the line

OC corresponding to Hamilton’s vector. It is now a matter of tracing a circle of radius u

centered at point C, the tip of Hamilton’s vector. This circle is the hodograph. Notice that

the points marked Vp and Va correspond, respectively, to the velocities at the perihelion

and at the aphelion. The velocity vectors at the aphelion and perihelion are necessarily

orthogonal to the symmetry axis (F P ) of the orbit. This construction is illustrated in

Fig. 1. The symmetry axis has the direction of the Runge-Lenz vector (shown in Fig. 2).

Figures 2, 3, and 4 include the same information as Fig. 1, but have certain features that

have been added or removed to focus the reader on a particular point. We have packed

much information in Figs. 1 and 2. Angular momentum conservation is explicitly included

because we have assumed that the orbit lies in a plane. The ﬂatness of all the orbits can be

shown to imply the central nature of the force.23

Given the amount of information in Fig. 1, it is not surprising that we can determine

from Fig. 1 the bounded or unbounded nature of the orbit stemming from r0 and v0: if the

point O, the origin in velocity space, is within the hodographic circle, the orbit is necessarily

elliptical and hence bounded, otherwise, the orbit is hyperbolic or parabolic (and hence

unbounded). The parabolic case only occurs if O sits exactly on the hodographic circle, a

property that follows directly from Eq. (8). For a circular orbit the center of the hodograph

C coincides with the velocity space origin O, that is, h = 0, which means that the speed

equals the constant hodograph radius u.

To completely determine the orbit (elliptical, in this case) with the information shown in

Fig. 1, we proceed as follows (see Fig. 2). Trace the line F P that is perpendicular to the line

OC and passes through F . This line is the symmetry axis of the orbit, as follows from the

orthogonality property mentioned earlier. By using the holograph and the symmetry axis of

the orbit, we can begin to locate points on the planet’s orbit. In Fig. 2 the points marked

O, V , F , R, and C, have the same interpretation as in Fig. 1; for example, the segment OC

represents the Hamilton vector h.

To locate any point on the orbit, extend the line V O back until it intercepts the hodograph

at point Vs. Trace a segment that is perpendicular to CVs and passes through R. This line

intercepts the symmetry axis at the point F ′. To locate the point on the orbit corresponding

to any given point on the hodograph, we notice that we already have one such pair of points,

6

namely the initial conditions (points R and V in Fig. 2). We choose another point, V ′, on

the hodograph, and extend the straight line OV ′ until it again intersects the hodograph at

point V ′

s . Draw two perpendiculars, one to CV ′ and the other to CV ′

s , passing through F
and F ′, respectively. The intersection, R′, of these two perpendiculars is the required point

on the orbit. This construction is similar to the case of lines CV and CVs that meet at the

initial condition R.

This process is repeated for every point on the hodograph and in this way we can trace

the complete orbit starting with the initial conditions and using only a straight edge and a

compass. This last feature is a manifestation of the extreme regularity of the orbit.20 We

should note that parabolic and hyperbolic orbits can also be traced using variants of the

method described above.

IV. THE SHAPE OF THE ORBIT AND THE ASSOCIATED VELOCITIES

Our method for drawing an orbit is fully contained in Sec. III. Here we will address two

loose ends that are not important if you are only interested in tracing the orbit. What is

the shape of the orbit and how can we be sure that the points we have found on the orbit

are the required points for the velocity vectors as required by the dynamics?

That the loci of the points found by the method of Sec. III is indeed an ellipse can be seen

as follows. We ﬁrst draw a circular arc F ′W centered at point R with radius RF ′; this arc

helps trace an auxiliary circle centered at F with a radius equal to the sum of the lengths

of the lines F R and RF ′, that is, the length of F W . This radius equals the length of the

orbit’s major axis, that is, the line PaPp, in Fig. 3. The points W and W ′ are, respectively,

the intersections of lines F R (the initial condition) and F R′ (the calculated point on the

orbit) with the auxiliary circle.

The isosceles triangles

CV ′V ′

s and

△

△

R′W ′F ′ in Fig. 3 are similar to each other, because

the line F R′ makes the same angle with line F F ′ as the line CV ′ makes with the line OC.

Thus the point R′ on the orbit is at the same distance from both W ′ and F ′. So we must

have that F R′ + R′F ′ = F R + RF ′ = PaPp. This description shows that the sum of the

distances from points on the orbit, such as R and R′, to the points F and F ′ is a constant;

this equality is precisely the deﬁning property of an ellipse. Therefore, the planets travel on

elliptical paths and the sun (the origin) is located at the position of one of the foci of the

7

ellipse, F in Figs. 1, 2, and 3; F ′ is the other focus of the ellipse.

Once the shape of the orbit has been established, we can check that the velocities, as

deﬁned by points on the hodograph, are parallel to the tangents at the corresponding points

on the ellipse. For example, in Fig. 3, point V on the hodograph and the tangent to the

ellipse at point R are parallel.

Figure 4 is similar to Fig. 3 with certain lines added and others removed with the purpose

of explaining what follows. The argument relies on identifying the three similar triangles,

W F W ′,

△
that a triangle inscribed in a circle (for example,

F ′RsWs, which by construction are isosceles, and on the fact
W W ′Ws) whose diameter coincides with

W RF ′, and

△

△

△

one of the sides of the triangle, is necessarily a right triangle. Trace the lines W Ws through
F ′, WsW ′′ through F , and W ′′W which closes the right triangle. Now trace lines MR and

MsRs. These are, respectively, perpendicular bisectors of the lines W F ′ and F ′Ws, and at
the same time, bisectors of the angles 6 W RF ′ and 6 F ′RsWs. These properties guarantee

that MR and MsRs are parallel to the the tangents to the orbit at the points R and Rs. To

see that MR and MsRs are parallel to V O and OVs, respectively, it suﬃces to understand

that W F ′ is perpendicular to V Vs. This argument establishes that the tangent to any point

on the orbit is necessarily parallel to the corresponding velocity on the hodograph.

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

The geometrical approach described in this paper is simple and direct and can serve to

explain, even to beginning students, how to trace a planet’s orbit from the initial conditions.

If presented with no further explanations, the approach may be regarded as being similar

to the idea described by the Mayan astronomer analogy as told by Richard Feynman.25 Our

method is an attempt to exhibit in simple terms the geometric beauty of dynamics — beauty

that captured the heart of Newton himself.3,5,14,22

Our method can be proﬁtably applied to other related problems. For example, what if we

wish to describe the trajectory of a comet? How can the hodographic method be used when

the initial conditions lead to a hodographic circle that does not surround the velocity space

origin O? The extension of the method to parabolic or hyperbolic orbits can be a relatively

simple project for interested students. Would it be possible to account for the untraversed

branch of the hyperbola? Can this branch have some physical interpretation?

8

We also can take advantage of the right triangle formed by h, u, and v∞ to derive the

cross section for comets bouncing oﬀ the sun. To begin with, the angle ξ between the vectors

v+∞ and v−∞ is the scattering angle. Then, after drawing the hodograph, the Hamilton

vector h, and the two velocity vectors v±∞, it is a simple matter of geometry to obtain the

from which the scattering cross section follows.24 Equation (9) is usually called the Ruther-

L =

cot(ξ/2),

GM
v∞

(9)

relation

ford relation.16

A slightly more ambitious project would be to obtain astronomical data for a planet and

use this information to determine the initial position and the initial velocity of the planet.

Then the student could trace the orbit with the method described in this paper and then

to check such theoretical orbit against the experimental data. That is, to compare the

orbit determined directly from the astronomical data with the orbit traced with our method

starting from just the initial conditions. A direct way of performing this comparison is to

use widely distributed data as that in the Orbit of Mars Experiment of the Project Physics

Course26, which includes photography of the night sky containing planet Mars and detailed

instructions for reconstructing its orbit from such images.

Acknowledgments

HNN-Y and ALS-B have been partially supported by a PAPIIT-UNAM research grant.

We acknowledge with thanks the Ricardo J. Zevada Foundation for the graphics software

used in this work. We also want to thank P. Weiss, M. Percy, E. Hera, J. E. Juno, R. Zeus,

K. Bielii, G. Gorbe, M. Botitas, Z. Ita, M. Crida, P. Schwartz, A. Saltar´ın, C. Schr¨odie,

and P. M. Zura and her family. We dedicate this work to the memories of F. C. Bonito

(1987–2002), M. Osita (1990–2001), and Ch. Shat (1991–2001).

1 W. R. Hamilton, “The hodograph, or a new method of expressing in symbolic language the

Newtonian law of attraction,” Proc. R. Ir. Acad. III, 344–353 (1845).

2 H. Abelson, A. diSessa, and L. Rudolph “Velocity space and the geometry of planetary orbits,”

Am. J. Phys. 43, 579–589 (1975).

9

3 J. Milnor, “On the geometry of the Kepler problem,” Am. Math. Monthly 90, 353–365 (1983).

4 M. C. Gutzwiller, Chaos in Classical and Quantum Mechanics (Springer, New York, 1990), pp.

180–193.

5 D. Moreno, Gravitaci´on Newtoniana (FCUNAM, M´exico City, 1990).

6 A. Gonz´alez-Villanueva, H. N. N´u˜nez-Y´epez, and A. L. Salas-Brito, “In velocity space the Kepler

orbits are circular,” Eur. J. Phys. 17, 168–171 (1996).

7 E. I. Butikov, “The velocity hodograph for an arbitrary Keplerian motion,” Eur. J. Phys. 21,

8 D. Derbes, “Reinventing the wheel: hodographic solutions to the Kepler problems,” Am. J.

297–302 (2000).

Phys. 69, 481–489 (2001).

from the 1879 edition.

9 J. C. Maxwell, Matter and Motion (Dover, New York, 1952), reprinted from the 1877 edition.

10 W. Thomson and P. G. Tait, Treatise on Natural Philosophy (Dover, New York, 1962), reprinted

11 D. K. Krpi´c and I. V. Aniˇcin, “The planets, after all, may run in perfect circles—but in velocity

12 D. L. Goodstein and J. R. Goodstein, Feynman Lost Lecture: The Motion of Planets Around

space,” Eur. J. Phys. 14, 255–258 (1993).

the Sun (W. W. Norton, New York, 1996).

Eur. J. Phys. 13, 64–69 (1992).

13 J. Sivardi`ere, “Comments on the dynamical invariants of the Kepler and harmonic motions,”

14 A. Gonz´alez-Villanueva, H. N. N´u˜nez-Y´epez, and A. L. Salas-Brito, “From circular paths to

elliptic orbits: A geometric approach to Kepler motion,” Eur. J. Phys. 19, 431–438 (1998);

arXiv: physics/9810034.

15 H. N. N´u˜nez-Y´epez, E. Guillaum´ın- Espa˜na, A. Gonz´alez-Villanueva, R. P. Mart´ınez-y-Romero,

and A. L. Salas-Brito, “Newtonian approach for the Kepler-Coulomb problem from the point

of view of velocity space,” Rev. Mex. Fis. 44. 604–610 (1998); arXiv: physics/9809028.

16 H. N. N´u˜nez-Y´epez, E. Guillaum´ın-Espa˜na, A. Gonz´alez-Villanueva, and A. L. Salas-Brito,

“Scattering in a Coulomb potential: A velocity space point of view,” Rev. Mex. Fis. 44, 303–

311 (1998).

17 H. N. N´u˜nez-Y´epez and A. L. Salas-Brito, “The velocity hodograph for an arbitrary Kepler

motion,” Eur. J. Phys. 21, L39–L40 (2000).

18 E. I. Butikov, Planets and Satellites (Physics Academic Software, 1999).

10

19 The Geometer’s Sketchpad, <http://www.keypress.com/>.

20 R. P. Mart´ınez-y-Romero, H. N. N´u˜nez-Y´epez, and A. L. Salas-Brito, “Closed orbits and con-

stants of motion in classical mechanics,” Eur. J. Phys. 13, 26–31 (1992).

21 D. W. Tiberiis, “Comment on “Reinventing the wheel: Hodographic solutions to the Kepler

problems,” David Derbes [Am. J. Phys. 69 (4), 481–489 (2001)] Am. J. Phys. 70, 79 (2002).

22 S. Chandrasekhar, Newton’s Principia for the Common Reader (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1995),

p. xxiii.

23 H. Urbankte, “Force ﬁelds in which all the orbits are planar,” Eur. J. Phys. 7, 157–159 (1986).

24 L. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Mechanics (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1976), Chap. IV.

25 R. P. Feynman, QED, The Strange Theory of Light and Matter (Princeton University Press,

Princeton, 1985). See the story of the Mayan astronomer, pp. 11–12.

26 G. Holton, F. J. Rutherford, and F. G. Watson, The Project Physics Course Orbit of Mars

Experiment, (Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York, 1970).

11

FIG. 1: The circular hodograph and the Hamilton vector h for planetary motion. We exhibit the

initial position r0, the initial velocity v0, and the rotating vector with constant magnitude u. We

also show the polar unit vectors ˆer and ˆeφ, the vector ˆez points upward from the plane of the paper.

Vp and Va are the points on the hodograph corresponding to the velocities at the perihelion and at

aphelion, respectively. The ﬁgure shows that u = (va + vp)/2, h = (va + vp)/2, and h = (va

vp)/2.

−

Note that by looking at the ﬁgure you can determine the shape of the planet’s orbit. If O is within

the hodographic circle, as in the case illustrated here, E < 0 and the orbit is elliptical. If O sits

on the hodographic circle, then the energy vanishes E = 0 and the orbit is parabolic. And if O is

outside the circle, then E > 0 and the orbit is hyperbolic.

FIG. 2: The geometrical method for tracing the orbit. F is the position of the center of force,

C is the hodograph center, O is the origin in velocity space, and the line F F ′ is the orbit axis

of symmetry, that is, the direction of the Runge-Lenz vector A. Note that every point on the

hodograph (for example, v) corresponds to a point on the orbit (r). The symbols have the same

meaning as the corresponding ones in Fig. 1. P is not necessarily an apsidal point on the ellipse.

FIG. 3: We redraw Fig. 2 to show that the orbit is an ellipse. The shaded triangles are both

isosceles and similar to each other. These properties are useful for showing that the sum of the

distances from any point on the orbit to the points F and F ′ is a constant.

12

FIG. 4: Illustration of the fact that the velocity, as taken from the hodograph, is always parallel

to the tangent at the corresponding point on the orbit. For example, the velocity corresponding to

the line OV is parallel to the tangent line M R at the point R, and the to velocity, corresponding

to the line OVs, is parallel to the line MsRs which is tangent to the orbit at point Rs. The three

shaded triangles are similar to each other.

13

