3
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
3
0
3
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Louis De Broglie’s experiment

S. L. Vesely1, A. A. Vesely

July 29, 2013

1

I.T.B., C.N.R., via Fratelli Cervi 93, I-20090 Segrate(MI)
Italy

email: sara.vesely@itb.cnr.it, vesely@tana.it
Keywords: quantum mechanics, Maxwell-Hertz electromagnetic theory, detected sig-
nal
PACS: 34.10.+x, 03.50.Kk, 84.47.+w,

Abstract

Louis de Broglie’s celebrated hypothesis transfers a problem of rep-
resentation of optics to the quantum theories. Let us suppose that the
fact that originated the problem in optics is the following, “The images
obtained by optical instruments are limited by diﬀraction. Is the diﬀrac-
tion phenomenon exclusively restricting of the information contained in
the image or does it have some physical meaning by itself?” This consid-
ered as a problem of measurement of the radiative ﬁeld does not pose the
question of tracing well-deﬁned processes in the sense of the light quan-
tum concept. Despite this the application thereto of quantum formalism
makes the essentially inferring statistical nature of measurement forecast-
ing most important. We suggest avoiding the probabilistic conception of
measurement by replacing the wave-corpuscle dualistic principle with the
duality one. The latter is a basic feature of projective geometry. Refer-
ring to it we shall try to include the diﬀraction in a geometrical model of
optics and interpret in that coherent schema the point -plane “wave” dual
solution. We show what experimental substantiation the proposed dual-
ity has. Lastly, we again discuss the experimental basis of wave-corpuscle
dualism.

1 Introduction

According to the literature [1] in the thesis work of L. de Broglie [2], ’recherches
sur la th´eorie des quanta’ the famous hypothesis that the same wave and cor-
puscle dualism as is present in light may also occur in matter is formulated. The
quantum mechanics [3] accepts the correctness of the terms because it places
them there where they are expounded in the manuals. Although it discusses the
consequences, it does not seem to assess the assumptions. Let us consider two

1

1 INTRODUCTION

2

aspects, one about the widespread use of calling it a hypothesis and the other
about the undulatory and corpuscular representation of light.

Precisely it is written that de Broglie formulated a hypothesis. It concerns a
metaphorical analogy of light with matter. We believe that, thus formulated, the
hypothetical analogy renounces interpretation of the facts. We want to explain
this. A mathematical hypothesis may be formulated within the framework of
a uniﬁed theory of light and matter [4]. A theory which is not mechanics in
short because this does not explain typically luminous eﬀects if there are any.
But in 1924 there is still no common theory of light and matter [5]. Therefore
at that time the hypothesis is not a conjecture formulated within a theory. It
might be a supposition on which to base a new research program. As it concerns
physics it should rest on a natural phenomenon. But the hypothesis precedes in
time all the experiments aimed at verifying it. Indeed, on the one hand it does
not grasp any evident resemblance between light and matter. For example, the
sun reﬂected by the burning glass mirror does not bombard ships exactly like
a cannon ball. On the other hand the oft quoted scrupulous experiment of C.
Davisson and L. Germer [6] is of 1927. This experiment conﬁrms the de Broglie
hypothesis in the sense that based on electronic diﬀraction measurements from a
nickel crystal it associates a wavelength with the collimated electronic emission.
This could be used to confute the conclusions reached by J.J. Thomson about
the corpuscular nature of cathode rays just as well as it was used to prove the
undulatory nature of matter. In short, in 1924 the hypothesis anticipates both
the theory and the veriﬁcation experiments.

The second imprecision of the literature concerning the contribution of de
Broglie seems to us to consist of a reversal of the order in which the words
appear. In our opinion the hypothesis would state more correctly, “the same
dualism of wave and corpuscle as is present in matter may also occur in light”.
Indeed, not only does it not deal with modeling mechanics in accordance with a
dualistic theory of radiation already formalized, but in addition both the emis-
sive material conception of I. Newton and the elastic one of A. Fresnel belong
to dynamics so that exactly the dualist concept of light is mechanical. But in
1924 there are at least two formalisms foreign to the conventional mechanical
schema, the electromagnetic theory and the quantized energetics of A. Einstein
[7]. The ﬁrst theory concerns more the propagation of electrical phenomena
than the characterization of ether; the second more the energy balance of ele-
mentary processes [8] than corpuscularity. Since the principle of interference of
Huygens-Fresnel can be ﬁtted on electromagnetism [9] and in addition Einstein
himself hastened to establish an equivalence between mass and energy [10], it
may be thought to trace back the two attempts in the already broken-in tracks
of mechanics [11]. This, which more than a hypothesis we would like to call an
idea [12], is valid in the absence of reasons justifying the attempts to develop
more original light theories.

In this work, which is not historical despite the problems faced being so,
we shall brieﬂy confront dualism in physics. Then we will seek to explain how
geometry allows justiﬁcation of the dual aspect of light phenomena in our opin-
ion. In literature other possible geometrical interpretations [13] are discussed.

2 DUALISM AS A CONTRIBUTION TO UNIFICATION

3

Lastly, we will seek to give a physical meaning to “de Broglie’s hypothesis” in
accordance with the experimental results obtained earlier by E. Abbe [14]. This
is the reason for the title we chose.

2 Dualism as a contribution to uniﬁcation

De Broglie’s contribution to physics is to have contemplated two diﬀerent enti-
ties, light and matter, and to have conceived that wave-corpuscle dualism can
unite them [15]. This means that dualism is referred to undulatory or corpus-
cular pictorial descriptions but at the same time uniﬁes the two entities light
and matter.

In quantum mechanics the conﬂict between the wave and corpuscle concepts

is resolved by postulating the principle of complementarity [16].

As to the essence of the two entities light and matter which the theory treats
monistically, we see two possibilities. Either both exist in the outside world,
which we as physicists admit, and dualism is accessible to the experiment. Or
division of things in two (or more) classes naturally is not given and dualism
between light and matter is equivalent to that between wave and corpuscle. Let
us take the ﬁrst case. If we consider the distinction between light elements and
matter elements a natural fact, in physics we should discuss the experimental
consistency of this not uniﬁable dualism between at least two types of distinct
substances. Second case: but if we consider linking between experiences and
pictures the work of physicists, dualism (or pluralism) takes place at the level of
our understanding of the experiments; we are referring certain experiments to
mechanics and we judge those remaining more linked to sensorial impressions.
At this level, theories diﬀerent from mechanics describe eﬀectively diﬀerent as-
pects of the external world. Since in addition dualism is not among the facts
accessible to experimental investigation, neither does the level of its insertion
among objects of the external world and their intellectual representation have an
objective substantiation. In this case a dialectic comparison between alternative
theories and conventions might not be contradictory.

To summarize, physics is the science of physicists but it is also a science
which explains phenomena occurring in nature [17]. On de Broglie’s thesis it
can be substantiated how he does not propose at all to put light manifesta-
tions in relation with material bodies. Rather, in the 1924 work he presumes
that theories are platonic ideas and formulates his unifying hypothesis for two
preexisting theories. He chooses analytical mechanics and geometrical optics.
Geometrical optics is distinguished from analytical mechanics as long as the
methods of the latter are not applied to the former. And this ensures the suc-
cess of uniﬁcation even if it perhaps makes superﬂuous formal veriﬁcation of
dualism separately for the light theory and for the matter theory.

Although it is innovative to introduce dualism in a theory, the dualistic as-
pect considered is not speciﬁc to light theories. To clarify what we mean, let
us consider the contrasting pictorial descriptions which would unify the dynam-
ics with optics. They are termed pictorial because they evoke in us familiar

3 CONTRADICTORY PICTURES IN OPTICS

4

concepts. Their conﬂict [16] precedes the formulation of de Broglie’s hypothesis
because it expresses a contradiction between being and movement. The dilemma
between the above mentioned concepts is a pillar of western philosophy and was
fed already in ancient Greek philosophy by two schools, one termed Eleatic and
the other Heraclitean. For the purposes of this article we agree that the ﬁrst
of the two terms, being, speciﬁes an actual (“realised”) property on condition
that it be permanently preserved. The mathematical magnitudes introduced are
used to represent a state. The other term, movement or “becoming”, expresses
a relationship between spatial positions of the same thing, for example along
a trajectory, or indiﬀerently between two or more things [18]. Mathematically
if the relationships represented refer to pairs of facts they are termed binary,
otherwise ternary et cetera. The variables represent not necessarily punctual
relative localizations. The state of things cannot be part of the representation.
In classical mechanics, with being are associated the causes of motion rep-
resented mathematically by means of vectors or tensors (state of motion) while
with becoming are associated displacements in geometrical space (kinematics).
The data available allow establishing for each speciﬁc application which is the
best adapted representation and therefore contradictions do not arise. To mix
the two pictures it is necessary to abolish the conventional distinction between
applied vectors (forces) and free vectors (displacements) which is what takes
place by graphically representing both on the same sheet of paper.

Contrary to mechanics optics, as a theory, is contradictory. The great merit
of the radiation theories of Einstein and Maxwell lies just in avoiding contra-
dictoriness by directly applying a mathematics to a preselected class of light
phenomena. In this work we shall consider the theory of the second because in
the present state of telecommunications development it is applied to the signal.
Einstein’s theory of radiation, since it puts on an equal footing modulation and
statistical ﬂuctuations, cannot include images like those of television when the
television is tuned to a channel.

3 Contradictory pictures in optics

Since from the beginnings of logic the choice of basing a hypothetical-deductive
theory on a dualistic principle appeared debatable, in the previous chapter we
identiﬁed in pluralism a possible alternative to a well-founded theory. Optics
is not a theory but a discipline which gathers together a large number of unre-
lated facts. The known facts, of which it is possible to specify the observation
conditions, are truly many because a goodly part of our information about the
external world is linked to the visual channel. The number of explanations
given is also considerable. If we remain with the descriptions having objective
corroboration, the ﬁrst diﬃculty lies in disentangling the physiological from the
physical contribution to visual impressions. The theories of colors are emblem-
atic.

3 CONTRADICTORY PICTURES IN OPTICS

5

3.1 Graphic optics when diﬀraction is a small eﬀect

If we go back to the history of optics, as does de Broglie in the thesis, we can
observe that in the same period the two representations he calls “undulatory”
(from C. Huygens’s; without periodicity principle) and “dynamic” (from New-
ton’s theory) are strictly relevant to the same experimental base and the oppo-
sition of ethereal wave-trains and luminous corpuscular matter takes place only
at the interpretive level [19]. The physical content of optics commonly termed
geometrical is summarized in graphic memoranda of the conditions of operation
of well diaphragmed instruments. These are used to view sharp images of known
objects and are ﬁrst of all the pinhole camera, then lenses, mirrors, telescopes
and the like. The majority of the graphic memoranda analyze their operation in
terms of reﬂection and refraction with recourse to the radial geometric element.
Mathematically speaking the theories developed on rays are linear. In them the
so-called optical aberrations are considered a small error which is allowed for
by making corrections to the linear theory. If by applying diﬀerential calculus
the graphic trace is corrected to higher orders, smooth curved lines replace the
rays.

In the same period as Newton, Huygens was able to trace the same stigmatic
images more elaborately by using a surface element associated with the ray-
optical path, instead of the ray itself. He showed us that by assuming fronts with
some extension instead of single trajectories it is possible to justify graphically
even two distinct stigmatic images if the fronts have two diﬀerent envelopes.
Strictly speaking we could not call stigmatic a split image and would judge
unusable for the purposes of observation an optical instrument which splits the
objects observed. But Iceland spar appropriately cut and ﬁnished optically
shows better than other crystals that it can form a neat double image. Let us
describe the fact. Resting the crystal on a sheet on which a point is marked,
the image thereof appears double and, rotating the spar, the duplicate executes
one rotation around the ordinarily refracted point, on a visibly higher plane.

Huygens had believed that the split image was not explainable otherwise
than by also assuming the propagation of non-spherical wave fronts inside the
spar. Newton objected that it was a matter of understanding if one should
assign the responsible property of the splitting of the image to the light matter
or to an ethereal ﬂuid. In the second case he didn’t understand why ether should
possess some anisotropy inside the spar and not show any in intergalactic space.
Actually the polarization could be understood in Newtonian terms and it was
thus that E. Malus ﬁxed it for posterity.

Again according to history, Newtonian optics did not reveal itself insuﬃ-
cient to explain the birefringence mentioned above but failed on the diﬀraction
experiments of Fresnel.

Diﬀraction as a phenomenon had already been accurately described by New-
ton. But no one believed that, when seen under high magniﬁcation, it might
prove to be a remarkable eﬀect. In addition, the supposed inadequacy of ge-
ometrical optics to account for Fresnel’s experiments has been used more for
setting precise limits of validity of the graphic analysis handed down than for

4 THE PROBLEM OF WHAT MOVES IN OPTICS

6

unequivocally identifying the fact to which to attribute the fanlike opening of
a diaphragmed light beam. Dispersion, interference, diﬀraction, diﬀusion. . . all
contribute to blurring the image. Although, contrary to Newton, we hesitate
to assign each as a separate property to light, nevertheless, if we want to allow
for the opening of the beam like a fan we must choose to deal with one of these
phenomena.

We are inclined to choose diﬀraction under the conditions of J. Fraunhofer,
ﬁrst of all because the experimental conditions are well deﬁned and then because
this diﬀraction can be treated mathematically. Ours is a choice and as such is
arbitrary. R.W. Hamilton made another choice. He found a mathematical
relation between a normal congruence of rays and a family of surfaces [20].
He also showed that integration of the diﬀerential equations of dynamics is in
relation with the integration of a ﬁrst order partial diﬀerential equation (the
one for the generating function). The above relation can receive any convenient
physical interpretation [21] provided it is remembered that the phase space
and that of graphical optics are not isomorphous [22]. Hamilton applied the
mathematics developed by himself to the conical refraction of biaxial crystals.
Conical refraction is so called because the image of a point observed through
a biaxial crystal, instead of appearing split appears widened like the base of a
cone. Fraunhofer’s diﬀraction takes place under quite diﬀerent conditions, i.e.
even in the absence of an interposed dielectric material. For this reason we
speak of a choice.

4 The problem of what moves in optics

Until now we have said that behind the early theories of light there are instru-
mentation manufacturing technologies which pursue magniﬁcation on condition
that images shall be similar to the original in form and colors. Even then opti-
cians were pragmatic, they assumed that the graphic prescription which allows
analysis of the image more conveniently was the most natural in a teleological
sense. Since Newton left us a (reﬂector) telescope they considered it certain
that he had understood the nature of light better than Huygens.

As concerns the Newtonian interpretation of the rays as particle trajectories
it is perfectly useless. It is not useful for improving the practice of processing
optical glasses of refractory telescopes. It is not even useful for further charac-
terizing by experiments the material nature of light; the proof of this lies in the
convincing explanations of diﬀraction based on the periodicity principle due to
T. Young and Fresnel.

Maxwell’ starting point is not oriented toward improvement of instrumenta-
tion but, in modern terms, towards coherent representation of the signal received
when we can disregard instrumentation particularly. Not in judge’s clothing but
in a lawyer’s, we insert a digression to give an idea of the theoretical concep-
tion. Maxwell, contrary to Einstein, considers only the phenomenology linked
to movement. Consequently he does not characterize and does not interpret the
moving object which we are calling a signal (to distinguish it from a tangible

4 THE PROBLEM OF WHAT MOVES IN OPTICS

7

body). A signal can be received through being propagated along an electrical
or optical transmission line. But if it is irradiated in space it can be detected
mechanically, chemically, electrically, magnetically, thermally or optically. Since
characterization of the signal is not the purpose of the theory, the latter is the
more general the more extended is the class of signals considered. This gen-
erality cannot be unraveled as long as the speciﬁc job attributed to optics is
to explain the transition of the object to the image. But this transition, once
separated from the process of production and detection of the signal, is a sui
generis movement. To the touch it is established that an object standing in the
laboratory and visible to the naked eye does not move due to the fact that it
is observed directly rather than with the aid of an optical instrument. And yet
the image of the object in toto is formed visibly elsewhere. Either microscopic
particles transit from the position of the object to that of the image, a case in
which mechanics can be applied as is to light (theory of F. Hasenoehrl [23]) or
the light can involve matter more ineﬀably. In the second case for the sake of
argument the movement has no equivalent in classical kinematics.

Now let us go back to Maxwell. He conceives interference as proof of the
immateriality of light. He reasons more or less thus: the description of fringes,
requiring evaluation locally of the algebraic sum of two quantities – those which
interfere – testiﬁes against the emissive theories, at least as long as mass is the
substantial characteristic. Indeed, usually to mass is attributed an essentially
positive magnitude so that, contrarily to the electric charge, there is no analogy
of Faraday’s cage capable of screening it. Following M. Faraday further, he lets
himself be guided by spatial considerations; phenomenology develops entirely in
our world and therefore describing it has sense at ﬁrst. At that time, this might
have seemed a foregone choice [24] [25].

A mechanical illustration is also part of Maxwell’s original interpretation. To
make plausible the distribution of light intensity on the immaterial fringes, he
identiﬁes electromagnetic ether with luminiferous ether. The latter is a hypothe-
sis on the indirect role of a medium during transmission; ether is a medium which
is subject to elastic vibrations while light traverses it and therefore transmits the
dynamic energy of light along deﬁnite directions. To dynamically characterize
the propagation of light it is necessary and suﬃcient to specify the state of mo-
tion of ether in accordance with the theory of elasticity. Of course the dynamic
characterization could continue to reveal itself perfectly useless in applications.
After Maxwell it was noticed that, whatever ether is, contradictory material
properties should be attributed to it. Therefore it was preferred not to consider
it a real entity. It follows that vacuum is not an entity replacing ether but is a
non-entity. Denying the existence of electromagnetic ether and replacing it with
nothing, nothing takes on a state of motion. In other words, an elastic vibration
energy associated with light propagation causing the appearance of the fringes is
lacking. Nor does thermal conduction account for the light distribution observed
experimentally in a manner which might be consistent with electromagnetism in
a vacuum. Indeed, the thermodynamic interpretation of the ﬂux of light energy
assumes that the thermodynamic state variables are functions of the spatial
It takes on this dependence to handle the
coordinates and possibly of time.

4 THE PROBLEM OF WHAT MOVES IN OPTICS

8

diﬀusion of heat by conduction from the hotter zones to the cooler zones of a
body. But the coordinates describe the thermal state of the conductor [26]. Part
of the above discussion aims at concepyually identifying what might move while
conveying energy in the absence of an interposed medium. In electromagnetism
every general solution (without boundary conditions) represents a movement of
permanent type. Although these movements have been interpreted mechanically
as waves of ether, they do not have a mechanical characterization. For example,
they have nothing in common with surface waves like those of the sea nor with
wave fronts like those generated in a pan by emersion of a cork nor with the
vibrations of tight ropes. They represent a movement dissociated from any
other characterization. Maxwell explains this in the Theory of Heat, especially
in chapters XV and XVI, ﬁrst paragraph.

The crucial point is that the equations remain valid regardless of the out-
come of the discussions on the essence of light because the vacuum hypothesis
is perfectly compatible with the geometrical representation of movement. By
geometrical movement is meant in this case the transformations of space in itself
[27].

4.1 Louis De Broglie’s phase waves are not electromag-

netic

Let us recall that Maxwell’s equations represent movements while the interfer-
ential fringes are the fact, i.e. the “thing which interferes”. Experimentally, the
fringes are said to be of equal thickness if they appear localized on the surface
of iridescent bodies; in this case light intensity can be put in direct relation with
the thickness of material on which it strikes. But if they are observed under
Fraunhofer’s conditions they are said to be focused at inﬁnity, meaning that
they are not at all localized because there is no place localized at inﬁnity where
their source lies; consequently something is lacking to the ﬁnite in relation to
light distribution. This fact can be interpreted in a manner compatible with
electromagnetism as a property of light or as a property of the object-optical
instrument pair or otherwise just because Maxwell didn’t write a theory of the
fact, that is he didn’t represent interference fringes. But the interference fringes
immateriality requirement remains a basic requisite because it brought about
Maxwell’s initial choice of representing not states but movements [30]. To keep
in the empty space the hypothesis that these fringes are not substance is equiv-
alent to denying that optical instruments function like cannons. More precisely,
it is denied that something is projected into the image like a cannon ball is
projected from the initial position to the expected ﬁnal one – provided aim is
good.

In the thesis de Broglie does not hypothesize that optical images can behave
like shot cannon balls because this is contrary to all experimental evidence.
Rather he hypothesizes that an energy transfer takes place because of a convec-
tive motion of emitted photons, motion which admits a statistical mechanical
model [28] but possibly without satisfying the principle of equipartition of en-
ergy. With the statistical mixture of photons he then dualistically associates

5 PERIODICITY AS A PROPERTY OF LIGHT

9

phase waves such that the instruments focus with scattering, i.e. with some
blur. These phase waves represent the intensity patterns which the diﬀusion of
photons alone doesn’t justify. The interferential fringes observed experimentally
are no longer a fundamental hypothesis of the theory but are the “visible result”
of a random reality to which the theory accedes. In other words a phenomenon
(i.e. the interferential fringes) is not observed but the statistical frequency with
which something absolutely inaccessible to the experiment occurs.

In short: the guiding waves, of which de Broglie speaks, are not equipollent
to the electromagnetic ones because the former justify interference with scat-
tering of photons while the latter do not at all explain interference; Maxwell
limited himself to ascertaining this [31]. Sometimes he calls it interference and
sometimes more generically diﬀraction.

5 Periodicity as a property of light

The intricate subject of the essence of light was not faced by de Broglie in
the thesis as we remarked above [29]. For this reason we shall limit ourselves
to a few considerations on its periodicity property.
In mechanics when it is
a matter of phenomena accessible to the experiment, i.e. reproducible in the
laboratory, it is possible to verify their degree of periodicity among other ways
by comparison with a periodic device having a period near the one investigated.
If the periodicity of the phenomenon to be tested is not simple, the intent can
be laborious. If in the long run we really can’t distinguish any periodicity in
the phenomenon it is usually agreed that it is random. Then, as no evolution
law can be given because of the endless becoming of the phenomenon, we have
recourse to statistics.

In optics the interferential fringes as such result indeed from the comparison
between two radiations as much as possible alike. This does not eﬀectively mean
that we possess a periodic reference device but that the source is the same. The
experiment allows attributing neither periodicity nor fortuitousness to the phe-
nomenon. Let us explain this point. A spatial tessellation with a Platonic solid
which is a covering can be represented geometrically by means of a ﬁnite group
of movements of space in itself. Each of these movements can be expressed by
parametrizing an appropriate function of the spatial variables. These functions,
written in terms of the real parameter, are commonly called periodic. Just
to interpret the real parameter as time, the geometrical regular arrangement
can be transferred to temporal evolution. The space-time correspondence is
mathematically ﬁxed but there is a dissymmetry between the spatial and tem-
poral variables. Time remains the parameter of a spatial transformation. It
is not deduced that the phenomenon described is periodical in the sense given
to the word in mechanics. Therefore this description does not make physical
hypotheses regarding the nature of the fringes. On the contrary, a theoretical
formulation assigning a period to a mathematical function of random variables
does not specify the nature of the phenomenon but is contradictory.

5 PERIODICITY AS A PROPERTY OF LIGHT

10

5.1 James Clerk Maxwell doesn’t attribute basic colors to

light

Among those who experimented and reﬂected on optics there is notoriously
Newton [32]. He attributed the colors of the rainbow to light and compared
them with the diatonic musical scale, tracing back sounds and light to states
of motion. His reasoning is subtle; here we can quote a deﬁnition as an exam-
ple: “The homogeneal Light and Rays which appear red, or rather make Objects
appear so, I call Rubriﬁck or Red-making; those which make Objects appear yel-
low, green, blue, and violet, I call Yellow-making, Green-making, Blue-making,
Violet-making, and so for the rest. And if at any time I speak of Light and
Rays as coloured or endued with Colours, I would be understood to speak not
philosophically and properly, but grossly, and accordingly to such Conceptions
as vulgar Pepople in seiing all these Experiments would be apt to frame. For
the Rays to speak properly are not coloured. In them there is nothing else than
a certain Power and Disposition to stir up a Sensation of this or that Colour.
For as Sound in a Bell or musical String, or other sounding Body, is nothing but
a trembling Motion, and in the Air nothing but that Motion propagated from
the Object, and in the Sensorium ’tis a Sense of that Motion under the Form
of Sound; so colours in the Object are nothing but a Disposition to reﬂect this
or that sort of Rays more copiously than the rest; in the Rays they are noth-
ing but their Dispositions to propagate this or that Motion into the Sensorium,
and in the Sensorium they are Sensations of those Motions under the Forms of
Colours.”

Hereafter we shall prefer to refer to colors rather than frequencies. Newton
concluded that sunlight is composed of single spectral colors from the fact that it
is dispersed by a glass prism in the colors of the rainbow. Since glass technology
hadn’t the interest it later acquired, he ignored that dispersion depends on the
chemical composition of the glass.

Maxwell on the other hand was in a position to observe that, if that which
has the property of color is light but there are pigments which radiate only
light with well-deﬁned coloring, then matter also has the property of color. In
the case of rareﬁed gases excited electrically, color radiates homogeneously and
isotropically trough space, i.e. patterns are not formed. If we manage to obtain
persistent light, which does not happen by subjecting a rareﬁed gas to any
stresses, color is also largely independent of external circumstances. It can be
asked if this characteristic allows using the phenomenon to deﬁne a physical
time relatively to duration or periodicity. The periodicity introduced here is
not in relation with that of the last paragraph; rather it should be traced back
to the stability of the feeding device.

It seems that Maxwell was not entirely a stranger to the problems linked
to ﬂow of time, timekeepers and movement. In the last pages of the Theory of
Heat he asks if, admitted that matter consists of molecules, the latter can be
harmonised with the “light unison”. For sure there he doesn’t link resonance
to a time arrow. However that may be, in electromagnetism to assume the
existence of fundamental components of a particular frequency is the equivalent

5 PERIODICITY AS A PROPERTY OF LIGHT

11

of raising the method of resolution by expansion into autofunctions to a principle
of physics.

On the contrary, if a physical meaning is not attributed to said mathematical
method, it can be replaced to all eﬀects with the integral transform method [33].

5.2 Electromagnetism is not a spectral theory

“Electromagnetic waves” thought of as propagating “monochromatic” solutions
of the wave equation exist subject to foundation of a spectral theory. As long
as in electromagnetism movement is attributed to ether, dynamics supplies the
laws of motion of ether and perhaps explains the color of light. If movement is
geometrical the only laws, those of transformation, are supplied by geometry.

A spectral principle for explaining interference and diﬀraction comes into
conﬂict with Euclidean geometry adopted in particular by Maxwell. Indeed, in
assuming the existence of basic physical components it is imagined that they
appear progressively or suddenly with increase in resolution. If the principle is
eﬀective it attributes absolute magnitudes to the basic constituents. But Eu-
clidean geometry does not allow introducing absolute magnitudes. To explain,
if by using a telescope with better image deﬁnition we can no longer distinguish
canals on Mars, the conclusion that these were artifacts at the previous degree
of resolution is in agreement with the Euclidean principle of similitude. The
alternative of considering the canals as real structures visible only by special
enlargements is in contrast with the above mentioned principle. In this sense
the geometrical theories uniﬁed with the spectral ones are contradictory.

Below in this work we shall no longer attribute several spectral components
to light. But this choice involves only the theory since all optical instruments
are dispersive. It must only be remembered that some disperse very little, and
others – interferometers and spectral analyzers – disperse more.

5.3 Interference in optical geometry

Traditionally, taking on the Huygens-Fresnel principle, optics manuals inaugu-
rate a new chapter dedicated to physical or undulatory optics. But this formu-
lation must not be misunderstood. No manual intends to answer the question
whether it is necessary to introduce this new basic principle to explain the phe-
nomenology of the new chapter. To judge whether geometry suﬃces or whether
the observations require development of a spectral theory is the concern of one
proposing to write one coherent theory. Observations on which one might rest
the ﬁrst hypothesis are not lacking. For example, in ’On the Estimation of
Aperture in the Microscope’ E. Abbe writes, “Let us assume that the ﬁneness
of a striation, a grating or a diatom is at the limit of instrumental resolution
for [a microscope of] a given aperture [. . . ], then always and only two diﬀracted
rays contribute to the image [observed with the eyepiece]. In clear ﬁeld this
would be the direct ray, and one spectrally decomposed, [the ﬁrst is the zero
order and the “colored one” is the ﬁrst order of diﬀraction]. In this case the
striation seems to be in clear and dark bands of equal width. But we know that

6 ERNST ABBE’S HYPOTHESIS ON WHAT MOVES

12

with [an objective of] greater aperture we would obtain a more complete image.
In this the ratio between the widths of clear and dark bands would be much
diﬀerent.” The italics are ours. In this passage Abbe explains that interference
is an image and not generically a pattern; in addition that it is the image of any
ﬂat grating, provided the instrumental resolution is insuﬃcient. The result is
that interference seems to be a property of light because it does not characterize
the object observed although it is it’s image. But the microscope observations
serve to elucidate the structure of the bodies observed and therefore it is the
bodies which possess the property of being visible.

6 Ernst Abbe’s hypothesis on what moves

We saw that, according to Abbe, the interference pattern is an image. We repeat
that the immaterial or ethereal image does not have existence independent of the
thing (it goes without saying that, if the thing is not alight, the image depends
also on illumination). But microscopic observation is an observation of light
only. More exactly, it is about the kind of light which in telecommunications
takes the name “signal”.

Now let us say what moves according to Abbe. If there is no other way to
accede to something but to observe it with the aid of an optical instrument,
it is illusory to assume that the image has the visual appearance which the
thing would have if we could observe it directly. This justiﬁes the aptitude to
also consider images those ﬁgures which certainly do not reproduce in all detail
the structure examined. With this qualiﬁcation Abbe’s aptitude consists of
assuming that the image is the linear transform of the anti-image. This linear
transform limited to the signal represents the displacement of competence of
optics. Analysis of the displacement totally disregards all information conveyed
by the signal, hence any question concerning its interpretation.
In addition
Abbe experimented with when the image is formed and how it depends on the
lens numerical aperture; then he appraised within what limits one may speak of
geometrical transformation and in this case how to express mathematically the
condition of formation of the image. What he called “condition of aplanatism”
is clearly an invariant of the transformation. One of his works on the subject is
entitled, ’¨uber die Bedingungen des Aplanatismus der Linsensysteme’ [14]. In
the ﬁgure 1 we reproduce from that work the plate in which he calculates the
aplanatic distortion of a square grating. Observing this plate through the lens
of the microscope he saw a grating with square meshes. Abbe also explains in
what this distortion diﬀers from spherical aberration. In eﬀect the aberrations
which meet aplanatism are practically those of Seidel.

7 Geometry as linear model of optics

Geometric modeling assumes for its applicability that relations between facts
are linear. Now, saying that a cannon and a mirror don’t have the same use, we

7 GEOMETRY AS LINEAR MODEL OF OPTICS

13

Figure 1: Aplanatic distortion of a square grating. Two arrays of orthogonal
equidistant parallels are transformed into two arrays of homocentrical hyperbo-
las. Aplanatic distortion may be observed looking through wide-angle lenses, in
case there are no convergency errors.

7 GEOMETRY AS LINEAR MODEL OF OPTICS

14

don’t bring any evidence that the phenomenology associated with light man-
ifestations of matter is easier to handle mathematically than that associated
with combustion, friction or viscoelastic deformations. On the contrary, we
foresee excluding from the model power applications such as the surgical laser
and microwave ovens.

Among the reasons for which the cannon and the mirror don’t behave in
the same manner there is thus also the diﬀerent use. The cannon is used for
oﬀensive purposes while the mirror is used as a detector of a signal– the one sent
by the object. In signal approximation the properties required to form reﬂected
(or refracted) images can be attributed to light just because for the purposes of
the interpretation of the image the detector function can be disregarded. The
image itself depends on the detection technique used (not only on the object
which transmits it and the transmission channel) because it is possible to exploit
a good number of diﬀerent eﬀects for detection purposes. Despite this we can
take into account some instrumental characteristics in signal approximation. In
this case we say that the receiver, including the detector, functions as a black
box.

Below we seek to specify possible uses for geometric modeling in a theory
of light in linear approximation. Geometry can take on one or the other of
two functions. It can serve as a linear model of a relationship. It will be our
responsibility to choose this in such a manner that the model will be linear.
But this does not imply that the relationship itself is analytically a straight
line in Cartesian coordinates. Otherwise we can choose to use a geometry to
describe our world. Since our world is a geoid, if we intend that we represent it
linearly by mapping a sphere on the plane, it will be well to clarify the meaning
of linearity.

In the ﬁrst case the geometric model cannot represent any peculiarity of our
world. We avoid confusion if, instead of introducing space as an ineluctable
modality of our perception, we immediately introduce geometry as a mathe-
matics. In this case it is clear that the space represented supplies on the outer
world the same kind of information which the cardinal number 3 supplies on
the three animals Bianchina, Fiorella and Estella.

If, on the contrary we intend to accede to a physical aspect regarding the
extension of the world and the access is experimental, for example an optical
detecting and ranging, again to avoid confusion, it is better to specify that we
are concerned with topography. Incidentally, a more traditional measurement
than remote sensing is to lay a graduated ruler on the object while being careful
to use a good surface plate common to the ruler and the object. Even in this
case the graphic representation is conventional except that whoever uses it must
succeed in orienting himself in the region represented by recognizing the elements
on the map.

Abbe made the ﬁrst choice. Indeed, he said that microscope images are not
recognized but known. Then the linearity hypothesized for the model allows
using the theory to represent the image of something. But the basic elements
used to represent it are basic only geometrically. Linearity allows making use
of the theory to interpret the image represented but it cannot consider it a

7 GEOMETRY AS LINEAR MODEL OF OPTICS

15

linear approximation of the world we live in because there is no way to compare
the image with the object. We make the ﬁrst choice even when we propose a
geometry as a diagram and a movement as a relationship. This is Maxwell’s
choice when vacuum is empty.

7.1 A proposal of Felix Klein

In 1901 F. Klein (No. LXXII in vol. II of the collection of scientiﬁc works; the
article is quoted by M. Born and E. Wolf in “Principles of Optics”, ed. 1991)
studied the geometrical conditions under which the image appears similar to
the original neglecting higher order diﬀerential corrections. This is the range of
validity of the theory of Hamilton. He concluded that the theory is inapplicable
to both the microscope and the telescope. He believes that the limitation on
the applicability of geometry might be overcome by using projective instead of
aﬃne transformations; but he warns that projective optics would give rise to
a theory completely diﬀerent from Hamilton’s. He says, “The impression that
both [the geometries] allow reasoning connected to each other is recalled only by
the marginal circumstance that linear relation appear at the end”. This author
does not put forward projective geometry as a new typography but has in mind
an application to physics of the mathematics which he himself developed.

Now we shall say what we want to show. At least one geometry, the projec-
tive one, doesn’t require specifying whether the geometrical element chosen is a
point or a plane. The reason is that all the projective theorems are dualizable
by substituting the element “plane” for “point” and vice versa. Incidentally, to
speak of projective geometry as a geometry like Euclidean geometry or one of
the inﬁnite non-Euclidean geometries , i.e. with ﬁxed curvature radius, is not
quite correct. Indeed, projective geometry is not categorical, it is not just one
geometry but many geometries, in fact inﬁnitely many [34]. Since the geometry
chosen does not distinguish the geometrical point element from the geometrical
plane element it is necessary that not even the physical interpretation make
such a distinction. We can agree that the point represents the object, let’s say
in the speciﬁc sense of being the stigmatic image of the point, and the plane
represents the associated wave, let us say in the sense of being Fraunhofer’s
diﬀraction pattern of the point. The above convention is equivalent to that
for which the same uniform illumination characterizes both a disc and a lumi-
nous sphere; under certain conditions it is experimentally veriﬁed and under
others it is not. We discuss this in greater detail below. For the time being
we observe that this interpretation of wave-corpuscle dualism as a dual solution
can be faced with the original experiments of Abbe and his interpretation of
them. In addition, since said geometry admits the biratio as a basic invariant,
it is not possible to introduce basic physical components. Abbe himself in ’On
the estimation of the aperture of the microscope’ takes the numerical aperture
from the condition of aplanatism and shows that the expression of aplanatism
is derived from a biratio. The same expression of Abbe can be found regardless
of any consideration on the microscope in projective terms. This is done for
example on the reference text indicated by Klein for projective geometry, ’Die

8 IMAGES AND THEIR MOVEMENTS

16

Geometrie der Lage’ by T. Reye [35]. Then the projective transformations of
space in itself allow a mathematical representation alternative to the one pro-
posed by Hamilton in which relative movements or displacements in our world
are associated with transformations. This representation of movement contrasts
with that proposed by Maxwell only as concerns the possibility of connecting
the electrical quantities with the mechanical units of measure. This will be fully
clariﬁed below in this work for the unit of length.

8 Images and their movements

According to Klein, the most general movement is represented considering the
group of projective transformations of space in itself according to the Erlangen
In this work we shall not apply projective transformations of
program [36].
space in itself. Rather, we shall ﬁrst describe the facts and then indicate which
relationship to represent by means of mathematics.

We refer below to catoptrical systems for deﬁniteness. The reason is that
the specular surface of a mirror functions only as a screen and reveals (usually)
a single image of the object, which is the one reﬂected.

8.1 Localized images

First let us consider a ﬂat mirror.
If it is in a room of a dwelling and we
place ourselves in front of it we will not identify light rays but will see ourselves
reﬂected in the mirror and, behind our image, a room of the same type as that
which we know to exist behind us. Truly, since our world is a bit asymmetrical,
in the world which appears in front of us the right is taken for the left. Although
there is no clear way for believing that the world of the mirror is other than ours,
someone might believe it diﬀerent because inaccessible. The “other world” seems
separated from ours by the impassable surface of the mirror only because the
image is virtual. But any real image is physically accessible to us. Let us clarify
further; the real image does not exist without the object and the instrument
capable of detecting it but when it exists it is topographically locatable.

Let us discuss accessibility better.

If we place ourselves before a concave
spherical mirror, let’s say with a diameter of about twenty centimeters, equipped
with a ball of foamed polystyrene and a pencil, we observe the extension of the
image of the ball by going through it physically with the pencil. The image has
extension in our world but we run through it without encountering obstacles
Impenetrability can characterize
because the mirror does not materialize it.
bodies but not images. The same experience can be repeated on the real image
refracted by a converging lens. But it is necessary to use the dioptric surface as
a support for the image. Then the image visibly occupies a position with respect
to the dioptric surface and the eyes settle automatically on the details observed.
We know that an image can be detected by placing a ﬂat screen of opaque or
translucent material approximately in that position; the image then appears ﬂat
and more or less sharp. The second procedure is usual using dioptric systems

8 IMAGES AND THEIR MOVEMENTS

17

but unacceptable for mirrors. For the same reason light diﬀused by objects
cannot be diaphragmed so as to be “paraxial” using catoptrics. Clearly, every
time the image is real it diﬀuses the light which illuminates the object for all
its extension as though it were the surface of the object itself.

If we want to generalize this observation by hypothesizing that even vir-
tual images are in our world, we cannot use Euclidean geometry because this
geometry does not allow representing inaccessible regions.

Now we want to make a distinction which seems important to us. That real
images are formed in the world in which we are is a fact. Adopting a geometry
such as to describe in the same way all locatable images is reasonable. Detecting
the movement of a body is on the other hand a measurement operation. Even
if we provided for representing the path with the same geometry used for rep-
resenting images, they are facts, this is and remains a useful concept. In other
words neither the trajectory nor the instantaneous speed with which a point
travels over it are optical images. This is true apart from the priority we like to
establish between concepts and things.

8.2 Movements of localizable images

In this paragraph we are not truly concerned with the optical detection of mov-
ing objects, rather our purpose is conﬁned to examining one eﬀect of increasing
distance. As an example we can follow the movement of the point of the pencil
looking in the concave mirror mentioned above, and supposed in relation to a
graduation integral therewith. Qualitatively the correspondence between move-
ment of the point and of its image is the following. While we cover the distance
between us an the focus of the mirror, we see the image of the point move
from the initial position in front of the mirror toward us until we no longer
see it clearly because it is so close. Then we lose sight of it.
Imaginarily it
moves behind us more and more. When we pass through the focal point with
the point and proceed towards the vertex it may happen that the image of the
point enters into the visual ﬁeld from the edge of the mirror as though it had
traveled an elliptical trajectory; if on the other hand the alignment is good the
contour of the stigmatic image forms visibly back-to-front behind the mirror.
The image failed beyond the surface of the mirror and is separated from us
by the specular surface. This surface, through which the point and its image
ﬁnally appear to touch, is the only physical impediment to continuing of the
movement of the pencil point. If the mirror is spherical, in addition to the one
on the surface there is another point of our world in which object and image
touch. It is metrically characteristic of the mirror and is quite localizable. If
the mirror is parabolic, there is a single point where object and image touch et
cetera.

If we had studied the path of withdrawal instead of the path of approach,
for example on the ball, having it moved by someone behind us but in such
a way as to continue to receive its image, we would have seen it proceed ever
“more slowly” toward the focus as a limit point and ﬂatten increasingly. All
this is applied to the movement of the image without diﬀering conceptually from

8 IMAGES AND THEIR MOVEMENTS

18

the kinematics of ﬂuids. As the only device it is necessary that each observer
hold immobile his point of view of the mirror. A repositioning of the mirror
in relation to the observer implies indeed a change of reference, the graduated
scale being supposedly integral with the mirror.

8.3 The information contained in the stigmatic image is

that contained in the wavy image

This short paragraph doesn’t concern so much the image in geometrical approx-
imation as it does analysis of the information contained. Up to this point we
have introduced the stigmatic image of the nearby object not diaphragmed in
diﬀuse light. The image is assumed to be reconstructed point by point, one plane
at a time from the object’s shell. Although usually in optics focal rays are rep-
resented, geometrically the transformation is a central projection [37]. For this
reason optics texts call “collineation” the image constructed according to the
principles of geometrical optics. The stigmatic image, i.e. the one reconstructed
in linear approximation, is not ﬂat if particular conditions such as those relative
to focusing on photographic ﬁlm are excepted. We showed a way of ascertaining
whether the specular image also reproduces the spatial extension. Whoever has
read about holography will not be surprised [38]. Among the more common
holograms are small reﬂecting plates which, when uniformly lighted, appear as
photographs having parallax. This moving eﬀect of the planes according to their
depth is codiﬁed interferometrically during recording of the hologram. The pro-
cedure consists essentially of impressing on a ﬁlm the pattern of interference
between a reference radiation and the diﬀuse light from the holographed object.
A complicated pattern remains impressed on the ﬁlm. After development the
plate is capable of regenerating the “wave” diﬀused by the object by modulating
a striking radiation of the same type as the one used as reference during record-
ing.
It appears that in the approximation in which we suppose the pattern
etched on the perfect plate, or the mirror free of aberrations, we can explain the
not ﬂat surface of the image by making use indiﬀerently of the properties of ra-
dial propagation assumed for the light, or of the wavy characteristic attributed
to radiation. The pictures are complementary but the decodable information
from the signal received is the same. From the analysis made it would seem
that we could really infer that a dual nature could be ascribed to light in the
sense of de Broglie. But this is not so. This dual nature must be attributed
to the receiver paired with the respective coder in the sense of the principle of
complementarity.

Setting aside the theories of light, the signal received by the mirror can also

be interpreted as though the instrument performed a central projection.

8.4 The delocalized image

In Abbe’s analysis the image of the light point or the uniformly lit plane is the
extreme case [4]. In the example of the mirror we begin to make plausible that
geometry is suﬃciently descriptive of what is observed. Let us assume that the

8 IMAGES AND THEIR MOVEMENTS

19

object, which now need not be symmetrical, and rather it is better that it not
be, while it continues to be illuminated in a diﬀuse light withdraws behind us
to the horizon while we, integral with the mirror, continue to receive its real
image. In practice, whatever the form of the object, we shall ﬁnish by seeing a
small luminous disc. The small disc, if the aperture of the mirror has a circular
shape, takes the name of Airy disc. It is not the geometrical image of the object.
According to geometrical optics as the object integral with its lamp withdraws
along the optical axis the concave mirror forms an image of it ever smaller and
nearer the focal point. But the analysis applies to objects quite far from the
horizon and, for essentially mathematical reasons, certainly doesn’t extend to
the case where the images are formed just in the focus. Indeed, geometrically
the focus is a true point. First of all it is not obvious which coordinates to assign
to the object which is projected in the focus. Then although in the present case
we know that the object on the horizon is extended we must believe that all its
points admit of a single point as image and not only the one intersecting the
optical axis. It is a question of deﬁnition if we consider the focal point an image
of something or not. If yes, the anti-image must be posed by deﬁnition. Making
the Abbe-Klein hypothesis the focus is included (with its antitransform). But
Einstein claimed that to do physics it is necessary to measure with the double
decimeter and with the clock with escapement and balance wheel. It is clear that
the distance of the horizon cannot be measured even in a Gedankenexperiment
by aﬃxing a graduated line. With the words of Klein added at the foot of no.
XXX of Vol. I for the 1921 edition, “Occasionally Einstein opposed me with the
following motivation: the transformation by reciprocal radii preserves the form
of Maxwell’s equations but not the relationship between coordinates and values
measured with rulers and clocks”.

As mentioned, with the Abbe-Klein hypothesis the focus is included [39].
Mathematically it can be deﬁned, “the anti-image of the focal point is a point”.
Since the transformation is invertible, the anti-image also belongs to space,
which topologically is simply connected.

Inclusion of the focus, just like its exclusion, can be justiﬁed physically. We
observed that Abbe found himself having to interpret the images especially when
comparison with the object is not possible. In that predicament he imposes that
the linear anti-image of the image contains all and only information accessible on
the object. Clearly when the geometric image consists only of the focal point,
even if we suspect or know that the object is not dot-like, from the received
signal we can infer only that it is located along the direction of the optical axis
in an indeﬁnite position.

The interpretation given can be completed both physically and geometrically
according to Abbe-Klein. The line of reasoning is the following. As the object
withdraws from the mirror the light which it diﬀuses in that direction illuminates
a broader zone. Thus the edge of the mirror diaphragms it under an ever
narrower solid angle. The light apparently emitted by the object is ever more
collimated laterally or even more coherent spatially. If the object is suﬃciently
far the only light eﬀectively received of all that diﬀused is the zero order of
It can be said that the aperture is too small to form an image.
diﬀraction.

8 IMAGES AND THEIR MOVEMENTS

20

In this manner the reﬂected image, in addition to being, in agreement with
geometrical optics, always smaller and nearer the focal point, is also always less
detailed because it diﬀuses the only light the mirror receives.

We can assume that the mirror reveals on the principle of the holographic
plate. Temporarily the analogy would appear with greater clarity if there were
a way to receive a reference radiation also. Let us explain this.
If the light
coming from afar were suﬃciently intense, let us say like sunshine, and if we put
ourselves in the observation conditions of Newton, we would see rings due to the
presence of the reference light. In the case of the mirror, a ﬂat surface is lacking,
pressed against the convexity of the mirror and capable of reﬂecting partially.
Consequently the appearance of the image is rather uniform and even rather
extended. It doesn’t cover all of the plane because when a mirror is illuminated
it also produces an image of itself, the exit pupil, to which geometrical optics
can be applied in the same manner. Even if in the focal plane there can be
neither more nor less light than that traversing the exit pupil, due to the place
where the Airy disc is formed it is not its geometrical image in the conventional
sense. Rather it has to do with a modulation of direction of the light originated
by the mirror and superimposed on the light coming from afar. Fraunhofer’s
observed diﬀraction ﬁgure is mathematically the transfer function of the mirror,
considered as a detector, in the sense that is attributed to the term in electrical
engineering. We can agree that the diﬀraction image of the point alone would
uniformly illuminate a plane (Abbe calls the relative condition “aplanatism”).
The diﬀraction pattern of the point, thought of as a geometrical plane, con-
tains the same information as the focal image, thought of as dot-like; even in
interferential terms the object is found along the direction of the optical axis,
direction which in the absence of a reference radiation is arbitrary. In a word,
we can say that a spatially coherent light in the absence of other light sources
illuminates a very extended zone uniformly or that the image of the point on
the horizon is “delocalized” to the fullest. Geometrically the previous deﬁnition
is completed thus, “The transform of the anti-image is a plane”. Clearly it is
not a plane of points. The geometry compatible with the double possibility of
representing the focus point of a spherical mirror is the projective one. But
the projective plane is a one-sided surface. Being it nonorientable, the mathe-
matical distinction between left and right, as well as between up and down is
without a diﬀerence.

8.5 Experimental interpretation of the uncertainty

We have described both the “geometrical” and the “diﬀraction” appearance of
a point on the horizon. Given a spherical mirror and nothing else it does not
correspond to two diﬀerent observative possibilities. On the contrary, despite
the interpretation being double a single image is observed, in each case an Airy
disc. This disc limits by diﬀraction the quality of the images produced. In the
case of the mirror, if the image belongs to a physical point, let us say a star,
the disc presents itself accompanied by an edging in the form of a small number
of more or less pale concentric rings which recall vaguely the photograph of a

8 IMAGES AND THEIR MOVEMENTS

21

wave caused by the fall of a small object into a basin full of water. Detection of
the direction light is coming from with respect to the principal optical axis of
the mirror cannot be arbitrarily precise because of the modulation introduced
by the ﬁnite aperture of the mirror. The spatial extension of the disc around
the focal point can also be made plausible with the impossibility of exactly
localizing a point on the horizon.

But the disc is also an eﬀect of the aperture stop toward the light diﬀused
by every point of a nearby object. In this form it confers a more or less granular
appearance on the images [16].

It is clear that the edged or granular appearance of the images has no coun-
terpart in any basic structure of the object and/or light, which is revealed thanks
to the choice of an experimental arrangement. Rather we can say that some un-
certainty either about the direction of the light or about localization of a point
in the spot which represents its image troubles this kind of optical measurement.

8.6 Physical characterization of the objects requiring the

point/plane geometrical duality

In para. 8.4 we sought to make it physically plausible that two images corre-
spond geometrically to a dot-like object. In geometrical approximation the two
elements point and plane represent the above mentioned images. We introduced
the “ object point” as the anti-image of the image of a material object extended
and illuminated with diﬀused light but on the horizon. We said that under
these conditions the object is such that the mirror cannot magnify it. Since a
plane is extended, we must clarify what is intended by “magniﬁcation”. With
this word Abbe designates the increase in discernable structural detail. This
means that the solid angle under which we see the object is in relationship with
the information on the detail. Neither a structureless ball nor a homogeneous
plate would ever be magniﬁed according to Abbe. Vice versa, if relative posi-
tion/direction are the only accessible information, any object behaves optically
like a ball.

Perhaps it is worthwhile clarifying how the microscope lens functions ac-
cording to Abbe using an analogy. Let us consider a radio signal. Everybody
knows that the useful information is contained in the modulation while the
carrier serves to allow tuning on the channel. Abbe presents the function of
lens aperture exactly in these terms. He writes that the ﬁneness of detail in
the image des not depend on the luminousness of the collimated beam but
on the modest percentage of light diﬀracted by the sample (¨uber die Grenzen
der geometrischen Optik. p.173). It is the magniﬁcation so understood that
requires large lens numerical apertures and possibly homogeneous immersion
lenses, typically in cedar oil. Returning to us, it is possible that Abbe didn’t
believe an unenlargeable object microscopic. But it seems to us that we can
identify the unenlargeable object with the one with which de Broglie associates
a dual nature.

9 DE BROGLIE’S HYPOTHESIS IN THE CONTEXT OF ELECTROMAGNETISM22

t

P

H

A

Q E

q

T

C

Figure 2: Geometrical construction of the real image for spherical mirrors ac-
cording to Newton. ACP is the cross-section of the mirror with center E and
vertex C; QC is the principal axis: t is the tangent at P. Q is the object-point ,
q the image-point. The angle of incidence of the ray QP, EPQ, and the reﬂec-
tion one, qPE satisfy the reﬂection law. Despite the speciﬁc ray QP not being
paraxial Newton’s law still holds.

9 De Broglie’s hypothesis in the context of elec-

tromagnetism

If the focal point and its antitransform belong to the domain of transformation,
to the dual anti-image-image transformation corresponds a shifting of the dot-
like object from where it is to the focus of the mirror. We shall see below when
the shifting indicated is a movement.

Let us assume ﬁrst of all that the object is continuing to withdraw from
us in accordance with any dynamic law of motion. According to Newtonian
dynamics the withdrawing of the object can be unlimited and in this case a
trajectory of not ﬁnite length is associated with it. But if we consider the
path of the point representative of the image, it tends towards a point on the
focal plane as limit point. The interpretation that the only optical information
we are allowing for is on the relative direction of the movement of the object
corresponds to this behavior of the image. But, due to the invertibility of the
optical path, the path of the image is such for the object also. In other words,
the geometrical support is identical for the path of the image and for that of
the object. Let us assume now that reciprocally the object travels from the
center of the mirror through the main focus point towards the vertex. This is
a movement so that the support cannot have discontinuities in a neighborhood
of the focal point. In fact the propagation trough the focus is not opposed by

9 DE BROGLIE’S HYPOTHESIS IN THE CONTEXT OF ELECTROMAGNETISM23

anything. As we noted above, when the mirror is spherical the representative
points of the object and image on the path coincide in the center and vertex of
the mirror. Then geometrically the unlimited withdrawing of the image must
take place along a ﬁnite path and the common support of the two trajectories is
homeomorphic with a circle.Experimentally it is very elusive to describe what
happens to the image when the object illuminated in diﬀuse light passes through
the focal point because in this zone the mirror ampliﬁes to the maximum, the
manufacturing imperfections are much enlarged and the increase in detail surely
does not correspond to the magniﬁcation. This diﬃculty arises because a “ﬂux”
of the image through the focus is imagined. Not even when we can consider the
image similar to the original is it admissible to call the light ﬂux laminar. So if
the focal point has not been whitened by the representation, hydrodynamics is
diﬃcult to apply. In addition, if the dynamic laws of motion could be applied to
the image also it would not be reasonable to assume that in an arbitrarily short
time interval, as measured by a clock, this might travel from where it is behind
us to behind the reﬂecting surface. Thus in mechanics, boundary conditions are
speciﬁed on the reﬂecting surface, it is admitted that the image jumps and the
specular reﬂection is not considered a movement. But the specular reﬂection is
the eﬀect which justiﬁes recourse to non-mechanical formalisms. Let us recall
that the trajectory is not a fact but the result of a measurement operation. This
measurement can be made by putting the ruler through each pair of positions
successively occupied by the representative point and taking transit time into
account, but can also be done by a theodolite. Remote ranging is an optical
reception as much as specular reﬂection, only that it is applied to objects further
away from the measuring instrument than the focal distance. If mathematical
formalism can diﬀer from that adopted in mechanics, the horizon aligned with
the optical axis can be represented on the geometrical support as a transformed
geometrical locus of the focal point and indicated by the symbol ∞. With this
convention the marker point of the image no longer jumps but passes through
that point. Since it is apparently not possible to ﬁnd on the curve of support
a neighborhood of ∞ such that all the points are at a lesser distance therefrom
than a predetermined length the trajectory is not measurable by means of a
ruler along the entire path. Our present interpretation justiﬁes Klein’s warning
(recalled in para. 7.1) that projective geometry would give rise to a theory of
light completely diﬀerent from Hamilton’s.

The formalism foreign to the mechanical laws of motion exists already. In
fact Klein shows by substitution of the analytical expression of the reﬂection
transformation in Maxwell’s equations that movements of this kind are solu-
tions of it. The analytical form of the transformation is termed inversion or
transformation by reciprocal radii. In Chap.XI, Vol.1 of his Treatise Maxwell
himself deals with the same kind of solutions. In particular, being the theory
of light dual, if the movement terminates in the focus, the solution also allows
for de Broglie’s hypothesis. As concerns material bodies the latter hypothesis
says: “It is impossible to ascertain the mechanical structure of an afar object
by optical means just because of the assumed duality of the ethereal images”.

9 DE BROGLIE’S HYPOTHESIS IN THE CONTEXT OF ELECTROMAGNETISM24

9.1 Geometrical interpretation of Isaac Newton’s formula

for spherical mirrors

We mentioned above that there has always been attributed to the construc-
tions of which geometrical optics makes use the meaning of graphic prescriptions
about a physical space. These represent the content of the formulas and describe
the facts. But use of the constructions in mathematics is limited to exempliﬁca-
tion in demonstrations and the solution of problems. There is no guarantee that
a particular problem is not indeterminate or does not have inﬁnite solutions.
On the contrary, if a geometry represents a model of certain facts, the mathe-
matical expressions of laws can rest directly on the model without the backing
of more tried theories such as mechanics. In relation to the purely mathematical
approach mentioned which was adopted at the end for light phenomena both by
Einstein and Maxwell we show below that Newton’s Axiom VI cas.2. represents
a hyperbolic projective involution. In the cited axiom Newton transfers to a
graph and calculates where a luminous axial point Q is reﬂected by a spherical
mirror with center E and vertex C in the case of paraxial beams. Obviously
since the light striking the mirror cannot be collimated using a diaphragm either
the source Q is directional or the beams are deprived of any physical meaning.
His prescription is: i) bisect any radius of the sphere, (suppose EC) in T; ii) let
the point Q be the focus of the incident rays, the point q shall be the focus of
the reﬂected ones; iii) you take the points Q and q so that TQ, TE and Tq be
continual proportionals.

With his conventions,

T Q : T E = T E : T qT q 6= 0

The ﬁxed point C in the ﬁgure 2 is practically coincident with the vertex of

the mirror only for paraxial beams.

This formula expresses a Euclidean result. With reference to ﬁgure 2 the
triangle QTH is rectangular at H by construction. Indeed, QH is tangent to the
small circle of radius TE centered at T while TH is another radius of the same
circle. But the tangents to the circumferences are orthogonal to the rays at the
2
tangential point. The theorem of Euclid in question says that the square (TE)
on the cathetus TH has an area equivalent to the rectangle which has for sides
the hypotenuse QT and projection qT of the cathetus TH on the hypotenuse.
When the formula is applied to mirrors both the distance of the object point
and that of the image point are evaluated by the main focus of the mirror. For
ﬁnite distances with a simple passage the formula for the power of the circle is
written as follows (Coxeter loc. cit. p. 78):

To ﬁnd therefrom the transformation for reciprocal radii which Klein says it

2
T Q × T q = (T E)

suﬃces to lay down,

2
(T E)

= 1

9 DE BROGLIE’S HYPOTHESIS IN THE CONTEXT OF ELECTROMAGNETISM25

More recently by convention all the distances are referred to the vertex of
the mirror which for paraxial rays is the point indicated here by C. E. Hecht
shows in his book on optics what is the relationship between the two formulas
and also speciﬁes all the present conventions on signs. We continue to follow
Newton’s convention. In ﬁgure 3 we show the relationship between the graphic
construction of the image by means of light rays and the projective deﬁnition
of the harmonic points on a straight line. The equation of mirrors relative to
the ﬁgure is written,

1
Cq

+

1
CQ

=

1
CT

=

2
CE

This, rearranged as,

CE
Cq

− 1 = 1 −

CE
CQ

is the continuous harmonic proportional,

CE − Cq
Cq

=

CE − CQ
CQ

from which,

qE
Cq

=

EQ
CQ

With this cross ratio is associated the ﬁgure of the projective geometry which
we have superimposed here on the usual graphic construction. If Q tends to the
inﬁnite, q tends to the mean point of EC, i.e. T, for a theorem relative to the
mean point, without it being necessary to consider dynamic properties for light.
The theorem is enunciated but in diﬀerent geometries, depending on whether Q
takes on the limit value or not. In this manner optics leans on one or the other
geometry depending on how it interprets the phenomenology. If it interprets
the diﬀraction image of Fraunhofer in the same manner as any other optical
image, as we propose, going back to de Broglie, then the construction drawn in
black causes a projective transformation.

While the full system of projective transformations either with the invariant
quadrics (system of Reye) or assuming imaginary geometrical elements accord-
ing to Klein is diﬃcult to deal with geometrically, it is easy to show what the
graphic appearance of the transformation involved is: polarity. We exemplify
the construction in ﬁgure 4. Finally in ﬁgure 5 we show the transformation
implied in the case of spherical mirrors according to Newton. It associates a
double ordering with the points of a range while leaving two points united.

9 DE BROGLIE’S HYPOTHESIS IN THE CONTEXT OF ELECTROMAGNETISM26

P

K

L

O

M

Q

qE

T

C

Figure 3: Object-point Q and image-point q as conjugate harmonic points. A
quadrilateral PkQEqCMLO is shown in black on the most common graphic
construction of the image. The harmonic ratio among Q, q and the united
points E and C does not depend on the choice of point P, provided it lays oﬀ
the line CqEQ.

q

q

Q

E

C

P

Figure 4: The simplest projective correlation between a point and its plane. A
hyperbolic polarity is shown in order to compare it with Newton’s axiom. Q is
the marker point of the object; qq is the section of its dual image; CPE is the
section of the quadric (as a locus of points) that determines the polarity.

10 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

27

B

2 1

3

A

3’

2’

1’

Figure 5: The involution pertaining to spherical mirrors. The relation estab-
lishes a double ordering involving each pair of points of a range. 1’, 2’, 3’ ...
locate the object Q; 1, 2, 3 ... locate the image q. A , B are invariant points.
The ordering might be induced from the quadric, as in stereographic projection.

10 Summary and Conclusions

In this work we have sought to specify a possible physical content for de Broglie’s
hypothesis. A priori it could be associated with three distinct types of experi-
mental observation, to wit,

i. comparison between spectral analysis of light and structural analysis of
matter. This aspect is the one thanks to which Bragg’s experiments can be
considered corresponding to those of Davisson and Germer. Despite this com-
parison having been most directly suggested by the hypothesis, a posteriori the
physical phenomena involved are too intricate to lend themselves to explain it
physically.

ii. Dualism of reception, wavy or granular signal [16]. Depending on whether
the electrical/optical detector used in the experiment was interferometrically
locked to the signal or was rather a counter, the signal detected is interpreted as
undulatory or corpuscular. In the classical schematic example of Young’s device,
if both slits are open and their image is projected correctly on a screen, delocal-
ized interference fringes appear which the photomultiplier detects by counting.
But if a single slit is open, the intensity modulation nevertheless observable on
the screen and which gives rise to Fraunhofer diﬀraction does not determine the
phase shift from the reference because the radiation which acted as reference
was obscured. The photomultiplier also detects diﬀraction by counting.

iii. Dual solution. According to us de Broglie himself proposed a con-

REFERENCES

28

ventional duality. But the mathematics he associated with it lacked whatever
connection to experiment and was not coherent. By facing the problem in op-
tics, where duality was ﬁrst observed, one sees that the dual aspect of light lies
in the fact, shown experimentally by Abbe, that image and diﬀraction pattern
of microscopic objects have the same informative content. Abbe found this re-
sult by examining separately the contributions of the lens and of the eyepiece
of the compound microscope. If this fact is expressed in terms of a coherent
light-signal theory, then de Broglie’s hypothesis is a hypothesis of mathematical
nature formulated in the framework thereof. As a theory of light-signals we
have considered Maxwell’s. Instead of illustrating this theory with a mechan-
ical analogy, we have leaned on geometry; we based on the Erlangen program
to deﬁne movements. We sought to illustrate to what the basic point and plane
elements of the model correspond and how they are transformed by specular
reﬂection.

In the new context, de Broglie’s hypothesis can be reformulated as, “The
same duality attributed to their images is attributed to material objects (i.e. to
the antitransforms)”. This means that the theory of light, as far as the hypoth-
esis applies, could be applied to movements of the material objects themselves.

References

Orig. Ed. 1958

Inc. (1968) New York

Ed. 1953

[1] A. Messiah, Quantum Mechanics, Dover Publications, Inc. (1999) New York.

[2] L. deBroglie, Ann. de Phys. 10.s´erie,t.III p.22-128 (1925)

[3] B. L. Van der Waerden, Sources of Quantum Mechanics, Dover Publications,

[4] R. W. Ditchburn, Light, Dover Publications, Inc. (1991) New York. Orig.

[5] J. Mehra, H. Rechenberg, The Historical Development of Quantum Theory.
Vol. 6 Part 1: The Completion of Quantum Mechanics, Springer Verlag
(2000) New York

[6] C. Davisson, L. H. Germer, Phys. Rev. 30(6):705-740 (1927)

[7] A. Einstein, Phys. Z. 18:121-128 (1917)

[8] A. Einstein, Ann. Phys 22:569-572 (1907)

[9] D. H. Towne, Wave Phenomena, Dover Publications, Inc. (1967) New York

[10] A. Einstein, Ann. Phys 18:639-641 (1905)

[11] L. de Broglie in ”Albert Einstein: philosopher-Scientist” p. 107-127, Ed. P.

A. Schilpp, Tudor Publishing Company (1949) New York

REFERENCES

29

[12] N. Bohr in ”Quantum Theory and Measurement” p. 9-49, Ed. J. A.

Wheeler, W. H. Zurek, Princeton University Press (1983) Princeton

[13] A. Feoli, Europhys. Lett. 58(2):169-175 (2002)

[14] E. Abbe, Abhandlungen ¨uber die Theorie des Mikroskops, Vol. 1 der

Gesammelten Abhandlungen, Georg Olms Verlah (1989) Hildesheim

[15] J. T. Cushing, Ann. Phys 9(11-12):939-959 (2000)

[16] M. Born, Atomic Physics, 8. Ed. Dover Publications, Inc. (1969) New York

Orig. Ed. 1935

[17] A. Matzkin, Eur. J. Phys. 23:285-294 (2002)

[18] B. Russell, I fondamenti della geometria, Club del libro Fratelli Melita

(1981) La Spezia Orig. Ed. 1897

[19] E. Mach, Die Prinzipien der physikalischen Optik, historisch und erkennt-
nispsychologisch entwickelt, Minerva G.M.B.H. (1982) Frankfurt/Main Orig.
Ed. 1913 (1921)

[20] F. Klein, Gesammelte Mathematische Abhandlungen, Vol. 2, Nr. LXX

p.601-602, Springer Verlag (1973) Berlin Orig. Ed. 1922

[21] C. D. Bailey, Found. Phys. 32(1):159-176 (2002)

[22] W. Pauli, Pauli Lectures on Physics, Vol. 2: Optics and the Theory of

Electrons, Dover Publications, Inc. (2000) New York Orig. Ed. 1973

[23] F. Hasen¨ohrl, Ann. Phys. 15:344-370 (1904)

[24] H. Manning Ed., The Fourth Dimension Simply Explained: A Collection
of Essays Selected from Those Submitted in the Scientiﬁc American’s Prize
Competition (1909), Peter Smith (1977) Gloucester, Mass.

[25] R. v. B. Rucker, Geometry, Relativity and the Fourth Dimension, Dover

Publications, Inc. (1977) New York

[26] J. Clerk Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity & Magnetism, Vol. 1 Art. 53,

60 Dover Publications, Inc. (1954) New York Orig. Ed. 1891

[27] F. Klein, Vorlesungen ¨uber nicht-euklidische Geometrie, Verlag von Julius

Springer 1928. Nachdruck 1968

[28] L. Boltzmann, Modelli matematici, ﬁsica e ﬁlosoﬁa. Scritti divulgativi. -
Sull’indispensabilit´a dell’atomismo nella scienza (1897), Universale Bollati
Boringhieri (1999) Torino

[29] F. Hund, Geschichte der Quantentheorie, 3. Auﬂage Wissenschaftsverlag,

Bibliographisches Institut (1984) Mannheim

REFERENCES

30

[30] M. Born, P. Jordan, Z. Phys 34:858-888 (1925)

[31] J. Clerk Maxwell, Theory of Heat, Dover Publications, Inc. (2001) Orig.

Ed. 1871

[32] I. Newton, Optics or A Treatise of the Reﬂections, Refractions, Inﬂections
& Colours of Light, IV Ed. Dover Publications, Inc. (1979) New York Orig.
Ed. 1730

[33] J. Clerk Maxwell, A treatise on Electricity & Magnetism, Vol.2 III Ed.

Dover Publications, Inc. (1954) New York Orig. Ed. 1891

[34] H. S. M. Coxeter, Introduction to Geometry, II Ed. John Wiley & Sons,

Inc. (1989) New York Ed. 1961

[35] T. Reye, Die Geometrie der Lage, 1. Abteilung IV Ed. Baumg¨artens Buch-

handlung (1898) Leipzig

[36] F. Klein Gesammelte mathematische Abhandlungen, p. V & p. 460

Springer- Verlag (1973) Berlin Orig. Ed. 1921

[37] R. W. Pohl, Optik und Atomphysik, 13. Auﬂage Springer-Verlag (1976)

Berlin

[38] E. Hecht, Optics, III Ed. Addison-Wesley (1998) Reading, Mass.

[39] F. Klein, Elementarmathematik vom h¨oheren Standpunkte aus, Vol. II: Re-
liefperspektive, p. 102, Verlag von Julius Springer (1925) Berlin Nachdruck
1968

