3
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
0
4
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Brussels-Austin Nonequilibrium Statistical
Mechanics in the Later Years: Large Poincar´e
Systems and Rigged Hilbert Space

Robert C. Bishop
Department of Philosophy, Logic and Scientiﬁc Method
The London School of Economics, Houghton St.
London, WC2A 2AE, UK

Abstract

This second part of a two-part essay discusses recent developments
in the Brussels-Austin Group after the mid 1980s. The fundamental con-
cerns are the same as in their similarity transformation approach (see Part
I), but the contemporary approach utilizes rigged Hilbert space (whereas
the older approach used Hilbert space). While the emphasis on nonequi-
librium statistical mechanics remains the same, the use of similarity trans-
formations shifts to the background. In its place arose an interest in the
physical features of large Poincar´e systems, nonlinear dynamics and the
mathematical tools necessary to analyze them.

Keywords: Thermodynamics, Statistical Mechanics, Integrable Sys-

tems, Nonlinear Dynamics, Probability, Arrow of Time

Word count (including notes): 9,547

1 Introduction

Part I of this essay discussed the earlier similarity transformation approach to
nonequilibrium statistical mechanics of Ilya Prigogine and his coworkers. This
approach, along with that of subdynamics, is perhaps somewhat familiar as it
has received some attention in philosophical literature and was the subject of
Prigogine’s well-known book, From Being to Becoming: Time & Complexity in
the Physical Sciences (1980). Part II of this essay focuses on their more recent
and less familiar work on nonequilibrium statistical mechanics in rigged Hilbert
spaces.

It has been argued that no current approaches to microscopic dynamics can
explain or derive the second law of thermodynamics, since it is both necessary
and suﬃcient for the derivation of the second law from microscopic dynamics
that the dynamics be exact (e.g. Mackey 1992, pp. 98-100; 2002).1 Although it
1A dynamics on a state space Ω with a transfer operator Pt is exact if and only if limt→∞

1

can be shown that the coarse-grained projection operator arising from the ear-
lier Brussels-Austin approach yields an exact dynamics, whether their similar-
ity transformation yields exact dynamics is unknown (Antoniou and Gustafson
1993; Antoniou, Gustafson and Suchanecki 1998, p. 119). Nevertheless, one
of the crucial claims of the earlier approach was that trajectory descriptions at
the microscopic level and probabilistic descriptions at the macroscopic level of
thermodynamic behavior are related via a transformation (Part I).

This way of viewing the relationship be trajectory and probabilistic descrip-
tions is de-emphasized in their more recent work. So the core point is no longer
to derive irreversible thermodynamic behavior from reversible microscopic de-
scriptions, so much as to argue for the priority of irreversible macroscopic de-
scriptions for a particular class of systems known as large Poincar´e systems.
However, the core intuitions of the new approach remain continuous with their
earlier work; namely, that irreversibility is fundamentally dynamical in charac-
ter and that distributions are ontologically fundamental explanatory elements
for complex statistical systems.

The Brussels-Austin Group’s recent work develops a method for constructing
a complete set of eigenvectors for the model equations describing the thermody-
namic approach to equilibrium for Large Poincar´e systems as well as nonlinear
dynamics more generally. This approach reformulates the question of how to
relate reversible trajectory and irreversible probabilistic descriptions as follows:
How can the trajectory dynamics of a large Poincar´e system (LPS) yield nec-
essary conditions for the thermodynamics approach to equilibrium and what
further mechanisms account for the suﬃcient conditions for such behavior?

Large Poincar´e systems are deﬁned and illustrated in §2 using nonintegrable
Hamiltonians and classical perturbation theory as a way of motivating some
of the key physical and mathematical problems for such systems. The rigged
Hilbert space approach to these systems is outlined in §3, and the corresponding
time-ordering rule and semigroup operators governing the dynamics are intro-
duced. Particular details of the approach are discussed in §4, where an alterna-
tive interpretation of Prigogine’s treatment of trajectories and their relationship
to the dynamics of distributions is developed. Some remarks on probabilistic
vs. deterministic dynamics closes the essay (§5).

2 Large Poincar´e Systems and Integrability

Toward the end of the 19th century, Poincar´e was investigating planetary mo-
tion, among other things. Solving the equations of motion for the solar system
is extremely diﬃcult because all the planets interact with each other through
gravitational forces. One of the questions Poincar´e pursued was whether there
was a suitable way to transform these equations of motion into a system of

|Ptρ − ρeq|L1 = 0 for every initial density ρ, where ρeq is the unique stationary density
(i.e. equilibrium density), Pt governs the dynamics (e.g. Liouville or the Frobenius-Perron
operators), and the norm is in the sense of Lebesgue integrable functions. Among other
properties, exact dynamics are noninvertible and always yield a unique stationary density.

2

equations where the gravitational interaction would vanish and one could solve
the evolution equations for the angle variables of each planet independently of
the others. What Poincar´e showed was that in general such a transformation
was impossible for systems of N mutually interacting bodies.
If a canonical
transformation for a system of equations describing a set of interacting particles
that carries the equations into a set where the interactions vanish exists, then
the system is classiﬁed as integrable. This means that the original system of
equations can be transformed into one where each particle’s angle variable is
fully described by an equation that is independent of any other particle’s angle
variable.

Poincar´e showed that systems of equations were nonintegrable when they
contained resonances between various degrees of freedom.
In essence a reso-
nance is a transient metastable state establishing a narrow, precise frequency
gateway through which energy can be eﬃciently transferred from one element
of a physical system to another. Physical examples of resonances include tran-
sient bound states produced in particle collisions and transient intermediates in
chemical reactions.

2.1 Integrable Systems and Classical Perturbation Theory

In order to make these notions of resonances and nonintegrability more precise,
consider Hamiltonian systems in classical mechanics. While models with com-
pletely integrable Hamiltonians are rare, they are still very useful in the study
of physical systems. For many systems can be modeled using Hamiltonians of
the form

H = H0( ~J) + λV ( ~J, ~α),
where H0 is assumed to be completely integrable, ~J represents the action vari-
ables (e.g. generalized momentum vectors), ~α the angle variables (e.g. general-
ized coordinate vectors) and λ (assumed ≪ 1) is the coupling coeﬃcient roughly
describing the strength of the interactions through the potential V . The ques-
tion of whether or not a Hamiltonian system is integrable is equivalent to being
able to ﬁnd a canonical transformation from the old state space coordinates
( ~J, ~α) to the new coordinates (~I, ~β) corresponding to a transformation operator
of the form

(1)

eiF (~I,~β)

(2)

decoupling all the equations for the angle variables (in essence turning oﬀ all
the interactions by making λ zero). When such a transformation can be found,
the Hamiltonian is said to be completely integrable and I will refer to this type
of integrability as complete integrability (to be distinguished from the Brussels-
Austin sense of integrability below).

In general one then must proceed using a perturbation method where the
strategy is to ﬁnd approximate solutions of (1) in terms of Ho(~I) plus small
perturbations due to V (~I, ~β). In the course of standard perturbation analysis

3

of such a model (e.g. Tabor 1989, 89-108), terms of the form

Vni,nj,nk...
niβi + njβj + nkβk + ...

(3)

emerge where i, j, and k are integers labeling the particles, Vninj nk represents
the Fourier transformed potential, the nl indicate the (discrete) degrees of free-
dom of the particles in the Fourier expansion, and the βl can be negative and
are often interpreted as generalized frequencies. Clearly terms like (3) increase
without bounds when the denominator approaches zero. The denominator be-
ing zero represents a resonance. It is the presence of a suﬃcient number of these
resonances that prevents us from using the standard canonical transformation
techniques to turn the model into a completely integrable system of equations.
For an N-body problem, the resonance condition takes the form that the ﬁ-
nite sum niβi + njβj + nkβk + ... + nN βN = 0. In general there are several
combinations of nl’s and βl’s satisfying this condition.

2.2 Large Poincar´e Systems

First consider an integrable Hamiltonian for a system with two degrees of free-
dom. The state space trajectories will then be conﬁned to the surfaces of nested
tori, where each surface corresponds to a diﬀerent combination of the values of
the two constants of the motion. Now add perturbations λV to this Hamiltonian
where λ ≪ 1. If the perturbations leave the Hamiltonian integrable, then the
model dynamics are not appreciably aﬀected. In contrast, if the perturbations
render the Hamiltonian nonintegrable (e.g. resonance phenomena), then these
periodic orbits will be disrupted because such perturbations are as physically
important as the unperturbed orbits of the integrable part of the model, due
to the transfer of energy involved. The KAM theorem speciﬁes the conditions
under which tori associated with quasi-periodic trajectories survive and con-
stitute the majority of motions realized in state space, so that most regions
in state space for nonintegrable models close to integrable models show stable
nonperiodic orbits (e.g. Hilborn 1994, 337-9).

There are two types of ﬁxed points for the state space trajectories in Hamil-
tonians of the form (1): elliptic and hyperbolic (saddle points). Elliptic ﬁxed
points correspond to stable periodic orbits which are disrupted by resonances.
Hyperbolic ﬁxed points present complex behavior: trajectories exhibiting sen-
sitive dependence on initial conditions and which wander erratically over large
regions of state space. These structures also exhibit self-similarity. The chaotic
behavior in Hamiltonian systems is similar to chaotic behavior in dissipative
systems. However, since Hamiltonian systems do not contract to some ﬁxed
point as do dissipative systems, orbits near hyperbolic ﬁxed points will become
unstable leading to exponentially diverging trajectories. It should be pointed
out that stable and chaotic orbits can coexist simultaneously in state space.

Large Poincar´e systems are of interest to Prigogine and coworkers. Consider

4

a typical SM Hamiltonian of the form

H(p, q) =

+ λ

V (|~qi − ~qj|),

(4)

N

Xi=1

~P 2
i
2mi

N

Xj>i

where ~q and ~p are N -component vectors representing generalized coordinates
and momenta respectively, and the system is in a large box with volume L3.
The Brussels-Austin group is interested in “large” systems, meaning they work
in the limit L3 → ∞ (the number of particles N may be ﬁnite or inﬁnite). A
LPS is obtained when the system is large and the number of degrees of freedom
of the system tends to inﬁnity. An example of a LPS with a ﬁnite number
of particles would be a ﬁnite number of charges interacting with an electro-
magnetic ﬁeld, while an example with an inﬁnite number of particles would
be the thermodynamic limit (L3 → ∞, N → ∞, N/L3 ﬁnite). Such systems
possess “continuous sets of resonances”. By continuous sets of resonances, the
Brussels-Austin Group means that in the Fourier transformed representation,
the eigenfrequencies are continuous functions of the wave vector k, so that the
summation operations over terms like (3) must be replaced by integrals and the
denominators of such terms can be arbitrarily close to zero.

The resonance condition for a continuous set of resonances for a LPS in the

context of perturbation theory takes the form

bβdbdβ = 0,

Z Z

(5)

where b (representing degrees of freedom) and β are continuous functions de-
ﬁned over the real numbers. Under condition (5) motion will not even be quasi-
periodic so that variables have a continuous spectrum.2 No canonical transfor-
mation exists that can turn these LPS models into completely integrable models
(Prigogine et al. 1991, pp. 6-7). Such models exhibit the type of randomness as-
sociated with mixing, K-ﬂows and Bernoulli systems, but are usually interpreted
as deterministic.3

As an example of a LPS, imagine a gas containing an inﬁnite number of
particles continually undergoing collisions, where the collision processes never
cease. A more realistic example is an electromagnetic oscillator with frequency
ωosc interacting with an electromagnetic ﬁeld. The ﬁeld has an inﬁnite number
of degrees of freedom and the frequency ωk of the ﬁeld varies continuously with k,
giving rise to an inﬁnite number of resonances. Continuous resonances like those
2As Koopman and von Neumann ﬁrst pointed out, for dynamical systems with continuous
spectra, ‘the states of motion corresponding to any set become more and more spread out
into an amorphous everywhere dense chaos. Periodic orbits, and such like, appear only as
very special possibilities of negligible probability’ (Koopman and von Neumann 1932, p. 261).
This is generally acknowledged to be the ﬁrst reference to the term “chaos” in the context of
dynamics.

3The Baker’s transformation is a favorite model of a deterministic random system for the
Brussels-Austin Group (Part I). The equations are reversible, deterministic and conservative,
yet the mapping turns out to have the Bernoulli property (randomness of a coin toss).

5

in LPS are involved in fundamental phenomena such as absorption and emission
of light, decay of unstable particles and the scattering of electromagnetic waves
oﬀ of ﬂuids or other forms of matter, and are found in both classical mechanics
(CM) and quantum mechanics (QM).

The rigged Hilbert space (RHS) approach of the Prigogine school is a method
for solving the equations of a LPS (both CM and QM) consisting in construct-
ing a complete set of eigenvalues and eigenvectors for the Liouville operator
acting on distribution functions ρ.4 The construction of such eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions is what Prigogine and colleagues call the ‘generalized problem of
integration’ (Prigogine et al. 1991, p. 4). To be clear about terminology, ﬁnd-
ing a transformation that decouples the Hamiltonian in (1) is what is required
to show that the system is completely integrable in the sense described earlier.
Constructing the complete set of eigenvalues and eigenvectors for a set of equa-
tions derived from (1) is what Prigogine and colleagues refer to as ‘integrating’
or solving the equations of motion. Although initially motivated in the context
of perturbation theory (as sketched here), the rigged Hilbert space approach is
more general in nature and applicable to any LPS (e.g. most systems in SM,
systems involving interacting ﬁelds).

3 Mathematical Details of the Rigged Hilbert

Space Approach

There are three key elements in the Brussels-Austin method to solving LPS
equations. First, they utilize distribution functions to describe the dynamics.
Second, they adopt extended spaces such as RHS as a mathematical framework
for solving the equations. Third, they introduce an “appropriate” time ordering
of the dynamical states of the system.

3.1 The Need for Distributions

When solutions of the generalized integration problem sketched at the end of
§2.2 exist, they reduce to classical trajectories for most CM systems and to
state vectors for most QM systems. In the context of a LPS, however, Prigogine
and colleagues argue solutions are not reducible beyond distributions for CM
systems. Examples include systems in kinetic theory, radiation damping and in-
teracting ﬁelds. One important feature of such physical contexts is that they are
characterized by persistent interactions. According to Petrosky and Prigogine,
a system’s interactions are persistent if there are no asymptotic states such that
the interactions ﬁnally cease (1997, pp. 33 and 35). For example in kinetic
theory, the molecules of a gas are in constant interaction with one another be-
cause they are undergoing continuous collisions. This physical situation should
4These distribution functions may be understood in terms of the probability density
ρ(~q1, ~q2, ~q3, ..., ~p1, ~p2, ~p3..., t) of ﬁnding a set of molecules (say) with coordinates ~q1, ~q2, ~q3, ...
and momenta ~p1, ~p2, ~p3... at time t on the relevant energy surface and are analogous to the
microcanonical distribution.

6

be contrasted with the idealized case of a single neutral particle scattering oﬀ
a ﬁxed target. In the latter situation, there is a transitory interaction because
the particle undergoes an interaction only in a ﬁnite region near the target over
a very short time interval, while the particle spends the majority of its life in
the so-called asymptotic in and out states free of any interactions with the tar-
get. Since interactions never cease for systems with persistent interactions, the
model equations typically will not be completely integrable.

The presence of persistent interactions is one of the features giving rise to
the continuous set of resonances in a LPS. In a gas containing a large num-
ber of particles, these resonances allow for energy to be transferred and leveled
throughout the system. Through persistent interactions and the resulting res-
onances, the particles will loose energy and any ordered patterns are destroyed
through diﬀusion (see §4.2 below).

A further consequence is that the physical dynamics are no longer localized,
but are spread throughout the space occupied by the LPS. For the gas example,
these nonlocal dynamics will take the form of correlations as described in §4.2
below. In addition if the number of particles is large enough, then the degrees
of freedom for such a gas of particles will have a continuous spectrum qualifying
it as a LPS. This implies that we should expect the dynamical description of
such systems to be in terms of distributions of particles rather than in terms
of individual particles, because the eﬀects of long-range and higher-order corre-
lations due to such interactions become at least as important as the trajectory
dynamics. The particles remain coupled to one another through their interac-
tions resulting in collective eﬀects (§4.2 below). This type of long-range coupling
at least implies that the global or collective dynamics of the system cannot be
accurately represented by trajectory dynamics alone (see §4.3 below). As a
consequence, Prigogine and colleagues believe we must view irreversibility as a
property of a system that emerges at the global level which is not derivable from
the trajectory description, meaning that distributions are the natural elements
for representing statistical phenomena rather than trajectories.5

3.2 The Need for RHS

A RHS is an extended mathematical space ﬁrst introduced by the Russian math-
ematician Gel’fand and his collaborators (Gel’fand and Vilenkin 1964).6 Brieﬂy
a RHS can be understood in the following way. Let Ψ be an abstract linear
scalar product space and complete it with respect to two topologies. The ﬁrst
topology is the standard Hilbert space (HS) topology τH

|h| =

(h, h),

(6)
p
5To avoid a simple confusion (e.g. Bricmont 1995, pp. 165-6), note that singular distribu-
tions such as delta functions are not used to represent probability distributions in the rigged
Hilbert space approach.

6In more recent work Petrosky and Prigogine (1997) have explored rigging “Liouville
space”–the space of density functions or density operators–for dynamics. Ord´o˜nez (1998)
has demonstrated that these Liouville spaces can be rigged as a Gel’fand triplet, yielding
semi-group operators and generalized eigenvectors.

7

where h is an element of Ψ resulting a HS H. The second topology τΦ is deﬁned
by a countable set of norms

(7)

(8)

(9)

where φ is also an element of Ψ and the scalar product in (7) is given by

|φn| =

(φ, φ)n, n = 0, 1, 2...

p

(φ, φ′)n = (φ, (∆ + 1)nφ′), n = 0, 1, 2...

and

φγ → φ in τΦ iﬀ |φγ − φ|n → 0 for every n,

X 2

where ∆ is the Nelson operator ∆ =
i (Nelson 1959, 587). The χi are the
generators of an enveloping algebra of observables for the system in question
P
and they form a basis for a Lie algebra (Nelson 1959; Bohm et al. 1999). For
example if we are modeling the harmonic oscillator, the Xi could be the raising
and lowering operators (Bohm 1978, 7-9). Furthermore if the operator ∆+1 is a
nuclear operator then this ensures that Φ is a nuclear space (Treves 1967, 509-34;
Bohm 1967, 276-7). An operator A is nuclear if it is linear, essentially self-adjoint
(Roman 1975, pp. 540-3) and its inverse is Hilbert-Schmidt. The operator A−1
is Hilbert Schmidt if A−1 =
XiPi, where the Pi are mutually orthogonal
a2
projection operators on a ﬁnite dimensional vector space and
i < ∞, ai
P
denoting the eigenvalues of A−1 (Bohm 1967, 273-6). Notice that the norm (6)
is a special case of (7) where n = 0.7

P

We obtain a Gel’fand triplet if we complete Ψ with respect to τΦ to obtain
Φ and with respect to τH to obtain H. In addition we consider the dual spaces
of continuous linear functionals Φ× and H× respectively. Since H is self dual,
we obtain

Φ ⊂ H ⊂ Φ×,

(10)

where Φ× is characterized by the induced topology τ×. The meaning of the
symbol ⊂ in relation (10) is that every space to the left of ⊂ a is a subspace of
every space to the right of ⊂ and every space to the left of ⊂ is dense in the
space to the right of ⊂ with respect to the topology of the space to the right of
⊂ (see Gel’fand and Vilenkin 1964 for more details).

For the Brussels-Austin Group, the chief reason to work in a RHS is the abil-
ity to naturally model unstable physical phenomena such as decay, scattering
and the irreversible approach to equilibrium which is lacking in HS (e.g., Bishop
2003a). These kinds of time-dependent processes require complex eigenvalues
7There are many diﬀerent inequivalent irreducible representations of an enveloping algebra
of a group characterizing a physical system (e.g.
the rotation group has an inequivalent
irreducible representation for each value of j). They can be combined in many ways by
taking direct products describing combinations of physical systems. These representations are
characterized by the values of the invariant or Casimir operators of the group. So although
the Nelson operator fully determines the topology of Φ, there is freedom in choosing the
enveloping algebra describing elementary physical systems. Further restrictions on the choice
of function space for a realization of Φ are due to the particular characteristics of the physical
system being modeled. This is analogous to the situation for W ∗-algebras in the algebraic
approach to QM (Primas 1981 pp. 161-249; Amann and Atmanspacher 1999).

8

and generalized eigenfunctions (Gel’fand and Shilov 1967). Such mathematical
quantities are not well-deﬁned in a HS, but are given rigorous justiﬁcation in a
suitable RHS. In particular the Liouville operator, which characterizes a LPS’s
approach to equilibrium, does not have a complete set of eigenvalues and eigen-
functions in a HS. Recently the Brussels-Austin Group has demonstrated that a
complete set of eigenvalues and eigenvectors for this important operator can be
deﬁned and calculated for several chaotic models in extended spaces (Antoniou
and Tasaki 1992 and 1993; Hasegawa and Shapir 1992; Hasegawa and Driebe
1993). An additional motivation for switching to a RHS is that the equations
of motion deﬁned on a HS are time-symmetric. Time-asymmetric equations
may be deﬁned and solved in a RHS making the latter type of space a nat-
ural choice for modeling intrinsic irreversible processes (irreversibility without
explicit reference to an environment; see Part I). Intrinsic irreversibility is of
prime interest to the Brussels-Austin Group because these types of irreversible
processes are related to intrinsic arrows of time in physics (i.e. arrows of time
which are independent of human intervention or approximation).

3.3 Semigroup Operators in RHS and Irreversibility

One of the important features of RHS is that evolution operators are often el-
ements of semigroups rather than groups, so that irreversible behavior can be
appropriately modeled. The case of simple scattering is a good example for illus-
trating the concepts. An idealized version of a scattering experiment is sketched
in Figure 1. There is a preparation apparatus which prepares particles in a par-
ticular state (energy, angular momentum, etc.). The particles are emitted at a
target (assumed to be ﬁxed in this analysis). The free particle Hamiltonian in
(1) is H0 while the potential in the interaction region surrounding the scattering
center is given by V . After the interaction with the target, the detector registers
the particle measuring quantities such as the angle of scattering relative to the
initial direction of the particle as emitted from the accelerator or the energy of
the particle after the scattering event.

Each interaction involves a resonance which can be described as

|E± >=

1 +

(cid:18)

1
E − H ± iε

V

(cid:19)

|E > ,

(11)

a Lippmann-Schwinger-type equation for the evolution of the energy eigenstates
as they pass through the scattering region. Whenever the operator on the right
hand side of (11) applied to the energy eigenstate |E > goes to inﬁnity, we have
a resonance. According to the Brussels-Austin Group, if, given a suﬃciently
large number of interacting particles, the number of resonances in a system is
suﬃciently large, then the system will evolve from a highly ordered state to
a completely randomized or equilibrium state. This evolution is intrinsically
irreversible, due to the internal dynamics of the system.

The intrinsic irreversibility of LPS models must be described by semigroups.
This necessitates leaving the HS framework and working in a broader mathe-
matical space such as a RHS which Antoniou and Prigogine (1993) adopt in

9

Figure 1: An idealized scattering experiment.

their analysis of the Friedrich’s model for scattering.
In the Gel’fand triplet
Φ ⊂ H ⊂ Φ×, Φ× is the space of particle distribution functions. Furthermore
Antoniou and Prigogine adopt the following time ordering condition: any exci-
tations or preparations are to be interpreted as events taking place before t =
0 while any de-excitations or detections are to be interpreted as events taking
place after t = 0 (1993, pp. 445 and 455).

At the point in the analysis of the scattering experiment where choices have
to be made regarding how to interpret the directions of integration for the
analytic functions involved in the upper and lower complex half-planes, they
choose the following interpretations (1993, pp. 454-5): excitations are identiﬁed
as taking place before t = 0 (taken to be represented as extensions from the
lower to the upper half-plane), while de-excitations are identiﬁed as taking place
after t = 0 (taken to be represented as extensions from the upper to the lower
half-plane). So the time-ordering rule is applied with respect to the choice of
how to deform the contours in the complex plane with respect to the choice of
direction of integration along the contours. Proceeding in this fashion Antoniou
and Prigogine derive concrete realizations for the space Φ involving Hardy class
function spaces (1993 pp. 457-9; see also Bishop 2003a and 2003b).

Antoniou and Prigogine discuss two semigroups of evolution operators. The
ﬁrst is U †(t) = e−iHt, initially deﬁned on H for −∞ < t < ∞, extended to Φ×.
It is continuous and complete in the topology τ× of Φ×, valid for t ≥ 0 and they
identify its temporal direction as carrying states into the forward direction of
time. This operator describes evolution reaching equilibrium in the future. The
second operator is U †(t) extended to Φ×, continuous and complete in the topol-
ogy τ×, but valid for t ≤ 0.8 They identify the temporal direction of this latter
8The requirements of continuity and completeness force the unitary group extended to Φ×
to be restricted to the separate time ranges t ≤ 0 and t ≥ 0 (Bohm and Gadella 1989, pp.
35-119).

10

operator as carrying states into the backward direction of time (−t increasing),
so this operator describes evolution reaching equilibrium in the past. Since no
physical systems are ever observed evolving to equilibrium from the future into
the past, they select U †(t) extended to Φ× for t ≥ 0 as the physically relevant
semigroup of evolution operators for modeling statistical mechanical systems.
This selection is taken to be an expression of the second law of thermodynamics
based on our empirical observations (Antoniou and Prigogine 1993, p. 461).

The approach sketched in this section for the case of transient scattering can
be extended to the case where the interactions are continuous and persistent,
yielding similar results (Petrosky and Prigogine 1996 and 1997).

4 Discussion of the RHS Approach

The Brussels-Austin Group’s RHS approach has yielded solutions (mostly nu-
merical) to nonequilibrium statistical mechanical system equations. Based on
these solutions and the insights gained from the new approach, Prigogine and
coworkers make a number of important claims needing detailed discussion.

4.1 Thermodynamic Arrow of Time

One of the claimed virtues of the approach is that it provides an explanation
for the thermodynamic arrow of time (the law of increasing entropy deﬁned
entropy close to equilibrium). This has been one of the central goals of Prigogine
since he began his work in SM. One feature that both the earlier similarity
transformation approach (discussed in Part I) and the RHS approach share
in this quest is a kind of vacillation between seeking an explanation of the
thermodynamic arrow in the dynamics of the physical system, and taking the
empirically observed direction of the arrow as a fundamental principle.

In the RHS approach, the types of mechanisms to which the Brussels-Austin
Group appeals for explaining the thermodynamic arrow are diﬀusion, the growth
of correlations and collective eﬀects, all of which are generated by Poincar´e
resonances (Antoniou and Prigogine 1993; Petrosky and Prigogine 1996 and
1997). The extension of the description of a LPS with their Poincar´e resonances,
persistent interactions and chaotic dynamics to Gel’fand triplet spaces allows the
eigenvector equations to be solved. In the course of analyzing these solutions,
characteristically there are two semigroups that emerge as sketched in §3.3. At
this point in the analysis, one semigroup is selected because it represents systems
approaching equilibrium in the temporal direction of the future, while the other
semigroup is disregarded because it describes systems approaching equilibrium
in the temporal direction of the past which is never observed and, therefore,
deemed to be unphysical (Antoniou and Prigogine 1993, p. 461; Petrosky and
Prigogine 1996, p. 453 and 1997, p. 13). By making this latter appeal to
observations, the Brussels-Austin Group is appealing to the very facts they seek
to explain via the dynamics of the physical system.

11

The model equations alone do not uniquely determine which semigroup is
the appropriate one, so some kind of appeal to physical considerations is needed.
As discussed in §3.3 above, the Brussels-Austin Group does make an appeal to a
criterion for choosing a temporal ordering: any excitations are to be interpreted
as events taking place before t = 0 while any de-excitations are to be interpreted
as events taking place after t = 0. While there is a clear ordering of time from
excitation to de-excitation, the criterion invoked still ultimately rests upon our
observations that a system is excited before it undergoes de-excitation. The
physical reason why the thermodynamic arrow runs from the past toward the
future is still undiscovered in the RHS approach, though the approach gives us
the mathematical tools to explore and describe the arrow precisely.

4.2 Correlation Dynamics

The RHS approach highlights the role of nonlocal and collective eﬀects due to
long-range correlations that introduce new dynamics in the probabilistic de-
scription that are typically ignored in the trajectory description of a LPS.9 The
term “collective eﬀects” is used to describe the behavior of an aggregate of par-
ticles coupled together in some fashion that is distinct from the behavior of
individual particles. Collective eﬀects can arise from long-range forces such as
electromagnetism, gravity or from spatial correlations caused by interactions.

Spatial correlations play an important role in the temporal ordering of the
dynamics of SM systems. In atomic or molecular gases, collective eﬀects are due
to collisions. Consider the idealized textbook situation, where we start with an
isolated gas of N particles in a volume V that have yet to interact with one
another. If the initial distribution of the particles is homogeneous and isotropic,
then the particles are equally likely to be at any point ~r in V .10 This result
holds for each individual particle under the condition that the positions of the
other particles are arbitrary. In a typical gas or liquid, this latter condition is
not fulﬁlled in general, however. Consider two particles at a time in our gas.
Given the position of one particle, diﬀerent positions of the second particle are
not equally likely to obtain; namely, the second particle cannot occupy the po-
sition of the ﬁrst particle. Due to interparticle interactions and the symmetry
properties of the state vectors, diﬀerent values of the relative position (~r2 − ~r1)
between our two test particles in the entire gas do not appear with equal likeli-
hood. This feature is known as a spatial correlation between the simultaneous
positions ~r1 and ~r2 of the two particles.

In a plasma, for example, where the gas is composed of charged particles,
spatial correlations are the tendencies of unlike charges to cluster together and
the tendencies of like charges to repel each other. The simultaneous positions
of the particles in the plasma are not all equally likely. It turns out that there
9Prigogine (1962, 138-95) introduced a simpliﬁed version of correlation dynamics and

George (1973a) developed the idea in the direction indicated in this section.

10Of course, in this idealized example the assumption of equiprobability of states is rea-
In a LPS, by contrast, interactions are persistent, so this assumption cannot be

sonable.
made.

12

is a simple relationship between the spatial integral of the correlation function
representing spatial correlation and the mean square ﬂuctuation of the density
of the gas particles (Pathria 1972, 447-50), meaning the spatial distribution of
the particles is inﬂuenced by the presence of such correlations. In addition these
correlations are directly dependent on the density of particles in the gas. As the
density decreases, such collective eﬀects disappear because the mean free path
of the particle, a measure of the likelihood of a collision during a given distance
traveled, becomes comparable to V . This means collision events will be very
rare and correlations will be kept to a minimum when the mean free path is
large.

Collisions are frequent in dense gases and the spatial correlations induced
by collisions couple each particle with many other particles in the gas. It is this
coupling due to correlations that leads to collective behavior responsible for gas
particles being collected into coherent structures rather than being uniformly
spread throughout the volume. Examples would be turbulence and shock waves.
To see how these correlations develop, start with the particles in the gas
before they have interacted with each other. As they begin colliding, the ﬁrst
interactions set up binary correlations between particles. As the interactions
persist, ternary correlations begin to appear. The process will continue by es-
tablishing quaternary correlations and so on through N-ary correlations as more
and more particles become involved others through collisions. The progression
from lower order correlations (which appear ﬁrst) to higher order correlations
(which appear later) corresponds to a natural temporal ordering for the evolu-
tion of the states of the gas. Correlations and other collective eﬀects can rival or
exceed the role of individual particle trajectories and be masked by a dynamical
description that treats trajectories as its basic explanatory element.

For example the electromagnetic force is a long-range force. It is the dom-
inant force in many situations in a plasma, so the behavior of a plasma is not
reducible to the dynamics of the trajectories of the individual particles alone.
In the case of a plasma, the energy of the plasma is aﬀected by the presence
of correlations, such that one of the diﬀerences between the energy of a plasma
and that of an ideal gas (noninteracting particles) is given by a correction term
due to correlation eﬀects (Krall and Trivelpiece 1986, 63-5). Not only do these
eﬀects interact with the electromagnetic ﬁelds of the plasma itself, but they also
generate new electromagnetic ﬁelds that react back on the plasma leading to
very complex dynamics.

Among the physical mechanisms playing a role in LPS, correlations appear
to play a crucial role in irreversibility. As was apparent in the earlier similar-
ity transformation approach, the progression of correlations suggests a natural
direction for the thermodynamic arrow (George 1973a). But this is not simply
another way of saying that entropy increases for such systems because in an
open system the order of correlations may continue to grow while the measure
of disorder in the system may remain constant or decrease. So correlations are
not the complete explanation for the thermodynamic arrow of time.

Long-range correlations are another eﬀect in the dynamics of correlations
that become apparent in RHS (discussed in its earliest form in Prigogine 1962

13

and George 1973a). As gas particles begin to interact, correlations develop
among the particles due to interactions (recall that in a LPS these interactions
are associated with resonances). Along with the growing order of correlations,
long-range correlations develop as particles interact with one another and then
separate over long distances while carrying the “memory” of their prior inter-
actions (correlations) with them to other parts of the gas. Over short time
scales, the growing order of correlations appears to be the more dominant of the
two eﬀects. As time goes on, the long-range correlations due to resonances are
built up so that collective eﬀects become inﬂuential. These long-range corre-
lations are associated with nonequilibrium modes of energy transfer (Petrosky
and Prigogine 1996, p. 468).

Over longer time-scales, another very interesting phenomenon occurs. Equi-
librium short-range binary correlations remain ﬁnite, but nonzero around each
particle. In turn ternary nonequilibrium correlations are built up among parti-
cles in a small region. These correlations diﬀuse throughout the system, leaving
the equilibrium correlations, while quartinary nonequilibrium correlations are
built up among the local particles. These correlations diﬀuse throughout the
system while quintinary nonequilibrium correlations build up and so forth. As
time continues the variously ordered nonequilibrium correlations can propagate
over large distances due to diﬀusion so that the corresponding information is
transferred globally among the particles of the gas. The end result is a “sea” of
multiple incoherent correlations (Petrosky and Prigogine 1996, p. 468). This ef-
fect provides a natural temporal direction for the ﬂow of entropy and is revealed
in the types of complex spectral representations of the statistical evolution op-
erators made possible by working in an RHS.

In this sense one might argue that as the order of correlations increases,
as long-range correlations grow and as higher-order nonequilibrium correlations
propagate throughout the gas, the eﬀects of individual trajectories on the global
dynamics of the gas become less important relative to the eﬀects of the dynamics
of correlations. This does not mean that particles lack trajectories and positions
in state space as these types of interaction events are parasitic on these concepts
(e.g. mean free path between collisions). In my view correlations and collective
eﬀects make the signiﬁcant contributions to the global dynamics while the eﬀects
of trajectories play a role only locally (see below).11

One might object that the dynamics of correlations can somehow be reversed
even though the probability of the right kinds of reversals to run the whole
evolution backwards (like a ﬁlm in reverse) is extremely small. If true, then the
situation is still the same as in standard thermodynamics where the increase
in entropy in systems is viewed as being reversible though the probability is
vanishingly small.

The Brussels-Austin response to such an objection for open systems has been
given in §4 of Part I. For closed systems they have shown that as the dynamics
11Of course I have used idealized examples in this section in the sense that we imagined
starting with a gas of noninteracting particles and then “turning on” the interactions. Recall
that interactions are persistent in a LPS so there is never a time in such systems when the
microscopic dynamics can be characterized by smooth, smooth trajectories.

14

of correlations continue, an “entropy barrier” against inversion develops. This
barrier can be deﬁned as the value of the H -function–a thermodynamic function
related to the entropy, which does not require coarse graining or the invocation
of an environment in the Brussels-Austin approach–after such an inversion mi-
nus its value before such an inversion. This diﬀerence increases exponentially
with time, so the longer the LPS evolves, the higher the barrier to inversion.
Essentially this means that the energy requirements to invert the system of par-
ticles increases very rapidly with time. As the model approaches equilibrium,
this energy barrier diverges, hence, there is no physical way of “going back” in
the anti-thermodynamic direction (Petrosky and Prigogine 1996, pp. 468-9 and
494-5).

4.3 “Collapse of Trajectories”

In the similarity transformation approach (Part I), Prigogine and collabora-
tors put forward several arguments to the eﬀect that smooth (i.e., everywhere
diﬀerentiable), deterministic trajectories do not exist for unstable statistical me-
chanical systems. These arguments were fundamentally ﬂawed in similar ways
in that epistemological claims were treated as ontological claims. In the new
approach, this bias against such smooth trajectories and the dynamics derivable
from trajectories resurfaces in a diﬀerent form that clariﬁes the Brussels-Austin
attitude toward trajectories.

It is well known that in the traditional description, the trajectory of a point
particle free of any external forces can be represented mathematically as a su-
perposition of “plane waves” by taking the position of the particle and applying
In this latter space, a
a Fourier transform from (q, p) space to (k, p) space.
trajectory is a coherent superposition of plane waves and this superposition is
modeled by a Dirac delta function. For a particle undergoing free motion, this
distribution function is a solution to the equation of motion, has unchanging
width and is everywhere diﬀerentiable throughout its deterministic evolution
(“smooth” trajectory).

For a ﬁnite number of particles with normalizable distributions, the trajec-
tory description in (k, p) space and the Brussels-Austin probabilistic description
agree.12 In the thermodynamic limit, however, Prigogine and coworkers argue
that resonances destroy smooth trajectories in the following way. In the thermo-
dynamic limit, the Dirac delta function describing the trajectories of particles
at t = 0, once evolution begins, immediately begins spreading throughout a sub-
space of (k, p) space under the action of resonances, though maintaining a delta
function singularity13 (Petrosky and Prigogine 1996, pp. 479-481 and 1997, pp.
12Some critics, such as Bricmont (1995, pp. 165 and 175), have overlooked the way in which
the RHS approach reduces to standard SM approaches for small numbers of particles when
LPS conditions are not fulﬁlled.

13The signiﬁcance of the delta function singularity appears to be more mathematical than
physical. Mathematically it means that so-called reduced distribution functions–where the
distribution function refers to a subset s of the total number of particles in the system–exists
in the thermodynamic limit, but such distribution functions almost always exist for molecules
under most realistic forces. Reduced distributions were introduced into nonequilibrium con-

15

35-37). The trajectories are no longer representable as delta functions, but by
broader kinds of distribution functions. Petrosky and Prigogine unfortunately
described this phenomenon as the “collapse of trajectories”, but all they really
mean is that a diﬀerent notion of trajectory is required in a LPS.

In (q, p) space, this implies that there are no longer any smooth (everywhere
diﬀerentiable) trajectories, but, rather, trajectories exhibiting Brownian motion.
A simple way to see this is to return to our idealized gas example. As before,
assume initially that the particles have not interacted with each other. Prior to
any collisions, the motion of the particles can be characterized by smooth tra-
jectories. As they begin interacting, the particle trajectories become piece-wise
continuous as instantaneous discontinuities arise associated with each collision.
Continuous interactions of this type would then prevent trajectories from being
everywhere diﬀerentiable, resulting in particles exhibiting Brownian trajectories
rather than smooth ones, but this in no way implies that there are no trajectories
whatsoever.

Consider the special case of a single smooth trajectory represented as

γ(p, q) =

δ(~qi − ~q0

i )δ(~pi − ~p0
i )

(12)

N

Yi=1

in a LPS model where the superscript 0 indicates the contribution from the
unperturbed Hamiltonian. To ﬁrst order the time evolution of the momentum
for the component i = 1 is giving by

~p1(t) = ~p0

1+ lim
Ω→∞

λ
Ω Xk

N

Xn=2

(−~k)

Vk
1 − ~v0

~k · (~v0

n) − iε (cid:16)

e−i~k·(~v

0

0
1 −~v

n)t − 1

e−i~k·(~q

0
0
1−~q

n),

(cid:17)

(13)
where Ω is the volume, ~k is the wave vector, ~v1 is the velocity vector of particle 1,
~vn is the velocity vector of particle n, and ε is an inﬁnitesimal positive constant.
The ﬁrst term represents the contribution from the unperturbed Hamiltonian
and the second term represents contributions from the interactions.
If N is
ﬁnite, (13) becomes

~p1(t) = ~p0

1 + λ

N

Xn=2 Z

d~k

Vk
1 − ~v0

~k · (~v0

n) − iε

~ke−i~k·(~q0

1 −~q0

n) + O(λ2),

(14)

1 − ~v0

in the limit t → ∞ because the pole at ~k · (~v0
n) = iε vanishes as Ω → ∞,
the LPS condition. According to (14) the value of the momentum to ﬁrst order
asymptotically approaches a constant and the time dependence drops out. Note
that in the limit |~q0
n| → ∞, the interactions from particles n remains
ﬁnite even if such interactions are short-ranged due to resonances, so that long-
In the thermodynamic limit, (13) generally
range correlations are built up.
diverges and Petrosky and Prigogine conclude that point distributions such
as (12) representing trajectories are not physically admissible and, therefore,

1 − ~q0

texts by (Brout and Prigogine 1956; Prigogine and Balescu 1959).

16

smooth trajectories are inconsistent with the thermodynamic limit in a LPS
(1996, p. 480). Only singular nonlocal distributions appear to be consistent
with the thermodynamic limit and such distributions lie outside of HS (Petrosky
and Prigogine 1996, pp. 479-81).

These results are related to the nonlocal nature of the collective eﬀects of
the entire distribution described in §4.2 above. If any arbitrary ﬁnite number of
particles were selected within the system and treated in isolation, all nonlocal
diﬀusion and correlation eﬀects become negligible and we are left with the stan-
dard description and results in terms of trajectories (however, these trajectories
would not necessarily be everywhere diﬀerentiable).

In more realistic situations, the nonexistence of smooth trajectories leads
directly to the Brussels-Austin claim that a LPS exhibits behavior that can-
not be derived from trajectory dynamics. Such eﬀects include the breaking of
time symmetry (i.e., the appearance of semigroups of operators governing the
evolution instead of groups), diﬀusion and nonlocal correlations. Prigogine and
coworkers refer to these eﬀects as “non-Newtonian” to emphasize the fact that
the trajectory description is inadequate to account for them. The existence of
collision operators such as the Fokker-Planck operator is only a necessary con-
dition for irreversibility and other “non-Newtonian” eﬀects. Particular types
of distributions (namely singular distributions) must also be present in order
to have suﬃcient conditions for such behavior. The class of singular distribu-
tion functions is quite broad and applicable to many ordinary situations in SM
(the canonical distribution is an example; see also Prigogine 1962 and 1997).
Petrosky and Prigogine have carried out algebraic and computer modeling to
demonstrate that the trajectory and distribution descriptions yield diﬀerent re-
sults for LPS (e.g. 1993, 1994 and 1996).

I believe the appropriate way to understand this new approach with its “non-
Newtonian” eﬀects is to agree with them that distribution descriptions cannot
be reduced to point-wise descriptions. However, both descriptions should be
viewed as valid within their domains. The trajectory description is valid for
local regions of a LPS, where there are relatively few particles, so that trajectory
dynamics is the dominant feature (the trajectories may be either smooth and
exact, or exhibit random walks). Interactions take place among particles at this
local level and to the extent that we can ignore higher-order and long-range
correlations, trajectory and distribution descriptions agree in their account of
physical behavior as was noted earlier.

Where my interpretation of the Brussels-Austin work diﬀers from their own
is when the conditions for a LPS are met (large number of particles, continuous
frequencies, etc.). I agree that in examining the global evolution of LPS, higher-
order correlations and collective eﬀects due to long-range, persistent interactions
are the dominant features, which are not reducible to trajectory dynamics alone.
Trajectories are not irrelevant, however, because such features as correlations
and collective eﬀects presuppose particle positions and trajectories. For ex-
ample, collective eﬀects in ordinary gases do not disconﬁrm the existence of
trajectories, though the eﬀects of correlations can rival or exceed the eﬀects of
individual particle trajectories and be masked by a dynamical description that

17

treats trajectories as the sole explanatory element. Note that (14) does not im-
ply smooth point trajectories are immediately expunged from a LPS. Physically
smooth trajectories are converted into random walks due to the persistent inter-
actions and the long-range higher-order correlations that diﬀuse throughout the
system over time. As described above, resonances, collisions and correlations
are closely related to long-range correlations and collective eﬀects, behavioral
features of unstable systems for which the trajectory description alone cannot
adequately account. For LPS models the whole is more than the sum of its parts.
Particle trajectories are necessary for global distributions to exist, but are in-
suﬃcient for determining how such global distributions evolve in time. The
thermodynamic paradox might be dissolved because (1) the time-symmetric
behavior of the trajectory dynamics contributes nothing more to the global evo-
lution of the SM system than the necessary conditions for the existence of such
a system and (2) in a LPS trajectories exhibit Brownian motion and correlation
dynamics dominate the macroscopic dynamics. Thermodynamic behavior is,
then, an emergent global phenomenon possessing a temporal direction.

My interpretation suggests a way to reduce the tension in their view between
operationalism with respect to trajectories and realism with respect to distri-
butions (see Part I), where the Brownian trajectories of the system give the
necessary conditions for the existence of the distribution ρ, but not suﬃcient
conditions for its evolution. In my judgement the new approach the Brussels-
Austin Group has been exploring illuminates some of the underlying physical
mechanisms of thermodynamic behavior. Focusing on the growth and dynamics
of correlations and collective eﬀects are important physical insights which have
advanced our understanding of thermodynamics processes. And by employing
extended mathematical structures such as RHS, they have developed powerful
tools for describing such processes which will doubtless lead to further insights.
As a last comment, I should point out that this RHS approach does not rep-
resent a kind of coarse-graining approach, at least as normally understood. Em-
phasis shifts away from trajectories because they are only a part of the story of
the behavior of a LPS (coarse-grained accounts typically assume that trajectory
dynamics is the whole story, but that complete descriptions at the trajectory
level are computationally intractable). And, as in the similarity transformation
approach, the RHS approach distinguishes between manifolds of stable and un-
stable motions (in contrast to typical coarse-grained accounts). Furthermore,
if the global behavior of a LPS is not only emergent, but also constrains the
motion of individual particles (say by restricting the modes of energy transfer),
then an appropriate mathematical description should be able to describe this
kind of feedback between levels in a system. The RHS approach can describe
such feedback eﬀects, whereas coarse-grained accounts cannot because they deal
with only one level of a given system. Finally, whether trajectories that are not
everywhere continuous nor everywhere diﬀerentiable are deterministic or not is
an open question in the RHS approach, as I discuss in the next section (coarse-
grained accounts typically assume trajectories are deterministic, though usually
no explicit assumptions are made regarding the trajectories’ continuity and dif-
ferentiablility).

18

5 Possibility Rather than Certainty?

Prigogine’s provocatively titled book, The End of Certainty (1997), sums up one
of arguably the most important and far reaching consequences of the Brussels-
Austin Group’s work: Namely, that the certainty of the deterministic, time-
symmetric trajectory description is not applicable to the global dynamics of a
LPS. Instead only a statistical description of probability densities remains. In
conventional CM and SM models, particle positions and trajectories are treated
as the fundamental ontological entities determining the dynamical evolution of
the system. In the Brussels-Austin view this is no longer the case for LPS mod-
els. The fundamental ontological feature for these models are the probability
distributions, i.e., the large-scale arrangements of the particles themselves. To
reformulate the laws of classical dynamics along the statistical lines suggested
by Prigogine and co-workers leads to the conclusion that such laws now ‘express
“possibilities” and no more “certainties”’ (Petrosky and Prigogine 1997, p. 1).
Where there are relatively few numbers of particles, the Brussels-Austin
Group’s approach to dynamics reduces to the standard results of CM, so the tra-
jectory picture with its deterministic and time-reversible character is preserved
as a limiting case. In non-LPS cases, the RHS approach recovers the usual re-
sults of SM (e.g. Fokker-Planck equation, Boltzmann equation, non-Markovian
master equations). It is in cases where the LPS criteria apply that probability
becomes the fundamental notion, irreducible to the trajectory description. Sys-
tems must be treated as wholes. If any subset of the total number of particles
N is treated by itself all the “non-Newtonian” eﬀects disappear and the con-
ventional descriptions are recovered. It is in this sense that Prigogine believes,
‘What is now emerging is an “intermediate” description that lies somewhere be-
tween the two alienating images of a deterministic world and an arbitrary world
of pure chance...[T]he new laws of nature deal with the possibility of events, but
do not reduce these events to deductible, predictable consequences’ (Prigogine
1997, p. 189).

The nature of this possibility supposedly represents a new conception which
remains to be clariﬁed, however.
It is clearly not the kind of irreducible in-
determinism described in von Neumann collapse, where some sort of collapse
from multiple possibilities to a single actuality is envisioned. As Prigogine and
colleagues describe it, their probabilistic formulation of physics is also to be dis-
tinguished from the type of chaotic dynamics, where the underlying dynamics
is deterministic, but the outcomes of the system are not predictable. The lat-
ter is epistemically indeterminable but not ontically indeterministic.14 Instead
the dynamics envisioned by Prigogine and his colleagues involve an interplay
between unitary reversible processes and irreversible processes. The LPS are
important examples of dynamical systems which show this kind of interplay
and are, therefore, intrinsically probabilistic.

But the relationship of this probabilistic evolution to deterministic dy-
namics remains unclear and requires attention because under some conditions
14Understanding what it means for a system or a description to be ontically indeterministic

is by no means straightforward (e.g. Bishop 2002).

19

the dynamics of probability distributions can be “embedded” into completely
deterministic dynamics and Markov processes can almost always be “embed-
ded” into deterministic Kolmogorov processes (Antoniou and Gustafson 1993;
Gustafson 1997, pp. 55-76). This leaves open the possibility that there is no
signiﬁcant fundamental diﬀerence between this new conception of probabilistic
evolution and the conventional conception of deterministic evolution, or so one
could plausibly argue.15

Though more needs to be said regarding the notion of probabilistic dynamics
they are working out, it must be internally generated by the dynamics of the
system (e.g. via correlation dynamics) rather than imposed from the outside
by observers, measuring apparatuses or the environment. I do not take it that
this need for more clariﬁcation is a serious weakness of their program. On the
contrary, I look at the situation as analogous to the early days of quantum
theory where many concepts (indeterminacy being one of them) were very hazy
at the start inviting serious reﬂection and exploration.

The RHS formalism gives us a uniﬁed description of dynamics and thermo-
dynamics within a statistical framework and a consistent, rigorous description of
irreversible processes. The mathematical developments are indeed impressive,
including new results regarding the theory of complex spectral representations
of operators. Furthermore this framework is powerful enough to allow a uni-
ﬁcation between CM and QM (Prigogine et al. 1991; Petrosky, Prigogine and
Tasaki 1991; Petrosky and Prigogine 1994). However, the promise of the recent
Brussels-Austin work must be balanced against two important open questions:
(1) What is the physical and mathematical status of the past-directed t ≤ 0
semigroup (§3.3) and (2) What is the precise nature of the probability lying
at the heart of an LPS? Answering these two questions holds the key to their
being able to oﬀer an explanation for the thermodynamic arrow of time and for
their developing a notion of indeterminism that is diﬀerent in kind from that
discussed in conventional QM developments that would be truly revolutionary.
As things stand, the Brussels-Austin Group has given us a powerful descrip-
tive tool for irreversible processes, and nonlinear dynamics more generally, but
they have not given us an explanation for the origination of the irreversibility
we observe in our world. One might object that the RHS approach is ultimately
only of mathematical interest since there is nothing philosophically interest-
ing given the current state of the above open questions. This response is too
quick, however. These open questions can also be viewed as opportunities for
exploration of the underlying concepts of the approach in order to attempt to
answer these questions. For example, by adopting a diﬀerent arrow of time in
the context of scattering in a RHS formulation of QM, one can show that the
15I should point out that although there may exist theorems showing that given any Markov
process, that process can be embedded in a larger deterministic Kolmogorov process, the gen-
eral result does not necessarily mean that the given Markov process is deterministic. Whether
or not a given Markov process is deterministic or not is an ontological rather than a mathe-
matical question. It should also be clear, however, that simply characterizing the probability
densities via Kolmogorov measures is insuﬃcient because this cannot settle the ontological
nature of the probability.

20

t ≤ 0 semigroup is also future oriented (this time arrow is, however, highly
operational in character and not generally applicable outside of laboratory con-
texts; for discussion, see Bishop 2003a and 2003b). So interesting conceptual
questions are raised by the Brussels-Austin work. Besides, even if questions (1)
and (2) should ultimately be answered in a way that closes oﬀ this avenue for
nonequilibrium SM, that information is also valuable to philosophers.

Acknowledgments–This essay was considerably strengthened from discus-
sions with and comments by Ioannis Antoniou, Harald Atmanspacher, Jeremy
Butterﬁeld, Dean Driebe, Fred Kronz, Tomio Petrosky, Michael Redhead, Michael
Silberstein and numerous anonymous referees. I take full responsibility for re-
maining weaknesses.

References

Amann, A. and Atmanspacher, H. (1999) ‘C∗- and W ∗-Algebras of Ob-
servables, Their Interpretations, and the Problem of Measurement’, in H. At-
manspacher, A. Amann and H. M¨uller-Herold (eds), On Quanta, Mind, and
Matter: Hans Primas in Context (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Aca-
demic Publishers).

Antoniou, I. and Gustafson, K. (1993) ‘From Probabilistic Descriptions to

Deterministic Dynamics”, Physica A 197: 153-66.

Antoniou, I., Gustafson, K. and Suchanecki, Z. (1998) ‘From Stochastic
Semigroups to Chaotic Dynamics’, in A. Bohm, H-D. Doebner and P. Kielanowski
(eds.), Irreversibility and Causality: Semigroups and Rigged Hilbert Spaces (Berlin:
Springer-Verlag).

Antoniou, I. and Prigogine, I. (1993) ‘Intrinsic Irreversibility and Integrabil-

ity of Dynamics’, Physica A 192: 443-464.

Antoniou, I. and Tasaki, S. (1992) ‘Generalized Spectral Decomposition of
the β-adic Baker’s Transformation and Intrinsic Irreversibility’ Physica A 190:
303-329.

(1993) ‘Spectral Decomposition of the Renyi Map’, Journal of

Physics A26: 73-94.

Bishop, R. (2002) ‘Deterministic and Indeterministic Descriptions’, in H.
Atmanspacher and R. Bishop (eds.), Between Chance and Choice: Interdisci-
plinary Perspectives on Determinism (Thorverton: Imprint Academic), in press.
(2003a) ‘The Arrow of Time in Rigged Hilbert Space Quantum Me-

chanics’, International Journal of Theoretical Physics, in press.

(2003b) ‘Quantum Time Arrows, Semigroups and Time-Reversal in

Scattering’, International Journal of Theoretical Physics, accepted.

Bohm, A. (1967) ‘Rigged Hilbert Space and Mathematical Description of
Physical Systems’, in W. Brittin, A. Barut and M. Guenin (eds), Lectures in
Theoretical Physics Vol IX A: Mathematical Methods of Theoretical Physics
(New York: Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, Inc), pp. 255-317.

(1978) The Rigged Hilbert Space and Quantum Mechanics (Berlin:

Springer-Verlag).

21

Bohm, A. and Gadella, M. (1989) Dirac Kets, Gamow Vectors, and Gel’fand

Triplets, Lecture Notes in Physics, vol. 348 (Berlin: Springer-Verlag).

Braunss, G. (1984) ‘On the Construction of State Spaces for Classical Dy-
namical Systems with a Time-dependent Hamiltonian Function’, Journal of
Mathematical Physics 25, 266-70.

Bricmont, J. (1995) ‘Science of Chaos or Chaos in Science?’ Physicalia

Magazine 17: 159-208.

Brout, R. and Prigogine, I. (1956) ‘Statistical Mechanics of Irreversible Pro-
cesses, Part VII: A General Theory of Weakly Coupled Systems’, Physica 22:
621-36.

Gel’fand, I. and Shilov, G. (1967) Generalized Functions Volume 3: Theory
of Diﬀerential Equations, Meinhard E. Mayer tr. (New York: Academic Press).
Gel’fand, I. and Vilenkin, N. (1964) Generalized Functions Volume 4: Ap-
(New York: Academic

plications of Harmonic Analysis, Amiel Feinstein tr.
Press).

George, C. (1973a) ‘Subdynamics and Correlations’, Physica 65, 277-302.

(1973) Lectures in Statistical Physics II, Lecture Notes in Physics

(Berlin: Springer-Verlag).

Gustafson, K. (1997) Lectures on Computational Fluid Dynamics, Mathe-

matical Physics, and Linear Algebra (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc).

Hasegawa, H. and Driebe, D. (1993) ‘Spectral Determination and Physical
Conditions for a class of chaotic Piecewise-Linear Maps’ Physics Letters A176:
193-201.

Hasegawa, H. and Shapir, W. (1992) ‘Unitarity and Irreversibility in Chaotic

Systems’, Physical Review A46: 7401-7423.

Hilborn, R. (1994) Chaos and Nonlinear Dynamics: An Introduction for

Scientists and Engineers (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

Krall, N. and Trivelpiece, A. (1986) Principles of Plasma Physics (San Fran-

cisco: San Francisco Press).

Koopman, B. and von Neumann, J. (1932), ‘Dynamical Systems of Contin-

uous Spectra,’ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 16: 255-261.

Mackey, M. (1992) Time’s Arrow: The Origins of Thermodynamic Behavior

(Berlin: Springer-Verlag).

(2002) ‘Microscopic Dynamics and the Second Law of Thermo-
dynamics’, in C. Mugnai, A. Ranfagni and L. Schulman (eds.), Time’s Arrows,
Quantum Measurement and Superluminal Behavior (Rome: Consiglio Nazionale
Delle Ricerche), pp. 49-65.

Ord´o˜nez, A. (1998) ‘Rigged Hilbert Spaces Associated with Misra-Prigogine-

Courbage Theory of Irreversibility’, Physica A 252: 362-376.

Pathria, R. (1972) Statistical Mechanics (Oxford: Pergamon Press).
Petrosky, T. and Prigogine, I. (1993) ‘Poincar´e Resonances and the Limits
of Trajectory Dynamics’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA
90: 9393-7.

(1994) ‘Complex Spectral Representation and Time-Symmetry

Breaking’, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 4: 311-359.

22

(1996) ‘Poincar´e Resonances and the Extension of Classical

Dynamics’, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 7: 441-497.

(1997) ‘The Extension of Classical Dynamics for Unstable
Hamiltonian Systems’, Computers & Mathematics with Applications 34: 1-44.
Petrosky, T., Prigogine, I. and Tasaki, S. (1991) ‘Quantum Theory of Non-

Integrable Systems’, Physica A 173: 175-242.

Philippot, J. (1961) ‘Initial Conditions in the Theory of Irreversible Pro-

cesses’, Physica 27: 490-6.

Wiley & Sons).

Prigogine, I. (1962) Non-Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics (New York: John

(1980) From Being to Becoming: Time & Complexity in the Physical

Sciences (New York: W. H. Freeman).

Nature (New York: The Free Press).

(1997) The End of Certainty: Time, Chaos, and the New Laws of

Prigogine, I. and Balescu, R. (1959) ‘Irreversible Processes in Gases I.: The

Diagram Technique’ Physica 25: 281-301.

Prigogine, I. and Petrosky, T. (1999) ‘Laws of Nature, Probability and Time
Symmetry Breaking’ in Antoniou and Lumer (ed) Generalized Functions, Oper-
ator Theory, and Dynamical Systems (Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC
Press).

Prigogine, I., Petrosky, T., Hasegawa, H And Tasaki, S. (1991) ‘Integrability
and Chaos in Classical and Quantum Mechanics’, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals
1:3-24.

Primas, H. (1990) ‘Mathematical and Philosophical Questions in the The-
ory of Open and Macroscopic Quantum Systems’, in A. Miller (ed), Sixty-Two
Years of Uncertainty: Historical, Philosophical, and Physical Inquiries into the
Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (New York: Plenum Press).

Roman, P. (1975) Some Modern Mathematica for Physicists and Other Out-
siders: An Introduction to Algebra, Topology, and Functional Analysis Volume
2 (New York: Pergamon Press).

Tabor, M. (1989) Chaos and Integrability in Nonlinear Dynamics (New York:

John Wiley & Sons).

York: Academic Press).

Treves, F. (1967) Topological Vector Spaces, Distributions and Kernels (New

23

