3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
2
0
5
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dynamical ordering induced by preferential transitions in Planar Arrays of
Superheated Superconducting granules

A. Pe˜naranda∗ and L. Ram´ırez-Piscina
Departament de F´ısica Aplicada,
Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya,
Avda. Gregorio Mara˜non 44, E-08028 Barcelona, SPAIN.

We perform simulations of planar arrays of superheated superconducting granules (PASS) under
an external magnetic ﬁeld, analyzing transitions undergone by the system when the external ﬁeld
is slowly increased from zero. We observe, for high concentrations, the existence of an interval of
external ﬁelds for which no transitions are induced. This eﬀect is analogous to a ”hot border zone”
identiﬁed in the response of Superheated Superconducting Granule detectors. We explain such
behaviour as produced by a geometrical ordering dynamically induced in the system by transitions
in preferential sites due to diamagnetic interactions.

PACS Numbers: 41.20.Gz, 29.40.Ym, 74.80.Bj
KEYWORDS: A. Superconductors. D. Phase transitions.

Superheated superconducting granules systems are being developed as detectors in areas such as dark matter,
neutrino, neutron, x-ray and transition radiation [1]. An ensemble of spherical granules of a Type I superconductor
material is maintained in a metastable superheated state by adequate conditions of temperature and external magnetic
ﬁeld. An increasing of the applied ﬁeld or the deposition of energy in a microgranule by radiation can produce a
transition to the normal state. The change of magnetic ﬂux inherent to the loss of Meissner eﬀect can be sensed by
a sensitive magnetometer which provides information about the incident radiation.

An early detector was proposed as a disordered colloidal suspension of microgranules in a suitable medium such
as paraﬃn wax [2]. The state of each grain of this suspension in the phase diagram depends, in addition to the
external ﬁeld and temperature, on its metallurgical defects and the diamagnetic interactions of the other grains of the
suspension. Metallurgical defects can increase the local magnetic ﬁeld of the grain and can precipitate the transition to
normal state. Diamagnetic interactions depend on the environment of each grain, producing an additional dispersion
in the surface magnetic ﬁeld values. As a consequence of these combined eﬀects, the spread of transitions ﬁelds of the
suspension reaches values of about 20% that can reduce the resolution of the detector [3].

In a previous work we showed that this spreading in transition ﬁelds is eﬀectively reduced following an increase
in the applied ﬁeld. We obtained that the successive transitions induced by the external ﬁeld are a strong ordering
mechanism which produce a more homogeneus distribution of surface magnetic ﬁelds of the granules. Consequently,
by using this eﬀect, the uncertainty could be reduced in these devices [4,5].

Experimentally, a variant of the colloidal device has been developed in response to the spread problem [6]. The
microgranules are arrayed on thin planar substrates. These Planar Arrays of Superconducting Spheres (PASS) have
yielded diﬀerential superheating curves in which the spreading is reduced by an order of magnitude.

Although the technique of fabrication of this device can only produce arrays of relative small size, it has been shown
that the PASS has both good energy and position sensitivity. On the other hand, the avalanche eﬀect, demonstrated in
lines of granules, can enhance the magnetic signal. This allows, in principle, the use of very small grains in devices with
high energy sensitivity [7]. We presented in a previous work [8] simulations of these systems, and results of maximun
surface ﬁelds were shown for diﬀerent distances between spheres, i.e. diﬀerent concentrations. The broadening of
maximum surface ﬁeld distributions for increasing concentrations as a consequence of diamagnetic interactions, with
noticeable ﬁnite size eﬀects, was noted. This would produce a larger dispersion in transition ﬁelds.

Numerical Monte Carlo techniques were applied by Esteve et al. [9] to study transitions induced in a bidimensional
lattice of small superconducting spheres by an external magnetic ﬁeld normally applied to the array. Even though
they only considered two body interactions and diamagnetic contributions until a small number of neighbours of each
sphere, they found an interesting phenomenon: a gap or plateau zone appears in the curves of transition counts versus
the applied ﬁeld for systems with small lattice spacing, which seems always located around a fraction f of remaining
superconducting spheres equal to 0.30. At this point, a large increase of ﬁeld is required to observe the next transition.
The qualitative explanation given for the existence of the plateau is the decreasing of diamagnetic interactions due

∗

angelina@fa.upc.es

to the change of distance between spheres as a result of transitions. Nevertheless the authors did not provide any
explanation of the observed discontinuity nor the f = 0.30 occurrence of this phenomenon.

This plateau corresponds to an eﬀective ’hot border zone’ previously observed in the response of Superheaed
Superconducting Grains devices, in the sense that the system is insensitive to small changes in external ﬁeld, and
transitions can only be produced by thermal nucleation [10]. This eﬀect has interesting consequences in PASS
operations, because it introduces a threshold in the value of the energy of the incident radiation to permit transitions
to occur.

In this paper we perform numerical simulations of transitions in PASS conﬁgurations immersed in an increasing
external ﬁeld, Bext, in order to analyse this phenomenon. We observe that the existence or not of the plateau is related
to diﬀerent dynamical evolutions, for concentrated or dilute systems, during transitions. This dynamics produces, in
the case of more concentrated systems, a spatial order coherent with the appearance of the plateau zone at about
f = 0.25 value. This ordering is the result of previous preferential transitions in certain lattice sites due to diamagnetic
interactions. However, transitions in dilute systems give an evolution to a diﬀerent kind of spatial conﬁguration. A key
point in this diﬀerentiation is the role of diamagnetic interactions, which are stronger in more concentrated systems.
We consider the applied magnetic ﬁeld Bext perpendicular to the planar system. We assume the microgranules as
spheres of equal radius a much larger than the London penetration length. We consider that the transition of each
microgranule to the normal phase is completed once the local magnetic ﬁeld at any point of its surface reaches a
threshold value Bth. This value can vary from sphere to sphere and is introduced in order to take into account the
defects of the spheres.

We employ, in our simulations, a distribution of threshold values experimentaly determined for tin microspheres
dispersed in paraﬃn. This distribution was ﬁtted by a parabolic distribution in a range of values between BSH(1 − ∆)
and BSH [11]. Small values of ∆ are related to more perfect spheres. Most results shown in this work correspond to
∆ = 0.2.

The procedure in our simulations is as follows: N spheres are placed in a square array, separated a distance d. After
assignment at random of a threshold ﬁeld value to each sphere, the system is immersed in an external magnetic ﬁeld
Bext which is slowly increased from zero. The knowledge of the surface magnetic ﬁeld on each microsphere is achieved
by solving the Laplace equation with the appropriate boundary conditions. We have used a numerical procedure that
allows us both to consider the complete multi-body problem and to reach multipolar contributions of arbitrary order
[8]. When the maximum local magnetic ﬁeld on the surface of any sphere reaches its threshold value Bth, the sphere
transits and the conﬁguration becomes one of N − 1 superconducting spheres. The change of diamagnetic interactions
in any transition leads us to repeat the process until all spheres have transited. The maximun surface magnetic ﬁeld
value of each sphere is monitored after each transition, allowing us to study the evolution of a system in its successive
transitions.

Numerical simulations have been performed on several conﬁgurations with distances between sphere centers, in
units of radius a, of d/a = 7.482, 4.376, 3.473, 3.034, 2.757 and 2.5. These distances correspond in a 3-D array to
values of ﬁlling factor (fraction of volume occupied by the spheres), of ρ = 0.01, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20 and 0.268.

An important point to be considered in this kind of system is the ﬁnite-size eﬀects [8] that aﬀect surface magnetic
ﬁeld values, especially in dense conﬁgurations, and that force us to work with a number of microgranules as large as
possible [8]. By computational limits and precision requirements, the number of spheres analysed has been N = 400
in the more concentrated systems and N = 169 in the other conﬁgurations.

Results of simulations of ﬁeld-induced transitions are shown in Fig. 1.

In this ﬁgure, the fraction f of still
superconducting spheres versus the (increasing) external ﬁeld, refered to the critical superheating ﬁeld (Bext/BSH ),
is presented for several values of lattice spacing. We can observe a fast decay in the most dilute case, in which
transitions are produced for external ﬁeld values closely following the distribution of threshold values. Transitions
begin for smaller external ﬁelds values as the concentration of the system increases. This shows the signiﬁcance of
diamagnetic interactions on local surface ﬁeld values, which is stronger for spheres in closer proximity. On the other
hand, the transition curves spread out for these concentrated conﬁgurations. But the more signiﬁcant eﬀect shown in
this ﬁgure is the breakdown of the continuous response and the appearance of a ’plateau zone’ clearly distinguished
for shorter lattice spacing. This eﬀect is produced for a fraction of remaining superconducting spheres slightly lower
than f = 0.25. In this zone there is a gap in the necessary increment of the external ﬁeld to generate the following
transition. The width of this gap increases as the lattice spacing is reduced. This plateau corresponds to an eﬀective
’hot border’.

2

FIG. 1. Fraction f of still superconducting spheres versus Bext/Bsh, after an increase of the perpendicular external magnetic
ﬁeld from zero, for several samples of N = 169 initially superconducting spheres, corresponding to diﬀerent initial lattice
spacings. (N = 400 for the more concentrated systems). Continuous line corresponds to the dilute limit, i.e. assuming a
maximum surface ﬁeld of 3/2Bext for all the spheres.

Comparison with results from the work of Esteve et al. [9], shows great similarity even though the location of the
plateau is in their case always around f = 0.3. They worked with perfect spheres and two-body interactions, which
were only considered for spheres closer than a few lattice spacing. They interpreted this zone as an interpolation
between two qualitatively diﬀerent dilute regimes. One would correspond to a initially homogeneous system, for large
values of d/a, where diamagnetic interactions are not very important. The other corresponds to a regular conﬁguration
obtained as a consequence of the dilution of an initially concentrated system after transitions.

We analyse this eﬀect by studying the dynamics of the system in its evolution during the increase of the external
ﬁeld. We consider both the spatial conﬁgurations and the distributions of surface ﬁelds that change after each
transition. Some of our results are represented in Fig. 2, where the maximum surface magnetic ﬁeld distributions
for a conﬁguration with d/a = 2.5 are shown at three values of the increasing external ﬁeld. Namely we present
distributions for the initial state (f = 0, all 400 granules are still superconducting) and for conﬁgurations before and
after the plateau (f = 0.24 and f = 0.225, 96 and 90 superconducting spheres respectively). Transitions induced
by the external magnetic ﬁeld split the initial distribution in two branches separated by a gap. When the system is
reaching the plateau zone, only a small number of spheres are in the branch of high surface magnetic ﬁelds. Some
of these microgranules will be the next to transit. Each transition aﬀects the interactions between microgranules,
especially in the nearest neighbours by reducing their surface ﬁeld. This situation is reﬂected in Fig. 2 by the jump
of each sphere from one branch to the other. The disappearance of the high ﬁeld branch corresponds to the plateau
zone. The remaining superconducting spheres have lower maximum surface ﬁelds, and need larger external ﬁelds to
achieve their threshold value and turn to the normal state. This explains the presence of the plateau.

FIG. 2. Fraction P of spheres with maximum surface ﬁeld lower than the x-axes value (in units of Bext), in the evolution of

a conﬁguration with initial lattice spacing d/a = 2.5 (ρ = 0.268) and N = 400 near the plateau zone.

Looking closely at the spatial distributions, we observe that the branch with larger surface magnetic ﬁelds cor-
responds to spheres having a superconducting next neighbour, and hence experiencing stronger diamagnetic inter-
actions. In the plateau zone, only spheres without superconducting next neighbours remain superconducting. The
system reaches a quite regular conﬁguration with a fraction of superconducting spheres of about f = 0.25. This is
clearly shown in Fig. 3. In this ﬁgure a snapshot of positions of superconducting microgranules are represented just
before and after the plateau zone.

FIG. 3. Spatial distribution of initial N = 400 spheres with lattice distance d/a = 2.5 (◦), and the still superconducting

spheres just before (⋄) and after (⋆) the plateau zone.

An interesting question is how the dynamics of transitions leads the system to such ordered conﬁgurations, and why
this occurs for higher concentrations and not for dilute systems. In order to gain insight into this phenomenon, we
have studied in detail the dynamics of transitions in systems with a reduced dispersion of threshold ﬁelds (i.e. more
perfect granules) and a larger number of initially superconducting spheres (in order to reduce ﬁnite-size and boundary
eﬀects). These systems show a more perfect spatial ordering at the plateau (with f very close to 0.25) and therefore

3

are more suitable to analyse regarding spatial conﬁgurations during transitions. This study reveals an interesting
behaviour. These more perfect spheres present two clearly diﬀerent spatial distributions before reaching the plateau
depending on the concentration (and corresponding to the the appearance or not of the plateau at f = 0.25). This
is shown in Fig. 4 where the two diﬀerent behaviours are compared at f = 0.5 on systems with initial spheres
separated distances d/a = 2.5 and 3.034 (3D ﬁlling factor ρ = 20% and 15%). For smaller distances between spheres
(more concentrated systems, Fig. 4.b), the remaining superconductor spheres, after a number of transitions, show a
conﬁguration separated into domains. In each of these domains, transitions are produced in such a way that spheres
have a tendency to form parallel lines in a sort of ’striped’ conﬁguration. Until f = 0.5 only spheres between lines
transit. The resulting conﬁguration is formed by alternately superconducting and normal lines. For more diluted
systems (Fig. 4.a) this patterning does not exist. Subsequent transitions in the concentrated systems are produced in
such a way that in each line, transitions occur of granules with superconducting next neighbours. When the plateau
appears, only spheres with third neigbours remain superconducting, forming a square lattice of spacing 2d. This
corresponds to a value of f = 0.25 for the appearance of the plateau. In the systems with less perfect granules, the
domains are smaller and not so clearly deﬁned, and the plateau can appear for slightly smaller values of f due to
more important boundary eﬀects between domains.

FIG. 4. Spatial distribution of initial N = 400 spheres with lattice distance d/a = 3.034 and 2.50 (3D 15% and 26.8%

respectively) and the corresponding distribution when half of the microspheres have transited (f = 0.5).

From this dynamical study we observe that the ordered spatial conﬁgurations for f = 0.5, would condition the
existence or not of the plateau at f = 0.25. We have elaborate a criterion that allows one to know if the striped
conﬁguration is possible, at f = 0.5, for a particular system. This criterion uses the simulation of a system representing
one of these domains. We prepare this system with parallel stripes of superconducting granules and an additional
granule in the middle. This additional granule should be the ﬁrst to transit in order to reach the striped conﬁguration.
If it should not be so, this conﬁguration could not be possible and them the plateau would not appear. We have
performed simulations on one of these domains by placing N = 82 spheres distributed in 9 lines of 9 spheres each,
and the additional sphere in a central position between two lines. Each line is separated a distance 2d from the
other. The distance between spheres of the same line is d. A diagram of this system is shown in the inset of Fig.
5. Analysing the maximum surface ﬁelds of the spheres in this conﬁguration, for diﬀerent lattice values, we have
observed that for diluted systems, the sphere that has the highest maximun surface ﬁeld (and that will be the next
sphere to transit) is not the additional one. On the contrary, for more concentrated systems, the highest maximum
surface ﬁeld does correspond to the central sphere, and consequently this sphere will be the ﬁrst to pass to the normal
state. In this case, the remaining spatial conﬁguration will be formed by complete lines. This is displayed in Fig. 5
where the maximun surface ﬁelds of the spheres on the horizontal line containing the central sphere are presented for
two representative values of d/a.

FIG. 5. Maximum surface magnetic ﬁeld (in units of Bext) for spheres , in a striped domain, with spatial conﬁguration
represented in the inset of the ﬁgure. The ﬁeld values on spheres lying on a line containing the central sphere are represented
for d/a = 3.034 and 2.757 (ρ = 0.15 and 0.20).

Repeating simulations for diﬀerent values of the lattice distances permits a location of the limit between both
behaviours, and consequently the density above which the plateau zone appears. We have obtained this limit for
a lattice distance d/a = 2.871 (ρ = 17.7%) in these ideal conditions. Results are represented in Fig. 6 for lattice

4

distances near to this concentration. In this ﬁgure the maximum surface ﬁeld of the central sphere and that of its
next neigbour are compared.

FIG. 6. Maximum surface magnetic ﬁeld (in units of Bext), versus lattice distances, corresponding to the central sphere and

its neighbour of a striped domain .

It can be interesting to relate the response of the system to the applied ﬁeld with the position of the ensemble of
spheres in the phase diagram. In both concentrated and dilute systems, the ﬁrst sphere to transit will be that with
largest diamagnetic interactions and consequently with the highest maximum surface ﬁeld (related to their threshold
limit). In dilute systems, diamagnetic interactions are weak, the maximum surface ﬁeld values of the spheres have a
small dispersion and the population of still-superconducting spheres will present a quasi- continuous distribution in
the phase diagram. Small changes of applied ﬁeld can produce subsequent ﬂips to the normal state, and the transition
curves present a continuous aspect. For more concentrated systems, the eﬀect of diamagnetic interactions is very
important. After successive transitions, the pairs of nearest superconducting spheres have higher surface ﬁelds, in
comparison with those without superconducting next neigbours, as can be seen in Fig. 2. This eﬀect separates the
population of still superconducting spheres in two distinguished groups in the phase diagram, one, corresponding
to spheres with higher surface ﬁelds and near the superheated line, and separated from the other corresponding to
spheres with smaller values. Successive transitions change the population of each group. When the plateau appears,
only the group of smaller ﬁeld values remains superconducting. A small increment of the external ﬁeld is unable to
produce any transition; this is possible only by thermal nucleation. A larger increment of Bext is necessary to continue
the transitions. This is reﬂected as a ’gap’, i.e. a plateau zone.

We can conclude that diamagnetic interactions play an important role in these kinds of systems, inducing distinct
behaviours depending on their concentration. In the case of small lattice distances, a gap or plateau zone appears
in the transition curves for a fraction of the remaining superconducting spheres of about f = 0.25. This plateau is
a consequence of a spatial order achieved through preferential transitions in these concentrated conﬁgurations. This
order produces a uniform distribution of surface magnetic ﬁeld values, which is reﬂected in the phase diagram as a
distribution of the population of still superconducting spheres separated from the superheated line. In this zone only
transitions by ﬁnite increments of temperature are possible. This corresponds to a hot border. Transitions undergone
by dilute systems follow diﬀerent spatial distributions that do not bring the plateau appearance. From simulation of
ideal systems of quasi-perfect spheres, we have located the limit between the two behaviours at a lattice distance of
d/a = 2.871.

Finally, it is worth to note the interest that this plateau has for a PASS detector, because the uncertainty in the

energy threshold for transitions can be reduced in the presence of a hot border.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge T. Girard for helpful discussions and a careful criticism of the manuscript.. We acknowledge
ﬁnancial support from Direcci´on General de Investigaci´on Cient´ıﬁca y T´ecnica (Spain) (Project BFM2000-0624-C03-
02, BFM2002-02629) and Comissionat per a Universitats i Recerca (Spain) Projects (2001SGR97-0021). We also
acknowledge computing support from Fundaci´o Catalana per a la Recerca-Centre de Supercomputaci´o de Catalunya
(Spain).

[1] T.A. Girard, in Particle detection & Metastable Superconductivity. Eds. T.A. Girard, M.R. Gomes and P. Valko, Lisbon

(2001), and references therein.

5

S. Casalbuoni et al, in Proc. Carolina Symposium on Neutrino Physics, ed. Bahcall J., Haxton W., Kubodera K., and
Poole C. (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2001) 310;
O. Heres et al, Jour. Low Temp. Phys. 93, 1993, 449;
C.P. Huan et al, Physica C341-348, 2000, 1963i;
L.C. Yuan et al. Nucl. Instrum. Methods, A441, 2000, 479.

[2] B. Mettout, Thesis, Universit´e Paris VII, June 1988.
[3] A.K. Drukier and C. Vallete, Nucl. Instrum. Methods, 105, 285 (1972); A.K. Drukier, Nucl. Instrum. Methods, 173, 259

(1980), ibid 201, 77 (1982).

[4] A. Pe˜naranda, C.E. Auguet and L. Ram´ırez-Piscina, Solid State Commun. 109, 1999, 277.
[5] A. Pe˜naranda, C.E. Auguet and L. Ram´ırez-Piscina Eur. Phys. J. B 25, 2002, 155.
[6] G. Meagher, A. Kotlicki, X.F. He, G. Eska and B.G. Turrell Proc. ”Superconductivity and Particle detection”, eds. Girard

T.A., Morales A. and Waysand G. (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore,1995) 147.
M. Le Gros, A. Da Silva, B.G. Turrell, A. Kotlicki and Drukier A.K., Appl. Phys. Lett. 56, 1990, 2234.

[7] R. Pozzi Proc. ”Superconductivity and Particle detection”, eds. Girard T.A., Morales A. and Waysand G. (World Scientiﬁc,

Singapore,1995) 73.
G. Meagher, et al. in Particle detection & Metastable Superconductivity. eds. T.A. Girard, M.R. Gomes and P. Valko,
Lisbon (2001), 25.

[8] A. Pe˜naranda, C.E. Auguet and L. Ram´ırez-Piscina, Nucl. Instrum. Methods, A424, 1999, 512.
[9] J.G. Esteve, G. Waysand and La´ın S., Mechanics Research Comm., 27, 2000, 7.
[10] T.A. Girard, Nucl. Instrum. Methods, A444, 2000, 353.
[11] U. Geigenm¨uller, J. Phys. France 49, 1988, 405. U. Geigenm¨uller,

Detectors, Ed. G. Waysand and G. Chardin, Elsevier (1989).

in Superconducting and Low-Temperature Particle

6

Fig.1

1.0

f

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

d/a=7.482 (1%)
d/a=4.376 (5%)
d/a=3.473 (10%)
d/a=3.034 (15%)
d/a=2.757 (20%)
d/a=2.500 (26.8%)

0.0

0.30

0.40

0.50
Bext/BSH

0.60

Fig.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

P

f=1
f=0.24
f=0.23

2.0
Bmax/Bext

0.0

1.4

1.6

1.8

2.2

2.4

2.6

Fig. 3

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

y

l

f=1
f=0.24
f=0.23

10

20

30

40

50

lx

Fig. 4

60

40

20

0

0

50

40

30

20

10

20

40

10

20

30

40

50

60

0

0

Fig. 5

1.85

t
x
e
B

/

x
a
m
B

1.75

d/a=2.757
d/a=3.034

1.65

0.0

20.0

40.0

60.0

lx

neighbour
central

Fig. 6

1.81

1.80

t
x
e
B

/

x
a
m
B

1.79

1.78

2.85

2.86

2.87

2.88

2.89

d/a

