3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
6
0
5
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

CAPACITORS CAN RADIATE - SOME CONSEQUENCES OF
THE TWO-CAPACITOR PROBLEM WITH RADIATION

T.C. CHOY

Abstract. We ﬁll a gap in the arguments of Boykin et al [1] by not invoking an
electric current loop ( i.e. magnetic dipole model) to account for the radiation
energy loss, since an obvious corollary of their results is that the capacitors
should radiate directly even if the connecting wires are shrunk to zero length.
That this is so is shown here by a direct derivation of capacitor radiation using
an oscillating electric dipole radiator model for the capacitors as well as the
alternative less widely known magnetic ’charge’ current loop representation
for an electric dipole [2]. Implications for Electromagnetic Compliance (EMC)
issues as well as novel antenna designs further motivate the purpose of this
paper.

1. Introduction

The recent paper by Boykin et al [1] on the two-capacitor problem with radia-
tion has a gap in their arguments which we shall ﬁll in this short note, which also
serves to provide an alternative and perhaps more direct derivation of their key
results. An important corollary of their results which we shall show explicitly here
implies that there can be radiation from the capacitors. This radiation source is
often not discussed in many standard texts on Electromagnetism [4, 5, 6] and in
particular Antenna theory [7, 8, 9] and others, with the exception perhaps of [2]
who highlighted the duality of magnetic dipole radiation due to a physical current
loop and the electric dipole radiation due to a ﬁctitious magnetic charge current
loop in his treatment. His seminal biconical antenna [2] is perhaps one of the few
exactly solvable antenna models that also demonstrates capacitor radiation. The
importance of direct radiation from capacitors has important implications for Elec-
tromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) issues [3] as well as alternative non-conventional
antenna designs currently hotly debated in the engineering and amateur radio lit-
eratures [13, 14]. It is hoped that this note shall help to clarify the basic physics
involved in these alternative antennas.

We shall ﬁrst discuss a corollary of the results of Boykin et al [1]. There is no
doubt that their derivation demonstrates that the missing energy can be accounted
for by radiation as they have shown using a magnetic dipole, current loop model.
We can then ask the question as to what would happen if the current loop is
shrunk to an inﬁnitely small radius. Their result then indicates that the capacitors
must now become the source of radiation. This can be seen in two ways. 1) In
their derivation eqn(16) indicates that the physical dimension of the current loop
b (which is absorbed in the constant K) eventually cancels out so that in fact the
limit b → 0 can be taken in eqn(16) without mathematical diﬃculties. 2) Owing to
an equivalence theorem between a circular and a square loop radiator (see their Fig
1) of identical area [9], we can now shrink the wire dipole radiators to zero length,
1

2

T.C. CHOY

from which energy conservation would imply that the capacitors must themselves
serve as radiators. That this is so will be demonstrated in the next two sections.

2. Oscillating electric dipole model

. In the long wavelength limit, the two capacitors connected in parallel with zero
length wires can be viewed as an oscillating electric dipole due to a series capacitor
of value Cs, (see Fig 3 of [1]) . The power intensity of radiation from such a dipole
of moment p is now given by [11]:

Prad =

1
6πǫ0c3 ¨p2.

¨p = Cs ¨Vc

ℓ2.

2

In our ideal capacitor model considered as two parallel plates with separation ℓ,
then:

Since now:

VX =

Prad
I

=

Prad
˙Q

=

Prad
˙VcCs

,

the non-linear diﬀerential equation eqn(12) of [1] immediately follows in a similar
way using their lump circuit model to account for the radiation resistance X i.e.:

except that now we have:

¨V 2
c +

1
KC Cs

˙VcVc = 0.

KC =

ℓ2
6πǫ0c3 .

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

The rest of the proof for the radiation energy follows identically as [1] so that
we do not need to reproduce them here. This result can also be derived using
an analogous model as [1], but this time using a ﬁctitious magnetic current loop
model [2]. As these formulas are not often used in standard texts we shall provide
the details in the next section, highlighting the advantage that this model will be
more useful in terms of evaluating actual antenna radiation characteristics in more
realistic capacitor antennas using standard formulas. Before we do so it is perhaps
worth drawing to attention that the point dipole model is an extreme limit for the
capacitor since like the corresponding short current dipole for wires [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9],
and as for long wires [9] of order λ, the contributions should be added vectorially
for each element and integrated over the capacitance area for a λ size capacitor.

3. Magnetic current loop model

The magnetic current loop model uses the fact that Faraday’s law of magnetic
induction can be used to deﬁne a magnetic ’charge’ current as the source for an
electric dipole ﬁeld. In this case we shall have a not frequently used vector potential
F such that:

and thus also:

(6)

(7)

curl F = −D, H = − ∂F
∂t

;

F =

ǫ0
4π Z

IM (t − r/c)
r

dl,

CAPACITORS CAN RADIATE - SOME CONSEQUENCES OF THE TWO-CAPACITOR PROBLEM WITH RADIATION3

where IM speciﬁes the magnetic current of the loop [10]. Once again the results of
[1] applies by analogy in particular their eqn(8), upon replacing ǫ0 by µ0:
πb4
m
6µ0c5 [ ¨IM (t − r/c)]2,

Prad =

(8)

where bm is now the magnetic current loop radius which should be at least the
radius of the assumed circular parallel plate capacitors. In view of Faraday’s law
Vc = −IM :

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

VX =

= KM

Prad
I

¨V 2
c
Cs ˙Vc

,

KM =

πb4
m
6µ0c5 ,

K
KM

≈ 105.

and once again eqn(4) follows except that now KM is deﬁned as:

which as we can see is a less eﬃcient radiator. For the same size loop bm = b the
ratio:

The implications of this result for EMC is also important. Since in terms of spectral
content, a less eﬃcient radiator would in the capacitor system tend to spread the
energy over a wider spectrum, i.e. assuming ideal capacitors with no internal losses.
Both magnetic or electric dipoles have an intensity that goes as a fourth power
of frequency ω4 [11].
Indeed as noted in [1] the radiation resistance is given by
Rrad = Ks4 in the frequency domain. Hence for a smaller K the radiation time
constant τ = RradCs is smaller which implies a wider spread in radiation energy.
Note however that the point dipole model of the previous section yields a diﬀerent
picture. Here the eﬃciency factor is given by:

K
KC

=

2π2
c2

b4
ℓ2

−15 b4

≈ 10

ℓ2 >≈ 107C2
s .

which for large capacitances can be comparable to the wire loop. Practical capaci-
tance antennas, depending on frequencies will behave somewhere between a point
electric dipole versus a magnetic current loop, as we shall see in the next section
[12].

4. Capacitance antennas

In recent years there has been controversies in the engineering community regard-
ing certain capacitance antennas, patented in the US and Britain [13, 14], which
purports to use Poynting vector synthesis for its operational principles. These are
in fact now commercial products that have received contradicting support from
broadcasting applications. We do not however subscribe to the theory of Poynting
vector synthesis [13, 14]. Nevertheless, the analysis from the last section shows that
(a) capacitance radiation is a reality and (b) their eﬃciencies based on the idealized
magnetic ’charge’ current loop model which is close to their practical counterparts,
depend very much on the capacitance disc sizes. To achieve similar eﬃciency as
a wire loop, the capacitance antenna loop bm needs to be an order of magnitude
bigger than the magnetic loop area b at low frequencies:

(13)

bm = 10b.

4

T.C. CHOY

It would seem that any low proﬁle advantages achieved in the use of capacitance
antennas has to be paid for by much larger capacitance disc areas. However at
high frequencies in which the point electric dipole model is approached, capacitors
might be better radiators, which might in fact ﬁnd useful applications for the new
digital spread spectrum modes of transmission. Having said this, most antennas are
not meant to act as broadband radiators. Wire antennas resonate at the operating
frequency by making use of either free space capacitances leading to the empirical
formula [7, 8, 9]:

(14)

L =

143
fMhz

,

for the length of a half-wave dipole antenna in metres up to several hundred MHz. In
the same way capacitance antennas can resonate using free space inductances. The
corresponding formula for the capacitance dipole, including its relative performance
would be an interesting exercise for the student. For practical systems a lump
circuit analysis [1] by introducing an inductance L which could be both a sum
of stray plus external inductances would suﬃce. However modern Pspice software
and various antenna modelling software do not include the radiation resistance from
capacitances discussed here, so some care needs to be exercised in their use.

5. Conclusion

We have ﬁlled a gap in the discussion of the radiation from the transient switch-
ing of charges between two capacitors. We showed that without a wire loop, or in
the limit where the wire lengths are inﬁnitesimal, the capacitance system will radi-
ate, using a point electric dipole model or more appropriately a magnetic ’charge’
current loop model. These results should be added to modern texts on electromag-
netism and antenna theory. The implications of our results for EMC directives and
for novel antenna designs are signiﬁcant and should also be noted in physics and
engineering teaching courses.

References

1. T. Boykin, D. Hite and Nagendra Singh “The two-capacitor problem with radiation” Am. J.

Phys. 70 (4), 415–420 (2002).

2. S. A. Schlekunoﬀ , “Electromagnetic Waves ” Van Nostrand, NY (1948).
3. See for example, “The FCC Interference Handbook ” which can be downloaded electroncially

from http://www.fcc.gov/cib/.

4. J. R. Reitz and F. J. Milford, “Foundations of Electromagnetic theory ” Addison Wesley,

5. W. K. H. Panofsky and M. Phillips, “Classical Electricity and Magnetism ” Addison Wesley,

6. D. J. Griﬃths, “Introduction to Electrodynamcis ” 2nd edition, Prentice-Hall, New Jersey

London (1970).

London (1964).

(1989).

7. R. E. Collin, “Antennas and Radio wave propagation ” McGraw-Hill, New York (1985).
8. R. S. Elliott, “Antenna Theory and Design ” Prentice-Hall, New York (1981).
9. J. D. Kraus, “Antennas ” McGraw-Hill, New York (1988).
10. The SI units for magnetic ’charge’ current is in fact in volts.
11. L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, “The Classical Theory of Fields ” Vol 2 in Course of

Theoretical Physics translated from Russian, Pergamon Press, Oxford (1975).

12. This property is of course similar to wire antennas.
13. U.S. Patent no 6486846 B1 ﬁled by T. Hart, see also “The EH Antenna - Exceptional or
Hype” by B. Prudhomme in “Monitoring Times” 22 (4) 22 (2003), see also http://www.eh-
antenna.com.

CAPACITORS CAN RADIATE - SOME CONSEQUENCES OF THE TWO-CAPACITOR PROBLEM WITH RADIATION5

14. British Patent no 9718311 and U.S. Patent no 6025813 ﬁled by M. Hately and F.Kabbary, see
also “Poynting Vector Synthesis and the CFL” by P. Hawker in RadCom - The Radio Society
of Great Britain members magazine 78 (8) 63 (2002) and references quoted there in.

Centre for Materials Research University College London Gower Street London

WC1E 6BT

