3
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
4
0
8
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SINGULAR SOURCES OF MAXWELL FIELDS
WITH SELF-QUANTIZED ELECTRIC CHARGE

Vladimir V. Kassandrov

Department of General Physics, Russian People’s Friendship University
Ordjonikidze Str. 3, 117419, Moscow, Russia, e-mail: vkassan@sci.pfu.edu.ru

Single- and multi-valued solutions of homogeneous Maxwell equations in vacuum are
considered, with ”sources” formed by the (point- or string-like) singularities of the ﬁeld
strengths and, generally, irreducible to any δ-functions’ distribution. Maxwell equations
themselves are treated as consequences (say, integrability conditions) of a primary “su-
perpotential”ﬁeld subject to some nonlinear and over-determined constraints (related,
in particular, to twistor structures). As the result, we obtain (in explicit or implicit
algebraic form) a distinguished class of Maxwell ﬁelds, with singular sources necessarily
carrying a “self-quantized” electric charge integer multiple to a minimal “elementary”
one. Particle-like singular objects are subject to the dynamics consistent with homoge-
neous Maxwell equations and undergo transmutations – bifurcations of diﬀerent types.
The presented scheme originates from the “algebrodynamical” approach developed by
the author and reviewed in the last section. Incidentally, fundamental equivalence rela-
tions between the solutions of Maxwell equations, complex self-dual conditions and of
Weyl “neutrino” equations are established, and the problem of magnetic monopole is
brieﬂy discussed.

1. Introduction. Classical electrodynamics: problems and approaches

It is generally believed that classical electrodynamics (CED) in vacuum is one of
the most trustworthy and fundamental physical theories. However, it suﬀers from
internal inconsistencies and paradoxes, some of them known over a century, yet not
resolved so far.

In CED we deal with two completely independent entities: (point-like) electric
charges-sources and electromagnetic (EM) ﬁelds produced by and acting on them.
As for mathematical structure, CED consists of Maxwell equations (ME) for ﬁelds
and of equations of motion of sources under the action of the Lorentz force and the
Abraham radiation-reaction force. This is a very complicated system of partial and
ordinary diﬀerential equations. There is a lot of problems bearing on the system

1

2 Vladimir V. Kassandrov

among which those of separation of external ﬁeld from the proper ﬁeld of the source
[1] and of ﬁtting the exact balance of the particles-ﬁelds’ energy-momentum (for,
say, a number of interacting point charges) seem to be crucial yet insoluble (in
remind, e.g., of the paradox of self-accelerating solution).

In hope to resolve these and other problems of CED and to describe some prop-
erties related to particles’ structure (e.g. to explain the mystery of the quantized
electric charge or to remove the divergence of the EM self-energy) a lot of nonlinear
generalizations of Maxwell electrodynamics have been proposed [2] some of them
being completely geometrical in origin.

In nonlinear ED schemes ﬁeld equations turn into linear ME asymptotically, in
the limit of weak ﬁelds. On the other hand, they possess “soliton-like” solutions
with ﬁnite energy, and equations of motion of such particle-like formations (under
the assumption of stability) follow from nonlinear ﬁeld equations themselves and,
in the ﬁrst approximation a, lead to the Lorentz force [3].

However, despite of a variety of new ideas and powerful methods developed,
the project of nonlinear ED failed in the same way as it was with the program of
geometrization of electromagnetism. Namely, no consistent and invariant equations
of motion of particle-like ﬁeld formations have been obtained, the origin of electric
charge quantization (and all the more – of the other quantum numbers of topological
origin [4]) hasn’t been understood etc. Beyond any doubt, the principal diﬃculty
here is that we are not at all aware of how to generalize CED and ME in particular,
which nonlinearity and which it underlying geometry really encodes the Nature.
These questions will be brieﬂy discussed below (section 7) in the framework of the
so called algebrodynamical approach developed by the author.

On the other hand, it turns out that linear ME themselves possess several classes
of peculiar solutions [5-8], the “knotted” solutions with nontrivial topology of ﬁeld
lines [5] and the solutions [7,8] with extended string-like or membrane-like singu-
larities [7,8] among them. It is especially interesting that both types of solutions
necessarily carry self-quantized electric charge, i.e. the charge integer multiple in
value to some minimal elementary one [9, 10-12]. These solutions of ME can be
naturally selected (and considered as the only physically meaningful) via some gen-
erating procedures in which ME are the direct consequences (say, the integrability
conditions) of a highly nonlinear and/or over-determined system of ﬁeld equations
for a fundamental (scalar or spinor) primodial ﬁeld.

Thus, we meet there, in J. Wheeler’s terminology, with “nonlinearity without
nonlinearity” or, in other words, with induced or “hidden” nonlinearity [5,14]. This
is a principally new paradigm alternative to that of the nonlinear ED. In its frame-
work, ME completely preserve their linear form whereas all the restrictions on the

aWith respect to the small parameters – the ratios v/c and R/R0, v being relative velocity and
R – separation of “solitons” while R0 — their radii

Singular sources of Maxwell ﬁelds . . .

3

shape and on “quantum numbers” of singular particle-like objects (as well as on
their nontrivial time evolution) follow from the constraints imposed onto the pri-
mary generating ﬁeld.
In the topological theory of electromagnetism (TEE) de-
veloped by A.F. Ran˜ada and J.L. Trueba [5,9,14] these constraints are specially
ﬁtted in the way to ensure ME to hold “on shell” and result in a complicated sys-
tem of PDEs for generating scalars. On the other hand, in the algebrodynamics
(AD) [10-13,15,7,8,21,29] these constraints originate from the generalized Cauchy-
Riemann equations for biquaternion - valued functions - ﬁelds and are deeply related
to twistors and to exceptional Weyl-Cartan geometries [11,21]. Consequently, the
generating procedure can be reduced to resolution of a purely algebraic system of
equations and opens thus the way to obtain the solutions of ME with extremely
complicated structure of the “particle-like” (i.e. spacially bounded) singularities.

The TEE and the AD approaches oﬀer a quite new treatment of the “sources-
ﬁelds” problem. Whereas in CED we deal with EM ﬁelds generated by charges
moving along their world lines, here we are brought to consider the sources deﬁned by
the EM ﬁeld itself in its singular locus. By this, ﬁeld singularities can be point-like b
or extended and can consist of (a great number of) connected components (bounded
or inﬁnite in space). On the other hand, EM ﬁeld itself can be globally multi-valued,
physically important example being presented by the EM ﬁeld of the Kerr-Newman
solution in GTR or by its ﬂat analogue (see below, section 6). Singular “sources” of
multi-valued solutions in principle can not be described by any set of δ-functions so
that the generally accepted in ﬁeld theories and in mathematical physics paradigm
of distributions seems to be not always suﬃcient and, moreover, not at all necessary
and general (for this, see the papers [16-17] and our discussion in [8,37]).
It is
especially important that singular sources always manifest themselves a well-deﬁned
and ﬁnite space and time distribution, and one has, in principle, no problem of
divergence here, the problem which is insoluble in the framework of the accepted
approach.

Historically, the concept of “intrinsic” singular sources of physical ﬁelds has been
advocated, say, by H. Bateman [18] et al. in the early XX century but unmeritely
abandoned then in favour of the Dirac’s δ-function formalism.

With respect to the above considerations and much similar to those used in the
nonlinear ED paradigm, throughout the paper we deal with solutions of “free” linear
ME (and also of other ﬁeld equations) in the sense that extended regular sources
are absent whereas the singular (generally extended) sources of zero measure are
assumed to exist. To prevent any conﬂict with commonly used terminology, we
shall avoid to call the considered ME “free” (and, all the more, “source-free”) and
will use the term “homogeneous” ME or simply ME themselves. The solutions

bIn our terminology, the Coulomb ﬁeld presents an example of a solution of the source-free (!)
ME with a simplest point-like “topological defect”

4 Vladimir V. Kassandrov

are assumed to be analytical everywhere except in singular loci so that it’s quite
natural to consider their complexiﬁcation which has been intensively advocated by
E.T. Newman [19], R. Penrose [27,30] et al. and which turns out to exhibit the
self-dual structure of EM ﬁelds and to open the way to the solution of the charge
quantization problem.

The main goal of the paper is to describe some simple constructions which
relate the whole of the solutions of homogeneous ME to those of the complex self-
dual conditions, of Weyl “neutrino” equations and of d’Alembert wave equation
and which make it possible to generate the above solutions in a simple, eﬀective
and, in particular, in a purely algebraical way. In section 2 we consider the complex
and the self-dual structures of EM ﬁeld. The proof of the charge quantization
theorem is presented in section 3 where also the related problem of the magnetic
monopole is brieﬂy discussed. A simple generating construction for the whole class
of (almost everywhere) analytical solutions of Maxwell and Weyl equations from one
complex “superpotential” function subject to wave equation is described in section
4 where we also establish important equivalence relations between the solutions of
these fundamental equations. Further, in section 5, we present our main algebraic
construction based on twistor structures and on the so called Kerr theorem and
leading to Maxwell ﬁelds with self-quantized charges. Some examples of this class
of solutions to ME are examined in section 6 where we are mainly interested in
the structure of ﬁeld singularities. To conclude, in section 7 we present a review
of the self-consistent algebrodynamical ﬁeld theory and of its links with complex
quaternionic analysis and with twistor structures and Kerr theorem.

To simplify the presentation, we do not use the diﬀerential forms or the 2-spinor
formalism (for this, we refer the reader e.g. to our preprint [21]) and apply where
possible the 3-vector notation.

2. Self-dual complex nature of Maxwell ﬁelds

We consider the simplest system of homogeneous ME (the light velocity c is

taken to be c = 1)

∂t H =

∂t E = +

E,

H,

−∇ ×

∇ ×

H = 0,

E = 0,

∇ ·

∇ ·

where E and H are respectively the electric and the magnetic ﬁeld strengths. First
pair (1) of ME is identically satisﬁed by the (locally always existing) potentials
φ(x), A(x) such that

E =

∂tA

−

− ∇

φ, H =

A.

∇ ×

(1)

(2)

(3)

Singular sources of Maxwell ﬁelds . . .

5

Similarly, the second pair (2) can be identically satisﬁed by the (locally always

existing) conjugated potentials ψ(x), B(x) such that

H =

∂tB

−

− ∇

ψ, E =

−∇ ×

B.

For consistency of deﬁnitions of ﬁeld strengths the following constraints for po-

tentials should hold:

∂tA +

φ =

B,

∂tB +

ψ =

A.

∇

∇ ×

∇

−∇ ×

On the other hand, for about a century it’s well known (see e.g. [18]) that ME

(1),(2) can be rewritten in a uniﬁed complex number form

say, for complex vector P = E + iH. Consistency conditions (5) also admit a
complex representation of the form

with complex potentials Π = φ + iψ and C = A + iB via which the complex ﬁeld
strength vector P is deﬁned as follows:

i∂tP =

P,

∇ ×

P = 0,

∇ ·

∂tC +

Π + i

∇

∇ ×

C = 0

P =

∂tC

−

− ∇

Π = i

∇ ×

C

and, provided the consistency conditions (7) are fulﬁlled, turns to identity the
complex-form ME (6).

Thus, locally ME reduce to and are equivalent to three ﬁrst-order (!) equations
(7) for complex 4-potential vector Π(x), C(x). They are evidently gauge invariant
(with gauge parameter being arbitrary (smooth) complex function of coordinates).
Therefore, one can complete the system (7) by a gauge ﬁxing condition, e.g. by the
complex Lorentz gauge

∂tΠ +

C = 0.

∇ ·

On the other hand, Eqs.(7) admit alternative treatment. Let us from the very
deﬁned via holomorphic 4-

beginning consider the complex-valued EM ﬁelds ~
E
potentials Π(x), C(x) in a usual way,

, ~
H

~
E

=

∂tC

−

Π,

− ∇

=

~
H

∇ ×

C.

Then Eqs.(7) turn to be just the antiself-duality conditions for complex ﬁeld

strengths ~
E

, ~
H

,

~
E −

i ~
H ≡ −

∂tC

Π

i

C = 0,

− ∇
and, if desirable, Eq.(9) can be joined to the latters. Note that the complex con-
jugated ﬁelds turn then to be self-dual. Eqs.(11) (and also those for conjugated

∇ ×

−

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

6 Vladimir V. Kassandrov

ﬁelds) below will be called complex self-duality (CSD) conditions [10,11]. Complex
self-dual EM ﬁelds have been considered, e.g., by R. Penrose [27] as the “wave
functions of photons”. G. A. Alekseev [22] used the CSD conditions instead of
Maxwell equations in his seach of the solutions of the Einstein-Maxwell and related
equations. The Heyl-Obukhov “metric-free ED” [23] can also be thought of as a
nonlinear extension of the CSD conditions.

As to the number of degrees of freedom, for CSD ﬁelds it is the same as for real
Maxwell ﬁelds: the procedure of complexiﬁcation redoubles the number but the SD
conditions reduce it to the ordinary one. Indeed, let ~
= H + iN
E
where E, D, H, N are the real and imaginary parts of complex electric and magnetic
ﬁeld strengths respectively. Then CSD conditions (11) result in

= E + iD, ~
H

N =

E, D = H

−

(12)

so that only, say, the real-part ﬁelds remain (algebraically) independent while the
imaginary-part ones are dual to them.

Dynamically, every solution Π(x), C(x) of CSD conditions (11) corresponds to
a solution of complexiﬁed ME and, by virtue of linearity of the latters, – to a pair
of solutions of real ME for the set of ﬁeld strengths E, H and for its dual one. For
example, one gets

=

~
H

(
∇ ×

C)

0,

= i

~
E

~
H

= 0 and so on.

∇ ·

∇ ·

⇒ ∇ ·
The converse statement has been already proved: for every solution to homogeneous
ME locally some complex potentials can be deﬁned subject to CSD conditions.

∇ ·

≡

Thus, we can declare that locally ME are completely equivalent to the 1-st order
CSD equations. It can be easily checked also that the ordinary 2-d order d’Alembert
equations are just the integrability conditions of CSD system (11). Therefore, all
EM ﬁelds (contrary to the well-known case of nonAbelian Yang-Mills ﬁelds) can be
regarded as complex self-dual in nature.

-part)
-part (or its dual
It’s interesting to ask for the reasons to select the
ﬁelds from the primodial holomolphic ﬁeld strengths ~
. This may be related to
E
a peculiar fact that for complex Maxwell ﬁelds all of the components of the energy-
momemtum tensor are identically zero. In particular, for the energy density W on
account of CSD conditions (11) one gets

ℜ
, ~
H

ℑ

W

(~
E

2 + ~
H

2)

0 and so on.

∝

≡
One can say in jest that complex ﬁelds do not possess any energy and acquire it only
through self-division into real and imaginary parts via which the conservation laws
can be constructed in a usual way.

The CSD structure of EM ﬁelds which consolidates them with the other well-
known quantum ﬁelds is, in our opinion, not a formal renotation but a fundamental

Singular sources of Maxwell ﬁelds . . .

7

property which manifests itself even in the complex structure (6) of homogeneous
ME themselves c.

Moreover, we can conjecture that the CSD conditions, though being locally
equivalent to homogeneous ME, are more fundamental from general viewpoint. In-
deed, we demonstrate below (section 3) that exchange of ME by CSD makes it
possible to propose a peculiar solution of the charge quantization problem. Besides,
it restores the complete intrinsic electric-magnetic symmetry of ME and oﬀers a
new approach to the magnetic monopole problem, another than that proposed by
P.A.M. Dirac. Finally, establishment of (local) equivalence of ME and CSD con-
ditions opens the way to powerful “superpotential” procedures for generation of
complicated solutions to both systems (sections 4,5) and, somewhat mysteriously,
permits to relate these solutions with those of the Weyl neutrino equation up to
establishment of the full local equivalence of these equations (section 4).

3. Quantization of electric charge and electric-magnetic symmetry in the
complex self-dual electrodynamics

Quantization of electric charge follows from CSD conditions if a gauge invariant
interaction with another ﬁeld Ψ(x) (a “section” of a scalar, 2-spinor, bispinor etc.
ﬁbre bundle) is included, so that complex-valued EM 4-potentials Cµ(x) enter the
theory only through the form of the “lengthened” derivative (∂µ
bCµ)Ψ, b = const
being the coupling constant. The theory is, therefore, invariant under the gauge
transformations

−

eα(x)Ψ,

Ψ

7→

Cµ

7→

Cµ + b−1∂µα

(13)

where α(x) is any smooth complex function of coordinate.

Apart from equations for the ﬁeld Ψ(x) and instead of inhomogeneous ME (with
distributed sources generated by the Ψ-induced charge-current density jµ(x)) we as-
sume here the CSD conditions (11) for the complex-valued EM ﬁelds to be satisﬁed.
A particular example of such a theory will be presented in section 5. Consider now
the solutions of this system for which the ﬁeld strength singularities – point-like or
extended charge carriers – are localized in a bounded region of 3-space (at any ﬁnite
moment of time). We shall call them singular particle-like (SPL) solutions below.
Then we formulate the following

Theorem. For every SPL solution for which the function Ψ(x) is single-valued
everywhere except the singularities of ﬁeld strengths the value of electric charge is
either zero or integer-multiple of a minimal ”elementary charge” (equal to qmin =
1/(2b)).

cOwing to diﬀerent signs in the r.h.s. of the “curl” Eqs. (1),(2) one fails to represent the ME in,
say, the double-number algebraic form (for which i2 = 1) but only via the exeptional algebra of
complex numbers with i2 = −1

8 Vladimir V. Kassandrov

The proof of this theorem [12] exploits, besides the CSD conditions themselves,
also the well-known Dirac’s considerations on the magnetic monopole problem [24],
namely the ordinary quantum ﬁeld conjectures on the existence of EM potentials as
of essential physical quantities (i.e. not only of the ﬁeld strengths themselves) and
on the gauge invariance (13) of the system of ﬁeld equations under study. Making
use of the deﬁnition of electric charge q via the Gauss theorem and integrating over
the closed 2-surface Σ enveloping one or more connected and bounded singularities
we have on account of the CSD conditions

4πq =

d~σ = i

~
E

IΣ

d~σ

~
H

≡

IΣ

4πiµ,

(14)

so that the electric charge q = iµ where µ is the correspondent magnetic charge
of the enclosed singularity (singularities). Thus, in theories of the type considered
we deal in fact with dions carrying always equal in modulus electric and magnetic
charges. We shall return to discuss the magnetic monopole problem at the end of
this section.

=

∇ ×

Let us assume now that complex vector-potential C(x) is analytic everywhere
except on a set of one-dimensional subspaces – “Dirac’s strings” – where it turns
to inﬁnity d. Such singular strings inevitably exist for nonzero µ since, otherwise,
the ﬁeld is solenoidal everywhere, ~
C, and the magnetic ﬂow in (14) is
H
null. Taking this into account, we can cut from the surface Σ the whole set of
which are pierced by the strings and can pass in this way to
inﬁnitesimal disks
integrate in Eq.(14) over (now not closed) 2-surface Σ′ = Σ
across which the
potential C is now regular. Notice that this procedure doesn’t change the value of
ﬂows (14) since the ﬁeld strengths themselves are regular everywhere on Σ including
the disks

so that the ﬂows through the disks are surely inﬁnitesimally small.
Now, making use of the Stokes theorem for the surface Σ′, we can reduce ex-
pression (14) to a sum of integrals over its boundary, i.e. over a set of inﬁnitesimal
closed loops L

Σ encircling the “strings”,

D
}

− {

D

D

{

}

{

}

∈

4πµ =

Cdl.

(15)

X IL
Only singular part of potential contributes into the latters integrals. This part
is necessarily a pure gauge, Csing =
Λ(x) being a complex function.
Indeed, if it’ were not the case the magnetic ﬁeld would be also singular on L
Σ
what contradicts to the assumptions of the theorem. Therefore, every integral in
to the increment of the (multi-valued) function Λ(x)
(15) reduces to ∆Λ, i. e.
in bypassing the closed loop. Now, taking in account the gauge invariance of the

Λ ,

∇

∈

dIn principle, singular locus of potential C(x) can also contain two-dimensional components, an
example of this situation being studied in our works [13,21]. However, it’s easy to see that these
singular subspaces do not contribute to the charges’ integrals (14)

Singular sources of Maxwell ﬁelds . . .

9

theory (13) and the single-valuedness of the ﬁeld Ψ(x) outside of the ﬁeld strengths’
singularities we get

∆Λ = b−1 ln ∆Ψ = b−12πin, n

Z,

∈

(16)

and from Eqs.(14) and (15) obtain ﬁnally for electric q and magnetic µ charge of a
singular source

N
2b

q = iµ =

, N =

n = 0,

1,

2, ....

(17)

X
To conclude, let us compare our results with Dirac’s construction. With re-
spect to quantum theory, he took b = ie/¯hc and came from here to well-known
quantization constraint [24]

±

±

µe = (¯hc/2)N

(18)

as it follows from our formula (17) too. However, the Dirac condition (18) doesn’t ﬁx
the values of each of the charges but only relates them one to another. Besides, the
quantity e therein plays the role of the coupling constant and, generally, has nothing
to do with the charge of a particle-like (singular or regular) solution of ﬁeld equations
which therein remains indeﬁnite. Contrary, in our construction the quantity q has
the explicit meaning of a characteristic of admissible ﬁeld distributions. If we choose
the coupling constant to be (in dimensional units) b = 1/2e then the minimal
(elementary) electric charge will be qmin = e. Below (sections 5,7) we demonstrate
that in twistor and in the algebrodynamical theories such solutions really exist and
in the simplest case describe a self-quantized Coulomb-like singularity carrying the
charge necessarily equal (i.e not multiple) to the elementary one.

Let us say also a few words about the magnetic charge in the framework of the
above presented scheme. Its physical meaning and reality completely depends on
the dynamics of singular sources, i.e. on the structure of the Lorentz and other
forces acting on the dion, and it would be speculative to discuss it here in detail.
Nonetheless, let us assume that, with respect to the quantization theorem, only one
sort of particles does exist, with necessarily equal in modulus electric and magnetic
charges. Then such a “CED with magnetic charge” (see e.g.
[25]) is known to
reduce (by dual rotation of electric - magnetic ﬁelds) to the scheme in which only
one eﬀective charge (which can be regarded, as an option, to be electric or magnetic
-parts
one) manifests itself. Note that for complex ﬁelds dual transformation of
~E, ~H corresponds to multiplication by the phase factor eiθ which obviously preserves
the property for complex ﬁelds to be (anti)self-dual, ~

= 0.

ℜ

We conjecture, therefore, that in gauge ﬁeld theories with minimal interaction
with (complex) EM ﬁeld for which CSD conditions replace Maxwell equations we
deal only with singular sources carrying one eﬀective (say, electric) charge; from this
viewpoint magnetic monopoles do not manifest themselves at all. Other geometrical
considerations which partially support this conclusion can be found in [12].

i ~
H

E −

10 Vladimir V. Kassandrov

4. Generating constructions and equivalence between the solutions of
Maxwell and Weyl equations

Let us continue to disscuss the properties of CSD conditions (11) for complex
4-potentials Cµ(x) which are locally equivavent to homogeneous ME. It turns out
that for every solution of the latters a gauge can be choosed in which only two
complex components of 4-potential are dictinct from zero. Moreover, in this gauge
CSD conditions reduce to well-known Weyl equations “for neutrino”, and every
solution of them both (and, consequently, of ME themselves) can be generated via
diﬀerentiation of a complex one-component(!) function subject to wave d’Alembert
equation.

To prove these statements let us introduce the commonly used spinor or null
iy, ¯w = x + iy which can be

z, w = x

space-time coordinates u = t + z, v = t
collected to form the Hermitian 2

−

2-matrix of coordinates

−

Similarly, for complex 4-vector of potentials Cµ(x) its matrix components look as
iC2, C ¯w = C1 + iC2 (note that
C3, Cw = C1 −
follows: Cu = Π + C3, Cv = Π
Ca, a = 1, 2, 3 are the components of the covariant 4-vector Cµ) and
Π, Ca =
form a matrix of general type

−

−

×

X = X + =

u w
¯w v (cid:19)

(cid:18)

C =

Cu Cw
C ¯w Cv (cid:19)

(cid:18)

Now it is easy to make sure that CSD conditions (11) together with gauge con-
dition (9) can be rewritten in the following (splitting into two pairs of independent
equations) form of double - Weyl equations (DWE):

or, equivalently, in the following matrix form:

∂ ¯wCu = ∂uCw

∂vCu = ∂wCw

∂ ¯wC ¯w = ∂uCv

∂vC ¯w = ∂wCv,

C←−W = 0, W

(∂t

~σ

)
· ∇

−

≡

where W is the Weyl diﬀerential operator (acting here to the left as indicated by
the arrow) deﬁned via three Pauli matrices ~σ in the usual representation.

Thus, in the Lorentz gauge CSD equations are equivalent to taken twice the
Weyl equations for the “spin 1/2 particles with zero rest-mass”. By this, the com-
plex 4-vector of potentials can be equivalently treated as a pair of Weyl 2-spinors
ψ(0) =
. The two alternative representations are

and ψ(1) =

Cu, Cw

C ¯w, Cv

{

}

{

}

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

Singular sources of Maxwell ﬁelds . . .

11

possible owing to the wide group of invariance of DWE (22) with respect to Lorentz
transformations

X

7→

AXA+, W

(A+)

−1W A

−1 C

7→

DCA,

7→

(23)

where A and D being arbitrary SL(2, C)-matrices. In particular, if we take D = A+,
the matrix C will transform as a (covariant) complex 4-vector whereas for D = Id
(the unity matrix) the two columns of C will tranform independently as a pair of
2-spinors ψ(A), A = 0, 1.

Dualistic vector-spinor nature of complex EM potentials follow thus from the
fact that the ﬁelds subject to the DWE (21) transform by reducible representation
of Lorentz group so that there is no contradiction with generally accepted point of
view (see also [11]).

As the next step let us notice now that for all the solutions of DWE a 2
superpotential matrix M (x) which turn Eqs.(21) to identity does exist locally,

2

×

C = M ←−W

∗

∗
, M ←−W

←−W

2M = 0,

(24)

≡
where the conjugated Weyl operator W ∗ = ∂t + ~σ
and the 2-d order d’Alambert
operator 2
∆ are deﬁned. Such a matrix M (x) can be always
found since the integrability conditions for Eq.(24) are just the DWE for matrix
C(x) and, by assumption, are satisﬁed.

W W ∗ = ∂tt

· ∇

−

≡

Now we can easily restore the gauge invariance of the procedure neglecting for
this Lorentz gauge condition (9) which corresponds to the trace part of matrix
Eq.(21). Then CSD conditions (11) themselves are equivalent to the trace-free part
of DWE. Then, together with the gauge freedom to choose the generating matrix

M

7→

M + Γ←−W , 2Γ = 0,

(Γ(x) being any matrix with components subject to wave equation) with respect
to (24) preserving the potentials C(x), we whould get again the gauge freedom of
complex potentials of usual type,

(α(x) being arbitrary complex function) as well as the resudial gauge invariance

Cµ

Cµ + ∂µα,

7→

Cµ

7→

Cµ + ∂µλ, 2λ = 0,

(λ(x) being any complex function subject to wave equation). Both types of gauge
transformations do not change the ﬁeld strengths correspondent to potentials Cµ(x),
and transformations (27) preserve also the Lorentz gauge condition (9) being a
symmetry of the whole system (21) of DWE e. To conclude, we have proved that
eThe extended symmetry C 7→ C + Λ
, 2Λ = 0 with Λ(x) being instead a full matrix also
preserves the structure of DWE but changes ﬁeld strengths and results in a diﬀerent solution to
complexiﬁed ME

←−
∗
W

(25)

(26)

(27)

12 Vladimir V. Kassandrov

2
every solution of CSD conditions can be locally obtained via diﬀerentiation of a 2
complex matrix ﬁeld subject to d’Alembert equation. Every solution of homogeneous
ME can be obtained from here via second diﬀerentiation and subsequent separation
of real and imaginary part of complex ﬁeld strengths. The procedure is completely
Lorentz and gauge invariant

×

f.

Further on we shall use the above-mentioned gauge freedom to simplify as much
as possible the choice of complex potentials and superpotentials generating the
solutions of ME. At ﬁrst we ﬁx the Lorentz gauge (9) and come, therefore, to the
structure of the full system of DWE (21). Then we exploit the residual gauge
invariance (27) and choose the parameter λ(x) in a way that some two components
of the transformed potentials (constituting one of the spinors ψ(A)(x), say ψ(0) =
) will turn to zero g. Thus, for every solution of ME we were able to reduce
Cu, Cw
{
the DWE for potentials to ordinary Weyl equations (WE) for one 2-spinor, say to
ψ(1) =

represented by two nonzero components of complex potentials.

C ¯w, Cv

}

As the last step we notice that under the above choice of potentials the gener-
ating superpotential matrix M (x) also reduce to one 2-spinor and, moreover, can
be brought to only one nontrivial component by use of its own gauge freedom (25).
In our particular choice we satisfy WE represented by the ﬁrst remaining pair of
Eqs.(21) setting e.g.

{

}

C ¯w = ∂uG, Cv = ∂ ¯wG, 2G = 0,

(28)

where G(x) is a “superpotential” complex function subject to wave equation.

At this point we can formulate our ﬁnal result.

Every solution of Weyl equations can be obtained via diﬀerentiation from one-
component complex function subject to wave equation. Every solution of homo-
geneous Maxwell equations can be obtained from here via repeated diﬀerentiation.

It should be emphasized that a remarkable equivalence relation of homogeneous
Maxwell and Weyl equations has been also established: for every solution of ME
locally a two-component complex potential can be deﬁned which satisﬁes WE. Every
solution of WE leads via diﬀerentiation to a solution of (complexiﬁed) ME.

Many interesting and physically important questions do arise in the framework
of the proved equivalence relation. For example, one can write out at least two
nonequivalent expressions for “energy”, “angular momentum”, Maxwell or Neuter’s
charge and other conserved quantities, for any pair of related solutions of Maxwell or
Weyl equations, which follow from the distinct structure of Lagrangians for those
ﬁelds. This question, as well as that about generalized continious and discrete

fUnder Lorentz transformations the superpotential matrix M (x) can be found to behave as a pair
of (conjugated) spinors
gThis is always possible since the integrability conditions for equations on desirable parameter
Cu = ∂uλ, Cw = ∂ ¯wλ hold identically on account of the ﬁrst pair of Eqs.(21) themselves

Singular sources of Maxwell ﬁelds . . .

13

symmetries of ME and WE, deserve special consideration.

Finally, let us present a simplest example of the Coulomb-like solution of ME
which satisﬁes them everywhere except the singular point. For this, we can make,
say, the following choice of the superpotential G(x) and of the two components of
complex potentials (28) respectively:

G =

4q ¯w
z + r

,

C ¯w = ∂uG =

, Cv = ∂ ¯wG =

(29)

2q ¯w
z + r

−

2q
r

,

{

}

−

p
C ¯w, Cv

r = √w ¯w + z2 =

x2 + y2 + z2 and the constant q is
where z = (u
v)/2,
constitute then a spinor which
assumed to be real. The components ψ =
satisﬁes WE everywhere except the ”open string” x = y = 0, z
0 where it turns
to inﬁnity. On the other hand, these components correspond to the complex ﬁeld
strengths

qxa
r3 ,
the real part of which represents the Coulomb electric ﬁeld of the point charge q
while the imaginary part – the dual ﬁeld of the magnetic monopole with the charge
µ =

q equal in modulus to the electric one.

a = 1, 2, 3

a = i

(30)

a =

H

≤

E

−

5. Twistor generating construction and Maxwell ﬁelds with self-quantized
charge

In the preceding section a simple “superpotential” construction was described
via which the whole of solutions of homogeneous ME can be obtained starting from
those of complex d’Alembert equation. This construction though interesting from
technical point of view has little to do with the basic approach considered in the
paper, i.e. with the paradigm of induced nonlinearity and with methods to se-
lect a subclass of physically interesting (eﬀectively interacting and self-quantized)
solutions of ME through imposing natural and strong restrictions on generating
functions (on potentials or superpotentials) themselves. Realization of such a pro-
cedure needs the use of twistor structures and of the Kerr theorem to which we pass
now.

Let ξ(x) and τ (x) be two 2-spinor ﬁelds for which the following linear incidence

relation takes place h:

τ = Xξ

τ 0 = uξ0 + wξ1, τ 1 = ¯wξ0 + vξ1,

(31)

⇔

where X = X + is the Hermitian matrix (19) of space-time coordinates represented
ξ(x), τ (x)
by u = t + z, v = t
}
linked via incidence relation with the points of Minkowsky space-time forms the so
called null twistor ﬁeld [27].

iy, ¯w = x + iy. The pair of spinors

z, w = x

−

−

{

hFor simplicity, we do not distinguish here between primed and unprimed spinor indices and
neglect the usually settled multiplier ”i” in the incidence relation below

14 Vladimir V. Kassandrov

Eq.(31) is evidently form-invariant under scaling of the both spinors together
and, therefore, we can pass to three projective components of the twistor which
form the complex projective space CP 3. Speciﬁcally, we set the component ξ0 = 1
(assuming it to be nonzero in the region of space-time considered) and reduce the
twistor to only three projective components

ξ1 ≡

G,

τ0 = u + wG,

τ1 = v + ¯wG.

(32)

Let us demand now that for some twistor ﬁeld its three projective components
are functionally dependent as functions of space-time coordinates. In other words,
let there exist a function Π(G, τ 0, τ 1) i of three complex variables (32) for which
the equation

Π(G, τ 0, τ 1) = Π(G, wG + u, vG + ¯w) = 0

(33)

holds identically for every space-time point X =
. Eq.(33) has been
introduced ﬁrstly by R.P. Kerr [28] and is based on fundamental geometrical and
algebraical structures deeply related to physical space-time and ﬁeld dynamics (they
will be brieﬂy discussed at the end of the section). Note also that, formally, Kerr
functional condition (KFC) (33) deﬁnes a hypersurface in CP 3-space.

u, w, ¯w, v

{

}

Let us verify now that KFC itself restricts the admissible 2-spinor (twistor) ﬁelds
and, in a remarkable way, gives rise to a physically signiﬁcant class of the latters.
Indeed, Eq.(33) can be algebraically and continiously resolved with respect to the
only unknown G at every space-time point (except those at which G(x) has poles
or branching points, see below). In this way we come to an “almost everywhere”
analytical and single-valued branch of (globally multi-valued) complex ﬁeld deﬁned
at a region of space-time.

Rather unexpectedly, this algebraically generated ﬁeld G(x) satisﬁes a whole
number of fundamental Lorentz invariant diﬀerential equations, in particular the
wave and the eikonal equations [26,7]. To prove this, let us diﬀerentiate the KFC
(33) with respect to coordinates u, w, ¯w, v and get then with respect to Eq.(32)

∂uG =
∂ ¯wG =

P −1Π0,
P −1Π1,

−
−

∂wG =
∂vG =

−
−

P −1GΠ0,
P −1GΠ1,

where ΠC , C = 0, 1 are the derivatives of Π with respect to correspondent twistor
arguments τ C and P = dΠ/dG is the total derivative of Π taken on account of the
constraints (32). In the branching points which are deﬁned by the condition

(34)

(35)

P =

= 0

dΠ
dG

the derivatives of G(x) become singular. In regular region, eliminating the quantities
ΠC from Eq. (34) we get two nonlinear diﬀerential constraints for the derivatives
iWe consider Π itself to be analytical with respect to its three complex arguments

Singular sources of Maxwell ﬁelds . . .

15

of G(x),

∂wG = G∂uG,

∂vG = G∂ ¯wG

(36)

for which (as it is easy to prove, see e.g.
[27]) KFC (33) represents their general
solution. As a direct consequence of (36), multiplying the two equations we get the
nonlinear eikonal equation

2
G
|

|∇

≡

4(∂uG∂vG

∂wG∂ ¯wG) = 0,

and calculating the integrability conditions – the linear wave equation

−

−

2G = 4(∂u∂vG

∂w∂ ¯wG) = 0,

which should hold both together in consequence of KFC (33) or correspondent
diﬀerential constraints (36).

Since the complex ﬁeld G(x) satisﬁes wave equation, by virtue of the results of
the previous section it can be taken as a superpotential function to generate the
solutions of ME and WE (with singular sources). Fot this, we identify the two
nonzero components of complex potentials with correspondent derivatives

C ¯w = ∂uG =

P −1Π0, Cv = ∂ ¯wG =

P −1Π1

−

−

and verify immediately that they satisfy WE of the form identical to that repre-
sented by the second pair of Eqs.(21)

(37)

(38)

(39)

(40)

∂ ¯wC ¯w = ∂uCv,

∂vC ¯w = ∂wCv

by virtue of deﬁnitions (39) and of wave equation (38) respectively. On the other
hand, WE (40) can be considered as a reduced system of CSD conditions (11)
complemented by the Lorentz gauge condition (9). Therefore, the antiself-dual
(~
= i ~
E
H
E+ = ∂uC ¯w = ∂u∂uG,
E3 =
which satisfy homogeneous ME for every G(x) implicitly deﬁned via KFC (33).

) complex ﬁeld strengths can be deﬁned, of the form (

E2)
∂ ¯w∂ ¯wG (41)

≡ E1 ±

∂ ¯wCv =

∂u∂ ¯wG,

∂uCv =

− =

−

−

−

−

E

E

±

i

As well as the potentials (39), the ﬁeld strengths (41) can be expressed via the
(1-st and 2-d order) derivatives ΠC , ΠCD, C, D = 0, 1 of generating function Π
with respect to its twistor arguments τ C . Final expression for (symmetric) spinor
of (antiself-dual) electromagnetic ﬁeld FCD =
has been obtained in
[21,29] and has the following invariant form:

{−E+,

E3,

E

}

−

FCD =

1
2P (cid:26)

ΠCD

d
dG (cid:18)

−

ΠC ΠD

.

P (cid:19)(cid:27)

(42)

Comparison of this Eq.(42) with condition (35) demonstrates then that singularities
of ﬁeld strengths (41) occur just in the branching points of superpotential function

16 Vladimir V. Kassandrov

G(x) so that everywhere except in the singular locus of EM ﬁeld the principal ﬁeld
G(x) is necessarily single-valued.

In the considered twistor construction the harmonic superpotential function
G(x), 2G = 0 is restricted to a much more extent being subject to nonlinear over-
determined system of two Eqs.(36). It follows then that only a subclass of solutions
to ME is covered by the antiself-dual ﬁeld strengths (41) in agreement with the
concept of “induced nonlinearity”. On account of the theorem of section 3 bounded
singular “sources” of these ﬁelds will carry necessarily quantized electric charge.

Indeed, the full version of the considered twistor scheme is invariant under the

so called “weak” or restricted gauge transformations [11,21] of the form

ξ

7→

α(ξ, τ )ξ, τ

α(ξ, τ )τ, Cµ

Cµ + 2∂µ ln α,

(43)

7→

7→

in which the gauge parameter α(ξ(x), τ (x)) is allowed to depend on the space-time
coordinates only implicitly, i.e. only through the components of the transforming
spinor ξ(x) itself and/or of its twistor counterparts τ (x) deﬁned via the incidence
relation (31).
In order to simplify the above presentation, the gauge symmetry
(43) has been broken by the scaling of the principal spinor of the form ξ0 = 1;
for manifestly invariant version of the presented twistor construction we refer the
reader to our works [13,21,29].

For us here it’s only important to mark that the restricted nature of gauge
invariance (43) doesn’t violate any consideration used in the proof of the charge
quantization’ theorem in section 3. Therefore, all the conditions of the theorem are
fulﬁlled: CSD conditions hold good, gauge invariance is ensured and the “wave func-
tion” G(x) is single-valued everywhere outside of the ﬁeld strengths’ singularities.
Thus, we can state that every bounded singularity of Maxwell ﬁelds (41) or (42)
obtained from KFC (33) carries necessarily quantized electric charge. Namely, by
comparison of (43) with (13) we ﬁnd that the (dimensionless) “coupling constant”
in our case is equal to b = 2 and, consequently, for admissible value of charge we
get

q = N qmin

, N = 0,

1,

2, ...

±

±

N
4

≡

(44)

Certainly, numerical value qmin = 1/4 of the quantum of charge itself is here
of no particular importance since the dimensional units are as yet ambiguous and
its dynamical meaning – as yet not clear. Nonetheless, we are free to choose the
units (say, of length and of ﬁeld strength) in the way to ensure qmin be equal in
dimensional units to the elementary electron charge. Thereafter, for every bounded
singularity of any Maxwell ﬁeld obtained from the KFC the charge will be integer
multiple of the elementary one. We shall see in the next section, moreover, that
fundamental charged solutions (of Coulomb-like type) possess precisely the elemen-
1 only), the property being speciﬁc, to our knowledge,
tary charge (for which N =

±

Singular sources of Maxwell ﬁelds . . .

17

only for this construction (compare, e.g., with the Ran˜ada’s Coulomb Ansatz [9]
with the charge arbitrary multiple of the minimal one).

Finally, let us underline that the above-presented twistor generating construction
is purely algebraic in origin since one doesn’t need to resolve here any PDE or
even to explicitly integrate in an auxiliary twistor space as in the Bateman-Penrose
transform for solutions of homogeneous Maxwell j and other linear equations [30,27].
Indeed, starting from an arbitrary complex function Π(G, τ 0, τ 1) we diﬀerentiate it
with respect to τ 0, τ 1 and to G (the latter being the total derivative) and resolve
thereafter the algebraical KFC (33) with respect to the only unknown G at any
space-time point. Substituting the latter into the expression (41) we are able to
calculate the ﬁeld strengths at this particular point, i.e. completely locally.

On the other hand, we can eliminate the generating ﬁeld G from the system
of KFC (33) and the condition (35) which deﬁnes the locus of branching points of
G(x) together with singular locus of ﬁeld strengths (42). In the result of elimination
we come to one (generally complex) constraint of the form

S(u, v, w, ¯w) = S(x, y, z, t) = 0

(45)

which determines, at a ﬁxed moment of time t, the shape of singular “source”
of EM ﬁeld strengths.
In “common case” one complex Eq.(45) corresponds to
two real constraints which deﬁne a 1-dimensional “string-like” singular object in
3-dimensional space. As an exception, singularities can be 0-dimensional (point
charges) or 2-dimensional (membranes). It can be proved [29] that for every solution
G(x) of KFC or,equivalently, of constraints (36) the function S(u, v, w, ¯w) in Eq.(45)
necessarily satisﬁes the complex eikonal equation (see also the last section).

As the time t in Eq.(45) varies, the latter deﬁnes the evolution of the singular
locus, i.e. can be regarded as the equation of motion of an extended singular (in
particular bounded, “particle-like”) object. Examples of shape and time evolution
of these objects will be presented in the next section.

In fact, diﬀerential constraints (36) deﬁne a well known fundamental geometrical
structure, namely a shear-free (null geodesic) congruence (SFC) in Minkowski space
(see, e.g., [27]). In particular, a SFC is formed from the rays of EM wave radiated
by an arbitrary moving electric charge. By this, the component G(x) of the basic
projective 2-spinor ξT =
deﬁnes the principal null 4-vector kµ(x) tangent
to the lines of the congruence,

1, G(x)
}

{

kµ = ξ+σµξ,

(46)

whereas the famous Kerr theorem [28,27] asserts that every SFC in Minkowsky space
can be obtained from KFC (33) using a generating twistor function Π(G, τ 0, τ 1).

jAnother simple algebraic procedure proposed by I. Robinson [38] also makes it possible to deﬁne
a Maxwell ﬁeld for every solution of the KFC. However, this ﬁeld is null and charge-free

18 Vladimir V. Kassandrov

exist, of the Kerr-Schild type

Moreover, a wide and physically important class of Riemannian metrics does

gµν = ηµν + H(x)kµkν,

(47)

for which the property of a congruence to be null geodesic and shear-free is pre-
served. On the other hand, a scalar function H(x) can be often deﬁned in the way
that the metric (47) would satisfy the vacuum or electrovacuum Einstein - Maxwell
equations [28,20]. Irrespectively to this, the curvature singularities for metrics (47)
are ﬁxed via the same condition (35) as those of EM ﬁelds (42) and form thus, in
the framework of our construction, a singular object – a unique source of EM and
eﬀective gravitational ﬁelds. Note that through the correspondence of SFC with
asymptotically ﬂat solutions of Einstein-Maxwell equations such characteristics as
(gravitational) mass and angular moment (spin) can be prescribed to these singular
particle-like objects (see the ﬁrst two examples from the next section).

Finally, potentials of a complex non-Abelian gauge ﬁeld can be deﬁned by the
same complex Maxwell 4-potentials Cµ(x) [11,21]. For every generating function
G(x) subject to KFC these potentials identically satisfy the nonlinear equation of
the Yang-Mills type! [11,21].

Thus, the KFC (33) generates a distinguished subclass of interrelated solutions
to a large number of (both linear and nonlinear) relativistic ﬁeld equations. These
and only these solutions are thought of as physically meaningful in the framework of
the above-presented twistor construction and with respect to the concept of induced
nonlinearity.

6. Singular structure of Maxwell ﬁelds obtained via Kerr functional
condition. Examples

1. Quantized Coulomb solution. Let us start from the previous Ansatz (29)
for superpotential G(x), 2G = 0 which results in the Coulomb solution (30) to
ME. It’s easy to check that it satisﬁes also the eikonal equation (63) but, generally,
doesn’t satisfy the two diﬀerential constraints (36). Therefore, it can’t be obtained
via twistor algebraic construction based on the KFC (33). The constraints (36) are
fulﬁlled only if the numerical factor in Eq.(29) q = 1/4, i.e. only for elementary
electric charge, in correspondence with the quantization theorem.

Indeed, only for this value of charge the Ansatz (29) can be obtained from KFC

(33) via the following generating function:

Π = Gτ 0

τ 1 = G(wG + u)

(vG + ¯w) = wG2 + 2zG

¯w = 0,

(48)

−

−

−

where z = (u
v)/2 and the time parameter t = (u + v)/2 doesn’t enter the deﬁning
KFC (48) which turns to be quadratic in this case. Explicitly resolving the latter,

−

Singular sources of Maxwell ﬁelds . . .

19

we obtain two branches of the superpotential function

G =

r =

x2 + y2 + z2

(49)

¯w

±

z

,

r

p

which, geometrically, correspond to stereographic projection S2
C from the North
and the South poles respectively and, on the other hand, result in the antiself-dual
(~
E

) EM ﬁelds (41) of the form [10,11]

= i ~
H

7→

F00 =

E+ =

−

¯w
4r3 , F01 = F10 =

E3 =

z
4r3 , F11 =

E

− =

w
4r3 .

(50)

The ﬁeld coincides in form with the standard Coulomb one (30) but carries electric
1/4 necessarily equal in modulus to the elementary. Notice that the
charge q =
same ﬁeld can be obtained algebraically from expression (42) if one calculates the
derivatives

±

Π0 = G, Π1 =

1, Π00 = Π01 = Π11 = 0

etc.

(51)

−

On the other hand, the function G gives rise to a static and spherically symmetric
SFC (46) and, consequently, – to a Riemannian metric (47) which (for correspondent
choice of the “gravitational potential” H(x) and together with the Coulomb ﬁeld
(50) which preserves its form under the change of geometry) satisﬁes the Einstein -
Maxwell equations and appears to be just the Reissner-Nordstr¨om solution [28].
2. Appel-Kerr solution. Now let us modify generating function (48) as follows:

Π = Gτ 0

τ 1 + 2iaG = wG2 + 2(z + ia)G

¯w = 0,

(52)

−

−

a being a real constant. Function (52) can be obtained from the previous one (29) by
z∗ = z + ia. Solving the quadratic equation,
means of the complex translation z
we again obtain two branches of the ﬁeld G which have the same form as in (49)
r∗. The branching locus of the ﬁeld G evidently
but with substitution z
corresponds to the (now complex) condition

z∗, r

7→

7→

7→

which deﬁnes a ring of radius equal to

∗

r

=

p

x2 + y2 + (z + ia)2 = 0,

,
|

a
|
x2 + y2 = a2.

z = 0,

(53)

(54)

Just on this ring EM ﬁeld strengths (which correspond again to expression (50)
with substitution of the “asterisk”-variables) become singular. On the other hand,
EM ﬁeld becomes now globally two-fold changing its sign when one goes round the
singular ring. However, the ring itself is well-deﬁned in shape and, moreover, can
be taken as a model of electron, see below.

For this solution the allowed value for electric charge remains, of course, the
1/4. However, the structure of ﬁelds

same and equal to the elementary one q =

±

20 Vladimir V. Kassandrov

(55)

(56)

becomes much more complicated, and the real and imaginary parts can be separated
only asymptotically, at distances r >>
-ﬁelds)
a
|
(E, H) we get approximately (in spherical coordinates) [7]

where for the real-part ﬁelds (

ℜ

|

Er

≃

q
r2 (1

−

3a2
2r2 (3 cos2 θ

−

1)),

Eθ

qa2
r4 3 cos θ sin θ,

≃ −

Hr

≃

2qa
r3 cos θ, Hθ

≃

qa
r3 sin θ

±

±

1/4. In view of Eqs. (55,56) and (53) the

where q =
-ﬁelds describe a singular
“source” with elementary electric charge q, dipole magnetic moment µ = qa and
quadrupole electric moment ϑ = 2qa2, i.e. only those characteristics of elementary
-ﬁelds, they are exact dual
particles which are observed in experiment. As to the
duplicates of the
-ones and, according to the arguments of section 3, wouldn’t,
perhaps, manifest themselves in interactions.

ℜ

ℑ

ℜ

Electric part of the considered solution, i.e. complexiﬁcation of Coulomb ﬁeld
has been obtained (in regard to the historical comments in [31]) by Appel back in
1887 (see also [20]). Exact Ansatz (50) (with substitution of “asterisk” - variables)
turns out to coincide with EM ﬁelds for the Kerr-Newman solution of Einstein-
Maxwell electrovacuum system. Just this eﬀective metric of the type (47) arises
from the SFC (46) deﬁned by the Appel superpotential G = ¯w/(z∗

r∗).

B. Carter demonstrated in [32] that the singular ring of Kerr-Newman solution
possesses gyromagnetic ratio exactly equal to the Dirac value g = 2 and proposed
a model of electron on this base. This molel has been thereafter studied in various
aspects in the works of E.T. Newman [33], A.Ya. Burinskii [34,36], C.A. L´opez [35]
et al. In [26] (see also [36]) it has been proved that “particle-like” (i.e. with bounded
singular locus) static solutions which can be obtained from KFC (33) are exhausted
by the Appel-Kerr solution of the type (49). For more detailed discussion of these
issues we also refer the reader to our papers [7,8].
Bisingular solution and its modiﬁcations. Solutions of this type, in particular
with a torus-like singular locus and a nontrivial evolution with bifurcations, have
been obtained and discussed in [13,21].
Wave-like singular solutions. It’s easy to see, say, from the complex form of ME
(6) that every null ﬁeld P3 = 0, P− = 0, P+ = P+(w, u) arbitrarily dependent on
a pair of spinor coordinates w = x
iy, u = t + z, satisﬁes ME identically. These
solutions evidently describe EM waves propagating with fundamental velocity along
the Z-direction and somehow distributed in the transversal plane. In the framework
of the considered twistor construction only a subclass of such wave-like solutions
can be realized, in the case the generating function is independent on one of the
twistor variables (τ 1) and has the form

−

Π = Π(G, τ 0) = Π(G, wG + u) = 0.

(57)

(58)

(59)

(60)

Singular sources of Maxwell ﬁelds . . .

21

In the result, the superpotential G should obey only the ﬁrst of the two constraints
(36) which binds together its dependence on the two coordinates and inhibits, in
particular, the existence of plane EM waves in the scheme. Instead, from Eq.(57)
In [8] an example
a wide class of singular wave-like solutions can be obtained.
of the latters has been presented, with a helix-like singularity inﬁnite in Z- and
localized in the transversal direction. More interesting is the “particle-like” case,
with completely bounded (localized) singular locus of ﬁeld strengths, which can be
obtained, in particular, from a rather simple generating function of the form

Π = G2(τ 0)2 + a2G2

b2 = 0,

−

∈

R and which will be discussed elsewhere. Such photon-like solutions
a, b = const
seem quite unusual and, certainly, need careful study and physical interpretation.
“Cocoon”-like solution. We conclude with a presentation of a time-dependent,
axially symmetrical solution for which (as well as for the solution generated from
Eq.(58)) the function G(x) can’t be resolved from the KFC in explicit form. For
this, we take the twistor function of the form

b > 0 being a real constant. Separating the coordinate ¯w through the substitution

Π = G2(τ 0)2 + (τ 1)2

b2G2 = 0,

−

¯w
ρ

G =

Y (ρ, u, v),

ρ =

x2 + y2,

p

we reduce Eq.(59) to the quartic equation in Y of the form

ρ2Y 4 + 2ρuY 3 + (u2 + v2

b2)Y 2 + 2ρvY + ρ2 = 0,

(61)

−

which at initial moment of time t = (u + v)/2 = 0 can be factorized into a pair of
quadratic equations

(ρY 2 + aY

ρ)(ρY 2 + cY

ρ) = 0,

−

−

(62)

−

−

±

b2

z2

p

2ρ2 respectively. After this, analytical analysis of the
with a, c = z
ﬁeld Y and of its branching points becomes possible. It shows that at t = 0 for every
of the four modes the associated EM ﬁeld at spacial inﬁnity is again Coulomb-like,
1/4, whereas the correspondent point singularity is
with elementary charge q =
located at the axis ρ = 0, either at z = +b/√2 or at z =
b/√2. Besides, for each
mode the ﬁelds become singular on the ellipsoidal “cocoon” z2 + 2ρ2 = b2 covering
the point singularity. More detailed analysis of this ﬁeld and its time evolution will
be presented elsewhere.

−

±

7. The algebrodynamical approach and its biquaternionic realization

22 Vladimir V. Kassandrov

There exists a great number of links between the twistor construction based on
KFC (33) and the general approach to ﬁeld theory developed in our works during
the last two decades – the algebrodynamics. As we have seen, the KFC is deeply
related, apart from the twistors themselves, to a lot of peculiar algebraical and geo-
metrical structures, namely to the shear-free congruences and eﬀective Riemannian
metrics, to the vector ﬁelds covariantly constant with respect to exeptional aﬃne
connection of the Weyl-Cartan type [10,11,21] and, in algebrodynamical theory, – to
the Cauchy-Riemann type equations generalized to the noncommutative algebra of
complex quaternions. All these structures constitute in essence a unique fundamen-
tal entity which can be described in diverse yet equivalent languages. According
to the philosophy of algebrodynamics [10,37], such an abstract structure can be
considered as a candidate for the primodial Code of Nature, and all the genuine
physical laws should directly follow from its intrinsic properties which can only be
carefully examined.

In our works [10,11,15,7,21] we have taken the algebra of complex quaternions
(or biquaternions) B as the fundamental structure which completely determines
both physical geometry and dynamics. Physical ﬁelds (B-ﬁelds) were assumed to
be just the diﬀerentiable functions of B-variable. Owing to the noncommutativity
of B-algebra, the diﬀerentiability conditions, i.e. the generalized Cauchy-Riemann
equations (GCRE) turned to be nonlinear and over-determined. Besides, they were
found to be naturally Lorentz and gauge invariant, and have been taken as the only
fundamental ﬁeld equations of a uniﬁed algebraic ﬁeld theory.

Remarkably, the nonlinear Lorentz invariant complex eikonal equation (CEE)

(∂tS)2

(∂xS)2

(∂yS)2

(∂zS)2 = 0

−

−

−

(63)

should be satisﬁed for every (spinor) component S(t, x, y, z)
C of any diﬀerentiable
function of B-variable (B-ﬁeld) [10,11] and is of great importance for the theory,
similar to that of the linear Laplace equation for complex analysis.

∈

Aside from this, in [29] the general solution of the CEE (63) has been obtained
(through the analysis of its intrinsic twistor structure) which turned out to consist
of two diﬀerent classes. For the ﬁrst one every solution is implicitly deﬁned just by
the KFC (33), whereas solutions of the second class can be obtained from them via
the elimination procedure described in section 5 and constitute the singular locus
(45) for the eikonal ﬁelds of the ﬁrst class. For them, the primary GCRE take the
following invariant form [10,11,8]:

dξ = CdXξ,

(64)

where the 2-spinor ξT (x) =
2 complex matrix C(x) correspond
and the 2
to the superpotential and complex 4-potentials respectively which were introduced

1, G(x)
}

×

{

Singular sources of Maxwell ﬁelds . . .

23

in sections 4,5 in context of generating constructions of solutions to ME. Conditions
of integrability of GCRE (64) result, as before, in CSD conditions for potentials C(x)
and, consequently, – in satisfaction of ME, WE as well as Yang-Mills type equations
“on shell”.

{

ξ(x), C(x)
}

On the other hand, the potentials C(x) can be eliminated from over-determined
GCRE (64), and the spinor function G(x) turns therafter to satisfy the diﬀerential
constraints (36) and to deﬁne, therefore, a shear-free congruence. Then, with respect
of GCRE (64) can be
to the Kerr theorem (section 5), every solution
algebraically obtained via KFC (33) from a generating twistor function Π(G, τ 0, τ 1).
Thus, the presented version of the algebrodynaimcs reduce completely to the
analysis of the KFC which has been partially accomlished in sections 5,6. Apart
from Maxwell ﬁelds, many other dynamical ﬁeld structures can be naturally broght
into correspondence with the KFC (see the end of section 5). The singular loci
of these ﬁelds coincide in shape and in dynamics being deﬁned from the “caustic
condition” (35). In the case the singular locus is spatially bounded, its connected
components can be considered as a set of particle-like objects with self-consistent
and topologically nontrivial shape and evolution. These objects manifest some prop-
erties of elementary particles, carrying, in particular, discrete and integer multiple
electric charge and the magnetic moment and spin with gyromagnetic ratio which
is inherent just to fermions.

We can say, in conclusion, that in the algebrodynamical approach physical prob-
lems reduce to those of algebraic geometry and of theory of singularities of diﬀer-
entiable mappings. By this, no extraneous assumptions are allowed (for, say, better
correspondence with physical phenomenology). Future study will show to which ex-
tent the real properties of elementary particles are encoded in those of fundamental
mathematical structures dealt with in the paper.

The author are greatly indebted to V. I. Zharikov and to V. N. Trishin.

8. Acknowledgments

References

1. P. A. M. Dirac, “Classical Theories of Radiating electrons,” Proc. Royal Soc. London

A167, 148-162 (1938).
See also, for example, S. R. de Groot and L. G. Suttorp, Foundations of Electrody-
namics (North-Holland Publ. Comp., 1972).
F. Rohrlich, Classical charged particles (Addison-Wesley Publ. Co., Inc., Reading,
Mass., 1965);
J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (2-d edition, Wiley, 1975);

2. The most fundamental and familiar from the nonlinear ED schemes are, perhaps, the
theory of G. Mie and the Born-Infeld ED. For review see, e.g., J. Plebansky, Lectures
on Nonlinear Electrodynamics (Ed. Nordica, Copenhagen, 1968).

24 Vladimir V. Kassandrov

3. See, for example, A. A. Chernitskii, “Nonlinear Electrodynamics with Singularities
(Modernized Born-Infeld Electrodynamics),” Helv. Phys. Acta 71, 274-287 (1998);
(Preprint hep-th / 9705075).

4. See, for example, A. Patani, M. Schlidwein and Q. Shati, “Topological Charges in Field

Theories,” J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 9, 1513-1520 (1976).

5. A. F. Ran˜ada, “Knotted solutions of the Maxwell Equations in vacuum,” J. Phys. A:

Math. Gen. 23, L815-L820 (1990);
A. F. Ran˜ada and J. L. Trueba, “Electromagnetic knots,” Phys. Lett. A202, 337-342
(1995); “Two properties of Electromagnetic knots,” Phys. Lett. A235, 23-33 (1997).
6. See also A. E. Chubykalo and A. Espinoza, “Unusual Formations of the Free Electro-
magnetic Field in Vacuum,” J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 35, 8043-8053 (2002) where an
interesting everywhere convergent “ball-like” solution of the free ME has been obtained.
7. V. V. Kassandrov and J. A. Rizcalla, “Particles as ﬁeld singularities in the uniﬁed
algebraic dynamics,” Geometrical and Topological Ideas in Modern Physics (Space
Researh Center of Russian Institute for High Energy Physics, Protvino, 2002), pp.
199-212; see also the old version, Preprint gr-qc / 9809056.

8. V. V. Kassandrov and V. N. Trishin, “Particle-like Singular Solutions in Einstein-
Maxwell Theory and in Algebraic Dynamics,” Gravitation & Cosmology (Moscow)
5, 272-277 (1999); (Preprint gr-qc / 0007026).

9. A. F. Ran˜ada, “A Topological Model of Electromagnetism: Quantization of the Electric

Charge,” An. Fis. (Madrid) A87, 55-59 (1991);
A. F. Ran˜ada and J. L. Trueba, “A Topological Mechanism of Discretization for the
Electric Charge,” Phys. Lett. B422, 196-200 (1998); (Preprint hep-th / 9802166).
10. V. V. Kassandrov, Algebraic Structure of Space-Time and the Algebrodynamics

(Peopl. Friend. Univ. Press, Moscow, 1992), in Russian.

11. V. V. Kassandrov, “Biquaternionic Electrodynamics and Weyl-Cartan Geometry of
Space-Time,” Gravitation & Cosmology (Moscow) 3, 216-222 (1995); (Preprint gr-
qc / 0007027).

12. V. V. Kassandrov, “The Algebrodynamics: Quaternions, Twistors and Particles,” Vest-

nik Peopl. Friend. Univ., Fizika 8, 36-47 (2000), in Russian.

13. V. V. Kassandrov and J. A. Rizcalla, “Algebrodynamical Approach in Field Theory:
Bisingular Solution and its Modiﬁcations,” Recent Problems in Field Theory (Kasan
Univ. Press, Kasan, 1998), pp.176-187; (Preprint gr-qc / 9809078); see also the Russian
version, Ibid., pp. 163-175.

14. A. F. Ran˜ada, “A Topological Theory of the Electromagnetic Field,” Lett. Math.
Phys. 18, 97-106 (1989); “Topological Electromagnetism,” J. Phys. A: Math. Gen.
25, 1621-1641 (1992).

15. V. V. Kassandrov, “Conformal Mappings, Hyper-Analiticity and Field Dynamics,”
Acta Applic. Math. 50 197-202, 1998; “Physical Fields as Superanalytic Mappings
on the Algebraic Structure of Space-Time,” Quazigroups and Nonassociative Alge-
bras in Physics (Proc. Inst. Phys. Estonia, No.66, Tartu, 1990), pp. 202-212.

16. E. T. Newman, R. Posadas, “Motion and Structure of Singularities in General Relativ-

ity,” Phys. Rev. 187, 1784-1791 (1969).

17. A. M. Vinogradov, “Multivalued Solutions and a Principle of Classiﬁcation of Nonlinear

Partial Diﬀerential Equations,” Sov. Math. Dokl. 14, 661-665 (1973);
V. V. Lychagin, “Singularities of Multivalued Solutions of Nonlinear Diﬀerential Equa-
tions and Nonlinear Phenomena,” Acta Appl. Math. 3, 135-144 (1985);
F. Lizzi, G. Marmo, G. Sparano and A. M. Vinogradov, “Eikonal-type Equation for
Geometrical Singularities of Solutions in Field Theory,” J. Geom. Phys. 14, 212-235
(1994).

18. H. Bateman, The Mathematical Analysis of Electrical and Optical Wave-Motion

Singular sources of Maxwell ﬁelds . . .

25

on the Basis of Maxwell’s Equations (Dover, N.Y., 1955). Reprint of the 1915 year
edition.

19. E. T. Newman, “Maxwell equations and complex Minkowsky space,” J. Math. Phys.

14, 102-107 (1973).

20. A. Burinskii, “Complex Kerr Geometry and Nonstationary Kerr Solutions,” Phys. Rev.

D67, 124024 (2003); (Preprint gr-qc / 0212048).

21. V. V. Kassandrov and J. A. Rizcallah, “Twistor and ”weak” gauge structures in the

framework of quaternionic analysis,” Preprint gr-qc / 0012109.

22. G. A. Alekseev, “Exact Solutions in the General Theory of Relativity,” Proc. Steklov

Inst. Math. 3, 215-246 (1988).

23. Y. N. Obukhov and F. W. Heyl, “Space-Time Metric from Linear Electrodynamics,”

Phys. Lett. B458, 466-470 (1999).
F. W. Heyl and Y. N. Obukhov, Foundations of Classical Electrodynamics
(B¨irkh¨auser, Boston, MA, 2001-2002).

24. P. A. M. Dirac, “Quantized Singularities in the Electromagnetic Field,” Proc. Royal
Soc. London A133, 60-72 (1931); “The Theory of Magnetic Poles,” Phys. Rev. 74,
817-830 (1948).

25. V. I. Strajev and L. M. Tomil’chik Electrodynamics with Magnetic Charge (Nauka i

Tekhnika, Minsk, 1975), in Russian.

26. R. P. Kerr and W. B. Wilson, “Singularities in the Kerr-Schild Metrics,” Gen. Rel.

27. R. Penrose and W. Rindler, Spinors and Space-Time. V. II (Cambridge Univ. Press,

Grav. 10, 273-281 (1979).

Cambridge, 1986).

28. G. C. Debney, R. P. Kerr and A. Schild, “Solutions of the Einstein-Maxwell Equations,”

J. Math. Phys. 10, 1842-1854 (1969).

29. V. V. Kassandrov, “General Solution of the Complex 4-Eikonal Equation and the ”Al-
gebrodynamical” Field Theory,” Gravitation & Cosmology (Moscow) 8, Suppl.2,
57-62 (2002).

30. R. Penrose, “Solutions of the Zero Rest-Mass Equations,” J. Math. Phys. 10, 38-56

(1969).
See also H. Bateman, Partial Diﬀerential Equations of Mathematical Physics
(Dover, N.Y., 1944).

31. E. T. Whittacker and G. N. Watson, A Course of Modern Analysis (Cambridge Univ.

Press, Cambridge, N.Y., 1969), p. 400.

32. B. Carter, “Global Structure of the Kerr Family of Gravitational Fields,” Phys. Rev.

174, 1559-1571 (1968).

33. E. T. Newman, “On a Classical, Geometrical Origin of Magnetic Moments, Spin-
Angular Momentum and the Dirac Gyromagnetic Ratio,” Phys. Rev. D65, 104005
(2000); (Preprint gr-qc / 0201055);

34. A. Ya.Burinskii, “Some properties of the Kerr solution to low energy string theory,”

Phys. Rev. D52, 5826-5831 (1995); (Preprint hep-th / 9504139).

35. C. A. L´opez, “Extended Model of Electron in General Relativity,” Phys. Rev. D84,

313-316 (1984).

36. A. Ya. Burinskii, “Strings in the Kerr-Schild Metrics,” Problems of Theory of Grav-
itation and Elementary Particles. No.11 (Atomizdat, Moscow, 1980), pp. 47-60, in
Russian.

37. V. V. Kassandrov, “Number, Time and Light (Algebraic Dynamics and Physical Picture
of the World),” Mathematics and Practice. Mathematics and Culture. No.2 (Self-
Education, Moscow, 2001), pp. 67-76, in Russian.

38. I. Robinson, “Null Electromagnetic Fields,” J. Math. Phys. 2, 290-292 (1961).

