3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
1
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Classial elementary partiles, spin,

zitterbewegung and all that

Dpto. de Físia Teória, Universidad del País Vaso-Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea,

Martín Rivas

Apdo. 644, 48080 Bilbao, Spain

e-mail: wtpripemlg.ehu.es

Abstrat After a revision of the main features of the struture of the Dira eletron a plau-

sible de(cid:28)nition of elementary partile is stated.

It is shown that this de(cid:28)nition leads in the

lassial ase to a piture whih produes a very lear orrespondene between the lassial and

quantum mehanial features of the eletron. It is analyzed how the lassial spin struture

and zitterbewegung are related to the lassial variables that de(cid:28)ne the kinematial state of the

partile.

1 Introdution

The very onept of elementary partile seems to be not su(cid:30)iently well stated in under-

graduate physis books. In most ases they are mentioned as the briks with whih matter an

be built. But, if they are so simple ob jets it is important to establish the theoretial di(cid:27)erene

between them and other small ob jets whih are not onsidered as elementary. One of the

goals of this work is to introdue some simple ideas whih shed light about a theoretial on-

ept of elementary partile and how these ideas lead to their lassial and quantum mehanial

desription.

We know that matter is formed by smaller and smaller units whih an be divided again and

again into smaller piees. This proess an be ontinued until we hypothetially reah what the

Greeks alled an atom, the indivisible unit of matter. Today we all this last division of matter

an elementary partile. Elementary partiles should be thus the building bloks with whih all

material systems an be formed.

Leptons and quarks are the basi elementary partiles in the standard model piture. They

all have, as intrinsi properties, mass, spin 1/2, eletri harge and several other quantum

numbers with some exoti names as baryon and lepton number, isotopi spin, strangeness,

beauty and others. Together the intermediate spin 1 bosons, whih arry the interations

between them, we have a olletion of, harged and unharged, spinning ob jets. It seems that

there are no spinless elementary partiles in nature, so that the spin desription is ruial for the

understanding of the struture of matter. Whether or not these todays onsidered elementary

partiles an be subsequently divided is still an open question. But if these (cid:28)nal indivisible

ob jets exist, it is possible to state, at least from the theoretial point of view, what are the

neessary onditions for a mehanial system to be onsidered as elementary, to be onsidered

as the ending proess of division of matter.

1

To (cid:28)x ideas we review in the next setion, the desription, from the lassial and quantum

mehanial point of view, of the struture of the eletron.

We state in setion 3 the onept of elementary partile as a mehanial system without

exited states. The desription of the state of an elementary partile is redued to the analysis

of the updated onseutive inertial observers whih desribe the partile in the same state.

The remaining setions are devoted to the analysis of the kind of Lagrangian systems the above

de(cid:28)nition allows to deal with, in partiular with the relativisti and non-relativisti point partile

and more important, of the spinning systems. We end this work with the lassial Lagrangian

desription of the photon and a (cid:28)nal setion devoted to general onlusions and some di(cid:30)ulties

of the formalism.

2 What is an eletron?

The usual attempt to desribe lassially the spinning eletron has been to endow the Newto-

nian point partile with some spherial shape of small radius, some plausible harge distribution

on its surfae or in its whole volume, and a (cid:28)nal rotation as a rigid body to give aount of the

spin angular momentum. Nevertheless this rigid body desription has led to serious di(cid:30)ulties.

One needs to justify how the harge is held together and therefore the additional desription of

the glue fores is neessary. With a (cid:28)nite radius and a uniform mass distribution the veloity

of the outer part of the sphere should exeed the veloity of light to obtain the measured values

of the spin.

The failure of this kind of lassial models led Barut to quote about the struture of the spin-

ning eletron: `If a spinning partile is not quite a point partile, nor a solid three dimensional

top, what an it be? What is the struture whih an appear under probing with eletromagneti

(cid:28)elds as a point harge, yet as far as spin and wave properties are onerned exhibits a size of

the order of the Compton wavelength?' [1℄.

Nevertheless, for the desription of the eletron what we have is the quantum mehanial

Dira's analysis. Dira equation has as many negative energy solutions as positive energy ones,

and one of the suess of this formalism is the interpretation of the negative energy solutions

as representing positive energy solutions of a partile of the same intrinsi attributes mass and

spin 1/2 but opposite eletri harge. Every harged spin 1/2 partile has an antipartile.

If point r is the position vetor on whih Dira's spinor ψ(t, r) is de(cid:28)ned, then, when

analyzing the veloity of point r , Dira (cid:28)nds that: [2℄

1. The veloity v = i/¯h[H, r] = cα, is expressed in terms of α matries, whih have eigen-

values ±1, and the veloity of light c, and writes:
`. . . a measurement of a omponent of the veloity of a free eletron is ertain to lead to
the result ±c. This onlusion is easily seen to hold also when there is a (cid:28)eld present.'

2. One of the puzzling features of this desription is that the linear momentum p does not
have the diretion of the veloity v of point r , but it is related to some average value of it:
. . . `the x1 omponent of the veloity, cα1 , onsists of two parts, a onstant part c2p1H −1

,

onneted with the momentum by the lassial relativisti formula, and an osil latory part,

whose frequeny is at least 2mc2/h, . . .'.
It seems that point r does not represent the enter of mass position of the eletron.

3. The position r osillates very fast in a small region of order of Compton's wavelength:
`The osil latory part of x1 is smal l, . . . , whih is of order of magnitude ¯h/mc, . . .'.
This osillatory motion of point r was de(cid:28)ned by Shrödinger as the zitterbewegung or

quivering or trembling motion of the eletron.

2

4. In his Nobel dissertation leture he insists on this peuliar feature of the quivering motion

at the speed of light of the eletron: [3℄

`The new variables α, whih we have to introdue to get a relativisti wave equation linear
in H , give rise to the spin of the eletron. From the general priniples of quantum mehan-
is one an easily dedue that these variables α give the eletron a spin angular momentum

of half a quantum and a magneti moment of one Bohr magneton in the reverse diretion

to the angular momentum. These results are in agreement with experiment. They were, in

fat, (cid:28)rst obtained from the experimental evidene provided by spetrosopy and afterwards

on(cid:28)rmed by the theory.'

`The variables α also give rise to some rather unexpeted phenomena onerning the mo-

tion of the eletron. These have been ful ly worked out by Shrödinger. It is found that an

eletron whih seems to us to be moving slow ly, must atual ly have a very high frequeny

osil latory motion of smal l amplitude superposed on the regular motion whih appears to

us. As a result of this osil latory motion, the veloity of the eletron at any time equals

the veloity of light. This is a predition whih annot be diretly veri(cid:28)ed by experiment,

sine the frequeny of the osil latory motion is so high and its amplitude is so smal l. But

one must believe in this onsequene of the theory, sine other onsequenes of the theory

whih are inseparably bound up with this one, suh as the law of sattering of light by an

eletron, are on(cid:28)rmed by experiment.'

The eletron has thus a regular motion, whih an be easily interpreted as the motion of

its enter of mass, and the osillatory motion of point r at the veloity of light around
the enter of mass. The absolute value of the veloity c is not modi(cid:28)ed by the presene

of an external (cid:28)eld.

5. The total angular momentum of a free eletron J = r × P + S = L + S , is a onstant
of the motion, but the orbital part L and the spin S are not separately onstants of the
motion. The spin S of a free eletron satis(cid:28)es the dynamial equation

dS
dt

= p × cα = p × v,

so that the spin operator S is only a onstant of the motion for the enter of mass observer
for whih p = 0.

6. In his original 1928 paper [4℄, when analyzing the interation of the eletron with an

external eletromagneti (cid:28)eld, after developing the interation Hamiltonian to (cid:28)rst order

in the external (cid:28)elds, he obtains two new interation terms:

e¯h
2m

Σ · B +

ie¯h
2mc

α · E = −µ · B − d · E,

(1)

where Dira's eletron spin operator is written as

S =

Σ =

¯h
2

¯h
2 (cid:18)

σ 0
0 σ (cid:19)

,

in terms of σ -Pauli matries and where E and B are the external eletri and magneti

(cid:28)elds, respetively. He says: `the eletron wil l therefore behave as though it has a magneti

moment −(e¯h/2m) Σ

and an eletri moment −(ie¯h/2mc) α. The magneti moment is

just that assumed in the spinning eletron model'.

`The eletri moment, being a pure

imaginary, we should not expet to appear in the model. It is doubtful whether the eletri

moment has any physial meaning.'

The eletron, in addition to the eletri harge behaves as though it has some eletri and

magneti dipole moments. The magneti dipole term is the right one to give aount of the

3

Zeeman e(cid:27)et in atoms. But, what about the eletri dipole? In the last Dira sentene it

is di(cid:30)ult to understand why Dira, who did not rejet the negative energy solutions, and

therefore its onsideration as the antipartile states, and insisted that the motion of point r

is at the speed of light as an `inseparably bound up' onsequene, disliked the existene of this

eletri dipole whih was obtained from his formalism on an equal footing and at the same time

as the magneti dipole term. In his book and in the Noble dissertation he never mentioned

again this eletri dipole property. But, what happens if the point r represents the position of

the enter of harge of the eletron. By the previous analysis it seems to be a di(cid:27)erent point

than the enter of mass. Then this separation implies that for the enter of mass observer there

is a nonvanishing eletri dipole moment. It is osillating very fast, its average value is probably

zero, but it is a physial property that has to be taken into aount.

In fat, in quantum eletrodynamis, the omplete Dira Hamiltonian ontains both terms,

perhaps in an involved way beause the above expression (1) is a (cid:28)rst order expansion in the

external (cid:28)elds onsidered as lassial ommuting (cid:28)elds. It might happen that this eletri dipole

does not represent the existene of a partiular positive and negative harge distribution for

the eletron, but rather a separation between the enter of mass and enter of harge. This

interpretation will be obtained later when analyzing the lassial spinning models.

3 What is an elementary partile?

The onept of elementary partile rests on the idea that this ultimate indivisible ob jet is

a so simple mehanial system that it has no exited states. In a broad sense it is always in a

single state whih looks di(cid:27)erent for the di(cid:27)erent inertial observers, but the di(cid:27)erene is only

a matter of hange of point of view and not a hange of its intrinsi properties. It is only a

kinematial hange.

In the quantum ase, one a single inertial observer O desribes the state of the eletron, the

olletion of the remaining states desribed by all other inertial observers ompletely reprodue

the Hilbert spae of all states. These states an be obtained from the previous one by the

orresponding transformation of the wave funtion to the new frames. There is no other possible

state of the eletron whih annot be desribed by any one of the above states or any linear

ombination of them. The Hilbert spae is the kinematial state spae of an elementary partile.

This set of states ontains only kinematial modi(cid:28)ations of any one of them.

This is Wigner's quantum de(cid:28)nition of an elementary partile as a system whose Hilbert

spae of pure states is an invariant spae under the group of spae-time transformations. In

group theoretial language, an elementary partile is thus a quantum system whose Hilbert

spae of states arries an irreduible representation of the kinematial group of spae-time

transformations. [5℄

It is lear that Wigner's irreduibility ondition is a neessary ondition for a quantum

system to be onsidered as elementary. But, what is the lassial equivalent requirement?

Let us assume that a partiular inertial observer is desribing the lassial state of a partile

by giving the values of the basi and essential variables whih haraterize its state. Now the

partile, under some external in(cid:29)uene, hanges some of its variables and therefore it goes into a

di(cid:27)erent state. Then, by assumption, if the partile is elementary it is always possible to selet

another inertial observer who desribes the partile in the same state and with the same values

of its variables as the previous observer. This is the idea about what an elementary partile

should be from a theoretial viewpoint. Every hange in the state of an elementary partile an

always be ompensated by hoosing a new inertial referene frame.

This idea imposes very stringent onditions on what are the lassial variables we need to

desribe the states of an elementary partile. For instane, if the partile has some diretional

property like spin and the spin orientation hanges, the new inertial observer should aommo-

4

date its referene frame to desribe the spin omponents as before and therefore its frame looks

rotated with respet to the previous one. By following the hange of orientation of the updated

inertial frames, we are desribing the hange of orientation of the spin of the partile, and thus

the spin dynamis.

At this stage we do not know yet what are the lassial variables to desribe an elementary

partile. But instead of desribing the partile let us try to desribe the olletion of onseutive

updated inertial observers who instantaneously desribe the elementary partile by the same

state. By desribing every one of these partiular inertial observers we are desribing the

instantaneous kinematial state of the elementary partile. By desribing the instantaneous

hange of these inertial observers we are desribing the dynamial behavior of the partile.

Let us see (cid:28)rst how we use to desribe every referene inertial frame with respet to eah

other. This is very deeply related to a restrited relativity priniple.

4 The Restrited Relativity Priniple

A very fundamental priniple is a Restrited (sometimes alled Speial) relativity priniple.

By restrited it is meant that the fundamental laws of physis have to be invariant for a restrited

set of equivalent observers, alled inertial observers. It is also alled restrited to distinguish

from a General relativity priniple in whih all observers, aelerated or not, desribe nature by

the same form invariant laws.

The relationship between the di(cid:27)erent inertial observers is related to their relative measure-

ment of spae-time events, i.e., to how they relate the time and position oordinates of the

same and every spae-time event. This relationship is de(cid:28)ned by a spae-time transformation

group whih is alled a kinematial group. Di(cid:27)erent kinematial groups ontaining as possible

transformations spae and time translations, rotations and boosts, are analyzed by Bary and

Levy-Leblond in [6℄. Among them we (cid:28)nd the Galilei and Poinaré group and also the de Sit-

ter groups. But more general groups, like the onformal group, ould be good andidates as

kinematial groups. If we restrit ourselves to the Galilei and Poinaré group we shall obtain

only as intrinsi attributes of matter the value of the mass and spin, whih are the two group

invariant properties. Other quantum numbers have no so lear lassial interpretation and are

related to the so alled `internal' symmetry groups.

Let us onsider (cid:28)rst the Galilei group. The relationship between two arbitrary inertial

observers is:

′

t

= t + b,

r′

= R(α)r + vt + d.

Observer O measures the oordinates t and r of a partiular spae-time event while observer
O′
above formulae b, d, v and R(α), whih are onstant one the two inertial observers are (cid:28)xed,

obtains the oordinates t′

and r′

for the same event. Then the remaining variables of the

de(cid:28)ne the relative relationship between them. Any relative measurement between them of any

other physial property of a system will depend on these onstants. Let us see their meaning.

Suppose observer O measures the emission of a burst of light from the origin of its Cartesian
frame r = 0 when its lok shows t = 0. This event takes plae for O′
at time t′ = b and
at the point r′ = d. If at instant dt observer O measures another light burst form its origin,
it takes the values t′ + dt′ = dt + b and r′ + dr′ = vdt + d, i.e., after a time dt′ = dt and
displaed dr′ = vdt with respet to the previous event. Therefore the origin of O is moving
with a veloity dr′/dt′ = v as measured by O′
. Finally R(α) represents how the Cartesian unit
vetors of O are represented in O′

frame if they were at relative rest.

Then O′

desribes observer O by giving at its time b the position of the origin of O frame
at d, moving with veloity v and with three unit vetors linked to it and oriented aording to
R(α). We say that O′

spei(cid:28)es any other inertial observer by some (cid:28)xed values of the time, the

position of a point, veloity of that point and orientation around that point. That's all.

5

5 Classial Elementary Partiles

Let us think now that we onsider ourselves identi(cid:28)ed with the observer O′

and we are mea-

suring the evolution of an elementary partile in terms of some arbitrary evolution parameter τ ,

whih an be our own time or any other monotoni funtion of it. Now let us fous our attention

to some partiular inertial observer. It an be, for instane, an inertial observer very lose to the

partile or an inertial observer loated in some spei(cid:28) part of the system. Then, at instant τ ,
we (cid:28)x this partiular inertial observer by giving the ten variables (t(τ ), r(τ ), v(τ ), α(τ )), with

the same meaning respetively as before, although we have partially hanged the notation. The

time translation parameter b has been replaed by the time observable t(τ ) and the position of
the origin d by r(τ ). By α(τ ) we mean the three parameters whih an be used to desribe

the orientation of any frame. They an be Euler's angles or any other parametrization of the

rotation group. In any ase we give the values of a time t, the position of a point r , the veloity
of this point v and the orientation around this point α or the matrix of the three unit vetors
R(α).

Now at instant τ + dτ the partile has hanged, so that the new seleted inertial observer

who sees the partile in the same state as the previous inertial observer, is desribed by the new

variables (t(τ + dτ ), r(τ + dτ ), v(τ + dτ ), α(τ + dτ )). The group struture of the Galilei group

implies that the relationship between these two inertial observers is given by an in(cid:28)nitesimal

element of the Galilei group δg of parameters (dt, dr, dv, dα), so that the hange of the ation
of the system between instants τ and τ + dτ is given to (cid:28)rst order in terms of these variations

by

Ldτ = T dt + R · dr + V · dv + A · dα = (T ˙t + R · ˙r + V · ˙v + A · ˙α)dτ,

where the overdot means derivation with respet to the evolution parameter τ . We do not know
yet the funtions T , R, V and A, but what is lear is that the most general Lagrangian whih
desribes this system must be a funtion of the kinematial variables (t, r, v, α) and their (cid:28)rst
order τ derivatives.

The evolution of the system in the interval [τ1, τ2] is desribed, one the Lagrangian is
known, by giving these kinematial variables (t, r, v, α) ≡ x(τ1) at instant τ1 and the values
of the same variables at the (cid:28)nal instant τ2 , x(τ2). The variational priniple implies that the
path followed by the system between these (cid:28)xed end points x(τ1) and x(τ2), is the one whih

produes a minimum for the ation of the system. The kinematial or evolution spae of this

Lagrangian system is just the manifold spanned by these initial (or (cid:28)nal) points. But, beause

any in(cid:28)nitesimal hange is produed by an in(cid:28)nitesimal element of the Galilei group δg , the

omposition of all these onseutive in(cid:28)nitesimal group elements will produe in general a (cid:28)nite

group element g suh that x(τ2) = gx(τ1). The manifold spanned by these variables has the
property that given any two points there exists at least a group element g that relates them. In

group theory it is said that the group ats transitively on this manifold or that the manifold is

a homogeneous spae of the group.

We onlude that the kinematial spae of a lassial elementary partile must neessarily

be a homogeneous spae of the kinematial group. This is the lassial requirement equivalent

to the irreduibility ondition of the quantum ase to de(cid:28)ne a lassial elementary partile.

Although we started this analysis with the Galilei group we see that the parametrization

of the Poinaré group leads to the same kind of ten variables (t, r, v, α), and with the same

geometrial meaning as before, to haraterize the relative desription of every inertial observer.

This implies that, even in the relativisti ase, the most general Lagrangian of a lassial

elementary partile an be written as before as

L = T ˙t + R · ˙r + V · ˙v + A · ˙α.

(2)

As a matter of fat we see that the Newtonian point partile is a lassial elementary

6

partile, aording to this de(cid:28)nition. The kinematial spae is spanned by t and r , whih is a

homogeneous spae of the Galilei group. Beause the free motion is at a onstant speed and

the partile has no orientation properties, it is not neessary to modify neither the veloity v
nor the orientation α of the suessive inertial observers, so that the variation of the ation is

written as

Ldτ = (T ˙t + R · ˙r)dτ,

and the most general free Lagrangian for a point partile is a funtion of t, r and their (cid:28)rst
order τ −derivatives. Variables t and r are interpreted as the time and position observable of the

partile, respetively, and in a time evolution desription the Lagrangian will be also a funtion

of the veloity dr/dt. The above expansion suggests that the Lagrangian an be written as

L = T ˙t + R · ˙r.

(3)

If the Lagrangian of any Lagrangian system is written in terms of the kinematial variables,

i.e., in terms of the end point variables xi of the variational formalism, instead of the inde-

pendent degrees of freedom, then the Lagrangian is a homogeneous funtion of (cid:28)rst degree of

the τ −derivatives of the kinematial variables ˙xi . Therefore, Euler's theorem on homogenous
funtions of (cid:28)rst degree in ˙xi imply

L(x, ˙x) =

∂L
∂ ˙xi

˙xi,

with the usual addition onvention on repeated indexes. This homogeneity property an be seen

for instane in [7℄ in whih a detailed analysis of this property, even for generalized Lagrangians

depending on higher order derivatives, is worked out.

Then the above expansion (3) is just this homogeneity ondition and thus

In the τ −evolution desription we see in the non-relativisti ase

T =

, R =

∂L
∂ ˙t

∂L
∂ ˙r

.

m
2

˙r2
˙t

Ldt = L ˙t dτ =

˙t dτ =

dτ ≡

L(x, ˙x)dτ

2

m
2 (cid:18)

dr
dt (cid:19)

b

L(x, ˙x) = m ˙r2/2 ˙t, a homogeneous funtion of (cid:28)rst degree in terms of ˙t and ˙r .

i.e.,

Similarly, in the relativisti ase, the spae-time manifold is also a homogeneous spae of

b

the Poinaré group. We also get for the point partile Lagrangian a homogenous funtion of

(cid:28)rst degree in terms of the derivatives of the kinematial variables

sine it is the square root of a seond order polynomial in terms of the ˙x.

L(x, ˙x) = −mc

c2 ˙t2 − ˙r2,

q

b

When ompared the point partile Lagrangian (3) with the most general Lagrangian (2), we

see that new possible terms depending on ˙v and ˙α should appear. It is from the dependene
on these new variables that the spin struture of the partile and the zitterbewegung of point r

will emerge.

6 Spinning Elementary Partiles

We propose the name of kinematial theory of elementary partiles for this formalism be-

ause the kinematial spae of the system is basially related, as a homogeneous spae, to the

kinematial group of spae-time transformations. Not only the kinematial group de(cid:28)nes the

7

spae-time symmetries of the system, but it also supplies the lassial variables whih hara-

terize the desription of a lassial elementary partile. It is the kinematial group of spae-time

transformations whih de(cid:28)nes the struture of the Lagrangian of an elementary partile. We

remit the reader to the published researh works on this sub jet for the di(cid:27)erent tehnial points

and limit ourselves to outline the main features of the formalism [8℄.

One tehnial thing is that the invariane of the dynamial equations under the kinemat-

ial group of transformations does not mean that the Lagrangian has to be invariant. The

invariane or not of the Lagrangian is related to the group struture [9℄. In the non-relativisti

ase the Lagrangian transforms under the Galilei group up to a total τ −derivative, while it

is invariant under the Poinaré group, provided the kinematial variables that de(cid:28)ne the me-

hanial system span a homogeneous spae of the group. If these kinematial variables do not

span a homogeneous spae the Lagrangians are no longer invariant, as it happens for ompound

systems.

The most general partile has thus ten kinematial variables x ≡ (t, r, v, α), whih orre-

spond to a mehanial system of six degrees of freedom. Three represent the position of a point

r and the other three α, its orientation in spae like a rigid body. But, sine the Lagrangian
also depends on ˙x it will depend on the derivative of v , and thus the seond derivative of r
and on the (cid:28)rst derivative of α. Sine the most general Lagrangian for an elementary partile
depends on the aeleration of point r , the dynamial equations of this point will be of fourth

order. Analysis and desription of the relativisti and non-relativisti fourth order di(cid:27)erential

equations to desribe the spinning eletron are obtained in [10℄.

Instead of the dependene of the Lagrangian on the derivative of the orientation ˙α is better
to use the angular veloity ω , whih is a linear funtion of ˙α, and the part of the Lagrangian
A · ˙α is replaed by W · ω , with W = ∂L/∂ω . In fat

A · ˙α ≡

˙αi =

˙αi =

ωj ≡ W · ω.

∂L
∂ ˙αi

∂L
∂ωj

∂ωj
∂ ˙αi

∂L
∂ωj

The most general struture of the Lagrangian, in a relativisti and non-relativisti formalism,

is thus

L = T ˙t + R · ˙r + V · ˙v + W · ω,
where T = ∂L/∂ ˙t, R = ∂L/∂ ˙r , V = ∂L/∂ ˙v , and W = ∂L/∂ω , as before, to be determined

(4)

one the Lagrangian is given. In general, sine we postulate translation and rotation invariane,

the Lagrangian will be independent of t, r and α.

Although we have not formulated yet any partiular Lagrangian it is possible to give some

general features of the di(cid:27)erent systems in terms of the general expression (4) and of these

de(cid:28)ned momenta. Noether's theorem, under the Galilei group transformations, gives rise to the

ten following onstants of the motion: [7℄

Under translations, the energy and linear momentum, respetively

under boosts the kinematial momentum

H = −T − v ·

, P = R −

dV
dt

dV
dt

,

K = mr − P t − V ,

and (cid:28)nally under rotations the angular momentum

J = r × P + v × V + W = L + S.

The time derivative of the onstant K leads to

P = mv −

dV
dt

,

8

(5)

(6)

(7)

and ompared with (5) we get that R = mv , and the linear momentum of the system has not
the diretion of the veloity of the point r , provided the Lagrangian depends on the aeleration,
and therefore the term V is nonvanishing. Point r does not represent the enter of mass position
of the partile. In fat if we de(cid:28)ne the position of a point q by

q = r − V /m ≡ r − k,

then the kinematial momentum an be written as K = mq − P t, and its time derivative leads
to P = mdq/dt. Point q , whih is a di(cid:27)erent point than r whenever V is di(cid:27)erent from zero,
represents the position of the entre of mass of the partile. Vetor k = V /m, represents the
relative position of point r with respet to the enter of mass q .

The angular momentum (7) ontains two parts: One, L = r × P , whih is the orbital
angular momentum of the system with respet to the origin, and another S = v × V + W ,

whih is translation invariant and an be interpreted as the spin of the system. The orbital

angular momentum is not a onstant of the motion beause P is not pointing along the veloity
of point r . After taking the time derivative of the onstant angular momentum we get that the

spin of a free partile satis(cid:28)es the dynamial equation

dS
dt

= P × v,

(8)

whih is the same dynamial equation satis(cid:28)ed by the Dira spin operator in the quantum

formulation. It is the lassial spin observable equivalent to Dira's spin operator.

We see that the struture of the spin is twofold. One W = ∂L/∂ω , oming from the

dependene of the Lagrangian on the angular veloity, like in a rigid body, and we thus expet

to be along the angular veloity for a spherial symmetri ob jet, and another v ×V , orthogonal
to the veloity of point r , whih an be written in terms of the relative position vetor k as

v × V = −k × mv.

It looks like an (anti-)orbital part of the momentum mv loated at r with respet to the enter

of mass. The term anti-orbital omes beause of the minus sign in front of it.

That point r represents the position of the harge an be seen when we onsider the inter-

ation of the system with some external soure. The most general interation Lagrangian will

be of the form

LI = −φ ˙t + A · ˙r,

i.e., what is alled the minimal oupling, independent of the variables ˙v and ω beause if the

system is elementary its spin annot be modi(cid:28)ed by the interation. The presene of terms in

˙v and ω in the interation Lagrangian, will produe a modi(cid:28)ation of the funtions V and W
whih de(cid:28)ne the spin. If we assume that the external potentials φ and A are only funtions of
t and r , then the external fore is the Lorentz fore where the (cid:28)elds are de(cid:28)ned at the position
r and it is the veloity of point r whih enters into the magneti fore term.

7 The Classial Relativisti Spinning Eletron

In the relativisti ase we have three possible maximal, disjoint, homogeneous spaes of the

Poinaré group, spanned by the ten variables (t, r, v, α), provided v is lesser, greater or equal
to c. The very important manifold for the desription of the lassial photon and eletron is
the one with v = c, beause it desribes a system whose position vetor r , whih is not the

enter of mass of the system, it is moving at the speed of light. The importane of this manifold

is suggested by Dira's previous analysis of the eletron. In fat, it is the quantization of this

system whih leads to Dira equation [11℄.

9

Figure 1: Evolution of point r in the enter of mass frame. The body frame, whih rotates with angular
veloity ω , is not depited.

The Lagrangian has the same expansion in terms of the derivatives as in (4). For this system

there is a small di(cid:27)erene in the Noether onstants of the motion, with respet to the Galilei

ase. The expression for H , P and J is the same as in (5) and (7). The K momentum is now

given by

K =

1
c2 Hr − P t −

1
c2 S × v,

with S = v × V + W , whih satis(cid:28)es the same dynamial equation as before (8), and is only a

onstant of the motion in the enter of mass frame. The enter of mass (or enter of energy) of

the eletron is de(cid:28)ned now as:

1
H
beause it leads to P = (H/c2)dq/dt, by derivation of K . Whenever the spin of the system is
di(cid:27)erent from zero the enter of mass is a di(cid:27)erent point than r , whih, by the same arguments

q = r −

S × v,

as before, represents the position of the harge.

For the enter of mass observer q = 0, the spin is a onstant of the motion, H = mc2

and

thus

r =

1
mc2 S × v,

so that point r is moving in irles, at the speed of light, on a plane orthogonal to the onstant
vetor S . Classial mehanis does not restrit the value of the onstant spin S whih an be

any positive real number. Its true value will be uniquely (cid:28)xed after quantization. The radius

of this irle is R = S/mc and the angular veloity of this internal motion or zitterbewegung
is ω = mc2/S . By inspetion of (10) we see that the relative orientation between the di(cid:27)erent

magnitudes is the one depited in (cid:28)g.1, in whih we also depit the two parts of the spin

Sω = W along the angular veloity ω , and the antiorbital Sv = v × V , orthogonal to the

zitterbewegung plane. The antipartile orresponds to the time reversed motion, or to onsider

that H = −mc2

.

The total spin S has the same diretion as the antiorbital part so that the Sv part has to be
larger than the other Sω . When quantizing the system the antiorbital part only quantizes with
integer values while the half integer omes from the quantization of the rotational part Sω , in

(9)

(10)

10

the opposite diretion [12℄. This twofold struture of the spin leads to the lassial onept of

gyromagneti ratio as will be shown below.

When we analyze the system in the enter of mass frame and, therefore, three translational

degrees of freedom are suppressed, the system redues to a mehanial system of only three

degrees of freedom. These are the two oordinates x and y of the point r on the zitterbewegung
plane and the phase α of the rotation of the body frame whih rotates with angular veloity
ω . However this phase is the same as the phase of the orbital motion. Sine the motion is at
a onstant veloity c, then the system is redued to a single degree of freedom, for instane,
the x oordinate. But as far as the x oordinate is onerned its motion is a one-dimensional
harmoni motion of frequeny ω = mc2/S . When we quantize this system, sine it represents an

elementary partile, it has no exited states and therefore its allowed energy is just the ground

state energy of the one-dimensional harmoni osillator ¯hω/2 = mc2
ompared with the lassial obtained value of ω , we get that after quantization the value of the
lassial spin parameter S = ¯h/2. This model of a lassial spinning partile orresponds after

in this frame. When

quantization to a fermion.

The lassial expression that leads to Dira equation when quantizing the system omes

from (9). If we take the time derivative of this onstant of the motion and after that, the salar

produt of the resulting expression with v we get the lassial equivalent of Dira's Hamiltonian

H = P · v +

1
c2 S ·

dv
dt

(cid:18)

× v

.

(cid:19)

This is a linear relationship between H and P , where the veloity v should be replaed by Dira's
veloity operator cα and the last term orresponds to βmc2
in terms of Dira's β matrix [11℄.

In fat, the three vetors in the last term are orthogonal vetors. In the enter of mass frame

the absolute value of the aeleration is c2/R, so that taking into aount the value of R we get
that this term redues to ±mc2

, the positive value for the partile and the negative one for the

antipartile.

One an feel unomfortable while talking about a massive partile whose position r is moving
at the speed of light. We must remark that r does not represent the enter of mass or enter
of energy of the system. In our starting analysis, as the desription of r as the origin of some

inertial referene frame, we must add that we are not talking about referene frames moving at

the speed of light but rather about di(cid:27)erent inertial frames that we hange from one to another

at our will aording to the evolution of the partile. The partiular observers of our analysis

ould be, for instane, those observers whih, at every instant τ have the origin of its frame at
the harge position, measure the veloity of the harge along its OX axis, the aeleration along
the OY axis, and thus the spin of the eletron along the OZ axis. All the kind of partiles this
formalism produes have a enter of mass at rest or moving with a veloity below c.

8 Features of the Model

If we analyze the lassial model of the eletron we see that the harge of the eletron

is at the point r , but this point is moving at the speed of light in a motion known as the
zitterbewegung, in a on(cid:28)ned region of radius ¯h/2mc around the enter of mass, and osillating
with a frequeny 2mc2/h. We see that the region of in(cid:29)uene of this motion is Compton's

wavelength. The harge is at a single point and this point like desription is onsistent with the

latest LEP experiments at CERN, whih suggest that the harge has to be on(cid:28)ned in a region

below 10−19

m, six orders of magnitude smaller than Compton's wavelength.

Now in this kind of lassial models, the eletri harge is at a single point so that the

problems related to a spatial harge distribution are avoided. The harge is moving for every

observer and therefore it reates a magneti (cid:28)eld. The eletron is a point-like urrent, whih is

11

Figure 2: Approximate struture of the eletron in the enter of mass frame. It is a point of mass m
and negative harge e. It has a onstant spin S and a onstant magneti moment µ in the opposite
diretion, and also an osillating eletri dipole moment d, with frequeny ω = 2mc2/¯h ≃ 1021
a plane orthogonal to S .

−1

, in

s

never at rest. The harge motion produes with respet to the enter of mass a magneti moment

µ in the diretion orthogonal to the zitterbewegung plane and whih is related mehanially
with the antiorbital part of the spin. But the spin has another part Sω related to the motion of

the body frame in the opposite diretion. When quantizing the system the total spin is half the

antiorbital part and this shows a plausible origin of the value g = 2 for the gyromagneti ratio

[12℄. But also, from the enter of mass observer point of view, there is an osillating eletri

dipole moment d = er . We an say with Dira that, in addition to the eletri harge, `the
eletron wil l therefore behave as though it has a magneti moment µ and an eletri moment
d. The orrespondene of this last observable with the quantum Dira eletri dipole moment

is shown in [7℄. I think this is the eletri dipole observable Dira disliked. It is osillating at

very high frequeny and it basially plays no role in low energy eletron interations beause

its average value vanishes, but it is important in high energy physis or in very lose eletron-

eletron interations.

For instane, if two eletrons have their spins parallel, the orresponding eletri dipoles

osillate at the same rate and are ontained in parallel planes. Therefore from the point of

view of the two eletrons the eletri dipoles always onserve the same relative orientation, and

although their average value is zero it is lear that the eletri interation between them is not

vanishing and in addition to the magneti interation this eletri interation has to be taken

into aount. If the two partiles are very lose and the eletri dipoles have opposite orientation

it is possible an attrative fore. It has been reently shown that this e(cid:27)et would produe, from

the lassial viewpoint, the formation of metastable bound pairs of eletrons with parallel spins,

when separated by a distane below Compton's wavelength and provided its relative veloity is

below some estimated value [10℄.

If we loate mathematially a positive and negative harge ±e in the enter of mass we an
have an approximate struture of the lassial spinning eletron as a point partile of mass m
and harge e in the enter of mass of the system, with the additional eletromagneti attributes
µ and d as the ones depited in (cid:28)gure 2. The relative orientation between the spin and magneti

moment of the lassial model depends on the sign of the harge of the ob jet onsidered as the

12

partile while the antipartile, whih is desribed by the time reversed motion of the other and

with opposite harge, will have the same relative orientation between the spin and magneti

moment, beause a urrent in the reversed diretion but of opposite harge will produe the same

magneti moment. It seems that the spin and magneti moment of the eletron are opposite to

eah other, whih orresponds to onsider that the positive harged ob jet is the partile.

9 The Photon

In the manifold spanned by the variables (t, r, v, α), with v(τ ) = c, we have two possibilities.
Sine the absolute value of the veloity is always onstant, then v · ˙v = 0. One possibility is
that ˙v = 0, the partile moves in straight lines at the speed of light. We have in this ase the
desription of a photon. The other is that ˙v 6= 0 but always orthogonal to the veloity. This

possibility leads to the eletron desription, as has been shown above.

For the photon, sine ˙v = 0, there will be no ˙v term in the expansion of the Lagrangian.

It is a system of six degrees of freedom. Three represent the position of a point and the other

three its orientation in spae and the spin will be related to the hange of orientation but not to

the dependene of the Lagrangian on the aeleration. The partile moves and rotates, but the

Lagrangian is not a funtion of the aeleration, whih vanishes. The homogeneity ondition

implies that the Lagrangian for a photon is

where ǫ = ±1 will be interpreted as the heliity and S the absolute value of the spin, whih

from the lassial point of view is unrestrited. The spin is now

whih is a vetor parallel (ǫ = +1) or antiparallel (ǫ = −1) to the veloity of propagation,

and it is never transversal to the motion. Its value is independent of the observer, and thus a

nonvanishing intrinsi property.

The linear momentum is

in a time evolution desription ( ˙t = 1). Sine the spin is onstant and dS/dt = P × v = 0, this
means that P , and thus ω , lie along v .

The energy of the photon is

and if it is de(cid:28)nite positive both S and ω have the same diretion.

Beause the spin struture is related to the rotation variables it an quantize with all integer

and half integer values [7℄. If, when quantized we take S = ¯h and thus H = ¯hω = hν . The

frequeny of the photon is the frequeny of its rotation around the diretion of motion, leftwards

or rightwards aording to the spin orientation.

Beause H 2 − P 2
If, when quantized, we take for S = ¯h/2, we are desribing both left and right handed

c2 = 0, the photon is a massless system.

neutrinos, but this lassial formalism does not disriminate the left handed ones.

L = ǫ

S
c

˙r · ω
˙t

,

S =

= ǫS

∂L
∂ω

v
c

,

P =

= ǫ

ω,

∂L
∂ ˙r

S
c

H = −

= S · ω,

∂L
∂ ˙t

13

10 Conlusions

We have seen that by desribing the evolution of the onseutive updated inertial observers,

whih measure the elementary partile in the same kinematial state, we an desribe the states

and dynamis of an elementary partile. Therefore we use the variables whih haraterize every

inertial observer as the lassial variables whih de(cid:28)ne the kinematial state of the partile. We

have found a lear interpretation between the motion of the harge at r at the speed of light

and the quantum mehanial Dira analysis of the eletron. Both, the magneti and eletri

dipole moments, have had a lear lassial explanation.

Nevertheless, the lassial model has several lassial inonsistenies. The stationary motion

of the harge is aelerated and therefore the system has to loose energy by radiation. As an

alternative, we see that although the harge is aelerated, the enter of mass of the free eletron

is not and thus there is no variation of the kineti energy of the free partile. It is suggesting that,

from the lassial viewpoint, we must revisit the lassial theory of the radiation of spinning

ob jets and assoiate the energy radiated with the aeleration of the enter of mass. Now

the model is more omplex beause we have to desribe the evolution of two points r and q .
Alternatively, we an only desribe the evolution of the enter of harge r , but it satis(cid:28)es then

a fourth order di(cid:27)erential equation, whih is more di(cid:30)ult to analyze.

The eletri (cid:28)eld produed by this model of spinning eletron it is neither stati nor Coulomb

like. Nevertheless its time average value during a omplete turn of the harge produes an

eletrostati (cid:28)eld whih is Coulomb like from a distane of three Compton's wavelength from

the origin to in(cid:28)nity and whih does not diverge at r = 0, but it vanishes there. The time average

of the magneti (cid:28)eld produes a stati magneti (cid:28)eld whih orresponds to the magneti (cid:28)eld

produed by a magneti moment µ at the origin. This stati magneti (cid:28)eld does not diverge

at the origin [7℄. In this time average there is no eletri dipole and this justi(cid:28)es the usual

piture of the eletron as a harged ob jet with a magneti moment and no eletri dipole.

All these (cid:28)elds have some in(cid:28)nities whih go like 1/r , and not like 1/r2

, in some points of the

zitterbewegung plane.

This piture predits that the spin and magneti moment of the partile and antipartile have

the same relative orientation. Nevertheless it is argued that for the eletron they are antiparallel

while they are parallel for the positron. To our knowledge, no lear experimental evidene of

this relative orientation an be found in the experimental literature. Most of the very aurate

measurements of the eletron magneti moment and of the g − 2 anomaly are done by analyzing

the preession frequeny of the spin in external magneti (cid:28)elds. But this preession frequeny

is independent of whether spin and magneti moment are parallel or antiparallel vetors. Two

plausible experiments for this relative measurement have been reently proposed [13℄.

This formalism is still at a seminal level, but some of the features it is able to desribe are

very promising. The usual spinless physis is ontained within it. But the interest is that we

an handle lassial dynamial equations for spinning systems. With the use of these dynamial

equations we have been able to show that there exists a nonvanishing lassial probability of

tunneling when the eletron is properly polarized [14℄, and also that polarized eletrons an

form bound states of spin 1, and thus a gas of bosons, provided they are very lose and with

no very high relative veloity [10℄. Spin 1 eletron pairs seem to be the most probably state of

ondensed eletrons in ferromagneti superondutors.

Aknowlegdments

This work has been supported by the Universidad del País Vaso/Euskal Herriko Unibert-

sitatea researh grant 9/UPV00172.310-14456/2002.

14

Referenes

[1℄ A.O. Barut, History of the eletron,

in the book: D. Hestenes and A. Weingartshofer

(editors), The eletron, new theory and experiment, Kluwer, Dordreht (1991).

[2℄ P.A.M. Dira, The Priniples of Quantum Mehanis, 4th ed. Oxford University Press,

Oxford, (1958), setion 69.

[3℄ P. A. M. Dira, Theory of eletrons and positrons, Nobel Leture, Deember 12, 1933, from

Nobel Letures, Physis 1922-1941, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam (1965).

[4℄ P.A.M. Dira, The Quantum Theory of the Eletron, Pro. Roy. So. Lon. A117, 610

(1928), in partiular p. 619.

40, 149, (1939).

[5℄ E.P. Wigner, On Unitary Representations of the Inhomogeneous Lorentz Group, Ann. Math.

[6℄ H. Bary and J.M. Levy-Leblond, Possible Kinematis, J. Math. Phys., 9, 1605 (1968).

[7℄ M.Rivas, Kinematial theory of spinning partiles, Fundamental Theories of Physis Series,

vol 116, Kluwer, Dordreht (2001).

[8℄ M. Rivas, Classial Partile Systems: I. Galilei free partiles, J. Phys. A 18, 1971 (1985);

Classial Relativisti Spinning Partiles, J. Math. Phys. 30, 318 (1989); Quantization of

generalized spinning partiles. New derivation of Dira's equation, J. Math. Phys. 35, 3380

(1994). A more detailed exposition of the di(cid:27)erent models is given in [7℄.

[9℄ J.M. Levy-Leblond, Group theoretial foundations of Classial Mehanis: The Lagrangian

gauge problem, Comm. Math. Phys. 12, 64 (1969).

[10℄ M. Rivas, The dynamial equation of the spinning eletron, J. Phys. A, 36, 4703, (2003),

and also LANL ArXiv:physis/0112005.

[11℄ M. Rivas,Quantization of generalized spinning partiles. New derivation of Dira's equation,

J. Math. Phys. 35, 3380 (1994).

[12℄ M. Rivas, J.M. Aguirregabiria and A. Hernández, A pure kinematial explanation of the

gyromagneti ratio g = 2 of leptons and harged bosons, Phys. Lett. A 257, 21 (1999).

[13℄ M. Rivas, Are the eletron spin and magneti moment paral lel or antiparal lel vetors?,

LANL ArXiv:physis/0112057.

279 (1998)

[14℄ M. Rivas, Is there a lassial spin ontribution to the tunnel e(cid:27)et?, Phys. Lett. A 248,

15

