Spin and Statistics in Classical Mechanics

J. A. Morgan

The Aerospace Corporation

P. O. Box 92957

Los Angeles, CA 90009∗

Abstract

The spin-statistics connection is obtained for classical point particles. The connection holds

within pseudomechanics, a theory of particle motion that extends classical physics to include anti-

commuting Grassmann variables, and which exhibits classical analogs of both spin and statistics.

Classical realizations of Lie groups can be constructed in a canonical formalism generalized to

include Grassmann variables. The theory of irreducible canonical realizations of the Poincar´e

group is developed in this framework, with particular emphasis on the rotation subgroup. The

behavior of irreducible realizations under time inversion and charge conjugation is obtained. The

requirement that the Lagrangian retain its form under the combined operation CT leads directly to

the spin-statistics connection, by an adaptation of Schwinger’s 1951 proof to irreducible canonical

realizations of the Poincar´e group of spin j: Generalized spin coordinates and momenta satisfy

fundamental Poisson bracket relations for 2j=even, and fundamental Poisson antibracket relations

for 2j=odd.

4
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
7
0
1
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTORY

”In conclusion we wish to state, that according to our opinion, the connection between

spin and statistics is one of the most important applications of the special relativity theory.”

W. Pauli, 1940

The spin-statistics connection was originally established as a theorem in relativistic quan-

tum ﬁeld theory. It has acquired a formidable reputation, not just from the undeniable diﬃ-

culty of the papers which originally established the connection in ﬁeld theory, but also from

the vicissitudes of later attempts to simplify and streamline proofs of the theorem. Over

time, these latter eﬀorts have increasingly come to concentrate on the quantum-mechanical

at the expense of the relativistic. In contrast, this paper presents an example of a classical

dynamical system that obeys a spin-statistics relation as a consequence of local Poincar´e

invariance. This project is very much in line with the sentiment, quoted above, expressed

more than sixty years ago by Pauli in his landmark paper.1 It does go-somewhat-against the

grain of much of the subesquent research on spin and statistics.

Developments in the intervening decades have fallen, roughly speaking, under three heads:

First, the basic result has seen a deepening and strengthening considered as a theorem in
relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory.2−17 A collection of the signiﬁcant papers marking this evo-
lution has been reprinted in the critical retrospective volume by Duck and Sudarshan18(vide.

also the paper by Greenberg.19)

Second, while special relativity in the form of local Poincar´e symmetry is a suﬃcient

condition for a local quantum ﬁeld theory to obey the spin-statistics connection, numerous

investigations have sought a weaker set of necessary conditions. Topological considerations
in a non-relativistic setting predominate in these studies.20 −24 In the course of this search,

the spin-statistics connection has been extended to settings sometimes far removed from

relativistic ﬁeld theory. Topological theorems have been obtained for strings25 and solitons

on two-dimensional surfaces26. A notable aspect of the topological theorems is that, while

they make no explicit use of relativity or of quantum ﬁeld theory, they do require the

existence of antiparticles.27

Third, since the axiomatic proofs of Burgoyne6 and L¨uders and Zumino7 there has been

continuing interest in ﬁnding simple and elementary proofs of the spin-statistics relation.

All demonstrations of the spin-statistics theorem in quantum theory amount to proving-

2

with greater, or lesser, amounts of travail-what can be stated very simply: The operation

of exchanging the position of two identical particles is equivalent to the rotation of one of
them by 2π.28 Feynman,29−31 Neuenschwander,32 Duck and Sudarshan33 and others have

addressed this goal explicitly. It is at the least implicit in the long search for topological
theorems by Balachandran et al.22−26 and, from a diﬀerent perspective, the proof of Berry

and Robbins34.

A common thread in both the search for necessary conditions and for simpliﬁed proofs is

retreat both from ﬁeld theory and from explicit reliance upon relativistic formalism. Despite

this last, it appears that any proof of the spin-statistics connection requires assumptions

traceable to local Poincar´e symmetry. All proofs depend upon rotational symmetry. The

topological proofs, in addition, require antiparticles.35 But, whatever the ultimate status of

relativistic assumptions in the topological theorems, they demonstrate that the necessary

conditions for the spin-statistics relation can be weak indeed.

This paper addresses a variation on that observation: It is not necessary for a physical sys-

tem to be quantum-mechanical in order to obey a spin-statistics relation. For this statement

to make sense, one needs classical notions of spin, and of statistics, both of which exist, and

appear in the following. That the spin-statistics connection is not intrinsically a quantum

mechanical relation should not come entirely as a surprise. The early topological theorem

for kinks36 by Rubinstein and Finkelstein invokes few assumptions of an overtly quantum

nature, while Mickelsson37 explicitly proved a topological theorem valid for classical as well

as quantum systems.

Apart from Mickelsson’s paper, little attention seems to have been devoted to classical

analogs of the spin-statistics connection. There has been great interest, on the other hand, in
classical descriptions of spin, and of spinning electrons.38 −43 In particular, a classical theory

of spinning particles constructed from anticommuting Grassmann variables ﬁnds practical

use in constructing path integral formulations of supersymmetry.44 ,45 This formulation of

classical mechanics of anticommuting dynamical variables has odd features, and has come

to be labeled ”pseudoclassical” mechanics in consequence. However, the pseudoclassical

theories prove suitable for exhibiting a classical spin-statistics connection.

While there is no attempt in this paper to evade explicit reliance upon relativistic sym-

metry in the form of local Poincar´e invariance, the reasoning, in common with most proofs

in recent decades 13,34 is not, in fact, all that relativistic in detail. The uses made of Poincar´e

3

invariance amount to two: (1) The properties of the rotational subgroup, speciﬁcally the

properties of irreducible canonical realizations of spin degrees of freedom, and (2) The com-

bination of the discrete symmetries time-reversal T and charge conjugation C.

Our starting point is a review of the properties of Grassmann variables, and the extension

of the canonical formalism to classical Grassmann variables. The properties of anticom-

muting Grassmann variables supply a classical equivalent of fermionic exchange symmetry.

Classical Lagrangians constructed from these variables are the simplest models of classical

half-integral spin.

Next, canonical realizations of continuous (Lie) symmetry groups are described. The

inﬁnitesimal generators of transformations produced by a Lie group form a ﬁnite algebra,

the Lie algebra of the group46,47. The algebra is expressed in terms of bracket relations. The

Lie bracket used in unitary representations of symmetries acting on quantum-mechanical

Hilbert spaces is the familiar commutator (or anticommutator). In the canonical formalism,

the place of quantum-mechanical irreducible unitary representations is taken by that of

irreducible canonical realizations. Commutators are replaced by the equivalent Poisson

brackets. Canonical equivalents exist for the entire apparatus of unitary representations in

a Hilbert space, including ladder and Casimir operators.

The theory of canonical realizations of the Poincar´e group for massive particles is de-

veloped, with emphasis on the rotation subgroup and the properties of dynamical variables

corresponding to a deﬁnite spin. The classical analog of an elementary particle then be-

comes an irreducible canonical realization of the Poincar´e group.48 The (anticanonical) time

inversion operation T is deﬁned and its action on irreducible canonical realizations is exhib-

ited. A classical analog of charge-conjugation C is introduced. The composition of T and

C, called strong time inversion, is also sometimes called Weyl time inversion.

Finally, following Schwinger, it is shown that invariance of the Lagrangian under strong

time inversion implies the spin-statistics connection.

Notation: Except as otherwise indicated in the text, lower case Greek letters can be either

even or odd Grassmann variables. When it is desirable to distinguish the even variables,

these will sometimes be lower case Latin letters. An asterisk denotes complex conjugation. A

spacelike convention is assumed for the Minkowski metric η = diag(-1,1,1,1). The summation

convention applies to repeated indices.

4

II. GRASSMANN VARIABLES IN CLASSICAL MECHANICS

A. Grassmann variables

The classical analogs of quantum-mechanical fermionic and bosonic exchange symmetry

are found in the properties of Grassmann variables.49,50 The creation and annihilation oper-

ators of ﬁeld theory are familiar examples of Grassmann variables in quantum theory. Even

Grassmann variables commute, and correspond to the usual bosonic c-number variables of

classical mechanics. Even and odd variables, in either order, commute. A set of n odd real

Grassmann variables obeys anticommutation relations

ξµξν + ξνξµ = 0

ξ2
µ = 0.

for µ, ν <= n. Thus,

principle.

Anticommutativity of odd classical Grassmann variables is a classical form of the exclusion

Diﬀerentiation on Grassmann variables can act from the right or the left. The sign

of the derivative of a product, for example, depends upon which derivative is used. Left

diﬀerentiation, in accord with the convention in Berezin,49 is assumed in the following.

Determining the behavior of Grassman variables under the time-reversal transformation

used in Sections IV and V requires their properties under complex conjugation. Given two

real odd variables ξR and ξI a complex Grassmann variable is deﬁned by

with modulus squared

One desires this quantity to be real. Equating it to its complex conjugate,

Since this relation must hold for an arbitrary complex Grassmann variable, it must be that

for any two real Grassmann variables η and ξ,

ξ = ξR + iξI

ξ∗ξ = i(ξRξI − ξIξR) = 2iξRξI.

(ξ∗ξ)∗ = −i((ξRξI)∗ − (ξIξR)∗)

= 2i(ξIξR)∗ = 2iξRξI.

(ηξ)∗ = ξη.

5

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

It follows51 that the complex conjugate of a product of complex Grassmann variables is

(ξ1ξ1 · · · ξn)∗ = ξ∗

n · · · ξ∗

2ξ∗
1.

(7)

B. Extension of Canonical Formalism to Grassmann variables

We consider the canonical formalism for massive particles only.52 Let qi, pi, i = 1, m

be coordinates and momenta of even variables, and ξα, πα, α = 1, n be coordinates and

momenta of odd variables. Given a Lagrangian

the generalized Hamiltonian is given by

and Hamiltons’ equations become

L = L(qi, pi, ξα, πα)

H = qipi + ξαπα − L

˙pi = −

∂H
∂qi

˙qi =

∂H
∂pi

˙πα = −

˙ξi = −

∂H
∂πα .

pi =

πi =

∂L
∂ ˙ξi

.

∂H
∂ξα

∂L
∂ ˙qi

The momenta are deﬁned by

In a theory containing even and odd Grassmann variables, the deﬁnition of the Poisson

bracket generalizes. The Poisson bracket of two even variables f, g is given by53,54

[f, g] =

∂f
∂qi

∂g
∂pi −

∂g
∂qi

∂f
∂pi (cid:27)

(cid:26)

+

∂f
∂ξα

∂g
∂πα −

(cid:26)

The bracket of two odd variables θ, π is given by

[θ, ψ] =

∂θ
∂qi

∂ψ
∂pi +

∂ψ
∂qi

∂θ
∂pi (cid:27)

(cid:26)

−

∂θ
∂ξα

∂ψ
∂πα +

∂ψ
∂ξα

(cid:26)

∂g
∂f
∂πα (cid:27)
∂ξα
= −[g, f ].

∂θ
∂πα (cid:27)
= [ψ, θ]

6

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

and is called an antibracket. When it is desired to emphasize the diﬀerence between brackets
of two even variables and antibrackets, these will be written [f, g]− and [θ, π]+, respectively.

Between an odd and an even variable,

[θ, f ] =

∂θ
∂qi

∂f
∂pi −

∂f
∂qi

∂θ
∂pi (cid:27)

(cid:26)

−

∂θ
∂ξα

∂f
∂πα +

(cid:26)

∂f
∂θ
∂πα (cid:27)
∂ξα
= −[f, θ].

(15)

With these deﬁnitions the brackets form a (Grassmann) ring.

Casalbuoni53 shows that the set of Poisson brackets and antibrackets in pseudomechanics

comprises a graded Lie algebra. A graded Lie algebra is a Lie algebra containing both

symmetric and antisymmetric bracket relations.55,56 Thus, in a quantum ﬁeld theory which

contains bosons and fermions and respects the symmetries of a Lie group, the set of ﬁeld

commutators and anticommutators make up a graded Lie algebra. The dynamical variables

are ”graded” by a degree that labels the symmetry of their brackets, e. g.:

(16)

(17)

(18)

where δσ is degree(σ). The degree of the product of dynamical variables is the sum of their

respective degrees modulo(2), so that

Thus, in order for the free Lagrangian for an odd dynamical variable to be an even quantity,

it must be of the form

The equation of motion of an anticommuting dynamical variable must therefore be ﬁrst

order.53

The generalized Jacobi identity53,57

(−1)δρδπ [γ, [ρ, π]] + (−1)δρδγ [ρ, [γ, π]] + (−1)δγ δπ[π, [ρ, γ]] = 0

(19)

ﬁnds use in the derivation of canonical angular momentum ladder operators in Section III B.

δqi = δpi = 0

δξα = δπα = 1,

δξα + δπα = 0.

L = iπξ.

7

C. Pseudoclassical Lagrangians

Classical Lagrangian theories of anticommuting Grassmann variables have been studied
by Berezin and Marinov,44 Galvao and Teitelboim,45 Casalbuoni,53,54 Gomis et al.,58−60 and

others. In these investigations, the goal was to devise a supersymmetric model of classical

point particles suitable for path integral quantization. These models possess three kinds

of symmetry: Poincar´e invariance, which preserves the distinction between even and odd

Grassman variables; supersymmetry under transformations which do not respect that dis-

tinction, instead relating even and odd Grassmann variables; and invariance under arbitrary

monotone reparameterizations of the proper time. This last is a form of gauge invariance.

Constructing particle solutions with a well-deﬁned world line that satisﬁes all these sym-

metry requirements turns out to be quite involved, especially the constraint analysis. Since

we are unconcerned with quantization, we limit our attention to Poisson brackets. The

construction of Dirac brackets described in Gomis et al. and others receives no further dis-

cussion, other than to note that Dirac brackets necessarily have the same symmetry under

exchange of arguments as do the Poisson brackets from which they are computed.

Of the three symmetries listed, only Poincar´e invariance is of concern for the present

discussion. The simpler Lagrangian given by Di Vecchia and Ravndal61 and Ravndal62

will serve as an illustrative example for the subsequent discussion, although the method of

proof given in Section V applies to the more involved models just mentioned as well. Like

those models, the Di Vecchia and Ravndal Lagrangian is invariant under supersymmetric

transformations, but it diﬀers from them in having a simple parameterization of proper time

along a particle trajectory. It is

L =

[ ˙qµ ˙qµ − iξµ ˙ξµ].

1
4

Here qµ is an even position variable, and the intrinsic spin tensor for spin 1/2 is constructed

from the spatial components of the Grassmann variable ξµ. The higher-spin generalization

of eqn (20) is described below. An overdot denotes the total diﬀerentiation with respect to

a timelike aﬃne parameter along a particle trajectory; in this model, the aﬃne parameter

is just proper time.

The canonical momenta for free motion are

(20)

(21)

pµ =

˙qµ

1
2

8

The free particle Hamiltonian is constant:

πµ =

iξµ.

1
4

H = p2 = −m2.

(22)

(23)

In the presence of an electromagnetic ﬁeld, the canonical momentum conjugate to ξµ is

given by minimal coupling to a vector potential in the usual manner. In order to construct

a classical theory for spin 1/2 which, upon quantization, yields the Dirac equation, the

pseudomechanical models usually introduce a further odd Grassmann variable ξ5, generalized

suitably as needed for higher spin.60 The Di Vecchia and Ravndal Lagrangian does not

include this extra dynamical variable.

While it is necessary for Poincar´e invariance that the ξµ be elements of a four-vector,

the models must also impose ξ0 =0 in some manner if the components of ξµ are to form

an irreducible realization of the angular momentum algebra. Berezin and Marinov,44 for

example, posit an additional symmetry relation that results in the exclusion of ξ0 from the

equations of motion.

GROUP

III.

IRREDUCIBLE CANONICAL REALIZATIONS OF THE POINCAR´E

In quantum ﬁeld theory, the notion of a particle is frequently identiﬁed with an irre-

ducible unitary representation of the Poincar´e group.63,64 The classical model of a massive

particle used in this paper is the counterpart in the canonical formalism of such an irre-

ducible unitary representation.48 One speaks, instead, of irreducible canonical realizations,

and replaces commutation relations amongst the matrix generators of inﬁnitesimal Lorentz

transformations and translations with Poisson brackets relating inﬁnitesimal generators of

canonical transformations. Similarly, a function on phase space which is a function solely

of the generators of the Lie algebra and which is an invariant in all realizations of the Lie

group is called a Casimir invariant. Casimir invariants serve as the canonical equivalents of

quantum-mechanical Casimir operators.

9

A. The Poincar´e Group

The Lie algebra of the Poincar´e group has a ten-parameter set of inﬁnitesimal generators

M and P satisfying commutation relations:48,63,65,66

MµνMαβ − MαβMµν = ηνβMµα − ηναMµβ − ηµβMνα + ηµαMνβ

MµνPα − PαMµν = −δν

αP µ + δµ

αP ν

(24)

PµPν − PνPµ = 0.

Here η is the Minkowski metric introduced earlier and µ, ν range from 0-3. The derivation

of these relations is sketched in Appendix A. They give the Lie algebra of the generators of

inﬁnitesimal inhomogeneous Lorentz transformations near the origin. Discrete transforma-

tions not deformable to the identity are described below. Mµν is the generator of rotations

in the µ − ν plane, while Pµ similarly generates spacetime translations in the µ-direction.

In Appendix B it is shown that to each commutator of generators As of a representation of

a Lie group,

corresponds the Poisson bracket of generators of the equivalent canonical transformation

where the d-matrices are constants. In the case of the Poincar´e group (but not the Galilei

group), it is possible to deﬁne the canonical generators Mµν and Pµ equivalent to Mµν and

Pµ in such a way that the d-matrices vanish identically,67 thus

ArAs − AsAr = C t

rsAt

[Ar, As]− = C t

rsAt + drs

[Ar, As]− = C t

rsAt.

The Poisson bracket relations for the canonical realization of the Poincar´e group are therefore

−

M µν , M αβ
(cid:2)

(cid:3)

= ηνβM µα − ηναM µβ − ηµβM να + ηµαM νβ

−
[M µν , Pα]

= −P µδν

α + P νδµ
α
−

[Pµ, Pν]

= 0.

The action of the ten generators of inﬁnitesimal canonical transformations can be grouped

as three spatial translations, one temporal translation, three boosts, and three rotations.63,67

10

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

Of these, only the bracket relations for the generators of rotational canonical transformations

Ji = ǫijkM jk;

[Ji, Jj]− = ǫijkJk.

(i, j, k=1-3) ﬁnd use in what follows.

B. Angular momentum, spin, and irreducible canonical realizations in pseudome-

chanics

A (unitary) representation of a group is a set of linear transformations induced by a set

of (unitary) matrices that gives a realization of the group; i.e., the matrix commutators are

isomorphic to the group bracket relations. In a canonical realization, the commutators are

replaced by the equivalent Poisson brackets. The discussion can be limited to irreducible

realizations without loss of generality. Within an irreducible realization of a Lie group, any

two points of phase space can be connected by a canonical transformation representing the

action of some element of the group. An irreducible realization possesses no nontrivial in-

variants. Thus, Casimir invariants reduce to numbers in an irreducible canonical realization.

The properties of irreducible canonical realizations with deﬁnite angular momentum is

obtained in a manner closely analogous to the corresponding quantum mechanical theory.

Consider the transformation properties of dynamical variables in the canonical formalism

under rotations. The bracket relations obeyed by canonical angular momentum variables

form a subgroup of the Poincar´e group decoupled from the boost degrees of freedom. In

particular, the spin degrees of freedom of a massive particle in the rest frame are treated

exactly as in the nonrelativistic case. Fix the direction of the z-axis along the spatial part

of ξµ and write ξ for its magnitude. The inﬁnitesimal canonical transformation induced by

the generator of rotations about the z-axis in a dynamical variable is

If the variable ξ is rotationally symmetric about the axis deﬁning φ, the eﬀect of this

transformation must be equivalent to multiplication by a phase:

ξ ⇒ ξ + δφ[ξ, Jz].

ξ ⇒ ξ + imδφξ,

11

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

[Jz, ξ] = −imξ.

J± = Jz ± iJy.

[J+, J−]− = −2iJz

[Jz, J±]− = ∓J±.

x + J 2

y + J 2
z

J 2 = J 2
1
2

= J 2

z +

[J+J− + J−J+]

or

identities

This relation amounts to a kind of eigenvector condition.69 Deﬁne the ladder operators

These have the following properties, closely analogous to the familiar quantum-mechanical

Note that these relations are obtained from the quantum deﬁnitions by setting i~ ≡ 1.

It easily veriﬁed that the quantity

has vanishing brackets with all the generators of rotations in an irreducible realization. It

is thus a Casimir invariant which, in any irreducible canonical realization, is a constant

number,70 so that71

[J 2, ξ] = const.ξ ≡ j(j + 1)ξ.

The irreducible realizations are labeled by the value of j. In the remainder of this section,

and the next, it is convenient to label ξ by both eigenvalues j and m as ξjm, just as for

irreducible tensor operators in spherical coordinates.

Now consider the quantity

We can determine the z-projection of its angular momentum by computing

[J±, ξjm].

[Jz, [J±, ξjm]]

with the aid of the Jacobi identity eqn (19) and the bracket relations of the ladder operators

from eqn (36):

[Jz, [J±, ξjm]] = −im[J±, ξjm] ∓ [J±, ξjm]

12

(33)

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)

(38)

(39)

(40)

(41)

(42)

or

[Jz, [J±, ξjm]] = −i(m ± 1)[J±, ξjm].

(43)

Comparing this expression with eqn (33) shows the result of taking the Poisson bracket of

one of the ladder operators with a dynamical variable of spin j is a dynamical variable with

the z-projection m of its dimensionless angular momentum changed by unity:

[J±, ξjm] = λξjm±1.

(44)

where λ will depend on j and m.

Proceeding in this vein, the action of the ladder operators in the canonical formalism is

obtained in close analogy to the quantum case. In particular,69

[J±, ξjm] = −i

(j ∓ m)(j ± m + 1)ξjm±1.

(45)

p

In a manner entirely analogous to the quantum case68−69,72 it can be shown that the eigen-

vectors of Jz given by eqn (33) have integer eigenvalues

−j ≤ m ≤ j

(46)

and that they span a 2j+1 dimensional subspace of the Hilbert space of canonical realizations

of the rotation subgroup. It is the behavior one expects, say, from a spherical harmonic

of angular momentum j, with z-projection m. Poisson brackets being dimensionless, the

quantities j and m that label distinct elements of an irreducible canonical realization with

deﬁnite angular momentum do not set a scale for the physical angular momentum associated

with the dynamical variable ξ. The machinery developed in this section may, therefore, have

the appearance of a mathematical analogy devoid of physical content, but it is required in

order to obtain the properties of classical Grassman dynamical variables under time inversion

in Section IV.

The canonical formalism just sketched accommodates intrinsic spin, in much the same

manner as its quantum-mechanical counterpart. The inﬁnitesimal canonical generator of

rotations M µν for point particle motion can be written

M µν = xµpν − xνpµ + Sµν.

(47)

Sµν, of course, is the classical intrinsic spin tensor of the particle. This result may be

obtained with aid of the classical Pauli-Lubanski vector74 or directly from even67 and odd58

13

(48)

(49)

(50)

(51)

(52)

(53)

irreducible canonical realizations. From eqn (47), the intrinsic spin vector of a particle in

its rest frame is obtained as

with

Si = ǫijkSjk

[Si, Sj]− = ǫijkSk.

In any frame in which the momentum p vanishes, J = S. Pauri and Prosperi75 construct

the irreducible canonical realizations of spin j, and note that they supply the classical

equivalent of a particle with spin. Gomis et al.60 extend the construction to arbitrary spin

Grassmann variables with the canonical version of the Bargmann-Wigner formalism.76,77

The corresponding generalization of the Di Vecchia and Ravndal model spin tensor in terms
of a set of spin 1/2 Grassman variables ξµ

λ is given by

where the spin is N/2. The spin portion of the Lagrangian becomes

Sµν = −

i
2

N

Xλ=1

ξµ
λξν
λ,

Lspin = −

ηµν

N

ξµ
λ

˙ξν
λ

Xλ=1
Θµ · ˙Θµ,

i
4

≡ −

i
4

by way of deﬁning both the dynamical variable Θ for spin N/2 and the scalar product on

spin indices. The form of the spin tensor in eqn (50) creates problems when either spacetime

index µ or ν is 0.44 In the Di Vecchia and Ravndal Lagrangian, the spin angular momentum

tensor satisﬁes

pµSµν = 0

identically, so that the spin has only spatial components in the particle rest frame.62

IV. TIME REVERSAL, WEAK AND STRONG, IN PSEUDOMECHANICS

A. Time reversal invariance and anticanonical transformations

The preceding Section developed the properties of continuous coordinate transformations

upon classical Grassmann variables, speciﬁcally rotations, necessary for proving the spin-

statistics connection. A complete realization of the Poincar´e group for massive spinning

14

particles must also include the discrete transformations of parity, time reversal, and charge

conjugation. The eﬀects of parity and time reversal are given by

The full Poincar´e group thus has four components related by the various combinations of

the parity and time-reversal transformations. The classical analog of charge conjugation is

discussed in Section IV D. Schwinger’s proof of the spin-statistics connection depends upon

the eﬀects of time-reversal and charge-conjugation on states of deﬁnite spin. The parity

operation is of no further concern here.78

The operation T commutes with the generators of spatial translations and rotations, but

anticommutes with the generators of boosts and, in particular, of time translations:

Let ˆT be the operator which realizes T on functions in phase space (q, p)

where the primed variables are related to the unprimed ones by a canonical transformation

⋄(φ(x, t) = φ(−x, t)

T (φ(x, t) = φ(x, −t)

T P 0 = −P 0T

ˆT (φ(q, p)) = φ(q′, p′)

q′ = q′(q, p)

p′ = p′(q, p).

[φ, γ]qp = [φ, γ]q′p′

ˆT [φ, γ] = [ ˆT (φ), ˆT (γ)],

15

We have, from eqn (56),

ˆT ([E, φ]) = −[E, φ] ˆT , ∀φ,

while from the deﬁnition of a canonical transformation

we have

(54)

(55)

(56)

(57)

(58)

(59)

(60)

(61)

(62)

(63)

(64)

(65)

(66)

(67)

ˆT (E) = −E.

T (E) = E.

T (J) = −J.

([ ˆT (E), ˆT (φ)]) = −[E, ˆT (φ)]

for arbitrary φ. ˆT (E) and -E can therefore diﬀer by only a constant. As ˆT 2 must equal

But this is awkward, because the generator of time translations is interpreted as the en-

ergy, and should be positive deﬁnite. The solution67 is to realize time reversal T as an

anticanonical operation T ,

T ([φ, γ]) = −[T (φ), T (γ)]

so that

unity,

with

The anticanonical time reversal operation commutes with the generator of boosts and anti-

commutes with generators of rotation and translations. In particular,

The quantum mechanical realization of time reversal is an antilinear and antiunitary

transformation. Wigner79 shows it is always possible to write such a transformation as the

composition of a unitary transformation with complex conjugation. To maintain consistency

with the quantum case-by way of inverting the correspondence principle-T is deﬁned as an

antilinear, as well as anticanonical, operation

T (aφ + bγ) = a∗T (φ) + b∗T (γ).

(68)

An antilinear operation is likewise the composition of complex conjugation with a linear

transformation. Note that the action of T , as deﬁned, on a scalar quantity is that of

complex conjugation. This observation ﬁnds use in Section IV C for ﬁnding the eﬀect of

time inversion on products of dynamical variables.

B. Weak Time-reversal symmetry in pseudomechanics

We next address the eﬀect of time inversion on the angular momentum relations given

earlier, in particular the raising and lowering operations eqn (45).80 First, consider the eﬀect

16

of T on eqn (33)

or

from which

T (ξjm) ⇒ T (ξjm) − imδφT (ξjm),

[Jz, T (ξjm)] = imT (ξjm),

T (ξjm) = ςmξj−m

T ([J±, ξjm]) = −[T (J±), T (ξjm)].

where ςm may depend on j as well. Second, the anticanonical action of T gives

Now, recalling eqns (45), (65) and (67)

T ([J±, ξjm]) = i

(j ∓ m)(j ± m + 1)ςm±1ξj−(m±1)

= −[T (J±), T (ξjm)] = [Jx ∓ iJy, ςmξj−m]

= −i

(j ∓ m)(j ± m + 1)ςmξj−(m±1).

p

p

Dividing out common terms in eqns (73) and (74) gives

It remains to ﬁx ς. The choice ςj = 1 ensures that T applied to a real dynamical variable

will give a real result, giving

or

Thus,

C. Weak T on products of dynamical variables

The Lagrangian is constructed from invariant scalar combinations of dynamical variables

and their derivatives. In pseudomechanical models, the invariant used is the scalar product

−ςm = ςm+1

ςm = ς(−1)−m.

ςm = (−1)j−m.

T (ξjm) = (−1)j−mξj−m.

17

(69)

(70)

(71)

(72)

(73)

(74)

(75)

(76)

(77)

(78)

of two dynamical variables with the same spin. The spin portion of the Lagrangian from

eqn (52) may be written as a sum of scalar products of the form81,82

σ · π = (−1)kσkπ−k.

(79)

Consider the action of T on the scalar product of two dynamical variables belonging to the

same irreducible canonical realization of spin j. Recall that the antilinear action of T on a

scalar quantity is that of complex conjugation and, from eqn (7), that complex conjugation

inverts the order of factors in a product:

(σπ)∗ = π∗σ∗

Thus,

T (σ · π) = (−1)kπ∗

= (−1)−jπ∗

−kσ∗

k(−1)j−kσ∗
k = (−1)−jπ∗
−k
kT (σk) = (−1)−2j(−1)kT (πk)T (σ−k)
= (−1)2jT (π) · T (σ).

The inversion of the order of factors under T clearly generalizes by induction to an arbitrary

number of them.

D. Charge conjugation in pseudomechanics and strong time-reversal invariance

Schwinger’s proof of the spin-statistics connection relies upon ”strong”, or ”Weyl”, time

reversal, as opposed to the ”weak” or ”Wigner” time reversal T as deﬁned above. The con-

dition of strong time reversal invariance is that the form of the classical action be preserved

if evolution from an initial to a ﬁnal state is replaced by the evolution of a time-reversed

state from the ﬁnal state to the initial one. That is, in addition to reversing the sign of the

locally timelike variable in all dynamical quantities, initial and ﬁnal states are exchanged in

the action, and the aﬃne parameter labeling proper time changes sign as well:

(80)

(81)

(82)

(83)

τ ⇒ −τ

d
dτ

⇒ −

d
dτ

18

Costella et al.83 show that this operation is the classical analog of charge conjugation. The

connection with St¨uckelberg’s identiﬁcation of antiparticle motion with time-reversed par-

ticle motion is clear; in fact, Feynman84 examined the classical formulation of this concept

prior to the debut of his theory of positrons.29 Strong time reversal is therefore the compo-

sition of the weak time reversal operation T with charge conjugation C.5,10,18,33

V. CONNECTION BETWEEN SPIN AND STATISTICS

With the results from preceding sections on properties of classical Grassmann variables

of deﬁnite spin under time-reversal and charge-conjugation in hand, we are now in position

to impose the condition of invariance under strong time-reversal transformation upon a

pseudomechanical system and show that the spin-statistics connection necessarily follows.

Invariance of the pseudoclassical description of particle motion under strong T inversion

requires that the form of the action functional

S =

dτ L(θ, ˙θ)

τ2

Z

τ1

be unaltered by inverting both the sign of t and the deﬁnition of proper time, to include

the order of the initial and ﬁnal proper time of a segment of a particle orbit. The former

operation is T ; the latter, C. Thus, if

S =

dτ L(θ, ˙θ) ⇒

dτ ′L(T (θ),

τ1

Z

τ2

d
dτ ′ T (θ))

τ2

Z

τ1

under the combined operation of T and C, the form of the action will be preserved. The

total Lagrangian in pseudoclassical models is made of quadratic forms in the dynamical

variables. It suﬃces to consider the contribution Lj for an irreducible realization of spin j.85

Apply the operations of T and C to Lj. First T :

where the superscript t on Lj indicates transposition of the order of all factors in the La-

grangian.

Next, applying C changes the sign of the proper time derivative:

T (Lj) = (−1)2jLt

j(T (θ),

= (−1)2jLt

j(T (θ), −

T (θ))

d
dτ
d
dτ ′ T (θ))

CT (Lj) = (−1)2jLt

j(T (θ),

d
dτ ′ T (θ))

19

(84)

(85)

(86)

(87)

Invariance of the form of the action under CT is guaranteed if

Lj(T (θ),

d
dτ ′ T (θ)) = (−1)2jLt

j(T (θ),

d
dτ ′ T (θ)).

(88)

This last will hold if the sign change attendant upon inverting the order of odd Grassmann

variables is compensated by a factor of minus one in front, while no compensating sign change

accompanies inverting the order of even Grassmann variables. We conclude classical spin

variables which are irreducible canonical realizations of spin j must be commuting, even

Grassmann variables if j is an integer, and anticommuting, odd Grassmann variables if j is

half-integral. From the symmetry properties of brackets in pseudomechanics given earlier

follows immediately the conclusion that irreducible canonical realizations for integral j obey

Poisson bracket relations, while realizations for half-integral j obey Poisson antibracket

relations. The Poisson brackets for the spin degrees of freedom are

for 2j=even, and

[θµ, θν]− = [πµ, πν]− = 0

[θµ, πν]− = ηµν

[θµ, θν]+ = [πµ, πν]+ = 0

[θµ, πν]+ = −ηµν

(89)

(90)

for 2j=odd. The vectorial position variables qµ and pµ satisfy Poisson bracket relations for

any value of j. This is the spin-statistics theorem stated in the language of the canonical

formalism for pseudomechanics.

VI. COMMENTS

The result just obtained is neither the strongest, nor the most general, that could be

desired. It is as close to a literal transcription of Schwinger’s 1951 reasoning into the language

of the canonical formalism for particle mechanics as could be contrived. The choice to

proceed in this manner was not made as a simple matter of ﬁlial piety. Rather, it appears

the simplest, quickest route to a classical spin statistics relation is to recapitulate Schwinger’s

20

proof in close to its original form. It is notable that the proof proper in Section V is shorter,

and arguably more appealing, than the formal developments necessary to erect the canonical

formalism underpinnings which preceded it.

Like that earlier proof, this one applies to free particles, or to particles minimally coupled

at most weakly by an interaction that conserves CT . This should not be considered a serious

shortcoming in the case of the electromagnetic interaction, in which C, P , and T are each

conserved separately. A classical spin-statistics connection valid for electromagnetically

interacting particles would seem capable of meeting most needs for that class of relation.86

There is another, and more serious, sense in which the result just shown should be

regarded as a comparatively weak one. Schwinger’s argument, strictly speaking, applies

only to brackets constructed from dynamical variables evaluated at a common point of

phase space. The point might seem of limited relevance for eqns (89) and (90), since that is

how one normally evaluates Poisson brackets, but the commutation properties of dynamical

variables at distinct phase space locations is left undetermined by the present argument.

Their extension even to separate points at null interval, which would be the minimum

required for consistency with the relation just shown, does not follow without additional

assumptions. Schwinger5 cites ”the general compatibility requirement for physical quantities

attached to points with a spacelike interval” to justify extending commutation relations

from coincident to spacelike intervals. The assumptions of a particular graded Lie algebra

structure for the bracket relations in the present discussion could similarly be strengthened

by ﬁat, but only at the price of underscoring the weakness of the result obtained.

The particular form of classical mechanics used in the foregoing may look odd as an

exemplar of classical physics-amongst other peculiarities, dynamical variables are allowed to

take on complex values, in general. While it is often said that classical dynamical variables

should be real-valued functions on spacetime, the classical physics of waves or oscillatory

phenomena is too riddled with complex exponentials for this stricture to be altogether

convincing.

In any event, complex conjugation is required in the present demonstration

for, strictly speaking, its eﬀect on real Grassman variables.

What should not be obscured, however, is that pseudomechanics oﬀers an elementary

example of a physical theory which respects the spin-statistics connection without being

quantum mechanical.

21

VII. CONCLUSION

”We conclude that the connection between spin and statistics of particles is implicit in

the requirement of invariance under coordinate transformations.” Schwinger, 1951

Schwinger used this comment as a period for his proof of the spin-statistics connection.

In spirit, it is very close to that of Pauli’s, cited at the start of this paper, but in wording

it is notably less emphatic. Oddly so, given that the requirement of invariance upon which

Schwinger erected his construction of quantum electrodynamics from the action principle

was Poincar´e invariance. Note that in either statement the tone struck can be interpreted

as a classical one.

It has been remarked more than once18,23,24,33 that proofs of the spin-statistics connection

necessarily depend upon some assumption traceable to Poincar´e invariance. The dependence

may be explicit, as in Pauli’s original proof, or the axiomatic proofs of Burgoyne, L¨uders,

and Zumino, or it may be implicit, as in Feynman,31 the topological proof of Balachan-

dran et al., or the proof of Berry and Robbins34 using topological phases. The topological

theorems23,24,36 invoke the existence of antiparticles. Proofs by Weinberg,13 which use the

language of representations of the Poincar´e group, or of Berry and Robbins, which do not,

invoke no symmetry higher than that of rotational invariance. But the Poincar´e group

contains rotational symmetry as a subgroup.

The physical world is not more relativistic than it is quantum-mechanical. However, the

existence of classical systems obeying the spin-statistics connection allows one to think of

that phenomenon as a relativistic one at bottom. Under terrestrial laboratory conditions,

Poincar´e invariance is an exquisitely accurate symmetry of nature. The lesser symmetries

upon which the spin-statistics connection depends, be they the existence of antiparticles,

or of rotational invariance, or (as here) invariance under time inversion, are all necessary

consequences of Poincar´e invariance in nature.

It is usually supposed that relativistic phenomena are signiﬁcant only for high energies,

or for velocities approaching that of light. The eﬀect of the spin-statistics connection on

the nature of the everyday world is profound, perhaps most signiﬁcantly under intrinsically

low energy conditions of Fermi degeneracy.

It cannot be doubted that, were the spin-

statistics connection diﬀerent, or nonexistent, the resulting world would almost certainly

be unrecognizable to us. To suppose such a violent rearrangement of microscopic physics

22

would leave the macroscopic world sensibly unaltered amounts to invoking a conspiracy of

nature for the sake of avoiding that conclusion. Not one of our senses is independent of the

accidents consequent upon the connection between spin and statistics, either from the role

played by Pauli exclusion in atomic structure and chemical binding, or from the eﬀects of

incompressible ﬂow; not sight, nor hearing, nor smell, nor taste, nor touch. One need not

invoke exotic conditions to ﬁnd evidence of relativistic symmetries in the world.

Acknowledgments

I wish to thank Drs. S. Gasster, J. Johnson, and G. Smit for their careful reading of this

paper, and for suggestions which subtantially improved its clarity.

APPENDIX A: THE LIE ALGEBRA OF THE POINCAR´E GROUP

The general inhomogeneous Lorentz transformation on a four-vector xµ is

If the four-interval between two points in spacetime is to remain invariant under eqn (A1),

then the Λ matrices must satisfy

x′µ = Λµ

αxα + aµ

Λµ

αΛν

βηµν = ηαβ.

Let a set of (unitary) matrices D comprise a representation of inhomogeneous Lorentz trans-

formations satisfying

and consider transformations inﬁnitesimally close to the origin,

D(Λ1)D(Λ2) = D(Λ1Λ2)

Λµ

α = δµ

α + ωµ

α + O(ω2)

and

with |ω|, |ǫ| ≪ 1. If Eqn (A2) is to be satisﬁed, ω must be antisymmetric in its indices. The

corresponding matrix representaton of eqns (A4) and (A5) is

D(1 + ω, ǫ) = 1 +

ωµνMµν − ǫρP ρ

aµ = ǫµ

1
2

23

(A1)

(A2)

(A3)

(A4)

(A5)

(A6)

to ﬁrst order, where M is a constant antisymmetric matrix and P is a vector. In order for

eqn (A3) to be satisﬁed, M and P must obey48,63,65,66

MµνMαβ − MαβMµν = ηνβMµα − ηναMµβ − ηµβMνα + ηµαMνβ

MµνPα − PαMµν = −δν

αP µ + δµ

αP ν

(A7)

PµPν − PνPµ = 0.

APPENDIX B: CANONICAL REALIZATIONS OF A LIE GROUP

The group action of a symmetry in the canonical formalism leads to a corresponding Lie

algebra of Poisson brackets. Let the commutation relations of the inﬁnitesimal generators

of a Lie group be written

ArAs − AsAr = C t

rsAt,

and let the canonical coordinates and momenta, (qµ, pν) even and (ξµ, πν) odd, obey funda-

mental Poisson bracket relations

[qµ, pν] = ηµν

[ξµ, πν] = −ηµν

[qµ, qν] = [pµ, pν] = [ξµ, ξν] = [πµ, πν] = 0.

A canonical realization of a symmetry group is a set of transformations of the canonical

coordinates, homomorphic to the symmetry group, that leaves the fundamental bracket

relations eqns (B2) unaltered. The inﬁnitesimal canonical transformations are deﬁned so as

not to mix even and odd Grassmann variables.54 That is,

where each of the set of parameters {a} which characterizes the transformation is even, and

i = q′
q′

i({q}, {p}, {a})

i = p′
p′

i({q}, {p}, {a})

α = θ′
θ′

α({θ}, {π}, {ρ})

α = π′
π′

α({θ}, {π}, {ρ})

24

(B1)

(B2)

(B3)

(B4)

(B5)

(B6)

where the set of {ρ}′s is odd. With canonical transformations so restricted, the generators

of inﬁnitesimal canonical transformations Ar are even functions of the canonical variables.

Then

and

and

and to

correspond to the inﬁnitesimal operations

respectively. These are the canonical generators of inﬁnitesimal transformations, and their

bracket relations must form a realization of the Lie algebra. In particular, to the inﬁnitesimal

transformation

must correspond the canonical transformation

−
q′
i = qi + δar [Ar, qi]
−
p′
i = pi + δar [Ar, pi]

−
θ′
α = θα + δas [As, θα]
−
π′
α = πα + δas [As, πα]

1 + δarAr

1 + δρsAs,

1 + δarδbs(ArAs − AsAr)

q′
i = qi + δarδbs

−

[Ar, As]

, qi

p′
i = pi + δarδbs

−

[Ar, As]

, pi

1 + δρtδυu(AtAu − AuAt),

θ′
α = θα + δρtδυu

−

[At, Au]

, θα

π′
α = πα + δρtδυu

−

[At, Au]

, πα

.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

25

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(B7)

(B8)

(B9)

(B10)

(B11)

(B12)

(B13)

(B14)

(B15)

(B16)

Inserting eqn (B1) into eqns (B11) and (B14), and comparing eqn (B9) with eqn (B7), and

eqn (B10) with eqn (B8), leads to the conclusion that87

[Ar, As]− = C t

rsAt + drs

(B17)

where the d’s are constants.

∗ Electronic address: john.a.morgan@aero.org

1 W. Pauli, ”The Connection between Spin and Statistics”, Phys. Rev. 58, 716-722 (1940).

2 W. Pauli, 1946, ”Exclusion principle and quantum mechanics”, in Nobel Lectures-Physics: 1942-

62, Elsevier, New York (1964) pp. 27-43.

3 W. Pauli, ”On the Connection between Spin and Statistics:”, Prog. Theo. Phys. 5, 526-543

4 H. J. Bhabha, ”On the Postulational Basis of the Theory of Elementary Particles”, Rev. Mod.

5 Julian Schwinger, ”Theory of Quantized Fields I”, Phys Rev. 82, 914-927 (1951).

6 N. Burgoyne, ”On the Connection of Spin and Statistics”, Nuovo Cimento 8, 607-609 (1958).

7 Gerhard L¨uders, and Bruno Zumino, ”Connection between Spin and Statistics’, Phys. Rev.

8 R. F. Streater and A. S. Wightman, PCT, Spin and Statistics, and All That (W. A. Benjamin,

9 G. F. Dell’Antonio, ”On the Connection between Spin and Statistics”, Ann. Phys. 16, 153-157

(1950).

Phys. 21, 451-462 (1949).

110, 1450-1453 (1958).

New York, NY, 1964).

(1961).

223-228 (1958).

10 Julian Schwinger, ”Spin, Statistics, and the TCP Theorem”, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sciences 44,

11 Julian Schwinger, Particles and Sources (Gordon and Breach, New York, NY, 1969) pp. 25-27

12 L. Brown and J. Schwinger, ”Spin and Statistics”, Prog. Theo. Phys. 26, 917-926 (1961).

13 Steven Weinberg, ”Feynman Rules for Any Spin”, Phys. Rev. 133B, 1318-1332 (1964).

14 Steven Weinberg, ”Feynman Rules for Any Spin. II. Massless Particles”, Phys. Rev. 134B,

882-896 (1964).

15 Steven Weinberg, ”Feynman Rules for Any Spin. III”, Phys. Rev. 181, 1893-1899 (1969).

26

16 C. L. Hammer and R. H. Good, ”Quantization Process for Massless Particles”, Phys. Rev. 111,

342-345 (1958).

17 R. H. Good, ”Theory of Particles with Zero Rest-Mass,” in W. E.Brittin and L. G. Dunham,

Eds., Lectures in Theoretical Physics, Summer Institute of Theoretical Physics, University of

Colorado, Boulder, (Interscience, New York, 1958)

18 Ian Duck and E. C. G. Sudarshan, Pauli and the Spin-Statistics Theorem (World Scientiﬁc

19 O. W. Greenberg, ”Spin-statistics, spin-Locality, and TCP: three distinct theorems”, Phys.

Press, Singapore, 1997)

Lett. B416, 144-149 (1998).

of Th. Phys. 28, 1269-1310 (1989).

20 Ralf D. Tscheuschner, ”Topological Spin-Statistics Relation in Quantum Field Theory”, Int. J.

21 Ralf D. Tscheuschner, ”Coinciding versus noncoinciding: Is the topological spin-statistics the-

orem already proven in quantum mechanics?”, J. Math. Phys. 32, p. 749-752 (1990).

22 A. P. Balachandran, A. Daughton, Z.-C. Gu, G. Marmo, R. D. Sorkin, and A. M. Srivastava,

”A Topological Spin-Statistics Theorem or a Use of the Antiparticle”, Mod. Phys. Lett. A5,

1575-1585 (1990).

23 A. P. Balachandran, R. D. Sorkin, W. D. McGlinn, L. O’Raifeartaigh, and S. Sen., ”The

Spin-Statistics Connection from Homology Groups of Conﬁguration Space and an Anyon Wess-

Zumino Term”, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A7, 6887-6906 (1992).

24 A. P. Balachandran, A. Daughton, Z.-C. Gu, R. D. Sorkin, G. Marmo, and A. M. Srivastava,

”Spin-Statistics Theorems Without Relativity or Field Theory”, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A8, 2993-

25 A. P. Balachandran, W. D. McGlinn, L. O’Raifeartaigh, S. Sen, R. D. Sorkin, and A. M.

Srivastava, ”Topological Spin-Statistics Theorems for Strings”, Mod. Phys. Lett. A7, 1427-

26 A. P. Balachandran, T. Einarsson, T. R. Govindarajan, and R. Ramachandran, ”Statistics and

Spin on Two-Dimensional Surfaces”, Mod. Phys. Lett. A6, 2801-2810 (1991).

27 In fact, no relation between spin and statistics holds for topological geons in canonical quantum

gravity, in which topology change, and thus the existence of anti-geons, is forbidden, vide. H.

F. Dowker and R. D. Sorkin, ”Spin and Statistics in Quantum Gravity”, arXiv:gr-qc/0101042

3044 (1993).

1442 (1992).

(2001).

27

28 I fear I cannot locate the origin of this formulation, but Finkelstein and Rubinstein state the

theorem for kinks using almost exactly these words in Section V.4 of their 1968 paper.

29 R. P. Feynman, ”The Theory of Positrons”, Phys. Rev. 76, 749-759 (1949).

30 R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, (Addison-

Wesley, Reading, MA, 1965), Vol III, Ch. 4.

31 R. P. Feynman, ”The reason for antiparticles,” in Elementary Particles and the Laws of Physics

(Cambridge University Press, Cantab., 1987)

32 D. E. Neuenschwander, ”Question #7. The spin-statistics theorem”, Am. J. Phys. 62, 972

33 Ian Duck and E. C. G. Sudarshan, ”Toward an understanding of the spin-statistics theorem”,

(1994).

Am. J. Phys. 66, 284-303 (1998).

34 M. V. Berry, and J. M. Robbins, ”Indistinguishability for quantum particles: spin, statistics,

and the geometric phase, Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. A453, 1771-1790 (1997).

35 It may be that electon-hole pairs would suﬃce in condensed matter applications.

36 David Rubinstein and Julio Finkelstein, ”Connection between Spin, Statistics, and Kinks”, J.

37 R. Mickelson, ”Geometry of spin and statistics in classical and quantum mechanics”, Phys. Rev.

Math. Phys. 11, 1762-1779 (1968).

D30, 1843-1845 (1984).

38 H. C. Corben, ”Spin in Classical and Quantum Theory”, Phys. Rev. 121, 1833-1839 (1961).

39 Ralph Schiller, ”Quasi-Classical Theroy of the Spining Electron,” Phys. Rev. 125, 1116-1123

40 Ralph Schiller, ”Quasi-Classical Theroy of a Relativistic Spining Electron,” Phys. Rev. 128,

41 A. J. Hanson and T. Regge, ”The Relativistic Spherical Top”, Ann. Phys 87, 498-566 (1974).

42 Patrick L. Nash, ”A Lagrangian theory of the classical spinning electron”, J. Math. Phys. 25,

(1962)

1402-1412 (1962)

2104-2108 (1984).

43 Jin-Ho Cho and Jae-Kwan Kim, ”Derivation of the classical Lagrangian for the relativistic

spinning particle”, Phys. Lett. 332B, 118-122 (1994).

44 F. A. Berezin and M. Marinov, ”Particle Spin Dynamics as the Grassmann Variant of Classical

Mechanics”, Ann. Phys. 104, 336-362 (1977).

45 Carlos A. P. Galvao and Claudio Teitelboim, ”Classical supersymmetric particles”, J. Math

28

Phys. 21, 1863-1880 (1980).

46 Robert Geroch, Mathematical Physics (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1958) ch. 19

47 W.-K.Tung, Group Theory in Physics (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1985) ch. 7-10

48 E. C. G. Sudarshan, and N. Mukunda, Classical Dynamics: A Modern Perspective, (John Wiley

and Sons, New York, NY, 1974) pp. 454-466; also p. 391

49 F. A. Berezin, The Method of Second Quantization (Academic Press, New York, NY, 1966)

50 M. S. Swanson, Path Integrals and Quantum Processes (Academic Press, New York, NY, 1992)

51 M. S. Swanson, Path Integrals and Quantum Processes (Academic Press, New York, NY, 1992)

52 The result to be proved concerns symmetries of Poisson brackets for dynamical variables of a

single massive particle; there is no need to examine what is meant by ”identical” particles in

53 R. Casalbuoni, ”On the Quantization of Systems with Anticommuting Variables”, Nuovo Ci-

ch. 5

p. 120

the present discussion.

mento 33A, 115-124 (1976).

431 (1976).

54 R. Casalbuoni, ”The Classical Mechanics for Bose-Fermi Systems”, Nuovo Cimento 33A, 389-

55 F. A. Berezin, and G. I. Kac, ”Lie Groups with Commuting and Anticommuting Parameters”,

Math. USSR Sbornik 11, 311-325 (1970).

56 L. Corwin, Y. Ne’eman, and S. Sternberg, ”Graded Lie algebras in mathematics and physics

(Bose-Fermi symmetry)”, Rev. Mod. Phys. 47, 573-603 (1975).

57 Steven Weinberg, The Quantum Theory of Fields III. (Cambridge University Press, Cantab.,

2000) pp. 25-26

58 J. Gomis, M. Novell, A. Poch, and K. Rafanelli, Pseudoclassical description of a relativistic

spinning particle, Phys. Rev. D32, 1985-1992 (1985).

59 J. Gomis and M. Novell, , Phys. Rev. D33, 2212-2219 (1986).

60 J. Gomis, M. Novell, and K. Rafanelli, ”Pseudoclassical model of a particle with arbitrary spin”,

61 P. Di Vecchia and F. Ravndal, ”Supersymmetric Dirac Particles”, Phys. Lett. 73A, 371-373

Phys. Rev. D34, 1072-1075 (1986).

(1979).

62 F. Ravndal, ”Supersymmetric Dirac particles in external ﬁelds”, Phys Rev. D21, 2823-2832

29

63 Steven Weinberg, The Quantum Theory of Fields I. (Cambridge University Press, Cantab.,

64 E. Wigner, ”On Unitary Representations of the Inhomogeneous Lorentz Group”, Ann. Math

65 P. A. M. Dirac, ”Forms of Relativistic Dynamics”, Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 392-399 (1949).

66 Steven Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology (John Wiley and Sons, New York, NY, 1972) pp.

(1980).

1995) pp. 58-62

40, 149-204 (1939).

58-61

67 M. Pauri and G. M. Prosperi, ”Canonical Realizations of the Poincare Group. I. General theory”,

J. Math. Phys. 16, 1503-1521 (1975).

68 W.-K.Tung, Group Theory in Physics (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1985) pp. 103-105

69 A. Loinger, ”New Concept of Representation of a Lie Algebra”, Ann. Phys. 23, 23-27 (1963).

70 E. C. G. Sudarshan, and N. Mukunda, Classical Dynamics: A Modern Perspective, (John Wiley

and Sons, New York, NY, 1974) pp. 322-327

71 In the corresponding classsical unitary representation, this result follows immediately from

72 P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 4th ed. (Clarendon Press, Oxon, 1958)

73 E. J. Saletan, and A. H. Cromer, Theoretical Mechanics (John Wiley and Sons, New York, NY,

74 E. C. G. Sudarshan, and N. Mukunda, Classical Dynamics: A Modern Perspective, (John Wiley

and Sons, New York, NY, 1974) pp. 447-453

75 Pauri and G. M. Prosperi, ”Canonical Realizations of the Rotation Group”, J. Math. Phys. 8,

Schur’s lemma.

pp. 144-146

1971) pp. 335-40

2256-2267 (1967).

76 V. Bargmann and E. P. Wigner, ”Group Theoretical Discussion of Relativistic Wave Equations”,

Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 34, 211-223 (1948).

77 M. Fierz and W. Pauli, ”On relativistic wave equations for particles of arbitrary spin in an

electromagnetic ﬁeld”, Proc. Roy. Soc. A173, 211-232 (1939).

78 Strictly speaking, the discrete transformation CT used later is a surrogate for P by virtue of the

CP T theorem. However, the discussion here is restricted in such a way that CP T need not be

explicitly invoked. The components connected by T make up the orthochorous Poincar´e group.

30

79 E. P. Wigner, Group Theory and its Application to the Quantum Mechanics of Atomic Spectra

(Academic Press, New York, NY, 1959) ch. 26

80 Steven Weinberg, The Quantum Theory of Fields I. (Cambridge University Press, Cantab.,

81 A. R. Edmonds, Angular Momentum in Quantum Mechanics (Princeton University Press,

1995) pp. 78-79

Princeton, 1960) p. 72

82 U. Fano and G. Racah, Irreducible Tensorial Sets (Academic Press, New York) pp. 27-31

83 John P. Costella, Bruce H. J. McKellar, and Andrew A. Rawlinson, ”Classical Antiparticles”,

84 R. P. Feynman, ”A Relativistic Cut-Oﬀ for Classical Electrodynamics”, Phys. Rev. 74, 939-946

Am. J. Phys. 65, 835-841 (1997).

(1948).

85 There is no loss of generality in this restriction, although the total Lagrangian in pseudoclassical

models contains terms corresponding to more than one irreducible realization, vide. eqn (20),

and in general, contains a term which which mixes vector and spinor variables.

86 Schwinger’s original proof can be generalized by substituting ﬂavor symmetry for CT invariance.

87 M. Pauri and G. M. Prosperi, ”Canonical Realizations of Lie Symmetry Groups”, J. Math.

Phys. 7, 366-375 (1966).

31

