Hyperbolical geometric quantum phase and topological dual mass

Jian-Qi Shen ∗
Zhejiang Institute of Modern Physics and Department of Physics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, P.R. China
(July 28, 2013)

4
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
1
1
2
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

In this note we show the existence of the hyperbolical ge-
ometric quantum phase that is diﬀerent from the ordinary
trigonometric geometric quantum phase. Gravitomagnetic
charge (dual mass) is the gravitational analogue of magnetic
monopole in Electrodynamics; but, as will be shown here,
it possesses more interesting and signiﬁcant features, e.g., it
may constitute the dual matter that has diﬀerent gravita-
tional properties compared with mass. In order to describe
the space-time curvature due to the topological dual mass,
we construct the dual Einstein’s tensor. Further investiga-
tion shows that gravitomagnetic potentials caused by dual
mass are respectively analogous to the trigonometric and hy-
perbolic geometric phase. The study of the geometric phase
and dual mass provides a valuable insight into the time evo-
lution of quantum systems and the topological properties in
General Relativity.

Keywords: Hyperbolical geometric quantum phase, topo-

logical dual mass

Both geometric phase [1] of wave function in Quan-
tum Mechanics and gravitomagnetic charge (topological
dual charge of mass) in the general theory of relativity
reveal Nature’s geometric or global properties. Diﬀer-
ing from the dynamical phase, geometric phase depends
only on the geometric nature of the pathway along which
the quantum system evolves [2]. Geometric phase exists
in time-dependent quantum systems or systems whose
Hamiltonian possesses evolution parameters [3]. As is
well known, the dynamical phase of wave function in
Quantum Mechanics is dependent on dynamical quan-
tities such as energy, frequency, coupling coeﬃcients and
velocity of a particle or a quantum system, while the ge-
ometric phase is immediately independent of these physi-
cal quantities. When Berry found that the wave function
would give rise to a non-integral phase (Berry’s phase) in
quantum adiabatic process [1], geometric phase problems
attract attention of many physicists in various ﬁelds such
as gravity theory [4], diﬀerential geometry [2], atomic
and molecular physics [5], nuclear physics [5], quantum
optics [6], condensed matter physics [7] and molecular re-
action (molecular chemistry) [5] as well. In many simple
quantum systems such as an electron possessing intrin-
sic magnetic moment interacting with a time-dependent
magnetic ﬁeld (or a neutron spin interacting with the
Earth’s rotation [8]), a photon propagating inside the
curved optical ﬁber [9], and the time-dependent Jaynes-
Cummings model describing the interaction of the two-

level atom with a radiation ﬁeld [10], geometric phase is
often proportional to 2π(1−cos θ), which equals the solid
angle subtended by the curve with respect to the origin
of parameter space1. This, therefore, implies that geo-
metric phase diﬀers from dynamical phase and it involves
global and topological information on the time evolution
of quantum systems.
In addition to this trigonometric
geometric phase, there exists the so-called hyperbolical
geometric phase that is expressed by 2π(1 − cosh θ) with
the hyperbolical cosine cosh θ = 1
2 [exp(θ) + exp(−θ)] in
some time-dependent quantum systems, e.g., the two-
level atomic system with electric dipole-dipole interac-
tion and the harmonic-oscillator system [11]. It is ver-
iﬁed that the generators of the Hamiltonians of these
quantum systems form the SU (1, 1) Lie algebra. Further
analysis indicates that quantum systems, which possess
the non-compact Lie algebraic structure (whose group
parameters can be taken to be inﬁnity) will present the
hyperbolical geometric phase, while quantum systems
with compact Lie algebraic structure will give rise to
the trigonometric geometric phase. Since Lorentz group
(describing the boosts of reference frames in the space
direction) in the special theory of relativity is also a non-
compact group, this leads us to consider the topological
properties associated with space-time. We take into ac-
count the gravitational analogue of magnetic charge [12],
i.e., gravitomagnetic charge that is the source of gravito-
magnetic ﬁeld just as the case that mass (gravitoelectric
charge) is the source of gravitoelectric ﬁeld (i.e., New-
tonian gravitational ﬁeld in the sense of weak-ﬁeld ap-
proximation).
In this sense, gravitomagnetic charge is
also termed dual mass. It should be noted that the con-
cept of the ordinary mass is of no physical signiﬁcance
for the gravitomagnetic charge; it is of interest to inves-
tigate the relativistic dynamics and gravitational eﬀects
as well as geometric properties of this topological dual
mass (should such exist). From the point of view of dif-

1

The solid angle subtended by a curve shows the topological
meanings of geometric phase. Geometric phase is absent in
the quantum system when its Hamiltonian is independent of
time. Geometric phase of many simple physical systems in the
adiabatic process can be expressed in terms of the solid angle
over the parameter space, e.g., the wave function of a pho-
ton propagating inside the non-coplanar curved optical ﬁber
obtains this topological phase, where the parameter space is
just the momentum (i.e., velocity) space of the photon.

1

ν

µ

2 (cid:0)ǫ λστ
µ

Rλστ ν − ǫ λστ

ferential geometry, matter may be classiﬁed into two cat-
egories: gravitoelectric matter and gravitomagnetic mat-
ter. The former category possesses mass and constitutes
the familiar physical world, while the latter possesses
dual mass that would cause the non-analytical property
of space-time metric. Einstein’s ﬁeld equation of grav-
itation in general theory of relativity governs the cou-
plings of gravitoelectric matter (which possesses mass)
to gravity (space-time); accordingly, we should have a
ﬁeld equation governing the interaction of dual matter
with gravity. By making use of the variational princi-
ple, the gravitational ﬁeld equation of gravitomagnetic
matter can be obtained where the dual Einstein’s tensor
is denoted by 1
Rλστ µ(cid:1) with ǫ λστ
and Rλστ ν being the four-dimensional Levi-Civita com-
pletely antisymmetric tensor and the Riemann curvature
tensor that describes the space-time curvature, respec-
tively [13]. By exactly solving this ﬁeld equation, one
can show that the topological property of the solution
gtϕ(r, θ) can be illustrated as follows: solid angle sub-
tended by the curved C showing the topological property
of the gravitomagnetic vector potential of a static grav-
itomagnetic charge at the origin of the spherical coordi-
nate system. Take the gravitomagnetic vector potentials
g = (cid:0)0, 0, 2µ
r sin θ (cid:1) in spherical coordinate system,
4π
then the loop integral, HC g · dl = µ(1 − cos θ), is propor-
tional to the solid angle subtended by the curved C with
respect to the origin. The same situations arise in the
adiabatic quantum geometric phase (Berry’s quantum
phase), which reﬂects the global or topological properties
of time evolution (or parameters evolution) of quantum
systems. Such property is in analogy with that of the
geometric quantum phase in the time-dependent spin-
gravity coupling (i.e., the interaction between a spinning
particle with gravitimagnetic ﬁeld [8]) and other quan-
tum adiabatic processes [4,9]. The topological properties
of gravitomagnetic charge (dual mass) may be shown in
terms of the global features of geometric quantum phase2.
It follows that the expression of gravitomagnetic poten-
tial, gtϕ(r, θ), due to dual mass is exactly analogous to

· 1−cos θ

2

Gravitomagnetic moment results from the mass current,
which is also the dynamical physical quantity. Comparison
between gravitomagnetic charge and geometric phase enables
to show the topological properties of the former. The rea-
son why the topological property is important lies in that the
global description of the physical phenomena is essential to
understand the world. It is of interest that dual matter may
constitute a dual world where dual mass abides by their own
dynamical and gravitational laws, which is somewhat diﬀer-
ent from the laws in our world; for example, dual mass is
acted upon by a gravitomagnetic Lorentz force in Newton’s
gravitational (gravitoelectric) ﬁeld, and the static dual mass
produces the gravitomagnetic ﬁeld rather than the Newton’s
gravitoelectric ﬁeld.

that of the trigonometric geometric phase. In the similar
fashion, it is readily veriﬁed that the gravitomagnetic po-
tential, gθϕ(r, t), is similar to that of the hyperbolical ge-
ometric phase. This feature originates from the fact that
the Lorentz group is a non-compact group. Although
there is no evidence for the existence of this topological
dual mass at present, it is still essential to consider this
topological or global phenomenon in General Relativity.
It is believed that there would exist formation (or cre-
ation) mechanism of gravitomagnetic charge in the grav-
itational interaction, just as some prevalent theories pro-
vide the theoretical mechanism of existence of magnetic
monopole in various gauge interactions [14]. Magnetic
monopole in electrodynamics and gauge ﬁeld theory has
been discussed and sought after for decades, and the exis-
tence of the ’t Hooft-Polyakov monopole solution [14] has
spurred new interest of both theorists and experimental-
ists [14]. As the topological gravitomagnetic charge in
the curved space-time, dual mass is believed to give rise
to such interesting situation similar to that of magnetic
monopole. If it is indeed present in universe, dual mass
will also lead to signiﬁcant consequences in astrophysics
and cosmology. We emphasize that although the gravit-
omagnetic vector potential produced by the gravitomag-
netic charge is the classical solution to the ﬁeld equation,
this kind of topological gravitomagnetic monopoles may
arise not as fundamental entities in gravity theory, e.g.,
it will behave like a topological soliton. Gravitomagnetic
charge has some interesting relativistic quantum grav-
itational eﬀects [8], e.g., the gravitational Meissner ef-
fect, which may serve as an interpretation of the small-
In accor-
ness of the observed cosmological constant.
dance with quantum ﬁeld theory, vacuum possesses inﬁ-
nite zero-point energy density due to the vacuum quan-
tum ﬂuctuations; whereas according to Einstein’s the-
ory of General Relativity, inﬁnite vacuum energy density
yields the divergent curvature of space-time, namely, the
space-time of vacuum is extremely curved. Apparently
it is in contradiction with the practical fact, since it fol-
lows from experimental observations that the space-time
of vacuum is asymptotically ﬂat. In the context of quan-
tum ﬁeld theory a cosmological constant corresponds to
the energy density associated with the vacuum and then
the divergent cosmological constant may result from the
inﬁnite energy density of vacuum quantum ﬂuctuations.
However, a diverse set of observations suggests that the
universe possesses a nonzero but very small cosmological
constant [15]. How can we give a natural interpretation
for the above paradox? Here, provided that vacuum mat-
ter is perfect ﬂuid, which leads to the formal similarities
between the weak-gravity equation in perfect ﬂuid and
the London’s electrodynamics of superconductivity, we
suggest a potential explanation by using the canceling
mechanism via gravitational Meissner eﬀect: the gravi-
toelectric ﬁeld (Newtonian ﬁeld of gravity) produced by
the gravitoelectric charge (mass) of the vacuum quan-

2

tum ﬂuctuations is exactly canceled by the gravitoelec-
tric ﬁeld due to the induced current of the gravitomag-
netic charge of the vacuum quantum ﬂuctuations; the
gravitomagnetic ﬁeld produced by the gravitomagnetic
charge (dual mass) of the vacuum quantum ﬂuctuations
is exactly canceled by the gravitomagnetic ﬁeld due to
the induced current of the gravitoelectric charge (mass
current) of the vacuum quantum ﬂuctuations. Thus, at
least in the framework of weak-ﬁeld approximation, the
extreme space-time curvature of vacuum caused by the
large amount of the vacuum energy does not arise, and
the gravitational eﬀects of cosmological constant is elimi-
nated by the contributions of the gravitomagnetic charge
(dual mass). If gravitational Meissner eﬀect is of really
physical signiﬁcance, then it is necessary to apply this
eﬀect to the early universe where quantum and inﬂation-
ary cosmologies dominate the evolution of the universe.
Study of the geometric property in quantum regimes is
an interesting and valuable direction. Since it reveals the
global and topological properties of evolution of quantum
systems, geometric phase has many applications in vari-
ous branches of physics, say, in the coupling of neutron
spin to the Earth’s rotation [8], a potential application
may be suggested where the information on the Earth’s
variations of rotating frequency will be obtained by mea-
suring the geometric phase of the oppositely polarized
neutrons through the neutron-gravity interferometer ex-
periment. The topological charge in curved space-time
also deserves further investigation, since it reﬂects plen-
tiful global or geometric properties hidden in the gravity
theory.
It is believed that both theoretical and exper-
imental interest in this direction may enable people to
understand the global phenomena of the physical world
better.

[1] Berry, M. V. Quantal phase factor accompanying adia-
batic changes. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 392, 45-57 (1984);
Berry, M. V. Interpreting the anholonomy of coiled light.
Nature 326, 277-278 (1987).

[2] Robinson, L. An optical measurement of Berry’s phase.
Science 234, 424-426 (1986); Simon, B. Holonomy, the
quantum adiabatic theorem, and Berry’s phase. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 51, 2167-2170 (1983).

[3] Gao, X. C., Xu, J. B. & Qian, T. Z. Geometric phase
and the generalized invariant formulation. Phys. Rev. A
44, 7016-7021 (1991); Yang, L. G. & Yan, F. L. The area
theorem of the Berry’s phase for the time-dependent ex-
ternally driven system. Phys. Lett. A 265, 326-330 (2000).
[4] Furtado, C. & Bezerra, V. B. Gravitational Berry’s quan-
tum phase. Phys. Rev. D 62, 045003-(1-5) (2000); Shen,
J. Q., Zhu, H. Y. & Li, J. Exact solutions to the in-
teraction between neutron spin and gravitation by using
invariant theory. Acta Phys. Sini. 50, 1884-1887 (2001).

3

[5] Wu, Y. S. & Kuppermann, A. Prediction of the eﬀect
of the geometric phase on product rotational state dis-
tributions and integral cross sections. Chem. Phys. Lett.
201, 178-186 (1993) and references therein; Wagh, A. G.
et al. Neutron polarimetric separation of geometric and
dynamical phases. Phys. Lett. A 268, 209-216 (2000).
[6] Sanders, B. C. et al. Geometric phase of three-level sys-
tems in interferometry. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 369-372
(2001); Gong, L. F., Li, Q. & Chen, Y. L. Nonlinear
behavior of geometric phases in transformations. Phys.
Lett. A 251, 387-393 (1999); Shen, J. Q., Zhu, H. Y. &
Shi, S. L. Polarization of single-mode photon propagat-
ing inside the ﬁber and its geometric phase factor. Acta
Phys. Sini. 51, 536-540 (2002).

[7] Exner, P. & Geyler, V. A. Berry phase for a poten-
tial well transported in a homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld.
Phys. Lett. A 276, 16-18 (2000); Yan. F. L., Yang, L.
G. & Li, B. Z. Formal exact solution for the Heisen-
berg spin system in a time-dependent magnetic ﬁeld and
Aharonov-Anandan phase. Phys. Lett. A 251, 289-293
(1999); Taguchi, Y. et al. Spin chirality, Berry phase,
and Anomalous Hall eﬀect in a frustrated ferromagnet.
Science 291, 2573-2576 (2001); Falci, G. et al. Detection
of geometric phases in superconducting nanocircuits. Na-
ture 407, 355-358 (2000).

[8] Shen, J. Q., Zhu, H. Y. & Shi, S. L. Gravitomagnetic
ﬁeld and time-dependent spin-rotation coupling. Phys.
Scr. 65, 465-468 (2002); Mashhoon, B. gravitational cou-
plings of intrinsic spin. Class. Quant. Grav. 17, 2399-2410
(2000); Mashhoon, B. On the spin-rotation-gravity cou-
pling. Gen. Rel. Grav. 31, 681-691 (1999).

[9] Chiao, R. & Wu, Y. S. Manifestations of Berry’s phase
for the photon. Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 933-936 (1986).
[10] Shen, J. Q., Zhu, H. Y. & Mao, H. An approach to
exact solutions of the time-dependent supersymmetric
two-level three-photon Jaynes-Cummings model. J. Phys.
Soc. Jpn. 71, 1205-1209 (2002).

[11] Shen, J. Q., Zhu, H. Y. & Chen, P. Exact solu-
tions of time-dependent three-generator systems. quant-
ph/0205170 (2002).

[12] Dirac, P. A. M. Quantized singularities in the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 133, 60-71 (1931).
[13] Shen, J. Q. Gravitational analogues, geometric eﬀects
and gravitomagnetic Charge. Gen. Rel. Grav. 34, 1423-
1435 (2002); Shen, J. Q. Dual curvature tensors and dy-
namics of gravitomagnetic matter. gr-qc/0312099 (2003).
[14] Hooft G. ’t. Magnetic monopoles in uniﬁed gauge theo-
ries. Nucl. Phys. B 79, 276-284 (1974); Craigie, N. S. et
al. Monopoles in Quantum Field theory: Proceedings of
the Monopole meeting (World Scientiﬁc Publishing, Sin-
gapore, 1982); Barriola, M. & Vilenkin, A. Gravitational
ﬁeld of a global monopole. Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 341-343
(1989); Chakraborty, S. Motion of test particles around
monopoles. Gen. Rel. Grav. 28, 1115-1119 (1996).
[15] Weinberg, S. The cosmological constant problem. Rev.
Mod. Phys. 61, 1-23 (1989); Datta, D. P. Can vacuum
energy gravitate? Gen. Rel. Grav. 27, 341-346 (1995);
Krauss, L. M. & Turner, M. The cosmological constant is
back. Gen. Rel. Grav. 27, 1137-1144 (1995); Kakushadze,
Z. Why the cosmological constant problem is hard. Phys.
Lett. B 488, 402-409 (2000).

