4
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
0
3
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On Temperature Radiation

S. L. Vesely1, A. A. Vesely

January 5, 2014

1I.T.B., C.N.R., via Fratelli Cervi 93, I-20090 Segrate(MI)
Italy

email: sara.vesely@itb.cnr.it, vesely@tana.it
Keywords: blackbody radiation, Maxwell-Hertz electromagnetic theory, detected sig-
nal
PACS: 34.10.+x, 03.50.Kk, 84.47.+w,

Abstract

In this work we compare two blackbody interpretations, those of G.
Kirchhoﬀ and M. Planck. We separate the problem of interpreting the
blackbody spectrum from that of determining the mechanical equivalent
of radiation. Then we propose that, if we set aside characterization of the
blackbody, electromagnetism suﬃces to analyze spectral distribution and
leads to interpreting it as determined by the receiver band-pass.

1 Introduction

Although the blackbody cannot be considered an elementary substance in a
chemical sense, G. Kirchhoﬀ considered it simple for thermodynamic interpre-
tation of spectral properties. Indeed, he introduced it to demonstrate a theorem
of capital importance in thermodynamics: that which ﬁxes the relationship be-
tween emission E and absorption A of light and heat. According to the theorem,
it makes sense to speak of thermal radiation if and only if for each pair of bod-
ies C1 and C2 is equal to E1/A1 = E2/A2. The prerogative of the blackbody
CS is AS ≡ 1. In the analysis of M. Planck however, the blackbody has lost
the most fundamental property attributed classically to matter because it is
It is clear that if the blackbody is
an empty cavity at thermal equilibrium.
identiﬁed with a “macroscopic” electromagnetic ﬁeld, the latter appears as the
most elementary of thermodynamic bodies, to wit, temperature radiation. But
it is necessary to bear in mind that ﬁelds are the solutions of the Maxwell equa-
tions. As J. Clerk Maxwell explains, the equations describe the experiments
of M. Faraday and give formal dress to his ideas. The physical interpretation
of the solutions is less immediate. Therefore, identifying temperature radia-
tion with an electromagnetic ﬁeld neither speciﬁes concretely the properties of

1

2 A THERMOMETER BASED ON THE BRIGHTNESS OF HOT BODIES2

Planck’s blackbody nor interprets physically a solution of Maxwell’s equations.
Rather, that identiﬁcation mixes two theoretical formulations having diﬀerent
assumptions to explain the phenomenon of heating by irradiation.

In this work we examine brieﬂy the question of the existence of thermal
emission on the basis of the properties which thermodynamics assigns it. On
the one hand, electromagnetism does not specify any property for radiation
while on the other it describes a mode of propagation incompatible with the
second principle of thermodynamics. Indeed, it is linked historically with the
development of telecommunications. But heat is not transferred from a warmer
tank to a cooler tank by this technology but only a signal (the image) from a
broadcaster to the receiving station regardless of the thermal gradients.

The most notable consequence of this analysis is the impossibility of deter-
mining an energy interpretation of the thermodynamic type [1] for electromag-
netism.

2 A thermometer based on the brightness of hot

bodies

Around 1860 Gustav Kirchhoﬀ wrote the famous article, “¨uber das Verh¨altnis
zwischen dem Emissionsverm¨ogen und dem Absorptionsverm¨ogen der K¨orper
f¨ur W¨arme und Licht” in which he sought to give a deﬁnition of the thermome-
ter alternative to that proposed by Lord Kelvin [2]. In it he deﬁned the “black-
body”. Although this body, thus introduced, has a very well deﬁned function
in thermodynamics – that of measuring high temperatures – it cannot have a
structural connotation quite as well deﬁned for a reason which we shall try to
clarify.

It is possible to use the luminous emission of a blackbody, for example the
incandescence of the surface of a platinum wire, for measuring temperature if
it is possible to calibrate in thermometric degrees a scale of luminous intensity
or colors with its aid.
If this is possible, the temperature can be read after
the measuring blackbody has led to thermal equilibrium by intimate contact
with the body whose temperature it is desired to measure. But light can be
detected at a distance. Therefore it might be possible to measure the temper-
ature at a distance by comparison of the light emitted by the body and that
of a blackbody taken as standard (for instance by making use of a pyrome-
ter). Since, unfortunately, diﬀerent substances display appreciable variations in
absolute emissive power, it can be asked whether the claim of graduating the
temperature according to optical properties might have some basis.

Now let us clarify better the notion of optical thermometer. “Thermometer”
is any object suitable for reproducible temperature measurement. “Optical”
means that it functions with no need of being placed in close contact with the
body having unknown temperature. The other way round, any luminous object
can function as an optical thermometer if it is possible to deﬁne the luminous
equivalent of temperature. In other words, in principle, evaluation of tempera-

2 A THERMOMETER BASED ON THE BRIGHTNESS OF HOT BODIES3

ture by the radiation emitted has sense if there is temperature radiation. This,
according to Kirchhoﬀ, implies a value of the ratio between absolute emissive
power and absorptive power dependent only on temperature. There are two
alternatives.

A. The ﬁrst assumes that, experimentally, a suﬃciently broad class of ma-
terials has well-deﬁned thermal behavior and is linked to a radiative process.
Logically, temperature is then conceived as an equivalence relation between the
bodies. Since thermodynamics admits that a system can pass from the initial
state to the ﬁnal state only by traversing states of equilibrium, the thermody-
namic parameters of the process can be attributed to the state of the system. If
the radiative process passes through states characterized by temperature alone,
then a function of the luminous emission measures it.

B. The second alternative conjectures that all energy exchanges, and thus
those of radiating energy too, are governed by thermodynamics. That is to say
that the heat radiation exchanged is included in the energy balance and that
radiation spreads from the hotter bodies to the colder ones. In the latter case
a light parameter must be among the variables characterizing the process and
must depend on temperature.

Alternative B requires that measurements depend on the initial tempera-
ture diﬀerence between the thermometer and the object. Clearly, the same
requirement applies to thermometers which function by contact. Except that
it is known that the latter do not satisfy it. Speciﬁc heat χ = dQ/dT was
introduced just because heating of bodies originally at diﬀerent temperatures
and placed in contact depends on their nature as well as their respective ini-
tial temperatures. Incidentally, the heat exchanged to reach the temperature
of equilibrium, measured so as to be an additive magnitude, could replace tem-
perature in thermodynamics. The problem is that it is not at all obvious what
heat is. On the contrary, until now it is known only what it isn’t; it is not a
variable of state.

Let us explain this last statement better. Historically, Rumford was the ﬁrst
to interpret the need for continuous cooling when proﬁling cannon barrels in
such a manner that the production of shavings produced heat. Hirn and Joule
used industrial systems to appraise as accurately as possible the amount of heat
produced in relation to the work carried out by systems and agreed to inter-
pret their measurement by saying that heat is, like mechanical work, a form
of energy. The eﬀort was considerable even if, the principle being established,
the values found by those measurements can be checked in the laboratory with
instruments which heat up little and convert little work into little heat, that is,
when considerable ﬂuctuations occur. But if the heat produced work in accor-
dance with a constant relationship, the temperature might be associated with
the work of expansion of a gas thermometer. That heat cannot be considered
a variable of state when the system exchanges work was the unfortunate fact if
we like.

After this short digression let us go back to temperature measurement and
introduce the thermodynamic thermometer of Lord Kelvin with which we pro-
pose to compare Kirchhoﬀ’s. Lord Kelvin, as everybody knows, managed to

2 A THERMOMETER BASED ON THE BRIGHTNESS OF HOT BODIES4

deﬁne temperature independently of the particular thermometer basing himself
on a cyclic process1. Thanks to him, thermodynamic temperature is an additive
magnitude. But it is also an absolute magnitude in the sense that the zero on
the scale is not arbitrary. The choice, which expresses giving up deﬁning the
thermometer operationally, became necessary due to the Joule-Kelvin2 eﬀect.
Lord Kelvin, after being persuaded that in any case an ill-deﬁned thermometer
does not allow establishing a unique mechanical equivalent of heat, redeﬁned
the thermometric scale on Carnot’s ideal gas engine 3 . The reversibility of the
cycle allows unequivocally deﬁning the mechanical equivalent of heat. In addi-
tion, very general considerations on the impossibility of perpetuum mobile of
the second kind allow keeping the same value of the equivalent, independently
of the absolute temperature value. In this manner however there appears to be
a thermodynamic state well deﬁned at temperature zero. In addition, the choice
of deﬁning temperature on a rational basis[4]instead of empirically, makes ther-
modynamics a prescriptive theory. In other words, this thermodynamics is not
a discipline which describes facts subject to measurement error, but a mathe-
matical one which deduces ideal universal processes from equations. Functional
mathematical dependence deﬁnes the thermodynamic potentials of energy, en-
thalpy, free energy, and entropy. Mathematics itself cannot be correct “on
average” but only correct or, if the equations are incoherent, incorrect. This
1This is not a periodic process in the sense that it spontaneously takes on the initial
conditions at the end of the period but one which again takes on the initial value of the
internal energy (∆U = 0) when the other variables of state are taken back to the initial
values, i.e. ∆Q =
In other words, the process is not identiﬁed with
rotation of the vanes of a steam turbine and it is not inverted by inverting the direction of
R
rotation of the vanes.

pdv on the cycle.

2Called also “Joule-Thomson eﬀect”. It is the eﬀect which allows obtaining dry ice from
carbon dioxide at surrounding temperature without doing work (for the work of expansion of
freezing water, compare. Mach, p. 234[3]). As this means that the material states associated
with thermodynamic processes are not unequivocally deﬁned by the parameters, it leads to
rejecting Alternative A.

3Let us recall that in the Carnot cycle an ideal gas is, let us say, constrained to do work.
The motor consists of one insulated cylinder with the exception of the base, and is equipped
with one free thermally insulated piston. To work in the adiabatic/isothermal cycle it is
placed alternately on an insulated stand or on one or the other of two stoves which are kept
at temperatures T1 and T2 K respectively. Its thermodynamic cycle takes place then between
two temperatures T1 and T2 which are prevented from balancing themselves at the Tmean
such that T1 < Tmean < T2. Nor is the number of rpm mentioned because the cycle must
function under conditions of thermodynamic equilibrium. This essential hypothesis excludes
that a pressure diﬀerence be created between external and internal pressure at the cylinder
(i.e. there must not be friction between the piston and the cylinder) and that the heat ﬂows
by conduction between the thermal baths and the piston. This hypothesis failing, Carnot’s
machine might not at all perform its duty despite the thermal gradient. Carnot’s machine
diﬀerently from Watt’s or Otto’s, which do not satisfy the hypothesis, has the prerogative of
being reversible. In this context, “reversible” means essentially that if a Carnot machine is
connected to a Carnot refrigerator between the same two temperatures, it still must not be
possible to transfer heat from the colder thermostat to the other. The postulate that the
energy balance per cycle of the two (perfect) connected machines is null is equivalent to the
postulate that the Carnot machine is ideal or reversible. It is also important to remember
that the second principle, taken for the Carnot cycle, is universally valid in thermodynamics.
Indeed, the energy statement is independent of the particular mechanism considered.

2 A THERMOMETER BASED ON THE BRIGHTNESS OF HOT BODIES5

seems to us to be the manner in which a thermal phenomenon is measurable
without thermodynamics being phenomenological.

The approach of Kirchhoﬀ diverges from that of Lord Kelvin because the
German physicist starts from the assumption that thermodynamics must be
prescriptive. His blackbody is a thermometer because it satisﬁes the same rela-
tionship between heat and temperature that the absolute thermometer satisﬁes
and not because it exists in our world. This means that he does not consider
the demonstration of his own theorem like a description of an observation.

In the demonstration, Kirchhoﬀ takes into consideration any body C having
as its property that its radiation depends only on temperature and on wave-
length since in any case C can be colored. He shows that the process or ab-
sorption/emission is cyclical and is in agreement with the principles of classical
thermodynamics (alternative B). For this purpose he makes use of a character-
istic property of the mirror, which, in the case of the blackbody, is summarized,
“A mirror which reﬂects a blackbody is black”. Since, the other way around,
“an optically machined black glass is a mirror”, it is seen that at thermodynamic
equilibrium the absorption/emission process is cyclical because it has the (opti-
cal) eﬀect of a reﬂection. According to us, since heat does not produce work in
accordance with a ﬁxed relationship, the (mechanical) eﬀect of a pressure cannot
be attributed without further ado to optical reﬂection. Indeed, a “Carnot cy-
cle” written to justify heat conduction between two thermal baths with diﬀerent
temperatures does not justify concomitantly the mechanical work of a thermal
machine.
In the same way, the substitute for the Carnot cycle proposed by
Kirchhoﬀ to justify the use of the pyrometer does not justify the mechanical
work carried out by an electric motor. The E/A relationship between emissive
and absorptive power of the body C measures temperature because the internal
energy changes by ∆U due to the eﬀect of heat ∆Q = χ · ∆T absorbed with
the change in temperature of the stove, where χ is precisely the speciﬁc heat
of the body. Under the new conditions of equilibrium, E/A measures the new
temperature of the body C.

Instead of going into the details of the demonstration, let us consider the ad-
herence of the terms to the facts. The ﬁrst part of the thesis (stated in his num.
3), or the rule that emission be proportional to the absorption of a body for
each wavelength of the radiation, is not in conﬂict with experience. Instead, the
assertion that there is temperature radiation is not supported experimentally
at least in three circumstances, which we recall below. Indeed, the theory pos-
tulates that at thermal equilibrium radiation depends only on temperature and
possibly on wavelength, that is it takes on a homogeneous and isotropic distribu-
tion in space 4. But, experimentally, the emission of electromagnetic radiators,
called antennas, does not possess the required characteristics of homogeneity
and isotropy, nor does it take them on at thermodynamic equilibrium with a
cylindrical, cubic or prismatic metallic container with optically machined walls.
Not even the light of a common incandescent light bulb generally displays an ef-
4This does not occur “on average” but because the independence of radiation energy from
spatial variables was postulated. In thermodynamics, wavelength is not in relation with the
normal vibration modes of a box.

3 THE QUANTUM ENERGETICS INTERPRETATION

6

ﬁcient emission/absorption mechanism to establish thermodynamic equilibrium;
if it remains lit and is visible from any point in a room it does not evolve towards
a situation of “equilibrium” illumination characterized by the impossibility of
distinguishing it from the wallpaper. In other situations involving measurement
of power distribution it is not at all based on equilibrium; to aﬃrm that radia-
tion from the sun goes to thermal equilibrium with a thermometer located here
on earth is ticklish from an experimental and a strictly theoretical viewpoint.

In conclusion, the operating principle of the optical pyrometer is justiﬁed by
thermodynamics (alternative B) but the absorption/emission process is as ideal
as the Carnot cycle.

3 The quantum energetics interpretation

In the preceding paragraph we saw that in thermodynamics the requisite of a
thermometer, or indiﬀerently an object whose temperature can be measured,
is to possess a temperature independent of chemical composition or structure.
We also saw that Kirchhoﬀ assumed a universal principle, which governs energy
exchanges (alternative B of the preceding num.) rather than attributing ener-
getic states to matter (alternative A). Is it possible as an alternative to identify
radiation with a form of energy?

M. Planck answered aﬃrmatively. Indeed, he borrowed the statistical me-
chanical interpretation of entropy expressly for interpreting by a characteristic
function the form of spectral radiation of hot bodies on the most updated data[5]
5 of O. Lummer and E. Pringsheim. Now, in these experiments the oven is
empty6. Hence the void exhibits special dependence on the wavelength of the
emission of the blackbody better than any hot material object. That is to say,
the property of being black belongs to radiation.

The characterizations of radiation which come out of the classical optics
framework develop, in our opinion, along three mutually independent lines, to
wit, statistical (*), energetic (**) and electromagnetic (***). Since Planck de-
sired to underscore the originality of his approach as compared to that adopted
by W. Wien or L. Boltzmann for extrapolating the less updated data, he has
become indeed the promoter of the explicative use of mechanical modeling (*)
while continuing to insist that he wishes to pursue the work of clariﬁcation of
the Maxwell equations (***) undertaken by H. Hertz (**) 7. In short, Planck
proposes to go beyond the energetic formulation of electromagnetism by making
use of the atomic hypothesis of matter. We clarify below why, in our opinion,

5From approximately 1µ up to 18µ, for temperatures from 87 K to 1650 K.
6In this context, “empty” stands for “containing a diathermanous medium”, eventually at

a low pressure (in the theory of heat, diathermanous means transparent).

7He expressed himself thus, “the job of ﬁnding a modiﬁcation [of the Maxwell theory]
allowing for the new facts without sacriﬁcing its best parts seems to me much more promising.
In accordance with this criterion, the theory of radiation developed by myself will, in my
opinion, reveal itself to be the most fruitful [of those thus far mentioned]. It is divided in two
perfectly distinct parts, to wit, the electrodynamics theory of elementary oscillators and the
statistical theory of these oscillators”. Ann. Phys. 31:758 (1910).

3 THE QUANTUM ENERGETICS INTERPRETATION

7

Planck’s formula of irradiation from hot bodies does not represent energy dis-
tribution neither according to Boltzmann nor according to Hertz.

3.1 States of light (*)

The division between classical (”macroscopic”) system and surrounding envi-
ronment (the rest of the world) is typical of the thermodynamics approach to
the study of energy exchanges. One imagines the system being studied en-
closed by a geometrical surface that ideally separates it from the environment.
Exchanges of mechanical energy, heat, or even mass through the surface are con-
sidered measurable with instruments like the thermometer and the calorimeter.
It is also thought that the system relaxes spontaneously until it settles into an
indeﬁnitely stable condition as a consequence of the failure of the constraints
responsible for the initial diﬀerences in temperature, pressure and volume be-
tween system and environment. Classically, the thermodynamic potentials are
attributed to the process and the accent is placed on the overall energy bal-
ance between the initial stable state and the ﬁnal state of the system. But the
deﬁnition of the absolute thermometric scale determines the problem of charac-
terizing the states of matter in thermodynamics. The ﬁrst theory which seeks to
trace the thermal properties of the states back to dynamics, takes the name of
kinetic theory. The latter does not consider the thermodynamic states as mere
“calculative expedients” but associates with them dynamic properties deduced
from an ad hoc model. Since dynamics is based on observations, it seems that, if
a model allows justiﬁcation of mathematical expressions of the state functions,
thermodynamics will be refounded on physical principles.

According to Boltzmann, kinetic modeling is obtained by separating the
thermodynamic system into a large number 8 of equal elements, atoms or
molecules, individually satisfying the laws of classical mechanics. Indeed, for
the purposes of dynamics, any material system can be represented by marking
out its elements (material points) subject to conservative forces. But each ther-
modynamic system is supposed to be a material system and therefore the same
separation into elements (”microscopic” subsystems) must apply. The corre-
spondence between the variables which dynamics associates with the number of
material points (considered as components of a ”macroscopic” system) and the
thermodynamic variables is not one to one. This is clear, according to Boltz-
mann. Indeed, thermodynamics labels only the states of equilibrium, that is the
stable ones. And it must be possible to label them in an univocal manner, i.e.
by adding a suﬃcient number of particular ”thermodynamic” parameters, be-
cause the thermodynamic problem is that of univocal characterization of states.
In a word, the physical properties of the system represented by thermodynamic
functions do not apply to each atom but emerge from collective behavior at
thermodynamic equilibrium 9. Since neither the laws governing the dynamic
8In a number of the order of that used by Avogadro during the volumetric determination

of chemical reactions.

9The common indicator diagrams in the Cartesian plane connect only possible states of
equilibrium. Therefore, on those diagrams there are no states diﬀerent from those of equilib-

3 THE QUANTUM ENERGETICS INTERPRETATION

8

elements 10 nor those which apply to the overall system are considered statisti-
cal in classical physics, what is statistical in the kinetic model is the collective
behavior at equilibrium; it is governed by the law of large numbers.

An interpretative problem of thermodynamics emerges because the magni-
tudes involved in atoms, from which the system is composed according to the
kinetic model, cannot be measured in principle with classical measuring instru-
ments. In other words, an average value is not the result of a statistical regularity
with which a measurement error is associated experimentally. It follows that
the law of large numbers is a mathematical principle. Roughly, the principle
speciﬁes the locution, “to converge in probability to a variable” 11 . This means
that collective behavior is a probabilistic regularity in the speciﬁc sense that
it assumes application of the theory of probability. This is the mathematical
model on which the kinetic theory is based.

If the laws of thermodynamics must agree with the mathematics of the ki-
netic theory, their new interpretation diﬀers from the classical one. Indeed, if
the mathematical relation between the two types of variables - thermodynamic
and mechanical - must respect the mathematical theory of probability, linear
combinations of dynamic variables enter into thermodynamic functions, all the
possible elementary events must be known in advance, the sure event and the
impossible event are in the ﬁeld of events, et cetera 12 . What determines the
classical probabilistic behavior of the system? Presumably the ”microscopic” el-
ements pertaining to a given thermodynamic state are shared equally as regards
initial conditions. So the elementary events would be the sets of initial condi-
tions. Since the number of events is very great but ﬁnite, the “sharing process”
is not random. Indeed, the events can always be put in biunique correspondence
with a ﬁnite subset of the set of natural numbers 13 . Not even the real num-
bers associated with the temporal evolution t at the dynamical level introduce
any fortuitousness under the initial conditions. At the level of motion of one
individual material point, to take the system back to the initial conditions at
time 2t it suﬃces that the boundary conditions reverse the direction of motion

rium. That equilibrium is dynamic only for mechanical reduction usually, despite the mechan-
ical conditions of equilibrium being assured by statics. Furthermore, in classical thermody-
namic representation the system does not evolve from initially assigned conditions according
to a position-time graph because neither positions nor time are part of the representation. So,
formal replacement of the averages on the ”spatial” variables with ”temporal” averages has
no justiﬁcation in thermodynamics.

10Not those governing the evolution of the density of probability of the dynamic states.
11We are discussing equilibrium states. Otherwise, dynamic time, deﬁned in the dynamics
of conservative systems basing on oscillatory or rectilinear motion, is not automatically the
parameter governing thermodynamic relaxation also.

12As thermodynamics is a physical theory and Boltzmann’s atoms are microscopic, it is
unclear which mechanical aspect determines the thermodynamic behavior of a system. But
having reached this point it is possible to exemplify at least the type of relationship sought.
It is a matter of connecting the roto-translation in the space of a tossed coin – movement
that can be ﬁlmed in the desired detail and reproduced by projection in “as many identical
examples as wanted” – with the quantitative evaluation of the possibility that a given side
will appear on top.

13To order numerable sets (for example, the elements of a set according to decreasing values)

it is necessary to postulate an axiom equivalent to well-ordering.

3 THE QUANTUM ENERGETICS INTERPRETATION

9

on the trajectory at time t. More generally, it is possible to classify dynamic
states according to symmetry properties and consider operations which reverse
the states[6] 14 . But it is necessary that the classiﬁcation have a meaning.
According to us, it has a meaning in mechanics but not in thermodynamics.
Indeed, in hydrostatics the considerations on pressure direction rest on the fact
that the surfaces on which hydrostatic pressure is exerted are precisely those of
the container. But the separating surface between the thermodynamic system
and the environment is largely arbitrary so that pressure in classic thermody-
namics is deﬁned in terms of elasticity of the (gaseous) system. In conclusion,
evolution has no direct role in thermodynamics because the time deﬁned in me-
chanics is not among the thermodynamic variables. However, the randomness
at the origin of the irreversibility in Boltzmann’s kinetic model does not depend
on evolution but on the arbitrariness of the boundary conditions[7].

Furthermore, dynamic reduction presents two essentially mathematical dif-
ﬁculties. First, the system contains a ﬁnite number of elements so that all the
average values calculated on it can be mapped as a function of a discrete vari-
able. But thermodynamic functions are continuous and in particular cover the
whole real range of values between any pair of mean values calculated for the
dynamic variables. That way, the dynamical states taken by one kinetic model
only account for a set of measure zero in the graph of a given thermodynamic
function. Quasi all thermodynamic states have no correspondent in the kinetic
model. Second, the concept of mean value pertaining to one element of the
kinetic model is not well deﬁned. When the values can be measured, we obtain
a distribution of values from which mean values can be calculated according
to a number of diﬀerent criteria. On atoms, such measures cannot be taken
in principle. The expected value must agree with the value calculated from
thermodynamic laws or whatever method of obtaining averages will give rise to
signiﬁcant thermodynamic magnitudes? In the ﬁrst case, i.e. if thermodynam-
ics functions are expressions not only bound to the correct unit of measure but
also mathematically assigned, the statistical interpretation is misleading. As re-
gards the second case, Einstein at last established the originality of the formula
of spectral energy distribution of the blackbody with respect to the hypotheses
of the kinetic theory of gasses. This means that a set of simple elements, let us
say an ideal gas, is not a valid model of radiation. But Einstein’s result really
clariﬁes only that the model assumed by Boltzmann does not allow recovering
the formula of Planck; it cannot show that the characteristic function which ef-
fectively interpolates the spectral form is an energy according to Boltzmann 15 .
Indeed, the mechanisms of emission/absorption assumed by Einstein have noth-
ing in common with Boltzmann’s collisions [11]. After all, classical statistical
mechanics had never analyzed the consequences of inelastic collisions – which
14To ”reﬂect” a trajectory on itself, a correctly positioned reﬂecting surface is needed. To
reﬂect n of them, n surfaces are needed. Mathematically, said conditions can not only be
assigned but, without regard for complication, can be speciﬁed with the desired accuracy.
Ignorance in principle of the experimental data associated with ”microscopic” subsystems
does not imply any random measurement error on the data.

15On page 124 Einstein[8] comments on the expression of the density of radiation.

3 THE QUANTUM ENERGETICS INTERPRETATION

10

give rise to emissions of the type of those which occur in radioactive phenomena
– on the state of a conservative mechanical system; nor did it admit directive
shocks[12][13].

Lastly, if the blackbody has merely radiative consistency, the possibility of
measuring thermal equilibrium experimentally with a conventional thermome-
ter is lacking and therefore there is no longer any guarantee that the color
or the intensity of the radiation measures temperature sooner or later in the
conventional sense.

3.2 Extension of energetics to nonmechanical phenomena

(**)

The other way of saying that radiation is a form of energy is to formally include
radiant energy in the energy balance (hypotheses B). While not taking support
from dynamic modeling, the energy approach also interprets thermology with
mechanics. To clarify, the cycle of a thermal machine in the usual Clapeyron
diagram was explained as a balance even under the hypothesis that heat is a
form of energy equivalent to mechanical energy. As underscored in the preced-
ing num., a balance usually considers only exchanges and not absolute values.
As to exchanges, the ”true” Carnot cycle maximizes the transformation of heat
into work. Despite this, the thermal diﬀerence on which the cycle functions does
not yet allow univocally identifying the factor of conversion between heat and
work because said factor also depends on the absolute temperature in degrees
Kelvin. But it is possible to evaluate the energy output of heat in mechanical
units. R. Clausius, who performed this calculation, adopted the subterfuge of
introducing a new function of state instead of heat. This, being integrable, al-
lows writing the energy balance between the initial and ﬁnal states. Entropy
without statistical signiﬁcance is just that function of state which allows writ-
ing the heat absorbed per cycle by all thermal machines in mechanical units,
[9] Replacement of heat by entropy in balance calculation im-
i.e.
plies a conceptual abstraction even at the level of that which is imagined to
be transferred between two bodies at diﬀerent temperatures. As temperature
increases, another mode of exchange of the heat substitute progressively ap-
pears, the mode called radiation. This mode, just as heat conduction and its
production by friction between mechanical parts in movement, is excluded from
Carnot’s cycle balance (reversible) 16. For mechanical purposes it enters as a
reduction of output. Despite the “Kirchhoﬀ cycle” having null eﬃciency, he be-
haved as though Fermat’s principle for optics allowed evaluating the mechanical
equivalent of radiation. Even if we leave out of consideration the question of
the unit of measure, it is not possible to calculate dissipated energy by leaning
on thermodynamic states. As a matter of fact, this has been known for some
time because the spectral lines of gaseous emission are typically associated with
quantum jumps between given energy levels. But this is only a half solution.
16If instead heat is assimilated with a ﬂuid, the principle of conservation of heat is indepen-
dent of the fact that heat produces work. Every mechanical interpretation of heat upstream
of the dissipation problem would do.

in joules.

3 THE QUANTUM ENERGETICS INTERPRETATION

11

Indeed, it is clear that the representation of a transition cannot derive from the
most meticulous study of the stability of the levels mentioned provided that the
transition in question does not occur. As an example, if illumination whitens
a coloring agent, the study of the chemical properties of the coloring agent be-
fore and after the reaction is diﬀerent from that of the velocity of reaction as a
function of illumination. But this is half the solution. Indeed, we even judge as
valid the interpretation of the associated emission as a mere signal. To be fair,
and irrespective for a moment of the particular structural conjecture associated
with the spectrum, all the chemistry based on spectral analysis identiﬁes the
substances by ”ﬁngerprinting”.

Recapitulating, in classical thermodynamics, whether an absolute temper-
ature is admitted or not, the hypothesis that the processes can pass through
states all of equilibrium contains the designation of the thermodynamic states.
Hertz himself admits at least that assigning an energy state in mechanics has
sense. To give a meaning to “non-mechanical” energy, he calculates the bal-
ance between states in which slowly variable electrical magnitudes are balanced
everywhere in “physical space” 17 by mechanical forces.
If radiation occurs
during the process, the radiant energy is not balanced but, Poynting’s result
for electromagnetism being valid, Hertz can hypothesize that radiation is trans-
formed into heat by the Joule eﬀect. Planck extends the balancing method to
the dipole antenna (Hertzian oscillator), feigning that it would be possible to
assimilate it with a mechanical oscillator.[10] Planck’s oscillators thus represent
the mechanical counterpart which balances electromagnetic radiation (station-
ary). Admitted that it would be admissible to mediate (in the sample space) the
energetic eﬀect of electromagnetic oscillations on an oscillator, Planck considers
that, at equilibrium, radiation is balanced on average. But an averaged oscil-
lation is not at all periodic. Besides, conclusions about statistical populations
of oscillators are not drawn in the space where bodies move, which for Hertz is
precisely physical space. For lack of the mechanical balancer, Planck does not
immediately represent an energy according to Hertz and therefore cannot assert
that his formula represents a distribution of energy localized in the cavity of
the oven and express it in joules. To be able to localize electromagnetic energy
in space, irrespective of the velocity at which electrical magnitudes change, it
is necessary to assume Einstein’s space-time concept. Below, we are setting
forth three points which in our opinion make the energy interpretation of the
equations of electromagnetism problematic nevertheless.

Einstein’s developments consist of this. Concomitantly with the principle of
equivalence of mass and energy, Einstein postulated in 1905 that the expressions
of the electromagnetic forces do not depend on the system of reference [used in
mechanics for drawing position-time graphs]. In formulas, provided again that
positive charges in motion generate neutral electrical current and putting the
speed c = 1 18 , he postulated that geometrical transformation of the frame
17This approach, and hence its energy interpretation, fails if electrical measurements re-
place mechanical ones. Indeed, Hertz uses mechanical forces to balance unknown electrical
quantities, not to establish once for all an electromechanical equivalent.

18Measurement is in Gauss units according to which

(ǫ0µ0) = 1

p

3 THE QUANTUM ENERGETICS INTERPRETATION

12

from E = 0, H magnetostatic to E = v × H → ∂H/∂t transforms an integral
frame with a charge in slow motion into one integral with the magnet in which
a force F = e(v × H) acts on the charge (deﬂection of the electrical charge due
to the eﬀect of movement of the magnet at velocity v). Instead, transformation
from H = 0, E electrostatic to H = −v × E → −∂E/∂t transforms the frame
integral with a magnetic needle into the one integral with the charge in motion
in which the needle point is subject to the force M = −I × E (deviation of
the magnetic needle point due to the eﬀect of a current of charges of velocity
−v). Because of the principle of equivalence, the ﬁeld variables also have an
energy interpretation for the microsystems and these correspond to geometric
points or inﬁnitesimal volumes. But before 1905 no one had ever asked that
the diagrams of which thermodynamics makes use to represent energy processes
enjoy some property of kinematic invariance. Indeed, the Galilean invariance
principle established independence from position and velocity only for the laws
of dynamics. Furthermore, a limit was set for the smallness of the systems
to which thermodynamics is applied.
Indeed, accurate determination of the
mechanical equivalent of heat had required the availability of industrial means
(Rumford, Hirn, Joule).

The ﬁrst problematical point arises if we want to distinguish “physical space”
from the space-time diagrams of which classical mechanics makes use. Admitted
that the relations indicated by Einstein represent Faraday‘s electromagnetic in-
duction and Maxwell’s displacement current in Amp`ere’s equation respectively,
the invariance of Maxwell’s equation system involves mechanical transformation
properties of the ﬁelds at small velocities. These transformation properties are
by no means shared by “physical space”. Again, the uniformity and isotropy
prescribed for temperature radiation in the oven cavity do not coincide with a
superposition of stationary waves in space-time.

The second problem is that, because of the principle of equivalence, the
position-time graphs of motion take on the same explicative value of the more
usual (in thermodynamics) indicator diagrams. In a word, in the new represen-
tation the electromagnetic ﬁeld energy variables depend on velocity in accor-
dance with the principle of relativity (Einsteinian relativity) without it being
clear whether the arguments x, y, z and t, of which they are in turn functions,
are to be considered thermodynamic potentials or whether they are indices of
position in bodies not uniformly heated as Fourier used them to describe the
diﬀusion of the caloric. Like Hertz, Fourier described in the “physical space”
the mechanical aspect of a phenomenology while in thermodynamics usually the
indices are thermodynamic parameters. This is not the place to discuss which
domain it would be appropriate to assume for x, y, z and t in the Maxwell
equations.

The third problematic point of Einstein’s interpretation is the following. Un-
til now we have identiﬁed radiative, electric et cetera phenomenology with the
assigned mathematical expressions of the electromagnetic ﬁelds. Therefore, the
expressions of the ﬁelds in empty space could already be considered equivalent
to thermodynamic potentials.
Instead, this is not quite correct because the
equations with partial derivatives of which the ﬁelds are solutions establish only

3 THE QUANTUM ENERGETICS INTERPRETATION

13

the dependence between variations and do not allow specifying functional ex-
pressions. But the ﬁelds in vacuo are obtained, for the mathematical theorem of
existence and uniqueness of the solutions of diﬀerential equation systems, when
the initial and boundary conditions are speciﬁed. Then the question is, how to
obtain non trivial solutions. Indeed, assumed the relativity principle, and given
the mathematical expression of an electromagnetic ﬁeld, it is understandable
that it does not reach thermodynamic equilibrium unless dissipation did not
characterize that solution initially. In a word, for purely mathematical reasons,
no solution of Maxwell’s equations satisfying boundary and initial conditions,
and not corresponding to “blackbody radiation” initially will merge with it at
the end of all the transients.

In conclusion, the premise for interpreting electromagnetic ﬁelds as local
energy perturbations in space and transport of electrical charges is that the
arguments x, y, z and t take on a single meaning for all the theories involved
and possibly that of coordinates of “physical space”.

3.3 Description of the electrical signal (received) (***)

In this paragraph we shall again take up the clariﬁcation of Maxwell’s equations
undertaken by Hertz and got beyond by Einstein. Electromagnetism is a descrip-
tive theory. Indeed, the system of the four partial diﬀerential equations stylizes
as many key experiments of Faraday, to wit electrostatic induction, absence of
magnetic monopoles, electromagnetic induction [14] and “unipolar motor”. It
doesn’t seem to be a physics theory because Maxwell didn’t clarify which of the
solutions are elementary. Or better, he proposed the analogy with light trans-
mission for the propagated solutions but without saying which characteristic of
light he imagined represented by E or H. Since the same theory includes the
oldest conceptions of electrostatics and magnetostatics and it seems to make
possible a uniﬁed treatment of them, the meanings attributed to the variables
from the older theories were automatically accepted. Thus, experimental ver-
iﬁcation of the ”existence” of Hertzian waves, instead of broadening the class
of signal-solutions, favored the extension from electrostatics to electrodynamics
of the mathematical magnitudes E and H (forces), and D and B (polariza-
tions). Therefore, in writing the overall mechanical and thermal energy balance
for those magnitudes, Hertz attacks the problem of determining the mechanical
equivalent of the electromagnetic theory [15].

In the ﬁrst place, he shows how, if desired, it is possible to take the equations
of Maxwell from the potentials taken from the rival theory. His procedure
consists of balancing with a system of electrical and magnetic forces the electrical
and magnetic current variations that result because of mutual dependence on
mathematical expressions.[16] Obviously, he assumes that eﬀective electrical
magnitudes correspond to the mathematical corrections. He calculates by the
induction principle (mathematical) the corrections necessary at each successive
order. The procedure allows expanding in power series the forces and therefore
the potentials from which they derive. The expansion in series of the potential
function satisﬁes a wave equation and in addition allows taking the equations of

3 THE QUANTUM ENERGETICS INTERPRETATION

14

electromagnetism in a quite immediate manner (as regularity conditions). But
it is not possible to make reﬂections on the (mechanical) work carried out by
the electrodynamics system because it is always balanced electrically.

H

In the second place he chooses as fundamental the experiment of Oersted,
of the torsion of a compass needle near a battery-powered electric circuit, an
eﬀect analogous to that caused by a magnet. It ensues that the same mechanical
eﬀect can be caused either electrically or magnetically. Therefore the formula:
(4π/c)I0 =
Hdr is interpreted as though it linked together the measured value
of the electric current and that of magnetomotive force[17]. For the behavior to
be perfectly symmetrical, it would be necessary to observe an electrical eﬀect
of the magnets or even a mutual interaction between solenoids traveled by a
direct current. In actual fact, Faraday observed that the abrupt movement of
a conducting loop near a magnet produces an electric shock at the clamps of
the circuit. 19 In formula: (1/c)∂H/∂t = −curlE. An eﬀect that, according
to Lenz, expresses an energy principle of homeostatic conception applied to
Oersted’s current.

Hertz’s thermodynamic interpretation of electromagnetism depends on the
hypothesis that the heat developed by the conductor is an integral part of Oer-
sted’s observation[18] i.e. on the assumption that the electromagnetic magni-
tudes deﬁned by the equations show some properties regardless of the mode of
detection. If the Faraday eﬀect is the equivalent of Oersted’s 20 experiment valid
for variable ﬁelds, part of the electrical energy of the current must necessarily be
dissipated in heat (in erg/second) even in induction. In 1843 Joule had excluded
that heat development was linked to induction; the latter appeared nevertheless
linked to the resulting current increase. Thus it seemed that current ﬂow al-
ways involves heat development. Today, on the contrary, we know that electric
”current” in a solenoid is detectable with Oersted’s needle under conditions in
which heat is not developed 21 . Under these conditions we cannot associate
19Maxwell num. 535. Vol. II. If the magnet M is replaced with a solenoid the variation
in the movement of the conductor N also alters the current in the solenoid (M). It is clear,
but we write it, that if the magnet can be replaced by a conductor, at the ends of which the
current can be measured, the distinction between conductor-magnet M and conductor-circuit
N is artiﬁcial, hence the case record is only apparent. In addition, Newton’s third law plays
no role.
Indeed, as the symmetry between circuit N and magnet M is the consequence of
varying only the current in one of the two conductors (M or N indiﬀerently), induction takes
place as the only eﬀect. Faraday’s induction is at the base of electromagnetic transmission
and reception.

20Maxwell used Oersted’s experiments to eliminate the magnetic hysteresis from all the
linear treatment of electromagnetism. Consequently, those facts are contained in the equa-
tions. But they are not expressed in the so-called Amp`ere-Maxwell equation.
Indeed, the
latter describes the experiment of Faraday’s unipolar motor, termed later “rotating ﬁeld” by
G. Ferraris.

21With superconduction the torsion of the magnetic needle is observed without accom-
panying heat. The process of ”creation” of the magnetostatic ﬁeld of the superconductor
according to electromagnetism is in relation with the Faraday eﬀect described by the inte-
gral of ∂H/∂t ÷ −curlE for the current which varies between closing of the circuit, I = 0
and stationary I0 at which the potential diﬀerence at the ends of the solenoid vanishes (then
L = Φ/I0). In classical thermodynamics the process in which a material is transformed from
(bad) conductor to superconductor is linked to the heat variation produced by the Oersted

4 SPECTRAL DISTRIBUTION AS THE RECEIVER’S RESPONSE

15

with current energy (in mechanical units) dispersible in heat due to the Joule
eﬀect. But this mechanical contribution jE is what allows interpreting in energy
terms all of the expression in the ﬁeld variables, to wit:

d/dt

1/8π
(cid:0)

ZZZ

(E2

+ H2

)dV

+ c/4π

(E × H) · ndS = −

jEdV

ZZZ

(cid:1)

ZZ

integrated on a volume V , on the boundary surface S of which the electrical and
magnetic forces do not vanish, without identifying the induced current with that
obtained by Neumann 22. [19] [20] [21] Dropping the energetic interpretation of
electromagnetic ﬁelds, there is no reason to think that the energy is saved or
dissipated by induction. There is nothing counterintuitive in this interpretation;
it is merely a matter of accepting that induction, as it is written, links two
electrical variations without ﬁxing any mode of detection.

In conclusion, mere identiﬁcation of radiant heat with an entire theory (elec-
tromagnetism) not only does not allow writing the energy involved in the pro-
cess of emission at equilibrium but even makes the subsequent development of
thermodynamics incoherent. As to identiﬁcation of black radiation with an ob-
served phenomenon – a problem totally outside of mathematics – the ﬁrst ﬁne
distinctions are surely prior to the theorem of Kirchhoﬀ.

4 Spectral distribution as the receiver’s response

In the preceding numbers we glanced at diﬀerent formalizations of light phe-
nomenology. Each of them answers certain requirements. In the past, it was
not usual to make distinctions because it was not usual to think that mathe-
matics is a language capable of representing even ideas in mutual disagreement.
In addition, it was assumed that energy principles had a universal signiﬁcance
or it was even believed that they were automatically satisﬁed by any faithful
description of nature. However that may be, ”veriﬁcation” of the predictions
concerning radiant heat implied demands at the experimental level. One of
these demands concerns the spectral characterization of radiation at equilib-
rium in the cavity of the oven (possibly electrically heated). The reason for this
demand, strictly experimental, is to be sought in the fact that spectral analysis
aimed at identifying chemical substances became popular at the same time. The
principles of thermodynamics did not prescribe a particular spectral form for
the black substance. Can they justify it when the experimenters ﬁnd a credible
one?

We propose the following two considerations.
i. Not only the emissions of rareﬁed gasses apparently depend on the chem-
ical constitution thereof but condensed matter also has characteristic emissions.

eﬀect between when resistance R = R0 and when R = 0. The reverse transformation, which
does not pass through states of thermodynamic equilibrium, is called ”quench”.

22At nos. 542 and 543, vol.

II, Maxwell explains the form of the theories of induction

alternative to his own. Hertz’s work to which we allude is of 1884 vo1. 1 num. 17.

4 SPECTRAL DISTRIBUTION AS THE RECEIVER’S RESPONSE

16

Calling temperature radiation ”black”, practically all shades of ”gray” are ob-
served instead of it. Nor is it certain that the spectral form deﬁned at the end
of 1800 by the experimenters for the empty cavity of the oven at temperature T
and attributed to black radiation is that of thermal equilibrium. Indeed we know
that in the cavity of a device which selectively ampliﬁes radiation the spectral
composition of radiation at steady condition is diﬀerent. Each of the experi-
mental spectral forms is credible, but how many thermodynamic principles do
we need to show the necessity and suﬃciency of all?

ii.

Electromagnetism in turn does not explain the mechanism with which
radiation of the sun takes place, or what sets oﬀ the lightning process, or what
causes the luminescence of the ﬁreﬂy’s glow. But the receiving and transmis-
sion modes according to Faraday and Hertz allow receiving them all and often
attributing each of them to a speciﬁc transmitter. Thus, the theory after Fara-
day’s experiments portrays as electromagnetic signals all of solar radiation, the
ﬂash and the ﬁreﬂy’s glow indiﬀerently.

Relying on these two considerations, we shall seek to explain why, according
to us, the black radiation spectrum can be considered an antenna reception and
can be interpreted as the receiver’s band-pass.

First of all, we believe that it is necessary to clarify what was intended by
temperature radiation in the days of the crucial experiments. Says L. Graetz,[22]
“It is common experience that a hot body in a cooler environment cools even
leaving out of consideration conduction and convection. This cooling is called
radiant heat. Caloriﬁc radiation which leaves hotter bodies heats only the ab-
sorbent bodies but not the diathermanous ones of the environment. [. . . ] It is
deduced [from the velocity of reception] that caloriﬁc radiation is of the same
type as light radiation. [. . . ]”.

From the passage quoted it appears that thermal emission propagates diﬀer-
ently from electromagnetic. Indeed, it spreads at great velocity from the hotter
bodies to the colder ones. Now, since the diﬀusion process is not endowed with
directivity, assuming that radiation spreads from hot to cold bodies, it is ex-
pected to be able to measure the absolute emissive power of a body only if the
detector surrounds it completely and is kept at such a low temperature as to
absorb entirely any radiation. As the thermometer cannot be taken to tempera-
ture T = 0 K in the laboratory, the problem of measuring the spread of radiant
heat has been faced by using a covering kept at a temperature other than zero
but very well insulated. The radiation which no longer spreads due to the ab-
sence of the thermal gradients takes the name of temperature radiation. First
of all, it seems that an oven radiation is not a MASER because the radiation
moves to equilibrium by diﬀusion instead of resonance, i.e. forming stationary
electromagnetic waves[23]. Then, if there is temperature radiation, a pyrometer
can measure the temperature at a distance. This means that the composition of
a sample of radiation extracted from the oven, collimated, dispersed, analyzed
and detected at the temperature of the laboratory is homogeneous with the
spectral composition of the radiation at thermal equilibrium in the same empty
oven. The external detector assigns to each frequency a characteristic intensity
in accordance with a function F (T, ν). In the oven, which is empty in the spe-

4 SPECTRAL DISTRIBUTION AS THE RECEIVER’S RESPONSE

17

ciﬁc sense that the air contained in the cavity does not heat by irradiation, being
diathermanous, there is an internal detector. The internal detector, for exam-
ple a bolometer, is set to measure the temperature of the oven cavity; for each
value of the electric current measured there is a corresponding temperature. As
the oven is empty, the internal detector attributes a single temperature to the
radiation at thermal equilibrium. It cannot distinguish between their spectral
components because the radiation is at thermal equilibrium and therefore all
the frequency components are at the same temperature. But the external de-
tector distinguishes the frequencies from each other because it allows assigning
to each dispersed beam a diﬀerent energy. Let us assume for convenience that
the external detector is also a bolometer. The external bolometer measures a
diﬀerent electrical current for each frequency component of the black radiation
impresses thereon (the laboratory air is also diathermanous). But the internal
bolometer records a single current despite the radiative frequencies of the ex-
tracted sample being those of the radiation in the cavity. To us, it seems that
the following circumstances are at the origin of the diﬀerent behavior of the two
bolometers. The body of the internal bolometer moves to thermal equilibrium
with the internal walls of the oven by convection (in the meaning of the heat
theory) despite the air being transparent to light. But the sensitivity of the
resistance of the external bolometer depends on the particular striking spectral
component in the ﬁrst place because the radiation striking it was actually dis-
persed and, in the second place, because air at atmospheric pressure diﬀuses (in
the optical sense) little at the so-called spectral windows.

The experimental veriﬁcation, if we want to call it that, of the theorem
of Kirchhoﬀ in the case of black radiation seems to us unacceptable. Indeed,
it would be a matter of taking the measured value of the emissive power for
each wavelength back to the same instrumental sensitivity and so on for all
the wavelengths actually irradiated by a cavity, however heated. But it is not
necessary to know the emission band of the oven cavity to verify the theorem
because this instruction is not in the terms. On the contrary, the theorem
prescribes for the ideal blackbody the property of absorbing all the radiation
regardless of temperature and wavelength, that is AS ≡ 1 where AS is the
absorption power of the blackbody. According to Kirchhoﬀ, the emission of
said blackbody must be proportional to absorption. Considering the fact that
the property for the other bodies is given by a biratio, i.e. E/A = ES/AS,
temperature being ﬁxed, it can be put ES ≡ 1 where ES is the emissive power
of the blackbody. From the experimental veriﬁcation of the theorem, with the
correction for sensitivity, it might prove to be that not even the oven cavity is
an ideal blackbody.

Rather than doing that, we are interested in pointing out that, whatever the
manner in which the oven produces radiation and whatever be the homogeneous-
ness of distribution of the intensity in the cavity, the technique of detection is
the one used in telecommunications. That is, radiation with the characteristics
of electromagnetic radiation propagation is detected. For this reason, allowance
can be made for the sensitivity of the instruments by introducing the band-pass
reception concept. Now we shall seek to make plausible that, given a body

5 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

18

emitting with the mode hypothesized by Kirchhoﬀ for the blackbody, the spec-
tral form observed would be exactly the band-pass of the receiver. Indeed, let
E/A = ηλ ≡ F (T, λ) where E and A are the relative emissive and absorption
power respectively of any body C at temperature T and wavelength λ. There-
fore, E/A = 1·ηλ(T, λ) where ηλ or better ην (T, ν) encodes the spectral response
of the receiver. This is universal when the measuring instrument is assigned.
But if the reference body is one of those which are usually called black without
being black, i.e. if there isn’t any temperature radiation, then the spectrum of
the body obtained using a “black detector” would be EG/AG = ǫG(T, ν) while
the spectrum actually recorded is the product of the irradiation of the body
with the response in frequency of the receiver, i.e. E/A = ǫG(T, ν) · ην (T, ν)
where T is a frill because:

1.
2.

the external detector is not at thermal equilibrium with the oven, and
the radiation detected is not that of the blackbody.

5 Summary and Conclusion

We have sought in this work to expose why we think that formulating in clas-
sical thermodynamics the hypothesis that radiant heat is electromagnetic is
of no use in accounting for either the distribution of energy of the blackbody
or the irreversibility of the thermodynamic processes. As regards the ﬁrst as-
pect, we have shown that temperature emission at thermal equilibrium does
not depend by deﬁnition on the characteristics of the transmitter. But in the
electromagnetic representation, irradiation depends on the initial and boundary
conditions. As far as the second aspect is concerned, we have tried to clarify
that thermodynamics and electromagnetism are diﬀerent theories that respond
to diﬀerent requirements. It is possible to trace diagrams in classical thermody-
namics but they do not depend on kinematic parameters, that is to say on spatial
and temporal variables. But electromagnetism has been designed to enjoy the
properties of invariance associated with movement in geometry. Although con-
duction, convection and radiation make the thermal machine cycle irreversible,
the electromagnetic representation of transport phenomena does not account for
irreversibility. Contrariwise, the emissive properties of the blackbody according
to thermodynamics being assigned, analysis of the signal received allows con-
cluding that the spectral form observed agrees with the receiver’s band-pass.

References

[1] R. Becker, Fields and Interactions, Dover Publications Inc., New York (1982)

(Ed. 1964 by F. Sauter)

[2] W. Thomson, Opere di Kelvin by E. Bellone, UTET, Torino (1971) (Ed.

1848 by Phil. Soc. Proc. Cambridge)

REFERENCES

19

[3] E. Mach, Die Prinzipien der W¨armelehre, 3. Auﬂage (1919), Minerva

GMBH, Frankfurt/Main (1981)

[4] G. H. Bryan, Thermodynamics, an introductory treatise dealing mainly with
ﬁrst principles and their direct applications, B. G. Teubners Lehrb¨ucher,
Leipzig (1907)

[5] M. Planck, Ann. Phys. 4:553 (1901)

[6] D. A. Lavis, http://arXiv.org/cond-mat/0401061 v.1 (2004)

[7] R. Tolman, The Principles of Statistical Mechanics, Dover Publications Inc.,

New York (1979)

[8] A. Einstein, Phys. Z. 18:121 (1917)

[9] M. Planck, Ann. Phys. 1:669 (1900)

[10] M. Planck, Ann. Phys. 1:719 (1900)

[11] A. Einstein, Ann. Phys. 22:180 (1907)

[12] A. Einstein, Ann. Phys. 20:627 (1906)

[13] M. Born, Einstein’s Theory of Relativity, Revised Ed., Dover Publications

Inc., New York (1965)

[14] J. Clerk Maxwell, A treatise on Electricity & Magnetism, III Ed. Dover
Publications, Inc. (1954) New York Orig. Ed. 1891, vol. 2. nr. 530 and nr.
486

[15] H. Hertz, Gesammelte Werke, vol. 1., p. 295, S¨andig Reprint Verlag, Vaduz

Liechtenstein (1993), Ed. 1894

[16] W. D. Bauer, http://arXiv.org/phys/0401151 v.1 (2004)

[17] J. Clerk Maxwell, A treatise on Electricity & Magnetism, III Ed. Dover

Publications, Inc. (1954) New York Orig. Ed. 1891vol. 2., nr. 481

[18] H. Hertz, Gesammelte Werke, vol. 2. Untersuchungen ¨uber die Ausbreitung
der elektrischen Kraft, Ed. 1894, S¨andig Reprint Verlag, Vaduz Liechtenstein
(1993)

[19] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 2. Ed., nr. 6 John Wiley & Sons,

Inc., New York (1975)

[20] J. C. Slater and N. H. Franck, Electromagnetism, VIII, Dover Publications

Inc., New York (1969), Ed. 1947

[21] D. H. Towne, Wave Phenomena, 6, Dover Publications Inc, New York

(1988), Ed 1967

REFERENCES

20

[22] Herausgeber A. Winkelmann, Handbuch der Physik, Band 3. W¨arme, Jo-

hann Ambrosius Barth (1906)

[23] A. Carati and L. Galgani, http://arXiv.org/physics/0312075 v.1 (2003)

