Velocity-selective resonance dips in the probe absorption spectra of
Rb D2 transitions induced by a pump laser.

Keywords: Velocity-selective resonance, hyperﬁne spectra, Rubidium D-line, control

laser, shifting of resonances.

PACS number(s): 32.60 + i, 32.80. Bx, 33.80. Be

S. Chakrabarti, A. Pradhan, A. Bandyopadhyay, A. Ray, B. Ray, N. Kar †
and
P. N. Ghosh ∗
Department of Physics, University of Calcutta
92, A. P. C. Road, Calcutta – 700 009,
I N D I A
(Phone : +91 33 2350 8386, Fax : +91 33 2351 9755,
E–mail : speclab@cubmb.ernet.in)

4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
1
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

†Permanent address: Department of Physics, North Bengal University, Siliguri - 734 430 , India.

Abstract

We report experimental observation of velocity-selective resonances in the Doppler-broadened

probe absorption spectra of 85Rb and 87Rb D2 transitions in the presence of a strong coprop-

agating pump laser locked to a frequency within the Doppler proﬁle of the transition. The

set of three dips having the separation of allowed hyperﬁne transitions can be moved along

the Doppler proﬁle by tuning the pump laser frequency indicating a resonance between the

pump laser frequency and the velocity shifted probe laser frequency.

Manipulation of atomic response to a probe radiation ﬁeld by using an intense pump laser

has attracted considerable attention in recent years. Typical atomic systems considered for the

purpose are three level atoms in the ladder or Λ conﬁguriation. The absorption proﬁle of an

atomic transition when the upper level is coupled coherently to a third level by a strong laser ﬁeld

exhibits reduction of absorption [1] leading to electromagnetically induced transperency(EIT).

Since the pioneering work on quantum interference leading to zero absorption at the line centre

by Harris and co-workers [2] and Agarwal and co-workers [3,4] a large number of theoretical and

experimental observations on EIT were reported [5-9]. Most of the experimental work reported

observation of EIT in a Λ type system in Rb. These work involved two lower hyperﬁne levels

with a common upper hyperﬁne level in a D transition. The hyperﬁne split components of D1
or D2 transitions in alkali atoms are embedded in a Doppler broadened Gaussian background
that makes it impossible to measure the splitting by using single resonance spectroscopy [10]. In

order to recover the hyperﬁne components from the Doppler background standing wave Lamb

dip spectroscopic method is used [10,11]. This method uses two counter propagating laser beams

originating from the same source and crossing each other within the gas cell.

If one of the

beams is stronger than the other then it saturates the transition and creates a hole in the lower

level Gaussian population distribution. At resonance the probe absorption shows a dip in the

absorption spectra because of the population depletion of the lower level. If there are two closely

spaced upper levels, in addition to the two dips at resonance frequencies Ω1 and Ω2 an additional
”crossover” resonance is observed at a frequency intermediate between the two frequencies i.e. at
(Ω1+Ω2)
2

[12,13]. Such a resonance occurs when the frequency tuned probe absorption of one beam

meets the hole created by the other beam. Hence, in such cases three resonance dips are observed

all of which may have similar strength [13].

In the case of hyperﬁne spectroscopy the atomic

energy levels commonly involved are a single ground state and three closely spaced upper level,

because of the selection rule ∆F = 0, ± 1. If the lower state hyperﬁne splitting is much larger

the transitions involving diﬀerent lower levels do not overlap and can be observed as seperate

transitions, commonly used in Λ type systems. For the three hyperﬁne transitions Lamb dip
spectroscopy reveals three Lamb dips and three crossover resonance dips. The Lamb dips for 85Rb
(F = 2 → F’ and F = 3 → F’) and for 87Rb (F = 1 → F’ and F = 2 → F’) have been studied

in detail [14], mainly because of the importance in laser cooling and Bose-Einstein Condensation
with Rb. Usually the hyperﬁne transition F=2 → F’=3 in 87Rb is frequency locked for using it as

cooling transition. However, all the six components may not be fully resolved because of the close

spacing of the six frequencies. Recent theoretical simulation [15] shows the diﬃculty of isolating

the components in Lamb dip spectroscopy.

In the traditional methods of double resonance spectroscopy in a three level system with one

common level copropagating pump and probe beams are used to observe induced emission power

of the probe [16,17] in the case of homogeneously broadened microwave-microwave transitions.

The emission line shape and a splitting of the absorption peak may be observed depending on the

power of the saturating beam [17]. In the case of inhomogeneously broadened transitions like D1
and D2 transitions in the alkali atoms similar copropagating beams from two laser sources may be
used. Very recently such a pump-probe spectroscopic method using copropagating laser radiations

has been reported to observe additional non-linear resonances of the Sodium D1 line [18]. They
used a four level system with two lower hyperﬁne levels and two upper hyperﬁne levels. The system

is a combination of double Λ and two V-type transitions. In addition to the EIT of the Λ-type

resonance they reported diﬀerence frequency crossing in the V-type conﬁguration. We report a

pump-probe experiment on Rb D2 lines using copropagating laser beams where the pump beam(or
the control laser) is locked at a certain frequency within the Doppler broadened background, the

probe frequency is tuned and the probe power is monitored. At all the lock points of the pump

beam we observe very clearly a set of three dips corresponding to the hyperﬁne components.

The set of dips can be shifted by tuning the pump frequency thus exhibiting velocity selective

resonances(VSR). Such a set of drifting VSR dips are reported for the ﬁrst time.

The pump-probe experiment carried out in this work uses an atomic rubidium vapour cell

having a length of 5cm and window of diameter 2.5 cm (Fig. 1). The vapour cell is sealed with

a pressure of one micro-Torr and there is no buﬀer gas. The pump frequency is produced by an

external cavity diode laser(ECDL), TEC 100 from Sacher Lasertechnik. The weak probe frequency

is obtained from another ECDL, Velocity 6312 from New Focus. The pump beam is split into

two components using a 70:30 beam splitter. The transmitted beam is sent through another

cell (cell 2) of the same conﬁguration for saturation absorption spectroscopy (SAS) or Lamb dip

measurements. The Lamb dip signal consisting of the hyperﬁne and crossover resonance transitions

is fed to the input of the PID lock circuit for frequency locking purpose. The pump frequency
is locked at diﬀerent frequencies around the 85Rb 52S 1

= 2, 3, 4) transitions

(F = 3) → 52P 3

(F

′

2

2

(Fig. 2) and their crossover resonance peaks appearing in the Doppler broadened background

by using a home built PID lock circuit that has a long term frequency stability of 1 MHz. The

reﬂected pump beam is sent through cell 1 . The pump and probe ﬁelds in cell 1 are copropagating

and colinear. A Coherent wavemeter is used to monitor the wavelengths of the pump and probe
trasitions. The typical pump and probe intensities used in the sample cell are 22 mW/cm2 and
1.27 mW/cm2 respectively. The powers are measured by a Melles Griot power meter. The lock

point is varied using the oﬀset of the lock circuit from the lower frequency to the higher frequency

region. For each lock frequency of the pump, the probe scans a frequency range of nearly 1 GHz
around the 85Rb D2 (F = → F
avoid feedback of laser power. Fig. 3a is the probe transmission in the absence of pump ﬁeld and

) transitions. The pump beam is sent through an optical isolator to

′

this may be used as the reference spectrum. Figs. 3b-3f show the probe transmission in presence

of the pump ﬁeld with diﬀerent lock frequencies as shown. The set of three dips in the Doppler

broadened background of probe absorption shift from the lower frequency to the higher frequency

region in harmony with the increasing lock frequency of the pump laser. The third dip has the

highest intensity and it always coincides with the pump frequency. The separations between the

dips match with the known hyperﬁne splittings (Ω2 - Ω1 = 63.43 and Ω3 - Ω2 = 120.91 MHz) of
= 2, 3, 4) of 85Rb [14]. The relative strengths of the
the excited state hyperﬁne lavels 52P 3

(F

′

2

dips also change with shift of the lock point of the pump ﬁeld. The set of three dips representing

emission or reduction of absorption, and their shifts are reproducible with all pump powers larger

than the probe power. By changing the pump power the peak height and width of the dips can

be changed. The collision broadening is negligible at the pressure used. So the dips are power

broadened Lorentzians.

The same experiment is repeated for the other D2 transitions of 85Rb and 87Rb. In all cases
the hyperﬁne triplets moving with the pump laser frequency are observed. However they are much
weaker than those in Fig. 3. Three well separated peaks in 87Rb (F = 2 → F

) are shown in Fig. 4.

′

Since one of the dips is weak vertical arrows are used to mark them.The separation being very

large, with the movement of the pump frequency, all the dips cannot be seen, as one of them may

fall beyond the Gaussian curve (Fig. 4f). In fact this dip is very weak, but distinctly visible in

other cases (Fig. 4b-4e). The observed separations of the triplet are Ω2 - Ω1 = 157.09 and Ω3 - Ω2
= 267.17 MHz. This agrees with the known hyperﬁne splitting values [14]. In all the spectra the

intermediate dip is the strongest and it coincides with the pump frequency.

When the pump laser is operating at any frequency within the Doppler broadened envelope,

it can cause non-resonant excitations for all the transitions Ω1, Ω2, and Ω3. Considering one-
dimentional motion of atoms, this will happen for the velocities vi of atoms given by Ωi = ωpu
(1 − vi
c ), i=1,2,3. These excitations will cause population holes for the three velocity groups v1, v2
and v3. The atoms will meet the probe laser at shifted frequencies ωpr (1 − vi
c ) for these velocities.
So the tuned probe laser absorption will exhibit dips at ωpr = ωpu, ωpr - ωpu = ± |(Ω3 − Ω1)|, ±
|(Ω3 − Ω2)|, ± |(Ω2 − Ω1)|. In principle there may be seven dips in the absorption curve.

However, the dips will not all be of the same magnitude as the population depletion for

the three velocity groups will not be the same. The population depletion will depend on two

factors - (i) the number of atoms with velocity vi:- Ni, which will be obtained from the Maxwell-
Boltzmann velocity distribution and (ii) the fraction fi of the atoms excited to the higher state by
the transition of frequency Ωi,fi will be determined by the transition probability of the particular

case. It will also depend on the power of the pump laser but that is kept constant during the

experiment. So if ni is the depth of holes for the transition Ωi, we may write ni = fiNi. Simple
numerical estimates show that for ωpu in the Doppler broadened region, the velocities vi for the
non-resonant excitations are such that the variations in Ni are not very large if the hyperﬁne

splitting is small. However, the relative transition probabilities for the three hyperﬁne transitions

may be quite diﬀerent. If one particular fi is much larger compared to the other two, then ni, the

depth of holes for that particular transition will be much larger compared to the other two. For

the 85Rb D2 transitions, it is known that Ω3 has the strongest transition probability [19]; in that
case f3 is much greater than f1 or f2 and so the population depletion for the v3 group will be the
largest. One can then see that the strongest dips will occur whenever ωpr = ωpu or ωpr = ωpu -
|(Ω3 − Ω2)| or ωpr = ωpu - |(Ω3 − Ω1)| as long as ωpu is within the Doppler-broadened region. The
experimental observation agrees with this (Fig. 3). In principle, there could be four other peaks,

but they are too weak to be observed by our experimental setup.

The data for the 87Rb transitions can also be explained by similar arguments. However,
in this case the separations between the hyperﬁne transitions are much larger. Hence Ni may

have wide variations.

In this case we have to calculate the complete absorption coeﬃcient by

considering the absorption cross section and the lower level population depletion caused by the

non-resonant pump in order to determine the relative strength of the dips.

The experimental results obtained by us are similar to the diﬀerence frequency crossing

proposed by Wong et al.[18]. But we do not observe symmetrically located dips on two sides

of the pump laser frequency. Such dips will be very small and have negligible intensity. The

two symmetrical dips reported for the single V -type system by Wong et al.[18] also had large

diﬀerence in intensities. In our case of a double V - system (single lower level and three upper

levels) considering one dimensional motion of atoms we predict seven dips. But the intensities of

such dips diﬀer considerably depending on the frequency diﬀerence |ωpu − Ωi|. The diﬀerence is

prominent in Rb as it has a narrower Doppler width compared to Na.

Using copropagating laser radiation the probe absorption always reveals three strong dips

corresponding to the hyperﬁne components and having the same separation as the hyperﬁne

splitting. There should be no crossover resonance as it is observed in the case of Lamb dip

spectroscopy. But it must be clear that the observed transmission peaks are not the hyperﬁne

transitions. The positions may be variable points of the Doppler broadened curve depending solely

on the pump laser frequency. It is found and explained that the set of transmission peaks, that

”represent” the hyperﬁne components, tread along the Doppler proﬁle and the pump laser actually

pulls or drags the triplet peaks. Thus we can control and manipulate the positions and intensities

of transmission peaks by shifting the position of the pump laser frequency. We can derive highly

accurate values of hyperﬁne splitting free from the problem of any crossover resonance in a simple

pump-probe experiment, though the absolute frequencies cannot be determined in this process.

No eﬀect of Autler-Townes splitting can be found in this experiment. The interesting feature of

this experiment is that the triplet of ’hyperﬁne dips’ appear at all pump frequencies within the

Doppler background.

Acknowledgments: P.N.G. thanks the BRNS, DAE, New Delhi for the award of a research

project. A.P and A.B thank the CSIR, New delhi for the award of Research Fellowships. The

project is also supported by the FIST programme of the DST, New Delhi.

References:

1. M. Xiao, Y. Li, S. Jin and J. Banacloche, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 666(1995).

2. S. E. Harris, J. E. Field, A. Imamoglu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 1107(1990).

3. S. P. Tewari and G. S. Agarwal, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 1811(1986).

4. G. S. Agarwal and S. P. Tewari, Phys. Rev. lett. 70, 1417(1993).

5. S. Wielandy and A. L. Gaeta, Phys. Rev. A 58, 2500(1998).

6. H. X. Chen, A. V. Durrant, J. P. Marangos and J. A. Vaccaro, Phys. Rev. A 58, 1545(1998).

7. Y. Zhu and T. N. Wasserlauf, Phys. Rev. A 54, 3653(1996).

8. G. S. Agarwal, Phys. Rev. A 55, 2467(1997).

9. R. R. Moseley, S. Shepherd, D. J. Fulton, B. D. Sinclair and M. H. Dunn, Phys. Rev. Lett.

10. V. S. Letokhov and V. P. Chebotayev, ”Nonlinear Laser Spectroscopy”. Springer-Verlag,

11. W. Demtr¨oder, ”Laser Spectroscopy”. Springer-Verlag, Berlin (1982).

12. H. R. Schl¨osberg and A. Javan, Phys. Rev 150, 267(1966).

13. S. Mandal and P. N. Ghosh, Phys. Rev. A 45, 4990(1992).

14. C. E. Wieman, G. Flowers and S. Gilbert, Am. J. Physics. 63, 317(1995).

15. D. Bhattacharyya, B. K. Dutta, B. Ray and P. N. Ghosh, Chem. Phys. Lett.(in-press).

16. C. H. Townes and A. L. Schawlow, ”Microwave Spectroscopy”, Dover Publications, New

17. A. Javan, Phys. Rev. 107, 1579(1957).

18. V. Wong, R. W. Boyd, C. R. Stroud, R. S. Vennink and A. N. Marino, Phys. Rev. A 68,

74, 670(1995).

Berlin (1977).

York(1975).

012502(2003).

19. K. B. MacAdam, A. Steinbach, and C. Wieman, Am. J.Phys. 60, 1098(1992).

Figure Captions

Figure 1 : Schematic representation of the experimental arrangement for velocity-selective resonances;

ECDL : external cavity diode laser, OI : optical isolator, BS : beam splitter, CBS : cubical

beam splitter, PD : photo detector, M : mirror, L : convex lens, BD : beam dump.

Figure 2 : Energy level diagram for the double V conﬁguration used in this work. F=2,3 for 85Rb

and F=1,2 for 87Rb. Ωi are resonance frequencies for D2 transition.

Figure 3 : The probe absorption proﬁle of 85Rb transition, when the pump laser is locked to diﬀerent

points of the Lamb dip spectrum of 85Rb 52S 1

(F=3) → 52P 3

(F’=2,3,4): (a)the pump is

switched oﬀ, (b)-(f) pump is on, the upward pointing arrows represent the lock points.

Figure 4 : The probe absorption proﬁle of 87Rb transition, when the pump laser is locked to diﬀerent

2

2

2

2

points of the Lamb dip spectrum of 87Rb 52S 1

(F=2) → 52P 3

(F’=1,2,3): (a) pump is oﬀ,

(b)-(f) pump is on, the upward pointing arrows represent the pump lock points, while the

downward pointing arrows represent the velocity selective resonances.

This figure "Fig1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0404120v1

This figure "Fig2.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0404120v1

This figure "Fig3.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0404120v1

This figure "Fig4.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0404120v1

