4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
0
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Chapter 6
Toward a Consistent Theory of Relativistic Rotation
in Relativity in Rotating Frames (Kluwer Academic)

Robert D. Klauber
1100 University Manor Dr., 38B, Fairﬁeld, IA 52556, USA
klauber@.iowatelecom.net or rklauber@.netscape.net[a)]

January 2004

Abstract

Part 1: Traditional Analysis Conundrums
Although most physicists presume the theoretical basis of relativistically rotating systems
is well established, there may be grounds to call the traditional analysis of such systems into
question. That analysis is argued to be inconsistent with regard to its prediction for cir-
cumferential Lorentz contraction, and via the hypothesis of locality, the postulates of special
relativity. It is also contended that the traditional analysis is in violation of the continuous
and single valued nature of physical time. It is further submitted to be in disagreement with
the empirical ﬁnding of Brillet and Hall, the global positioning system satellite data, and a
light pulse arrival time analysis of the Sagnac experiment.

Part 2: Resolution of the Conundrums:
Diﬀerential Geometry and Non-time-orthogonality

It is postulated that physical constraints on time (its continuous and single-valued nature)
limit the set of possible synchronization/simultaneity schemes in rotation to one, the “ﬂash
from center” scheme. A diﬀerential geometry analysis based on this simultaneity postulate is
presented in which the rotating frame metric is constrained to be locally non-time-orthogonal
(NTO) and due to which, all inconsistencies and disagreements with experiment are resolved.
The hypothesis of locality is shown to be invalid for rotation speciﬁcally, and generally valid
only for non-inertial frames in which the metric can have all null oﬀ diagonal space-time
components (i.e., time is orthogonal to space.) The analysis approach presented does not
contravene traditional relativistic theory for translating systems and makes many (but not
all) of the same predictions for rotating systems as does the traditional (time orthogonal)
analysis.

Part 3: Experiment and Non-time-orthogonal Analysis

Experiments performed from the 1880s to the present to test special relativity are sum-
marized, and their relevance to NTO analysis is presented. One test, that of Brillet and Hall,
appears capable of discerning between the NTO and traditional approaches to relativistic
rotation. It yielded a signal predicted by NTO analysis, but not by the traditional approach.
Other evidence in favor of the NTO approach may be inherent in the global positioning
system data, and the Sagnac experiment.

1

1 Traditional Analysis Conundrums

1.1 Introduction

Part 1 outlines the traditional approach to relativistic rotation and discusses various apparent in-
consistencies associated therewith. Following an analysis of synchronization/simultaneity in ro-
tating frames and seeming traditional approach problems therein, a new postulate is introduced,
which will be used in Part 2 to pose an alternative approach to resolving the inconsistencies.

1.2 Relevant Relativity Principles

Special relativity theory (SRT) is restricted to inertial systems and is derived from two symmetry
postulates:

1. The speed of light is the same for all inertial observers (it is invariant) and equals c.

2. There is no preferred inertial reference frame. (Velocity is relative, and the laws of nature

are covariant, i.e., the same for all inertial observers.)

The ﬁrst postulate, applied to the one-way speed of light, is equivalent to demanding that
Einstein synchronization of clocks holds. In Einstein synchronization, one starts from a ﬁrst
clock at time tA on that clock and sends a light pulse to a second clock ﬁxed in the same frame
as the ﬁrst. The light pulse is reﬂected back at the second clock and returns to the ﬁrst clock
at time tB on the ﬁrst clock. The time on the second clock is then set such that its reading
when the light was reﬂected would have been (tA + tB)/2, the time on the ﬁrst clock half way
between the emission and reception times. This ensures the one-way speed of light, measured as
the distance traveled between clocks divided by the time diﬀerence of the two clocks, is always
c.

In recent years, many relativists have come to consider Einstein synchronization merely a
convention, or gauge, that aﬀects no measurable quantities[1],[2]. For example, in all such gauge
theories of synchronization, the round trip speed of light is c (though the one-way speed of light
need not be.) Nevertheless, underlying SRT is the assumption that Einstein synchronization is
always one of the possible conventions that makes valid predictions about inertial frames in the
physical world.

General relativity is applicable to non-inertial systems and is based on additional postulates,
including the equivalence principle and the hypothesis of locality (or sometimes, the “surrogate
frames postulate”). The hypothesis of locality stands as a linchpin in the traditional approach
to relativistic rotation, and thus, I number it among the postulates of importance to this article.

3. Hypothesis of locality: Locally (i.e., over inﬁnitesimal regions of space and time), neither
gravity nor acceleration changes the length of a standard rod or the rate of a standard
clock relative to a nearby freely falling (i.e.,
inertial) standard rod or standard clock
instantaneously co-moving with it. See Møller[3], Einstein[4], and Mashoon[5].

Stated another way, a local inertial observer is equivalent to a local co-moving non-inertial
observer in all matters having to do with measurements of distance and time. It follows immedi-
ately that Einstein synchronization can be carried out locally, and that for such synchronization,
the local one-way speed of light measured in a non-inertial frame is c. Hence, a Lorentz frame

2

can be used as a local surrogate for the non-inertial frame. This has a basis in diﬀerential
geometry, in which a curved space is locally ﬂat and can be represented locally by Cartesian
coordinates.

Minguzzi[6] and Møller[7], among others, note that the hypothesis of locality is only an
assumption. It is, however, an assumption that, historically, has worked very well in a large
number of applications. See, for example, the treatment of acceleration by Misner, Thorne, and
Wheeler[8] using instantaneous local Lorentz frames.

1.3 The Traditional Approach

The traditional approach to relativistic rotation assumes the hypothesis of locality is a funda-
mental and universal truth. As done successfully in other, non-rotating, cases, values in local
co-moving Lorentz frames are integrated to determine global values for quantities such as dis-
tance and time, which would, in principle, be measured with standard meter sticks and clocks
by an observer in the rotating frame.

The oft-cited example, ﬁrst delineated by Einstein[9], is the purported Lorentz contraction of
the rim of a rotating disk. (Or alternatively, the circumferential stresses induced in the disk when
the rim tries to contract but is restricted from doing so via elastic forces in the disk material.)
A local Lorentz frame instantaneously co-moving with a point on the rim, it is argued, exhibits
Lorentz contraction of its meter sticks in the direction of the rim tangent, via its velocity, v =
ωr. This inﬁnitesimal length contraction is subsequently integrated over all of the local Lorentz
frames instantaneously at rest with respect to each successive point along the rim. The result
is a number of meter sticks that is greater than 2πr, and thus, the disk surface is concluded to
be non-Euclidean, or Riemann curved[10],[11].

1.4 Inconsistency of Circumferential Lorentz Contraction

According to SRT, an observer does not see his own lengths contracting. Only a second observer
moving relative to him sees the ﬁrst observer’s length dimension contracted. Hence, from the
point of view of the disk observer, her own meter sticks are not contracted[12], and there can
be no curvature of the rotating disk surface. The traditional analysis is thus, inconsistent[13].

Consider further the disk observer looking out at the meter sticks at rest in the lab close to
the disk’s rim. Via the hypothesis of locality (in which she is equivalent to a local co-moving
Lorentz observer), she sees the lab meter sticks as having a velocity with respect to her. Hence,
by the traditional logic, she sees them as contracted in the circumferential direction. She must
therefore conclude that the lab surface is curved. But those of us living in the lab know this is
simply not true, and again the analysis is inconsistent.

Although these arguments seem to be rarely considered by traditionalists, when they are
brought to their attention, the usual defense is that “the rotating frame is not an inertial frame
and thus is diﬀerent”. Yet, the hypothesis of locality, the starting point for the analysis, assumes
that they are not diﬀerent in this regard.

Furthermore, if the non-inertial argument has any validity, then it must imply that the length
contraction of the rim is absolute, i.e., both the lab and disk observer agree that the disk meter
sticks are contracted. Yet, consider the limit case of low ω, high r, such that a = ω2r
0, while
v = ωr is close to the speed of light (the “limit case”). Advocates of the traditional approach
contend that, since the limit case observer ﬁxed to the rotating disk rim feels no inertial “force”,

≈

3

she becomes, eﬀectively, a Lorentz observer. In this case, each of the lab and disk observers
must see the other’s meter sticks as contracted and their own as normal. Yet, the non-inertial
argument started with the assumption that the disk observer’s meter sticks contracted in an
absolute way, agreed to by all observers[14].

Conclusion: Length contraction applied via the traditional analysis to rotating systems

appears self-contradictory.

1.5 Second SRT Postulate Not Valid in Rotation

Without looking outside, an observer on the rim of a rotating disk can determine her angular
velocity ω, using, for example, a Foucault pendulum. She can also use a spring mass system
to measure kx/m = ω2r, and hence determine r, the distance to the center of rotation. (The
Newtonian limit is used to simplify the example. The conclusion is also true for relativistic
calculations.)

That is, contrary to the dictate of the second postulate, there are experiments an observer
can perform locally from entirely within the rotating frame to determine her speed in an absolute
sense. (To be precise, her speed with respect to the inertial frame in which her center of rotation
is ﬁxed.) Her velocity is not relative. Both the lab and the rim ﬁxed observers determine the
same value for it. With respect to circumferential speed, there is a preferred frame, and both
observers agree it is the one where such speed is zero, i.e., the non-rotating lab frame.

Conclusion: The second relativity postulate does not appear to hold for rotating systems

1.6 First SRT Postulate: Thought and Sagnac Experiments

1.6.1 Thought Experiment

Consider the following thought experiment (see Selleri[15]) involving an observer ﬁxed to the
rotating disk of Figure 1 who measures the speed of light.

The observer shown has already laid meter sticks along the rim circumference and determined
the distance around that circumference. As part of her experiment, she has also set up a
cylindrical mirror, reﬂecting side facing inward, all around the circumference. She takes a clock
with her and anchors herself to one spot on the disk rim. When her clock reads time T = 0 (left
side of Figure 1) he shines two short pulses of light tangent to the rim in opposite directions.
The mirror will cause these light pulses to travel circular paths around the rim, one clockwise
(cw) and one counterclockwise (ccw).

From the lab, we see the cw and ccw light pulses having the same speed c. However, as the
pulses travel around the rim, the rim and the observer ﬁxed to it move as well. Hence, a short
time later, as illustrated in the right side of Figure 1, the cw light pulse has returned to the
observer, whereas the ccw pulse has yet to do so. A little later (not shown) the ccw pulse will
have caught up to the observer.

For the observer, from her perspective on the disk, both light rays travel the same number
of meters around the circumference. But her experience and her clock readings tell her that
the cw pulse took less time to travel the same distance around the circumference than the ccw
pulse.

She can only conclude that, from her point of view, the cw pulse traveled faster than the ccw
pulse. Hence, the speed of light as measured on the rotating disk is anisotropic and diﬀerent

4

 

T = 0

T > 0

 

Figure 1: Rotating Disk Observer Measuring Light Speed

from that measured in the lab. Thus, one could conclude that the ﬁrst relativity postulate, in
the context of the hypothesis of locality, is violated.

Arguments against this conclusion are rooted in two interrelated concepts:

i) purported
diﬀerences between the global (as measured in the above thought experiment) and local, physical
speeds of light[16],[17],[18], and ii) the synchronization/simultaneity employed[19],[20]. The
author has extensive remarks on this in a subsequent section, but for now, submits that the
appropriate synchronization scheme comprises the following.

Consider the ccw light pulse and the time diﬀerence on the clock held by the observer in
Figure 1 between the emission (assume initial clock time is tA = 0) and reception (clock time
tB) events. Employ the synchronization method of Section 1.2, only instead of using a back and
forth round trip for light (Einstein synchronization), use a circular round trip. That is, the time
on the clock half way along the round trip ccw path (at 180˚ of the disk here), at the instant
the ccw light pulse was there, should be (tA + tB)/2 = tB/2. With this time, the ccw speed
of light will be the same as that computed for the round trip, i.e., it will be less than c. Now
synchronize the clock at 90˚ the same way. Assume its setting at the instant the light pulse
passed was half that on the clock at 180˚ when the light passed that clock (or equivalently, 1/4
of tB.) Doing this, one again ﬁnds the ccw speed of light to be the same value, which is < c.
Repeat over smaller intervals until, in the limit, one ﬁnds the local speed of light to be the same,
and therefore not equal to c.

The entire procedure can be repeated for the cw light pulse, and one will ﬁnd the clocks at
each location done via the cw and ccw methods are synchronized, i.e., they are the same clocks.
One will also ﬁnd that the local speeds of light are anisotropic and equal to the same values as
the global ones determined using a single clock at the emission/reception point.

Conclusion: While it may appear that the local speed of light, being anisotropic, violates
the ﬁrst relativity postulate, there is still the possibility that Einstein synchronization may be
valid locally (as one of the possible local synchronization schemes). This would mean that for
such synchronization, the local speed of light would be c, and one could get correct results using
the hypothesis of locality and local Lorentz frame analyses.

Challenge to traditionalists: The author does not believe this and challenges advocates
of the traditional approach to begin with the assumption of local isotropic light speed, and
without looking outside of the rotating frame, kinematically derive the result that the cw light
pulse arrives back at the emission point before the ccw one.

 

 

5

w
w
w
w
1.6.2 The Sagnac Experiment

In 1913, G. Sagnac[21] carried out a now famous experiment, similar in many ways to the
thought experiment of Figure 1. On a rotating platform, he split light from a single source into
cw and ccw rays that traveled identical paths in opposite directions around the platform. He
combined the returning rays to form a visible interference pattern, and found that the fringes
shifted as the speed of rotation changed. A number of others[22],[23] subsequently performed
the same test with the same results.

If the speed of light were locally invariant and always equal to c, then speeding up or slowing
of the rotation rate of the platform should not change the location of the fringes. However, the
fringes do change with speed and once again we have a test (Sagnac) whereby we can determine
a preferred frame, in seeming violation of the second relativity postulate and the hypothesis of
locality.

Putative explanations for this in the context of the traditional approach hinge, once again,
local arguments. These are addressed in the

on synchronization/simultaneity and global vs.
following section.

I do contend that the thought experiment of Figure 1 makes it clear that any explanation
for the Sagnac experiment, from the point of view of the disk reference frame, must account for
diﬀerent arrival times for the cw and ccw light pulses. Analyses based on Doppler shifts[24] or
DeBroglie momentum/wave length[25] changes are simply not suﬃcient to explain this.

The calculation of this arrival time diﬀerence, derived from the lab frame, is well known and

is repeated for reference in the Appendix.

1.7 Synchronization/Simultaneity in the Traditional Approach

1.7.1 The Traditional Approach “Time Gap”

Consider the non-rotating (lab) frame as K; the rotating (disk) frame as k. Figure 2 depicts
inertial measuring rods in inertial frames K1 to K8 with speeds ωr instantaneously at rest with
respect to eight points on the rotating disk rim as shown. For practical reasons, only eight ﬁnite
length rods are shown, and one can consider them as a symbolic representation of an inﬁnite
number of such rods of inﬁnitesimal length. A and B are events located in space at the endpoints
of the K1 rod which are simultaneous as seen from K1; B and C are events located in space at
the endpoints of the K2 rod which are simultaneous in K2; and so on for the other events C to
J. A,B, ...J can be envisioned as ﬂashes of light emitted by bulbs situated equidistantly around
the disk rim.

p is a spatial (three-dimensional) point ﬁxed to the disk at which both A and J occur. q is
the spatial point on the disk at which B occurs. In principle, A, B, ... J, as well as p and q
are located on the disk rim though they may not look so in Figure 2, since the co-moving rods
shown are not inﬁnitesimal in length.

In the traditional analysis, the hypothesis of locality is invoked to claim that times and
distances measured by standard measuring rods and clocks in the local co-moving inertial frames
are identical to those riding with the disk.

Note that although events A and B are simultaneous as seen from K1, they are not simul-
taneous as seen in K (via SRT for two inertial frames in relative motion). As seen from K, A
occurs before B. Similarly, B occurs before C, and so on around the rim. If the events are light
ﬂashes, a ground based observer looking down on the disk would see the A ﬂash, then B, then

6

G

H

F

E

v

K3

D

C

v

K2

pppp

qqqq

J

A

w r

v = w
K1

B

Figure 2: Inertial Co-Moving Frames

Spacelike path 
of AJ integration

cT

Timelike path
of 3D point pppp

J
cT2

X2

X

A

B

K2  frame

Y

Figure 3: Co-Moving Frames Integration Path

C, etc. Hence we conclude that as seen from K, A occurs before J even though A and J are
both located at the same 3D point p ﬁxed to the rim. As seen from K, during the time interval
between events A and J, the disk rotates, and hence the point p moves. (As an aside, Figure 2
can now be seen to be merely symbolic since events A to J would not in actuality be seen from
K to occur at the locations shown in Figure 2. That is, by the time the K observer sees the B
ﬂash, the disk has rotated a little. It rotates a little more before he sees the C ﬂash, etc.)

According to the traditional treatment of the rotating disk, one then uses the Ki rods and
integrates (adds the rod lengths) along the path AB ...J, moving sequentially from co-moving
inertial frame to co-moving inertial frame. This path is represented by the solid line in Figure
3, and one can visualize small Minkowski coordinate frames situated at every point along the
curve AJ (see K2 in Fig. 3) with integration taking place along a series of spatial axes (such as
X2 in Fig. 3). By doing this one arrives at a length for AJ, the presumed circumference of a
disk of radius r, of

2πr
ω2r2/c2 > Circumference in lab,

AJ =

1
p

−

(1)

and thus, the disk surface is concluded to be non-Euclidean (Riemann curved.)

But consider that since point p moves along a timelike path as seen from K (see dotted line in
Fig. 3), a time diﬀerence between events A at 0o and J at 360o must therefore exist as measured
by a clock attached to point p. To continue from J to A requires a jump in time, and thus,
the traditional analysis approach leads to a discontinuity in time (or alternatively, multi-valued
time), a seemingly impossible physical situation. Further, as noted by Weber[26], this means
that if light rays are sent 360o around the rim to synchronize the clock at J with that at A, then
the two clocks (which are really one and the same clock) are not in synchronization. That is,

7

w
w
each clock on the disk is out of synchronization with itself.

Still further, according to the traditional analysis, time all along the path AJ is ﬁxed. Thus,
by that analysis, which depends on the locality hypothesis and integration of values (time in
this case) from local frame to local frame, A and J must be simultaneous. But they are not.

1.7.2 Traditional Approach to Resolve the “Time Gap”

In recent years, this problem has been treated as if this “time gap” were a mathematical artifact,
and approaches labeled “desynchronization”[27],[28],[29] and “discontinuity in synchronization”[30],[31]
have been proposed that entail multiple clocks at a given event. These approaches seem mo-
tivated by the gauge theory of synchronization philosophy that time settings on clocks are
inherently arbitrary.

Furthermore, the time gap is often said to be identical in nature to traveling at constant
radius in a polar coordinate system. The φ value is discontinuous at 360o. Similar logic applies
for time, with the International Date Line for the time zone settings on the earth. If one starts
at that line and proceeds 360o around the earth, one returns to ﬁnd one must jump a day in
order to re-establish one’s clock/calendar correctly.

1.7.3 Arguments for Physical Interpretation of the “Time Gap”

The gauge synchronization philosophy champions innumerable, equally valid, synchronization
schemes. Yet, within any one of those schemes, time is single valued and continuous, and clocks
are all in synchronization with themselves. For a given synchronization method, each event
within a given frame has a single time associated with it.

In the desynchronization approaches, a given event in a given rotating frame, for a given
synchronization method, can have any number of possible times on it. For example, the clock
at point p in Fig. 2 has one time on it at event A. If one Einstein synchronizes the clock at
360o (i.e., the same clock at p) with ccw light rays, one gets another time setting. Thus, one
has a choice of which of two times one prefers for any given event at point p. If, on the other
hand, one synchronizes the clock at 360o via cw light rays, one gets yet another setting, and
a third possible time to choose for any given event. Consider yet another path in which the
light ray goes radially inward 1 meter, then 360o around, then radially outward 1 meter. One
then gets yet another setting for the clock at p. Since there are an inﬁnite number of possible
paths by which one could synchronize the clock at p, there are an inﬁnite number of possible
times for each event at p. (This does not happen in translation. Any possible path for the light
rays results in the same unique setting, for a given synchronization scheme, on each clock in the
frame.)

This plethora of possible settings for the same clock results from insisting on “desynchro-
nization” of clocks in order to keep the speed of light locally c everywhere. And thus, one is in
the position of choosing whichever value for time one needs in a given experiment in order to
get the answer one insists one must have (i.e., invariant, isotropic local light speed.) One can
only then ask if this is really physics or not. Can an inﬁnite number of possible readings on
a single clock at a single event for a single method of synchronization be anything other than
meaningless?

The polar coordinate analogy, I believe, confuses physical discontinuity with coordinate
discontinuity. In 2D, place a green X at 0o, travel 360o at constant radius, and then place a red

8

X. The red and green marks coincide in space. There is no discontinuity in space between them,
although there is a discontinuity in the coordinate φ.

Flash a green light on the equator at the International Dateline, then trace a path once
around the equator along which no time passes. If you ﬂash a red light at the end of that path,
the red and green ﬂashes are coincident in space and time. There is no physical discontinuity,
although your time zone clocks show a coordinate discontinuity.

In Fig. 3, ﬂash a green light at event A. Travel 360o on the disk along the space-time path
AJ (along which no time passes according to the traditional analysis), then ﬂash a red light at
event J. The two lights are not coincident. There is real world space-time gap between them,
and they exist at diﬀerent points in 4D. The discontinuity is physical, not merely coordinate.

Peres was aware of this time discontinuity, calling it a “heavy price which we are paying
to make the [circumferential] velocity of light ... equal to c”[32]. Dieks[33] noted that though
arbitrary in certain senses, time in relativity must be “directly linked to undoubtedly real physical
processes”. This author agrees.

1.7.4 The Only Physically Possible Synchronization/Simultaneity

There are potential choices for synchronization/simultaneity in the rotating frame other than
Einstein’s. The traditional one with local Einstein synchronization around the disk rim is based
on the Lorentz transformation from the lab to the local co-moving inertial frame, i.e.

cdTi =

1
p

−

1
v2/c2 (cdT

v
c

−

dX) = γ(cdT

dX)

v
c

−

where v = ωr, dT is the time interval in the lab, dX is the space interval in the lab along the
disk rim, dT i is the time interval in the local co-moving inertial frame, which we presume, by the
locality hypothesis, equals the time interval on the disk. We could just as well have chosen[34]

cdTi = γ(cdT

κdX)

−

where κ could have any value other than v/c.

However, for any κ

= 0, we would again have a time discontinuity, and all the issues with
multiple event times and clocks being out of synchronization with themselves of the prior section.
I suggest that, prior to all else, any theory of rotation must be compliant with the physical
world constraint that time be continuous and single valued (within a given frame, and for a
given synchronization scheme.) That is only possible for a synchronization/simultaneity scheme
where κ = 0. For this scheme, events in the lab that are simultaneous (i.e., have dT = 0 between
them) are also simultaneous in the rotating frame (have dt = 0).

Postulate: Any synchronization/simultaneity scheme for the rotating frame for which that
frame and the lab do not share common simultaneity results in a physical time discontinuity
and is thus unacceptable on physical grounds.

The traditional approach to rotation is at odds with this postulate.

1.8 Experiment and the Traditional Approach

In Part 3, virtually all of the experiments that have been carried out to verify SRT are reviewed.
One of these, the Michelson-Morley type experiment performed by Brillet and Hall[35], found
a persistent, anomalous, non-null signal at the 10−13 level, which is not predicted by SRT. The

(2)

(3)

9

6
approach to relativistic rotation of Part 2, which is based on the above postulate, predicts this
signal, and otherwise, makes the same predictions as the traditional approach for the remaining
tests.

Furthermore, as a result of studies on the Global Positioning System (GPS) data for the

rotating earth, recognized world leading GPS expert Neil Ashby states

“Now consider a process in which observers in the rotating frame attempt to use Einstein
synchronization..... Simple minded use of Einstein synchronization in the rotating frame ... thus
leads to a signiﬁcant error”.[36]

He also recently noted in Physics Today,
“ .. the principle of the constancy of c [the speed of light] cannot be applied in a rotating

reference frame ..” [37].

1.9 Summary of Part 1

Thought experiments, actual experiments, and the physical nature of the space-time continuum
appear discordant with the traditional approach to relativistic rotation.

2 Resolution of the Conundrums: Diﬀerential Geometry and

Non-time-orthogonality

“.. a good part of science is distinguishing between useful crazy ideas and those that are just
plain nutty.”

Princeton University Press advertisement for the book “Nine Crazy Ideas in Science”

2.1 Introduction

Part 2 poses an alternative approach to relativistic rotation that resolves the inconsistencies, and
as will be seen in Part 3, appears to have better agreement with experiment than the traditional
approach. There are two fundamental steps to the alternative approach.

1. Postulate that, in accord with physical world logic as presented in Part 1, simultane-
ity/synchronization in the rotating frame can only be such that time in that frame is
continuous and single valued.

2. Apply diﬀerential geometry and note resulting predictions.

Before beginning the analysis, relevant background material from diﬀerential geometry is

presented in Section 2.2.

2.2 Physical vs. Coordinate Components

If one has coordinate components, found from generalized coordinate tensor analysis, for some
quantity, such as stress or velocity, one needs to be able to translate those into the values
measured in experiment. For some inexplicable reason, the method for doing this is not typically
taught in general relativity (GR) texts/classes, so it is reviewed here. (Note that often in GR,
one seeks invariants like dτ , ds, etc., which are the same in any coordinate system, and in such

10

cases, this issue does not arise. The issue does arise with vectors/tensors, whose coordinate
components vary from coordinate system to coordinate system.)

The measured value for a given vector component, unlike the coordinate component, is
unique within a given reference frame. In diﬀerential geometry (tensor analysis), that measured
value is called the “physical component”.

Many tensor analysis texts show how to ﬁnd physical components from coordinate components[38].

A number of continuum mechanics texts do as well[39]. The only GR text known to the present
author that mentions physical components is Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler[40]. Those authors
use the procedure to be described below, but do not derive it[41]. The present author has written
an introductory article on this, oriented for students, that may be found at the Los Alamos web
site[42]. The following is excerpted in part from that article.

The displacement vector dx between two points in a 2D Cartesian coordinate system is

where the ˆei are unit basis vectors and dX i are physical components (i.e., the values one would
measure with meter sticks). For the same vector dx expressed in a diﬀerent, generalized, coor-
dinate system we have diﬀerent coordinate components dx i
= dX i (dx i do not represent values
measured with meter sticks), but a similar expression

where the generalized basis vectors ei point in the same directions as the corresponding unit
basis vectors ˆei, but are not equal to them. Hence, for ˆei, we have

dx = dX 1ˆe1 + dX 2ˆe2

dx = dx1e1 + dx2e2,

ˆei =

ei
ei
|

|

=

ei
√ei

ei

·

=

ei
√gii

where underlining implies no summation.

Substituting (6) into (4) and equating with (5), one obtains

dX 1 = √g11dx1

dX 2 = √g22dx2,

which is the relationship between displacement physical (measured with instruments) and coor-
dinate (mathematical value only) components.

Consider a more general case of an arbitrary vector v

v = v1e1 + v2e2 = v

ˆ1ˆe1 + v

ˆ2ˆe2

where, e1 and e2 here do not, in general, have to be orthogonal, ei and ˆei point in the same
direction for each index i, and carets over component indices indicate physical components.
Substituting (6) into (8), one readily obtains

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

which we have shown here to be valid in both orthogonal and non-orthogonal systems.

As a further aid to those readers familiar with anholonomic coordinates (which are associ-
ated with non-coordinate basis vectors superimposed on a generalized coordinate grid), physical

ˆi = √giivi,
v

11

6
components are special case anholonomic components for which the non-coordinate basis vectors
have unit length.

It is important to recognize that anholonomic components do not transform as true vector
components. So one can not simply use physical components in tensor analysis as if they were.
Typically, one starts with physical components as input to a problem. These are converted
to coordinate components, and the appropriate tensor analysis carried out to get an answer in
terms of coordinate components. One then converts these coordinate components into physical
components as a last step, in order to compare with values measured with instruments in the
real world.

As a basis vector is derived from inﬁnitesimals (derivative at a point), one sees (9) is valid
locally in curved, as well as ﬂat, spaces, and can be extrapolated to 4D general relativistic
applications. So, very generally, for a 4D vector vµ and a metric signature (-,+,+,+)

where Roman sub and superscripts refer solely to spatial components (i.e. i = 1,2,3.)

ˆi = √giivi
v

ˆ0 = √

v

g00v0,

−

(10)

2.3 Alternative Analysis Approach

We begin with the simultaneity postulate of Section 1.7.4, repeated below for convenience.

Postulate: Any synchronization/simultaneity scheme for the rotating frame, for which that
frame and the lab do not share common simultaneity, results in a physical time discontinuity
and is thus unacceptable on physical grounds.

2.3.1 Disk Transformation and Metric

As will be discussed, the global transformation from the lab to the rotating frame apparently
ﬁrst used by Langevin[43] to ﬁnd a suitable metric for the rotating frame incorporates the
above postulate. This transformation is used in the following analysis, which parallels that of
Klauber[44]. The correctness of the transformation can be judged by whether the predictions
made by using it match experiment.

This transformation, between the non-rotating (lab, upper case symbols) frame to a rotating

(lower case) frame, is

ω is the angular velocity of the rotating frame as seen from the lab, and cylindrical spatial
coordinates are used. The coordinate time t for the rotating system equals the proper time of a
standard clock located in the lab. Substituting the diﬀerential form of (11) into the line element
in the lab frame

results in the line element for the rotating frame

ds2 =

c2dT 2 + dR2 + R2dΦ2 + dZ 2

−

ds2 =

c2(1

−

−

r2ω2
c2 )dt2 + dr2 + r2dφ2 + 2r2ωdφdt + dz2 = gαβdxαdxβ.

Note that the metric in (13) is not diagonal, since gφt
orthogonal to space (i.e., a non-time-orthogonal, or NTO, frame.)

= 0, and this implies that time is not

(11)

(12)

(13)

cT = ct
R = r
Φ = φ + ωt
Z = z .

12

6
2.3.2 Time on the Disk
Time on a standard clock at a ﬁxed 3D location on the rotating disk, found by taking ds 2 =

c2dτ and dr = dφ = dz = 0 in (13), is

−

dτ =

1
q

−

r2ω2/c2dt = √

gttdt,

−

This varies with radial position r. At the axis of rotation (where r = 0), the standard clock
agrees with the clock in the lab. At other locations, standard clock time is diluted by the Lorentz
factor, as in traditional SRT. The coordinate time everywhere on the disk is t, and that equals
the time T in the lab.

The time diﬀerence between two events at two locations (each having its own clock) on the

disk, in coordinate components, is dt. The corresponding physical time diﬀerence is

dtphys = dˆt = √

gttdt =

r2ω2/c2dt.

−

1
q

−

If the two locations happen to be one and the same location, one obviously gets (14).

Note that two events seen as simultaneous in the lab have dT = 0 between them. From the
ﬁrst line of (11) and (15), the same two events must also have dtphys = 0, and thus they are also
seen as simultaneous on the disk. This statement is true for all standard (physical) clocks on
the disk. Though the standard clocks at diﬀerent radii thereon run at diﬀerent rates, and thus
can not be synchronized, they can share common simultaneity. The lab shares this common
simultaneity with all of the disk clocks, and thus our postulate above holds for transformation
(11), and the resulting (NTO) metric of (13).

Note further, that the simultaneity chosen here is equivalent in the physical world to what
is sometimes called “ﬂash from center” simultaneity (or synchronization if one is conﬁned to
clocks at ﬁxed radius). In that scheme, one imagines a ﬂash of light on the axis of rotation
whose wave front propagates outwardly in all radial directions. Events when the wave front
impacts individual points along a given circumference are considered simultaneous.

It is signiﬁcant that the “ﬂash from center” synchronization is the same as that proposed

(via other logic) near the end of Section 1.6.1.

2.3.3 Local Speed of Light on the Disk
For light ds 2 = 0. Inserting this into (13), taking dr=dz=0, and using the quadratic equation
formula, one obtains a local coordinate velocity (generalized coordinate spatial grid units per
coordinate time unit) in the circumferential direction

vlight,coord,circum =

dφ
dt

=

ω

−

±

c
r

,

where the sign before the last term depends on the circumferential direction (cw or ccw) of travel
of the light ray. The local physical velocity (the value one would measure in experiment using
standard meter sticks and clocks in units of meters per second) is found from this to be

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

vlight,phys,circum =

√gφφdφ
gttdt
√

−

rω

= −

1
q

−

c
±
ω2r2
c2

v

= −

±

1
q

−

.

c
v2
c2

13

Note that for this approach, the local physical speed of light in rotating frames is not invariant
or isotropic, and that this lack of invariance/isotropy depends on ω, the angular velocity seen
from the lab. Note particularly that this result is a direct consequence of the NTO nature of
the metric in (13). If ω=0, local physical (measured) light speed is isotropic and invariant, the
metric is diagonal, and time is orthogonal to space.

I thus call this alternative analysis method, the NTO approach to relativistic rotation.

2.4 Implications of NTO Approach

2.4.1 Hypothesis of Locality

Local physical light speed in the rotating frame, according to the NTO approach, is not equal
to c. Yet, in a local, co-moving, Lorentz frame, which via the hypothesis of locality is equivalent
locally to the non-inertial frame, the physical speed of light is always c. Thus, a local co-moving
Lorentz frame is not equivalent locally to the rotating frame, and the hypothesis of locality is
not valid for such frames. One does not measure the same values for velocity, and hence by
implication for time and space, in the two frames.

This is a direct result of the simultaneity postulate, required to keep time in the rotating
frame continuous and single-valued. That requirement results in a rotating frame that can only
be NTO, i.e., it can only have a metric with oﬀ diagonal terms in the metric.

I submit that the hypothesis of locality remains true only for those non-inertial frames in
which it is possible for the metric to have all null oﬀ-diagonal space-time components. This
set of frames comprises the vast majority of problems encountered in GR. Rotation is a critical
exception.

2.4.2 Absolute Nature of Simultaneity in Rotation

In NTO analysis, simultaneity/synchronization on the rotating disk, unlike that in the gauge
theory of synchronization, is unique (absolute.) The gauge theory validity, it is submitted,
is restricted to translating frames and does not apply to rotation. This is not unlike other
diﬀerences between rotation and translation. Velocity in rotation, for example, has an absolute
quality, whereas in translation it does not. There is a preferred frame in rotation, upon which
everyone agrees (the frame with no Coriolis eﬀect, for example); in translation, there is no such
frame.

2.4.3 Lorentz Contraction Revisited

To determine Lorentz contraction of meter sticks, we merely need to compare physical length
in the circumferential direction in both the lab and rotating frames, i.e., look at the physical
component for dΦ and dφ. This is equivalent to ﬁnding the proper length when dT = 0 in the
ﬁrst frame (lab here), and dt = 0 in the second frame (disk here), which is what one does in
SRT.

The distance between two points along the circumference in the lab in meter sticks is

dΦphys = d ˆΦ = √gΦΦdΦ = RdΦ = R(Φ2

Φ1),

−

(18)

(18) represents the
which is not surprising, and which (for dR = dT = dZ = 0) equals ds.
number of meter sticks between points 1 and 2 in the lab. Now, consider two 3D points on the

14

disk located instantaneously at the same place as points 1 and 2 in (18). We ask, how many
meter sticks span that distance as measured on the disk? That distance between points 1 and
2 in meter sticks is

dφphys = d ˆφ = √gφφdφ = rdφ = r(φ2

φ1).

−

(19)

−

t1 = 0, (18)
According to (11), φ1 = Φ1
and (19) are equal. The disk observer sees the same number of meter sticks between two points
as the lab observer does between those points, and hence, there is no Lorentz contraction.

ωt2. Since, r = R and dt = t2

ωt1 and φ2 = Φ2

Note that we would need a metric component gφφ

= r2 in the rotating frame to have Lorentz
contraction. The postulate of simultaneity/time continuity leads to the metric of (13), which is
NTO, and which has gφφ = r2.

−

−

The Lorentz contraction issue is treated more extensively, and with graphical illustrations,
in Klauber[44]. The limit case for NTO analysis is also discussed therein though it is treated at
great length in Klauber[45], and found to be free of inconsistencies.

2.4.4 Sagnac and Thought Experiments

A complete and general derivation of the Sagnac result from the rotating frame using NTO
analysis can be found in Klauber[46]. Shown below is the simpler derivation for a circumferential
light path whose center is the axis of rotation. Note that diﬀerent speeds for light in the cw and
ccw directions is inherent in the NTO approach, and thus that approach is completely consonant
with the thought experiment of Part 1, Section 1.6.1.

The diﬀerence in time measured on a ccw rotating disk between two pulses of light traveling

opposite directions along a circumferential arc of length dl is

dtphys =

dl
v− −

dl
v+

,

(20)

(21)

(22)

where v+ is the speed for the cw light ray and v− is the speed for the ccw ray. Using (17) this
becomes

dtphys =

dl

1
c

p

−
−

v2/c2
v

dl

1
−
p
c + v

−

v2/c2

=

v
c2

2dl
v2/c2 .

1
p

−

By integrating the RHS of (21) from 0 to 2πr (recall there is no Lorentz contraction), the LHS
becomes the time diﬀerence on the clock ﬁxed at the emission/reception point,

ω2r2/c2 ,
which agrees with the derivation from the lab frame of the Appendix.

ω2r2/c2 =

∆tphys =

1
p

1
p

c2

−

−

2(2πr)

4ωA

ωr
c2

2.4.5 Brillet and Hall

The Brillet and Hall[35] experiment is described in Part 3. It remains to this day the only test
of suﬃcient accuracy to detect any non-null Michelson-Morley (MM) eﬀect due to the surface
speed of the earth rotating about its axis. Brillet and Hall found null signals for the solar and
galactic orbit speeds. However, they noted a persistent non-null signal at 2 X 10−13, which had
ﬁxed phase in the lab frame.

This signal is not predicted by traditional SRT, which insists on local Lorentz invariance for
light speed, and was thus simply deemed “spurious” without further explanation. However, this
signal is predicted by NTO analysis due to the earth surface speed. (See Klauber[47].)

15

6
2.4.6 Gravitational Orbit vs. True Rotation

One could ask why any test should get a null signal for the solar and galactic orbital velocities,
but a non-null signal for the earth surface speed from its own rotation.

The answer is that a body in gravitational orbit is in free fall, and is therefore Lorentzian.
No centrifugal “force” is felt, and no Foucault pendulum moves, as a result of revolution in
orbit. There is no experimental means by which one could determine (without looking outside
at the stars) one’s rate of revolution in orbit. Hence, you can not determine any absolute
circumferential speed, and the second postulate of relativity holds. Related logic[48] leads to
the conclusion that the speed of light on such a body is invariant and equal to c as well.

Thus, the usual form of relativity should hold for gravitational orbits and one should expect
a null Michelson-Morley result for orbital speeds, which is just what is measured. However, one
can use instruments to determine the speed of the earth’s surface about its axis, and therefore
we should expect that relativity theory will not hold in precisely the same form for that case.
It is submitted that the Brillet and Hall result justiﬁes that expectation.

This subject is treated in depth in Klauber[48].

2.4.7 NTO vs. Selleri Transformations

In treating rotation, Selleri[49] uses the same simultaneity as the lab (though he advocates an
“absolute” simultaneity that pervades translation as well.) He ﬁnds anisotropic one-way light
speed on a rotating disk as

vlight,phys,circum,Selleri = −
−

1

c

ωr
±
ω2r2/c2

(23)

for the cw and ccw speeds of light along the circumference. Comparing this with the NTO
relation of (17), one ﬁnds the two diﬀer by a factor of 1/

ω2r2/c2.

1

Selleri shows that his relation (23) results in a circular round trip speed for light (one way
around the rim) that agrees with (the ﬁrst order) Sagnac experimental results. However, for
a back and forth round trip for light along the same path, he shows his relation results in a
round trip speed of precisely c. Thus, he predicts a null result for any Michelson-Morley type
experiment.

p

−

NTO analysis on the other hand, due to the Lorentz factor diﬀerence from (23), predicts a
back and forth round trip speed for light as not equal to c. Therefore, it predicts a non-null
result for MM experiments (which are sensitive enough to detect eﬀects from the earth surface
speed due to its own rotation.)

This diﬀerence can be attributed to the lack, in the NTO approach, of circumferential Lorentz
contraction, as opposed to the inclusion of such contraction in the Selleri approach. Given
Lorentz contraction, light rays will travel a greater number of meter sticks, and thus speed will
be increased by the magnitude of that contraction. This is the diﬀerence between (23) and (17).

2.4.8 Co-moving vs. Disk-ﬁxed Observers

It should be clearly noted that in the NTO approach, the rotating disk ﬁxed observer and the
local co-moving Lorentz observer are not equivalent. They do not, for example, see the lab
meter sticks as having the same length. This is in accord with earlier statements regarding the
invalidity of the hypothesis of locality for rotating frames.

16

From another perspective, it could be claimed that the two observers are not truly co-moving,

as the disk observer at r is rotating (at ω), whereas the local Lorentz observer is not.

2.5 Summary of Part 2

By adopting

1) the postulate that time in a rotating frame must be continuous and single valued (each

clock must be in synchronization with itself), and

2) the speciﬁc transformation of form (11) that incorporates that postulate,

one can develop an NTO theory for rotation that resolves all conundrums of Part 1, and in which
the physical speed of light is constrained to be locally anisotropic. One ﬁnds agreement with
experiment, including the Brillet and Hall test result, which is not predicted by the traditional
approach to relativistic rotation.

One also ﬁnds the hypothesis of locality can only be true for non-inertial frames in which
the metric can be expressed in diagonal form and still maintain continuity in time. In rotation,
this is not true, and the local co-moving observer does not see events (in particular, meter stick
lengths) in the same way as the disk-ﬁxed observer.

3 Experiment and Non-time-orthogonal Analysis

3.1 Introduction

Part 3 reviews the experiments that have been performed to test special relativity, and implicitly
therein, the hypothesis of locality and the traditional approach to relativistic rotation. Results
of these experiments are examined in order to compare the predictive capacity of the NTO and
traditional analysis approaches.

3.2 The Experiments

Table 1 is an extensive list of experiments performed since 1887 capable of evaluating at least
one aspect of SRT. Particular experiments are referred to herein via the symbol in the ﬁrst
column. A terse description of each is given in column two, with the year and author citations
in column three. Note the acronym SRT implies both special relativity theory and the traditional
approach to rotation. Column four brieﬂy summarizes how the NTO eﬀect in a given experiment
compares with the traditional approach eﬀect. The last two columns compare the predictions
of NTO and the traditional approach (Trad) for the given experiment. For a summary of JPL,
M¨ossbauer, TPA, and GPA, see Will[50]. For a summary of Hughes-Drever, BH, NBS, UWash,
and M¨ossbauer see Haugan and Will[51].

Three experiments known to the author are not included in the table because their results
were contrary to both SRT and NTO theories. What these results mean is subject to debate,
though most physicists who are aware of them believe they must be in error. The earliest of
these was by Miller[52], a highly respected colleague of Michelson. He repeated the Michelson-
Morley test four times over many years, with various equipment in various places, and much
of the work was done jointly with Morley. The other experiments reporting results contrary to
SRT were by Silvertooth[53] and Marinov[54]. In any event, these experiments do not discern
between the Trad and NTO approaches, and are referenced here for completeness.

17

3.3 The Comparisons

Both the traditional and NTO approaches predict time dilation, and experiments measuring this,
such as PartAcc (see table), would, for the most part, provide no capability of diﬀerentiating
between approaches. Also, Doppler shift eﬀects tend to be the same in NTO and Trad, though,
for certitude, each experiment comprising Doppler measurement needs to be evaluated on its
own.

Tests of the speed of light itself, such as MM, should be more directly indicative. These
must, however, have i) suﬃcient accuracy to detect any eﬀect from the relatively low earth
surface speed about its axis, and ii) apparatus that turns with respect to the earth surface. The
MM, Post MM, and Joos tests, for example, lacked the ﬁrst of these. The JPL and CORE
experiments lacked the second. The LFV test did not meet either criterion.

For some tests, there is uncertainty. For example, in the ODM experiment, rotation of
1.5 km/sec variation, which was attributed to the earth’s
the apparatus yielded a persistent
magnetic ﬁeld. This would, however, mask any NTO eﬀect (at
0.35 km/sec), and yield uncer-
tainty as to whether Trad predicts the result or not. In the Hughes-Drever test, Doppler shifts
are measured and NTO usually predicts the same shift as Trad. Extensive analysis would be
required, however, to be certain.

∼

∼

The most interesting of the tests is BH (Brillet and Hall), as this is the only one for which
NTO and Trad diﬀer with certainty with regard to results. BH used a Fabry-Perot interferometer
that rotated with respect to the lab. A fraction of the light ray incident on the interferometer
emerged directly from the far end. Another portion of the ray was reﬂected at the far end
and forced to travel round trip, rear to front to rear, before emerging. The diﬀerent portions
interfered to form a fringe pattern. If the round trip speed of light were anisotropic, the time for
it to travel back and forth inside the interferometer would vary with orientation of the apparatus.
This, in turn, would cause the fringe pattern, and thus, the signal BH monitored, to vary. In
Newtonian theory, this variation, peak-to-peak and to second order, is 1
2 v2/c2, where v is the
maximum change from c of the speed of light. As shown by Klauber[47], the NTO eﬀect on
light transit time is quantitatively the same (though subtle calculational diﬀerences exist from
the Newtonian analysis.)

The speed of the earth surface about its axis at the location of the BH test is .355 km/sec.

1
4

.355

For this, the amplitude of the variation via NTO theory should be
v2
c2 =
10−13 signal at
at twice the apparatus rotation rate. The BH test found a “persistent”
that rate and with ﬁxed phase relative to the earth surface. They deemed this signal “spurious”,
because it seemed inexplicable. The character of the BH signal and its proximity in value to
(24) should, of themselves, be intriguing. However, there is a secondary eﬀect of light speed
anisotropy on the BH signal.

1
4 (cid:18)

105 (cid:19)

= 3.5

(24)

1.9

−13

10

×

×

×

∼

3

2

The path of travel is altered slightly when the light ray direction is transverse to the principle
direction of anisotropy. In a heuristic sense, the ray seems to be pushed “sideways”. In the BH
experiment, this would result in a shifting of the fringe pattern, and a concomitant change in the
measured signal. Klauber[47] calculated this eﬀect and found it dependent on certain dimensions
of the apparatus, which are not known. However, by using values for these dimensions estimated
from the ﬁgure of the apparatus shown in the BH report, he found an expected net signal from
all eﬀects of

10−13.

2

∼

×

18

3.4 Comparison to Selleri

As noted in Section 2.4.7, the Selleri theory, like the NTO approach, is based on what this
author considers a physically defensible simultaneity scheme. The Selleri theory, on the other
hand, predicts a null signal for the BH experiment.

It would be interesting to compare predictions of the Selleri theory to results of other tests

such as M¨ossbauer.

3.5 GPS and Sagnac

I do not profess expertise in the GPS system, though I have noted earlier the remarks by Ashby,
who does have extensive expertise. Those remarks appear consonant with NTO analysis and its
requisite non-Einstein synchronization and local light speed anisotropy.

Furthermore, in the context of the thought experiment of Section 1.6.1, the traditional
approach seems incapable of deriving the Sagnac eﬀect from within the rotating frame. That
is, considering the local physical speed of light to be isotropic does not seem suﬃcient to derive
diﬀerent arrival times for the cw and ccw light rays. This is not the case for the NTO approach,
and in this context, the Sagnac experiment may be considered empirical support for it.

3.6 Future Experiments

Tobar[55][56] (WSMR in Table 1) expects to complete a modiﬁed version of the Michelson-
Morley experiment, accurate to several orders of magnitude beyond that of BH, by the end of
2004. He will use a whispering spherical mode resonator and rotate it with respect to the lab.
Preliminary analysis by the present author suggests that the WSMR experiment may be capable
of detecting an NTO eﬀect on light speed, if it exists, due to the surface speed of the earth.

3.7 Summary of Part 3

Only one non GPS/Sagnac experiment appears capable of distinguishing between the traditional
and NTO approaches to relativistic rotation, that of Brillet and Hall. That test, sensitive to
10−13, which is strikingly close to the signal predicted by the
10−15, found a signal at
NTO approach from the earth surface speed about its axis of rotation, and which is not predicted
by the traditional approach.

1.9

∼

×

Table 1. History of SRT Experiments

Test Description

Authors (Year)

NTO Eﬀect

Trad NTO

Symbol

MM

Original Michelson-
Morley experiment

&
Michelson
Morley[57] (1887)

Accuracy too low.
7-10 km/sec.

∼

Y

Y

19

Electric ﬁeld eﬀect of
rotating magnetic in-
sulator
in magnetic
ﬁeld
Repeats of MM inter-
ferometer tests

Wilson
and
Wilson[58] (1913);
Hertzberg
et
al[59] (2001)
Kennedy (1926);
Piccard & Stahel
(1926-8); Michel-
son et al ((1929)

NTO prediction =
Trad[60]

results:
to

Null
km/sec
km/sec accuracy

1
7

Version of MM

Joos[61] (1930)

Accuracy too low.

1.5 km/sec.

∼

Not rotated. Low
accuracy
10
km/sec

∼

Original
on time dilation

experiment

Kennedy
Thorndike[62](1932)

and

Doppler
frequency
time dilation in H
canal rays

and

Ives
Stilwell[63](1938,
1941)

Accuracy
100X
too low for NTO
eﬀect[64]

Particle
accelerator
time dilation on half
lives

di-
opposite
Two
rection NH3 maser
beams.
Ether wind
Doppler variation as
rotate.
Isotropy
nuclear
of
energy levels. Doppler
shift of photons emit-
ted
2 diﬀerent
atoms.
Perpendicular
direc-
tion He-Ne masers.
Rotated.

by

1900s

to

Mid
present

NTO prediction =
Trad

Cedarholm
al[65] (1958)

et

Hughes et al[66]
and Drever (1960)

Jaseva, Townes et
al[67] (1964)

Rotated

180o,
1.5 km/sec vari-
∼
ation. Attributed
to earth mag ﬁeld.

Signiﬁcant
anal-
ysis needed for
NTO prediction.

Accuracy too low.
Systematic signal
as rotated.

NTO
same
change as Trad

predicts
frequency

rotor.
frequency
from

diﬀerent

M¨ossbauer
Classical
shift
SRT

Champeney
al[68]
Turner
Hill[69] (1964)

et
(1963);
and

WW

Post
MM

Joos

KT

Ives-
Stilwell

PartAcc

ODM

Hughes-
Drever

PDM

M¨oss-
bauer

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

?

Y

Y

?

?

Y

Y

Y

20

Time
atomic
around world

dilation
on
clocks ﬂown

Hafele
Keating[70]
(1972)

and

NTO prediction =
Trad

Fringe shift in interfer-
ometer as rotate

Brillet
Hall[35] (1978)

and

Vessot
and
Levine[71] (1979),
Vessot
al[72]
et
(1980)

et

al[73]

Byl
(1985)

2nd
eﬀect
order
at 10−13. NTO
predicts[47]

in

NTO shift =
Analysis
Trad.
non-
done
earth
rotating
centered frame.
1st
eﬀect
order
NTO = Trad
or
= Galilean
Fresnel drag.[74]

Prestage[75] et al
(1985) at National
Bureau Standards

Apparatus not ro-
tated. NTO eﬀect
= Trad

Y

Y

HK

BH

GPA

Refract

NBS

TPA

UWash

JPL

LFV

Gravity
probe A.
Maser on rocket and
maser
ground.
on
Doppler
Classical
varies from SRT.
Light split in air and
glass. 1st order fringe
in Galilean &
eﬀect
Fresnel ether drag the-
ories.
Isotropy of nuclear en-
ergy levels. Doppler
shift.
Rotation of
earth changed orienta-
tion.
2 photon absorption in
atomic beam. Doppler
shift opposite direc-
tions aﬀected by ether
wind.
Isotropy of nuclear en-
ergy levels. Doppler
shift.
Rotation of
earth changed orienta-
tion.
Jet Propulsion Lab.
2 earth ﬁxed masers.
Fiberoptic
compari-
son.
Laser frequency varia-
tion as earth rotates:
stabilized laser com-
pared to stable cavity
locked laser.

Kaivola et al[76]
(1985); Riis
et
al[77] (1988)

et
at Univ

Lamoreaux
al[79]
Washington
(1986)

Krisher et al[80]
(1990)

Hils and Hall[81]
(1990)

not
Apparatus
rotated.
Beam
aligned N-S[78].
NTO eﬀect =
Trad
Apparatus not ro-
tated. NTO eﬀect
= Trad

Apparatus not ro-
tated. NTO eﬀect
= Trad

Apparatus not ro-
tated, plus accu-
racy too low for
NTO eﬀect.

21

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

6
Sat

CORE

WSMR

GPS satellite test of
SRT.

Wolf and Petit[82]
(1997)

of

Cryogenic
Optical
Resonators measure
light
anisotropy
speed as earth rotates.
Whispering
spheri-
resonator
cal mode
Michelson-Morley
experiment.

Braxmaier
al[83] (2002)

et

Tobar[55][56]
(2004)

done
non-rotating
centered
NTO

Analysis
in
earth
frame.
eﬀect = Trad.
Apparatus not ro-
tated. NTO eﬀect
= Trad.

Appears
capable
of discerning be-
tween NTO and
Trad

Y

Y

Y

Y

TBD

TBD

Appendix. Deriving Sagnac Result from the Lab Frame

Consider Figure 1 of section 1.6.1 with time (T > 0) in the right side of the ﬁgure when the cw
light pulse reaches the disk observer designated as T1. Consider the time when the ccw pulse
reaches the disk observer (not shown) as T2. Then lengths traveled as seen from the lab by the
ccw light pulse and the observer at T1 must sum to equal the circumference, i.e.

Similarly, at time T2

cT1 + ωRT1 = 2πR

cT2 = ωRT2 + 2πR

→

→

T1 =

2πR
c + ωR

.

T2 =

2πR

c

ωR

−

.

Hence, the arrival time diﬀerence in the lab is

∆T = T2

T1 =

−

2ωR
c2

(1

−

2πR
ω2R2/c2)

=

c2(1

−

4ωA
ω2R2/c2)

.

As is well known, the standard (physical) clocks on the disk rim run more slowly than the lab
ω2R2/c2, so the observer on the disk must measure an arrival time diﬀerence of
clocks by

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

∆tphys =

4ωA

ω2R2/c2 .

c2

1
p

−

1
p

−

References

[a)] Omit dots after @ used to thwart bots seeking spam addresses.

[1] Anderson, R., Vetharaniam, I., Stedman, G.E., “Conventionality of Synchronisation, Gauge
Dependence and Test Theories of Relativity”, Phys. Rep. 295(3&4), 93-180 (March 1998).
Many articles have appeared on this subject. These authors cite virtually all of them prior
to 1998.

22

[2] Minguzzi, E., “On the Conventionality of Simultaneity”, Found. Phys. Lett. 15, 153 (2002).

[3] Møller, C., The Theory of Relativity, Oxford at the Clarendon Press (1969), pp. 223.

[4] Stachel, J., ”Einstein and the Rigidly Rotating Disk”, Chapter 1 in Held, General Relativity
and Gravitation (Plenum Press, New York, 1980), Stachel, p. 9; A. Einstein, The Meaning
of Relativity (Princeton University Press, 1950), footnote on pg 60.

[5] Mashoon, B., “Gravitation and Nonlocality”, gr-qc/0112058; “The Hypothesis of Locality
and Its Limitations”, Relativity on a Rotating Frame in series Fundamental Theories of
Physics, Editor van der Merwe, A., Kluwer Academic Press (2003).

[6] Minguzzi, E., “Simultaneity and generalized connections in general relativity”, Class.

Quant. Grav. 20, 2443-2456 (2003), gr-qc/0204063. See Section III.

[8] Misner, C.W., Thorne, K.S., and Wheeler, J.A., Gravitation (Freeman, New York, 1973).

[7] See ref. [3], p. 223.

See Chapter 6.

[9] Ref. [4], Stachel, p. 7.

[10] Transforming from the 4D Riemann ﬂat space of the lab to the 4D space of the rotating
frame implies the 4D space of the rotating frame is also Riemann ﬂat. The traditional
analysis does not contradict this, but claims the 2D surface of the rotating disk is curved
within the ﬂat 4D rotating frame space.

[11] Grøn, Ø., ”Relativistic Description of a Rotating Disk”, Amer. J. Phys. 43(10), 869-876
(1975); ”Rotating Frames in Special Relativity Analyzed in Light of a Recent Article by M.
Strauss”, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 16(8), 603-614 (1977); “Space Geometry in Rotating Frames:
A Historical Perspective”, Relativity on a Rotating Frame in series Fundamental Theories
of Physics, Editor van der Merwe, A., Kluwer Academic Press (2003). Grøn’s treatment
has become a classic for traditional approach advocates.

[12] Some may contend that other meter sticks in the rotating frame (such as a meter stick
on the far side of the rim) appear to have velocity with respect to a given rim observer.
However, an observer ﬁxed on the rim of the disk does not see the far side of the disk moving
relative to her, since she, unlike the local Lorentz frame with the same instantaneous linear
velocity, is rotating. There are two diﬀerent local frames of interest here. Both have the
same instantaneous rectilinear velocity as a point on the rim. But one rotates relative to
the distant stars (at the same rate as the disk itself), and one does not. The latter is a local
Lorentz frame. The former is not, and represents the true state of an observer anchored to
the disk. The diﬀerence in kinematics between these two frames is signiﬁcant, and is dealt
with in Klauber, R., “Non-time-orthogonality, gravitational orbits and Thomas precession”,
gr-qc/0007018.

[13] Tartaglia, A., “Lengths on Rotating Platforms”, Founds. Phys. Lett., 12(1), 17-28 (1999).

Tartaglia and I have made the point in this paragraph independently.

23

[14] Nikolic’, H., “Relativistic contraction and related eﬀects in noninertial frames”, Phys. Rev.
A. 61, 032109 (2000), gr-qc/9904078; “Fermi co-ordinates and rotation”, Relativity on a
Rotating Frame in series Fundamental Theories of Physics, Editor Van der Merwe, A.,
Kluwer Academic Press (2003). Nikolic’ presents a resolution of this based on the postulate
that “although there is no relative motion among diﬀerent points on a rotating disc, each
point belongs to a diﬀerent non-inertial frame”. Though Nikolic’ focuses on Fermi frames,
for which this postulate may hold, the present author disagrees with it for the physical
frame of the rotating disk. The present author considers the deﬁnition of the term “frame”
to mean precisely that “there is no relative motion among diﬀerent points therein.”

[15] Selleri, F., “Noninvariant One-Way Speed of Light and Locally Equivalent Reference
Frames”, Found. Phys. Lett. 10, 73-83 (1997). Selleri presents this argument quantitatively
and makes a cogent argument for violation of the ﬁrst postulate of SRT.

[16] For example, see Budden, T., “Geometric Simultaneity and the Continuity of Special Rel-

ativity”, Found. Phys. Lett. 11 (4), 343-357 (Aug 1998).

[17] Also, Sorge, F., “Local and Global Anisotropy in the Speed of Light”, Relativity on a
Rotating Frame in series Fundamental Theories of Physics, Editor van der Merwe, A.,
Kluwer Academic Press (2003).

[18] Also, Weber, T. “Some Elementary Relativistic Considerations of the Time and Geometry of
Rotating Reference Frames”, Relativity on a Rotating Frame in series Fundamental Theories
of Physics, Editor van der Merwe, A., Kluwer Academic Press (2003).

[19] See, for example, Bergia, S., and Guidone, M., “Time on a Rotating Platform and the

One-Way Speed of Light”, Found. Phys. Lett., 11(6), 549-560 (Dec 1998).

[20] Also, refs. [11] and [18]

[21] Sagnac, M.G., Acad´emie des sciences - Comptes rendus des s´eances, 157, 708-718 (1913);
“Eﬀet tourbillonnaire optique. La circulation de l’´ether lumineux dans un interf´erographe
tournant”, Journal de Physique Th´eorique et Appliqu´ee, Paris, Soci`ete fran¸caise de
physique, Series 5, Vol 4 (1914), 177-195.

[22] Dufour, A. et Prunier, F., “Sur l’observation du ph´enom`ene de Sagnac avec une source
´eclairante non entraˆın´ee”, Acad´emie des sciences - Comptes rendus des s´eances, 204, 1322-
1324 (3 May 1937); “Sur un D´eplacement de Franges Enregistre sur une Plate-forme en
Rotation Uniforme”, Le Journal de Physique et Le Radium, serie VIII, T. III, No 9, 153-
161 (Sept 1942).

[23] See other citations in E.J. Post, ”Sagnac eﬀect,” Mod. Phys. 39, 475-493 (1967).

[24] Dresden, M., and Yang, C.N., “Phase shift in a rotating neutron or optical interferometer”,

Phys. Rev. D. 20(8), 1846-1848 (15 Oct 1979).

[25] Mashoon, B., Neutze, R., Hannam, M., Stedman, G.E., “Observable frequency shifts via
spin-rotation coupling”, Phys. Lett. A, 249, 161-166 (1998). The authors consider the
Sagnac eﬀect to be a “manifestation of the coupling of orbital angular momentum of a

24

particle .. to rotation”. For a wave this perturbation in the Hamiltonian induces a “fre-
quency perturbation . . . [which] . . . recovers the Sagnac phase shift”. Again, correct arrival
and departure times are not predicted by this approach.

[26] Weber, T.A., “Measurements on a rotating frame in relativity, and the Wilson and Wilson

experiment,” Am. J. Phys. 65(10) , 946-953 (Oct 1997).

[27] Ref. [19].

[28] Rizzi, G., and Tartaglia, A., “Speed of Light on Rotating Platforms”, Found. Phys. 28(11),
1663 (Nov 1998); “On Local and Global Measurements of the Speed of Light on Rotating
Platforms”, Found. Phys. Lett. 12(2), 179-186 (April 1999).

[29] Rizzi, G., and Ruggiero, M.L., “Space Geometry of Rotating Platforms: An Operational

Approach”, Found. Phys. (in press), gr-qc/0207104.

[30] Cranor, M.B., Heider, E.M., Price, R.H., “A circular twin paradox”, Am. J. Phys. 68(11),

[31] Anandan, J., “Sagnac eﬀect in relativistic and nonrelativistic physics”, Phys. Rev. D 24(2),

[32] Peres, A., “Synchronization of clocks in a rotating frame”, Phys Rev D, 18(6), 2173-2174

[33] Dieks, D., “Time in special relativity and its philosophical signiﬁcance”, Eur. J. Phys. 12,

1016-1020 (Nov 2000).

338-346 (15 July 1981).

(15 Sept 78).

253-259 (1991).

[34] See ref. [1] for details.

42(9), 549-552 (1979).

[35] Brillet, A., and Hall, J.L., “Improved laser test of the isotropy of space,” Phys. Rev. Lett.,

[36] Ashby, N.,

“Relativistic Eﬀects

Conf. Gen. Rel. and Gravitation, Pune,
www.colorado.edu/engineering/GPS/Papers/RelativityinGPS.ps. See pp. 5-7.

in the Global Positioning System”, 15 th

Intl.
India (Dec 15-21, 1997), available at

[37] Ashby, N., “Relativity and the Global Positioning System”, Phys. Today, May 2002, 41-47.

See pg 44.

[38] The texts and article listed below are among those that discuss physical vector and tensor
components (the values one measures in experiment) and the relationship between them
and coordinate components (the mathematical values that depend on the generalized coor-
dinate system being used.) D. Savickas, “Relations between Newtonian Mechanics, general
relativity, and quantum mechanics”, Am. J. Phys., 70(8), 798-806; I.S. Sokolnikoﬀ, Tensor
Analysis, Wiley & Sons (1951) pp. 8, 122-127, 205; G.E. Hay, Vector and Tensor Analysis,
Dover (1953) pp 184-186; A. J. McConnell, Application of Tensor Analysis, Dover (1947) pp.
303-311; Carl E. Pearson, Handbook of Applied Mathematics, Van Nostrand Reinhold (1983
2nd ed.), pp. 214-216; Murry R. Spiegel, Schaum’s Outline of Vector Analysis, Schaum,
pg. 172; Robert C. Wrede, Introduction to Vector and Tensor Analysis, Dover (1972), pp.
234-235.

25

[39] Malvern, L.E., Introduction to the Mechanics of a Continuous Medium Prentice-Hall, En-
glewood Cliﬀs, New Jersey (1969). See Appendix I, Sec. 5, pp. 606-613. Fung, Y.C., Foun-
dations of Solid Mechanics Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ (1965). See pp. 52-53
and 111-115. Eringen, A.C., Nonlinear Theory of Continuous Media, McGraw-Hill, NY
(1962). pp. 437-439. Chung, T.J., Continuum Mechanics, Prentice Hall, Inc., Englewood
Cliﬀs, NJ (1988. pp. 40-53, 246-251.

[40] See ref. [8].

[41] Physical components are introduced in ref. [8] on pg. 37, and used in many places throughout
the text, though surprisingly, the relation between physical and coordinate components is
not derived. It is used, however. See, for example, physical velocity components found in
equation (31.5) on pg. 821.

[42] Klauber, R.D., “Physical components, coordinate components, and the speed of light”,

gr-qc/0105071;

[43] Langevin, P., “Th´eorie de l’exp´erience de Sagnac”, Acad´emie des sciences - Comptes rendus
des s´eances, 173, 831-834 (1921); “Relativit´e – Sur l’exp´erience de Sagnac”, Acad´emie des
sciences - Comptes rendus des s´eances, 205, 304-306 (2 Aug 1937.)

[44] Klauber, R.D., “New perspectives on the relatively rotating disk and non-time-orthogonal

reference frames”, Found. Phys. Lett. 11(5) 405-443 (1998). qr-qc/0103076.

[45] Klauber, R.D., “Relativistic Rotation in the Large Radius, Small Angular Velocity Limit”,

gr-qc/0209025.

gr-qc/0210106.

gr-qc/0007018

[46] Klauber, R.D., “Derivation of the General Case Sagnac Result using Non-time-orthogonal

Analysis”, (in press) Found. Phys. Lett. (Oct 2003), gr-qc/0206033.

[47] Klauber, R.D., “Analysis of the Anomalous Brillet and Hall Experimental Result”,

[48] Klauber, R.D., “Non-time-orthogonality, gravitational orbits and Thomas precession”,

[49] Selleri, F., “Noninvariant One-Way Velocity of Light”, Found. Phys. 26(5), 641-664 (May
1996); “Noninvariant One-Way Speed of Light and Locally Equivalent Reference Frames”,
Found. Phys. Lett. 10, 73-83 (1997); “Space, Time, and Their Transformations”, Chinese J.
Sys. Eng. & Elect. 6(4), 25-44 (1995); “The Relativity Principle and the Nature of Time”,
Found. Phys. 27(11), 1527-1548 (1997).

[50] Will, C. M., “Clock synchronization and isotropy of the one-way speed of light”, Phys Rev.

D, 45(2), 403-411 (15 Jan 1992).

[51] Haugan, M.P., and Will, C.M., “Modern Tests of Special Relativity”, Phys. Today, May

1987, 69-76.

[52] Miller, D.C., “The Ether-Drift Experiment and the Determination of the Absolute Motion

of the Earth”, Rev. Mod. Phys. 3, 203-242 (July 1933).

26

[53] Silvertooth, E.W., “Motion through the ether”, Elect. & Wireless World, May 1989, 437-
438; “Special Relativity”, Nature 322(14), 590 (Aug 1985); “Experimental detection of
the ether”, Spec. Sci. & Tech. 10(1), 3-7. Silvertooth, E.W., and Whitney, C.K., “A New
Michelson-Morley Experiment”, Phys. Essays, 5(1), 82-89 (1992).

[54] Marinov, S., “The Experimental Measurement of the One-Way Light Velocity and its Pos-
sibilities for Absolute Velocity Measurement”, Spec. Sci. & Tech. 3(1), 57-82 (1980); See
Maddox, J., “Stefan Marinov wins friends”, Nature 316, 209 (18 July 1985).

[55] Tobar, M.E., Hartnett, J.G., Anstie, J.D., “Proposal for a new Michelson-Morley experi-
ment using a single whispering mode resonator”, Phys. Lett. A., 300, 33-39 (22 July 2002).

[56] Wolf, P., Bize, S., Clairon, A., Luiten, A.N. Gantarelli, G., Tobar, M.E., “Test of relativity

using a microwave resonator”, gr-qc/0210049 (Oct 2002).

[57] Michelson, A.A., and Morley, E.W., Am. J. Sci. 34, 333 (1887).

[58] Wilson, M., and Wilson, H.A., “On the electric eﬀect of rotating a magnetic insulator in a

magnetic ﬁeld”, Proc.R. Soc. London, Ser A 89, 99-106 (1913).

[59] Hertzberg, J.B., Bickman, S.R., Hummon, M.T., Krause, D., Jr., Peck, S.K. and Hunter,
L.R., “Measurement of the relativistic potential diﬀerence across a rotating magnetic di-
electric cylinder”, Am J. Phys. 69(6), 648-654 (June 2001).

[60] Burrows, M.L., “Comment on ‘Maxwell’s equations in a rotating medium:

Is there a
problem?,’ by G. N. Pellegrini and A. R. Swift”, Am. J. Phys. 65 (9), 929-931 (1997);
Klauber, R., “Generalized Tensor Analysis Method and the Wilson and Wilson Experi-
ment”, gr-qc/0107035.

[61] Joos, V.G., Ann. Phys. 7(4), 385-407 (1930)

[62] Kennedy, R.J., and Thorndike, E.M., “Experimental Establishment of the Relativity of

Time”, Phys Rev. 42, 400-418 (1 Nov 1932).

[63] Ives, H.E. and Stilwell, G.R., “An Experimental Study of the Rate of a Moving Atomic
Clock”, Jour. Opt. Soc. Am., 28(7), 215-226 (July 1938); “An Experimental Study of the
Rate of a Moving Atomic Clock II”, Jour. Opt. Soc. Am., 31, 369-374 (May 1941).

[64] There may not be a diﬀerence between the NTO and SRT predictions for this experiment,
and even with suﬃcient accuracy, the test might not be capable of discerning between the
two approaches. Signiﬁcant analysis would be required to answer this question.

[65] Cedarholm, J.P., Bland, G.F., Havens, B.L., and Townes, C.H., “New Experimental Test

of Special Relativity”, Phys Rev. Lett., 1(9), 342-343 (1 Nov 1958).

[66] Hughes, V.W., Robinson, H.G., Beltran-Lopez, V., Phys Rev Lett. 4, 342 (1960); Dreve,

R.W.P., Philos. Mag. 6, 683 (1961).

[67] Jaseva, T.S., Javan, A., Murray, J., and Townes, C.H., “Test of Special Relativity or of the
Isotropy of Space by Use of Infrared Masers”, Phys. Rev. 133(5A), A1221-A1225 (2 March
1964).

27

[68] Champeney, D.C., Issak, G.R., and Khan, A.M., “An ‘Aether Drift’ Experiment Based on

the M¨ossbauer Eﬀect”, Phys. Lett., 7(4), 241-243 (1 Dec 1963)

[69] Turner, K.C., and Hill, H.A., “New Experimental Limit on Velocity-Dependent Interactions

of Clocks and Distant Matter”, Phys. Rev., 134(1B), B252-B256 (13 April 1964).

[70] Hafele, J.C., and Keating, R.E., “Around-the-World Atomic Clocks: Predicted Relativistic
Time Gains”, Science 177, 166-167 (14 July 1972); “Around-the-World Atomic Clocks:
Observed Relativistic Time Gains”, Science 177, 168-170 (14 July 1972);

[71] Vessot, R.F.C., and Levine, M.W., “A Test of the Equivalence Principle Using a Space-

Borne Clock”, Gen. Rel. and Grav. 10(3), 181-204 (1979).

[72] Vessot, R.F.C., Levine, M.W., Mattison, E.M., Blomberg, E.L., Hoﬀman, T.E., Nystrom,
G.U., Farrell, B.F., Decher, R., Eby, P.B., Baugher, C.R., Watts, J.W., Teuber, D.L., and
Wills, F.D., “Test of Relativistic Gravitation with a Space-Born Hydrogen Maser”, Phys
Rev Lett. 45(26), 2081-2084 (29 Dec 1980).

[73] Byl, J., Sanderse, M., van der Kamp, W., “Simple ﬁrst-order test of special relativity”, Am.

J. Phys. 53(1), 43-45 (Jan 1985).

[74] Klauber, R.D., “Non-time-orthogonality and Tests of Special Relativity”, gr-qc/0006023.

[75] Prestage, J.D., Bollinger J.J., Itano, W.M., Wineland, D.J., “Limits for Spatial Anisotropy

by Use of Nuclear-Spin-Polarized 9Be+ Ions”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 2387 (1985).

[76] Kaivola, M., Poulsen, O., Riis, E., “Measurement of the Relativistic Doppler Shift in Neon”,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 54(4), 255-258 (28 Jan 1985).

[77] Riis, E., Andersen, L.A., Bjerre, N., Poulsen, O., Lee, S.A., , Hall, J.L., “Test of the Isotropy
of the Speed of Light Using Fast-Beam Laser Spectroscopy”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60(2), 81-84
(11 Jan 1988); Bay, Z., and White, J.A., “Comment on ‘Test of the Isotropy of the Speed
of Light Using Fast-Beam Laser Spectroscopy’, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62(7), 841 (13 Feb 1989);
Riis et al, “Reply”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62(7), 841 (13 Feb 1989).

[78] With the beam aligned north-south, as it was in the experiment, there is deﬁnitely no
diﬀerence between the NTO and SRT predictions. For an east-west alignment, there may,
or may not be a diﬀerence. Signiﬁcant analysis would be required to answer this question.

[79] Lamoreaux, S.K., Jacobs, J.P., Heckel, B.R., Raab, F.J., Fortson, E.N., “New Limits on
Spatial Anisotropy from Optically Pumped 201Hg and 199Hg”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 57, 3125
(1986).

[80] Krisher, T.P., Maleki, L., Lutes, G.F., Primas, L.E., Logan, R.T., Anderson, J.D., and
Will, C.M., “Test of the Isotropy of the One-way Speed of Light Using Hydrogen-maser
Frequency Standards”, Phys Rev D 42, 731-734 (15 July 1990).

[81] Hils, D., and Hall, J.L., “Improved Kennedy-Thorndike Experiment to Test Special Rela-

tivity”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 64(15), 1697-1700 (9 April 1990).

28

[82] Wolf, P., and Petit, G., “Satellite Test of Special Relativity Using the Global Positioning

System”, Phys. Rev. A. 56(6), 4405-4409 (Dec 1997).

[83] Braxmaier, C., M¨uller, H., Pradl, O., Mlynek, J., Peters, A., “Test of Relativity Using a
Cryogenic Optical Resonator”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88(1), 010401-1 to 010401-4 (7 Jan 2002).

29

