4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
0
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Linking Maxwell, Helmholtz and Gauss through
the Linking Integral

F. De Zela
Departamento de Ciencias, Secci´on F´isica,
Pontiﬁcia Universidad Cat´olica del Per´u, Ap.1761, Lima,Per´u.
e-mail:fdezela@ﬁsica.pucp.edu.pe

February 2, 2008

Abstract

We take the Gauss’ linking integral of two curves as a starting point to
discuss the connection between the equation of continuity and the inho-
mogeneous Maxwell equations. Gauss’ formula has been discussed before,
as being derivable from the line integral of a magnetic ﬁeld generated by a
steady current ﬂowing through a loop. We argue that a purely geometrical
result - such as Gauss’ formula - cannot be claimed to be derivable from a
law of Nature, i.e., from one of Maxwell’s equations, which is the departing
point for the calculation of the magnetic ﬁeld. We thus discuss anew the
derivation of Gauss’ formula, this time resting on Helmholtz’s theorem for
vector ﬁelds. Such a derivation, in turn, serves to shed light into the con-
nection existing between a conservation law like charge conservation and
the Maxwell equations. The key role played by the constitutive equations
in the construction of Maxwell’s electromagnetism is brieﬂy discussed, as
well.

1 Introduction

Dated January 22, 1833, there is a note by Carl Friedrich Gauss that appeared
in Volume V of his complete works, a note that refers to a formula which is
nowadays known as the Gauss’ linking integral.
It represents the very ﬁrst
result of what has grown to be in the following centuries a new mathematical
theory: knot theory, a branch of topology. Gauss presented his result, a formula
for calculating the linking number of two curves, without giving any proof of
it. In modern notation, what Gauss asserted was the following. Consider two
non-intersecting curves, C1 : x(s) and C2 : y(u), (see Fig. 1), and deﬁne the
linking integral of the two curves, Lk(C1, C2), to be given by

Lk(C1, C2) =

1
4π

ZC1 ZC2

(y(u) − x(s)) · (y′(u) × x′(s))
|y(u) − x(s)|3

duds,

(1)

1

Figure 1: Two non-intersecting curves C1 : x(s) and C2 : y(u), whose linking
number is equal to one, in this case.

where the prime denotes derivation with respect to the curve parameter.

According to Gauss, when C1 and C2 are closed curves, Lk(C1, C2) equals
the number n of times that one curve winds around the other: Lk(C1, C2) = n
(amazingly, it is the factor 1/4π what makes Lk(C1, C2) an integer -valued func-
tional of the loops). Furthermore, Lk(C1, C2) is invariant under re-parametrization
and under continuous deformation of the curves.

In the course of time, Gauss’ linking integral has been generalized within
the context of diﬀerential geometry[1]. It has been deﬁned for any two oriented
submanifolds in an Euclidean n-space En, whose respective dimensions, r and
s, have to satisfy r + s + 1 = n. The special case of two curves in an Euclidean
3-dimensional space corresponds to r = s = 1 and n = 3. The generalization is
based on a concept called the degree of a mapping. In order to introduce such
a concept, one has to rely on several tools from modern diﬀerential geometry,
and it is based on these tools that a formal proof of Gauss’ assertion has been
given. However, a formal demonstration of this sort seems to be completely un-
illuminating. Surely, Gauss’ steps leading to equation (1) must have followed a
very diﬀerent path. Unfortunately, it seems diﬃcult to ﬁnd in current literature
an elementary derivation of equation (1).
It should be mentioned that the
editor of Gauss’ Works conjectured that the method used by Gauss in arriving
at equation (1) relied on calculating the line integral of the magnetic ﬁeld due
to a steady current. Such a conjecture seems to be substantiated by the fact
that Gauss’ linking integral is presented in the volume of his Works dedicated
to mathematical physics, in the section of electromagnetism. However, Gauss’
interest in arriving at a formula for the linking number seems to stem from his
duties as an astronomer: he wanted to know which regions of the celestial sphere
had to be observed over a period of time, in order to register the passing of an
asteroid or other astronomical objects [2]. The Earth’s orbit deﬁnes one curve,
whereas the orbit of the celestial object deﬁnes a second one. The linking integral
of these two curves can be shown to determine whether the celestial object can

2

(2)

(3)

be observed or not. Within this context, a magnetic ﬁeld does not play any role,
of course, and a derivation of equation (1) from magnetostatics seems unlikely.
Whether Gauss relied or not on magnetostatics for deriving his result will remain
an open question probably forever. Anyhow, it has been recently published an
illustrative and instructive article [3] in which the connection to magnetostatics
is presented as an adequate starting point for deriving Gauss’ assertion.

Let us see in detail how the connection between magnetostatics and equation
B(y) · dy of a magnetic ﬁeld around a
(1) arises. Consider the line integral
closed curve, C2 : y(u). The magnetic ﬁeld is assumed to be produced by a
H
steady current I ﬂowing through another loop, C1 : x(s). The ﬁeld B can be
obtained by using the well-known Biot-Savart formula [6],

B(y) =

µ0I
4π

ZC1

dx×

y − x
|y − x|3 .

It leads to the following expression for the line integral to be calculated:

B(y) · dy =

IC2

µ0I
4π

dx× (y − x)
|y − x|3

· dy

(y − x) · (dy×dx)
|y − x|3

,

IC2 IC1
µ0I
4π

=

IC2 IC1
where the last step follows by applying the cyclic property of the triple product.

Alternatively, we can calculate

C2 B(y) · dy by using Ampere’s law:
H

B(y) · dy =

∇ × B · dS = µ0

J · dS = µ0Iencl = µ0nI.

(4)

IC2

ZS

ZS

Here, Iencl means the total amount of current crossing the surface S. Comparing
equations (3) and (4) we obtain Gauss’ result, equation (1) with Lk(C1, C2) =
n. We stress, however, that equation (1) involves nothing but geometrical (or
topological) properties of the curves, whereas equation (3) and Ampere’s law
do express some intrinsic property of the magnetic ﬁeld.

What lies at the origin of the laws of Biot-Savart and Ampere are Maxwell’s
equations. These equations express a law of Nature. In principle, we should
not take them as a starting point, in order to demonstrate a purely geometrical
property of two curves. It is certainly appealing to consider that given a current
in a loop, it produces a magnetic ﬁeld which winds around the loop. But - let us
stress it again - this follows as a consequence of a law of Nature, which rules how
a magnetic ﬁeld can be produced by the ﬂow of electric charges. At most, the
picture of a magnetic ﬁeld winding around a circuit could have inspired Gauss
to arrive at his assertion. At proving it, however, he must have followed quite
another path, in accordance with the requirements of utmost rigor that he put on

3

any mathematical result1. To some physicists, questions of mathematical rigor
might appear superﬂuous or not worth to deal with, particularly in cases where
one can arrive straightforwardly at a formula, by starting from well established
natural laws. To others, however, it results obvious that a mathematical truth
cannot follow from a law of Nature. This, for the very simple reason that
what we call a natural law might change or become obsolete in view of new
facts, whereas a mathematical result, once it has been proved, will remain true
forever.

A parable might be useful to illustrate our concern. Let us assume that the

following series of events takes place:

bears his name: FC ∼ q1q2/r2.

1. In 1785 Coulomb reports his ﬁndings about a law of Nature, which now

2.

In 1833 Gauss reports a formula involving the sum of the angles of a

spherical triangle. However, he does not include a proof of his formula.

3. During the 20th century mathematicians develop diﬀerential geometry
and by applying this theory they prove Gauss’ formula, establishing it as a
mathematical truth.

4. In 1998 a physics journal publishes a paper in which it is claimed that
Gauss’ formula can be proved by simple means. Starting point of the proof is
Coulomb’s law.

5. In 2020 very accurate experiments show beyond any reasonable doubt
that Coulomb’s inverse-square law is not exact: It should be replaced by a
power law in which the exponent of r is −2.000000534(13).

We are obviously entitled to ask: Was the proof published in the physics

journal ﬂawless? At ﬁrst sight and in view of point 5, it was not.

Now, let us put aside point 5 - or assume it never happens - but ask anew:
Can the proof published in the physics journal be correct? The mere possibility
that point 5 could happen makes the proof based on Coulomb’s law at least
suspicious of being ﬂawed. In any case, it raises interesting questions: If the
proof is correct, then it should be based only apparently on Coulomb’s law.
Perhaps it was some geometrical property lurking behind the inverse-square
law what was actually used in the proof. Or perhaps there exists some deep
connection between Coulomb’s law and spherical symmetry that precludes point
5 from ever occurring. Bringing such a connection into light would certainly
help saving time and eﬀorts dedicated to test the validity of Coulomb’s law. For
instance, sophisticated experiments are continually planned to test natural laws
like the gravitational inverse-square law [5]. To be sure, as physicists we are
ready to accept the verdict of an experiment. But we must be able to properly
interpret what the verdict means and what it does not2.

1As just two examples of this, let us remind Gauss’ unpublished work on non-Euclidean
geometry, that he developed 30 years before Bolyai and Lobachevsky, as well as his also
unpublished work on special complex functions. These works remained unpublished because
they did not satisfy the requirement of utmost rigor, that Gauss so fervently demanded from
his and other’s work.

2As a matter of fact, a phenomenon like e.g. the Lamb shift can be interpreted as an indirect
demonstration that Coulomb’s law does not hold true at very small distances. Alternatively,

4

One could still argue that we should distinguish between a physical law
and the mathematical statement in terms of which we express that physical
law. The physical law comes in when we assert that the real world behaves as
described by the mathematical statement. From this mathematical statement
if-then relationships. In
we may deduce other such statements by a series of
the case of Coulomb’s law, such a relationship would tell that if the ﬁeld of a
point charge goes as 1/r2 then some other results follow. If some experiment
then shows that the real world does not behave according to the 1/r2 law, it
does not mean that the if-then relationships turn to be false. This is true,
of course. However, without going into philosophical questions concerning the
foundations of mathematics, we may see it as embracing diﬀerent theories that
can be constructed independently from one another, as free creations of the
human mind. Each mathematical theory consists of a set of axioms, deﬁnitions,
and theorems. It is clear that we cannot use a statement A of one theory - be
it an axiom or a theorem - to prove a statement B of another theory, unless
A is shared by both theories. Let one of these theories be the mathematical
idealization of the real world that we may simply call, for the argument’s sake,
electrodynamics. Let the other theory be pure geometry. We could hardly say
that the 1/r2 statement of Coulomb’s law, or more generally, that Maxwell’s
equations ﬁt into the body of pure geometry. They are neither axioms nor
theorems of pure geometry and therefore cannot be used as starting points
to prove purely geometrical statements, like those involving the angles of a
spherical triangle or the properties of two curves.

Let us write Coulomb’s law in vectorial form, FC ∼ q1q2(r1 − r2)/ |r1 − r2|3,
and so we have the integrand of Biot-Savart’s law showing up. To put Coulomb’s
law to a test is as justiﬁed as to put Biot-Savart’s law to a test. Coulomb’s law
can be traced back to one of Maxwell’s equations: ∇ · E = ρ/ε0. Biot-Savart’s
law can be traced back to ∇ × B =µ0J, a special, steady-state, case of one of
the Maxwell’s equations. Change the spherical triangle in the parable above
by Gauss’ linking integral and the foregoing remarks apply to the real case.
This real case oﬀers us the opportunity to analyze the content of Maxwell’s
equations from a somewhat new perspective. In the following, we will undertake
an analysis of the Biot-Savart law and the Maxwell’s equations, on which the
proof of Gauss’ linking integral that appeared in the real physics journal [3] was
based. This will lead us, at the end, to ﬁnd the connection between the principle
of charge conservation and Maxwell’s equations.

2 Analysis of the Biot-Savart law

The argument which allegedly proves Gauss’ result was based on equations
(3) and (4). Let us see the extent to which such a proof eﬀectively depends on
electromagnetism. Assuming that the derivation is correct, it should be possible
to reformulate it in terms of purely geometrical concepts. In order to do this,

it can be interpreted as showing the limit of validity of a theory based on nonquantized ﬁelds.

5

we ﬁrst try to see the essence of the arguments: equation (3) derives from
the expression that gives the magnetic ﬁeld at point y produced by a steady
current-density J(x):

(5)

(6)

(7)

B(y) =

J(x) ×

µ0
4π

ZV

y − x
|y − x|3 d3x.

Indeed, by taking J as appropriate for the current in a loop, the volume

integral in equation (5) reduces to a line integral (J(x)d3x → Idx):

B(y) =

µ0I
4π

dx×

(y − x)
|y − x|3 ,

ZC
which is equation (2), the expression commonly referred to as the Biot-Savart
law [6].

Equation (5), in turn, follows as a solution of one of the Maxwell’s equations

(for steady ﬁelds):

∇ × B =µ0J,

together with ∇ · B = 0, although this last equation is not essential for our
present purposes3.

Let us recapitulate the essential steps leading to Gauss’ result. We have
as a starting point Maxwell’s equation for a stationary current, equation (7).
S J · dS, as well as the
From it, we derive Ampere’s law,
Biot-Savart law, equation (6), which leads to equation (3). In Ampere’s law we
S J · dS =Iencl. Here, Iencl means the total current going through
must put
In Biot-Savart’s law, the current I
the loop C2 that encloses the surface S.
R
refers instead to the current in the wire. When this wire winds n times around
C2, we have Iencl = nI and Gauss’ result follows.

B(y) · dy =µ0

C2

R

H

It seems therefore that the essential points in the foregoing proof of Gauss’
result are: 1) Maxwell’s equation (7), and 2) the concept of current as a ﬂow of
charged particles. Our question is: Is it possible to extract from these two points
some purely geometrical properties on which to base an alternative proof?

Let us analyze more closely point 2). After all, the current might be merely
playing the role of a “counting device”, and so it might be an exchangeable unit
within the foregoing reasoning. Alas, such a counting property should not be
intimately tied to the physical nature of the current. The factor I appearing in
equation (6) corresponds to the current ﬂowing through a thin wire, the loop C1
in our case. The replacement J(x)d3x → Idx leading from equation (5) to (6)
seems to be crucial. It follows from the way we relate our concepts of current-
density and current. Indeed, such a replacement comes from considering that
the volume element d3x appearing in equation (5) can be written as d3x = S0dx,
3Note that equation (5) automatically satisﬁes ∇ · B = 0. We remark that equation (5) is
a special solution of (7), whereby the general solution can be obtained by adding to (5) a term
∇U , with U an arbitrary scalar function. For the purpose of demonstrating Gauss’ result we
C ∇U · dy = 0, so that it is not essential to
could have used the general solution, because
invoke ∇ · B = 0.

H

6

b

where S0 is the cross-sectional area of the wire and dx a distance-element along
n, parallel to J). Thus,
it (the direction of dx being given through a unit vector
J(x)d3x = J(x)S0dx = |J(x)| S0
ndx = Idx, whereby the last step expresses the
connection between current-density and current: |J(x)| S0 = I.
b

Now, when going from equation (5) to (6), the current I refers to the charge
going through each piece dx of the wire. On the other hand, when we use
S J · dS, by the total current
equation (4) we must replace the right-hand side,
Iencl crossing the surface S which is enclosed by C2. When the current-carrying
R
S J · dS = nI
loop crosses C2 a number n of times, we must put Iencl ≡
in Ampere’s law. As we said before, replacing the left-hand side of equation
R
(3) by µ0nI and cancelling the common factor µ0I, we obtain Gauss’ result,
Lk(C1, C2) = n. Thus, both the equation Iencl = nI and the relationship
between current-density and current, as expressed by J(x)d3x = Idx, seem to
be intimately tied to our physical concept of current as being a ﬂow of particles.
However, the cancelation of I in the last step of the proof seems to indicate that
the current was not so essential. We will see in the following that we can in fact
dispose of the concept of a current, and that we can replace Maxwell’s equation
(7) by another one which expresses a purely geometrical property.

3 Derivation of the Gauss Linking Integral

Let us now start by considering the closed curve C1 : x(s). This curve can be
embedded in a family of curves, under quite general conditions. To deﬁne a
family of curves amounts the same as to deﬁne a vector ﬁeld v(r). Indeed, the
curves pertaining to the family of curves can be seen as integral curves of the
vector ﬁeld, i.e., as curves whose tangent vectors coincide with v(r). They fulﬁll
the following equation:

We will be ﬁnally interested in only one member of the family of curves,
namely on C1. In case that all the curves of the family are closed curves, as we
will assume henceforth, we have4

dx(s)
ds

= v(x(s)).

∇ · v(r) = 0.

(8)

(9)

Let us remark in passing that equation (9) holds true also for the velocity
ﬁeld of an incompressible ﬂuid of constant and uniform density ρ. In absence of
sources and sinks, such a velocity ﬁeld satisﬁes the continuity equation

+ ∇ · ρv = ρ∇ · v = 0.

(10)

4We recall that the coordinate-free deﬁnition of the divergence of a vector ﬁeld F(x) is
S F · nda. When all integral curves of F(x) are closed, the

1
given by ∇ · F(x) = limV →0
V
surface integral in the deﬁnition of the divergence gives zero.

∂ρ
∂t

H

7

(11)

(12)

(13)

Although in the present case equation (9) follows because the integral curves
of v are closed, its relationship with the continuity equation will be important
afterwards. Now, for v satisfying equation (9) and under appropriate conditions
(see Helmholtz’s theorem below), there exists a ﬁeld W, whose curl is v:

∇ × W = v.

This last equation is analogous to equation (7). We have so introduced the
vector ﬁelds v and W, playing the roles of J and µ−1
0 B, respectively. From
equation (11) we can derive the analogous to Ampere’s and Biot-Savart’ laws:
equation (11) can be solved for W explicitly, by writing W = ∇ × Z, with

From this Z, by taking its curl, we obtain a solution of equation (11) given

by

Z(y) =

1
4π

ZV

v(r)
|y − r|

d3r.

W(y) =

v(r) ×

1
4π

ZV

(y − r)
|y − r|3 d3r.

It corresponds to equation (5) for the magnetic ﬁeld. In order to derive Gauss’
result from here, by following similar steps as before, we would need to reduce
the volume integral in equation (13) to a line integral. To this end, we invoke
the Dirac delta function to single out the contribution to W(y) which comes
from a single integral curve x(s) of v(r). This is equivalent to restricting the
ﬁeld v(r) in equation (13) to be diﬀerent from zero only along the curve x(s)5:

dx(s)
ds
Introducing this expression for v(r) into equation (13) we obtain

δ3(r − x(s))ds.

v(r) =

Z

(14)

W(y) · dy =

IC2

IC2  ZV IC1

1
4π

1
4π

=

ds

dx(s)
ds

ds

dx(s)
ds

×

×

y − r
|y − r|3 δ3(r − x(s))d3r
y − x(s)
|y − x(s)|3

· dy.

!

· dy

!

(15)

IC2  IC1

We have, therefore, that

W(y) · dy =

1
4π

dx ×

y − x
|y − x|3

IC2

IC2  IC1
5As in the commonly employed deﬁnition of a current density j(x, t) due to a single charge
moving along the path r(t), i.e., j(x, t) = ev(t)δ3(x − r(t)), an expression like equation (14)
makes sense only under the assumption that subsequent integrations over its arguments have
to be carried out. Equation (14) is similar to the covariant form of the 4-vector current
density jα(x), given in terms of the path r(τ ) that is traced back by a charge in space-time:
jα(x) = ec

dτ vα(τ )δ(4)(x − r(τ )).

!

· dy.

(16)

R

8

This last expression can in turn be changed as follows, by applying the cyclic
property of the triple product:

W(y) · dy =

IC2

1
4π

1
4π

=

IC1 IC2

IC1 IC2

(x − y) · (dx × dy)
|x − y|3

(y(u) − x(s)) · (y′(u) × x′(s))
|y(u) − x(s)|3

duds.

(17)

We have so obtained the right-hand side of Gauss’ formula. In this case we
have made no reference to a current. As a second step, let us turn our attention
to the left-hand side of equation (17). We have, by applying Stokes theorem
and considering equation (11), that

W(y) · dy =

(∇ × W) ·

ndS =

v ·

ndS,

(18)

b

b

b

b

ZS

IC2

S v ·
R

S v ·
R

b
ndS = n is somewhat involved, we relegate it to an Appendix.

ZS
ndS,
S being the area enclosed by C2. We have to prove that the integral
with v given by equation (14), readily equals n, the number of times that one
ndS = n. If
curve winds around the other, i.e., we have to demonstrate
we succeed, we have the aforementioned “counting device” at our disposal, and
with it the second piece that is needed for the proof. Because the proof that
S v ·
Alternatively, we may introduce a small change in what we have done so far,
R
in order to give a proof of Gauss’ result that resembles closely the one based
on magnetostatics. However, it is based on the concept of the strength of a
tube of curves, a concept whose properties might be diﬃcult to substantiate by
ndS works as
purely geometrical means. It makes possible to show that
a “counting device”. Indeed, the current-carrying wire may be replaced by a
tube of curves, something that depends on v(r) alone: To this end, consider
some closed curve C in the region where v(r) is deﬁned. Consider further a
family of integral curves of v(r) passing through C. These curves constitute a
tube of curves. Now, the ﬂux of v(r) across the surface S bounded by C remains
n′dS′ for all surfaces S′
S v ·
constant along the tube. That is,
that cut the tube. This result follows from ∇ · v = 0 alone. Let us refer to the
R
ndS as the strength of the tube [13]. It is always possible - with
ﬂux σ ≡
an appropriate redeﬁnition of v, if necessary - to let the tube of curves shrink
into a line, keeping ﬁxed the value of σ. It is clear that σ can play just the same
role that the current I has played before. That is, we may substitute v(r)d3r
by σdx, with dx a length element of the curve x(s), and then proceed further
as we did before: equation (13) reduces in this case to

S′ v ·
R

S v ·
R

ndS =

S v ·

b

b

b

b

R

W(y) =

dr ×

σ
4π

ZC1

(y − r)
|y − r|3 ,

(19)

so that the right sides of equations (16) and (17) acquire a factor σ.
If the
curve C1 : x(s) crosses the surface S enclosed by C2 a number n of times, it

9

contributes with nσ to the total ﬂux through S that appears on the left side
of equation (17). The common factor σ cancels then, and we arrive at Gauss’
result again. However, this time the strength - at variance with the current -
does refer to a geometrical property alone.

By introducing the strength we are provided with a purely geometrical con-
cept on which our proof of Gauss’ result can rely. Nevertheless, for the sake of
demonstrating Gauss’ result, the introduction of the strength appears still as a
disposable artiﬁce. As already said, it is in fact possible to demonstrate that
ndS = n without introducing the strength as a substitute of the current,
S v ·
as it is done in the Appendix.
R

In any case, we have arrived at Gauss’ result by applying purely geometrical
facts. We do not claim that the present method resembles more likely what
Gauss probably did, than the method conjectured by the editor of Gauss’ Works.
Although it is true that the genius of Gauss could have anticipated some of
Helmholtz’s results needed for the proof given above, there are other aspects
that one should take into account before making any conjecture about the line
of reasoning actually followed by Gauss. We are not concerned, however, with
this kind of issues here.

b

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

µ−1
0 B

Our analysis has brought into light that the proof of Gauss’ result that
was based on Biot-Savart’s and Ampere’s laws was in fact based on Maxwell’s
= J. We also saw that this last equation could be replaced,
equation ∇×
for the sake of proving Gauss’ result, by the equation ∇×W = v. This equation
can be seen as the one deﬁning a vector ﬁeld W(r), given another vector ﬁeld
v(r) whose divergence vanishes: ∇ · v = 0. This one restriction put on v(r) is
a particular instance of the continuity equation. We are so naturally led to ask
about the equation that would replace ∇ × W = v, when instead of ∇ · v = 0
we require from v to satisfy the continuity equation: ∂tρ + ∇ · ρv =0. Putting
it otherwise, we are led to ask about the connection between the continuity
equation and Maxwell’s equations. This is the issue we want to discuss in what
follows, with the help of Helmholtz’s theorem.

4 Helmholtz’s theorem

In this Section we review the aforementioned Helmholtz’s theorem [8, 9, 10, 11,
12]. According to this theorem, a vector ﬁeld v(r) is completely determined by
its divergence and its curl, together with a boundary condition which speciﬁes
n · v, at the boundary of the domain where
the normal component of the ﬁeld,
the vector ﬁeld is to be determined. For physical applications it is natural to
take as “boundary” the inﬁnity and the vector ﬁeld vanishing there. Helmholtz’s
theorem then says that we can write v(r) in terms of two potentials, ϕ and A,
as

b

v(r) = −∇ϕ + ∇ × A,

(20)

where ϕ and A can be expressed through the divergence and the curl of v(r).
Writing

10

∇ · v(r) = ρ(r)
∇ × v(r) = j(r)

(21)
(22)

(23)

(25)

(26)

we have that

v(r1) = −∇

d3r2

+ ∇ ×

d3r2

ρ(r2)
4π |r1 − r2|

j(r2)
4π |r1 − r2|

.

This can be written, alternatively, as

Z

Z

Z

Z

v(r1) = ∇

d3r2G(r1, r2)ρ(r2) − ∇ ×

d3r2G(r1, r2)j(r2),

(24)

with the Green’s function G(r1, r2) satisfying

∇2G(r1, r2) = δ(r1 − r2)

and vanishing at inﬁnity. Under this last condition, the solution of equation
(25) is given explicitly by

G(r1, r2) = −

1
4π |r1 − r2|

.

Now, assume that we prescribe only the divergence ρ of a ﬁeld, which is
a function not only of position but of time as well, i.e., ρ = ρ(t, r). Let our
boundary condition be that ρ vanish at inﬁnity. Helmholtz’s theorem states
that there is a ﬁeld, call it D, such that

∇ · D(t, r) = ρ(t, r).

(27)

The ﬁeld D(t, r) is explicitly given by

D(t, r) = −∇r

+ ∇r × Z1,

(28)

d3r1

ρ(t, r1)
4π |r − r1|

Z

with Z1 an arbitrary ﬁeld that we may take equal to zero, for simplicity. Note
that the time t plays, in all of this, only the role of a parameter that can
be appended to the ﬁelds, without having yet any dynamical meaning. The
ﬁeld D(t, r) satisﬁes therefore the only condition we have put upon it, i.e.,
∇ · D(t, r) = ρ(t, r). Its curl has been assumed as unspeciﬁed or else set equal to
zero. We have then, by applying the gradient operator that appears in equation
(28),

D(t, r) =

1
4π

Z

d3r1

ρ(t, r1)
|r − r1|2

(r − r1)
|r − r1|

.

(29)

For a point-like charge we set ρ(t, r) = qδ(r−r0(t)) and the above expression

reduces to

11

D(t, r) =

q
4π |r − r0(t)|2

r − r0(t)
|r − r0(t)|

.

(30)

According to equations (29) and (30), the ﬁeld D(t, r) at time t corresponds
to an instantaneous Coulomb ﬁeld produced by a charge distribution ρ, or else
by a point-like charge q. Such a result would correspond to an instantaneous
response of the ﬁeld to any change suﬀered by the charge distribution. Appar-
ently, there is here a contradiction with the ﬁnite propagation-time needed by
any signal. This issue has been discussed and cleared, in the case of the com-
plete set of Maxwell’s equations, by showing that both the longitudinal and the
transverse parts of the electric ﬁeld contain such instantaneous contributions,
which turn out to cancel each other [14]. Note that by taking Z1 equal to zero in
equation (28) we have ∇ × D = 0 in our case, which is not what happens when
D has to satisfy (together with H) the complete system of Maxwell’s equations.
Coming back to Helmholtz’s theorem, assume next that ρ(t, r) satisﬁes the

continuity equation

By using equation (27) the continuity equation can be written as

∂tρ + ∇ · j = 0.

∇ · (∂tD + j) = 0.

Here, again, we can apply Helmholtz’s theorem and write the ﬁeld ∂tD + j
as the curl of some other ﬁeld H, whose divergence we do not need to specify.
This ﬁeld is given by Helmholtz’s theorem as

H(t, r) = ∇r ×

d3r2

(j(t, r2) + ∂tD(t, r2))
4π |r − r2|

+ ∇ϕ.

(33)

As before, we may take ∇ · H = 0, and hence ϕ = 0. That such H(t, r), with

ϕ set equal to zero, fulﬁlls the required equation, namely

can be shown as follows. By writing

∇ × H = j + ∂tD,

A(t, r) ≡

d3r2

(j(t, r2) + ∂tD(t, r2))
4π |r − r2|

in equation (33), we have H(t, r) = ∇r × A(t, r), so that taking the curl on both
sides of this last equation we obtain

∇r × H(t, r) = ∇r × ∇r × A(t, r) = ∇r(∇r · A) − ∇2

rA.

(36)

The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side vanishes:

∇r(∇r · A) = 0.

(37)

Z

Z

(31)

(32)

(34)

(35)

12

This can be seen by applying the operator ∇r(∇r·) to A given by equation
−1

(35). One replaces the second derivatives with respect to r in the term |r − r2|
inside the integral, by second derivatives with respect to r2.
Integrating by
parts one obtains equation (37), upon using that the ﬁeld j(t, r) + ∂tD(t, r)
is solenoidal, i.e., one whose divergence vanishes, and that it is bounded in
space, or that it vanishes faster than r−1 for large r [12]. We have therefore
∇ × H = −∇2A, so that

∇r × H = −

d3r2(j(t, r2) + ∂tD(t, r2))∇2
r

Taking now into account that

Z

1
4π |r − r2|

.

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

we ﬁnally obtain

1
|r − r2|

∇2
r

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

= −4πδ (r − r2) ,

∇ × H = j(t, r) + ∂tD(t, r),

which is identical to one of the two Maxwell’s equations with sources. The other
Maxwell equation that has a source term is identical to equation (27).

5 Maxwell’s equations with sources

Let us summarize how the inhomogeneous Maxwell’s equations followed from
the assumption of charge conservation. Let us describe charge - or any other
quantity, e.g., matter - by its density ρ(t, x) and its velocity distribution v(t, x).
It is well known that charge or matter conservation can be expressed through
the equation of continuity

As we have shown above, given a bounded, scalar, function ρ(t, x), there

exists a ﬁeld Y(t, x), satisfying

so that equation (41) can be written in the form

Because the ﬁeld ∂tY+ρv is divergenceless, there exists another ﬁeld W(t, x)

(38)

(39)

(40)

(41)

(42)

(43)

(44)

∂tρ + ∇ · (ρv) = 0.

∇ · Y = ρ,

∇ · (∂tY + ρv) = 0.

∇ × W =∂tY + ρv.

13

such that

ρv → j), i.e.,

Equations (42) and (44), written with the usual notation (Y → D, W → H,

∇ · D = ρ
∇ × H = j + ∂tD,

(45)
(46)

are the two inhomogeneous Maxwell’s equations. They follow from equation
(41) alone. Reciprocally, the continuity equation follows from equations (45)
and (46) by taking the divergence of the second of these equations and replacing
in it the ﬁrst equation. We stress that the curl of D and the divergence of H
have been left unspeciﬁed - or set arbitrarily equal to zero - when going from
equation (41) to equations (45) and (46). In the case of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld, such an arbitrariness does not correspond to the observed facts, as charge
and current distributions completely determine the ﬁelds they produce. There
must be, therefore, additional equations for the curl of D and the divergence of
H in order to completely determine these ﬁelds, when their boundary conditions
are also speciﬁed.

Let us now turn our attention to the source-free, or homogeneous, Maxwell’s

equations:

∇ · B = 0
∇ × E+∂tB = 0.

Of course, by a similar reasoning as above, we could derive these equations
from the conservation of something, call it ρm. The conservation of ρm could be
expressed through an equation similar to the equation of continuity, equation
(41). After deriving equations similar to (45) and (46) we put ρm = 0 and
obtain equations (47) and (48). In other words, this something - a “magnetic
charge” if you want - is assumed to be conserved: zero before and zero after.

Alternatively, the source-free Maxwell’s equations can be understood as a
purely mathematical statement telling us that the ﬁelds E and B derive from
a scalar function ϕ and a vector potential A (not to be confused with those in
equation (20)), through the deﬁnitions

(47)
(48)

(49)
(50)

In other words, given two arbitrary ﬁelds, ϕ and A, by deﬁning E and B
through equations (49) and (50), it follows that equations (47) and (48) are
identically satisﬁed.

In any case, we should stress that equations (45, 46) on the one hand, and
equations (47, 48) on the other hand, are - up to this point - independent from
each other. We may connect them through some constitutive equations, like,
e.g.,

E = −∇ϕ − ∂tA,
B = ∇ × A.

14

D = εE
H = µ−1B.

(51)

(52)

These equations are usually assumed to describe a linear medium of electrical
permittivity ε and magnetic permeability µ. A particular case of such a medium
is vacuum, and the system of equations (45, 46, 47, 48), that arises out of a
connection like the one given by equations (51, 52) is what we know as the
complete system of Maxwell’s equations.

Let us stress once again that without connecting (D, H) with (E, B) through
some constitutive equations we have no closed system. The equations that we
have written down for (D, H), that is Maxwell’s equations with sources, can
also be written down for a ﬂuid, for example. These equations are, as already
stated, ∇·Y = ρ and ∇×W = j+∂tY. We can expect that any conclusion that
can be derived in the realm of electrodynamics from the equations ∇·D = ρ and
∇ × H = j + ∂tD without coupling them to the source-free Maxwell’s equations,
will have a corresponding result in the realm of ﬂuid dynamics. This assertion
can be illustrated by two examples: 1) The case in which a point-like singularity
of ρ is produced in the interior of a ﬂuid, for which one obtains a velocity-ﬁeld
obeying a law that is mathematically identical to Coulomb’s law [13]. 2) The
case of a ﬂuid where a so-called vortex tube appears (tornadoes and whirl-pools
are associated phenomena), in which case - after approximating the vortex-tube
by a line singularity - one obtains a velocity-ﬁeld through an expression which
is mathematically identical to the Biot-Savart law [13].

Finally, let us mention that the derivation of the inhomogeneous Maxwell’s
equations as a consequence of charge conservation is nothing new [15]. It follows
as a direct application of a theorem of de Rahm for diﬀerential forms: given a
4-vector jα(x) for which a continuity equation holds, ∂αjα = 0, there exists an
antisymmetric tensor F αβ = −F βα such that ∂αF αβ = jβ. This last equation
is nothing but the tensorial form of the inhomogeneous Maxwell’s equations
(45) and (46). Now, the tensor F αβ does not need to be derivable from a 4-
vector Aα, according to F αβ = ∂αAβ − ∂βAα. For this to be the case, F αβ
would have to satisfy ∂αF βγ + ∂βF γα + ∂γF αβ = 0. This is the tensorial
form of the homogeneous Maxwell’s equations (47) and (48). In other words,
given jα and Aα, with jα satisfying a continuity equation, we can introduce two
antisymmetric tensors, F αβ
(1) = jβ and
the second one, F αβ
(2) = 0.
In order that these two equations do conform a closed system, i.e. the total
system of Maxwell’s equations, we need to connect F αβ
(2) through some
constitutive relation6.

(2) ≡ ∂αAβ − ∂βAα, satisfying ∂αF βγ

(2) , the ﬁrst one satisfying ∂αF αβ

(1) with F αβ

(1) and F αβ

(2) + ∂βF γα

(2) + ∂γF αβ

6As a matter of fact, it is not necessary to rest on de Rham’s theorem and the theory
of diﬀerential forms on manifolds in order to derive the foregoing conclusions in tensorial
form. Indeed, one can start with the tensorial form of Helmholtz’s theorem (see Ref.[9]) and
go-ahead with a similar reasoning as the one we have followed in the preceding paragraphs.

15

6 Summary and Conclusions

We have presented an elementary proof of Gauss’ result concerning the linking
number of two curves. The proof is based on geometrical properties of a vector
ﬁeld, properties that are at the root of Helmholtz’s theorem. It could be cleared
up what at ﬁrst glance appeared as an astonishing connection between Gauss’
linking integral of two curves and the line integral of a magnetic ﬁeld. By ex-
posing the connection that holds between Helmholtz’s theorem and the linking
integral of Gauss, we could show which purely geometrical properties were be-
hind the line integral of a magnetic ﬁeld. In this way, we could lay bare the
essential constituents of the connection between an empirically established nat-
ural law (Maxwell’s equations) and a geometrical property of two curves (their
linking integral). Such essential constituents are certainly not characteristic of
the electromagnetic ﬁeld. As a consequence, we showed that starting from the
conservation of any property - like mass or charge - for which the continuity
equation holds true, one can arrive at equations which are mathematically iden-
tical to the Maxwell’s equations. These equations are therefore tightly linked to
a general statement telling us that something is conserved. Consider anything
- charge, matter, or whatever - the amount of which that is contained inside
an arbitrary volume changes with time. If this change is exclusively due to a
ﬂow through the volume’s boundary, then a continuity equation holds true. As
a consequence of it, a pair of Maxwell-like equations must be fulﬁlled for some
auxiliary ﬁelds that we may introduce, playing the role of D and H.

The fact that Maxwell’s equations with sources can be derived from charge
conservation is known [15], although it is not usual to ﬁnd it mentioned in stan-
dard textbooks of electromagnetism. Maxwell’s equations with sources involve
the ﬁelds D and H, whereas the source-free equations involve the ﬁelds E and
B. It is through some constitutive equations connecting (D, H) with (E, B)
that we obtain a closed system, i.e., the complete system of Maxwell’s equa-
tions. The constitutive equations express, in some way, the underlying proper-
ties of the medium where the ﬁelds act or are produced. From this perspective,
Maxwell’s equations entail besides charge conservation some other properties of
the medium, yet to be unraveled. These properties are eﬀectively described, in
the simplest case, through the permittivity ε and the permeability µ. The ﬁrst
one refers to electrical, the second one to magnetic, properties of the medium,
be it vacuum or any other one. It is just when the equations for (D, H) to-
gether with those for (E, B) do form a closed system, that we can derive a wave
equation for these ﬁelds. The velocity of wave propagation is then given by
c = (εµ)−1/2, the velocity of light. It is remarkable that the velocity of light can
be decomposed in terms of a product of two independent parameters. However,
the historical development in physics has led us to look at c as a fundamental
constant of Nature, instead of ε and µ . Nevertheless, currently discussed and
open questions related to accelerated observers, Unruh radiation, self-force on a
charge, magnetic monopoles and the like, might well require an approach where
the role of c recedes in favor of quantities like ε and µ. Such an approach could
perhaps be reminiscent of Helmholtz’s eﬀorts to develop an ether theory as the

16

basis of electrodynamics, a theory that strongly relied on the mathematical ma-
chinery that Gauss so much helped to develop. If this happens to be the case, it
will seem somewhat ironical that the Maxwell’s equations, when written in the
- by now - most commonly used Gaussian units, do not include but the single
constant c, hiding so ε and µ from our view. These last two constants might
well be key pieces that remain buried under the beauty of a uniﬁed theory of
electromagnetic phenomena, which is the version of electrodynamics that we
know and use today.

7 Appendix

b

ndS = n can be proved in the following way, in which
The assertion that
we will try not to veil with abstract deﬁnitions and too much mathematical
detail what we do intuitively take for true.

S v ·
R

The curve C1 pierces the surface S at diﬀerent points P1, P2, . . . , PN . These
points can be obtained as intersections of C1 and S7. Consider a neighborhood
Ni of Pi, it being suﬃciently small so as to contain no other point Pj 6= Pi. We
can deform this small portion Ni of S, making it ﬂat and lying parallel to the
S v · ndS, as long as C2,
XY -plane. By so doing we do not change the value of
the bounding curve of S, remains unchanged. The idea is to split the integral
R
S v · ndS into N contributions, each one of them corresponding to a small, ﬂat
surface that locally can be made lye parallel to the XY -plane. Now, in general,
R
the integral

S v · ndS can be expressed as [7]
R

v · ndS =

vz(x, y, f3(x, y))dxdy.

(A.1)

ZS

ZS

Here, v = (vx, vy, vz), whereas S is assumed to be described by the equation
z = f3(x, y). With v given by equation (14) and after properly adapting the
variables in equation (A.1) to our case, we have

v · ndS =

ds

δ(rx − x(s))δ(ry − y(s))δ(rz − z(s))drxdry.

(A.2)

ZS
In order to evaluate the integral on the right-hand side of equation (A.2) we

ZS Z

dz
ds

use the rule

δ(g(x)) =

δ(x − xi)
|g′(xi)|

,

(A.3)

xi
X
where the xi satisfy g(xi) = 0. Applying this property successively to equation
(A.2) we obtain

7Let C1 be given by equations of the form xi = f i(s), and S by equations of the form
xi = gi(u, v) with i = 1, 2, 3 and s, u, v some parameters. The points of intersection Pk ∈
C1 ∩ S are obtained by solving the system f i(s) = gi(u, v), i = 1, 2, 3, for s, u, v. In general,
there are a number N ≥ 0 of solutions (sk, uk, vk), k = 1, . . . N, of these equations.

17

ds

δ(rx − x(s))δ(ry − y(s))δ (rz(rx, ry) − z(s)) drxdry

N

v · ndS =

ZS

dz
ds

i=1 ZNi Z
X
N

=

Ni

i=1 Z
X
N

dz/ds
|dz/ds|

i=1
X

Ni

Z

=

±

δ(rx − x(s))δ(ry − y(s))drxdry =

±1 = n ≤ N.

δ(rx − x(s))δ(ry − y(s))drxdry

N

i=1
X

We have used the fact that the surface integral splits into N integrals, i.e.,
as many as the number of times that C1 pierces S. We have also used that each
Ni can be described as a small part of the plane rz = const.. It might occur
that in some cases C1 goes through S in one direction, turns then back and goes
through S again but in the opposite direction, without having wound around the
boundary C2 of S in-between. For these cases we have a positive contribution
(dz/ds = + |dz/ds|) followed by a negative one (dz/ds = − |dz/ds|). These
contributions cancel in pairs. In order that the contributions of two consecutive
points Pi and Pi+1 are of the same (positive) sign, it must occur that the portion
of C1 joining Pi and Pi+1 winds once around C2. At the end, what we obtain as
N
i=1(±1) is the number n of times that C1 winds around
a result of the sum
S v · ndS = n in equations (17) and (18) to obtain
C2. Hence, we may use that
Gauss’ result.
R

P

References

[1] Flanders H 1963 Diﬀerential Forms with Applications to the Physical Sci-

ences (New York: Academic Press) p 77–81.

[2] Epple M 1998 “Orbits of Asteroids, a Braid, and the First Link Invariant”,

The Mathematical Intelligencer, 20 number 1.

[3] Hirshfeld A C 1998 Am. J. Phys. 66 1060–66.

[4] Feynman R P, Leighton R B and Sands M 1964 The Feynman Lectures on

Physics (Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley), 1st. ed., 13–1.

[5] Hoyle C D, Schmidt U, Heckel B R, Adelberger E G, Gundlach J H, Kapner

D J, and Swanson H E 2001 Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 1418–21.

[6] Reitz J R and Milford F J 1962 Foundations of Electromagnetic Theory

(Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley) 1st. ed., p 152–163.

[7] Nikolsky S M 1977 A course of Mathematical Analysis (Moscow: MIR

Publishers), Vol. 2, p 104–6.

[8] Hauser W 1970 Am. J. Phys. 38 80–85.

18

[9] Kobe D H 1984 Am. J. Phys. 52 354–8.

[10] Kobe D H 1986 Am. J. Phys. 54 552–4 (1986).

[11] Baierlein R 1995 Am. J. Phys. 63 180–2 (1995).

[12] Arfken G B and Weber H J 1995 Mathematical Methods for Physicists (San

Diego: Academic Press), 4th ed., p 92–97.

[13] Batchelor G K 1970 An introduction to Fluid Dynamics, (Cambridge: Uni-

versity Press), p 88–99.

[14] Donnely R and Ziolkowski R W 1994 Am. J. Phys. 62 916-922.

[15] Parrot S 1987, Relativistic Electrodynamics and Diﬀerential Geometry

(New York: Springer) p 100.

19

