4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
1
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ESSAY REVIEW

Boltzmann-Gibbs Entropy Versus Tsallis Entropy: Recent
Contributions to Resolving the Argument of Einstein
Concerning “Neither Herr Boltzmann nor Herr Planck
has given a deﬁnition of W”?

H.J. Haubold
Oﬃce for Outer Space Aﬀairs, United Nations
P.O. Box 500 A-1400 Vienna, Austria

A.M. Mathai
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, McGill University,
Montreal, Canada H3A 2K6

R.K. Saxena
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Jai Narain Vyas University,
Jodhpur 342001, India

Abstract. Classical statistical mechanics of macroscopic systems in equilib-
rium is based on Boltzmann’s principle. Tsallis has proposed a generalization
of Boltzmann-Gibbs statistics. Its relation to dynamics and nonextensivity of
statistical systems are matters of intensive investigation and debate. This essay
review has been prepared at the occasion of awarding the ’Mexico Prize for Sci-
ence and Technology 2003’ to Professor Constantino Tsallis from the Brazilian
Center for Research in Physics.

Mathematical structures entered the development of physics, and problems
emanating from physics inﬂuenced developments in mathematics. Examples are
the role of Riemann’s diﬀerential geometry in Einstein’s general relativity, the
dynamical theory of space and time, and the inﬂuence of Heisenberg’s quantum
mechanics in the development of functional analysis built on the understand-
ing of Hilbert spaces. A prospective similar development occurred more than
a decade ago when non-Abelian gauge theories emerged as the quantum ﬁeld
theories for describing fundamental-particle interactions (Greene, 2000). Re-
cently, attention has turned to the applications of Riemann-Liouville fractional
calculus and Mandelbrot’s fractal geometry of nature to physics, including the
emerging Tsallis statistical mechanics (Abe and Okamoto, 2001; Gell-Mann and
Tsallis, 2004; Hilfer, 2000). The latter is the subject of this essay review.

Statistical mechanics concerns mechanics (classical, quantum, special or gen-
eral relativistic) and the theory of probabilities through the adoption of a spe-
ciﬁc entropic functional. Connection with thermodynamics and its macroscopic
laws is established through this functional. The entropy concept of statistical

mechanics has also been central to the creation of information theory by Shan-
non. A crucial step in these development was the development of a ﬁrst form
of non-equilibrium statistical mechanics (Prigogine, 1997).

The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution is Gaussian in particle velocities and
the whole distribution has physical meaning, so that being away from the
mean is not an error. In fact the whole distribution is (i) a prediction of the
Boltzmann-Gibbs entropic functional consistent with S = k lnW and (ii) a solu-
tion of the Boltzmann equation for thermodynamic equilibrium. Tsallis entropy
generalizes Boltzmann-Gibbs entropy and involves a power law: For an isolated
system, W is raised to the power (1 − q), where q is the entropic parameter. But
when the entropic parameter q equals one, Tsallis entropy equals the logarithmic
Boltzmann entropy

for q → 1 one obtains

S(Tsallis) = k

W 1−q − 1
1 − q

,

S(Boltzmann-Gibbs) = k lnW.

(1)

(2)

Although the equation on Boltzmann’s grave at the Vienna Central Cemetary
captures his insight into entropy, he never wrote it down himself. It was Planck
who, in 1900, ﬁrst put it into the form that became Boltzmann’s epitaph and
supported the birth of quantum theory (Pais, 1982; Sch¨opf, 1978). Later, in
one of his papers in his miraculous year 1905, Einstein called it Boltzmann’s
principle (Pais, 1982; Stachel, 1998). Equation (2) reﬂects the fundamental
insight that the second law of thermodynamics can be understood only in terms
of a connection between entropy and probability and thus the second law is
statistical in nature.

Einstein’s perspective on classical statistical mechanics and particularly on
Boltzmann’s principle is reﬂected by his written words ”Gew¨ohnlich wird W
gleichgesetzt der Anzahl der m¨oglichen verschiedenen Arten (Komplexionen),
in welchen der ins Auge gefasste, durch die beobachtbaren Parameter eines
Systems im Sinne einer Molekulartheorie unvollst¨andig deﬁnierte Zustand re-
alisiert gedacht werden kann. Um W berechnen zu k¨onnen, braucht man eine
vollst¨andige Theorie (etwa eine vollst¨andige molekular-mechanische Theorie) des
ins Auge gefassten Systems. Deshalb erscheint es fraglich, ob bei dieser Art
der Auﬀassung dem Boltzmannschen Prinzip allein, d.h. ohne eine vollst¨andige
molekular-mechanische oder sonstige die Elementarvorg¨ange vollst¨andig darstel-
lende Theorie (Elementartheorie) irgend ein Sinn zukommt. Die Gleichung
S = (R/N ) lgW + konst. erscheint ohne Beigabe einer Elementartheorie oder
- wie man es auch wohl ausdr¨ucken kann - vom ph¨anomenologischen Stand-
punkt aus betrachtet inhaltslos” (Einstein, 1910). [”Usually W is put equal to
the number of complexions in which the state of a system under consideration,
uncompletely deﬁned in the sense of a molecular theory through observable pa-
In order to calculate W , one needs a complete
rameters, could be realized.

(molecular-mechanical) theory of the system under consideration. Therefore, it
is dubious whether the Boltzmann principle as such has any meaning without a
complete molecular-mechanical theory or some other theory that describes the
elementary processes. The equation S = (R/N ) lgW + const. seems without
content, from a phenomenological point of view, without giving, in addition,
such an elementary theory”].

Further, Einstein emphasizes with respect to the equation S = (R/N ) lgW +
const., that ”Weder Herr Boltzmann noch Herr Planck haben eine Deﬁnition
von W gegeben. Sie setzen rein formal W = Anzahl der Komplexionen des
betrachteten Zustandes” (Einstein, 1909). [”Neither Herr Boltzmann nor Herr
Planck gave a deﬁntion of W . They put formally W = number of complexions
of the state under consideration”].

The total entropy of an ensemble is some function of W , the number of

microstates or “complexions”,

W =

n!
m nm!

Q
and all that remains is to ﬁnd that functional relationship which leads to results
that agree with experiment. The relationship which leads to success identiﬁes
the ensemble entropy with lnW according to Boltzmann’s equation S = k lnW ,
where S is the entropy of the entire ensemble. This equation is the fundamental
principle of Boltzmann-Gibbs statistical mechanics. There is no way to prove
it. One can only guess that it is right and then test the consequences against
experiment. The remaining steps are mathematical. First, one uses the equation
for W (mindfully observing Einstein’s argument on Boltzmann’s and Planck’s
approach as given above) to get an expression for lnW , and then one simpliﬁes
this expression and substitutes the result into S = k lnW to get an expression for
entropy. Finally, one maximizes the entropy to obtain the preferred distribution
of states. The distribution of probabilities for the possible states of an ensemble
is known as the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. It is by no means the only
distribution of probabilities that satisﬁes appropriate constraints on the total
internal energy and total number of members of the ensemble

U =

nm Em = constant,

Xm

Xm

N =

nm = constant.

The constancy of E results from the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics. The constancy
of N results because the ensemble is considered to be isolated. It is the particular
distribution that maximizes the ensemble entropy and which therefore conforms
to the laws of thermodynamics. To be speciﬁc, the above procedure applied to
Tsallis entropy in eq. (1) leads to Tsallis’s distribution

f (E, q) = Aq[1 − (q − 1)

1
q−1 ,

]

E
kT

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

where

Aq = (q − 1)1/2 3q − 1

2

1 + q
2

Γ( 1

q−1 )

2 + 1
Γ( 1
q−1 )

A1

as it leads to Maxwell-Boltzmann’s distribution if applied to eq. (2)

f (E) = A1exp

− E

(cid:26)

kT (cid:27)

(7)

where

)3/2

A1 = (

µ
2πkT
There is no need here to detail the record of successful applications of (7)
to experiment since Boltzmann established his theory more than hundred years
ago. However, it shall be highlighted here that Tsallis statistics has been applied
with increasing success to an impressive range of phenomena in physics, chem-
istry, biology, economics, linguistics, medicine, geophysics, computer science, to
name a few (Abe and Okamoto, 2001; Gell-Mann and Tsallis, 2004). Heated
debates in the scientiﬁc literature conﬁrm this and there is hope that they will
produce more light for the beneﬁt of understanding and applying Tsallis statis-
tics 1(Tsallis, 2004).

References

S. Abe and Y. Okamoto (Eds.): Nonextensive Statistical Mechanics and Its Ap-
plications, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg 2001.

A. Einstein: Zum gegenw¨artigen Stand des Strahlungsproblems, Physikalische
Zeitschrift 10 (1909) 185-193.
In J. Stachel (Ed.): The Collected Papers of
Albert Einstein, The Swiss Years: Writings, 1900-1909, Volume 2, Princeton
University Press, Princeton 1993, pp. 541-553.

A. Einstein: Theorie der Opaleszenz von homogenen Fl¨ussigkeiten und
Fl¨ussigkeitsgemischen in der N¨ahe des kritischen Zustandes, Annalen der Physik
(Leipzig) 33 (1910) 1275-1298. In M.J. Klein, A.J. Kox, J. Renn, and Robert
Schulmann (Eds.): The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein, The Swiss Years:
Writings, 1909-1911, Volume 3, Princeton University Press, Princeton 1993, pp.
286-312.

M. Gell-Mann and C. Tsallis (Eds.): Nonextensive Entropy - Interdisciplinary
1Tsallis statistics was part of the scientiﬁc programmes of the series of annual UN/ESA
Workshops on Basic Space Science since their inception in 1991, particularly related to the
gravitationally stabilized solar fusion reactor and solar neutrinos. A report on selected aspects
of these workshops was recently given in W. Wamsteker, R. Albrecht, and H.J. Haubold
(Eds.): Developing Basic Space Science World Wide: A Decade of UN/ESA Workshops,
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht 2004.

Applications, Oxford University Press, New York 2004.

B. Greene: The Elegant Universe - Superstrings, Hidden Dimensions, and the
Quest for the Ultimate Theory, Vintage Books, New York 2000.

R. Hilfer (Ed.): Applications of Fractional Calculus in Physics, World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore 2000.

A. Pais: ’Subtle is the Lord ...’: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein,
Oxford University Press, Oxford 1982.

I. Prigogine: The End of Certainty - Time, Chaos, and the New Laws of Nature,
The Free Press, New York 1997.

H.-G. Sch¨opf: Von Kirchhoﬀ bis Planck (in German), Akademie-Verlag, Berlin
1978.

J. Stachel (Ed.): Einstein’s Miraculous Year - Five Papers That Changed the
Face of Physics, Princeton University Press, Princeton 1998.

C. Tsallis: Some thoughts on theoretical physics, arXiv:cond-mat/0312699, v2,
7 February 2004.

