4
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
6
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the Persistence of Homogeneous Matter

All Souls College, Oxford OX1 4AL
email: jb56@cus.cam.ac.uk; jeremy.butterﬁeld@all-souls.oxford.ac.uk

J. Butterﬁeld

Saturday 22 May 2004

Abstract

Some recent philosophical debate about persistence has focussed on an argu-
ment against perdurantism that discusses rotating perfectly homogeneous discs
(the ‘rotating discs argument’; RDA). The argument has been mostly discussed
by metaphysicians, though it appeals to ideas from classical mechanics, espe-
cially about rotation. In contrast, I assess the RDA from the perspective of the
philosophy of physics.

After introducing the argument and emphasizing the relevance of physics
(Sections 1 to 3), I review some metaphysicians’ replies to the argument, espe-
cially those by Callender, Lewis, Robinson and Sider (Section 4). Thereafter, I
argue for three main conclusions. They all arise from the fact, emphasized in
Section 2, that classical mechanics (non-relativistic as well as relativistic) is both
more subtle, and more problematic, than philosophers generally realize.

The ﬁrst conclusion is that the RDA can be formulated more strongly than is
usually recognized: it is not necessary to “imagine away” the dynamical eﬀects
of rotation (Section 5.5). The second is that in general relativity, the RDA fails
because of frame-dragging (Section 5.6).

The third is that even setting aside general relativity, the strong formulation
of the RDA can after all be defeated (Section 6). Namely, by the perdurantist
taking objects in classical mechanics (whether point-particles or continuous bod-
ies) to have only temporally extended, i.e. non-instantaneous, temporal parts:
which immediately blocks the RDA. Admittedly, this version of perdurantism
deﬁnes persistence in a weaker sense of ‘deﬁnition’ than pointilliste versions that
aim to deﬁne persistence assuming only instantaneous temporal parts. But I
argue that temporally extended temporal parts: (i) can do the jobs within the
endurantism-perdurantism debate that the perdurantist wants temporal parts to
do; and (ii) are supported by both classical and quantum mechanics.

Contents

1 Introduction

1.1 The RDA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.2

1.3

Intrinsic properties and velocities

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

“Naturalism” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.4 The accompaniments of rotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.5 Two kinds of reply: Against the consensus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

2 The relevance of physics

2.1 Classical mechanics is subtle and problematic

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Classical physics leads to relativity theory and quantum theory . . . . .

2.3 Prospectus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 The RDA and kinds of reply—in detail

3.1 The argument: keeping track of homogeneous matter . . . . . . . . . .

3.2 Why continuous and homogeneous matter? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2.1 Tracking matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2.2 The persistence of spatial points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2.3 The accompaniments of rotation—again . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3 Tu quoque? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.4 Kinds of reply . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Some metaphysical replies

4.1 Appealing to causation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2 Appealing to velocities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.1 The consensus against velocities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.2 Against the consensus

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3 Velocities on the cheap? Lewis and Robinson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3.1 The proposal

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3.2 Assessment

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.4 Functionally deﬁning persistence and laws: Sider . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 Describing rotation

1

3

4

6

7

9

11

12

15

18

20

20

21

22

23

23

24

25

28

29

32

32

34

43

44

47

51

54

5.1 The need for precision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2 Motion needs a connection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3 Connections, metric and rotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3.1 Common ingredients

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3.2 Details: the rotation tensor

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3.3 Rotation in general relativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.4 The endurantism-perdurantism debate in the light of physics . . . . . .

5.5 Dynamical eﬀects revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.5.1 Rotation is kinematic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.5.2 Beware of rigidity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.5.3 An improved RDA—allowing dynamical eﬀects

. . . . . . . . .

5.6 The RDA fails in general relativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6 Replying to the RDA

6.1 Two replies

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.2 Some details of persistence within classical mechanics . . . . . . . . . .

6.2.1 Comparison with Sider . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.2.2 Persistence and the web of belief

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7 Perdurantism without tears: the classical case

7.1 Rejecting instantaneous temporal parts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7.2

Intrinsic properties of non-instantaneous temporal parts . . . . . . . . .

7.2.1 Can the perdurantist appeal to them?

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7.2.2 Temporal intrinsicality at an instant is rare . . . . . . . . . . . .

7.2.3 A better reason for temporal intrinsicality . . . . . . . . . . . .

7.3 Non-instantaneous parts can do the jobs

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7.4 Velocity revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8 Support from decoherence in quantum theory

8.1 Classical and quantum: relativizing the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction .

8.1.1 Unitarity: momentum as temporally intrinsic

. . . . . . . . . .

8.2 Position and existence as nomically extrinsic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9 References

2

54

55

57

57

58

59

61

64

64

65

67

68

71

71

71

71

72

79

80

83

83

84

86

86

90

91

91

92

93

97

1 Introduction

This paper is an attempt to connect what modern physics, especially classical physics,
says about matter, with the debate in analytic metaphysics whether an object per-
sists over time by the selfsame object existing at diﬀerent times (nowadays called ‘en-
durance’), or by diﬀerent temporal parts, or stages, existing at diﬀerent times (called
‘perdurance’). This is a multi-faceted debate, with various connections to physics and
the philosophy of physics. This paper focusses on just one such connection.
I will
assess, from the perspective of the philosophy of physics, a metaphysical argument
against perdurantism, which is based on the idea of rotating homogeneous matter, and
is nowadays often called the ‘rotating discs argument’ (RDA). I will argue, against
much of the literature, that the argument fails, because of some features of classical
mechanics (including how it should be interpreted in the light of quantum mechanics).
But my larger hope is to connect the philosophy of physics, and metaphysics, commu-
nities. In this hope, I will sometimes expound details familiar to one community or
the other—at the cost of some length!

I begin by outlining the argument, the kinds of reply usually made to it, and my
own preferred reply (Section 1). This will lead to an discussion of how physics, and
philosophy of physics, is relevant to the argument (Section 2). This will include a more
detailed prospectus of the later Sections (Section 2.3). But in short, I will:

(i): present some more details about the RDA’s assumptions and scope (Section 3);
(ii): discuss some replies made to it in the metaphysical literature (Section 4);
(iii): present some details of how physics describes rotation, and thereby formulate
a stronger version of the RDA than the usual one—albeit one that fails in general
relativity (Section 5);

(iv): present my own two replies to the RDA (Sections 6-8); of which I favour
the second. This reply involves some novel proposals about the intrinsic-extrinsic
distinction among properties. It is also supported by the way in which the objects of
classical mechanics emerge from quantum theory.

This paper is a part of a larger project. My (2004, 2004a) describe some other
connections between the endurantism-perdurantism debate and aspects of physics and
its philosophy. In particular, my (2004) presents in more detail both the endurantism-
perdurantism debate, and my arguments against philosophers’ tendency to interpret
classical mechanics in what I will call a pointilliste way (cf. Section 2.1). For the
moment, suﬃce it to say that I conceive the endurantism-perdurantism debate in much
the same way as Sider’s ﬁne recent survey, and defence of perdurantism (2001); cf. also
Hawley (2001). Hawley and Sider also both discuss the RDA, at pp. 72-90, and
224-236, respectively.

3

1.1 The RDA

The argument envisages that the perdurantist with her ontology of temporal parts faces
the project of deﬁning persistence: since persistence is not identity, she needs to tell us
what it is. (This project is called ‘analyzing persistence’, and ‘analyzing or deﬁning the
genidentity relation between temporal parts’.) In particular, she needs to deﬁne per-
sistence so as to distinguish “ordinary persisting objects” (i.e. the referents of ordinary
terms, and elements of ordinary domains of quantiﬁcation) from the countless other
“spacetime worms”, i.e. mereological fusions of temporal parts. (Most perdurantists
accept unrestricted mereological composition, so that they also accept these worms as
genuine objects.) On pain of circularity, the deﬁniens is not to presuppose the notion
of persistence.

The argument urges that the perdurantist cannot succeed in this project.1

It is

based on two ideas:

(i) Homogeneous: In a continuum (i.e. a continuous body whose composing matter
entirely ﬁlls its volume) that is utterly homogeneous throughout a time-interval con-
taining two times t0, t1, a spatial part at the time t0 is equally qualitatively similar
to any spatial part congruent to itself (i.e. of the same size and shape) at the later
time t1. (The properties of the continuum can change over time, but must not vary
over space; e.g. the continuum could cool down, but must at each time have the same
temperature everywhere.)

(ii) Follow: The perdurantist will presumably try to deﬁne persistence in terms of
suitable relations of qualitative similarity between temporal parts. The obvious tactic
is to have the deﬁniens “follow” the curves in spacetime that are timelike and track
maximum qualitative similarity.

The tactic of Follow seems to work well when applied to point-particles moving in
a void each with a continuous spacetime trajectory (worldline). For however exactly
we deﬁne ‘maximum qualitative similarity’, there will no doubt be, starting at a point-
particle at t0, a unique timelike curve of qualitative similarity passing through it: the
worldline of the particle.
(Indeed, for this case we could dispense with qualitative
similarity, and have the deﬁniens refer just to spacetime points’ property of being
occupied by matter.) Similarly for point-particles moving, not in a void, but in a
continuous ﬂuid with suitably diﬀerent properties—a diﬀerent “colour”, or made of
diﬀerent “stuﬀ”, than the point-particle. (Again, we could have the deﬁniens refer just
to spacetime points’ property of being occupied by matter with the “colour”, or made
of the “stuﬀ”, of the given point-particle.)2

1The RDA arose in recent philosophy in Kripke (unpublished lectures) and Armstrong (1980).
Zimmerman (1998) reports how the argument goes back at least to Broad in 1925. Sider (2001, p.
226) notes that Leibniz (1698, sect. 13) deploys essentially the same argument: but Leibniz’s target
is Descartes’ doctrines about matter and motion.

2Agreed, one can object that: (i) any such deﬁniens is too weak, i.e. not suﬃcient for persistence,
since a god could instantaneously destroy a point-particle and immediately replace it with a qualitative
replica—suggesting that the deﬁniens must invoke causal notions; and-or that (ii) any such deﬁniens is
too strong, i.e. not necessary for persistence, since a point-particle could jump about discontinuously.

4

But Homogeneous implies that Follow’s strategy stumbles when applied to a ho-
mogeneous continuum. There are altogether too many spatial parts at t1 that are
tied-ﬁrst-equal as regards qualitative similarity to the given spatial part at t0: any
congruent spatial part will do. In other words: the curves of qualitative similarity run
“every which way”.

This problem is made vivid by urging that the perdurantist cannot distinguish two
cases that, the argument alleges, must be distinguished. One main example, on which
I will focus, is the case of a perfectly circular and rigid disc of homogeneous matter
that is stationary; and a duplicate disc (rigid and congruent to, made of the same
homogeneous material as, at the same temperature as etc. the ﬁrst) that is rotating
about the axis through its centre. It will be convenient to have labels for two such
possibilities: call them ‘(Stat)’ and ‘(Rot)’.

Hence the argument is nowadays often called the ‘rotating discs argument’ (RDA).
(In some discussions, both discs are rotating, but with diﬀerent velocities, maybe even
in diﬀerent senses.) But all agree that countless other examples would serve just as well
as a disc: e.g. a sphere; or a body of ﬂuid, like a river, that can be either stationary
or ﬂowing (or ﬂowing with diﬀerent speeds, or in diﬀerent directions).

It seems that the endurantist can easily distinguish the two possibilities, according
to whether the very same non-circularly-symmetric part, e.g. a segment, is in the same
place at two times. Later (especially Sections 3.3, 5.3), I will pursue the question
whether this is really so: can the endurantist legitimately use the notion of being in
the same place at two times, i.e. the notion of persisting spatial points? (This question
is almost entirely ignored in the metaphysical literature: authors often appeal without
further discussion to the idea of “the same place” (e.g. Hawley 2001, p. 85).) But for
the moment, I just assume, in order to give the RDA as good a run as possible, that
the answer is Yes.

On the other hand, it seems the perdurantist has a problem. Surely she must say
that all the relations (and therefore, all her proﬀered “suitable relations” for analysing
persistence) between two temporal parts of the disc (say, second-long parts at noon and
12.01) are the same—whether the disc is rotating or not? And similarly for temporal
parts at the two times of any spatial part of the disc, such as a segment.

The rest of this Section clariﬁes the scope of this argument, and the kinds of reply
the perdurantist can give to it. This will yield a statement of a consensus which is
widespread in the literature—and an announcement of how the remainder of the paper
will argue against that consensus.

I address these objections in Sections 4.1-4.2.1 of my (2004a). In short: as to (i) I am sceptical of the
appeal to causation—a topic I will return to in Section 4.1 below; and as to (ii), I suggest we restrict
the deﬁniens to point-particles assumed to have continuous worldlines. But the details of my replies
are not needed for this paper: for they are no help to the perdurantist in facing the trouble made by
the RDA.

5

1.2

Intrinsic properties and velocities

So far I have expressed the RDA’s main idea as the inadequacy, for deﬁning persistence,
of qualitative similarity. But in some versions of the argument, the emphasis is instead
on the inadequacy of intrinsic properties. The intrinsic-extrinsic distinction among
properties is controversial, but the rough idea is that possession of an intrinsic property
implies nothing about the possessor’s environment, i.e. about matters of fact beyond
the instance. So in these versions, the target is a perdurantist who seeks a deﬁniens
using intrinsic properties of temporal parts. And in some versions, the target is a
yet stronger neo-Humean doctrine to the eﬀect that (roughly speaking) all facts—not
just facts of persistence—are determined by all the various intrinsic properties of all
the points of spacetime. The most inﬂuential version of this sort of extreme pointilliste
doctrine is Humean supervenience, as formulated and defended by Lewis (1986, p. ix-x;
1994, p. 474; 1999).

This emphasis on intrinsic properties goes along with an objection to the obvious
suggestion that what distinguishes the two cases is the direction of the instantaneous
velocity of the disc’s (or sphere’s, or river’s) constituent parts. Thus for the stationary
disc, all the disc’s parts have zero velocity; while for the rotating disc, the parts have
various velocities (and for a perfectly rigid disc, a common angular velocity); and
similarly for the sphere or river. But, says the RDA, the notion of velocity presupposes
the persistence of the object concerned. For average velocity is a quotient, whose
numerator must be the distance traversed by the given persisting object: otherwise
you could give me a superluminal velocity by dividing the distance between me and
the Sun by a time less than eight minutes. So average velocity’s limit, instantaneous
velocity, surely also presupposes the notion of persistence. Accordingly, says the RDA,
the perdurantist cannot adopt the obvious suggestion, of distinguishing the cases in
terms of instantaneous velocity (or angular velocity)—on pain of circularity.

The notion of presupposition, like the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction, is controver-
sial. Besides, Tooley (1988) proposes a heterodox account of instantaneous velocity
as an intrinsic property of an object at a time; (and Bigelow and Pargetter (1989,
1990 Section 2.6) propose a similar account). Though these authors are not concerned
with the debate over persistence, their account of velocity has been discussed in the
context of the RDA. So I shall later return to the idea of appealing to velocity, and to
this heterodox account of it (Section 4.2). But for the most part, I will concede the
above objection. That is, I will concede that both average and instantaneous velocity
presuppose the notion of persistence, and are extrinsic properties. Nevertheless, my
favoured reply to the RDA (Section 7) will be that a perdurantist who accepts only
non-instantaneous temporal parts (a version of perdurantism which, I contend, is sup-
ported by physics) can endorse the obvious suggestion, i.e. can appeal to velocities to
distinguish the two cases.

6

1.3 “Naturalism”

So far, my description of the perdurantist project of deﬁning persistence, and of the
RDA against it, might well be read within the tradition of conceptual analysis. By this
I mean that the perdurantist’s deﬁnition would be both ﬁnite in length, and formulated
using everyday concepts. But nowadays, the literature also considers a “naturalized”
perdurantist project of

(a): providing only a supervenience basis for persistence (i.e. allowing inﬁnitely

long deﬁnitions), rather than a ﬁnite deﬁnition or analysis of it; and-or

(b): appealing to technical notions, and contingent bodies of doctrine, in par-
ticular the laws of dynamics. Also, some authors combine (b) with use of the Ramsey-
Lewis technique for simultaneous functional deﬁnition; (in particular, Sider (2001, 224-
236)—details in Section 4.4).

Accordingly, the RDA is nowadays sometimes formulated as targeting even: (a) the
supervenience of persistence on qualitative similarity among, and-or intrinsic proper-
ties of, the perdurantist’s temporal parts; where (b) such supervenience may even be
contingent, say relative to the laws of a dynamical theory.

This situation prompts two comments: the ﬁrst relates mostly to (a), the second

mostly to (b).

(1): Non-reductive perdurantism:— There is also an even more naturalistic con-
ception of perdurantism, which might well avoid the RDA. On this conception, the
perdurantist seeks a theory of perdurance and related concepts, that can appeal to
scientiﬁc technicalities, that can revise rather than describe our concepts—and that
does not have to deﬁne persistence in terms that do not presuppose it. Of course,
analogous “non-reductive” conceptions are nowadays commonplace in the philosoph-
ical study of many concepts, such as causation, perception and action. So just as a
philosophical theory of causation might decline to deﬁne causation (even inﬁnitarily,
even by Ramsey-Lewis functional deﬁnition), a perdurantist might decline to deﬁne
persistence (even in these liberalized senses), on the grounds that she nevertheless says
enough to adequately distinguish “ordinary persisting objects” from other “spacetime
worms”. I shall return to this modest (because non-reductive) perdurantism in Section
7. But until then I shall consider the more ambitious perdurantist, who aspires to
deﬁne persistence, and so faces the RDA.

(2): How many worlds?:— Once we allow that a perdurantist theory of persistence
might appeal to a contingent body of doctrine, such as a physical theory, the discussion
of the RDA (or even the whole endurantism-perdurantism debate) is liable to become
relative to a theory. There are two aspects to this; the ﬁrst leads on to the second.

(2.A): The RDA might hold good in one theory, and fail in another. Thus it
is a familiar thought that any consistent theory lays out a set of possibilities:
in
philosophical jargon, possible worlds according to the theory; in physics jargon, a space
of solutions. So relative to any consistent theory about matter and rotation (describing
them no doubt partially rather than completely—and perhaps falsely), the two cases
(Stat) and (Rot) are either two distinct possibilities: or they are not, either because

7

at least one is not possible (since e.g. the theory denies that matter is homogeneous),
or because they are the same possibility.

This point is independent of whether to accept the notion of a law of nature, not
relativized to a speciﬁc scientiﬁc theory. Authors (on either side of the endurantism-
perdurantism debate) who accept this notion can consider contingent theses of reduc-
tion or supervenience cast in such terms, e.g. supervenience across a class of possible
worlds that each make true all the actual laws of nature. For example, Armstrong
and Lewis (to whom I will return in Section 4) are two such authors, and both perdu-
rantists: though they disagree about how to understand laws of nature, and how the
perdurantist should respond to the RDA.

On the other hand, authors who reject the notion will construe contingent su-
pervenience theses, and so perhaps their discussion of the RDA (or even the whole
endurantism-perdurantism debate), as relative to a given theory.

I myself will not need the notion of a law of nature; (indeed, I am wary of it). And
we will later see the RDA holding good, and failing, in diﬀerent theories. But I will
of course allow for evaluation of the RDA which is not wholly relative to a theory. In
particular, special interest will of course attach to the case of true theories: or to put
it from our epistemic perspective, theories that are our best guess for truth. Such an
interest does not presuppose “scientiﬁc realism”, which concerns whether we should
believe the theoretical claims of our best theory to be at least approximately true. Any
“naturalist”, whether or not they are a “scientiﬁc realist”, will of course be especially
interested in whether the RDA holds good in our best theory of matter and rotation.
(I will in fact argue that the RDA fails, not only in general relativity and quan-
tum theory—our best guesses about space, time and gravity, on the one hand, and
about matter, on the other—but even in classical mechanics, under an interpretation
I favour.)

(2.B): But we should beware of just dismissing the RDA on the ground that ac-
cording to our best theories, matter is in fact made of atoms and so not homogeneous.
For presumably:

(i): A continuous, rigid and utterly homogeneous form of matter could exist and

be formed into a disc that either rotates or is stationary. And:

(ii): No philosopher of persistence is “so far gone” in naturalism as to be interested

only in how objects persist, given all the contingencies of the actual world.

In what follows, I will agree with these presumptions, so as to give the RDA against
perdurantism as good a run as possible. But it is worth drawing attention to them
since, as we shall see:

(i’): The sort of continuous and homogeneous matter the RDA needs is a much
subtler and more problematic aﬀair than the RDA literature typically recognizes; (cf.
Section 2). This leads in to (ii’):—

(ii’): Some perdurantists reply to the RDA by saying that for the possibilities (Stat)
and (Rot) to exhibit no diﬀerence to which the perdurantist can appeal, the advocate
of the RDA needs to “imagine away” so many actual laws, technical and-or everyday,

8

which describe various causes and eﬀects of rotation, that the RDA’s possibilities (Stat)
and (Rot) are, though logically or metaphysically possible, very arcane. Indeed, they
are so arcane that a naturalist perdurantist need feel no shame in being unable to
accommodate them.

To put the reply (ii’) in the jargon of possible worlds: the perdurantist claims their
theory of persistence, though contingent and unable to discriminate the possibilities
(Stat) and (Rot), is true in so broad a class of possible worlds that excluding (at least
one of) (Stat) and (Rot) is a small price—and worth paying. (Examples of this reply
include: Lewis (1986, p.xiii, 1994, p. 475), Callender (2001), and (less explicitly) Sider
(2001, 230-236).) This leads to the next Subsection.

1.4 The accompaniments of rotation

Rotation has countless typical causes and eﬀects; or if one is wary of causal talk: count-
less typical accompaniments. Typically, a rotating object was previously set in motion,
say by being pushed by someone, and exhibits distinctive dynamical eﬀects:
for ex-
ample, a solid object tends to become oblate, and a ﬂuid, like water in a whirlpool,
develops a concave surface. These accompaniments do not depend on matter being in
fact atomistic (or on the laws of physics being relativistic and quantum). So in a possi-
ble world that contained continuous and homogeneous matter but was otherwise “like
the actual world”, these accompaniments—even the “technical” ones, like oblateness
and concavity—would occur. In which case, the RDA needs to block the perdurantist
appealing to them so as to distinguish the cases.

True to the tradition of conceptual analysis, the literature on the RDA almost
entirely sets aside the technical accompaniments, and concentrates on the everyday
ones, like having been pushed in the past; and on related everyday counterfactuals,
such as ‘were I to spray a spot of paint on the disc, I would see it move’, or ‘were
I to grasp the disc, I would feel friction’. More speciﬁcally, the literature tends to
assume that the RDA can legitimately set aside all the technical accompaniments by
just stipulating that the rotating disc is not only solid but perfectly rigid, so that it
does not become oblate; (hence Section 1.1’s mention of rigidity). The philosophical
battle can then be joined on two battleﬁelds familiar to metaphysicians; as follows.

First, there is debate about whether the RDA can legitimately “imagine away”
the everyday accompaniments of rotation, so that the perdurantist cannot appeal to
them. In particular: if (as usual) the RDA stipulates that the present and “occurrent”
everyday accompaniments are absent, can the perdurantist appeal to past or future
accompaniments, or perhaps to counterfactuals about them? For example:

(i) Can the perdurantist make the distinction by appealing to a past cause, such as

a push, or to a present counterfactual about seeing a paint-spot move?

(ii) Or would appealing to a past cause amount to postulating an unacceptable
“temporal action-at-a-distance” (e.g. Robinson 1989 p. 405-406; Hawley 2001 p. 81)?
(iii) And would appealing to a present counterfactual amount to postulating unac-

9

ceptably “ungrounded” counterfactual truths (Robinson 1989 p. 403; Hawley 2001 p.
74-75)?

Second, there is debate about whether the perdurantist can appeal to diﬀerences
between (Stat) and (Rot) that are distinctively metaphysical (neither everyday nor
technical-physical). For example: Can the perdurantist appeal to:

(i) a special (non-Humean) relation of immanent causation between temporal parts
that subvenes (or even yields an analysis of) persistence (Armstrong 1980, 1997, pp.
73-74); or

(ii) special vectorial properties that are numerically equal to, yet diﬀerent from,
velocities (Robinson 1989 pp. 406-408, Lewis 1999: incidentally, this idea echoes Leib-
niz’s proposal against Descartes (1698, sect. 13)); or

(iii) non-causal relations between temporal parts that are not supervenient on the
intrinsic natures of the parts that are the relata, and yet are not just spatiotemporal
relations (Hawley: 1999, p. 63-66; 2001, p. 85-90)?

For my reply to the RDA, I do not need to enter either of these battleﬁelds; (fortu-
nately, since they remain well-populated, despite the crossﬁre!). As to the ﬁrst, I can
set aside the “everyday accompaniments”. For I shall argue (especially in Sections 2
and 5) that the RDA should not just set aside technicalities, in particular the technical
accompaniments of rotation; and that in any case, it cannot do so just by stipulating
perfect rigidity. As to the second, my reply to the RDA (in Section 6) does not need
controversial metaphysical proposals like immanent causation, special vectorial prop-
erties etc. (of which I am in any case wary). However, I will make some points about
these proposals, from the perspective of the philosophy of physics (Section 4).

1.5 Two kinds of reply: Against the consensus

We can sum up “the story so far” in two stages. First, there are two main ways
perdurantists can reply (and have replied) to the RDA. They can either:

(‘Appealing Diﬀerences’): argue that there are diﬀerences between the discs to
‘someone pushed it’), technical (e.g.
‘the timelike curves of immanent causation are

which they can appeal; whether everyday (e.g.
‘it’s oblate’) or metaphysical (e.g.
helical, not straight’); or

(‘No Diﬀerence’): argue that possible worlds in which the discs show no such
they do not fall within the scope of their

i.e.

diﬀerence are too arcane to matter:
“naturalist” account of persistence.

Second: In the literature on the RDA, considerations of metaphysics, and in par-
ticular conceptual analysis, tend to dominate. This dominance has led to a widespread
consensus on four points: two in support of the RDA, and two against the perdurantist.
Namely:

(I): The RDA can legitimately

(a) imagine away the usual accompaniments of rotation: both the everyday
ones; and the technical ones such as discs tending to be become oblate (in the latter

10

case, by requiring the discs to be rigid);

(b) assume the intuitive notion of rotation, with its idea of persisting spatial

points.

can they

On the other hand:
(II): the perdurantist cannot legitimately

(c) appeal to diﬀerences of velocity, since velocity presupposes persistence; nor

(d) appeal to the atomic, indeed quantum-theoretic, nature of matter, since the
topic of debate is our common-sense conception of persistence—which surely allows
continuous matter.

Turning to this paper: I shall argue against the consensus (a)-(d). Section 5 argues
against (a) and (b); Sections 6 to 8 against (c) and (d).
(Sections 2 to 4 will set
the stage for these arguments.) The overall eﬀect will be twofold. As to (a) and
(b): I will concede that there are sound versions of the RDA. Indeed, the RDA can
be formulated more strongly than usual (i.e. than Section 1.1’s formulation): for it
does not need to imagine away the usual accompaniments of rotation. But as to (c)
and (d): a certain sort of perdurantist—roughly speaking, one who accepts only non-
instantaneous temporal parts—can both appeal to diﬀerences of velocity, and garner
support for their position from quantum theory.

2 The relevance of physics

So much by way of introducing the RDA. We have already seen that it raises issues in
the philosophy of physics as much as in metaphysics. There is of course a spectrum
here, from “common sense” doctrines about persistence to “folk physics” to technical
physics. And I agree that it is in part a matter of intellectual judgment and-or interest:
(i) how far along the spectrum to move; and if one considers technical physics, (ii) which
physical theories to consider, classical or quantum, relativistic or non-relativistic. But
only in part! I shall argue that the philosophy of persistence needs to go further towards
technical physics than the literature on the RDA tends to.

By and large, the RDA literature engages a bit with “folk physics”, but not tech-
nical physics. There are two connected aspects to this restriction. First, the literature
sets aside the fact that matter is in fact made of atoms. Almost all authors maintain
that our “common-sense” notions of matter and its persistence are surely compatible
with matter’s being continuous in its composition; so that a perdurantist seeking an
account of these notions faces the RDA.3 And most authors, especially those closer to
traditional conceptual analysis, maintain that these notions form a framework suﬃ-
3I say ‘surely compatible’ since some authors toy with the view that the RDA shows that the com-
patibility is an illusion: our notion of matter and its persistence requires atomistic matter. Robinson
(1989, p.404, reporting Lewis) portrays this as an example of the traditional “paradox of analysis”:
roughly, that philosophical analysis can reveal surprising truths.

11

ciently widespread, and cognitively central, for such an account to be not parochial,
but worthwhile; and worthwhile even if continuous matter is “science ﬁction physics”
(e.g. Robinson 1989, pp. 396-398; Zimmerman 1999, p. 213).

Second, although many authors in this literature discuss velocity, even instanta-
neous velocity—and several brieﬂy discuss allied concepts from elementary mechanics,
like force and momentum—almost all set aside technical physics: not just the modern
theories which are our best guesses, viz. relativity theory and quantum theory, but
also the details of the classical mechanical description of rotation and of continua (i.e
continuous bodies).4

I believe these two aspects—taking common sense to encompass continua, and
setting aside technical physics—arise from two mutually related, and widespread, as-
sumptions. But these assumptions are in fact false—and correcting these assumptions
will be the main ingredient in my rebuttal of the RDA. In short, the assumptions are:
(Straightforward): The ontology of classical mechanics, including the classical me-

chanics of continua, is straightforward, i.e. unproblematic.

(Bracket): Although the world is in fact relativistic and quantum, we can “bracket”
this fact when we investigate persistence. That is: classical mechanics, or at least clas-
sical physics as a whole, forms a coherent whole, which can be safely assumed to
provide the supervenience basis on which facts about the persistence of macro-objects
supervene.

So in the next two Subsections, I shall spell out the errors of these two assumptions,
and so urge that the philosophy of physics is relevant to the RDA. That will serve to
introduce Section 2.3’s Section-by-Section prospectus.5

2.1 Classical mechanics is subtle and problematic

(Straightforward) says that the ontology of classical mechanics, including the classical
mechanics of continua, is unproblematic. More precisely, I think the literature assumes
a conception of the ontology of classical mechanics, which I call the particles-in-motion
picture. This analyses matter into extensionless particles: either point-particles sepa-
rated from each other by a vacuum, or the extensionless inﬁnitesimal constituents of a
continuum (i.e. continuous body), “cheek by jowl” with each other. In either case, the
composition and behaviour of matter is analysed in terms of extensionless particles,
interacting by particle-to-particle forces such as gravity (with their motions through
Euclidean space determined by the forces, according to Newton’s second law). Fur-
thermore, the literature assumes that this particles-in-motion picture is unproblematic,
4So far as I know, only one article about the RDA engages with technical physics: viz. Callender
(2001), who discusses the classical physics of rotation; I discuss it below. Oppy (2000) surveys vari-
ous threats from physics, including quantum physics, to Lewis’ Humean supervenience; but without
focussing on persistence.

5For a more detailed discussion of the two aspects above, and these two assumptions, cf. Sections

2.2 and 2.3 of my 2004.

12

as regards matter; i.e. once one sets aside the various familiar philosophical problems
about space and time (e.g. “absolute” or “relational”?).

This assumption, (Straightforward), leads to the ﬁrst aspect of the RDA literature’s
restriction, i.e.
its taking common sense to encompass continua. For the assumption
implies that: (i) philosophical discussions of persistence have no need to tangle with
the details of mechanics, either of point-particles or of continua; and (ii) since continua
are both countenanced by common sense and unproblematic, an account of persistence
needs to allow for matter being continuous, even though matter is in fact made of
atoms—so the perdurantist faces the RDA.

But the particles-in-motion picture is wrong. There are in fact considerable con-
ceptual tensions in classical mechanics’ description of matter, whether conceived as
point-particles or as continua. Besides, classical continua cannot be treated in the
“pointilliste”, i.e. particle-by-particle, way envisaged by the particles-in-motion pic-
ture.

Obviously I cannot here enter into details about the foundations of classical me-
chanics. I will only present two points that bear directly on my concern with the RDA.
The ﬁrst illustrates classical mechanics’ subtlety, and will be directly relevant below:
in Sections 4.2 and 7 it will give the perdurantist a reply to the RDA. The second illus-
trates how classical mechanics is problematic, and will lead in to the next Subsection
(against assumption (Bracket)).6

(1): Against pointillisme: The ﬁrst point is that classical mechanics does not in fact
describe continua in the pointilliste way that the particles-in-motion picture envisages.
Instead, the classical mechanics of continua has to be formulated in terms of spatially
extended regions and their properties and relations. In particular, one cannot under-
stand the forces operating in continua (whether solids or ﬂuids) as particle-to-particle.
Rather, one needs to conceive of a force being exerted on the entirety of an arbitrary
ﬁnite (i.e. not inﬁnitesimal) portion of matter, and of a force being exerted at the sur-
face of such an portion. In Sections 4.2 and 7, this anti-pointillisme will be extended to
include temporal extension (motivated in part by quantum theory). It will thereby give
the perdurantist the right to have only temporally extended, i.e. non-instantaneous,
parts: and this will secure a reply to the RDA.

This need to take extended regions as primitives is worth stressing, even apart from
the debate about RDA; for two reasons. First, I admit that prima facie the particles-
in-motion picture’s strategy for analysing continuous matter is more attractive. For the
alternative strategy, of describing the states of all the countless overlapping extended
sub-regions of a continuum, is highly redundant: each sub-region is described countless
times, viz. as a part of the description of a larger region in which it is included. Never-
theless, classical mechanics adopts—and needs to adopt—this alternative strategy. In
6My 2004 gives a more detailed critique of the particles-in-motion picture, especially of its pointil-
lisme. For classical mechanics’ anti-pointillisme, cf. e.g. Truesdell (1991, especially Sections II.2,
III.1, III.5). For a philosopher’s general introduction to the conceptual tensions in classical mechan-
ics’ description of matter, I recommend Wilson’s papers, e.g. his (1997) and (2000).

13

short: a redundancy worth remarking.

Second, pointillisme has been a prevalent theme in recent analytic metaphysics:
witness the recent interest in Lewis’ pointilliste doctrine of Humean supervenience. But
classical mechanics’s anti-pointillisme seems not to have been noticed in metaphysics;
though the relevant physics goes back to Euler.

(2): Problems about point-particles: Even if we set aside continua and consider only
point-particles, i.e. extensionless point-masses, there are conceptual problems. One
main group of problems arises once we add to the idea of a point-particle the notion
of a ﬁeld: I will postpone them to Section 2.2. Here, I will just mention two obvious
problems, independent of the notion of a ﬁeld.

The ﬁrst problem is: how can we describe in terms of point-particles, contact be-
tween objects? As I see it: this problem divides into two sub-problems—both of them
hard. First: how can we reconcile point-particles with solid objects’ impenetrability?
Even if we postulate, as Boscovitch did, that when point-particles are very close some
repulsive force dominates the attractive force of gravity, questions abound. For exam-
ple: how can we describe the diﬀerence between solids and ﬂuids? Second: there is the
problem of describing (or else somehow prohibiting!) collisions of point-particles. Such
collisions are clearly problematic, not just kinematically but dynamically. In particu-
lar, under Newtonian gravity (or any interaction described by an inﬁnite potential well
around each particle), two colliding point-particles each have inﬁnite kinetic energy at
the instant of collision.

The second problem arises from the fact that, barring collisions, point-particles
require that all forces act at a distance. Newton famously “deduced from the phenom-
ena” that gravity acted at a distance. In particular, it acts instantaneously: according
to his theory, if the Sun as a whole were now to move by, say, a metre, the direction
of its gravitational pull on the Earth would now change, albeit by a minuscule angle.
On the other hand, since light takes eight minutes to travel from Sun to Earth, the
minuscule change in the visual direction, from our standpoint, of the Sun would take
eight minutes to occur. But Newton also agreed that it is ‘inconceivable that inanimate
brute matter should, without the mediation of something else which is not material,
operate upon and aﬀect other matter without mutual contact’; so that he ‘contrived no
hypotheses’ about ‘the reason for these properties of gravity’. Though the outstanding
successes of Newtonian gravitational theory during the next two centuries accustomed
people to action at a distance, the advent of general relativity, in which gravity prop-
agates at the same speed as light, has now revived the natural suspicion of it—which
Newton shared.7

I end
In this Subsection, I have argued against the particles-in-motion picture.
7The quotations are from a letter to Bentley of 1693, and the General Scholium added to the
Principia in 1713:
I also stress that it is
general, not special, relativity, that militates against action at a distance: Lorentz invariance does not
prohibit action at a distance, whether along the light cone or across spacelike intervals; (cf. Earman
1989, p. 156, who cites Kerner 1972).

for discussion and references, cf. Torretti 1999, p. 78.

14

with a conjectural, but humdrum, reason why this wrong picture is so widespread in
philosophy. I think it is a result of the educational curriculum’s inevitable limitations.
In the elementary mechanics that most of us learn in high school, extended bodies
are assumed to be small and rigid enough to be treated as point-particles. One never
faces the subtleties of classical mechanics’ treatment of continua. Philosophers often
augment high school mechanics with some seventeenth-century mechanics, through
studying such great natural philosophers as Descartes, Hobbes and Leibniz. But there
ends most philosophers’ acquaintance with mechanics. About 1700, natural philosophy
divided into physics and philosophy, so that few philosophers know about mechanics’
later development. In particular, as regards the eighteenth century: philosophers read
Berkeley, Hume and Kant, not such ﬁgures as Euler and Lagrange—whose monumental
achievements in developing mechanics, and in particular its treatment of continua,
changed the subject out of all recognition.

A fortiori, philosophers also tend not to know about relativity theory and quantum
theory. So this conjectural, but humdrum, reason also helps explain the second aspect
of the RDA literature’s restriction, viz. its setting aside these theories.

But I think there is also another explanation. Namely, the literature tends to
make the assumption I labelled (Bracket): that classical mechanics, or at least classical
physics as a whole, forms a coherent whole, which can be safely assumed to provide the
supervenience basis on which facts about the persistence of macro-objects supervenes.
In the next Section, I argue that (Bracket) is false.

2.2 Classical physics leads to relativity theory and quantum

theory

(Bracket) says that, although the world is in fact relativistic and quantum, we can
“bracket” this fact when we investigate persistence. More precisely: All agree that the
everyday macroscopic world “emerges” somehow or other from the relativistic quan-
tum realm; and that in describing that world, classical physics, in particular classical
mechanics, is outstandingly successful. This suggests that some enquiries, even some in
the foundations of physics or in metaphysics, will be able to take the classical mechani-
cal description of the world as the physical “given”, ignoring the fact that it is emergent
and approximate. (Bracket) proposes that enquiries, physical or metaphysical, about
the persistence of macroscopic objects are among them. In more philosophical jargon:
the classical mechanical description of the world provides the supervenience basis on
which facts about the persistence of macro-objects supervenes.

The tendency of the metaphysical literature on persistence to invoke “folk physics”
and classical mechanics, but to set aside relativity theory and quantum theory, suggests
that (Bracket) is widespread. But I claim that it is false. Besides, its falsity is central
to my own position about the RDA. For the moment, I will just argue that (Bracket) is
false, in three stages. The ﬁrst two are brief and general; the third is an illustration. (1):
First, I will urge that interpreting classical mechanics leads one to the vast landscape

15

of all of classical physics.
(2): Then I will describe how classical physics leads to
relativity theory and quantum theory. (3): I will illustrate (2) with the example of
self-interaction.

(1): From classical mechanics to classical physics

There is vastly more to classical physics than is contained in classical mechanics: for
example, thermodynamics, optics and electromagnetism. Furthermore, classical me-
chanics conceptually depends on these other ﬁelds in an open-ended way that is even
today not wholly and rigorously mapped out. That is, classical mechanics cannot
be assumed to have some consistent and unproblematic ontology; (whether along the
pointilliste lines of Section 2.1’s particles-in-motion picture, or in my preferred non-
pointilliste terms, using extended regions). Even for the special case of point-particles
in a void, we saw that one can raise worries, about collisions and the comprehensi-
bility of action-at-a-distance forces. But in any case, the mechanics of continua (even
if conceived in a non-pointilliste way) leads out into these other ﬁelds of physics in
so open-ended a way as to raise many questions of ontology, or more generally, of
interpretation.

Obviously I cannot go into detail: it must suﬃce to make one basic point. Energy’s
role as a grand unifying concept in physics (as discovered in the nineteenth century)
means that the classical mechanics of continua needs to be uniﬁed with thermodynam-
ics: how else could we understand rigorously such phenomena as the expansion of a
(classical!) tarmac road in the heat of the day? For a glimpse of such a uniﬁed theory,
cf. Truesdell (1991, pp. 79-83, and references therein). But we can hardly stop there.
Since the sunlight heats the road, we are led to optics; and thermodynamics leads us to
statistical mechanics and the atomic constitution of matter. And so it goes: it would
be a brave, nay a foolhardy, person who claimed to descry hereabouts a consistent
and unproblematic ontology even for classical mechanics, let alone for all of classical
physics.

(2): From classical physics to relativity and the quantum

Not only does classical mechanics lead out into the unsurveyably vast landscape of
classical physics. Also, that landscape has—as Lord Kelvin famously put it in 1900—
clouds on the horizon. Kelvin was in fact referring to the failures of the equipartition
theorem in statistical mechanics, and of attempts to detect the motion of the earth
through the ether: failures which in due course led to quantum theory, and relativity
theory, respectively. But what matters for us is the general point: that classical physics’
description of the microscopic structure of matter, and of matter’s interaction with
the electromagnetic ﬁeld, turns out to be embroiled in paradox. This means that
the would-be ontologist of classical mechanics faces, not just the problem of open-
endedness discussed under (1), but an in-principle diﬃculty—of paradox.
In short,
classical mechanics, together with the rest of classical physics, turns out to be a house
built on sand.

We know now that it is quantum sand—and that it somehow keeps the house up.
But it remains pretty darned mysterious how it does so. By this I do not just mean

16

that the interpretation of quantum theory (especially the resolution of its measurement
problem) remains mysterious. Also, some aspects of how “the house manages to stay
up” are current research projects in theoretical, not foundational, physics. One obvious
example is the physics of decoherence; which also, all agree, will play an important role
in solving the measurement problem. But I postpone this example till Section 8 and
the Appendix, where it will be important in replying to the RDA.

Another example, closely related to the paradoxes of classical physics’ description
of matter’s interaction with the electromagnetic ﬁeld, is the stability of matter. Classi-
cally, atoms would be unstable, since the orbiting electrons would radiate, lose energy
and so tumble down to the nucleus. But quantum theory promises to secure stable
atoms. The main idea here is the Pauli exclusion principle:
it prevents an atom’s
electrons all tumbling down to be together in the atom’s lowest electronic energy lev-
els; (and similarly the principle prevents a cascade down nuclear energy levels). But
the details are very complicated; and though they have been attacked successfully,
especially in work from the 1960s, they remain an active research area (Levy-Leblond
(1995), Lieb (1997)).

(3): An illustration: self-interaction

Even apart from atoms, there are paradoxes about the interaction of a classical charged
particle with the electromagnetic ﬁeld. These paradoxes will illustrate (2). They also
illustrate the spectrum from conceptual analysis to technical physics, with which I be-
gan this Section. For they show that any philosophical theory of persistence (whether
endurantist or perdurantist), even one that considered only the apparently straight-
forward case of point-particles, is liable to get led along this spectrum, even as far
as relativity theory and quantum theory. (A fortiori, there is good reason to think
technical physics is relevant to the more complex case of continua, considered by the
RDA.)

The paradoxes arise as soon as we accept that the electromagnetic ﬁeld carries
energy, and that energy is conserved. Here it must suﬃce to sketch the main idea;
there is not space for a proper discussion.8 Classical electrodynamics says that an
accelerating charge emits radiation, and thereby energy; and the conservation of energy
then requires that it slow down. If the charge were a point-particle and was the only
particle in the universe, the only force present that could cause it to slow down is that
derived from its own electromagnetic ﬁeld. So it seems that we must take a classical
charged point-particle to “feel” its own ﬁeld, even though in ordinary calculations we
do not do so—e.g. in applying the Lorentz force formula F = e(E + v ∧ B) we ignore
the charge’s (inﬁnite!) contribution to E.

This predicament suggests two possible strategies.
(i): To try to formulate a consistent interaction of a charge with its own ﬁeld which
will both (a) give some sensible result for the solitary accelerating charge, and (b)
8Rohrlich (2000) is a philosophically and historically oriented entry into this large subject. It also
covers treatments of charged particles as extended rather than point-like; indeed Lorentz’s original
statement (1892) of the Lorentz force law assumed an extended charge.

17

vindicate as approximately correct our usual calculational practice of ignoring each
charge’s self-interaction. (We need both (a) and (b) since the point-particle can hardly
“know” whether it is lonely or not.)

(ii): To revise classical electrodynamics so as to avoid the solitary-charge argument
for a self-interaction; e.g. by postulating that energy is radiated only if, later on,
something will absorb it.

Each of these strategies has had very distinguished proponents: from Lorentz and
Dirac, for (i), to Feynman and Wheeler, for (ii). But the details of their work, and
that of others, do not matter here. Anyway, a proper discussion of how to reply to
these paradoxes must nowadays include quantum theory’s description of matter (and
speciﬁcally topics like renormalization in quantum electrodynamics): which lies far
beyond this paper’s scope. Here it is enough to have shown that the concept of a point-
particle, which at ﬁrst seems part of “educated common sense”, is in fact problematic:
as we saw in Section 2.1, point-particles with action-at-a-distance are problematic, and
now we see that problems remain when we combine point-particles with the concept
of a ﬁeld.

2.3 Prospectus

In this Section, I have argued: that classical mechanics is both more subtle, and more
problematic, than philosophers generally recognize (Section 2.1); and that in addressing
its problems, one is led to the rest of classical physics, and even to relativity theory
and quantum theory—though it is still unclear, in various ways, how the everyday
macroscopic world “emerges” from the relativistic quantum realm (Section 2.2). I can
now describe how these views yield my main claims about the RDA.

My overall position is that the perdurantist can rebut the RDA; but physics also
shows how the RDA can be formulated more strongly than it has been. More specif-
ically, I will argue for three main conclusions. The ﬁrst two are in Section 5, which
focusses on the details of physics’ description of rotation, especially for continuous mat-
ter. (Quantum theory is set aside until Section 8.) The ﬁrst conclusion is that the RDA
can be formulated more strongly than is usually recognized. For it is not necessary
to “imagine away” the dynamical eﬀects of rotation (e.g. the tendency of a spinning
sphere to be oblate), as advocates of the RDA usually do; (Section 5.5). The second
conclusion is that in general relativity, the RDA (even in its stronger formulation)
fails, because an (amazing but well-established) physical eﬀect called ‘frame-dragging’
implies that there are diﬀerences between rotation and non-rotation which the perdu-
rantist can appeal to (Section 5.6).9

9These two conclusions are not original to me. (1): The strengthened formulation of the RDA
is due to Paul Mainwood and David Wallace, in an Oxford seminar, autumn 2003; and is hinted at
by Zimmerman (1998, p. 268-269). (2): Callender (2001, p. 38) mentions frame-dragging as one of
many diﬀerences between rotation and non-rotation the perdurantist can appeal to. So to all four,
my thanks: my only contribution is to set these conclusions in a broader landscape than did their
originators.

18

The third conclusion is in Section 6.

It is that even setting aside general rela-
tivity, the strong formulation of the RDA can after all be defeated.
I argue that
the subtleties and problems of classical mechanics (including the way it “emerges”
from quantum theory) mean the perdurantist can take objects in classical mechanics
(whether point-particles or continuous bodies) to have only temporally extended, i.e.
non-instantaneous, temporal parts (stages): which blocks the RDA.

I stress that I will not claim that considerations of physics show perdurantism su-
perior to endurantism; though, as I will discuss in Section 5.4, endurantism and perdu-
rantism have traditionally been associated with conceptions of metaphysics as a priori
I do not
conceptual analysis, and as a posteriori theory-construction, respectively.
even claim this, when one considers quantum theory’s description of atomic particles
as “wave-like” and evanescent. My reason is that (as I said in Section 2.2) it remains
mysterious how the macroscopic world, with its persisting objects “emerges” from the
quantum realm—despite impressive recent progress in understanding the physics of
decoherence (Section 8). This mystery means that it is, at least today, impossible for
anyone to state precisely what is the “supervenience basis” for macroscopic objects’
persistence. In short, the jury is still out, scientiﬁcally as well as philosophically. The
most we can now claim is that the RDA fails, and that perdurantism is, so far, tenable.

I will prepare the ground for these three conclusions, by ﬁrst discussing: (i) the
RDA in more detail (Section 3); (ii) some metaphysicians’ replies to it (Section 4).
Besides: though Sections 3 and 4 are written from the perspective of the philosophy of
physics, they will exclude technical physics, especially relativity and quantum theory.
(Indeed, so will Sections 5 onwards, to a large extent.)

More speciﬁcally, nothing in Sections 3 and 4 contradicts the metaphysicians’ preva-
lent assumption which I labelled (Bracket): that classical mechanics, or perhaps instead
the whole of classical physics, provides a supervenience basis for persistence. (But of
course, nothing I say depends on this assumption, which I reject.) To that extent,
these two Sections should be of interest to friends of that assumption. In eﬀect, these
Sections report some of the themes and arguments of the RDA literature, from the
perspective of the philosophy of physics. So it is only in Sections 5 onwards that the
claims of Sections 2.1 and 2.2 come to the fore: in Section 5, I will “re-admit” relativity
theory; and in Section 8, I re-admit quantum theory.

Finally, by way of prospectus: it may help to announce what my answers will be
to the following questions about rotation and continuous matter, which are obviously
relevant to evaluating the RDA. As to rotation, one naturally asks:

(1) How exactly does physics, or more speciﬁcally a given physical theory, describe

rotation?

(2) Do endurantist and perdurantist have equal rights to that description?
(3) Does that description supply some diﬀerences between rotation and non-rotation
which the endurantist’s RDA has ignored, but which the the perdurantist can appeal
to? Or does it strengthen the RDA?

And about continuous matter, one naturally asks:

19

(4) Must a theory of persistence allow that continuous matter is possible, and so
address the RDA’s distinction between the two discs? Or could it legitimately set
aside continuous matter, and so duck out of discussing the RDA? (As we have seen:
the metaphysical literature says Yes to the ﬁrst question; and tends to explicitly set
aside atomism and especially quantum theory.)

My answers to these questions will be broadly as follows.
(1): I will report in Section 5 how physics describes rotation, including some pecu-

liarities of rotation in our best theory of space and time, viz. general relativity.

(2) I will allow in Section 5.4 that endurantist and perdurantist have equal rights
to this description; though this is largely for the tactical reason of giving the RDA as
good a run as possible.

(3) This description has both a positive and a negative implication for the RDA.
The positive implication is that the RDA can be formulated more strongly than is
usually recognized; (my ﬁrst conclusion, Section 5.5). But within general relativity,
the RDA fails: frame-dragging implies that there are diﬀerences between rotation and
non-rotation which the perdurantist can appeal to; (my second conclusion, Section
5.6).

(4) Though I maintain that classical continua are subtler and more problematic
than usually recognized, I agree that they are indeed logically possible. And I therefore
agree that a philosophical theory of persistence should if possible allow for continuous
matter, and so not duck out of discussing the RDA. But as stressed, I will go on to
maintain (Section 6 onwards) that in fact a perdurantist theory can reply to the RDA,
by endorsing its distinction between the discs.

3 The RDA and kinds of reply—in detail

In this Section, I ﬁrst present the RDA more fully than in Section 1.1; (Sections 3.1 and
3.2). Then I consider what the RDA implies for endurantism (Section 3.3). Finally, in
Section 3.4, I distinguish the two kinds of perdurantist reply to it, more fully than in
Section 1.5.

3.1 The argument: keeping track of homogeneous matter

Here are two distinct possibilities for a perfectly circular disc made of homogeneous
matter: where ‘homogeneous’ means that the properties of the matter do not vary
across space even on the smallest length scales:

(Stat): that it is stationary, and in particular not rotating about an axis perpen-
dicular to the plane of the disc; (of course this possibility can be subdivided as regards
the disc’s size, and the properties of its matter, e.g. its mass-density):

(Rot): that it rotates about this axis; (of course this possibility can be further
subdivided, apart from the subdivisions in (Stat), viz. as regards the angular velocity

20

of the disc.)

It seems that the endurantist can easily recognize and describe the two possibilities,
according to whether the very same non-circularly-symmetric part, e.g. a segment, is in
the same place at two times. But I postpone considering the endurantist until Section
3.3. For the moment, consider the perdurantist. It seems she has a problem: surely
she must say that all the relations (and therefore, all her proﬀered “suitable relations”
for analysing, or at least subvening, persistence) between two stages (temporal parts)
of the disc, say at noon and 12.01, are the same—whether the disc is rotating or not?
And similarly for stages at the two times of any spatial part of the disc, such as a
segment: surely perdurantism must say that all the relations are the same?

More precisely: the phrase ‘any spatial part of the disc, such as a segment’ seems
to presuppose persistence—which is precisely in question here. So a better way to put
the second rhetorical question is to say: Similarly for any spatial part of the disc-at-
noon, such as a segment, and any congruent subvolume of the disc-at-12.01: surely
the perdurantist must say that all the relations are the same, whichever of the many
congruent subvolumes of the disc-at-12.01 are chosen?

In the sequel, it will sometimes be useful to have mnemonic labels for the temporal
parts being compared. So let me express perdurantism’s apparent problem by using
some memorably ugly labels, as follows. For any four choices of spatially congruent
temporal parts of the discs:

a spatial segment of the stationary disc at noon, call it StatNoon;
a congruent spatial segment of the stationary disc at 12:01, call it StatMin;
a congruent spatial segment of the rotating disc at noon, call it RotNoon;
a congruent spatial segment of the rotating disc at 12:01, call it RotMin;
StatNoon and RotNoon match in their properties; as do StatMin and RotMin; and
StatNoon bears to StatMin exactly the same relations as RotNoon does to RotMin.

I have phrased this argument so as to allow:

(i) the properties of spatial parts of the discs to vary, provided they vary in
a circularly symmetric way, e.g. by each disc being decorated with circles of colour,
centred on the centre of the disc;

(ii) the discs’ properties to change over time, provided that the two discs always
match, e.g. the discs could have a temperature, even a circularly symmetric distribution
of tempearture, and could cool down, provided temperatures always match.

3.2 Why continuous and homogeneous matter?

Let us ﬁrst ask: Why does the RDA use a disc composed of continuous and homoge-
neous, rather than atomistic, matter? Most of the philosophical discussions do not say
why. But the implicit answer is:

Because if the disc is atomistic (i.e. a swarm of point-particles), the set
of spatial points occupied by matter varies over time, or stays constant,

21

according as the disc rotates or not; so that the perdurantist can distinguish
rotation from non-rotation by “following” which spatial points are occupied
by matter at which times. Similarly, if the disc’s matter is continuous
but inhomogeneous, the perdurantist can distinguish the cases by following
lines of qualitative similarity. But for continuous homogeneous matter, the
perdurantist is stuck: she cannot distinguish the cases.

This answer raises three issues. The ﬁrst is straightforward, independent of the dis-
tinction between the discs, and is largely a matter of setting some matters aside. The
second and third are important for us, and will need more attention later on.

3.2.1 Tracking matter

The idea of the answer is twofold. First, the answer concedes that the perdurantist can
provide an account of persistence (in other jargon: a diachronic criterion of identity)
for a point-particle in a void. The criterion is just to follow the continuous curve of the
presence of mass (or perhaps of charge; or more generally, of qualitative similarity).
The ambient void means that starting from a point-particle at a time, there is a unique
way to go forward or backward in time. Similarly for a point-particle moving, not in a
void, but in a continuous ﬂuid with suitably diﬀerent properties—a diﬀerent “colour”,
or made of diﬀerent “stuﬀ”, than the point-particle; (cf. the discussion of Follow in
Section 1.1).

But second: in continuous matter, there is no void—the lines of matter-occupation
run “every which way”. And it seems that if the matter is also homogeneous, then even
the lines of qualitative similarity, however they are exactly deﬁned, run every which
way—leading to the argument’s challenge to the perdurantist.

This second point will of course preoccupy us in what follows. Here I just make
three ancillary remarks about the ﬁrst point. Though straightforward, they have the
merit of showing the scope of the sort of criterion that says “follow the lines of matter-
occupation or qualitative similarity”. (Recall also from footnote 2 in Section 1.1 that
this sort of criterion can be disputed; but that dispute is not directly relevant to the
RDA, and I set it aside.)

(i): This sort of criterion will also work for extended objects moving through a void,
or through a suitably diﬀerent continuous ﬂuid—provided it is understood as applying
only to such an object as a (spatial) whole. For of course, applying it to the spatial
parts of an extended object (e.g. parts of a rigid homogeneous sphere) just resets, on
a smaller scale, the problem ﬁrst posed by the RDA. (So I agree that the perdurantist
who considers extended objects will have to add to this sort of criterion some account
of the objects’ parts.)

(ii): This sort of criterion even works for a homogeneous rotating disc as a whole,
if it is not perfectly circularly symmetric. Imagine a disc made of Lego—of rectangular
Lego blocks:
it is approximately circular, and may be treated as circular for certain
purposes, e.g. if looked at from a suﬃcient distance, and-or if suﬃciently larger than

22

the individual blocks that the edge can be treated as smooth. Now imagine a disc
of exactly the same shape, but which is homogeneous (no bricks!). Since the disc’s
edge is in fact rough, our “follow the lines” sort of criterion works: exactly tracking
the lines of matter-occupation or qualitative similarity at the edge reveals whether or
not the disc rotates. Similarly of course for all actual rotating objects: they are not
perfectly circularly symmetric, and so the spatially varying qualitative features, such as
a roulette wheel’s numerals, suggest the correct way the “identify” spatial parts across
time (i.e. to deﬁne persistence)—so that the challenge of the RDA does not arise.

(iii): On the other hand, exact homogeneity is not needed for the RDA. In my
version above, I allowed the spatial properties to vary in a circularly symmetric way.
If they do, the lines of qualitative similarity will have to be circularly symmetric: but
the challenge to the perdurantist will remain, since there nevertheless seems to be an
abundance—a continuous inﬁnity—of such lines. How can the perdurantist specify
those that deﬁne persistence?

3.2.2 The persistence of spatial points

The second issue is that the answer above glosses the distinction between rotation
and non-rotation intuitively. It presupposes that there are persisting spatial points,
so that it can say: only in the rotating disc do the point-sized bits of matter occupy
diﬀerent spatial points at diﬀerent times. This prompts the question: What account
is to be given of the persistence of spatial points? This question is very important
to evaluating the RDA, but is almost entirely ignored in the metaphysical literature:
even in the best discussions, authors often appeal without further analysis to the idea
of ‘the same place’ (e.g. Hawley 2001, p. 85). This question will take centre-stage
in Section 5, where I leave metaphysics for the philosophy of space and time and the
physics of rotation.

3.2.3 The accompaniments of rotation—again

The third issue arises from the last sentence of the answer. That sentence is con-
tentious: and (unlike the assumption of persisting spatial points) it is contested in the
metaphysical literature—as I reported in Section 1.4. And as I also announced there,
my own view will be that:—

(i): the RDA should not just set aside the technical accompaniments (this goes
along with the importance of the technical description of rotation, just announced in
Section 3.2.2);

(ii): it cannot do so just by stipulating perfect rigidity; and
(iii): the perdurantist can reply to the RDA without resorting to distinctively meta-
physical proposals such as immanent causation, or special vectorial properties. (I shall
also join some perdurantists such as Sider in accepting appeal to everyday causes, ef-
fects and counterfactuals.
I discuss Sider’s position in Section 4.4; and develop an
analogue of his position in Section 6.2.)

23

So, to sum up this presentation of the RDA:— Its strategy is clear. It needs to
“imagine away” enough of the usual accompaniments of rotation (and-or non-rotation)
to make it plausible that the perdurantist (or Humean) has trouble making distinquish-
ing the discs. This Subsection has developed the ﬁrst main example of this strategy:
the RDA imagines a perfectly circular and perfectly rigid disc, made of continuous
and perfectly homogeneous matter; thereby aiming to block the perdurantist from
“tracking” matter through the void, or “following” lines of qualitative similarity.

3.3 Tu quoque?

So far as I know, the RDA literature never considers whether the rotating discs harbour
any problems or projects for the endurantist (or more generally, non-Humean). I think
this is a mistake. Surely the endurantist owes us a discussion of diachronic criteria of
identity for the spatial parts of a piece of homogeneous matter, such as the disc: a
discussion that will secure the distinction. Of course, it is not my brief here to develop
endurantism. But as a preliminary to considering perdurantist replies to the RDA, it
is worth discussing the factors that combine to make us forget that the endurantist
owes us such a discussion.

First, we easily slip into relying on intuitive judgments of sameness of place. But
as we saw in Section 3.2.2, it is not enough for the endurantist to say just that the
diﬀerence between the possibilities is a matter of whether the worldlines of the enduring
pieces of matter are straight or helical. The intuitive contrast “straight vs. helical”
depends on the idea of persisting spatial points. The endurantist owes us an account of
this idea, just as much as the perdurantist does. Either this idea must be vindicated,
or some other (maybe more technical) notions that describe rigorously the distinction
between rotation and non-rotation must be invoked and justiﬁed. This is an endeavour
which leads into issues in the philosophy of space and time, and the physics of rotation.
I will discuss these issues in Section 5. In fact, I will there allow that as regards these
issues, the honours are even, or roughly even, between the endurantist and perdurantist.
That is, I will allow that both sides have equal right to the notion of persisting spatial
points, or to whatever notions are needed to describe rigorously the rotation/non-
rotation distinction. I say ‘allow’, because my reason will be that since I want to give
endurantism and the RDA as good a run as possible, I give them the beneﬁt of the
doubt about their rights to these notions.

On that assumption, it is tempting to think, as the discussion in Section 3.1 implic-
itly did, that only the perdurantist “has work to do”. More precisely: it is tempting
to think that:

(i): the perdurantist needs to say what, in terms of qualitative similarity or cau-
sation or whatever, distinguishes the correct worldlines from all the other spacetime
worms (mereological fusions of stages) they accept as objects;10 while

10How diﬃcult this is, how much work there is to do, will of course depend on their other views.
In particular, perdurantists who are Humean about causation, like Lewis, will presumably have more

24

(ii): the endurantist can take the distinction between the correct and incorrect
worldlines (straight vs. helical) as “bedrock”: no more can be said, and besides, no
more needs to be said.

I think this temptation arises from a widespread belief that only for the endurantist
does a persisting object remain self-identical over time. This belief leads to the idea
that—at least for the spatial parts of a piece of homogeneous matter—diachronic cri-
teria of identity are unnecessary, or even unintelligible: i.e. the idea that the identity
over time of such parts is just “good old identity”, and is both unanalysable, and in
no need of analysis—it is as clear as crystal!

But this belief is false. Sider (2001, p. 54-55) exposes the error: also for the
perdurantist, the persisting object is genuinely self-identical over time. (Sider seems
to forget this insight on p. 226, para 2, when he endorses assumption (i) above, i.e.
says the endurantist has an ‘easy answer’ about how to distinguish the discs.)

So I think a good case can be made that the endurantist also has work to do
(even after persisting spatial points, or whichever notions are used to describe the
rotation/non-rotation distinction, are in play). I agree that it is unclear exactly what
sort of account of matter’s identity over time, the endurantist is to give. But in what
follows, I shall not go further into this: developing endurantism is not my brief. Suﬃce
it to make three remarks:

(i): I think part of the reason for the obscurity is that it is unclear exactly how

to formulate endurantism (Sider 2001, p. 63-68).

(ii): Some endurantists agree that some such account is needed. For example,
Zimmerman, after developing a detailed account of immanent causation for the per-
durantist (1997, p. 449-456), argues that the endurantist should accept some parts
of it; (roughly speaking, for histories of enduring objects: p. 456-459). For more on
immanent causation, cf. Section 4.1.

(iii): I think endurantists are likely to see what perdurantists say in order to
distinguish the discs as so complex, as to amount to a serious disadvantage for per-
durantism. In particular, they are likely to accuse Sider’s position (and mine) of this.
My response will be, in eﬀect, that endurantists will themselves need them to say
much of what the perdurantist says: though for them it may well be collateral infor-
mation about the distinction between the discs, rather than (as for the perdurantist)
“constitutive” of the distinction.

3.4 Kinds of reply

In this last Subsection, I will develop Section 1.5’s two kinds of reply to the RDA. This
will also bring out a complaint implicit in Section 3.2.2’s question about the account
of space and rotation. Namely, that as Callender (2001, p.30) puts it: ‘analysing RDA
is frustrating because the possible worlds described are left so vague’.

work to do, in distinguishing the discs, than perdurantists who are not, like Armstrong; cf Section
4.1.

25

A preliminary remark.

I admit that my distinction is not exhaustive: there are
other possible replies.
In particular, Teller (2002, p. 207-208) gives a reply which,
though at a glance similar to my ﬁrst kind, is much more radical. He suggests the
perdurantist, or at least the advocate of Humean supervenience, should say that even
for a inhomogeneous disc like a roulette wheel, there is nothing objectively right about
deﬁning persistence in terms of “tracking” spatially varying qualitative features such
as one of the wheel’s numerals. Teller agrees that the perdurantist can and should
accept that:

(i) it is convenient to “identify” parts across time (i.e. to deﬁne persistence) on the

basis of such features; and

(ii) this is convenient because of its association with what Teller calls ‘rotational
phenomena’: i.e. what I called ‘accompaniments of rotation’, e.g. having been pushed
by someone, and the tendency of rotating solid objects to become oblate.

But, according to Teller, perdurantists should not accept that any disc, even an
inhomogeneous one, ever has any ‘literal rotation ... for them there is only rotation by
courtesy’ (p. 208). (So though the perdurantist might call being pushed, oblateness
etc.
‘rotational phenomena’, she should not call them, as we normally do, ‘typical
causes and eﬀects of rotation’: for that suggests there is literal rotation.)

Teller’s reply certainly blocks the RDA: but, by my lights, at far too high a price.
Its denial that there are any facts of persistence in the countless unproblematic cases
(e.g. of inhomogeneous discs), facts which perdurantism must accept, amounts to a
sort of nihilism about persistence—which I ﬁnd incredible: but I will not argue against
it here.11

Though my distinction between replies is not exhaustive, it is natural. We saw
in Section 3.2 that the strategy of the RDA is to imagine away enough of the usual
accompaniments of rotation to make it plausible that the perdurantist (or Humean)
has trouble distinguishing the discs. So in reply, the perdurantist and Humean can
either

(i) say there is no diﬀerence: too much has been imagined away for there to be a

diﬀerence remaining; or

(ii) say that in fact, they have the wherewithal to describe the diﬀerence.

These are my two kinds of reply, which I label ‘(No Diﬀerence)’ and ‘(Appealing Dif-
ferences)’. Of course, a perdurantist can in a sense combine them. For in the back-
and-forth of debate, she might move from one reply to the other: ‘well, if you imagine
away all of those accompaniments of rotation, I will then reply that there is after all
no diﬀerence’. I turn to stating the two replies in more detail.

(No Diﬀerence): There is no good reason to distinguish the possibilities (Stat)
and (Rot). More precisely: though there is of course a distinction between rotating and
non-rotating discs, a distinction manifested in various diﬀerences between the discs—
recall the usual accompaniments of rotation—the RDA needs to assume that its discs,
11Note that it is much more radical than both the non-reductive perdurantism mentioned in (1) of
Section 1.3, and the (No Diﬀerence) reply discussed below. Both these positions accept the facts of
persistence in the countless unproblematic cases.

26

in the possibilities (Stat) and (Rot), do not manifest any of these diﬀerences. And then
there is no reason to distinguish the discs.

Note that this reply does not need the diﬀerences to in some sense “ground” the
rotation/non-rotation distinction. It is enough that the diﬀerences exist, and so could
be mentioned in the perdurantist’s prospective deﬁnition of persistence in such a way
that the deﬁnition yields for each disc its correct (straight or helical) lines of persis-
tence/worldlines. That is: this is enough, as regards replying to the RDA. Of course,
knowing these diﬀerences does not by itself tell us how to frame the deﬁnition.

Similar remarks apply, when the RDA’s target is not perdurantism, but some other
neoHumean doctrine such as Lewis’ Humean supervenience (1986, p.
ix-x; 1994, p.
474). I will discuss this in more detail in Section 4.3. Here I only note that also with
this target, the RDA needs to imagine away any diﬀerences between the discs to which
the neoHumean could appeal.

So far as I know, Callender (2001) is the main example of this reply; (he focusses
on Humean supervenience, rather than perdurantism, but he also uses the label ‘no-
diﬀerence’). Lewis also gives essentially the (No Diﬀerence) reply, again taking the
RDA to have as its target Humean supervenience not just perdurantism (1986, p.xiii,
1994, p. 475). But he later changed his mind, endorsing a proposal of Robinson (1989).
And since I want to discuss that proposal only after discussing velocities, I shall post-
pone Lewis’ views, and the comparison of Lewis with Callender, till then (Section 4.3).
For the moment, I just bring out the ﬂavour of the (No Diﬀerence) reply by report-
ing Callender’s analogy between the discs and the up/down distinction. He says the
distinction between (Stat) and (Rot) is as spurious as the distinction between

(Up): an arrow in an otherwise empty world pointing up; and
(Down): an arrow in an otherwise empty world pointing down:

which all agree to be a distinction without a diﬀerence, since there is no up/down
distinction except with reference to some other direction, in particular the direction of
the local gravitational force. (At least: nowadays, if not in Aristotle’s day, all agree to
this.)

Callender makes the analogy between the disc-worlds and the arrow-worlds closer,

by:

(i): imagining the discs to be each alone in its world; and
(ii) saying ‘Assuming Newtonian spacetime with its absolute standard of rest
is not crucial to the argument, a harmless change of coordinates will change our case
[viz.: one disc rotating, the other not] into one with one disc rotating clockwise, and
the other rotating counter-clockwise [i.e. with equal speeds]’ (p. 32).

So: since the clockwise/counter-clockwise distinction depends on a choice of direc-
tion (a clock-dial moves counter-clockwise when seen from behind!), this really is a
distinction without a diﬀerence, just like (Up) vs. (Down).

(Appealing Diﬀerences): According to this kind of reply, the perdurantist (or
Humean) can distinguish the possibilities. That is: even supposing that the RDA
stipulates that its discs do not manifest the usual diﬀerences between rotation and
non-rotation—so that the argument seems to get a grip—there are diﬀerences the

27

perdurantist (or neoHumean) will ﬁnd acceptable—even appealing!—and can appeal
to. In short: there are more things in the (perdurantist or Humean) heaven and earth
than are dreamt of by the RDA’s advocates.

This reply is much more common than (No Diﬀerence). Indeed, so far as I know,
Hawley (1999, p. 55-56; 2001, p. 74-76) is the only author, apart from Callender
and Lewis, who considers the (No Diﬀerence) reply at any length: (but she believes it
defective, and advocates a version of (Appealing Diﬀerences)).

I think the reason (Appealing Diﬀerences) is more common lies in the facts noted

in Section 1.4. Namely:

(i): The metaphysical literature concentrates on the everyday, not technical physi-

cal, accompaniments of rotation. And:

(ii): The usual everyday diﬀerences that the RDA stipulates to be absent involve
present and “occurrent” accompaniments of rotation, such as a roulette wheel’s nu-
meral, or a spot of paint, moving relative to the disc’s environment.

(iii): This leads the metaphysical literature to focus on whether the perdurantist

can legitimately appeal to:

(a): diﬀerences in past or future or counterfactual everyday accompaniments of
rotation; such as having been pushed in the past; or that if a spot of paint were sprayed
on the disc, it would move; and-or

(b): diﬀerences that are distinctively metaphysical (neither everyday nor tech-
nical physical), such as a special relation of immanent causation, or special vectorial
properties that are numerically equal to, yet diﬀerent from, velocities.

(iv): The issues raised in (a) and (b) are familiar to metaphysicians.

In the next Section, I shall discuss various examples of this reply. But by no means
all.
I shall concentrate on distinctively metaphysical diﬀerences, i.e. (iii) (b). But
even there I will omit some views, e.g. Hawley’s proposal there are relations between
temporal parts that are not supervenient on the intrinsic natures of the parts that are
the relata, and yet are not just spatiotemporal relations (the paradigm case of such
non-supervenient relations: 1999, p. 60, 63-66; 2001, p. 85-90).

4 Some metaphysical replies

In this Section, I give a survey of some metaphysicians’ replies to the RDA, emphasising
points that will be important later on (or that I think important in themselves!). For
the most part, these replies are examples of (Appealing Diﬀerences).
I begin with
two such examples: appealing to causation (Section 4.1), and appealing to velocities
(Section 4.2). I reject the ﬁrst, but am more sympathetic to the second. This leads me
to consider a third example of (Appealing Diﬀerences): Lewis’ and Robinson’s appeal to
a quantity analogous to (but diﬀerent from!) velocity; and Zimmerman’s reply to that
proposal (Section 4.3). Finally (Section 4.4), I discuss Sider’s reply, which combines
(Appealing Diﬀerences) and (No Diﬀerence). I discuss Sider in some detail, since his

28

reply is in eﬀect my “fallback position”:
analogue of his (Section 6.2).

if my own reply failed, I would endorse an

Much of this Section involves the distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic properties—

a distinction which I have so far just mentioned. Though intuitively compelling, this
distinction is controversial, and in particular hard to analyse. By and large, I will not
need contentious claims about it. But I will argue (in Section 4.2.2.C) that to assess
the RDA, it is worth distinguishing (though the literature has not done so):

(i): degrees of extrinsicality;
(ii): whether predicating an extrinsic property has implications for other times, or
for other places (which I will call ‘temporal extrinsicality’ and ‘spatial extrinsicality’
respectively).
(It will also be obvious that proposals (i) and (ii) might also be useful for other problems
in metaphysics.)

4.1 Appealing to causation

Much discussion of the RDA as an argument against perdurantism concerns the relation
between persistence and causation within the persisting object. I shall note four points,
in (a)-(d), and then in (e) express my scepticism about appealing to causation.

(a): The Idea Quite apart from the RDA, many philosophers take causation to
somehow underpin persistence. For in some puzzle cases, causation seems to be what is
needed for persistence: instead of, or in addition to, qualitative similarity. A simple oft-
cited example is the imaginary case in which a god destroys an object and immediately
replaces it with a qualitative replica: it seems that what is missing in such a case of
non-persistence are causal relations between the (states of the) destroyed object and
the replica. Some philosophers call such causal relations (perhaps together with special
doctrines claimed about them) ‘immanent causation”. (For details and references, cf.
the discussion of Armstrong after (d) below, and e.g. Zimmerman (1997, p. 435-437).)

(b): An obvious reply?

If so, the obvious reply to RDA is to appeal to whether
or not there is (an appropriate sort of) causation between the given stages of spatial
parts of the disc. Using the ugly labels of Section 3.1: only if StatMin is chosen so as
to comprise the same matter as does StatNoon will there be (the appropriate sort of)
causation between them; and similarly for RotMin and RotNoon. In short: the obvious
reply is to deny the RDA’s claim that for any choices of the four stages, StatNoon bears
to StatMin exactly the same relations as RotNoon does to RotMin: the causal relations
are sensitive to the choices.

But this reply is “a bit quick”, for two reasons. That is: there are two problems
about appealing to causation to subvene, or even yield an analysis of, persistence. The
ﬁrst problem, in (c), is much more often discussed, and so presumably thought more
important; but I shall later develop ideas from the second problem, presented in (d).

(c): Trouble for Humeans

Some perdurantists want to endorse some broadly
Humean account of causation. (Indeed, for some, Humeanism is a leading motivation

29

for their perdurantism.) For such perdurantists, the RDA still threatens. For surely,
once we restrict attention to properties and relations that are intrinsic (or “qualitative”,
or “occurrent”—or whatever the Humean regards as characterizing their supervenience
basis for causation and so persistence), the properties and relations within the two
pairs, {StatNoon,StatMin} and {RotNoon,RotMin}, do match for any choices of the
four stages—as the RDA alleged. So for a Humean, the causal relations should also
match: so the RDA seems to show that perdurantism is incompatible with a broadly
Humean account of causation. (For a fuller exposition, cf. Zimmerman’s discussion of
‘Humean supervenience of the Causal Relation’ (called ‘(HS)’); 1998, p. 271.)

(d): Causation and motion The second problem is a threat of circularity, arising
from connections between the notions of causation and motion. As Shoemaker (1979,
p. 328) puts it: ‘it seems very unlikely that we can specify the relevant causal relation-
ships without invoking the notion of motion and with it the notion of cross-temporal
identity (i.e. persistence) ... which we are trying to analyse.’

But (as Shoemaker goes on (p. 329-330) to describe) there seems to be a way in

which this can be done. Namely, one adopts the following two-stage procedure.

(i): One can apply the concept of motion—and its associated quantitative con-
cepts like average and instantaneous velocity or acceleration etc.—to an arbitrary spa-
tiotemporally continuous series of momentary stages.

(ii): Only then does one appeal to causation to underpin persistence. That is:
One now assumes that the worldlines or worldtubes of persisting objects are distin-
guished by the stages of each of them having (maybe: the ancestral of) some suitable
relaton of causation (maybe of immanent causation)).

Shoemaker’s two-stage procedure is rarely discussed; but (so far as I know) is en-
dorsed by those who do discuss it; for example, Zimmerman (1998, p. 279-280). But
Zimmerman goes on to emphasise the ﬁrst problem, (c) above. That is, in the context
of the RDA, with its two pairs of spatial parts of discs, one pair causally related and the
other not: the appeal in stage (ii) to causal relations surely requires non-Humeanism
about causation.

I myself agree that Shoemaker’s stage (i) works. One can certainly apply the con-
cept of motion and its associated quantitative concepts, as made precise by diﬀerential
geometry, to:

(a) any worldline, or to a foliated worldtube (in the latter case, one would as-
sign the velocity and acceleration vector to, say, the centroid of each of the foliation’s
leaves); and even to

(b) spacelike curves and tubes (though for these cases, one might resist using
the usual language of motion, e.g. calling the tangent vector of a spacelike curve a
‘velocity’).

Indeed, textbooks of modern spacetime theories contain countless examples of (a)
and (b). Agreed, the notions of velocity, acceleration etc., as usually understood, pre-
suppose the notion of persistence; (as I conceded in Section 1.2 and will discuss in
Section 4.2). But Shoemaker’s procedure does not conﬂict with that understanding.
His stage (i) applies such notions, stripped of that presupposition; (how this works

30

will become clearer in Section 4.2.2.C). Then, after stage (ii), notions like the instan-
taneous velocity of spatial parts of the discs are to be reinstated, “piggy-backing” on
the relation of causation. That is: the notions as usually understood are applied just
to the worldlines or worldtubes that stage (ii), i.e. causation, picks out.

But on the other hand, turning to Shoemaker’s stage (ii): I fear that it may fail, be-
cause causation might presuppose persistence in a diﬀerent way than that Shoemaker
alerts us to, i.e. in a way independent of the notion of motion—details below.

(e): Armstrong, Lewis and a warning The issues raised in (a)-(d), especially (a)-
(c), are illustrated in many perdurantists’ discussions of the RDA, e.g. Armstrong’s
and Lewis’. Armstrong is not a Humean about causation and so endorses the reply
in (b): he believes the perdurantist can and should reply to the RDA by appealing
to causal relations between stages, and spatial parts of stages (1980, 1997, pp.73-74).
More precisely: he thinks that, quite apart from the RDA, the perdurantist should
take persistence—the “suitable relations” between stages of a persisting object—to be
a matter of what (following Broad and W.E. Johnson) he calls ‘immanent causation’:
‘a form of causality which remains conﬁned to a single particular and that, further,
does not proceed by interaction between sub-particulars’ and which involves ‘the ac-
tual bringing into existence of later by earlier temporal parts’ (1997, pp.73-74). So
for Armstrong, the moral of the RDA is simply that immanent causation does not
supervene on the intrinsic natures of the relata: a conclusion which, as a non-Humean
about causation in general, Armstrong is happy to endorse.12

On the other hand, Lewis is a Humean about causation. (More precisely: he defends
a counterfactual analysis of causation, which makes the truth-values of counterfactuals,
and so of causal statements, supervene on the qualitative nature of the world (1979,
1986a, p.22).) But he also agrees with (a) above that causation is crucial to under-
standing persistence: as he says in his last discussion of the RDA: ‘the most important
sort of glue that unites the successive stages of a persisting thing is causal glue’ (Lewis
1999, p. 210). So Lewis cannot endorse the reply in (b) above, and has to reply to the
RDA in another way; cf. Section 4.3.

But I myself am wary about appealing to causation to solve a metaphysical prob-
lem, since, like many philosophers of science, I think the notion is too problematic
to be relied on. (Recent discussion of its problems include Hitchcock 2003, Norton
2003.) More speciﬁcally, analytic metaphysicians should take heed when their doc-
trines, e.g. about persistence, carry contentious commitments about causation. For
example: Dowe (2000) argues for a process theory of causation which explicitly as-
sumes the notion of a persisting object. So a metaphysician who appeals to causation
to analyse or at least subvene persistence is commited to Dowe’s theory being wrong:
not a commitment to be entered into lightly! (This warning is not a universal accu-
sation: some metaphysicians are admirably explicit about their commitments about
causation; for example Zimmerman (1997, p. 444-449, 464-465).)

12So far as I know, the fullest account of immanent causation is Zimmerman (1997), which builds

on his (1995).

31

4.2 Appealing to velocities

On ﬁrst meeting the RDA, most people’s response is that since the two discs diﬀer
in their instantaneous angular velocity (similarly: corresponding spatial parts of them
diﬀer in instantaneous velocity), the perdurantist should reply to the argument by
attributing instantaneous angular velocity to the stages (or similarly:
instantaneous
velocity to spatial parts of stages).

But as I said in Section 1.2, there is a consensus in the RDA literature against
this tactic. The consensus urges that the notion of velocity presupposes the notion of
persistence, so that appealing to velocity brings circularity; and that this is so, both
for the usually notion of velocity, and a heterodox notion advocated by Tooley and
others.

I shall ﬁrst report this consensus (Section 4.2.1); and then present three replies to
it, in ascending order of importance (Section 4.2.2). The second and third replies will
foreshadow Sider’s and my own replies to the RDA. And the third reply will develop
my denial of pointillisme (announced in Section 2.1).

4.2.1 The consensus against velocities

The consensus against appealing to velocities relates to metaphysics rather than tech-
nicalities of physics. It uses only “naive” notions of average and instantaneous velocity,
thereby implicitly assuming a space of persisting spatial points. So as I did in Section
3.3, I will postpone till Section 5 the question how to describe rigorously the distinction
between rotation and non-rotation: whether by invoking a space of persisting spatial
points, or by invoking some other notions.

The ﬁrst, and main, point of the consensus is that if velocity is understood, as
usual, in terms of spatial separations of the places occupied at diﬀerent times by one
and the same object, then the notion of velocity assumes the idea of persistence. (This
goes with the so-called ‘Russellian theory of motion’, also called the ‘at-at theory
of motion’.) This is obvious for the elementary deﬁnition of average velocity as the
quotient of distance traversed and time elapsed. And the notion of instantaneous
velocity is usually understood “just” as a limit of such quotients, so that it also assumes
the idea of persistence.

Many authors make this point, taking it to show: either that
(i) it would be circular for the perdurantist to reply to the RDA by appealing to

(ii) velocity is not an intrinsic property of an object at a time, or of a temporal

velocity; or

part; or

(iii) both (i) and (ii).

For example, cf. Shoemaker (1979, p.327), Zimmerman (1998, p.268), Sider (2001, p.
34) and Hawley (2001, p. 77-79).

But perhaps velocity should not be understood as usual. Various authors have
sketched a rival, heterodox account of velocity, based on the idea that velocity should

32

be an intrinsic property of an object at a time; for example, Tooley (1988, p. 236f.),
Bigelow and Pargetter (1989, especially pp. 290-294; 1990, pp. 62-82) and Arntzenius
(2000: pp. 189, 197-201). These proposals seem to be mutually independent: the three
later authors do not cite the previous work. But in what follows, I shall concentrate
(as the RDA literature does) on Tooley; and so speak of ‘Tooleyan velocities’.

Tooley denies the Russellian theory of motion on the grounds just mentioned: that it
makes instantaneous velocity extrinsic to the moving object (at the time). He sketches
an alternative, which aims to have velocity be an intrinsic property of the object:
a property that causes and explains its position at (shortly) later times—whereas the
usual notion is a “logical construction” out of the object’s positions at those times (and
shortly earlier ones). In developing this rival notion, Tooley’s strategy is to Ramsify
the accepted laws of motion: i.e. to adapt Lewis’ (1970) tactic for functional deﬁnition
of theoretical terms. So, roughly speaking: Tooley says that the velocity of object o at
time t is that unique intrinsic property of o at t that is thus-and-thus related to other
concepts, as spelled out in the usual formulas of kinematics and dynamics. It follows,
in particular, that velocity is equal to the time-derivative of position, only as a matter
of physical law, and not as a matter of logic or conceptual analysis.

Similarly, Bigelow and Pargetter (ibid.) propose that velocity should be an intrinsic
property that causes and explains later positions: but they develop this idea in terms,
not of Ramsiﬁcation, but of the metaphysics of universals. Finally, Arntzenius’ recent
survey of three possible answers to Zeno’s arrow argument takes one answer to be that
the velocity of an object at an instant is an intrinsic property of it: a property that
causes and explains change of position, on account of a law of nature (not a deﬁnition!)
stating the value of velocity to be equal to the time-derivative of position (ibid.). (Both
Bigelow and Pargetter, and Arntzenius, suggest their view is a descendant of medieval
views, in particular impetus theory.)

At ﬁrst sight, this heterodox view of velocity has an obvious merit and an obvious
defect. The merit is that velocity causes and explains later position: which sounds
right. The defect is that on this view it is logically, though not nomically, possible
that the velocity should point in the “wrong direction”. It is logically possible that
an object move to the right, while all the while its velocity vector pointed to the
left—which sounds wrong!

But to weigh this pro and con—and other pros suggested by Tooley, Bigelow and
Pargetter, and cons suggested by Arntzenius—would take us too far aﬁeld.13 For
present purposes, I need only add to the above sketch that:

(i): In my opinion, the main motivation for this view is to secure a “pointilliste”
interpretation of mechanics; (as these authors say or hint: e.g. Arntzenius (2000, p.
200)). But there are good reasons against such pointillisme; cf. Section 2.1 and my
(2004).

(ii): I will return to this view, in both a positive and a negative way, when I state
13For more discussion, cf. e.g.: Zimmerman (1998, pp. 275-278) who adds some discussion of the
notion of intrinsicality (277-278); Sider (2001, pp. 35, 39, 228), who cites only Tooley; and Smith
(2003) who defends the orthodox account of velocity, mostly against Arntzenius.

33

my favoured reply to the RDA (in Sections 7 and 8. Positively: the view will fare
better in quantum theory than in the context considered by the RDA, viz. classical
mechanics. But negatively: my anti-pointillisme, which militates against the view,
provides the best reply to the RDA.

But it seems that “Tooleyan velocities” do not circumvent the consensus above, that
velocity presupposes persistence. For the laws of motion that Tooley Ramsiﬁes make
constant use of the notion of persistence. So even though a Tooleyan velocity is an
intrinsic property of the object, the concept of velocity urged on us by Tooley involves
the notion of persistence no less than does the usual Russellian concept. Accordingly,
Zimmerman (1998, p. 282-284) reiterates, for Tooleyan velocities, the consensus above;
(Hawley (2001, p. 79) makes what is apparently the same point):

...the friends of temporal parts cannot appeal to [Tooleyan] velocities as
theoretical properties implicitly deﬁned by the laws of motion [to answer
the RDA] ... [For it is] part of the deﬁnition of instantaneous velocity that it
be that property of an object which is such that its possession by an object
at each instant of an interval, together with its location at the beginning
of an interval and the length of the interval, determines where that very
same object will be at the end of the interval.
[Zimmerman 1998, p. 282.
Side-remark: Zimmerman adds a footnote which sets aside forces acting
during the interval, and refers to Tooley (1988, p. 238) for discussion of so
doing.]

Agreed, this consensus is no worries for Tooley. He is not concerned with the RDA,
or in any way with the metaphysics of persistence: his desideratum for velocity is only
that it should be an intrinsic property that causes and explains later positions.

As to the other advocates of heterodox velocities:—

(1): Arntzenius is also unconcerned with the debate about persistence.
(2): Bigelow and Pargetter brieﬂy discuss the RDA, and deny the consensus
above. They claim both that: (i) a portion of matter has a “non-qualitative identity”
across time; and, more directly against the consensus above, (ii) velocity, as understood
by them, grounds such identities, and associated causal powers (1989, p. 297; 1990,
pp. 72-74). But I shall not try to evaluate these claims, since:

(a): I shall later criticize a more developed version of claim (ii), due to Robinson

(b): being no friend of heterodox velocities, I think there are better ways than

and Lewis ((4) of Section 4.3.1); and

this to reply to the consensus ...

4.2.2 Against the consensus

I now present three replies to this consensus, in order of what I take to be ascending
importance. The ﬁrst two are objections to the verdict just given, that Tooleyan
velocities are no help to a perdurantist who wants to distinguish the discs in terms of

34

velocity. The third is more substantial:
it develops the idea that the presupposition
of persistence by velocity (understood either as usual, or a la Tooley) is mild and
innocuous. All three replies will connect with other positions or topics in the debate—
which I will return to.

4.2.2.A Functionally deﬁning rotation? Just as Tooley speciﬁes velocity,
in
Ramsey-Lewis style, by its functional-causal role, i.e. the collection of its nomolog-
ical or causal accompaniments, one might claim that the perdurantist should specify
rotation (and associated quantitative measures) in terms of its functional-causal role,
i.e. the accompaniments of rotation. And one might claim that this yields an (Appeal-
ing Diﬀerences) reply to the RDA.

So the idea is to admit that Tooleyan velocity presupposes persistence: but to
urge that rotation etc. can be functionally deﬁned without such a presupposition. So
roughly speaking: the rotating disc is rotating “in virtue of” having one or other of
the accompaniments of rotation.

I think the reply is coherent, but not attractive. (So far as I know, it has not been
articulated in the literature; I learnt it from David Wallace in conversation—who also
does not advocate it.) I say ‘not attractive’ because, as an example of the (Appealing
Diﬀerences) reply, it will have to face the usual trouble for this reply: that an advo-
cate of the RDA will argue that the accompaniments of rotation (i.e. the conjuncts
within the functional-causal role) that it invokes can be “imagined away”, while the
disc nevertheless rotates. Agreed, the reply may well be able to outface this trouble,
e.g. by the commonly discussed tactic of appealing to past or future of counterfactual
diﬀerences between the discs. But I do not think the use of a functional deﬁnition adds
much to the general strategy of the (Appealing Diﬀerences) reply: for two reasons.

(a): However exactly the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction is made precise, it seems
that rotation (and its quantitative measures) should be intrinsic to an object; and that
it needs to be intrinsic, if we are to answer the RDA, since the RDA can consider discs
that are alone in their worlds. But there is no reason to think that when rotation is
functionally deﬁned in the proposed way, it will be intrinsic. For in general, a property
that is functionally deﬁned by its occupying a certain role need not be intrinsic.14

(b): Functionally deﬁning rotation without making a presupposition of persis-
tence runs the risk that rotation, so deﬁned, will not mesh appropriately with one’s
other doctrines about persistence, be they general philosophical doctrines (even anal-
yses) or physical doctrines (as in the laws of mechanics). For presumably, both en-
durantist and perdurantist want rotation to involve, as a matter of conceptual analysis
(not just scientiﬁc law), an object’s (the disc’s) persisting parts having circular (or
approximately circular) orbits in space (on some appropriate account of “space”—cf.
Section 5). But if rotation is functionally deﬁned by accompaniments none of which
presuppose persistence, such as a tendency to oblateness, rotation will have only a
14So Tooley, keen to have velocity cause and explain (together with forces) the object’s later position,
needs his functional deﬁnition of velocity to require that the role-occupant be intrinsic to the object:
intrinsicality does not come for free.

35

nomological connection to persisting parts having circular orbits in space.15

4.2.2.B Functionally deﬁning velocity and persistence? One might propose
that even though Tooley’s own version of Tooleyan velocities presupposes persistence,
one could extend Tooley’s appeal to Ramsey-Lewis style functional deﬁnition so as to
simultaneously deﬁne both velocity and persistence. As we shall see, this is very close
to Sider’s position (Section 4.4); which is my own “fallback position”.

For the moment, I note only that since this tactic functionally deﬁnes—not rotation
alone—but both persistence and velocity, objection (b) at the end of Section 4.2.2.A will
not apply. For rotation will be deﬁned in the usual way, after velocity and persistence
have been deﬁned. So as usual, and as desired, rotation will involve, as a matter of
conceptual analysis, an object’s persisting parts having circular orbits in space. (Again,
to say ‘usual’ is true but casual: a proper account of space is still needed—cf. Section
5).

4.2.2.C Instantaneous velocity is hardly extrinsic My third reply to the con-
sensus is the most important of the three, for three reasons:

(i):

it introduces new ideas about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction: speciﬁcally

about the need to subdivide the distinction by admitting degrees of extrinsicality;

(ii): it bears on the reply to the RDA proposed by Robinson and Lewis; which I

will discuss in Section 4.3;

(iii): most important, it supports my favoured reply to the RDA (in Section 7).
This Subsection develops the reply’s main ideas. The next Subsection adapts these
ideas to ascriptions of speciﬁc values of velocity, as a preparation for the comparison
with Robinson’s and Lewis’s proposal in Section 4.3.

My leading idea is that the consensus that velocity presupposes persistence is,
though correct “in the letter”, wrong “in spirit”. Although velocity does presuppose
persistence, the presupposition is milder than the literature allows. For “most” of the
content of an ascription of velocity to an object is free of this presupposition: though
this “most” is about the object at other times, it does not imply that the object exists
at any such times, since it is hypothetical (conditional) in content. This leading idea
will also apply to acceleration and higher derivatives of position. In (1) and (2) below,
I present two closely related ways of making this idea precise. But I should ﬁrst make
three general points, (A)-(C).

(A): Temporal intrinsicality and extrinsicality:— Our topic prompts some terminol-
ogy. Since here and later, I will be focussing on whether the possession of a property
P by an object o at a time implies propositions concerning matters of fact, especially
about o, at other times, it will be convenient to use the phrase ‘temporally intrinsic
property’. By this I mean “intrinsic as regards time”: i.e. roughly, a property whose
possession by o at a time implies nothing about matters of fact (especially about o) at
15Point (b) brings out that this reply is similar to Teller’s (Section 3.4), though more “positive”

than Teller’s in that it accepts there are facts of rotation. But I will not pursue the comparison.

36

other times (though it may imply propositions about other places). Similarly, I shall
talk of temporally extrinsic properties; and of spatially intrinsic and extrinsic proper-
ties.

Two warnings about this terminology. (1): I agree that my explanation is vague,
not least because the general intrinsic-extrinsic distinction on which it rides is itself
vague; (indeed probably ambiguous—cf. Humberstone 1996, Weatherson 2002). But
my vague explanation will be enough for this paper. (2): Note that a property could
be temporally extrinsic for one instance and not for another. Velocity itself provides
examples of this. Imagine a non-instantaneous temporal part. That one of the part’s
constituent pieces of matter o has a certain instantaneous velocity at a time t “within”
the part surely corresponds to an intrinsic property of the part. But it is tempo-
rally extrinsic for o at the instant t. Humberstone (1996, p. 206, 227) notes that a
similar phenomenon—extrinsic for one instance, but intrinsic for another—occurs for
extrinsicality and intrinsicality simpliciter.16

(B): Degrees of extrinsicality:— Extrinsicality is usually considered an all-or-nothing
aﬀair. But it is natural to suggest that it comes in degrees. Intuitively, a property
is more extrinsic, the more that its ascription implies about the world beyond the
property’s instance: (compare the philosophy of mind’s jargon of ‘wide’ and ‘narrow’
mental states—some are wider than others).17 That is rough speaking; and all the
rougher because of controversies about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction. But I expect
that in many suﬃciently limited contexts, the idea could be made precise in a natural
way.
In any case, I shall only consider the temporal extrinsicality at an instant of
the properties of position and its time-derivatives (velocity, acceleration etc.), in the
classical description of motion. This is certainly a suﬃciently limited context for the
idea to be made precise.

(C): Other conceptions of velocity:— My claims in (1) and (2) below could be car-
ried over, with appropriate changes of wording, to Tooleyan velocities, accelerations
etc. But I shall develop my claims only for the orthodox view of velocity as the
time-derivative of position, since as I said in Section 4.2.1 I am not convinced by the
pointilliste motivation for Tooleyan velocities. (Indeed, I am not convinced in good
part because of the present idea that orthodox velocity is “almost intrinsic”.)

But here I should also admit that, from the perspective of physics rather than meta-
physics, my discussion is limited; (and will remain so until Section 8.1.1). Namely: I
go along with the RDA literature’s assumption that, Tooleyan velocities apart, veloc-
ity is deﬁned as the time-derivative of position, so that position is conceptually prior
to velocity, and momentum is deﬁned as mass times velocity. But I admit that even
apart from Tooleyan velocities, this assumption is questionable. In particular, one can
develop classical mechanics by taking momentum as primitive, together with position
and mass, and deﬁning velocity as momentum divided by mass. And in such a presen-
tation, momentum does not need to be “secretly understood” as mass times velocity:

16My (2004) further discusses temporal and spatial extrinsicality.
17It is all the more natural when we consider how few properties are intrinsic: the extrinsic properties

form so large a class as to merit being sub-divided.

37

one can introduce it abstractly, and without reference to time, as the generator of
spatial translations. (Thanks to Gerard Emch for this point.)

So in (1) and (2) below, I present two closely related ways of making precise the
idea that instantaneous velocity is “hardly extrinsic”, i.e. hardly temporally extrinsic,
since its ascription to an object o at t implies “little” about matters of fact at other
times.18 Both ways are based on the obvious point that the only “categorical” propo-
sition that an ascription of a velocity (or indeed, of a higher derivative of position)
to o at t implies about other times is that the o exists for some open interval (a, b)
containing t: all the other implications are hypothetical.

(The diﬀerence between the two ways will be that according to the ﬁrst, which is
“read oﬀ” the calculus, successively higher time-derivatives of position are more ex-
trinsic; while on the second way, which is more logical and less mathematical, velocity
acceleration and all higher derivatives are equally—and only mildly—extrinsic.)

In what follows, we can think of o as a point-particle; but it could equally well
be a point-sized piece of matter in a continuum, or an extended body small and rigid
enough to be treated as a point-particle. It will also be clear that the temporal extrin-
is mild for essentially the same reasons
sicality of average velocity, acceleration etc.
as for instantaneous velocity, acceleration etc. But to save space, I will focus on the
instantaneous quantities.

(1): The sequence of time-derivatives:— The discussion will be tidier if we consider
ascriptions, not of speciﬁc values of position, velocity, acceleration etc. to o at time
t, but of some or other value. Then successive ascriptions are of increasing logical
strength: having a velocity implies having a position, having an acceleration implies
having a velocity etc.

So consider a sequence of ascriptions to o at time t: viz.

(Pos): an ascription of a position, i.e. a proposition saying that o has some or

other position at t;

(Vel): an ascription of an (i.e. some or other) instantaneous velocity at t;
(Acc): an ascription of an instantaneous acceleration at t.

These ascriptions are of course the ﬁrst three members of an inﬁnite sequence of
ascriptions stating the existence of higher time-derivatives of o’s position. This gives an
obvious sense in which instantaneous velocity is only mildly extrinsic. Each ascription
is logically stronger than its predecessor; so (Vel), being almost at the start of the
sequence, implies little in comparison with later members.

In more detail: if a real function f has a derivative at a point t ∈ IR, it must be
deﬁned on a neighbourhood of t and be continuous at t. So the existence of f ′′(t)
requires the existence of f ′ in a neighbourhood of t and its (i.e. f ′’s) continuity at t;
and this in turn requires the continuity of f in that same neighbourhood of t. And so
on. In short: the existence of the nth derivative gives more information about times
other than t than does the existence of the (n − 1)th derivative.

18It is also hardly temporally extrinsic, on a third construal of that notion discussed in my 2004. Of
course none of this is to deny that instantaneous velocity is temporally extrinsic at an instant, since
it presupposes persistence.

38

(2): The “only categorical implication”:— But there is also another sense in which
velocity and the higher derivatives of position are only mildly temporally extrinsic.
This sense is more directly tied to the basic idea that the only categorical proposition
that an ascription of such a quantity to o at t implies about other times is that the o
exists for some open interval (a, b) containing t.

In more detail. Let us ask what exactly is implied about other times by the as-
criptions in the sequence; starting with (Pos). The metaphysical literature invariably
assumes position to be temporally intrinsic: why? The answer seems clear: ‘because
(Pos), or even an ascription of a speciﬁc value ‘o is at x at t’, implies nothing about
o’s position at other times’.19

But to be more precise about ‘implying nothing’ (apart of course from necessary or

analytic propositions), we need:

(a) to decide whether to allow that the object o might exist only for an instant; (as
many metaphysical discussions of persistence do: true to the tradition of conceptual
analysis, they allow all metaphysical or logical possibilities, not just the nomic ones);
and

(b) to distinguish categorical from hypothetical propositions.
Although the categorical-hypothetical distinction is vague and contentious (because
‘logical form’ is), I will not need to be precise or partisan about this:
for it will be
obvious from the calculus’ deﬁnition of a limit which propositions implied by ascriptions
such as (Pos)-(Acc) to count as hypothetical.

If we allow o to exist only for an instant (if we say ‘Yes’ in (a)), then indeed (Pos)
implies no categorical proposition about o’s positions at other times: there may be no
such positions! But consider a hypothetical proposition along the lines: ‘if o exists at
a later time t′, and some value (or upper limit) is assumed about its average speed
(deﬁned in the usual way as distance traversed divided by time elapsed) over [t, t′],
then o is at t′ within a sphere of a certain radius, centred on x’. Such a hypothetical
proposition is of course not analytic; but it follows by just deﬁnitions and logic from
‘o is at x at t’.

When we turn to the next member of the sequence, (Vel), we of course get many
more implications. o must exist throughout some open interval, maybe tiny, around
t; and since diﬀerentiability implies continuity, o’s position at a time t′ in the interval
tends, as t′ tends to t, to o’s position x at t; and so on. But these implied propositions
are, with one exception, hypothetical. The hypothetical propositions include those
about average velocity discussed in the previous paragraph, and various others one can
spell out by applying the deﬁnitions of continuity and diﬀerentiability. The exception
is of course the categorical proposition that o exists throughout some open interval of
times around t; (and, to be precise: its analytic consequences, like o’s existing at some
time t′ not equal to t). In particular, (Vel) is compatible with o being anywhere at any
19As discussed e.g. in Section 3.2.2: I here set aside (i) the absolute-relational debate about space,

and thereby (ii) possible implications about other objects’ positions, at t or other times.

39

other time t′, no matter how close t′ is to t.20

Similarly again, for (Acc). There are again more implications, but they are almost
all complicated hypotheticals: the only categorical proposition about other times that
the ascription implies is the same one again: that o exists throughout some open
interval of times around t. And so on along the inﬁnite sequence of ascriptions.

To sum up this discussion of (1) and (2): the temporal extrinsicality of velocity
and higher derivatives of position is mild. For almost all of the implied propositions
are hypothetical; and even the temporally intrinsic ascription (Pos) implies countless
such propositions. Besides, the categorical propositions implied by an ascription of
velocity, or of any higher derivative, are all just consequences of the one proposition
that o exists throughout some open interval of times around t. So as regards categorical
implications about other times, the temporal extrinsicality gets already at stage (Vel)
as “bad” as it ever gets along the sequence: and that, I submit, hardly deserves the
name ‘bad’—it is mild.21

4.2.2.D Instantaneous velocity without presuppositions: “welocity” Finally,
I turn to ascriptions of speciﬁc values of velocity, acceleration etc. The ﬁrst point to
make is that the discussion above can of course be carried over straightforwardly. For
example, an ascription of velocity v to o at t simply adds to the ascription (Vel)
information about what is the limit to which the countless average velocities tend for
smaller time-intervals, viz. v; and similarly for acceleration etc.

But for my purposes, it is more important to notice that there is a way of rep-
resenting my conclusion, that velocity etc. are hardly extrinsic, in terms of a novel
vector-valued quantity that is like velocity—but lacks its presupposition of persistence
(mild though that presupposition is).

I will call this new-fangled quantity welocity, the ‘w’ being a mnemonic for ‘(log-
ically) weak’ and-or ‘without (presuppositions)’. The beneﬁt of introducing welocity
will be clear in Section 4.3’s comparison of it with Robinson and Lewis’ proposed reply
to the RDA.

So the idea is that welocity is to reﬂect, in the way its values are deﬁned, this lack of
presupposition. That is: the values are to be deﬁned in such a way that it is impossible
to infer from the value of the welocity of the object o at time t that o in fact exists
and has a diﬀerentiable worldline in some neighbourhood of t: an inference which,
as we have just seen, can be made from the value of velocity (at least as orthodoxly
understood!).

Developing this idea takes us to familiar philosophical territory, viz. rival proposals

20I here assume there is no limiting velocity, as in relativity.
21This view is reﬂected in the jargon of mathematics and physics. For example, mathematicians
call not only (Pos), but also the ascriptions (Vel) etc., ‘local’; and physicists call equations of motion
that determine the object’s motion at t in terms of its position and some of its derivatives then (but
without reference to facts a ﬁnite temporal interval from t) ‘local in time’. For more discussion, cf.
Arntzenius 2000 pp. 192-195, Smith 2003 and my 2004.

40

for the semantics of empty referring terms. In our case, the empty terms will be ex-
pressions for o’s instantaneous velocity at t; and, as we have seen, they can be empty
either because:

(NotEx): o does not exist for an open interval around t, or
(NotDiﬀ): o does exist for an open interval around t, but its position x is not

diﬀerentiable at t; (roughly: there is a “sharp corner” in the worldline).

(And similarly for acceleration and higher derivatives; but I shall discuss only

velocity—tempting though words like ‘wacceleration’ are!)

In fact, it will be clearest to lead up to my proposal for welocity by ﬁrst considering
a more familiar one, which is modelled on Frege’s proposal that (to prevent truth-value
gaps) empty terms should be assigned some “dustbin-referent”, such as the empty set
∅. Thus if one sets out to deﬁne a quantity that is like velocity but somehow avoids its
presupposition of persistence, one naturally ﬁrst thinks of a quantity, call it u, deﬁned
to be

(a): equal to the (instantaneous) velocity v for those times t at which o has a

velocity; and

(b): equal to some dustbin-referent, say the empty set ∅, at other times t;
i.e. times such that either (NotEx): o does not exist for an open interval around t;
or (NotDiﬀ): o does exist for an open interval around t, but its position x is not
diﬀerentiable at t.

Of course, variations on (b) are possible. One could select diﬀerent dustbin-referents
for the two cases, (NotEx) and (NotDiﬀ), (say, ∅ and {∅}) so that u’s value registered
the diﬀerent ways in which an instantaneous velocity could fail to exist. And instead
of using a dustbin-referent, one could say that the empty term just has no “semantic
value”, or “is undeﬁned”: (a contrast with dustbin-referents which would presumably
show up in truth-value gaps, and logical behaviour in general).

Agreed, this deﬁnition is natural. But it does not do the intended job. For this
quantity u, whether deﬁned using (b) or using the variations mentioned, does not
avoid, in the way intended, the presupposition of persistence. For u’s value (or lack of
it, if we take the no-semantic-value option) registers whether or not the presupposed
persistence holds true. That is: we can infer from the value of u (or its lack of value)
whether (a) o has a velocity in the ordinary sense, or (b) the presupposition has failed
in that (NotEx) or (NotDiﬀ) is true. In short: u’s individual values tell us too much.

But there is an appropriate way of assigning semantic values to empty terms, i.e. a
way of deﬁning a quantity, welocity, that is like velocity but avoids its presupposition
of persistence, in that welocity’s values do not give the game away about whether the
presupposition has failed, i.e. about whether (NotEx) or (NotDiﬀ) is true. In order
not to give the game away, welocity must obviously take ordinary values, i.e. triples of
real numbers, when the presupposition has failed. But how to assign them?

The short answer is: arbitrarily. The long answer is: we can adapt schemes devised
by logicians in which a deﬁnite description, whose predicate has more than one instance,
is assigned as a referent any one of the objects in the predicate’s extension. (The ﬁrst

41

such scheme was devised by Hilbert and Bernays; but we will only need the general
idea.) Such a scheme applies to our case, because we can write the deﬁnition of welocity
in such a way that when the presuppositions fail (i.e. (NotEx) or (NotDiﬀ) is true),
the predicate (of triples of reals numbers) in the deﬁnition is vacuously satisﬁed by
all such triples; so that forming a deﬁnite description, and applying semantic rules
like Hilbert-Bernays’, welocity is assigned an arbitrary triple of real numbers as value.
Thus we get the desired result: if you are told that the value of welocity for o at t is
some vector in IR3, say (1,10,3) relative to some axes and choice of a time-unit, you
cannot tell whether:

(a): (NotEx) and (NotDiﬀ) are both false (i.e. the presuppositions hold), and o

has velocity (1,10,3); or

(b): (NotEx) or (NotDiﬀ) is true, the predicate is vacuously satisﬁed by all triples,
and (1,10,3) just happens to be the triple assigned by semantic rules taken from Hilbert-
Bernays’ (or some similar) scheme.

The details are as follows.

(1): Hilbert and Bernays introduced the notation
(εx)(F x) for the deﬁnite description ‘the F ’, with the rule that if F had more than one
instance, then (εx)(F x) was assigned as referent any such instance, i.e. any element of
F ’s extension. (We need not consider their other rules, nor their rules’ consequences
for the semantics and syntax of singular terms.)

(2): Next, we observe that intuitively the velocity of an object o at time t can be
deﬁned with a deﬁnite description containing a material conditional whose antecedents
are the presuppositions of persistence and diﬀerentiability. That is: it seems velocity
can be deﬁned along the following lines:—

The velocity of o at time t is the triple of real numbers v such that:

for some (and so any smaller) open interval I around t:
{[o exists throughout I] and [o’s position x(t) is diﬀerentiable in I]} ⊃
[v is the common limit of average velocities for times t′ ∈ I, compared with
t, as t′ → t from above or below].

This deﬁniens uses a material conditional. So it will be vacuously true for all triples
v, if the antecedent is false for all open intervals I around t, i.e. if (NotEx) or (Not-
Diﬀ) is true: in other words, if velocity’s presuppositions of continued existence and
diﬀerentiability fail.

(3): Now we put points (1) and (2) together. Let us abbreviate the displayed
deﬁniens, i.e. the open sentence with v as its only free variable, as F (v). Then I
propose to deﬁne the welocity of o at t by the singular term (εv)(F v): which is, by
Hilbert-Bernays’ semantic rule:

(a): equal to the (instantaneous) velocity of o for those times t at which o has

a velocity; and

(b): equal to some arbitrary triple of real numbers, at other times t; i.e. times
such that either (NotEx): o does not exist for an open interval around t; or (NotDiﬀ):
o does exist for an open interval around t, but its position x is not diﬀerentiable at t.

42

Welocity, so deﬁned, has the desired features:
about whether (NotEx) or (NotDiﬀ) is true.

its values do not give the game away

That is all I need to say about welocity, for this paper’s purposes; and in particu-
lar, for Section 4.3’s comparison with Robinson’s and Lewis’ proposal. But I end this
Subsection by noting that there are of course various technical questions hereabouts,
even apart from the logical questions about ε (which are of course addressed by the
masters, Hilbert and Bernays!).

In a discussion of the RDA and so of continuous matter, a natural question arises
from letting o be a point-sized bit of matter in a continuum, and letting the presuppo-
sitions of velocity fail for various such point-sized bits of matter: some such bits may
fail to exist, and some may have a non-diﬀerentiable worldline. One then faces the
question: how widely across space, and in how arbitrary and gerry-mandered a spatial
distribution, can these bits fail to exist, or have a non-diﬀerentiable worldline—i.e. how
widely and arbitrarily can the presuppositions of velocity fail—while yet the welocity
ﬁeld might not give the game away, in that the arbitrary values can be assigned at all
the points where the presuppositions of velocity fail, in such a way as to give a smooth
(e.g. continuous or even diﬀerentiable) welocity ﬁeld?

This is in eﬀect a question about the scope and limits of “regularization” of “sin-

gularities” in real vector ﬁelds: a good question—but not one for this paper!

To sum up this Subsection, i.e. Section 4.2.2: I hope here—and especially in the last
two parts, Subsections 4.2.2.C and 4.2.2.D—to have “set the cat among the pigeons”, to
have “upset the applecart”, about the literature’s consensus that velocity presupposes
persistence.

These scattered pigeons and upset apples will be important for my reply to the
RDA in Section 7. But in the meantime, they will not much aﬀect the discussion,
except for the next Subsection’s comparison of welocity with Robinson’s and Lewis’
proposal (Section 4.3). So they can be set aside for:

(i) most of this Section’s discussion of metaphysical replies to the RDA; and for
(ii) the next Section’s discussion of the technical description of rotation, and of

what it entails about the RDA.

4.3 Velocities on the cheap? Lewis and Robinson

I turn to Lewis’ and Robinson’s version of (Appealing Diﬀerences). They propose that
a moving object has a vectorial property (i.e. a property represented by a vector) which
is intrinsic to the object, and whose vector is equal to the velocity vector. But this
property is not itself velocity, since velocity presupposes persistence, and this property
is to be intrinsic, not merely “almost intrinsic”.

I will ﬁrst present the proposal, in Section 4.3.1.

I will emphasize: (i) Lewis’
doctrine of Humean supervenience; and (ii) how Lewis came around to this defence of
Humean supervenience (ca. 1998), after espousing for a while (ca. 1986-1994) a (No
Diﬀerence) reply. Then in Section 4.3.2 I will assess the proposal.

43

4.3.1 The proposal

(1) Humean supervenience
We saw in Section 4.1 that Armstrong’s appeal to causation, in response to the RDA, is
not available to someone like Lewis who advocates both perdurantism, and a Humean
view of causation. Indeed, as I mentioned, Lewis advocates a much stronger doctrine,
Humean supervenience, which has become the paradigm in contemporary metaphysics
for what I have called pointillisme (cf. Section 2.1). He holds that all truths supervene
on truths about matters of local particular fact: where ‘matters of local particular
fact’ is to be understood in terms of Lewis’ metaphysics of natural properties, with the
properties having spacetime points, or perhaps point-sized bits of matter, as instances.
He writes:

. . . all there is to the world is a vast mosaic of local matters of particular
fact, just one little thing and then another ... We have ...
relations of
spatio-temporal distance between points ... And at those points we have
local qualities ... For short: we have an arrangement of qualities. And that
is all. There is no diﬀerence without a diﬀerence in the arrangement of
qualities. All else supervenes on that. (1986, p. ix-x.)

Or in other words: Humean supervenience

. . . says that in a world like ours, the fundamental relations are exactly
the spatiotemporal relations: distance relations, both spacelike and time-
like, and perhaps also occupancy relations between point-sized things and
spacetime points. And it says that in a world like ours, the fundamen-
tal properties are local qualities: perfectly natural intrinsic properties of
points, or of point-sized occupants of points. Therefore it says that all else
supervenes on the spatiotemporal arrangement of local qualities throughout
all of history, past and present and future. (1994, p. 474.)

(2) Lewis’ (No Diﬀerence) Reply

So Lewis addresses the RDA as an objection to his Humean supervenience thesis. His
reply changed over time; we can distinguish three phases (1986 p.xiii, 1994 p. 475,
1999). At ﬁrst (1986 p.xiii), he appealed to the fact (clear from the second quota-
tion) that he advocates Humean supervenience as a contingent thesis, true at some
worlds (including, he hopes, ours) but not at others. That is, he advocated Humean
supervenience for an “inner sphere” consisting of the non-alien worlds—deﬁned (in his
quiddistic theory of natural properties) as the worlds where any instantiated natural
property is not alien to the actual world. So he replied to the RDA, taken as putting
its diﬀering discs (Stat) and (Rot) each in its own world, by saying that one or both
of the worlds must be outside the inner sphere.

Of course, essentially the same reply can be given using other deﬁnitions of the
“inner sphere” across which Humean supervenience is to hold as a contingent super-
venience thesis. For example, as I mentioned in Section 1.3: one might claim the

44

supervenience to hold across all the worlds that each make true all the actual laws of
nature.

Similarly, Robinson (1989, p.404: crediting Lewis):

(i): toys with replying to the RDA that it shows that the common sense notion

of homogeneous matter and its persistence requires atomistic matter; and

(ii): suggests this would be an example of the traditional “paradox of analysis”:

roughly, that philosophical analysis can reveal surprising truths.

Later, Lewis adjusted this reply; (1994 p. 475—this is the second phase). He agreed
that this reply had not given a reason for thinking that enduring objects were diﬀerent
in their fundamental nature from perduring objects, so that one or both of the disc
worlds had to be alien; (in response to Haslanger (1994); cf. also Robinson 1989, p.
403-404). But his preferred reply to the RDA remained a version of (No Diﬀerence):
that one or both of the disc worlds were not “worlds like ours”; i.e. they fell outside
the class of worlds (now only vaguely speciﬁed) for which Humean supervenience was
claimed.

(3) Comparison with Callender

It is worth brieﬂy comparing this reply with Callender’s (No Diﬀerence) reply (cf.
Section 3.4). The main diﬀerence is that:—

Lewis admits that there are some possible worlds very ‘unlike ours’ (roughly: outside
the inner sphere of possibility) which sustain the distinction between (Stat) and (Rot),
in the sense that at least one of these two worlds must be outside the inner sphere.

On the other hand, Callender (at least as I read him) takes a tougher stance. He
does not deﬁne a limited class of worlds in which there is no diﬀerence (i.e. from which
the (Stat)/(Rot) distinction is banished). He apparently believes the (Stat)/(Rot)
distinction is yet “worse oﬀ”. For good metaphysical arguments can be given that it
is as spurious as the up/down distinction (his Section 2, p. 30-35). And even if these
arguments fail, there are methodological reasons (roughly: Occam’s razor) to deny the
distinction (his Section 3, p. 35-40). Thus he says that the discs that the RDA needs
are ‘the metaphysical equivalent of fairies, ghosts and vital spirits’ (p. 26). By this
he means that they must be uncoupled (i.e causally isolated) from any of the ﬁelds
(electromagnetism, gravity etc.) that exist in our world, and from all the usual causes
and eﬀects of rotation. ‘Such a disc is no diﬀerent from a ghost, and is not something
Humeans or non-Humeans ought to posit’ (p. 37).

(But maybe Callender is closer to Lewis than this summary suggests: perhaps he
thinks the (Stat)/(Rot) distinction makes some kind of sense, but is less committed
than Lewis to the framework of possible worlds and so to deﬁning some kind of “inner
sphere” from which the distinction is banished.)

(4) Lewis’ (Appealing Diﬀerences) Reply

But in a ﬁnal short paper (replying to Zimmerman 1998), Lewis endorsed (1999, p.
211) a proposal that had been ﬂoated by Robinson (1989; p. 405 para 2, p. 406 para
2—p. 408 para 1). Roughly speaking, the proposal is that:

(i) a vectorial property at a point can be an intrinsic property of that point;

45

(ii) the propagation of continuous matter through spacetime involves such a prop-

erty at every spacetime point; and

(iii) these properties distinguish the rotating and non-rotating discs, since the vec-
tor that represents the property at a point is timelike, and points in the same direction
as the instantaneous four-dimensional velocity vector at that point;

(iv) the distribution of these properties, from point to point, determines (subvenes)
the relations of qualitative similarity between points, and especially the relations of
causal dependence between events at those points; and

(v) the distribution of these properties, by determining the lines of causal depen-

dence, determines the lines of persistence.

Three side-remarks: (a) So this proposal takes causal dependence to underpin per-

sistence: as I noted at the start of Section 4.1, many philosophers endorse this.

(b) In fact, Lewis already agreed to (i) in his (1994, p. 474); but lacking (ii) and
(iii), and so also (iv) and (v), he there retained his “not like ours” (No Diﬀerence)
reply.

(c) Robinson’s (i)-(iv) are clearly similar in spirit to Tooley’s and Bigelow and
Pargetter’s heterodox understanding of velocity as an intrinsic property, discussed in
Section 4.2.1. Robinson does not refer to their papers which were of course contempo-
raneous. But Zimmerman (1998, p. 281, p. 284) and Sider (2001, p. 228) both see the
similarity to Tooley’s proposal (1988). Zimmerman ﬁrst discusses reading Robinson’s
proposal as the same as Tooley’s (p. 281), and then discusses reading it as just similar
(p. 284, note 65). Sider reads the proposals as similar. More speciﬁcally, Sider and
Zimmerman’s second reading both see Robinson’s proposal as going with a Russellian
“at-at” account of motion. So also (implicitly) does Lewis’ discussion.

So the idea of the proposal is that the diﬀerence in these properties amounts to
a diﬀerence in the ‘local arrangement of qualities’ as demanded by Humean superve-
nience. Thus Lewis (1999, p. 211) begins by approvingly quoting Robinson, suggesting
we should

. . . see the collection of qualities characteristic of the occupation of space
by matter as in some sense jointly self-propagating; the fact of matter
occupying space is itself causally responsible ...
for the matter going on
occupying space in the near neighbourhood immediately thereafter. ... [The
posited vectors] ﬁgure causally in determining the direction of propagation
of [themselves as well as] other material properties.
(Robinson 1989, p.
406-407.)

Lewis then goes on to formulate the proposal more formally, as a putative law that
partially speciﬁes a vector ﬁeld V . The speciﬁcation is partial, both in (i) being ad-
mitted to be a “ﬁrst approximation”, and (ii) specifying only the direction but not
it will be obvious
the length of the vector at each point. But (ii) hardly matters:
that Robinson and Lewis could frame their proposal entirely in terms of postulating
a timelike direction ﬁeld (i.e. a speciﬁcation at each point of continuous matter of a

46

timelike direction), rather than a vector ﬁeld. But I shall follow them and talk of a
vector ﬁeld.

In giving this formulation, Lewis’ aim is partly to avoid various objections or limita-
tions. In particular, the formulation should not invoke either persistence or causation,
since these are meant to supervene on the local arrangement of qualities, taken of
course as including facts about the vector ﬁeld V . Thus the formulation is to avoid
circularity objections that had been urged by Zimmerman (1998) against some related
proposals.

So in particular: the vector ﬁeld V cannot simply be the instantaneous (four-
dimensional) velocity (Russellian, not Tooleyan!) of the matter at the point in ques-
tion. For V is to contribute to an analysis of (or at least to a supervenience basis for)
persistence and thereby of velocity.

Similarly, since Lewis agrees that causation is crucial to persistence (‘the most im-
portant sort of glue that unites the successive stages of a persisting thing is causal
glue’: 1999, p. 210), causation cannot be invoked in the course of specifying the vector
ﬁeld V .

Lewis proposes that (for a world with continuous space and time), the speciﬁcation

of V ‘might go something like this’:

Let p be any spacetime point, and let t be any smooth timelike trajectory
through spacetime with p as its ﬁnal limit point. Let each point of t before
p be occupied by matter with its vector [i.e. vector of the vector ﬁeld V ]
pointing in the direction of t at that point.
[So in the jargon of modern
geometry, t is an integral curve of V .] Then, ceteris paribus, there will be
matter also at p. (1999, p. 211.)

Here, the ‘ceteris paribus’ clause is to allow for the fact that the point-sized bit of
matter might cease to exist before p, because of ‘destructive forces or self-destructive
tendencies’ (ibid.).

Lewis also stresses that this proposal is to be read as a law of succession, not of
causation. This means, I take it, that the ‘Then, ceteris paribus’ is to be read as a
material conditional.

4.3.2 Assessment

I think Lewis’ proposal fails. After saying why, I will broach the more general (and
I think, more important) issue of how plausible is an extreme pointillisme like Lewis’
Humean supervenience. This will return us to the discussion in Sections 4.2.2.C and
4.2.2.D.

4.3.2.A The vector ﬁeld remains unspeciﬁed I claim Lewis’ proposal is too
weak: it does not go far enough to specify V . For it only says, of any timelike open
curve that is an integral curve of V , that the future end-point p of this curve will,

47

ceteris paribus, have matter at it.

But every suitably smooth vector ﬁeld U deﬁned on a open region R of spacetime
has integral curves throughout R; (which are timelike, by deﬁnition, if U is). (To be
‘suitably smooth’ is none too demanding: all we need is that U be C 1, i.e.
precise:
the partial derivatives of its components exist and are continuous.) So suppose Lewis
stipulates, that the ﬁeld V is to be timelike and C 1 on an open set R which is its
domain of deﬁnition (say, the spatiotemporal region occupied by continuous matter):
which (“giving rope”) we can assume to be a legitimate, in particular non-circular,
stipulation. Then his proposal says that, ceteris paribus, every point p ∈ R has matter
at it.

But that claim hardly helps to distinguish V from the countless other (timelike
continuous) vector ﬁelds U. For however exactly one interprets ‘ceteris paribus’, the
claim is surely true of p regardless of the integral curve one considers it as lying on.
So the claim about p does not constrain the vector ﬁeld. Indeed, if Lewis sets out to
specify V on the spatiotemporal region occupied by continuous matter, the claim is
thereby assumed to be true for all p in the region, regardless of vector ﬁelds. So again,
we have said nothing to distinguish V from the countless other vector ﬁelds U.

Agreed, Lewis puts forward his proposal as a “ﬁrst approximation” to specifying
V . But so far as I can see, his discussion doesn’t contain any ingredients which would,
for continuous matter, help distinguish V from other vector ﬁelds.22

Zimmerman (1999) makes a somewhat similar objection to Lewis’ proposal. But

his exact intent is not clear to me.

He maintains that in some seemingly possible cases of continuous matter, Lewis’
proposal does not specify a unique vector ﬁeld V —indeed hardly constrains V at all. He
says (p. 214 para 1 and 2) that in possible worlds with a physics of the sort Descartes
might have envisaged, i.e. where there is nowhere any vacuum, and only one kind of
(continuous homogeneous) stuﬀ ﬁlls all of space: ‘every vector ﬁeld will satisfy [Lewis’]
law.’

Thus Zimmerman assumes that:

(i): the worlds with which he is concerned are wholly ﬁlled with the one kind of

stuﬀ; and

(ii): these worlds are thus ﬁlled as a matter of law, not happenstance (in the

jargon: as a matter of physical or nomic necessity).

He also says (p. 214-5) that he needs to assume (i) and (ii) in order to criticize
Lewis’ proposal, together with obvious modiﬁcations of it which allow for diﬀerent
types (“colours”) of continuous matter. That is: Zimmerman thinks Lewis’ proposal
works, or could be modiﬁed to work, for worlds in which:

(i’) continuous matter does not ﬁll all of space and-or comes in various types; or
22Nor can I guess how I might have misinterpreted Lewis’ proposal. The situation is puzzling:
and not just because Lewis thought so clearly, and my objection is obvious. Also, the objection is
analogous to what Lewis himself says (p. 210) against the naive idea that V should point in the
direction of perfect qualitative similarity: viz. that ‘in non-particulate homogeneous matter, ... lines
of qualitative similarity run every which way’.

48

(ii’) continuous matter of just one type ﬁlls all of space, but only as a matter of

happenstance.

In view of my own objection, I do not understand why Zimmerman feels he needs
to assume (i) and (ii) in order to object to Lewis. He does not explicitly say why he
does so. Maybe it is to block some Lewisian rejoinder, that would better specify V , by
adding constraints of either or both of two kinds:

(i”): constraints about the spatiotemporal relations of the continuous matter in a

bounded volume (say, one of our discs) to other matter outside the volume.

(ii”): constraints about the nomic or modal properties of matter.

But it remains unclear how the details of (i”) and (ii”) might go.

To sum up: For all I can see, my objection, that V is not distinguished from
countless other vector ﬁelds, applies to Lewis’ proposal (and thereby: the spirit of
Zimmerman’s objection also applies) for the case that Lewis intended it—i.e. the discs
of the original RDA.

4.3.2.B What price Humean supervenience? Doubts about intrinsic vec-
torial properties
I announced my denial of pointillisme, and so my antipathy to
Humean supervenience, already in Section 2.1. And in Sections 4.2.2.C and 4.2.2.D, I
developed this by arguing that temporal extrinsicality was after all “not so bad”. More
speciﬁcally, I argued that velocity was almost intrinsic, and that we could even deﬁne
a quantity, welocity, that in a sense avoids velocity’s presupposition of persistence.

I am afraid these doctrines would not appeal to Lewis! He would probably be
unimpressed by velocity’s being almost intrinsic. For Humean supervenience is so
central to his metaphysical system that he sets considerable store by intrinsicality. So
he would probably say that as regards failing to be intrinsic, a miss is as good (i.e.
bad!) as a mile.

Similarly, I am not conﬁdent that he would welcome welocity. I agree that he might
be “envious” of its being well-deﬁned (modulo the freedom to assign referents associ-
ated with the ε operator), since his own proposal, the intrinsic vector V , is yet to be
successfully deﬁned.

I also agree that in one important respect, welocity ﬁts Lewis’ conception of intrin-
sicality. Namely, on Lewis’ conception, intrinsicality is not hyperintensional: that is,
necessarily co-extensive properties are alike in being intrinsic, or not. (The reason for
this lies in Lewis’ proposal for how to analyse intrinsicality. Both his preferred analysis
(and a fallback analysis, in (Langton and Lewis 1998)) take an intrinsic property to
be one that does not diﬀer between duplicate objects—where duplication is deﬁned, in
both analyses, as sharing a certain elite minority of properties. Clearly, any analysis
with these features will imply that necessarily co-extensive properties are alike in being
intrinsic, or not.)

Now, the welocity of an object o is intuitively (albeit hypothetically!) “about” o’s
positions at other times; so that someone who construes intrinsicality as hyperinten-
sional may want to argue that welocity is extrinsic, or temporally extrinsic (if they use

49

that notion). Conversely, the idea that welocity is intrinsic goes with a conception of
intrinsicality as not hyperintensional—such as Lewis’.

Nevertheless, I am not conﬁdent Lewis would welcome welocity, just because there

are two general obstacles to connecting it to his framework:—

(a): Lewis talks only of intrinsic and extrinsic properties, not (as I have) of

temporally and spatially intrinsic or extrinsic properties; and

(b): Lewis’ proposed analysis of intrinsicality (and the Langton-and-Lewis fall-
back proposal) is cast in terms of his very general metaphysical system, using notions
like ‘natural property’ and ‘possible world’. This makes it a delicate matter to classify
everyday, or even technical scientiﬁc, properties in terms of his proposal. So in partic-
ular, I am unsure whether my welocity counts as intrinsic for Lewis.

(I add, in Lewis’ defence: I think this “gap” between his metaphysical categories
and the properties we know explains some of the counterexamples brought against his
proposal. But I also add, against him: the “gap” makes considerable trouble for his
overall Humean project (Mainwood 2003); and these counterexamples, together with
other considerations, also suggest that there is no single intrinsic-extrinsic distinction;
(cf. Humberstone (1996) and (broadly following him) Weatherson 2002).)

But it would take us too far aﬁeld to further compare my anti-pointillisme with
Lewis’ Humean supervenience, even if we considered only the topic of velocity. I must
leave further discussion of these issues to my 2004. To advertise that discussion, and to
emphasise that controversy surrounds even basic questions about the intrinsic-extrinsic
distinction in application to scientiﬁc properties, I end this Subsection by pointing out
that the very ﬁrst claim of the Robinson-Lewis proposal, viz. (i) of Section 4.3.1:
(i): a vectorial property at a point can be an intrinsic property of that point
has been doubted in the metaphysical literature—and even by Robinson and (the
earlier) Lewis themselves! (Lewis endorsed (i) in what I called the ‘second phase’ reply
to the RDA; (1994, p. 474).)

I said in Section 4.3.1 that Robinson ‘ﬂoated’ the Robinson-Lewis proposal, pre-
cisely because he did not endorse it. His anxiety concerns the directionality of a vector.
He writes: ‘Direction seems to me an inherently relational matter’ (1989,p. 408). He
supports this with the following argument, for which he credits Lewis; (so Lewis seems
to have come round to believing (i), that vectors can represent intrinsic properties of
points, sometime between ca. 1988 and writing his (1994, p. 474)).

The argument has two premises:
(a): A vector quantity could not be instantiated in a zero-dimensional world con-
sisting of a single point; (though since arbitrarily close points deﬁne a direction, there
is of course no lower limit to the “size” of a world in which a point instantiates a vector
quantity). But it also seems that:

(b): Since a point in an extended world that instantiates a vector quantity is indeed
a point, it could have a duplicate that existed on its own, i.e. was the only object in
its world.

Taken together, (a) and (b) imply that duplicate points might diﬀer in their vec-

50

torial properties; so that (at least on a Lewisan approach to the intrinsic-extrinsic
distinction, according to which intrinsic properties are those shared by duplicates)
such properties are extrinsic.

Nor is Robinson alone in worrying that vectors could only represent extrinsic prop-
erties of a point. Cf. also: Bricker (1993); Zimmerman (1998, p. 277-278; mentioned
in Section 4.2.1’s discussion of Tooleyan velocities (footnote 13); and Black (2000, p.
103), who holds that vectors can only represent intrinsic properties in a ﬂat manifold,
i.e. roughly, a manifold in which there is a unique preferred way to compare vectors
located at diﬀerent points.

To sum up: even among authors squarely within contemporary metaphysics’ ap-
proach to the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction, step (i) of the Robinson-Lewis proposal
remains controversial.

4.4 Functionally deﬁning persistence and laws: Sider

I will describe Sider’s reply to the RDA (2001, p. 230-236) in some detail, as it is in
eﬀect my “fallback position”: if my own reply failed, I would endorse an analogue of
his (Section 6.2).

It also combines several of the themes we have introduced. For example, it is close
to Section 4.2.2.B’s idea of simultaneously deﬁning velocity and persistence. More
important, it is an interesting example of combining the two kinds of reply, (Appealing
Diﬀerences) and (No Diﬀerence), in the way mentioned in Section 3.4. First, Sider
appeals to non-obvious diﬀerences that other perdurantist replies have not appealed
to; (‘non-obvious’ because they are diﬀerences in the discs’ environments, not in the
discs themselves). But second, if these diﬀerences are “imagined away”, along with
the more obvious diﬀerences (like oblateness) that the RDA imagines away, then Sider
turns to the (No Diﬀerence) reply: he “bites the bullet” and says that in such a world,
there is no distinction between the discs. This second part of Sider’s position is also
interesting. For he does not turn to the (No Diﬀerence) reply merely as a matter of his
philosophical judgment, or “intuition”: nor even as a matter of scientiﬁc methodology
(as Callender argues). Rather it follows from Sider’s theory of how the perdurantist
should go about deﬁning persistence, that in such a world there will be no distinction.

Sider develops his position from the following two independent components.
(i): He notes the “logical circle” of the laws (of dynamics) and persistence. That
is: the laws concern persisting objects, and so use the notion of persistence. But for
perdurantists, persistence, i.e. the relation between stages of an ordinary persisting
object, has a causal or nomic component—and Sider is happy to have it be nomic,
so that the notion of persistence presupposes the laws.
In the face of this logical
circle, Sider proposes the now-familiar tactic: Ramsey-Lewis simultaneous functional
deﬁnition, so as to simultaneously specify persistence and the laws from a single body
of doctrine.

(ii): He adopts the Mill-Ramsey-Lewis best-system theory of laws of nature (Lewis

1973, Section 3.3, p. 72-77).

51

Given these components, Sider’s position follows swiftly. He writes (using
‘genidentity’, where I have hitherto used ‘persistence’, for the relation between stages
(temporal parts) of an ordinary persisting object—which he calls ‘continuants’):

...

Consider various ways of grouping stages together into physical continu-
ants. Relative to any such way, there are candidate laws of dynamics. The
correct grouping into physical continuants is that grouping that results in
the best candidate set of laws of dynamics; the correct laws are the mem-
bers of this candidate set.
More carefully. Any law of dynamics is a statement restricted to physical
continuants, which may be rewritten in terms of the predicate ‘geniden-
‘for any maximal genidentity-interrelated sum x ...’. Let
tity’ as follows:
S be any axiomatization of any candidate set of laws of nature. Let
S(genidentity) be the result of rewriting any dynamical laws in S in terms
of the genidentity predicate. Where G is any two-pace predicate vari-
able, let S(G) be the result of replacing all occurrences of ‘genidentity’
in S(genidentity) with G.
relative to any assignment of a two-place
relation G to the variable G, we can evaluate the strength [JNB: and the
simplicity] of the resulting system S(G). We now deﬁne the best system
and genidentity at once: they are the pair hS(G), Gi, where G is a two-
place relation over stages and S(G) is the system that achieves the best
combination of strength and simplicity.
[The idea is that] we must look globally, across the entire world, to ﬁnd what
assignment yields the best candidate laws of dynamics. Thus although the
states of a spinning disk may qualitatively match those of a stationary disk,
what is going on elsewhere in the world may result in diﬀerences of rotation.
[JNB: ‘result in’ here means ‘imply’ not cause] Suppose, for example, that
a stationary disk with a small hole is impacted by an object that seam-
lessly lodges itself in the hole, resulting in a perfectly homoegenous disk
... Suppose further that, in the possible world in question, collisions gen-
erally result in transfer of momentum. The best simultaneous assignment
of genidentity and laws of dynamics will then be one according to which
this disk is spinning, for a pair of a genidentity assignment and set of laws
on which the disk does not spin will not contain exceptionless laws gov-
erning the transfer of momentum. Now suppose further that, elsewhere in
the same world, a disk with an empty niche had initially been spinning,
and that a perfectly ﬁtting object moving opposite to the direction of ro-
If the speeds and masses are appropriate,
tation collided with the disk.
the best assignment of genidentity and laws will have the result that this
second disk is stationary after the collision. The present view, therefore,
allows the possibility of diﬀerences in rotation between homogeneous disks
without appealing to non-Humean quantities. (p. 230-231)

So Sider’s leading idea is to have both the notion of genidentity and the laws

52

of dynamics “get established” in unproblematic cases, and then “projected” to the
problematic cases involving continuous homogeneous matter. As he says:

it is crucial that the world contain plenty of unproblematic cases not involv-
ing uniform homogeneous matter. Once a certain candidate pair of laws
and genidentity gets its foothold in these unproblematic cases, it can then
be projected into the problematic cases involving homogeneous objects, for
this projection increases the strength of the candidate laws and does not
decrease their simplicity. (p. 233)

So Sider goes on to admit (in eﬀect by way of concession to the argument of Zim-

merman (1999), which I discussed in Section 4.3.2.A) that his view cannot

distinguish states of rotation in cases where there is not enough else going
on in the world to give candidate pairs of genidentity and laws a foothold.
In a world that contains only a homogeneous disk, the facts will not be
suﬃciently rich to allow one candidate pair to win out; there will therefore
be no unique facts about genidentity, no unique spacetime worm that counts
as a given spatial part of the disk, and no fact of the matter whether the
disk spins or rotates. (p. 233-234)

Sider then argues (p. 234-236) that he can “bite this bullet”. (Though Sider does not
explicitly discuss Zimmerman’s space-ﬁlling homogeneous ﬂuid, he would no doubt also
bite the bullet in this case.) That is to say, in terms of Section 3.4’s two kinds of reply:
for such a world, he adopts the (No Diﬀerence) reply; where, as I noted above, this
is not just a matter of his philosophical judgment, but follows from his theory of how
to go about deﬁning persistence—functional deﬁnition, and the best-system theory of
laws.

(Sider also argues that he can similarly bite another “more general” bullet, that
arises from his overall strategy of deﬁning both laws of dynamics and persistence by
looking ‘globally, across the entire world’. Namely: the bullet that according to his
account, whether or not a disc is rotating is a very extrinsic matter—i.e.
it depends
on what goes on in spacetime external to the disc. Sider, a good Humean, says he can
accept this: indeed, for much the same reasons that a Humean about causation accepts
that a singular causal fact, say c causes e, is extrinsic to the two relata c and e.)

In metaphysics, I am an aspiring Humean: to that extent, I like Sider’s position.
But the endurantist will no doubt reply that Sider’s bullet-biting amounts to conceding
the force of the RDA: ‘even Sider’s version of perdurantism, with its sophistication
about the account of persistence invoking the laws of mechanics, cannot secure facts of
persistence in the troublesome cases considered by the RDA’. In other words: Sider’s
(No Diﬀerence) verdict suggests that after all, there is at best a stalemate.

From Section 6 onwards, I will argue that the perdurantist can do better than this

stalemate. But before turning to that, we need to consider ...

53

5 Describing rotation

So much, for the moment, for metaphysics! I now return to Section 3.2.2’s demand that
the advocate of the RDA (indeed all parties to the dispute) should state and justify their
claims about spatiotemporal structure—i.e. the claims they need to make, in order that
statements of rotation make sense. I begin by stressing the need for precision (Section
5.1). Then I report how physics rigorously describes states of rotation (Sections 5.2
and 5.3), and review how these technicalities bear on the endurantism-perdurantism
debate (Section 5.4). This yields two of the paper’s three main conclusions:

(i): the RDA can be formulated more strongly than is usually recognized: it is not

necessary to “imagine away” the dynamical eﬀects of rotation (Section 5.5); but

(ii): in general relativity, the RDA fails (even in the strengthened version), because

of frame-dragging (Section 5.6).

5.1 The need for precision

As I argued in Section 3.2.2: to get a grip on the two possibilities that the RDA urges on
us, it is certainly not enough to just draw or visually imagine the contrasting diagrams,
with straight and helical worldlines. For such diagrams implicitly assume that the
rotation/non-rotation distinction is deﬁned in terms of a space of persisting spatial
points; and the question arises what account either party, endurantist or perdurantist,
can give of such points—or of whatever (maybe more technical) notions they need, or
choose, to use so as to describe rotation.

Besides, this question is also brought out by Callender’s (No Diﬀerence) reply in
Section 3.4. Callender’s claim that the (Stat)/(Rot) distinction is as spurious as that
between (Up) and (Down) is essentially the claim that, pending some further account,
the straight/helical contrast for a diagram’s worldlines can be dismissed as an artefact
of the diagram:
I can change coordinate system to make what I drew as straight
(helical) be now drawn as helical (straight), just as I can change coordinates to make
an arrow drawn pointing upward get drawn as downward.

The general point here is that diagrams can carry implicit assumptions or connota-
tions that a certain distinction makes sense (aka: ‘is physically signiﬁcant/real’)—and
that one can propose, or hope to have, a theory of motion in which that distinction is
in fact denied.

This is a familiar point in the philosophy of geometry. A standard simple example,
much like the up/down one, is the description of 3-dimensional Euclidean space with
cartesian coordinates, i.e. as IR3. The diagram of the three axes suggests a distin-
guished point, and three distinguished directions: a connotation we immediately do
away with by emphasising how we can equally well choose coordinate systems with
other origins and-or axis-directions.23

23This leads into a large mathematical subject, which goes back to Klein: articulating the geometric

54

Indeed, this sort of rectilinear example is very relevant to the RDA. For the RDA can
be—and sometimes has been—developed using, instead of discs (or spheres, cylinders
etc.) and rotation: rivers of homogeneous continuous matter undergoing an homoge-
neous steady ﬂow, i.e. with the velocities of all the point-sized bits of matter being the
same as each other, and constant in time.

Thus the argument against perdurantism would be that the perdurantist appar-
ently cannot distinguish between the river being stationary and ﬂowing steadily. (But
most authors in the RDA literature who mention rivers do not conﬁne themselves to
steady homogeneous ﬂow: they gesture at the endless variety of possible ﬂows, with
all sorts of eddies, which allegedly all “look the same” to the perdurantist or Humean.
And the argument prompts the now-familiar two kinds of reply. (Appealing Diﬀer-
ences): Can the perdurantist distinguish the cases by appealing to, for example, motion
relative to the river bank? And if not, say because the river is the only thing in the
world (say, ﬁlling all space), can she appeal to instantaneous velocity or causation? On
the other hand, (No Diﬀerence): can the perdurantist deny that there is a distinction?

So in fact our topic in this Section is, not just how is rotation rigorously described,
but: how is all motion, even rectilinear motion, rigorously described? But I shall
emphasise rotation, since:

(i) the RDA literature does so, and:
(ii) nowadays, the rejection of absolute space makes an argument, based on the
irrotationally steadily ﬂowing river, look weak. That is: if the river is
stationary vs.
“lonely”, the only thing in the world, then the (No Diﬀerence) reply seems convincing.
So rotation seems to give the endurantist their best chance of making trouble for
perdurantism.

The rigorous description of motion, and especially rotation, in modern geometry
and physics is a very large and subtle subject. But to assess the RDA we can fortunately
make do with some simple points. I start in Section 5.2, simply and traditionally, by
discussing how Newton argued for persisting spatial points, i.e. an absolute space, by
appealing to the dynamical eﬀects of rotation. This will lead to Section 5.3’s summary
of some aspects of the modern kinematical description of rotation.

5.2 Motion needs a connection

In his bucket and globes thought-experiments, Newton appealed to the dynamical
eﬀects of rotation to argue that the theory of motion needed to postulate an absolute
space of persisting spatial points. (At least this is the usual reading: but for subtleties
and controversy, cf. e.g. Rynasiewicz 1995, Mainwood 2004.) So at ﬁrst sight, it
seems that both the endurantist and perdurantist might hope to appeal to, or adapt,
Newton’s argument so as to give an account of the persistence of spatial points.

(Here I assume that for the advocate of the RDA, this does not conﬂict with the

structure of a space by singling out a class of coordinate systems that gives its structure an especially
simple expression, and stating the group structure of this class.

55

fact that the RDA imagines away such dynamical eﬀects. The idea is that the advocate
follows Newton in arguing for the actual existence of absolute space; but then says that
for the purposes of the argument, the dynamical eﬀects can be imagined away—and
that this is not so “unlike the actual world” as to let the perdurantist oﬀ the hook of
having to distinguish the cases of (Stat) and (Rot).)

But Newton’s arguments (and their ilk) can be resisted. There are two points here,

of which the second is more important for us.

(i): Those inclined to relationism about space and time (like Leibniz and Mach)
will say that the correct account of space must be based on relations between material
bodies—and that therefore for a “lonely” disc, i.e. a disc alone in the universe, there
can be no distinction between rotation and non-rotation. In eﬀect, Leibniz and Mach
hoped to develop a mechanics in which Newton’s arguments would fail, because the
mechanics would contain a law that vetoes Newton’s putative possibilities in which
the total material content of the universe rotates: the law would require that the total
angular momentum of the universe be zero. Such a relational mechanics has now been
developed, especially by Barbour et al.; (for discussion and references, cf. Earman 1989,
p. 27-30, 92-96, Belot 2000, p. 570-574, 580-582, Pooley and Brown 2002, Butterﬁeld
2002 296-311). But I set these theories aside in what follows.

(ii) Nowadays, it is clear that, even apart from alternative relationist mechanics,

Newton’s arguments fail in one precise sense. That is: all now agree that:

(a) Though (relationism apart) Newton was justiﬁed in inferring from the dy-

namical eﬀects of rotation that acceleration had an absolute (i.e. coordinate-independent)
physical signiﬁcance;

(b) And though Newton was justiﬁed, within the mathematics of his time, in
inferring that absolute acceleration could only make sense if there was also absolute
velocity (since acceleration seems to be “just” the time-derivative of velocity), and
thereby also absolute position (since velocity seems to be “just” the time-derivative of
position);

(c) Nevertheless, modern mathematics enables us to make sense of absolute ac-
celeration (and its quantitative measures), and so of the contrast between straight and
helical worldlines, without an absolute space (and without having a notion of absolute
velocity).

The idea in (c) is mathematically subtle:

it only became clear in the 1920s (in
the work of Weyl, Cartan etc.) after relativity theory prompted physicists to think
in terms of spacetime concepts. But I will not need to develop it in detail (cf. e.g.
Sklar 1974 pp. 202-206, Earman 1989 p.33). Here it suﬃces to say that we postulate
a geometric structure on spacetime called an aﬃne connection (for short: connection),
which essentially deﬁnes a notion of straightness, and thereby notions of amounts of
curvature, for curves in spacetime. Applied to timelike curves, these are notions of
unacceleratedness, and amounts of acceleration. A spacetime that is non-relativistic
(has a notion of absolute simultaneity) and is equipped with such a connection—but
is not equipped with a notion of absolute space, that induces the connection—is called

56

neo-Newtonian or Galilean.

So to sum up (ii): we can make sense of absolute acceleration without absolute rest
or absolute velocity. Although a connection can be legitimately deﬁned by a notion
of absolute rest, as Newton in eﬀect did, it is a logically weaker idea than a notion of
absolute rest, and so can be postulated directly—without the rest. Besides, relativistic
theories (both special and general) also have a connection in just this way (without
absolute rest): they diﬀer in that they also lack absolute simultaneity.

5.3 Connections, metric and rotation

So let us ask: how is motion, and in particular rotation, described using a connection?
I shall summarize the answer in three Subsections. The ﬁrst introduces the ingredients
needed for describing motion; the second gives more details about the description of
rotation; and the third reports some subtleties of general relativity.

5.3.1 Common ingredients

The ﬁrst thing to say is that most (but not all!) of the ingredients for describing mo-
tion are the same in most spacetime theories: both non-relativistic (with and without
absolute space: Newtonian and neo-Newtonian) and relativistic (special and general).
(Again, I set aside the relational theories of Barbour et al.) But we will see in Section
5.3.3 that general relativity has some very special features.

The foremost “common ingredient” is that all these theories describe rotation by

invoking two types of mathematical structure, which mesh in an appropriate way.

The ﬁrst type is relatively familiar: it is metrical structure, which we can think of
as primarily assigning a length to curves in spacetime. In relativistic theories, there
is a single notion of length for all curves: a spatiotemporal metric. In non-relativistic
theories, there are two notions of length—spatial length for spacelike curves, and tem-
poral length for timelike curves: so there is a spatial metric and a temporal metric.
For both kinds of theory, I will speak of ‘a spatial metric and a temporal metric’.

The second type of structure is the connection, which gives a standard of straight-
ness, and numerical degrees of curvature, for an arbitrary curve in spacetime, and so
in particular for the worldline of a point-particle, or point-sized bit of matter in a con-
tinuous body.

The meshing required between the two types of structure is called compatibility.
(In fact, in relativistic theories (whether special or general) any spatiotemporal metric
has a unique compatible connection; but in non-relativistic theories, the two metrics
(spatial and temporal) do not ﬁx a unique compatible connection.)

So to sum up: Only once we have in hand a spatial metric, temporal metric and
a compatible connection, does the judgment that a disc is rotating—that its matter’s

57

worldlines are “helical rather than straight”—even make sense.24

5.3.2 Details: the rotation tensor

This Subsection and the next spell out some details about how the metrics and con-
nection give a framework for describing rotation. This Subsection makes two points
which are in common between the theories; the next makes points which are speciﬁc
to general relativity.

(a) Acceleration of a single particle:

For a single worldline, i.e. the worldline of a single point-particle, the connection deﬁnes
at each point along the worldline a (four-dimensional) acceleration of the point-particle.
Using the metrics, one can also deﬁne the more familiar three-dimensional acceleration.
This point holds good in both non-relativistic and relativistic theories.

(b) Rotation, local and non-local:

Though one can deﬁne in these theories the rotation of one point-particle relative to
another, this notion is not usually treated in the textbooks: (and general relativity
holds some surprise about it—cf. (b) of Section 5.3.3). Nor is the notion of a swarm
of point-particles rotating about another particle (or about a spatial point) treated in
the textbooks. In fact, they concentrate on the case of most relevance to the RDA:
the case where we are given a congruence of timelike curves, i.e. a continuously inﬁnite
collection of worldlines whose points of intersection with a (possibly ﬁnite) spacelike
slice completely ﬁll the slice. (So the worldlines might be given as the integral curves of
the 4-velocity vector ﬁeld of some continuous matter.) And for this case, the textbooks
deﬁne a local notion of rotation.

That is: the metrics and compatible connection together deﬁne at each point in
the congruence a rotation tensor, usually symbolized as ω, which gives a quantitative
measure of the speed and direction of rotation (of the congruence) in an arbitrarily small
neighbourhood of that point. Roughly speaking, ω at a point in spacetime encodes
how an observer located there sees the limitingly close worldlines of the congruence
swirling around her. For us, this construction is important in two main ways.

(i): The construction of ω proceeds in much the same way in the diﬀerent
theories; (for more details, cf. e.g. Misner et al. 1973, p. 566; Dixon 1978, p. 121-128,
140-145, 163-166; Wald 1984, p. 216-218).

(ii): The construction is a robust local limit of other non-local deﬁnitions of
rotation. By this, I mean the following; (I thank David Malament for explaining this).
There are various intuitively compelling (and experimentally realizable) criteria for
whether an extended object, such as a disc, is rotating; but as one considers smaller
and smaller discs, the verdicts of these various criteria as to whether a given disc is
rotating converge on the verdict given by the rotation tensor (i.e. by whether or not
24Or rather, this is true once we set aside relational mechanics. More precisely: only with these
structures can one make sense of the judgment that the disc is rotating, irrespective of its relations
to other bodies—and in particular, if it is lonely.

58

ω = 0). So the local notion given by the rotation tensor is a common “robust” limit
of the other criteria. Besides, this is so in all the diﬀerent theories.

To give an example: one such criterion supposes that an observer at the
centre of the disc bolts a telescope to a water-bucket and then continually observes
a light source ﬁxed on the edge of the disc: the disc is judged to be rotating iﬀ the
water-surface is concave. Another criterion supposes that a light source ﬁxed on the
edge of the disc sends light-signals right around the edge of the disc, in both directions,
and asks whether the two signals arrive back simultaneously: the disc is judged to be
rotating iﬀ there is a diﬀerence.

In (c) of Section 5.3.3, I will discuss how in general relativity, these criteria (and
others) can disagree in their verdicts about whether an extended disc is rotating. But
for the moment, I just make the more “positive” point that as the disc shrinks in size,
all these criteria must (in all the theories) tend towards agreeing with each other—and
with the mathematical condition that the rotation tensor ω at the centre of the disc is
non-zero.25

5.3.3 Rotation in general relativity

I turn to report three points which indicate the subtlety of rotation in general relativity.
The ﬁrst point is standard material in the physics textbooks: but worth reporting since,
as we shall see, it implies that the RDA fails in general relativity. The second and third
points are specialist knowledge: striking results by Malament (2002, 2003).

(a) Frame-dragging: According to general relativity, there is an (amazing) physical
eﬀect of rotation, understood in Section 5.3.2’s sense that ω 6= 0), on spacetime itself.
Namely, a rotating body distorts its nearby spacetime geometry; or as it is more vividly
put, the rotating body “drags” the inertial frames in its vicinity (hence the name
‘frame-dragging’). That is: test particles falling freely under gravity near a body move
diﬀerently, according to whether the body is rotating (and in what sense, and how
fast)—they “feel” not just the mass of the body, but also its state of rotation. (Cf.
Misner et al. 1973, p. 699, 879, 1117.)

The theory of this eﬀect goes back to 1918 (by Thirring and Lense). The eﬀect is
numerically minuscule, even when the rotating body is very massive, e.g. the earth.
Yet the dragging of frames by the rotating earth may soon be detected.26

25By the way: to deﬁne, not the rotation tensor, but merely the qualitative distinction, rotating vs.
non-rotating, one does not need all of Section 5.3.1’s ingredients, metrics and compatible connection.
One needs only a conformal structure: which is, roughly speaking, a structure in which angles are
meaningful but lengths are not. A conformal structure can be encoded by an equivalence class of
metrics, with equivalence classes [g0] := {g : g = Ωg0}; where Ω is a positive smooth IR-valued
function on spacetime, and where this structure is to be again compatible with the connection (where
‘compatible’ is spelt out by adapting the usual relativistic and non-relativistic conditions for a given
metric by an existential quantiﬁer over the equivalence class).

26Namely, by tiny supercooled gyroscopes in an orbiting satellite, recently launched. Some numbers
make vivid how ambitious, and delicate, is this experiment (called ‘Gravity Probe B’). After a year in
orbit, the drag on a gyroscope will be 42 milliarc-seconds, which is the angle subtended by a metre-

59

(b) Relative rotation of two particles

In this and the next point, I report two much less well-known peculiarities—indeed
surprises—of rotation in general relativity. But they are only needed brieﬂy later (in
(B) of Section 5.6); so the reader can skip to the summary of this Subsection.

For a pair of worldlines, X and Y say, in either a non-relativistic or a relativistic
theory, one can deﬁne a “direction from X to Y ” (and vice versa), and its “rate of
change”, and thereby deﬁne the “angular velocity of Y relative to X”. Besides, the
physical ideas behind these deﬁnitions are natural, and similar, in non-relativistic and
relativistic theories: e.g. in relativity theory, the direction from X to Y is given by the
direction of the tube of a telescope held by an observer on X who continually observes
Y . (And one can extend these deﬁnitions so as to talk about a collection of worldlines
(particles) Y1, Y2, . . . rotating relative to a given particle X.)

But even with just two worldlines, general relativity surprises us. In non-relativistic
theories, the deﬁned notions have the expected properties: in particular, the angular
velocities of Y relative to X, call it ωXY , and of X relative to Y , ωY X, are equal. But
this is not so in general relativity. In this theory, Y can be non-rotating relative to X,
i.e. ωXY = 0, while X rotates relative to Y , i.e. ωY X 6= 0; and this can be so while the
distance between X and Y (in any reasonable sense of ‘distance’) remains constant,
and is as small as you care to demand! (For details, cf. Malament 2003.)

(c) Conﬂicting criteria of rotation

Finally, general relativity also holds considerable surprises about the RDA’s case: the
rotation of a disc (or a sphere or hoop). One surprise is that diﬀerent intuitively com-
pelling (and experimentally realizable) criteria for whether a disc is rotating can give
diﬀerent verdicts—not in all spacetimes, but in some. Thus recall the two examples
from (b) of Section 5.3.2. The ﬁrst asks if the water-surface in the bucket at the cen-
tre of the disc is concave; the second asks if light-signals circumnavigating the disc in
opposite directions arrive back at diﬀerent times. These criteria will match in their
verdicts for any disc in a non-relativistic spacetime, or in the Minkowski spacetime
of special relativity. Besides, in any general relativistic spacetime, they must tend
to agreement with each other, and with whether the rotation tensor is non-zero, for
smaller and smaller discs (as discussed in (b):(ii) of Section 5.3.2). But for a disc of
given size, there are general relativistic spacetimes in which the verdicts will diﬀer; e.g.
Kerr spacetime (Malament 2002).

Indeed, more is true: any criterion of rotation for a disc must violate some in-
tuitively compelling condition in some general relativistic spacetime! More precisely:
Malament (2002) shows that any criterion of rotation (in the very weak sense of a
binary classiﬁcation, for any disc in any state of motion, as to whether it qualiﬁes as
rotating), that agrees with the water-surface criterion (and so with the rotation tensor
criterion: ω 6= 0?)
in the limit of smaller and smaller discs, must violate another

stick at a distance of 3000 miles, or the thickness of a sheet of paper at a distance of a mile. To prevent
this minuscule eﬀect being masked by random thermal motions, the gyroscope must be cooled to very
close to absolute zero; and then one has to measure the eﬀect by radio contact with the satellite a
year after its launch. No wonder the experiment has been designed over some thirty years!

60

compelling condition, when it is applied to a spacetime like the Kerr spacetime. (This
other condition is roughly: if a disc d1 is not rotating, and d2 is rigidly attached to d1
in the sense that the distance between any two point-sized bits of matter in d1 and d2
is constant over time, then d2 is also not rotating.)

To sum up Sections 5.2 and 5.3:— To make sense of rotation, it is by no means
enough to draw straight vs. helical worldlines. One needs a considerable body of the-
ory: speciﬁcally, spatial and temporal metrical structure, and a compatible connection
(whether or not induced a la Newton by a notion of absolute rest). With this equip-
ment, one can deﬁne (in much the same way in the diﬀerent theories) a robust local
notion of rotation, expressed by the rotation tensor. But in general relativity, rotation
has complex and even counter-intuitive features, especially as regards the rotation of
extended bodies—like a disc.

I believe this technical material yields two signiﬁcant conclusions about the RDA,
which I will develop in Sections 5.5 and 5.6. But ﬁrst (Section 5.4), I need to con-
nect this material to the endurantism-perdurantism debate in general, by stating some
familiar general assumptions about the bearing of physical theories on metaphysical
theses.

5.4 The endurantism-perdurantism debate in the light of physics

I began this Section by recalling Section 3.2.2’s demand that both endurantist and per-
durantist should state and justify the claims they need to make about spatiotemporal
structure. We have now seen that these claims are technical; and that physics always
formulates them in terms of equipping a manifold of spacetime points with various
mathematical structures. So even apart from the RDA, the question arises whether
the endurantist and perdurantist have “equal rights” to these claims.

This is a large question. I will lay out some of its aspects, but not pursue them
in detail. My reason is that I want to give endurantism some rope. That is: since
I want to give the RDA against perdurantism as good a run as possible, I will give
endurantism the beneﬁt of the doubt about its right to these claims.

(i) Traditional associations:

Our question has two traditional associations:

(a): Perdurantists have traditionally argued that their position ﬁts much better
than does endurantism with the description of matter, space and time in modern
physics; and in particular, with the description in spacetime theories like relativity
theory. On the other hand, endurantists often distinguished the conceptual schemes of
physics and everyday thought, and took their position to be about the latter.

(b): The endurantism-perdurantism debate is also traditionally aligned with the
debate whether there is objective “temporal becoming”, as against the “tenseless” or
“block universe” theory of time being true. Again, modern physics, especially relativity
theory, has been taken to support the tenseless view, and thereby perdurantism.

61

(ii) Today’s debate:

But nowadays, endurantism’s traditional associations, as sketched in (a) and (b) of (i),
are broken.

As regards (a), many endurantists are “scientiﬁc realists”, and even substantivalists
about spacetime. They believe that successful scientiﬁc theories like relativity theory,
literally construed, are approximately true; and even that spacetime points are bona
ﬁde objects bearing the properties and relations represented by mathematical structures
like metrics and connection.

As regards (b), the tenseless view is nowadays often called ‘eternalism’—and many
endurantists endorse it. (On the other hand, the currently most popular version of
becoming seems to be presentism, the doctrine that only the present exists—which is
no doubt at least as hard to reconcile with relativity’s denial of absolute simultaneity,
as are other versions of temporal becoming.)

I think the breaking of these associations reﬂects both: the rise of philosophical
naturalism (cf. Section 1.3); and (more contentiously!), the diﬃculty of defending (or
even making sense of!) the idea of temporal becoming.
In any case, the upshot is
that nowadays, the endurantist is likely to claim “full rights” to the technical claims of
modern spacetime theories, just as much as perdurantist does. (For more discussion of
the current standing of both traditional associations, (a) and (b), cf. Butterﬁeld 2004
and Sider 2001 pp. 75-76, 110-119.)

(iii) Three questions:

Accordingly, I think that our large question breaks down, at least nowadays, into the
following three questions, (A) to (C). The ﬁrst two questions, I propose to set aside,
since they are independent of the endurantism vs. perdurantism debate.

(A): The ﬁrst pertains to general philosophy of science. It is the question: should
one be (a) a scientiﬁc realist about the theoretical claims of modern spacetime theories,
especially general relativity, or (b) some sort of instrumentalist (maybe constructive
empiricist) about them? So in setting this question aside, I shall in eﬀect speak like a
scientiﬁc realist: which is anyway the widespread practice of much current discussion
of endurantism and perdurantism—cf. (ii) above.

(B): The second question pertains to the philosophy of (chrono)geometry. Even
if we are scientiﬁc realists, and even substantivalists, there is a further question about
how we should interpret spacetime points’ properties and relations as represented by
e.g. metrics and connection. One view is that they are in some strong sense indepen-
dent of the physics of matter (and radiation), at least in theories where the metrics
and connection are not dynamical. (I think this is the dominant view among substan-
tivalists.) An alternative view is that these properties and relations are dependent
on the physics of matter:
for they are a way of compendiously representing some
features, especially invariances, of the dynamical equations governing matter. (This
is the view—at least as I read them!—of Brown and Pooley; cf. Brown and Pooley
2001, 2004.) Again, I shall not pursue this question; so I shall in eﬀect speak like a
substantivalist—which is anyway widespread in current discussion.

62

(C): So: setting (A) and (B) set aside, and assuming substantivalism, and (as
in (i)) that the perdurantist thereby has “full rights” to the technical claims of modern
spacetime theories, our question becomes: does an endurantist have equal rights to
them?

Note that even with these assumptions in place, one can envisage two versions of
endurantism. The ﬁrst version is committed to spacetime points and sets of them (and
their properties and relations), but does not accept spacetime regions as spatiotempo-
rally located objects (say as mereological fusions of points). Rather, regions are to be
treated as sets of points; and sets are “abstract” in at least the sense that they are not
located in spacetime—and therefore in no sense persist. Since such regions, taken to
be spatiotemporal objects, would surely persist by perduring, not enduring, this ver-
sion’s denial that regions are spatiotemporal objects enables it to hold, not only that
ordinary material objects endure, but also that no spatiotemporal object perdures.

On the other hand, a second version of endurantism accepts spacetime regions as
perduring objects, and so is what I will call a mixed view: some objects endure, but
others perdure. (These others include at least spacetime regions, but maybe also other
objects which one might call ‘events’, like wars or meals; (for more discussion, cf.
Butterﬁeld 2004).)

So our question is whether either of these versions of endurantism has as much right

to the technical claims of modern spacetime theories as the perdurantist does.

A proper answer to this question would have to investigate two main topics:

[i]: whether there are problems about the mixed view (i.e. the mixed view for

spacetime points—nevermind wars and meals); and

[ii]: whether relativity theory makes problems for endurantism (as it certainly

does for temporal becoming);

and then decide whether any such problems could be solved.

As I announced above, here I want to give the RDA against perdurantism as good
a run as possible, and so I will simply assume that (setting aside the RDA) there are
no such problems—that the answer to both [i] and [ii] is ‘No’.

This assumption can be partly defended by appealing to a formal equivalence be-
tween the ways that endurantism and perdurantism describe the motions of point-
particles and continua (in both non-relativistic and relativistic spacetimes). The idea
of the equivalence is that:

(a): an endurantist will represent the motion of a point-particle, or a point-sized
bit of matter in a continuum, by a single function q : t 7→ q(t) ∈ M, mapping times at
which it exists to locations in a manifold M (either space or spacetime); while

(b): the perdurantist will use a collection of functions, labelled by time-intervals
that together cover the object’s lifetime; for example, if it exists throughout the closed
time-interval [a, b], there might be a function q[a,b] : t ∈ [a, b] 7→ q[a,b](t) ∈ M.

I develop this equivalence (including extending it to spatially extended objects),
and relate it to both [i] and [ii] in Butterﬁeld 2004 and 2004a. But I should also note
that this equivalence gives only a partial defence of the assumption, that the answer to
both [i] and [ii] is ‘No’. For the equivalence is formal; and formal equivalences are liable

63

to be broken by philosophical considerations. (For more discussion, cf. e.g. Balashov
1999, 2000 for [ii]; and Sider 2001 p. 110-119 for [i], and p. 79-87 for [ii].)

5.5 Dynamical eﬀects revisited

So much by way of general connections between the physics of rotation and the
endurantism-perdurantism debate. I now return to the RDA, and to arguing, in this
Subsection and the next, for two main conclusions.

In this Subsection, I return to the accompaniments of rotation, especially dynamical
eﬀects like oblateness. Since Section 1.4 (and especially since Section 3.4) I have
assumed, along with the metaphysical literature, that the RDA’s advocates need to
justify “imagining away” any accompaniments that the perdurantist might latch on to
as marking the distinction between the discs, (Stat) and (Rot).

The physics of rotation—the material in Sections 5.2 and 5.3—yields three main
points about this assumption, which I develop in the next three Subsections. In short:—
(i): One main theme of Sections 5.2 and 5.3 supports the practice by the RDA’s

advocates, of ignoring such accompaniments (Section 5.5.1).

(ii): But the advocates are lucky—it is an undeserved victory—since their avowed
reasons for ignoring such accompaniments, especially dynamical eﬀects, are worse than
what these Subsections provide (Section 5.5.2).

(iii): But in any case, the RDA can be developed very eﬀectively, without imagining

away all such accompaniments (Section 5.5.3).

5.5.1 Rotation is kinematic

We saw in Section 5.3.2 that rotation—and its quantitative measures, given by the
rotation tensor locally, and by various criteria non-locally—is deﬁnable in a wholly
kinematic way: i.e. without mention of dynamics. In less abstract terms, it is deﬁnable
in terms of acceleration, without mention of forces (or more generally, the causes and
eﬀects of motion).

Agreed, it was perhaps Newton’s greatest insight to couple acceleration and force,
viz. in his second law of motion F = ma. But that is a nomic, not logical connection.
the ﬁrst derivative of position (an
Force could instead be coupled to velocity, i.e.
“Aristotelian mechanics”), or to a higher derivative than the second: such alternative
schemes change physical behaviour enormously, but are logically coherent.

(Indeed, in a framework in which force is coupled to velocity, but which is otherwise
as close to classical mechanics as possible, a body’s future motion would be determined
by its position, and the force acting on it. This would imply, I take it, that:—

(a): Metaphysicians like Tooley, Bigelow and Pargetter would feel no temptation
to introduce a heterodox intrinsic notion of velocity to act as cause and explanans of
future positions.

64

(b): More importantly for us: the RDA would have much less bite, at least for
a “naturalistic” perdurantist, who is willing to let her account of perdurance depend
on the actual laws. For now ingredients that the RDA agrees to be available to the
perdurantist (more generally, the Humean), viz. position and forces, would be enough
to determine future positions. I will return to this in the context of quantum theory
(Section 8.1.1).

More radically, rotation makes sense without any forces at all—nevermind how force
couples to kinematic quantities. To talk in terms of possible worlds: there are worlds
with a spacetime manifold, spatial and temporal metrics and compatible connection,
and a congruence of timelike curves representing continuous matter—again, nevermind
the forces. A pair of these worlds can match in countless ways and yet diﬀer as to
whether the matter is rotating, in say the usual local sense, i.e. at some given point in
their common spacetime. Just suppose that in one world the rotation tensor is zero at
the point, while in the other it is non-zero.

I take this as evidence that perdurantism should strive to accommodate the dis-

tinction between these possibilities.

I do not claim that it is conclusive evidence. Some perdurantists such as Callender
(Section 3.4) will still prefer the ‘No Diﬀerence’ reply to the RDA. That is: they will
say that worlds with no dynamics are so unlike the actual world, that perdurantists
have no responsibility to distinguish rotation and non-rotation within them (cf. Cal-
lender 2001, p. 38).

But I do not need to resolve this dispute between myself and fellow-perdurantists.
For all perdurantists can agree to the more important conclusions in the following
Subsections.

5.5.2 Beware of rigidity

On the other hand, I think that advocates of the RDA have often had worse reasons
than than that just given, for insisting that the perdurantist should distinguish (Stat)
and (Rot) even without any of the usual accompaniments of rotation. I will not try
to catalogue people’s errors, but will focus on one prevalent reason.
(Parts of this
Subsection’s critique will carry over to versions of the RDA that use a homogeneous
ﬂuid, rather than a rigid solid.)

This reason is the belief that it is entirely straightforward to “imagine away” the
accompaniments, since one only needs to stipulate that the discs are perfectly rigid.
This implies in particular that the rotating disc will not be oblate—and so the RDA
will be posed, to the consternation of the perdurantist.

This reason is defective in two ways. First: to say these two words ‘perfectly rigid’,
so “trippingly oﬀ the tongue”, is to forget that within the theories of classical continuum
physics, perfect rigidity is a very strong idealization—it violates central principles of
these theories.

To take our example: what in fact would happen when a (classical, continuous,

65

homogeneous) stationary disc is given a push at its edge to make it rotate, is very
complicated. A disturbance would travel outward (at the speed of sound for the disc’s
material) from the place where the push is applied, leading to a complex process that
settled down so that the whole disc rotated approximately uniformly, with internal
cohesive forces exerting the required centripetal forces on parts of the disc. (In the
actual quantum world, this description is a very good approximation for solid discs,
the cohesive forces being electromagnetic forces between atoms. But I am here just
assuming a classical continuum treatment.) Without going into further details, this
is enough to bring out that assuming perfect rigidity requires that the disc’s cohesive
forces should respond “inﬁnitely quickly” to distorting inﬂuences. More precisely, it
amounts to vetoing any account of how the whole disc is set in motion as a consequence
of the motions of the parts. (In physics jargon: it vetoes any constitutive theory.)27

Second: it is not true that perfect rigidity gets rid of all the actual technical accom-
paniments of rotation. For not all such accompaniments are kinematically manifested,
i.e. associated with changes in shape or size, like oblateness. There are also forces
and energies that would be present in a perfectly rigid rotating disc. (In physics jar-
gon: some dynamical eﬀects of rotation involve stress rather than strain.) There will
be cohesive forces throughout the disc’s interior which would be absent if the disc
were stationary: besides, the disc’s energy is greater—which means in relativity that
its mass is greater. Though such accompaniments are more technical, less common-
sensical, than being oblate, that is no reason to think the perdurantist is less able to
appeal to them, so as to distinguish (Stat) and (Rot).28 So it seems the RDA will also
need to imagine away these “kinematically hidden” accompaniments.

Finally, I note that this critique of just assuming perfect rigidity leads us back
to Section 2.1’s theme, that classical mechanics is more subtle and problematic than
philosophers usually recognize.

More speciﬁcally, I think that a traditional philosophical view, that forces are un-
observable, underlies the second defect above, i.e. the allegation that the perdurantist
can appeal only to accompaniments of rotation that are kinematically manifested. I
cannot here go into details about why this view is wrong. Suﬃce it to say that I think
it mainly arises from either or both of:

(a): an overly strong empiricism, that the only physical quantities to which we
have empirical access are some small handful, no doubt including length, time, mass
27Two incidental remarks about rigidity. (1): There is also the worry that perfect rigidity violates
relativity’s prohibition on faster-than-light signals. But in fact, relativistic theories allow generalized
notions of rigidity:
for a philosopher’s introduction, cf. Earman (1989, Chapter 5.5, pp. 98-101).
(2): Among Bigelow and Pargetter’s arguments for their heterodox account of instantaneous velocity,
as not always a limit of average velocities, is a thought-experiment involving perfectly rigid spheres
(1989, pp. 292-293, 1990, pp. 67-68). As it happens, I disagree with their argument, but I will not go
into details: as I have said (starting in Section 1.2), I am not convinced by such heterodox accounts
of velocity—and my reply to the RDA does not need them.

28At least: it is only a reason if we take the endurantism-perdurantism debate as entirely a matter
of analyzing everyday concepts. In particular, the RDA cannot just consider an oblate rotating disc
and a non-rotating one moulded so as to be congruent to it (as proposed by Hawley 2001, p. 83-84).

66

and charge—but excluding force;

(b): a distortion of Hertz’ research program in the foundations of classical me-
chanics. Thus Hertz proposed to explain forces in terms of cyclic microscopic variables;
(Lanczos (1986, Section V.5, p. 130-132) explains the idea). But had he succeeded,
forces would not have been rendered unobservable.

5.5.3 An improved RDA—allowing dynamical eﬀects

I said just now that it seems the RDA will need to imagine away accompaniments
it only seems
involving stress, as well as those involving strain. But in fact, not so:
so. More precisely: the RDA can be developed, and be a powerful argument against
perdurantism, without imagining away any accompaniments of rotation. We only have
to change the example a bit, so that two possibilities, apparently distinct on account
of worldlines, match exactly in such accompaniments.29

Thus the endurantist challenges the perdurantist to distinguish the possibilities:—
(Same): Two perfectly circular discs, d1 and d2, both made of continuous homoge-
neous matter and lying in the same spatial plane—but otherwise as diﬀerent as you
please from one another—spin in the same sense (i.e. both clockwise as seen from one
side of the plane, and so anti-clockwise as seen from the other side).
1 and d′

2, match d1 and d2 respectively in all respects (at

(Diﬀerent): Two discs, d′

all times); except that d′

1 and d′

2 spin in opposite senses relative to one another.

The idea is that all the usual accompaniments (stress as well as strain: forces and
energies as well as distortion) match between d1 and d′
1; and similarly between d2 and
d′
2. So there is no need to imagine them away, in order to challenge the perdurantist.
Nor is there any need for discs within one of the possible worlds to match in any
respect, except being perfectly circular, made of continuous homogeneous matter, lying
in the same spatial plane—and for (Same), spinning with the same sense.

Four comments, in descending order of importance, by way of clarifying this for-

mulation of the RDA:—

(i): Intuitively, (Diﬀerent) describes equally well two distinct possibilities: one
in which d′
1 spins in the same sense as both d1 and d2; and the other in which instead, d′
2
shares their common sense of rotation. This contrast of course depends on there being
a ﬁducial spatial direction in common between the possibilities. I agree that this idea
is perfectly coherent: though I emphasise, as Callender did with his pseudo-distinction
between the arrow’s states (Up) and (Down) (Section 3.4), that the direction needs
29Paul Mainwood and David Wallace devised the following formulation in a seminar in autumn
2003. The idea of exploiting the distinction between two senses of rotation, so as to avoid having to
imagine away the usual accompaniments, had already been brieﬂy advocated by Dean Zimmerman
(1998, p. 268-269), crediting an anonymous referee. But beware: Zimmerman’s discussion can be
read as placing each disc in a separate possible world—in which case it fails, as explained in (ii)
below. Zimmerman kindly points out (personal communication) that this was not his intention; so
that his formulation of the RDA is essentially the same as that invented by Mainwood and Wallace.
For novelty and precision, I present theirs. My thanks to them and Zimmerman.

67

to be speciﬁed by something salient in the environment, such as a local gravitational
ﬁeld giving one an up-down distinction, on pain of its being a distinction without a
diﬀerence, i.e. a spurious distinction—an artefact of a diagram, or of our visual imag-
ination. So: given such a speciﬁcation, (Diﬀerent) indeed represents two possibilities.
No matter: to challenge the perdurantist, the RDA can simply consider either one of
them.

(ii): (This follows on from (i).) The danger of making a distinction without a
diﬀerence also crops up in another way. As mentioned in footnote 29, a formulation
of the RDA in terms of distinguishing two senses of rotation (and thereby keeping the
usual accompaniments) has been urged before, by Zimmerman (1998, p. 268-9). But
Zimmerman’s brief discussion can be read as challenging the perdurantist to distinguish
between a disc rotating clockwise, alone in its possible world, and a duplicate disc ro-
tating counterclockwise at the same rate, alone in its world. And this formulation fails
for the reason emphasised in (i): the clockwise-counterclockwise distinction assumes a
ﬁducial spatial direction in common between the possibilities, which for these “lonely”
discs is a spurious distinction. (Callender (2001, p. 32, 36-7) seems to read, and object
to, Zimmerman in this way.) Our formulation above avoids this diﬃculty by consider-
ing two discs in each possible world, so that we need only intra-world comparisons of
the sense of rotation.

(iii): The possibilities can be modiﬁed in various ways. In particular, to secure
the needed intra-world comparisons of sense of rotation, we do not need two discs.
(Same) could instead contain just one disc, rotating in the same sense as a curved
arrow drawn on a sheet of paper lying beside it; (Diﬀerent) would then similarly con-
tain a single disc rotating contrary to the sense of another curved arrow drawn on an
adjacent sheet of paper.

(iv): As in the original RDA, at the end of Section 3.1: we can also allow the
discs’ properties to change over time, and to vary in a circularly symmetric way—
provided of course that they do so in a suitably matching way.

Finally, a comment about how the perdurantist should reply to this version of the
RDA. I shall develop my own reply in the next Subsection and subsequent Sections.
Here I just report my guess about how Sider (Section 4.4) would reply to this version
of the RDA; (which of course, he does not discuss).

I think Sider would bite the bullet, just as he did in the “lonely disc” worlds he
considered. That is: he would say that in a suﬃciently simple two-disc world, there
need be no unique facts about persistence, and so no fact of the matter about whether
the two discs’ senses of rotation match; (and similarly for the analogous world with
one disc and a curved arrow drawn on paper).

5.6 The RDA fails in general relativity

So much by way of expounding some implications of the physics of rotation—the mate-
rial in Sections 5.2 and 5.3—for the RDA literature’s usual assumption that the RDA
needs to imagine away the actual accompaniments of rotation.

68

But beware: the last Subsection’s punchline—that this assumption is unnecessary,
that the RDA can keep all the usual accompaniments—is fragile. This improved RDA,
and the original version, both fail in the context of general relativity, because of the
dragging of inertial frames around rotating bodies (cf. (a) of Section 5.3.3).

That is:

in general relativity, the trajectory of a test-particle falling towards a
massive body depends on whether (and how) the body is rotating: the rotating mass
“drags”, albeit very slightly, the inertial frames in its vicinity (Misner et al. 1973 pp.
699, 879, 1117). This frame-dragging means that the RDA fails in the sense that, in the
usual version, the inertial frames (the worldlines of test particles) are dragged around
the rotating disc (Rot), but not around (Stat); and in Section 5.5.3’s version, there
cannot be the perfect match in rotation’s accompaniments both between d1 and d′
1 and
between d2 and d′
2, since the dragging of inertial frames around a rotating body is dif-
ferent, for diﬀerent senses of rotation. In short: the RDA fails because frame-dragging
represents an appealing diﬀerence, to which a “suﬃciently naturalist” perdurantist can
appeal so as to answer the challenge of distinguishing the possibilities.30

Before asking how the advocate of the RDA might respond, it is worth making two

comments.

(A): First it is worth listing—as a partial review of the story so far—the ﬁve

main ideas that have led to this conclusion. This “cast, in order of appearance” is:

(i): the idea that since a (consistent and precise) physical theory speciﬁes a set of
solutions (in philosophers’ jargon: possible worlds), the RDA could hold in one such
theory and fail in another; (cf. (2A) in Section 1.3);

(ii): the idea that classical mechanics is subtle and problematic, and leads to rel-
ativity theory and quantum theory; so that there is good reason to consider general
relativity as the setting of the RDA (even apart from its being our best guess about
space, time and matter); (cf. especially the qualms about action-at-a-distance in New-
tonian gravity, in Section 2.1);

(iii): the idea that the perdurantist can reply to the RDA by ﬁnding diﬀerences
between the possibilities, (Stat) and (Rot), that she can appeal to; (Appealing Diﬀer-
ences) in Section 3.4;

(iv): the dragging of inertial frames around rotating bodies in general relativity (cf.

(a) of Section 5.3.3);

(v): the idea that the endurantist will want to accept, as much as the perdurantist,
the technical claims of general relativity’s description of spacetime (presumably by be-
ing a scientiﬁc realist, maybe even some form of substantivalist); and this will involve
a largely literal (though perhaps not a substantivalist) construal of general relativity’s
ascription of a dynamical geometry to otherwise empty spacetime; (Section 5.4).

(B): The RDA failing in general relativity does not mean there is no more to say
about the endurantism-perdurantism debate in the context of general relativity. As
always in philosophy, there is plenty to explore! In particular, the subtleties of rotation
30This argument against the RDA, in its usual version, is due to Callender (2001, p. 38); it is part

of his ‘No Diﬀerence’ reply.

69

in general relativity (witness Malament’s results in (b) and (c) of Section 5.3.3) return
us to question [ii] at end of Section 5.4. That is: can endurantism and perdurantism
really make equally good sense of all these subtleties?

If not, so much the worse for whichever party cannot make sense of them. For
once you have gone beyond traditional conceptual analysis to the extent of considering
general relativity, it would surely be ad hoc to rule out of court whichever of the
general relativistic spacetimes, such as the Kerr spacetime, you have trouble making
sense of. That is, you cannot just declare that the spacetime represents a world which
is “so unlike ours” as to make considerations based on it irrelevant to the endurantism-
perdurantism debate. (In any case, the spacetime in question might not be “exotic”:
assuming scientiﬁc realism, it might describe, or approximately describe, our world.)

I turn to the question how the advocate of the RDA can respond. Could she im-
prove the argument’s thought-experiment so as to allow for frame-dragging, in the kind
of way that (Diﬀerent) and (Same) improve on (Stat) and (Rot) by allowing for the
usual accompaniments of rotation? Perhaps, but I do not see how.

On the other hand, the endurantist has two lines of reply, even if she cannot thus

improve the thought-experiment. Both return us to some questions raised before.

First, she might emphasise that in developing the RDA for general relativity (in the
usual, or Section 5.5.3’s, version) she can stipulate that the discs are “lonely”, i.e. that
there are to be no test-particles travelling the dragged worldlines. Does this stipulation
make the diﬀerence to which the perdurantist appeals—viz. whether the frames are
dragged, and if so, how—counterfactual? The answer depends on the interpretation of
general relativity. Roughly speaking, a substantivalist will answer ‘No’, since they take
the metrical structure of spacetime to be real and occurrent: it is not just an encoding
of how suitable bodies would behave. But the endurantist may argue that she can ac-
cept general relativity, and so develop the RDA for it, without being a substantivalist
in this sense; (cf. Section 5.4). On the other hand, even if we accept that the diﬀerence
is counterfactual, perhaps the perdurantist can still appeal to it: (cf. Section 1.4).

The second reply is the obvious one about philosophical method. Surely no philo-
sophical account of persistence should be “so far gone” in naturalism as to depend on
general relativity: it should be able to accommodate continuous matter in classical and
special relativistic spacetimes (cf. (2.B) in Section 1.3). And for these cases, the RDA
remains unrefuted, at least in Section 5.5.3’s improved version.

I think the second reply has force. But in Sections 7 and 8, I will argue that
the perdurantist can meet the challenge of defeating the RDA even outside general
relativity: in short, by accepting only non-instantaneous temporal parts. Besides, this
version of perdurantism is supported by some heterodox proposals about the intrinsic-
extrinsic distinction among properties: proposals which are themselves supported by
some features of classical and quantum physics.

70

6 Replying to the RDA

6.1 Two replies

We have seen in Section 5 how the RDA fails in general relativity—but, so far, looks
good in classical mechanics. But only ‘so far’ ! From now on, I will develop two replies
to the RDA: the ﬁrst in this Section (Section 6.2), and the second in Sections 7 and 8.
The ﬁrst reply is an analogue of Sider’s (Section 4.4); the main diﬀerence being that
it is less metaphysically committed and closer to the detail of empirical enquiry. But like
Sider’s reply, it will be a combination of (Appealing Diﬀerences) and (No Diﬀerence).
In particular, it bites the bullet as Sider does, in that it denies the distinction between
the discs, in suﬃciently simple worlds. The endurantist advocate of the RDA will of
course see this bullet-biting as conceding victory to the RDA, or at best as forcing a
stalemate.

This situation will prompt the second reply, which is my preferred reply. It is a
version of (Appealing Diﬀerences), not (No Diﬀerence), given by a modest version of
perdurantism which accepts only non-instantaneous temporal parts.

6.2 Some details of persistence within classical mechanics

6.2.1 Comparison with Sider

I can present this reply to the RDA most clearly, by ﬁrst stating the similarities and
diﬀerences between it and Sider’s reply. There are three similarities.

(i) Like him, I envisage that the perdurantist appeals to a wide “web of belief” to

yield a perdurantist deﬁnition of persistence.

(ii) Like him, I allow this web to involve technicalities, so that the perdurantist
account of persistence is “naturalistic” (Section 1.3): in particular, the account is not
a conceptual analysis of the sort traditionally sought by metaphysicians.

So the idea is that the perdurantist deﬁnes persistence by appealing to the various
relations that the notion has to other notions, including technical ones. Like Sider, I
will discuss these relations only for classical mechanics; (in particular, I will not need
to distinguish between using a Newtonian and a special relativistic spacetime).

(iii) Like Sider, this reply will bite the bullet in that it denies the distinction between
the discs, for cases using suﬃciently simple possible worlds, such as worlds with lonely
homogeneous discs or with space-ﬁlling homogeneous ﬂuids.

On the other hand, there are two main diﬀerences from Sider.
(i) I will give more details about the theories of mechanics. For example, while
Sider talks of ‘the laws of dynamics’ (or ‘laws of nature’), I will be more speciﬁc, e.g.
distinguishing point-particles and continua.

(ii) I will be less metaphysically committed. In particular:

(a) I will not be committed to the Mill-Ramsey-Lewis best-system theory of

71

laws; nor to any other speciﬁc way of selecting the true “laws of dynamics” from a list
of rival candidates.

(b) Nor will I be committed to the use of Ramsey-Lewis simultaneous functional
deﬁnition; i.e. to the assumption that the body of doctrine selected by the method
in (a)—the doctrine dubbed S(G) in Sider’s notation—is logically strong enough to
uniquely specify G.31

So the broad idea of this position is that by exploiting details about mechanics,
the perdurantist can claim to deﬁne persistence, without having to be committed to
Sider’s philosophical methods (a) and (b).

A side-remark. One can of course take the details of this reply as “ﬁlling in” Sider’s
position, e.g. as giving details about how the best-system theory of laws applies to
mechanics, rather than as providing an alternative to Sider’s position. That is, in
terms of Sider’s notation (cf. Section 4.4): Sider could endorse the details in the next
Subsection as exactly what makes the system S(G) ‘the system that achieves the best
combination of strength and simplicity’ (his p. 231).

6.2.2 Persistence and the web of belief

So let us join Sider in imagining a world governed by classical mechanics: a world that
is not too simple, but has the sort of variety and complexity of motions of objects that
we see in the actual macroscopic world.

So here, we are to set aside: (i) the fact that the actual world is quantum; and
(ii) Section 2’s misgivings about how problematic the ontology of classical mechanics
taken on its own is. (There is no reason to think (i) and (ii) prevent a classical me-
chanical world having a variety and complexity of motions similar to that of the actual
macroscopic world.)

We are also to set aside the question how in this imagined world the laws of me-
in particular, it need not be (though it could be) by

chanics earn the name of laws:
the best-system analysis of lawhood.

My task is to sketch (in more detail than Sider does) the “functional role” of per-
sistence, the web of belief in which it is embedded. To do so, I shall proceed in three
stages.

(1) Kinds of Object: First, I shall be more speciﬁc about the various kinds of object

that are described by classical mechanics: I distinguish four kinds.

(2) Persistence: Then I discuss the persistence of these objects. This is a matter
of applying familiar factors, qualitative similarity and causation, to the four kinds of
objects.

(3) Establishing the laws: Then I sketch how the behaviour of these persisting ob-
jects could underpin the laws of mechanics, both as true generalizations and as laws:
31I think this debatable assumption of the Ramsey-Lewis technique tends to be forgotten: though
not by Sider, nor of course by Lewis. Indeed, Lewis recognized that here lurk deep diﬃculties for his
theory of natural properties; cf. his (2004).

72

even without using Ramsey-Lewis simultaneous deﬁnition.32

But I stress at the outset that, as is now familiar from Quine’s “web” metaphor:
ideas and propositions about each of these three stages of course inﬂuence, in various
complex ways, ideas and propositions about the others. We do not ﬁrst ﬁx the objects,
then discover or decide their conditions of persistence (diachronic criteria of identity),
and ﬁnally establish what laws they obey. Rather, what counts as an object is inﬂu-
enced by the convenience of having diﬀerent putative criteria of identity agree in their
verdicts. And the laws of mechanics (or candidate laws) can contribute to determining
persistence. For example, we might judge that o at t is the same persisting object
as o′ at t′, despite some contrary evidence (e.g.
insuﬃcient qualitative similarity),
just because the laws of mechanics prescribe for o at t (together with its velocity) a
future trajectory that at t′ passes through where o′ then is. (This mutual inﬂuence
between (1), (2) and (3) of course illustrates my similarities to Sider: both of us appeal
naturalistically to a complex web of belief.)

(1) Kinds of Object:

As mentioned in Section 2, the main distinction among objects which classical mechan-
ics makes is the distinction between:

(a): point-particles, i.e. extensionless point-masses moving through empty space

(and so interacting by action-at-a-distance forces);

(b): continua, i.e. bodies whose entire volume is ﬁlled with matter.

Mathematically, this diﬀerence is in the ﬁrst place one of ﬁnitude vs. inﬁnity:—
According to (a), a system consists of a ﬁnite number of point-particles, so that the
system’s state is given by ﬁnitely many real numbers. (In fact, one needs six for each
point-particle: three for its position in space, given by, say, coordinates in a cartesian
coordinate system; and three for the components of its momentum.) So (a) conceives
an extended macroscopic body, whether solid, liquid or gas—a brick, or a sample of
water or air—as a swarm of a gigantic number of point-particles.

On the other hand, according to (b), a system—even a single small rigid body like
a marble—consists of continuum-many point-sized bits of matter, one at each spatial
point in the volume occupied by the body: so these bits of matter are truly “cheek
by jowl” to one another! So we expect the system to be described by continuously
many real numbers:
indeed, “six times continuously many”, to specify the position
and momentum of each point-sized bit of matter. (I say ‘we expect’, because this is
a simpliﬁcation, albeit a harmless one in the present discussion. That is, as I stressed
in (1) of Section 2.1: the pointilliste particles-in-motion picture is wrong. Classical
mechanics in fact describes continua not point-by-point but in terms of the states of
the countless arbitrary (in general, overlapping) sub-regions of the body.)

Accordingly, the systems treated `a la (a) and (b) are often called, respectively,
‘ﬁnite-dimensional’ and ‘inﬁnite-dimensional’ systems: or for short, ‘ﬁnite’ and ‘in-
ﬁnite’ systems. Broadly speaking, ﬁnite systems are in principle simpler since they
32I will not need to distinguish the various formulations of classical mechanics, in particular New-
tonian, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian: one can think throughout just of Newton’s second law F = ma.

73

are described by ordinary diﬀerential equations, while inﬁnite systems require us to
use partial diﬀerential equations, which are considerably more subtle and complicated,
both in theory and in practice.

But even ﬁnite systems can be very complicated—in various senses, which I will
not need to distinguish. All I need to say here is that even for a ﬁnite system, i.e. a
swarm of point-particles, the number of real numbers needed to specify the state (called
the number of degrees of freedom) might well be, though ﬁnite, intractably large. But
fortunately, mechanics has various strategies for reducing such daunting numbers to
something manageable.

The paradigm example of such a strategy is to assume that a body is rigid. Indeed,
it is a strategy that applies both to ﬁnite systems and continua—in both cases, enor-
mously reducing the number of degrees of freedom one needs to consider. The idea of
rigidity is not just the everyday vague idea of being solid, like a brick: it is the precise
assumption that all the distances between the body’s smallest constituents—whether
they are point-particles in a swarm, or point-sized bits of matter “cheek by jowl” ﬁlling
a continuum—are constant in time.33

Putting together the ﬁnite vs. inﬁnite contrast and the rigid vs. ﬂexible contrast,

we get a distinction between four kinds of object described by classical mechanics:

(i) a point-particle, i.e. an extensionless point-mass;
(ii) an extended object (in physics jargon: body) that is small and rigid enough that
both its internal structure (whether a swarm of point-particles or a continuum) and its
orientation can be ignored, so that it can be successfully modelled as a point-particle;
(iii): an object that, though extended, is rigid enough that its internal structure
(whether a swarm of point-particles or a continuum) can be ignored, so that it can be
successfully modelled as a rigid body; (if it is also small enough that its orientation
can be ignored, so that it can be modelled as a point-particle, we revert to case (ii));
(iv): an extended object that is both large and ﬂexible enough (especially: a ﬂuid)
that its internal structure (whether a swarm of point-particles or a continuum) cannot
be ignored, and it cannot be modelled as a rigid body.

To sum up: objects of kinds (i)-(iii) either are, or can be modelled as, ﬁnite systems.
But objects of kind (iv) cannot be, and are thereby in general the hardest objects to
model successfully using classical mechanics.

(2): Persistence

In saying these objects are ‘point-particles’, or ‘successfully modelled as point-particles’,
‘successfully modelled as rigid bodies’ etc., I have implicitly assumed that they persist.
But what ingredients should enter into the deﬁnition of persistence? Or less ambi-
tiously: into its supervenience basis, or its functional role?

33This assumption implies that the positions of all the point-particles, or point-sized bits of matter,
is ﬁxed once we ﬁx the position of just three of them. For imagine: if the tips of three of your ﬁngers
were placed at three given positions within a rigid brick, and someone speciﬁed the exact positions
of the ﬁnger-tips, then they would have implicitly speciﬁed the positions of all the brick’s constituent
parts. Similarly, rigidity reduces enormously how many momenta one needs to specify, in order to
specify a state, i.e. in order to implicitly specify all the momenta.

74

We have already brieﬂy discussed the two main factors that the philosophical lit-

erature (especially in the tradition of conceptual analyis) considers. Namely:

[i] qualitative similarity (cf. Follow in Section 1.1);
[ii] causation (cf. Section 4.1).

Of course, how these factors might ﬁgure in a deﬁnition, or the functional role, of per-
sistence is a large and controversial subject. It is even controversial if, pace my denials
in Sections 2.1 and 2.2, we make the assumptions (Straightforward) and (Bracket), i.e.
we assume that the interpretation of classical mechanics, or more generally classical
physics, is straightforward and does not lead in to the relativity and quantum theories.
As discussed in Section 2, that is what the philosophical literature about persistence
for the sort of classical mechanical
usually assumes; and in the present context, i.e.
possible world that we are presently (following Sider) envisaging, I of course agree that
it is fair enough.

I will not review, let alone try to settle, this controversy.

Indeed, even if the
philosophical literature settled this controversy to its own satisfaction, work would
remain for me (and Sider): since for us the contribution of the laws of mechanics to
the deﬁnition (or supervenience basis, or functional role) of persistence would remain
to be spelt out. So here I will conﬁne myself to sketching in just a bit more detail,
the factors [i] and [ii], and how they apply to the objects of classical mechanics. (I
discuss the controversy, also from an endurantist perspective, more fully elsewhere:
2004, 2004a).

I think many, even most, philosophers on both sides of the endurantism-perdurantism
debate agree that for most objects, the deﬁnition of persistence (i.e. of perdurance as
a relation between temporal parts, or for endurantists, of objects’ criteria of identity)
will invoke one or both of the factors, [i] and [ii] (which also might well overlap).

[i]: Qualitative similarity concerns whether the object at the two times (or in per-
durantist terms: the two stages) has suitably similar qualitative properties. Here,
‘suitably similar’ is to be read ﬂexibly. It is to allow for:

(i) only a tiny minority of properties counting in the comparison;
(ii) considerable change in the object’s properties, provided the change is “con-

tinuous”; i.e. provided the object goes through some kind of chain of small changes.

[ii]: Causation concerns whether the state of the object at the later time (or the later
stage) is suitably causally related by the earlier state or stage. Here again ‘suitably
causally related’ is to be read ﬂexibly. It is to allow for:

(i) various rival doctrines about causation—including even the special variety,
‘immanent causation’, that some philosophers believe underpins persistence (Section
4.1);

(ii) a suitable chain of states or stages linked by causation.

It is notoriously diﬃcult to go beyond this vague consensus to give a precise def-
inition of persistence (a precise criterion of identity): even if we allow the deﬁni-
tion/criterion to vary from one sort of object to another.

Agreed, in practice, we have little diﬃculty with the macroscopic objects of ev-

75

eryday life (Austin’s ‘medium-sized dry goods’, and analogous ‘wet goods’, such as
organisms, rivers, etc.), for the simple reason that for the vast majority of such ob-
jects, various relatively simple deﬁnitions of persistence or criteria of identity which one
might propose, based on the ideas of [i] and [ii], agree in their verdicts. The diﬀerent
proposed criteria are “convergent”. In other words, such an object typically has many
observable qualitative properties, and the changes in these properties are slow and-or
rare enough, and-or linked suﬃciently systematically (causally) to other events, that
the various proposals based on [i] and [ii] yield the very same judgments of persistence
over time.

So it takes strange cases to tease apart the proposals’ verdicts. Hence the tradition
within conceptual analysis of considering puzzle cases, as a tactic to help us formulate
a deﬁnition/criterion that covers all (logically or metaphysically) possible cases.

The philosophy of personal identity provides the most obvious examples: viz. puz-
zle cases where the verdicts of proposals based on bodily properties, and those based
on psychological properties, diﬀer. (This is so even if we consider only one of [i] and
[ii]. For [i], the trajectories determined by “tracking” bodily properties (albeit slowly
changing) and by “tracking” psychological properties (albeit slowly changing) diverge.
For [ii], the causal chain of bodily states diverges from that for psychological states.)

As I said, I will here duck out of the project of trying to go beyond the vague
consensus above. But by way of justifying my doing so, I note two points. First, I
believe this project is independent (at least, to a large extent) both of the endurantism-
perdurantism debate, and of whether classical mechanics is true. (I think this claim
is uncontroversial: by and large, the literature addressing this project sets aside these
two issues.)

Second, recall (from the start of this Subsection) that my present task is to sketch
the functional role of persistence in a classical mechanical world with the sort of vari-
ety and complexity of motions of objects that we see in the actual macroscopic world.
And for that task, it seems legitimate to assume that the actual fact just mentioned—
that in the actual world, most macroscopic objects change their observable qualitative
properties in a slow and-or rare and-or orderly enough way that various putative cri-
teria of identity agree—“carries over” to the envisaged classical mechanical world. In
particular, I see nothing in my denials of (Straightforward) and (Bracket) (Sections 2.1
and 2.2) to prevent such a widespread agreement of criteria of identity in a classical
mechanical world.

Assuming this widespread agreement of criteria of identity, it is straightforward to
sketch how the ideas [i] and [ii] would apply in practice to the four kinds of object
distinguished in (1) above. In other words, we can see how the practice of physics in
the envisaged world would be able to ignore, at least in large measure, puzzle cases
and conundrums about persistence (including the RDA), just as it does in the actual
world. Being myself wary of appealing to causation (cf. end of Section 4.1), I will
(For some more discussion of
only consider applying [i], i.e. qualitative similarity.
causation’s role in the deﬁnition of persistence, cf. my (2004a).)

76

As discussed in Section 1.1, qualitative similarity works well when applied to bodies
of kind (i): point-particles each with a continuous spacetime trajectory (worldline),
moving either in a void or in a continuous ﬂuid with suitably diﬀerent properties—a
diﬀerent “colour”, or made of diﬀerent “stuﬀ”, than the point-particle. For however
exactly we deﬁne ‘maximum qualitative similarity’, there will no doubt be, starting at
a point-particle at t0, a unique timelike curve of qualitative similarity passing through
it: the worldline of the particle. (Indeed, for the case of a void we could dispense with
qualitative similarity, and have the deﬁniens refer just to spacetime points’ property
of being occupied by matter.)

Similarly for the other kinds (ii), (iii) and (iv). Again, qualitative similarity will in

practice work well, at least for most cases.

For an object of kind (ii) is small and rigid enough to be modelled as a point-
particle: i.e. a successful physical description of it does not need to keep track of its
spatial parts.

And though a successful physical description of an object of kind (iii) does need
to keep track of the object’s spatial parts, the assumption of rigidity makes this a
vastly easier task than it otherwise would be. In particular, qualitative similarity will
again work well, provided there is some property or other (such as colour, density,
temperature ...) that (a) varies suﬃciently across the object’s diﬀerent spatial parts,
and (b) for each such part changes over time slowly/rarely/systematically enough, to
enable “tracking” of the spatial part. Broadly speaking, qualitative similarity will only
fail in the limiting case of continuous matter that is utterly homogeneous as regards
all properties: i.e. the case of the RDA.

For kind (iv), objects large and ﬂexible enough that they must be treated as non-
rigid, the assumption of rigidity is unavailable, and tracking the parts of objects will
be correspondingly harder. But again, we can expect qualitative similarity to work
well, at least in practice, for objects with properties that vary spatially, and change
over time in an orderly enough way: for cases unlike that of the RDA.

(Of course, for all four kinds, there might be no single deﬁnition of persistence
(criterion of identity) in terms of qualitative similarity for the whole kind: the kind
might be divided into subsets, each with their own deﬁnition/criterion.)

To sum up this discussion:— I have argued it is legitimate to assume that in the

envisaged classical mechanical world:

(i) the account of persistence, for each of our four kinds of object, will appeal to
the same factors, qualitative similarity and causation, that most philosophers actually
appeal to; and

(ii) objects change properties slowly and/or regularly enough that in practice, var-
ious proposed criteria of identity agree, and conundrums about persistence like the
RDA do not arise.

(3): Obeying the laws of mechanics

Finally, I discuss what it means in the envisaged classical mechanical world, for our
four kinds of persisting object to ‘obey the laws of mechanics’. I shall discuss in order,

77

(a) ‘obeys’ and (b) ‘laws’, urging that for my purposes both can be left vague.

(a): That a kind of object obeys a certain mechanical generalization (in particular
Newton’s second law, F = ma)34 should not mean merely that for each object in the
kind there is some possible schedule of forces exerted on the object, such that were
they exerted, the object’s motion would satisfy the generalization. That would be far
too weak: in particular Newton’s second law could be obeyed in a spurious and ad hoc
way by each object having a schedule of forces tailor-made to describe its motion, no
matter how peculiar it might be.

Rather, it is to mean, roughly, that there is some overall assignment of the forces
exerted at each time on each object (and for an object of kind (iii) or (iv): its spatial
parts) that

(i) is derived from some general principles or formulas applying to all objects of
the kind (or at least all of a broad sub-kind, e.g. among point-particles, the electrically
charged ones), and

(ii) makes the generalization satisﬁed by the object’s motion.

But for present purposes, we do not need to be more precise than (i) and (ii). In
particular, the principles or formulas in (i) surely need not be require using only forces
familiar from the actual practice, and macroscopic success, of classical mechanics: e.g.
gravitational forces taken as ﬁxed by Newton’s inverse-square law. I think it would
also be too much to require the forces to have more abstract features familiar from
actual classical mechanics, such as being two-body, rather than many-body, in nature.

(b): So much by way of sketching how the laws of mechanics could be true in the
envisaged world (with (2) giving an account of the persistence of (1)’s four kinds of
object). I turn to their being laws.

Though as an aspiring Humean, I am attracted to the best-system analysis of the
notion of a law of nature, it is clear that the discussion above does not need the
notion, or this analysis of it. We can make do with the theory-relative notion of a law
of mechanics (or more generally, of a given physical theory); and though this notion
might be explicated by some theory-relative version of the best-system analysis, it need
not be.

Indeed, I think that even if you are sceptical of any general explication of law, even
a theory-relative one, you are likely to accept that in the envisaged world, the laws of
mechanics earn the name of ‘law’ if anything does. After all, recall requirements (i)
and (ii) in (a) above, that there be a principled overall assignment of the forces exerted
on objects that their various motions satisfy: what else need you require of laws of
mechanics?

To sum up my stages (1) to (3):— We have seen how a possible classical mechanical
world could contain various kinds of object, and sustain a notion of persistence for
them such that they satisfy classical mechanical laws. Besides, this need not involve
specifying ﬁrst the objects, then the account of their persistence, then the laws. Rather,
34Again, I do not need to distinguish the various formulations of classical mechanics; cf. footnote

32.

78

the three stages can inﬂuence each other: in particular, the account of persistence can
invoke the laws (cf. comments just before (1)). Nor need it involve Ramsey-Lewis
simultaneous deﬁnition or the best-system analysis of laws.

Coda: Biting the bullet

Finally, I admit that that my stages (1)-(3) lead to the same bullet-biting which Sider
admits he must do for the case of a lonely homogeneous disc; and which he must also
do for my preferred version of the RDA, using two discs or a disc and a sheet of paper,
and for Zimmerman’s space-ﬁlling homogeneous ﬂuid. That is, stages (1)-(3) lead to
saying that in such cases, there is (No Diﬀerence) between the two putative cases; (cf.
the discussion at the end of Section 4.4).

This means the endurantist will reply to me, as they did to Sider, that this amounts
to conceding the force of the RDA: ‘even this version of perdurantism, with its sophisti-
cated appeal to the web of belief, cannot secure facts of persistence in the troublesome
cases considered by the RDA’. This suggests that again, there is after all at best a
stalemate between the endurantist and this sort of perdurantist.

But I think the perdurantist can do better than this. They can secure facts of
persistence in the troublesome cases such as lonely discs and space-ﬁlling ﬂuids—by
adopting the position in the next two Sections ...

7 Perdurantism without tears: the classical case

I turn to my second, and favoured, reply to the RDA. It meshes with Section 2’s
rejection of the widespread assumptions (Straightforward) and (Bracket). That is: it
ﬁts my claims that:

(i) classical mechanics is subtle and problematic and
(ii) classical mechanics leads to relativity and the quantum.

More speciﬁcally:— As to claim (i), this reply uses that claim’s rejection of pointil-
lisme to say that the perdurantist can take objects to have only temporally extended
i.e. non-instantaneous temporal parts. As we shall see, this makes the perdurantist’s
account of persistence non-reductive: it uses notions which presuppose persistence (cf.
(1) in Section 1.3). But for reasons already discussed (especially Section 4.2.2.C), the
account is only “slightly” non-reductive: the presupposition of persistence is “mild”
in the way that Section 4.2.2.C maintained velocity’s presupposition of persistence
was mild. In any case, the perdurantist who accepts only non-instantaneous tempo-
ral parts has an (Appealing Diﬀerences) reply to the RDA: that is, she can appeal
to diﬀerences between the two discs. Furthermore, I maintain that non-instantaneous
temporal parts can do the various jobs, within the endurantism-perdurantism debate,
that the perdurantist demands of temporal parts.

All this, I will argue in this Section. Section 8 will pick up on claim (ii) above. It
will support this non-pointilliste version of perdurantism by considering how classical
mechanical objects “emerge” from quantum theory. (This argument will also suggest

79

augmenting discussion of the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction with a new idea: relativizing
the distinction to bodies of doctrine, such as scientiﬁc theories.)

7.1 Rejecting instantaneous temporal parts

At the end of Section 1.2, I said I would take it that both average and instantaneous
velocity presuppose the notion of persistence, and are extrinsic properties. But when
we consider a non-instantaneous temporal part, the second point needs to be qualiﬁed.
For one of the part’s constituent pieces of matter having a certain worldline segment
within the part is surely an intrinsic property of the part. And similarly for lesser, i.e.
logically weaker, information than the entire worldline segment. For example, that a
constituent piece of matter has a certain average velocity over a time-interval “within”
the temporal part is intrinsic to the part: notwithstanding the fact that average velocity
presupposes the notion of persistence. Similarly for instantaneous velocity at a time
“within” the temporal part.

At least, these properties are intrinsic to the part, modulo the topic I set aside in
Section 5.2, viz. how to justify the appeal to persisting spatial points, and a spatial
metric, that is needed for the idea of the distance traversed by the persisting object.

This situation returns us to the terminology of temporally intrinsic properties which
I introduced in (A) of Section 4.2.2.C. Roughly speaking, these are properties whose
possession by an object o at a time implies nothing about matters of fact (especially
about o) at other times (though it may imply propositions about other places). Thus
the fact that one of a non-instantaneous temporal part’s constituent pieces of matter,
o, has a certain instantaneous velocity at a time t “within” the part corresponds to a
temporally intrinsic property of the part, though the velocity is temporally extrinsic
for o at the instant t.

The above points are of course independent of whether matter is atomic or contin-
uous. The piece of matter can be a point-particle or a point-sized bit of matter in a
continuum. (Indeed, the qualiﬁcation could be stated in the very same words for an
extended piece of matter, provided it was small enough for us to model it as point-like,
i.e. having a worldline, and a single velocity: but I can focus on unextended pieces of
matter.)

To sum up: a non-instantaneous temporal part has a rich set of intrinsic, or at
least temporally intrinsic, properties concerning the worldline-segments and average
and instantaneous velocities, during the part, of its constituent pieces of matter.

Now consider a version of perdurantism that accepts only non-instantaneous tempo-
ral parts. (I will not discuss the pre-history of this proposal in authors like Whitehead:
for details cf. Grattan-Guinness (2002). But I will soon discuss whether it should
accept all such parts, i.e. parts with an arbitrarily short, though non-zero, temporal
extent.)

Since such parts have a rich set of intrinsic properties, the prospects for the per-
durantist project of deﬁning persistence (or providing a supervenience-basis for it, or

80

at least some non-reductive account of it) look a great deal better than for a pointil-
liste version of perdurantism accepting only instantaneous parts (or accepting also
extended parts, yet requiring persistence to supervene on the intrinsic properties of
instantaneous parts, as in Lewis’ Humean supervenience). For with these rich sets of
properties, there are so many more ingredients which one could use in the deﬁniens
of persistence (or more generally, in the account of persistence). More precisely: the
perdurantist’s prospects are a great deal better, provided their deﬁnition or account
of persistence can legitimately refer to these intrinsic properties of non-instantaneous
temporal parts.

In the rest of this paper, I will endorse this version of perdurantism, both in general
and as a reply to the RDA (both the usual formulation and Section 5.5.3’s stronger
one).

The reply it aﬀords to the RDA is as follows. The worldline segments, average
velocities and instantaneous velocities of point-sized bits of matter within a homoge-
neous disc provide intrinsic properties of the disc’s temporal parts. Assuming that the
perdurantist can appeal to these intrinsic properties—an assumption I will discuss in
Section 7.2—she can certainly distinguish the discs. Indeed, with these intrinsic prop-
erties to hand, she may well have no more of a problem about her project of deﬁning
persistence, for the parts of a perfectly circular homogeneous disc, than for the parts of
an inhomogeneous one. There are two aspects to this, which we can call ‘kinematical’
and ‘dynamical’.

7.1.A “Kinematics” First, the perdurantist can appeal to the mathematical fact
that every suitably smooth vector ﬁeld U deﬁned on a open region R of spacetime
has integral curves throughout R: curves which are timelike, by deﬁnition, if U is
timelike. (I mentioned this when discussing Lewis’ proposal in Section 4.3.2.A. To be
‘suitably smooth’ requires only that U be C 1, i.e. the partial derivatives of
precise:
its components exist and are continuous.) So the idea is that the intrinsic properties
of a non-instantaneous temporal part of a classical continuum specify the vector ﬁeld
U, of instantaneous velocities (to be precise: 4-velocities) of the point-sized bits of
matter, on the spacetime region R of the part. U then speciﬁes integral curves, i.e.
the worldlines within R of the bits of matter. Besides, by considering a set of such
non-instantaneous parts that “cover” the entire period for which a given bit of matter
exists, its entire worldline can be reconstructed.

There are two points to make about this proposal; of which the second will lead us

to “dynamics”.

(1): Agreed, this proposal seems at ﬁrst sight a cheat, a case of theft over honest
toil. But I am for the moment just assuming that the perdurantist can appeal to
intrinsic properties of non-instantaneous parts, even though some of them involve the
notion of persistence: postponing discussion to Section 7.2. And rest assured, I will
there admit that this assumption makes this kind of perdurantism “non-reductive”.
(This assumption also marks the diﬀerence from Lewis’ proposal in Paragraph 4.3.2.A:

81

lacking the assumption, Lewis had trouble specifying the vector ﬁeld U.)

(2): The idea of reconstructing an object’s entire worldline by concatenating seg-
ments (each lying in one of a “covering” set of non-instantaneous temporal parts)
returns us to the formal equivalence I mentioned at the end of Section 5.4. That equiv-
alence had the perdurantist represent the location in spacetime M of a point-particle, or
a point-sized bit of matter in a continuum, by a collection of functions, labelled by time-
intervals that together cover the object’s lifetime; for example, if it exists throughout
the closed time-interval [a, b], there might be a function q[a,b] : t ∈ [a, b] 7→ q[a,b](t) ∈ M.
Indeed, one can show how to reconstruct worldlines from such functions, even for a
point-sized bit of matter in an utterly homogeneous continuum, provided the functions’
domains are non-degenerate time-intervals, i.e. not singleton sets of times. (For details,
cf. Butterﬁeld 2004a, Section 3.)

This reconstruction of worldlines from a collection of functions raises two points.
First, I admit again that it seems at ﬁrst sight a case of theft over honest toil: the per-
durantist reconstructs worldlines from functions that involve the notion of persistence.
Here I again refer to Section 7.2’s discussion.

Second, this reconstruction of worldlines is “kinematical”. It uses no information
about the properties of the moving matter, in particular the causes of its motion
(“dynamics”): it simply invokes a set of functions that immediately specify worldline-
segments. So it is natural to ask whether our kind of perdurantist can give an account
of persistence that in some way appeals to (i) the properties of the moving matter, or
(ii) the causes of its motion. I already reviewed in (2) of Section 6.2.2 how appealing to
(i) would work in practice for inhomogeneous matter in a classical mechanical world:
and the rejection of instantaneous temporal parts obviously does not aﬀect that appeal.
But our perdurantist can also appeal to (ii), at least if she is a “naturalist”. This leads
to “dynamics”.35

7.1.B “Dynamics” Our perdurantist can indeed appeal to dynamics. That is:
if
she is suﬃciently “naturalist” that she is willing to appeal to the laws of motion, then
in a classical mechanical world, the deﬁnition of persistence can “piggy-back” on the
determinism of those laws. (Cf. my endorsement of Quine’s “web” metaphor just before
(1) of Section 6.2.2: the laws of mechanics can contribute to determining persistence.)
That is: in common cases, the classical laws (above all, Newton’s second law, that
Force = mass × acceleration) fully determine the motion of a point-particle, or a point-
sized piece of matter in a continuum, over an interval of time [t1, t2], in terms of its
initial position and velocity at t1 and the regime of forces on it during [t1, t2]: all of
which the perdurantist can take to be given by intrinsic properties of a temporal part
35This “kinematics-dynamics” contrast exempliﬁes two more general contrasts in the philosophy of
identity (discussed in in my 2004a, Section 4.1) which I call (i) ‘ontic-epistemic’ and (ii) ‘conceptual-
empirical’. (i) concerns whether the criterion or account of identity speciﬁes the “constitutive facts”
of persistence, or our grounds—everyday or technical, occasional or systematic—for judgments of
persistence. (ii) concerns whether the criterion or account eschews the concepts and results of empirical
theories, e.g. physical theories, or is willing to invoke them.

82

that begins before t1 and ends after t2.

Agreed, that is rough speaking: hence my ‘in common cases’. For accuracy, I should
note some of the subtleties, in particular the threat to determinism from solutions in
which some quantities become inﬁnite within a ﬁnite period of time after the initial
time t1. For point-particles, such solutions are known to exist even if we veto collisions
(cf. (2) of Section 2.1); for a popular account of this, cf. Diacu and Holmes (1996,
Chapter 3). For continua, whether there are such solutions is a deep open question:
witness the fact that one of the Clay Institute’s million-dollar Millennium Prizes is for
a proof or disproof of the rigorous existence for all times of solutions of the equations
that govern a classical ﬂuid, i.e. the Navier-Stokes equations.36

But for present purposes, I can discount these subtleties: here it is enough to suggest
that a naturalist perdurantist can go about deﬁning persistence in terms of integrating
the equations of motion.

So much by way of replying to the RDA. But I do need to linger on defending this
version of perdurantism, especially the assumption that the perdurantist can appeal
to the non-instantaneous parts’ intrinsic properties. I will defend this perdurantism
in four stages. The ﬁrst two stages are metaphysical: I expound them in the next
two Subsections. The third and fourth stages will return us to the philosophy of
physics, and will each involve a proposal about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction among
properties. The third stage (Section 7.4) just appeals to what Section 4.2.2 already
argued for, concerning the classical mechanical description of motion: that velocity is
hardly extrinsic. The fourth stage, in Section 8, concerns quantum theory.

7.2

Intrinsic properties of non-instantaneous temporal parts

Intrinsic properties of non-instantaneous temporal parts raise three issues; which I
address in three Subsections.

7.2.1 Can the perdurantist appeal to them?

I claim that the perdurantist can legitimately appeal to these parts’ intrinsic properties,
even though some of them involve the notion of persistence. Does this mean that my
sort of perdurantist just gives up on the project of deﬁning persistence (or at least
providing a supervenience basis for it) in terms that do not presuppose it? Agreed,
giving up need not spell defeat for perdurantism. For a non-reductive perdurantism of
the sort mentioned in (1) of Section 1.3 might have various merits—and merits that are
not undermined by accepting only non-instantaneous temporal parts. (I will support
this in Section 7.3.) But does my sort of perdurantist give up?

Yes and No! Yes, in that she aims to give some account of persistence, yet is
36For a popular account, cf. Devlin (2002, Chapter 4); for a monograph discussion of what is known
about the simpler case of a perfect ﬂuid (Euler’s equations), cf. Section 4.4 and Example 5.5.8 of
Abraham and Marsden (1978)—thanks to Gordon Belot for this reference.

83

willing to have the account invoke notions that presuppose persistence; in particular,
instantaneous velocity.
But also, No:

for reasons hinted at in Section 7.1.B’s discussion of persistence
“piggy-backing” on the laws of motion. That is: my sort of perdurantist need not
assume persistence as a primitive—or that persistence is somehow satisfactorily deﬁned
(or accounted for, say with a supervenience thesis)—for some speciﬁc set of parts: say,
a set that covers the lifetime of the persisting object in question, or a set containing
all those temporal parts with a temporal extent (lifetime) less than some bound. She
can perfectly well pursue the project of deﬁning, or accounting for, persistence as a
relation between any two non-instantaneous parts (including any two sub-parts of any
given non-instantaneous part).

And even if the perdurantist accepts all such parts, so that there are parts with
arbitrarily short, though non-zero, temporal extents, I maintain that this need not
involve a vicious regress of endlessly deferred deﬁnitions or accounts of persistence. For
the account may, for time-intervals less than some amount, become suitably “uniform”,
i.e. with no substantive variations for shorter times. In short:
it can be “turtles all
the way down”, provided that below a certain level, the turtles are all the same. Of
course, this is in eﬀect what happens in an account of persistence that piggy-backs
on the classical deterministic laws of motion, determining future and past positions in
terms of present position and instantaneous velocity (or momentum).

7.2.2 Temporal intrinsicality at an instant is rare

I turn to a general point about the sorts of property invoked in an account of per-
sistence: a point that applies to both endurantist and perdurantist, and to accounts
of criteria of identity for speciﬁc kinds of object, e.g. persons, where there are issues,
e.g. about the weighing of diverse factors such as bodily and psychological similarity,
absent from the highly general endurantism-perdurantism debate.

The point is simply that almost no properties are temporally intrinsic to their in-
stance at an instant. That is: almost all properties require features of their instance
not only at a single instant, but also at other (albeit perhaps close) times. So an ac-
count of persistence, or a criterion of identity for a speciﬁc kind of object, needs must
appeal to temporally extrinsic properties; (though the other times involved may be
close to the given one).

Unfortunately, this fact is obscured in most philosophical discussion of persistence
(at least in the tradition of conceptual analysis). This discussion focusses on the idea
of giving an account of, or criterion for, o at time t being the same persisting object
(maybe of a speciﬁc kind, e.g. person) as o′ at t′, that invokes everyday properties.
As discussed in (2) Persistence, in Section 6.2.2, the idea is almost always that the
object(s) (in perdurantist terms: the two temporal parts) need to be:

[i] suitably similar as to these properties: where ‘suitably similar’ allows consid-

erable change provided there is some kind of chain of small changes; and-or

[ii] suitably causally related, with the properties being the causally relevant

84

ones (in other jargon: part of the speciﬁcation of the object’s causal state); where
again there can be a suitable chain of stages or states linked by causation.

So far, so good: I have no objection to searching for this sort of account or crite-
rion, nor to its invoking everyday properties in ways [i] and-or [ii]. But the locution
‘at time t’, and the focus on everyday properties, makes philosophers often choose as
their examples observational properties, i.e. properties which can be ascribed “at a
glance”: be they “everyday-taxonomic” like ‘is a rock/leaf/chair’ or “purely sensory”
like ‘is red/hot’. And since they can be ascribed at a glance, philosophers are tempted
to think they are temporally intrinsic in the strong sense of requiring something of
their instance only for a instant.37

And that is false. We are very gross creatures: our perceptual apparatus is insen-
sitive to such properties. Rather, the process of perception “averages”, in myriadly
complex (and often adaptive) ways, over the instant-by-instant properties of not only
the object but also the medium, and our perceptual apparatus itself. So any observa-
tional property is temporally extrinsic at an instant: it demands features of its instance
over a time-interval of at least about one twentieth of a second—and in general a very
complex, open-ended and vague array of features, to boot.

When we set aside conceptual analysis and everyday properties, and consider the
properties of technical science, in particular physical theories, the same conclusion
holds good: most properties are temporally extrinsic at an instant (though as empha-
sised, they may well be intrinsic to a non-instantaneous temporal part). Thus most
of the hundred-odd physical quantities that get an entry in a physics dictionary are
clearly temporally extrinsic at an instant. I have already mentioned velocity: obvi-
ously momentum, angular momentum and kinetic energy are temporally extrinsic for
the same reason. Many other quantities, such as temperature, conductivity (thermal
and electrical), permeability and permittivity, depend for their deﬁnition (as well as
their value) on collective phenomena that require a process or situation to last longer
than an instant (though perhaps much less than a second).

I admit that within classical physics, three familiar quantities are good candidates
for being temporally intrinsic even to an instant: viz. position, mass and electric
charge. Besides, for a point-particle: these also seem to be spatially intrinsic at a
spatial point, not just for an extended spatial region. At least, this is so modulo the
topic I set aside in Section 5.2, about the basis of spatial geometry: that is to say,
a “relationist” about spatial geometry would no doubt object to the claim that the
position of a point-particle is spatially intrinsic to a point.38

37All parties can agree that among non-observational everyday properties, most are temporally
extrinsic; indeed they often require features at other times of objects other than their instance: for
example, being married requires a spouse at a past wedding, and no intervening divorce or death.

38Beware! For a point-sized bit of matter in a continuum, the trio of position, mass-density and
charge-density seem to be not only temporally intrinsic, but also spatially intrinsic—provided we can
interpret the densities (i) as deﬁning mass and charge through integration, rather than (ii) being
themselves deﬁned from the masses and charges of ﬁnite volumes, by taking the limit of smaller
and smaller volumes. But in fact, we cannot interpret the densities like this: (i) fails, and we need
(ii)—another mark against pointillisme, in my view (2004).

85

I also admit that this trio seeming to be intrinsic—taken together with the great
success of classical physics in reducing much of the behaviour of large complex objects
to the classical mechanics and electrodynamics of postulated tiny components, whether
point-particles or point-sized bits of matter in a continuum (“micro-reductionism”)—
has undoubtedly been one strong reason, perhaps the main reason, for the prevalence
in philosophy of pointilliste doctrines like Lewis’ Humean supervenience.

Of course, the RDA is precisely an argument that such doctrines come to grief on the
topic of persistence.39 And my present point is that the rarity of temporal intrinsicality
at an instant supports my proposal to be perdurantist without being pointilliste—and
so to block the RDA.

7.2.3 A better reason for temporal intrinsicality

Finally, an incidental point. Philosophers discussing persistence have another reason
to focus on temporally intrinsic properties, in addition to the erroneous tendency to
think observational properties are temporally intrinsic to an instant. I admit that it is
a better reason. But it is a reason only for properties temporally intrinsic for shortish
intervals, up to about a second: not for the stronger notion of temporal intrinsicality at
an instant—which is the target of my anti-pointilliste campaign. In short, the reason is
that a property that is temporally intrinsic for a longish interval is liable to be useless
in a criterion of identity.

In detail: All parties (both endurantists and perdurantists) can agree that an ac-
count of persistence, or a criterion of identity, had better not invoke a property that
requires some feature of its instance within a period of time similar to the time-scale
over which the account or criterion is to be applied. For doing so is liable to make the
criterion hard or even impossible to apply. Thus suppose an account of the conditions
under which o at time t is the same persisting object (maybe of a speciﬁc kind, e.g.
person) as o′ at t′, invokes a property P : requiring, say, that o at t must be P and
so must o′ at t′. (The argument works equally well with other requirements, e.g. that
only one of the two need be P , but that change as regards P is suitably continuous,
with some kind of chain of small changes.) Then if being P at t requires a feature φ at
a time close to t′, it may well be hard to apply the account: having to ascertain that φ
holds close to t′ might entangle one in ascertaining whether the persistence claim for o
and o′ holds.

7.3 Non-instantaneous parts can do the jobs

I turn to the second stage of my defence of perdurantism without instantaneous tempo-
ral parts. I claim that, by and large, non-instantaneous temporal parts do the various
39Philosophers tend to forget that they also have trouble in physics. The classical mechanics and
electrodynamics of point-particles and continua have considerable conceptual tensions, some of which
are aggravated by a pointilliste picture; cf. Section 2.1.

86

jobs, within the endurantism-perdurantism debate, that the perdurantist demands of
temporal parts, just as well as instantaneous temporal parts. More precisely: this is
so once the perdurantist “just says No” to the siren-calls of pointillisme. Of course,
I cannot here discuss all these jobs: I will make do with three short comments. The
ﬁrst comment is general, and will be illustrated by the second and third, which concern
particular jobs temporal parts are invoked to do.

7.3.A Humean supervenience revisited The ﬁrst comment is an oﬀer of a peace-
pipe to the neo-Humean. She envisages the world as “loose and separate”, a succession
of “distinct existences”: “just one darned thing after another”. My version of perdu-
rantism can agree, in that it might well accept all non-instantaneous temporal parts,
no matter how short-lived: my veto is only against utterly instantaneous parts.

Besides, my perdurantist can echo Lewis’ Humean supervenience, by making some
claim along the lines that all the facts supervene on the temporally local facts; i.e. the
facts speciﬁed by the intrinsic (if you like: temporally and spatially intrinsic) proper-
ties of all the non-instantaneous temporal parts. To state this echo more precisely: she
can claim that for any covering of spacetime M by a family F of non-instantaneous
temporal parts (no matter how short-lived some or all of the parts may be), all the
facts supervene on the intrinsic properties of elements of F . (Here, ‘covering’ is un-
derstood in mathematicians’ usual sense: a set M is covered by a family F of sets iﬀ
M ⊆ ∪F ; and similarly if M and the elements of F are treated not as sets, but as say
mereological fusions.)

So the only aspect of Lewis’ Humean supervenience that my perdurantist needs to
deny is the pointilliste idea that all the facts supervene on the intrinsic properties of
spacetime points (or of spatially extended instants of time, i.e. spacelike surfaces). I
think neo-Humeans should ﬁnd this a price worth paying: having all the facts super-
vene on the intrinsic properties of all the non-instantaneous temporal parts should be
enough to satisfy a Humean’s ambition to have the “global” supervene on the “local”.40

7.3.B The problem of change The second comment concerns the so-called ‘prob-
lem of change’. Perdurantists argue that o’s changing in respect of a property P is
best understood in terms of one temporal part having P and another having ¬P . In
particular, they argue that the endurantist has to understand P (and ¬P ) as a relation
to a time, and that for the case of an intrinsic property P this is surely wrong. Hence
the problem is also called the ‘problem of temporary intrinsics’; (cf. e.g. Sider 2001
pp. 92-98, Lewis 2002).

So far as I can tell, almost all the arguments for the perdurantist understanding of
40Agreed: since these parts in general overlap, the “fundamental description of the world”, given
by the inﬁnite conjunction of all (the ascriptions of) the intrinsic properties of all such parts, is highly
redundant. But I say: no worries. After all, the exact spatial analogue occurs in continuum classical
mechanics: to describe a continuum, this theory needs—not the inﬁnite point-by-point conjunction
of all the properties of points—but the highly redundant inﬁnite region-by-region conjunction of all
properties of all regions; cf. Section 2.1.

87

change carry over, so as to support my version of perdurantism, i.e. perdurantism with-
out instantaneous temporal parts. (Admitted: as do almost all the arguments against
the perdurantist understanding of change.) The main reason is of course that if within
a single non-instantaneous part o there is change in respect of P , the perdurantist will
understand the change in terms of one shorter-lived part of o having P , and another
not—and this need not involve any regress (Section 7.2.1). Besides: since temporal
intrinsicality at an instant is rare (Section 7.2.2), the perdurantist’s argument that
endurantism has trouble with temporary intrinsics is more persuasive as an argument
for non-instantaneous temporal parts.

But there is one objection; (my thanks to Oliver Pooley). Suppose that a tempo-
rary intrinsic property such as shape changes continuously over time, so that an object
o is square for merely an instant: to secure an instance of squareness simpliciter in this
scenario, the perdurantist surely needs an instantaneous temporal part.

Reply: Given the supposition, this is certainly right. Here I can only bite the bullet,

by any or all of:

temporal parts are to do; or

(i) dropping the problem of change from the list of jobs my non-instantaneous

(ii) urging that since temporal intrinsicality at an instant is rare (Section 7.2.2)
my temporal parts can solve the problem of change for the vast majority of temporary
intrinsic properties; and besides, urging that succeeding with this vast majority should
satisfy the neo-Humean (cf. the ﬁrst comment above); or

(iii) adopting a “mixed” view, more congenial to pointillisme, that admits in-
stantaneous parts as well as non-instantaneous ones, but then argues that it is le-
gitimate to account for persistence (and so answer the RDA) by invoking only the
non-instantaneous ones, as I have.

Of these options, I on the whole prefer reply (ii). But I will not in this paper try
to choose between these replies: in particular, I will not refer again to the mixed view,
though I agree it is tenable.

7.3.C Puzzles of coincidence Thirdly, the situation as regards the debate over
‘puzzles of coincidence’ is similar to that for the problem of change. The puzzles (re-
viewed by Sider 2001, p. 5-10, 141-152) concern such cases as the statue and the clay,
or the ﬁssion and fusion of objects such as amoebae—or even persons. For example,
after an artist makes on Tuesday a statue out of a lump of clay, the statue and clay
seem to be the very same object. But they seem to diﬀer in their temporally extrinsic
properties (often in this debate called ‘historical properties’, e.g. by Sider 2001, p.
5, 142): the statue but not the lump was created on Tuesday, the lump but not the
statue existed on Monday. Perdurantists argue that these puzzles are best understood
in terms of distinct objects sharing temporal parts, just as objects can share spatial
parts (such as two roads having a stretch in common).

Again: so far as I can tell, almost all the arguments for the perdurantist understand-
ing of these puzzles carry over, so as to support my perdurantism without instantaneous
temporal parts. (As do, I admit, the arguments against!). For example, almost all the

88

arguments in Sider’s critique of endurantist approaches (2001, p. 154-188), and in his
advocacy of perdurantism (2001, p. 152-153, p. 188-208), carry over.

I said ‘almost all the arguments’ carry over. For there are two wrinkles. First, Poo-
ley puts the analogue of his objection in Section 7.3.B. Suppose that two objects fuse
for merely an instant: here the perdurantist surely needs an instantaneous temporal
part. I reply: I think this objection is weaker than its analogue in Section 7.3.B, be-
cause its supposition is more of an idealization, more a merely logical or metaphysical
possibility, rather than part of the content of classical mechanics. That is: classical
mechanics does describe deformable objects changing shape continuously, as the objec-
tion in Section 7.3.B requires. But it does not describe instantaneous fusions. Indeed
as mentioned in Section 2.1, classical mechanics ﬁnds collisions, even of point-particles,
problematic—let alone fusions and ﬁssions. (There is of course no problem about the
spatial analogue of instantaneous fusions, i.e.
two 3-dimensional objects sharing a
2-dimensional part: think of two semi-detached houses!)

The second wrinkle is that the issue whether to accept instantaneous temporal parts
does bear on one signiﬁcant division within the perdurantist camp. This distinction
concerns how the perdurantist treats temporal language. The traditional perdurantist
view is that an object of ordinary ontology—i.e. a referent of an ordinary term, a
subject of ordinary predications, an element of ordinary domains of quantiﬁcation—is
the whole four-dimensional object, the “maximal spacetime worm”; (Sider calls this
the ‘worm view’). But both Sider (2001, p. 188-208) and Hawley (2001, pp. 30-32,
41-64) defend the rival ‘stage view’, that the referents of our ordinary terms, subjects
of ordinary predications etc. are the temporal parts.

This is not the place to assess their arguments for this proposal. They concern, for
example, counting: the stage view says that at each time before an amoeba splits into
two, there is one amoeba (the stage), a verdict which matches everyday thought and
language; but since there are then two maximal spacetime worms, the worm view has
to say that there are stricto sensu two amoebae, and explain away everyday thought
and language by invoking some conventions about counting.41

For my purposes here, it suﬃces to comment on Sider’s position that the stages he
claims to be the referents of ordinary terms are indeed instantaneous—and so do not
persist: ‘no person lasts more than an instant’ (2001, p. 193)! Sider of course agrees
that everyday thought and language take: (i) ordinary objects to persist, as in ‘Ted was
once a boy’; and (ii) most of their properties to be temporally extrinsic at an instant,
as in ‘Ted believes perdurantism is true’ (Section 7.2.2). So he goes on to argue that he
can accommodate (i) and (ii) with a temporal analogue of Lewis’ counterpart theory
(2001, pp 111-113, 193-198).

My comment on Sider’s position is now obvious. While I admit that temporal
41For this line of argument, cf. Sider 2001, pp 152-153, 188-193. But Sider has to admit that
sometimes we count by maximal spacetime worms, not by stages, as in ‘Fewer than two trillion people
have set foot in North America throughout history’. He writes (2001, p. 197): ‘if ‘person’ refers to
person stages, this sentence will turn out false, since more than two trillion (indeed, inﬁnitely many
if time is dense) person stages have set foot in North America throughout history’.

89

counterpart theory is coherent and powerful enough to cope with (i) and (ii)—the
stage view does not have to be so pointilliste as Sider! That is: one could combine my
perdurantism, the rejection of instantaneous temporal parts, with the stage view. Not
only do most arguments for a perdurantist understanding of the puzzles of coincidence
carry over and support my perdurantism (as I said above). Also, one could combine it
with some arguments speciﬁcally for the stage view: e.g. a version of my perdurantism
that denies overlapping parts could retain Sider’s counting argument for favouring the
stage view over the worm view ... But I leave developing this topic for another occasion.

This concludes my metaphysical defence of my version of perdurantism. I hope to
have made it plausible, quite apart from its blocking the RDA. But the philosophy of
physics has some more support to oﬀer it. In the next Subsection, the support comes
from the classical description of motion. In Section 8, the support comes from quantum
theory. But these two pieces of support are not “just technical”: each of them involves
a novel proposal about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction among properties.

7.4 Velocity revisited

My version of perdurantism, without instantaneous temporal parts, meshes well with
Section 4.2.2’s arguments that:

(i) it is natural to sub-divide the vast class of extrinsic properties—and in particular,

temporally extrinsic properties—in terms of degrees of extrinsicality; and

(ii) in the classical mechanical description of motion, velocity is hardly extrinsic.

I will not rehearse again the details of those arguments. I only need to recall the
main idea: that the “only proposition going beyond the instance” that is implied by an
ascription of velocity (or of other derivatives of position) is the proposition that the in-
stance o exists throughout some open interval of times, perhaps very short, around the
time t. This proposition corresponds to an intrinsic property of any non-instantaneous
temporal part containing t, no matter how short: a property that is thereby hardly
extrinsic to t.

Obviously, this idea meshes with two points in previous Subsections of this Section:—

(a): A perdurantist who rejects instantaneous temporal parts can account for persis-
tence: either by fusing segments, perhaps arbitrarily short, of worldlines (“kinematics”;
Section 7.1.A); or (more naturalistically) by “piggy-backing” on solving the determin-
istic classical laws of motion, given o’s initial position and velocity, and the forces on
it; (“dynamics”; Section 7.1.B).

(b): A perdurantism without instantaneous temporal parts can accept all non-
instantaneous parts, no matter how small their temporal extent. Besides, if one accepts
all such parts one can add a claim that all facts supervene on the “temporally local”
facts, in a strong enough sense to satisfy all but the most pointilliste neo-Humeans; (cf.
Section 7.3.A).

90

8 Support from decoherence in quantum theory

8.1 Classical and quantum: relativizing the intrinsic-extrinsic

distinction

As I said in Section 1.3, I am not so far gone in naturalism as to just dismiss the
I agree: a classical mechanical
RDA on the grounds that matter is in fact atomic.
continuum could exist—prompting the RDA, modulo the above replies. My argument
in this Section will instead be that the way in which classical mechanical objects (both
particles and continua) are in fact emergent from the quantum realm provides further
support for Section 7’s perdurantism without tears, i.e. without instantaneous temporal
parts.

This argument will use two new assumptions: one about philosophical method, the

other about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction.

(1): I will now assume that the interpretation of classical mechanics—in particular,
our conception of how its objects (both particles and continua) persist—should be
sensitive to how classical mechanical objects in fact “emerge from the quantum”. I
agree that this assumption is controversial: why not just interpret each theory on its
own, as best you can? After all, there is no lack of work: as I have stressed, classical
mechanics is interpretatively subtle and problematic, even without considering the
dreaded quantum. But I am not alone in endorsing this assumption, even as regards
the interpretation of a classical theory being sensitive to an “adjacent” quantum theory.
Thus for Belot (1998, p. 550-554), it is the main moral of his examination of classical
electromagnetism and the Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect.

(2): My second assumption is that it is legitimate to relativize the intrinsic-extrinsic
distinction among properties to a body of doctrine. The distinction is of course usually
discussed in terms of logical or metaphysical possibility: the literature discusses taking
a property P to be intrinsic iﬀ it is logically or metaphysically possible for an object
o to have P “while lonely”, or “whatever the rest of the world is like”, or ... But I
now assume that it is legitimate to relativize the modality to a body of doctrine, such
as a scientiﬁc theory T . (I will not need the metaphysically more ambitious idea of
relativizing to the “laws of nature”, or to the laws of nature of some possible world.)
Therefore I shall talk, for any such body of doctrine or theory T , of nomic intrinsicality
and extrinsicality.

Unless T is logically or metaphysically necessary—a case I need not consider—the
relativized modality will be a restricted one. That is: not all logically or metaphysically
possible worlds make T true. In general, this will strengthen the notion of intrinsicality,
and correspondingly weaken the notion of extrinsicality—however exactly we under-
stand the original intrinsic-extrinsic distinction. That is: nomic intrinsicality will imply
intrinsicality simpliciter, and extrinsicality simpliciter will imply nomic extrinsicality.
For intrinsicality is a matter of “not implying propositions about the instance’s en-
vironment”; and once we assume a theory T is true, any proposition in T can be an

91

implicit premise in an implication—yielding more implications. So in general, once we
assume T , more properties will be classiﬁed as extrinsic. So extrinsicality simpliciter
implies nomic extrinsicality; and vice versa for intrinsicality. (Similar remarks apply to
my notions of temporal, and spatial, intrinsicality and extrinsicality; and to the case
where we consider two theories T1 and T2, one implying the other.)

In fact, this idea of relativized intrinsicality has surfaced in the literature (Hum-
berstone 1996, p. 238); but so far as I know, it has not been pursued. I agree that
many a metaphysician will at ﬁrst sight doubt its value, though they will probably
accept it as coherent. Thus Humberstone writes, after ﬂoating the idea of relativizing
intrinsicality to a class of possible worlds that match in their laws of nature:
‘From
suitably general philosophical stance], this has an
a suitably elevated position [i.e.
element of arbitrariness about it: why not restrict attention to worlds—not with the
same laws as ours, but—with the same tourism statistics for Naples as ours?’ (ibid.).
But I submit that relativization to (our best guess for) the laws of physics has some
interest! In any case, I can at least show that in the present context, it has the interest
of being surprising. For in Section 8.2 I will argue that the position, and even the
existence, at a time of an emergent classical object (whether a particle or a point-sized
piece of matter in a continuum) is extrinsic, relative to the laws of quantum theory.42

But before arguing for this, I should brieﬂy set aside another way in which quantum

theory bears on persistence, and apparently on the RDA.

8.1.1 Unitarity: momentum as temporally intrinsic

Quantum theory violates an assumption that the RDA depends on, viz. that velocity
is not part of the instantaneous state of an object. (This assumption, ﬁrst registered in
Section 1.2, led to discussing Tooley’s heterodox proposal that velocity should be part
of the instantaneous state.) This assumption is often endorsed in the metaphysical
literature about space, time and motion, even apart from the RDA: for example, Sider
(2001, p. 39) says ‘ﬁxing the properties and relations of present objects will not ﬁx
their velocities’ (cf. also his p. 34-35).

The assumption tends to be associated with the fact that in classical mechanics, in
order to determine an object’s future (and past) motion, you need not only its present
position and the forces acting on it (in the time-interval concerned), but also its present
velocity; i.e. the fact that classical mechanics’ equations of motion are second-order
in time. For in a theory in which position and forces were enough to determine the
motion (a theory that is ﬁrst-order in time), it would be more tempting to say that
velocity is part of the present instantaneous state. At least, it would be as tempting to
say this, as that the whole future (and past) history of the system is part of the present
instantaneous state (because of the determinism). Certainly, in such a theory the RDA
42Besides, the extrinsicality has nothing to do with the possible involvement of other objects in
deﬁning position, as urged by a relational conception of space (set aside since Section 5.2). The
extrinsicality is what I have called temporal extrinsicality, rather than spatial; and it arises from
decoherence.

92

itself would have much less sting for a “naturalistic” perdurantist, who is willing to let
her account of perdurance depend on the actual laws. For in such a case, ingredients
that the RDA’s advocate presumably agrees to be available to the perdurantist, viz.
position and forces, are enough to determine future positions.

But quantum theory violates this assumption.43 It is ﬁrst-order in time. It combines
the position and velocity (better: momentum) aspects into a single instantaneous state
of a system which, together with the forces acting on the system, determines its future
(and past) states (setting aside controversy about whether there is a “collapse of the
wave-packet” on measurement).44

So it is tempting to say that in quantum theory, velocity and momentum are just
as intrinsic (or temporally intrinsic) to the system at a time, as is position; (Arntze-
nius (2003, p. 282) says this). A bit more precisely: once we are willing to relativize
the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction to a physical theory (as proposed in (2) above), it is
tempting to say this.

Furthermore, just as Section 7.1 proposed that in a classical setting, a perdurantist
accepting only non-instantaneous parts could have their account of persistence “piggy-
back” on integrating the classical equations of motion: so in quantum theory, the
perdurantist’s account of persistence could appeal to integrating the quantum equa-
tions of motion.
(But as the weasel-word ‘system’ hints, it is controversial how to
relate persisting objects to quantum systems, even if you know the systems’ complete
histories: cf. the next Subsection).

So be it, say I. But again: I am not so far gone in naturalism about persistence—I
am loath to just dismiss the RDA on the grounds that quantum theory is ﬁrst-order
in time. A theory of persistence should accommodate classical continua, and this
Subsection’s points do not bear directly on how it can do so. However, I will now
argue that quantum theory has other light to shed on our topic—once we ask the
interpretation of classical mechanics to take note of how classical mechanical objects
emerge through decoherence.

8.2 Position and existence as nomically extrinsic

So let us adopt the idea in (2) of Section 8.1, of nomic intrinsicality and extrinsicality.
The intrinsic-extrinsic distinction among properties is to be relativized to bodies of
43As readers who are cognoscenti of quantum theory will have long ago noticed: at least by the
time that Section 7.1 proposed we could have perdurantism without tears, by letting the perdurantist
“have” velocity, and even have their account of persistence “piggy-back” on integrating the classical
equations of motion. Apologies for the delay!

44Agreed, the Hamiltonian formulation of classical mechanics also combines position and momentum
in its conception of state, and so is ﬁrst-order in time. But there is a crucial disanalogy: neither of
the pair, position and momentum, determines the other. (Indeed, the formulation is equivalent to
the Lagrangian or Newtonian formulation, under certain conditions, in particular taking the phase
space to be the cotangent bundle of a conﬁguration space.) But in quantum theory, the position and
momentum representations each determine the other.

93

doctrine—in particular, to quantum theory.

Warning: Choosing logically strong bodies of doctrine can yield odd-sounding ver-
dicts of extrinsicality. Given our interest in temporal extrinsicality, the obvious example
of this is provided by a deterministic theory. Thus suppose you choose to relativize,
not just to the deterministic theory itself, but to the conjunction of the theory and
the regime of forces imposed on a system in some time-interval (a, b). This yields the
verdict that every instantaneous state45 is temporally very extrinsic: indeed, about as
extrinsic as it could be. For given the laws of the theory and the forces imposed, any
instantaneous state of a system determines the system’s states during (a, b). But it
sounds wrong to say that every instantaneous state is temporally very extrinsic.

The solution of course is to exercise some judgment about what is a natural or use-
ful body of doctrine to which to relativize. In our example, the theory is presumably
such a body of doctrine, but its conjunction with a speciﬁed regime of forces is not:
that is too particular (logically strong). More generally, we should allow some distinc-
tion between “central” and “peripheral” statements (or more generally; features) of an
ambient body of doctrine, and relativize the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction only to (the
conjunction of) the central ones. That is, only the central ones are held ﬁxed in all the
nomic possibilities, and so by nomic intrinsicality and extrinsicality. Then you may
say in the example that (maybe part of) the speciﬁcation of the forces is not central,
so that instantaneous states are not so very temporally extrinsic.

Let us now apply this sort of relativization to how classical mechanical objects
emerge through decoherence. Fortunately for us, although the quantum measurement
problem remains controversial and there remain many open technical questions in the
physics of decoherence, we need not address these controversies and questions. We
can sidestep the measurement problem, and manage with only the most basic and
best-established features of decoherence.46

Classical mechanical objects (both particles and continua) are in fact transient and
approximate patterns in the quantum state of an underlying quantum system. They
are patterns that emerge from an ubiquitous, continuous and very eﬃcient process of
decoherence, which continues throughout the lifetime of the classical object. Roughly
speaking, decoherence is diﬀusion (spreading) in to the quantum system’s environment
of coherence, i.e. of the puzzling interference eﬀects in the probability distributions
that are the system’s state.

To keep things simple, I shall discuss this in terms of the elementary quantum

theory of particles, not quantum ﬁeld theory. But I should note that:

(i): quantum particles are themselves transient and approximate patterns in
the quantum state of an underlying quantum ﬁeld or ﬁelds; for discussion of this, cf.
45Since for some philosophers, a state is not a property, it is better to say: every property that

speciﬁes such a state.

46Bacciagaluppi (2003) is an excellent introduction to decoherence for philosophers; for more techni-
cal details, Guilini et al. (2003), Schlosshauer (2003) are also excellent. By the way, all these sources
endorse the consensus that decoherence cannot by itself provide the solution of the measurement
problem, but is an important ingredient in any such solution.

94

Wallace (2004, especially Section 5.2);

Guilini et al. (2003, Chapter 4).

(ii): decoherence also happens within quantum ﬁeld theory; for a review, cf.

Here are some details about a well-studied model of a quantum particle immersed
in an environment (called ‘quantum Brownian motion’). Take as the initial quantum
state of a tiny dust-particle (radius 10−3 cm) in air, a superposition of two positions
for the centre of mass of the particle, with the two positions just 10−4 cm apart (i.e.
a tenth of the particle’s radius), and with (say) the two positions not moving relative
to one another. The bombardment of the particle by air molecules is very eﬃcient in
diﬀusing the coherence in to the environment: the superposition’s interference eﬀects
converge to zero like exp(t/10−36 sec) and remain small for a very long time (1010
years)!

This means that very soon the probabilities for any quantity on the particle you
care to measure are as if there is an even chance of the (centre of mass of the) particle
being in the two positions; (i.e. probabilities for quantities other than position are
also given by a 50-50 mixture corresponding to the two positions). Similarly for other
if the initial superposition had the two positions separating from each
initial states:
other at say x cm sec−1, then after a second, the probabilities would be as if there is an
even chance of the (centre of mass of the) particle being in two positions x + 10−4 cm
apart. Indeed, more generally: it is even possible to deduce the approximate validity
of the deterministic classical mechanical equations of motion of a dust-particle from
the underlying equations for the quantum system, together with a description of the
decoherence process.

So the classical object, “the dust-particle we see”, corresponds to one of these
two decohered possibilities (in my example: possibilities for the position of the centre
of mass).
It is a pattern in a quantum state, which also contains another pattern
corresponding to the other possibility. If the quantum state were suﬃciently diﬀerent,
not only would the classical object not have the position and momentum we see:
it
would not exist. In particular, if the decoherence process did not occur, it would never
exist; and if the decoherence process did not continue, it would cease to exist. That
is: the quantum system would continue to exist, but the classical dust-particle would
not: it would “disappear into a quantum fog”.47

I propose that we take these propositions, about how classical objects are in fact
patterns in a quantum state that are formed because of an ongoing process of deco-
herence, as what I called ‘central’. After all, they are crucial to how such objects are
in fact constituted. That is: I propose they are to be held ﬁxed in assessing whether
a property is nomically intrinsic or extrinsic. So they are to be available as implicit
premises for implications from ascriptions of a property to propositions about the world
beyond the property’s instance.

It follows that an ascription to a classical object such as a dust-particle, of a po-
47For more discussion of the idea of classical objects as patterns in quantum objects, cf. Wallace

(2003).

95

sition at t (to be precise: for its centre of mass, say), is nomically extrinsic. (I would
say: temporally extrinsic, since the implications are about facts at times other than
t). For the ascription (together with the implicit premises) implies the (categorical)
proposition that the object has a position at all other times in a (very short but non-
zero!) interval of times around t. Here, the length of the interval is determined by the
decoherence process’ time-scale.

Similarly, a statement that the object exists at a time is nomically extrinsic. For
it implies that the object exists at all other times in an interval about as long as the
decoherence time-scale.48

So far I have only discussed the emergence of a classical particle, such as a dust-
particle. But the discussion just given carries over to continua, as regards both physics
and philosophy.

Admittedly, there are more technical questions about decoherence in quantum ﬂuids
that are still open than about quantum Brownian motion, which is by now very well-
studied. But there is already a good understanding of decoherence in quantum ﬂuids,
and so of the emergence of classical continua. In short: recent work shows that even in
a quantum ﬂuid, where there is no clear distinction between system and environment,
decoherence selects certain quantities (roughly, hydrodynamic variables) as “behaving
classically”. Again, one can deduce the approximate validity of the classical equations
of motion for a ﬂuid. (For details, cf. Halliwell (1999) and references given there.)

As regards philosophy: I said above that the fact that classical mechanical objects
(both particles and continua) are in fact emergent from the quantum realm should be
reﬂected in the interpretation of classical mechanics, and so in a naturalistic theory of
persistence. One way to do this is now clear. Namely: take the nomic extrinsicality of
position at a time, and even existence at a time, as favouring the denial of instantaneous
temporal parts. Thus decoherence supports the perdurantism without the tears of
pointillisme which I defended in Section 7: a naturalistic perdurantist can interpret
classical mechanics in terms of temporally extended temporal parts—and thereby block
the RDA.

Acknowledgements:— I thank: G. Belot, C. Callender, W. Demopoulos, G. Emch,
I. Gibson, L. Humberstone, P. Mainwood, A. Oliver, O. Pooley, M. Redhead, T. Sattig,
S. Saunders, N. Shea, D.Wallace, A. Wilson and D. Zimmerman for discussions and
comments on previous versions; audiences in Florence, Granada, Leeds, London Eng-
land, London Ontario, Montreal and Oxford; and participants at a seminar in autumn
2003.

48A point of clariﬁcation for quantum aﬁcionados. You might object that since
(i) the reduced state density matrix of the dust-particle (strictly: of its centre of mass degree of

freedom) is nearly diagonal (upto some desired level of approximation) in position, at an instant;

it surely follows that:
(ii) the position and existence of the classical particle is not nomically temporally extrinsic.
I reply: (i) is of course true, but does not imply (ii). For I am taking as “central”, not just the

formalism of reduced states etc., but also the physical fact of a decoherence process over time.

96

9 References

R. Abraham and J. Marsden (1978), Foundations of Mechanics, 2nd edition, Ben-
jamin/Cummings.
D. Armstrong (1980), ‘Identity through time’, in ed. P. van Inwagen, Time and Cause,
Dordrecht: Reidel.
D. Armstrong (1997), A World of States of Aﬀairs, Cambridge: University Press.
F. Arntzenius (2000), ‘Are there really instantaneous velocities?’, The Monist 83, pp.
187-208.
F. Arntzenius (2003), ‘An arbitrarily short reply to Sheldon Smith on instantaneous
velocities’, Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 34B, pp. 281-282.
G. Bacciagaluppi (2003), ‘The role of decoherence in quantum theory’, in ed. E. Zalta,
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, available at: http://plato.stanford.edu.
Y. Balashov (1999), ‘Relativistic objects’, Nous 33 pp. 644-662.
Y. Balashov (2000), ‘Persistence and spacetime: philosophical lessons of the pole and
the barn’, The Monist 83, pp. 321-340.
G. Belot (1998), ‘Understanding electromagnetism’, British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science 49, pp 531-555.
G. Belot (2000), ‘Geometry and motion’, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
51, pp. 561-595.
J. Bigelow and R. Pargetter (1989), ‘Vectors and Change’, British Journal for the Phi-
losophy of Science 40, pp 289-306.
J. Bigelow and R. Pargetter (1990), Science and Necessity, Cambridge University Press.
R. Black (2000), ‘Against Quidditism’, Australasian Journal of Philosophy 78, pp. 87-
104.
P. Bricker (1993), ‘The fabric of space:
intrinsic vs. extrinsic distance relations’, in
ed.s P.French et al., Midwest Studies in Philosophy 18, University of Minnesota Press,
pp. 271-294.
H. Brown and O. Pooley (2001), ‘The origin of the spacetime metric: Bell’s ‘Lorentzian
pedagogy’ and its signiﬁcance in general relativity’, in C. Callender and N. Huggett
(eds) Physics Meets Philosophy at the Planck Scale, Cambridge University Press, pp.
256–72; available at http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001385/
H. Brown and O. Pooley (2004), ‘Minkowski spacetime: a glorious non-entity’, forth-
coming in V. Petkov ed., The Ontology of Spacetime; available at http://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001661/
J. Butterﬁeld (2002), ‘The end of time?’, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
53, pp. 289-330.
J. Butterﬁeld (2004), ‘Classical mechanics is not pointilliste and can be perdurantist’,
in preparation.
J. Butterﬁeld (2004a), ‘On the persistence of particles’, forthcoming in Foundations of
Physics. Available at Los Alamos archive: http://xxx.soton.ac.uk/abs/physics/0401112;
and Pittsburgh archive: http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001586/
C. Callender (2001), ‘Humean supervenience and rotating homogeneous matter’, Mind

97

110, pp. 25-42.
F. Diacu and P. Holmes (1996), Celestial Encounters: the Origins of Chaos and Sta-
bility, Princeton University Press.
K. Devlin (2002), The Millennium Problems, London: Granta Books.
W. Dixon (1978), Special Relativity, Cambridge: University Press.
P. Dowe (2000), Physical Causation, Cambridge University Press.
J. Earman (1989), World Enough and Space-Time, Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
I. Grattan-Guinness (2002), ‘Algebras, Projective Geometry, Mathematical Logic and
Constructing the World: intersections in the philosophy of mathematics of A.N. White-
head’, Historia Mathematica 29, pp. 427-462.
D. Guilini et al. (2003), Decoherence and the Appearance of a Classical World in Quan-
tum Theory, New York: Springer (2nd edition).
J. Halliwell (1999), ‘The Emergence of Hydrodynamic Equations from Quantum The-
ory: A Decoherent Histories Analysis’, to appear in Proceedings of the 4th Peyresq
Conference, 1999; available at: http://xxx.soton.ac.uk/abs/quant-ph/9912037
S. Haslanger (1994), ‘Humean supervenience and enduring things’, Australasian Jour-
nal of Philosophy 72, pp. 339-359.
K. Hawley (1999), ‘Persistence and Non-supervenient Relations’, Mind 108, pp. 53-67.
K. Hawley (2001), How Things Persist, Oxford University Press.
C. Hitchcock (2003), ‘Of Humean Bondage’, British Journal for the Philosophy of Sci-
ence 54, pp. 1-25.
I. Humberstone (1996), ‘Intrinsic/Extrinsic, Synthese 108, pp. 205-267.
C. Lanczos (1986), The Variational Principles of Mechanics, Dover (reprint of 4th edi-
tion, 1970).
R. Langton and D. Lewis (1998), ‘Deﬁning ‘intrinsic”, Philosophy and Phenomenolog-
ical Research 58, pp. 333-345; reprinted in Lewis’ Papers in Metaphysics and Episte-
mology (1999), Cambridge University Press.
G. Leibniz (1698), ‘On Nature itself, Or On the inherent force and actions of created
things’; pp. 498-508 of L.E. Loemker ed. (1989) Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz: Philosoph-
ical Papers and Letters, Dordrect: Kluwer.
J. Levy-Leblond (1995), ‘Quantum Phenomena at Large’, in ed.s Enrico Beltrametti
and J. Levy-Leblond, Advances in Quantum Phenomena, Plenum Press (Nato Series),
pp. 281-295.
D. Lewis (1970), ‘How to deﬁne theoretical terms’, Journal of Philosophy 67, 427-446;
reprinted in his (1983).
D. Lewis (1973), Counterfactuals, Oxford: Blackwell.
D. Lewis (1983), Philosophical Papers, volume I, New York: Oxford University Press.
D. Lewis (1986), Philosophical Papers, volume II, New York: Oxford University Press.
D. Lewis (1994), ‘Humean Supervenience Debugged’, Mind 103, pp 473-490; reprinted
in his Papers in Metaphysics and Epistemology (1999), Cambridge University Press pp.
224-247.
D Lewis (1999), ‘Zimmerman and the Spinning sphere’, Australasian Journal of Phi-
losophy 77, pp. 209-212.
D Lewis (2002), ‘Tensing the copula’, Mind 111, pp. 1-13.

98

D. Lewis (2004), ‘Ramseyan Humility’, forthcoming in The Canberra Plan, ed. D.
Braddon-Mitchell and R. Nola.
E. Lieb (1997), ‘The Pauli Principle and the Stability of Matter from Atoms to Stars’
in ed. W. Thirring, The Stability of Matter: from Atoms to Stars. Selecta of Elliott
H. Lieb, Springer-Verlag.
P. Mainwood (2003), Properties, Permutations and Physics, B.Phil thesis, University
of Oxford; available at: http://users.ox.ac.uk/ univ0767/physics/PPP.pdf
P. Mainwood (2004), ”Thought Experiments in Galileo and Newton’s Experimental
Philosophy”, available at: http://users.ox.ac.uk/ univ0767/history/ThoughtExperiments.pdf
D. Malament (2002), ‘A No-Go theorem about rotation in relativity theory’, in D. Mala-
ment ed. Reading Natural Philosophy Chicago: Open Court; p. 267-293.
D. Malament (2003), ‘On relative orbital rotation in relativity theory’, in A. Ashtekar,
R.Cohen et al. eds. Revisiting the Foundations of Relativistic Physics: Festchrift for
John Stachel, Kluwer Academic; pp. 175-190.
C. Misner et al. (1973), Gravitation, San Francisco: Freeman.
J. Norton (2003), ‘Causation as folk science’, Philosophers’ Imprint, an e-journal at
http://www.philosophersimprint.org/003004/; also at: http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001214/
G. Oppy (2000), ‘Humean supervenience?’, Philosophical Studies 101 pp. 77-105.
O. Pooley and H. Brown (2002), ‘Relationism rehabilitated? I: Classical mechanics’,
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 53 pp. 183-204.
D. Robinson (1989), ‘Matter, Motion and Humean supervenience’, Australasian Jour-
nal of Philosophy 67, pp. 394-409.
F. Rohrlich (2000), ‘Causality and the arrow of classical time’, Studies in the History
and Philosophy of Modern Physics 31B, pp. 1-13.
R. Rynasiewicz (1995), ‘By their Properties, Causes and Eﬀects: Newton’s Scholium
on Time, Space, Place and Motion; Part I—the Text; Part II—The Context’, Studies
in the History and Philosophy of Science 26, pp. 133-154 and 295-321.
M. Schlosshauer (2003), ‘Decoherence, the measurement problem, and interpretations
of quantum mechanics’, available at the Los Alamos physics arXive: quant-ph/0312059.
S. Shoemaker (1979), ‘Identity, properties and cauality’, Midwest Studies in Philosophy
4, pp. 321-342.
T. Sider (2001), Four-Dimensionalism, Oxford University Press.
L. Sklar (1974), Space, Time and Spacetime, University of California Press.
S. Smith (2003), ‘Are instantaneous velocities real and really instantaneous?’, Studies
in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 34B, pp. 261-280.
P. Teller (2002), ‘The rotating discs argument and Humean supervenience: cutting the
Gordian knot’, Analysis 62, pp. 205-210.
M. Tooley (1988), ‘In Defence of the Existence of States of Motion’, Philosophical Top-
ics 16, pp. 225-254.
R. Torretti (1999), The Philosophy of Physics, Cambridge University Press.
C. Truesdell (1991), A First Course in Rational Continuum Mechanics, volume 1; sec-
ond edition; Academic Press.
D. Wallace (2003), ‘Everett and structure’, Studies in the History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics 34B, 87-105.

99

D. Wallace (2004), ‘In defence of naivete: The conceptual status of Lagrangian quan-
tum ﬁeld theory’, forthcoming in Synthese;
available at: http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00000519.
R. Wald (1984), General Relativity, Chicago: University Press.
B. Weatherson (2002), ‘Intrinsic vs extrinsic properties’, The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy.
M. Wilson (1997), ‘Reﬂections on Strings’, in ed.s T. Horowitz and G. Massey, Thought
Experiments in Science and Philosophy, University of Pittsburgh Press, pp. 193-207.
M. Wilson (2000), ‘The Unreasonable Uncooperativeness of Mathematics in the Natu-
ral Sciences’, The Monist 83, pp 296-314.
D. Zimmerman (1995), ‘Theories of masses and problems of constitution’, Philosophi-
cal Review 104, pp. 53-110.
D.Zimmerman (1997), ‘Immanent causation’, Philosophical Perspectives 11. pp. 433-
471.
D. Zimmerman (1998), ‘Temporal parts and supervenient causation: the incompatibil-
ity of two Humean doctrines’, Australasian Journal of Philosophy 76, pp. 265-288.
D. Zimmerman (1999), ‘One really big liquid sphere: reply to Lewis’, Australasian
Journal of Philosophy 77, pp. 213-215.

100

