4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
0
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On linear momentum in quasistatic electromagnetic systems∗

V Hnizdo

National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health,
1095 Willowdale Road, Morgantown, WV 26505, USA

E-mail: vbh5@cdc.gov

Abstract. The analysis of Aguirregabiria, Hern´andez, and Rivas [2004 Eur. J. Phys. 25
555–567] of the electromagnetic linear momentum in quasistatic systems omits the presence of an
equal and opposite hidden mechanical momentum in such systems. The existence of hidden
mechanical momentum ensures that the action-reaction law holds for the forces between the
charge- and current-carrying bodies of a quasistatic system, and thus the total mechanical
momentum associated with the motion of such bodies in a closed quasistatic system is conserved.

In a recent article [1], Aguirregabiria, Hern´andez and Rivas (AHR) consider examples of qua-
‘In
sistatic systems consisting of current-carrying bodies and moving charges, and assert:
all of them the internal electromagnetic forces will not satisfy the action–reaction principle,
so that to maintain constant the total mechanical momentum one has to apply a non-null
external force on the system. Then, the only way to keep the balance equation (the total
external force equals the derivative of the total linear momentum) is to attribute a linear
momentum to the [quasistatic] electromagnetic ﬁeld.’ AHR then calculate the electromag-
netic linear momentum in their examples, and show that its time derivative indeed equals
the external force that they believe is required in order to keep the mechanical momentum
associated with the motion of the bodies in the system constant.

We would like to point out that such an explanation of the necessity for a non-zero
momentum of a quasistatic electromagnetic ﬁeld is misleading because it ignores the ex-
istence of an equal and opposite mechanical momentum that is not associated with any
‘overt’ motion of the bodies in a quasistatic system. This quantity, called hidden momen-
tum, was ‘discovered’ some 35 years ago in investigations of the forces that an electrically
neutral current loop may experience in an electric ﬁeld [2,3]. The existence and importance
of hidden momentum in quasistatic electromagnetic systems are now universally accepted,
and this topic is included in the last editions of authoritative textbooks [4,5]. The surpris-
ing fact that a current-carrying body the centre of mass of which is at rest may possess a
nonzero mechanical momentum is demanded by a general theorem that requires that the
total (i.e., ‘electromagnetic’ plus ‘mechanical’) momentum of any ﬁnite stationary distri-
bution of charge, current and matter must vanish [6,7]; the hidden mechanical momentum

∗This comment is written by V Hnizdo in his private capacity. No support or endorsement by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is intended or should be inferred.

1

required to match a nonzero momentum of a quasistatic electromagnetic ﬁeld can be shown
to arise as a subtle relativistic eﬀect from the electric-current-constituting motion of charged
elements of the current-carrying body [7,8]. (Some quantities, like for example the stress
in a charged ﬂuid medium, that may play an important role in the emergence of hidden
momentum in a given speciﬁc mechanism of the current transport are microscopically of
an electromagnetic origin, and so the division of the physical quantities of any macroscopic
system into ‘electromagnetic’ and ‘mechanical’ is only conventional.)

A quasistationary system with a current density J and electrostatic potential Φ contains

a hidden momentum [7]

c2 Z
which is equal and opposite to the momentum P f of the quasistatic ﬁelds E = −∇Φ and
B, ∇ × B = µ0J in the system:

P h = − 1

dV ΦJ

P f = ǫ0

Z

dV E × B =

dV ΦJ .

1
c2 Z

Here, the second equality can be derived using integration by parts (see, e.g., [7]). When
the electric ﬁeld varies only very little over the distribution of the current density J , the
hidden momentum (1), and thus also the negative of electromagnetic momentum (2), can
be approximated by [7–9]

P h =

1
c2 m × E

R

where m = 1
dV r × J is the magnetic dipole moment of the electric currents and E
2
is the value of the electric ﬁeld at the currents. The presence of hidden momentum in a
current-carrying body modiﬁes the force that the body experiences in external electric and
magnetic ﬁelds. This is seen most easily by considering the force on a magnetic dipole
moment m that is located in external quasistatic magnetic (B) and electric (E) ﬁelds, and
whose velocity vanishes at the given instant of time. The rate of change of the total (i.e.,
overt plus hidden) mechanical momentum of the dipole is given by the standard expression
∇(m · B), but that means that the force F , understood as the rate of change of the dipole’s
overt mechanical momentum, i.e., that arising from its translational motion, is diminished
by the rate of change of the hidden momentum (3) of the dipole [3,8,9]:

F = ∇(m · B) − 1
c2

d
dt

(m × E).

Using this expression for the force on a magnetic dipole, it is not diﬃcult to show [10] that
the action–reaction principle holds true for the forces acting between the body that carries
the currents characterized by the magnetic moment m and a moving charge creating the
electric ﬁeld E.

The validity of the action–reaction principle for the interactions between current-carrying
bodies and charged bodies in a quasistationary system is a general result [11], independent
of the magnetic dipole approximation used in (4). The total momentum associated with
the motion of such bodies in a closed quasistationary system is thus conserved itself, and

2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

therefore the existence of a linear momentum of a quasistatic electromagnetic ﬁeld cannot be
detected through an overt-mechanical-momentum non-conservation [10] (angular momentum
of a quasistatic electromagnetic ﬁeld is diﬀerent in this respect, as it can be detected through
a non-conservation of mechanical angular momentum—this is the famous Feynman’s disk
‘paradox’ [12]—because there in no equal and opposite hidden angular momentum to match
the electromagnetic angular momentum [10]).

Taking the AHR’s example of a thin toroidal solenoid and a point charge q moving along
the toroid’s axial symmetry axis, we can show easily that in fact the net force on the solenoid
vanishes, as required by the action–reaction principle and the fact that there is no force on
the charge since the toroidal solenoid does not produce any magnetic ﬁeld in its exterior.
The hidden momentum P h of the solenoid is evaluated most easily using expression (3) in
a line integral along the torus main circuit C:

P h =

1
c2 IC

dm × E

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

where dm = (NIS/2π)dφ ˆφ is the magnetic dipole moment of an element of the solenoid
subtended by an azimuth angle dφ (cf. equation (14) of AHR), and E=(1/4πǫ0)[q/(R2+a2)]ˆζ
is the charge’s electric ﬁeld at dm [N, I and S are the solenoid’s number of turns, current
and cross-sectional area, respectively, and R, a and ˆζ are the toroid’s main radius, distance
from its centre to the charge and a unit vector along the straight line passing through the
charge and the element of dipole moment dm, respectively (see ﬁgure 1 of AHR)]. With the
z-axis along the straight line passing through the toroidal solenoid’s centre and the charge,
only the z-component of (5) is non-zero, giving

P h = − µ0
4π

qNIS

R
(R2 + a2)3/2 ˆz

which is equal and opposite to the electromagnetic ﬁeld momentum P f of the system (see
equation (21) of AHR). Taking into account the hidden momentum (6), the net force F on
the solenoid is then

F = F B − dP h
dt

= F B − 3µ0
4π

qNIS

Ra ˙a
(R2 + a2)5/2 ˆz

where F B is the direct force on the solenoid due to the magnetic ﬁeld of the moving charge.
But since the force F B equals the second term on the right-hand side of (7) (see equation
(18) of AHR), the net force on the solenoid indeed vanishes,

F = F B − dP h
dt

= 0.

Contrary to an assertion of AHR, no external force is therefore necessary to be applied
on the torodial solenoid in order to keep it at rest and thus to maintain the total overt
mechanical momentum of the system constant. Hidden-momentum analysis of the other
example of AHR will yield a similar conclusion that the eﬀective force on the circuit is equal
and opposite to the magnetic force on the charge, and thus no external force is needed to be
applied to any part of the system in order to maintain its total overt mechanical momentum
constant.

3

Before concluding, it should be mentioned that a quasistationary system’s hidden mo-
mentum P h and electromagnetic momentum P f vanish when the body that supports the
current density J is a good electric conductor. Indeed, the electrostatic potential Φ is con-
stant in such a body and such a system, and thus the integrals (1) for P h and (2) for P f are
dV J, which vanishes as an integral over a divergenceless localized vector
proportional to
quantity. However, one can show that even then the force on such a body is still given in the
dipole approximation by equation (4), where the second term on the right-hand side now
arises from the force on the charge and/or current induced in the conductor by the external
electric ﬁeld in order to keep the potential Φ throughout the body of the conductor constant
[9].

R

The momentum of the electromagnetic ﬁeld of a quasistationary system does not manifest
itself through a violation of the conservation of overt mechanical momentum—its physical
signiﬁcance is rather more subtle as that of a quantity that is equal and opposite to the
hidden mechanical momentum of the system. Hidden momentum is an essential element
in the momentum balance of a quasistationary electromagnetic system, and therefore its
existence cannot be ignored in a correct momentum analysis of any such physical system, no
matter how idealized or schematic it is for simplicity assumed to be. The existence of hidden
momentum is necessary for maintaining the correct relativistic-transformation properties of
the observed total energy, momentum and rest mass of a charge- and current-carrying body
[13,14], and, in fact, is not completely ‘hidden’ since it manifests itself in the force that a
current-carrying body experiences in an electromagnetic ﬁeld.

[1] Aguirregabiria J M, Hern´andez A and Rivas M 2004 Linear momentum density in quasistatic

electromagnetic systems Eur. J. Phys. 25 555–567 (Preprint physics/0404139)

[2] Shockley W and James R P 1967 ‘Try simplest cases’ discovery of ‘hidden momentum’ forces

on ‘magnetic currents’ Phys. Rev. Lett. 18 876–79

[3] Haus H A and Penﬁeld P 1968 Force on a current loop Phys. Lett. A 26 412-13
[4] Jackson J D 1999 Classical Electrodynamics 3rd edn (New York: Wiley) pp 618–19
[5] Griﬃths D J 1999 Introduction to Electrodynamics 3rd edn (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-

[6] Coleman S and Van Vleck J H 1968 Origin of ‘hidden momentum forces’ in magnets Phys.

Hall) pp 520–21

Rev. 171 1370–75

[7] Hnizdo V 1997 Hidden mechanical momentum and the ﬁeld momentum in stationary electro-

magnetic and gravitational systems Am. J. Phys. 65 516–18

[8] Vaidman L 1990 Torque and force on a magnetic dipole Am. J. Phys. 58 978–83
[9] Hnizdo V 1992 Comment on Torque and force on a magnetic dipole Am. J. Phys. 60 279–80
[10] Hnizdo V 1992 Conservation of linear and angular momentum and the interaction of a moving

charge with a magnetic dipole Am. J. Phys. 60 242—246

[11] Furry W H 1969 Examples of momentum distributions in the electromagnetic ﬁeld and in

matter Am. J. Phys. 37 621–36

[12] Feynman R P, Leighton R B and Sands M 1964 The Feynman Lectures on Physics vol II

(Reading, MA: Addison–Wesley) pp 17-5–17-6

4

[13] Hnizdo V 1997 Hidden momentum and the electromagnetic mass of a charge and current

[14] Hnizdo V 1998 Covariance of the total energy–momentum four-vector of a charge and current

carrying body Am. J. Phys. 65 55–65

carrying body Am. J. Phys. 66 414–18

5

