4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
9
0
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SI, CGSG, and c¯h units: metrology and
special relativity

L.B. Okun
ITEP, Moscow, Russia

Abstract

Invited report at the 8th Meeting of the Working Group “Base
units and fundamental constants” of the French Academy of Sciences.
June 14, 2004.

The text consists of seven sections:

1. Great importance of SI.

2. The necessity of updating SI.

3. Special relativity: four-dimensional quantities.

4. Maxwell equations in vacuum in CGSG units.

5. Maxwell equations in vacuum in SI.
6. c¯h units.
7. Systems CGSG and c¯h should be legalized.

1 Great importance of SI

The SI units are of great importance for science, industry, business, trade, ju-
risdiction, for the knowledge-based society as a whole. SI forms the language
of modern metrology with its world-wide network of national metrological
institutes. Therefore any improvements should be introduced into SI with
maximal caution and conservatism.

2 The necessity of updating SI

On the other hand the successes of fundamental science and its role in the
knowledge-based society necessitate the evolution of SI, whose basic elements
were laid down in XIXth century. Since the middle of the XXth century SI

1

has been internationally accepted as the only legal unit system to be used
in textbooks for pupils and students. According to the legal documents of
SI, other systems of units might be exceptionally allowed in research papers,
but, as was stressed by Thibauld Damour, as nobody learns anymore how
to use such systems, new generations of scientists are fully SI dominated.
In particularly they are CGSG (CGSG = CGSGauss) ignorant and their
knowledge of special relativity is non-adequate.

3 Special relativity: four-dimensional quantities

In CGSG units Maxwell equations in vacuum are expressed in terms of coor-
dinate four-vector xi, of four-vector potential Ai, four-vector current ji and
four-tensor of electromagnetic ﬁeld Fik.

Contravariant and covariant expressions:

xi = x0, x1, x2, x3 = (ct, x)

xi = (ct, −x)
Ai = A0, A1, A2, A3 = (ϕ, −A)

Ai = A0, A1, A2, A3 = (ϕ, +A)
Al = glmAm

ji = (ρ, j)

Fik =

∂Ak
∂xi
∂Am
∂xl
1
2
where εiklm is fully antisymmetric four-tensor ( ˜Fik is dual with respect to
Fik).

− ∂Ai
∂xk
− ∂Al
∂xm

εiklmF lm

F lm =

˜Fik =

4 Maxwell equations in vacuum in CGSG units

In terms of Fik and ji the two Maxwell equations are simple and beautiful:

∂Fik

∂xk = −4π

c

ji

2

∂ ˜Fik
∂xk = 0
They express the gist of classical electrodynamics and together with
Lorentz transformations present one of the most remarkable manifestations
of special relativity.

The diﬀerence between CGS and CGSG is that the former has three
base units (that of length, time, and mass), while in the latter a fourth base
(electromagnetic) unit is added (that of electric charge, or current, or electric
permittivity). In this respect CGSG is similar to SI.

5 Maxwell equations in vacuum in SI

According to SI, Maxwell equations cannot be presented as two four-dimensional
equations, but as four three-dimensional equations for four three-dimensional
vectors E, D, B, H with dimensional coeﬃcients µ0 = 1/π10−7 NA−2, ε0 =
1/µ0c2 = 8.854... · 10−12 Fm−1, which are called magnetic permeability and
electric permittivity of vacuum and have no direct physical meaning. They
acquire such meaning when vacuum is compared with material media for
which µ and ε are very important. Both µ0 and ε0 originate from the obso-
lete concept of ether. The SI form of Maxwell equations hides their beauty
and the genuine physical meaning which are seen so clearly in the CGS units.
This side of SI inevitably leads to lack of understanding of special rela-
tivity and to deterioration of general culture in the community of physicists
and engineers, which cannot be tolerated in a knowledge-based society.

If in CGSG ε0 is chosen as the unit of permittivity, the Coulomb law
and Maxwell equation in general look identical in CGSG and CGS. But this
choice does not reduce the number of base units in CGSG from four to three.
For a similar discussion concerning c see next section.

6 c¯h units

In Quantum Field Theory, combining Quantum Mechanics and Special Rel-
ativity, the c, ¯h units are widely used. In these units the velocity of light is
the unit of velocity, while quantum ¯h is the unit of action (and of angular
momentum). Quite often this system is referred to as “c, ¯h = 1 units”. How-
ever this name is a kind of theoretical “stenography”. When using c and ¯h as
units one naturally can replace in equations factors c and ¯h by c/c = 1 and
¯h/¯h = 1. But this does not mean that unit of speed c and unit of action ¯h are
equal to unity. Such statements are much worse than “stenography”, they

3

are examples of confusing theoretical “jargon”. Unit, which is a dimensional
quantity, cannot be equal to 1 or to any other dimensionless number.

The crucial role played by c in relativity and its extraordinary stabil-
ity and reproducibility have led to its nominalization (without experimental
uncertainties). However neither nominalization, nor using c as the unit of
speed have led to reduction of number of units or to reducing space to time.
The use of atomic clocks for deﬁning distances does not reduce space to
time. Astronomers have a long tradition of using light years as a measure
of large distances. But they never claimed that time interval abolishes dis-
tance. Space and time would be “the same” in Euclidean world, with metric
s2 = t2c2 + x2, but our world is Minkowskian (s2 = t2c2 − x2). Hence space
is space and time is time. They are not “the same”.

7 Systems CGSG and c¯h should be legalized

The French Academy of Sciences should recommend to the International
Committee on deﬁnition of units to explicitly allow in the legal SI documents
the use of CGS based Gaussian units not only in research papers, but also
in the textbooks and other educational texts.

Moreover it should address SUNAMCO of IUPAP with a recommenda-
tion on necessity to have CGSG as a part of basic electrodynamical courses.
(SUNAMCO = Symbols, Units, Atomic Masses and Fundamental Constants,
IUPAP = International Union of Pure and Applied Physics.)

Similarly c¯h-system in which the unit of velocity is c and the unit of
action and angular momentum is ¯h should be legalized and allowed for the
textbooks on fundamental physics both theoretical and experimental.

A certain knowledge of CGSG as well as absolute units, c¯h-units, atomic
and Planck units should be a legal requirement (based on SI) on licenses for
engineers, school teachers of physics, for university and college diplomas for
physicists.

Acknowledgements

I am grateful to T. Damour, S. Karshenboim, G. Veneziano and L. Vitushkin
for valuable discussions.

4

