4
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
2
1
7
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Frozen Waves: Stationary optical waveﬁelds with
arbitrary longitudinal shape, by superposing equal
frequency Bessel beams: Frozen Waves (†)

Michel Zamboni-Rached,

Department of Microwaves and Optics, Faculty of Electrical Engineering,

State University of Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil.

Abstract – In this paper it is shown how one can use Bessel beams to obtain a

stationary localized waveﬁeld with high transverse localization, and whose longitudinal

intensity pattern can assume any desired shape within a chosen interval 0 ≤ z ≤ L of

the propagation axis. This intensity envelope remains static, i.e., with velocity v = 0;

and because of this we call “Frozen Waves” such news solutions to the wave equations

(and, in particular, to the Maxwell equations). These solutions can be used in many

diﬀerent and interesting applications, as optical tweezers, atom guides, optical or acoustic

bistouries, various important medical purposes, etc.

Keywords: Stationary wave ﬁelds; Localized solutions to the wave equations; Localized

solutions to the Maxwell equations; X-shaped waves; Bessel beams; Slow light; Subluminal

waves; Subsonic waves; Limited-diﬀraction beams; Finite-energy waves; Electromagnetic

wavelets; Acoustic wavelets; Electromagnetism; Optics; Acoustics.

1. – Introduction

Since many years a theory of localized waves (LW), or nondiﬀracting waves, has been

developed, generalized, and experimentally veriﬁed in many ﬁelds as optics, microwaves

and acoustics[1]. These waves have the surprising characteristics of resisting the diﬀraction

eﬀects for long distances, i.e., of possessing a large depth of ﬁeld.

These waves can be divided into two classes, the localized beams, and the localized

pulses. With regard to the beams, the most popular is the Bessel beam[1].

(†) Work supported by FAPESP (Brazil), ; previously available as e-print ******. E-mail address

for contacts: mzamboni@dmo.fee.unicamp.br

1

Much work have been made about the properties and applications of single Bessel

beams. By contrast, only a few papers have been addressed to the properties and ap-

plications of superpositions of Bessel beams with the same frequency, but with diﬀerent

longitudunal wave numbers. The few works on this subject have shown some surprising

possibilities related with this type of superpositions, mainly the possibility of controlling

the transverse shape of the resulting beam[2,3]. The other important point, i.e., that of

controlling the longitudinal shape, has been very rarely analyzed, and the relevant papers

have been conﬁned to numerical optimization processes[4,5] to ﬁnd out one appropriate

computer-generated hologram.

In this work we develop a very simple method∗∗ that makes possible the control of

the beam intensity longitudinal shape within a chosen interval 0 ≤ z ≤ L, where z is the

propagation axis and L can be much greater than the wavelength λ of the monochromatic

light which is being used.

Inside such a space interval, we can construct a stationary

envelope with many diﬀerent shapes, including one or more high-intensity peaks (with

distances between them much larger than λ). This intensity envelope remains static, i.e.,

with velocity V = 0; and because of this we call “Frozen Waves” such news solutions to

the wave equations (and, in particular, to the Maxwell equations).

We also suggest a simple apparatus capable of generating these stationary ﬁelds.

Static wave solutions like these can have many diﬀerent and interesting applications,

as optical tweezers, atom guides, optical or acoustic bisturies, electromagnetic or ultra-
sound high-intensity ﬁelds for various important medical purposes, etc..∗∗

2. – The mathematical methodology ∗∗

We start with the well known axis-symmetric Bessel beam

ψ(ρ, z, t) = J0(kρρ)eiβze−iωt

with

∗∗ Patent pending.

k2
ρ =

ω2
c2 − β2 ,

2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

where ω, kρ and β are the angular frequency, the transverse and the longitudinal wave

numbers, respectively. We also impose the conditions

ω/β ≥ 0 and k2

ρ ≥ 0

to ensure forward propagation only, as well as a physical behavior of the Bessel function.

Now, let us make a superposition of 2N + 1 Bessel beams with the same frequency

ω0, but with diﬀerent (and still unknown) longitudinal wave numbers βn:

Ψ(ρ, z, t) = e

An J0(kρ nρ) ei βn z ,

N

−i ω0 t

Xn=−N

where An are constant coeﬃcients. For each n, the parameters ω0, kρ n and βn must satisfy

Eq.(2), and, because of conditions (3), when considering ω0 > 0, we must have

0 ≤ βn ≤

ω0
c

Now our goal is to ﬁnd out the values of the longitudinal wave numbers βn and of the

coeﬃcients An in order to reproduce approximately, inside the interval 0 ≤ z ≤ L (on the
axis ρ = 0), a chosen longitudinal intensity pattern that we call |F (z)|2.

In other words,

we want to have

N

Xn=−N

Anei βn z ≈ F (z) with 0 ≤ z ≤ L

(6)

Following Eq.(6), one might be tempted to take βn = 2πn/L, thus obtaining a trun-

cated Fourier series, expected to represent the desired pattern F (z). Superpositions of

Bessel beams with βn = 2πn/L has been actually used in some works to obtain a large

set of transverse amplitude proﬁles[2]. However, for our purposes, this choice is not ap-

propriate due two principal reasons: 1) It yields negative values for βn (when n < 0),

which implies backwards propagating components (since ω0 > 0); 2) In the cases when

L >> λ0, which are of our interest here, the main terms of the series would correspond

to very small values of βn, which results in a very short ﬁeld depth of the corresponding

Bessel beams(when generated by ﬁnite apertures), impeding the creation of the desired

envelopes far form the source.

3

Therefore, we need to make a better choice for the values of βn, which allows forward

propagation components only, and a good depth of ﬁeld. This problem can be solved by

putting

βn = Q +

n ,

2 π
L

0 ≤ Q ±

N ≤

2 π
L

ω0
c

where Q > 0 is a value to be chosen (as we shall see) according to the given experimental

situation, and the desired degree of transverse ﬁeld localization. Due to Eq.(5), we get

Inequation (8) determines the maximum value of n, that we call N, once Q, L and ω0

have been chosen.

As a consequence, for getting a longitudinal intensity pattern approximately equal to

the desired one, F (z), in the interval 0 ≤ z ≤ L, Eq.(4) should be rewritten as:

with

with

Ψ(ρ = 0, z, t) = e−i ω0 t ei Q z

An ei 2π

L n z ,

N

Xn=−N

An =

L

1
L Z
0

F (z) e−i 2π

L n z d z

Obviously, one obtains only an approximation to the desired longitudinal pattern,

because the trigonometric series (9) is necessarily truncated. Its total number of terms,

let us repeat, will be ﬁxed once the values of Q, L and ω0 are chosen.

When ρ 6= 0, the wave ﬁeld Ψ(ρ, z, t) becomes

Ψ(ρ, z, t) = e−i ω0 t ei Q z

An J0(kρ n ρ) ei 2π

L n z ,

N

Xn=−N

The coeﬃcients An will yield the amplitudes and the relative phases of each Bessel

beam in the superposition.

ρ n = ω2
k2

0 −

Q +

(cid:18)

2

2π n

L (cid:19)

4

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Because we are adding together zero order Bessel functions, we can expect a high ﬁeld

concentration around ρ = 0.

3. – Some examples

In this section we shall present two examples of our methodology.

Let us suppose that we want an optical wave ﬁeld with λ0 = 0.632 µm, that is, with
ω0 = 2.98 1015 Hz), whose longitudinal pattern (along its z-axis) in the range 0 ≤ z ≤ L

is given by the function

F (z) =

(13)

in l3 ≤ z ≤ l4

−4

(z − l1)(z − l2)
(l2 − l1)2

for

l1 ≤ z ≤ l2

−4

(z − l5)(z − l6)
(l6 − l5)2

for

l5 ≤ z ≤ l6

elsewhere ,






where l1 = L/10,

l2 = 3L/10,

l3 = 4L/10,

l4 = 6L/10,

l5 = 7L/10 and l6 = 9L/10.

In other words, the desired longitudinal shape, in the range 0 ≤ z ≤ L, is a parabolic

function for l1 ≤ z ≤ l2, a unitary step funtion for l3 ≤ z ≤ l4, and again a parabola

in the interval l5 ≤ z ≤ l6, it being zero elsewhere (in the interval 0 ≤ z ≤ L). In this

example, let us put L = 0.5 m.

We can then calculate the coeﬃcients An, which appear in the superposition (11), by

inserting Eq.(13) into Eq.(10). Let us choose, for instance, Q = 0.9998 ω0/c: This choice

allows the maximum value N = 158 of n, as one can infer from Eq.(8). Let us specify

that, in such a case, one is not obliged to use just N = 158, but one can adopt for N any

values smaller than it; more in general, any value smaller than that calculated via Eq.(8).

Of course, on using the maximum value allowed for N, one will get a better result.

In the present case, let us adopt the value N = 20.

In Fig.1(a) we compare the

intensity of the desired longitudinal function F (z) with that of the Frozen Wave (FW),

Ψ(ρ = 0, z, t), obtained from Eq.(9) by using the mentioned value N = 20.

One can verify that a good agreement between the desired longitudinal behaviour and

our approximate Frozen Wave is already obtained with N = 20. Obviously, the use of

1

0

5

Figure 1: (a) Comparison between the intensity of the desired longitudinal function F (z)
and that of our Frozen Wave (FW), Ψ(ρ = 0, z, t), obtained from Eq.(9). The solid
line represents the function F (z), and the dotted one our FW. (b) 3D-plot of the ﬁeld
intensity of the FW chosen in this case by us.
.

higher values for N will improve the approximation.

Fig.1(b) shows the 3D-intensity of our FW, given by Eq.(11). One can observe that

this ﬁeld possesses the desired longitudinal pattern, while being endowed with a good

transverse localization.

We can expect that, for a desired longitudinal pattern of the ﬁeld intensity, on choosing

smaller values of the parameter Q one will get FWs with higher transverse width (for the

same number of terms in the series (11)), because of the fact that the Bessel beams in

(11) will possess a larger transverse wave number, and consequently higher transverse

concentrations. We can verify this expectation on considering, for instance, a desired

longitudinal pattern, in the range 0 ≤ z ≤ L, given by the function

−4

(z − l1)(z − l2)
(l2 − l1)2

in l1 ≤ z ≤ l2

,

(14)

0

in the otherwise

F (z) =





with l1 = L/2 − ∆L and l2 = L/2 + ∆L. Such a function has a parabolic shape, with

6

the peak centered at L/2 and a width of 2∆L. By adopting λ0 = 0.632 µm (that is,
ω0 = 2.98 1015 Hz), let us use the superposition (11) with two diﬀerent values of Q: we

shall obtain two diﬀerent FWs that, in spite of having the same longitudinal intensity

pattern, will have diﬀerent transverse localizations. Namely, let us consider L = 0.5 m

and ∆L = L/50, and the two values Q = 0.99996ω0/c and Q = 0.99980ω0/c. In both

cases the coeﬃcients An will be the same, calculated from Eq.(10), on using this time the

value N = 30 in the superposition (11). The results are shown in Figures (2a) and (2b).

One can observe that both FWs have the (same) longitudinal intensity pattern, but the

one with the smaller Q is endowed with the higher transverse localization.

Figure 2: (a) The Frozen Wave with Q = 0.99996ω0/c and N = 30, approximately
reproducing the chosen longitudinal pattern represented by Eq.(14).
(b) A diﬀerent
Frozen wave, now with Q = 0.99980ω0/c (but still with N = 30) forwarding the same
longitudinal pattern. We can observe that in this case (with a lower value for Q) a higher
transverse localization is obtained.
.

4. – Generation of Frozen Waves

Concerning the generation of Frozen Waves, we have to recall that the superpositions

(11), which deﬁne them, consists of sums of Bessel beams. Let us also recall that a Bessel

beam, when generated by ﬁnite apertures (as it must be, in any real situations), maintains

7

its nondiﬀracting properties till a certain distance only (its ﬁeld depth), given by

Z =

R
tan θ

,

(15)

where R is the aperture radius and θ is the so-called axicon angle, related with the

longitudinal wave number by the known expression[1] cos θ = cβ/ω.

So, given an apparatus whatsoever capable of generating a single (truncated) Bessel

beam, we can use an array of such apparatuses to generate a sum of them, with the

appropriate longitudinal wave numbers and amplitudes/phases (as required by Eq.(11)),

thus producing the desired FW. Here, it is worthwhile to notice that we shall be able

to generate the desired FW in the the range 0 ≤ z ≤ L if all Bessel beams entering the

superposition (11) are able to reach the distance L resisting the diﬀraction eﬀects. We

can guarantee this if L ≤ Zmin, where Zmin is the ﬁeld depth of the Bessel beam with the

smallest longitudinal wave number βn=−N = Q − 2πN/L, that is, with the shortest depth

of ﬁeld. In such a way, once we have the values of L, ω0, Q, N, from Eq.(15) and the

above considerations it results that the radius R of the ﬁnite aperture has to be

ω2
0
c2β2

n=−N

− 1

R ≥ Lv
u
u
t

(16)

The simplest apparatus capable of generating a Bessel beam is that adopted by Durnin

et al.[6], which consists in an annular slit located at the focus of a convergent lens and

illuminated by a cw laser. Then, an array of such annular rings, with the appropriate
radii and transfer functions able to yield both the correct longitudinal wave numbers∗ and

the coeﬃcients An of the fundamental superposition (11), can generate the desired FW.

This questions will be analyze in more detail elsewhere.

Obviously, other powerful tools, like the computer generated holograms (ROACH’s

approach, for instance), may be used to generated our FWs.

5. – Conclusions

In this work we have shown how Bessel beams can be used to obtain stationary lo-

calized wave ﬁelds, with high transverse localization, whose longitudinal intensity pattern

∗Once a value for Q has been chosen.

8

can assume any desired shape within a chosen space interval 0 ≤ z ≤ L. The produced

envelope remains static, i.e., with velocity V = 0, and because of this we have called

Frozen Waves such news solutions.

The present results can ﬁnd applications in many ﬁelds:∗∗ For instance, in the optical

tweezers modelling, since we can construct stationary optical ﬁelds with a great variety

of shapes, capable, e.g., of trapping particles or tiny objects at diﬀerent locations. This

topic is being studied and will be reported elsewhere.

The author is very grateful to Erasmo Recami, Hugo E. H. Figueroa, Marco Mattiuzi,

C. Dartora and V. Abate for continuous discussions and collaboration. This work was

supported by FAPESP (Brazil).

Acknowledgements

References:

[1] For a review, see: E.Recami, M.Zamboni-Rached, K.Z.N´obrega, C.A.Dartora, and

H.E.Hern´andez-Figueroa, “On the localized superluminal solutions to the Maxwell equa-

tions,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 9, 59-73 (2003); and

references therein.

[2] Z. Bouchal and J. Wagner, “Self-reconstruction eﬀect in free propagation waveﬁeld,”

Optics Communications 176, 299-307 (2000).

[3] Z. Bouchal, “Controlled spatial shaping of nondiﬀracting patterns and arrays,” Optics

Letters 27, 1376-1378 (2002).

[4]J. Rosen and A. Yariv, “Synthesis of an arbitrary axial ﬁeld proﬁle by computer-

generated holograms,” Optics Letters 19, 843-845 (1994).

9

[5] R. Piestun, B. Spektor and J. Shamir, “Unconventional light distributions in three-

dimensional domains,” Journal of Modern Optics 43, 1495-1507 (1996).

[6] J. Durnin, J. J. Miceli and J. H. Eberly, “Diﬀraction-free beams,” Physical Review

Letters 58, 1499-1501 (1987).

10

