4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
0
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Between Laws and Models:
Some Philosophical Morals of Lagrangian Mechanics

J. Butterﬁeld1

All Souls College
Oxford OX1 4AL

Friday 3 September 2004

Abstract

I extract some philosophical morals from some aspects of Lagrangian me-
chanics. (A companion paper will present similar morals from Hamiltonian me-
chanics and Hamilton-Jacobi theory.) One main moral concerns methodology:
Lagrangian mechanics provides a level of description of phenomena which has
been largely ignored by philosophers, since it falls between their accustomed
levels—“laws of nature” and “models”. Another main moral concerns ontology:
the ontology of Lagrangian mechanics is both more subtle and more problematic
than philosophers often realize.

The treatment of Lagrangian mechanics provides an introduction to the sub-
ject for philosophers, and is technically elementary. In particular, it is conﬁned
to systems with a ﬁnite number of degrees of freedom, and for the most part
eschews modern geometry.

Newton’s fundamental discovery, the one which he considered necessary to keep se-
cret and published only in the form of an anagram, consists of the following: Data
aequatione quotcunque ﬂuentes quantitae involvente ﬂuxiones invenire et vice versa.
In contemporary mathematical language, this means: “It is useful to solve diﬀerential
equations”.

V. Arnold, Geometrical Methods in the Theory of Ordinary Diﬀerential Equa-

tions, Preface

1email: jb56@cus.cam.ac.uk; jeremy.butterﬁeld@all-souls.oxford.ac.uk

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Morals

1.1 Against the matter-in-motion picture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.2 Prospectus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.1 Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.1.1

(Scheme): what is it to be “given a function”? . . . . . . . . . .

2.1.2 Generalizing the notion of function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.1.3

Solutions of ordinary diﬀerential equations; constants of the motion 19

2.1.4

Schemes for solving problems—and their merits . . . . . . . . .

24

2.1.5 Reformulating and Restricting a Theory: (Reformulate) and (Restrict) 28

2.2 Ontology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2.1 Grades of modal involvement: (Modality)

. . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2.2 Accepting Variety: (Accept) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Analytical mechanics introduced

3.1 Conﬁguration space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.1.1 Constraints and generalized coordinates

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.1.2 Kinetic energy and work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2 The Principle of Virtual Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2.1 The principle introduced . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2.2 Lagrange’s undetermined multipliers

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3 D’Alembert’s Principle and Lagrange’s Equations . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.1 From D’Alembert to Lagrange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.2 Lagrange’s equations: (Accept), (Scheme) and geometry . . . .

4 Lagrangian mechanics: variational principles and reduction of problems 62

4.1 Two variational principles introduced . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1.1 Euler and Lagrange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1.2 Hamilton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2 Hamilton’s Principle for monogenic holonomic systems

. . . . . . . . .

4.3 Extending Hamilton’s Principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

3

3

7

9

10

11

12

30

30

32

37

39

39

42

44

44

46

49

49

53

63

63

68

69

73

4.3.1 Constrained extremization of integrals

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3.2 Application to mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.4 Generalized momenta and the conservation of energy . . . . . . . . . .

4.5 Cyclic coordinates and their elimination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.5.1 The basic result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.5.2 Routhian reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.6 Time as a cyclic coordinate; the principle of least action; Jacobi’s principle 81

4.7 Noether’s theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.7.1 Preamble: a modest plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.7.2 From cyclic coordinates to the invariance of the Lagrangian . .

4.7.3 Vector ﬁelds and symmetries—variational and dynamical

. . . .

4.7.4 The conjugate momentum of a vector ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.7.5 Noether’s theorem; and examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

73

74

76

77

77

78

85

85

88

91

97

98

100

100

5 Envoi

6 References

2

1 Introduction

1.1 Against the matter-in-motion picture

Lagrangian mechanics is one of the three great schemes of analytical mechanics, which
forms a major part of classical mechanics. The other two schemes are Hamiltonian me-
chanics and Hamilton-Jacobi theory; (sometimes, Hamilton-Jacobi theory is considered
a part of Hamiltonian mechanics). This paper is only about Lagrangian mechanics. But
its companion paper will give a similar discussion—with similar morals—of Hamilto-
nian mechanics and Hamilton-Jacobi theory. So I shall begin by celebrating analytical
mechanics as a whole, and arguing that all of it, i.e. all three schemes, deserves much
more philosophical attention than it currently gets.

Analytical mechanics is one main part, and one of the glories, of classical mechanics.
Its development is one of the triumphs, of both mathematics and physics, in the last
three hundred years. It runs from the early discoveries of Maupertuis and d’Alembert,
through those of Euler, Lagrange, Hamilton and Jacobi, and the application of their
theories to continuous systems (as in classical ﬁeld theory), to the work of Poincar´e
and his twentieth-century successors in chaos theory, and catastrophe theory. This
development reveals the enormous depth and power of just a handful of ideas, such
as conﬁguration space, “least action”, phase space and the Legendre transformation.
Besides, these ideas, and the theories of analytical mechanics that use them, underpin
in various ways the twentieth-century theories, quantum theory and relativity, that
overthrew classical mechanics. In short: a triumph—and a rich legacy.

But in recent decades, analytical mechanics, indeed all of classical mechanics, has
been largely ignored by philosophers of science. They have focussed instead on the
interpretative problems of quantum theory and relativity. There are of course good
reasons for this: among them, the enormous inﬂuence of the new theories on analytic
philosophy of science, their undeniably radical innovations (e.g. indeterminacy, dynam-
ical spacetime) and philosophers’ understandable desire to address the issues raised by
currently accepted physical theories.

But I fear there is also a worse reason: worse because it is false. Namely, philoso-
phers think of classical mechanics as unproblematic. Indeed, there are two errors here,
corresponding to what I will call the ‘matter-in-motion picture’ and the ‘particles-
in-motion picture’. Here I will discuss the ﬁrst, leaving the second to Section 2.2.2.
According to the matter-in-motion picture, classical mechanics pictures the world as
made out of bodies (conceived either as swarms of a vast number of tiny particles
separated by void, or as made of continuous space-ﬁlling ‘stuﬀ’), that move through a
vacuum in Euclidean space and interact by forces such as gravity, with their motions
determined by a single deterministic law, viz. Newton’s second law.

Nowadays this picture is suﬃciently part of “common sense” to seem unproblematic.
Or at least, it is part of the common sense of the “educated layperson”, with memories
of high school treatments of falling balls and inclined planes! Certainly a great deal

3

of work in contemporary analytic metaphysics of science uses this picture of classical
mechanics. Writings on such topics as laws of nature and physical properties often
appeal to the matter-in-motion picture, as a source of examples or counterexamples
for various metaphysical theses. For example, in debates about such theses as whether
laws could be ‘oaken’, or Lewis’ doctrine of Humean supervenience, the speculative
examples often concern particles, conceived in an essentially classical way, and how
they might interact with one another when they collide.2

So I agree that classical mechanics suggests the matter-in-motion picture; or to
be more speciﬁc, the elementary approach to classical mechanics, familiar from high
school, suggests it. But a moment’s thought shows that the matter-in-motion picture
is problematic. For whether we conceive bodies as swarms of tiny particles, or as made
of continuous ‘stuﬀ’, there are troublesome questions about how bodies interact.

For example, if they are swarms of particles, how can two bodies interact? And
how can we explain the impenetrability of solids, or the diﬀerence between liquids and
solids? Indeed, how should we take individual particles to interact? A force between
them, across the intervening void (“action-at-a-distance”), seems mysterious:
indeed
it seemed so, not only to critics of Newton’s theory of gravity, but to Newton himself.3

On the other hand, if individual particles interact only on contact (as the seven-
teenth century corpuscularians proposed), we face the same sorts of question as confront
the alternative conception of bodies as made of continuous “stuﬀ”. For example, how
should we conceive the boundary of a continuous body (including as a special case, a
tiny particle), in such a way that there can be contact, and so interaction, between two
such bodies? And even if we have a satisfactory account of boundaries and contact,
there are questions about how to understand bodies’ interaction. Considering for sim-
plicity two continuous spheres that collide and touch, either at a point, or if deformed,
over a ﬁnite region: how exactly does each sphere exert a force on the other so as to
impede the other’s motion (and limit its own further deformation)? Does each particle
(i.e. point-sized bit of matter) somehow exert a force on “nearby” particles, including
perhaps those in the other sphere?

These are hard, deep questions about the foundations of classical mechanics. They
were pursued and debated, not only by the giants of seventeenth century natural phi-
losophy; but also by their successors, the giants of classical mechanics from 1700 to
1900, including the heroes of analytical mechanics: Euler, Lagrange, Hamilton and Ja-
cobi. But despite the supreme empirical success that classical mechanics had achieved
by 1900, these and similar questions remained controversial—and were recognized as
scientiﬁcally signiﬁcant. So much so that in 1900 Hilbert proposed the rigorous axioma-
tization of mechanics (and probability) as the sixth of his famous list of open problems.
2Indeed, I think much contemporary philosophy is unduly wedded to the idea that the ontology
(“world-picture”) of any physical theory must be close to this matter-in-motion picture: consider for
example discussions of “naturalism”, or of the contrast between causes and reasons. But I shall duck
out of trying to substantiate these accusations, since they are irrelevant to my aims.

3For discussion and references, cf. e.g. Torretti 1999, p. 78.

4

But soon afterwards research in the foundations of classical mechanics was overshad-
owed by the quantum and relativity revolutions. It was only after 1950 that it ﬂourished
again, pursued as much by engineers and mathematicians, as by physicists. (It formed
part of a multi-faceted renaissance in classical mechanics; other aspects included ce-
lestial mechanics, much stimulated by spaceﬂight, and “chaos theory”, stimulated by
numerical analysis on computers.) And it remains a very active research area.

But not for philosophers! That is: most philosophers will recognize my list of
questions as ones with which the seventeenth century natural philosophers struggled.
But with the one exception of the mystery of action-at-a-distance, our philosophical
culture tends to ignore the questions, and (even more so) the fact that they are still a
focus of scientiﬁc research. There are at least two reasons, both of them obvious and
understandable, for this.

First (as I said above), the quantum and relativity revolutions have led philosophers

of science to concentrate on those theories’ interpretative problems.

Secondly, there is a humdrum pedagogical reason, relating to the educational cur-
riculum’s inevitable limitations. In the elementary mechanics that most of us learn
in high school, these questions are in eﬀect suppressed. The problems discussed are
selected so that they can be solved successfully, while ignoring the microscopic consti-
tution of bodies, and the details of contact between them. For example, the bodies are
often assumed to be small and rigid enough to be treated as point-particles, as in ele-
mentary treatments of planetary motion; (where, as I conceded, the main mystery one
faces is the one acknowledged by philosophers—action-at-a-distance). And for some
simple problems about extended bodies, like a block sliding down a plane, one can
manage by adopting a broadly “instrumentalist” approach, in which for example, one
just assumes that each body is rigid (whatever its microscopic constitution), contact is
unproblematic, and all the forces on a body (including friction exerted at a boundary)
act on the body’s centre of mass. One then determines the motion of each body by
determining the vector sum of all forces on it. (Pedagogy apart, I shall return to the
limitations of this approach to mechanics at the start of Section 3.) In short, one never
faces the questions above.

Of course, philosophers often augment high school mechanics with some seventeenth-
century mechanics, through studying natural philosophers such as Descartes, Hobbes
and Leibniz. But again curricular limitations impinge. Most philosophers’ acquain-
tance with mechanics ends there. For around 1700, natural philosophy divided into
physics and philosophy, so that few philosophers know about how mechanics devel-
oped after 1700, and how it addressed these foundational questions. In particular, as
regards the eighteenth century: philosophers read Berkeley, Hume and Kant, but not
such ﬁgures as Euler and Lagrange, whose monumental achievements in developing
analytical mechanics, and in addressing such questions, changed the subject out of
all recognition: a transformation continued in the nineteenth century by ﬁgures like
Hamilton and Jacobi.

In addition to these two reasons, there may well be others. For example, we now

5

know that quantum theory underpins the empirical success of classical mechanics in
the macroscopic world. (Somehow! There are many open questions, both philosophical
and technical, about the details: the quantum measurement problem, and the physics
of decoherence, are active research areas.) From this, some philosophers, especially
those with more instrumentalist inclinations, will conclude that we need not worry too
much about foundational questions about classical mechanics.

These reasons are obvious and understandable. But their eﬀect—the belief that the
matter-in-motion picture is unproblematic (apart perhaps from action-at-a-distance)—
is unfortunate. It is not just that good foundational questions about classical mechanics
get ignored. There is also a loss to our understanding of modern philosophy of science’s
origins. For it was not only the quantum and relativity theories that had an inﬂuence on
philosophy of science; (as I mentioned). Before they arose, the lively debate over these
foundational questions also strongly inﬂuenced philosophy of science. For example,
Duhem’s instrumentalism was largely a response to the intractability of these questions.

To be sure, today’s specialist philosophers of physics know perfectly well that the
matter-in-motion picture is problematic. Even in what seem the most unproblematic
cases, there can be both a wealth of intricate mathematical structure, and plenty of
philosophical issues to pursue. The familiar case of Newtonian point-particles interact-
ing only by gravity aﬀords good examples. Most philosophers would say that surely
the mathematics and physics of this case is completely understood, and the only prob-
lematic aspect is gravity’s acting at a distance. But the mathematics and physics is
subtle.

For example, Painlev´e conjectured in 1898 that there are collision-free singularities:
that is, roughly speaking, that a system of Newtonian point-particles interacting only
by gravity could all accelerate to spatial inﬁnity within a ﬁnite time-interval (the en-
ergy being supplied by their inﬁnite gravitational potential wells), so that a solution
to the equations of motion did not exist thereafter. Eventually (in 1992) Xia proved
that ﬁve particles could indeed do this.4

As to philosophy, relationist criticisms of the absolute Euclidean space postulated
by Newton, and endorsed by the matter-in-motion picture, continue to be a live issue
(Belot 2000). And instead of the usual deﬁnition of determinism in terms of instanta-
neous states across all of space determining the future, alternative deﬁnitions in terms
of the states on open spacetime regions have been proposed and investigated (Schmidt
1997, 1998).

So much by way of exposing the errors of the matter-in-motion picture; (for more
discussion, cf. my (2004: Section 2, 2004a)). I now turn to the speciﬁc theme of this
paper and its companion: the philosophical morals of analytical mechanics.
4For more details, cf. e.g. Diacu and Holmes’ splendid history (1996; Chapter 3).

6

1.2 Prospectus

I will draw four such philosophical morals: (the morals will be the same in this paper
and its companion). Two concern methodology, and two concern ontology; and in each
pair, there will be a main moral, and a minor one. No doubt there are other morals:
after all, analytical mechanics is a vast subject, inviting philosophical exploration. I
emphasize these four partly because they crop up throughout analytical mechanics;
and partly because they all (especially the two main morals) arise from a common
idea.

Namely: by considering the set of all possible states of the systems one is concerned
with, and making appropriate mathematical constructions on it, one can formulate a
general scheme for representing these systems by a characteristic family of diﬀerential
equations—hence the quotation from Arnold which forms this paper’s motto. As we
shall see, such a scheme has several merits which greatly extend the class of problems
one can solve; and even when one cannot solve the problem, the scheme often secures
signiﬁcant information about it. Though the details of the schemes of course vary
between Lagrangian, Hamiltonian and Hamilton-Jacobi mechanics, they have several
merits, and morals, in common.5

These schemes lie at a level of generality between two others on which philosophers
have concentrated: the very general level of “laws of nature” or “the laws” of classical
mechanics; and the level of a “model” (which in some philosophers’ usage is so speciﬁc
as to be tied to a single physical problem or phenomenon). Hence my title.

Lagrangian mechanics is a large subject, and I cannot fully expound even its more
elementary parts. On the other hand, it is largely unfamiliar to philosophers, to whom I
want to advertise the importance of its details. So I must compromise: I shall describe
some central ideas—with a minimum of formalism, but with enough detail to bring
out my morals. But in a few places (including some whole Subsections!), I indulge in
expounding details that are not used later on, and so can be skipped: I will announce
those indulgences with a Warning in italics.

But fortunately, my morals will be in many ways straightforward, and I will only
need elementary pieces of formalism to illustrate them. There will be nothing arcane
or recherch´e here.6 (I suppose the reason these straightforward morals have apparently
5Of course, the ideas of a space of states (state-space), and general schemes for representing and
solving problems, also occur in other physical theories, quantum as well as classical. I believe similar
morals can often be drawn there. One salient example is catastrophe theory, a framework that grew out
of analytical mechanics, but is in various ways much more general; I discuss its morals in Butterﬁeld
(2004b).

6Many ﬁne books contain the pieces of formalism I cite (and vastly more!). I will mainly follow
and refer to just two readable sources: Goldstein et al. (2002), a new edition of a well-known text,
with the merit of containing signiﬁcant additions and corrections to previous editions; and Lanczos
(1986), an attractively meditative text emphasising conceptual aspects. Among more complete and
authoritative books, I recommend: Arnold’s magisterial (1989), the beautifully careful and complete
textbooks of Desloge (1982) and Johns (2005), and Papastavridis’ monumental and passionate (2002).
All these books also cover Hamiltonian mechanics and Hamilton-Jacobi theory.

7

been neglected is, again, the matter-in-motion picture: i.e. the widespread belief that
the ontology of classical mechanics is unproblematic, and that every problem is in
principle solved by the deterministic laws—so why bother to look at the details of
analytical mechanics?)

To indicate the road ahead, I shall also state the morals ﬁrst, in Section 2. Then
I illustrate them in two further Sections. In Section 3, I describe the basic ideas of
analytical mechanics, using the principle of virtual work and d’Alembert’s principle to
lead up to the central equations of Lagrangian mechanics: Lagrange’s equations. Then
in Section 4, I discuss variational principles, the reduction of a problem to a simpler
problem, and the role of symmetries in making such reductions: I end by proving a
simple version of Noether’s theorem. Most of the morals will be illustrated, usually
more than once, in each of Sections 3 and 4.

Two more preliminary remarks: both of them about the limited scope of this paper,

and its companion covering Hamiltonian mechanics and Hamilton-Jacobi theory.

(1): Eschewing geometry:—

One main way in which my treatment will be elementary is that I will mostly eschew
the use of modern geometry to formulate mechanics. Agreed, the use of geometry
has in the last century formed a large part of the glorious development of analytical
mechanics that I began by celebrating. For example, the maestro is no doubt right
when he says ‘Hamiltonian mechanics cannot be understood without diﬀerential forms’
(Arnold, 1989: 163). But apart from a few passages, I will eschew geometry, albeit
with regret. One cannot understand everything in one go—suﬃcient unto the day is
the formalism thereof!

(2): Finite systems: (Ideal):—

Another way in which my treatment will be elementary is that I will only consider
analytical mechanics’ treatment of ﬁnite-dimensional systems (often called, for short:
ﬁnite systems). These are systems with a ﬁnite number of degrees of freedom. That
is: they are systems whose conﬁguration (i.e. the positions of all component parts)
can be speciﬁed by a ﬁnite number of (real-valued) variables. So any ﬁnite number of
point-particles is an example of a ﬁnite system.

If one takes bodies (i.e. bulk matter) to be continua, i.e. as having matter in every
region, no matter how small, of their apparent volume, then one is taking them as
inﬁnite-dimensional, i.e. as having inﬁnitely many degrees of freedom. For there will
be at least one degree of freedom per spatial point. In that case, to treat a body as ﬁnite-
dimensional represents a major idealization. But as we shall see, analytical mechanics
does this. Indeed, it idealizes yet more. For even if bodies were ultimately discrete,
the total number of their degrees of freedom would be enormous, though ﬁnite. Yet
analytical mechanics typically describes bodies using a small ﬁnite number of variables;
for example, it might describe the conﬁguration of a bead on a ring by just the position
of the centre of mass of the bead. So whether or not bodies are in fact continua (inﬁnite
systems), analytical mechanics typically makes the idealization of treating them with
a ﬁnite, indeed small ﬁnite, number of coordinates. These are in eﬀect collective

8

coordinates that aggregate information about many underlying microscopic degrees of
freedom.

This idealization—of treating inﬁnite or “large-ﬁnite” systems as “small-ﬁnite”—-
will occur often in what follows; so it will be convenient to have a label for it. I will
call it (Ideal).

But (Ideal) will not aﬀect my morals; (and not just because, being an idealization
adopted by analytical mechanics itself, my morals must anyway “follow suit”). There
are two reasons. First, the very same morals could in fact be drawn from the analytical
mechanics of inﬁnite systems: but to do so in this paper would make it unduly long
and complicated.7

Second, (Ideal) can of course be justiﬁed in various ways. It can be justiﬁed em-
pirically. For like any idealization, it amounts to limiting the theory to those physical
situations where the error terms arising from the idealization are believed to be negli-
gible; (I shall be more precise about idealization in Section 2.1.4). And the countless
empirical successes of analytical mechanics using (small!) ﬁnitely many degrees of free-
dom shows that indeed, the errors often are negligible. Besides, (Ideal) can in various
ways be justiﬁed theoretically; for example, by theorems stating that for systems with
many degrees of freedom, a collective coordinate like the system’s centre of mass will
evolve according to a formula involving only a small number of degrees of freedom.8

2 Morals

Recall the idea which I announced as central to all of analytical mechanics: that by
considering the set of all possible states of systems, and making appropriate mathe-
matical constructions on it, one can formulate a general scheme with various merits
for solving problems—or if not solving them, at least getting signiﬁcant information
about them.

With this idea in hand, I can give a general statement of my four morals. For all
four arise from this idea. They fall into two pairs, the ﬁrst pair concerning scientiﬁc
method, and the second pair ontology. In each pair, one of the morals is the main one
since it is more novel (and perhaps controversial!) than the other one. For the minor
morals rebut the idea that classical mechanics is unproblematic, just matter-in-motion.
As I said in Section 1, that idea is wrong. But as I admitted, for specialist philosophers
of physics its being wrong is old news: so for them, these two rebuttals will be less
important.

7Anyway, it is pedagogically indispensable to ﬁrst treat the case of ﬁnitely many degrees of freedom.
It was also no doubt historically indispensable: even a genius of Lagrange’s or Hamilton’s stature could
not have ﬁrst analysed the inﬁnite system case, treating the ﬁnite system case as a limit.

8Such theorems are not special to analytical mechanics:

in particular, what is often called ‘the
vectorial approach’ to mechanics has such theorems. For more discussion of (Ideal), cf. Section 2.2.2’s
statement of my fourth moral.

9

To help keep track of the morals, I shall give each moral a label, to be used in later
Sections. The main moral about method will be labelled (Scheme); the minor one will
have two labels, (Reformulate) and (Restrict). The main moral about ontology will
be (Modality); the minor one (Accept). (So main morals get nouns, and minor ones
verbs.)

The morals are presented in the following Sections. First, the morals about method:
(Scheme): Section 2.1.4. (Sections 2.1.1 to 2.1.3 give necessary preliminaries.)
This moral is about analytical mechanics’ schemes for representing problems. Section
2.1.4 will also introduce labels for four merits the Lagrangian scheme enjoys; (mer-
its also shared by the Hamiltonian and Hamilton-Jacobi schemes). Those labels are:
(Fewer), (Wider), (Reduce), (Separate).

(Reformulate) and (Restrict): Section 2.1.5. This moral is about the method-

ological value of reformulating and restricting theories.

Then the morals about ontology:—

(Modality) : Section 2.2.1. This moral is about analytical mechanics’ involve-
ments in modality (necessity and possibility). I will distinguish three grades of modal
involvement, labelled (Modality;1st) through to (Modality;3rd). Lagrangian mechanics
will exhibit all three grades; (as will Hamiltonian and Hamilton-Jacobi mechanics).

(Accept): Section 2.2.2. This moral is about the subtle and various ontology of

analytical mechanics, in particular Lagrangian mechanics.

2.1 Method

My main moral about method, (Scheme), is that the provision of general schemes
for representing and solving problems is a signiﬁcant topic in the analysis of scientiﬁc
theories: not least because it falls between two topics often emphasised by philosophers,
I will urge this moral by showing that Lagrangian
“laws of nature” and “models”.
mechanics is devoted to providing such a scheme for mechanical problems. But I will
lead up to Section 2.1.4’s description of Lagrangian mechanics’ scheme, and its merits,
by :

(i): discussing some of physics’ various senses of ‘solve a problem’: an ambiguous

phrase, which repays philosophical analysis! (Section 2.1.1 and 2.1.2);

(ii): reporting some results about diﬀerential equations that I will need (Section

2.1.3).
Finally, Section 2.1.5 states my minor moral about scientiﬁc method.9

9I shall duck out of trying to prove my accusation that the philosophical literature has overlooked
a signiﬁcant topic, between “laws of nature” and “models’. But here is one example. Giere gives
two extended discussions of classical mechanics to illustrate his views about laws, models and related
notions like scientiﬁc theories and hypotheses (1988: 62-91; 1999: 106-117, 165-169, 175-180). Very
roughly, his view (partly based on ideas from cognitive science) is that science hardly needs laws, and
that theories are appropriately structured clusters of models. Maybe: but it is noteworthy that he
does not articulate the level of description provided by analytical mechanics. For him, Newton’s laws
are typical examples of laws, and the harmonic oscillator, or inverse-square orbital motion, are typical

10

2.1.1 (Scheme): what is it to be “given a function”?

Throughout physics we talk about ‘solving a problem’. The broad meaning is clear. To
solve a problem is to state the right answer to a question.10 And similarly for related
phrases like ‘reducing one problem to another’: to reduce one problem to a second one
is to show that the right answer to the second immediately yields the right answer to
the ﬁrst; and so on.

But there is a spectrum of meanings of ‘stating a right answer’, ranging from the “in-
principle” to the “useful”. The spectrum arises from a point familiar in philosophy: the
ambiguity of what it is to be “given” an object (in our case, an answer to a question).
One is always given an object under a mode of presentation, as Frege put it; and the
mode of presentation may be useless, or useful, for one’s purposes.

A standard example in the philosophy of mathematics (speciﬁcally, discussion of
Church’s thesis) makes the point clear. Suppose I give you a function f on positive
integers by deﬁning: f (n) := 1
n, if Goldbach’s conjecture is true; and f (n) :=
n, otherwise. Have I given you an eﬀectively computable function? Intuition pulls
0
both ways: Yes, since both the constant-1 and constant-0 functions are eﬀectively
computable; No, since the mode of presentation that the deﬁnition used makes it
useless for your purpose of calculating a value of the function.

∀

∀

Similarly in physics, in particular mechanics. The solution to a problem, the right
answer to a question, is typically a function, especially a function describing how the
position of a body changes with time. And a number or function can be “given”
uselessly (one might say: perversely) as f was in the example. So the extreme in-
principle meaning for ‘stating the right answer’ is logically weak: it tolerates any way
of giving the answer. In this sense, one may take a speciﬁcation of appropriate initial
conditions (and perhaps boundary conditions) for any deterministic set of equations
to “solve” any problem about the variables’ values in the future. Though this in-
principle sense is cavalier about whether we could ever “get our hands on” the answer
to the problem (i.e.
It is connected with
state it in useful form), it is important.
signiﬁcant mathematics, about the existence and uniqueness of solutions to diﬀerential
equations, since for the initial conditions to “solve”, even in this in-principle sense,
any such problem, requires that they dictate a unique solution. (Hence, the jargon: ‘a
well-posed problem’, ‘the initial-value problem’ etc.)

On the other hand, there are logically stronger meanings of ‘solution’. There is
obviously a great variety of meanings, depending on just which ways of stating the
right answer (what modes of presentation) are accepted as “useful”. Broadly speaking,

models; (in fact, the closest Giere comes to articulating analytical mechanics is in a brief discussion
of axiomatic approaches: 1988: 87-89). Similarly, I submit, for the rest of the literature.

10For present purposes, ‘right’ here can mean just ‘what the theory dictates’ not ‘empirically correct’.
That is, I can set aside the threat of empirical inadequacy, whether from neglecting non-negligible
variables, or from more fundamental ﬂaws, such as those that quantum theory lays at the door of
classical mechanics. Of course, nothing I say in this paper about analytical mechanics’ schemes for
solving all problems is meant to deny the quantum revolution!

11

there is a spectrum, from the tolerance of “in-principle” to very stringent conceptions
of what is acceptable: for example that the function that solves a problem must be one
of an elite family of functions, e.g. an analytic function.

Here we meet the long, rich history of the notion of a mathematical function. For,
broadly speaking, physics has repeatedly (since at least 1600) come across problems in
which the function representing the solution (or more generally, representing a phys-
ical quantity of interest) does not belong to some select family of functions; and in
attempting to handle such “rogue” functions, physics has often prompted develop-
ments in mathematics. In particular, these problems in physics have been among the
main causes of the successive generalizations of the notion of function: a process which
has continued to our own time with, for example, distributions and fractals.

The general schemes provided by analytical mechanics (whether Lagrangian, Hamil-
tonian or Hamilton-Jacobi) do not secure solutions in any of these stringent senses,
except in a few cases. As we shall see, these schemes lie in the middle of the spectrum
that ranges from the tolerance of “in-principle” to the stringent senses. So neither
these stringent senses, nor the history of how physics had repeatedly to go beyond
them, is my main topic; (and each is of course a large topic on which many a book
has been written!). But I need to say a little about these senses and this history, just
because analytical mechanics’ schemes are themselves examples—and historically very
signiﬁcant ones—of how physics’ conception of solving problems has gone beyond the
stringent senses.

In other words: it will help locate these schemes, and the middle of the spectrum,
if I report some of the pressure towards the middle from the stringent extreme. So
Section 2.1.2 gives a (brutal!) summary of the history of the notion of function. Then
Section 2.1.3 reports some basic results about diﬀerential equations, as preparation for
Section 2.1.4’s return to the schemes.

2.1.2 Generalizing the notion of function

2.1.2: Preamble Since at least the seventeenth century, the notion of a mathemati-
cal function (and allied notions like that of a curve) has been successively generalized—
and often it has been problems in physics that prompted the generalization. I shall
sketch this development, giving in Paragraphs 2.1.2.A-C three examples of how solving
problems, in particular solving diﬀerential equations, prompted going beyond stringent
conceptions of function. (For more details of the history, cf. Bottazini (1986), Lutzen
(2003), Kline (1972) and Youschkevitch (1976).)

Warning:— A reassurance at the outset: none of the details in these three Para-
graphs will be needed later in the paper, though the main idea of the second Paragraph,
viz. quadrature, will be important later.

Nowadays, our conception of function is utterly general: any many-one mapping
between arbitrary sets. But this represents the terminus of a long development. In the
seventeenth century, a much narrower concept had emerged, mainly from the study of

12

curves and its principal oﬀspring, the calculus. Authors diﬀered; but speaking broadly
(and in modern terms), a function was at ﬁrst taken to be a real function (i.e. with IR as
both domain and codomain) that could be expressed by a (broadly algebraic) formula.
One main episode in the formation of this concept was Descartes’ critique in his La
Geometrie (1637: especially Book II) of the ancient Greeks’ classiﬁcation of curves;
and in particular, their disparagement of mechanical curves, i.e. curves constructed by
suitable machines. More positively, Descartes accepted (and classiﬁed as ‘geometric’)
all curves having an algebraic equation (of ﬁnite degree) in x and y; thereby including
some curves the Greeks disparaged as ‘mechanical’, such as the conchoid of Nicomedes
and the cissoid of Diocles (But Descartes himself, and his contemporaries, of course also
studied non-algebraic curves. For details, cf. Kline (1972: 117-119, 173-175, 311-312,
335-340) and Youschkevitch (1976: 52-53).)

But the exploration of new problems, in (what we would call!) pure mathematics
and physics, gradually generalized the concept: in particular, so as to include trigono-
metric and exponential functions, and functions represented by inﬁnite series—though
there was of course never an agreed usage of the word ‘function’. (The word ‘function’
seems to be due to Leibniz; as are ‘constant’, ‘variable’ and ‘parameter’.) Kline (1972:
339) reports that the most explicit seventeenth century deﬁnition of ‘function’ was
Gregory’s (1667): that a function is a quantity obtained from other quantities by a
succession of operations that are either

(i) one of the ﬁve familiar algebraic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplica-

tion, division and extraction of integral roots), or
(ii) the operation we would call taking a limit.

But Gregory’s (ii) was lost sight of. The contemporary emphasis was on (i), augmented
with the trigonometric and exponential functions and functions represented by series.

Let us put this more precisely, in some modern jargon which is customary, though
not universal (e.g. Borowski and Borwein 2002). The elementary operations are: ad-
dition, subtraction, multiplication, division and extraction of integral roots, in a given
ﬁeld. (Of course, the general notion of a ﬁeld dates from the late nineteenth century,
together with group, ring etc.; so here we just take the ﬁeld to be the reals.) An
algebraic function is any function that can be constructed in a ﬁnite number of steps
from the elementary operations, and the inverses of any function already constructed;
e.g. √(x2
2). An elementary function is any function built up from the exponen-
tial and trigonometric functions and their inverses by the elementary operations, e.g.
log[tan−1 √(exp x2) + 1]. A transcendental function is one that is not elementary.11

−

So by the early eighteenth century, it had emerged that the function that answers
a physical problem, in particular an indeﬁnite integral expressing the solution of a
diﬀerential equation, is often not elementary. (Though this is now a commonplace of
the pedagogy of elementary calculus, it is of course hard to prove such functions are not
11A related usage: an algebraic number is any number that is a root of a polynomial equation
with coeﬃcients drawn from the given ﬁeld, and a transcendental number is any number that is not
algebraic. But in this usage, the ﬁeld is almost always taken to be the rationals, so that √2 is algebraic
(and there are only denumerably many algebraic numbers), while π and e are transcendental.

13

elementary.) Accordingly, what was regarded as a solution, and as a general method of
solution, was generalized beyond the elementary functions and techniques associated
with them.

To illustrate, I will discuss (in succeeding Paragraphs) three main ways in which

such a generalization was made, namely:

(A): to include inﬁnite series; a topic which leads to the foundations of the calculus.
(B): to include integrals, even if these integrals could themselves only be evaluated
numerically. (Jargon: quadrature means the integration, perhaps only numerical, of a
given function).

(C): to include weak solutions; which originated in a famous dispute between

d’Alembert and Euler.

Warning: The details of (A)-(C) are not needed later on, and can be skipped. But
the main idea of (B), the idea of reducing a problem to a quadrature, will be prominent
later on.

2.1.2.A Inﬁnite series, and the rigorization of the calculus
I have already
mentioned the admission of inﬁnite series. That is to say: such series were not required
to be the series for an elementary function, especially since one sought series solutions
of diﬀerential equations.

For simplicity and brevity, I will only consider ﬁrst-order ordinary diﬀerential equa-
dt = f (x, t). To ﬁnd an inﬁnite series solution of such

tions, i.e. equations of the form dx
an equation, one assumes a solution of the form

x = a0 + a1t + a2t2 + . . .

;

˙x = a1 + 2a2t + 3a3t2 + . . . ,

(2.1)

substitutes this into the question, and equates coeﬃcients of like powers of t. Though
Newton, Leibniz and their contemporaries had provided such solutions for various equa-
tions (including higher order equations), the method came to the fore from about 1750,
especially in the hands of Euler. Such series of course raise many questions about con-
vergence, and about what information might be gained by proper handling of divergent
series.

Here we meet another large and complicated story: the development of the cal-
culus, especially its rigorization in the nineteenth century by such ﬁgures as Cauchy
and Weierstrass (Bottazini 1986: Chapters 3, 7; Boyer: 1959 Chapter 7; Kline 1972:
Chapter 40). But for present purposes, I need only note two aspects of this story.

(i): With the rigorization of analysis, a function became an arbitrary “rule” or
“mapping”; and with the late nineteenth century’s set-theoretic foundation for math-
ematics, this was made precise as a kind of set, viz. a set of ordered pairs. Note the
contrast with the eighteenth century conception: for Euler and his contemporaries, a
function was ﬁrst and foremost a formula, expressing how one “quantity” (cf. Gre-
gory’s deﬁnition above) depended on another.

(ii): Again, physics’ need for functions that were not “smooth” (in various stringent
senses) was a major motivation for this rigorization. It was also a signiﬁcant reason

14

why, after the rigorization was accomplished, one could not go back to founding anal-
ysis solely on such smooth functions. (But even in the late nineteenth century, many
mathematicians (including great ones like Weierstrass and Poincar´e!) hankered after
such a return. Cf. Lutzen 2003: 477-484, and Paragraph 2.1.2.C below.)

Several episodes illustrate both these aspects, (i) and (ii). For example, Dirichlet’s
famous example of a function that cannot be integrated occurs in a paper (1829) on
the convergence of Fourier series (a physically motivated topic). He suggests

φ(x) := c

for x rational ; φ(x) := d for x irrational ;

(2.2)

the ﬁrst explicit statement of a function other than through one or several analytic
expressions (Bottazini (1986: 196-201), Lutzen (2003: 472), Kline (1970: 950, 966-
967). Another example is the realization (in the 1870s, but building on Liouville’s
work in the 1830s) how “rarely” is the solution of a diﬀerential equation algebraic; (for
details, cf. Gray (2000: 49, 70f.).)

2.1.2.B Examples of quadrature Again I will, for simplicity and brevity, only
consider ﬁrst-order ordinary diﬀerential equations dx
dt = f (x, t). Here are three standard
examples of methods which reduce the integration of such an equation dx
dt = f (x, t) to
a quadrature.

(i): The most obvious example is any autonomous equation, i.e. an equation

dx
dt

= f (x)

whose right hand side is independent of t. Eq. 2.3 gives immediately t =
inverting this, we obtain the solution x = x(t).

R

(ii): Another obvious example is the separation of variables. That is: If f (x, t) is a

product, the problem immediately reduces to a quadrature:

dx
dt

1
g(x)

⇒ Z

Z

= g(x)h(t)

dx =

h(t) dt .

(2.4)

(iii): Less obvious is the method of integrating factors, which applies to any linear

ﬁrst-order ordinary diﬀerential equation, i.e. an equation of the form

dx
dt

+ p(t)x = q(t) .

t p(t′)dt′].
This can be integrated by multiplying each side by the integrating factor exp[
t p)), so that multiplying the equation
For the left hand side then becomes d
dt (x(t). exp(
by dt, integrating and rewriting the upper limit of integration as t, the solution is given
by

R

R

x(t). exp(

p) =

t

Z

t′

t

dt′

Z

exp(

{

Z

p(t′′)dt′′) . q(t′)

.

}

These three examples, indeed all the elementary methods of solving ﬁrst-order equa-
tions, were known by 1740. In particular, the third example (and generalizations of it

(2.3)

1
f (x) dx;

(2.5)

(2.6)

15

to non-linear ﬁrst-order equations) was given by Euler in 1734/35; (and independently
by Clairaut in 1739/40: Kline 1972: 476).

So much by way of examples of quadrature. The overall eﬀect of the developments
sketched in this Paragraph and 2.1.2.A was that by the middle of the eighteenth century,
the prevalent conception of a function had become: an analytic expression formed by
the processes of algebra and calculus.

Here ‘processes of algebra and calculus’ is deliberately vague, so as to cover the
developments I have sketched. And ‘analytic expression’ emphasises the point above
(in (i) of Paragraph 2.1.2.A) that a function was deﬁned as a formula: not (as after
the rigorization of analysis) as an arbitrary mapping, indeed a set-theoretic object.

That a function was a formula meant that it was ipso facto deﬁned for all values
of its variable(s), and that identities between functions were to be valid for all such
values. These features were at the centre of a famous dispute, that led to our third
generalization of the notion of function ...

2.1.2.C Vibrating strings and weak solutions Namely, the dispute between Eu-
ler and d’Alembert over the nature of the solutions of d’Alembert’s wave equation
(1747) describing the displacement f (x, t) of a vibrating string:

∂2f

∂t2 = a2 ∂2f

∂x2

.

(2.7)

Though this paper will be almost entirely concerned with ordinary diﬀerential equa-
tions, whose theory is enormously simpler than that of partial diﬀerential equations, it
is worth reporting this dispute. Not only did it represent the ﬁrst signiﬁcant study of
partial diﬀerential equations. More important: Euler’s viewpoint foreshadowed impor-
tant nineteenth century developments in the notions both of function, and of solution
of an equation—as we shall see. (For details of this dispute, cf. Bottazini (1986: 21-
43), Kline (1972: 503-507), Lutzen (2003: 469-474), and Youschkevitch (1976: 57-72);
Wilson (1997) is a philosophical discussion).

More precisely, the dispute was about whether eq. 2.7 could describe a plucked
string, i.e. a string whose conﬁguration has a ‘corner’. In the simplest case, this would
be a matter of an initial condition in which, with the string extending from x = 0 to
x = d:

(i) f (x, 0) consists of two straight lines, with a corner at x = c < d. That is:
d.

f (x, 0) = kx, k a constant, for 0

x

x

≤

≤

c and f (x, 0) = ( −kc
(d−c))x + kcd
0.

(d−c) , for c

(ii) the string has zero initial velocity: i.e. ∂f

≤

≤

More generally, the question was whether the wave equation can describe a waveform,
in particular an initial condition, that is (as we would now say) continuous but not
(even once) diﬀerentiable.

∂t |t=0 ≡

D’Alembert argued that it could not. His reasons lay in the prevalent contemporary
conception of a function just outlined. But his arguments also come close to formulating
what later became the standard requirement on a solution of a second-order equation

16

such as eq. 2.7: viz. that it be twice diﬀerentiable in both variables.

Euler took the view that analysis should be generalised so that it could indeed
describe a plucked string: as he puts it (1748) ‘so that the initial shape of the string
can be set arbitrarily ... either regular and contained in a certain equation, or irregular
and mechanical’. More generally, Euler advocates allowing functions given by various
analytic expressions in various intervals; or even by arbitrary hand-drawn curves for
which, he says, the analytic expression changes from point to point. (He calls such
functions ‘discontinuous’.)

To be precise: according to Truesdell (1956: p. xliii, 1960: p. 247-248), Euler
proposes to mean by ‘function’ what we now call a continuous function with piece-
wise continuous slope and curvature. Accordingly, he disregards the diﬀerentiability
conditions implicit in eq. 2.7 and focusses on the general solution he ﬁnds for it, viz.
f (x

at) + f (x + at) with f an arbitrary function in his sense.

−
Truesdell stresses the scientiﬁc and philosophical importance of Euler’s innovation.
Indeed, he goes so far as to say that ‘Euler’s refutation of Leibniz’s law [i.e.: Leibniz’s
doctrine that natural phenomena can be described by what we now call analytic func-
tions] was the greatest advance in scientiﬁc methodology in the entire century’ (1960:
p.248).12

That may well be so: I for one will not question either Truesdell’s scholarship or
In any case: several major developments thereafter—some of them
Euler’s genius!
well into the nineteenth century—vindicated Euler’s viewpoint that analysis, and in
particular the conception of solutions of diﬀerential equations, should be generalised.

To illustrate, I will sketch one such development: weak solutions of partial diﬀer-
ential equations. Though the idea is anticipated by Euler and contemporaries (e.g.
Lagrange in 1761: cf. Bottazzini 1986: p. 31-33), it was properly established only
in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries; partly through the investigation of shock
waves—another example of physics stimulating mathematics.13

The idea is to multiply the given partial diﬀerential equation L[f ] = 0 by a test
function g (roughly: a function that is suﬃciently smooth and has compact support),
and then to integrate by parts (formally) so as make the derivatives fall on g. A function
f satisfying the resulting equation for all test functions g is called a ‘weak solution’ of
the original equation. Thanks to the integration by parts, such an f will in general not
obey the standard diﬀerentiability conditions required of a solution of L[f ] = 0. (But
I should add that one common strategy for ﬁnding solutions in the usual sense is to
ﬁrst construct a weak solution and then prove that it must be a solution in the usual
12Truesdell’s reading is endorsed by Bottazini (1986: 26-27) and Youschkevitch (1976: 64, fn 18,
67). But I should add that—as all these scholars of course recognize—some of Euler’s work (even
after 1748) used, and sometimes even explicitly endorsed, more traditional and restrictive notions of
function.

13For a philosophical discussion of diﬀerent kinds of “optimism” about mathematics’ ability to
describe natural phenomena (including praise of Euler’s optimism), cf. Wilson (2000). St¨oltzner
(2004) is a sequel to this paper, arguing that optimism can and should be combined with what Wilson
calls “opportunism”.

17

sense.)

To give more details in modern but heuristic terms, I will consider only a linear ﬁrst-
order partial diﬀerential equation for the unknown function f of independent variables
x and t; (I follow Courant and Hilbert 1962: Chap.V.9, p. 486-490). So the equation
is, with partial derivatives indicated by subscripts:

L[f ] := A(x, t)fx + B(x, t)ft + C(x, t) = 0 .

(2.8)

We deﬁne the operator L∗ adjoint to L by the condition that gL[f ]
divergence expression. That is, we deﬁne

−

f L∗[g] is a

L∗[g] :=

(Ag)x −
−

(Bg)t + Cg

so that

gL[f ]

f L∗[g] = (gAf )x + (gBf )t

. (2.9)

−

For the domain R in which f is considered, we now consider functions g that have
compact support in a subregion S of R (called test functions); so that integrating eq.
2.9 over S, we obtain by Gauss’ theorem

If f is a solution of the partial diﬀerential equation, i.e. L[f ] = 0, then

(gL[f ]

f L∗[g]) dx dt = 0 .

Z ZS

−

f L∗[g] dx dt = 0 .

Z ZS

(2.10)

(2.11)

(There is a converse, roughly as follows. If eq. 2.11 holds for f with continuous deriva-
tives, for all suitably smooth test functions g with compact support in any suitable
subregion S, then eq. 2.11 yields

S gL[f ] dxdt = 0: which implies that L[f ] = 0.)

R R

This motivates the following (admittedly, non-rigorous!) deﬁnition. Suppose a
function f (x, t) and its partial derivatives are piecewise continuous; (i.e. at worst, each
possesses jump discontinuities along piecewise smooth curves). Such a function f is
called a weak solution of L[f ] = 0 in R if for all suitable subregions S of R, and suitably
smooth test functions g with compact support in S

f L∗[g] dx dt = 0 .

Z ZS

(2.12)

I shall not further develop the idea of a weak solution, since it will not be used in
the rest of the paper. But I note that it gives yet more examples of the theme at the
end of Section 1.1: the subtleties of determinism in classical mechanics.

(i): It was discovered (with a shock!)

in the mid-nineteenth century that for a
non-linear equation, a solution that begins with smooth, even analytic, initial data can
develop discontinuities in a ﬁnite time. And:

(ii): For weak solutions of the Euler equations for ﬂuids, determinism is strikingly
false. Scheﬀer (1993) and Shnirelman (1997) exhibit weak solutions on IR3
IR with
compact support on spacetime. This means that a ﬂuid is initially at rest (t = 0) but

×

18

⊂

later on (t = 1) starts to move with no outside stimulus, and later still (t = 2) returns
to rest: the motion being always conﬁned to a ball B

IR3!14

To conclude this Subsection: in this history of generalizations of the notion of func-
tion, I have emphasised the inﬂuence of diﬀerential equations. I of course admit that
other inﬂuences were equally important, though often related to diﬀerential equations:
e.g. the rigorization of analysis.

But my emphasis suits this paper’s purposes; and is surely “not too false” to the
history. Recall the paper’s motto; and these two famous remarks by late nineteenth-
century masters. Lie said ‘The theory of diﬀerential equations is the most important
branch of modern mathematics’; and—more evidence of mathematics being stimulated
by physics—Poincar´e said ‘Without physics, we would not know diﬀerential equations’.

2.1.3 Solutions of ordinary diﬀerential equations; constants of the motion

I now report some basic results of the theory of ordinary diﬀerential equations: results
which are crucial for Lagrangian mechanics (and for Hamiltonian and Hamilton-Jacobi
mechanics). Incidentally, this Subsection will also give a glimpse of a fourth way that
functions have been generalized: viz.
to include discontinuous functions, so as to
describe dynamical chaos. But this paper (and is companion) will not discuss chaos.
And here my emphasis will be on very elementary aspects of diﬀerential equations. I
shall report that:

(A) this theory guarantees the local existence and uniqueness of solutions, and of

constants of the motion; but

(B) for most problems, these constants only exist locally.

Both these points, (A) and (B), will be fundamental for later Sections.

I shall follow an ex-
2.1.3.A The local existence and uniqueness of solutions
position of the basic theorems about solutions to systems of ordinary diﬀerential equa-
tions, by a maestro: Arnold (1973).

For our purposes, these theorems can be summed up in the following four propo-
sitions. Arnold calls the ﬁrst, about ﬁrst-order ordinary diﬀerential equations in Eu-
clidean space IRn, the ‘basic theorem’.
It not only secures the local existence and
uniqueness of solutions; it also characterizes the local constants of the motion; and
it underpins the corresponding propositions about diﬀerential equations that are of
higher order than the ﬁrst, or that are deﬁned on diﬀerential manifolds rather than
IRn.

14These weak solutions are discontinuous unbounded L2 functions. Underlying Shnirelman’s ex-
ample is the physical idea (which had already been recognized) of an inverse energy cascade in two-
dimensional turbulence. Given a force f (x, t) with a small spatial scale, energy is transported via the
non-linearity of the Euler equations to the lower frequencies and longer spatial scales. In particular,
if f ’s spatial scale is inﬁnitely small, simple dimension considerations show that it nevertheless takes
only a ﬁnite time for the energy to reach the low-frequency range. I am very grateful to Tim Palmer
for explaining these examples to me.

19

(i): The Basic Theorem (Arnold 1973: 48-49).

Consider a system of n ﬁrst-order ordinary diﬀerential equations

˙x = v(x) , x

U

∈

(2.13)

on an open set U
⊂
point of the vector ﬁeld, i.e. v(x0)
V of x0, there is a coordinate system (formally, a diﬀeomorphism f : V
such that, writing yi : IRn
standard basic vector of IRn, eq. 2.13 goes into the very simple form

IRn; equivalently, a vector ﬁeld v on U. Let x0 be a non-singular
= 0. Then in a suﬃciently small neighbourhood
IRn)
IR for the standard coordinates on W and e1 for the ﬁrst

→

→

W

⊂

˙y = e1;

i.e.

˙y1 = 1,

˙y2 = . . . = ˙yn = 0 in W .

(2.14)

(In geometric terms: f∗(v) = e1 in W .) On account of eq. 2.14’s simple form, Arnold
suggests the theorem might be called the ‘rectiﬁcation theorem’. NB: For simplicity,
I have here set aside the non-autonomous case where v = v(t, x); for details of that
case, cf. ibid., p. 56.

(ii): Solutions; (ibid.: 12, 50).

Let us deﬁne a solution (aka: integral curve) of eq. 2.13 to be a diﬀerentiable mapping
φ : I

U of the real open interval I

IR to U such that for all τ

I

→

⊂

d
dt |t=τ φ(t) = v(φ(τ )) .

∈

(2.15)

The image φ(I) is called the phase curve (also sometimes, the integral curve).

Then Proposition (i) implies that there is a solution of eq. 2.13 satisfying the initial
condition φ(t0) = x0. But NB: this solution need only exist locally in time: as I men-
tioned in Section 1, a solution need not globally exist even for familiar “deterministic”
theories, such as point-particles interacting by Newtonian gravity.

Proposition (i) also implies that the local solution is unique in the obvious sense that
any two solutions with the same initial condition are equal on a common sub-interval.

(iii): Constants of the motion; (ibid.: 75-78).

A diﬀerentiable function f : U
IR is called a constant of the motion (aka: ﬁrst
integral) of eq. 2.13 iﬀ its derivative in the direction of the vector ﬁeld v vanishes.
U; iﬀ every phase curve
Equivalently:
φ(I) belongs to a unique level set f −1(

iﬀ f is constant along every solution φ : I

IR, of f .

), c

→

→

c

Typically, eq. 2.13 has no ﬁrst integrals other than the trivial constant functions

{

}

∈

f (U) = c

IR.

∈

But it follows from the Basic Theorem that locally there are non-constant ﬁrst in-

tegrals. That is, in the notation of (i):

(a): There is a neighbourhood V of x0 such that eq. 2.13 has n

−
ally independent ﬁrst integrals f1, . . . , fn−1 in V . (We say f1, . . . , fm : U
functionally independent in a neighbourhood of x
independent. More precisely: if the rank of the derivative f∗
determined by the functions f1, . . . , fm equals m.)

1 function-
IR are
→
U if their gradients are linearly
IRm
|x of the map f : U

→

∈

20

6
(b): Moreover, any ﬁrst integral of eq. 2.13 in V is a function of f1, . . . , fn−1.
(c): Of course, in the coordinate system in which eq. 2.13 take the very simple
form eq. 2.14, the coordinates y2, . . . , yn give us n
1 functionally independent ﬁrst
integrals; and the other ﬁrst integrals are all the arbitrary diﬀerentiable functions of
these coordinates.

−

Assertions (a)-(c) give a sense in which the Basic Theorem secures the existence of
a coordinate system in which the problem of integrating eq. 2.13 is completely solved,
locally. But I stress that this does not mean it is easy to write down this coordinate
system: to write down the diﬀeomorphism f . In general, it is very hard to do so!

This point can hardly be over-emphasised.

It will be a recurrent theme in this

paper—and I will discuss it in philosophical terms already in Section 2.1.4.

(iv): Other cases:

Corresponding deﬁnitions and propositions hold for:

(a) ordinary diﬀerential equations of higher order, principally by the standard device
of writing down an equivalent system of ﬁrst-order equations in which new variables
represent the higher derivatives of the original variable or variables (ibid.: 59-61); and

(b) collections of such equations of varying orders (p. 62-63); and
(c) ordinary diﬀerential equations deﬁned, not on a patch of IRn but on a diﬀerential

manifold (p. 249-250).

There are countless details about (iv) which I will not report; (some more details

are in Sections 3.3.2 and 4.7.3). Here I note only the following:—

In Lagrangian mechanics, the dynamics of a system with n conﬁgurational de-
grees of freedom is essentially described by n second-order ordinary diﬀerential equa-
tions; or equivalently, by 2n ﬁrst-order equations. (In most cases, this system of equa-
tions is deﬁned on a manifold, not a patch of IRn.) This system has a locally unique
solution, speciﬁed by 2n arbitrary constants; (roughly, the initial positions and ve-
locities of the system’s constituent particles). Besides, we deﬁne a ﬁrst integral of a
diﬀerential equation of arbitrary order (or of a system of them) as a ﬁrst integral of
the equivalent system of ﬁrst-order equations. This means that for this system, as in
(iii) above: global constants of the motion are rare; but locally, we are guaranteed that
there are 2n

1 of them.

−

2.1.3.B The rarity of global constants of the motion: the circle and the
I said in (iii) of Paragraph 2.1.3.A that typically, eq. 2.13 has ﬁrst integrals
torus
other than the trivial constant functions f (U) = c
IR, only locally. We will later be
much concerned with the few global constants such as energy that arise in mechanics.
But it is worth giving at the outset two (related) examples of a system with no global
constants of the motion. For they are a simple and vivid illustration of the rarity of
such constants. (They are also a prototype for: (i) topics that will loom large in the
companion paper, viz. Poincar´e’s theorem, and the theory of completely integrable
systems; (ii) structural stability, a central topic in catastrophe and bifurcation theory.)

∈

One or both examples occur in many books. But again I recommend Arnold. For

21

proofs of the results below, cf. his (1973: 160-167); or more brieﬂy, his (1989: 72-74).
For further results (including details about topics (i) and (ii)), cf. his (1983: 90-112;
1989: 285f.).

First example: the circle:—

The ﬁrst example is a “toy-model” in discrete time, rather than a classical mechanical
system. Consider a circle S, and let τ : S
S be a rotation through an angle α.
(Think of S as a space of states, and τ as time-evolution in discrete time.) If α is
commensurable (aka: commensurate) with 2π, i.e. α = 2π(m/n) with integers m, n
, then τ n is the identity. So for any point x
S, the orbit of x under the repeated
∈
it eventually rejoins itself. But if α is
action of τ (the set of images of x) is closed:
incommensurable with 2π (i.e. α
= 2π(m/n) for any integers m, n), then the set of
i
images

of any point x is everywhere dense in S.

τ i(x)

→

{

Z
}

|

∈

Now suppose we deﬁne a constant of the motion for this discrete-time dynamical
system on analogy with (iii) of Paragraph 2.1.3.A. We need only require continuity,
not diﬀerentiability: so we say a continuous function f : S
IR is a constant of the
motion iﬀ throughout each orbit f is constant. (Here ‘throughout’ emphasises that the
deﬁnition is “global in time”.)

→

(i):

If α = 2π(m/n) with integers m, n in their lowest terms, there are many
constants of the motion: any continuous real-valued function f deﬁned on an arc of 2π
n
radians deﬁnes one. But:—

(ii): If α is incommensurable with 2π, the only constants of the motion are the

trivial constant functions f (S) =

c

, c

{

}

∈

IR.

It is worth expressing (ii) in terms of discontinuous functions. For that will show
how even simple systems prompt a general notion of function. (This point gets greatly
developed in the study of chaos—though as I said at the start of this Subsection, I will
not discuss chaos.) Suppose we partition S under the equivalence relation: x
y iﬀ
x is an image of y, or vice versa, under repeated application of τ . Then any function
IR that is constant on the cells of this partition (i.e. whose level sets f −1(c)
f : S
are cells, or unions of cells) is either discontinuous at every point of S, or a trivial
constant function f (S) =

IR.

→

, c

≡

c

∈
Second example: the torus:—

}

{

The second example is a harmonic oscillator in two spatial dimensions, but with dif-
ferent frequencies in the two dimensions. So the equations of motion are

which have the energy in each dimension as two constants of the motion

(2.16)

(2.17)

and solutions

xi = Ai cos(ωit + φi) , Ai =

,

i = 1, 2 .

(2.18)

¨xi + ω2

i xi = 0 ,

i = 1, 2 ;

Ei =

˙x2
i +

i x2
ω2
i

;

1
2

1
2

√(2Ei)
ωi

22

6
Each Ei deﬁnes an ellipse in the (xi, ˙xi) plane, so that a pair of values (E1, E2) deﬁnes
a two-dimensional torus T (i.e. a product of two ellipses).

As we shall discuss in more detail for Lagrangian mechanics:— Here, the original
system has four degrees of freedom, two for conﬁguration and two for velocity, i.e.
x1, x2, ˙x1, ˙x2. But the two constants of the motion have reduced the problem to only
two variables. That is: given a pair (E1, E2), the system’s state—both positions and
velocities—is deﬁned by a pair of variables, say x1, x2. Besides, the variables are
separated: the equations for them are independent of each other.

Furthermore, we can introduce on the surface of the torus T , angular coordinates
θ1, θ2 mod 2π, each winding around one of the two ellipses, in terms of which the
equations of motion become even simpler:

˙θi = ωi

,

i = 1, 2 .

(2.19)

So

(2.20)
In terms of the θi (which we naturally call longitude and latitude), the motion winds
around the torus uniformly.

θi = ωit + θi(0) ,

i = 1, 2 .

The qualitative nature of the motion on T depends on whether the frequencies
ω1, ω2 are commensurable (aka: commensurate, or rationally dependent). That is: on
whether the ratio ω1
ω2 is rational. More precisely: it follows readily from the results for
the discrete-time system on the circle S that:—

(i): If ω1, ω2 are commensurable, then every phase curve of eq. 2.19 on T is closed: it
eventually rejoins itself. We say the motion is periodic. And similarly to the discrete-
time system: any diﬀerentiable real-valued function deﬁned on a curve γ in T that
intersects every phase curve once (so that the orbit of γ is the whole of T ) deﬁnes a
constant of the motion which is independent of the two energies.

(ii): But if ω1, ω2 are incommensurable, then every phase curve of eq. 2.19 on T is
everywhere dense on T : for any neighbourhood of any point on it, the curve eventually
re-enters the neighbourhood. We say the motion is quasiperiodic. Now recall that
we deﬁned constants of the motion (in (iii) of Paragraph 2.1.3.A) to be diﬀerentiable
functions. So as in the discrete-time system on S: phase curves being everywhere dense
implies that the only constants of the motion independent of the energies are the trivial
constant functions f (T ) =
IR. That is: these are the only constants for all
time. Locally, i.e. in a suﬃciently small neighbourhood V of any point (θ1, θ2), there
are constants of the motion independent of the energies. They are given as in case
(i) by any diﬀerentiable real-valued function deﬁned on a curve γ that intersects every
phase curve in V just once; and the time-scale on which they “hold good” as constants
is set by how long it takes for some such phase curve to wind around the torus and
re-enter V .

, c

∈

}

{

c

And again, one could express these points by saying that any function that is
constant on every phase curve is either discontinuous at every point of T , or a trivial
constant function f (T ) =
. (For more details, cf. Arnold (ibid.) who also discusses
the analogues using higher-dimensional tori.)

}

{

c

23

2.1.4 Schemes for solving problems—and their merits

As I announced at the end of Section 2.1.1, analytical mechanics’ schemes for repre-
senting and solving problems operate in the middle of the spectrum of meanings of
‘solve a problem’: neither very tolerant (even of the useless), nor very intolerant (e.g.
accepting only algebraic functions). To further explain this, I must ﬁrst distinguish
two main topics. The ﬁrst has received philosophical attention and I will set it aside.
The second has not—and is my topic.

The ﬁrst topic is that of approximation techniques. Mathematics and physics have
of course developed an armoury of such techniques, precisely in order to overcome the
predicament of how few problems are soluble in more stringent senses (e.g. analyt-
ically). That armoury is impressively large and powerful: and in recent years—not
before time!—philosophicers have studied it, often as part of studying scientiﬁc mod-
els.15

But I shall not enter into details about this topic. For my point is that analytical
mechanics’ general schemes bring out another topic. Though these schemes do not (of
course!) “solve all problems” in some stringent sense, they are not simply examples of
the armoury of approximation techniques, for two (related) reasons.

First, there is a sense in which these schemes do not involve approximations—
though they do involve idealizations. Agreed, there is no established philosophical
usage distinguishing approximation and idealization. But I distinguish between them
as follows.16 Both approximation and idealization involve neglecting some quantities
believed (or hoped!) to make little diﬀerence to the answer to a problem. But approx-
imation does not involve simplifying, or in any way revising, the mathematical form
in which the problem is posed. Rather, one applies the approximation in the course
of solving the problem as posed. On the other hand, idealization involves neglecting
such quantities, precisely by simplifying or otherwise revising the mathematical formu-
lation of the problem; (maybe the simpliﬁcation occurs implicitly, when formulating a
mathematically well-deﬁned problem, once given a verbal physical description). So as
I use the terms, idealization is neglecting what you believe negligible when you ﬁrst
15The literature is of course vast, but Morgan and Morrison (1999) is a useful recent anthology. One
reason it is vast is that ‘model’ is used in so many senses: here, Emch’s distinction (2002) between
L-models (L for ‘logic’ or ‘language’) and H-models (H for ‘heuristic’) is helpful. Emch and Liu (2002)
is a gold-mine of information about approximations and models (and much else) in thermodynamics
and statistical physics.

16Some authors propose similar distinctions. For example, in McMullin’s excellent discussion of
Galileo (1985), ‘causal idealization’ (264f.) is like my ‘approximation’, and ‘construct idealization’
(254f.) is like my ‘idealization’; and more brieﬂy, Teller (1979: 348-349) makes almost exactly my
distinction. But agreed: other authors vary, sometimes using other words, such as ‘abstraction’, e.g.
Suppe (1989: 82-83, 94-96) and Cartwright (1989: 183-198); (thanks to Anjan Chakravartty for these
two references). In any case, discussion suggests my distinction is an acceptable stipulation; though
I admit that for some colleagues, the terms have other connotations, e.g. the semantic one that any
idealization is strictly speaking false, while some approximations are true. Earman and Roberts (1999)
is a ﬁne discussion of the related topic of ceteris paribus clauses in laws of nature.

24

pose a problem, while approximation is doing so while solving it. As we shall see, the
schemes of analytical mechanics involve, in this sense, idealizations—a major example
being (Ideal), discussed in Section 1—but not approximations.

Second and more important, these schemes give information—indeed, an amazing
amount of information—not just about solutions to individual problems, but about the
structure of the set of solutions to all problems of a large class. Of course, the nature
of this information, and of the large class, can only become clear when I expound the
scheme in question, be it Lagrangian (in this paper) or Hamiltonian or Hamilton-Jacobi
(in the companion paper). For they vary from one scheme to another. But for all three
schemes, this information is independent of approximations.

For these reasons, I think the schemes give a sense of ‘solve a problem’, that lies in
the middle of our spectrum—and is distinctive, because not a matter of approximations.
Or rather: they give a group of senses, since the information the scheme provides varies
both with the problem and with the scheme:—

(i): Variation from one problem to another is already clear. After all, despite the
“pessimism” of Section 2.1.2’s review of “rogue” functions: Happily, some problems
can be solved in one of the stringent senses, e.g. the position of a particle being given at
all times by an analytic formula. And as we shall see, the other problems are a mixed
group: the information a scheme can provide varies. For example, some problems can
be reduced to quadratures (cf. Paragraph 2.1.2.B); others cannot be.

(ii): Variation from one scheme to another. This variation will of course only be
clear once the schemes are expounded. But broadly speaking, it is fair to say that for
a given problem:

(a): The schemes agree about what kind of solution (stringent, or middle-of-the-
spectrum) it has. After all, the schemes can hardly disagree about whether the position
of a particle in a well-deﬁned problem is given at all times by analytic formula—nobody
can disagree about it!

(b): But the schemes can and do diﬀer in the information they provide about the
given problem. And this information is not always “just theoretical”: it can bear very
directly on how to solve the problem (to the extent that it can be solved). The obvious
example is the way that Jacobi’s invention of transformation theory (for Hamiltonian
mechanics) enabled him to solve problems that had thitherto been intractable.

This variation across problems and schemes, points (i) and (ii), reinforces the im-
portant point that these schemes are by no means “algorithms” for solving problems.
Indeed, they are not such algorithms, even in some single middle-of-the-spectrum sense
of ‘solve a problem’, such as reduction to quadratures. If only such “middling” solu-
tions were always possible—what a neat world it would be!

In particular, be warned:— In Section 3 onwards, one recurrent theme will be the
schemes’ allowance of arbitrary variables, so that we can adopt those variables best
suited to the problem we face—i.e. yielding as stringent a solution to it as is possible.
So that allowance will be a major advantage of the schemes. But it will not mean that
the schemes tell us what are the best variables for our problem. If only!

25

It would be a good project to deﬁne more precisely various middle-of-the-spectrum
senses of ‘solution’, and classify the various problems and schemes with respect to these
senses. But I shall duck out of this project, and restrict myself to laying out the kinds
of information the schemes provide. In eﬀect this sort of information would be the raw
material to use for making such deﬁnitions and ensuing classiﬁcation.

We will see in Sections 3 and 4 that the Lagrangian scheme has the following four
It will be

merits—as do the other two schemes, Hamiltonian and Hamilton-Jacobi.
convenient to have mnemonic labels for these merits, just as it was for the morals.

(Fewer): The use of fewer functions to describe the motion of a complicated system
that the number of degrees of freedom suggests. Indeed, in each of the three schemes an
arbitrarily complicated system is described by just one main function. (Their symbols
are respectively L, H and S: so this paper will be concerned with L, where ‘L’ stands
for ‘Lagrangian’.)

(Wider): A treatment of a wider class of problems. One main way this happens (in
all three schemes) is that the scheme allows a choice of variables, to suit the problem
at hand. (If there is a symmetry, or another way to separate (de-couple) variables, the
best choice will almost always exploit it; see (Reduce) and (Separate) below.) But all
choices of a certain wide class are equally legitimate: this will give a sense in which
the general scheme’s equations are covariant.17

(Reduce): The ability to reduce the number of variables in a problem. By this I do
not mean the general idea of holding some variables negligible: whether as a matter of
what I labelled approximation or of idealization. Nor do I mean the speciﬁc idealization
labelled (Ideal) at the end of Section 1.2: i.e. treating inﬁnite or “large-ﬁnite” systems
as “small-ﬁnite”.

Rather, I mean a speciﬁc kind of elimination of variables from the description of a
problem, where the elimination is rigorously justiﬁed by the scheme in question. Two
main sorts of example of such elimination will recur in this paper. Namely, elimination
of:

(i) Variables that describe constraints, or the forces that maintain constraints. This

will be prominent in Section 3.

(ii) Variables that describe diﬀerent values of a constant of the motion. Recall from
IR of a constant of the motion f means we
Section 2.1.3 that knowing the value c
can analyse the motion wholly within the level set f −1(
). As we shall see, constants
of the motion typically arise from a symmetry of the system. This will be prominent
in Section 4.4 onwards.

∈

{

}

c

A simple “toy” example of all of (Fewer), (Wider) and (Reduce) is provided by
one-dimensional conservative systems: by which is meant any system described by a
17The morals arising from allowance of arbitrary coordinates turn out to be very diﬀerent from
those arising from general covariance in spacetime theories. This is not surprising: after all, since the
manifold we are concerned with is a state-space, not spacetime, at most one point of the manifold is
“occupied” or “realized” at any one time.

26

diﬀerential equation, for a single real variable as a function of time x(t), of the form

¨x = F (x) ; F a diﬀerentiable function deﬁned on a real interval.

(2.21)

In mechanical terms, these are systems with one conﬁgurational degree of freedom,
such as a point-particle moving frictionlessly in one spatial dimension.

It is easy to show that for any such system, the total energy E, the sum of the

potential and kinetic energies T and V

E := T + V :=

F (ξ) dξ

(2.22)

1
2

˙x2

x

− Z

x0

is a constant of the motion. And this implies that the motion of the system can be
explicitly solved in the sense of being reduced to a single integration; (though we may
be able to do the integration only numerically: ‘quadrature’). For by solving eq. 2.22
for ˙x, the problem of integrating the second-order eq. 2.21 is reduced to integrating

This has the solution (cf. Paragraph 2.1.2.B’s ﬁrst example of quadrature, eq. 2.3)

˙x =

√

2E

±

{

−

V (x)

.

}

dx

± Z

√

2E

{

−

V (x)

}

=

dt

t ;

≡

Z

(2.23)

(2.24)

which we then invert so as to give x as a function of t.

To spell out the illustration of the three merits:— The conservation of energy re-
duces the problem from two dimensions (variables)—from needing to both know x and
˙x—to one: (Reduce). A single function V describes the system: (Fewer). And our
method solves, in the sense of quadrature, an entire class of problems: (Wider).

(Separate): The ability to change to variables that are “de-coupled”, in that one

has to solve, either:

(a) ideally, independent rather than coupled equations; or
(b) much more commonly, equations that are coupled less strongly (at least not

pairwise!) to one another than was the originally given set.

1 will typically leave us, after we solve the (n

This merit often occurs in association with (Reduce). Reducing a problem from n
1)-variable problem,
dt = f (q1, . . . , qn−1)
dt as a function of the other variables, which are now

variables to n
having to ﬁnd the nth variable, qn say, from a single equation dqn
where the right-hand side gives dqn
themselves given as functions of time. So qn can be found by quadrature.

−

−

More speciﬁcally, it also occurs in the method of separation of variables. Paragraph
2.1.2.B’s example (ii) gave the simplest example of this method; but it will come to
the fore in Hamilton-Jacobi theory.

I submit that this is an impressive list of merits, especially since all three schemes
have all of them. In any case, it ﬁlls out my claim that analytical mechanics is devoted
to providing general schemes for representing and solving mechanical problems.

27

In Section 2.1’s opening statement of my main moral about method, (Scheme), I
also claimed that the provision of such schemes is a signiﬁcant topic in the analysis of
scientiﬁc theories—not least because it falls between two topics often emphasised by
philosophers, “laws of nature” and “models”.

Assessing my claim must largely rest with the reader. But I think there are two
reasons why philosophers should take note of (Scheme)—apart from the simple fact
that one science, viz. analytical mechanics, is mostly devoted to such schemes, and has
succeeded most impressively. These reasons concern how the development of schemes
for treating “any” problem, is ignored in the philosophical literature; (or so it seems
to me). I think this happens in two ways. The ﬁrst relates to observations; the second
relates to theory, and will be taken up in the next moral.

As to observations: the literature emphasizes the “opposite” idea. That is, it
emphasizes what it takes to account for, or give a model of, given observations (or
a given phenomenon): and in particular, the nature of the approximations involved.
Indeed, one inﬂuential vein of literature emphasizes the limitations of theory. Namely,
it stresses that one needs to choose a model that one can solve in some strong sense
(as people say: exactly, or nearly exactly), and then exploit it as much as possible to
deal with other problems. (Here ‘model’ and ‘solve’ have various senses, for various
examples and various authors: for example, contrast Kuhn’s emphasis on exemplars
in the Postscript (1970) of his (1962), with Cartwright (1999).) I agree this happens
often, maybe “all the time”, in science.18 But—my moral again—we should also note
the “opposite”, i.e. schemes for treating any problem in a large class.

My second reason for noting (Scheme), relating to theory rather than observations,

is covered in my second, minor, moral about method.

2.1.5 Reformulating and Restricting a Theory: (Reformulate) and (Re-

strict)

Most of the philosophical literature conceives the development of a theory as a matter
of increasing the theory’s logical strength (information content). The two main ways in
which this can happen are taken to be: deepening the theory’s account of the phenom-
ena in its domain (especially by invoking a more detailed causal and/or microstructural
account); and extending the theory to new phenomena, outside its domain. Again, I
agree this happens often, and maybe “all the time”. But one should also notice the
“opposite” idea: theory development without an increase in logical strength. There are
18But I think this literature also misses a point about the frequent exploitation of a single model:
namely that there are sometimes good theoretical reasons for the selection of the preferred model,
and for the success of its application to other problems. The obvious example in physics concerns
x2 the simplest polynomial
analysing problems in terms of harmonic oscillators. Not only is V
way to specify a spatially varying force; also, Taylor’s theorem implies that locally it provides the
dominant contribution to a generic smoothly spatially varying force. Of course, such considerations
are the springboard for a wealth of theory: the obvious example is the analysis of small oscillations
about equilibrium; and catastrophe theory (Butterﬁeld 2004b) provides a very advanced example.

∝

28

two main cases to consider. The new formulation might be equivalent (theoretically,
not just empirically) to the old; I call it (Reformulate). Or it might be logically weaker;
I call it (Restrict).

Agreed: the ﬁrst case, (Reformulate), is old news. That is, it is not controver-
sial that providing equivalent formulations of a theory can be very signiﬁcant, both
methodologically and ontologically. For one of a pair of theoretically equivalent formu-
lations might extend better than the other to another domain of phenomena; or deal
better, in some sense, with the given domain. This can even be so when theoretical
equivalence is construed strongly enough that theoretical equivalence implies, or near
enough implies, that the two formulations have the same ontology.19

But analytical mechanics provides several examples of equivalent formulations, for
which this old news is worth reading; for three reasons. The ﬁrst reason relates back
to (Scheme): one of the equivalent formulations might have the speciﬁc methodolog-
ical advantage of providing such a scheme. Second, as to ontology: such equivalent
formulations help rebut the false idea that classical mechanics gives us a single matter-
in-motion picture. Third, these equivalences are subtler than is suggested by textbook
impressions, and folklore slogans like ‘Lagrangian and Newtonian mechanics are equiv-
alent’.

The second case, (Restrict), at ﬁrst seems paradoxical: how can one develop a
theory by restricting it, i.e. by decreasing its logical strength? My answer to this again
relates to (Scheme), but I can state it in general terms. For it reﬂects the usual trade-
oﬀ in scientiﬁc enquiry between the aims of covering (i.e. describing and explaining)
a wide domain of phenomena, and covering phenomena in detail—between width and
depth, as people say. So imagine a case where a theory admits, for just a subset of its
domain of phenomena, a formulation which oﬀers, for just that subset, advantages of
“depth”. In such a case, it could be best to restrict one’s attention to the subset, and
pursue just the special formulation.

Analytical mechanics provides several major examples of this; we will see some as
early as Sections 3.1 and 3.2. Besides, in analytical mechanics the advantage of “depth”
oﬀered by the special formulation is not a more detailed causal and/or microstructural
account, or even the possibility of adding such an account. It is rather the provision of
a general scheme for solving problems; (or adding further merits to a given scheme).
So in these examples, (Restrict) is not simply a preliminary to adding logical strength.
Furthermore, in these examples, the special formulation and the original general theory
are often logically equivalent, as regards what they say about the given subset of
phenomena. So in this way, (Restrict) and (Reformulate) will often be exempliﬁed
19Here are two examples from non-relativistic quantum mechanics of a ﬁxed number of particles:
(i) the Schr¨odinger and Heisenberg pictures; (ii) the wave-mechanical and path-integral formulations
of the position representation. The members of each pair are provably equivalent; and though the
ontology of quantum mechanics is a murky business, I think no one sees a relevant diﬀerence between
the members of a pair. But when we turn to relativistic quantum theories, in particular quantum ﬁeld
theory, each pair’s symmetry is broken:
in various ways, the Heisenberg picture and path-integral
formulation “win”.

29

together.

2.2 Ontology

In Section 1, I stressed that the ontology of classical mechanics is a subtler aﬀair than
the matter-in-motion picture suggests. This general point will be borne out in two
morals, which concern respectively: modality and objects.

2.2.1 Grades of modal involvement: (Modality)

As I said at the start of this Section, the starting-point of each of the schemes—
Lagrangian, Hamiltonian and Hamilton-Jacobi—is to postulate the state-space: the
set of all possible states of the system it is concerned with; (though the structure of
this set varies between the diﬀerent schemes).

At ﬁrst sight, the philosophical import of this would seem to be at most some un-
controversial version of the idea that laws support counterfactuals. That is: whether or
not one believes in a ﬁrm distinction between laws of nature and accidental generaliza-
tions, and whatever one’s preferred account of counterfactuals, a theory (or “model”)
that states ‘All As are Bs’ surely in some sense warrants counterfactuals like ‘If any
object were an A, it would be a B’. And so when analytic mechanics postulates state-
space and then speciﬁes e.g.
laws of motion on it, it seems at ﬁrst that this just
corresponds to the passage from ‘All actual systems of this kind (having such-and-such
initial states—usually a “small” proper subset of state-space) evolve thus-and-so’ to
‘If any system of this kind were in any of its possible initial states, it would evolve
thus-and-so’.20

But this ﬁrst impression is deceptive. The structures with which state-space is
equipped by analytical mechanics, and the constructions in which it is involved, make
for a much more varied and nuanced involvement with modality than is suggested by
just the idea that laws support counterfactuals. This is my third moral, which I call
(Modality).

I propose to delineate, in Quinean fashion, three grades of modal involvement; so
I shall write (Modality;1st) etc. Like Quine’s three grades, the ﬁrst is intuitively the
mildest grade, and the third the strongest. But this order will not correspond to
any ordering of the three schemes, Lagrangian, Hamiltonian and Hamilton-Jacobi. In
particular, this paper’s scheme, the Lagrangian one, was historically the ﬁrst, and is
in various respects the most elementary, of the three: but it exhibits the third grade of
modal involvement.

20Here, and in all that follows, I of course set aside the (apparent!) fact that the actual world is
quantum, not classical; so that I can talk about e.g. an actual system obeying Hamilton’s Principle.
Since my business throughout is the philosophy of classical mechanics, it is unnecessary to encumber
my argument, from time to time, with antecedents like ‘If the world were not quantum’: I leave you
to take them in your stride. Cf. also footnote 10 in Section 2.1.1.

30

The grades are deﬁned in terms of which kind of actual matters of fact they allow
to vary counterfactually. One kind is the given initial conditions, and/or ﬁnal and/or
boundary conditions; roughly speaking, this is the given initial state of the system.
Another kind is the given physical problem: which I here take as speciﬁed by a number
of degrees of freedom, and a Lagrangian or Hamiltonian. (In elementary terms, this
means: speciﬁed by the number of particles involved, and the forces between them.) A
third kind is the laws of motion, e.g. as speciﬁed by Newton’s or Hamilton’s equations.
Thus I propose the following grades.21

(Modality;1st): The ﬁrst i.e. mildest grade keeps ﬁxed the given actual physical
problem and laws of motion. But it considers diﬀerent initial conditions, and/or ﬁnal
and/or boundary conditions, than the actual given ones; roughly speaking, diﬀerent
initial states of the system. And so it also considers counterfactual histories of the
system. (Under determinism, a diﬀerent initial state implies a diﬀerent history, i.e.
trajectory in state-space.)

So this grade includes the idea above, that laws support counterfactuals. But it
will also include subtler modal involvements. Perhaps the most striking case occurs in
Hamilton-Jacobi theory. For details, cf. Butterﬁeld (2004d: Sec. 4, 2004e: Sec. 4) or
the companion paper. But in short: one solves a problem, as it might be an actual one,
by introducing an ensemble of systems, i.e. a set of possible systems, of which the actual
system is just one member. Furthermore, the ensemble can be chosen in such a way
that the problem is solved without performing integrations, i.e. just by diﬀerentiation
and elimination: a remarkable—one might well say ‘amazing’—technique.

(Modality;2nd): The second grade keeps ﬁxed the laws of motion, but considers
diﬀerent problems than the actual one (and thereby in general, diﬀerent initial states).
Such cases include considering a counterfactual number of degrees of freedom, or a
counterfactual potential function. Maybe no actual system is, nor even is well modelled
as, a Lagrangian system with 5,217 coordinates; and maybe no actual system has a
potential given (in certain units) by the polynomial 13x7 + 5x3 + 42. But analytical
mechanics (in all three schemes) considers such counterfactual cases. And one can have
good reason to do so, the obvious reason being that the counterfactual case provides
an idealization or approximation needed to get understanding of an actual system.

However, this second grade also includes more ambitious cases of considering coun-
terfactual problems: namely, cases where one makes a generalization about a whole
class of problems. An elementary example is the conservation of energy theorem, which
we will see in Lagrangian mechanics.22

21I don’t claim that these three grades are the best way to classify the modal involvements of
analytical mechanics. But they have the merit of being obvious, and of showing clearly the variety of
modal involvement that occurs. I also think:

(i): the grades could be sub-divided in various ways, for example using Section 3.1.1’s classiﬁcation

of kinds of constraints (or ﬁner classiﬁcations made in the literature);

(ii): similar grades can be discerned in other physical theories.

But I shall not develop (i) or (ii) here.

22Again: an advanced, indeed spectacular, example is the classiﬁcation of catastrophes by catastro-

31

(Modality;3rd): The third grade allows diﬀerent laws, even for a given problem.
Again, this can happen even in Lagrangian mechanics. Here one does not explicitly
formulate non-actual laws (much less calculate with them).
Instead, one states the
actual law as a condition that compares the actual history of the system with counter-
factual histories of it that do not obey the law (in philosophers’ jargon: are contralegal).
That is, the counterfactual histories share the initial (and ﬁnal) conditions, but do not
obey the given deterministic laws of motion, with the given forces. (Agreed, for any
suﬃciently smoothly varying counterfactual history, there could be forces which in
conjunction with the actual laws and initial and ﬁnal conditions, would yield the coun-
terfactual history. But this does not matter, in the sense that it is not appealed to in
the formulation of the actual law.)

This is at ﬁrst sight surprising, even mysterious. How can it be possible to state
the actual law by a comparison of the actual history with possible histories that do not
obey it? Besides, metaphysicians will recognize that this seems to contradict a Humean
view of laws, and in particular Lewis’ doctrine of Humean supervenience (Lewis 1986,
pp.ix-x). I address this issue at length elsewhere (2004e: Section 5). For this paper,
it suﬃces to note (and thereby reassure Humeans) that this third grade of modal
involvement can be reconciled with Humeanism.

To sum up this moral: the detail of analytical mechanics reveals it to have a varied

and nuanced involvement with modality.

2.2.2 Accepting Variety: (Accept)

it
My second moral is about ontology in a more obvious way than was (Modality):
is about what are the basic objects of analytical mechanics.
In general terms, it is
that this is a subtler and more varied aﬀair than suggested by the matter-in-motion
picture.23 More speciﬁcally, the ontology need not be “just point-particles”. I shall
develop this moral in three more speciﬁc points.

2.2.2.A Inﬁnite as ﬁnite, and conversely First, analytical mechanics is much
more ﬂexible about its basic ontology than one might think—especially if one thinks of
classical mechanics as requiring au fond point-particles. In particular, each of my three
schemes can treat both ﬁnite and inﬁnite systems. (By this I mean, respectively, sys-
tems with a ﬁnite, or inﬁnite, number of degrees of freedom.) Furthermore, each scheme

phe theory.

23This general idea is already suggested by the moral (Reformulate) of Section 2.1.5. For given
that the world is in fact quantum, we can only interpret a phrase like ‘the basic objects of analytical
mechanics’ as about the objects postulated by analytical mechanics. And we already know from (Re-
formulate) that diﬀerent approaches or theories within analytical mechanics might have heuristic, and
even ontological, diﬀerences (and might do so, even if they are in some sense theoretically equivalent).
So unless some single approach or theory is favoured, we already expect that analytical mechanics
might be pluralist about ontology.

32

can, starting with a system given to it as ﬁnite/inﬁnite, treat it as inﬁnite/ﬁnite—and
under appropriate circumstances, can justify doing so.

This point returns us to (Ideal), discussed at the end of Section 1.

I said there
that analytical mechanics typically describes bulk matter (bodies) in terms of a small
ﬁnite number of variables (degrees of freedom). But this idealization can be justiﬁed,
both empirically, and theoretically—by proving theorems to the eﬀect that collective
variables of many-dimensional systems (i.e. systems with many, even inﬁnitely many,
degrees of freedom) would behave as described by a low-dimensional analysis. So here
we see analytical mechanics treating an inﬁnite or “large-ﬁnite” system as “small-
ﬁnite”—and justifying its doing so.

But the “converse” can also happen. Analytical mechanics has (on all three ap-
proaches) a rigorous formalism for describing inﬁnite systems (aka: continuous sys-
tems); though as mentioned in Section 1, I’ll say nothing about these formalisms. But
the use of such a formalism does not commit one to the described system being re-
ally inﬁnite. When for example, analytical mechanics describes a string or a gas as a
continuous system (so as to describe e.g. sound waves in it), it is not committed to
the string or gas really having inﬁnitely many degrees of freedom. For a ﬁnite system
can have so many degrees of freedom as to justify a model that treats it as contin-
uous. For example, one can treat the density or pressure in a gas as a continuous
function of spatial position, but take this function to represent, in an idealized way,
an average over a macroscopically small volume, of very many microscopic degrees of
freedom. And again, the justiﬁcation for this kind of treatment can be both empirical
and theoretical. (Continuous models of discrete phenomena are of course not special
to analytical mechanics: they are endemic in physics.)

To sum up: when analytical mechanics successfully describes a system as ﬁnite/inﬁnite,

the system could really (i.e. in a classical world!) be the “opposite”, i.e inﬁnite/ﬁnite: a
salutary lesson in ﬂexibility, and an antidote to the matter-in-motion picture (whether
it takes matter as continuous bodies or as point-particles).

2.2.2.B Beware micro-reductionism Second, analytical mechanics is less micro-
reductionist than one might think—especially if one focusses on the matter-in-motion
picture.
In particular, if a given approach to analytical mechanics is applied to a
problem or range of problems, and some objects (or quantities i.e. variables) are
deﬁned from the fundamental objects etc. postulated by the approach, then we should
accept the derived objects etc. as no less real than the fundamental ones.

Here, I say ‘accept as no less real than the fundamental objects’, rather than ‘accept
as real, like the fundamental objects’, in order not to presuppose, nor favour, some
version of scientiﬁc realism—either in general or about analytical mechanics. Like
most others including anti-realists like van Fraassen, I take interpreting a physical
theory to be a matter of describing what the world would be like if it were true: an
endeavour that makes sense even if as an anti-realist, one is agnostic, or even atheistic,
about theories’ assertions about unobservables.

33

I admit that this point raises issues about reductionism etc. which I cannot address

here.24 Suﬃce it to make two remarks in defence of the point.

(a): Since it concerns deﬁned objects and quantities, it is surely plausible: why

deny reality to what is deﬁned in terms of the real?

(b): This point is of course related to Paragraph 2.2.2.A above. For many if not
most examples of deﬁned quantities are collective variables, typically of inﬁnite or
“large-ﬁnite” systems. And as in Paragraph 2.2.2.A, there are two main cases: the
deﬁned variable might be used in a “small-ﬁnite” description of the system; or it might
be used in a continuous description (for example, taking a continuous function of spatial
position to represent a macroscopically local average of very many microscopic degrees
of freedom). So for collective variables as examples of deﬁned quantities, my second
point is in eﬀect an application of my ﬁrst to the topic of reductionism.

Here is an example combining these points. Consider a circular wave spreading on a
still pond. An analytical mechanical treatment will no doubt identify a few variables,
such as the radius and height of the wave as relevant; and so describe the crest as
propagating radially, though no water molecules do (except brieﬂy). But apart from
these few variables, analytical mechanics can treat the problem in three main ways.
Either it uses just these few variables; or it takes the water to be composed of a vast
number of particles; or it takes the water to be a continuum:(Paragraph 2.2.2.A).
According to the last two ways, the few selected variables are collective variables of a
very complex system; but they are no less real than they are on the ﬁrst treatment:
(this Paragraph).

To put these points in a slogan: we should accept that analytical mechanics suggests
a varied ontology. Hence my label, (Accept). This slogan will be sharpened in the
next Paragraph. Though it mostly concerns inﬁnite systems i.e. continua, while my
subsequent Sections are conﬁned to ﬁnite systems, it is worth expounding it here—not
least because it exposes a common “micro-reductionist” error.

2.2.2.C Beware the particles-in-motion picture One might reply to Paragraphs
2.2.2.A and 2.2.2.B that nevertheless point-particles are the “basic micro-ontology” of
analytical mechanics. For when analytical mechanics conceives a body or a ﬂuid as a
continuum, it thereby postulates point-sized “bits of stuﬀ”, “cheek by jowl” with one
another. Agreed, these are not point-particles in the sense of mass-points separated
from each other by a void; (the sense usually associated with Boscovitch—though in
fact the notion was introduced two decades earlier by Euler). But they are close cousins,
and deserve the name ‘point-particle’. For each has a deﬁnite position and so also its
time-derivatives (velocity, acceleration etc.), mass-density—and other properties, such
as pressure, depending on the details of the continuum being treated.

24Section 2 of Butterﬁeld and Isham (1999) is a brief statement of my general views. It stresses
how widespread explicit deﬁnability is within physics. Wilson stresses such deﬁnability in analytical
mechanics, and puts it to work in a critique of currently popular doctrines in the metaphysics of mind
and of properties; (1985: 230-238; 1993: 75-80).

34

I reply: fair comment. I am willing to agree that point-particles, in this weak sense
including point-sized bits of matter in a continuum as well as Boscovitchean point-
particles, are the “basic micro-ontology” of analytical mechanics. Accordingly, I will
from Section 3 onwards adopt the common habit of saying ‘particle’ to mean, according
to context, either:

(i) a point-particle (Boscovitchean or not); or following (Ideal),
(ii): a small solid (maybe rigid) body, which is assigned just one position vector r,

i.e. treated as having no internal structure or orientation.

But beware! Point-particles being the basic objects does not mean that analytical
mechanics should be, or even can be, understood in a particle-by-particle way. And
in fact, it cannot be. Here, we meet what Section 1.1 called the second error in the
idea that classical mechanics is unproblematic: what I call the ‘particles-in-motion
picture’. This picture claims that analytical mechanics can and should be understood
in a particle-by-particle way: i.e. that analytical mechanics not only takes matter to be
composed of point-particles (in the above weak sense), but also analyses all the physics
of matter’s behaviour in terms of particle-to-particle relations.

It is this second claim that is false. Agreed, some parts of analytical mechanics
conform to it. The main example is of course the analytical mechanics of point-particles
in the stricter i.e. Boscovitchean sense, with action-at-a-distance forces. Here the main
illustration of the claim is that the total force on each particle is the sum of the forces
exerted on it by each other particle. That is, all the fundamental forces are from one
particle to another; in physics jargon, all interactions are two-body, not many-body.
The standard example is of course Newtonian gravity.25

Agreed also, some parts of the analytical mechanics of continua conform to it.
For example, the forms of the terms in the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian densities for
continua are in many cases deduced by conceiving the continua as an inﬁnite limit of
a large ﬁnite assembly of point-particles. For example, one assumes that each point-
particle in the assembly interacts only with its nearest neighbours, and does so by a
quadratic potential (which might be modelled by a spring).26

25The way I have stated this illustration assumes that the component forces are just as real as the
total force on a particle. Though I fully accept this assumption, it has been denied. No matter: the
illustration could be restated in more cumbersome language so as to be independent of this controversy.
26This kind of deduction (which goes back to at least Green (1855) and Thomson (1863)) raises an
interesting methodological and historical point. Namely, if the deduced continuum model is empirically
successful, it is tempting to think the assumptions are not “merely heuristic”, a ladder to be thrown
away `a la Wittgenstein, once the continuum treatment is written down. That would represent “too
great a coincidence”: we should expect a body or ﬂuid, which is well modelled as a continuum with such
Lagrangian and Hamiltonian densities, to consist in fact of a vast number of point-particles of some
sort, that (to a good approximation) interact as assumed, e.g. with a nearest-neighbour quadratic
potential. In other words (with less connotation of scientiﬁc realism—and of our acquaintance with
quantum theory!): we should interpret analytical mechanics, when it successfully describes a body or
ﬂuid as a continuum with such densities, as idealizing in the way discussed in Paragraph 2.2.2.A—as
taking the body or ﬂuid to be a swarm of such interacting point-particles.

Indeed, this line of thought was pursued and contested in the nineteenth century debates about the
foundations of classical mechanics; but I shall not go into this. In any case, it is only in many, not in

35

Nevertheless, the claim is false. In fact, the analytical mechanics of continua has to
be formulated in terms of spatially extended regions and their properties and relations.
Two examples will suﬃce: one is kinematical, the other dynamical.

(i): I mentioned above that a point-sized bit of stuﬀ in a continuum (a point-particle,
in the weaker sense) has a mass-density. At ﬁrst sight, that seems to support the
particles-in-motion picture: that the mass of a ﬁnite volume is the integral of the mass-
density seems to be a case, albeit a very simple one, of “micro-reductionism” or the
“supervenience of the global on the local”. But in fact a rigourous formulation proceeds
in the opposite direction.
It takes as primitive the attribution of masses to ﬁnite
volumes, and deﬁnes mass-density as a limit of ratios of mass to volume, as the volume
tends to zero; (the details are taken over from measure theory). Besides this opposite
procedure is necessary, in order to avoid various conundrums; (unsurprisingly, these
conundrums are not really speciﬁc to mass—they have analogues in general measure
theory.)

(ii): One cannot understand the forces operating in continua (whether solids or
ﬂuids) as particle-to-particle. In particular, returning to Section 1.1’s example of two
continuous bodies that touch, at a point or over a ﬁnite region: it is wrong to think
each point-sized bit of matter exerts a force on some (maybe “nearby”) particles, or
on all other particles. Rather, one needs to consider, for each arbitrary ﬁnite (i.e. not
inﬁnitesimal) portion of matter: (a) a force exerted on its entirety by matter outside
it, and (b) a force exerted at each point of its surface by matter outside it. (Agreed,
this strategy, of describing the forces on all the countless overlapping extended sub-
regions of a continuum, is highly “redundant”, in the sense that each sub-region is
described countless times, viz. as a part of the description of a larger region in which
it is included. Nevertheless, analytical mechanics adopts—and needs to adopt—this
strategy.)

To sum up: (i) and (ii) both show that in the mechanics of continua, one can-
not analyse the physics wholly in terms of particle-to-particle relations: the particles-
in-motion picture is false. Rather, one needs to take spatially extended regions as
primitives.27

all, cases that the Lagrangian or Hamiltonian densities are deduced by taking such an inﬁnite limit.
27My 2004a gives a more detailed critique of the particles-in-motion picture; it also connects the
picture to philosophical concerns about intrinsic properties, and Humean supervenience. My 2004
applies this critique to the philosophical debate about the nature of objects’ persistence through time.
For more technical details about (i) and (ii), cf. e.g.: Truesdell (1991, Sections II.2, III.1, III.5);
and for (ii), Marsden and Hughes (1983), Section A.2 and Chapter 2. Topic (ii) has a rich history.
It was Euler who in 1775 ﬁrst realized continuum mechanics’ need for (a) and (b); but the road to
general acceptance was long and complex. For a glimpse of this history (emphasising the relation to
the principle of rigidiﬁcation), cf. Casey (1991: especially 333, 362-369).

36

3 Analytical mechanics introduced

3.0 Diﬃculties of the vectorial approach to mechanics
In expounding the an-
alytical mechanics of ﬁnite-dimensional systems, one can of course take various routes.
In this Section, my route will be based on those of Goldstein et al. (2002) and Lanczos
(1986).

First of all, I will motivate analytical mechanics by considering two diﬃculties faced
by the more elementary approach to mechanics familiar from high school (mentioned
in Section 1.1). Roughly speaking, this approach takes the motion of each body to be
determined by the vector sum of all forces on it. More precisely, a body is taken to be
either:

(i) a Boscovitchean point-particle; or
(ii) (following (Ideal), the idealization discussed at the end of Section 1): a body
which is small and rigid enough to be assigned just one position vector r, i.e. to be
treated as having no internal structure or orientation; or

(iii) composed of particles in sense (i) or (ii).

I shall from now on use ‘particle’ in this way, i.e. to mean (i) or (ii). Then according
to this approach, the motion of each particle is to be determined by the vector sum of
all forces on it. So to determine the motion of a system of particles labelled by i is in
principle to solve

mi¨ri = Fi = ΣjFij + F(e)
i

(3.1)

where Fij is the force on particle i due to particle j, and F(e)
is the external force on
i
particle i. (Here I will wholly set aside the topic, familiar in philosophy of physics, of
the need to identify inertial frames with respect to which the quantities in eq. 3.1 are
to be measured.) This is often called the vectorial approach to mechanics.28

In general, solving eq. 3.1 is so complex as to be utterly intractable, since there
are countless particles in any macroscopic body. But the vectorial approach has two
tactics, one empirical and one theoretical, for simplifying the problem. They are both
aspects of (Ideal).

(i): It is often empirically adequate to treat the body in question as a particle (e.g.
a bob on a pendulum), or as a small set of particles; perhaps with other simpliﬁcations,
such as all the forces acting at the body’s centre of mass.

(ii): Some problems allow an assumption about, and-or an analysis of, the many
inter-particle forces, that greatly simpliﬁes the problem. The simpliﬁcation may even
allow the problem to be solved in some “medium sense” such as quadrature. The
standard example is the rigid body: conceived as composed of particles, it is deﬁned
as having constant inter-particle distances. The conﬁguration of the body in space can
28It is also called ‘Newtonian’; eq. 3.1, or ‘F = ma’, being the most familiar form of Newton’s
second law. But this name is anachronistic. In particular: (i) it was Euler in 1749 who ﬁrst wrote
down F = m d2r
dt2 , though in cartesian coordinates rather than vector notation (which was developed
only in the nineteenth century e.g. by Heaviside and Gibbs (Crowe 1985)); (ii) it was Boscovitch
(1758) who advocated an ontology of point-particles moving in a void.

37

then be speciﬁed by just six numbers.29 And other assumptions may further simplify
the problem. For example, the assumption that internal forces lie along the lines
between particles implies that internal forces do no work; which further implies that if
these forces are derived from a potential, then the internal potential energy is constant.

But these tactics are of limited value when one considers constrained systems, i.e.
systems that are required to be placed, or to move, in certain limited ways. For con-
straints lead to two diﬃculties, which tactics (i) and (ii) cannot in general overcome—
and which analytical mechanics, in particular Lagrangian mechanics, does overcome.
Namely:—

(Dependent): Constraints imply that the ri are not independent: i.e. one cannot
in imagination vary each of them while leaving all the others ﬁxed. (This implication
holds good, whether ri represents the position of a body, using (Ideal), or the position
of a point-particle.) Note that independence and dependence of the ri is a modal
notion: I shall return to this in Section 3.1.

(Unknown): In general, the forces that maintain the constraints (forces of con-
straint; aka: forces of reaction) are not known. Thus we may suppose that we know
impressed, or given, or active, forces)
what are often called the applied forces (aka:
on each particle: forces like gravity, spring forces etc. that apply to the parts of the
system whether constrained or not. (So ‘applied’ does not mean ‘external’: the source
of an applied force can be internal to the system.) Even so, we will in general not know
the constraint forces on the system, e.g. from the surface on which it rests and across
which it is constrained to move. And so the use of eq. 3.1 is forestalled.30

Lagrangian mechanics overcomes these diﬃculties; (as do Hamiltonian and Hamilton-
Jacobi mechanics). In short: for (Dependent), one eliminates variables so as to work
with a smaller set of variables which are independent. As for (Unknown): under re-
markably general conditions, one can solve problems without knowing the constraint
forces! Furthermore, after solving the problem, one can then calculate the constraint
forces:
in eﬀect, they have the values they need to have so as to maintain the con-
straints.

So for both diﬃculties, Lagrangian mechanics will illustrate the strategy of reducing

the number of variables that describe a problem—i.e. the merit (Reduce).

Section 3.1 will describe how to overcome (Dependent). Section 3.2 will begin on
it describes the principle of virtual work
the topic of how to overcome (Unknown):
and Lagrange’s method of multipliers. The last Subsection, Section 3.3, introduces
29Here is an argument for the number six (which works even if the body is continuous). (1): Rigidity
implies that the positions of all the particles are ﬁxed once we ﬁx the position of just three of them.
if the tips of three of your ﬁngers were placed at three given positions within a rigid
For imagine:
brick, and someone speciﬁed the exact positions of the ﬁnger-tips, then they would have implicitly
speciﬁed the positions of all the brick’s constituent parts. (2): the position of three particles given as
forming a certain triangle can be speciﬁed by six numbers.

30This point is not aﬀected by the vagueness of my distinction between applied and constraint
forces. For if one wishes, one can deﬁne the applied forces as the known ones (e.g. Desloge 1982: 528),
so that it is merely usual that unknown forces maintain constraints.

38

d’Alembert’s principle, and from that deduces Lagrange’s equations. These lie at the
centre of Lagrangian mechanics, which is further developed in Section 4.

Here I should stress a qualiﬁcation about this order of exposition: a qualiﬁcation
which will become clearer in Section 3.3. To get to Lagrange’s equations, it is not nec-
essary to proceed as I do, via the principle of virtual work and d’Alembert’s principle.
One could go “straight” from eq. 3.1 to Lagrange’s equations; and some ﬁne exposi-
tions do. But as John Bell said, about how to teach special relativity: ‘the longer road
sometimes gives more familiarity with the country’ (1987: 77).

We will see all four of my morals illustrated in this Section. I already mentioned
the merit (Reduce). By and large, the minor morals, (Reformulate), (Restrict) and
(Accept) will be a bit more prominent than the main ones, (Scheme) and (Modality).
But these two will come to dominate in Section 4 onwards.

3.1 Conﬁguration space

The key to overcoming the ﬁrst diﬃculty, (Dependent), lies in what can claim to
It will be clearest to
be Lagrangian mechanics’ leading idea: conﬁguration space.
ﬁrst describe how this idea addresses (Dependent) (Section 3.1.1), and then turn to
describing dynamics in terms of conﬁguration space (Section 3.1.2).

3.1.1 Constraints and generalized coordinates

The idea is to represent the conﬁguration of the entire system by a point in a higher-
dimensional space. This is the basic version of the idea of state-space, which, as
discussed in Section 2, underlies all my morals and all three schemes of analytical
mechanics.
Indeed, one might expect this, simply in view of determinism—which
implies that for a given system and given forces on it,“all problems” are ﬁxed by all
initial conditions, and so by the state-space: (Modality;1st). But we can already be
more speciﬁc.

Namely, we can state two important advantages of the idea of state space.
(i): Such a space can be described using many diﬀerent coordinate systems (in
ways analysed in detail in diﬀerential geometry). This yields a striking generalization
of the idea of changing variables the better to solve a problem. Stated thus, the idea
is endemic to science and hardly remarkable. But allowing arbitrary coordinates on a
state-space suggests that one develop a scheme that encompasses all choices of variables,
with a view to obtaining the most tractable representation (if one is lucky: a solution,
at least in Section 2.1.1’s “medium sense”) of any problem: the merit (Wider).

(ii) Using a state-space allows us to relate dynamics to the geometry of higher-
dimensional spaces, in particular their curvature. (These two advantages were ﬁrst
emphasized by Jacobi.)

Returning to the diﬃculty (Dependent), the main ingredient for overcoming it is
the idea of allowing arbitrary coordinates on conﬁguration space, i.e. (i) above. To

39

spell this out, I need to ﬁrst state two independent distinctions between constraints. I
will also need these distinctions throughout what follows; in fact most of my discussion
will concern the ﬁrst half of each distinction.

Holonomic constraints are expressible in the form of say k equations

fj(r1, r2, . . . , t) = 0; where j = 1, 2, . . . k

(3.2)

governing the coordinates ri. The obvious example is any rigid body: the constraints
are expressed by the equations stating the ﬁxed inter-particle distances. (The term
“holonomic” is due to Hertz.) On the other hand, non-holonomic constraints are not
thus expressible; though they might be expressible by inequalities, or by equations
governing diﬀerentials of coordinates. For example:–

(i): conﬁnement of a particle to one side of a surface (e.g. one particle conﬁned
to the region beyond a sphere of radius a centred at the origin—expressed by the
inequality

2 > a2);

(ii): a rigid body rolling without slipping on a surface; the condition of rolling is a
condition on the velocities (i.e. that the point of contact is stationary), a diﬀerential
condition which can be given an integrated form only once the problem is solved.

r1 |

|

Scleronomous (respectively: rheonomous) constraints are independent of (depen-
dent on) time. (The terminology is due to Boltzmann: “scleronomic” and “rheonomic”
are also used.) So the time-argument in eq. 3.2 (and in corresponding equations for
non-holonomic constraints) is to allow for rheonomous constraints.

As to overcoming the diﬃculty (Dependent), the situation is clearest for holonomic
constraints. The idea is to use our free choice of coordinate systems on conﬁguration
space so as to describe the system by appropriate independent variables, called gener-
alized coordinates. So consider a system of N particles (i.e. point-particles or bodies
small and rigid enough to be described by a single position vector r), with k holonomic
constraints. The system’s conﬁguration (r1, r2, . . . , rN ) is at each time conﬁned to a
hypersurface in IR3N which will in general be (3N
k)-dimensional. (Rheonomous
constraints just mean that the hypersurface in question varies with time.)

−

More precisely: we say the k constraints eq. 3.2, fj = 0 are (functionally) indepen-
fj (i.e. with
)) are linearly independent: i.e. if at each point, the

dent if at each point on the hypersurface, the 3N-dimensional gradients
cartesian coordinates ( ∂fj
k

3N matrix with entries ∂fj
If the constraints are independent, then the hypersurface to which the system is
k)-dimensional, and

conﬁned (for rheonomous constraints: at a given time) is (3N
there is a system of coordinates on IR3N in which the constraints become

has maximal rank k.31

∂x1 , . . . , ∂fj

∂x1 , . . . , ∂fj

∂zN

∂zN

∇

×

−

q3N −k+1 = 0, . . . , q3N = 0 .

(3.3)

(These generalized coordinates need not have the dimension of position.)
words, there are 3N

In other
k independent variables q1, . . . , q3N −k coordinatizing the hyper-

31Cf. the deﬁnition of functional independence in Paragraph 2.1.3.A, (iii).

−

40

surface, such that (again allowing for rheonomous constraints)

ri = ri(q1, . . . , q3N −k, t),

i = 1, 2, . . . , N.

(3.4)

Such coordinates are said to be adapted to the constraints. I shall usually focus
on the hypersurface, not the ambient 3N-dimensional conﬁguration space; and I shall
write n for 3N
k, and therefore write the generalized coordinates as q1, . . . , qn. The
n-dimensional space is sometimes called the constraint surface in the 3N-dimensional
space; ‘conﬁguration space’ is used for either of these spaces.

−

Conﬁguration space, and the way it underlies (Scheme), will be centre-stage in this

Section and Section 4.

First of all, let me address two doubts which can be raised about this strategy
of analysing the system wholly within the lower-dimensional constraint surface. (The
second is more important in what follows.)

(A): In everyday problems the constraints are often non-holonomic; as in examples
(i) and (ii) above. Here we see our ﬁrst example of the moral (Restrict); and a main
one to boot. In fact, many of the methods and results of analytical mechanics depend
on the constraints, if any, being holonomic; and most of my discussion will assume this.

(B): Since forces of constraint are in fact ﬁnite, a constrained system is not rigor-
ously conﬁned to the constraint surface—it can depart slightly from it; (more precisely,
its conﬁguration can depart slightly).

There are three replies to this. The simplest and dullest is that the forces of con-
straint are often strong enough that this strategy is an empirically adequate idealiza-
tion. (Incidentally, it is an idealization in Section 2.1.4’s proposed usage of neglecting
the negligible while posing, not while solving, the problem.)

A more interesting reply is that there are theorems proving that in the limit as the
forces of constraint become inﬁnitely strong, the system’s dynamics in the full conﬁg-
uration space becomes as analytical mechanics describes it, on the constraint surface.
Such theorems illustrate (Ideal) and (Accept). I will report such a theorem in Para-
graph 3.3.2.A.

Finally, the most interesting reply is one of the triumphs of Lagrangian mechanics—
and a prime example of the merit (Reduce). Namely, suppose we maintain—say on
the strength of the ﬁrst two replies—that the constraint equations hold, i.e. the sys-
tem is conﬁned to the constraint surface. Then: under some very general conditions,
Lagrangian mechanics enables us to rigorously solve the mechanical problem, i.e. to
ﬁnd the generalized coordinates q1, . . . , qn as functions of time (at least in a “medium
sense” such as quadrature), without ever knowing the forces of constraint!32 Further-
more, after solving the problem in this way, we can come back and calculate what the
constraint forces were (as a function of time).

32To anticipate a little: it is suﬃcient for this ability that the constraints are holonomic and ideal,

and the applied forces are monogenic.

41

3.1.2 Kinetic energy and work

In this Subsection, I describe how to represent on conﬁguration space, notions which are
close cousins of the two sides of Newton’s second law—the ma representing a body’s
inertia and the F representing the force on it. For in analytical mechanics, these
Newtonian notions are displaced as central concepts by these cousins: respectively, the
kinetic energy, and the work done by the forces (which latter is in many cases the
derivative of a certain function, the work function, i.e. the negative of the potential
energy). Thus:–

(a): The analogue of inertia:– The kinetic energy T := Σi

1

2 miv2

i deﬁnes a line-

element (in modern jargon: a metric) in the 3N-dimensional conﬁguration space by

(ds)2

ds2 := 2T dt2 = Σimiv2

i dt2 = Σimi(dx2

i + dy2

i + dz2

i ) .

(3.5)

≡

Incidentally, this implies that

T =

m

1
2

2

ds
dt !

 

with m = 1 ;

(3.6)

i.e. the system’s kinetic energy is represented by the kinetic energy (relative to the
new line-element) of a single particle of mass 1.

(b): The analogue of force:– To explain this, I need the idea, which will be crucial in
all that follows, of a virtual displacement. This idea also provides a main example of the
moral (Modality;1st). That is, it considers counterfactual states, but not counterfactual
problems or laws—indeed, so far laws are not in play.

A virtual displacement, δri, of particle i is deﬁned as a possible displacement of
i that is consistent with both the applied force Fa
i , and the force of constraint fi, on
particle i, at the given time. Here, it will be consistency with the constraints at the
given time that matters. We similarly deﬁne a virtual displacement of the system as
possible displacements of its particles that are jointly consistent with the constraints
at the time. We will usually be concerned with arbitrarily small virtual displacements,
often called ‘inﬁnitesimal’; and I will usually omit this word.

We can express this more precisely by supposing the constraints yield diﬀerential
conditions on the coordinates. (Warning: This paragraph is more precise than I will
it is not used later on.) If the constraints are holonomic, as in eq 3.2, we can
need:
diﬀerentiate to get the diﬀerential conditions; if the constraints are rheonomous, at
least one of the conditions will be time-dependent. So if the conditions are, in terms
of n generalized coordinates (and with k constraints),

ΣjAij(q1, . . . , qn, t)dqj + Ait(q1, . . . , qn, t)dt = 0 ;

i = 1, . . . , k,

(3.7)

then a virtual displacement of the system at time t is deﬁned to be any solution
(δq1, . . . , δqn) of the k equations

ΣjAij(q1, . . . , qn, t)δqj = 0 ;

i = 1, . . . , k.

(3.8)

42

Obviously, virtual displacements need not be actual. But beware: the converse also
fails: actual displacements need not be virtual, because the forces and constraints might
vary with time (the rheonomous case), and virtual displacements must be consistent
with the forces and constraints at the given time.33 Note also that ‘virtual’ will be
used in this sense, not just for displacements, but more generally. We distinguish
between virtual and actual variations of any quantity; and use the respective notations
(introduced by Lagrange), δ and d, for them. Also, I shall sometimes use δ, either

(i): for a small (not inﬁnitesimal) variation; or
(ii): to indicate that the diﬀerential is not exact.

If the total applied force on particle i has cartesian components Xi, Yi, Zi, the total
work done by this applied force in an inﬁnitesimal virtual displacement can be written
as a diﬀerential form in the cartesian coordinates, i.e. as a sum over the 3N cartesian
coordinates

δw = ΣN

i=1Xiδxi + Yiδyi + Ziδzi;

or, transforming to generalized coordinates, say q1, . . . , qn, as a diﬀerential form in the
generalized coordinates

(3.9)

(3.10)

δw = Σn

j=1Fjδqj

where the transformation eq. 3.4 determines the Fj in terms of the cartesian compo-
nents of force Xi, Yi, Zi.

In general, δw is not integrable. But if it is, then its integral is called the work
function U. Lanczos (1986, p. 30) calls applied forces of this kind monogenic (‘mono-
genic’ for ‘single origin’) as against polygenic. Goldstein et al (2002) follow him; and I
shall also adopt these terms.34

In many of the simpler cases of monogenic forces, U is independent of both the
time, and the generalized velocities ˙qi, so that U = U(q1, . . . , qn). If so, we say the
system is conservative; and we have

ΣjFjδqj =

δqj

∂U
∂qj

Fj =

∂U
∂qj

.

so that by the mutual independence of the qs, we can set all but one of the δqj equal
to 0, and so infer

33So there is no real conﬂict with the venerable principle of modal logic, that the actual is possible.
But the point is important: it underpins the derivation of the conservation of energy from D’Alembert’s
principle, cf. Paragraph 3.3.1.A.

34But beware: Lanczos’ text sometimes suggests ‘monogenic’ is also deﬁned for constraint forces.
Agreed, in statics at equilibrium, the total applied force is the negative of the total constraint force:
so if the former are monogenic with work function U , one can also call the latter monogenic with
“work function”
U . But in dynamics (Section 3.3), this correspondence breaks down: even with
monogenic applied forces, most constraint forces will not be derivable from a work function. Thanks
to Oliver Johns for this point.

−

(3.11)

(3.12)

43

−

U, we have Fj =

Writing V :=
and we interpret V as a potential energy. This
corresponds to the “cartesian deﬁnition” of conservative systems, viz. that the force
on the ith particle Fi is derivable (
i) from a time-independent scalar function V on
conﬁguration space, i.e.

−

∀

∂V
∂qj

Fi =

−∇iV

(3.13)

∇ ∧

where the i indicates that the gradient is to be taken with particle i’s coordinates.
(Incidentally: Here we meet the prototypical case of an integrability condition. For
each i, eq. 3.13, with given Fi, has a solution V only if in the domain considered F is
curl-free, i.e.

F = 0: or equivalently, any closed loop integral

ds vanishes.)

When we add to the assumption of conservativity (i.e. V depending only on the
generalized coordinates, not on the time, nor on the generalized velocities), the as-
sumption that constraints, if any, are scleronomous, we get the conservation of energy,
i.e. the constancy in time of T + V . This can be deduced in various ways, e.g. from
d’Alembert’s principle in Section 3.3 below. But however the theorem is derived, its
being a generalization over many problems means it illustrates (Modality;2nd).35

H

Fi ·

3.2 The Principle of Virtual Work

3.2.1 The principle introduced

I turn to the second diﬃculty, (Unknown), faced by vectorial mechanics at the start
of this Section: that the forces that maintain the constraints (‘forces of constraint’,
‘forces of reaction’) are not known. So we ask: can we somehow formulate mechanics
in such a way that we do not need to know the forces of constraint? In fact for many
problems, we can: viz. problems in which these forces would do no work in a virtual
displacement. Such constraints are called ideal. The prototypical case is a rigid body;
where indeed the work done by the internal forces (with Fij assumed to lie along the
line between particles i and j) is zero. But this condition is quite common, even for
non-holonomic constraints; though to be sure, it also excludes very many cases e.g.
friction.

Restricting ourselves to ideal constraints (characterized, note, by a counterfactual!)
is a crucial example of the moral (Restrict). It is even more important an example
than my previous one (viz. analytical mechanics’ frequent restriction to holonomic con-
straints). For most of analytical mechanics depends on this restriction. In particular,
those of its great principles that I will discuss in this paper—the principle of virtual
work, d’Alembert’s principle, the principle of least action, and Hamilton’s principle—
35Two remarks about the more general case where U depends on the velocities and time, so that
(1) As we shall see, analytical mechanics and its variational principles apply in
U = U (qj, ˙qj, t).
this case.
systems with
a work-function U that has no explicit dependence on time, but may be dependent on velocities
U = U (qj, ˙qj)—there is a conservation of energy theorem: T + V is conserved but with V deﬁned by
V := Σj

(2) In particular, for scleronomous systems with monogenic forces—i.e.

U .

˙qj

∂U
∂qj

−

44

do so. Accordingly, I (like many authors) will often not repeat that constraints are
being assumed to be ideal.

Besides, as envisaged at the end of Section 2.1.5, the principles are often closely re-
lated to each other, and in some cases equivalent under the assumption of ideal and/or
holonomic constraints; so that they exemplify (Reformulate) as well as (Restrict).

The ﬁrst of the principles governing such problems is the principle of virtual work.
Again we need Section 3.1’s idea of an (inﬁnitesimal) virtual displacement (and so
(Modality;1st)). For the principle of virtual work concerns the total work done in such
a displacement in the special case of equilibrium.

i

So let us assume that the system is in equilibrium. This means that for each particle
δri = 0
δri = 0. Let us split Fi in to the applied force (impressed
, and the force of constraint fi. And let us make our restricting assumption

i the total force Fi on it vanishes. Then for any virtual displacement δri, Fi ·
and so, summing, ΣiFi ·
force) F(a)
that the constraints are ideal, i.e. the virtual work of the fi is 0. Then we have
Σi F(a)
i

·
That is: a system is in equilibrium only if the total virtual work of all the applied
forces vanishes.

δri = 0.

(3.14)

Under certain conditions the converse of this statement also holds; as follows. First
note that we cannot conclude from eq 3.14 that each F(a)
i = 0, because the δri are not
linearly independent vectors—recall that we are considering virtual displacements. But
it does represent a statement of orthogonality; as does the corresponding statement in
generalized coordinates (cf. the transition from eq. 3.9 to eq. 3.10)

Σn

j=1Fjδqj = 0,

(3.15)

which says that the “vector” of the Fj must be “orthogonal” to the surface of allowed
variations in the coordinates qj.

On the other hand, suppose the following two conditions hold.
(i): The coordinates —whether ri or qj—are indeed independent; i.e.

in the case
of qj: the constraints are holonomic so that we work in their n-dimensional space, the
constraint surface; and

(ii): the displacements are reversible in the sense that if δqj is allowed by the

constraints, so is

δqj).

−

Then each Fj = 0. For only the zero vector can be orthogonal to all vectors. And so
we have the converse of the above statement. That is, we have the principle of virtual
work:

A system (subject to our restrictions) is in equilibrium if and only if for
any virtual displacement the total virtual work of all the applied forces
vanishes. (It is of course the ‘if’ half of the principle that is substantive.)

(This is an example of what Section 2.1.5 envisaged: (Restrict) and (Reformulate)
together.)

45

Note that if the applied forces are monogenic, the total virtual work of these forces
is the variation of the work-function U. So in this case equilibrium means: δU =
δV = 0. So the topic of equilibrium with holonomic constraints leads to the topic of
−
a function being stationary, subject to other functions taking prescribed values. And
similarly, the topic of equilibrium with non-holonomic constraints leads to the topic
of a function being stationary, subject to conditions other than prescribed value(s) of
function(s)—conditions that might be expressed as equations relating some functions’
values or functions’ diﬀerentials.
(Here, ‘being stationary’ means, as in elementary
calculus, having a zero derivative: details below. But again as in calculus, our interest
in stationary points of functions is often that they are extrema, i.e. maxima or minima.
And so I will often talk of ‘extremizing a function’ etc., to avoid cumbersome phrases
like ‘ﬁnd a point at which a function is stationary’—there is no word ‘stationarize’ ! )

This is one of the several reasons for analytical mechanics’ endemic use of the
method of Lagrange multipliers, to analyse extremizations of a function subject to
constraints. I ﬁnish this Subsection with a brief introduction to this method. It will
lead us back to the topic of overcoming the diﬃculty (Unknown), that we do not know
the forces of constraint.

3.2.2 Lagrange’s undetermined multipliers

This method has two signiﬁcant advantages over the obvious method of eliminating as
many variables as there are constraint equations, and then using diﬀerential calculus
to perform an unconstrained extremization in fewer variables.

(i): In many cases, there is no natural choice of variables to be eliminated: either
because of the symmetrical, or nearly symmetrical, way that the variables occur; or
because any choice makes for cumbersome algebra.

(ii): The Lagrange method is more powerful. It can handle constraints given by
diﬀerential conditions (in mechanical terms: non-holonomic constraints); which the
elimination method cannot.

Apart from its advantages (i) and (ii), it is also worth noting that:—
(a): The method is not conﬁned to the context in which it is often met, viz. varia-

tional principles (where the function to be extremized is an integral).

(b): In mechanics, the method has a physical interpretation, which provides a way
to calculate the forces that maintain the constraints; more details in Paragraph 3.2.2.B.

3.2.2.A Lagrange’s method The idea is clearest in a visualizable elementary set-
ting. Suppose we want to extremize f (x, y, z) i.e. f : IR3
IR subject to two con-
straints g1(x, y, z) = 0 and g2(x, y, z) = 0. Generically, the constraint surfaces meet in
a line, and at the solution point (x0, y0, z0) the gradient
f must be orthogonal to the
line’s tangent vector v; (otherwise f could be increased or decreased by a displacement
along the line). But v lies in the intersection of the two tangent planes of the constraint
g2 respectively. So at the solution
surfaces, and these planes are normal to

g1 and

→

∇

∇

∇

46

point (x0, y0, z0) the gradient
∇
must be a linear combination of

f must lie in the plane deﬁned by

g1 and

g2, i.e. it

∇

∇

g1 and
g2;
∇
∇
g1 + λ2∇
f = λ1∇

∇

g2.

(3.16)

∇

This argument generalizes to higher dimensions (say n), and an arbitrary number (say
m) of constraints. So using

for the n-dimensional gradient,

∇

gj.

f = Σjλj∇
We now put the argument (in higher dimensions) algebraically. We will use xi
not qi, even though the argument makes no use of cartesian coordinates; this has the
merit of indicating that the equations, eq. 3.16 and 3.17, and eq. 3.18 below, refer
to the ‘larger’ conﬁguration space, i.e. whose dimension, n say, exceeds the dimension
of the constraint surface by m, where m is the number of constraints. We are to ﬁnd
the point x0 := (x01, . . . , x0n) at which δf = 0 for small variations x′
x0 such that
gj(x′) := gj(x′
n) = 0 for j = 1, 2, . . . , m. So eq. 3.17 requires that there
are λj such that deﬁning h(x) := f (x) + Σjλjgj(x), we have:

1, . . . , x′

i, . . . , x′

(3.17)

−

δh = δf + Σjλjδgj = 0 , i.e.

+ Σjλj

= 0,

i = 1, . . . , n

(3.18)

∂f
∂xi

∂gj
∂xi

∀

We use these n equations, together with the m equations gj(xi) = 0 to ﬁnd the n + m
unknowns (the n xi and the m λj).

Thus the fundamental idea is to replace a constrained extremization in n variables
subject to m constraints by an unconstrained extremization in n + m variables. I will
make three brief comments, (1)-(3), about further developments, before I turn to the
physical interpretation.

(1): Thinking of the λj as variables, and so of h as a function of the n + m variables
(xi, λj) we can ask that it be stationary. This variation problem gives eq. 3.18 again, if
we vary with respect to xi; and the constraint equations gj = 0, if we vary with respect
to λj. In short: Variation of the λj gives back the constraint equations a posteriori.

(2): Lagrange’s method also applies to constraints expressed not by equations gj = 0

but only by conditions on diﬀerentials, i.e. a set of equations

δgj := Gj1δx1 + . . . + Gjnδxn = 0;

j = 1, 2, . . . , m

(3.19)

where the left-hand side uses the δ to indicate that it is not an exact diﬀerential, i.e.
Gji is not the ith partial derivative of a function gj. Lagrange’s method again applies
and we get the condition

δf + λ1δg1 + . . . + λmδgm = 0,

(3.20)

where we are to treat all the xi, i = 1, . . . , n as independent variables; and into this
equation the expressions for δgj from eq. 3.19 can be substituted. (It is just that the
left-hand side of eq. 3.19 is not the diﬀerential of a function gj, as it was above).

(3): Lagrange’s method (including the above two comments) also applies to the
central idea of calculus of variations—the extremization of an integral, which we will
meet in Section 4; (details in Section 4.3.1).

47

3.2.2.B Physical interpretation: the determination of the constraint forces
When Lagrange’s multiplier method is applied to mechanics, it has a physical interpre-
tation. The interpretation is easily seen for our present topic, equilibria for monogenic
applied forces. As we have seen, for such forces, there is a V which, once added to some
linear combination of constraints, is to be extremized. In short, the physical interpre-
tation is that the Lagrange multipliers give the forces of constraint. I shall develop this
interpretation only for the special case of holonomic constraints and constraint forces
that are derivable from a potential (unusual though this is: cf. footnote 35). But the
interpretation holds much more generally.

So suppose that the constraints are holonomic (as well as ideal), so that we are
to extremize V subject to the constraints that all the gj = 0, i.e. to extremize V +
λjgj. Suppose also that each force of constraint is “monogenic”, i.e.
is derivable
from a potential energy. Then, two results follow. First, for each j, λjgj represents
the potential energy of the jth force of constraint. Second, the fact that each λj is
known only at the solution-point x0 reﬂects our scanty knowledge about the forces of
constraint. For in forming the gradient of the jth additional potential energy λjgj, we
get as the contribution Fji to the i cartesian component of the force

Fji :=

(λjgj) =

λj

(no summation on j);

(3.21)

∂
∂xi

−

∂gj
∂xi −

∂λj
∂xi

gj

−

at the solution-point x0, gj vanishes, i.e. gj(x0) = 0, so that at x0

Fji =

λj

−

∂gj
∂xi

(no summation on j).

(3.22)

Remarkably, this physical interpretation carries over to the case of non-holonomic
(but ideal!) constraints, and to the case where the ideal constraint forces do not have
a work-function, i.e. no potential energy λjgj; (as Lanczos might say, the case of
polygenic constraint forces). One proceeds as in comment (2) of Paragraph 3.2.2.A;
the forces are again given by the λ-method. Furthermore, this physical interpretation
carries over to the case of non-equilibrium, i.e. dynamics, for both holonomic and
non-holonomic constraints. I will discuss this a little more in Sections 4.3.2 and 4.6;
but for more details, cf. Desloge (1982: 532-534) and Johns (2005: Chapter 3.4).

This physical interpretation underpins the striking way in which Lagrangian me-
chanics enables one to solve problems without knowing the forces of constraint. Again,
I will not go into details: not even in Section 3.3’s discussion of dynamics—since there
I use ideal constraints and d’Alembert’s principle to reduce mechanical problems very
directly to a description on the constraint surface which does not even mention the
constraint forces: vividly illustrating the merit (Reduce).

But in short, the idea is that, similar to just above: the ith generalized compo-
λj∂gj/∂qi. This
nent (i = 1, . . . , n) of the jth constraint force (j = 1, . . . , m) is
means that knowing the constraint equations as functions of the generalized coordi-
nates gj(q1, . . . , qn) = 0 is enough. For as in Paragraph 3.2.2.A, there are enough

−

48

equations to determine not just the system’s motion qi(t), but also the λs, and thereby
the forces of constraint.

So to sum up: under some widespread conditions, we can, after we solve the problem
(i.e. ﬁnd the motion of the system) without even knowing the constraint forces, go
back and calculate the constraint forces. In eﬀect, the idea of this calculation is that
the constraint forces have whatever values they need to have so as to maintain the
In this way we can overcome the
constraints on the previously calculated motion.
diﬃculty (Unknown) in the best possible way. (For details, cf. Desloge (1982: 545-546,
549-552, 555), Johns (2005: Chapter 3-5,3-8,3-11).)

3.3 D’Alembert’s Principle and Lagrange’s Equations

3.3.1 From D’Alembert to Lagrange

To sum up Section 3.2: it described how the principle of virtual work eliminates the
force of constraint fi on each particle i for the case of equilibrium (thus overcoming the
diﬃculty (Unknown) for that case). The idea of D’Alembert’s principle is to eliminate
the fi also for non-equilibrium situations, by the simple and ingenious device of treating
the negative of the mass-acceleration,

˙pi, as a force; as follows.36

Newton’s second law Fi = ˙pi “reduces to statics” if we rearrange it as if there were

−

a “reversed eﬀective force”

˙pi; i.e. if we write

−

Σi (Fi −

˙pi)

·

δri = Σi (F(a)

i −

˙pi)

δri + Σi fi ·

·

δri = 0.

Again we assume that the virtual work of the forces of constraint fi is 0, so that:

(3.23)

(3.24)

Σi (F(a)

i −

˙pi)

δri = 0.

·

This is d’Alembert’s Principle. Since the forces of constraint fi are now eliminated, I
will now drop the superscript (a) for ‘applied’.

This prompts three immediate comments: technical, philosophical and strategic.
(i): Given d’Alembert’s Principle, we can argue, as we did after eq 3.15. Namely,
suppose that the coordinates are independent (so that constraints, if present, are holo-
nomic and we focus on the constraint surface), and that the displacements reversible.
˙pi = 0. This diﬀerence of the applied force and the inertial force,
Then each Fi −
˙pi, is sometimes called the ‘eﬀective force’ on particle i; (and also sometimes the
Fi −
‘constraint force’, despite equalling
fi!). So d’Alembert’s principle eq. 3.24 implies:
the total virtual work done by the eﬀective forces is zero. This is sometimes written
as: δwe = 0, where δwe is a non-exact diﬀerential; (non-exact because in general fi is
not derived from a work function).

−

(ii): Again, we see (Restrict) and (Modality;1st) at work.

36As usual, the history of the principle is much more complicated than modern formulations suggest.

For d’Alembert’s original formulation, cf. Fraser (1985a).

49

(iii): A warning about my chosen route for expounding analytical mechanics. On
this route, d’Alembert’s principle ﬁgures large (despite having so simple a deduction
from the principle of virtual work). Thus I shall report in the Paragraphs just below
how it implies a form of the conservation of energy, and a form of Lagrange’s equa-
tions. It also underlies the other central principles of analytical mechanics, including
the most important one, Hamilton’s Principle—which I will discuss in Section 4. Be-
sides, ‘underlies’ here is logically strong: it means ‘implies when taken together with
just pure mathematical apparatus, and (for some implications) some general physical
assumptions; and in some cases, the converse implication holds’.

But I admit: many ﬁne expositions adopt other routes, on which d’Alembert’s
principle hardly ﬁgures. In particular, one can proceed directly from Newton’s equa-
tions to Lagrange’s equations. For example, cf. Woodhouse (1987: 31-34,41-47), Johns
(2005: Chapter 2-2,2-7); or in more detail, for successively less straightforward systems,
e.g. ﬁrst for holonomic, then for non-holonomic, constraints, Desloge (1982: 522-523,
542-545, 554-557, 564-565).

As it stands, d’Alembert’s principle has a signiﬁcant disadvantage; (so that it does
not itself supply a general scheme, on a par with the Lagrangian or Hamiltonian one).
Though the virtual work of the applied forces is often an exact diﬀerential (i.e. the
forces are monogenic, there is a work-function) there is no such function for the virtual
work of the inertial forces.

It is one of the key insights of Lagrangian mechanics that this disadvantage can
be overcome, by expressing d’Alembert’s principle in terms of conﬁguration space. In
particular, by integrating d’Alembert’s principle with respect to time, we can derive
Hamilton’s principle itself. More precisely: by integrating the total virtual work of the
eﬀective force δwe along the system’s history (trajectory in conﬁguration space) with
time as the integration variable, the inertial forces become monogenic: for details cf.
Section 4.2.

Besides, we can similarly derive from d’Alembert’s principle other principles of La-
grangian mechanics. (In some cases, this is done via Hamilton’s principle, i.e. by ﬁrst
deriving Hamilton’s principle from d’Alembert’s principle.) For reasons of space, I shall
not report such derivations, though they illustrate well my moral (Reformulate). For
some details, cf. Lanczos (1986: 106-110). He discusses in order:

(a): how Gauss’ principle of least constraint expresses d’Alembert’s principle as a

minimum principle;

(b): the merits and demerits of Gauss’ principle; and
(c): Hertz’ interpretation of Gauss’ principle as requiring the system’s path in con-
ﬁguration space be of minimal curvature—an idea developed by Jacobi’s principle,
which I will discuss in Section 4.6.

I emphasise that these derivations and discussion are all conducted under the re-
striction we imposed at the start of Section 3.2; viz. that the constraints are ideal, i.e.
the virtual work of the forces of constraint is 0. Thus we again see (Restrict).37
37Incidentally, Lanczos raises this restriction to a postulate, called Postulate A (1986: 76).

50

But I shall report: (A) how d’Alembert’s principle implies the conservation of en-
ergy (under appropriate conditions); and (B) how it also implies Lagrange’s equations.
These equations, set in the context of Hamilton’s principle, will be centre-stage in the
next Section; so it is also worth seeing that they are implied by d’Alembert’s principle
directly, i.e. not via Hamilton’s principle.

Then (in the next Subsection) I will end this Section by discussing how Lagrange’s
equations, regardless of how they are deduced, represent mechanical problems and
illustrate (Scheme).

3.3.1.A Conservation of energy Integrating D’Alembert’s Principle, under certain
assumptions, yields as a result the conservation of energy; as follows. If the applied
forces are monogenic, then the Principle becomes

δV + Σimi¨ri ·

δri = 0.

Then: If (and only if!) the system is not only holonomic, but also scleronomous in
work-function and constraints (i.e. the work-function U can be U(qi, ˙qi) but U cannot
be an explicit function of t, and the constraints are gj(qi) = 0 but not gj(qi, t) = 0),
then we can choose the δri to be the actual changes dri in an inﬁnitesimal time dt;
(Lanczos 1986: 92-94; cf. also footnote 33). This implies:

Σimi¨ri ·
so that D’Alembert’s Principle gives:

δri = Σimi¨ri ·

dri = dT

dV + dT = d(T + V ) = 0.

(3.25)

(3.26)

(3.27)

This result, being a generalization across a whole class of problems, illustrates my
moral (Modality;2nd).

3.3.1.B Deducing Lagrange’s equations The deduction of Lagrange’s equations
from d’Alembert’s Principle illustrates (Reformulate) and (Restrict). In the course of
the derivation, one makes two restrictions in addition to constraints being ideal (which
is implicit in d’Alembert’s principle): ﬁrst to holonomic constraints, and then to mono-
genic systems. (Conservativity, which is used in some expositions, is not necessary.)
Warning: The details of this derivation are not used later on.

The idea will be to transform d’Alembert’s principle eq. 3.24 to generalized coor-
k, with N particles
dinates qj, of which there are say n (e.g. above we had n = 3N
and k constraints). So the transformed equation will concern virtual displacements
δqj. Then we will assume the constraints are holonomic, i.e. the qj are independent,
so that each coeﬃcient of δqj in the transformed equation must vanish.

−

We begin by noting that the transformation (i again labelling particles)

ri = ri(q1, q2, . . . , qn, t)

(3.28)

51

yields

vi :=

= Σj

˙qj +

∂ri
∂qj

∂ri
∂t

.

dri
dt

This implies “cancellation of the dots”, i.e.

and also commutation of diﬀerentiation with respect to t and qj, i.e.

∂vi
∂ ˙qj

=

∂ri
∂qj

;

d
dt

∂ri
∂qj

=

∂vi
∂qj

.

δri = Σj

∂ri
∂qj

δqj

Besides, note that

implies

Σi Fi ·

δri = Σj Qjδqj with Qj := Σi Fi ·  
The Qj are the components of generalized force. Though the Qj need not have the
dimensions of force (and will not if the qj do not have the dimensions of length), Qjδqj
must have the dimensions of work.

(3.33)

.

∂ri
∂qj !

Applying these results to the second term of d’Alembert’s Principle, eqn 3.24, i.e.

to

Σi

˙pi ·
and using the deﬁnition of total kinetic energy T := Σi
becomes:

δri = (Σi mi ˙vi)

·  

Σj

∂ri
∂qj

δqj

!
2miv2

1

Σj[
{

d
dt

(

∂T
∂ ˙qj

)

−

∂T
∂qj } −

Qj]δqj = 0.

i , d’Alembert’s Principle

Now let us assume the constraints are holonomic, so that the qj are independent. Then
we can conclude that for each j

Equations 3.36 are sometimes called Lagrange’s equations. But this name is more
often reserved for the form these equations take for a system that is not just holonomic,
but also monogenic with a velocity-independent work function. That is: If each applied
force Fi (the force on the ith particle) is a gradient (with respect to i’s coordinates) of
a (possibly time-dependent) scalar function V on conﬁguration space, i.e.

(3.29)

(3.30)

(3.31)

(3.32)

(3.34)

(3.35)

(3.36)

(3.37)

d
dt

(

∂T
∂ ˙qj

)

−

∂T
∂qj

= Qj.

Fi =

−∇iV

52

(3.38)

(3.39)

(3.40)

(3.41)

(3.42)

then the deﬁnition of Qj, eq. 3.33, immediately yields

so that deﬁning the Lagrangian L := T

V , we get from eqn 3.36:

Qj =

∂V
∂qj

−

−

d
dt

(

∂L
∂ ˙qj

)

−

∂L
∂qj

= 0.

Qj =

∂V
∂qj

−

+

d
dt  

∂V
∂ ˙qj !

.

(Furthermore, we can get this same form for the equations (again with L = T
V ) if
there is velocity-dependence, provided the generalized forces Qj are then obtained by

−

This formula applies in electromagnetism; (cf. e.g. Goldstein et al (2002: 22).)

This is a good point at which to note the form of the kinetic energy T in terms of
the generalized coordinates; and in particular, the form T takes when the constraints
are scleronomous—which is the case I will mostly consider. We transform between
cartesian and generalized coordinates by equations 3.28 and 3.29. Note in particular
that

T = Σi

miv2

i = Σi

1
2

1
2

mi

Σj

 

∂ri
∂qj

˙qj +

2

∂ri
∂t !

and that expanding this expression, we can express T in terms of the generalized
coordinates as

T = a + Σjaj ˙qj + Σj,kajk ˙qj ˙qk

where a, aj, ajk are deﬁnite functions of the r’s and t, and hence of the q’s and t.
Besides, if the transformation equations 3.28 and 3.29 do not contain time explicitly
(i.e. the constraints are scleronomous), then only the last term of eq. 3.42 is non-zero:
i.e. T is a homogeneous quadratic form in the generalized velocities.

This result has a geometric signiﬁcance. For we saw in eq. 3.5 that T deﬁnes a
metric (a line-element) in the 3N-dimensional conﬁguration space of N particles; we
now see that for scleronomous constraints it deﬁnes a metric on the constraint surface.
This geometric viewpoint will be developed in Paragraph 3.3.2.E.

3.3.2 Lagrange’s equations: (Accept), (Scheme) and geometry

Lagrange’s equations (especially in the form of eq 3.39) are the centre-piece of La-
grangian mechanics; and since Lagrangian mechanics is the basis of other approaches
to analytical mechanics, such as Hamiltonian mechanics, these equations can fairly
claim to be the crux of the subject.
I end this Section with ﬁve comments (in ﬁve
Paragraphs) about these equations.

53

The ﬁrst comment is foundational: it concerns using Lagrange’s equations to jus-
tify analysing a system with holonomic constraints wholly in terms of the constraint
surface. This comment illustrates my moral (Accept). The second, third and fourth
comments are about solving Lagrange’s equations, and the practical advantages of us-
ing them, i.e. my moral (Scheme). These comments lead in to the ﬁfth comment, about
the modern geometric description of Lagrangian mechanics, and the representation it
provides of the solution of a mechanical problem.

3.3.2.A Conﬁnement to the constraint surface I said at the end of Section
3.1 when I ﬁrst introduced the idea of the constraint surface, that there were theo-
rems proving that in the limit as the forces of constraint become inﬁnitely strong, the
system’s dynamics in the full conﬁguration space becomes as analytical mechanics de-
scribes it, on the constraint surface. With Lagrange’s equations eq. 3.39 in hand, we
can state such a theorem (cf. Arnold 1989: 75-77).

Suppose again we are given N particles, and so a 3N-dimensional conﬁguration
space M, which we equip with the line-element eq 3.5. Let S be an n-dimensional
n holonomic constraints); let q1
hypersurface of M; (so we imagine there are k := N
be n coordinates on S and let q2 be k coordinates in directions orthogonal to S. Let
the potential energy have the form V = V0(q1, q2) + Cq2
2. The idea is that we will let
C tend to inﬁnity, to represent a stronger and stronger force constraining the system
to stay on S. So consider the motion in M according to eq 3.39 (with 3N coordinates)
of a system with initial conditions at t = 0

−

q1(0) = q0
1

˙q1(0) = ˙q0

1 q2(0) = ˙q2(0) = 0

(3.43)

Then as C

, a motion on S is deﬁned with the Lagrangian

→ ∞

L∗ = T

q1=q2=0 −
This result illustrates (Accept) and (Ideal). This conception of a constrained system
as a limit also plays a role in the equivalence of some analytical mechanical principles;
cf. Section 4.2 and Arnold (1989: 91f.).

|

q2=0 .

V0 |

(3.44)

3.3.2.B Integrating Lagrange’s equations
about solving Lagrange’s equations, in the usual form, eq 3.39.

I begin with three general comments

(1): Diﬀerential equations on a manifold: velocity phase space:—

The ﬁrst point to stress is that the n second-order diﬀerential equations eq. 3.39 are
(despite the appearance of the partial diﬀerentials!) ordinary diﬀerential equations;
equations which are deﬁned on a diﬀerential manifold, the constraint surface.

In Paragraph 2.1.3.A’s brief review of the theory of ordinary diﬀerential equations, I
mentioned that the basic theorem about the local existence and uniqueness of solutions
of (and local constants of the motion for) ﬁrst-order ordinary diﬀerential equations car-
ried over to higher-order equations deﬁned on a diﬀerential manifold. And Paragraph

54

3.3.2.E will give more details about the description of Lagrangian mechanics in terms
of modern geometry, i.e. manifolds. But there are two important points to make about
this, which do not require any modern geometry.

(i): It is worth introducing jargon for the 2n-dimensional space coordinatized by
the qs and ˙qs taken together (n is the number of conﬁgurational degrees of freedom).
After all, the crucial function, the Lagrangian L(q, ˙q) is deﬁned on this space. It is
called velocity phase space. (Sometimes, it is called ‘phase space’; but this last term is
more often used for the momentum phase space of Hamiltonian mechanics.) It is often
denoted by T Q: here T stands for ‘tangent’, not ‘time’, for reasons given in Paragraph
3.3.2.E.

Incidentally: In writing L(q, ˙q) and saying L is deﬁned on T Q, I have simpliﬁed
by setting aside time-dependent potentials and rheonomous constraints. For treating
them, there is again useful jargon. If Q is a conﬁguration space given independently of
time, then the space Q
IR representing a time, is often called
the extended conﬁguration space. And the treatment of time-dependent potentials and-
or rheonomous constraints might then proceed in what can be called extended velocity
phase space T Q

IR, with points (q, t), t

IR.

×

∈

(ii): As regards integrating Lagrange’s equations:— Recall the idea from ele-
mentary calculus that n second-order ordinary diﬀerential equations have a (locally)
unique solution, once we are given 2n arbitrary constants. This idea holds good for
Lagrange’s equations, even in the “fancy setting” of a manifold T Q or T Q
IR. And
the 2n arbitrary constants can be given just as one would expect: as the initial con-
ﬁguration and generalized velocities qj(t0), ˙qj(t0) at time t0. Comments (2) and (3)
expand a little on this.

×

×

(2): The Hessian condition:—

Expanding the time derivatives in eq. 3.39 gives

∂2L
∂ ˙qk∂ ˙qj

¨qk =

∂2L
∂qk∂ ˙qj

−

˙qk −

∂2L
∂t∂ ˙qj

+

∂L
∂ ˙qj

.

So the condition for being able to solve these equations to ﬁnd the generalized accel-
erations at some initial time t0, ¨qj(t0), in terms of qj(t0), ˙qj(t0) is that the Hessian
matrix ∂2L
, and partial derivatives
∂ ˙qj∂ ˙qk
as subscripts, the condition is that:

be nonsingular. Writing the determinant as

|

|

(3.45)

(3.46)

∂2L

|

∂ ˙qj∂ ˙qk | ≡ |

L ˙qj ˙qk |

= 0

;

This Hessian condition holds in very many mechanical problems; and henceforth, we
impose it.
it will also be the condition
needed to deﬁne the Legendre transformation, by which we will pass from Lagrangian
to Hamiltonian mechanics.

Indeed it underpins most of what follows:

But I should also stress that the Hessian condition can fail, and does fail in im-
portant problems. The point has been recognized since the time of Lagrange and

55

6
Hamilton; though it was only in the mid-twentieth century, that Dirac, Bergmann and
others developed a general framework for mechanics that avoided the Hessian condi-
tion. I shall make just three remarks about this: one mathematical, one physical and
one terminological.

(i): It is easy to show that the Hessian condition implies that L cannot be ho-
mogeneous of the ﬁrst degree in the ˙qi. That is, L cannot obey, for all λ
IR:
L(qi, λ ˙qi, t) = λL(qi, ˙qi, t). It is also easy to show that homogeneity of the ﬁrst degree
in the ˙qi for positive λ is equivalent to an integral of L (viz., the integral that is cen-
tral to the calculus of variations: cf. Section 4.2) being independent of the choice of
its integration variable (called being ‘parameter-independent’). (For details, cf. e.g.
Lovelock and Rund (1975: Section 6.1).)

∈

(ii): Some problems are naturally analysed using an L that is homogeneous in this

sense, and so has a parameter-independent integral.

Perhaps the best-known case occurs in Fermat’s principle in geometric optics. It
says, roughly speaking, that a light ray between spatial points P1 and P2 travels by the
path that minimizes the time taken. If one expresses this principle as minimizing an
integral with time as the integration variable, one is led to an integrand that is in gen-
eral, e.g. for isotropic media, homogeneous of degree 1 in the velocities ˙qi—conﬂicting
with the Hessian condition eq. 3.46. So geometric optics usually proceeds by taking a
spatial coordinate as the integration variable, i.e. the parameter along the light path.
For details and references, cf. e.g. (Butterﬁeld 2004c: Sections 5,7).

But also in mechanics as against optics, there are cases of homogeneous L and
parameter-independence. This is especially true in relativistic theories—beyond this
paper’s scope! (Cf. Johns (2005: Part II) for a beautifully thorough account.)

(iii): Beware of jargon. The framework of Dirac et al.

is called ‘constrained
dynamics”—so be warned that this is a very diﬀerent sense of ‘constraint’ than ours.

Of course, even with eq. 3.46, it is still usually hard in practice to solve for the
¨qj(t0): they are buried in the left hand side of eq. 3.45. This circumstance prompts
the move to Hamiltonian mechanics, taken up in the companion paper. Meanwhile,
the topic of the practical diﬃculty of solving equations prompts (3).

(3): The ineluctable:—

I admit that from a very general viewpoint, Lagrange’s equations represent no advance
over the vectorial approach to mechanics. Namely: the dynamical problem of n degrees
of freedom is still expressed by n second-order diﬀerential equations. Broadly speaking,
this “size” of the dynamical problem is an ineluctable consequence of Newton’s second
law being second-order in time. By and large, the most that a general scheme can hope
to do to reduce this “size” is:

(i) to provide help in ﬁnding and-or using new variables that simplify the prob-
lem; especially by reducing the number of equations to be solved, by some of the new
variables dropping out (cf. (Reduce) and (Separate));

(ii) to make a useful trade-in of second-order equations for ﬁrst-order equations.
As we shall see, Lagrangian mechanics does (i). (Hamiltonian mechanics does

both (i) and (ii).)

56

So much by way of general remarks about integrating Lagrange’s equations. I now
turn to the practical advantages of using them to solve problems. We can already
see two substantial advantages—advantages that are valid for all holonomic systems
(eq. 3.36), not just those holonomic systems which are monogenic with a velocity-
independent work function (eq. 3.39).

q′
j.

j, and then prove they also hold for the q′
q′

3.3.2.C Covariance; (Wider) The above deduction of Lagrange’s equations, eq.
3.36 and 3.39, makes it clear that they are covariant under any coordinate transfor-
mations (aka: point-transformations) qj →
(Of course, one can also prove this
covariance directly i.e. assume the equations hold for the qj, and assume some trans-
formation qj →
j.) This covariance means
we can analyse a problem in whichever generalized coordinates we ﬁnd convenient:
whichever coordinates we choose, we just write down the Lagrangian in those coordi-
nates and then solve Lagrange’s equations in the form eq. 3.36 or eq. 3.39. This is
one of our main illustrations of (Scheme), and its merit (Wider). (We will later see
this covariance as an automatic consequence of a variational principle; cf. the end of
Section 4.2.)

3.3.2.D One function; (Fewer)
In any such generalized coordinates, and for any
number of particles (or generalized coordinates), the solution of the problem is encoded
in a smaller number of functions than the number of degrees of freedom immediately
In eq. 3.36, the inertia is encoded in one function T (cf. (a) in Section
suggests.
3.1.2). And more remarkably, eq. 3.39 encodes the forces in one function V ; besides,
V . This
it encodes the solution to the problem in just one function, viz. L := T
illustrates merit (Fewer) of (Scheme). This situation prompts a technical comment,
and some philosophical remarks.

−

(1): Equivalent Lagrangians:— The technical comment is that my phrase ‘one func-
tion’ needs clarifying. To explain this, let us consider just holonomic conservative
systems, described by eq. 3.39. It is easy to show that two Lagrangians L1 and L2
determine the very same equations eq. 3.39 if they diﬀer by the time derivative of a
function G(qj(t)) of the generalized coordinates, i.e. if L1(q, ˙q)
dt G(q(t)).
Such Lagrangians are called equivalent.

L2(q, ˙q) = d

−

The converse is false: two inequivalent Lagrangians can yield the same equations of
motion. A two-dimensional harmonic oscillator gives an example. We met this system
in Paragraph 2.1.3.B, with diﬀerent frequencies in the two dimensions. Now we need
only the special case of a common frequency. So the usual Lagrangian and its Lagrange
equations are (with cartesian coordinates written as qs):

L1 =

1
2

1 + ˙q2
˙q2
h

2 −

ω2(q2

1 + q2
2)

; ¨qi + ω2qi = 0 , i = 1, 2.

(3.47)

But the same Lagrange equations, i.e. the same dynamics, is given by

(3.48)

i

ω2q1q2 ,

L2 = ˙q1 ˙q2 −
57

which is not equivalent to L1. This example is given by Jos´e and Saletan (1998: 68,
103, 145), together with a proof that the converse results holds locally.38

(2): How the Lagrangian controls the motion:—

Turning to philosophy:
it is at ﬁrst sight puzzling that the motion in 3-dimensional
space of an arbitrary number of particles can be controlled by fewer functions than
there are degrees of freedom: how so?

Part of the answer is of course that the functions are deﬁned not on physical space.
In particular, V is deﬁned on conﬁguration space Q (or for a time-dependent po-
tential on extended conﬁguration space Q
IR). And L and T are deﬁned on the
2n-dimensional velocity phase space T Q with points (q, ˙q) (or again: on the extended
velocity phase space T Q
IR). So these functions encode properties of the entire
system’s conﬁguration, or of the conﬁguration taken together with the n generalized
velocities. And there is no diﬃculty in general about how a single function on a higher-
dimensional space might determine a motion in the space. After all, one could take
the function’s (higher-dimensional) gradient.

×

×

But this is of course not how these functions determine the motion; (though inci-
dentally, it is in eﬀect how another function, the Hamiltonian, determines the motion
in Hamiltonian mechanics). So the question arises how they do so, i.e. whether there
is some notion—perhaps a geometric one, like taking the gradient—that underlies how
these functions determine the motion, via eq.s 3.36 and 3.39.

The short answer is that there is such a notion: these equations reﬂect the fact
that the dynamical laws (the determination of the motion) can be given a variational
formulation. In particular, for holonomic conservative systems (cf. eq. 3.39): it turns
out that when we consider L’s values not just at various times for the actual motion,
but also for suitably similar possible motions, then the collection of all these values
encodes the physical information that determines the motion.

But this short answer immediately invites two further questions, one philosophical
and one technical. The philosophical question is: ‘how can it be that possible values of
a function such as L determine actual motions?’ As I mentioned at the end of Section
2.2.1, I address this issue at length elsewhere (2004e: Section 5) and will not pursue it
here. The technical question is (again, stated just for holonomic conservative systems):
‘how do L’s values for some merely possible motions determine the actual motion?’ I
will answer that in detail in Section 4; (and Hamiltonian mechanics gives a deeper
perspective on the answer).

3.3.2.E Geometric formulation I turn to give a brief description of the elements
of Lagrangian mechanics in terms of modern diﬀerential geometry. (Warning: This
Paragraph is not used later on.) Here ‘elements’ indicates that:

(i): As this paper mostly eschews modern geometry, I will here assume without
explanation various geometric notions, in particular: manifold, vector, one-form, met-
38Thanks to Harvey Brown for alerting me to this example and Jos´e and Saletan’s discussion; and

to two other uses of this example in connection Noether’s theorem (Section 4.7.5).

58

ric, Lie derivative and tangent bundle. (But a reassurance: Section 4.7.3 gives some
explanations of manifold, vector ﬁeld and tangent bundle, which apply equally here.)
(ii): I make the simplifying assumptions that led to the usual form of Lagrange’s
equations eq. 3.39: in particular, that the constraints are holonomic, scleronomous and
ideal, and that the system is monogenic with a velocity-independent work-function.
But much of the description below can be generalized in various ways to avoid these
assumptions.

(iii): I will also simplify by speaking “globally, not locally”. For example, I will
speak as if the relevant scalar functions, and vector ﬁelds and their integral curves, are
deﬁned on a whole manifold; when in fact all that Lagrangian mechanics can claim in
application to most systems is a corresponding local statement—as we already know
from Paragraph 2.1.3.A’s report that diﬀerential equations are guaranteed the existence
and uniqueness only of a local solution.

Finally, a warning:— Hitherto I have written qj, qk etc. for the generalized coordi-
nates. But in this Paragraph, I need to respect the distinction between contravariant
and covariant indices (in more modern jargon: vectors and forms). So I write the
coordinates as qi, qj etc. Similarly, I will in this Paragraph, though not elsewhere in
the paper, adopt the convention that repeated indices are summed over.

We begin by assuming that the conﬁguration space (i.e. the constraint surface) is
a manifold Q. So the kinetic energy T , being a homogeneous quadratic form in the
generalized velocities (cf. discussion of eq. 3.42), deﬁnes a metric on Q.

The physical state of the system, taken as a pair of conﬁguration and generalized
velocities, is represented by a point in the tangent bundle T Q. That is, writing Tx
Tx; so T Q is a 2n-
Q, T Q has points (x, τ ), x
for the tangent space at x
dimensional manifold. As I said in Paragraph 3.3.2.B, T Q is sometimes called velocity
phase space. We will of course work with the natural coordinate systems on T Q induced
by coordinate systems q on Q; i.e. with the 2n coordinates (q, ˙q)

(qi, ˙qi).

Q, τ

∈

∈

∈

The fundamental idea is now that this tangent bundle is the arena for the geometric
description of Lagrangian mechanics: in particular, the Lagrangian is a scalar function
L : T Q
IR which “determines everything”. But I must admit at the outset that this
involves limiting our discussion to Lagrangians, and coordinate transformations, that
are time-independent.

→

IR, and-or the extended velocity phase space T Q

More precisely: recall, ﬁrst, the simplifying assumptions in (ii) above. Velocity-
dependent potentials and-or rheonomous constraints would prompt one to use the
extended conﬁguration space Q
IR.
So would time-dependent coordinate transformations.39 I admit that this last is a
considerable limitation from a philosophical viewpoint, since it excludes boosts, i.e.
transformations to a coordinate system moving at constant velocity with respect to
another; and boosts are central to the philosophical discussion of spacetime symmetry
groups, and especially of relativity principles. To give the simplest example:
the
Lagrangian of a free particle in one spatial dimension is just its kinetic energy, i.e.

×

×

≡

39Thanks to Harvey Brown for urging this last limitation.

59

−

−

7→

x′ := x

in cartesian coordinates 1
2m ˙x2. Under a boost with velocity v in the x-direction to
vt; i.e. the point labelled x in
another cartesian coordinate system, x
the ﬁrst system is labelled by x
vt in the second system (assuming the two spatial
coordinate systems coincide when t = 0). For example, if v = 5 metres per second,
the point ﬁrst labelled x = 10 metres is labelled by the second system at time t = 2
v, and the Lagrangian, i.e. the
seconds as 10
kinetic energy, is not invariant under the boost: by choosing v equal to the velocity
of the particle in the x-direction, one can even make the particle have zero energy. (I
shall return to the topic of transformations under which the Lagrangian is invariant,
though again with my limitation to T Q, when presenting Noether’s theorem; Section
4.7, cf. especially Section 4.7.3).

5.2 = 0, i.e. as the origin. So ˙x′ = ˙x

−

−

But setting aside these caveats, I now describe Lagrangian mechanics on T Q, with

four comments.

(1): 2n ﬁrst order equations; the Hessian again:—

The Lagrangian equations of motion (in the natural coordinates (q, ˙q)) are now 2n
ﬁrst-order equations for the functions qi(t), ˙qi(t), determined by the scalar function
L : T Q

IR. The 2n equations fall in to two groups: namely

→
(a) the n equations eq. 3.45, with the ¨qi taken as the time derivatives of ˙qi with
respect to t; i.e. we envisage using the Hessian condition eq. 3.46 to solve eq. 3.45 for
the ¨qi, hard though this usually is to do in practice;

(b) the n equations ˙qi = dqi
dt .
(2): Vector ﬁelds and solutions:—

(a): These 2n ﬁrst-order equations are equivalent to a vector ﬁeld on T Q. This
vector ﬁeld is called the ‘dynamical vector ﬁeld’, or for short the ‘dynamics’. I write
it as D (to distinguish it from the generic vector ﬁeld X, Y, ...). So the solutions are
integral curves of D.

(b): In the natural coordinates (qi, ˙qi), the vector ﬁeld D is expressed as

D = ˙qi ∂

∂qi + ¨qi ∂

∂ ˙qi

;

(3.49)

(3.50)

and the rate of change of any dynamical variable f , taken as a scalar function on T Q,
f (q, ˙q)

IR is given by

∈

df
dt

= ˙qi ∂f

∂qi + ¨qi ∂f

∂ ˙qi = D(f ).

(c): Again, the fundamental idea of the Lagrangian framework is that the La-
grangian L “determines everything”. In particular, it determines: the dynamical vector
ﬁeld D, and so (for given initial q, ˙q) a solution, a trajectory in T Q, 2n functions of
time q(t), ˙q(t) (with the ﬁrst n functions determining the latter).

(d): The (local) existence and uniqueness of solutions to sets of ﬁrst-order equa-
tions means not just that initial conditions qi(t0), ˙qi(t0) determine a unique solution;
but this solution is now a curve (parametrized by time) in T Q. This separation of solu-
tions/trajectories within T Q is important for the visual and qualitative understanding

60

of solutions.

(e): I stress again that if the Hessian condition eq. 3.46 fails, the (local) exis-
tence and uniqueness of solutions can fail: there can be points in T Q through which
no solution, or more than one, passes.

(3): Geometric formulation of Lagrange’s equations:—

We can formulate Lagrange’s equations in a coordinate-independent way, by using
three ingredients. Namely: L itself (a scalar, so coordinate-independent); the vector
ﬁeld D that L deﬁnes; and the one-form on T Q deﬁned by L (locally, and in terms of
the natural coordinates (qi, ˙qi)) by

∂L
∂ ˙qi dqi
(This one-form takes a central role in Hamiltonian mechanics, where it is called the
canonical one-form.)

(3.51)

θL :=

.

The Lie derivative of θL along the vector ﬁeld D on T Q deﬁned by L is, by the

Leibniz rule:

LDθL = (

LD

∂L
∂ ˙qi )dqi +

∂L
∂ ˙qi LD(dqi) .

But the Lie derivative of any scalar function f : T Q
just X(f ); and for the dynamical vector ﬁeld D, this is just ˙f = ∂f
have

IR along any vector ﬁeld X is
∂qi ˙qi + ∂f
∂ ˙qi ¨qi. So we

→

Rewriting the ﬁrst term by the Lagrange equations, we get

LDθL = (

d
dt

∂L
∂ ˙qi )dqi +

∂L
∂ ˙qi d ˙qi

.

LDθL = (

∂L
∂qi )dqi +

∂L
∂ ˙qi d ˙qi

≡

dL .

We can conversely deduce the familiar Lagrange equations from eq. 3.54, by taking
coordinates. So we conclude that these equations’ coordinate-independent form is:

LDθL = dL .

(4): Limitations:—

Finally, a comment about the Lagrangian framework’s limitations as regards solving
problems, and how they prompt the transition to Hamiltonian mechanics.

Recall the remark at the end of Paragraph 3.3.2.B (2), that the n equations eq.
3.45 are in general hard to solve for the ¨qi(t0): they lie buried in the left hand side of
eq. 3.45. On the other hand, the n equations ˙qi = dqi
dt (the second group of n equations
in (1) above) are as simple as can be.

This makes it natural to seek another 2n-dimensional space of variables, ξα say

(α = 1, ..., 2n), in which:

(i): a motion is described by ﬁrst-order equations, so that we have the same
advantage as in T Q that a unique trajectory passes through each point of the space;

(3.52)

(3.53)

(3.54)

(3.55)

61

but in which

functions fα(α = 1, ..., 2n).

(ii): all 2n equations have the simple form dξα

dt = fα(ξ1, ...ξ2n) for some set of

Indeed, Hamiltonian mechanics provides exactly such a space: viz., the cotan-

gent bundle of the conﬁguration manifold, instead of its tangent bundle.

4 Lagrangian mechanics: variational principles and

reduction of problems

4.0 Preamble This Section will begin with conceptual discussion, and then move
to more technical matters. I will ﬁrst introduce the two main variational principles of
Lagrangian mechanics: the principle of least action (understood as it was by Lagrange
and Euler), and Hamilton’s Principle; (Section 4.1).

Beware: Hamilton’s Principle is often called a (or even: the) least action princi-
ple. Indeed, a more general warning is in order.
‘Action’ has, unfortunately, various
meanings; there is no agreed and exact usage, though it always has the dimension of
momentum
time. In this Section, action will tend to mean the
integral with respect to time, along a possible history or trajectory of the system in
conﬁguration space, of a quantity with the dimension of energy:

length = energy

E dt.

×

×

(But the companion paper will give increasing prominence to:
R

(i) the integral (not always along a possible history of the system!) of a momentum
p dq; or more generally, summing over degrees of freedom
p with respect to length

Σi pi dqi;40 and

R

(ii) the integral (again, not always along a history) of the diﬀerence,
R

Σi pi dqi −

E dt.)

After Section 4.1, Hamilton’s Principle takes centre-stage. Its technical features are
reported in Sections 4.2, 4.3. Then the rest of the Section is dominated by the theme
of symmetry: especially, how a symmetry can help reduce the number of variables of
a problem—again, the merit (Reduce).

R

First, I introduce generalized momenta in the context of the conservation of energy
(Section 4.4). Section 4.5 begins with the simple but important result that the gener-
alized momentum of any cyclic coordinate is a constant of the motion, and so reduces
the dimension of the dynamical system by one. The rest of the Section develops this
result in two ways.

(1): First, I describe the method of Routhian reduction. This leads to Section 4.6’s
explanation of how, starting from Hamilton’s Principle, Routhian reduction applied to
time as a cyclic coordinate recovers Euler’s and Lagrange’s principle of least action.
The discussion will also cover another famous variational principle of Lagrangian me-
chanics, Jacobi’s principle.

(2): Finally in Section 4.7, I describe Noether’s theorem, which provides a powerful

general perspective on symmetry.

Σi pi dqi is the canonical one-form, which is central to Hamiltonian mechanics.

40

R

62

(All these aspects of this Section’s discussion of symmetry will have analogues, and

further developments, in Hamiltonian mechanics.)

As regards my four morals, this Section will illustrate all of them. But the main

morals will be prominent:

(i): the four merits of (Scheme); i.e. (Fewer), (Wider), (Reduce) and (Separate); as
just discussed, (Reduce) will be especially prominent in connection with symmetries.
(ii): all three grades of (Modality); but especially the third grade, (Modality;3rd),

which involves considering possibilities that violate the actual laws.

4.1 Two variational principles introduced

Analytical mechanics contains many variational principles, which are closely related
(and in some cases equivalent) to one another. But I will focus on just two principles,
and their relationship to each other: Euler’s and Lagrange’s “principle of least action”;
and Hamilton’s Principle.41 In this Subsection, I introduce them without technicalities.
In particular, I will present them as using two diﬀerent kinds of ‘variation of a path’:
a distinction that I will gloss philosophically in terms of (Modality)’s three grades of
modal involvement.

4.1.1 Euler and Lagrange

For simplicity, let us consider a single point-particle in a time-independent potential
V = V (r); in short, a conservative one-particle system. (We will remark later that the
principle in fact applies much more widely.) Suppose one is given the initial conditions
that the particle is at spatial point P1 at time t1, with a given total energy E =
T + V (P1) compatible with the value of V (P1), i.e. E
V (P1). Then for any spatial
path γ starting from P1, the initial conditions, together with the conservation of energy,
determine the particle’s motion over the next time-step, if we assume that it must start
out travelling along γ. For the initial value of T and the speciﬁcation of γ determine
an initial velocity. And so they determine at which point P ′ along γ the particle will
be at time t1 + dt i.e. an inﬁnitesimal time-step later. Furthermore, the conservation
of energy, and value of V (P ′) determine (by T = E
V (P ′)) what the speed of the
particle is at the time t1 + dt. The argument can be iterated. That is: if we assume
that also at time t1 + dt the particle must continue to travel along our chosen path γ ,
then its motion over the next time-step is determined—and so on.42

≥

−

Of course, we chose γ arbitrarily; and so (since V is given) we were almost certainly
wrong to suppose that the particle must follow γ, even assuming it starts out along γ
41The history of the principles’ discovery and evolution is fascinating: in particular, Lagrange himself
worked with Hamilton’s Principle—the name was coined by Jacobi, and only became prevalent in the
20th century. But I will not go into this history.

42By the way: the argument so far clearly also works for V a prescribed [i.e.

independent of the
particle] function of time. But the principle of least action , to follow, requires V independent of time.

63

at time t1. That is: the imagined motion is not just counterfactual but contralegal:
it violates the dynamical laws (i.e. Newton’s equations). But Euler and Lagrange
discovered that:
for this system, these laws are equivalent to a statement about a
whole class of possible paths through P1. To formulate this statement, ﬁrst note that
the previous paragraph also shows: The initial conditions and the requirement of energy
conservation at all times also determine, for any time-interval [t1, t2], the time-integral
of T along the path γ. And similarly, for any other possible path, η say, through P1:
the initial conditions, in particular the initial energy, and the requirement of energy
conservation at all times determine, what the time-integral of T along η would be if
the particle were to traverse η.

We can now state Euler’s and Lagrange’s principle of least action, for a single

particle. The idea is as follows: Given

(i): the initial conditions that the particle is at spatial point P1 at time t1, with a

given velocity v (which ﬁxes the total energy E = T + V (P1)); and given also

(ii): the particle later passes through the point P2 (i.e. one assumes that P2 lies on
the particle’s actual spatial path,, as determined by the dynamical laws and the given
potential V ): it follows that

(iii): the actual path traversed will be that path among all possible paths connecting
P1 to P2, motion along which, with a common ﬁxed initial energy E, makes the time-
integral of T along the path, a minimum.

That is the idea. But (iii) needs amendment. For the actual path might not make
the integral a minimum: even in comparison with just the class of all paths close to
the actual one, rather than all possible paths. The precise statement of the principle
is rather that the actual path makes the integral stationary in comparison with all
suﬃciently close paths.

Here ‘stationarity’ means that a derivative is zero. The details are made precise in
the calculus of variations, and reviewed in Section 4.2. For the moment, we only need
the idea that, as in elementary calculus, a zero derivative is compatible, not only with
a minimum of the function in question, but also with a maximum or a turning-point
of it. (We similarly replaced minimality by stationarity at the end of Section 3.2.1.)

This distinction, between minimization and stationarity of a function, has both a
historical and a terminological signiﬁcance—and both points will apply just as much
to Hamilton’s Principle as to the principle of least action.

Historically, some early advocates of the principle of least action asserted that the
actual path minimized the integral. Besides, this was regarded as a remarkable “eﬃ-
ciency” or “economy” on the part of Nature—and as suggesting a proof of the existence
of God. The main example of this tendency is Maupertuis, who announced (an ob-
scure form of) the principle, claiming minimization, in 1744. But already in the same
year, Euler published his ground-breaking treatise on the calculus of variations, in an
addendum of which the principle is expounded as a precise theorem. (For details, cf.
Fraser (1994); or more brieﬂy, Kline (1972: 577-582), Yourgrau and Mandelstam (1979:
19-29).) In due course, it became clear that only the stationarity version of the princi-

64

ple held good; and similarly, that Hamilton’s Principle (Section 4.1.2) was a matter of
stationarity, not of minimization. Thus for example, Hamilton in 1833 criticized the
idea of minimization, noting that ‘the quantity pretended to be economized is in fact
often lavishly expended’: so he preferred to speak of a ‘principle of stationary action’.
This distinction also raises a signiﬁcant mathematical question, regardless of me-
chanics: what are the necessary or suﬃcient conditions, for problems in the calculus
of variations, of securing a minimum rather than just stationarity? Though the inves-
tigation of this question has a long and distinguished history (starting essentially with
Legendre in 1786), and a good deal is now known about it, we will not need any of these
details. (For the history, cf. Kline (1972: 589-590, 745-749); for the technicalities, cf.
e.g. Courant and D. Hilbert (1953: 214-216), Fox (1987: Chapters 2, 9).)

Finally, this distinction also has a terminological aspect. It is easier to say ‘minimize
a function’ or ‘extremize a function’ (where ‘extremize’ means ‘minimize or maximize’),
than to say ‘render a function stationary’: there is no English word ‘stationarize’ ! So
despite the remarks above, I shall from now on (for Hamilton’s Principle as well as
the principle of least action) usually say ‘minimize’ or ‘extremize’:
in fact, this is a
widespread practice in the textbooks. But ‘stationarize’ is to be understood!

This principle of least action for a single particle is a remarkable principle—and a
ﬁne example of (Reformulate). But much more is true: the principle can be extended
to systems with an arbitrary number N of particles. Here, I do not just mean the
trivial N-fold conjunction of the one-particle principle, which follows immediately if
we assume no particle-particle interactions (and no collisions in the time-period).43 I
mean, rather, that for any system (i) which is conservative, and (ii) for which the
constraints, if any, are ideal, holonomic and scleronomous (so that we can work in the
constraint surface): a corresponding principle holds.

This will be stated very precisely in Section 4.6. For the moment, we only need the

main idea, that:

For such a system, whatever the details of the interactions between its parts
(encoded in V ), the representative point in conﬁguration space moves along
the curve between given initial and ﬁnal conﬁgurations that makes station-
ary (in comparision with neighbouring curves) the time-integral along the
curve of the total kinetic energy T .

This is a very striking, even amazing, principle; both technically and philosophically.
Technically, one can apply the calculus of variations to deduce the corresponding Euler-
Lagrange equations; (Section 4.2 gives more explanation). Indeed, Euler and Lagrange
43That is:— Given a system of N point-particles, at spatial points P11 , . . . , P1N at time t1, subject to
an external potential V (r), and with given initial velocities v1, . . . , vN (and so initial kinetic energies
T1(t1), . . . , TN (t1)); and given N points P21 , . . . , P2N (mutually distinct and in general distinct from
P11 , . . . , P1N ), through which, respectively, the N particles later pass (with no collisions): for each
particle i, the actual path traversed will be the path connecting Pi1 to Pi2 , motion along which, with
V (Pi1 ) common to all comparison paths, makes the time-integral
a ﬁxed initial energy Ei = Ti(t1)
of Ti, along the path, stationary.

−

65

did just this, obtaining the correct equations of motion for conservative systems that,
if constrained, have ideal, holonomic and scleronomous constraints.

As regards philosophy, there are three immediate comments. The ﬁrst concerns my

morals; the other two are more general, and have a historical aspect.

(1): Morals:—

Clearly, the principle is a ﬁne illustration of (Scheme), and the merit (Fewer). (Once
Section 4.2 connects it with the Euler-Lagrange equations, we shall also see the other
merits, (Wider) etc.; and the moral (Reformulate).)

The principle is also a ﬁne illustration of (Modality). Recall that Section 2.2.1 dis-
tinguished three broad grades of modal involvement: (Modality;1st) to (Modality;3rd).
In (Modality;1st) we keep ﬁxed the problem and laws of motion, but vary the initial
and/or ﬁnal conditions;44 while in (Modality;2nd) we consider various problems but
again keep ﬁxed the laws of motion; and in (Modality;3rd) we vary the laws of motion
in the sense that we consider histories that violate the actual laws (for the given forces,
i.e. problem).

Broadly speaking, the principle of least action illustrates all three grades, though

there is a minor wrinkle about (Modality;1st).

Applying the principle to a given problem obviously involves (Modality3rd): most
of the various counterfactual histories, along the paths not traversed, are contralegal.
And the principle itself clearly involves (Modality;2nd), since it generalizes across a
whole class of problems.

The wrinkle about (Modality;1st) is that, despite the variety of positions and speeds
at intermediate times (i.e. times after t1 but before arrival at P2), the principle does
not vary the initial or ﬁnal conditions in the sense of position and speed. The reason is
that

(i): the given initial position P1, and so V (P1), and velocity v determine a total

energy E; (indeed, to determine E, one needs only V (P1) and the speed v); and

(ii): the conservation of the energy E, together with the given ﬁnal position P2,
and so V (P2), determines the speed with which the particle would arrive at P2 along
any path—whether the unique dynamically allowed one, or another one.

Nevertheless the principle illustrates (Modality;1st). For the variety of paths makes
for a variety of (both initial and ﬁnal) velocity or momentum, though not of speed—and
that variety counts as varying the initial and ﬁnal conditions.

(2): Other formulations:—

Historically, the principle for a single particle was of course formulated ﬁrst; and it
was often formulated in terms of minimizing the integral along the path of the particle
of the momentum mv, with distance s as the integration variable. (Thus wrote Euler
in 1744.) It was also formulated in terms of the integral of twice the kinetic energy
44In some usages of the word ‘problem’, varying the initial conditions would count as varying the
problem. But not mine: in Section 2.2.1, I stipulated that a problem is speciﬁed by the number of
degrees of freedom and the forces involved, here coded in the potential function; (and more generally
in a Lagrangian or Hamiltonian).

66

2T , with time as the integration variable. These alternative formulations are trivially
equivalent to the single-particle principle above. But they are historically important,
because of the role they played in discussions of the relative dynamical importance of
momentum and kinetic energy; in particular, in the controversy about vis viva, which
was in eﬀect deﬁned as 2T . I shall not need the ﬁrst alternative, using
mv ds, at all.
But in Section 4.6, I shall recover the second (with 2T ) from Hamilton’s Principle.

R

(3): Teleology foresworn:—

The principle’s reference to the ﬁnal conﬁguration suggests teleology and ﬁnal causes:
that the values attained by the integral at the end of various possible trajectories
through conﬁguration space somehow determines (or even: causes or explains) from
the start which trajectory is traversed. (This is clearest for our ﬁrst case, the single
particle:
it looks as if the particle’s ﬁnal position determines which path it takes to
that position.)

This suggestion is of course not peculiar to this principle. It arises for any varia-
tional principle that ﬁxes a ﬁnal condition (in time), and so it is endemic in analytical
mechanics. In particular, we will see that Hamilton’s Principle similarly refers to the
ﬁnal conﬁguration of the system. Accordingly, this aspect of analytical mechanics has
been much discussed. Indeed, teleology was the dominant topic in philosophical dis-
cussion of variational principles, from the beginnings in the eighteenth century (with
Maupertuis’ theological arguments, mentioned above), to Planck’s advocacy of them
in the late nineteenth century: a dominance which helps explain the logical empiricists’
strong rejection of variational principles. (For discussion and references, cf. Yourgrau
and Mandelstam (1979: 163-165, 173-175) and St¨oltzner (2003).)

But I shall not pursue this topic, for two reasons. First, it would involve discus-
sion of causation and explanation—large subjects beyond my scope. Second and more
important: there is a strong reason to reject an interpretation of the principle, and
of other ﬁnal-condition variational principles in analytical mechanics, in terms of ﬁnal
causes—as against one in terms of eﬃcient causes. This reason is based on the formal-
ism of mechanics, and does not depend on any general philosophical objections to ﬁnal
causes.

Namely: given such a principle, the calculus of variations deduces a set of diﬀeren-
tial equations, the corresponding Euler-Lagrange equations, which are (in the cases we
will consider) equivalent to the principle; and these equations suggest an interpretation
in terms of eﬃcient causes. In particular, we will see that Lagrange’s equations in their
most familiar form, eq. 3.39, are equivalent to Hamilton’s Principle for a holonomic and
monogenic system. Recalling that these equations are n second-order equations (for n
degrees of freedom), and so need n positions and velocities as initial conditions (just
like Newton’s equations), we can surely regard the initial conditions, together with the
equations, as determining (or causing or explaining) which trajectory in conﬁguration
space is traversed; (and so in particular, the value of the integral of T ).

This interpretation is surely just as good as the one in terms of ﬁnal causes. Be-
sides, we can similarly defend an eﬃcient-cause interpretation for principles other than

67

the principle of least action and Hamilton’s; (though I will not go into details).45

To sum up this Subsection: Euler and Lagrange discovered that for any conservative
system that, if constrained, has ideal, holonomic and scleronomous constraints: two
functions, T and V , determine the motion of the system, by a principle that selects
the actual motion from a whole class of conceivable motions. Note that the motions in
the class have a common ﬁxed start-time t1, common initial and ﬁnal conﬁgurations,
and a common ﬁxed energy (and so a common T (t1)). So the times of arrival at the
ﬁnal conﬁguration vary. This will not be so for Hamilton’s Principle.

4.1.2 Hamilton

Hamilton’s Principle replaces Euler and Lagrange’s “common-energy, varying arrival
times” variation, with a variation that has “varying energies, common arrival time”.
But as for Euler and Lagrange, the variations have ﬁxed initial and ﬁnal conﬁgurations
(i.e. spatial positions P1, P2 for one particle, and

for N particles).

Pi1; Pi2}

{

With this kind of variation, it turns out that for many kinds of system, just one
function determines the motion, again via a variational principle that selects the actual
motion by comparison with a class of “nearby” motions. In particular, for a conserva-
tive system that, if constrained, has ideal and holonomic constraints, the function is
V of the total kinetic and potential energies
the Lagrangian, the diﬀerence L := T
of the system.

−

That is: Hamilton’s Principle for such a system, consisting of N particles, says:

The actual motion between a conﬁguration
at
time t2 will be the motion that makes stationary the time-integral, along
the trajectory in conﬁguration space, of L := T

at time t1 and

Pi1}

Pi2}

V .

{

{

−

This calls for two immediate comments. The ﬁrst concerns my morals; the second is
about Hamilton’s Principle’s advantages over the principle of least action.

(1): Morals:—

Like the principle of least action, Hamilton’s principle is a ﬁne illustration of (Scheme),
and (Fewer); and we will later see the other merits, (Wider) etc.

And again like the principle of least action, Hamilton’s Principle illustrates all three
grades of modal involvement. But the details about (Modality;1st) and (Modality;3rd)
are a bit diﬀerent from the case of the principle of least action, because now the various
histories have varying energies and a common arrival time. There are two points here.
First: even for a single problem (speciﬁed by a number of degrees of freedom and
the forces), the counterfactual histories have to have diﬀerent energies one from an-
other, in order for them to have a common arrival time; e.g. a constituent particle
45I claim no originality for appealing to the Euler-Lagrange equations to suggest an eﬃcient-cause
interpretation of variational principles, as a reply to the proposed ﬁnal-cause interpretations. This
appeal is common enough; e.g. Torretti (1999: 92). But so far as I know, my emphasis on modality,
here and in (2004e), is novel.

68

could have diﬀerent initial speeds in two histories. This illustrates (Modality;1st) and
(Modality;3rd), as the principle of least action did. But in so far as one ﬁnds it un-
natural in counterfactual suppositions to ﬁx some future actual fact (arrival time),
and thereby have to counterfactually vary present facts (energy, speed)—rather than
vice versa—one will ﬁnd Hamilton’s Principle’s (Modality;1st) more “radical” than the
principle of least action’s.

Second: for Hamilton’s Principle, the energy is in general not preserved (constant)
within a counterfactual history—even for a system that actually obeys the conserva-
tion of energy, i.e. a conservative scleronomous system. Indeed, for any problem with
prescribed initial and ﬁnal conditions: almost all (in a natural measure) of the histories
considered will violate energy-conservation. This is because Hamilton’s principle con-
siders all smooth curves in conﬁguration space that are close to the actual trajectory;
(details in Section 4.2).

(1): Advantages:—

I emphasise the three main advantages of Hamilton’s Principle over Euler and La-
grange’s principle of least action. In ascending order of importance, they are:–

(i): It encompasses the principle of least action, in two senses. First, it immediately
yields the Euler-Lagrange equations, eq. 3.39—describing conservative systems, whose
constraints, if any, are ideal, holonomic and scleronomous—that the principle of least
action also obtains; cf. Section 4.2. Second, it explains how the principle of least action
obtains those equations; cf. Section 4.6.

(ii) It can be extended to other kinds of system, even some non-holonomic systems.
V (Section 4.2); for

For some of these kinds, it again uses as its integrand L = T
others, it uses an analogous integrand; (cf. Section 4.3).

−

(iii) It leads to Hamilton’s equations, and thereby to Hamiltonian mechanics; which
have various advantages over Lagrange’s equations, and indeed Lagrangian mechanics;
cf. the companion paper.

The ﬁrst two advantages will be spelt out in the sequel.

I begin with an exact

statement of Hamilton’s Principle.

4.2 Hamilton’s Principle for monogenic holonomic systems

Beware: this Section’s title is somewhat misleading, for two reasons. First, the discus-
sion is as usual restricted to ideal constraints, not just to monogenic and holonomic
systems.

Second and more important: ‘monogenic’ is a slight misnomer. For one of my main
V as integrand is equivalent to
points will be that Hamilton’s Principle with L = T
Lagrange’s equations in the familiar form eq 3.39. As discussed in Section 3.3, these
equations are physically correct, i.e. follow from d’Alembert’s principle, not only when
the potential V is time-independent and velocity-independent (i.e. conservative sys-
tems), or when V is time-dependent but velocity-independent, but also in some cases
of velocity-dependence, e.g. when eq. 3.40 holds. Such conditions are a mouthful to

−

69

say; and this Section’s title abbreviates that mouthful in the somewhat more general
word ‘monogenic’. But this inaccuracy will be harmless.

Thus understood, Hamilton’s Principle for a monogenic holonomic system says:—

The motion in conﬁguration space between prescribed conﬁgurations at
time t1 and time t2 makes stationary the line integral

I =

L(q1, . . . , qn, ˙q1, . . . , ˙qn, t) dt

(4.1)

t2

t1

Z

of the Lagrangian L := T
to allow V to be time-dependent.)

−

V . (Note the inclusion of time t as an argument

Hamilton’s Principle (in this form) is a necessary and suﬃcient condition for Lagrange’s
equations, i.e. eq. 3.39: ((Scheme) with merits (Fewer) and (Wider), again). I will not
prove necessity; (for this, cf. e.g. Whittaker (1959: Section 99: 245-247) and Lanczos
(1986: 58-59, 116)). But I show suﬃciency, since the argument:

(i) simply applies the basic result of the calculus of variations, that the uncon-

strained stationarity of an integral requires the Euler-Lagrange equations; and

(ii) makes clear that the Principle involves (Modality;3rd), as announced in Section

4.1.2.

The basic result of the calculus of variations:—
The variation, with ﬁxed end-points, of an integral

x2

x1

Z

∀

J =

f (y1(x), . . . , yn(x), ˙y1(x), . . . , ˙yn(x), x) dx

(4.2)

(where the dot ˙ indicates diﬀerentiation with respect to x) is obtained by consid-
ering J as a function of a parameter α which labels the possible curves yi(x, α).
We take y1(x, 0), y2(x, 0), . . . as the solutions of the stationarity problem; and we let
η1(x), η2(x), . . . be arbitrary functions except that they vanish at the end-points, i.e.
ηi(x1) = ηi(x2) = 0

i. Then we write:

yi(x, α) = yi(x, 0) + αηi(x)

i.

∀

(Such variations can be analysed using the idea of a functional derivative, and for
inﬁnite i.e. continuous systems they need to be; but I shall not need that idea.)

The condition for stationarity is then that

∂J
∂α !α=0

 

= 0;

and the variation of J is given in terms of that of α by

δJ =

dα =

∂J
∂α

x2

Σi

∂f
∂yi

∂yi
∂α

 

x1

Z

dα +

∂f
∂ ˙yi

∂ ˙yi
∂α

dα

dx.

!

70

(4.3)

(4.4)

(4.5)

Integrating by parts, for each i, the second term in the integrand, and using the fact
that the variations δyi = ( ∂yi

∂α )0dα are independent, we get that δJ = 0 only if

∂f
∂yi

=

d
dx

∂f
∂ ˙yi

∀

i = 1, . . . , n;

(4.6)

which are called the Euler-Lagrange equations. (They ﬁrst occur in a 1736 paper of
Euler’s. But the δ-notation and this neat deduction is due to Lagrange: he developed
his approach in letters to Euler from 1754, but ﬁrst published it in 1760: Kline (1972:
582-589), Fraser (1983, 1985).)

We remark that for a variational principle that uses ﬁxed end-points, the integrand
is undetermined up to the total derivative with respect to the independent variable
x of a function g(y). That is: suppose we are given a variational principle δJ :=
f dx = 0, and accordingly its Euler-Lagrange equations. Then exactly the same
δ
Euler-Lagrange equations would arise from requiring instead δJ ′ := δ
dx ]dx = 0.
For the end-points being ﬁxed means that δ
0; so that
δJ = 0 iﬀ δJ ′ = 0.

dg
dx dx = δ[g(x2)

[f + dg

g(x1)]
R

≡

−

R

Though simple, this result is important: it corresponds to the result in Paragraph
3.3.2.D that Lagrangians diﬀering by a total time derivative determine identical La-
grange’s equations. (It also underlies the idea of generating functions for canonical
transformations—developed in the companion paper.)

R

Now I return to mechanics. Consider a monogenic holonomic system: Hamilton’s

system implies, by the above argument but with the substitutions

→
Lagrange’s equations (3.39), i.e.:

x

t ; yi →

qi

; f

L,

→

∂L
∂qi

=

d
dt

∂L
∂ ˙qi ∀

i = 1, . . . , n.

(4.7)

(4.8)

The use of arbitrary functions η in the variation problem means that the Principle
mentions contralegal histories, illustrating (Modality;3rd).

Note that the assumption of holonomic constraints is used in the argument; for we
appeal to independent variations δqi to get eq. 4.8, in the way we got eq. 4.6 from eq.
4.5. (For the modiﬁcation of Hamilton’s Principle to cover non-holonomic systems, see
the next Subsection.)

On the other hand, the argument proceeds independently of how L is deﬁned, and
so of the assumption of monogenicity. The role of this assumption is, rather, to limit
of the scope of Hamilton’s Principle, for the sake of empirical correctness (cf. Lanczos
1986: 114).

This deduction of Lagrange’s equations from Hamilton’s Principle implies that they
have an important property. Namely, they are covariant under coordinate transforma-
q′
tions (point-transformations) qj →
j; (the merit (Wider)). For since the stationarity

71

of a deﬁnite integral is ipso facto independent of a change of the independent variable,
q′
qj →
j, deducing Lagrange’s equations from Hamilton’s Principle implies the covari-
q′
ance of the equations (a covariance that holds even if the point-transformation qj →
j
is time-dependent). (This property also followed from the deduction from d’Alembert’s
principle; cf. Paragraph 3.3.2.C.)

I end this Section by discussing the relation between Hamilton’s Principle and
d’Alembert’s principle. As I mentioned at the start of Section 3.3.1, one can de-
duce Hamilton’s Principle from d’Alembert’s principle. More precisely, one can deduce
Hamilton’s Principle in the above form—for a holonomic system whose applied forces
are monogenic with their work function U independent of velocities—from d’Alembert’s
principle for such a system. Besides, the deduction can be reversed: this is an equiva-
lence, illustrating (Reformulate).

Lanczos (1986: 111-113) gives details of this. So does Arnold (1989: 91-95).
Arnold’s discussion has the merit that it also formulates an equivalence with the
conception of a constrained system as a limit (cf. eq. 3.43 in Paragraph 3.3.2.A)—
(Reformulate) again! But Arnold also assumes conservative systems, and makes some
use of modern geometry. I will just summarize Lanczos’ deduction in the ﬁrst direction,
i.e. from d’Alembert’s principle to Hamilton’s Principle.

The idea is to overcome the intractable because polygenic character of the inertial
forces, by representing them by the kinetic energy T (and by boundary terms that, by
the variation in Hamilton’s principle having ﬁxed end-points, are equal to zero). One
integrates, with respect to time, the total virtual work δw done by what Section 3.3.1
called the ‘eﬀective forces’: i.e. the work done by the diﬀerence between the applied
force on particle i, Fi and the rate of change of i’s momentum, ˙pi, summed over i.

d’Alembert’s Principle sets this total virtual work δw equal to 0. So we write,

summing over particles i and working in cartesian coordinates:

δw dt =

Σ

Fi −

 

Z

Z

(mivi)

δri dt = 0

! ·

d
dt

(4.9)

Assuming that the Fi are monogenic with their U independent of velocities, and setting
V =

U, we deduce (by integrating by parts) that

−

δw dt = δ

L dt

Z

Z

[Σ mivi ·

−

δri]t2

t1 = 0 where L := T

V.

−

(4.10)

Then requiring that the δri vanish at the end-points of the integration makes the
right-hand side the variation of a deﬁnite integral: i.e.

δwdt = δ

L dt = 0 with L := T

V.

(4.11)

Z

Z

−

Finally, the assumption that the system is holonomic (i.e. qj freely variable) means
that the variations in this last equation match those of Hamilton’s principle.46

46By the way: the boundary term that is here zero will later be very important in Hamiltonian

mechanics and Hamilton-Jacobi theory. It is essentially the canonical one-form I mentioned before.

72

4.3 Extending Hamilton’s Principle

In this Subsection, I discuss (simplifying Goldstein et al (2002: 46f.)) how Hamilton’s
Principle can be extended to some kinds of non-holonomic system. But warning: this
Section can be skipped, in that its material is not central to the rest of this paper.
However, the topic does illustrate the merit (Reduce); and it involves an important
its application
application of Lagrange’s method of undetermined multipliers, viz.
to extremizing integrals. I begin with an interlude about this; (for more details, cf.
Lanczos (1986: 62-66)).47

4.3.1 Constrained extremization of integrals

Recall from Section 3.2.2 the main idea of Lagrange’s method. We are to ﬁnd the point
x0 such that gj(x′) =
x0 := (x01, . . . , x0n) at which δf = 0 for small variations x′
gj(x′
n) = 0 for j = 1, 2, . . . , m. So deﬁning h(x) = f (x) + Σjλjgj(x), we
have:

1, . . . , x′

i, . . . , x′

−

δh = δf + Σj λjδgj = 0 , i.e.

+ Σj λj

= 0,

i = 1, . . . , n

(4.12)

∂f
∂xi

∂gj
∂xi

We use these n equations, together with the m equations gj(xi) = 0 to ﬁnd the n + m
unknowns (the n xi and the m λj).

I now show how to apply this technique to the case where f is an integral; treating
ﬁrst (A) holonomic, then (B) non-holonomic, constraints. With an eye on applications
to Hamilton’s Principle, I assume the independent variable of the integral is time t, i.e.
we are to extremize f =

F (qi, ˙qi, t) dt, subject to some constraints. Also:

(1): I will now use qs not xs to emphasise that the coordinates need not be cartesian.
(2) Because of the constraints, the qs in this Subsection (unlike Section 4.2) are not

R

independent.

(A): Holonomic constraints:— Assume that the constraints are holonomic, so that
we have equations gj(qi) = 0 for j = 1, . . . , m. Then variation of the constraint
equations gives

δgj = Σi

δqi for each j = 1, . . . , m .

(4.13)

∂gj
∂qi

Lagrange’s method is to multiply each of these equations by an undetermined multiplier
λj. But since these constraint equations are to hold for each t, each λj becomes an
47Also beware: Lanczos remarks (1986: 92, 114) that Hamilton’s principle applies only to holonomic
systems. That is wrong. Lanczos seems best interpreted as mis-reporting the true requirement (also
stated by him, p. 112) on Hamilton’s principle in the form using L := T
V , that the applied forces
have a work function—so that we can write V =
U . The confusion arises because Lanczos also
sometimes (e.g. p. 85) takes holonomic (respectively: non-holonomic) constraints to be maintained
by monogenic (polygenic) forces. I deny that (cf. footnote 34 in Section 3.1.2). But even if it were
true, it would be a point about the forces of constraint, not about the applied forces. So it would not
make the true requirement above, that the applied forces have a work function, imply that Hamilton’s
Principle is restricted to holonomic systems.

−

−

73

undetermined function of t, and an integral over t is added to the summation over j.
So the condition for extremization (the variational principle) is:

δ

F dt +

(λ1δg1 + . . . + λmδgm) dt = 0.

(4.14)

Z

Z

Then the usual calculus of variations argument, using the fact that F = F (qi, ˙qi, t)
while each gj is a function only of the qi, leads to the Euler-Lagrange equations, for
each i = 1, . . . , n:

∂F
∂qi −

d
dt  

∂F
∂ ˙qi !

∂g1
∂qi

∂gm
∂qi

+ λ1

+ . . . + λm

= 0.

(4.15)

F dt subject to
In other words:
the original variational problem of extremizing
gj(qi) = 0 is replaced by the equivalent problem of extremizing (subject to no con-
straints)

R

F + λ1g1 + . . . + λmgm.

(4.16)

Z

We have so far considered the λj as constants of the variation problem. But, as in
Section 3.2.1, comment (1), after eq. 3.18: we do not have to do so; and if we vary the
λj, we get back the constraint equations a posteriori.

(B): Non-holonomic constraints:— We now suppose that the constraints are non-
holonomic, so that we do not have equations gj(qi) = 0 for j = 1, . . . , m. But suppose
that, as in Section 3.2.1, comment (2) and its eq. 3.19, we have diﬀerential constraint
equations

δgj = Σi Gjiδqi = 0 for each j = 1, . . . , m.

(4.17)

Lagrange’s method again applies. We get again eq. 4.15, but with factors Gji (as in
eq. 3.19) replacing the ∂gj
∂qi

of eq. 4.15. That is, we get:-

∂F
∂qi −

d
dt  

∂F
∂ ˙qi !

+ λ1G1i + . . . + λmGmi = 0.

(4.18)

We will see this in more detail with eq. 4.19 et seq. below.

4.3.2 Application to mechanics

It is the second case, (B), that we need when formulating Hamilton’s Principle for non-
holonomic systems. I will consider only those non-holonomic systems whose equations
of constraint can be expressed as a relation between the diﬀerentials of the q’s, i.e. can
be put in the form of say m equations

Σi ajidqi + ajtdt = 0, j = 1, . . . , m.

(4.19)

The variation considered in Hamilton’s Principle holds constant the time, so that vir-
tual displacements δqi must satisfy

Σi ajiδqi = 0.

74

(4.20)

This implies that for any undetermined functions of time λj(t), we have λjΣiajiδqi = 0.
We sum over j, and integrate over an arbitrary time interval, to get
t2

We now assume the integrated statement of Hamilton’s Principle in the form

Σi,j λjajiδqi dt = 0.

t1

Z

t2

t1

Z

dt Σi

∂L
∂qi −

d
dt

∂L
∂ ˙qi !

 

δqi = 0;

(4.21)

(4.22)

and add the equations, so that

t2

t1

Z

dt Σi

∂L
∂qi −

d
dt

∂L
∂ ˙qi

 

+ Σj λjaji

δqi = 0.

(4.23)

We can then choose the ﬁrst n
ﬁxed); and we can choose the λj so that:

−

m of the δqi freely (so that the last m are thereby

∂L
∂qi −

d
dt

∂L
∂ ˙qi

 

!

+ Σj λjaji

= 0, for i = n

m + 1, . . . , n;

(4.24)

(these are in eﬀect equations of motion for the last m of the qi). Then eq. 4.23 becomes

t2

t1

Z

dt Σn−m
i

∂L
∂qi −

d
dt

∂L
∂ ˙qi

 

+ Σj λjaji

δqi = 0,

!

(4.25)

an equation which involves only the independent δqi, so that we can deduce by the
usual calculus of variations argument

!

−

∂L
∂qi −

d
dt

∂L
∂ ˙qi

+ Σj λjaji = 0 for i = 1, . . . , n

m.

(4.26)

−

Putting this together with eq 4.24 (and with λ
4.18)

→ −

λ), we have n equations (cf. eq.

∂L
∂qi −

d
dt

∂L
∂ ˙qi

= Σj λjaji i = 1, . . . , n.

(4.27)

There are altogether n + m unknowns (the qi and λj). The other m equations are the
equations of constraint relating the qi’s, now considered as diﬀerential equations

Σi aji ˙qi + ajt = 0, j = 1, . . . , m.

(4.28)

Finally, I note that the λj again have the physical interpretation discussed in Para-
graph 3.2.2.B; (but now with λ
λ, and without the assumption of cartesian coor-
dinates). This interpretation is related to the issue of justifying treating motion wholly
within the constraint surface, ﬁrst raised after eq 3.4—and so to (Reduce), and also
(Ideal) and (Accept). For discussion, cf. the references given in Paragraph 3.2.2.B and
Lanczos (1986: 141-145) who relates the interpretation to the fact that the constraints
are microscopically violated.

→ −

So much by way of extending Hamilton’s Principle to non-holonomic systems. NB:
The rest of this Section will assume that the constraints, if any, are holonomic—and
as usual, ideal.

75

4.4 Generalized momenta and the conservation of energy

The rest of this Section is dominated by one idea: using a symmetry to reduce the
number of variables of a problem. First, in this Subsection, I introduce generalized
momenta and discuss the conservation of energy. This is a preliminary to Section
4.5’s result that the generalized momentum of any cyclic coordinate is a constant of
the motion. Though very simple, that result is important: for it is the basis of both
Routhian reduction and Noether’s theorem—which will take up the rest of the Section.

In Section 3.3 we deduced the conservation of energy, for a (ideal and holonomic)
system that is scleronomous in both work function and constraints, from d’Alembert’s
principle—by choosing virtual displacements δri equal to the actual displacements dri
in an inﬁnitesimal time dt. We can similarly deduce the conservation of energy for such
a system from Hamilton’s principle, by considering such a variation for the generalized
coordinates qj, i.e. with dt = ǫ

δqj = dqj = ǫ ˙qj.

(4.29)

This deduction is important in that it introduces two notions which will be important
in what follows.

Since this variation does not ﬁx the conﬁgurations at the end-points, we get a
boundary term when we perform the integration by parts in the usual derivation of the
Euler-Lagrange equations (cf. eq. 4.5 in Section 4.2.). That is, we get from Hamilton’s
principle and an integration by parts

t2

δ

t1

Z

L dt =

Σj

δqj

∂L
∂ ˙qj

"

t2

#

t1

Here we see for the ﬁrst time two notions that will be central in the sequel.

(i): Generalized momenta:—

Elementary examples prompt the deﬁnition of the generalized momentum, pj, conjugate
to a coordinate qj as:
; (Poisson 1809). So Lagrange’s equations for a holonomic
monogenic system, eq. 4.8, can be written:

∂L
∂ ˙qj

and we can write eq. 4.30 as:

Note that pj need not have the dimensions of momentum: it will not if qj does not have
the dimension length. And even if qj is a cartesian coordinate, a velocity-dependent
potential will mean pj is not the usual mechanical momentum.

(ii): The diﬀerential Σjpjδqj, as in the right-hand side of eq. 4.32:—

As I have mentioned, this will be important in Hamiltonian mechanics.

d
dt

pj =

∂L
∂qj

;

t2

δ

t1

Z

L dt = [Σjpjδqj]t2
t1

76

(4.30)

(4.31)

(4.32)

(4.34)

(4.35)

(4.36)

(4.37)

(4.38)

d ˙qj = ǫ¨qj, we get:

If L does not depend on time explicitly, i.e. L = L(qj; ˙qj), then using dqj = ǫ ˙qj ⇒
δL = dL = ǫ ˙L
(4.33)

so that

δ

L dt =

δL dt =

Z

Z

Z

ǫ ˙L dt = ǫ [L]t2
t1 .

Then eq. 4.32 implies

[Σjpj ˙qj −
Since the limits t1, t2 are arbitrary, we get
H := Σjpj ˙qj −

L]t2

t1 = 0.

L = constant

This function H (‘H’ for ‘Hamiltonian’) can be called the ‘total energy’ of the system;
(though as we shall see in a moment, only under certain conditions is it the sum of
potential and kinetic energies).

We can also deduce directly from Lagrange’s equations, rather than from Hamilton’s

Principle, that H is constant for a system that is both:

(i) monogenic and holonomic (so that Lagrange’s equations take the familiar

form 4.8), and

(ii) scleronomous, so that L is not an explicit function of time.
The deduction simply applies Lagrange’s equations to the expansion of dL/dt:

We get immediately that

is a constant of the motion.

dL
dt

= Σi

˙qi +

∂L
∂qi

∂L
∂ ˙qi

¨qi.

H := Σi ˙qipi −

L

Now let us add the assumption that the system is conservative in the sense that
(the applied) forces are derived from potentials, and that the potentials are velocity-
independent. Then, using again the assumption that the system is scleronomous, we
can show that H is the sum of potential and kinetic energies—as follows.

These assumptions imply that pi := ∂L
. Now recall from the discussion of
∂ ˙qi
equation 3.42, that the system being scleronomous implies that T is a homogeneous
∂T
quadratic function of the ˙qi’s. This means that the ﬁrst term of H, i.e. Σi ˙qipi = Σi ˙qi
∂ ˙qi
must be 2T (Euler’s theorem). So we have:-

= ∂T
∂ ˙qi

H = 2T

(T

V ) = T + V.

−

−

(4.39)

4.5 Cyclic coordinates and their elimination

4.5.1 The basic result

We say a coordinate qi is cyclic if L does not depend on qi. (The term comes from
the example of an angular coordinate of a particle subject to a central force. Another

77

term is: ignorable.) Then the Lagrange equation for a cyclic coordinate qn say, viz.
˙pn = ∂L
∂qn

, becomes ˙pn = 0, implying

pn = constant, cn say.

(4.40)

So: the generalized momentum conjugate to a cyclic coordinate is a constant of the
motion.

In other words, thinking of pn as a function of the 2n + 1 variables q, ˙q, t, pn =
pn(q, ˙q, t), and using the terminology of Paragraph 2.1.3.A (iii): the motion of the sys-
tem is conﬁned to a unique level set p−1
n (cn). And assuming scleronomous constraints,
so that we work with the velocity phase space (tangent bundle) T Q: this level set is a
(2n

1)-dimensional sub-manifold of T Q.

−
So ﬁnding a cyclic coordinate48 simpliﬁes the dynamical system, i.e. the problem
of integrating its equations of motion. The number of variables (degrees of freedom of
the problem) is reduced by one—the merit (Reduce) of my moral (Scheme).

This result is simple but important. For ﬁrst, it is straightforward to show that
it encompasses the elementary theorems of the conservation of momentum, angular
momentum and energy; (Goldstein et al (2002: 56-63)). Let us take as a simple
example, the angular momentum of a free particle. The Lagrangian is, in spherical
polar coordinates,

L =

m( ˙r2 + r2 ˙θ2 + r2 ˙φ2 sin2 θ)

1
2

so that ∂L/∂φ = 0. So the conjugate momentum

(4.41)

(4.42)

∂L
∂ ˙φ

= mr2 ˙φ sin2 θ ,

which is the angular momentum about the z-axis, is conserved.

Secondly, this result leads into important theoretical developments about how to
use symmetries, so as to simplify (reduce) problems. The rest of this Section is devoted
to two such developments: in this Subsection, Routhian reduction; and later (Section
4.7), Noether’s theorem. Noether’s theorem will be more general in the sense that
Routhian reduction requires us to have identiﬁed cyclic coordinates, while Noether’s
theorem does not.

4.5.2 Routhian reduction

My discussion of Routhian reduction has two main aims:

(i): in this Subsection, to illustrate using symmetries to secure (Reduce); and

48Beware: The condition ∂L/∂qn = 0 is of course a property not just of the coordinate qn, but of the
entire coordinate system, since partial derivatives depend on what other variables are held constant.
So one can have another coordinate system q′ such that q′
= ∂L/∂qn. Besides, one
can have ∂L/∂ ˙q′
n 6

= ∂L/∂ ˙qn, i.e. the momenta conjugate to q′

n = qn but ∂L/∂q′
n 6

n = qn are distinct.

78

(ii) in Section 4.6, to vindicate Section 4.1.1’s principle of least action from the
perspective of Hamilton’s Principle. (Warning: This use of Routhian reduction is a
topic in the foundations of classical mechanics, not much related to my philosophical
morals: it will not be used later, and can be skipped.)

So suppose qn is cyclic. To exploit this fact so as to reduce the number of variables
in a mechanical problem, we can proceed in either of two ways: (a) after writing down
Lagrange’s equations; or (b) before doing so. I treat these in order; Routhian reduction
is (b).

(a): Notice ﬁrst that since qn does not occur in L, it does not occur in ∂L
∂ ˙qn

, so that

we can solve pn = ∂L
∂ ˙qn

= cn for ˙qn as a function of the other variables, i.e.

˙qn = ˙qn(q1, . . . , qn−1, ˙q1, . . . , ˙qn−1, cn, t)

(4.43)

and substitute the right-hand side of this into Lagrange’s equations. This reduces the
problem of integrating Lagrange’s equations to a problem in n
1 variables. Once
solved we can ﬁnd ˙qn by eq. 4.43, and then ﬁnd qn by quadrature.
(Recall that
‘quadrature’ is jargon for integration of a given function: if we cannot do the integral
analytically, we do it numerically.)

−

(b): But we can also instead reduce the problem ab initio, i.e. when it is formulated
as a variational problem. This is Routhian reduction. It is important both historically
and conceptually. As to history, it was Routh who ﬁrst emphasised the importance of
cyclic coordinates (and his work led to e.g. Hertz’ programme in mechanics). And as
to conceptual aspects, Routhian reduction yields a proper understanding of how the
principle of least action is based on Hamilton’s Principle. Indeed, since the principle
of least action preceded Hamilton’s principle, and thus also this understanding, the
historical and conceptual roles are related—as we shall see in the next Subsection,
Section 4.6.49

Note ﬁrst that we cannot just replace ˙qn in Hamilton’s principle

δ

L(q1, . . . , qn−1, ˙q1, . . . , ˙qn−1, ˙qn, t) = 0

(4.44)

Z

by the right-hand side of eq. 4.43. For eq. 4.43 makes ˙qn a function of the non-cyclic
variables in the sense that pn ≡
= cn is to hold not just for the actual motion
but also for the varied motions. This restriction on the variations is not objectionable
(since the integral’s variation is to vanish for arbitrary variations). But the fact that
qn is obtained by a quadrature means that the variation of qn does not vanish at the
end-points. Rather we have (cf. eq 4.30):

∂L
∂ ˙qn

L dt = [pnδqn]t2
t1.
49Beware: many textbooks (including ﬁne ones like Goldstein et al) only treat Routhian reduction
as an aspect of Hamiltonian theory: in short as involving a Legendre transformation on only the cyclic
coordinates—details in the companion paper. That lacuna is another reason for describing Routhian
reduction within the Lagrangian framework. My discussion will follow Lanczos (1986: 125-140).

(4.45)

δ

Z

79

But pn is constant along the system’s (actual or possible) trajectory in conﬁguration
space, so that

so that eq. 4.45 becomes

[pnδqn]t2

t1 = pn δ

˙qn dt = δ

pn ˙qn dt

Z

Z

To sum up: our problem is reduced to extremizing a modiﬁed integral in n

1 variables

(4.46)

(4.47)

(4.48)

−

δ

(L

pn ˙qn) dt = 0.

−

−

Z

Z

δ

(L

cn ˙qn) dt = 0;

where qn does not occur in the modiﬁed Lagrangian ¯L := L
cn ˙qn; and nor does
˙qn explicitly occur, since it is eliminated by using eq. 4.43, i.e. the momentum ﬁrst
integral ∂L
∂ ˙qn

−

1 variables is solved, we again (as at the end of (a) above)
ﬁnd ˙qn by using the momentum integral eq. 4.43; and then we ﬁnd qn by quadrature.

−

= cn.
Once this problem in n

We can easily adapt the argument of (b) to the case where the given problem has
more than one cyclic coordinate. The modiﬁed Lagrangian ¯L subtracts the correspond-
ing sum over cyclic coordinates:

¯L := L

−

Σk ignorable ck ˙qk .

(4.49)

Three ﬁnal comments.

(1): Anticipating the companion paper a little:— This
kind of subtraction of pn ˙qn from the Lagrangian will be crucial in the discussion of
the Legendre transformation which carries us back and forth between the Lagrangian
and Hamiltonian frameworks. This is the reason why, as mentioned above, Routhian
reduction is often treated in textbooks just as an aspect of Hamiltonian theory:
in
short as involving a Legendre transformation on only the cyclic coordinates.

(2): This reduction has consequences for the form of the modiﬁed Lagrangian

¯L := L

−

cn ˙qn; (details in Lanczos: 128-132).

First: there is a new velocity-independent potential term.

(An historical aside:
This fostered Hertz’s (1894) speculation that mechanics could be forceless, i.e. that all
macroscopically observable forces are analysable in terms of monogenic forces whose
potential energy arises in just this way from the elimination of cyclic microscopic coor-
dinates. Hertz’s proposal reﬂects, and contributed to, a long tradition of philosophical
suspicion of forces. The root idea, present already in the seventeenth century, was that
forces are unobservable while other quantities in mechanics, especially mass, length
and time, are observable. For details, cf. Lutzen (1995).)

Second: in general, the reduction also gives new kinetic terms in ¯L which are linear

in the generalized velocities ˙qi, i = 1, 2, . . . , n

1 (called ‘gyroscopic terms’).

(3): Note that Routhian reduction assumes we have identiﬁed cyclic coordinates. In
Section 4.7, Noether’s theorem will provide a perspective on symmetry and constants
of the motion that does not assume this.

−

80

4.6 Time as a cyclic coordinate; the principle of least action;

Jacobi’s principle

Warning: This Section can be skipped: it is not used later on. But I include it on two
grounds:—

(i): It is worth seeing how to use Routhian reduction to understand the principle
of least action (and another principle, Jacobi’s), with which we began in Section 4.1.1.
(ii): It illustrates the idea of a parameter-independent integral, which came up in
Paragraph 3.3.2.B, (2), in connection with the fact that the Hessian condition can fail;
though this paper will not pursue the topic.

Any holonomic system whose Lagrangian does not contain time explicitly provides
an important case of the theory of Section 4.5. For with such a system we can take the
time itself as a cyclic coordinate. If furthermore the system is conservative (i.e. forces
are derived from potentials, and the potentials are velocity-independent) and also the
system is scleronomous, so that Σpj ˙qj = 2T (cf. end of Section 4.4), then the theory
of Section 4.5 yields the principle of least action—i.e. the variational principle at the
centre of Lagrange’s and Euler’s formulations of analytical mechanics.

But there are subtleties about this principle. As we shall see, the correct form of
this principle is due to Jacobi. And on the other hand, we shall also be able to explain
why earlier authors like Lagrange were able to get the right Euler-Lagrange equations
for holonomic conservative scleronomous systems—even though some of these authors
lacked Hamilton’s Principle.

If the Lagrangian L of a holonomic system does not contain time explicitly, we
can treat time t ‘like the qs’, to give a problem in n + 1 variables. That is, we write
the integral to be extremized (by Hamilton’s principle) in terms of a diﬀerentiable
parameter τ = τ (t), which is such that dτ /dt > 0 but is otherwise arbitrary; (for more
discussion of why this can be useful, cf. e.g. Butterﬁeld (2004c: Sections 5,7)). So with
t′dτ , Hamilton’s
a prime indicating diﬀerentiation with respect to τ , and dt
Principle becomes

q′
1
t′ , . . . ,
So the generalized momentum conjugate to t must be conserved. One immediately
calculates that this momentum is the negative of the Hamiltonian as deﬁned in general
by eq. 4.36. That is:
∂(Lt′)
∂t′ = L

Σj pj ˙qj = constant.50

t′ dτ = 0.

q1, . . . , qn;

t′ = L

q′
j
t′2 !

∂L
∂ ˙qj

dt
dτ dτ

(4.50)

(4.51)

q′
n
t′

pt :=

−  

Σj

−

≡

≡

L

 

!

δ

Z

But now let us apply the theory of Section 4.5. That is: let us eliminate t, to get
a reduced variational problem—which will determine the path in conﬁguration space
50As we also saw in Section 4.4, if the system is conservative and scleronomous, the Hamiltonian
is the sum of the kinetic and potential energies, so that we here get yet another derivation of the
conservation of energy: (Reformulate) again!

81

without regard to the passage of time. The modiﬁed Lagrangian is:

so that the reduced variational problem is

¯L := Lt′

ptt′ = Σj pj ˙qj t′

−

′
Σj pj ˙qj t

dτ = 0.

δ

Z

δ 2

T t′ dτ = 0.

Z

Z

δ 2

T dt = 0,

If furthermore the system is conservative and scleronomous, so that Σpj ˙qj = 2T , we
can write this as:

Eq. 4.54 is the principle of least action of Section 4.1.1. But as Jacobi emphasised,

we should not write this

since the cyclic coordinate t obviously cannot be used as the independent variable of
our problem: t does not occur in eq. 4.54.

However, eq. 4.55 does occur in the earlier authors using the principle of least
action, e.g. Euler and Lagrange themselves.51 At the end of this Subsection, I will
report how the practice of Euler and his contemporaries was in fact justiﬁed, by using
Lagrange’s method of multipliers (the λ-method).

Let us now apply the theory of Section 4.5 to the principle of least action, i.e. to

our modiﬁed Lagrangian problem eq. 4.54. We need to undertake two stages:

(i) to eliminate the corresponding velocity t′, by solving for this velocity the equation

saying that the corresponding momentum is constant, i.e. by solving eq. 4.51 for t′;

(ii) to integrate the resulting equation for t′, to ﬁnd t.
As to stage (i), we use eq. 3.5 and 3.6. Recall that the latter is:

T =

1
2  

ds
dt !

2

,

so that now using τ as independent variable,

1
2  
This implies that solving the energy conservation equation, eq. 4.51, for t′ yields

ds
dτ !

/t′2.

T =

(4.57)

2

t′ =

1
√(2(E

ds
dτ

V ))

−

51Arnold (1989: 246) joyously quotes Jacobi who says (in his Lectures on Dynamics, 1842-1843): ‘In
almost all textbooks, even the best, this principle is presented so that it is impossible to understand’.
‘I do not choose to break with tradition. A very interesting “proof”
Arnold continues ironically:
of [the principle of least action] is in Section 44 of the mechanics textbook of Landau and Lifshitz.’
Arnold’s own exposition (1989: 242-248) is of course admirably lucid and rigorous. But it is abstract
and hard, not least because it is cast within Hamiltonian mechanics.

82

(4.52)

(4.53)

(4.54)

(4.55)

(4.56)

(4.58)

Also eq. 4.57 implies that the principle of least action, eq. 4.54, can be written as:

δ

√(2(E

V ))

dτ = 0

Z

−

ds
dτ

(4.59)

(4.60)

This form is known as Jacobi’s principle. It determines the path in conﬁguration space
without regard to the passage of time. This completes stage (i).

NB: Though one might write Jacobi’s principle as

δ

√(2(E

V ))ds = 0,

Z

−

beware that ds is not an exact diﬀerential, and is not the diﬀerential of the independent
variable in eq. 4.59. Some parameter τ must be chosen as the independent variable,
e.g. one of the qj, say qn, so that all the other qj are functions of qn: which clearly
reduces the problem from n to n

1 degrees of freedom.

As to stage (ii), one integrates eq. 4.58 to get t as a function of τ . This determines

how the motion through conﬁguration space occurs in time.

−

I end this Subsection with four comments on the principle of least action. The ﬁrst
two are technical; but since they connect the principle of least action to the geometry
of conﬁguration space, they illustrate the moral (Reformulate), and the merit (Wider)
of (Scheme). The third and fourth comments will return us to Section 4.1.1’s treatment
of the principle of least action.

(1): The analogy with optics:—

For a single particle, the line-element ds is just ordinary spatial distance (in arbitrary
curvilinear coordinates). Jacobi’s principle is then very like Fermat’s principle of least
time in geometric optics (mentioned in Paragraph 3.3.2.B, (2)), which determines the
optical path by minimizing the integral

n ds

(4.61)

Z
where n is the refractive index, which can change from point to point (cf. √(2(E
V ))).
This optico-mechanical analogy is deep and important: it plays a role both in Hamilton-
Jacobi theory and in quantum theory. (Butterﬁeld (2004c: Sections 7-9) gives details
and references.) But here I just note that the analogy concerns the path, not how the
motion occurs in time—which is diﬀerent in the two cases.

−

(2): Geodesics:—

Eq. 4.60 suggests that we think of Jacobi’s principle as determining the path in con-
ﬁguration space as the shortest path (geodesic), according to a new line-element, dσ2
say, deﬁned by

dσ2 := (E

V )ds2

−

(4.62)

dσ.
so that Jacobi’s principle is the statement that the motion minimizes the integral
Besides, if the system is free i.e. V = 0, dσ2 and ds2 just diﬀer by a multiplicative
constant E, and Jacobi’s principle now says that the system travels a geodesic of the

R

83

original line-element ds2 deﬁned in terms of T . Furthermore, the conservation of energy
and

E = T =

2

1
2  

ds
dt !

(4.63)

implies that the representative point moves at constant velocity in conﬁguration space.

(3): Euler’s and Lagrange’s practice:—

We have deduced the principle of least action, eq. 4.54, for holonomic conservative
scleronomous systems, as an example of Routhian reduction applied to Hamilton’s
Principle. But now let us ask how Euler and Lagrange wrote down the principle of
least action, and got the right Euler-Lagrange equations for such systems, without
starting from Hamilton’s Principle. The short answer is that Lagrange et al. regard
the energy conservation equation eq. 4.58 as an auxiliary condition, and treat it by
Lagrange’s λ-method.

Thus recall that in essence, Jacobi’s principle involves two steps:—
(A): In the kinetic energy, replace diﬀerentiation with respect to t by diﬀerentiation

with respect to the parameter τ :

T ′ =

k = T t′2 .
iq′
Σ aikq′

1
2

(B): Minimize the action integral (cf. eq. 4.54)

after eliminating t′ by using the energy relation (cf. eq. 4.58)

Lagrange instead proposes to treat eq. 4.66 by his λ-method. So his integral to be

extremized is

 
Since t′ is one of our variables, we can ﬁnd λ by minimizing with respect to t′, getting

Z "

!#

T ′
t′ + λ

2

T ′
t′2 + V

dτ.

−
Then the integral becomes

2T ′
t′2 −

2λT ′
t′2 = 0;

giving λ =

t′.

−

T ′
t′2 −

V

!

Z  

t′ dτ =

(T

V )t′ dτ.

−

Z

But now that the variational problem is a free problem, i.e. has no auxiliary conditions,
there is no reason not to use t as the independent variable. Doing so, we get

(4.64)

(4.65)

(4.66)

(4.67)

(4.68)

(4.69)

(4.70)

T ′
t′ dτ

2

Z

T ′
t′2 + V = E.

(T

V ) dt.

Z

−

84

Thus we are led back to Hamilton’s Principle; and thus Lagrange et al. could obtain the
usual, correct, equations of motion for holonomic conservative scleronomous systems
from their principle of least action.

(4): Two kinds of variation, revisited:—

In Section 4.1.1, I introduced the principle of least action using a notion of variation
diﬀerent from the type I have considered throughout this Subsection. There I used
a variation in which the energy H is conserved, so that the transit time varies from
one path to another. Indeed, the principle of least action is often discussed using this
kind of variation. But I shall not go into details, nor relate this notion of variation to
comment (3) above; (for details, cf. Goldstein et al (2002: 356-362) or Arnold (1989:
242-248)).

4.7 Noether’s theorem

4.7.1 Preamble: a modest plan

Any discussion of symmetry in Lagrangian mechanics must include a treatment of
“Noether’s theorem”. The scare quotes are to indicate that there is more than one
Noether’s theorem. Quite apart from Noether’s work in other branches of mathematics,
constants of the
her paper (1918) on symmetries and conservation principles (i.e.
motion) in Lagrangian theories has several theorems. I will be concerned only with
applying her ﬁrst theorem to ﬁnite-dimensional systems. In short: it provides, for any
symmetry of a system’s Lagrangian (a notion I will deﬁne), a constant of the motion;
the constant is called the ‘momentum conjugate to the symmetry’.

I stress at the outset that the great majority of subsequent applications and com-
mentaries (also for her other theorems, besides her ﬁrst) are concerned with versions
of the theorems for inﬁnite (i.e. continuous) systems. In fact, the context of Noether’s
investigation was contemporary debate about how to understand conservation prin-
ciples and symmetries in the “ultimate continuous system”, viz. gravitating matter
as described by Einstein’s general relativity. This theory can be given a Lagrangian
formulation: that is, the equations of motion, i.e. Einstein’s ﬁeld equations, can be
deduced from a Hamilton’s Principle with an appropriate Lagrangian. The contem-
porary debate was especially about the conservation of energy and the principle of
general covariance (aka: diﬀeomorphism invariance). General covariance prompts one
to consider how a variational principle transforms under spacetime coordinate trans-
formations that are arbitrary, in particular varying from point to point. This leads to
the idea of “local” symmetries, which since Noether’s time has been immensely fruitful
in both classical and quantum physics.52

So I agree that from the perspective of Noether’s work, and its enormous later
52An excellent anthology of philosophical essays about symmetry is Brading and Castellani (2003):
apart from its papers speciﬁcally about Noether’s theorem, the papers by Wallace, Belot and Earman
(2003) are closest to this paper’s concerns.

85

development, this Section’s application of the ﬁrst theorem to ﬁnite-dimensional sys-
tems is, as they say, trivial. Furthermore, this application is easily understood, without
having to adopt that perspective, or even having to consider inﬁnite systems. In other
words: its statement and proof are natural, and simple, enough that no doubt several
nineteenth century masters of mechanics, like Hamilton, Jacobi and Poincar´e, could
recognize it in their own work—allowing of course for adjustments to modern language.
In fact, versions of it for the Galilei group of Newtonian mechanics and the Lorentz
group of special relativity were published a few years before Noether’s paper; (Brading
and Brown (2003: 90); for details, cf. Kastrup (1987)).53

Nevertheless, for this paper’s purposes, it is worth expounding the ﬁnite-system
version of Noether’s ﬁrst theorem. For it generalizes Section 4.5’s result about cyclic
coordinates (and so the elementary theorems of the conservation of momentum, angular
momentum and energy which that result encompasses). There is also a pedagogic
reason for expounding it. Many books (e.g. Goldstein et al 2002: 589f.) concentrate on
the versions of Noether’s theorems for inﬁnite systems: for the reasons given above, that
is understandable—but it can unwittingly give the impression that there is no version
for ﬁnite systems. (Noether’s theorem also has an important analogue in Hamiltonian
mechanics.)

I should also give a warning at the outset about the sense in which Noether’s the-
orem generalizes Section 4.5’s result about cyclic coordinates. I said at the very end
of Section 4.5 that (unlike Routhian reduction) the theorem does not assume we have
identiﬁed cyclic coordinates.

Indeed so: but every symmetry in the Noether sense will arise from a cyclic coordi-
nate in some system of generalized coordinates. In fact, this will follow from the Basic
Theorem (what Arnold dubs the “rectiﬁcation theorem’) of the theory of ordinary dif-
ferential equations; cf. Paragraph 2.1.3.A (i).

So the underlying point here will be the important one we have seen before. Namely:
the Basic Theorem secures the existence of a coordinate system in which “locally, the
problem is completely solved”: i.e., n ﬁrst-order ordinary diﬀerential equations have,
locally, n
1 functionally independent ﬁrst integrals. But that does not mean it is easy
to ﬁnd the coordinate system!

−

In other words: as I emphasised already in Section 2.1.4: analytical mechanics
provides no “algorithmic” methods for ﬁnding the best coordinate systems for solving
problems. In particular, Noether’s theorem, for all its power, will not be a magic device
for ﬁnding cyclic coordinates!

My own exposition of the theorem is a leisurely pedagogic expansion of Arnold’s
concise geometric proof (1989: 88-89).54 This will involve, following Arnold, two main
53Here again, ‘versions of it’ needs scare-quotes. For in what follows, I shall be more limited than
these proofs. I limit myself, as I did in Paragraph 3.3.2.E, both to time-independent Lagrangians and
to time-independent transformations: so my discussion does not encompass boosts.

54Other brief expositions of Noether’s theorem for ﬁnite-dimensional systems include: Desloge (1982:
581-586), Lanczos (1986: 401-405: emphasizing the variational perspective) and Johns (2005: Chapter
13).

86

limitations of scope:

(i): I limit myself, as I did in Paragraph 3.3.2.E, both to time-independent La-
grangians and to time-independent transformations. Formally, this will mean L is a
scalar function on the 2n-dimensional velocity phase space (aka: tangent bundle) T Q
coordinatized by q, ˙q: L : T Q

IR.

(ii): I will take a symmetry of L (or L’s being invariant) to require that L be the
very same. That is: a symmetry does not allow the addition to L of the time-derivative
of a function G(q) of the coordinates q—even though, as discussed in Paragraph 3.3.2.D
(and Section 4.2), such a time-derivative makes no diﬀerence to the Lagrange (Euler-
Lagrange) equations.

→

So my aims are modest. Apart from pedagogically expanding Arnold’s proof, my
only addition will be to contrast with (ii)’s notion of symmetry, another notion. Al-
though this notion is not needed for my statement and proof of Noether’s theorem,
it is so important to this paper’s theme of general schemes for integrating diﬀerential
equations (from Section 2.1.1 onwards!) that I must mention it brieﬂy.

This is the notion of a symmetry of the set of solutions of a diﬀerential equation:
(aka: a dynamical symmetry). This notion applies to all sorts of diﬀerential equations,
and systems of them; not just to diﬀerential equations of this paper’s sort—i.e. derived,
or derivable, from an variational principle. In short, this sort of symmetry is a map that
sends any solution of the given diﬀerential equation (in eﬀect: a dynamically possible
history of the system—a curve in the state-space of the theory) to some other solution.
Finding such symmetries, and groups of them, is a central part of the modern theory
of integration of diﬀerential equations (both ordinary and partial). (This notion, and
the theory based on it, were pioneered by Lie.)

It will turn out that broadly speaking, this notion is more general than that of a
symmetry of L (the notion needed for Noether’s theorem). Not only does it apply to
many other sorts of diﬀerential equation than the Euler-Lagrange equations. Also, for
the latter equations: a symmetry of L is (with one caveat) a symmetry of the solutions,
i.e. a dynamical symmetry—but the converse is false.

An excellent account of this modern integration theory, covering both ordinary and
partial diﬀerential equations, is given by Olver (2000). He also covers the Lagrangian
case (Chapter 5 onwards), and gives many historical details about Lie’s and others’
contributions.

The plan is as follows. Starting from cyclic coordinates, I ﬁrst develop the idea of
the Lagrangian being invariant under a transformation (Section 4.7.2). This leads to
deﬁning:

(i): a symmetry as a vector ﬁeld (on conﬁguration space) that generates a family

of transformations under which the Lagrangian is invariant (Section 4.7.3);

(ii): the momentum conjugate to a vector ﬁeld, as (roughly) the rate of change of

the Lagrangian with respect to the ˙qs in the direction of the vector ﬁeld.

Together, these deﬁnitions lead directly to Noether’s theorem (Section 4.7.5): that
the momentum conjugate to a symmetry is a constant of the motion. One might guess,
in the light of the rough deﬁnitions just given in (i) and (ii), that proving this statement

87

promises to be easy work. And so it is: after all the stage-setting, the proof in Section
4.7.5 will be a one-liner application of Lagrange’s equations.55

4.7.2 From cyclic coordinates to the invariance of the Lagrangian

I begin by restating Section 4.5’s result that the generalized momentum conjugate to
a cyclic coordinate is constant, in terms of coordinate transformations. This leads
to the correspondence between passive and active transformations, and between their
associated deﬁnitions of ‘invariance’.

The passive-active correspondence is of course entirely general:

it applies to any
space on which invertible diﬀerentiable coordinate transformations are deﬁned. But it
is a notoriously muddling subject and so worth expounding slowly! And although my
exposition will be in the context of cyclic coordinates in Lagrangian mechanics, it will
be clear that the correspondence is general.

So let qn be cyclic, and consider a coordinate transformation q

the cyclic coordinate qn by an amount ǫ:

q′ that just shifts

→

q′
i := qi + ǫδin

˙q′
i = ˙qi

.

So to write the Lagrangian in terms of the new coordinates, we substitute, using the
reverse transformation, i.e.

Lǫ(q′, ˙q′, t) = L(q(q′, t),

˙q(q′, t), t) .

That is: the Lagrangian is a scalar function on the space with points labelled (q, ˙q, t).
(In Paragraph 3.3.2.B, we called this the ‘extended velocity phase space’, or without the
time argument, just ‘velocity phase space’; in the geometric description of Paragraph
3.3.2.E, we called it the ‘tangent bundle’.) It is just that we use Lǫ to label its functional
form in the new coordinate system.

Now we let ǫ vary, so that we have a one-parameter family of transformations.

Diﬀerentiating Lǫ with respect to ǫ, we get using the chain rule

∂Lǫ
∂ǫ

= Σi

∂L
∂qi

∂qi
∂ǫ

+ Σi

∂L
∂ ˙qi

∂ ˙qi
∂ǫ

= Σi −

∂L
∂qi

δin =

∂L
∂qn

−

.

Now we use the fact qn is cyclic. This implies that eq. 4.73 is equal to zero:

(4.71)

(4.72)

(4.73)

(4.74)

∂Lǫ
∂ǫ ≡ −

∂L
∂qn

= 0 ;

and thus that the Lagrangian has the same functional form in the new coordinates as
in the old ones: which we can express as

Lǫ(q, ˙q, t) = L(q, ˙q, t) ; or equivalently Lǫ(q′, ˙q′, t) = L(q′, ˙q′, t) .

(4.75)
55If in (ii), the conjugate momentum had been deﬁned simply as the rate of change of the Lagrangian
in the direction of the vector ﬁeld, then of course the theorem would be truly trivial: it would not
require Lagrange’s equations.

88

So far we have viewed the coordinate transformation in the usual way, as a passive
transformation: cf. the comment after eq. 4.72. But for Noether’s theorem, we need
to express these same ideas in terms of active transformations. So I will now describe
the usual correspondence between passive and active transformations, in the context
of the velocity phase space.

(Again, I stress that my discussion assumes time-independent Lagrangians and
transformations; so I will not work with extended velocity phase space. But some of
the following discussion could be straightforwardly generalized to that context. For
example, the vector ﬁelds X that in the next Subsection will represent symmetries
would become time-dependent vector ﬁelds, so that their rates of change pick up a
partial time-derivative ∂X

∂t .)

∈

7→

∈

I will temporarily label the velocity phase space S (for ‘space’). And let us write s
for a point (however coordinatized) in S, and indicate scalar functions on S (however
expressed in terms of coordinates) by a bar. So the Lagrangian is a scalar function
¯L : s

¯L(s)

IR.

S

Furthermore, in this Subsection’s discussion of the corresponding active transforma-
tions, the distinction between the qs and the ˙qs will play no role. As in the discussion
above, we will start with a passive coordinate transformation on S (both qs and ˙qs)
that is induced by a passive coordinate transformation on just the conﬁguration space
(just qs); and then we will deﬁne a corresponding active transformation. But since
˙q-distinction plays no role—the ˙qs just “carry along” throughout—it will be
the q
clearest to temporarily drop the ˙qs from the notation. So in this Subsection, when I
q′ coordinate transformation inducing an active one, you can
talk of a passive q
think indiﬀerently of there being:

→

−

either (i) n qs on conﬁguration space, with the discussion “lifting” to the 2n-

dimensional S,

or (ii) 2n qs on S, so that the q

q′ transformation need not be induced by a

→

−

transformation on just the n-dimensional conﬁguration space.

In the next Subsection, the q

˙q-distinction will of course come back into play.

A passive coordinate transformation q

q′ deﬁnes an active transformation, θ say,
→
as follows. We will allow the coordinate transformation to be local, i.e. deﬁned only
on a patch (to be precise: an open subset) U of S. Then θ : U
U is deﬁned by the
U the coordinates of θ(s) in the q′-system are to be the same
rule that for any s
numbers as the coordinates of s in the q-system; that is

→

∈

′
i(θ(s)) = qi(s)
q

(4.76)
This deﬁnition implies that θ’s functional form in the q′-system is the transformation
q′
θ(s)
q, i.e. the inverse of our original coordinate transformation. That is: θ : s
is expressed in the q′-system by

for all i .

→

7→

q′(s)

q′(θ(s)) = q(s) .

7→

(4.77)

On the other hand, a scalar function ¯L : U

composition with θ. That is, we deﬁne ¯L

θ : s

IR can be “dragged along” by
¯L(θ(s))

IR.

→
U

∈

7→

∈

◦

89

Putting these points together, we deduce that the functional forms of ¯L and ¯L

in the coordinate systems q and q′ respectively, match.

θ,

◦

That is:

let the functional form of ¯L in the q-system be L: so ¯L(s) is calculated
θ in
L(q): which is the same. That is, this functional form is
L(q(q′(s))). (The occurrence of q(q′) here corresponds to the use of the

in the q-system as L(q(s)). But eq. 4.77 implies that the functional form of ¯L
the q′-system is q′
also L(q(s))
inverse coordinate transformation under the passive view; cf. eq. 4.72.)

→

→

≡

◦

q

−

Furthermore, we could undertake this construction in reverse. That is, we could
instead start with diﬀerentiable invertible active maps θ on S, and thereby deﬁne
coordinate transformations, with the property that a scalar function and its “drag-
along” have the same functional expression in the two coordinate systems. (Exercise!
Fill in these details; and ﬁll in the details of the above discussion, so as to respect the
q

˙q distinction.)

This passive-active correspondence obviously applies to any space on which invert-
ible diﬀerentiable coordinate transformations are deﬁned. For our construction of the
corresponding active transformation made no appeal to the three special features of
Lagrangian mechanics and cyclic coordinates that we used in our passive discussion,
eq. 4.71 to 4.75. Namely, the three features:

(i): the q
(ii): the use of a translation in just one coordinate to give a one-parameter family

˙q distinction on S;

−

of transformations, labelled by ǫ;

(iii): the idea of a cyclic coordinate and L being invariant.

So we will now re-introduce these features. We begin with the most important one:

(iii), invariance.

(We will re-introduce feature (i), the q

˙q distinction, in the next Subsection. And
−
it will be clear that the main role of (ii), in both passive and active views, is to provide
a diﬀerential notion of invariance; cf. how eq. 4.74 is the diﬀerential form of eq. 4.75.)

We saw that on the passive view, the invariance of the Lagrangian means that it

has the same functional form in both coordinate systems; eq. 4.75.

On the active view, it is natural to deﬁne: ¯L is invariant under the map θ : U

U

→

iﬀ ¯L and ¯L

◦

θ are the same scalar function U

IR.

→

But we also saw that on the active view, now replacing θ by ǫ in the obvious way:
for any ¯L and its drag-along ¯Lǫ, the functional forms in the q-system and q′-system
respectively, match. This implies that ¯L being invariant means that ¯L itself has the
same functional form in the q-system and q′-system.

So to sum up: the correspondence between passive and active (local) transforma-
tions implies an equivalence between two deﬁnitions of what it is for a scalar such as
the Lagrangian to be invariant—where this invariance is understood as above, and not
just as being a scalar on the space S! Namely: that L have the same functional form
in two coordinate systems, and that it be identical with its “drag-along”.

90

4.7.3 Vector ﬁelds and symmetries—variational and dynamical

The last Subsection used, albeit brieﬂy, the idea of a one-parameter family of trans-
formations on the n-dimensional conﬁguration space Q, and how it “lifts” to the 2n-
dimensional velocity phase space that I labelled S.

I now need to state these ideas more carefully; and especially, to be explicit about
the “diﬀerential version” of such a family of transformations. This is the idea of a
vector ﬁeld on Q. Here my discussion borders on the relatively abstract ideas of mod-
ern geometry: ideas which this paper has eschewed, apart from the geometric interlude
Paragraph 3.3.2.E. But fortunately, in proving Noether’s theorem I will be able to make
do with an elementary notion of a vector ﬁeld. More speciﬁcally, I need to expound
four topics:

(1): the idea of a vector ﬁeld on Q;
(2): how such vector ﬁelds “lift” to velocity phase space;
(3): the deﬁnition of a (variational) symmetry;
(4): the contrast between (3) and the idea of symmetry of the equations of motion
(aka: a dynamical symmetry). Warning: the material in (4) will not be needed for
Section 4.7.5.

(1): Vector ﬁelds on Q :—-

The intuitive idea of a vector ﬁeld on conﬁguration space Q is that it is an assignment
to each point of the space, of a inﬁnitesimal displacement, pointing to a nearby point
in the space. The assignment is to be continuous in the sense that close points get
similar inﬁnitesimal displacements assigned to them, the displacements tending to each
other as the points get closer. For present purposes, we will furthermore require that a
vector ﬁeld be diﬀerentiable; (this is deﬁned along similar lines to its being continuous).
In this way, it is intuitively clear that a diﬀerentiable vector ﬁeld on an n-dimensional
conﬁguration space is represented in a coordinate system q = (q1, . . . , qn) by n ﬁrst-
order ordinary diﬀerential equations

dqi
dǫ

= fi(q1, . . . , qn) .

(4.78)

At each point (q1, . . . , qn), the assigned inﬁnitesimal displacement has a component in
the qi direction equal to fi(q1, . . . , qn)dǫ.

Thus we return to the basic ideas of solving ordinary diﬀerential equations, ex-
pounded in Paragraph 2.1.3.A, (1).
In particular, a vector ﬁeld has through every
point a local integral curve (solution of the diﬀerential equations). In this way, a vec-
tor ﬁeld generates a one-parameter family of active transformations: that is, passage
along the vector ﬁeld’s integral curves, by a varying parameter-diﬀerence ǫ, is such a
family of transformations. The vector ﬁeld is called the inﬁnitesimal generator of the
family. It is in this sense that a vector ﬁeld is the “diﬀerential version” of such a family.
(Using the last Subsection’s passive-active correspondence, one could deﬁne what it is
for a vector ﬁeld to generate a one-parameter family of coordinate transformations.
But I will not need this idea: exercise to write it down!)

91

I turn to a more precise deﬁnition of a vector ﬁeld on Q: informal, by the standards
of modern geometry, but adequate for present purposes. The idea of the deﬁnition
is that a vector ﬁeld X on Q is to assign the same small displacements irrespective
of a choice of coordinate system on Q. So ﬁrst we recall that the expressions in two
coordinate systems q and q′ of a small displacement are related by

We therefore deﬁne: a vector ﬁeld X on Q is an assignment to each coordinate system q
on Q, of a set of n real-valued functions Xi(q), with the diﬀerent sets meshing according
to the transformation law (for the coordinate transformation q

q′):

→

δq′

i = Σj

δqj + O(ǫ2) .

∂q′
i
∂qj

X ′

i = Σj

∂q′
i
∂qj

Xj.

(4.79)

(4.80)

The functions Xi(q) are called the components of the vector ﬁeld in the coordinate
system q.

(2): Vector ﬁelds on T Q; lifting ﬁelds from Q to T Q:—-

Now consider the velocity phase space, the 2n-dimensional space of conﬁgurations
and generalized velocities taken together. This has a natural structure induced by Q,
essentially because a coordinate system q on Q, deﬁnes a corresponding coordinate
system q, ˙q on the velocity phase space. Indeed, the velocity phase space is called the
tangent bundle of Q’, written T Q—where T stands, not for ‘time’, but for ‘tangent’.
The reason for ‘tangent’ lies in modern geometry; (cf. Paragraph 3.3.2.E for more
detail). But in short, the reason is as follows.

I

∈

IR

7→

q(φ(t))

Consider any smooth curve in conﬁguration space, φ : I

Q, with coordinate
expression in the q-system t
q(t) = qi(t). Mathematically, t is just
the parameter of the curve φ: but the physical interpretation is of course that φ is a
possible motion, and t is the time, so that if we diﬀerentiate the qi(t) the dot ˙ stands
for time, and the n functions ˙qi(t) together deﬁne the generalized velocity vector, for
each time t. Besides: for each t, the values ˙qi(t) of these n functions together form the
tangent vector to the curve φ where it passes through the point in Q with coordinates
q(t)
q(φ(t)). We think of this tangent vector as attached to the space Q, at the
≡
point.

→

≡

⊂

It will be helpful to have a notation for this point in Q, independent of its coordinate
expression (here, q(t)). Let us write it as x
Q. Then: considering all the various
possible curves φ that pass through x (with various diﬀerent directions and speeds),
we get all the various possible generalized velocity vectors. They naturally form a
n-dimensional vector space, which we call the tangent space Tx attached to x

Q.

∈

Then the set (space) T Q is deﬁned by saying that an element (point) of T Q is
Q together with a vector in Tx. So: adopting the
a pair, comprising a point x
coordinate system q on (a patch of) Q, there is a corresponding coordinate system q, ˙q
on (a corresponding patch of) T Q.

∈

∈

92

T Q is a “smooth space”—formally, a diﬀerential manifold—so that we can deﬁne
vector ﬁelds on it, on analogy with (1) above. In full generality, a vector ﬁeld on T Q
will be an assignment to any coordinate system ζ α = (ζ 1, . . . , ζ 2n) on T Q of a set of 2n
real-valued functions Xα(ζ), with the diﬀerent sets meshing according to the analogue
of eq. 4.80, i.e. for a coordinate transformation ζ

ζ ′:

X ′

α = Σ2n
β=1

→

Xβ.

∂ζ ′
α
∂ζβ

(4.81)

But we will be interested only in vector ﬁelds on T Q that “mesh” with the structure
of T Q as a tangent bundle, i.e. with vector ﬁelds on T Q that are induced by vector
ﬁelds on Q—in the following natural way.

This induction has two ingredient ideas.
First, any curve in conﬁguration space Q deﬁnes a corresponding curve in T Q—
intuitively, because the functions qi(t) deﬁne the functions ˙qi(t). More formally: given
any curve in conﬁguration space, φ : I
Q, with coordinate expression in the
IR
q-system t
q(t) = qi(t), we deﬁne its extension to T Q to be the curve
Φ : I
IR

I
T Q given in the corresponding coordinates by qi(t), ˙qi(t).

q(φ(t))

→

7→

≡

⊂

Second, any vector ﬁeld X on Q generates displacements in any possible state of
motion, represented by a curve in Q with coordinate expression qi = qi(t). (So here t
is the parameter of the state of motion, not of the integral curves of X.) Namely: for
a given value of the parameter ǫ, the displaced state of motion is represented by the
curve in Q

∈
→

⊂

qi(t) + ǫXi(qi(t)) .

(4.82)

Putting these ingredients together: we ﬁrst displace a curve within Q, and then
extend the result to T Q. Namely, the extension to T Q of the (curve representing)
the displaced state of motion is given by the 2n functions, in two groups each of n
functions, for the (q, ˙q) coordinate system

qi(t) + ǫXi(qi(t)) and ˙qi(t) + ǫYi(qi(t), ˙qi) ;

(4.83)

where Y is deﬁned to be the vector ﬁeld on T Q that is the derivative along the original
state of motion of X. That is:

Yi(q, ˙q) :=

= Σj

dXi
dt

∂Xi
∂qj

˙qj.

(4.84)

In this sense, displacements by a vector ﬁeld within Q can be “lifted” to T Q. The
vector ﬁeld X on Q lifts to T Q as (X, dX
dt ); i.e. it lifts to the vector ﬁeld that sends a
T Q to (qi + ǫXi, ˙qi + ǫ dXi
dt ).56
point (qi, ˙qi)

56I have discussed this in terms of some system (q, ˙q) of coordinates. But the deﬁnitions of extensions
and displacements are in fact coordinate-independent. Besides, one can show that the operations of
displacing a curve within Q, and extending it to T Q, commute to ﬁrst order in ǫ: the result is the
same for either order of the operations.

∈

93

(3): Deﬁnition of ‘symmetry’ :—-

To deﬁne symmetry, I begin with the integral notion and then give the diﬀerential
notion. I will also simplify, as I have often done, by speaking “globally, not locally”,
i.e. by writing as if the relevant scalar functions, vector ﬁelds etc. are deﬁned on all of
Q or T Q: of course, they need not be.

We return to the idea at the end of Section 4.7.2: the idea of the Lagrangian L being
θ. (So here
invariant under an active transformation θ, i.e. equal to its drag-along L
L is the coordinate-independent scalar function on T Q, not a functional form. But we
could use Section 4.7.2 to recast what follows in terms of a passive notion of symmetry
as sameness of L’s functional form in diﬀerent coordinate systems: exercise!)

◦

Now we consider an entire one-parameter family of (active) transformations θs :
IR. We deﬁne the family to be a symmetry of L if the Lagrangian is invariant
I
θs. (But see (4) below for why ‘variational

s
under the transformations, i.e. L = L
symmetry’ is a better word for this notion.)

⊂

∈

◦

For the diﬀerential notion of symmetry, we use the idea of a vector ﬁeld. We deﬁne
a vector ﬁeld X to be a symmetry of L if the Lagrangian is invariant, up to ﬁrst-
order in ǫ, under the displacements generated by X. (But again, see (4) below for
why ‘variational symmetry’ is a better word.) More precisely, and now allowing for a
time-dependent Lagrangian (so that for each time t, L is a scalar function on T Q): we
say X is a symmetry iﬀ

L(qi + ǫXi, ˙qi + ǫYi, t) = L(qi, ˙qi, t) + O(ǫ2) with Yi = Σj

(4.85)

∂Xi
∂qj

˙qj .

An equivalent deﬁnition is got by explicitly setting the ﬁrst derivative with respect to
ǫ to zero. That is: X is a symmetry iﬀ

Σi Xi

+ Σi Yi

= 0 with Yi = Σj

(4.86)

∂L
∂qi

∂L
∂ ˙qi

∂Xi
∂qj

˙qj

(4): A Contrast: symmetries of the equations of motion :—-

Warning:— As I said at the end of Section 4.7.1, the material here is not needed
for Section 4.7.5’s presentation of Noether’s theorem. But the notion of a symmetry
of equations of motion (whether Euler-Lagrange or not) is so important that I must
mention it, though only to contrast it with (3)’s notion.

E

The general deﬁnition is roughly as follows. Given any system of diﬀerential equa-
say, a (dynamical) symmetry of the system is an (active) transformation ζ on
tions,
’s space of both independent variables, xj say, and dependent variables
the system
yi say, such that any solution of
, yi = fi(xj) say, is carried to another solution. For
a precise deﬁnition, cf. Olver (2000: Def. 2.23, p. 93), and his ensuing discussion of
the induced action (called ‘prolongation’) of the transformation ζ on the spaces of (in
general, partial) derivatives of the y’s with respect to the xs (called ‘jet spaces’).

E

E

As I said in Section 4.7.1, groups of symmetries in this sense play a central role
in the modern theory of diﬀerential equations: not just in ﬁnding new solutions, once

94

given a solution, but also in integrating the equations. For some main theorems stating
criteria (in terms of prolongations) for groups of symmetries, cf. Olver (2000: Theorem
2.27, p. 100, Theorem 2.36, p. 110, Theorem 2.71, p. 161).

But for present purposes, it is enough to state the rough idea of a one-parameter
group of dynamical symmetries (without details about prolongations!)
for the La-
grangian equations of motion in the usual familiar form, eq. 3.39 or 4.8. In this simple
case, there is just one independent variable x := t, so that we are considering ordinary,
not partial, diﬀerential equations; and there are n dependent variables yi := qi(t).

Furthermore, following the discussion in Section 3, these equations mean that the
constraints are holonomic, scleronomous and ideal, and the system is monogenic with a
velocity-independent and time-independent work-function. As I have often emphasised
(especially Sections 4.4 and 4.6), this means that the system obeys the conservation of
energy, and time is a cyclic coordinate. And this means that we can deﬁne dynamical
symmetries ζ in terms of the familiar active transformations on the conﬁguration space,
Q, discussed since Section 4.7.2. In eﬀect, we deﬁne a ζ by just adjoining
θ : Q
to any such θ : Q
t. (More
formally: ζ : (q, t)

Q the identity map on the time variable i : t

×
Then we deﬁne in the usual way what it is for a one-parameter family of such maps
ζs : s
IR to be a one-parameter group of dynamical symmetries (for Lagrange’s
equations eq. 3.39): namely, if any solution curve q(t) (or equivalently: its extension
q(t), ˙q(t) to T Q) of the Lagrange equations is carried by each ζs to another solution
curve, with the ζs for diﬀerent s composing in the obvious way.

(θ(q), t)

→
∈

IR.)

→

7→

7→

IR

IR

×

⊂

Q

Q

∈

∈

∈

I

And ﬁnally: we also deﬁne (in a manner corresponding to (3)’s discussion) a diﬀer-
ential, as against integral, notion of dynamical symmetry. Namely, we say a vector ﬁeld
X is a dynamical symmetry if it is the inﬁnitesimal generator of such a one-parameter
family ζs.

For us, the important point is that this notion of a dynamical symmetry is diﬀerent
from (3)’s notion of a variational symmetry. Hence it is best to use diﬀerent words.57

Many discussions of Noether’s theorem only mention (3)’s notion, variational sym-
metry. Arnold himself just says that any variational symmetry is a dynamical sym-
metry, adding in a footnote that several textbooks mistakenly assert the converse
implication—but he does not give a counterexample (1989: 88). But in fact there is a
subtlety also about the ﬁrst implication, from variational symmetry to dynamical sym-
metry. Fortunately, the same simple example will serve both as a counterexample to
the converse implication, and to show the subtlety about the ﬁrst implication. Besides,
it is an example we have seen before: viz., the two-dimensional harmonic oscillator with
a single frequency (Paragraph 3.3.2.D).58

57Since the Lagrangian L is especially associated with variational principles, while the dynamics is
given by equations of motion, calling (3)’s notion ‘variational symmetry’, and the new notion ‘dynam-
ical symmetry’ is a good and widespread usage. But beware: it is not universal. Many treatments
call (3)’s notion ‘dynamical symmetry’—understandably enough in so far as, for the systems being
considered, L determines the dynamics.

58All the material from here to the end of this Subsection is drawn from Brown and Holland (2004a);

95

(4.87)

(4.88)

(4.89)

Recall from eq. 3.47 and eq. 3.48 that the usual and unfamiliar Lagrangians are

respectively (with cartesian coordinates written as qs):

L1 =

1
2

1 + ˙q2
˙q2
h

2 −

ω2(q2

1 + q2
2)

; L2 = ˙q1 ˙q2 −

ω2q1q2 .

i

These inequivalent Lagrangians give the same Lagrange equations eq. 3.39—or using
Hamilton’s Principle, the same Euler-Lagrange equations: viz.

The rotations in the plane are of course a variational symmetry of L1, and a dynamical
symmetry of eq. 4.88. But they are not a variational symmetry of L2. So a dynamical
symmetry need not be a variational one. Besides, eq.s 4.87 and 4.88 contain another
example to the same eﬀect. Namely, the “squeeze” transformations

¨qi + ω2qi = 0 , i = 1, 2.

1 := eηq1 , q′
q′

2 := e−ηq2

are a dynamical symmetry of eq. 4.88, but not a variational symmetry of L1. So again:
a dynamical symmetry need not be a variational one.59

I turn to the ﬁrst implication: that every variational symmetry is a dynamical
symmetry. This is true: general and abstract proofs (applying also to continuous
systems i.e. ﬁeld theories) can be found in Olver (2000: theorem 4.14, p. 255; theorem
4.34, p. 278; theorem 5.53, p. 332).

But beware of a condition of the theorem. It requires that all the variables q (for
continuous systems: all the ﬁelds φ) be subject to Hamilton’s Principle. The need for
this condition is shown by rotations in the plane, which are a variational symmetry of
the harmonic oscillator’s familiar Lagrangian L1. But it is easy to show that such a
rotation is a dynamical symmetry of one of Euler-Lagrange equations, say the equation
for the variable q1

¨q1 + ω2q1 = 0 ,

(4.90)

only if the corresponding Euler-Lagrange equation holds for q2.

cf. also their (2004). Many thanks to Harvey Brown for explaining these matters. The present use of
the harmonic oscillator example also occurs in Morandi et al (1990: 203-204).

59In the light of this, you might ask about a more restricted implication: viz. must every dynamical
symmetry of a set of equations of motion be a variational symmetry of some or other Lagrangian
that yields the given equations as Euler-Lagrange equations? Again, the answer is No for the simple
reason that there are many (sets of) equations of motion that are not Euler-Lagrange equations of
any Lagrangian, and yet have dynamical symmetries in the sense discussed, i.e. transformations that
move solution curves to solution curves.

Wigner (1954) gives an example. The general question of under what conditions is a set of ordinary
diﬀerential equations the Euler-Lagrange equations of some Hamilton’s Principle is called the inverse
problem of Lagrangian mechanics. It is a large subject, with a long history; cf. e.g. Santilli (1979),
Lopuszanski (1999).

96

4.7.4 The conjugate momentum of a vector ﬁeld

Now we deﬁne the momentum conjugate to a vector ﬁeld X to be the scalar function
on T Q:

pX : T Q

IR ; pX = Σi Xi

→

∂L
∂ ˙qi

(4.91)

(For a time-dependent Lagrangian, pX would be a scalar function on T Q
representing time.)

×

IR, with IR

We shall see in examples below that this deﬁnition generalizes in an appropriate
way our previous deﬁnition of the momentum conjugate to a coordinate q, in Section
4.4.

For the moment, I just note that it is an improvement in the sense that, as I said
in Section 4.5.1 (footnote 49), the momentum conjugate to a coordinate q depends
on the choice made for the other coordinates. But the momentum pX conjugate to
a symmetry X is independent of the coordinates chosen.
I will (i) explain why, in
intuitive terms (expanding Arnold 1989: 89); and then (ii) give a proof. Warning:—
(i) and (ii) are not needed for the statement and proof of Noether’s theorem in Section
4.7.5.

(i): This independence is suggested by the deﬁnition of pX. For think of how in
elementary calculus the rate of change (directional derivative) of a function f : IR3
IR
IR3 is a coordinate-independent notion; and it is given by
along a line φ : t
contracting the gradient of f with the line’s tangent vector, like eq. 4.91. That is:
Taking cartesian coordinates, so that the tangent vector of the line is ( dx1
dt ),
the directional derivative of f is given by

dt , dx2

dt , dx3

φ(t)

7→

→

∈

df
dt

= Σi

dxi
dt

∂f
∂xi

.

(4.92)

Then on analogy with the case in elementary calculus, we have: pX as deﬁned by eq.
4.91 is given by contracting the “gradient of L with respect to the ˙qs” with the vector
X.

Arnold (1989: 89) makes much the same point in terms of:

(i) the one-parameter family of transformations generated by X, call it θs with

s = 0 corresponding to the identity at a point q

Q;

∈

(ii) the idea introduced in (2) of Section 4.7.3, that the various possible velocity

vectors ˙q form the tangent space Tq at q

Q.
Thus Arnold says pX is the rate of change of L(q, ˙q) when the vector ˙q ‘varies inside

the tangent space Tq with velocity d

∈
ds |s=0 θs(q)’.

(ii) To prove independence, we ﬁrst apply the chain-rule to L = L(q′(q), ˙q′(q, ˙q))
and “cancellation of the dots” (i.e. eq. 3.30, but now between arbitrary coordinate
systems), to get:

∂L
∂ ˙qi

= Σj

∂L
∂ ˙q′
j

∂ ˙q′
j
∂ ˙qi

= Σj

∂L
∂ ˙q′
j

∂q′
j
∂qi

(4.93)

97

Then using eq. 4.80, and relabelling i and j, we deduce:

X = Σi X ′
p′

i

∂L
∂ ˙q′
i

= Σij Xj

= Σij Xi

= Σi Xi

pX .

(4.94)

∂q′
i
∂qj

∂L
∂ ˙q′
i

∂q′
j
∂qi

∂L
∂ ˙q′
j

∂L
∂ ˙qi ≡

Finally, I remark incidentally that in a geometric formulation of Lagrangian mechanics,
the coordinate-independence of pX becomes, unsurprisingly, a triviality. Namely: pX
is obviously the contraction of X with the canonical one-form

θL :=

∂L
∂ ˙qi dqi

.

(4.95)

that we deﬁned in eq. 3.51 of Paragraph 3.3.2.E (3).

4.7.5 Noether’s theorem; and examples

Given just the deﬁnition of conjugate momentum, eq. 4.91, the proof of Noether’s
theorem is immediate. (The interpretation and properties of this momentum, discussed
in the last Subsection, are not needed.) The theorem says:

If X is a (variational) symmetry of a system with Lagrangian L(q, v, t),
then X’s conjugate momentum is a constant of the motion.

Proof: We just calculate the derivative of the momentum eq. 4.91 along the solution
curves in T Q, and apply the deﬁnitions of Yi eq. 4.84, and of symmetry eq. 4.86:

dp
dt

= Σi

dXi
dt

∂L
∂ ˙qi
∂L
∂ ˙qi

+ Σi Xi

∂L
∂ ˙qi !

d
dt  
∂L
∂qi

= Σi Yi

+ Σi Xi

= 0 .

All of which, though neat, is a bit abstract! So here are two examples, both of

which return us to examples we have already seen.

The ﬁrst example is a shift in a cyclic coordinate qn: i.e. the case with which our
discussion of Noether’s theorem began, in Section 4.7.2. So suppose qn is cyclic, and
deﬁne a vector ﬁeld X by

X1 = 0, . . . , Xn−1 = 0, Xn = 1 .

(4.97)

So the displacements generated by X are translations by an amount ǫ in the qn-
direction. Then Yi := dXi
dt vanishes, and the deﬁnition of (variational) symmetry eq.
4.86 reduces to

(4.96)

(4.98)

∂L
∂qn

= 0

98

So since qn is assumed to be cyclic, X is a symmetry. And the momentum conjugate
to X, which Noether’s theorem tells us is a constant of the motion, is the familiar one

pX := Σi Xi

=

∂L
∂ ˙qi

∂L
∂ ˙qn

.

(4.99)

Furthermore, as mentioned in this Section’s Preamble, Paragraph 4.7.0, this example
is universal, in that it follows from the Basic Theorem about solutions of ordinary
diﬀerential equations (the ‘rectiﬁcation theorem’: Paragraph 2.3.1.A (i)) that every
symmetry X arises from a cyclic coordinate in some system of coordinates.

But for good measure, let us nevertheless look at our previous example, the angular
momentum of a free particle (Section 4.5.1), in the cartesian coordinate system, i.e. a
coordinate system without cyclic coordinates. So let q1 := x, q2 := y, q3 := z. Then a
small rotation about the x-axis

δx = 0, δy =

ǫz, δz = ǫy

(4.100)

corresponds to a vector ﬁeld X with components

so that the Yi are

For the Lagrangian

−

−

−

X1 = 0, X2 =

q3, X3 = q2

Y1 = 0, Y2 =

˙q3, X3 = ˙q2 .

L =

m( ˙q2

1 + ˙q2

2 + ˙q2
3)

1
2

X is a (variational) symmetry since the deﬁnition of symmetry eq. 4.86 now reduces
to

Σi Xi

+ Σi Yi

∂L
∂qi

∂L
∂ ˙qi

=

˙q3

−

∂L
∂ ˙q2

+ ˙q2

= 0 .

∂L
∂ ˙q3

So Noether’s theorem them tells us that X’s conjugate momentum

pX := Σi Xi

= X2

+ X3

=

mz ˙y + my ˙z

(4.105)

∂L
∂ ˙qi

∂L
∂ ˙q2

∂L
∂ ˙q3

−

which is indeed the x-component of angular momentum.

(4.101)

(4.102)

(4.103)

(4.104)

99

5 Envoi

Two of this paper’s themes have been: praise of eighteenth century mechanics; and
criticism of conceiving physical theorizing as “modelling”. So let me end by quoting
two passages concordant with those themes. My praise is summed up by Lanczos in
the Preface to his wise book:

[T]he author ... again and again ... experienced the extraordinary elation
of mind which accompanies a preoccupation with the basic principles and
methods of analytical mechanics. (Lanczos 1986: vii)

And as an antidote to elation!
... My criticism is illustrated by Truesdell, famous
not only as a distinguished mathematician and historian of mechanics, but also as an
acerbic polemicist against all manner of shallow and fashionable ideas:

Nowadays people who for their equations and other statements about na-
ture claim exact and eternal verity are usually dismissed as cranks or lu-
natics. Nevetheless, we lose something in this surrender to lawless uncer-
tainty: Now we must tolerate the youth who blurts out the ﬁrst, untutored,
and uncritical thoughts that come into his head, calls them “my model” of
something, and supports them by ﬁve or ten pounds of paper he calls “my
results”, gotten by applying his model to some numerical instances which
he has elaborated by use of the largest machine he could get hold of, and if
you say to him, “Your model violates NEWTON’s laws”, he replies “Oh, I
don’t care about that, I tackle the physics directly, by computer.”
(Truesdell 1987: 74; quoted by Papastavridis 2002: 817)

Acknowledgements:— I am grateful to various audiences and friends for comments
on talks; and to Alexander Afriat, Harvey Brown, Jordi Cat, Tim Palmer, Graeme
Segal and David Wallace for conversations and correspondence. I am especially grateful
for comments on previous versions, to: Harvey Brown, Anjan Chakravartty, Robert
Bishop, Larry Gould, Oliver Johns, Susan Sterrett, Michael St¨oltzner and Paul Teller.
I am also grateful to Oliver Johns for letting me read Chapters of his forthcoming
(2005).

6 References

edition).

versity Press.

V. Arnold (1973), Ordinary Diﬀerential Equations, MIT Press.

V. Arnold (1989), Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics, Springer, (second

J. Bell (1987), Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, Cambridge Uni-

100

G. Belot (2000), Geometry and Motion, British Journal for the Philosophy of Sci-

ence, vol 51, pp. 561-596.

pp. 393-412.

Collins; second edition.

G. Belot (2003), ‘Notes on symmetries’, in Brading and Castellani (ed.s) (2003),

E. Borowski and J. Borwein (2002), The Collins Dictionary of Mathematics, Harper

U. Bottazini (1986), The Higher Calculus: A History of Real and Complex Analysis

from Euler to Weierstrass, Springer-Verlag.

C. Boyer (1959), The History of the Calculus and its Conceptual Development, New

York: Dover.

versity Press.

K. Brading and H. Brown (2003), ‘Symmetries and Noether’s theorems’, in Brading

and Castellani (ed.s) (2003), p. 89-109.

K. Brading and E. Castellani (ed.s) (2003), Symmetry in Physics, Cambridge Uni-

H. Brown and P. Holland (2004), ‘Simple applications of Noether’s ﬁrst theorem
in quantum mechanics and electromagnetism‘, American Journal of Physics 72 p.
34-39. Available at: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/quant-ph/0302062 and http://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu/archive/00000995/

H. Brown and P. Holland (2005), ‘Dynamical vs. variational symmetries: Under-

standing Noether’s ﬁrst theorem’, Molecular Physics, forthcoming.

J. Butterﬁeld (2004), ‘On the persistence of homogeneous matter’,

Available at Los Alamos arXive: http://xxx.soton.ac.uk/abs/physics/0406021; and
Pittsburgh archive: http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001760.

J. Butterﬁeld (2004a), ‘Classical mechanics is not pointilliste, and can be perdu-

rantist’. In preparation.

ration.

J. Butterﬁeld (2004b), ‘Some philosophical morals of catastrophe theory’. In prepa-

J. Butterﬁeld (2004c), ‘On Hamilton-Jacobi Theory as a Classical Root of Quantum
Theory’, in Quo Vadis Quantum Mechanics?, ed. A. Elitzur et al., Proceedings of a
Temple University conference; Springer.
Available at Pittsburgh archive: http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001193, and
at Los Alamos arXive: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/quant-ph/0210140 or
http://xxx.soton.ac.uk/abs/quant-ph/0210140

J. Butterﬁeld (2004d), ‘David Lewis Meets Hamilton and Jacobi’, forthcoming in

Philosophy of Science. Available at Pittsburgh archive:
http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001191

J. Butterﬁeld (2004e), ‘Some Aspects of Modality in Analytical mechanics’, in For-

mal Teleology and Causality, ed. M. St¨oltzner, P. Weingartner, Paderborn: Mentis.
Available at Los Alamos arXive: http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0210081 or

101

http://xxx.soton.ac.uk/abs/physics/0210081; and at Pittsburgh archive: http://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001192.

J. Butterﬁeld and C.Isham (1999), ‘The Emergence of time in quantum gravity’,
in J. Butterﬁeld ed., The Arguments of Time, British Academy and Oxford University
Press.

N. Cartwright (1989), Nature’s Capacities and their Measurement, Oxford Univer-

sity Press.

N. Cartwright (1999), The Dappled World, Cambridge University Press.

J. Casey (1991), The principle of rigidiﬁcation, Archive for the History of the Exact

Sciences 43, p. 329-383.

R. Courant and D. Hilbert (1953), Methods of Mathematical Physics, volume I,

Wiley-Interscience (Wiley Classics 1989).

R. Courant and D. Hilbert (1962), Methods of Mathematical Physics, volume II,

Wiley-Interscience (Wiley Classics 1989).

M. Crowe (1985), A History of Vector Analysis:

the evolution of the idea of a

vectorial system, Dover.

E. Desloge (1982), Classical Mechanics, John Wiley.

F. Diacu and P. Holmes (1996), Celestial Encounters: the Origins of Chaos and

Stability, Princeton University Press.

J. Earman (2003), ‘Tracking down gauge: an ordinary diﬀerential equation to the
constrained Hamiltonian formalism’, in Brading and Castellani (ed.s) (2003), pp. 140-
162.

J. Earman and J. Roberts (1999), ‘Ceteris paribus, there is no problem of provisos’,

Synthese 118, p. 439-478.

G. Emch (2002), ‘On Wigner’s diﬀerent usages of models’, in Proceedings of the
Wigner Centennial Conference, Pecs 2002;paper No. 59; to appear also in Heavy Ion
Physics.

G. Emch and C. Liu (2002), The Logic of Thermo-statistical Physics, Springer.

C. Fox (1987), An Introduction to the Calculus of Variations, Dover.

C. Fraser (1983), ‘J.L. Lagrange’s early contributions to the principles and methods
of dynamics’, Archive for the History of the Exact Sciences 28, p. 197-241. Reprinted
in C. Fraser (1997).

C. Fraser (1985), ‘J.L. Lagrange’s changing approach to the foundations of the
calculus of variations’, Archive for the History of the Exact Sciences 32, p. 151-191.
Reprinted in C. Fraser (1997).

C. Fraser (1985a), ‘D’Alembert’s Principle: the original formulation and application
in Jean d’Alembert’s Trait´e de Dynamique (1743), Centaurus 28, p. 31-61, 145-159.
Reprinted in C. Fraser (1997).

102

C. Fraser (1994), ‘The origins of Euler’s variational calculus’, Archive for the History

of the Exact Sciences 47, p. 103-141. Reprinted in C. Fraser (1997).

C. Fraser (1997), Calculus and Analytical Mechanics in the Age of the Enlighten-

ment, Ashgate: Variorum Collected Studies Series.

R. Giere (1988), Explaining Science: a Cognitive Approach, University of Chicago

Press.

ﬁrst edition)

R. Giere (1999), Science without Laws, University of Chicago Press.

H. Goldstein (1966), Classical Mechanics, Addison-Wesley. (third printing of a 1950

H. Goldstein et al. (2002), Classical Mechanics, Addison-Wesley, (third edition)

J. Gray (2000), Linear Diﬀerential Equations and Group Theory from Riemann to

Poincar´e, Boston: Birkhauser.

H. Hertz (1894), Die Principien der Mechanik, Leipzig: J.A.Barth; trans. by
D. Jones and J. Whalley as The Principles of Mechanics, London: Macmillan 1899;
reprinted Dover, 1956.

O. Johns (2005), Analytical Mechanics for Relativity and Quantum Mechanics, Ox-

ford University Press, forthcoming.

J. Jos´e and E. Saletan (1998), Classical Dynamics: a Contemporary Approach,

Cambridge University Press.

H. Kastrup (1987), ‘The contributions of Emmy Noether, Felix Klein and Sophus
Lie to the modern concept of symmetries in physical systems’, in Symmetries in Physics
(1600-1980), Barcelona: Bellaterra, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, p. 113-163.

M. Kline (1972), Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times, Oxford:

University Press.

T. Kuhn (1962), The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, second edition with a

Postscript (1970); University of Chicago Press.

C. Lanczos (1986), The Variational Principles of Mechanics, Dover; (reprint of the

4th edition of 1970).

World Scientiﬁc.

ciples, John Wiley.

D. Lewis (1986), Philosophical Papers, volume II, Oxford University Press.

J. Lopuszanski (1999), The Inverse Variational Problem in Classical Mechanics,

D. Lovelock and H. Rund (1975), Tensors, Diﬀerential Forms and Variational Prin-

J. Lutzen (1995), Denouncing Forces; Geometrizing Mechanics: Hertz’s Principles

of Mechanics, Copenhagen University Mathematical Institute Preprint Series No 22.

J. Lutzen (2003), ‘Between rigor and applications: developments in the concept
of function in mathematical analysis’, in Cambridge History of Science, vol. 5: The

103

modern physical and mathematical sciences, ed. M.J. Nye, p. 468-487.

J. Marsden and T. Hughes (1983), Mathematical Foundations of Elasticity, Prentice-

E. McMullin (1985), ‘Galilean idealization’, Studies in the History and Philosophy

G. Morandi et al (1990), ‘The inverse problem of the calculus of variations and the

geometry of the tangent bundle’, Physics Reports 188, p. 147-284.

M. Morgan and M. Morrison (1999), Models as Mediators, Cambridge University

E. Noether (1918), ‘Invariante Variationprobleme’, G¨ottinger Nachrichten, Math-

P. Olver (2000), Applications of Lie Groups to Diﬀerential Equations, second edi-

Hall; Dover 1994.

of Science 16, p. 247-273.

Press.

physics. Kl., p. 235-257.

tion: Springer-Verlag.

J. Papastavridis (2002), Analytical Mechanics, Oxford University Press.

R.M. Santilli (1979), Foundations of Theoretical Mechanics, vol. I, Springer-Verlag

V. Scheﬀer (1993) ‘An inviscid ﬂow with compact support in spacetime’, Journal

Geom. Analysis 3(4), pp. 343-401

J H Schmidt (1997), ’Classical Universes are perfectly Predictable!’, Studies in the

History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, volume 28B, 1997, p. 433-460.

J H Schmidt (1998), ’Predicting the Motion of Particles in Newtonian Mechanics
and Special Relativity’, Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics,
volume 29B, 1998, p. 81-122.

A. Shnirelman (1997), ‘On the non-uniqueness of weak solutions of the Euler equa-

tions’, Communications on Pure and Applied mathematics 50, pp. 1260-1286.

St¨oltzner, M. (2003), ‘The Principle of Least Action as the Logical Empiricist’s

Shibboleth’, Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 34B, p. 285-318.

St¨oltzner, M. (2004), ‘On Optimism and Opportunism in Applied Mathematics
(Mark Wilson Meets John von Neumann on Mathematical Ontology), Erkenntnis 60,
pp. 121-145. Available at http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001225

F. Suppe (1988), The Semantic Conception of Scientiﬁc Theories and Scientiﬁc

Realism, University of Illinois Press.

P. Teller (1979), ‘Quantum mechanics and the nature of continuous physical quan-

tities’, Journal of Philosophy 76, p. 345-361.

R. Torretti (1999), The Philosophy of Physics, Cambridge University Press.

C. Truesdell (1956), ‘Introduction’, in L. Euler Opera Omnia (four series from 1911:

Leipzig/Berlin/Zurich/Basel): series 2, 13, pp. ix-cv.

C. Truesdell (1960), ‘The rational mechanics of ﬂexible or elastic bodies 1638-1788’,

104

in L. Euler Opera Omnia (four series from 1911: Leipzig/Berlin/Zurich/Basel): series
2, 11, Section 2.

C. Truesdell (1987), Great Scientists of Old as Heretics in “The Scientiﬁc Method”,

University Press of Virginia.

second edition; Academic Press.

C. Truesdell (1991), A First Course in Rational Continuum Mechanics, volume 1;

D. Wallace (2003), ‘Time-dependent symmetries: the link between gauge symme-

tries and indeterminism’, in Brading and Castellani (ed.s) (2003), pp. 163-173.

E. Whittaker (1959), A Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles and Rigid

Bodies, Cambridge University Press (4th edition).

E. Wigner (1954), ‘Conservation laws in classical and quantum physics’, Progress

of Theoretical Physics 11, p. 437-440.

M. Wilson, (1985), ‘What is this Thing called Pain?—the Philosophy of Science

behind the Contemporary Debate’, Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly 66, p. 227-267.

M. Wilson, (1993), ‘Honorable Intensions’,

in Naturalism, ed. S. Wagner and

R.Warner, South Bend: University of Notre Dame Press, p. 53-94.

M. Wilson (1997), ‘Reﬂections on Strings’, in Thought Experiments in Science and

Philosophy, ed. T. Horowitz and G. Massey, University of Pittsburgh Press p.??

M. Wilson, (2000), ‘The Unreasonable Uncooperativeness of Mathematics in the

Natural Sciences’, The Monist 83, 296-314.

N. Woodhouse (1987), Introduction to Analyical Dynamics, Oxford University Press.

W. Yourgrau and S. Mandelstam (1979), Variational Principles in Dynamics and

Quantum Theory, Dover.

A Youschkevitch (1976), ’The Concept of Function up to the Middle of the nine-

teenth Century’, Archive for the History of the Exact Sciences 16, p. 37-85.

105

