4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
1
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Self-stresses and Crack Formation by Particle
Swelling in Cohesive Granular Media

M. S. El Youssouﬁ∗, J.-Y. Delenne and F. Radjai
LMGC, CNRS-Universit´e Montpellier II,
Place Eug`ene Bataillon,
34095 Montpellier cedex, France.

February 2, 2008

Abstract

We present a molecular dynamics study of force patterns, tensile
strength and crack formation in a cohesive granular model where the
particles are subjected to swelling or shrinkage gradients. Non-uniform
particle size change generates self-equilibrated forces that lead to crack
initiation as soon as strongest tensile contacts begin to fail. We ﬁnd that
the coarse-grained stresses are correctly predicted by an elastic model that
incorporates particle size change as metric evolution. The tensile strength
is found to be well below the theoretical strength as a result of inhomoge-
neous force transmission in granular media. The cracks propagate either
inward from the edge upon shrinkage and outward from the center upon
swelling.

83.80.Fg, 74.80.-g, 45.70.Mg

key words: granular media / porous media / cohesion / shrinkage / swelling
/ rupture

The term “cohesive granular media” covers a vast spectrum of granular ma-
terials in which rigid grains are bound together by cohesion forces of various
chemico-physical origins [Maugis, 1999]. Well-known examples are ﬁne pow-
ders and soils with more or less colloidal or water content [Mitchell, 1993]. The
solid-like behavior attributed to noncohesive granular media under quasistatic
shearing [Jaeger et al., 1996] becomes the dominant feature in the presence of
cohesion, with an increasing eﬀective tensile strength as a function of the con-
tact tensile strength [Kim and Hwang, 2003]. The stress-stain behavior and
fracture mechanics of cohesive granular media raise interesting open issues from
a grain-scale point of view and in interaction with heat or mass transfer.

∗Correspondance to: M.S. El Youssouﬁ (elyous@lmgc.univ-montp2.fr)

1

r

q

nd

g

td

(a)

R

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Geometry of the sample; (b) Relative displacements between two
edge points belonging to two particles and coinciding initially with their contact
point.

An appealing issue is how and in which respects these “granular solids”
diﬀer from molecular solids (in the absence of a granular structure). For
example, the phenomenon of stress concentration, induced by defects at dif-
ferent scales, governs the initiation of failure in molecular solids, the eﬀec-
tive tensile strength remaining generally far below the “theoretical” strength
[Herrmann and Roux, 1990]. In a granular assembly, stress concentration oc-
curs already at the particle scale in the form of a highly inhomogeneous distri-
bution of contact forces [Mueth et al., 1998, Radjai et al., 1998]. This suggests
that, even in the absence of mesoscopic defects, the tensile strength will be
weak compared to its theoretical value for a granular assembly (to be deﬁned
below). However, the tensile-strength properties have scarcely been analyzed
from a microscopic standpoint [Kim and Hwang, 2003, Radjai et al., 2001].

In this Letter, we consider a benchmark test that was designed to probe the
intrinsic tensile response (reﬂecting only the granular disorder) of a cohesive
granular sample by avoiding both wall eﬀects and strain localization as spurious
sources of randomness. The sample consists of rigid cohesive disks compacted
numerically into a circular form in a two-dimensional space; See Fig. 1(a). At
the start, the normal force is exactly zero at all contacts. Then, the particle
diameters are increased (or decreased) at a rate that depends on distance to
the sample center. Such gradients of particle size change occur, for instance, in
ﬁne soils, where particle swelling (or shrinkage) happens as a result of humidi-
ﬁcation (or drying) [Mitchell, 1993]. As we shall see in detail below, this bulk
straining induces a ﬁeld of radial (or orthoradial) tensile self-stresses increasing
in magnitude with time, and leading eventually to crack initiation at the center
(or on the edge).

For the simulations, we used the molecular dynamics method with
a velocity-Verlet scheme for the integration of the equations of motion
[Allen and Tildesley, 1987]. Cohesive interaction between two particles implies
resistance to relative motion (normal displacement dn, tangential displacement

2

Figure 2: Tensile (a) and compressive (b) normal forces generated by the
swelling of a single particle (in black). The line width is proportional to the
normal force.

dt and angular displacement γ) of two edge points belonging respectively to the
two particles and coinciding initially with the contact point; Fig. 1(b). The
corresponding contact actions are the normal force fn, the tangential force ft
and the contact torque M . We assume a linear elastic behavior characterized by
three stiﬀnesses En, Et and Eγ, so that fn = Endn, ft = Etdt and M = Eγγ.
As usual, damping actions are added in order to account for contact inelasticity
and ensure numerical stability.

This elastic behavior holds as long as the contact actions remain below a
“yield surface” ζ = ζ(fn, ft, M ) = 0. We used the following function that ﬁts
our previous experimental tests with a particular type of glue used to stick
cylindrical particles together [Delenne et al., 2002]:

ζ =

fn
f y
n (cid:19)

(cid:18)

+

ft
f y
t (cid:19)

(cid:18)

2

2

+

M
M y (cid:19)

(cid:18)

− 1,

(1)

n, f y

t and M y are the yield parameters for normal, tangential and an-
where f y
gular actions, respectively. The elastic domain corresponds to ζ < 0. Note
that fn can take indeﬁnitely large values (the positive sign corresponding to
compressive forces) but it has a lower bound fn = −f y
n that deﬁnes the largest
tensile force that can be sustained by a contact. As soon as ζ ≥ 0, the cohesive
bond breaks down irreversibly and the contact turns into noncohesive frictional
behavior [Luding, 1998].

In general, the shape of the yield function ζ and the values of the parameters
will inﬂuence the failure properties of the material as a whole for a speciﬁed
loading path. In our system, loading by particle swelling or shrinkage induces
appreciable displacements only along the contact normals. As a result, the
behavior is not sensitive to the choice of the values of f y
t and M y, and the
failure is governed by extensional strain when f y
n is reached at a strongly tensile
contact in the sample.

3

Figure 3: Compressive (a) and tensile (b) forces in a shrinkage simulation.

We used samples composed of 1133 polydisperse disks with a uniform dis-
tribution of diameters D within a range [Dmin, Dmax] where Dmax = 1.2 Dmin.
The coeﬃcient of friction is µ = 0.1. Each sample is created by removing all
particles belonging to a noncohesive assembly in static equilibrium except those
contained inside a circle of radius R0. The cohesive bonds are then switched on
and the sample is allowed to relax to equilibrium. The samples prepared by this
procedure correspond to a dense but disordered packing of solid fraction ≃ 0.89
and coordination number 3.8.

At the beginning, the system is in its reference state with the contact actions
being identically zero everywhere. Obviously, multiplying all particle diameters
by the same factor does not disturb this state since no relative motions are
generated at the contact points, whereas diﬀerential particle-size change gives
immediately rise to permanent compressive and tensile force gradients. For
instance, the swelling of a single particle produces compressive radial forces by
pushing the neighboring particles outward, as well as tensile orthoradial forces
by increasing the total length of the “rings” of contiguous particles surrounding
the swelling particle; Fig. 2. A slight shrinkage of the same particle produces
exactly the same force patterns with the signs inverted everywhere (compressive
contacts turning to tensile, and vice versa).

Since we are interested here only in the eﬀect of bulk straining, we require
that the swelling rate ˙si ≡ ˙Di/Di of each particle i is independent of its diameter
Di. We use the simplest swelling kinetics deﬁned by a constant gradient from
the center to the edge, ˙si = α
R0 ri, where ri is the distance of the particle to
the system center, and α is a constant rate. Positive and negative values of α
correspond to particle swelling and shrinkage, respectively.

Figure 3 shows snapshots of normal compressive and tensile forces in a
shrinkage simulation. Although at the very local scale the forces are inho-
mogeneously distributed, we observe radial and orthoradial compressive forces
decreasing in magnitude from the center to the edge, as well as orthoradial

4

Figure 4: Crack patterns in swelling (a) and shrinkage (b) simulations.

s
1

0 0

-1

s
1

Rr/
1

0

0

(b)

-1

qqs

rrs

(a)

Rr/
1

rrs

qqs

Figure 5: Normalized stress components as a function of distance r to the center
in swelling (a) and shrinkage (b) simulations. The full lines are elastic ﬁts.

tensile forces decreasing in magnitude from the edge to the center. The cracks
appear on the edge as soon as the ﬁrst tensile contact fails, and they propagate
towards the center as shown in Fig. 4(b). In swelling simulations, the respective
roles of compressive and tensile roles are simply interchanged with respect to
the shrinkage case. As a result, the cracks are initiated at the center, and they
propagate towards the edge; Fig. 4(a).

The coarse-grained stresses can be evaluated from the contact forces
the stress tensor σ

the “micromechanical” expression of

by means of
[Christoﬀersen et al., 1981]:

σij =

1
V Xc∈V

i ℓc
f c
j,

(2)

where i and j design the coordinates, V is the control volume over which the
stress tensor is evaluated (the contacts c taken from this volume), f c
is the i
i
component of the force f c at contact c, and ℓc
j is the j component of the vector
ℓc joining the centers of the two contact neighbors.

5

/ RR

0

1.03

1.00

/ RR

0

1.03

t×a

1.00

9.70

5.00E-02

0.00E+00

t×a

5.00E-02

2.50E-02
(b)

9.70

0.00E+00

2.50E-02
(a)

Figure 6: Evolution of the sample radius R in swelling (a) and shrinkage (b)
simulations.

The stress tensor is a well-deﬁned average if the control volume V contains
a suﬃciently large number of contacts. This requirement is satisﬁed by taking
concentric circular volume elements as suggested by the rotational invariance of
our system. We use polar coordinates and the radial and angular positions will
be denoted by r and θ, respectively; Fig. 1(a). As a result of isotropic straining,
the cross components σrθ are zero.

The radial stress σrr and orthoradial stress σθθ are shown in Fig. 5(a) as a
function of distance r to the center at diﬀerent stages of a swelling simulation.
For each data set at a given instant of evolution, we have normalized the distance
r by R and the stress components by the largest tensile stress −σmax (occurring
at the center). We see that the normalized stresses collapse on a straight line
as a function of r and they nicely agree with a one-parameter analytical ﬁt that
will be detailed below. Note that σrr is negative (tensile stress) throughout
the sample, whereas σθθ changes sign at r ≃ R/2.
In the case of shrinkage
simulations, similar results are obtained with opposite signs, as shown in Fig.
5(b).

We now turn to analytical evaluation of the stresses. At a coarse-grained
scale, the granular assembly will be represented by a linear elastic medium with
an eﬀective stiﬀness E and an eﬀective Poisson’s ratio ν. This is a plausible
assumption although, as we shall see below, the behavior of the stresses as a
function of r is independent of the nature of the interactions. On the other
hand, coarse-grained swelling at a point A of polar coordinates (r, θ) in space is
equivalent to an imposed isotropic space dilation ˙s(r, θ) = h ˙siii∈V (r,θ) , where the
average is taken over all particles contained in a representative volume V (r, θ)
centered on A. Since the rates are independent of particle diameters, we get

Then, the strain-rate tensor ˙ε at a point is the sum of two terms:

˙s =

r.

α
R0

˙ε = ˙εe + ˙sI,

6

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

where ˙εe is the elastic strain rate, I represents the unit tensor, and ˙sI is the
metric change rate.

We assume that the displacement ﬁeld u(r, θ) is radial (according to the
symmetry of straining expressed by Eq. 3 and that of the sample) so that
˙εrθ ≡ 0. Since the radius R of the sample changes with time, Hooke’s laws will
be written in the form of rate equations:

rr = ˙εrr − ˙s = − 1
˙εe
θθ = ˙εθθ − ˙s = − 1
˙εe

E ( ˙σrr − ν ˙σθθ),
E ( ˙σθθ − ν ˙σrr),

(cid:26)

where extensional strains and compressive stresses are counted positive. We
need also the balance equation which takes the following form in polar coordi-
nates:

˙σθθ − ˙σrr = r

∂ ˙σrr
∂r

.

The set of equations 3, 5 and 6 is easily integrated over time and space using
the boundary conditions u(r = 0) = 0 (imposed by 3) and σrr(r = R) = 0 (by
continuity of the normal stress at the boundary). The solution is

R0
1−2αt/3 ,

R
=
σrr = E
σθθ = E

1 − R0
R
1 − R0
(cid:0)
R
(cid:0)

(cid:1) (cid:0)
(cid:1) (cid:0)

,

r
R − 1
2 r
R − 1
(cid:1)

.

(cid:1)






We see that both stress components are linear in r. The simulation data of Fig.
5 were ﬁtted by adjusting only the eﬀective elastic modulus E. The evolution
of the system is, however, nonlinear as a function of time. The evolution of
R is shown in Fig. 6 for swelling (α > 0) and shrinkage (α < 0) simulations
together with the analytical ﬁt from Eq. 7 which involves no ﬁtting parameter.
The agreement is excellent although the nonlinear nature of the evolution can
not be seen for |α|t ≪ 1. The largest tensile stress σmax occurs on the edge for
shrinkage and at the center for swelling. From Eq. 7, we get σmax = 2
3 E |α|t.
Again, this linear form nicely ﬁts the evolution of σmax (by virtue of the ﬁts
shown in Fig. 5) up to failure for σmax = σy. The latter represents the eﬀective
tensile strength of the material.

It is worth noting that, Posisson’s ratio ν does not appear in Eqs. 7 and
the only role of the stiﬀness E is to set the stress scale. This means that the
behavior of the stress components and and sample size as a function of r is
independent of the local force law. In particular, in the limit of inﬁnitely rigid
particles, the same results remain true up to a stress scale which may be ﬁxed
through a conﬁning pressure. More generally, both the local interactions and
the mass or heat transfer inﬂuence the stress scale.

solids, we

th based on the

By analogy with molecular

“theoretical”
tensile strength σy
interactions between two particles
[Herrmann and Roux, 1990]. According to Eq. 2, the orthoradial stress is
σθθ = nc hfθℓθi ≃ nchℓi hfθi, where nc is the density of contacts and h. . .i
designs averaging over the control volume. The largest value of σθθ in tension
corresponds to the limit where all forces are polarized in the same direction and

introduce

a

7

they have all reached the largest tensile force f y
tensile strength

n. This deﬁnes the “theoretical”

n

(8)

th.

σy
th = nchℓif y
In our simulations, the measured tensile strength σy is by a factor ≃ 4.3
In molecular solids, a similar discrepancy between σy
below σy
th, deﬁned
from atomic interactions in a regular atomic arrangement, and σy stems
from “built-in” disorder at diﬀerent scales leading to stress concentration.
In a granular solid, the disorder is “intrinsic” to the structure. As a re-
sult, the contact forces both in cohesive and noncohesive granular media
have a wide distribution with a decreasing exponential shape for strong forces
[Radjai et al., 1998, Radjai et al., 2001]. It seems that σy reﬂects the strongest
contact force at failure, whereas σy
th represents the mean tensile force by con-
struction. Indeed, the strongest tensile force in simulations is by a factor ≃ 5
below the mean tensile force, and this is close to σy
th/σy ≃ 4.3. As far as we
know, this is the ﬁrst example showing how the local force inhomogeneities in a
granular material control a macroscopic property, namely the tensile strength.
In summary, our numerical data and their comparison with an analytical
evaluation of stresses in the elastic domain and at failure suggest that a macro-
scopically elastic behavior is relevant up to crack initiation, as in molecular
solids. However, the tensile strength is dependent on the inhomogeneous trans-
mission of forces. The simple test described in this Letter not only provides
reproducible results, but it has also the advantage of combining features of
discrete modeling with theoretical predictability at the macroscopic scale.

This approach may now be used to investigate and to predict the tensile
thresholds and crack propagation in cohesive granular materials as a function of
the intial density and anisotropy of the material or the possible couplings of the
local cohesion with mass and heat transfer in the pores as in ﬁne soils and gran-
ular rocks [Tarbuck and Lutgens, 2002]. The theoretical approach can be ex-
tended to other structured media involving mesoscopic length scales, such as gels
[Mrani et al., 1995], cellular media [Schwarz and Safran, 2002], layered struc-
tures such as wood [K¨ubler, 1987] and pastes[Ponsart et al., 2003]. Swelling or
shrinkage may occur as a result of cellular growth (in biological systems) or the
evolution of local variables such as water content and temperature.

It is a pleasure to thank J.-C. B´enet and J. N. Roux for helpful suggestions.

References

[Allen and Tildesley, 1987] Allen, M. P. and Tildesley, D. J. (1987). Computer

Simulation of Liquids. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

[Christoﬀersen et al., 1981] Christoﬀersen, J., Mehrabadi, M. M., and Nemat-

Nasser, S. (1981). J. Appl. Mech., 48:339–344.

8

[Delenne et al., 2002] Delenne, J.-Y., Youssouﬁ, M. S. E., and B´enet, J.-C.
(2002). Comportement m´ecanique et rupture de milieux granulaires coh´esifs.
C.R. M´ecanique, 330:475–482.

[Herrmann and Roux, 1990] Herrmann, H. J. and Roux, S., editors (1990). Sta-
tistical models for fracture in disordered media, Amsterdam. North Holland.

[Jaeger et al., 1996] Jaeger, H. M., Nagel, S. R., and Behringer, R. P. (1996).
Granular solids, liquids, and gases. Reviews of Modern Physics, 68(4):1259–
1273.

[Kim and Hwang, 2003] Kim, T.-H. and Hwang, C. (2003). Modelling of tensile
strength on moist granular earth material at low water content. Engineering
Geology, 69:233–244.

[K¨ubler, 1987] K¨ubler, H. (1987). Growth stresses in tree stems and related

wood properties. Forest Products Abstracts, 10:61–119.

[Luding, 1998] Luding, S. (1998). Collisions & contacts between two parti-
cles. In Herrmann, H. J., Hovi, J.-P., and Luding, S., editors, Physics of dry
granular media - NATO ASI Series E350, pages 285–304, Dordrecht. Kluwer
Academic Publishers.

[Maugis, 1999] Maugis, D. (1999). Contact, Adhesion and Rupture of Elastic

Solids. Springer, Berlin, Germany.

[Mitchell, 1993] Mitchell, J. K. (1993). Fundamentals of Soil Behavior. Wiley,

New York,USA.

[Mrani et al., 1995] Mrani, I., B´enet, J.-C., and Fras, G. (1995). Transport of

water in a biconstituent elastic medium. Appl. Mech. Rev., 48:717–721.

[Mueth et al., 1998] Mueth, D. M., Jaeger, H. M., and Nagel, S. R. (1998).
Force distribution in a granular medium. Phys. Rev. E., 57(3):3164–3169.

[Ponsart et al., 2003] Ponsart, G., Vasseur, J., Frias, J. M., Duquenoy, A.,
and M´eot, J. (2003). Modelling of stress due to shrinkage during drying
of spaghetti. Journal of Food Engineering, 57:277–285.

[Radjai et al., 2001] Radjai, F., Preechawuttipong, I., and Peyroux, R. (2001).
Cohesive granular texture. In Vermeer, P., Diebels, S., Ehlers, W., Herrmann,
H., Luding, S., and Ramm, E., editors, Continuous and discontinuous mod-
elling of cohesive frictional materials, pages 148–159, Berlin. Springer Verlag.

[Radjai et al., 1998] Radjai, F., Wolf, D. E., Jean, M., and Moreau, J.-J. (1998).
Bimodal character of stress transmission in granular packings. Phys. Rev.
Lett., 80(1):61–64.

[Schwarz and Safran, 2002] Schwarz, U. S. and Safran, S. A. (2002). Elastic

interactions of cells. Phys. Rev. Lett., 88:048102.

9

[Tarbuck and Lutgens, 2002] Tarbuck, E. J. and Lutgens, F. K. (2002). Earth:
An Introduction to Physical Geology. Pearson Education, Inc., New Jersey.

10

