Surprising Symmetries in Relativistic Charge Dynamics

Department of Physics, University of Windsor, Windsor, ON, Canada N9B 3P4∗

William E. Baylis

(Dated:)

Abstract

The eigenspinor approach uses the classical amplitude of the algebraic Lorentz rotation con-

necting the lab and rest frames to study the relativistic motion of particles. It suggests a simple

covariant extension of the common deﬁnition of the electric ﬁeld: the electromagnetic ﬁeld can

be deﬁned as the proper spacetime rotation rate it induces in the particle frame times its mass-

to-charge ratio. When applied to the dynamics of a point charge in an external electromagnetic

ﬁeld, the eigenspinor approach reveals surprising symmetries, particularly the invariance of some

ﬁeld properties in the rest frame of the accelerating charge. The symmetries facilitate the discov-

ery of analytic solutions of the charge motion and are simply explained in terms of the geometry

of spacetime. Symmetries of the uniformly accelerated charge and electric dipole are also brieﬂy

discussed.

4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
9
1
0
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: baylis@uwindsor.ca

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

The electric ﬁeld is commonly deﬁned as the acceleration per unit charge-to-mass ratio of a

small charge at rest. Lorentz transformations of the charge and the covariant electromagnetic

ﬁeld then imply the Lorentz-force equation. The eigenspinor (or rotor) approach[1, 2, 3, 4]

to the motion of charged particles in electromagnetic ﬁelds suggests a deﬁnition of the

electromagnetic ﬁeld that is a simple extension of the textbook deﬁnition of the electric

ﬁeld. The extension, which is required to make the equation of motion for the eigenspinor

linear, associates the electromagnetic ﬁeld with the spacetime rotation rate of any charge in

the ﬁeld. It implies not only the Lorentz-force equation but also a spatial rotation in any

magnetic ﬁeld at the cyclotron frequency.

A couple of rather surprising symmetries of the dynamics of charges in the electromagnetic

ﬁeld result from the deﬁnition. The symmetries involve the invariance of ﬁeld in a classical

rest frame (commoving inertial frame) of charges moving in (a) a uniform constant ﬁeld, and

(b) a pulsed plane-wave ﬁeld. This paper derives, examines, and illustrates these symmetries,

showing that they result directly from the deﬁnition of the ﬁeld and from the geometry of

Minkowski spacetime. It also discusses symmetries in the ﬁeld of a uniformly accelerating

charge and the interaction of a uniformly accelerated physical dipole.

Symmetries simplify many physics problems and are often keys to ﬁnding analytical

solutions. This has in fact been demonstrated for charges in a pulsed plane-wave ﬁeld,

where the symmetry, together with the powerful spinor and projector tools inherent in the

eigenspinor approach, has allowed analytic solutions to be found[5] for the relativistic motion

of charged of charged particles in propagating plane-wave pulses and in such pulses plus

constant longitudinal ﬁelds, such as occur, for example, in autoresonant laser accelerators.

It is important to understand the origin of the symmetries so that their applications to other

problems can be anticipated. This is particularly true of relativistic symmetries that are

often less obvious.

The eigenspinor is the amplitude of a Lorentz transformation relating the instantaneously

commoving particle frame with the lab.[2] It gives directly both the proper velocity and

relative orientation of the particle frame and is related to the quantum wave function of

the particle.[6] It arises as a natural rotor or transformation element of the particle in

the algebra of physical space (APS),[7] Cliﬀord’s geometric algebra of vectors in three-

2

dimensional Euclidean space.

In the following section, we review the spinorial form of Lorentz transformations that

arises naturally in treatments of classical relativistic dynamics based on Cliﬀord’s geometric

algebra. A summary of essential features of APS is given in Appendix A. Section III describes

the use of rotors to describe the motion of charges in external ﬁelds, and Sections IV and V

present the dynamical symmetries for static and plane-wave ﬁelds, respectively. A couple of

further symmetries are brieﬂy mentioned in Section VI, followed by conclusions.

II. LORENTZ ROTORS

APS is the algebra of physical vectors and their products. It is isomorphic to both complex

quaternions and to the even subalgebra of the spacetime algebra, and it is sometimes called

the Pauli algebra because of its representation in which the unit vectors ek are replaced by

the Pauli spin matrices σk . In fact, there are many possible matrix representations, but only

the algebra is important. The algebra is quite simple, and we summarize its basic elements

in the Appendix. More details can be found elsewhere.[2, 7]

In the algebra, simple, physical (“restricted”) Lorentz transformations are rotations in

spacetime planes, and the Lorentz rotation of a spacetime vector p such as the momentum

of a charge is given by the algebraic product

p → LpL†,

where L = exp (W/2) is an amplitude of the rotation called a Lorentz rotor, and W gives

both the spacetime plane and size of the rotation in that plane. The rotors are unimodular,
that is unit elements of the algebra: L ¯L = 1.

III. EIGENSPINOR

The eigenspinor Λ of a particle is the Lorentz rotor L that transforms properties from

the rest frame to the lab. By rest frame is meant the commoving inertial frame. The inertial

frame instantaneously at rest with an accelerating particle is continuously changing. Given

any known paravector prest in the commoving particle frame, it is transformed to the lab

by p = ΛprestΛ†. For example, the time axis e0 in the rest frame becomes the dimensionless

proper velocity u = Λe0Λ† and p = mcu is the momentum of the particle.

3

The time development of the eigenspinor takes the form

˙Λ =

ΩΛ ,

1
2

where Ω = 2 ˙Λ¯Λ is a spacetime plane giving the spacetime rotation rate of the particle and
the dot indicates a derivative with respect to the proper time. We note that ˙Λ and Λ are

orthogonal by virtue of the unimodularity of Λ. The proper-time derivative of the particle

momentum is

˙p =

ΛmcΛ†

=

Ωp + pΩ†

≡ hΩpiℜ ,

d
dτ

1
2

(cid:1)
/2 is the real (i.e., the hermitian) part of the element x. The Lorentz-

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

where hxiℜ =
(cid:1)
force equation has exactly the same form:

x + x†

(cid:0)

where F = 1

2F µν heµ¯eνiV = E + icB is the electromagnetic ﬁeld. This follows from the

eigenspinor equation of motion (1) for a spacetime rotation rate

(1)

(2)

(3)

˙p = heFuiℜ ,

Ω =

e
mc

F.

and this rotation rate suggests an explicit, relativistically covariant deﬁnition the electro-

magnetic ﬁeld: F is the spacetime rotation rate of the frame of a classical point charge per

unit e/mc. For a charge at rest, this deﬁnition reduces to the usual deﬁnition of the electric

ﬁeld as the force per unit charge.

The identiﬁcation (3) is not the only relation between Ω and F that gives the Lorentz-

force equation. The Lorentz force is independent of the magnetic ﬁeld in the rest frame,

and integration of the Lorentz-force equation gives the velocity and path of the particle,

but not the orientation of its frame. The choice (3) satisﬁes the Lorentz force equation

with a particular evolution of the orientation of the particle frame. We call the frame to

which it refers the classical-particle frame. It is the simplest choice for Ω consistent with the

Lorentz-force equation (2) and the only one for which Ω is independent of Λ and for which

the equation of motion (1) is therefore linear in Λ. A more general relation consistent with

the Lorentz-force equation (2) is given in Appendix B, where it is shown that the choice (3)

corresponds to the nonspinning frame of a particle with a g-factor of 2.

4

IV. SURPRISING SYMMETRY 1: CHARGE IN UNIFORM FIELD

When F is any uniform, constant electromagnetic ﬁeld, the solution of (1,3) is

Λ (τ ) = exp (Ωτ /2) Λ (0)

from which one generally gets a spacetime rotation (both a boost and a spatial rotation) of

the particle frame in the plane of F. The ﬁeld seen by the particle at proper time τ is

Frest (τ ) = ¯Λ (τ ) FΛ (τ )

= ¯Λ (0) exp (−Ωτ /2) F exp (Ωτ /2) Λ (0)

= Frest (0)

since the plane F is invariant under rotations in the plane itself. Thus the ﬁeld seen by the

accelerating charge is invariant!

E and B ﬁelds when c2B2 > E2.

This is hard to believe. Consider a familiar example: charge motion from rest in crossed

FIG. 1: Cycloid motion of charge in crossed ﬁelds.

At the top of the cycloid motion (see Fig. 1), the charge is moving at about twice the

drift velocity (more precisely: u = u2

drift ) and the electric ﬁeld in the unrotated charge frame

has changed sign. However, the particle frame has also rotated about the lab B direction

by 180 degrees, so that the ﬁeld it sees is unchanged. A similar result can be shown for any

point on the trajectory.

5

V. SURPRISING SYMMETRY 2: CHARGE IN PLANE WAVE

Directed plane waves are null ﬂags[8] of the form

F =

1 + ˆk
(cid:17)

(cid:16)

E (s) ,

(4)

where ˆk is the propagation direction, which is perpendicular to the electric ﬁeld E, assumed

to be a known function of the Lorentz scalar s = hk¯xiS = ωt−k · x, where x is the spacetime
position of the charge and k is a constant spacetime vector proportional to the spacetime

wave vector. The null-ﬂag form (4) is imposed by Maxwell’s equations for source-free space,
¯∂F = 0, since for any nontrivial ﬁeld of the form F (s) they imply ¯kF = 0, and this implies
that both k and F are noninvertible and hence null: k¯k = 0 = F2. The spacetime wave

vector k = ω

/c is called the ﬂagpole of the null ﬂag.

1 + ˆk
(cid:17)
(cid:16)

The equation of motion (1,3) can only be solved because of a remarkable symmetry. In

the particle rest frame it is

krest = ¯Λk ¯Λ†

which is a rotation of k in the spacetime plane of F. But because k is null ( k¯k = 0 ), it

is not only in the null ﬂag, it is also orthogonal to it, and therefore it is invariant under

rotations in F (see Fig. 2). Thus, while the charge is being accelerated by the plane wave,

it continues to see a ﬁxed wave paravector krest.

FIG. 2: Null ﬂag ﬁeld. The spacetime wave vector k is in the ﬂag plane but also orthogonal to it.

6

Consequently

˙s = hk¯uiS = ωrest

is constant and the equation of motion reduces to

which is trivially integrated. Note that since

˙Λ = ωrest

dΛ
ds

=

e
2mc (cid:16)

E (s) Λ (0)

1 + ˆk
(cid:17)
˙Λ = 0, we have

1 − ˆk
(cid:17)

(cid:16)
1 − ˆk
(cid:17)

=

(cid:16)
1 + ˆk
(cid:17)

(cid:16)

E (s) Λ (0) .

1 + ˆk
(cid:17)

(cid:16)

E (s) Λ (τ ) = E (s)

Λ (τ ) = E (s)

1 − ˆk
(cid:17)
(cid:16)

Λ (0)

VI. OTHER SYMMETRIES OF THE ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD

A. Boosts of Plane-Wave Fields

Any two null ﬂags (4) are related by a rotation and a dilation. Since propagating plane

waves have the form of a null ﬂag, and any inertial observer will see a propagating plane wave

as a propagating plane wave, any boost of a propagating plane wave must be equivalent to a

spatial rotation and dilation of that wave. This can be easily veriﬁed algebraically, where a

less obvious symmetry is also demonstrated: the boost applied to the spacetime wave vector

k is also equivalent to a spatial rotation and dilation, and the rotation angle and dilation

factor are precisely the same as for the null ﬂag.[9]

This symmetry allows one to derive results for waves obliquely incident on plane conduc-

tors in terms of the normally incident case, and to express wave-guide modes as boosted

standing waves.

B. Field of Uniformly Accelerated Charge

Consider a point charge in hyperbolic motion tracing out the world line r (τ ) :

r = exp (cτ e3) = γ (e3 + β)

u ≡ c−1 ˙r = e3r = γ (1 + βe3) .

(5)

Here, r0 ≡ ct = γβ = sinh cτ is the local coordinate time, β is the speed of the charge in units
of c, and γ = (1 − β2)−1/2
. The unit of length is l0 = c2/ |ar| = 1, where ar = c ˙u¯u = c2e3 is

7

the acceleration in the rest frame. We note u¯u = 1 = −r¯r and r¯u = e3. The ﬁeld position

is x = xµeµ = x0 + x, and the relative position R = x − r is lightlike:

R ¯R = R2

0 − R2 = x¯x − 1 − 2 hx¯riS = 0 .

This is the retarded condition that gives the retarded proper time τ in terms of x.The

Li´enard-Wiechert ﬁeld[2]

F =

Kce
3
S (cid:18)
hx¯ui

hR¯uiV +

1
2c

R ˙uu ¯R

(cid:19)

is the sum of the boosted Coulomb ﬁeld and the acceleration ﬁeld. Neither ﬁeld by itself

satisﬁes Maxwell’s equations; only the sum does. For the hyperbolic motion (5), the total

Kce
3
2 hx¯ui
S
At the instant t = 0, x = x and F is purely real: the magnetic ﬁeld vanishes throughout

(e3 + xe3 ¯x) .

F = −

ﬁeld reduces to

space.

The boosted Coulomb ﬁeld and the acceleration ﬁeld separately have magnetic parts,

but their sum cancels everywhere at t = 0, as it must by the equivalence principle. It is
surprising that part of the essentially R−1 radiation ﬁeld can be canceled by the Coulomb
term. The usual R−2 dependence of the Coulomb term has a R−1 behavior because the

proper velocity u at the retarded time grows linearly in R, and this makes the cancellation

possible. The electric ﬁeld lines are curved away from the direction of acceleration. In the

equivalent case of the uniform gravitational ﬁeld, one would ascribe the curvature of the

ﬁeld lines to being a result of the gravitational ﬁeld. The interesting implications for the

interpretation of of the radiative ﬁeld will be explored elsewhere.

The dynamical symmetry in this case arises when we consider the interaction of two

opposite charges that form a dipole. Both charges have the same hyperbolic motion (5)

but are held displaced a small distance from each other along a direction perpendicular to

e3. At t = 0, both charges are instantaneously at rest and each interacts with the purely

electric ﬁeld of the other. However, because of the curvature of the electric ﬁeld lines,

there is a net force in the direction of the acceleration. This force is readily evaluated and

corresponds to a reduction in the gravitational force on the dipole that it would experience

in a gravitational ﬁeld. One also expects a reduction in the mass of the dipole arising from

the attractive electromagnetic interaction between the charges. It is easily conﬁrmed that

8

at small separations the resultant reduction in gravitational force equals to the upward lift

arising from the curved electric-ﬁeld lines.

VII. CONCLUSION

Much beautiful symmetry in electrodynamics can best be appreciated in a relativisti-

cally covariant formulation of electrodynamics such as APS that emphasizes the geometry

of spacetime while maintaining clear relationships to the space and time components seen by

any observer. The extension of the deﬁnition of the electric ﬁeld to the covariant electromag-

netic ﬁeld F in terms of the spacetime rotation rate of the classical charged-particle frame

leads to new symmetries that are powerful tools for solving some problems in relativistic

dynamics.

Acknowledgment

support of this research.

Appendix A: Summary of APS

The author thanks the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada for

The structure of APS is entirely determined by the axiom that the square of any vector
is its length squared: v2 ≡ vv = v · v, together with the usual associative and distributive

laws for the sums and products of square matrices. For example, it follows directly from the

axiom that aligned vectors, which are proportional to each other, commute, and that every
nonzero vector has a inverse: v−1 = v/v2. In particular, unit vectors such as ek, k = 1, 2, 3,
are their own inverses, and an explicit operator that transforms the vector v into w can
be written wv−1. By replacing v in the axiom by the sum of perpendicular vectors, one

sees that perpendicular vectors anticommute. Indeed, e2e1 = −e1e2 is called a bivector, and

when operating from the left on any vector v = vxe1 +vye2 in the e1e2 plane, it gives another

vector, related to the original by a π/2 rotation in the plane: e2e1v = vxe2 − vye1. To rotate

v by the angle φ in the plane, we can multiply by exp (e2e1φ) = cos φ + e2e1 sin φ, where

the Euler relation follows by power-series expansions when one notes that (e2e1)

= −1.

2

9

The bivector e2e1 thus generates rotations in the e2e1 plane. A rotation of a general vector

u = uxe1 + uye2 + uze3 by φ in the e2e1 plane can be expressed by what is called a spin

transformation[10]

u → RuR†,

where R = exp (e2e1φ/2) is a rotor and R† = exp

= exp (e1e2φ/2) is its

reversion, obtained by reversing the order of vector factors. The notation reﬂects the fact

(e2e1)† φ/2
h

i

that in any matrix rotation in which the basis vectors are hermitian, reversion corresponds
to hermitian conjugation. Note that in this sense, R is also unitary: R† = R−1, and it

follows that the bivector e2e1 is itself invariant under rotations in the e2e1 plane.

A general element of APS can contain scalar, vector, bivector, and trivector parts. The

unit trivector e1e2e3 is invariant under any rotations, commutes with vectors and hence all

elements of APS, and squares to −1. It is called the pseudoscalar of the algebra and can be

identiﬁed with the unit imaginary i. The linear space of APS is thus eight-dimensional space

over the reals and contains several subspaces, including the original vector space, spanned by

{e1, e2, e3} , the bivector space, spanned by {e2e3, e3e1, e1e2} , the complex ﬁeld, spanned

by {1, e1e2e3 = i} , and direct sums of subspaces such as paravector space, spanned by

{1, e1, e2, e3} . Paravectors are sums of scalars plus vectors. The linear space of APS can be

viewed as paravector space over the complex ﬁeld.

The Euclidean metric of physical space induces a Minkowski spacetime metric on par-
avector space. This is seen by noting that the square of a paravector p = p0 + p is generally
− p2 always is, where ¯p ≡ p0 − p is the Cliﬀord conjugate
not a scalar, but that p¯p = (p0)

2

of p. It is convenient to denote e0 = 1 so that paravectors can be written with the Einstein

summation convention as p = pµeµ. The scalar product of paravectors p and q is then the

scalar-like part of the product p¯q :

hp¯qiS ≡

(p¯q + q ¯p) = pµqνηµν

1
2

where the metric tensor ηµν = heµ¯eνiS is exactly that of Minkowski spacetime. It is therefore
natural to use paravectors as spacetime vectors, where the scalar part of the paravector

If hp¯qiS = 0, the paravectors p
represents the time component of the spacetime vector.
and q are orthogonal to each other. The inverse of a paravector p is p−1 = ¯p/p¯p, but this

exists only if p is not null: p¯p 6= 0. An explicit algebraic operator that transforms p into q is
qp−1 = q ¯p/p¯p.

10

Any two non-collinear paravectors p, q determine a plane in spacetime represented by the

biparavector hp¯qiV ≡ 1
2 (p¯q − q ¯p) . Biparavector space is six dimensional and is spanned by
heµ¯eνiV
0≤µ<ν≤3 . It is a direct sum of the vector and bivector spaces of APS. Biparavectors
(cid:9)
(cid:8)
generate rotations in spacetime, and these are the physical (restricted) Lorentz transforma-

tions, which we may also call Lorentz rotations. Such rotations preserve the scalar product

of paravectors and can be generally written in the same form as a spatial rotation:

p → LpL†,

where L = ± exp (W/2) is a Lorentz rotor and W = 1
2W µν heµ¯eνiV is a biparavector. If W
contains only bivector parts, L = ¯L† is unitary and gives a spatial rotation; if W contains
only vector parts, L = L† and gives a boost. In all cases, L is unimodular: L ¯L = 1.

Because of the unimodularity, the Lorentz rotation of a biparavector takes the form

p¯q → LpL†(LqL†) = Lp¯q ¯L

and in particular, the biparavector for the spacetime plane of a Lorentz rotation is invariant

under that rotation.

Appendix B: General Rotation Rate for a Spinning Particle

As discussed above, the Lorentz-force equation determines the path of a charge, starting

with a given position and velocity, in an electromagnetic ﬁeld F, but it does not give the

orientation of its frame. The eigenspinor Λ gives both the path and the orientation. Math-

ematically, the acceleration ˙u depends only on the real part of Ω in the particle rest frame,

whereas Λ depends on both the real and imaginary parts. However, if the charge also pos-

sesses a spin with an associated magnetic moment, that spin will precess in a magnetic ﬁeld,

and this precession constrains the evolution of the orientation. The most general relation

consistent with the Lorentz-force equation (2) can be expressed

(cid:0)
where g is the g-factor for the spin and ω0 is the spin rate in the spin plane given by the unit

Ω =

e
mc (cid:20)

F +

g − 2
4

F − uF† ¯u
(cid:1)

(cid:21)

+ ω0S ,

(6)

bivector S. This can be shown[11] to give the well-known BMT equation[12] for the motion

of a classical point charge with spin. The last term on the RHS represents the rotation

11

rate associated with the spin, while the second term on the RHS contains a u dependence

that makes the eigenspinor equation of motion (1) nonlinear. The simpler result (3) is

the spacetime rotation rate of what we may call the classical particle frame: a non-spinning

frame tied to the point charge. Because Ω (3) does not depend on the velocity of the charge,

it gives a linear equation of motion (1). By comparison to the general expression (6), the

spacetime rotation rate classical particle frame is that of a particle with ω0 = 0 and g = 2.

[1] D. Hestenes, J. Math. Phys. 15, 1778 (1974).

[2] W. E. Baylis, Electrodynamics: A Modern Geometric Approach (Birkh¨auser, Boston, 1999).

[3] C. Doran and A. Lasenby, Geometric Algebra for Physicists (Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, UK, 2003).

[4] D. Hestenes, Am. J. Phys. 71, 691 (2003).

[5] W. E. Baylis and Y. Yao, Phys. Rev. A 60, 785 (1999).

[6] W. E. Baylis, Phys. Rev. A 45, 4293 (1992).

[7] W. E. Baylis,

in Lectures on Cliﬀord (Geometric) Algebras and Applications, edited by

R. Ab lamowicz and G. Sobczyk (Birkh¨auser, Boston, 2004), chap. 4.

[8] R. Penrose and W. Rindler, Spinors and Space-Time, Vol. I: Two-Spinor Calculus and Rela-

tivistic Fields (Cambridge University, Cambridge , UK, 1984).

[9] W. E. Baylis, Can.

J. Phys. p.

xxx

(Accepted for publication,

2004,

see

[10] P. Lounesto, Cliﬀord Algebras and Spinors (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001),

arXiv.org/physics/0406158).

2nd ed.

[11] W. E. Baylis, in Computational Noncommutative Algebra and Applications, edited by J. Byrnes

(Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, the Netherlands, 2004), pp. 127–154.

[12] V. Bargmann, L. Michel, and V. L. Telegdi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2, 435 (1959).

12

