A note on Dolby and Gull on radar time and the twin “paradox”

Antony Eagle∗
Exeter College, Oxford, OX1 3DP, United Kingdom

Recently a suggestion has been made that standard textbook representations of hypersurfaces of
simultaneity for the travelling twin in the twin ‘paradox’ are incorrect. This suggestion is false: the
standard textbooks are in agreement with a proper understanding of the relativity of simultaneity.

4
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
0
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

I.

INTRODUCTION

It is common wisdom that there is nothing paradoxical
about the twin ‘paradox’, and that appropriate attention
to the unambiguous diﬀerences between the proper times
of the travelling twin (whom we shall call ‘Barbara’) and
the stay-at-home twin (‘Alex’) resolves any air of para-
dox. Indeed, the reader may well feel exasperated that
any work is still being done on this fallacious argument.
However, in a recent article in this journal,1 Dolby
and Gull argue that the standard resolutions of the twin
‘paradox’ incorrectly answer the question of how the trav-
elling twin should assign times of occurrence to distant
events; that is, how Barbara should represent her hyper-
surfaces of simultaneity. They claim that proper appli-
cation of ‘radar time’ to the accelerated twin allows us
to sort out an unambiguous time of happening to each
event, from Barbara’s perspective, and they go on to do
just that.

I have no complaint with their mathematics (though
see section IV). My query, rather, is with the point of
their exercise. For correct attention to both the concept
of simultaneity and to what it means for an observer to
assign a ‘time of happening’ to an event shows that there
was no problem with the standard textbook resolutions
in the ﬁrst place—though perhaps it is true that the text-
book authors were not aware of the facts that render their
work unproblematic.

II. DOLBY AND GULL’S WORRY

Standard textbook resolutions of the twin paradox (in
the instantaneous turnaround case) claim that the hy-
persurfaces of simultaneity for Barbara are as in Fig. 1.
Regarding this ﬁgure, Dolby and Gull point out two
things. Firstly they note that when Barbara instanta-
neously turns around, the points G and H are regarded
as simultaneous by Barbara. They acknowledge that this
problem is dissolved if we make the situation more physi-
cally realistic, and adopt a turnaround of extended dura-
tion, as in Fig. 2. (We do well to note that this move still
leaves the original conceptual problem untouched.) Sec-
ondly, they note that moving to an extended turnaround
“cannot resolve the more serious problem. . . which occurs
to Barbara’s left. Here her hypersurfaces of simultane-
ity are overlapping, and she assigns three times to ev-
ery event!”1 They make no further comment, assuming
that the exclamation mark is suﬃcient to convey their

attitude to the standard treatments. That attitude, I
assume, is that the very fact of assigning three times to
every event is an absurdity, and the standard textbook
resolutions must be wrong if they entail the absurd claim
that there can be overlapping hypersurfaces of simultane-
ity.

III. DEFUSING THE WORRY

Is the claim that more than one time of happening can
be assigned to a single event such a patent absurdity as
Dolby and Gull seem to regard it? I will now give a
reinterpretation of Fig. 1, which will show that it is far
from an absurdity.

Let us call the point of turnaround T . Consider an ob-
server, O1, who travels inertially until T along the same
path as Barbara, and whose worldline then sadly termi-
nates. Consider another observer, O2, who springs into
existence at T , and shadows Barbara thereafter.

I take it that it is obvious that the hypersurfaces of
simultaneity for O1 and O2 are as in Fig. 1, and that
those hypersurfaces overlap without problem or absur-
Indeed, it is a central fact about the relativistic
dity.

FIG. 1: A typical “textbook illustration” of the hypersur-
faces of simultaneity of the travelling twin Barbara in the
twin paradox. (Figure adapted from Dolby and Gull’s Figure
1.)

2

minedly pre-relativistic individual, in which case she may
have some conceptual problems with the diﬀerent assign-
ments, perhaps because she still operates with a hidden
Newtonian assumption that there is one universal time.
But that cannot be at the root of Dolby and Gull’s wor-
ries, since they should make no such assumption.
Dolby and Gull go on to say the following:1

[I]f Barbara’s hypersurfaces of simultaneity at
a certain time depend so sensitively on her
instantaneous velocity as these diagrams sug-
gest, then she would be forced to conclude
that the distant planets swept backwards and
forwards in time whenever she went dancing!

Perhaps if we can decipher this remark, we will get at
the root of their worries.

As far as I can tell, their worry here is that, as Bar-
bara’s instantaneous velocity changes from moment to
moment, she will be forced to conclude that some events
that are in her current subjective future (i.e. that lie
within the future light cone of some event on her cur-
rent hypersurface of simultaneity) were, at some point
on her past worldline, judged to be in the past (i.e. ly-
ing within the past light cone of some event on her past
(then-current) hypersurface of simultaneity). Of course,
this is no absurdity: it has long been clear that the pre-
theoretical concepts of ‘past’ and ‘future’ do not mesh
perfectly with their relativised versions. Yet I cannot see
anything more to Dolby and Gull’s worry, other that it
is motivated by pre-theoretical intuitions about distant
assignments of pastness and futurity to events, intuitions
that should by now be seen as very doubtful in a rela-
tivistic universe.

One residual worry remains: What happens at T ? In
Fig. 1, it does seem that, at T , Barbara has two conﬂict-
ing simultaneity assignments (this is related to Dolby and
Gull’s ﬁrst worry). The resolution is simple: we need to
assign her at most one instantaneous frame of reference.
The obvious one to choose is that at the instant T , she
is counted as at rest; her frame of reference then yields a
hypersurface of simultaneity that is orthogonal to Alex’s
worldine, running horizontally across the page. This as-
signment has the virtue that it shows Fig. 1 to be the
limit of Fig. 2, as the period of acceleration decreases in
extension. Perhaps, though, we might think that at this
instantaneous point, there is no sense to be made of the
observer’s frame of reference, and hence perhaps we as-
sign no hypersurface of simultaneity. This latter option
has problems of its own, of course; but in principle, either
choice serves to resolve the residual worry.

IV. THE CONVENTIONALITY OF
SIMULTANEITY

On the basis of the above considerations, I see no
force to the motivating remarks that Dolby and Gull pro-
vide, and hence I query whether their mathematical work

FIG. 2: Another typical “textbook illustration”,
in which
Barbara’s hypersurfaces of simultaneity ‘sweep around’ from
EG to F H during the period of turnaround (acceleration).
(Figure adapted from Dolby and Gull’s Figure 2.)

theories that observers who are moving diﬀerently are in
diﬀerent frames of reference, and hence their partitions
of events into equivalence simultaneity classes can diﬀer
quite radically. So it cannot be the mere fact that the
hypersurfaces of simultaneity overlap that worries Dolby
and Gull. It must rather be that it is possible that one
observer, who happens to move diﬀerently at diﬀerent
times, can assign the same event to diﬀerent equivalence
classes under simultaneity, again at diﬀerent times.

But, again, why should this be a problem? An ab-
surd situation would be: if at one and the same time, an
observer assigned the same event to two diﬀerent hyper-
surfaces of simultaneity, since that would (at the least)
involve the absurdity that the observer was in two dis-
tinct frames of reference at one and the same time, among
other problems. But there is no absurdity in the claim
that, at diﬀerent times, whilst moving diﬀerently and
hence in diﬀerent frames, Barbara assigns a single event
to two diﬀerent simultaneity classes. Hence, it seems,
there was no need to tinker with the original ‘textbook’
presentations of her hypersurfaces of simultaneity: they
are perfectly adequate to capture Barbara’s judgements
of simultaneity at every time at which she makes such a
judgement.

Perhaps Dolby and Gull are worried that a single,
persisting observer cannot (without considerable mental
problems) assign one and the same event to diﬀerent si-
multaneity classes, even if the observer never does that
at a single time. This seems an empty worry, for those
diﬀering assignments are precisely what we should ex-
pect in a relativistic scenario. Maybe Barbara is a deter-

needed to be performed.

Setting that issue aside, however, some interesting de-
tails emerge when one considers their positive proposal.
They begin by deﬁning the ‘radar time’ of an event e ba-
sically as follows: let t1 be the (proper) time at which the
observer sends a signal to e, and let t2 be the (proper)
time at which the observer receives a return signal from
e. The ‘radar time’ τ (e) of e is deﬁned:

τ (e) =

(t2 − t1).

1
2
A hypersurface of simultaneity σe is set of events with the
same radar time (σe = {x : τ (x) = τ (e)}); it is obviously
an equivalence class. This same relation of simultaneity
is, as Dolby and Gull are well aware, Einstein’s standard
convention for simultaneity.2

(1)

Quite a large body of work has sprung up concerning
the status of this deﬁnition of simultaneity.3,4,5 Though
they make passing reference to some of this work,4 Dolby
and Gull do not engage more thoroughly with it. If they
had, they would have noticed that while their radar time
deﬁnition of simultaneity is a valid deﬁnition, it is by no
means the only available option.

Debs and Redhead4 maintain that any deﬁnition of
radar time is acceptable if it is compatible with the fol-
lowing:

τǫ(e) = ǫ(t2 − t1)

(0 < ǫ < 1).

(2)

They take any such choice of ǫ to be conventional: that
is, not ﬁxed by the physical facts, but only by a conven-
tional decision by us to use the term ‘simultaneous’ to
pick out an equivalence class under τǫ. No contradiction
with any physical fact is possible for any of these rela-
tions deﬁned by diﬀerent ǫ values, because only proper
time has “objective status in special relativity”.6 If Debs
and Redhead are right, then no special signiﬁcance will
attach to assignments of distant simultaneity at all: they
are arbitrary and hence without physical importance. If
that is true, then the purported conﬂict over assignments
which so exercised Dolby and Gull is of even smaller sig-
niﬁcance than I made out above.

Of course, others have rushed to defend the Einsteinian
convention, proving its unique adequacy if we set certain

3

conditions on a plausible candidate for simultaneity.3,7
But those further conditions have been disputed too, and
it seems at the moment that conventionalists about si-
multaneity have the upper hand.4,5 If so, then Dolby and
Gull have done some excellent work deﬁning a potential
candidate simultaneity relation, but one that loses its im-
portance once we see that any candidate relation, within
wide bounds, will do. In particular, the textbook presen-
tations of the hypersurfaces of simultaneity are perfectly
good candidates for us to adopt as our convention.

V. CONCLUSION

Dolby and Gull have given an elegant and precise ex-
ample of how to apply the standard Einsteinian conven-
tion on assignments of distant simultaneity in the twin
paradox case. It very usefully illustrates that the stan-
dard convention can be applied alike to accelerating and
inertial observers, contrary to some of the received wis-
dom in the ﬁeld.8

However, their work was not strictly necessary. Firstly
because there was no intuitive paradox or problem with
the standard textbook presentations, as I showed in sec-
tion III. Secondly, many people regard the deﬁnition
of simultaneity as a conventional matter in any case, as
discussed in section IV. Hence no acceptable choice for
this convention can be criticised as mistaken on physi-
cal grounds, but only on grounds of usefulness for our
purposes. On this criterion, I suggest, the standard text-
book suggestion concerning what should be regarded as
the hypersurfaces of simultaneity is at least as successful
as Dolby and Gull’s more complicated alternative pro-
posal.

Acknowledgments

Thanks to Luke Elson for the initial discussion which

prompted my interest in this material.

Electronic address: antony.eagle@philosophy.ox.ac.uk

∗
1 C. E. Dolby and S. F. Gull, “On radar time and the twin

‘paradox’,” Am. J. Phys. 69 (12), 1257–1261 (2001).

2 A. Einstein, “On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies,”

5 S. Sarkar and J. Stachel, “Did Malament Prove the Non-
Conventionality of Simultaneity in the Special Theory of
Relativity?” Philos. Sci. 66 (2), 208–220 (1999).

6 M. Friedman, Foundations of Space-Time Theories (Prince-

Ann. Phys. (Leipzig) 17, 891–921 (1905).

ton University Press, Princeton, 1983), 166.

3 D. Malament, “Causal Theories of Time and the Conven-

7 A. A. Robb, A Theory of Time and Space (Cambridge Uni-

tionality of Simultaneity,” Noˆus 11, 293–300 (1977).

4 T. A. Debs and M. L. G. Redhead, “The twin ‘paradox’ and
the conventionality of simultaneity,” Am. J. Phys. 64 (4),
384–392 (1996).

versity Press, Cambridge, 1914).

8 H. Bondi, Assumption and Myth in Physical Theory, (Cam-

bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1967).

