EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

5
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
0
1
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Numerical study of the temperature and porosity eﬀects on the
fracture propagation in a 2D network of elastic bonds.

Harold Auradou1,2, Maria Zei1,3, and Elisabeth Bouchaud1

1 Commissariat `a l’Energie Atomique, DSM/DRECAM/Service de Physique et Chimie des Surfaces et Interfaces, Bˆat. 462,

2 Laboratoire Fluide, Automatique et Syst`emes Thermiques, UMR No. 7608, CNRS, Universit´e Paris 6 and 11, Bˆatiment 502,

F-91191, Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, FRANCE.

Universit´e Paris Sud, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France.

3 Laboratoire d’´etude des Milieux Nanom´etriques, Universit´e d’Evry, Bˆatiment des Sciences, rue du p`ere Jarlan, 91025 Evry

Cedex.

September 24, 2013

Abstract. This article reports results concerning the fracture of a 2d triangular lattice of atoms linked
by springs. The lattice is submitted to controlled strain tests and the inﬂuence of both porosity and
temperature on failure is investigated. The porosity is found on one hand to decrease the stiﬀness of the
material but on the other hand it increases the deformation sustained prior to failure. Temperature is shown
to control the ductility due to the presence of cavities that grow and merge. The rough surfaces resulting
from the propagation of the crack exhibit self-aﬃne properties with a roughness exponent ζ = 0.59 ± 0.07
over a range of length scales which increases with temperature. Large cavities also have rough walls which
are found to be fractal with a dimension, D, which evolves with the distance from the crack tip. For large
distances, D is found to be close to 1.5, and close to 1.0 for cavities just before their coalescence with the
main crack.

PACS. 62.20.Mk Fatigue, brittleness, fracture, and cracks 62.20.Fe Deformation and plasticity (including
yield, ductility, and superplasticity) 81.40.Np Fatigue, corrosion fatigue, embrittlement, cracking, fracture
and failure 05.40.-a Fluctuation phenomena, random processes, noise, and Brownian motion 68.35.Ct
Interface structure and roughness

1 Introduction

Many materials such as cement or rocks have mechan-
ical properties which are greatly inﬂuenced by the pres-
ence of pre-existing defects such as microcracks and micro-
porosity due to their elaboration process [1]. In order to
understand the mechanical behavior of such materials, dif-
ferent numerical modelling are developed.
The most classical approach consists in using discretiza-
tion schemes for the continuum description. The favorite
scheme in fracture and damage mechanics is the ﬁnite el-
ement method. Yet network models constitute an alter-
native scheme which has been developed in order to sim-
ulate the eﬀect of heterogenities on the fracture process.
Network models can be classiﬁed in three categories. The
ﬁrst group is composed of scalar models, which exploit the
similarity between the failure of a heterogeneous material
submitted to an external load and the breakdown of an
array of randomly distributed fuses [3,4]. The results can
be used as a very interesting guideline, but in order to
compare theory with experiments, it is inevitable to con-
sider the vectorial nature of elasticity. In the central force
model [5], the bonds are springs which can freely rotate

around the site. The site, which will be called “atom” in
the following, undergoes displacements under the action
of the local forces acting on it. The third model, which
will not be considered here, is the beam model [6] which
contains full bond bending elasticity. In this case the elas-
tic energy of the beam is the sum of the elongation, shear
and ﬂexural energies. This contrasts with the spring model
for which only the elongation of the bonds leads to their
failure.
For all network approaches, bonds are supposed to model
the material at a mesoscopic level, and the aim is to inves-
tigate the interrelation between disorder and properties of
the network - such as fracture stress or strain, and damage
spreading. The surprising result is that properties of the
network are related to the system size by scaling laws in-
volving non trivial exponents, independent of the precise
distribution, and of the microscopic aspects of the consid-
ered model [7].
Scaling is also observed on rough fracture surfaces for a
large variety of materials [8,9] (from rocks [10] to wood
[11] through metallic alloys [12] and glasses[13,14]), which
can be described as self-aﬃne structures. Self-aﬃnity [15]
means that a proﬁle extracted from such a surface, de-

2

Harold Auradou et al.: Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

±

±

∼

scribed by a heights distribution z(x), where x is a Carte-
sian coordinate along the proﬁle, remains statistically in-
variant under the scale transformation z(λx) = λζ z(x),
where the Hurst or roughness exponent ζ characterizes
the roughness of the surface. The ﬂuctuation of the sur-
face heights over a length L is given by σz(L) = ℓ (L/ℓ)ζ.
Here ℓ is the topothesy, deﬁned as the horizontal distance
over which ﬂuctuations in height have a RMS slope of one
[10]. For 3d fracture surfaces, experimental values of ζ are
found to be close to 0.8, for most materials [10,11,12,13,
14], with the exception of some materials displaying inter-
granular fractures, such as sandstone rocks, where ζ
0.5
[16]. The exponent 0.5 was also measured on glasses [13]
and on metallic alloys [17,18] at length scales smaller than
the length scales at which the 0.8 exponent is observed [8,
9].
Experiments conducted on two-dimensional samples re-
ported somewhat smallest self-aﬃne exponent; 0.6
0.1
for paper [19] and 0.68
0.04 for the fracture of wood,
when the crack propagates along the ﬁbers[20].
In this paper, we present simulations of a mode I macro
crack initiated by a notch growing in a bidimensional porous
material. The model is precisely described in Section II.
The initial pores are deﬁned as regions of the sample where
bonds are missing. In our model, the temperature of the
network is controlled and its eﬀect on the macroscopic me-
chanical behaviour of the system is studied in Section III.
In this section, the stress-strain curves corresponding to a
samples with no disorder and with 30% porosity are com-
pared for two values of the temperature. It is shown that
under an increasing strain, the pores will grow into cavi-
ties, and merge with each other and with the main crack.
Fracture hence proceeds by voids growth and coalescence.
The size and the density of the cavities is inﬂuence by the
temperature. At low temperature, the stress concentration
due to the initial notch dominate the junction of cavities
which are most likely collinear and located in its vicinity
while at high temperature, the cavities spread over the
whole materials. This has strong consequence on the fail-
ure mechanisum: at low temperature, the material frac-
tures in a brittle way, while at high temperature, it ex-
hibits a ductile behaviour. Once the porous samples are
broken, we study the resulting rough proﬁles, which are,
like for real cracks, self-aﬃne with a roughness exponent
ζ = 0.59
0.07 that is independent of temperature. The
results of the analysis of the morphology of both the frac-
ture proﬁles and the cavities during their growth prior to
failure are presented in Section IV. Finally, Section V is
devoted to discussion.

±

2 The model

The model consists in a 2d triangular lattice with nearest-
neighbour interactions (see Fig.1) that break as soon as
the mutual distance becomes larger than a prescribed thresh-
old. More precisely, by noting ri the position of the ith
“atom”, the force f ij due to the interaction with the jth

particle can be written as follows:

|

≡

−

−

rj

)
|

(1)

| · |

α(u

−
−

rj
rj

ri
f ij = F (
|

ri
ri
|
where
is the modulus and F (u) is a scalar function
deﬁning the force law. Here, we have chosen F (u) to be a
linear function of the distance u between atoms: F (u) =
d) (harmonic potential). The parameters are ﬁxed
−
in such a way that u = d is the equilibrium position and α
is the spring constant. In order to explicitly eliminate the
irrelevant parameters, we suitably rescale the spatial vari-
ables as well time: in this way, both α and d can be ﬁxed
to unity in all that follows. Accordingly, all the quantities
deﬁned in this paper are dimensionless.
In this work the size of the network is kept constant and
is made of 68608 triangular bonds. Due to the orientation
of the lattice with respect to the network (see Fig.1), its
sizes in unit of atoms distance d is 886.8 for length, and
201 for width.
As far as the sample is concerned, c denotes the fraction
of initially missing bonds. c = 0 thus corresponds to a
perfectly homogeneous medium. Note that c = cp
0.653
corresponds to the ordinary percolation threshold: for c >
cp so many bonds are missing that the lattice is no longer
macroscopically connected [21]. Moreover, in the case of
central forces, there is a second threshold, the so-called
rigidity-percolation threshold (cr = 0.3398 [22,23]) above
which the lattice although connected has zero Young mod-
ulus. In what follows, the fraction of missing bonds is set
to c = 0.3.
A triangular notch of sides 50 atoms is carved at the left
side of the lattice to act as a stress concentrator and force
a main crack to propagate from the notch tip, along the
x direction (see Fig. 1). The lattice is then submitted to a
controlled strain which acts vertically along the upper and
lower sides of the sample, to which ﬁxed boundary con-
ditions are imposed, while free boundary conditions are
chosen along the right and left borders.
The application of an external strain which gradually in-
creases by small steps of size δǫ = 0.000725 results in
a deformation of each spring, hence into atoms motion.
Between two successive increases of the strain, the new
positions of the atoms are computed. The ﬁrst step of
the calculation consists in determining, for each atom, the
force applied by its neighbours is computed, and the var-
ious components are added to get the total force acting
on the considered atom. Newton’s equation [24] is then
solved for each atom i (coordinates ri(t) ; velocity ˙ri(t)).
For this purpose, we use the leap-frog algorithm [24,25],
which is a modiﬁed version of the Verlet algorithm. This
algorithm uses positions and accelerations at time t and
positions at time t + δt to predict the positions at time
t + δt, where δt is the integration step, set to the value
10−2. This step is repeated N times before a new δǫ in-
crease of the strain is imposed.
A bond breaks when it reaches a critical length d∗ which
is set to the uniform value 1.1. The fracture of a bond
transforms its potential energy into kinetic energy, which
travels all over the lattice. A local dissipation, i.e. a force

Harold Auradou et al.: Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

3

−

γ ˙ri, is added along the left and right boundaries
term
(Fig. 1) where we expect the coupling with the external
world to be more eﬃcient in removing kinetic energy from
the medium. In the present work, complete damping, i.e.
γ = 1 is imposed.
A close look at the amount of kinetic energy present in the
system prior to any strain increase reveals ﬂuctuation of
constant over the
the order of 10% with an average,
whole range of strain including the loading and the failure
parts of the test. The parameter that controls the amount
of kinetic energy present in the network is the number N of
iterations used to determine atomic positions. A decrease
in N results in an increase of the amount of kinetic energy
remaining in the network. The latter is used to deﬁne a
reduced equivalent temperature

E
h

i

∗

T

= h

E
ǫc

i

(2)

−

d∗)2 is the energy needed to break
where ǫc = 0.5α(d
a single bond (under our conditions ǫc = 0.005). The re-
duced equivalent temperature can be seen as the number
of bonds that the remaining kinetic energy might break if
it was not diluted in the network.
In the present work, two diﬀerent values of N are used:
N = 105 and N = 106, which lead respectively to reduced
equivalent temperatures T ∗ = 80 and T ∗ = 8. Before dis-
cussing the quantitative results concerning the structure
of damage and the roughness of the fracture proﬁles, let
us here brieﬂy illustrate the phenomenology that can be
observed for the two values of T ∗.

3 Macroscopic mechanical properties

e.g. for strains smaller than 0.005

Let us ﬁrst examine the stress response at the two diﬀer-
ent reduced equivalent temperatures. Figure 2 shows the
variation of the stress as a function of strain for two sets
of simulations performed at T ∗ = 80 and T ∗ = 8, and for
two diﬀerent materials. The ﬁrst material is initially intact
(c = 0), meaning that no bonds were removed. From the
second one, 30% of the springs were removed at random
(c = 0.3).
After a ﬁrst stage where the system gets easily deformed
, the stress-strain
−
curves all exhibit a linear behaviour. The stiﬀness de-
creases when bonds are removed, from 2.5
0.2 for the
intact material to 0.70
0.04 when c = 0.3. This decrease
does not seem to be temperature-dependent.
There is another major diﬀerence between the behaviours
of the two materials. For a given temperature, (see Tab.
1), the initially damaged material breaks at a lower stress
but sustains a higher deformation. This is a typical “quasi-
brittle” behaviour, where toughening in an intrinsically
brittle material is the result of damage created ahead of
the crack tip, which screens out the external ﬁeld under-
gone by the main crack.
Let us now focus on the eﬀect of the temperature. While
the stiﬀness is only a function of the density of remain-
ing springs, the maximum strain reached before the onset

±

±

−

of crack propagation increases with the temperature, as
shown in Tab. 1. At low temperature, a sharp decrease of
the stress is observed after the critical strain is reached.
The strain-stress curve is more rounded for a larger tem-
perature. This eﬀect reﬂects the presence of damage ahead
of the crack tip, as can been seen in Figures 3 and 4. It
is clear from these ﬁgures, that a temperature increase
results in an increase of the number of damage cavities.
This can be seen on the dynamics of bond failures: as
shown in Fig. 5, bonds start breaking at a lower strain
when the temperature is increased. For T ∗ = 8, the num-
ber of broken bonds as a function of strain almost follows
a step function, and increases abruptly when the crack
starts to propagate. This distribution broadens when the
temperature is increased up to 80, showing that some of
the bonds are broken before the main crack propagation.
Despite this change in the shape of the distribution of the
number of broken bonds, which has a strong inﬂuence on
the macroscopic mechanical property of the network, the
total number of broken bonds changes only slightly, from
209 for T ∗ = 8 to 241 for T ∗ = 80, which only represents
approximately 0.15% of the springs.
The other striking diﬀerence occurring when the temper-
ature is increased is an increase in the vertical shift of the
stress-strain curve. In fact, a linear ﬁt of the data indi-
cates that the strain-stress curves do not pass through 0.
This indicates that an excess of stress is present within
the material. This quantity is independent of the disorder
and evolves from 2.10−4 for T ∗ = 8 to 2.10−3 for T ∗ = 80.
Note that stress is applied via the forces acting on the sur-
face atoms: a positive stress excess thus indicates a force
acting from the bulk toward the outside and comes from
the energy ﬂux going from the network, at temperature
T ∗, to its ”cold” sides where complete damping of the en-
ergy is imposed. Moreover, as for a perfect gas, the stress
acting on the sides is proportional to temperature.

This section points out that changes in the network
porosity and temperature greatly inﬂuence its macroscopic
properties. The porosity eases the creation of damage cav-
ities, the density of which is shown to be dependent on
temperature. At low temperature, the cavities are more
likely ahead the crack tip; in the region where the stress is
concentrated. When the temperature rises, cavities spread
over the network and the crack propagates in the damaged
material by meandering from one cavity to another. This
phenomenon has a strong eﬀect on the maximum strains
that can be sustained by the structure. The deviation from
the main direction of propagation results, after failure, in
rough fracture proﬁles. The next section is devoted to the
analysis of their statistical properties.

4 Self-aﬃne properties of the fracture lines

After each mechanical test, the positions of atoms belong-
ing to the two fracture lines are recorded. Figure 6 shows
the four proﬁles obtained from the two tests performed
at T ∗ = 8 and 80 on the porous material. In the past

4

Harold Auradou et al.: Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

years, various methods have been developed to measure
the roughness exponent of self-aﬃne structures. In this
paper, two independent methods are considered namely
the average wavelet coeﬃcient (AWC) analysis [26] and
the min-max method [15].
In the case of the AWC analysis the one-dimensional line
z(x) is transformed into the wavelet domain as

W[y](a, b) =

ψ

∗
a,b(x)z(x)dx,

(3)

1
√a Z

where ψa,b(x) is obtained from the analyzing wavelet ψ
(in our case a Daubechies wavelet [27]), via rescaling and
translation, ψa,b(x) = ψ((x
b)/a). The AWC measures
−
the average “energy” present in the proﬁle at a given scale,
2 over all
deﬁned as the arithmetic average of
W[y](a, b)
|
|
possible locations b, and for a statistically self-aﬃne pro-
a2ζ+1.
ﬁle with exponent ζ, it scales as:
For the second method, the proﬁle of length L is divided
into windows of width r. The linear trend of the line is then
subtracted from the proﬁle for each window. The diﬀer-
ence ∆z(r) between the maximum and minimum height
are computed on each window and then averaged other
all possible windows. For a self-aﬃne proﬁle, a power law
behavior is expected :

2
W[y](a, b)
|

b
i

∼

h|

∆z(r)
h

i ∝

rζ

(4)

±

±

±

0.07 for T ∗ = 80 and to 0.55

0.1 for T ∗ = 80 and ζ = 0.55

For both methods, the self-aﬃne scaling invariance will
be revealed by data aligned along a straight line on a log-
log plot, with a slope which provides an estimate of ζ.
Figures 7 and 8 shows log-log plots of the results of the
AWC and the min-max methods respectively, for the four
proﬁles considered. A self-aﬃne domain can be deﬁned in
each case and a self-aﬃne exponent can be measured. In
the case of the wavelet analysis (Figure 7), ζ is found close
0.1 for T ∗ = 8.
to 0.60
For the min-max method (Figure 8), a linear ﬁt indicates
that ζ = 0.65
0.02 for
T ∗ = 8. The self-aﬃne exponent characterizing the geom-
etry of the proﬁles may appear to depend slightly on the
temperature, with a slight increase when the temperature
rises from 8 to 80. However, the scaling domain is quite
restricted (especially when the AWC method is used), and
the diﬀerence lies within error bars. When averaged over
the imposed temperature, the self-aﬃne exponent is found
to be close to 0.59
0.07. The diﬀerence in the lower cut-
oﬀ revealed by the two methods may be attributed to the
presence of overhangs on the proﬁles (see Figure 6), which
are not included in the AWC description, as discussed
in [28]. Contrary to the value of the exponent, the self-
aﬃne correlation length, deﬁned as the upper cutoﬀ of the
power-law domain, appears to be temperature-dependant
and is found to be close to 100 atoms spacing for T ∗ = 8,
while for T ∗ = 80 it overpasses the system size (886 inter-
atomic spacing).

±

±

In this section, we have pointed out that despite the
ductility enhancement observed on the macroscopic me-
chanical properties when the temperature is raised, the

±

resulting post mortem proﬁles have a self-aﬃne roughness
characterized by an exponent ζ = 0.59
0.07, independent
of the temperature. Yet, the temperature has a strong in-
ﬂuence on the crossover length which separates the self-
aﬃne regime observed at small scales and the euclidean
behavior displayed at large scales. At low temperature,
the growth of cavities is a consequence of the disordered
structure of the sample, in a region close enough to the
main crack tip for the stress to be high enough. Cavities
nucleate from missing atoms in this region, and the process
zone remains in the vicinity of the crack tip. The fracture
proﬁles which result from the coalescence of the macro
crack with the cavities have thus an amplitude which is
limited by the lateral extension of the process zone.
On the other hand, when the temperature rises, the excess
of stress due to the undamped kinetic energy (see Section
3) becomes non negligible compared to the stress created
by the notch, and cavities are created everywhere in the
lattice. In this case, the macro crack meanders through
the whole network, and the amplitude of the post mortem
proﬁles is larger.
Recently experimental and numerical observations of crack
propagation in damaged materials suggested the existence
of two self-aﬃne domains [9]. At the scale of the cavity,
the surface is characterized by an exponent ζ
0.5 while
0.8, is observed at the scale of the
a larger exponent, ζ
”superstructure” resulting from the coalescence of these
cavities. The next section is devoted to the quantitative
analysis of the morphology of a single cavity.

∼

∼

5 Structure of the damage zone

Figure 4 shows clearly that the morphology of the crack
proﬁles is inﬂuenced by the presence of cavities. In order
to describe quantitatively their evolution, we focus our at-
tention on one of the largest cavities. Figure 9 shows the
positions of atoms belonging to the external contour of the
cavity for three diﬀerent values of the strain, during crack
propagation. Note that the total number of atoms, 1600,
belonging to this contour remains unchanged through these
three stages, and that the ﬁrst contour (stage (1)) is al-
ready the result of the coalescence of smaller cavities. We
clearly see on this ﬁgure that as the crack tip gets closer
to the cavity, the latter is more open and elongated. More-
over, when the distance from the crack tip is important,
the contour shows meanders, the importance of which de-
creases as the crack tip gets closer. In order to describe
the tortuosity of the contours and their possible scale in-
variance properties, the average mass method has been
selected [29].
This method is very similar to the box counting method
and consists in computing the number of atoms, N (r) lo-
cated within a circle of radius r with its center located
on one of the atoms of the contour. The average of N (r)
over all possible circle centers provides
. Figure
N (r)
h
i
) with respect
N (r)
10 displays the evolution of log10(
i
h
to log10(r), for the various contours. For a fractal con-
tour,
should increase with r following a power law,
N (r)
i
h
rD, where D is the fractal dimension. For a
N (r)
i ∝
h

Harold Auradou et al.: Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

5

6 Discussion

Within the framework of a bidimensional numerical model,
we have examined crack propagation and damage spread-
ing in a porous material at two temperatures. We have
shown that damage develops more at high temperature,
which results into a decrease of the fracture strength and,
correlatively, into an increase in ductility. This increase in
the elongation at failure results from a screening of the
external stress by damage. No plasticity is required in the
model, which only involves bonds breaking and atom re-
arrangements on a local scale. This behaviour is similar
to the one observed in quasi-brittle materials [11]-[30].

The crack morphology exhibits in both cases the same
self-aﬃne roughness, with an exponent close to 0.6 which
agrees with measurement performed on 2d materials [19,
20]. The structure of damage at high temperature is also
examined. Damage cavities are shown to be fractal, with
a fractal dimension which decreases from 1.5 to 1 prior
to coalescence with the main crack. This change in the
fractal dimension is due to the increase of the local stress
generated by the closer vicinity of the crack tip during
propagation. This increase results in the coalescence of
small cavities and in atomic rearrangements of atoms on
the cavity front which can be interpreted as a partial ”de-
pinning”. A similar change in the morphology of cavities
with their size was actually observed recently in [31]. The
scaling properties of the resulting crack is, in ﬁne, due to
the relative positions of damage cavities with respect to
each other rather than to their structure, since they are no
more fractal when they join the main crack and become
part of it. Further studies of the inter-correlations of dam-
age cavities for 2- and 3-dimensional systems should lead
to a better understanding of the still mysterious morphol-
ogy of fracture surfaces.

We are indebted to A. Politi, who is at the origin of the model
used here. Many thanks also to R. Kalia, J-P Hulin, D. Bonamy
and C. Guillot for their scientiﬁc support, and to Y. Meurdes-
oif and P. Kloos (CEA-Saclay Computer Science Division) for
their technical support in the parallel simulations. HA is sup-
ported by the CNRS and ANDRA through the GdR FORPRO
(contribution No. XXXX) and the EHDRA (European Hot
Dry Rock Association) and PNRH programs.

smooth, Euclidean line, D = 1, while for a line ﬁlling
completely the plane, D = 2.
Let us ﬁrst focus on the behaviour of the contour of the
cavity at stages (1) and (2). For these two stages, the cav-
ity displays a fractal geometry over a domain of length
scales spanning from the atom spacing, d, up to approxi-
mately 50 d. Its fractal dimension decreases from D = 1.5
(stage (1)) to 1.35 (stage (2)). For stage (3), the aver-
age mass displays a more complex behaviour: for length
scales smaller than 50 d, the contour has a fractal dimen-
sion of 1 but for larger length scales, the fractal dimension
seems to increase. In order to understand this behaviour,
we have analyzed separately the left and ride sides of the
cavity normal to the external load (Figure 9). As shown
in Figure 10, the two sides are characterized by a fractal
dimension D = 1 and no abrupt change is detected.
The analysis of the contour of the cavity indicates that it
is indeed fractal, with a fractal dimension which decreases
continuously when the distance between crack tip and cav-
ity decreases. For large distances, the fractal dimension is
found close to 1.5, but just before junction between the
cavity and the main crack, the contour of the cavity has
a fractal dimension of 1.
It must be remembered however that the fractal dimen-
sion of a self aﬃne function is not uniquely deﬁned: it
strongly depends on the range of length scales considered
as well as on the method used. As pointed out in the in-
troduction, the height ﬂuctuations of a self-aﬃne proﬁle is
characterized by two parameters: the self-aﬃne exponent
ζ and the topothesy l which is the scale at which the slope
of the proﬁle is of the order of unity. Above l, the fractal
dimension is equal to 1 for a 2d proﬁles. At smaller length
scales, the dimension will depend on the method used and
is D = 2
ζ for the average mass method. Because of
the fact that in the present work the topothesy of the two
sides of the cavity is less than the atom spacing the aver-
age mass method is not an appropriate method to analyse
possible self-aﬃne nature of the sides of the cavity.
As mentioned in Sec. 4, a more appropriate tool to de-
scribe the self-aﬃne nature of the proﬁles is the AWC
method. The latter has been applied to the two sides of
the cavity (See Fig. 7), they display a self-aﬃne character-
istic with an exponent, ζ
0.6, close to the value obtained
for the fracture proﬁles over length scales ranging from 6
to 50 atoms spacing.
This section was devoted to the analyse of the morphology
of a single cavity. Previous works suggested that cavities
have rough walls with a self aﬃne geometry character-
ized by a self aﬃne exponent close to 0.5 [9]. The dam-
age cavities obtained with our modelization is found to be
self-aﬃne with an exponent close to the one which charac-
terizes the post mortem surface i.e. 0.6. Yet, the self aﬃne
regime is observed over a narrow range of scale (less than
one decade), making diﬃcult any conclusion. Neverthe-
less, the structure of the walls of the cavity was found to
be sensitive to the presence of the crack tip. This contrast
with the scenario suggested in [9] in which the surfaces
created by the failure have a ”quenched” geometry.

−

∼

6

Harold Auradou et al.: Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

c = 0

c = 0.3

T ∗
ǫσmax
σmax
ǫmax

80
0.014
0.029
0.024

8
0.0096
0.024
0.012

T ∗
ǫσmax
σmax
ǫmax

80
0.023
0.017
0.029

8
0.022
0.013
0.026

Table 1. Mechanical properties of the system as a function
of the temperature T ∗
for two diﬀerent fractions of missing
springs c = 0.0 and c = 0.3. ǫmax, σmax and ǫσmax stand for the
maximum strain (reached at the onset of complete failure), the
maximum stress reached during the test, and the corresponding
strain.

References

1. Physical Aspects of fracture NATO Sciences Series.
2. J.C. Charmet, S. Roux and E. Guyon, Disorder and frac-

3. P.M. Duxbury, P.B. Beale and P.L. Leath, Phys. Rev. Lett.

4. A. Hansen and J. Schmittbuhl, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,045504

5. A. Politi and M. Zei, Phys. Rev. E 63, 056107 (2001).
6. H. Herrmann, A. Hansen and S. Roux, Phys. Rev. B 39,

ture, Plenum Press.

57, 1052 (1986).

(2003).

637 (1989).

7. L. de Arcangelis, A. Hansen, H. Herrmann and S. Roux,

Phys. Rev. B 40, 877 (1989)

8. E. Bouchaud, J. Phys.: Condensed Matter 9 4319 (1997).
9. E. Bouchaud, Surf. Rev. and Lett. 10, 73 (2003).
10. C. Poon, R. Sayles, and T. Jones, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys.

11. S. Morel, J. Schmittbulh, J. L´opez and G. Valentin, Phys.

12. E. Bouchaud, G. Lapasset, and J. Plan`es, Europhys. Lett.

25, 1269 (1992).

Rev. E 58, 6999 (1998).

13, 73 (1990).

13. P. Daguier, B. Nghiem, E. Bouchaud, F. Creuzet, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 78, 1062 (1997).

14. F. C´elari´e, S. Prades, D. Bonamy et al, Phys. Rev. Lett.

90, 075504 (2003).

15. J. Feder, Fractals (Plenum, New York, 1988).
16. J.M. Boﬀa, C. Allain and J.P. Hulin, European Phys. J. -

17. E. Bouchaud, S. Nav´eos, J. de Physique (Paris) 15, 547

App. Phys. 2, 2 (1998).

(1995).

Rev. E 53, 5637 (1996).

32, 369 (2003).

Lett. 73, 834 (1994).

18. P. Daguier, S. H´enaux, E. Bouchaud, F. Creuzet, Phys.

19. L. Salminen, M. Alava and K. Niskanen, Eur. Phys. J. B

20. T. Engøy, K.J. M˚aløy, A. Hansen and S. Roux, Phys. Rev.

21. D. Stauﬀer and A. Aharony, Introduction to Percolation

Theory, 2nd ed. London: Taylor and Francis, 1992.
22. S. Feng and P.N. Sen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 216 (1984).
23. D.J. Jacobs and M.F. Thorpe, Phys. Rev. E 53, 3682

(1996).

24. R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton and M. Sands, The Feyn-
man Lectures on Physics, Vol. 1, Addison-Wesley, 1963,
Chapter 9 (“Newton’s Laws of Dynamics”).

25. M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley, Computer simulation of

liquids, Oxford, 1987.

26. I. Simonsen, A. Hansen and O.M. Nes, Phys. Rev. E. 58,

27. I. Daubechies, Ten Lectures on Wavelets (SIAM, Philadel-

2779 (1998).

phia, 1992).

28. G. Drazer and H. Auradou, J. Koplik, J.P. Hulin, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 92 014501 (2004).

29. H. Auradou and J.P. Hulin, S. Roux Phys. Rev. E 63

066306 (2001).

30. S. Morel, E. Bouchaud, J. Schmittbuhl, G. Valentin, Int.

J. of Fracture 114 307 (2002).

31. F. Paun, E. Bouchaud, Int. J. of Fract. 121 43 (2003).

Fig. 1. Illustration of the elastic bond network used in the
simulations. a) shows the specimen submitted to an external
uniaxial tension . b) is a detailed view of the material consisting
of atoms initialy placed on a triangular lattice and connected
by identical elastic springs. Note that a ﬁxed density of springs
is removed before application of the load.

Harold Auradou et al.: Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

7

0.03

0.02

0.01

σ

0

0

0.01

0.03

0.04

0.02
ε

Fig. 2. Stress-strain evolution of the system. Circles and
squares correspond respectively to c = 0.3 and c = 0 (non-
porous material). Filled and empty symbols correspond respec-
tively to T ∗

= 8 and 80.

Fig. 4. Breakdown under tension of a network kept at the
temperature T ∗
= 80. From bottom to top the strain is re-
spectively ǫ = 0.0217, 0.0231, 0.0225 and 0.0289.

0.02

0.015

σ

0.01

0.005

Fig. 3. Breakdown of the atoms network under strain test
performed at the temperature T ∗
= 8. From bottom to top the
strain is respectively ǫ = 0.0223, 0.0224, 0.0225 and 0.0282.

0
0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

ε

Fig. 5. Filled and unﬁlled symbols correspond respectively to
T ∗ = 8 and 80. Circles show the stress-strain variation for a
porosity c = 0.3. Diamonds show the number of broken bonds
verticaly normalised to ﬁt the plot.

8

Harold Auradou et al.: Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

200

100

0

−100

−200

0

6

5

4

3

1

0

)

b
>
2

,

)
b
a
(
W
<
(

0
1
g
o

l

2

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

>
)
r
(
 
z
∆
<
0
1
g
o

 

l

0.0

0

800

700

600

200

400

600

800

Fig. 6. Fractures proﬁles obtained after the breakdown of the
lattice with c = 0.3. The two top curves correspond to the
top and bottom proﬁles obtained for T ∗ = 80. The two lowest
proﬁles are for T ∗ = 8.

1

2

3

log10(r)

Fig. 8. log10(h∆z(r)i) as function of log10(r). Circles and
squares show the result of the analyse of the top and bottom
proﬁles after failure at T ∗ = 80 while diamonds and triangles
are obtained when top and bottom failure proﬁles obtained at
T ∗
= 8 are considered. These results where shifted verticaly
for convinience. The dotted line has a slope of 0.6 .

0

1

2

3

log10(a)

Fig. 7. log10h|W[y](a, b)|2ib as function of log10(a) where a is
in unit of d. Circles and squares show the result of the analyse
of the top and bottom proﬁles after failure at T ∗
= 80 while di-
amonds and crosses are obtained when top and bottom failure
proﬁles obtained at T ∗
= 8 are considered. The ﬁlled triangles
correspond to the average of the analyse of the two sides of the
cavity at stage (3) displays in Fig. 9. The dotted lines has a
slope of 2ζ + 1 = 2.2 corresponding to a self-aﬃne exponent
ζ = 0.6. These results where shifted verticaly for convinience.

500

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Fig. 9. From the left to the right, pictures of the same cavity
at stages (1), (2) and (3) of the test performed on the porous
material at temperature 80. The distance from the crack tip
is respectively : 393, 359 and 355 atoms spacing. The boxes
indicate the left and right sides of the cavity at stage (3).

Harold Auradou et al.: Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

9

3.5

2.5

3

2

1.5

)
)
r
(

M

(

0
1
g
o

l

1
0.5

1

1.5
log10(r)

2

2.5

Fig. 10. Log log representation of the average mass M (r)
measured within circle of radius r applied to the three cav-
ities displayed in ﬁgure 9. Cirlcle, squares and diamonds are
respectively for cavities 1, 2 and 3. Triangles up and left are
for the right and left sides of the cavity (3) displayed in Fig.
9. The long dashed, the dot dashed and the dahed lines have
respectively a slope of 1.5, 1.35 and 1.

