5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
2
1
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Improving antenna near-ﬁeld pattern by

use of artiﬁcial impedance screens

Stanislav Maslovski, Pekka Ikonen, Student Member, IEEE, Constantin Simovski,

Mikko K¨arkk¨ainen, Sergei Tretyakov, Senior Member, IEEE, and Vasil Denchev

Abstract— An antenna prototype utilizing artiﬁcial impedance

on the usage of artiﬁcial impedance surfaces with moderate

surfaces to control the near ﬁeld distribution is described. The

inductive impedances to form the desired near-ﬁeld pattern

antenna is a folded dipole placed above a ﬁnite-size artiﬁcial

impedance surface. We have found that the ﬁeld screening is

most effective if the surface is a metal conductor. However, to

achieve a reasonable value of the radiation resistance the dipole

of a horizontal antenna positioned parallel to the impedance

surface. The known solutions for artiﬁcial antenna substrates

(e.g., [2]) utilize impedance surfaces in the resonant regime

should be located far off the screen. If the surface is a magnetic

(as artiﬁcial magnetic walls) in order to reduce the antenna

wall, the antenna design is more compact, but the ﬁeld behind the

thickness. In papers [2]–[5] implied applications of artiﬁcial

screen is large. Here we realize a compromise solution using an

inductive surface of a moderate surface impedance, which allows

realization of an effective near-ﬁeld screen with still a reasonably

low-proﬁle design.

Index Terms— antenna, antenna near-ﬁeld pattern, impedance

surface, screening, antenna efﬁciency.

I. INTRODUCTION

In paper [1] an idea of decreasing the ﬁeld level on one side

of low-proﬁle antennas was proposed and developed. Using

such antennas, efﬁciency can be maintained at a good level

even if absorbing bodies are near the antenna but behind

the screening substrate, because the power absorbed in the

near vicinity of the antenna is reduced. The idea is based

Stanislav Maslovski, Pekka Ikonen, Mikko K¨arkk¨ainen, and Sergei

Tretyakov are with Radio Laboratory / SMARAD, Helsinki University of

Technology, P.O. Box 3000, FIN-02015 HUT, Finland. Contact e-mail:

impedance surfaces are within the resonant band. However,

it has been shown in [1], [6] that

the antenna solutions

with a high inductive impedance of the ground surface do

not correspond to a good screening effect in the near-zone

ﬁeld of horizontal antennas. The present approach allows

an effective reduction of the near ﬁeld behind the antenna,

whereas the required radiation resistance can be achieved with

a small increase of the structure thickness (the primary radiator

antenna is positioned at a certain height over the impedance

surface). Impedance screens of two kinds have been studied.

The ﬁrst one is so-called mushroom structure and the second

one is a thin layer named Jerusalem crosses structure. These

impedance screens should work well when the surface is of

moderate inductive impedance and when the antenna excites

mostly TE modes (respectively to the screen normal). In this

work we validate experimentally our theoretical expectations

stanislav.maslovski@hut.fi

designing optimized radiating elements for the use with two

Constantin Simovski

is with Physics Dept. of

the St. Petersburg

State University of

Information Technologies, Mechanics and Optics,

14 Sablinskaya str., 197101, Saint-Petersburg, Russia. Contact e-mail:

different impedance surfaces and measuring the near ﬁeld

distributions around the antenna. We do not study the far-ﬁeld

simovsky@phd.ifmo.ru

pattern since it is not a practically important characteristic

2

for handsets operating in the frequency range 1–2 GHz.

value. In this frequency range the surface supports TM-

Really, this pattern is weakly directive (because the antenna

polarized surface waves, whose excitation is not desirable.

of a mobile phone is electrically small), and it is perturbed

This means that we should use a primary radiator that excites

depending on the device position with respect to the user.

(at least primarily) TE-polarized waves, that is, there should

However, the non-perturbed ﬁeld distribution measured in the

be mainly electric currents parallel to the surface. A natural

vicinity of a portable terminal clearly indicates the possible

choice is a simple dipole antenna positioned parallel to the

inﬂuence of the user body or other nearly located objects to

surface. Another choice criterion is the compact design. When

the antenna. If the ﬁeld behind the terminal (where the user’s

a dipole antenna is brought close to a surface with a small

body is normally) is not signiﬁcant, the user’s body will not

inductive impedance, its radiation resistance becomes rather

signiﬁcantly reduce the antenna efﬁciency. Therefore, we make

low due to cancelation of radiation from the currents induced

measurements at the distances of a few centimeters to test

on the surface. For this reason, a better choice is a folded

the near-ﬁeld screening efﬁciency of the artiﬁcial impedance

dipole because of its high radiation resistance.

surface.

Notice, that in the known literature the problem of the

improving the antenna efﬁciency and SAR reduction is often

considered in terms of far-zone measurements and related with

such a parameter of the antenna as the front-to-back ratio in the

far zone. Following this point of view, if one wants to reduce

the SAR one should form the far-zone antenna pattern with a

small backward radiation [7], [8]. This is a potentially mislead-

ing approach. There is no proportionality between the far-zone

and the near-zone ﬁeld patterns, and a high front-to-back ratio

for the far-zone ﬁelds can correspond to a small front-to-back

ratio in the near zone. Only the measurements of the near-ﬁeld

The use of a folded dipole requires a balun to connect the

dipole to the unbalanced coaxial cable. At the ﬁrst stages of

our experiments we wanted to avoid complications related to

any additional elements in the antenna system, and decided to

use in experiments only a half of the dipole antenna (over a

half of the artiﬁcial impedance surface) positioned orthogonal

to a large metal ground plane. The mirror image of the half

of the antenna simulates the other half, so that the whole

system radiates as the complete antenna in the half space

where the actual radiator is located. No balun is needed if the

feeding cable is behind the ground plane because no currents

spatial distribution (and not the ﬁeld angular dependence since

the angular near-ﬁeld pattern strongly depends on the distance

are induced on the cable.

from the antenna) can deﬁnitely indicate the degree of ﬁeld

interactions between the antenna and various objects in its

near ﬁeld. Our measurements are, therefore, not conventional

and they became possible due to the use of special equipment

dedicated for near-ﬁeld testing.

After successful tests with this installation, we designed

a planar balun, manufactured and tested a complete antenna

sample. Let us emphasize that our paper is not a description

of a new practical antenna with good front-to-back ratio in

In the proposed design, the artiﬁcial impedance surface

the far ﬁeld. The goal of this paper is to demonstrate the

(such as the mushroom structure) is operating at frequencies

feasibility of handset antennas for the frequency range 1–2

below the surface impedance resonance, where the effective

GHz with reduced interaction with objects in the antenna near

surface impedance is inductive and not high in the absolute

ﬁeld region.

3

II. MODELING MEASUREMENTS AND SIMULATIONS WITH

by the coaxial connector in our case) is then applied between

ONE HALF OF THE ANTENNA STRUCTURE

the screen and one end of one half of the folded dipole.

A. Experimental set-up

The experimental set-up modeling the complete antenna is

shown in Figure 1. It consists of a 220

230 mm2 rectangular

×

The second end of the dipole is connected to the ground

(see Figure 2). The impedance surface should also be well

electrically connected to the ground.

metal screen with a 50 Ohm 3.5 mm coaxial connector in

Cabling effects are eliminated here due to the simple fact

its center and a half of the antenna structure attached to the

that the cable is now behind the screen. It prevents currents

connector (and also to the screen, as explained below).

from ﬂowing on the outer surface of the coax. This means

that there is no need for a special balancing device which

can possibly inﬂuence the input impedance measurements, etc.

The input impedance of the complete antenna is two times

larger than that measured for a half of the antenna in this

experimental set-up. The ﬁeld distributions measured in this

modeling set-up should correspond to the same distributions

for the complete antenna in free space. The position of

the impedance surface is adjustable mechanically, and the

separation between the dipole and the surface can be changed.

Three types of surfaces have been used in the experiments:

a mushroom structure, a metal screen with slits shaped as

Jerusalem crosses, and a simple metal screen, all of the same

surface dimensions.

Antenna dimensions were chosen for operation around

1.8 GHz. To take into account the inﬂuence of the impedance

screen on the effective resonant length of the antenna, mea-

surements with a test microstrip transmission line formed

above the impedance screen have been made. It was found

that in the presence of the impedance surface the resonant

length is slightly shorter than the same for the antenna in

free space. It has been set approximately to 30 mm (it is

the dipole half-length corresponding to the quarter wavelength

distance). Folded dipole samples have been prepared from a

Fig. 1. Experimental modeling set-up: side view (left) and top view (right).

Fig. 2. Photo of the modeling set-up.

Neglecting the inﬂuence of the ﬁnite sizes of the screen and

metallized dielectric material (sheets of FR-4). Geometrical

the effect of the ﬁnite screen conductivity, a half of the real

parameters for all studied cases (sizes are in mm, for the

antenna and its mirror image can be considered as forming the

deﬁnition see Figure 1) are given in Table I. The last column

entire antenna. The source voltage (the source is represented

gives the total thickness of the structures: H = d1 + d2 + h.

4

Distance h between the folded dipole and the impedance

simple mushroom structure:

surface determines the input impedance of the antenna. The

following experimental procedure to ﬁnd an optimal distance

was used. The working frequency was ﬁrstly chosen (close

to 1.8 GHz). Then, the distance between the folded dipole

Zs

j

≈

1

ωL
ω2LC

,

−

L = µ0d2, C =

Dε0(εr + 1)
π

2D
πδ

log

, lms

(1)

and the impedance surface was changed until the imaginary

where d2 is the thickness of the mushroom structure, D is the

part of the antenna input

impedance became zero at

the

patch array period and δ is the gap between patches.

working frequency. If the real part of the impedance is close

Notice,

that a moderate inductive impedance is needed

to 25 Ohm (note that in the modeling set-up we measure one

for the expected screening effect [1], [6], and the obtained

half of the actual impedance of the complete antenna) for

result for Zs ﬁts to this condition. Design 2 (a screen with

the same frequency, then the antenna is matched and ready

complex-shaped slits) is formed by a grid of slits made in a

for measurements. If this condition was not reachable, then

metal covering of a thin dielectric substrate (of the relative

a frequency close to the original one was chosen and the

permittivity εr = 4.5). The thickness of the substrate is equal

procedure was repeated.

to 0.8 mm. The notations for all the dimensions of the slits are

TABLE I

given in Figure 3. On this ﬁgure the slits in the metal screen

DIMENSIONS OF THE ANTENNA ELEMENTS (IN MM).

are shown in black. The following sizes were chosen for the

l1

33

33

l2

62

62

d1

1.6

1.5

d2

3.3

0.45

h

4.6

7.4

w1

9.0

10

w2

s

32

30

3.0

3.2

H

9.5

9.35

experimental sample: g = w = 0.2 mm, d = 2 mm, D = 4.2

mm, h = 0.8 mm. The theory of such surfaces is known for

both cases when the substrate is metal-backed and when it is

Mushrooms

Metal

Jerusalem

crosses

33

60

1.5

0.80

10

10

33

3.2

12.3

free [4], [5]. In our case it is free, and the surface impedance

at low frequencies is complex with inductive imaginary part. It

can be found as a parallel connection of the grid impedance of

the slotted screen Zg and the input impedance of the dielectric

B. Impedance surfaces

Two designs of artiﬁcial impedance surfaces have been

layer of thickness d2:

experimentally studied and compared with the case of a metal

plate of the same size. The sizes of the impedance surfaces

in both variants are indicated in Table I. Design 1 (mushroom

structure) is an array of square metal patches on the upper

Zs =

ZdZg
Zd + Zg

.

The grid impedance (relating the tangential electric ﬁeld in

the screen plane and the surface current induced on it) can be

surface of a metal-backed dielectric layer. The central points

approximately presented as

of every patch are connected to the ground plane by vertical

vias. The theory of mushroom structures is well-known [3],

Zg

j

≈

1

−

ωLg
ω2LgCg

, lnew

(2)

and the dielectric layer in free space has the following surface

[9]. The parameters of mushrooms and the dielectric layer

impedance:

(Taconic TLY-5) are shown in Figure 4. The surface impedance

of this mushroom structure at f = 1.8 GHz was theoretically

Zd = η

1 + j
√ǫr tan kd2
1 + j√ǫr tan kd2

.lnew1

(3)

estimated as Zs

j50 Ohm. We used the analytical theory

In ˚new the effective inductance and capacitance determining

≈

from [9] which gives following approximate relations for a

the grid impedance of the uniplanar screen can be expressed

5

as

To understand the inﬂuence of such impedance surfaces to

Lg =

log

, Cg =

µ0d
π

2d
πg

Dε0(εr + 1)
π

log

2D
πw

.

(4)

the input parameters of the folded dipole we have calculated

the wave impedance and the propagation constant of the

The notations are clear from Fig. 3. In ˚new1 k = ω√ε0µ0εr

is the wave number of the dielectric medium. The real part

of Zs corresponds to the penetration of radiation through the

impedance surface. For this design the analytically estimated

inﬁnite metal strip of width 3

4 mm raised at 5

−
over the impedance plane. This was done with the exact image

−

10 mm

method [10]. The results have shown no dramatic inﬂuence,

and this has been conﬁrmed by measurements.

surface impedance was Zs

0.80 + j17 Ohm at 1.8 GHz.

≈

This is also a moderate surface impedance.

C. Measurements

Fig. 3. A grid of slots shaped as Jerusalem crosses (slots are in black).

Measurements with the modeling set-up have been done for

a folded dipole above three types of impedance surfaces: metal

surface, mushroom structure, and Jerusalem crosses structure.

Near ﬁelds have been measured by a special set-up (proprietary

design of SPEAG and HUT Radio Laboratory) developed

for SAR measurements. The set-up has two probes, electric

and magnetic, which allow measuring the amplitudes of three

components of the ﬁeld vectors. Unfortunately, the dipoles

in the electric probe are oriented differently relatively to the

usual laboratory coordinate system: They are not along the

two horizontal directions and the vertical one. Because such

components cannot be transformed to the usual ones without

knowledge about the phases of the ﬁelds, the total absolute

values of the ﬁeld vectors have been measured.

At ﬁrst, the near ﬁeld distribution over the radiating folded

dipole was measured, to check that the modeling antenna was

operating in the desired regime and the ﬁeld distribution corre-

sponded to the expected pattern. The probe moved in a plane

7 mm above the half-dipole (here above corresponds to the

orientation shown on Figure 1, left). The measurement points

covered an area equal to the area of the underlying mushroom

structure. The measurements showed that the electric near ﬁeld

had a maximum at the end of the half-dipole, and the magnetic

ﬁeld had its maximum close to the feeding point, as expected.

Next, we measured the distribution of the near ﬁeld in

vertical planes which included the antenna cross section. In the

Fig. 4. Mushroom surface and dimensions of its elements (in mm).

following series of measurements the probe was moved around

6

the antenna along a planar spiral path in the yOz) plane (the

axes are accordingly to Figure 1). The path covers an area of

230 mm2. The measurements have been performed at

220

×

the antenna resonant frequency. The electric near ﬁeld pattern

of the folded dipole placed over the mushroom surface is

depicted on Figure 5. Figure 6 shows the magnetic near-ﬁeld

distribution over the same plane. The ﬁeld values are given in

dB relatively to the maximum level. The coordinate axes are

parallel to the edges of the ground plate. In these ﬁgures the

plane over which the ﬁeld distributions are measured is located

in the middle of the half-dipole. The bottom side of the picture

corresponds to the area behind the impedance surface where

Fig. 5. Near-ﬁeld spatial distribution in the vertical plane across the hori-

zontally positioned folded half-dipole located over the mushroom impedance

the screening effect is signiﬁcant. The region 0 < y < 70

screen (electric ﬁeld vector relative magnitude, dB). The antenna and the

mm,

40 mm < z < 0 should be excluded from the plots.

−

This region was occupied by the antenna structure and it was

impossible to move probes inside this area. As a result, we

ground plane location are shown. The picture top corresponds to the re-

gion in front of the antenna,

the bottom represents the screened area.

The antenna structure is located in the region 0 < y < 70 mm,
−40 mm < z < 0.

have measured the near ﬁeld distribution inside a rather large

spatial box containing the antenna except a small box having

To compare the radiation properties of the studied antennas

the sizes of the antenna itself.

measurements of antenna impedances and antenna efﬁciencies

We deﬁne the local screening effect (LSE) as the ratio (in

have been done. The input impedance measurements have

dB) between the ﬁeld amplitudes at two points located in front

been performed with the HP 8753D network analyzer. To

(z > 5 mm) and behind (z <

45 mm) the antenna structure,

−
equidistantly from the antenna center. The averaged screening

measure the efﬁciency, the antenna samples were covered by

a conducting semi-sphere (Wheeler’s cap), and the real part of

effect (ASE) is the averaged value of LSE over all these points

the input impedance was measured. Then, the efﬁciency value

covered by our measurements. For the mushroom structure

was calculated as

ASE is approximately equal to 15 dB for electric ﬁelds and

20 dB for magnetic ﬁelds.

Next, we have studied the near-ﬁeld patterns of a half of the

folded dipole when the mushrooms are replaced by a metal

η = (1

R0/R)

100%

−

·

(5)

surface and by the Jerusalem-crosses surface. The screening

where R0 is the real part of the input impedance of the covered

effect is maximal for the metal surface: ASE is close to 20

antenna at resonance, and R is the real part of the antenna

dB for both electric and magnetic ﬁelds. But for the input

impedance without the covering, at the resonance. The results

impedance of the half-dipole to be close to 25 Ohm, the metal

of measurements are given in Table II. The best efﬁciency was

screen should be positioned at a larger distance from the source

achieved with the Jerusalem crosses structure. But in the same

than the mushroom layer (parameter h in Table I).

time this structure was the thickest one (see Table I).

7

Fig. 7.

The magnitude of S11 parameter of the folded dipole over the

impedance surface. The measured and the simulated results agree relatively

Fig. 6. The same as in Figure 5 for the magnetic ﬁeld relative magnitude,

well.

dB.

TABLE II

WHEELER-CAP ANTENNA EFFICIENCY MEASUREMENT RESULTS FOR THE

III. FULL-SIZED FOLDED DIPOLE AND A SYMMETRIZED

PROTOTYPE ANTENNA

ANTENNAS UNDER TEST.

Mushrooms Metal

Jerusalem crosses

A. The prototype antenna

R, Ohm

R0, Ohm

22

6

Efﬁciency, % 73

25

6

76

25

3

88

D. Some numerical results by the FDTD method

Experiments with the modeling set-up (Section II) have

shown that there is a possibility to obtain a 50 Ohm (full-

sized) matched antenna using the folded dipole placed on

top of an impedance surface. The needed distance of the

antenna from the impedance surface was found experimentally.

A three-dimensional computer code for the numerical cal-

When a real full-size antenna is feeded by a coaxial cable,

culation of the input antenna parameters has been developed.

a symmetrizing device is needed. Such a device has been

The FDTD method was used to solve the Maxwell equations in

designed and manufactured using the planar technique. The

the time domain, the simulated data were converted into the

photo is shown in Figure 8.

frequency domain by the Fourier transform. The mushroom

surface impedance was modeled as the input impedance of a

parallel circuit with the parameters given by ˚ms. For details of

the simulation method, see [6]. In this example the distance

of the dielectric support of the radiator from the impedance

screen is 7.7 mm. The numerical and measured results for the

magnitude of S11 parameter are presented in Figure 7. The

smallest reﬂection occurs at about 1.9 GHz, in agreement with

the measured results. So, the antenna is tuned as we need and

has a rather good bandwidth for this frequency range (8% on

the level

10 dB).

−

Fig. 8. The prototype folded-dipole antenna with an integrated symmetrizing

device. Behind the antenna a foam layer and the mushroom surface are seen.

The folded dipole and the designed symmetrizing device

to measure the prototype antenna. The only difference in the

are inseparable parts of a microstrip construction. The detailed

set-up was that it had no additional metal screen and the

chart of the construction is given in Figure 9. The developed

cable was directly connected to the antenna. The location of

the measurement points and the orientation of the prototype

antenna under measurement are shown in Figure 10.

8

Fig. 9. A detailed chart of the developed folded-dipole antenna with an

integrated symmetrizing device.

radiator is fed as follows. The outer connector of the coax

is attached to the central point of one of the two conductors

that form the folded dipole. The output voltage of the coaxial

cable is transmitted to the feeding point by a microstrip

line formed by an additional strip placed on top of one of

the folded dipole conductors. If the width of the additional

strip is smaller than the width of the dipole strip, and if the

separation between the two strips is much smaller than the

width of the folded dipole, the total construction radiates as

the left.

a single folded dipole. That is because the additional strip is

Fig. 10. The location of the measurement points and the orientation of the

prototype antenna under measurement. The feeding coaxial cable is seen on

effectively screened by the dipole itself and does not inﬂuence

Test ﬁeld distributions along the antenna dipole showed that

the operation of the antenna. The construction is effectively

the antenna was well balanced. The operating frequency was

symmetric, since the outer connector of the coaxial cable is

1.77 GHz. We have measured the ﬁeld distribution around the

attached to a zero-potential point. Moreover, the width of the

antenna and calculated the averaged screening effect taking

additional conductor and the thickness of the insulator can

into account the ﬁeld at every point shown in Fig. 10. The

be chosen so that the additional microstrip line is a 50 Ohm

results depicted in Figures 11 and 12 are in good agreement

line. Alternatively, it is possible to use this transmission line

with similar ones obtained in the ﬁrst experiment with a half of

segment as an impedance transformer, if the line characteristic

an analogous antenna. A small asymmetry of the electric ﬁeld

impedance differs from 50 Ohm.

distribution is caused by the coaxial cable connected to the

B. Near-ﬁeld measurements with the prototype antenna

dipole. The input return loss at the resonance is

S11
|

|

=

−

20

dB, the radiation efﬁciency is 73%, the averaged screening

The prototype antenna consists of a balanced folded dipole

effect ASE = 13 dB, the input resistance at the resonance is

over a mushroom layer of the size 64

33 mm2. The same

61 Ohm, the antenna bandwidth at the level

6 dB (for S11)

×

−

measurement procedure as described in Section II was used

is 9% (at

9.5 dB it is 5.5%).

−

We also studied the same radiating element with other

impedance surfaces behind it: Jerusalem-slot screen and a

metal plate. In both these cases we obtained good agreement

with the studies of the half of a similar folded dipole (Section

II). The ﬁnal results are presented in Table III.

TABLE III

MAIN PARAMETERS OF THE THREE DESIGNED PROTOTYPES.

Metal Mushrooms

Jerusalem

plate

Central frequency, GHz

1.81

1.77

Radiation efﬁciency† , % 76

Total thickness H, mm

9.35

Bandwidth, %

Electric ﬁeld ASE, dB

–

15

73

8.3

13

Magnetic ﬁeld ASE, dB

15–17

12–13

crosses

1.83

88

12.3

15

13–15

† The efﬁciency values were measured in the modeling set-up discussed in

Section II.

5.5 (−9.5 dB)

4 (−10 dB)

dB.

Fig. 12. The same as in Figure 11 for the magnetic ﬁeld relative magnitude,

in which the near-ﬁeld screening effect would be calculated

or measured for antennas operating at 1–3 GHz. In [8] the

screening effect of 7 dB corresponds to the far-zone ﬁeld,

and in [2] 6 dB is the front-to-back ratio (also a far-zone

parameter). To compare our results with the basic known ones

we should replace ASE introduced in our paper by its analogue

in which the far-zone part of our measured data is kept.

Estimation of the distance to the far zone is not obvious in

this case when the antenna is not electrically large but cannot

be considered as a point source. Looking at the distance to the

far-zone Z for considerably large antennas

where G = 64 mm is the maximal size of our radiating system,

and to the same for point dipoles

Z =

2G2
λ

,

Z =

λ
2π

Fig. 11.

Near-ﬁeld spatial distribution of the prototype full-size folded

dipole antenna around the radiating system. The electric ﬁeld vector relative

magnitude, is given in dB. The position of the antenna and feeding cable are

shown. The radiating structure is located in region 15 mm < y < 45 mm,
−25 mm < z < −17 mm, see Figure 10.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

and choosing the larger value, we estimate that the distance

Z > 5 cm from the antenna (which corresponds to the z-

coordinates z = 35 . . . 50 and z =

70 . . .

80 mm in

−

−

Compared to the known designs of antennas utilizing high-

Fig. 10) can be referred to the far-zone. Calculating ASE

impedance surfaces (see, e.g. [2], [8]), our prototypes are

for these distances we obtain 18 dB for the present design

much superior in the screening effect. We do not know works

against the known 6-7 dB [2] and [7]. It is also clearly visible

9

(6)

(7)

10

in Figures 5, 6, 11, 12 that the maximal screening effect in

can be used in the design of antennas for reducing the near

our measurements corresponds to relatively large distances.

ﬁeld behind the antenna and increasing the antenna efﬁciency

Therefore, we assume that the result of 6 dB for the front-to-

without any bandwidth reduction.

back ratio in the far zone corresponds to a practically small

ASE for the near ﬁeld and does not witness any considerable

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

improvement of the near-ﬁeld pattern of the antenna.

This work was supported in part by Nokia Research Center,

We also have demonstrated increased radiation efﬁciency

(73-88 percent against the known 60 percent). However, the

designs of [2], [8] have smaller thicknesses (approximately 3

mm against our 8-12 mm). Let us explain this point. We have

Filtronic LK, and TEKES.

REFERENCES

[1] S.A. Tretyakov and C.R. Simovski, “Wire antennas near artiﬁcial

impedance surfaces,” Microwave Opt. Tech. Lett., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 46–

tried to achieve a compromise between high near-ﬁeld screen-

50, 2000.

ing, high efﬁciency, and a small thickness with the emphasis on

the near-ﬁeld screening. Notice, that in other known designs,

[2] W.E. McKinzie and R.R. Fahr, “A low proﬁle polarization diversity

antenna built on an artiﬁcial magnetic conductor,” 2002 IEEE Antennas

Propag. Society International Symposium and USNC/URSI National

the resonant frequency region of the mushroom surface is used.

Radio Science Meeting, San Antonio, TX, USA, pp. 762–765, June 16–

In that regime the surface operates as a magnetic screen, which

21, 2002.

means that the radiating element can be brought very close to

[3] D. Sievenpiper et al, “High-impedance electromagnetic surfaces with

a forbidden frequency band,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech.,

the surface without cancelation of the radiation resistance. This

vol. 47, pp. 2059–2074, 1999.

allows a compact design. But, this leads to a smaller screening

[4] F.P. Yang, K.-P. Ma, Y. Qian, and T. Itoh, “A novel TEM waveguide us-

ing UC-PBG structures,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. 47,

efﬁciency [1]. And this point was not studied enough in the

pp. 2092–2098, 1999.

known literature.

Also, the radiation efﬁciency of an antenna over a high-

[5] J.Y. Park, C.C. Chang, Y. Qian, and T. Itoh, “An improved low-

proﬁle cavity-backed slot antenna loaded with 2D UC-PBG reﬂector,”

2001 IEEE Antennas Propag. Society International Symposium and

impedance surface can be lower than in the regime of the

USNC/URSI National Radio Science Meeting, USA, vol. 4, pp. 194–

moderate surface impedance because of stronger ﬁelds in the

197, June, 2001.

dielectric substrate. In our design we work at a frequency much

[6] M. K¨arkk¨ainen and S. Tretyakov, “2D-FDTD modeling of wire antennas

near artiﬁcial impedance surfaces,” Microwave Opt. Tech. Lett., vol. 34,

lower than the impedance surface resonance. In this region

no. 1, pp. 38–40, 2002.

the surface impedance is rather low, so that the properties are

[7] M. Vnuk and R. Kubacki, “Dual-band antenna and minimization of

radiation towards head,” 2004 Progress in Electromagnetics Research

close to that of an electric screen. For this reason we cannot

Symposium, Italy, vol. 2, pp. 914–917, March, 2004.

bring the primary radiator very close to the surface, and the

[8] J.J. Lee, R.J. Broas, and S. Livingston, “Flush-mounted antennas on Hi-

thickness is increased, but the screening of the back radiation

is very much improved. The bandwidth is the best for the case

Z ground planes,” 2002 IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society Inter-

national Symposium and USNC/URSI National Radio Science Meeting,

San Antonio, TX, USA, pp. 764–767, June 16–21, 2002.

of the mushroom surface. The simple metal plate (Zs

0)

[9] S.A. Tretyakov and C.R. Simovski, “Dynamic model of artiﬁcial reactive

≈

impedance surfaces,” J. Electromagn. Waves Appl., vol. 17, no. 1,

can be used for screening if we neglect the requirement of the

broad band antenna operation (and allow even thicker design).

[10] I.H. Lindell, Methods of Electromagnetic Fields Analysis. Clarendon

pp. 131–145, 2003.

Press, UK, 1992.

Summarizing, we can conclude that it has been experimen-

tally demonstrated that simple artiﬁcial impedance surfaces

