5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
7
0
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Patch antennas with new artiﬁcial magnetic layers

M.E. Ermutlu1,2, Member, IEEE, C.R. Simovski3, M.K. K¨arkk¨ainen1, P. Ikonen1, Student Member, IEEE,
A.A. Sochava4, Member, IEEE, and S.A. Tretyakov1, Senior Member, IEEE

1

Abstract— A new type of high-impedance surfaces (HIS) has
been introduced by C.R. Simovski et al. recently. In this paper, we
propose to use such layers as artiﬁcial magnetic materials in the
design of patch antennas. The new HIS is simulated and patch
antennas partially ﬁlled by these composite layers are measured
in order to test how much the antenna dimensions can be reduced.
In order to experimentally investigate the frequency behavior
of the material, different sizes of the patches are designed and
tested with the same material
layer. Also the height of the
patch is changed in order to ﬁnd the best possible position for
minimizing the antenna size. This composite layer of an artiﬁcial
magnetic material has made the antenna smaller while keeping
the bandwidth characteristics of the antenna about the same.
About 40% of size reduction has been achieved.

Index Terms— artiﬁcial magnetic material, patch antenna,

antenna miniaturization, high-impedance surface.

I. INTRODUCTION

H IGH impedance surfaces for microwave frequency an-

tennas and other devices have been recently introduced
and actively investigated. These surfaces are mostly thought
to be applied for reducing surface waves, for controlling
the plane-wave reﬂection phase, and as artiﬁcial magnetic
conductors [1], [2].

High-impedance surfaces are thin composite layers (as a
rule backed by a metal plane), whose surface impedance
has a parallel resonance at a certain frequency or at several
frequencies. Within the resonant band the surface of the layer
behaves as a magnetic wall for normally incident plane waves.
is why the HIS are often called artiﬁcial magnetic
That
conductors (AMC). In practical cases,
the thickness of an
AMC layer at resonance is much smaller than a quarter of
the wavelength. It means that the reﬂection coefﬁcient of a
plane wave from the structure can be close to +1 at a very
small distance from the ground plane. This means that the
electromagnetic interaction of a horizontal electric current with
an AMC can be constructive even for very small distances
from the current to the ground plane. This is why AMC are
prospective for designing low proﬁle antennas [1], [3], [4], [5].
Inﬁnite (practically very high) surface impedance means that
the tangential magnetic ﬁeld component is very weak at the
surface of the wall. Tangential electric ﬁeld can be strong at
this surface. The reﬂection properties of a HIS depend on the
frequency, and the HIS resonant band can be deﬁned as a

February 2, 2008 version.
1Radio Laboratory / SMARAD, Helsinki University of Technology, P.O.

Box 3000, FI-02015 TKK Finland

2Nokia Networks, P.O. Box 301, FI-00045, Finland
3Dept. of Physics, St. Petersburg Institute of Fine Mechanics and Optics,

Sablinskaya 14, 197101 St. Petersburg, Russia

4Radiophysics Department, St. Petersburg Polytechnical University, Russia

frequency range at which the phase change of the reﬂected
π/2 to
electric ﬁeld is within certain limits (usually from
+π/2). A HIS conventionally possesses a rather narrow band
of AMC operation.

−

In general, these structures support surface waves, however
there is an important difference with the case of a simple
metal-backed dielectric layer: there are stop bands for surface
waves. Therefore, the same structures interacting with plane
waves as HIS operate as EBG (electromagnetic band gap)
structures with respect to the surface waves. Sometimes they
are called as 2D PBG (photonic band gap) structures which is
not a proper term at microwaves. Besides the high-frequency
band gaps whose band structure is related with the spatial
periodicity of the AMC layer, there can be one or two low-
frequency ones, related with the resonance of the surface
impedance which can also hold in the regime of the surface
wave.

While the AMC are useful to design low-proﬁle antennas
[1], [3], [4], [5], artiﬁcial material ﬁllings are useful in the
design of small antennas, especially magnetic materials can
be utilized as a mean to reduce the antenna size [6], [7], [8].
According to a simple theoretical model of a small patch
antenna as a resonator, the resonant frequency and impedance
bandwidth BW of a small antenna depend on the relative
permittivity and permeability of the loading material as

Fr

∼

1
√εrµr

√µr
√εr

∼

, BW

.lsup

(1)

∼

Here
means the proportionality. In practice, these expres-
sions are not very accurate, and the result of loading depends
on the antenna type, but still the tendency predicted by ˚sup
holds.

There has been some work on the effects of magneto-
dielectric substrates on the bandwidth of microstrip antennas
[6], [7], [8], but these results are contradictory. Papers [6]
and [8] conclude that the best ﬁlling is a magnetic material
with large µ, although the authors of [7] conclude that the
best ﬁlling is a material with both ǫ
µ0.
Nevertheless, the usefulness of magnetic ﬁlling is evident from
the known literature.

ǫ0 and µ

≫

≫

In paper [9] a material with a ﬁnite isotropic permeability
was considered as a loading material. Natural magnetic materi-
als at frequencies higher than 100
500 MHz are ferrimagnetic
crystals (for example, hexaferrites). These ferrites are not very
attractive for applications in small antennas since they are
lossy, heavy, and expensive. Probably because of this, antennas
with ferrite or ferromagnetic ﬁlling have been analyzed mainly
from the point of view of electrical control of their reso-
nant frequency and radiation pattern, see, e.g., [10]. Possible

−

−

realizations of artiﬁcial magnetics at 0.5
3 GHz can be
based on the resonant principle: Artiﬁcial magnetic materials
can be formed by small particles with a resonant magnetic
susceptibility. These should resonate at a frequency which
is close to the resonant frequency of an unloaded antenna.
Such artiﬁcial magnetic materials are practically known in
15 GHz (the structures formed by
the frequency range 4
the so-called split-ring resonators). Such loadings have been
successfully tested with patch antennas in [11]: A 0.075λ size
patch antenna with the bandwidth of 1.5% has been reported
in that paper.

−

In certain frequency regions, high-impedance surfaces be-
have as layers of effective magnetic materials, and can be used
as magnetic ﬁllings in the antenna design. AMC are not similar
isotropic magnetics. These cannot be properly
to natural
described in terms of magnetic permeability. Formally, one
can introduce an effective permeability, but it will strongly
depend on the incident plane wave polarization and the angle
of incidence. This dependence is a spatial dispersion effect.
However, this effect does not forbid one to use such composite
layers as a magnetic ﬁlling material. Recently, these artiﬁcial
layers have been used to reduce the size of antennas [12] and
ﬁlters [13].

The main idea of the present paper is to use an artiﬁcial
material which would possess the properties of both AMC
and magneto-dielectric composite [14] within a rather wide
resonance band. In this paper, the new HIS [14] playing also
the role of an artiﬁcial magnetic material (AMM) is tested
under a patch antenna. The choice of this material can be
explained in terms of the angular stability of the resonant
frequency. The known AMC introduced in papers [1], [2],
[15] have the resonance depending on the angle of incidence
θ and wave polarization (TE or TM). Therefore the interaction
of such AMC with currents on a real antenna cannot be
completely constructive. For example, let the working fre-
quency of the patch antenna correspond to the resonance of
the conventional AMC illuminated by a normally incident
plane wave. Then the narrow part of the angular spectrum
of radiation centered at θ = 0 will interact with the AMC as
if it were a magnetic wall. For the other part of the angular
spectrum the conventional AMC is not a magnetic wall, since
its resonant frequency will be different [16], [17], [18]. In the
AMC used here this shortcoming is absent as it was shown in
[14]. Notice, that in paper [19] another full-angle AMC has
been suggested and studied. This is a self-resonant grid on a
simple metal-backed dielectric layer. However, our choice of
the artiﬁcial magnetic material suggested in [14] has additional
advantages. First, in this AMM there are vertical conductors
(vias). We expect that the TM-polarized surface waves are
suppressed in this structure at low frequencies due to the
presence of vias in the same way as in mushroom structures
[1], [2]. Second, the resonance of the structure [14] takes
place at lower frequencies (compared to the structure period)
than the resonance of the AMC described in [19]. Both these
advantages are important for patch antennas. The second one
is important for the antenna miniaturization. The ﬁrst one is
crucial when one uses an array of patches and the problem of
mutual interaction appears.

2

Elements of a HIS from [14]. Top: two variants of the structure
Fig. 1.
geometry. Left: triangular patches. Right: square patches. Middle: structure
cross section along the (x − z) or (y − z) loops. Bottom: upper surface of
the structure containing planar metal crosses. When E = Ex0 the (y − z)
loops are not excited.

The behavior of the AMM is investigated at different
distances from the patch antenna with different conﬁgurations.
Also a simple comparison method is introduced in order to ﬁnd
the effective (averaged) permeability value of the layer. Results
from IE3D/FDTD simulations are shown and compared with
the measurement results.

II. THE NEW HIGH IMPEDANCE SURFACE AS AN
ARTIFICIAL MAGNETIC MATERIAL

T HE structure introduced in [14] is shown in Fig. 1.

This AMM can be considered as a 2D grid of bulk
unit cells with the horizontal period D. Every cell contains
two orthogonal loops of length d, so that the upper interface
represents an array of metal crosses on the surface of a
dielectric layer. Every cross (whose ends are connected to
metal vias) together with vias and patches form two orthogonal
loops (the loop length d is the same as the length of a cross
side). So, the effective vertical loop is formed by two vias
perforating the dielectric layer and a horizontal strip lying
on the dielectric interface. The loading capacitors are formed
by metal patches and the ground plane. The patch array is
separated from the ground plane by a thin dielectric layer. The
standard printed-board circuit (PBC) can be used to prepare
both patch array (which is located on one side of a PBC) and
the array of crosses (located on the other one) if the thin layer
has no metallization (teﬂon ﬁlm). The analysis of the structure
impinged by a plane wave becomes easier with the help of
the image theory. Every real loop complemented by its mirror
image is a symmetrically loaded rectangular loop with sizes

3

Fig. 2. Equivalent scheme of a HIS.

×

−∞

and z =

P , where P = 2(h + ∆) (see Fig. 2). The electric
S = d
ﬁeld is zero at the loop center (at the ground plane z = 0).
Therefore, the electric polarization of the loop is negligible and
it can be considered as a horizontal magnetic dipole excited
by an external magnetic ﬁeld. Following the image method,
consider an array of loaded rectangular loops illuminated by
two plane waves from both sides of the array. Let the plane
wave be polarized so that E = Ex0 and the magnetic ﬁeld
is directed along the y-axis. Then the loops in the yz plane
are not excited (see Fig. 1). The whole structure behaves as
an array of parallel loops lying in the planes xz within the
dielectric layer excited by two plane waves coming from z =
. Since there is no electric dipole polarization
∞
of loops, the electric polarization of the whole structure is
practically that of the dielectric layer. The reﬂected ﬁeld is
then the sum of the ﬁeld produced by the single dielectric
layer of thickness P (excited by two waves impinging the
layer from the top and the bottom) and the ﬁeld produced by
the magnetic moments of loops. The magnetization of loops
is resonant due to the presence of capacitive loads, and the
magnetic response at the resonance is comparatively strong
due to high inductance of the loops. Loops are made from thin
electric conductors and their inductance is much higher than
the effective inductance of the conventional AMC (which is
practically determined by the thickness of the dielectric layer
[2]). This factor is responsible for rather low frequency of the
resonance and for a wider bandwidth (in parallel LC-circuits
the higher is the inductance the larger is the resonant band).
An analytical model of this structure and a comparison with
the results of numerical simulations (obtained with the HFSS
package) are presented in a recent paper by C. Simovski and
A. Sochava [20].

The geometry of the structure that we use in this paper
is different from the structure proposed in [14], although
the operational principle is the same. This new structure is
shown in Fig. 3, where square horizontal loops replace the
conducting crosses of the structure [14]. For simplicity, let
us consider the normal incidence of a wave whose electric
ﬁeld is polarized along one side of the square horizontal loop.
Then the two vertical C-loaded loops (formed by two sides

Fig. 3. Geometry and dimensions of the manufactured AMM layer.

of the horizontal loop, four vias connected to them and four
capacitances between patches and the ground plane) will be
excited in every unit cell of the structure. A horizontal loop
as such is not excited by the external magnetic ﬁeld since
this magnetic ﬁeld is tangential. The electric connection of
the two vertical loops does not change the operation and the
theory developed in [14] basically remains valid.

To realize the material a two sided TLY-5 ﬁlm with the

thickness of 0.127 mm and the dielectric constant ǫr = 2.2
−
j0.001 has been used. This ﬁlm separates small patches from
the ground plane. Horizontal parts of the loops and the patches
are printed on the opposite sides of a printed circuit board layer
j0.002. Horizontal parts
with the dielectric constant ǫr = 2.2
of the loops and the patches are connected by via wires (round
metal cylinders) as shown in Fig. 3. The whole manufactured
structure contains 5
5 unit cells and has the dimensions of
3 mm. This structure is a “brick” from which larger
20
samples of an AMM can be built.

20

×

×

−

×

III. ANTENNA AND THE ARTIFICIAL MAGNETIC MATERIAL

T O test the performance of the new artiﬁcial magnetic

layers with patch antennas we design and study square-
patch antennas with different sizes. For measurements, a large
ground plane is used and for simulations the ground plane
is inﬁnite. This is done in order to exclude possible resonant
effects of a ﬁnite ground plane. IE3D software as well as an
in-house developed FDTD code are used to simulate antennas
with and without the material ﬁlling. Also, for the sake of
comparison, we simulate the same antennas with an inﬁnite
dielectric material layer inserted between the ground plane
and the patch. The dielectric has the relative permittivity
ǫr = 2.2 and the slab thickness is 3 mm (the same as for the
substrate used to manufacture the artiﬁcial magnetic layer).
The antenna is fed from a side using a microstrip. The new
AMM is introduced under the patch gradually in order to
save simulation time. In Fig. 4, the conﬁguration with three
columns of the material under the patch antenna are shown.
AMM blocks are located at the two sides of the antenna
symmetrically.

50, and 60

Antennas with the patch dimensions of 30

40,
60 mm have been considered. Since patches
50
of different sizes resonate at different frequencies from 2.5
GHz to 4.5 GHz, we could test the effectiveness of the material

30, 40

×

×

×

×

4

Fig. 4. A patch antenna partially ﬁlled with an artiﬁcial material. Three
columns of the new AMM at each side of the antenna patch are inserted. The
ﬁrst column is placed just under the side of the patch where the currents are
strong. The distance between the patch and the ground plane is t = 4, 5, and
6 mm. Different square patches with the sizes 30 × 30, 40 × 40, 50 × 50,
and 60 × 60 mm have been designed. The height from the ground plane t
and the size of the patch are used as parameters to test the artiﬁcial magnetic
material.

at different frequencies. The height of the antenna changes the
ﬁeld applied on the material which also changes the response
of the material layer.

A. The effect of the patch height

×

The height of the patch antenna has been varied in order to
ﬁnd the best reduction for the resonance frequency. In these
50 mm antenna is chosen and only one
simulations, the 50
column of the material is placed under each side of the patch.
The return loss is compared for 4, 5, and 6 mm heights of
the patch antenna (see Fig. 5). The results show that the
effect of the material is enhanced when the patch is closer
to the material layer. Here we of course see also the effect of
the relative permittivity of the loading layer. If there would
be no magnetic behavior of the material, antenna would be
thought as loaded with a dielectric layer with ǫr = 2.2 and
the thickness 3 mm. In that case the resonant frequency drops
from 2.82 to 2.28 GHz for a patch antenna with the patch at
4 mm above the ground plane. But with the magnetic material
the resonant frequency drops to 2.14 GHz. Here, with only
one column of the artiﬁcial material we have a 24% reduction
in the resonant frequency or, in other words, we have a patch
antenna with a size of 0.357λ.

B. The effect of the number of columns

When an antenna is totally ﬁlled with such complex mate-
rial, it becomes very difﬁcult to simulate it with IE3D, using
the computer power we have. This is because the AMC is
made of a lot of small metal strips, patches, and vias. Therefore
we gradually ﬁll the volume below the antenna. We start to ﬁll
from the sides of the antenna where the currents and magnetic
ﬁelds are strong. Here we investigate the effect when the
antenna is partially ﬁlled. The number of columns is increased
and the effect in return loss is shown in Fig. 6 for the 50
50
mm patch. In this example the antenna patch is at 6 mm above
the ground plane. The same exercise has been repeated with
the patch at 4 mm above the ground plane. The results are
listed in Table I.

×

Fig. 5. The return loss of the 50×50 mm patch for different antenna heights
from 4 to 6 mm above the ground plane. There is only one column of the
material used.

Fig. 6. The effect of the new AMM on the return loss of the antenna. The
number of columns is increased to see the effect of the increased volume
fraction of the material ﬁlling.

It is seen from the simulations that even with only one
column we achieve a 16% reduction in the antenna resonant
frequency for the patch at 6 mm above the ground and 24%
for the 4 mm height. With three columns we achieve about
25% and 33% reduction for heights 6 and 4 mm, respectively.

C. The effect of the patch size

In order to see the effect of the new HIS at different
frequencies, different-size antennas are simulated with and
without the material. Resonant frequencies of antennas with
an inﬁnite dielectric material layer placed under the patch
antenna with the 3 mm height and ǫr = 2.2 are also shown for
comparison. There is a 1 mm distance between the material
layer and the antenna ground plane. First, only one column
60 mm
is placed under 30
patch antennas with the height of 4 mm, then for 30
30
50 mm patch antennas three columns
mm, 40
are placed. In Fig. 7, return loss of patch antenna is shown
with and without materials. Also in Table II we show the
reduction in the resonant frequencies with a dielectric material
and when the AMM is inserted. The results clearly show that
the magnetic properties of this material sample are stronger at

50, and 60

40, and 50

40, 50

30, 40

×

×

×

×

×

×

×

5

Res. freq. (GHz)

Reduction %

The effect of the AMM on the resonant frequencies of 30 × 30,
Fig. 7.
40 × 40, 50 × 50, and 60 × 60 mm patch antennas is shown. There is only
one column of AMM used. Antenna patches are all at 4 mm above the ground
plane.

0.00

19.15

24.11

20.08

32.98

0.00

10.91

15.64

21.45

25.09

19

32

40

TABLE I
RESONANT FREQUENCIES OF THE 50 × 50 MM ANTENNA WITH AND
WITHOUT AMM FOR THE PATCH HEIGHTS 4 AND 6 MM. THE ANTENNA

RESONANT FREQUENCIES ARE ALSO SHOWN WHEN THERE IS AN INFINITE

DIELECTRIC MATERIAL SLAB UNDER THE ANTENNA PATCH WITH THE 3
MM THICKNESS AND ǫr = 2.2.

Res. freq. (GHz)

Reduction %

t = 4 mm
No material
No AMM ǫr = 2.2
1 column
2 columns
3 columns

t = 6 mm
No material

No AMM ǫr = 2.2
1 column
2 columns
3 columns

2.82

2.28

2.14

2.00

1.89

2.75

2.45

2.32

2.16

2.06

TABLE II
RESONANT FREQUENCIES OF DIFFERENT-SIZED PATCHES AND REDUCTION

IN THE RESONANT FREQUENCIES COMPARED TO A PATCH ANTENNA

WHERE THERE IS ONLY A DIELECTRIC MATERIAL WITH ǫr = 2.2, ONE
COLUMN OF THE ARTIFICIAL MATERIAL, AND THREE COLUMNS OF THE

MATERIAL AT BOTH SIDES OF THE PATCH.

Patch size (mm)

Reduction % 3 columns

Reduction % ǫr = 2.2
10

50

40

30

17

17

higher frequencies (near 4.5 GHz) than at 3 and 2 GHz. On
the other hand, we see that the resonance is quite broadband,
as the effect is rather strong even far from the resonance of
the AMM.

D. Current distribution and the radiation pattern

The current distribution and the radiation pattern of the
30 mm patch antenna with the
antenna are shown for the 30
×
patch at 4 mm above the ground plane. The material has been
placed in three columns. The antenna resonates at 2.7 GHz. It
is clearly seen that the current distribution on the patch has an
effect on the material and the current is rotating on the loop
part of the material. The calculated radiation pattern is shown
in Fig. 9. The gain of the antenna is 5.3 dBi. The shape of
the pattern is similar to that of a usual patch antenna, so we
can conclude that the AMM material is working as expected.

IV. ESTIMATION OF THE EQUIVALENT EFFECTIVE
PERMEABILITY

As has been already noted, the artiﬁcial magnetic layers
built as HIS surfaces cannot be properly described in terms
of magnetic permeability, since that would strongly depend
on the incident plane wave polarization and on the angle of
incidence. However, it is possible to introduce an equivalent
effective averaged permeability for this particular application,

Fig. 8. Vector current distribution of the 30 × 30 mm patch antenna with
three columns of AMM. The scale is going from red (maximum) to dark blue
(minimum, −40 dB).

comparing the performance of the actual antenna with an
artiﬁcial layer and calculated results for the same antenna ﬁlled
by a uniform and isotropic magnetic material.

This has been done using IE3D simulations. First, we
simulate antenna with different sizes of the patch ﬁlled by
an inﬁnite slab of an isotropic magneto-dielectric material
(thickness 3 mm). The material parameters are changed from
ǫr = 2.2, µr = 1 to ǫr = 2.2, µr = 4. Then the same
antennas are ﬁlled by the AMM are simulated. Resonant
frequencies of these results are recorded and graphs are drawn
for the calculated frequency shifts. Comparing the resonant

Fig. 9. Radiation pattern of the 30 × 30 mm antenna with three columns of
AMM at 2.7 GHz. The maximum gain is 5.28 dBi.

6

Fig. 10.
magnetic material and by uniform isotropic magneto-dielectrics.

Comparison of the response of antennas ﬁlled by the artiﬁcial

Fig. 11. Calculated effective relative permeability values of the AMM for
one and three columns as functions of the frequency.

TABLE III

CALCULATED EFFECTIVE RELATIVE PERMEABILITY VALUES OF THE

AMM FOR ONE AND THREE COLUMNS AS FUNCTIONS OF THE
FREQUENCY.

Patch size (mm)
60
50
40
30

Calc. µr, one column
1.136
1.233
1.295
1.575

Calc. µr, three columns
-
1.725
1.79
2.43

frequencies, the equivalent permeabilities are identiﬁed. These
equivalent permeability values are underestimating the actual
permeability values of the AMM since AMM is not uniformly
ﬁlling the volume and it is not isotropic. The ﬁeld applied to
the AMM is not uniform, therefore different parts of the AMM
sample are excited differently. But this comparison gives a
clear and easy way of understanding the effective permeability
of the material and could be used as a helping design tool in
the future.

×

In Fig. 10 one can see the return loss of the 50

50 mm
patch at 4 mm above the ground plane with a 3 mm material
layer with different µr values. In that ﬁgure, the results for the
same antenna with three columns of AMM are also shown. For
example, for three columns it is clearly seen that the equivalent
averaged relative permeability value is between 1.5 and 2.
With this method the effective material permeability value is
estimated as µr = 1.7 at the resonant frequency of the 50
50
mm patch and 2.43 for the resonant frequency of the 30
30
mm patch.

×
×

In Fig. 11, the averaged effective material permeability is
shown as a function of the frequency. The frequency values
are the values when the inﬁnite material layer has ǫr = 2.2,
µr = 1. When the AMM is introduced, the resonant frequency
drops. From this difference the effective relative permeability
values are calculated. This procedure is done for one and three
columns of the material and the results are shown also in
Table III.

V. COMPARISON BETWEEN MEASUREMENTS AND
SIMULATIONS USING FDTD AND IE3D

An antenna with the patch size 40

40 mm has been built.
The patch is ﬁrst positioned at 6 mm above the ground plane,

×

Fig. 12.
layer.

Photo of the measured antenna ﬁlled with an artiﬁcial magnetic

then at 4 mm above the ground plane. It is ﬁlled with the
artiﬁcial material layer of the dimensions 40
3 mm
(Fig. 12). The antenna in Fig. 12 has also been simulated with
a 3D FDTD code. In FDTD, the particles are constructed from
joint thin wires and small plates of approximately same size
as in measurements (within limits of ﬁnite cell sizes).

40

×

×

As can be seen from Fig. 13, the results are similar even
though there are differences in the resonant frequencies. Of
course in simulations we have an inﬁnite ground plane, and
only three columns of the artiﬁcial material partially ﬁll the
antenna volume in the case of IE3D simulations. On the
other hand, in measurements we have had a large but ﬁnite
ground plane, and the material sample is of the same transverse
dimensions as the patch.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

A new artiﬁcial magnetic material layer has been tested in
order to shrink patch antenna dimensions. In simulations a
0.34λ antenna and in practice a 0.38λ antenna have been
realized, with the 6-dB bandwidth of 4.35%. The antenna
bandwidth of these reduced-size antennas is practically of
the same order as for usual air-ﬁlled patch antennas with the
patch size 0.5λ, that resonate at the same frequency. Thus, we
have demonstrated in practice a technique to miniaturize patch
antennas with the use of a certain high-impedance surface

7

[16] S.A. Tretyakov, Analytical modeling in applied electromagnetics, Nor-

wood, MA: Artech House, 2003.

[17] C.R. Simovski, P. de Maagt, S.A. Tretyakov, M. Paquay, and A.A.
Sochava, Angular stabilization of resonant frequency of artiﬁcial mag-
netic conductors for TE-incidence, Electronics Letters, vol. 40, no. 1,
pp. 1-3, 2004.

[18] C.R. Simovski, A.A. Sochava, High impedance surfaces based on self-
resonant grids. Analytical modeling and numerical simulations, Progress
in Electromagnetics Research, vol. PIER 43, pp. 239-256, 2003.
[19] C. Simovski, P. de Maagt, I. Melchakova, High-impedance surfaces
with angular and polarization stability, Proc. 27-th European Space
Agency Antenna Workshop On Innovative Periodic Antennas, Santiago
de Compostela, Spain, March 9-11, 2003, pp. 178-185.

[20] C.R. Simovski, A.A. Sochava, New high-impedance surfaces with full-
angle low-frequency resonance, submitted to IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag.

Fig. 13. Comparison of simulated and measured results.

(working as an artiﬁcial magnetic material
worsening the bandwidth.

layer) without

REFERENCES

[1] D. Sievenpiper et al., High-impedance electromagnetic surfaces with a
forbidden frequency band, IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techniques, vol.
47, no. 11, pp. 2059-2074, Nov. 1999.

[2] D.

Sievenpiper.

(1999)
surfaces,
Dissertation,
http//www.ee.ucla.edu/labs/photon/thesis/ThesisDan.pdf.

High-impedance

UCLA,

PhD

[On-line].

electromagnetic
Available:

[3] S.A. Tretyakov, C.R. Simovski, Wire antennas near artiﬁcial impedance
surfaces, Microwave and Optical Technology Letters, vol. 27, no. 1, pp.
46-50, 2000.

[4] J. Yes and R. Mittra, Bandwidth enhancement of multiband antennas
using frequency selective surfaces for ground planes, in Proc. IEEE
AP-S Int. Symp., Boston, MA, July 8-13, pp. 366-369, 2001.

[5] H. Mossalaei and K. Sarabandi, Antenna miniaturization and bandwidth
enhancement using a reactive impedance surface, IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 2403-2413, 2004.

[6] R.C. Hansen, M. Burke, Antenna with magneto-dielectrics, Microwave

and Optical Letters, vol. 26, no. 2, July 2000.

[7] H. Mossallaei and K. Sarabandi, Periodic meta-material structures in
electromagnetics: Concept, analysis, and applications, 2002 IEEE APS
International Symposium Digest, vol. 2, pp. 380-383, San Antonio, TX,
2002.

[8] S. Yoon and R.W. Ziolkowski, Bandwidth of a microstrip patch antenna
in Proc. USNC/CNC/URSI North

on a magneto-dielectric substrate,
American Radio Science Meeting, Columbus, Ohio June 22-27, 2003.

[9] O. Edvardsson, On the inﬂuence of capacitive and inductive loading on
different types of small patch/pifa structures for use on mobile phones,
ICAP2001, 17-20 April 2001.

[10] A.D. Brown, J.L. Volakis, L.C. Kempel, Y.Y. Botros, Patch antennas on
ferromagnetic substrates, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagation, vol. 47,
no. 1, pp. 26-32, 1999.

[11] H. Mosallaei, K. Sarabandi, Engineered meta-substrates for antenna
miniaturization, in Proc. URSI Electromagnetic Theory Symposium, Pisa,
Italy, May 23-27, 2004.

[12] H. Mosallaei and K. Sarabandi, Magneto-Dielectrics in electromagnet-
ics: Concept and Applications, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 52, no. 6, June 2004.

[13] F. Mart´in, F. Falcone, J. Bonache, R. Marqu´es, and M. Sorolla, Miniatur-
ized coplanar waveguide stop band ﬁlters based on multiple tuned split
ring resonators, IEEE, Microwave and Wireless Components Letters,
vol.13, no. 12 December 2003.

[14] C.R. Simovski, A.A. Sochava, S.A. Tretyakov, New compact and wide-
band high impedance surface, 2004 IEEE Antennas and Propagation
Society International Symposium, Monterey, CA, USA, vol. 1, pp. 297-
300, June 20-25, 2004.

[15] F.-R. Yang, K. P. Ma, Y. Qian, T. Itoh, A novel TEM waveguide using
uniplanar compact photonic band-gap (UC-PBG) structure, IEEE Trans.
Microw. Theory Techniques, vol. 47, no 11, pp. 2092-2098, Nov. 1999.

