5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
5
0
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Journal of Nonlinear Mathematical Physics

Volume 12, Supplement 1 (2005), 1–8

Birthday Issue

Canonically Transformed Detectors Applied to
the Classical Inverse Scattering Problem

C JUNG, T H SELIGMAN and J M TORRES

Centro de Ciencias F´isicas, Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico, Cuernavaca,
Morelos, M´exico

E-mail: jung@ﬁs.unam.mx, seligman@ﬁs.unam.mx, mau@ﬁsica.unam.mx

This article is part of the special issue published in honour of Francesco Calogero on the occasion
of his 70th birthday

Abstract

The concept of measurement in classical scattering is interpreted as an overlap of a
particle packet with some area in phase space that describes the detector. Considering
that usually we record the passage of particles at some point in space, a common
detector is described e.g. for one-dimensional systems as a narrow strip in phase space.
We generalize this concept allowing this strip to be transformed by some, possibly non-
linear, canonical transformation, introducing thus a canonically transformed detector.
We show such detectors to be useful in the context of the inverse scattering problem
in situations where recently discovered scattering echoes could not be seen without
their help. More relevant applications in quantum systems are suggested.

1

Introduction

Usually a classical scattering measurement will determine at what time the outgoing par-
ticle passes a certain point in a surface of codimension one in conﬁguration space, which
in one dimension is simply characterized by a distance from the center of the scattering re-
gion, and in more dimensions will also include scattering angles. If we allow for a non-zero
thickness of the detector this will describe a region in conﬁguration space. If in addition
we consider that normally particles can be detected only within some ﬁnite energy range,
this in turn implies a ﬁnite region in phase space. Depending on the characteristics of a
real experiment or on theoretical advantages for a one-dimensional system it could be any
structure narrow in conﬁguration space and rather wider in momentum space. We now
consider an experiment where the incoming particles form a narrow packet in phase space.
The result of this experiment will be given as the time evolution of the overlap in phase
space of the evolving packet with the phase space strip characterizing the detector.

The purpose of the present paper is to generalize this concept of a detector by allowing
canonical transformations of the area in phase space that describes the detector, in order to
be able to detect more subtle structures in the outgoing particle packet. We shall see that
such generalized detectors are essential to solve the classical inverse scattering problem in

Copyright c(cid:13) 2005 by C Jung, T H Seligman and J M Torres

2

C Jung, T H Seligman and J M Torres

certain cases, and we shall demonstrate the usefulness of the concept in a simple example,
which will also provide typical transformations needed.

In two recent publications [1, 2] it has been suggested to use the self-pulsing eﬀect
of chaotic scattering ( scattering echoes ) to solve the chaotic inverse scattering prob-
lem. Recently an experiment in superconductive cavities [3] has conﬁrmed the theoretical
prediction [1, 2]. The basic idea is the following:

Imagine a scattering system with two essential degrees of freedom ( one of them may be
a periodic explicit time dependence, the case we are mainly concerned with in the present
paper ) which can be converted into a 2-dimensional iterated map, either a Poincar´e map
or a stroboscopic map. We consider the case where this map has a large KAM island
surrounded by a homoclinic/heteroclinic tangle. Incoming particles form a narrow packet
in phase space. Many of these particles undergo a direct scattering process and emerge im-
mediately. The rest comes in contact with the homoclinic/heteroclinic tangle and rotates
around the KAM island. After each complete rotation some leave the homoclinic tangle
and produce an outgoing particle pulse. We call the sequence of outgoing pulses echoes.
The time diﬀerence τ between adjacent echoes is determined by the time it takes to circle
around the KAM island and this time in turn is given by the development stage of the
homoclinic tangle. For example for the case of a symmetric ternary horseshoe, which we
shall encounter later, this development is described by a parameter γ. It varies between
zero for a separatrix line and one for a complete horseshoe [4] and relates to the rotation
period T as

T = −2log3(γ) + 3/2

(1.1)

Thereby in the end a measurement of the temporal distance between adjacent echoes gives
the development degree of the homoclinic tangle.

The crucial point is a clean measurement of the echoes. If all particles in any echo would
have exactly the same speed, then each packet would stay together and we could measure
them at any distance from the target. However, in reality each echo consists of a group
of particles with diﬀerent speeds and therefore the packets have dispersion i.e. become
broader with increasing distance from the target. At some distance the echoes become
broader than the distance between two adjacent ones. A separation into a sequence of
consecutive echoes is no longer possible. At ﬁrst one could think of using a detector which
only accepts a small velocity window. This might work if the velocity spread is not too
large. However it becomes diﬃcult because of two reasons. First, for attractive potentials,
where the outer ﬁxed point of the Poincar´e map is located at inﬁnity, some of the outgoing
particles have velocities close to zero and then the relative spread of velocities is beyond
any limit. Second, a small velocity window of the detector only accepts a small part of
the particles and thereby leads to a very small signal strength. There are two completely
diﬀerent strategies to circumvent these problems. One possibility is a measurement of the
energy dependence of the cross section and to Fourier transform from the energy domain
to the time domain (see discussion in [2, 3]).

If we insist to measure the sequence of echoes directly the second possibility is a detector
whose sensitivity depends on an appropriate combination of position and velocity, i.e. a
detector whose sensitivity covers an appropriate strip in phase space or in the domain of the
Poincar´e map. The ideal case is to cover a single unstable tendril of the homoclinic tangle.
This can be achieved by canonically transforming the phase space strip that describes

Canonically Transformed Detectors Applied

3

the simple minded (inadequate) detector. We shall call this a canonically transformed
detector (CTD). In one approach to the inverse scattering problem, discussed in [4, 5], a
central point is to ﬁnd to which hierarchical level a particular scattering trajectory (or the
corresponding interval of continuity of scattering functions) belongs. In the present setup
the answer to this question becomes almost trivial. If we place the set of initial conditions
into a single stable tendril and the detector is sensitive in a single unstable tendril only,
then the total delay time (measured in units of the period of the kick) is the hierarchical
level up to an irrelevant global constant.

In the present paper we concentrate for simplicity on periodically kicked systems in a
1-dimensional position space where the homoclinic tangle extends to inﬁnity. In the next
section we shall discuss an example giving rise to a symmetric ternary horseshoe, and in
the following section we shall show how a CTD can detect echoes that cannot be seen in
the usual way. Some concluding remarks will complete our argument.

2 The system and its homoclinic tangle

We use the system described by the Hamiltonian

H(q, p, t) =

+ A V (q)

δ(t − n).

p2
2

∞

X
n=−∞

(2.1)

(2.2)

Here q is the position and p the momentum of the particle at time t. V (q) = −exp(−q2)
indicates the potential function of the kick and A its strenght. It is a periodically kicked
system on an one-dimensional conﬁguration space with a purely attractive potential. We
represent the dynamics by the stroboscopic map taken at times t = n + 1/2, i.e. always
in the middle between two consecutive kicks. This choice is adapted to the time reversal
symmetry of our system in so far as time reversal corresponds to a reﬂection in the q axis
and this reﬂection maps stable manifolds into unstable manifolds and vice versa. The map
is given in closed form as

pn+1 = pn − AV ′(qn + pn/2)
qn+1 = qn + 1

2 (pn + pn+1)

Because the potential is purely attractive the system does not have any point of no return
in conﬁguration space. Therefore recurrent trajectories are not conﬁned to a ﬁnite part
of conﬁguration space and also the chaotic invariant set (homoclinic tangle) extends to
inﬁnity. The outermost ﬁxed points of the horseshoe are located at inﬁnity. Since in the
asymptotic region the dynamics is invariant under translations in position this outer ﬁxed
point is parabolic. However, under inclusion of nonlinearities of the dynamics it has a
stable and an unstable invariant manifold reaching inwards to the interaction region. The
local branch of the stable manifold of the point at inﬁnity consists of trajectories which
run in position monotonically to inﬁnity while the momentum converges to zero. The
corresponding part of the unstable manifold is obtained by time reversal. The horseshoe
is traced by the continuation of these invariant manifolds of the points at inﬁnity. Figure
1 shows the stroboscopic map Eq. 2.2. In the center marked in green we see a few KAM
tori around the central ﬁxed point at the origin as well as a few secondary islands, all

4

C Jung, T H Seligman and J M Torres

Figure 1. Horseshoe of low development in the stroboscopic map given by Eq. 2.2. KAM tori and
secondary islands in green, the boundary of the fundamental rectangle R in blue and the tendrils
of the invariant manifolds of the outer ﬁxed points in grey.

inside the outermost KAM surface. In blue we mark the boundary of the fundamental
rectangle R [4, 6] that extends to inﬁnity for zero momenta. The grey points are further
iterations of the blue line and they show tendrils in the asymptotic region as well as in the
chaotic layer between the outermost KAM surface and the boundary of R. This layer is
interspersed with a fractal set of integrable islands, the largest of which appear as white
areas within this layer. A small strip around the line of momentum zero in the domain of
the map (its boundaries are the local segments of the invariant manifolds) belongs to the
fundamental region R of the horseshoe even for q → ±∞. Therefore we exclude a larger
strip from the asymptotic region and deﬁne the asymptotic region in phase space as the
subset of the domain which, ﬁrst, is far out in position space such that the potential is
close to zero and, second, the absolute value of the momentum is large compared to the
momentum values of the boundary of R. In the asymptotic region the dynamics converges
to free motion and the action of the map converges to a pure shear motion. If we take
as a set of initial conditions in the asymptotic region a circular spot in phase space and
let it evolve under the asymptotic motion then it turns into a more and more elongated
ellipse. The major axis turn more and more horizontal under further iteration. Figure
2 shows such an initial distribution in red and a few of its iterated images. In blue we
see the evolution of a particle packet well deﬁned in q and with a fairly small spread in
p starting in the incoming asymptotic region. We see how it evolves emitting strongly
deformed pulses in both directions that cover several tendrils.

Canonically Transformed Detectors Applied

5

Figure 2.
Superimposed on the horseshoe of Fig. 1 plotted in grey we show in red the time
development of a small particle packet in the outgoing asymptotic region and in blue the time
development of a small particle packet placed into the incoming asymptotic region. The various
parts of the ﬁgure show the development at time values 0, 10, 12, 20, 26, 30, 34, 42, 47 and 53
respectively.

6

C Jung, T H Seligman and J M Torres

3 Canonically transformed detectors

Looking at Fig. 2 we suspect, that a detector described by a strip cutting through many
tendrils in the outgoing region would not show any interesting features of the dynamics
and certainly not resolve any echoes in the sense discussed in [1, 3]. This would be the case
even if the outgoing signal would start as a rather clean pulse due to the shear seen for
the inicial conditions marked in red in Fig. 2, and certainly for the result of a scattering
process as marked in blue in Fig. 2. Indeed Fig. 3a shows such a detector, and Fig. 3c
shows the corresponding useless signal. The blue line gives the signal for a detector on
the left-hand side, and the red line the one from a detector on the right-hand side, from
which we sent the incoming pulse (c.f. Fig. 2).

We therefore search for a canonical transformation that transforms a line of some
constant distance in conﬁguration space, at which we would like to measure and cover
an appropriate momentum interval, into a shape that adjusts to a single tendril. In the
present case we choose

P = p
Q = q + sign(q)f (p)

where

f (p) = (7|p|)1.3 + 16|p| − 4.6

(3.1)

(3.2)

The transformation only makes sense in the asymptotic region and is only used there. The
corresponding detector is depicted in Fig. 3b, and in Fig. 3d we can now clearly detect
three echoes. As expected the echoes to the right and to the left are in counter phase.

We thus clearly see that the CTD produced a useful signal, where the original detector
did not. Yet we may ask, why we do not see signals as neat and numerous as in ref. [2].
There the incoming particle pulse was launched around the outer branch of the stable
manifold of the ﬁxed point. This branch does not exist in the present case and a launch
near the inner branch of the unstable manifold does not make much sense due to the very
low momenta. Yet we could use the same procedure as for the detector and create an
incoming packet that would mimic the shape of a tendril and furthermore be suﬃciently
narrow to lie within one or a few intervals of continuity. This would obviously produce
the desired neat image. Yet having a canonically transformed initial packet and detector
is fortunately more then we really need to see the echoes. But we should keep in mind,
that we can operate on the pulses or on the detectors.

4 Discussion and ﬁnal remarks

We have seen, that CTD’s, as obtained by canonically transforming more conventional
detectors are very helpful to produce scattering data, that allow to understand the inverse
scattering problem.

As an example we used a periodically kicked system in a one-dimensional position space.
Generalization to any scattering system with two important degrees of freedom where one
In truely two-dimensional
of them is open and the other one closed result trivial [5].

Canonically Transformed Detectors Applied

7

Figure 3. The “standard” detector (a) and the canonically transformed detector (b) are depicted
together with the corresponding number of particle counts I on a semi-log scale as a function of
time t in (c) and (d). The counts are integrated over one period of the map and shown in blue for
a detector on the left and in red for a dector on the right. The lines are drawn to guide the eye.
Note the echoes in counterphase in (d)

systems we have to construct an appropriate Poincar´e section that allows the relevant
horseshoe construction [4, 6]

Here we must recall that probably the main applications of the classical inverse scatter-
ing problem arise in the context of semi-classical behaviour of wave and quantum systems,
as best exempliﬁed by an experiment devised explicitly for this goal [3]. Apart from
this specially designed experiment several practical situations occur. Examples are: The
collinear scattering of a particle from a two particle bound state where collisional excita-
tion of the vibration occurs; a system with any periodic drive by an external ﬁeld (laser
assisted collisions); the motion of an electron in a channel e.t.c..
In [5] it has become
evident that we need a detector which measures position and momentum simultaneously
to extract information for the inverse problem in the case of collisional excitations of the
closed degree of freedom, but from the considerations in the present paper it is also clear,
that the shear in outgoing asymtotic motion will make canonically transformed detectors
necessary even in systems that display echoes in the near ﬁeld as soon as we move the
detectors suﬃciently far away.

Yet the most important perspective is the option to realize this idea in quantum optics,
where overlaps with coherent states are commonly considered as measurements [7], and
overlap with squeezed states is an obvious extension; yet the posibility of using canonically
transformed coherent states in a more general setting opens new perspectives, which we
plan to explore in a future paper.

8

C Jung, T H Seligman and J M Torres

Acknowledgments

The authors acknowledge helpful discussions with C. Mejia-Monasterio, W. Schleich and
V. Manko as well as ﬁnancial support by DGAPA project IN-101603 and CONACyT
project 43375-F.

References

(2004)

[1] C. Jung, C. Mejia-Monasterio and T. H. Seligman, Europhys. Lett. 55, 616 (2001)

[2] C. Jung, C. Mejia-Monasterio, O. Merlo and T. H. Seligman, New J. Phys. 6, 48

[3] C. Dembovsky et. al. Phys. Rev. Lett (2004) (in press) (nlin.CD/0408046)

[4] C. Jung, C. Lipp and T. H. Seligman, Ann. Phys. 275, 151 (1999)

[5] H. Tapia and C. Jung, Phys. Lett. A 313, 198 (2003)

[6] C. Jung and H.J. Scholz, J. Phys. A, 20, 3607 (1987)

[7] W. Schleich, Quantum Optics in Phase Space, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2001

