5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
0
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Covariant Thermodynamics of an Object with
Finite Volume

Tadas K. Nakamura

Fukui Prefectural University, 910-1195, Fukui, Japan

Abstract

A covariant way to deﬁne the relativistic entropy of a ﬁnite object has been pro-
posed. The energy-momentum of an object with ﬁnite volume is not a covariant
physical entity because of the relativity of simultaneity. A way to correctly handle
this situation is introduced and applied to the calculation of entropy. The result
together with van Kampen-Israel theory gives simple and self-consistent relativistic
thermodynamics.

Key words: relativity, thermodynamics, entropy

Theory of relativistic thermodynamics has a long and controversial history
(see, e.g., [1] and references therein). The controversy seems to have been
settled more or less by the end of 1960s [2], however, papers are still being
published to this date [3]. Among a number of theories proposed, the one
proposed by van Kampen and later reﬁned by Israel gives covariant deﬁni-
tions to thermodynamical quantities. Van Kampen [4] proposed to treat the
momentum of an object as a thermodynamical parameter. Relativistic heat
was deﬁned in a covariant way to this end, however, he states “an equiva-
lent, but slightly more streamlined this formalism consists in eliminating the
concept of heat altogether ...” at the end of his paper. Israel [5] reformulated
the problem in this line, and obtained simple and straightforward covariant
thermodynamics.

The author of the present paper believes this van Kampen-Israel theory is
one of the best, if not the best, solution to the problem basically. However,
there still remains one problem that has not been cleared: problem of three
dimensional volumes. The purpose of the present study is to make a small
correction to the van Kampen-Israel theory on this point and, hopefully, to
complete the fully covariant theory of relativistic thermodynamics.

It is known that a three dimensional volume viewed from two distinct inertial

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

30 December 2012

frames are diﬀerent physical entities that are not connected each other by a
Lorentz transformation. Consequently total energy-momentum of an object in
one frame is not connected to that in another frame, i.e., energy-momentum
of an object with a ﬁnite volume is not a covariant entity.

Gamba [6] wrote a paper about the confusion caused by this fact; he states
“... physicists have made the same mistake. The examples are so numerous
that to review them all one should have to write a book, not an article.” He
deplores the same misunderstanding have not been eliminated from physics to
the date of his paper [6] in 1967, although the problem itself has been reported
with the correct answer as early as 1923 [7]. He would deplore more to ﬁnd
the same misunderstanding in papers to this date [3].

This misunderstanding causes an erroneous explanation of the energy-momentum
in a ﬁnite volume, which considers the eﬀect of container walls causes the dif-
ference of energy-momentum deﬁnition. The paper by van Kampen [4] seems
to have fallen this pitfall. Israel [5] were well aware of the problem, however,
he did not examine it in detail.

There have been papers warning this problem in connection with relativistic
thermodynamics (e.g., [2]), however, the answer that tells us how to handle
the problem has not been explicitly given. Our solution in the present study
is to abandon the unique energy-momentum of an object, and treat it as a
function of four dimensional “direction” of the volume. Consequently other
thermodynamical quantities become functions of the direction, however, it is
shown the entropy is a constant as long as there is no entropy ﬂux across the
boundary of the object.

Let us brieﬂy review van Kampen-Israel theory from our own view point.
Hereafter Einstein summation convention is enforced; summation with Greek
letters runs from 0 to 3, and roman letter is runs from 1 to 3. Zero-th com-
ponent of the Minkowki coordinate represents time, and the speed of light is
scaled as unity (c = 1). A four vector is denoted by a bar (e.g., ¯a) and its
component is represented by indexes (aµ or aµ).

We start with rewriting non-relativistic thermodynamics to eliminate the con-
cept of heat, and then extend it to relativity. In non-relativistic thermodynam-
ics, the entropy S of an object is deﬁned as

dS = βdU

βπdV ,

−

(1)

where β = inverse temperature (= 1/kBT ), U = thermal energy, π = pressure,
and V = volume, of the object. Let us neglect the second term of the right
hand side assuming dV = 0 for a while, and concentrate on the ﬁrst term.
The volume change will be considered later.

2

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

We rewrite U with more basic physical quantities namely, the total energy E,
momentum P and mass M, as

U = E

P2
2M

.

−

Then (1) with dV = 0 is rewritten as

dS = β

dE

 

−

P
M ·

dP

.

!

The most straightforward way to extend the above expression to relativity is

dE

P
M ·

−

dP

→

√1

v2

−

(dE

vidP i) = uµdP µ ,

1

−

where v is the three dimensional velocity and ¯u is four velocity of the object.
Then the relativistic entropy becomes

dS = βuµdP µ = βµdP µ .

Here βµ = βuµ is so called four inverse temperature. The above expression is
identical to the equation (25) of van Kampen [4] with dAV µ = 0.

The very basic deﬁnition of temperature is based on the fact: when two equi-
librium objects have heat exchange (random energy exchange), heat ﬂows
from the higher temperature one to the lower temperature one. Provided the
entropy is suitably deﬁned, this statement is paraphrased as: “heat ﬂows spon-
taneously only when the total entropy increases.”

Let us generalize the above statement to relativity. Heat is a form of en-
ergy in non-relativistic thermodynamics, where the energy and momentum
are distinct quantities. In relativity, however, the energy and momentum are
components of one physical entity, energy-momentum four vector namely, and
thus cannot be treated independently. Therefore we must treat the energy-
momentum exchange between the objects, not energy alone. Consequently,
the inverse temperature must have four components, βµ = βuµ, corresponding
to each component of energy-momentum four vector.

Suppose two objects (denoted by I and II) with diﬀerent four inverse temper-
ature ¯βI and ¯βII have random energy-momentum exchange. Then the above
statement becomes: “energy-momentum transfer of dP from I to II takes place
spontaneously only when the total entropy increases,” which means

dS = (βIµ −

βII µ)dP µ > 0 .

(6)

3

This formulation can treat not only heat conduction but also frictional mo-
mentum transfer.

In the above review, we have treated ¯P as a four vector subject to Lorentz
transformation. As mentioned earlier, however, this has one problem in deﬁn-
ing the total energy-momentum of the object. Suppose an object with a ﬁnite
extent, such as a gas in a container or a sold body, viewed from an inertial
frame Σ. Usually the volume of this object is deﬁned by the three dimensional
cross section of its world tube at t = constant, where t is the temporal co-
ordinate (= x0) in Σ. Let us refer this volume as V . Hereinafter the word
“volume” means a three dimensional cross section of the world tube in the
four dimensional Minkowski space.

When we look at the same object from another inertial frame Σ′ that is moving
with the velocity ¯u relative to Σ, its volume (we refer V ′ hereafter) is the cross
section of t′ = constant (t′: temporal coordinate in Σ′). These two volumes V
and V ′ are distinct physical entities: when we view V ′ from S, it is the cross
uixi = 0. Consequently physical quantities in V and V ′ are
section of u0t
not the same in general.

−

Møller [8] has argued that the energy-momentum of a ﬁnite object can be
treated as four vector if the object is isolated. This is true, however, there
are cases in which we wish to apply thermodynamics even when the object in
interest is not isolated. For example, an object in a heat bath with a constant
pressure is not isolated because of the momentum ﬂux (= pressure), but still
thermodynamics should be valid.

Let us introduce a way to handle the volume mathematically. Given a unit
time-like vector uµ, a three dimensional ﬂat surface is deﬁned as a set of points
that satisﬁes uµxµ = 0. The volume V (¯u) is deﬁned as the intersection of this
ﬂat plane and the world tube of the object. Thus ¯u can be interpreted as the
normal vector that deﬁnes the direction of the three-dimensional volume in
the four dimensional space. Then volume can be represented by a four vector

Vν(¯u) = uν

V0
uλ
0uλ

,

(7)

where V0 is the amplitude of three dimensional volume of the object in its
rest frame, and ¯u0 is the four velocity of the object, in other words, the unit
vector along the temporal axis of the comoving frame. Usually the direction
of the volume is taken to be along the time axis of the reference frame, i.e.,
¯u = (1, 0, 0, 0), however, this can be any time-like unit vector in general.

Now that the volume of the object is the function of ¯u, then the energy-
momentum within this volume must depend on ¯u as ¯P(¯u). The energy-momentum

4

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

density tensor T ν
in the thermal equilibrium, then we can write

µ is supposed to be constant within ¯V (¯u) when the object is

P ν(¯u) =

T ν
µ dσµ =

Z¯V (¯u)

µ uµ
V0T ν
uλ
0uλ

.

Once we have covariant expression for energy-momentum of an object, the
rest of the story is straightforward. The volume change we neglected in the
previous calculation can also be treated in a covariant expression d ¯V (¯u), then
the entropy change of the object is

dS = βµdP µ(¯u)

βµπdV µ(¯u) ,

−

where βµ = βu0µ with ¯u0. This expression is a revised version of Equation (25)
in van Kampen’s paper 1 .

With (8) and (9) we obtain

dS =

βu0νV0uµ
u0λuλ dT ν

µ −

βu0µπdV µ .

The energy-momentum tensor T in equilibrium is expressed as

µ = (π + ε)u0µuν
T ν

0 + πην

µ ,

where ε is the energy density measured in the comoving frame. Substituting
the above expression and (7) into (10) we can write

dS = βV0dε

βπdV0 .

−

We understand from the above expression that the entropy of the object does
not depend on ¯u.

Now we have the clearly covariant deﬁnition of the entropy, other thermody-
namical quantities can be derived covariantly using it.

1 The treatment of the volume is somewhat diﬀerent in the paper by Israel; he
deﬁned the volume as a ﬁxed region in the three dimensional space. Consequently
there is no volume change in his theory, and the eﬀect of compression/expansion is
treated through the particle number ﬂux (δnµ in his paper).

5

References

[1] Stuart, E. B., Brainard, A. J. and Benjamin, G-O. (ed), A Critical Review of

Thermodynamics (Mono Book Corp. Baltimore, 1970).

[2] C. K. Yuen, Amer. J. Phys., 38 (1970), 246.

[3] Ch. French and J. P. Vigier, Phys. Lett. A, 215 (1996), 247; H. Kolbenstvedt,

Nuovo Cimento, 115B (2000), 257.

[4] N. G. van Kampen, Phys. Rev., 173 (1968), 295.

[5] W. Israel, Ann. Phys., 100 (1976), 310; Physica, 106A (1981), 204.

[6] A. Gamba, Amer. J. Phys., 35 (1967), 83.

[7] E. Fermi, Nuovo Cimenmto, 25 (1923), 159.

[8] Møller, C., The Theory of Relativity, 2nd Ed. 1972, London: Oxford.

6

