Bavu et al.

Torsional waves in a bowed string

Eri Bavu, John Smith and Joe Wolfe

1

Musi Aoustis, Shool of Physis, University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052 Australia

PACS numbers: 43.75.+a

Abstrat

Bowing a string with a non-zero radius exerts a torque, whih exites torsional waves.

In general,

torsional standing waves have higher fundamental frequenies than do transverse standing waves, and there

is generally no harmoni relationship between them. Although torsional waves have little diret aousti

e(cid:27)et, the motion of the bow-string ontat depends on the sum of the transverse speed v of the string
plus the radius times the angular veloity (rω). Consequently, in some bowing regimes, torsional waves

ould introdue non-periodiity or jitter to the transverse wave. The ear is sensitive to jitter so, while quite

small amounts of jitter are important in the sounds of (real) bowed strings, modest amounts of jitter an

be pereived as unpleasant or unmusial. It follows that, for a well bowed string, aperiodiities produed

in the transverse motion by torsional waves (and other e(cid:27)ets) must be small. Is this beause the torsional

waves are of small amplitude or beause of strong oupling between the torsional and transverse waves? We

measure the torsional and transverse motion for a string bowed by an experiened player over a range of

tunings. The torsional wave spetrum shows a series of harmonis of the translational fundamental, with

strong formants near the natural frequenies for torsion. The peaks in rω , whih our near the start and
end of the 'stik' phase in whih the bow and string move together, are only several times smaller than v

during this phase. We present sound (cid:28)les of the transverse veloity and the rotational veloity due to the

torsional wave. Beause the torsional waves our at exat harmonis of the translational fundamental and

beause of similarities in the temporal envelope, the sound of the torsional signal alone learly suggests the

sound of a bowed string with the pith of the translational fundamental. However, the harmonis that fall

near the torsional resonanes are so strong that they may be heard as distint notes.

5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
5
0
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Address for orrespondene: J.Wolfeunsw.edu.au 61-2-93854954

1

Bavu et al.

Contents

Introdution

2

1 Materials and Methods

4

2 Results and disussion

5

List of Figures

In ideal Helmholtz motion, the orner between two straight segments of a string (length L) traes two parabolæ in one period T .

1

is the translational speed of the string,

is the angular veloity due to the torsional wave and

is its radius.

is the speed of the bow.

3

2

A sketh of the sensors mounted on the string. The sizes of the sensor wires have been magni(cid:28)ed for larity. The magneti (cid:28)eld is vertial so that the (cid:29)ux through the oil is zero when the string is at rest.

5

3

Time (left) and frequeny domain (right) measurements of the translational (upper) and torsional veloity of the string, measured simultaneously on the string at point

. The string was bowed at

.

6

4

The string was bowed at

Hz and

Hz.

7

L
13 . The translational and torsional waves were measured simultaneously on the string at point

L
5 . The string was tuned so that the translational fundamental was 40 Hz. At this tension, the frequenies of the (cid:28)rst two torsional resonanes, measured in a separate experiment, were

L
13 and the translational and torsional waves were measured simultaneously on the string at point

5

As in Figure 4, the string was bowed at

. In this ase, however, the string was tuned so that the translational fundamental was 50 Hz. At this tension, the (cid:28)rst two torsional resonanes were at

Hz and

Hz.

8

2

Bavu et al.

Introdution

In one of the most important books ever published in musi aoustis, Helmholtz [1℄ desribed what is now

known as Helmholtz motion: the steady state motion of an idealised, one-dimensional, bowed string. Many

of the studies of the bowed string sine that of Helmholtz have studied departures from or ompliations to

Helmholtz motion [2-11℄. One onsequene of the (cid:28)nite radius of the string is that the bow, whih ats at the

surfae of the string and not at its entre, exerts a torque that produes torsional waves. The relationship

between translational and torsional waves in the bowed string is the sub jet of the present study.

Waves approximating Helmholtz motion may be produed in a string by a bow to whose hairs rosin has

been applied. Beause of the rosin, the stati frition between the string and bow may, during transients, be

onsiderably greater than the kineti frition. Figure 1 shows the motion shematially for a string bowed at a

point

1
β from one end, where β > 1. If the period is T , stati frition maintains ontat between the string and
β ) (the stik phase), and the string slides rapidly past the string in the opposite

the bow for a time T × (1 − 1

diretion for a time

T
β (the slip phase). For a string of (cid:28)nite radius, the speed of the point of ontat on the
surfae of the string is the ombination v + rω of the translational speed v and the angular veloity ω due to
the torsional wave, where r is the radius of the string.

Figure 1: In ideal Helmholtz motion, the orner between two

straight segments of a string (length L) traes two parabolæ
in one period T . v is the translational speed of the string, ω
is the angular veloity due to the torsional wave and r is its
radius. vbow is the speed of the bow.

The fundamental frequenies of torsional waves in string instruments are rather higher than those of the

translational waves. The speed of translational waves (and therefore the frequeny) is proportional to the square

root of the tension in the string: this dependene is used to tune strings. The speed of torsional waves depends

on the square root of the ratio of torsional sti(cid:27)ness to moment of inertia, and depends only weakly on the

tension [12℄. An important onsequene of this di(cid:27)erent dependene on tensions is that there is, in general, no

harmoni relation between waves of the two types. Gillan and Elliot [13℄ studied torsional standing waves in

strings using small oils attahed to the string both for exitation and measurement of the waves. They showed

that the ratio of the fundamental frequeny of the torsional waves to that of the translational waves varied

among strings of di(cid:27)erent pith and of di(cid:27)erent manufature.

The diret aousti e(cid:27)et of torsional waves is small, beause the torques that they exert on the bridge are

small ompared with those exerted by the translational waves. Nevertheless, as disussed above, the torsional

waves ould, in priniple, have an important e(cid:27)et on the sound produed beause they a(cid:27)et the motion of the

ontat point between bow and string. If the waves were in linear superposition, then one might expet that

the varying relative phase between v and ω , and therefore that the variation from yle to yle in the value of
v + rω , would lead to aperiodiity or jitter in the stik-slip motion.

A number of other e(cid:27)ets give rise to small amounts of variation from one yle to another, inluding those

due to variations in the frition onditions and to the dynamis of the bow itself [7,8,11℄. Human hearing is

very sensitive to jitter [14℄, so even very small amounts are notied, and they ontribute to the sound of a real

string instrument, as distint from that made by a rude synthesiser. However, variations of a few perent would

produe an unmusial sound. This is learly not the ase in a string bowed by an experiened player, who an

3

Bavu et al.

reliably produe onditions that give rise to almost ompletely periodi, self-sustained osillations. How is this

ahieved? Are the torsional waves small so that rω ≪ v? Or are the torsional waves exited only at harmonis

of the translational fundamental?

Torsional waves have been disussed by several authors [4,5,6,12℄, Woodhouse and Loah [12℄ measured their

damping and their variation with string tension and Woodhouse et al.

[11℄ disuss the e(cid:27)ets of torsion in a

study in whih they determined the fore at the bridge. The ob jet of the present study is to measure the

torsional and translational waves in a bowed string while it is being played, and to ompare their amplitudes

and phases. It aims to answer the questions: How large are the torsional waves produed during playing? and

How are their frequenies related to those of the translational motion?

1 Materials and Methods

A string with high mass per unit length was hosen so that the mass of the sensors produed relatively little

perturbation. The study was onduted using a string designed to play E1 (41 Hz) on a bass guitar. It was steel

ored, with three steel windings. Its mass per unit length was 20 g.m

−1

. Using a bass guitar mahine head,

it was strethed between two heavy, rigid 'bridges' , eah onsisting of a metal plate mounted on a hardwood

blok. The bridges were bolted to a brass frame mounted diretly on a laboratory benh. The bridge separa-

tion was L = 750 mm. The tension was varied between experiments so that the transverse frequeny took 13
di(cid:27)erent values over the range 30 to 60 Hz. The string has a (cid:29)exural rigidity of 1.5 mN.m

2

, measured for stati

loads. (The (cid:29)exural rigidity may inrease with frequeny [5℄.) Its torsional sti(cid:27)ness, measured in situ on the

monohord at normal tension using a torsional pendulum, was 3.1 mN.m

2

.

A permanent magnet, of (cid:28)eld strength 80 mT and approximately in the shape of a letter C, was used to

produe the magneti (cid:28)eld, whih was measured with a Hall probe mounted on a miro-manipulator. The pole

piees of the magnet were shaped by adding a series of rings whose thiknesses, inner and outer diameters and

position were hosen empirially, by a proess of iteration, to produe a region of homogeneous magneti (cid:28)eld.

In the plane of symmetry between the poles, at right angles to the (cid:28)eld, this proess produed a region in whih

the (cid:28)eld varied by less than ±1% over a irular region with radius 14 mm. The magnet was plaed so that

the bowed string passed through the entre of this region, and the diretion of bowing was hosen to produe

translational motion in this plane.

are positive integers, then the (n.m)th

L
n from one bridge, where n and m
harmonis are absent. So n should ideally be large. However, large n

The position of the motion sensor is a ompromise: if it is at a position

means small amplitudes of both translational and torsional waves, and therefore an inferior signal:noise ratio.

For thus study, n = 5.

To measure the translational motion, two segments of insulated opper wire, of length 12 mm and diameter
100 µm, were attahed above and below the string as shown in Figure 2. At eah end, these wires were bent

into semiirular loops oriented so that the plane of the loop had no magneti (cid:29)ux. The other ends of the

loops were onneted to preampli(cid:28)ers. The average of the emfs produed by these two iruits is assumed to

be proportional to the translational veloity of the string. The sum of the emfs in series was reorded on one

hannel of a digital osillosope at a sampling rate of 10 kHz and thene transferred as data to a omputer.

The relationship between this signal and the translational veloity was determined experimentally by driving

the string with an eletromagneti shaker with an aelerometer head.

In priniple, the di(cid:27)erene between the emfs of the two wires mentioned above would, in the small angle

approximation, be proportional to the torsional emf. However, the signal:noise ratio of this signal was inad-

equate. Consequently, a oil of 10 turns, 12 mm long and 2 mm wide, made of insulated opper wire of 50

µm diameter, was attahed to the string and oriented so that its magneti (cid:29)ux was zero when the string was

in mehanial equilibrium. The wires onneting the oil to another preampli(cid:28)er were twisted, to redue stray

(cid:29)ux, and bent in a loop to minimise the fore exerted on the string. The signal from this oil was reorded

on the other hannel of the osillosope and thene transferred to the omputer. The (cid:29)ux linkage of this oil

4

Bavu et al.

Figure 2: A sketh of the sensors mounted on the string.

The sizes of the sensor wires have been magni(cid:28)ed for larity.

The magneti (cid:28)eld is vertial so that the (cid:29)ux through the

oil is zero when the string is at rest.

(cid:22) and hene the relationship between the signal and the angular veloity ω (cid:22) was measured by generating

an osillating (cid:28)eld of known magnitude and frequeny with a large oil. Fourier transforms were made using a

Hann window.

The sensors were attahed to the string with mylar tape. The total mass of the sensors was 20 mg, whih

is equivalent to the mass of a 1 mm length of the string. The fore required to deform the onneting loops

was orders of magnitude less than that required to displae the string laterally by the same distane, whih was

estimated by pushing them with a (cid:28)nger.

The fundamental frequeny of the torsional motion, in the absene of a bow, was measured in a separate

experiment using a method adapted from that of Gillan and Elliot [12℄. A driving oil (20 turns of 200 µm

wire) was attahed to the oil 15 mm from one end, and driven with an AC urrent in the (cid:28)eld of a permanent

magnet. A sensing oil, 10 turns of 100 µm wire was attahed 25 mm from the opposite end, in the (cid:28)eld of an-

other magnet. The frequeny of the driving oil was varied to obtain a maximum in the signal of the sensing oil.

The Q of the fundamental resonanes for translational and torsional standing waves was measured by giving

the string respetively a translational and a rotational displaement at the bowing point and measuring the

signals (low pass (cid:28)ltered to remove higher harmonis) as a funtion of time to obtain the deay time. The Q

of translational standing wave fundamental of the E string on a double bass was measured (in situ) in a similar

fashion.

shown).

The monohord string was bowed with a violin bow, hosen beause it was less wide than a bass bow, and

beause the bowing position ould therefore be spei(cid:28)ed more preisely. The bowing position, at a distane

f racLbeta from one bridge, was varied between the sensor and the loser bridge over the range β = 6 to 15,

the (cid:28)rst limit being the minimum possible distane between the bow and the sensor with this apparatus. The

string was bowed in a horizontal diretion, at right angles to the string. For the measurements shown here, it

was bowed by the (cid:28)rst author E.B., who had 17 years of experiene playing violin. It was also bowed by three

experiened bass players, aording to whom, it was no more di(cid:30)ult to bow than a normal E string on a bass.

For omparison, it was also bowed by people with little experiene in bowing a string instrument (data not

2 Results and disussion

For a translational wave on this string on a monohord, the harateristi deay time was typially 7.5 s. This

orresponds to a Q value of typially 900. This value is rather higher than the value for a string on a double

bass, beause on the latter the bridge is less rigid and thus more energy is extrated from eah yle to drive

the soundboard. For the E string on a double bass, the deay time was 0.45 s, orresponding to a Q of 57. For

the torsional wave on the string on the monohord, the Q was 17.

Figures 3, 4, and 5 show the translational and torsional waves produed when the string was bowed at

di(cid:27)erent positions and at di(cid:27)erent tensions. In all ases, the results are given in the time domain at left, and in

the frequeny domain at right, for simultaneous measurements. The following features are ommon to results

for all the bowing positions and tunings examined. The time domain representations of translational veloity

5

Bavu et al.

Figure 3: Time (left) and frequeny domain (right) measurements of the translational (upper) and torsional veloity of

the string, measured simultaneously on the string at point

L
5 . The string was bowed at

L
6 .

show that the motion approximates Helmholtz motion: eah period omprises a short phase, during whih the

string moves rapidly one way, and a longer phase during whih the string moves more slowly in the opposite

diretion. The slow phase in all of the graphs shows several osillations, whih we disuss below. The motion

is almost exatly periodi. The frequeny domain also shows the approximation to Helmholtz motion. In ideal

standing waves on a one dimensional string whose motion was measured (as here) at one (cid:28)fth of its length, the

(cid:28)fth, tenth, (cid:28)fteenth et. harmonis would be zero. In all of the measurements, the (cid:28)fth and tenth harmonis

of the translational motion of the (entre of the) string were small but non-zero.

The harmonis above about the tenth are weaker than expeted. The attenuation is unlikely to be produed

by the (cid:28)nite bending sti(cid:27)ness and damping of the string beause higher harmonis are present in the sound

reorded by a mirophone plaed very near the string. We attribute this feature to high frequeny attenuation

in the measurement tehnique used to measure translational veloity. The (cid:28)nite length of the sensor is not

alone great enough to explain the putative attenuation. However, it is possible that the (cid:28)nite mass of the sensor

and the (cid:28)nite rigidity of the onneting loops might interat with the bowed string so as to attenuate the high

frequeny omponents.

The time domain representations of torsional veloity show an almost exatly periodi motion whose period

equals that of the translational motion. Within eah yle of this motion are several osillations, whose period

is approximately that of the fundamental mode of torsional waves in the (entire) string. The largest peaks our

lose to the onset and end of the rapid phase (cid:22) the passage of the Helmholtz orner. For the results in Figure

3, the bowing point is lose to the measurement point, so the end points of the slow phase orrespond, to within

2% of a period, to those of the stik phase. The peak value of rω is about one third of the speed of the string

in the stik phase. So, in answer to one of the questions posed in this study, the torsional omponent of the

6

Bavu et al.

veloity of the bow-string ontat point is far from negligible.

The frequeny domain representations of the torsional waves show a series of harmonis, whose (missing)

fundamental is that of the translational wave. There are also formants at frequenies orresponding to the

fundamental and higher harmonis of the torsional standing waves on the (entire) string. In other words, the

harmonis of the translational fundamental that are losest to the torsional resonanes are muh stronger than

the others. Figure 3d shows that the 40 Hz omponent (cid:22) the translational fundamental (cid:22) is zero in the

torsional signal. The presene of the many harmonis of this frequeny give the signal a lear period of

1
40 s,

whih is evident in the time domain representation (Figure 3). This missing fundamental is learly heard in

the sound (cid:28)les, whih are disussed below.

Together, these results show that the torsional wave has a period equal to that of the translational wave or

equivalently that the frequeny omponents of the torsional wave are driven at harmonis of the translational

fundamental. This loking is explained by the muh lower Q (more than (cid:28)fty times lower) of the torsional waves.

The time resolution of the measurements was 0.1 ms, or 0.004 of a typial value of a period. At this resolution,

the jitter was not measurable. This small upper bound to the jitter is onsistent with the ommon observation

that the sound of a bowed string is musial, pleasant and has a well de(cid:28)ned pith.

The osillations observed in the slow phase of the translational motion have a frequeny similar to that of

the torsional fundamental. It is therefore interesting to ask whether, during this phase, the entre of the string

is moving at a onstant speed plus rω . Unfortunately, the low pass (cid:28)ltering of the translational wave signal

mentioned above makes it impossible to answer this question quantitatively. (A retangular wave with high

harmonis removed looks like a square wave with high harmonis added, in opposite phase.) However, the sum of

the measured v + rω shows osillations with smaller amplitude than those in the v signal alone (data not shown).

Figure 4: The string was bowed at

L
5 . The string was tuned so that the translational fundamental was 40 Hz. At this tension, the frequenies

L
13 . The translational and torsional waves were measured simultaneously on the

string at point

of the (cid:28)rst two torsional resonanes, measured in a separate experiment, were 240 ± 2 Hz and 472 ± 3 Hz.

7

Bavu et al.

L
13 . Bowing loser to one

Figures 4 and 5 show the waves produed by bowing muh loser to the bridge, at

end of the string inreases the relative power distributed to higher harmonis. This well known phenomenon

is due in part to the requirement by the player to inrease the ratio of normal fore to bow speed so as to

maintain bowing onditions within the 'Shelleng triangle' [4,5℄. On the transverse wave, this e(cid:27)et is redued

by the low pass (cid:28)ltering disussed above. On the torsional wave, however, the e(cid:27)et is rather large, and so the

seond formant is several times larger than the (cid:28)rst. The magnitude of the torsional waves is a little smaller in

this ase than in Fig 3, while the magnitude of the transverse waves is a little more, so the peak value of rω is

a smaller fration of the transverse veloity.

Figures 4 and 5 also show the e(cid:27)et of tuning the string. The frequenies of the transverse waves in the

examples shown are 40 and 50 Hz respetively. In separate experiments, the translational and torsional funda-

mental frequenies were measured. The tension that gave a translational fundamental of 40 Hz produed the

(cid:28)rst two torsional resonanes at 240 ± 2 Hz and 472 ± 3 Hz. The tension that gave a translational fundamental
of 50 Hz produed the (cid:28)rst two torsional resonanes at 222 ± 2 Hz and 438 ± 3 Hz. The variation with tension

of the frequenies of the torsional modes may be due to the e(cid:27)ets of varying tension on the fores between

the string's windings. There is a little hysteresis in this e(cid:27)et, whih here may be related to the way in whih

individual windings slip over the bridge. This hysteresis leads to the unertainties in the resonane frequeny.

The ause of the inharmoniity in the torsional resonanes is unknown.

Di(cid:27)erent harmonis of the translational fundamental are therefore enhaned by the torsional resonanes:

when the translational fundamental is 40 Hz, its sixth and eleventh harmonis (240 and 440 Hz) are strongly

present in the torsional signal. When the translational fundamental is 50 Hz, its (cid:28)fth and ninth harmonis (250

and 450 Hz) are strongest.

Figure 5: As in Figure 4, the string was bowed at

neously on the string at point

50 Hz. At this tension, the (cid:28)rst two torsional resonanes were at 222 ± 2 Hz and 438 ± 3 Hz.

L
5 . In this ase, however, the string was tuned so that the translational fundamental was

L
13 and the translational and torsional waves were measured simulta-

8

Bavu et al.

It is interesting to listen to the measured signals v(t) and ω(t), whih we have stored as sound (cid:28)les at our web
site [15℄. The spetrum of v(t) is expeted to be rather di(cid:27)erent to that of the sound radiated by an instrument,

beause of the strong frequeny dependene of the mehanial impedane at the bridge and the radiativity of the

instrument [16℄. Nevertheless, the sound (cid:28)le of v(t) resembles somewhat a bowed bass playing E1. The sound
of ω(t) is also learly identi(cid:28)able as the sound of a low-pithed bowed string instrument, presumably beause of

the rihness in harmonis and the transient during whih periodi motion is established, but it does not sound

like a bass. It has the pith E1, the missing fundamental of the torsional wave, disussed above. Although E1

is the most notieable pith heard, the strong harmoni that falls near the torsional fundamental an be learly

heard as a distint note whose pith, of ourse, is an exat harmoni of the 40 Hz translational fundamental, as

desribed above.

In all ases where the string was bowed by an expert, the translational and torsional waves are periodi

waves with the same period, whih is that of the fundamental of the translational wave for the string at that

tension. In ases where the string was bowed by volunteers with no experiene in bowing a string, the waves

were often non-periodi, and the resultant sound unmusial (data not shown).

It is sometimes di(cid:30)ult to establish periodi motion quikly [17℄ and indeed, steady periodi motion of the

bowed string is only possible for a limited volume of the parameter spae de(cid:28)ned by the bow position, normal

fore applied, and bow speed [4℄. It seems likely that the limits of this volume are determined by the requirement

that self-sustained osillations are produed with minimal jitter. The string player must maintain the operat-

ing point within that volume. Part of the skill in playing a string instrument presumably involves learning to

establish quikly a periodi motion in whih all of the waves, inluding the torsional waves, are fored into a

harmoni relation.

Referenes

[1℄ H. L. F. Helmholtz: On the Sensations of Tone, 4th ed. Trans. Ellis, A. J., Dover, NY, 1954. p 83. Die

Lehre von den Tonemp(cid:28)ndungen 1877.

[2℄ C. V. Raman: On the Mehanial Theory of Vibrations of Musial Instruments of the Violin Family.

Pro. Indian Asso. Cultivation Si. 6 (1920) 19-36.

[3℄ M. E. MIntyre , J. Woodhouse: On the fundamentals of bowed-string dynamis. Austia 43 (1979)

93-108.

[4℄ J. C. Shelleng: The Bowed String and the Player. J. Aoust. So. Am. 53 (1973) 26-41.

[5℄ L. Cremer: The Physis of the Violin. Trans. Allen, J. S., MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1984. Physik

der Greige S. Hirzel Verlag, Stuttgart, 1981.

[6℄ R.T. Shumaher: Self-sustained osil lations of the bowed string. Austia 43 (1979) 109-120.

[7℄ M. E. MIntyre, R. T. Shumaher, J. Woodhouse: Aperiodiity in bowed-string motion Austia

49 (1981) 13-32.

Am. 89 (1991) 887-895.

[8℄ G. Weinreih, R. Caussé: Elementary stability onsiderations for bowed-string motion. J. Aoust. So.

[9℄ J. Woodhouse: Idealised models of a bowed string. Austia 79 (1993) 233-250.

[10℄ J. Woodhouse: On the stability of bowed string motion. Austia 80 (1994) 58-72.

[11℄ J. Woodhouse, R. T. Shumaher, S. Garo(cid:27) : Reonstrution of bowing point frition fore in a bowed

string. J. Aoust. So. Am. 108 (2000) 357-368.

[12℄ F. S. Gillan, S. J. Elliot: Measurement of the Torsional Modes of Vibration of the Strings on Instruments

of the Violin Family, J. Sound Vibration 130 (1989) 347-351.

9

Bavu et al.

[13℄ I. Pollak: Detetion and relative disrimination of auditory 'jitter'. J. Aoust. So. Am. 43 (1968) 308-315.

[14℄ J. Woodhouse and A. R. Loah: The torsional behaviour of el lo strings. Austia/Ata Austia 85

[15℄ Musi Aoustis Website: http://www.phys.unsw.edu.au/∼jw/torsional.html

[16℄ E. Jansson, I. Bork, J. Meyer: Investigation into the aoustial properties of the violin. Austia, 61

(1999) 734-740.

(1986) 1-15.

[17℄ K. Guettler, A. Askenfelt: Aeptane limits for the duration of pre-Helmholtz transients in bowed string

attaks. J. Aoust. So. Am. 101 (1997) 2903-2913.

10

