Dynamics of a bouncing dimer

S. Dorbolo,†,‡ D. Volfson,∗ L. Tsimring,∗ and A. Kudrolli†
†Department of Physics, Clark University, Worcester, MA 01610
‡GRASP, Physics Department, University of Li`ege, B-4000 Li`ege, Belgium
* Institute for Nonlinear Science, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We investigate the dynamics of a dimer bouncing on a vertically oscillated plate. The dimer,
composed of two spheres rigidly connected by a light rod, exhibits several modes depending on
initial and driving conditions. The ﬁrst excited mode has a novel horizontal drift in which one end
of the dimer stays on the plate during most of the cycle, while the other end bounces in phase with
the plate. The speed and direction of the drift depend on the aspect ratio of the dimer. We employ
event-driven simulations based on a detailed treatment of frictional interactions between the dimer
and the plate in order to elucidate the nature of the transport mechanism in the drift mode.

5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
6
0
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 05.45.-a, 45.70.-n, 47.52.+j

The shape of grains has a fundamental impact on static
and dynamic properties of granular materials. Packing of
granular material is aﬀected by the relative orientation of
grains [1], the statistics of avalanching is apparently dif-
ferent in regular sandpiles and piles of elongated rice [2],
and strongly shaken rods exhibit self-organization which
leads to formation of large vortices [3, 4]. Thus the phe-
nomenology of asymmetric grains is very diﬀerent from
that of spherical beads and irregularly shaped sand.

In Ref. [5], using a combination of theory and exper-
iments in a quasi-2D geometry (vibrated rods in an an-
nulus), we showed that the motion of rods is caused by
the non-eccentric frictional collisions between the rods
and the vibrated plate. These collisions are translated
into collective motion by multiple non-elastic collisions
among the rods during the ﬂights between rod-plate col-
lisions. In this paper, we focus on an even simpler case of
a single anisotropic “grain” on an oscillated plate in or-
der to study mechanisms of transformation of vibrational
excitation into horizontal transport in the absence of ex-
ternally imposed asymmetry. Recent studies of thermal
ratchets have addressed the more straightforward situa-
tion where there is an imposed left/right asymmetry in
the substrate [6].

In contrast with our previous work with thin rods, here
we study the dynamics of a rigid dimer consisting of two
heavy spheres connected by a light rod. Unlike the rods
case, the points of contact with the plate are easily deter-
mined even when the dimer is horizontal at the time of
collision (in this case, there are two well deﬁned contact
points). We also note that the oscillated dimer can serve
as a natural generalization to the much studied system
of a particle on a vibrated plate which is a paradigm for
period doubling and transition to chaos [7]. As we show
here, in addition to those regimes, the oscillated dimer
displays spontaneous symmetry breaking and ratchet-like
transport in a system without externally imposed asym-
metry.

Figure 1 shows a photo and a schematic diagram of the

FIG. 1: (a) Photo of a dimer bouncing on the vibrated plate.
(b) A sketch of the system.

system. The experiments reported here are performed
with dimers fabricated with steel spheres with a diam-
eter of 9.5 mm, and a glass rod with a 4 mm diameter.
The length of the rod is varied to change the aspect ra-
tio Ar (deﬁned as the ratio of the length of the dimer
along the symmetry axis and the diameter of the ball)
between 2 and 10. The dimers are placed on a plate be-
tween two vertical glass walls which are rigidly attached
to the plate and separated by 10 mm in order to conﬁne
the motion to a vertical plane. The container is vibrated
with an electromagnetic shaker and a sinusoidal wave-
form generator. The oscillation frequency f and magni-
tude Γ = 4π2Af 2/g, where A is amplitude of plate oscil-
lation, and g is gravitational acceleration, can be varied
independently. The period of plate oscillation T = 1/f .
The motion of the dimer and the plate is recorded using a
Phantom v5.1 camera at 2000 frames per second using a
standard reﬂection lighting conﬁguration and a centroid
algorithm which yields positions to within 20 µm.

For Γ > 1, complicated irregular hopping and tumbling
motion is observed for most initial conditions. Here, we
focus on the weak excitation regime Γ < 1. Clearly, for
Γ < 1 the dimer may remain on the plate. However, if
the dimer is dropped onto the plate, three main modes of
persistent motion can be observed depending on initial
conditions. The vertical coordinates of the tips of the
dimer [9] in the laboratory frame of reference are plotted
in Fig. 2. In the highest energy mode, the tips hit the
plate out of phase at every other period of oscillation
[see Fig. 2(a)]. We call this motion the ﬂutter (F) mode.

2

FIG. 2: The vertical position of the left (◦) and right (△)
tips [9] of the dimer as a function of time for the lowest energy
modes observed in the experiment. (a) The ﬂutter (F) mode.
(b) The jump (J) mode. (c) The drift (D) mode. The solid
curve corresponds to the vertical position of the plate (Ar =
3.9, f = 50 Hz, Γ = 0.9.)

In the next lower energy mode, both tips collide with
the plate once every cycle [see Fig. 2(b)]. We call this
the jump (J) mode.
In this mode the dimer does not
have signiﬁcant angular momentum and resembles the
ﬁrst excited mode of a single particle bouncing on an
oscillated plate. The lowest energy mode is shown in
Fig. 2(c). As can be noted from the ﬁgure, one of the
ends of the dimer hits the plate once every cycle while
the other appears to stay on the plate throughout the
cycle. In addition to the non-trivial vertical motion, a
persistent horizontal drift is observed and therefore we
call it the drift (D) mode [8]. Although the excitation
of a particular mode depends sensitively on the initial
conditions, the drift mode can be excited easily by lifting
one end by a fraction of the sphere diameter and releasing
it while keeping the other end on the plate.

To test that sidewalls have negligible eﬀect on the dy-
namics, we also performed experiments using a container
with a shallow 1mm deep U-shaped groove with crossec-
tional curvature which is at least four times that of the
spheres in the dimer. The curvature focuses the dynam-
ics to a vertical plane without dimer-sidewall collisions.
Similar results were observed. However, higher quality
position data is obtained with the container with side-
walls, and used to report details of dynamics.

We can characterize the diﬀerent modes by the total
mechanical energies of the vibrating dimer. As a simple
measure of such energy we take the sum of maximum
elevations of both spheres above the plate. Ignoring in-
elasticity and horizontal translation yields the following
estimates of energies per unit mass of drift, jump, and
ﬂutter modes Ed = gT 2/8, Ej = gT 2/4, Ef = gT 2 for
Ar ≫ 1. Therefore the ratio of the energy for the drift,
jump and ﬂutter mode is approximately 1:2:8, which is
consistent with observations.

In the remainder of the paper we focus on the D-mode,
since it exhibits the most non-trivial dynamics. The hor-
izontal coordinate of the left tip of the dimer “resting” on

FIG. 3: (a) Horizontal position of the left tip of the dimer as
function of time in the drift mode for Ar = 3.9 (solid line)
and 5.7 (dashed line), (b) The corresponding horizontal tip
velocity. The thick solid line indicates the vertical position of
the plate (f = 25 Hz, Γ = 0.9).

the plate is plotted as shown in Fig. 3(a) versus time for
dimer with Ar = 3.9 (solid line), and Ar = 5.7 (dashed
line) at f = 25 Hz. In Fig. 3(a), the net motion of the
Ar = 3.9 dimer is directed towards its bouncing end. In
the following, this direction is called forward or positive.
We measured the horizontal drift speed of dimers with
various Ar between 2 and 10 at three diﬀerent frequencies
of vibration [see Fig. 4(a)]. The speed is determined by
measuring the time taken by the dimer to move over a
55 mm horizontal distance. For Ar < 2.5, the D-mode
becomes unstable. The drift speed is maximal for an
aspect ratio of approximately 3.5, and then observed to
It can be also noted that
decrease as Ar is increased.
dimer moves in the backward direction at large Ar > 5.
We also varied the driving parameters to check their
inﬂuence on the dimer dynamics. We found that the drift
speed of the D-mode is inversely proportional to f [see
Fig. 4(a)]. However, for ﬁxed f , the drift speed is almost
independent of Γ over a broad range. For example, for
Ar = 3.9 and f = 25 Hz, the measured speed was approx-
imately constant over a range of Γ between 0.5 and 1.1.
For smaller Γ < 0.5, the D-mode spontaneously collapses
to rest, and for higher Γ > 1.1, the D-mode is unstable
with respect to the transition to the higher energy J and
F-modes, and their combinations.

We checked that the drift motion is not due to any
residual tilt in the plate by testing that the speed is the
same when the dimer moves in either direction. Further-
more, when the oscillated plate was deliberately tilted,
uphill motion was observed depending on Ar over a range
of angles [see Fig. 4(b)]. (These experiments where per-
formed with the U-shaped bottom plate which has no
sidewalls.) Thus the driving mechanism in the drift mode
is robust enough to overcome gravity.

Detailed examination of each tip reveals that the hor-
izontal drift occurs due to the asymmetric slip of the
low-energy left sphere “resting” on the plate (see Fig. 3).
Speciﬁcally, the horizontal velocity Ul of the left tip is
plotted in Fig. 3(b). For small Ar, the positive slip which
begins immediately after the right sphere collides with
the plate, gradually slows down and is succeeded by a

3

(−Xc, 0, −Zc) is radius-vector from CM to a contact
point (CP) [see also Fig. 1]. The sum over c ∈ {l, r} indi-
cates that either left or right or both spherical ends can be
in contact with the plate during collisions. The CP veloc-
ity components in the plate frame of reference are given
by Uc = u − ωZc, Vc = v + ωXc − Vpl, where Vpl(t) is the
plate velocity. In a sliding contact, F c
z , where µ
is the friction coeﬃcient and j = sgnUc, and in the stick-
ing phases, F c
x is found from the no-slip condition Uc = 0.
Transitions from stick to slip occur when |F c
x | = µsF c
z
with the static friction coeﬃcient µs. Although the grav-
itational force can be neglected during collisions, it must
be taken into consideration during ﬂight and rolling.

x = −jµF c

For isolated collisions, we integrate Eqs. (1) with ini-
tial conditions (ub, vb, ωb) and the kinematic condition
V a
c = −ǫV b
c (where indices b, a correspond to before and
after collision, and ǫ is the kinematic restitution coeﬃ-
cient), to obtain after-collision CM velocities (ua, va, ωa).
Note that the dynamic and static friction coeﬃcients for
the rolling phase in general can diﬀer signiﬁcantly from
those for the short collisions [12] and we use separate
notations ˆµ and ˆµs for the latter coeﬃcients. A detailed
description of all contact types is rather cumbersome and
will be presented elsewhere [10] (see also Supplementary
material).

r < 0).

r < 0, V b

We combined the conditions for the occurrence of the
various kinds of collisions and the forces acting on the
dimer into an event-driven algorithm. We used this al-
gorithm to elucidate the origin of the observed regimes
of dimer motion.
In D-mode, the left tip rolls on the
plate with negative slippage as the right tip approaches
the plate (see Fig. 5). At time t0, the right tip col-
lides with the plate with an incident contact velocity
(U b
In the ﬁrst phase of collision, neg-
ative slippage slows down due to the frictional force
x = ˆµF r
F r
z . For large enough friction, at a certain
time t′
0 > t0 during collision, the negative slip stops
r > −ǫV b
(Ur(t′
0) = 0, Vr(t′
r ,
r ).
the dimer leaves the plate before the negative slip stops,
and so the collision would be of a continuous slide type.
Continuous negative slide cannot persist in the station-
ary regime, because this would yield cumulative positive
horizontal impulse transfer from the plate to the dimer
over the period of vibration and hence an accelerated
motion. For V s
r , there can be two possible sce-
narios for the second phase of the double collision. For
large enough aspect ratios, ˆµs(A2 + 7/5) > A, (where
A = Ar − 1,) the CP sticks at t > t′
0) = 0.
For ˆµs(A2+7/5) < A, the slip reverses direction, in which
case it can be shown that U a

0, i.e. Ur(t > t′

If formally V s

r < −ǫV b

0) = V s

r is given by

5ˆµA2 − 5A + 7ˆµ
10A2 − 5ˆµA + 2 (cid:20)
For small Ar, U a

(1 + ǫ)V b

r −

10A2 + 5ˆµA + 2
5ˆµA2 + 5A + 7ˆµ

U b
r (cid:21)

.

r becomes positive after the double
collision in agreement with experiment [cf. Fig. 5(b) and
Fig. 3(b)]. This “kick” during the two point collision is

FIG. 4: (a) The mean horizontal speed hui of the dimer scaled
by gravity and frequency versus Ar for three values of driving
frequency. Positive direction points towards the bouncing end
of the dimer. Symbols corresponds to experiments, and the
line to the event-driven simulations at f = 25Hz (lines cor-
responding to f = 50, 75 are virtually indistiguishable from
this line and are not shown). Parameters of simulations are
Γ = 0.9, ǫ = 0.65, µ = 0.2, µs = 0.4, and ˆµ = 0.1, ˆµs = 0.2.
(b) Phase diagram of the direction of dimer translation in
the D-mode as a function of plate inclination angle and Ar.
Robust uphill motion is observed for a broad range of param-
eters.

slower negative slip during the phase when the right end
of the dimer approaches the plate, after which the process
repeats. For large Ar, the positive slip is much smaller
or absent, and the drift is dominated by negative slip.

Although it appears from Fig. 2(c) that the left sphere
is simply rolling on the plate, in fact it performs a se-
quence of small jumps immediately after the right sphere
collides with the plate. We conﬁrmed both the loss of
contact after the collision during the small jumps as well
as the fact that the left sphere is in contact with the plate
for a large fraction of the cycle by measuring the electric
resistance between the spheres and the plate.

Our theoretical description of the dimer dynamics is
based on a detailed analysis of frictional contacts between
the dimer and the plate. Frictional inelastic oblique col-
lision between asymmetric bodies has been a subject of
many studies in contact mechanics where various regimes
of isolated contacts have been identiﬁed (see e.g. [11]).
Depending on the geometry and the incident velocity of
the body one can distinguish three qualitatively diﬀerent
regimes: continuous slide, slip-stick, or slip-reversal (see
also Ref. [5] for the case of thin rods).
In addition to
these regimes, the dimer in the D-mode experiences an
even greater variety of contacts with the plate, includ-
ing three types of double collisions (slide, slip-stick, and
slip reversal) when two spheres touch the plate simul-
taneously, and two regimes of rolling (with or without
sliding).

The dynamics of the dimer is governed by the Newton
equations written for the center of mass (CM) velocity
v = (u, 0, v) and the angular velocity ω

m ˙v =

Fc + mg,

I ˙ω =

rc × Fc,

(1)

Xc

Xc

where m, I are the dimer mass and moment of iner-
tia, Fc = (F c
z ) is the contact force, and rc =

x , 0, F c

4

In conclusion, we investigated the dynamics of a dimer
bouncing on an oscillated plate with the special focus on
the ﬁrst excited D-mode in which the dimer travels in
one of the two directions selected via a symmetry break-
ing. In typical ﬂuctuation-driven transport systems, the
direction of transport is selected by the local asymmetry
[6]. In contrast, our bouncing
of microscopic potential
dimer presents a novel phenomenon of ratchet motion in
a system without an imposed asymmetric potential [13].
Our theoretical analysis reveals that the D-mode is in fact
a concatenation of multiple collisions which include indi-
vidual, double, and rolling contacts. Horizontal trans-
port is forced by the Coulomb friction during collisions
and rolling phases. Because our preliminary experiments
show that the drift mode survives collisions, one can an-
ticipate that a collection of dimers, while initially exhibt-
ing random motion, will align mutually due to excluded
volume interactions ampliﬁed by inelastic collisions. We
expect that this alignment would give rise to a global
convection similar to vortices observed with rods [3, 4].

SD thanks FNRS for ﬁnancial support. This work was
supported by NSF grant # DMR-9983659 (Clark) and
the U.S. DOE grant DE-FG02-04ER46135 (UCSD).

[1] F. X. Villarruel, B. E. Lauderdale, D. M. Mueth, and
H. M. Jaeger, Phys. Rev. E 61, 6914 (2000); K. Stokely,
A. Diacou, and S.V. Franklin, Phys. Rev. E 67, 051302
(2003).

[2] V. Frette, et al., Nature (London) 379, 49 (1996).
[3] D. L. Blair, T. Neicu, and A. Kudrolli, Phys. Rev. E 67,

[4] I. S. Aranson and L. S. Tsimring, Phys. Rev. E 67,

031303 (2003).

021305 (2003).

[5] D. Volfson, A. Kudrolli, and L. S. Tsimring, Phys. Rev.

E 70, 051312 (2004).

[6] I. Der´enyi, P. Tegzes, and T. Viscek, Chaos, 8, 657
(1998); Z. Farkas, P. Tegzes, A. Vukics, and T. Vicsek,
Phys. Rev. E 60, 7022 (1999); J. F. Wambaugh, C. Reich-
hardt, and C. J. Olson, Phys. Rev. E 65, 031308 (2002).
[7] See, e.g., N. B. Tuﬁllaro, T. Abbot, and J. Reilly, An Ex-
perimental Approach to Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos
(Addison-Wesley, New York, 1992).

[8] See movies of the modes in the supplementary material
(also at: http://physics.clarku.edu/∼akudrolli/dimer/).
[9] We call the tip the point on the sphere surface directly

underneath its center.

[10] D. Volfson, et al., to be published.
[11] W. J. Stronge, Proc. R. Soc. London A, 431, 169 (1990);
Y. Hurmuzlu, ASME J. Appl. Mech., 65, 952 (1998).
[12] J. N. Israelachvili, Intermolecular and Surface Forces,

Academic Press: London, 2nd ed. (1991).

[13] In a recent preprint cond-mat/0306646, J. Atwell and
J. S. Olafsen reported anisotropy of velocity ﬂuctuations
of loosely connected pairs of grains on a vibrated plate
which may be caused by similar ratchet mechanism.

FIG. 5: Vertical coordinates of left and right tips of the dimer
(a) and the horizontal velocity of the left contact point for the
short dimer Ar = 3.9 (b) and long dimer Ar = 6.1 (c). Diﬀer-
ent symbols and line styles denote diﬀerent modes of motion
and collisions between the dimer and the vibrating plate: sin-
gle slide (×), single slip reversal ((cid:3)), double collision (△),
rolling (thick solid line), ﬂight (thin solid line). Parameters
of simulations are the same as in Figure 4.

.

l ≪ V a

the main source of the positive drift momentum. Simul-
taneously, the right tip acquires a ﬁnite vertical velocity
V a
r which equals −ǫV b
r . The left tip also acquires a small
positive vertical velocity V a
r , resulting in the dimer
being lifted oﬀ the plate. Following the lift-oﬀ, the left
end makes a sequence of collisions with the plate which
result in a decaying sequence of small ﬂights. This se-
quence converges through inelastic collapse at time t1,
after which the left tip of the dimer stays on the plate.
Meanwhile the right end of the dimer is still in the air,
and the rolling mode with slippage commences and con-
tinues until the right tip ﬁnally collides with the plate,
after which the process repeats.

For large Ar, the double collision is of the slip-stick
type, so that U a
c = 0, and the mean slip velocity is nega-
tive [Fig. 5(c)]. While this picture qualitatively agrees
with the experimental ﬁndings [compare Fig. 5(b),(c)
with Fig. 3(b)], in order to match the mean drift veloc-
ity quantitatively [see Fig. 4(a)], we had to choose ˆµ, ˆµs
for short-term collisions which were half of those for the
rolling phase. While we do not have a good explanation
for the smaller values, it is well known [12] that the fric-
tion properties depend strongly on the age of the contact
and therefore can diﬀer between short-time collisions and
relatively long rolling contacts. As seen in Fig. 4(a), even
with this ﬁtting of friction parameters, there is a signiﬁ-
cant deviation between theory and observations for large
aspect ratios. In particular, experiments do not show a
discontinuous transition from forward to reverse drift at
a certain Ar. We believe that this discrepancy can be ex-
plained by the sensitivity of the double collision to small
variations in frictional properties of the plate at large Ar.

