5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
1
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

H-theorem for classical matter around a black hole

Piero Nicolini1,2,3 and Massimo Tessarotto1,4
1Dipartimento di Matematica e Informatica, Universit`a di Trieste, Italy
2Dipartimento di Matematica, Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy
3Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Trieste, Italy
4Consorzio di Magnetoﬂuidodinamica, Trieste,Italy
(Dated: July 27, 2013)

We propose a classical solution for the kinetic description of matter falling into a black hole,
which permits to evaluate both the kinetic entropy and the entropy production rate of classical
infalling matter at the event horizon. The formulation is based on a relativistic kinetic description
for classical particles in the presence of an event horizon. An H-theorem is established which holds
for arbitrary models of black holes and is valid also in the presence of contracting event horizons.
PACS: 65.40.Gr 04.70.Bw 04.70.Dy.

PACS numbers:

The remarkable mathematical analogy between the laws
of thermodynamics and black hole (BH) physics following
from classical general relativity still escapes a complete
and satisfactory interpretation.
In particular it is not
yet clear whether this analogy is merely formal or leads
to an actual identiﬁcation of physical quantities belong-
ing to apparently unrelated framework. The analogous
quantities are E ↔ M , T ↔ ακ and S ↔ (1/8πα)A,
where A and κ are the area and the surface gravity of
the BH, while α is a constant. A immediate hint to be-
lieve in the thermodynamical nature of BH comes from
the ﬁrst analogy which actually regards a unique physical
quantity: the total energy. However, at the classical level
there are obstacles to interpret the surface gravity as the
BH temperature since a perfectly absorbing medium, dis-
crete or continuum, which is by deﬁnition unable to emit
anything, cannot have a temperature diﬀerent from ab-
solute zero. An reconciliation was partially achieved by
in 1975 by Hawking [1], who showed, in terms of quan-
tum particle pairs nucleation, the existence of a thermal
ﬂux of radiation emitted from the BH with a black body
spectrum at temperature T = ~κ/2πkB (Hawking BH ra-
diation model). The last analogy results the most intrigu-
ing, since the area A should essentially be the logarithm
of the number of microscopic states compatible with the
observed macroscopic state of the BH, if we identify it
with the Boltzmann deﬁnition. In such a context, a fur-
ther complication arise when one strictly refers to the
internal microstates of the BH, since for the inﬁnite red
shift they are inaccessible to an external observer. An ad-
ditional diﬃculty with the identiﬁcation S ↔ (1/8πα)A,
however, follows from the BH radiation model, since it
predicts the existence of contracting BH for which the
radius of the BH may actually decrease. To resolve this
diﬃculty a modiﬁed constitutive equation for the entropy
was postulated [2, 3], in order to include the contribution
of the matter in the BH exterior, by setting

S′ = S +

1
4

k

c3A
G~ ,

(1)

(S′ denoting the so-called Bekenstein entropy) where S
is the entropy carried by the matter outside the BH and
Sbh ≡ 1
G~ identiﬁes the contribution of the BH. As a
consequence a generalized second law

4 k c3A

δS′ ≥ 0

(2)

was proposed [2, 3] which can be viewed as nothing more
than the ordinary second law of thermodynamics applied
to a system containing a BH. From this point of view one
notices that, by assumption and in contrast to the ﬁrst
term S, Sbh cannot be interpreted, in a proper sense, as a
physical entropy of the BH, since, as indicated above, it
may decrease in time. However, the precise deﬁnition and
underlying statistical basis both for S and Sbh remain
obscure. Thus a fundamental problem still appears their
precise estimates based on suitable microscopic models.
Since the evaluation of Sbh requires the knowledge of
the internal structure of the event horizon (excluding for
causality the BH interior), the issue can be resolved only
in the context of a consistent formulation of quantum
theory of gravitation [4, 5]. This can be based, for exam-
ple, on string theory [6] and can be conveniently tested
in the framework of semiclassical gravity [7, 8]. Regard-
ing, instead the entropy produced by external matter S,
its evaluation depends on the nature, not yet known, of
the BH. However, even if one regards the BH as a purely
classical object surrounded by a suitably large number
of classical particles its estimate should be achievable in
the context of classical statistical mechanics.

In statistical mechanics the “disorder” characterizing a
physical system, classical or quantal, endowed by a large
number of permissible microstates, is sometimes conven-
tionally measured in terms of the so-called Boltzmann
entropy SB = K ln W. Here K is the Boltzmann con-
stant while W is a suitable real number to be identiﬁed
with the total number of microscopic complexions com-
patible with the macroscopic state of the system, a num-
ber which generally depends on the speciﬁc micromodel
of the system. Therefore, paradoxically, the concept of

Boltzmann entropy does not rely on a true statistical
description of physical systems, but only on the classiﬁ-
cation of the internal microstates (quantal or classical).
As is well known[9], SB can be axiomatically deﬁned, de-
manding (i) that it results a monotonic increasing func-
tion of W and (ii) that it satisﬁes the entropy additivity
law SB(W1W2) = SB(W1)+SB(W2). Boltzmann entropy
plays a crucial role in thermodynamics where (i) and (ii)
have their corresponding laws in the entropy nondecreas-
ing monotonicity and additivity. Since in statistical me-
chanics of ﬁnite system it is impossible to satisfy both
laws exactly, the deﬁnition of SB is actually conditioned
by the requirement of considering systems with W >> 1
(large physical systems).

An alternate deﬁnition of entropy in statistical me-
chanics is the one given by the Gibbs entropy, in turn
related to the concept of Shannon information entropy.
In contrast to the Boltzmann entropy, this is based on a
statistical description of physical systems and is deﬁned
in terms of the probability distribution of the observable
microstates of the system. In many cases it is suﬃcient
for this purpose to formulate a kinetic description, and
a corresponding kinetic entropy, both based on the one-
particle kinetic distribution function. In particular, this
is the case of classical many-particle systems, consist-
ing of weakly interacting ultra relativistic point particles,
such as those which may characterize the distribution of
matter in the immediate vicinity of the BH exterior.

The goal of the paper is to to provide an explicit
expression for the contribution S, which characterizes
Bekenstein law (1), to be evaluated in terms of a suit-
able kinetic entropy, and to estimate the corresponding
entropy production rate due to infalling matter at the
BH event horizon. In addition we intend to establish an
H-theorem for the kinetic entropy which holds, in prin-
ciple, for a classical BH characterized by event horizons
of arbitrary shape and size and even in the presence of
BH implosions or slow contractions. This is obtained in
the framework where the classical description of outside
matter and space is a good approximation to the under-
lying physics. The basic assumption is that the matter
falling into the BH is formed by a system of N ≫ 1 clas-
sical point particles moving in a classical spacetime. We
adopt a covariant kinetic formalism taking into account
the presence of an event horizon and assuming Hamil-
tonian dynamics for the point particles. The evolution
of such a system is well known and results uniquely de-
termined by the classical equations of motion, deﬁned
with respect to an arbitrary observer O. To this purpose
let us choose O, without loss of generality, in a region
where space time is (asymptotically) ﬂat, endowing with
the proper time τ , with τ assumed to span the set I ⊆ R
(observer’s time axis). Each point particle is described by
the canonical state x spanning the 8−dimensional phase
space Γ, where x = (rµ, pµ). Moreover, its evolution is
prescribed in terms of a suitable relativistic Hamiltonian

2

H = H (x), so that the canonical state x = (rµ, pµ) re-
sults parameterized in terms of the world line arc length
s (see [10]). As a consequence, requiring that s = s(τ )
results a strictly monotonic function it follows that, the
particle state can be also parameterized in terms of the
observer’s time τ. To obtain the a kinetic description for
a relativistic classical system of N point particles we in-
troduce the kinetic distribution function for the observer
O, ρG(x), deﬁned as follows

ρG(x) ≡ ρ(x)δ(s − s(τ ))δ(

uµuµ − 1)

(3)

p

where ρ (x) is the conventional kinetic distribution func-
tion in the 8−dimensional phase space. Notice that the
Dirac deltas here introduced must be intended as phys-
ical realizability equations.
In particular the condition
placed on the arc length s implies that the particle of
the system is parameterized with respect to s(τ ), i.e., it
results functionally dependent on the proper time of the
observer; instead the constraints placed on 4-velocity im-
plies that uµ is a tangent vector to a timelike geodesic.
The event horizon of a classical BH is deﬁned by the
hypersurface rH speciﬁed by the equation

R(x) = rH

(4)

where x denotes a point of the space time manifold, while
R(x) reduces to the radial coordinate in the spherically
symmetric case. According to a classical point of view,
let us now assume that the particles are ”captured” by
the BH (i.e., for example, they eﬀectively disappear for
the observer since their signals are red shifted in such a
way that they cannot be anymore detected [11]) when
they reach γ of equation

Rǫ(x) = rǫ.

(5)

Here rǫ = (1 + ǫ)rH , while ǫ depends on the detector
and the 4−momentum of the particle. The presence of
the BH event horizon is taken into by deﬁning suitable
boundary conditions for the kinetic distribution function
on the hypersurface γ. For this purpose we distinguish
between incoming and outgoing distributions on γ, ρ−
G(x)
and ρ+
G(x) corresponding respectively to nαuα ≤ 0 and
nαuα > 0, where nα is a locally radial outward 4−vector.
Therefore the boundary conditions on γ are speciﬁed as
follows

ρ+
G(x) ≡ ρ(x)δ(s − s(τ ))δ(
ρ−
G(x) ≡ 0

p

uµuµ − 1)

It follows that it is possible to represent the kinetic dis-
tribution function in the whole space time manifold in
the form

ρG (x) = ρ−

G (x) + ρ+

G (x)

where

ρ±
G(x) ≡ ρ(x)δ(s − s(τ ))δ(

uµuµ − 1) ×

×Θ±(Rǫ(x) − rǫ(s(τ )))

p

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

3

with Θ± respectively denoting the strong and the weak
Heaviside functions

the distribution function vanishes. Hence S(ρ) can also
be written:

and

Θ+(a) =

1 f or a ≥ 0
0 f or a < 0.

(cid:26)

Θ−(a) =

1 f or a > 0
0 f or a ≤ 0.

(cid:26)

We stress that in the above boundary conditions no de-
tailed physical model is actually introduced for the par-
ticle loss mechanism, since all particles are assumed to
be captured on the same hypersurface γ, independent of
their mass, charge and state. This provides a classical
loss model for the BH event horizon.

Let us now consider the evolution of the the kinetic dis-
tribution function ρG(x) in external domains, i.e. outside
the event horizon. Assuming that binary collisions are
negligible, or can be described by means of a mean ﬁeld,
and provided that the phase space volume element is con-
served, it follows the collisionless Boltzmann equation, or
the Vlasov equation in the case of charged particles [19],

ds
dτ (cid:26)

drµ
ds

∂ ˆρ(x)
∂rµ +

dpµ
ds

∂ ˆρ(x)
∂pµ (cid:27)

= 0

(12)

∂r0(s)
∂s

with summation understood over repeated indexes, while
ρ(x) denotes ρG(x) evaluated at r0 = r0(s(τ )) and
p0 = m
. This equation resumes the conser-
b
vation of the probability in the relativistic phase space in
the domain external to the event horizon. Invoking the
Hamiltonian dynamics for the system of point particles,
the kinetic equation takes the conservative form

s=s(τ )
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(10)

S(ρ) = −P

dx(s)δ(s − s(τ ))ρ1(x) ln ρ(x),

(15)

Z
Γ

where ρ1(x) now reads

(11)

ρ1(x) = Θ(r(s) − rǫ(s))δ(

uµuµ − 1)ρ(x(s)).

(16)

p

Diﬀerentiating with respect to τ and introducing the in-
variant volume element d3rd3p, the entropy production
rate results manifestly proportional to the area A of the
event horizon

dS(ρ)
dτ

Z
Γ−

= −P

d3rd3pFrrǫ [δ (r − rǫ) ˆρ ln ˆρ] .

(17)

Indeed, the r.h.s represents the entropy ﬂux across the
event horizon. Moreover here, Γ− is the subdomain of
phase space corresponding to the particle falling into the
BH and Frrǫ is the characteristic integrating factor

Frrǫ ≡

ds(τ )

dτ (cid:18)

dr
ds

−

drǫ
ds (cid:19)

.

We can write the above expression in terms of the ki-
netic probability density evaluated at the hypersurface

uµuµ − 1, deﬁned as ˆf (x) ≡ ˆρ/N . It follows

p

ˆρ ln ˆρ ≡ N ˆf ln N ˆf .

At this point we adopt a customary procedure in statis-
tical mechanics [16] invoking the inequality

N ˆf ln N ˆf ≥ N ˆf − 1

(18)

(19)

(20)

ds
dτ

[ˆρ(x), H]x = 0.

(13)

and notice that in the subdomain of phase space Γ− in
which Frrǫ ≥ 0 there results by deﬁnition ˆρ = 0. Hence
it follows that in Γ−

Let us now introduce the appropriate deﬁnition of kinetic
entropy S(ρ) in the context of relativistic kinetic theory.
We intend to prove that in the presence of the BH event
horizon it satisﬁes an H theorem. The concept of entropy
in relativistic kinetic theory can be formulated by direct
extension of customary deﬁnition given in nonrelativistic
setting [12, 13, 14, 15]. For this purpose we introduce
the notion of kinetic entropy measured with respect to
an observer endowed with proper time τ as follows

S(ρ) = −P

dx(s)δ(s − s(τ ))δ(

uµuµ − 1)ρ(x) ln ρ(x)

Z
Γ

p

(14)
where ρ(x) is strictly positive and, in the 8-dimensional
integral, the state vector x is parameterized with respect
to s, with s denoting an arbitrary arc length. Here P is
the principal value of the integral introduce in order to
exclude from the integration domain the subset in which

Frrǫ < 0

(21)

where by construction ds(τ )
dτ > 0. This result holds in-
dependent of the value of drǫ
ds . Next let us introduce the
bounded subset Ω ⊂ Γ− such that N ˆf results inﬁnitesi-
mal (of order δ ) in the complementary set Γ− \ Ω and
moreover the ordering estimate

P

Z
Γ−\Ω

d3rd3p |Frrǫ | δ (r − rǫ)

N ˆf ln N ˆf
i
h

∼ O (δ ln δ)

is required to hold. Manifestly this domain includes the
In the set Ω, N ˆf is by
set of improper points of Γ−.
assumption positive and such that N ˆf > δ. Therefore
there results

0 < P

d3rd3p |Frrǫ | δ (r − rǫ) ≡ Mδ

(22)

Z
Ω

where Mδ is a suitable ﬁnite constant. Thus one obtains

dS(ρ)
dτ

Z
Ω

≥ P

d3rd3p |Frrǫ | δ (r − rǫ) [N f − 1] + O (δ ln δ)

(23)
The ﬁrst term of the r.h.s of (23) can be interpreted in
terms of the eﬀective radial velocity of incoming particles

V ef f
r ≡

d3p |Frrǫ | δ (r − rǫ) ˆf ,

(24)

1
n0 Z
Ω

while n0 is the surface number density of the incoming
particle distribution function

d3rd3p ˆf (x)δ(r − r0(s(t)) = Ano.

(25)

Z
Ω

b

Finally we invoke the majorization

dS(ρ)
dτ

≥ ˙S ≡ N inf

d3rn0V ef f

r (cid:27)

(cid:26)ZΩ

−Mδ + O (δ ln δ)

(26)

and impose that N ≫ 1 be suﬃciently large to satisfy
the inequality ˙S > 0. We stress that inf
can be assumed strictly positive for non isolated BHs
(cid:9)
surrounded by matter. This proves the relativistic H-
theorem

d3rn0V ef f

(cid:8)R

r

Let us brieﬂy analyze the basic implications of our re-
sults. First we notice that the H-theorem here obtained
appears of general validity even if achieved in the classical
framework and under the customary requirement N ≫ 1
(large classical system) and in validity of the subsidiary
condition ˙S > 0. Indeed the result applies to BH hav-
ing, in principle, arbitrary shape of the event horizon.
The description adopted is purely classical both for the
falling particles (charged or neutral [17, 18, 19, 20]) and
for the gravitational ﬁeld and is based on the relativis-
tic collisionless Boltzmann equation and/or the Vlasov
equation respectively for neutral and charged particles.
A key aspect of our formalism is the deﬁnition of suitable
boundary conditions for the kinetic distribution function
in order to take into account the presence of the event
horizon. Second, the expressions for the entropy and
entropy production rate, respectively Eqs.(14) and (17),
can be used to determine the Bekenstein entropy for clas-
sical BH (1) and the related generalized second law (2),
although we stress that the present results are indepen-
dent of the assumptions involved in the deﬁnition of the

4

Bekenstein entropy (17). Finally interesting features of
the derivation are that the entropy production rate re-
sults proportional to the area of the event horizon and
that the formalism is independent of the detailed model
adopted for the BH. In particular also the possible pres-
ence of an imploding star (contracting event horizon) is
permitted.

Acknowledgments

P. N. is supported by the Ministero dell’Istruzione,
dell’Universit`a e della Ricerca (MIUR) via the Pro-
gramma PRIN 2004: ‘Metodi matematici delle teorie ci-
netiche’.

[1] S.W. Hawking, Comm. Math. Phys. 43, 199 (1975).
[2] J. D. Bekenstein, Phys. Rev. D 7, 2333 (1973).
[3] J. D. Bekenstein, Phys. Rev. D 9, 3292 (1974).
[4] J. D. Bekenstein, Phys. Rev. D 12, 3077 (1975).
[5] S. W. Hawking, Phys. Rev. D 13, 191 (1976).
[6] For reviews see. for instance J. M. Maldacena, PhD
1996 hep-th/9607235;
thesis, Princeton University,
A.W. Peet, Class. Quantum Grav. 15, 3291 (1998);
R. M. Wald, Living Rev. Rel. 4, 6 (2001).

[7] R. Balbinot, A. Fabbri, V. Frolov, P. Nicolini, P. J. Sut-

ton, A. Zelnikov, Phys. Rev. D 63 084029 (2001).

[9] C. G. Chakrabarti and Kajal De, Internat. J. Math &

Rev. D 66 024014 (2002).

Math. Sci. 23, 243 (2000).

PC, Amsterdam 1960.

[10] J. L. Synge, Relativity: the general theory, North Holland

[11] R.M. Wald, General relativity, The University of Chicago

Press, Chicago and London 1984.

[12] H. Grad, Handbuch der physik, Vol. XII, 205, Springer

Verlag, Berlin 1956.

[13] W. Israel, J. Math. Phys. 4, 1163 (1963).
[14] C. Cercignani, Theory and applications of the Boltzmann
equation, Scottish Academic Press, Edinburgh and Lon-
don 1975.

[15] S. R. De Groot, Relativistic Kinetic Theory - Principles

and Applications, North-Holland 1980.

[16] J. Yvon, Correlations and entropy in classical mechanics,

Pergamon Press, Oxford 1969.

[17] M. Pozzo and M. Tessarotto, Phys. Plasmas, 5, 2232

[18] A. Beklemishev and M. Tessarotto, Phys. Plasmas, 6,

[19] A. Beklemishev and M. Tessarotto, A. & A. 428, 1

(1998).

4548 (1999).

(2004).

[20] A. Beklemishev, P. Nicolini and M. Tessarotto, AIP Conf.

Proc. 762, 1283 (2005).

dS(ρ)
dτ

> 0.

(27)

[8] R. Balbinot, A. Fabbri, P. Nicolini, P. J. Sutton, Phys.

