5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
1
2
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Physics Notes1

Note 13

28 June 2005

Axiomatics of classical electrodynamics
and its relation to gauge ﬁeld theory

Frank Gronwald1, Friedrich W. Hehl2,3, and J¨urgen Nitsch1

1 Otto-von-Guericke-University of Magdeburg
Institute for Fundamental Electrical Engineering and EMC
Post Box 4120, 39016 Magdeburg, Germany

2 University of Cologne
Institute for Theoretical Physics
50923 K¨oln, Germany

3 University of Missouri-Columbia
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Columbia, MO 65211, USA

ﬁle essential14.tex

Abstract

We give a concise axiomatic introduction into the fundamental structure of classical elec-
trodynamics: It is based on electric charge conservation, the Lorentz force, magnetic ﬂux
conservation, and the existence of local and linear constitutive relations. The inhomogeneous
Maxwell equations, expressed in terms of Di and Hi , turn out to be a consequence of electric
charge conservation, whereas the homogeneous Maxwell equations, expressed in terms of Ei
and Bi, are derived from magnetic ﬂux conservation and special relativity theory. The exci-
tations Di and Hi , by means of constitutive relations, are linked to the ﬁeld strengths Ei and
Bi. Eventually, we point out how this axiomatic approach is related to the framework of gauge
ﬁeld theory.

E-Mail: Frank.Gronwald@et.uni-magdeburg.de, hehl@thp.uni-koeln.de, Juergen.Nitsch@et.uni-magdeburg.de

1Edited by C.E. Baum, Air Force Research Laboratory, Kirtland Airforce Base, New Mexico, USA

1

Table of contents

1 Introduction

2 Essential classical electrodynamics based on four axioms

2.1 Electric charge conservation (axiom 1) and the inhomogeneous Maxwell equations

2.2 Lorentz force (axiom 2) and merging of electric and magnetic ﬁeld strengths

2.3 Magnetic ﬂux conservation (axiom 3) and the homogeneous Maxwell equations

2.4 Constitutive relations (axiom 4) and the properties of spacetime

3 On the relation between the axiomatics and the gauge approach

3.1 Noether theorem and electric charge conservation

3.2 Minimal coupling and the Lorentz force

3.3 Bianchi identity and magnetic ﬂux conservation

3.4 Gauge approach and constitutive relations

4 Conclusion

Acknowledgments

Appendix: Mathematical background

A.1 Integration

grands

A.2 Poincar´e lemma

A.3 Stokes theorem

References

A.1.1 Integration over a curve and covariant vectors as line integrands
A.1.2 Integration over a surface and contravariant vector densities as surface inte-

A.1.3 Integration over a volume and scalar densities as volume integrands

2

1 Introduction

In nature one has, up to now, identiﬁed four fundamental interactions: Gravity, electromag-
netism, weak interaction, and strong interaction. Gravity and electromagnetism manifest
themselves on a macroscopic level. The weak and the strong interactions are generically
microscopic in nature and require a quantum ﬁeld theoretical description right from the begin-
ning.

The four interactions can be modeled individually. Thereby it is recognized that electro-
magnetism has the simplest structure amongst these interactions. This simplicity is reﬂected
in the Maxwell equations. They, together with a few additional assumptions, explain the elec-
tromagnetic phenomena that we observe in nature or in laboratories.

Without digressing to philosophy, one may wonder about the origin of the Maxwell equa-
tions. Should we believe in them as such and just study their consequences? Or should
we rather derive them from some deeper lying structures? Certainly, there are already some
answers known to the last question. The Maxwell equations rely on conservation laws and
symmetry principles that are also known from elementary particle physics, see [1, 21]. In
the framework of classical physics, authoritative accounts of electrodynamics are provided by
[19, 23], e.g.. In this paper we would like to add some new insight into this subject.

We will provide a short layout of an axiomatic approach that allows to identify the basic
ingredients that are necessary for formulating classical electrodynamics, see [4]. We believe
that this axiomatic approach is not only characterized by simplicity and beauty, but is also of
appreciable pedagogical value. The more clearly a structure is presented, the easier it is to
memorize. Moreover, an understanding of how the fundamental electromagnetic quantities
Di, Hi, Ei, Bi are related to each other may facilitate the formulation and solution of actual
electromagnetic problems.

As it is appropriate for an axiomatic approach, we will start from as few prerequisites as
possible. What we will need is some elementary mathematical background that comprises
differentiation and integration in the framework of tensor analysis in three-dimensional space.
In particular, the concept of integration is necessary for introducing electromagnetic objects as
integrands in a natural way. To this end, we will use a tensor notation in which the components
of mathematical quantities are explicitly indicated by means of upper (contravariant) or lower
(covariant) indices [22]. The advantage of this notation is that it allows to represent geometric
properties clearly. In this way, the electromagnetic objects become more transparent and can
be discussed more easily. For the formalism of differential forms, which we recommend and
which provides similar conceptual advantages, we refer to [10, 4].

We have compiled some mathematical material in the Appendix. Those who don’t feel
comfortable with some of the notation, may ﬁrst want to have a look into the Appendix. Let
us introduce the following conventions:

Partial derivatives with respect to a spatial coordinate xi (with i, j,
resepct to time t are abbreviated according to

•

· · ·

= 1, 2, 3) or with

∂
∂xi −→

∂i ,

∂
∂t −→

∂t .

(1)

3

•

We use the “summation convention”. It states that a summation sign can be omitted
if the same index occurs both in a lower and an upper position. That is, we have, for
example, the correspondence

3

i=1
X

αi βi

αi βi .

←→

(2)

(3)

•

We deﬁne the Levi-Civita symbols ǫijk and ǫijk. They are antisymmetric with respect
to all of their indices. Therefore, they vanish if two of their indices are equal. Their
remaining components assume the values +1 or
1, depending on whether ijk is an
even or an odd permutation of 123:

−

ǫijk = ǫijk =

(

−

1 ,
1 ,

for ijk = 123, 312, 231,
for ijk = 213, 321, 132.

With these conventions we obtain for the gradient of a function f the expression ∂if . The curl
of a (covariant) vector vi is written according to ǫijk∂jvk and the divergence of a (contravari-
ant) vector (density) wi is given by ∂iwi.

Now we are prepared to move on to the Maxwell theory.

2 Essential classical electrodynamics based on four axioms

In the next four subsections, we will base classical electrodynamics on electric charge con-
servation (axiom 1), the Lorentz force (axiom 2), magnetic ﬂux conservation (axiom 3), and
the existence of constitutive relations (axiom 4). This represents the core of classical electro-
dynamics: It results in the Maxwell equations together with the constitutive relations and the
Lorentz force law.

In order to complete electrodynamics, one can require two more axioms, which we only
mention shortly (see [4] for a detailed discussion). One can specify the energy-momentum
distribution of the electromagentic ﬁeld (axiom 5) by means of its so-called energy-momentum
tensor. This tensor yields the energy density (DiEi + HiBi)/2 and the energy ﬂux density
ǫijkEjHk (the Poynting vector), inter alia. Moreover, if one treats electromagnetic problems
of materials in macrophysics, one needs a further axiom by means of which the total electric
charge (and the current) is split (axiom 6) in a bound or material charge (and current), which
is also conserved, and in a free or external charge (and current). This completes classical
electrodynamics.

2.1 Electric charge conservation (axiom 1) and the inhomogeneous

Maxwell equations

In classical electrodynamics, the electric charge is characterized by its density ρ. From a
geometric point of view, the charge density ρ constitutes an integrand of a volume integral.

4

This geometric identiﬁcation is natural since, by deﬁnition, integration of ρ over a three-
dimensional volume V yields the total charge Q enclosed in this volume

Q :=

ρ dv .

ZV
We note that, in the SI-system, electric charge is measured in units of “ampere times second”
or coulomb, [Q] = As = C. Therefore the SI-unit of charge density ρ is [ρ] = As/m3 = C/m3.

It is instructive to invoke at this point the Poincar´e lemma. There are different explicit
versions of this lemma. We use the form (69) that is displayed in Appendix A. Then (if space
fulﬁlls suitable topological conditions) we can write the charge density ρ as the divergence of
an integrand Di of a surface integral. Thus,

∂iDi = ρ

(div

= ρ) .

D

This result already constitutes one inhomogeneous Maxwell equation, the Coulomb-Gauss
law. In parenthesis we put the symbolic form of this equation.

Electric charges often move. We represent this motion by a material velocity ﬁeld ui, that
is, we assign locally a velocity to each portion of charge in space. The product of electric
charge density ρ and material velocity ui deﬁnes the electric current density J i,

J i = ρui .

Geometrically, the electric current density constitutes an integrand of surface integrals since
integration of J i over a two-dimensional surface S yields the total electric current I that
crosses this surface,

ZS
We have, in SI-units, [I] = A and [J i] = A/m2.

I =

J i dai .

We now turn to electric charge conservation, the ﬁrst axiom of our axiomatic approach. To
this end we have to determine how individual packets of charge change in time as they move
with velocity ui through space. A convenient way to describe this change is provided by the
material derivative D/Dt which also is often called convective derivative [20]. It allows to
calculate the change of a physical quantity as it appears to an observer or a probe that follows
this quantity. Then electric charge conservation can be expressed as

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

where the material derivative is taken with respect to the velocity ﬁeld ui. It can be rewritten
in the following way [20],

DQ
Dt

= 0 ,

DQ
Dt

=

D
Dt

ρ dV

ZV (t)

5

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

=

=

∂ρ
∂t

dV +

I∂V (t)
+ ∂i(ρui)

∂ρ
∂t

ZV (t)

ZV (t) (cid:18)

ρui dai

dV .

(cid:19)

∂tρ + ∂iJ i = 0 .

∂i

∂tDi + J i
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

= 0 .

Here we used in the last line the Stokes theorem in the form of (70). The volume V (t) that is
integrated over depends in general on time since it moves together with the electric charge that
it contains. By means of (6), (8), and (9) we obtain the axiom of electric charge conservation
in the local form as continuity equation,

Now we use the inhomogeneous Maxwell equation (5) in order to replace within the con-

tinuity equation (10) the charge density by the divergence of Di. This yields

Again we invoke the Poincar´e lemma, now in the form (68), and write the sum ∂tDi + J i as
the curl of the integrand of a line integral which we denote by Hi. This yields

ǫijk∂jHk

∂tDi = J i

−

(curl H

˙
D

−

=

) .

J

Equation (12) constitutes the remaining inhomogeneous Maxwell equation, the Amp`ere-
Maxwell law, which, in this way, is derived from the axiom of charge conservation. The
ﬁelds Di and Hi are called electric excitation (historically: electric displacement) and mag-
netic excitation (historically: magnetic ﬁeld), respectively. From (5) and (12) it follows that
their SI-units are [Di] = As/m2 and [Hi] = A/m.

Some remarks are appropriate now: We ﬁrst note that we obtain the excitations Di and
Hi from the Poincar´e lemma and charge conservation, respectively, without introducing the
concept of force. This is in contrast to other approaches that rely on the Coulomb and the
Lorentz force laws [2]. Furthermore, since electric charge conservation is valid not only on
macroscopic scales but also in micropysics, the inhomogeneous Maxwell equations (5) and
(12) are microphysical equations as long as the source terms ρ and J i are microscopically
formulated as well. The same is valid for the excitations Di and Hi. They are microphysical
quantities — in contrast to what is often stated in textbooks, see [7], for example. We ﬁnally
remark that the inhomogeneous Maxwell equations (5) and (12) can be straightforwardly put
into a relativistically invariant form. This is not self-evident but suggested by electric charge
conservation in the form of the continuity equation (10) since this fundamental equation can
also be shown to be relativistically invariant.

2.2 Lorentz force (axiom 2) and merging of electric and magnetic ﬁeld

strengths

During the discovery of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, the concept of force has played a major role.
Electric and magnetic forces are directly accessible to experimental observation. Experimental

6

evidence shows that, in general, an electric charge is subject to a force if an electromagnetic
i). If it has the
ﬁeld acts on it. For a point charge q at position xq
velocity ui, we postulate the Lorentz force

i, we have ρ(xi) = qδ(xi

xq

−

Fi = q(Ei + ǫijkujBk)

(13)

as second axiom. It introduces the electric ﬁeld strength Ei and the magnetic ﬁeld strength
Bi. The Lorentz force already yields a prescription of how to measure Ei and Bi by means
of the force that is experienced by an inﬁnitesimally small test charge q which is either at
rest or moving with velocity ui. Turning to the dimensions, we introduce voltage as “work per
charge”. In SI, it is measured in volt (V). Then [Fi]=VC/m and, according to (13), [Ei] = V/m
and [Bi] = Vs/m2 = Wb/m2 = T, with Wb as abbreviation for weber and T for tesla.

iB!

q

Bi

Ei

u

q

a) charge observed from its rest frame

b) charge observed from inertial frame

moving with respect to q

Figure 1: A charge that is, in some inertial frame, at rest and is immersed in a purely magnetic
ﬁeld experiences no Lorentz force, see Fig.1a. The fact that there is no Lorentz force should
be independent of the choice of the inertial system that is used to observe the charge. There-
fore, a compensating electric ﬁeld accompanies the magnetic ﬁeld if viewed from an inertial
laboratory system which is in relative motion to the charge, see Fig.1b.

From the axiom of the Lorentz force (13), we can draw the conclusion that the electric and
the magnetic ﬁeld strengths are not independent of each other. The corresponding argument
is based on the special relativity principle: According to the special relativity principle, the
laws of physics are independent of the choice of an inertial system [2]. Different inertial
systems move with constant velocities vi relative to each other. The outcome of a physical
experiment, as expressed by an empirical law, has to be independent of the inertial system
where the experiment takes place.

Let us suppose a point charge q with a certain mass moves with velocity ui in an elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld Ei and Bi. The velocity and the electromagnetic ﬁeld are measured in an
inertial laboratory frame. The point charge can also be observed from its instantaneous iner-
tial rest frame. If we denote quantities that are measured with respect to this rest frame by a

7

prime, i.e., by u′i, E′
laboratory system, i.e., if additionally E′
therefore no acceleration,

i, and B′i, then we have u′i = 0. In the absence of an electric ﬁeld in the
i = 0, the charge experiences no Lorentz force and

F ′

i = q(E′

i + ǫijku′jB′k) = 0 .

(14)

electric

E

c o v e c t o r s

field strength

D

v
e
c
t

o
r
 

d
e
n
s
i

t

i
e
s

B

e

x

c
i
t
a
t
i

o

n

H

magnetic

Figure 2: The tetrahedron of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. The electric and the magnetic excita-
tions Di, Hi and the electric and the magnetic ﬁeld strengths Ei, Bi build up 4-dimensional
quantities in spacetime. These four ﬁelds describe the electromagnetic ﬁeld completely. Of
electric nature are Di and Ei, of magnetic nature Hi and Bi. The electric and the magnetic
excitations Di, Hi are extensities, also called quantities (how much?), the electric and the
magnetic ﬁeld strengths Ei, Bi are intensities, also called forces (how strong?).

The fact that the charge experiences no acceleration is also true in the laboratory frame.
This is a consequence of the special relativity principle or, more precisely, of the fact that the
square of the acceleration can be shown to form a relativistic invariant. Consequently,

Thus, in the laboratory frame, electric and magnetic ﬁeld are related by

Fi = q(Ei + ǫijkujBk) = 0 .

Ei =

ǫijkujBk .

−

(15)

(16)

This situation is depicted in Fig.1. Accordingly, we ﬁnd that electric and magnetic ﬁeld
strength cannot be viewed as independent quantities. They are connected to each other by
transformations between different inertial systems.

Let us pause for a moment and summarize: So far we have introduced the four electromag-
netic ﬁeld quantities Di, Hi and Ei, Bi. These four quantities are interrelated by physical and
mathematical properties. This is illustrated in Fig.2 by the “tetrahedron of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld”.

8

2.3 Magnetic ﬂux conservation (axiom 3) and the homogeneous Maxwell

equations

We digress for a moment and turn to hydrodynamics. Helmholtz was one of the ﬁrst who
studied rotational or “vortex” motion in hydrodynamics, see [8]. He derived theorems for
vortex lines. An important consequence of his work was the conclusion that vortex lines are
conserved. They may move or change orientation but they are never spontaneously created nor
annihilated. The vortex lines that pierce through a two-dimensional surface can be integrated
over and yield a scalar quantity that is called circulation. The circulation in a perfect ﬂuid,
which satisﬁes certain conditions, is constant provided the loop enclosing the surface moves
with the ﬂuid [8].

There are certainly fundamental differences between electromagnetism and hydrodynam-
ics. But some suggestive analogies exist. A vortex line in hydrodynamics seems analogous to
a magnetic ﬂux line. The magnetic ﬂux Φ is determined from magnetic ﬂux lines, represented
by the magnetic ﬁeld strength Bi, that pierce through a two-dimensional surface S,

Φ :=

Bi dai .

(17)

ZS
As the circulation in a perfect ﬂuid is conserved, we can guess that, in a similar way, the
magnetic ﬂux may be conserved. Of course, the consequences of such an axiom have to be
borne out by experiment.

At ﬁrst sight, one may ﬁnd vortex lines of a ﬂuid easier to visualize than magnetic ﬂux
lines. However, on a microscopic level, magnetic ﬂux can occur in quanta. The corre-
sponding magnetic ﬂux unit is called ﬂux quantum or ﬂuxon and it carries Φ0 = h/(2e)
≈
10−15 Wb, with h as Planck constant and e as elementary charge. Single quantized
2, 07
magnetic ﬂux lines have been observed in the interior of type II superconductors if exposed
to a sufﬁciently strong magnetic ﬁeld, see [4], p.131. They even can be counted. The corre-
sponding experiments provide good evidence that magnetic ﬂux is a conserved quantity.

·

But how can we formulate magnetic ﬂux conservation mathematically? It is at this point

instructive to reconsider the notion of the electric charge

ZV
together with its corresponding conservation law

Q =

ρ dv

The rate of change of the electric charge within a speciﬁed volume V is balanced by the out-
or inﬂowing charge across the surface ∂V . This charge transport is described by the electric
charge current J i that is integrated over the enveloping surface ∂V . By means of the Stokes
theorem in the form (70), equation (19) yields the local continuity equation

(18)

(19)

(20)

∂tQ +

J i dai = 0 .

Z∂V

∂tρ + ∂iJ i = 0 .

9

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

Let us follow the same pattern in formulating magnetic ﬂux conservation: Starting with the
deﬁnition (17) of the magnetic ﬂux, the corresponding conservation law, in analogy to (19),
reads

where we introduced the magnetic ﬂux current J Φ
i . Geometrically, this is a covariant vector
that is integrated along a line ∂S, that is, along the curve bordering the 2-dimensional surface
S. The conservation law (21) tells us that the rate of change of the magnetic ﬂux within
a speciﬁed area S is balanced by the magnetic ﬂux current J Φ
that is integrated along the
i
boundary ∂S. Then the Stokes theorem in the form (71) yields the local continuity equation

∂tΦ +

i dci = 0 ,
J Φ

Z∂S

∂tBi + ǫijk∂jJ Φ

k = 0 .

One interesting consequence is the following: The divergence of (22) reads

∂i(∂tBi) = 0

∂iBi = ρmag ,

∂tρmag = 0 .

=

⇒

Thus, we ﬁnd a time-independent term ρmag, which acquires tentatively the meaning of a
magnetic charge density. Let us choose a speciﬁc reference system in which ρmag is constant in
time, i.e., ∂tρmag = 0. Now we go over to an arbitrary reference system with time coordinate
t′ and spatial coordinates xi′
= 0. The only way to evade a
. Clearly, in general ∂t′ρmag 6
contradiction to (23) is to require ρmag = 0, that is, the magnetic ﬁeld strength Bi has no
sources, its divergence vanishes:

∂iBi = 0

(div

= 0) .

B

This is recognized as one of the homogeneous Maxwell equations. Note that our derivation of
(24) was done under the assumption of magnetic ﬂux conservation (21). Under this condition
we ﬁnd ρmag = 0.

In order to understand better the magnetic ﬂux current, we note that J Φ

i , as a covariant
vector, has the same geometric properties as the electric ﬁeld strength Ei. Additionally, J Φ
i
and Ei share the same physical dimension voltage/length, i.e., in SI, V/m. Accordingly, it is
plausible to identify both quantities,

J Φ
i ≡
That also the sign chosen is the appropriate one (consistent with the Lenz rule) was discussed
in [6]. Then the local continuity equation (22) assumes the form

(25)

Ei .

∂tBi + ǫijk∂jEk = 0

+ curl E = 0) .

( ˙
B

(26)

This equation reﬂects magnetic ﬂux conservation, the third axiom of our axiomatic approach.
It also constitutes the remaining homogeneous Maxwell equation, that is, Faraday’s induction
law.

At this point one might wonder to what extend the identiﬁcation (25) is mandatory. It turns
out that it is special relativity that dictates this identiﬁcation. We illustrate this circumstance

10

as follows: In the rest frame of a magnetic ﬂux line B′i the magnetic ﬂux current vanishes,
J ′Φ
i = 0. The rest frame is also deﬁned via the Lorentz force: In the absence of an electric
i = 0, a test charge q is not accelerated by B′i. Then a Lorentz transformation,
ﬁeld, E′
together with (24), yields an equation that relates Bi and J Φ
in a laboratory frame according
i
to

J Φ
i =

ǫijkujBk .

−

(27)

A comparison with (16), which was obtained by an analogous transformation of a magnetic
ﬂux line from its rest frame to a laboratory frame, shows that the identiﬁcation (25) needs to
be valid, indeed. However, one should be aware that our simple argument requires E′
i = 0 in
the rest frame of the considered magnetic ﬂux line.

2.4 Constitutive relations (axiom 4) and the properties of spacetime

×

3 = 12 unknown electromagnetic ﬁeld components Di, Hi,
So far we have introduced 4
Ei, and Bi. These components have to fulﬁll the Maxwell equations (5), (12), (24), and (26),
which represent 1 + 3 + 1 + 3 = 8 partial differential equations. In fact, among the Maxwell
equations, only (12) and (26) contain time derivatives and are dynamical. The remaining equa-
tions, (5) and (24), are so-called “constraints”. They are, by virtue of the dynamical Maxwell
equations, fulﬁlled at all times if fulﬁlled at one time. It follows that they don’t contain in-
formation on the time evolution of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. Therefore, we arrive at only
6 dynamical equations for 12 unknown ﬁeld components. To make the Maxwell equations
a determined set of partial differential equations, we still have to introduce additionally the
so-called “constitutive relations” between the excitations Di, Hi and the ﬁeld strengths Ei,
Bi.

The simplest case to begin with is to ﬁnd constitutive relations for the case of electromag-
netic ﬁelds in vacuum. There are guiding principles that limit their structure. We demand
that constitutive relations in vacuum are invariant under translation and rotation, furthermore
they should be local and linear, i.e., they should connect ﬁelds at the same position and at the
same time. Finally, in vacuum the constitutive relations should not mix electric and magnetic
properties. These features characterize the vacuum and not the electromagnetic ﬁeld itself.
We will not be able to prove them but postulate them as fourth axiom.

If we want to relate the ﬁeld strengths and the excitations we have to remind ourselves
that Ei, Hi are natural integrands of line integrals and Di, Bi are natural integrands of surface
integrals. Therefore, Ei, Hi transform under a change of coordinates as covariant vectors
while Di, Bi transform as contravariant vector densities. To compensate these differences
we will have to introduce a symmetric metric ﬁeld gij = gji. The metric tensor determines
spatial distances and introduces the notion of orthogonality. The determinant of the metric
is denoted by g. It follows that √ggij transforms like a density and maps a covariant vector
into a contravariant vector density. We then take as fourth axiom the constitutive equations for
vacuum,

Di = ε0 √g gij Ej ,

(28)

11

Hi = (µ0 √g)−1gij Bj .
In ﬂat spacetime and in cartesian coordinates, we have g = 1, gii = 1, and gij = 0 for
= j. We recognize the familiar vaccum relations between ﬁeld strengths and excitations.
i
The electric constant ε0 and the magnetic constant µ0 characterize the vacuum. They acquire
the SI-units [ε0] = As/Vm and [µ0] = Vs/Am.

(29)

What seems to be conceptually important about the constitutive equations (28), (29) is that
they not only provide relations between the excitations Di, Hi and the ﬁeld strengths Ei, Bi,
but also connect the electromagnetic ﬁeld to the structure of spacetime, which here is repre-
sented by the metric tensor gij. The formulation of the ﬁrst three axioms that were presented
in the previous sections does not require information on this metric structure. The connection
between the electromagnetic ﬁeld and spacetime, as expressed by the constitutive equations,
indicates that physical ﬁelds and spacetime are not independent of each other. The constitutive
equations might suggest the point of view that the structure of spacetime determines the struc-
ture of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. However, one should be aware that the opposite conclusion
has a better truth value: It can be shown that the propagation properties of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld determine the metric structure of spacetime [4, 9].

Constitutive equations in matter usually assume a more complicated form than (28), (29).
In this case it would be appropriate to derive the constitutive equations, after an averaging
procedure, from a microscopic model of matter. Such procedures are the subject of solid state
or plasma physics, for example. A discussion of these subjects is out of the scope of this
paper but, without going into details, we quote the constitutive relations of a general linear
magnetoelectric medium:

Di =
Hi =

εij
−
−1
ij −

µ

ǫijk nk
ǫijk mk
(cid:1)

Ej +
Bj +

γi
γj

j + ˜sj

i

i + ˜si

j
(cid:1)

Bj + (α
Ej

s) Bi ,
(α + s) Ei .

−

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

−

−

(cid:0)
This formulation is due to Hehl & Obukhov [4, 5, 15], an equivalent formulation of a “bian-
(cid:0)
isotropic medium” — this is the same as what we call general linear medium — was given
by Lindell & Olyslager [17, 10]. Both matrices εij and µ−1
ij are symmetric and possess 6
independent components each, εij is called permittivity tensor and µ−1
impermeability ten-
ij
sor (reciprocal permeability tensor). The magnetoelectric cross-term γi
j, which is tracefree,
γk

k = 0, has 8 independent components. It is related to the Fresnel-Fizeau effects.
The 4-dimensional pseudo-scalar α, we call it axion piece [4], represents one component.
It corresponds to the perfect electromagnetic conductor (PEMC) of Lindell & Sihvola [11], a
Tellegen type structure [24, 25].

(30)

(31)

Accordingly, these pieces altogether, which we printed in (30) and (31) in boldface for
better visibility, add up to 6 + 6 + 8 + 1 = 20 + 1 = 21 independent components. The situation
with 20 components is described in Post [18] (he reqiured α = 0 without a real proof), that
with 21 components in O’Dell [16].

We can have 15 more components related to dissipation, which cannot be derived from a
Lagrangian, the so-called skewon piece (see [14] and the literature given), namely 3 + 3 com-
ponents of nk and mk (electric and magnetic Faraday effects), 8 components from the matrix

12

6
j (optical activity), which is traceless ˜sk

k = 0, and 1 component from the 3-dimensional
˜si
scalar s (spatially isotropic optical activity). This scalar was introduced by Nieves & Pal [13].
It has also been discussed in electromagnetic materials as chiral parameter, see Lindell et al.
[12]. Note that s, in contrast to the 4-dimensional scalar α, is only a 3D scalar. We end then
up with the general linear medium with 20 + 1 + 15 = 36 components.

With the introduction of constitutive equations the axiomatic approach to classical elec-
trodynamics is completed. We will see in the next Section 3 how this approach relates to the
framework of gauge theory.

3 On the relation between the axiomatics and the gauge ap-

proach

Modern descriptions of the fundamental interactions heavily rely on symmetry principles. In
particular, this is true for the electromagnetic interaction which can be formulated as a gauge
ﬁeld theory that is based on a corresponding gauge symmetry. In a recent article this approach
towards electromagnetism has been explained in some detail [3]. The main steps were the
following:

•

•

•

Accept the fact that physical matter ﬁelds (which represent electrons, for example) are
described microscopically by complex wave functions.

Recognize that the absolute phase of these wave functions has no physical relevance.
This arbitrariness of the absolute phase constitutes a one-dimensional rotational type
symmetry U(1) (the circle group) that is the gauge symmetry of electromagnetism.

To derive observable physical quantities from the wave functions requires to deﬁne
derivatives of wave functions in a way that is invariant under the gauge symmetry. The
construction of such “gauge covariant” derivatives requires the introduction of gauge
potentials. One gauge potential, the scalar potential φ, deﬁnes a gauge covariant deriva-
tive Dφ
t with respect to time, while another gauge potential, the vector potential Ai,
deﬁnes gauge covariant derivatives DA
i with respect to the three independent directions
of space.

•

Finally, the gauge potentials φ and Ai describe an electrodynamically non-trivial situa-
tion, if their corresponding electric and magnetic ﬁeld strengths

Ei =
∂iφ
Bi = εijk∂jAk ,

−

−

∂tAi ,

(32)

(33)

are non-vanishing.

In the following we want to comment on the interrelation between the previously presented
axiomatic approach and the gauge approach. It is interesting to see how the axioms ﬁnd their
proper place within the gauge approach.

13

(34)

(35)

3.1 Noether theorem and electric charge conservation

In ﬁeld theory there is a famous result which connects symmetries of laws of nature to con-
served quantities. This is the Noether theorem which has been proven to be useful in both
classical and quantum contexts. It is, in particular, discussed in books on classical electrody-
namics, see [19, 23], for example.

Laws of nature, like in electrodynamics, e.g., can often (but not always) be characterized
(Ψ, ∂iΨ, ∂tΨ) which, in the standard case, is a
concisely by a Lagrangian density
function of the ﬁelds Ψ of the theory and their ﬁrst derivatives. Integration of the Lagrangian
density

over space yields the Lagrangian L,

=

L

L

L

and further integration over time yields the action S,

L =

(Ψ, ∂iΨ, ∂tΨ) dV ,

L

Z

S =

L dt .

Z
There are guiding principles that tell us how to obtain an appropriate Lagrangian density for
a given theory. Once we have an appropriate Lagrangian density, we can derive conveniently
the properties of the ﬁelds Ψ. For example, the equations of motion which determine the
dynamics of Ψ follow from extremization of the action S with respect to variations of Ψ,

δΨS = 0

=

⇒

equations of motion for Ψ .

(36)

(Ψ, ∂iΨ, ∂tΨ) to conserved quantities. Suppose that

Now we turn to the Noether theorem which connects the symmetry of a Lagrangian density
is invariant under time translations δt.
L
In daily life this assumption makes sense since we do not expect that the laws of nature change
in time. Then the Noether theorem implies a local conservation law which expresses the con-
servation of energy. Similarly, invariance under translations δxi in space implies conservation
of momentum, while invariance under rotations δωi
j yields the conservation of angular mo-
mentum,

L

δtL
δxi
L
δωi
L

j

= 0
= 0
= 0

=
=
=

⇒
⇒
⇒

conservation of energy ,
conservation of momentum ,
conservation of angular momentum .

(37)
(38)
(39)

These symmetries of spacetime are called external symmetries. But the Noether theorem also
works for other types of symmetries, so-called internal ones — especially gauge symmetries.
In this case, gauge invariance of the Lagrangian implies a conserved current with an associated
charge. That is, if we denote a gauge transformation by δǫ we conclude

= 0

δǫ

L

=

⇒

charge conservation .

(40)

If we apply this conclusion to electrodynamics, we have to specify the Lagrangian density to
be the one of matter ﬁelds that represent electrically charged particles. Then invariance of
this Lagrangian density under the gauge symmetry of electrodynamics yields the conservation
of electric charge. Thus, if we accept the validity of the Lagrangian formalism, then we can
arrive at electric charge conservation from gauge invariance via the Noether theorem.

14

3.2 Minimal coupling and the Lorentz force

We already have mentioned that, according to (36), we can derive the equations of motion of a
physical theory from a Lagrangian density and its associated action. We can use this scheme to
derive the equations of motion of electrically charged particles. In this case, the corresponding
Lagrangian density (that of the electrically charged particles) has to be gauge invariant.

If electrically charged particles are represented by their wave functions, the corresponding
Lagrangian density will contain derivatives with respect to time and space. It follows that
the Lagrangian density will be gauge invariant if we pass from partial derivatives to gauge
covariant derivatives according to

∂t

∂i

−→

−→

Dφ

t := ∂t +

φ ,

DA
i

:= ∂i

Ai ,

−

q
¯h
q
¯h

with q the electric charge of a particle, ¯h = h/(2π) with h as the Planck constant and φ, Ai
as electromagnetic potentials [3]. This enforcement of gauge invariance has a classical ana-
logue. If electrically charged particles are represented by point particles, rather than by wave
functions, we have to replace within the Lagrangian density the energy E and the momentum
pi of each particle according to [23]

E
pi

−→
−→

E + qφ ,
qAi .
pi

−

The substitutions (41), (42) or (43), (44) constitute the simplest way to ensure gauge invariance
of the Lagrangian density of electrically charged particles. They constitute what commonly is
called “minimal coupling”. Due to minimal coupling, we relate electrically charged particles
and the electromagnetic ﬁeld in a natural way that is dictated by the requirement of gauge
invariance.

Having ensured gauge invariance of the action S, we can derive equations of motion by
extremization, compare (36).
It then turns out that these equations of motion contain the
Lorentz force law (13). Therefore the Lorentz force is a consequence of the minimal coupling
procedure which couples electrically charged particles to the electromagnetic potentials and
makes the Lagrangian gauge invariant.

3.3 Bianchi identity and magnetic ﬂux conservation

The electromagnetic gauge potentials φ and Ai are often introduced as mathematical tools to
facilitate the integration of the Maxwell equations. Indeed, if we put the relations (32) and (33)
into the homogeneous Maxwell equations (24) and (26), we recognize that the homogeneous
Maxwell equations are fulﬁlled automatically. They become mere mathematical identities.
This is an interesting observation since within the gauge approach the gauge potentials are
fundamental physical quantities and are not only the outcome of a mathematical trick. Thus

(41)

(42)

(43)
(44)

15

we can state that the mathematical structure of the gauge potentials already implies the homo-
geneous Maxwell equations and, in turn, magnetic ﬂux conservation. In this light, magnetic
ﬂux conservation, within the gauge approach, appears as the consequence of a geometric iden-
tity. This is in contrast to electric charge conservation that can be viewed as the consequence
of gauge invariance, i.e., as the consequence of a physical symmetry.

The mathematical identity that is reﬂected in the homogeneous Maxwell equations is a
special case of a “Bianchi identity”. Bianchi identities are the result of differentiating a po-
tential twice. For example, in electrostatics the electric ﬁeld strength Ei can be derived from
a scalar potential φ according to

Differentiation reveals that the curl of Ei vanishes,

Ei = ∂iφ .

ǫijk∂jEk = ǫijk∂j∂kφ = 0 ,

(45)

(46)

which is due to the antisymmetry of ǫijk. Again, this equation is a mathematical identity, a
simple example of a Bianchi identity.

3.4 Gauge approach and constitutive relations

The gauge approach towards electrodynamics deals with the properties of gauge ﬁelds, which
represent the electromagnetic ﬁeld, and with matter ﬁelds. It does not reﬂect properties of
spacetime. In contrast to this, the constitutive equations do reﬂect properties of spacetime,
as can be already seen from the constitutive equations of vacuum that involve the metric gij,
compare (28) and (29). Thus, also in the gauge approach the constitutive equations have to be
postulated as an axiom in some way. One should note that, according to (32), (33), the gauge
potentials are directly related to the ﬁeld strengths Ei and Bi. The excitations Di and Hi are
part of the inhomogeneous Maxwell equations which, within the gauge approach, are derived
as equations of motion from an action principle, compare (36). Since the action itself involves
the gauge potentials, one might wonder how it is possible to obtain equations of motion for the
excitations rather than for the ﬁeld strengths. The answer is that during the construction of the
action from the gauge potentials the constitutive equations are already used, at least implicitly.

4 Conclusion

We have presented an axiomatic approach to classical electrodynamics in which the Maxwell
equations are derived from the conservation of electric charge and magnetic ﬂux. In the context
of the derivation of the inhomogenous Maxwell equations, one introduces the electric and the
magnetic excitation Di and Hi, respectively. The explicit calculation is rather simple because
the continuity equation for electric charge is already relativistically invariant such that for the
derivation of the inhomogeneous Maxwell equations no additional ingredients from special
relativity are necessary. The situation is slightly more complicated for the derivation of the

16

homogeneous Maxwell equations from magnetic ﬂux conservation since it is not immediately
clear of how to formulate magnetic ﬂux conservation in a relativistic invariant way. It should
be mentioned that if the complete framework of relativity were available, the derivation of the
axiomatic approach could be done with considerable more ease and elegance [4].

Finally, we would like to comment on a question that sometimes leads to controversial
discussions, as summarized in [20], for example. This is the question of how the quantities
Ei, Di, Bi, and Hi should be grouped in pairs, i.e., the question of “which quantities belong
together?”. Some people like to form the pairs (Ei, Bi), (Di, Hi), while others prefer to build
(Ei, Hi) , (Di, Bi). Already from a dimensional point of view, the answer to this question
is obvious. Both, Ei and Bi are voltage-related quantities, that is, related to the notions of
force and work: In SI, we have [Ei] = V/m, [Bi] = T=Vs/m2, or [Bi] = [Ei]/velocity.
Consequently, they belong together. Analogously, Di and Hi are current-related quantities:
[Di] = C/m2 = As/m2, [Hi] = A/m, or [Di] = [Hi]/velocity. Thermodynamically speaking,
(Ei, Bi) are intensities (answer to the question: how strong?) and (Di, Hi) extensities (how
much?)

These conclusions are made irrefutible by relativity theory. Classical electrodynamics is a
relativistic invariant theory and the implications of relativity have been proven to be correct on
macro- and microscopic scales over and over again. And relativity tells us that the electromag-
netic ﬁeld strengths Ei, Bi are inseparably intertwined by relativistic transformations, and the
same is true for the electromagnetic excitations Di, Hi. In the spacetime of relativity theory,
the pair (Ei, Bi) forms one single quantity, the tensor of electromagnetic ﬁeld strength, while
the pair (Di, Hi) forms another single quantity, the tensor of electromagnetic excitations. If
compared to these facts, arguments in favor of the pairs (Ei, Hi), namely that both are cov-
ectors, and (Di, Bi), both are vector densities (see the tetrahedron in Fig.2), turn out to be of
secondary nature. Accordingly, there is no danger that the couples (Ei, Bi) and (Di, Hi) ever
get divorced.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Yakov Itin (Jerusalem), Ismo Lindell (Helsinki), Yuri Obukhov (Cologne/
Moscow), and to G¨unter Wollenberg (Magdeburg) for many interesting and helpful discus-
sions.

A Mathematical Background

Within a theoretical formulation physical quantities are modeled as mathematical objects. The
understanding and application of appropriate mathematics yields, in turn, the properties of
physical quantities. In the development of the axiomatic approach, we made repeated use of
integration, of the Poincar´e lemma, and of the Stokes theorem. It is with these mathemati-
cal concepts that it is straightforward to derive the basics of electromagnetism from a small
number of axioms.

17

A.1

Integration

Integration is an operation that yields coordinate independent values.
It requires an inte-
gration measure, the dimension of which depends on the type of region that is integrated
over. We want to integrate over one-dimensional curves, two-dimensional surfaces, or three-
dimensional volumes that are embedded in three-dimensional space. Therefore, we have to
deﬁne line-, surface-, and volume-elements as integration measures. Then we can think of suit-
able objects as integrands that can be integrated over to yield coordinate independent physical
quantities.

A.1.1 Integration over a curve and covariant vectors as line integrands

We consider a one-dimensional curve c = c(t) in three-dimensional space.
coordinate system xi, with indices i = 1, 2, 3, a parametrization of c is given by the vector

In a speciﬁc

The functions ci(t) deﬁne the shape of the curve. For small changes of the parameter t, with
t

t + ∆t, the difference vector between c(t + ∆t) and c(t) is given by

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

→

c(t) =

c1(t), c2(t), c3(t)

.

∆c(t) =

∆c1
∆t

,

∆c2
∆t

,

∆c3
∆t

(cid:18)

∆t ,

(cid:19)

compare Fig.3. In the limit where ∆t becomes inﬁnitesimally we obtain the line element

dc(t) = (dc1(t), dc2(t), dc3(t))
∂c1(t)
∂t

∂c2(t)
∂t

∂c3(t)
∂t

:=

,

,

dt .

(cid:19)
It is characterized by an inﬁnitesimal length and an orientation.

(cid:18)

We now construct objects that we can integrate over the curve c in order to obtain a co-
ordinate invariant scalar. The line element dc contains three independent components dci. If
we shift from old coordinates xi to new coordinates yj′
(xi) these components transform
according to

= yj′

Therefore we can form an invariant expression if we introduce objects α = α(xi), with three
independent components αi, that transform in the opposite way,

This transformation behavior characterizes a vector or, more precisely, a covariant vector (a
1-form). It follows that the expression

(47)

(48)

(49)

(50)

(51)

(52)

dcj′

=

∂yj′
∂xi dci .

αj′ =

∂xi
∂yj′ αi .

αi dci = αj′ dcj′

18

t+  t∆

c(t+  t)∆

line c

∆c(t)

t

x3

c(t)

x2

x1

Figure 3: Parametrization of a curve c(t). The difference vector ∆c(t) between c(t + ∆t) and
c(t) yields, in the limit ∆t

0, the line element dc(t).

→

yields the same value in each coordinate system.

Thus, we can now immediately deﬁne integration over a curve by the expression

αi dci =

α1 dc1 + α2 dc2 + α3 dc3

Z

Z

=

Z (cid:18)

α1

∂c1
∂t

+ α2

+ α3

dt .

∂c2
∂t

∂c3
∂t

(cid:19)

(53)

The last line shows how to carry out explicitly the integration since αi and ci are functions of
the parameter t.

A.1.2 Integration over a surface and contravariant vector densities as surface inte-

grands

Now we consider a two-dimensional surface a = a(t, s). Within a speciﬁc coordinate sys-
tem xi, a parametrization of a is of the form

a(t, s) = (a1(t, s), a2(t, s), a3(t, s))

(54)

with parameters t, s and functions ai(t, s) that deﬁne the shape of the surface.

An elementary surface element is bound by lines t =const, t + dt =const, s =const, and
s + ds =const, compare Fig.4. It is characterized by the two edges ∂ai
∂s ds. These
edges span an inﬁnitesimal surface, the area and orientation of which is characterized by a
covariant vector dai that points normal to the inﬁnitesimal surface. The vector dai is given by
the vector product of ∂ai

∂t dt and ∂ai

∂t dt and ∂ai

∂s ds,

dai = ǫijk

dt ds .

∂aj
∂t

∂ak
∂s

(55)

19

surface a

∆ai
∆s

∆s

t

∆ai

∆ai
∆t

∆t

t+  t∆

s+  s∆

s

Figure 4: Parametrization of a surface a(t, s). The lines t =const, t + ∆t =const, s =const,
and s + ∆s =const circumscribe a surface ∆ai that is spanned by the edges ∆ai
∆s ds.
ds, it becomes an elementary surface element dai.
In the limit ∆t

∆t dt and ∆ai

dt, ∆s

→

→

In order to know how the components dai transform under coordinate transformations
yj′
= yj′
(xi), we have to know the transformation behavior of the symbol ǫijk. Since in any
coordinate system, ǫijk assumes the values 0, 1, or -1 by deﬁnition, it is obvious that in general

This is because the determinant of the transformation matrix, i.e.,

ǫi′j′k′

=

∂xi
∂yi′

∂xj
∂yj′

∂xk
∂yk′ ǫijk .

det (∂x/∂y) = ǫijk

∂xi
∂yi′

∂xj
∂yj′

∂xk
∂yk′ ,

is, in general, not equal to one. But it follows from (57) that the correct transformation rule
for ǫijk is given by

With (55) this yields the transformation rule for the components dai,

ǫi′j′k′ =

1
det(∂x/∂y)

= det(∂y/∂x)

∂xi
∂yi′
∂xi
∂yi′

∂xj
∂yj′
∂xj
∂yj′

∂xk
∂yk′ ǫijk
∂xk
∂yk′ ǫijk .

daj′ = det(∂y/∂x)

∂xi
∂yj′ dai .

Now we construct quantities that can be integrated over a surface. Since a surface element
is determined from three independent components dai we introduce an integrand with three
independent components βi that transform according to

(56)

(57)

(58)

(59)

(60)

βj′

=

1
det(∂y/∂x)

∂yj′
∂xi βi .

20

6
Transformation rules that involve the determinant of the transformation matrix characterize so-
called densities. Densities are sensitive towards changes of the scale of elementary volumes.
In physics they represent additive quantities, also called extensities, that describe how much
of a quantity is distributed within a volume or over the surface of a volume. This is in contrast
to intensities. The covariant vectors that we introduced as natural line integrals are intensive
quantities that represent the strength of a physical ﬁeld.

The transformation behavior (60) of the components βi characterizes a contravariant vector

density. With this transformation behavior the surface integral

βidai =

βiǫijk

Z

Z

∂aj
∂t

∂ak
∂s

dt ds

(61)

yields a scalar value that is coordinate independent.

A.1.3 Integration over a volume and scalar densities as volume integrands

We ﬁnally consider integration over a three-dimensional volume v in three-dimensional space.
Again we choose a speciﬁc coordinate system xi and specify a parametrization of v by

v(t, s, r) =

v1(t, s, r), v2(t, s, r), v3(t, s, r)

,

(62)

with three parameters t, s, and r.

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

An elementary volume element dv is characterized by three edges ∂vi
The volume, which is spanned by these edges, is given by the determinant

∂t dt, ∂vi

∂s ds, and ∂vi

∂r dr.

dv = det

ds,

dr

∂vi
∂r

dt,

∂vi
∂t
∂vj
∂s

∂vi
∂s
∂vk
∂r

(cid:18)
∂vi
∂t
It is not coordinate invariant but transforms under coordinate transformations yj′
according to

dt ds dr .

= ǫijk

(cid:19)

dv′ = det(∂y/∂x) dv .

(63)

= yj ′

(xi)

(64)

Since the volume element dv constitutes one independent component, a natural object to
integrate over a volume has one independent component as well. We denote such an integrand
by γ. It transforms according to

γ′ =

1
det(∂y/∂x)

γ .

This transformation rule characterizes a scalar density and yields

γ dv =

γ ǫijk

dt ds dr

∂vi
∂t

∂vj
∂s

∂vk
∂r

Z

Z

as a coordinate independent value.

(65)

(66)

21

A.2 Poincar´e Lemma

The axiomatic approach takes advantage of the Poincar´e lemma. The Poincar´e lemma states
under which conditions a mathematical object can be expressed in terms of a derivative, i.e.,
in terms of a potential.

We consider integrands αi, βi, and γ of line-, surface-, and volume integrals, respectively,
and assume that they are deﬁned in an open and simply connected region of three-dimensional
space. Then the Poincar´e lemma yields the following conclusions:

1. If αi is curl free, it can be written as the gradient of a scalar function f ,

ǫijk∂jαk = 0

=

⇒

αi = ∂if .

2. If βi is divergence free, it can be written as the curl of the integrand αi of a line integral,

⇒
3. The integrand γ of a volume integral can be written as the divergence of an integrand βi

∂iβi = 0

=

βi = ǫijk∂jαk .

of a surface integral,

γ is a volume integrand =

γ = ∂iβi .

⇒

x

While conclusions (67), (68) are familiar from elementary vector calculus, this might not be
the case for conclusion (69). However, (69) is rather trivial since, in cartesian coordinates
x, y, z, for a given volume integrand γ = γ(x, y, z) the vector βi with components βx =
z
0 γ(t, y, z)/3 dt, βy =
0 γ(x, y, t)/3 dt fulﬁlls (69). Of course,
the vector βi is not uniquely determined from γ since any divergence free vector ﬁeld can be
R
added to βi without changing γ. We further note that γ, as a volume integrand, constitutes a
scalar density. It can be integrated as above to yield the components of βi as components of
a contravariant vector density. Therefore the integration does not yield a coordinate invariant
scalar such that γ cannot be considered as a natural integrand of a line integral.

0 γ(x, t, z)/3 dt, and βz =
R

R

y

A.3 Stokes Theorem

In our notation Stokes theorem, if applied to line integrands αi or surface integrands βi, yields
the identities:

(67)

(68)

(69)

(70)

(71)

where ∂V denotes the two-dimensional boundary of a simply connected volume V and ∂S
denotes the one-dimensional boundary of a simply connected surface S.

∂iβi dv =

βi dai ,

ZV
ǫijk∂jαk dai =

Z∂V

Z∂S

αi dci ,

ZS

22

References

Oxford, 1984).

York, 1992).

[1] Chen, T.-P. and Li, L.-F.: Gauge theory of elementary particle physics (Clarendon Press,

[2] Elliott, R.S.: Electromagnetics – History, Theory, and Applications (IEEE Press, New

[3] Gronwald, F. and Nitsch, J.: “The structure of the electrodynamic ﬁeld as derived from
ﬁrst principles,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 43 (August 2001) 64-
79.

[4] Hehl, F.W. and Obukhov, Yu.N.: Foundations of Classical Electrodynamics: Charge,

Flux, and Metric (Birkh¨auser, Boston, 2003).

[5] Hehl, F.W. and Obukhov, Yu.N.: “Linear media in classical electrodynamics and the Post

constraint,” Phys. Lett. A, vol. 334 (2005) 249-259; arXiv.org/physics/0411038.

[6] Itin, Y. and Hehl, F.W.: “Is the Lorentz signature of the metric of spacetime electro-
magnetic in origin?” Annals of Physics (NY), vol. 312 (2004) 60–83; arXiv.org/gr-
qc/0401016.

[7] Jackson, J.D.: Classical Electrodynamics, 3rd ed. (Wiley, New York, 1998).

[8] Lamb, H.: Hydrodynamics, 6th ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1936, and

Dover, New York, 1993).

[9] L¨ammerzahl, C. and Hehl, F.W.: “Riemannian light cone from vanishing birefringence
in premetric vacuum electrodynamics,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 70 (2004) 105022 (7 pages);
arXiv.org/gr-qc/0409072.

[10] Lindell, I.V.: Differential Forms in Electromagnetics (IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, and

Wiley-Interscience, 2004).

[11] Lindell, I.V. and Sihvola, A.H.: “Perfect electromagnetic conductor,” J. Electromag.

Waves Appl., vol. 19 (2005) 861-869; arXiv.org/physics/0503232.

[12] Lindell, I.V., Sihvola, A.H., Tretyakov, S.A. and Viitanen, A.J.: Electromagnetic Waves

in Chiral and Bi-Isotropic Media (Artech House, Boston, 1994).

[13] Nieves, J.F. and Pal, P.B.: “The third electromagnetic constant of an isotropic medium,”

Am. J. Phys., vol. 62 (1994) 207-216.

[14] Obukhov, Yu.N. and Hehl, F.W.: “Possible skewon effects on light propagation,” Phys.

Rev. D, vol. 70 (2004) 125015 (14 pages); arXiv.org/physics/0409155.

[15] Obukhov, Yu.N. and Hehl, F.W.: “Measuring a piecewise constant axion ﬁeld in classical

electrodynamics,” Phys. Lett. A, vol. 341 (2005) 357-365; arXiv.org/physics/0504172.

23

[16] O’Dell, T.H.: The Electrodynamics of Magneto-Electric Media (North-Holland, Amster-

dam, 1970).

[17] Olyslager, F. and Lindell, I.V.: “Electromagnetics and exotic media: A quest for the holy

grail,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 44, No.2 (2002) 48-58.

[18] Post, E.J.: Formal Structure of Electromagnetics – General Covariance and Electromag-
netics (North Holland, Amsterdam, 1962, and Dover, Mineola, New York, 1997).

[19] Rohrlich, F.: Classical Charged Particles (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1965).

[20] Rothwell, E.J. and Cloud, M.J.: Electromagnetics (CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2001).

[21] Ryder, L.: Quantum Field Theory, 2nd ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,

1996).

1989).

[22] Schouten, J.A.: Tensor Analysis for Physicists, 2nd ed. reprinted (Dover, New York,

[23] Schwinger, J., DeRaad Jr., L.L., Milton, K.A., and Tsai, W.: Classical Electrodynamics

(Perseus Books, Reading, 1998).

[24] Tellegen, B.D.H.: “The gyrator, a new electric network element,” Philips Res. Rep., vol.

3 (1948) 81-101.

[25] Tellegen, B.D.H.: “The gyrator, an electric network element,” Philips Technical Review,
vol. 18 (1956/57) 120–124. Reprinted in H.B.G. Casimir and S. Gradstein (eds.) An
Anthology of Philips Research. (Philips’ Gloeilampenfabrieken, Eindhoven, 1966) pp.
186-190.

=========

24

