The Paradoxical Forces for the Classical Electromagnetic Lag

Associated with the Aharonov-Bohm Phase Shift

Timothy H. Boyer

Department of Physics, City College of the City

University of New York, New York, New York 10031

Abstract

The classical electromagnetic lag associated with the Aharonov-Bohm phase shift is obtained by

using a Darwin-Lagrangian analysis similar to that given by Coleman and Van Vleck to identify

the puzzling forces of the Shockley-James paradox. The classical forces cause changes in particle

velocities and so produce a relative lag leading to the same phase shift as predicted by Aharonov

and Bohm and observed in experiments. An experiment is proposed to test for this lag aspect

implied by the classical analysis but not present in the currently-accepted quantum topological

description of the phase shift.

5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
8
1
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

In the past 45 years, the Aharonov-Bohm phase shift[1] has passed from a surprising

novelty into a standard part of the quantum mechanical textbook and research literature.[2]

Yet the nature of the eﬀect may well be misunderstood.

Aharonov and Bohm[1] attracted attention to the phase shift, which had been suggested

earlier by Ehrenberg and Siday,[3] by claiming that the eﬀect involved a new role for the elec-

tromagnetic potentials in quantum as compared to classical physics, and that the phase shift

arose as a quantum topological eﬀect occurring in the absence of classical electromagnetic

forces. A contrary view has also been urged.[4] It has been suggested that the experimen-

tally observed phase shift results from a lag eﬀect involving classical electromagnetic forces.

Although the Aharonov-Bohm phase shift itself has been well veriﬁed experimentally, there

is no experimental evidence indicating whether or not the eﬀect involves classical forces and

velocity changes.[5] The support for the quantum topological nature of the shift comes only

from theoretical arguments which claim that classical electromagnetic forces can not possi-

bly cause the phase shift. However, it has been suggested repeatedly that electromagnetic

theory actually supports exactly the contrary view. Now at last, the forces involved are

identiﬁed in some detail in the discussion of the following paper.[6] The observed phase

shift can indeed be accounted for by a semiclassical analysis based upon a classical electro-

magnetic lag eﬀect. Therefore it is now time for further experiments measuring aspects of

the phase shift which diﬀer between the two alternative explanations.

II. FORCE PARADOXES

The basic classical electromagnetic interaction involved in the Aharonov-Bohm phase

shift involves a point charge and a magnet. Such an interaction was discussed in 1968 in an

often-quoted paper by Coleman and Van Vleck,[7] ”Origin of ’Hidden Momentum Forces’

on Magnets.” The authors used the Darwin Lagrangian to treat the interaction to order
1/c2. Their discussion centers on the paradox of Shockley and James[8] involving a changing

magnetic moment which leads to an easily identiﬁable force on an external charge, and yet

there seems to be no force back on the magnet. Momentum conservation seems to fail. The

situation discussed by Coleman and Van Vleck seems remarkably similar to the situation

2

of the Aharonov-Bohm phase shift involving charged particles passing a magnetic solenoid

or toroid. Because a moving charged particle causes a magnetic ﬁeld, it puts an easily

identiﬁable Lorentz force on the currents of the magnet, and yet for a toroid or long solenoid

there seems to be no force back on the passing charge. In both cases, the same fundamental

interaction between a charged particle and a magnet is involved.

Indeed, Coleman and Van

Vleck have provided some aspects needed to understand the classical electromagnetic lag

connected with the Aharonov-Bohm phase shift.

In this article, we point out the classical electromagnetic energy and momentum changes

which must be accounted for in understanding the classical electromagnetic aspects of the

Aharonov-Bohm situation.

In the following article,[6] we turn to a classical hydrogen atom

as a model of a magnetic moment and treat its interaction with a passing charge using the

Darwin Lagrangian, illustrating in detail aspects of the Coleman-Van Vleck analysis and the

forces associated with the energy and momentum changes; then we comment on the passage

to a many-particle situation for the case of a magnetic toroid conﬁguration.

III. USE OF THE DARWIN-LAGRANGIAN ANALYSIS

The Aharonov-Bohm situation involves a point charge moving past a magnet in the

form of a long solenoid or toroid. Let us imagine that external forces are applied to the

charges carrying the currents of the magnet and also to the passing charge q so that the

non-interacting motions are preserved despite the interaction of the magnet and the charge

due to their electromagnetic ﬁelds. As shown previously,[9] the net work Wext done by the

external forces provides the energy of overlap of the magnetic ﬁeld of the passing charge and

the magnet, and also the net impulse Iext delivered by the external forces accounts for the

change in linear momentum in the electromagnetic ﬁelds. These relations take the form

Wext = (q/c)vq · Aµ(rq(t))

Iext = (q/c)Aµ(rq(t))

(1)

(2)

where Aµ(rq(t)) is the vector potential in the Coulomb gauge of the magnet evaluated at the

position rq(t) of the passing charge. Thus the Aharonov-Bohm situation involves energy

and momentum changes which can be associated with the vector potential of the magnet.

3

Of course, an experimental situation does not involve external forces which maintain the

currents constant and the distant particle at constant velocity. Thus the crucial question is

just how do the currents and particle velocity change so as to give energy and momentum

conservation and also constant motion of the system center of energy.

In the following

article, we analyze this problem in a simple model for a magnetic moment, and then discuss

the multiparticle limit to form a toroid. We suggest that the charge and current densities

of the magnet change in such a way as to screen the passing electric ﬁeld out of the magnet

and to produce an electric ﬁeld back at the passing charge which changes the velocity of the

passing charge as

m∆vq = (q/c)Aµ(rq(t))

(3)

As shown in the following article, these changes are consistent with ideas of conservation of

energy, of linear momentum, and for constant motion of the center of energy. Furthermore,

the net Lorentz forces between the toroid and passing charge satisfy Newton’s third law.

IV. CALCULATION OF THE AHARONOV-BOHM PHASE SHIFT

The result in Eq. (3) is also exactly what is required to account for the Aharonov-Bohm

phase shift as a classical electromagnetic lag eﬀect. A point charge moving with initial

velocity v0 down the axis of a toroid will suﬀer a relative displacement compared to a point

charge which passes outside the toroid and experiences no forces. The relative displacement

in the direction of motion when the point charge passes through the toroid can be found

by integrating the magnitude of the velocity change ∆v in Eq. (3), taken here as in the

y-direction,

therefore

∆Y =

dt ∆vy =

∞

Z
−∞

∞

Z
−∞

dy
v0

q
mc

Ay(r)

∆φ =

dy

Ay(r) =

∞

1
~
Z
−∞

q
c

qΦ
~c

The semiclassical phase shift ∆φ = py∆Y /~ = mvy∆Y /~ associated with this relative lag is

(4)

(5)

where Φ is the magnetic ﬂux enclosed in a path around the toroid. Here we have used
A · dr = Φ and can imagine closing the path of integration along a curve which passes

I

4

outside and far from the toroid. The same phase shift in Eq. (6) was predicted by Aharonov

and Bohm,[1] and is observed experimentally.[10]

V. EXPERIMENTAL TESTS FOR VELOCITY CHANGES

The Aharonov-Bohm phase shift involves the shift of the double-slit electron interference

pattern inside an undisplaced single-slit pattern[11] as shown in Fig. 1. The electron beams

pass around a solenoid (or toroid), and the shift of the double-slit pattern is proportional

to the magnetic ﬂux enclosed. According to Aharonov and Bohm,[1] the phase shift is a

quantum topological eﬀect and involves no forces on the passing electrons and no velocity

changes of the electrons. The alternative classical-based explanation[4] views the phase shift

as analogous to placing a piece of glass behind one slit of a double-slit optical interference

experiment, with the phase shift occurring because of a time lag between the transit times

for the two beams. This situation is shown in Fig. 2.

In the classical-based explanation of

the Aharonov-Bohm phase shift, there is a relative lag between the electrons passing through

the two diﬀerent slits based upon classical forces which slow the electrons diﬀerently on the

opposite sides of the solenoid. An exactly analogous phase shift due to the electrostatic

forces of a line of electric dipoles was observed experimentally by Matteucci and Pozzi[12]

and is sketched in Fig. 3. The electrostatic phase shift clearly involves velocity changes due

to electrostatic forces, analogous to the situation of the optical phase shift in Fig. 2.

It is

now time for experiments which do not simply verify the existence of the Aharonov-Bohm

phase shift, but rather which test whether or not the phase shift involves velocity changes

for the electrons.

One possible experimental test looks for a breakdown of the double-slit interference pat-

tern at large magnetic ﬂux. According to Aharonov and Bohm’s view, the magnetic ﬂux in

the solenoid can be made arbitrarily large and the double-slit phase shift will never break

down. According to the lag view (again in analogy with classical optics where a wave

passing through a piece of glass suﬀers a velocity change), if the relative lag between the

beams becomes larger than the coherence length, then the double-slit interference pattern

will indeed break down. Testing for this break-down of the interference pattern at large

ﬂux seems a feasible experiment; a large magnetic ﬂux can be inserted between the electron

beams either by the use of many solenoids or a solenoid of very large ﬂux.

5

I know of no other aspect of optics or wave-aspects of particles where a phase shift is

claimed to occur without any other change whatsoever in the system.

If experiments show

that there are no velocity changes involved in the Aharonov-Bohm phase shift, then nature

is indeed revealing an important nonclassical aspect.

If there are velocity changes corre-

sponding to a lag eﬀect, as I believe is overwhelmingly likely, then the quantum topological

interpretation is untenable, and the phase shift is consistent with an unfamiliar aspect of

classical electromagnetic theory.

VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT

VII. FIGURE CAPTIONS

I wish to thank Mrs. Laurette B. Fisher for her assistance with the diagrams.

Fig. 1. The Aharonov-Bohm Phase Shift. The double-slit interference pattern of

charged particles arriving at a distant screen is shifted by a long solenoid (a line of magnetic

dipoles) inserted between the beams. The mechanism for the shift is in dispute. At present

it is not known whether or not the passing particles experience velocity changes associated

with the interference pattern shift.

Fig. 2. Optical Phase Shift Due to a Lag Eﬀect. The double-slit interference pattern on

a distant screen is shifted when a piece of glass is introduced behind one of the slits. The

waves passing through the glass are slowed down by the piece of glass.

Fig. 3. The Matteucci-Pozzi Phase Shift. The double-slit interference pattern of charged

particles arriving at a distant screen is shifted by a pair of line charges (a line of electric

dipoles) inserted between the beams. The diﬀerence in the time order of the electrostatic

forces experienced by the charges passing through the two slits leads to an electrostatic lag

eﬀect which accounts for the interference pattern shift.[12]

[1] ”Y. Aharonov and D. Bohm, ”Signiﬁcance of electromagnetic potentials in quantum theory,”

Phys. Rev. 115, 485-491 (1959).

6

[2] See, for example, D. J. Griﬃths, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, (Prentice Hall, Upper

Saddle River, New Jersey 1995), pp. 343-349 or J. J. Sakurai, Modern Quantum Mechanics,

Revised edn. (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA 1994), pp. 136-139, 472-473.

[3] W. Ehrenberg and R. E. Siday, ”The refractive index in electron optics and the principles of

dynamics,” Proc. Phys. Soc. Lond. B62, 8-21 (1949).

[4] B. Liebowitz, ”Signiﬁcance of the Aharonov-Bohm Eﬀect,” Nuovo Cimento 38, 932-950 (1965);

”Signiﬁcance of the Aharonov-Bohm Eﬀect. Rebuttal of a Criticism,” 46B, 125-127 (1966).

T. H. Boyer, ”Classical Electromagnetic Deﬂections and Lag Eﬀects Associated with Quan-

tum Interference Pattern Shifts: Considerations Related to the Aharonov-Bohm Eﬀect,”

Phys. Rev. D 8, 1679-1693 (1973); T. H. Boyer, ”The Aharonov-Bohm Eﬀect as a Classi-

cal Electromagnetic-Lag Eﬀect: an Electrostatic Analogue and Possible Experimental Test,”

Il Nuovo Cimento 100B, 685-701 (1987); T. H. Boyer, ”Semiclassical Explanation of the

Matteucci-Pozzi and Aharonov-Bohm Phase Shifts,” Found. Phys. 32, 41-49 (2002). The

work by B. Liebowitz sees a need for new non-Lorentzian forces in order to explain the

Aharonov-Bohm phase shift. My own work is entirely within the context of conventional

classical electromagnetic theory.

[5] None of the experiments to date have investigated whether or not the phase shifts are due to

velocity changes. Indeed, an analogous phase shift (but clearly based upon easily-understood

classical electrostatic forces) arises for the experimentally-observed Matteucci-Pozzi phase

shift due to a line of electric dipoles, G. Matteucci and G. Pozzi, ”New diﬀraction experiment

on the electrostatic Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 2469-2470 (1985).

[6] T. H. Boyer, ”Darwin-Lagrangian Analysis for the Interaction of a Point Charge and a Magnet:

Considerations Related to the Controversy Regarding the Aharonov-Bohm and Aharonov-

Casher Phases shifts,” submitted for publication.

[7] S. Coleman and J. H. Van Vleck, ”Origin of ’Hidden Momentum Forces’ on Magnets,” Phys.

Rev. 171, 1370-1375 (1968).

[8] W. Shockley and R. P. James, ”’Try simplest cases’ discovery of ’hidden momentum’ forces

on ’magnetic currents,’” Phys. Rev. Lett. 18, 876-879 (1967).

[9] T. H. Boyer, ”Classical Electromagnetic Interaction of a Charged Particle with a Constant-

Current Solenoid,” Phys. Rev. D 1667-1679 (1973).

[10] The phase shift was ﬁrst observed by R. G. Chambers, ”Shift of an electron interference pattern

7

by enclosed magnetic ﬂux,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 5, 3-5 (1960). M. Peshkin and A. Tonomura,

The Aharonov-Bohm Eﬀect, Lecture Notes in Physics, Vol. 340 (Springer, New York 1989)

give extensive references to the experimental tests.

[11] The form taken by the phase shift is sometimes presented incorrectly, as for example in The

Feynman Lectures on Physics (Addison-Wesley, Reading Mass., 1964), Vol. II, Sec. 15-5. See,

for example, T. H. Boyer, ”Misinterpretation of the Aharonov-Bohm Eﬀect,” Am. J. Phys.

40, 56-59 (1972), or R. J. Cook, H. Fearn, and P. W. Milonni, ”Fizeau’s experiment and the

Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect,” Am. J. Phys. 63, 705-710 (1995).

[12] See G. Matteucci and G. Pozzi, ”New diﬀraction experiment on the electrostatic Aharonov-

Bohm eﬀect,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 2469-2470 (1985) and T. H. Boyer, ”Semiclassical Expla-

nation of the Matteucci-Pozzi and Aharonov-Bohm Phase Shifts,” Found. Phys. 32, 41-49

(2002).

8

This figure "ABfig1c3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0506180v1

This figure "ABfig2c3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0506180v1

This figure "ABfig3c3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0506180v1

