Synchronization of organ pipes by means of air ﬂow coupling:

experimental observations and modeling

M. Abel, S. Bergweiler, and R. Gerhard-Multhaupt

Institute of Physics, University of Potsdam,

14415 Potsdam, Germany

(Dated: January 14, 2014)

We report measurements on two organ pipes positioned side by side. We investi-

gate two diﬀerent questions. First, the mutual inﬂuence of two pipes with diﬀerent

pitch.

In analogy to the coupling of two nonlinear oscillators with feedback, one

observes a frequency locking, which can be explained by synchronization theory.

Second, we measure the dependence of the frequency of the signals emitted by two

mutually detuned pipes with varying distance between the pipes. The spectrum

shows a broad “hump” structure, not found for coupled oscillators. This indicates

a complicated hydrodynamical coupling of the two jets creating the acoustic ﬁeld

when exiting from the pipe mouth. We interpret our acoustic measurements with a

model for the ﬂow which exits from the ﬂues of the pipes.

PACS numbers: 43.75.+a, 43.28.+h

5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
9
0
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

I.

INTRODUCTION

2

Sound production in organ pipes is traditionally described as a generator-resonator cou-

pling.

In the last decades, research has been concerned with the complex aeroacoustic

processes which lead to a better understanding of the sound generation in a ﬂue organ pipe.

The process of sounding a ﬂue-type organ pipe employs an airstream directed at an edge,

the labium of an organ pipe. An oscillating ”air sheet” is used to describe the situation in

which the oscillations of the jet exiting from the ﬂue are responsible for the creation of the

pipe sound [1, 2]. Using the “air sheet” terminology, it is pointed out that the oscillation

is controlled not by pressure, as in earlier investigations [3, 4, 5, 6, 7], but by the air ﬂow

[8, 9, 10, 11, 12].

The situation becomes more involved if two ﬂue organ pipes are close in sounding fre-

quency and in spatial distance. Then a synchronization of the pipes, a frequency locking,

occurs [13, 14, 15]. This has a direct importance for the arrangement of organ pipes in a

common Orgelwerk. The eﬀect has been known by organ builders for a long time and taken

into account intuitively in the design of organs [16]. Detailed measurements of the acoustic

ﬁeld or of its dependence on the mutual coupling or on the distance between the pipes have,

however, apparently not been reported in the available literature. Nor has the full ﬂow of

two “coupled” pipes been measured by modern experimental methods. In this article, we

report acoustic measurements and give a possible explanation including the ﬂow ﬁeld. In

our opinion, it is useful to draw parallels to the vortex dynamics in the cylinder wake. Even

though some aspects are fundamentally diﬀerent, other mechanisms like the interaction of

vortices are similar.

As a side result, we can clarify a discussion about the nature of the strong amplitude de-

crease for two coupled pipes, already observed by Lord Rayleigh [13]. It has been interpreted

as so-called oscillation death in [17], which means that there is no oscillation at the the pipe

mouth, but all the energy is dissipated. From our results, we rule out such a scenario and

suggest an antiphase oscillation which yields destructive interference of the emitted acoustic

waves.

This article is structured as follows: In section II we explain brieﬂy how the sound of an

organ pipe is related to the oscillating jet created by the ﬂow out of the organ pipe ﬂue and

review basic concepts from synchronization theory concerning two coupled oscillators. In

3

section III we report on detailed measurements of the synchronization of two adjacent pipes

and interpret our results within the frame of synchronization theory. We give an explanation

of why a model of two oscillators works out so well, as indicated in [14] and give a possible

scenario for the full ﬂow created by two interacting jets. Further, the dependence of the

frequency spectrum on the distance between two detuned pipes is investigated for a ﬁxed

amount of detuning. Finally, we conclude with section IV.

II. BASIC PRINCIPLES

A. Sound generation in organ pipes

Sound generation in organ pipes has been repeatedly investigated [8, 11, 18]. Here, the

beauty of musical sound generation is paired with complex aerodynamical phenomena; their

coupling to the acoustic ﬁeld has been understood to a reasonable degree in the last 30 years

(see the review [1]).

Let us consider a single organ pipe: The wind system blows with constant pressure

producing a jet exiting from the pipe ﬂue. Typical Reynolds numbers, corresponding to a
free jet are of the order of 103, depending on the pressure supplied and the pipe dimensions,

see [11, 19]. This is a transitional regime roughly analogous to the scenario found behind

a long cylinder [11, 20]. The jet exiting from the ﬂue hits the labium of the pipe where a

pressure perturbation is generated, travelling inside the pipe resonator and reﬂected at the

end of the resonator. This pressure wave returns after time T to the labium where it in

turn triggers a change of the phase of the jet oscillations. After a few transients, a stable

oscillation of an “air sheet” at the pipe mouth is established. This oscillation of the wind

ﬁeld couples to the acoustic modes and a sound wave is emitted.

The coupling of the ﬂow and the acoustic modes can be described in the framework of

aeroacoustic modelling on the basis of Lighthills analogy. According to Howe [21, 22, 23],

the sound emission is dominated by the singularity at the edge of the labium. Numerical

approaches still suﬀer from the very expensive runs needed to resolve the large range of

excited scales and the proper choice of boundary conditions [24, 25].

B. Synchronization of two oscillators

In his book, Lord Rayleigh states “When two organ pipes of the same pitch stand side

by side ... it may still go so far as to cause the pipes to speak in absolute unison in spite of

inevitable small diﬀerences” [13]. He describes the so-called “Mitnahme-Eﬀekt” (loosely the

take-along eﬀect), known by organ builders [14, 15]. In [17] the phenomenon is interpreted in

the frame of synchronization theory as “oscillation death”, explained brieﬂy below. Hereafter

we will use the terms frequency locking or synchronization to be synonymous with the

“Mitnahme-Eﬀekt”. In [15] the eﬀect has been analyzed heuristically, while Stanzial has

investigated the dependence of the frequency locking on the detuning or frequency diﬀerence

of two single pipes in [14] by acoustic measurement. He modeled the eﬀect by two coupled

oscillators, without giving a physical reason of the coupling. In the following we will rely on

synchronization theory to show that any pair of self-sustained coupled oscillators generically

shows synchronization; later on we will try to give a physical model for the coupling in aero-

dynamical terms. As a starting point, we consider two self-sustained, coupled, nonlinear

oscillators.

Any pair of uncoupled oscillators close to a limit cycle can be written in terms of phase,

(Θ1, Θ2), and amplitude, (A1, A2), in the following form:

with i = 1, 2. For weak coupling, the phase equations are

˙Θi = 2πfi

˙Ai = −γ (Ai − Ai,0) ,

˙Θ1 = 2πf1 + ǫG1(Θ1, Θ2) ,

˙Θ2 = 2πf2 + ǫG2(Θ1, Θ2) .

˙φ = 2π∆f + ǫ sin(φ)

For f1 ≃ f2 the phase diﬀerence φ = Θ1 − Θ2 is a slow variable (in comparison with the

angle Θ). Averaging yields the simplest approximation, the Adler equation [17, 26]:

where the two parameters are detuning ∆f and coupling strength ǫ. This equation has a
stationary solution ˙φ = 0 if |2π∆f | < ǫ. This means that Θ1 = Θ2 and the phases are

locked. In a typical plot, the frequency diﬀerence of the coupled oscillators, ∆ν is plotted

4

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

5

against the frequency diﬀerence of the uncoupled ones, |f1 −f2|. This yields a clearer picture
than the use of the absolute frequencies ˙Θ1, ˙Θ2 as in [14] because perfect synchronization is

observed as ∆f = 0. When two pipes are coupled diﬀusively, a so-called oscillation death

can occur, leading to a complete silence of both pipes. The whole input power would then

be converted to heat without radiation.

Even though it seems appealing to explain the frequency locking of organ pipes in such a

simple way, it is not completely satisfactory because organ pipes are extended systems and

such a simple description does not take into account the aeroacoustics which is eventually

needed for a complete understanding.

III. MEASUREMENT AND PHYSICAL MODELLING

We positioned two pipes side by side. During preliminary measurements, it was no-

ticed that temperature and pressure conditions can vary and inﬂuence the frequency spec-

trum. To avoid such eﬀects, pressure and temperature were simultaneously controlled. The

temperature was measured to be 23.5 ±0.2 ‰, humidity 44 ±5 % and the atmospheric pres-

sure 1009.9 ±3 hPa, with negligible variations for our experiment. The acoustic signal was

recorded by a B&K 4191 condensator microphone positioned at the centerline between the

pipes in plane with the mouth at a distance of 10 cm. The absolute measured error in

frequency was ± 1 Hz. The setup is sketched in Fig. 1.

A. Results

The pipes used are stopped, manufactured by Alexander Schuke GmbH [27]. The res-

onator top of the pipes was moveable; to minimize losses, a gasket made of felt was applied.
The pipes as delivered from the manufacturer were tuned to e′ and f′. The driving pressure

was set to 160 Pa, which yields roughly a Reynolds number Re = 760. To measure the

dependence of frequency locking on the detuning of the two pipes, both pipes were installed

on a common bar directly side by side. One of the pipes has been kept at the ﬁxed fre-

quency of 170.1Hz, the other pipe was detuned in variable steps. To avoid confusion, in the

following we will use the symbol f for uncoupled frequencies, and ν for measurements of the

coupled pipes. In [14], the frequencies ν1, ν2 of the coupled pipes were plotted against the

6

frequency detuning of the uncoupled pipes, ∆f . As explained above, a clearer characteri-

zation is achieved when the frequency diﬀerence ∆ν is plotted versus ∆f [17, 28]. We plot

this quantity in Fig. 2. Clearly, the typical behavior of frequency locking can be observed.

As synchronization theory predicts, the bifurcation close to the ends of the locking region is

of saddle node type [29] (stars in Fig. 2).

Now, stressing the analogy with two coupled oscillators, a change of the relative phase

from φ0 − π/2 to φ0 + π/2 is expected [17] (φ = 2πf ). This has consequences for the

amplitude of the emitted sound. The radiated sound wave in the far ﬁeld can be roughly

approximated by a spherical wave, and the ﬁeld at the measurement point ~r is obtained

by superposition of the two waves emitted at the pipe mouths positions. Assuming the

sources to be point-like and considering that the pipes are situated directly side-by-side, the

amplitude along the center line is A = 2A0/r (1 + cos φ0).

Varying the frequency mismatch ∆f we observe a gradual increase of the amplitude at

the centerpoint, where the microphone is situated. In Fig. 3, the result of the measurement

is displayed: We see an excellent agreement of our estimate with the measurement. This

behavior is observed as well in the spectral plot, Fig. 4. where one can observe the collapse

of all sidebands in the measured spectrum to one single frequency as a very sharp transition.

For higher harmonics, the phase diﬀerence by φ0 does not imply destructive interference

because they are slaved and follow the ﬁrst harmonic. In other words, the relative phase

for the nth harmonic in the synchronization region lies in the interval (n(φ0 − π/2), n(φ0 +

π/2)). For the second harmonic, this implies in-phase oscillations at ∆f = 0. This is heard

acousticly by a dominance of the octave around ∆f = 0. At the edge of the synchronization

region, however, there is a phase diﬀerence of π and destructive interference is expected.

This is conﬁrmed well by the quantitative measurement of the amplitude dependence of the

second harmonic, shown in Fig. 5. The agreement with the estimate from superposition

of two monopoles is still good, but deviations occur. Higher harmonics are in qualitative

accordance with the above ideas, but quantitatively more and more diﬀerences are observed.

This can be expected, because the approximation by a monopole source does not hold.

We thus observe a strong impact of the synchronization of the pipes on the acoustic

properties of the emitted sound. From our results, we can rule out an oscillation death for

two coupled pipes. Rather, the two oscillators radiate two antiphase waves; this results in a

vanishing acoustic signal. What implication has this synchronization on the air ﬂow?

B. The Flow Model

7

Let us turn the attention to the jets. We will give a possible explanation of the underlying

physics that is compatible with our experimental observations. For sound emission, the

interpretation of the air sheet as a point oscillator appears to be suﬃcient. A more complete

model has to take into account the oscillating jets and vortices of the wind ﬁeld emitted at

the pipe mouth.

If two pipes are arranged side by side, the jets can interact hydrodynamically. The

pressure ﬂuctuations at one ﬂue interact with the ﬂow ﬁeld produced by its neighboring

counterpart and vice versa. Now, the question is how the two jets and the oscillating air

sheets at the pipe mouths rearrange under interaction. Pipes with a frequency mismatch

have jet oscillations with diﬀerent frequency. Synchronization is observed with a common

frequency that is higher than either of the original ones. This means that the two space-time

ﬂuctuations of the jets, with a priori diﬀerent frequencies, are reordered to have the same,

higher frequency. How does this reordering happen? We try to conclude the pattern indi-

rectly from the acoustic measurements. In our considerations, we assume as an idealization

that the anechoic box does not inﬂuence the air ﬂow.

The air sheet in the opening between ﬂue and labium follows the oscillations of the jet

which originates at the ﬂue. Let us consider the two extreme situations of frequency locking:

no detuning, in the middle of the synchronization region and critical detuning, right at the

synchronization transition. For the ﬁrst case, a minimum amplitude at the microphone is

observed; we ascribe this to a phase diﬀerence of the oscillators of φ0 = π. For the Reynolds
numbers relevant for organ pipes, Re ∼ 103, a free jet would be in a transitional regime

with vortex shedding of more or less ordered vortices. For the analog situation of a ﬂow

around a cylinder, very precise measurements exist, marking diﬀerent instabilities of a jet

[20]. We are not aware of correspondingly detailed measurements for rectangular nozzles,

which would correspond to a pipe ﬂue. In [11], the ﬂow proﬁle in a pipe was measured for

several values of the Reynolds number. Their results are roughly similar to those found for

a cylinder, but in addition, resonator and labium strongly inﬂuence the ﬂow. A transition is

seen from a quite ordered Karman-like vortex street which evolves along the labium towards

a wake-transition regime with turbulent vortex shedding.

The new important observation for two pipes is that the lateral antiphase coupling oc-

8

curs between the two jets.

In the Re-regime interesting for organ pipes, intrinsic three-

dimensional instabilities occur leading to lateral patterns.

In addition, one knows (from

the cylinder analogy) that the end points heavily inﬂuence the whole pattern, leading to

oblique vortex shedding and more complex phenomena [20]. It is not clear which eﬀects are

important for coupling in our setup. To clarify why the jets couple in antiphase requires

more detailed work with ﬂow visualization and modeling.

At the edge of the synchronization region, there must be a phase diﬀerence of φ0 ± π/2,

which corresponds to a shift of a quarter of a jet oscillation. The jets then undergo a mutual

reordering into a complex spatio-temporal three dimensional pattern. Again, the observation

of the pattern was beyond the facilities of the current experimental setup.

All our observations are consistent with an interpretation in the frame of synchronization

theory of two oscillators. A full description of the physics has to take into account the origin

of the sound generation—the oscillations and vortices generated by two jets that couple,

predominantly by hydrodynamic interaction.

In principle, there is a competition of the

interaction between the jets and the driving by the resonators which are forcing a certain

wavelength of the jets. A comment should be made on why the synchronization description

by two oscillators holds so well.

In the measured Reynolds number regime, there might

be three-dimensional patterns at the pipe mouth, if the aspect ratio is large enough. To

check this in our particular case requires detailed experiments. Neglecting three dimensional

structures, and assuming that the air sheet is homogeneously oscillating, a description by

oscillator models like Stuart-Landau or a van-der-Pol equation could be suﬃcient to describe

the two dimensional oscillations and the transition to turbulence [30]. Since the main sound

production is due to the interaction with the labium, an oscillator model suits well. From

synchronization theory it follows that any self-sustained oscillators will generically follow

the synchronization scenario when coupled, leading to the observed behavior [17, 31]. The

simulations in [14] are completely in agreement with this fact. We are convinced that full

understanding may be achieved by studiying the details of the ﬂuid dynamics of the coupling

mechanism. To investigate the dependence of synchronization on the coupling (or spatial

distance), we performed additional measurements.

C. Coupling Sensitivity

9

To investigate the sensitivity to coupling strength, we measured the frequency spectrum

about the ﬁrst harmonic while varying interpipe distance. The corresponding plot is de-

picted in Fig. 7. For large distances, the typical interference pattern of two noninteracting

oscillators is observed. As the pipes come closer to each other, the individual, sharp peaks

of half width ≃ 0.1 Hz reduce in amplitude and at the same time the spectrum broadens

to a “hump” with half width ≃ 1 Hz. Peaks typical of the beating from linear superposi-

tion sit on the hump. Coming even closer, full synchronization is observed with one single,

very sharp peak of again half width ≃ 0.1 Hz. That means the hump is about ten times

broader than either of the peaks for the uncoupled system or the synchronized one. This

phenomenon cannot be explained by classical synchronization theory and requires detailed

understanding of the ﬂuid dynamics of the two oscillating jets with vortex shedding.

A possible explanation of the broad “hump” is the following; the jets couple intermittently

showing typical on-oﬀ behavior. This results in peaks varying with time, because our spectra

are time-averaged, the observed broad spectrum is observed. From another point of view,

the jets couple by pressure perturbations. This perturbation is part of a turbulent vortex

street. With increasing distance the turbulence develops and the jets are more and more

decorrelated, however, still feel each other. This yields a time dependent position of the

emitted frequency and a broadening.

In a dynamical sense the signal is a result of two

concurring processes: a complex, possibly turbulent coupling which synchronizes the jets

and a driving which forces the jets to the unperturbed resonance frequency.

IV. CONCLUSION

We presented measurements on the mutual inﬂuence of two organ pipes. The observed

behavior of two pipes, close to each other, is completely consistent with an explanation

in the frame of synchronization theory. Measurements determining the dependence of the

frequencies on the interpipe distance reveal that conventional theory is not suﬃcient to

explain a “hump” in the frequency spectrum. Further measurements with ﬂow visualization

and hydrodynamical modelling are needed to clarify the underlying physics of the three-

dimensional, transitional ﬂow.

10

In a more abstract model, one can refer to the setup as a coupling of two adjacent ﬂues,

located at some distance to each other. For vanishing distance, there should be a transition

to zero phase shift of the jets, if no three dimensional instabilities are involved. The situation

should be qualitatively analog to two cylinders, separated by a gap. To our knowledge this

has not been investigated yet, although several publications focus on the interaction of

parallel vortex streets (see [32] and Refs. therein).

From an acoustic point of view, one can address the question of how to position two

organ pipes close in frequency. This has been intuitively solved by organ builders by trial

and error in the last centuries [15]. Our work might give quantitative hints on how large the

interpipe distance needs to be to suppress mutual inﬂuence, and on details of the coupling

mechanism. For example, avoiding an amplitude minimum for the ﬁrst harmonic is highly

desirable.

From an aerodynamical point of view, the above scenario requires more detailed inves-

tigations to understand the full dynamics of the coupled jets, although a model consisting

of two mutually coupled oscillators seems to be suﬃcient for all qualitative questions. In

addition the more involved setup of more than two organ pipes is an interesting subject for

further investigations. From our measurements, one can clearly say that the pipes do not

show an oscillation death; rather, antiphase sound radiation yields the observed weakening

of the amplitude.

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge fruitful discussion with M. Rosenblum and A. Pikovsky about synchro-

nization theory, with D. Lohse and J. F. Pinton who pointed out the analogy to the cylinder

wake and hydrodynamic interaction, and thank J. Ong for careful reading of the manuscript.

M. Abel acknowledges support by the DFG (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft). We thank

the organ manufacturer Alexander Schuke Potsdam Orgelbau GmBH for kindly providing

the organ pipes for our measurements.

[1] Fabre, B., and Hirschberg, A., Acustica - Acta Acustica, 86, 599–610 (2000).

[2] Rossing, T., and Fletcher, N., The physics of musical instruments, Springer, New York, 1998.

11

[3] Cremer, L., and Ising, H., Acustica, 19, 143–153 (1967).

[4] Coltman, J. W., J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 44, 983–992 (1968).

[5] Coltman, J. W., J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 92, 74–83 (1992).

[6] Fletcher, N., J. Acoust. Soc. Am, 93, 2172–2180 (1993).

[7] Nolle, A., J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 73, 1821–1832 (1983).

[8] Coltman, J. W., J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 60, 725–733 (1976).

[9] Verge, M. P., Fabre, B., Mahu, W. E. A., Hirschberg, A., Hassel, R. v., Wijnands, A., Vries,

J. d., and Hogendoorn, C., J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 95, 1119–1132 (1994).

[10] Hirschberg, A., van der Laar, R., Marrou-Mourie‘eres, J., Wijnands, A., Dane, H., Krujswijk,

S., and Houtsma, A., Acustica, 70, 146–154 (1990).

[11] Fabre, B., Hirschberg, A., and Wijnands, A. P. J., Acustica - Acta Acustica, 82, 863–877

[12] Segouﬁn, C., Fabre, B., and de Lacombe, L., Acta Acoustica united with Acustica, 90, 966–975

(1996).

(2004).

[13] Rayleigh, J. W. S., The Theory of Sound, vol. 2, Dover Publications, 1945.

[14] Stanzial, D., Bonsi, D., and Gonzales, D., “Nonlinear modelling of the Mitnahme-Eﬀekt in

coupled organ pipes,” in International symposium on musical acoustics (ISMA) 2001, Perugia,

Italy, 2001, pp. 333–337.

[15] Angster, J., Angster, J., and Mikl´os, A., AES Preprint 94th Convention Berlin 1993 (1993).

[16] Zscherpel, D., Alexander Schuke GmbH (2004), priv. comm.

[17] Pikovsky, A., Rosenblum, M., and Kurths, J., Synchronization: A Universal Concept in Non-

linear Sciences, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2001.

[18] Rayleigh, J. W. S., Phil. Mag., XIII, 340–347 (1882).

[19] Pitsch, S., Angster, J., Strunz, M., and Mikl´os, A., Proceed. International Symposium on

Musical Acoustics, 1997, Edinburgh, 19, 339–344 (1997).

[20] Williamson, C. H. K., Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 28, 477–539 (1996).

[21] Howe, M. S., J. Fluid Mech., 71, 625–673 (1975).

[22] Howe, M. S., Theory of vortex sound, Cambridge texts in applied mathematics, Cambridge

[23] Howe, M. S., Acoustics of ﬂuid-structure interactions, Cambridge University Press, Cam-

University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2003.

bridge, UK, 1998.

12

[24] Lele, S., AIAA, Pap. 97, 0018 (1997).

[25] Tam, C., AIAA, Pap. 97, 1774 (1997).

[26] Adler, R., Proc. IRE, 34, 351–357 (1946).

[27] Alexander Schuke GmbH (2004), URL http://www.schuke.com.

[28] Bogoliubov, N. N., and Mitropolsky, V. A., Asymptotic methods in the theory of non-linear

oscillations, International Monographs on Advanced Mathematics and Physics, Gordon and

Breach Science Publishers, New York, 1961, translation from russian original (1955).

[29] Ott, E., Sauer, T., and Yorke, J., Coping with Chaos, Series in Nonlinear Science, Wiley, New

York, 1994.

[30] Provansal, M., Mathis, C., and Boyer, L., J. Fluid Mech., 182, 1 (1987).

[31] Aronson, D. G., Ermentrout, G. B., and Koppel, N., Physica D, 41, 403–449 (1990).

[32] Cerretelli, C., and Williamson, C. H. K., J. Fluid Mech., 475, 41–77 (2003).

Figures

13

FIG. 1: Setup of the experiment. The microphone is in plane with the pipe mouth, the view is at

an angle from above.

)
z
H
(

ν
∆

4

2

0

-2

-4

-4

-2

0

2

4

∆f (Hz)

FIG. 2: Frequency locking of two organ pipes. The plot shows the observed frequency diﬀerence

∆ν versus the detuning of the uncoupled pipes, ∆f (circles).

In the synchronization region, a

very clean plateau is observed. A square root function has been ﬁtted to the data near the edges

(stars). This corresponds to a a saddle-node bifurcation from the synchronized state, as predicted

by theory. The agreement is very good.

14

200

195

190

185

180

175

170

165

160

)
z
H
(

ν

100

A
m
p
l
i
t
u
d
e

(
d
B
)

90

80

70

60

50

40

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

3

4

5

0

1
2
∆f (Hz)

FIG. 3: Absolute frequency ν for two coupled pipes next to each other, versus detuning of the

uncoupled pipes ∆f (bottom graphs). The synchronization region in this plot is not a plateau

and one recognizes the decrease in pitch with increasing detuning ∆f . The top graph shows the

amplitude (dB/log scale), measured at the microphone in dependence on the detuning ∆f . The

graph for the ﬁrst harmonic is shown; the sharp decrease of the amplitude at ∆f = 0 indicates an

antiphase oscillation of the air sheets of the pipes. We plot the absolute frequency to show that

the pipe with ﬁxed frequency changes pitch in the synchronization region (circles). The stars show

the analytical curve obtained from synchronization theory, assuming φ0 = π—the agreement is

excellent.

FIG. 4: A sharp transition to synchronization is observed and the sidebands from beating in the

measured spectrum collapse to a single frequency in the synchronization region. The amplitude is

encoded according to the levels on the right.

15

)
z
H
(

ν

350

400

390

380

370

360

340

330

320

50

40

30

20

10

0

A
m
p
l
i
t
u
d
e

(
d
B
)

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

3

4

5

0

1
2
∆f (Hz)

FIG. 5: The same graphs as in Fig. 3 for the second harmonic. Here, the phase is doubled and an

annihilation occurs right at the edge of the synchronization region, seen as a sharp decrease. The

curve predicted by theory shows deviations for the second harmonic.

FIG. 6: Sketch of the situation at the pipe openings. One jet is drawn in black, the other in

gray. At zero detuning of the pipes, an antiphase oscillation should occur (left). At the edge of

the synchronization region the phase is shifted by π/2 (right). The drawing corresponds to the

measurements published in [11], p. 872.

16

FIG. 7: Frequency spectrum of the coupled pipes in dependence on the distance, given in the

legend. The pipes decouple more and more when farther apart. For small distances, a sharp peak

at the synchronization frequency is observed, for large distances, the peak broadens more and

more, at very large distances the spectrum of the uncoupled pipes is recovered with the typical

beat phenomenon. To distinguish diﬀerent graphs, an oﬀset has been added to each curve.

This figure "fig4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0506094v1

