5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
2
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The gauge non-invariance of Classical Electromagnetism

Germain Rousseaux
Institut Non-Lin´eaire de Nice, Sophia-Antipolis.
UMR 6618 CNRS.
1361, route des Lucioles. 06560 Valbonne, France.
(Germain.Rousseaux@inln.cnrs.fr)

Physical theories of fundamental signiﬁcance tend to be gauge theories. These are theories in
which the physical system being dealt with is described by more variables than there are physically
independent degree of freedom. The physically meaningful degrees of freedom then reemerge as being
those invariant under a transformation connecting the variables (gauge transformation). Thus, one
introduces extra variables to make the description more transparent and brings in at the same time
a gauge symmetry to extract the physically relevant content. It is a remarkable occurrence that the
road to progress has invariably been towards enlarging the number of variables and introducing a
more powerful symmetry rather than conversely aiming at reducing the number of variables and
eliminating the symmetry [1]. We claim that the potentials of Classical Electromagnetism are not
indetermined with respect to the so-called gauge transformations. Indeed, these transformations
raise paradoxes that imply their rejection. Nevertheless, the potentials are still indetermined up to
a constant.

INTRODUCTION

In Classical electromagnetism, the electric ﬁeld E and
the magnetic ﬁeld B are related to the scalar V and vec-
tor A potentials by the following deﬁnitions [2] :

E = − ∂A
∂t

− ∇V

and B = ∇ × A

(1)

One century ago, H.A. Lorentz noticed that the elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld remains invariant (E′ = E and B′ = B)
under the so-called gauge transformations [3] :

A′

= A + ∇f

and V

′

= V − ∂f
∂t

(2)

where f (x, t) is the gauge function.

Hence, this indeterminacy is believed to be an essen-
tial symmetry of Classical Electromagnetism [3]. More-
over, it is often related to the assertion that the poten-
tials are not measurable quantities contrary to the ﬁelds.
Hence, one must specify what is called a gauge condition,
that is a supplementary equation which is injected in the
Maxwell equations expressed in function of the electro-
magnetic potentials in order to supress this indetermi-
nacy. It is common to say that these gauge conditions
are mathematical conveniences that lead to the same de-
termination of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. In this context,
the choice of a speciﬁc gauge condition is motivated from
the easiness in calculations compared to another one. In a
certain manner, although their mathematical expressions
are diﬀerent, it is supposed that they are equivalent as
the ﬁelds are invariant with respect to the gauge trans-
formations. Furthermore, no physical meaning is ascribed
to the gauge conditions as the potentials are assumed not
to have one...

Despite these assertions which are shared by a large
majority of physicists, a deﬁnition for the potentials dat-

ing back to Maxwell was recalled recently and which re-
solves, according to our point of view, the question of
indeterminacy by giving them a physical interpretation.
Moreover, we showed that the Coulomb and Lorenz gauge
conditions were, in fact, not equivalent because they must
be interpreted as physical constraints that is electromag-
netic continuity equations [4, 5]. In addition, we were
able to demonstrate that the Coulomb gauge condition is
the galilean approximation of the Lorenz gauge condition
within the magnetic limit of L´evy-Leblond & Le Bellac
[6, 7, 8]. So, to ”make a gauge choice” that is choosing
a gauge condition is, as a consequence of our ﬁndings,
not related to the fact of ﬁxing a special couple of poten-
tials. Gauge conditions are completely uncorrelated to
the supposed indeterminacy of the potentials. Hence, we
proposed to rename ”gauge condition” by ”constraint”
[4, 5, 6].

In this article, we would like to reexamine the common
belief concerning the assumed indeterminacy of the po-
tentials with the assumption that the ”constraint” do not
ﬁx the value of the potentials. Indeed, we will show that
gauge transformations introduce paradoxes which imply
their rejection. This point of view was expressed already
by the school of De Broglie : by the master himself [9] or
by his followers like Costa De Beauregard [10]...

THE CASE OF A STATIONNARY ELECTRIC
FIELD

Imagine a one dimensional stationary problem de-

ﬁned by the following potentials :

A = 0 and V (x) = −Ex

(3)

One ﬁnds easily :

B = 0 and E = Eex

(4)

The electric and magnetic ﬁelds are constants in time.

Now, we can perform a gauge transformation with this

particular gauge function :

f (x, t) = −Ext

(5)

The new potentials are :

A′

= −Et and V

′

= V − ∂f
∂t

= 0

(6)

Of course, the electric ﬁeld is unchanged but is the un-
derlying physics expressed by the potentials the same ?
We believe that an electric ﬁeld can be created by two
very diﬀerent physical processes that is time variation of
a vector potential (like in induction phenomena) or space
variation of a scalar potential (like in the electron gun).
We are in front of the ﬁrst paradox : how can a physi-
cal quantity (here, the vector potential) be a function of
time in a stationary problem ? In the case of a capacitor
for example, the static electric ﬁeld is created by static
electric charges on the plates of the capacitor. If one ad-
mits that one can describe this static electric ﬁeld by
a time-dependent vector potential, one must admit that
the sources (charges or currents) of this electric ﬁeld are
time-dependent which is not experimentally the case.

The unconvinced reader could argue that we proposed
a gauge function which depends explicitly on time in a
stationary problem. As a matter of fact, if f (x, t) does not
depend on time, the scalar potential is invariant V ′ = V
and so is not indetermined with respect to the gauge
transformations.

In a stationary problem, the electric ﬁeld is expressed
as E = −∇V whereas the magnetic ﬁeld is still deﬁned
as previously. In this case, the vector potential could still
be indetermined. So, are two vector potentials diﬀering
from a gradient physically equivalent ?

THE CASE OF A VECTOR POTENTIAL EQUAL
TO A GRADIENT

Now, one will apply the so-called Stokes-Helmholtz-

Hodge decomposition to the vector potential :

A = Alongitudinal + Atransverse

with :

A = ∇g + ∇ × R

where g is a scalar and R a vector. The decomposition is
unique up to the additive gradient of a harmonic function
with the following properties [11] :

∇.Aharmonic = 0 ∇ × Aharmonic = 0

(9)

(7)

(8)

2

If we use gauge transformations, we can notice that
only the longitudinal (and/or harmonic) part of the vec-
tor potential and the scalar potential are aﬀected by these
transformations. The transverse part remains unchanged.
Moreover, the magnetic ﬁeld depends only on the trans-
verse part. So, if there is indeterminacy, it must imply in-
determinacy of the longitudinal (and/or harmonic) part.
As a consequence, the longitudinal (and/or harmonic)
part cannot have a physical meaning if it is indetermined
with respect to the gauge transformations.

Usually, the vector potential is equal to its transverse
part in most of the problems of Classical Electromag-
netism. For example, the vector potential for a magnet is
expressed by :

A = Atransverse =

(10)

µ0
4π

∇ × (

m
r

)

where m is the strengh of the poles (the so-called mag-
netic mass or moment).

In this case, we observe a magnetic ﬁeld by deﬁnition.
And, if the vector potential varies in time, it creates an
electric ﬁeld again by deﬁnition : the time integral of the
electric ﬁeld could be considered as a direct measure of
the vector potential without the presence of static charges
that is of a scalar potential. If not, one can use the super-
position theorem to evaluate ﬁrst the part of the electric
ﬁeld associated to the static charge (that is the scalar po-
tential) and then the part associated to the current (that
is the vector potential) if and only if the separation is
possible...

At this stage, the question is to know whether a vector
potential only equal to a gradient can have a physical
eﬀect when the electromagnetic ﬁeld is null.

Outside a solenoid, the vector potential is precisely
equal to a gradient as expressed by the following formula
in cylindrical coordinates (r, θ) [2] :

A =

eθ =

Φ
2πr

Φ∇θ
2π

(11)

where Φ is the ﬂux of magnetic ﬁeld inside the solenoid
or the circulation of the vector potential outside the
solenoid. More precisely,
its curl and divergence are
null so the vector potential outside a solenoid is of a
harmonic-type according to the indeterminacy of the
Stokes-Helmholtz-Hodge decomposition [11]. Moreover,
we point out forcefully that the mathematical indetermi-
nacy due to the gauge transformations is discarded by
the boundary conditions which give a physical determi-
nation to the vector potential outside a solenoid : the
vector potential vanishes far from its current sources.

The external region of a solenoid is one of the numerous
experimental conﬁgurations to observe the well-known
Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect [12]. So, we are in front of the
second paradox : the Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect contradicts
the fact that a vector potential equal only to a gradient
could not have a physical eﬀect.

However, one usually argues that the Aharanov-Bohm
eﬀect is a quantum eﬀect and that the potentials can
have a meaning in quantum physics and not in classical
physics. Moreover, the prediction of the Aharonov-Bohm
eﬀect pointed out an unanticipated way in which the vec-
tor potential can aﬀect a measurement on a charged par-
ticle in a region of zero ﬁeld, but the predicted phase is
the result of a path integral which insures that the re-
sult is gauge independent : it is not the result of a local
(gauge-dependent) value of the vector potential.

Why add in the path integral a (mathematical) gradi-
ent to the vector potential which is already a (physical)
gradient ?

A vector potential equal only to a gradient should not
have a physical eﬀect as imply by gauge transformations
because we could cancel the longitudinal (and/or har-
monic) part by adding the gradient of the appropriate
gauge function.

In the solenoid example, we can take as a gauge func-
tion f (r, θ, t) = −Φθ/2π and still there is experimentally
an eﬀect despite the fact that all the potentials and so
the ﬁelds cancel outside the solenoid.

However, one can found in the litterature some theoret-
ical arguments against this gauge transformation accord-
ing to the fact that the existence of the solenoid implies
that the the space is not simply-connected. Yet, it is true
that in a multiply connected region, the function α which
characterises the longitudinal (and/or harmonic) part of
the vector potential in the general case becomes multi-
valued but the longitudinal (and/or harmonic) part of
the vector potential (the only one which is diﬀerent from
zero outside the solenoid) is not multivalued as one take
the gradient of α.

Another argument is to remember that the gauge
transformations were introduced by Lorentz without any
constraint on the connectness of the space.

Having the Aharonov-Bohm eﬀect in mind, we can re-
call now a very simple experiment which cannot be ex-
plained with Maxwell equations expressed in function of
the electromagnetic ﬁeld only and which shows the phys-
ical character of a longitudinal (and/or harmonic) vector
potential in classical physics.

Let’s take again the geometry of the solenoid. If the
current varies with time the magnetic ﬁeld is still null
outside the solenoid but because the vector potential is
not null outside the solenoid and varies with time, it cre-
ates an electric ﬁeld outside the solenoid. If we denote
the ﬂux of the magnetic ﬁeld inside the solenoid (or the
circulation of the vector potential outside the solenoid)
Φ = LI where L is the inductance of the solenoid and I
the current intensity, the electric ﬁeld is expressed by :

E = − ∂A
∂t

= − L
2πr

dI
dt

eθ

(12)

If we apply Maxwell equations expressed in function of
the ﬁelds with the prescription that the magnetic ﬁeld is

3

null outside the solenoid, we only ﬁnd that the electric
ﬁeld is lamellar outside the solenoid which is supposed
to be inﬁnite (∇ × E = 0 because ∂B/∂t = 0 even in
this time-dependent problem because B = 0 outside the
solenoid)...

This experiment is carried out very easily. It demon-
strates that a vector potential only equal to a gradient
can have a physical eﬀect in Classical Electromagnetism
when it varies in time and thus creates by deﬁnition an
electric ﬁeld. Of course, for a ﬁnite solenoid, the leak-
ing magnetic ﬁeld is not null outside the solenoid. How-
ever, it creates a leaking electric ﬁeld which is negligeable
and opposite with respect to the electric ﬁeld created by
the contribution of the vector potential due to the ideal
solenoid...

Another example of a physical vector potential which
is equal to a gradient appears in the well-known Meissner
eﬀect in supraconductivity and it was discussed nicely by
Tonomura [13].

THE CASE OF A UNIFORM MAGNETIC FIELD

Another drawback of the gauge transformations can
be illustrated by the following example : one often ﬁnds
in textbooks that we can describe a uniform magnetic
ﬁeld B = Bez by either the so-called symmetric ”gauge”
As = 1/2B × r or by the so-called Landau ”gauge” [3].
This two ”gauges” are related by a gauge transformation :

A1 =

B × r =

[−By, Bx, 0]

(13)

1
2

1
2

becomes either :

A2 = [0, Bx, 0]

or A3 = [−By, 0, 0]

(14)

with the gauge functions ±f = ±xy/2.

However, there is no discussion in the litterature of
the following issue. As a matter of fact, if we consider
a solenoid with a current along eθ, the magnetic ﬁeld is
uniform (along ez) and could be described by the sym-
metric ”gauge” or the Landau ”gauge”. Yet, the vector
potential in the Landau ”gauge” A2 is along ey whereas
the vector potential in the symmetric gauge is along eθ.
We advocate that only the symmetric ”gauge” is valid
in this case because it does respect the symmetry of the
currents (J = Jeθ) whereas the Landau ”gauge” does
not. Moreover, the symmetric ”gauge” (or the Landau
”gauge”) is not, in fact, a gauge condition but a solution
describing a uniform magnetic ﬁeld under the Coulomb
constraint (∇.A1 = 0). In order to understand this last
point, one can picture an analogy between Fluid Mechan-
ics and Classical Electromagnetism. Indeed, the solenoid
is analogous to a cylindrical vortex core with vorticity w
and we know that the velocity inside the core is given by
u = 1/2w × r which is analogous to the symmetric gauge

for an incompressible ﬂow (∇.u = 0). Outside the vortex
core, the velocity is given by [14] :

u =

Γ∇θ
2π

=

Γ
2πr

eθ

(15)

where Γ is the ﬂux of vorticity inside the vortex or the
circulation of the velocity outside the vortex. One recov-
ers the analogue formula for the vector potential outside
a solenoid...

Of course, if the problem we are considering does not
feature the cylindrical geometry (two horizontal plates
with opposite surface currents for example, analogous to
a plane Couette ﬂow [14]), one of the Landau gauges
A2 or A3 must be used instead of the symmetric gauge
A1 according to the necessity of respecting the under-
lying distribution/symmetry of the currents which is at
the origin of both the vector potential and the magnetic
ﬁeld. To give a magnetic vector ﬁeld without specifying
its current source is an ill-posed problem which was in-
terpreted so far by attributing an indeterminacy to the
vector potential which is wrong.

Now, how can we test experimentally this argument
based on symmetry ? If the current of the solenoid varies
with time, it will create an electric ﬁeld which is along eθ
as the vector potential because the electric ﬁeld is minus
the time derivative of the vector potential. If the currents
in the horizontal plates change with time, a horizontal
electric ﬁeld will appear for the same reason. The author
rejects all the arguments based on the fact that one can
deﬁne through a gauge transformations a time dependent
scalar potential which would explain the oberved electric
ﬁeld. Indeed, a scalar potential is physically deﬁned with
respect to charge distributions and not current distribu-
tions.

Contrary to the common belief, it is possible to dis-
criminate experimentally between two vector potentials
(related by a gauge transformation) creating a uniform
magnetic ﬁeld. We have shown that the symmetry of the
current source implies a certain distribution of the vec-
tor potential which is at the origin of an electric ﬁeld
when the intensity is time-dependent. Its orientation is
dictated by the vector potential alone which, eventhough
is not observable by itself, has observable consequences.

CONCLUSIONS

What is the meaning of gauge transformations ? We be-
lieve that it is only a structural feature (that is linearity)
of the deﬁnitions of the potentials from the ﬁelds. The po-
tentials of Classical Electromagnetism do have a physical
meaning as recalled recently [4, 5, 6, 15, 16] and should be
considered as the starting point of Classical Electromag-
netism [6, 15]. If we deﬁned the ﬁelds from the potentials
and not the contrary, the gauge transformations loose
their sense because they imply the paradoxes raised in

4

this article. As a conclusion, we must reject gauge trans-
formations. Gauge invariance is preserved but in a weaker
sense : the potentials are deﬁned up to a constant. This
constant is equal to zero when the sources are conﬁned
to a certain region of space : one assumes that the po-
tentials vanish at inﬁnity far from their sources. If the
domain is bounded like in a Faraday cage, the surface
potentials are given by the contribution of all the sources
outside the region of interrest [17] : one makes the as-
sumption that their knowledge is not important as one
measures only diﬀerences of potentials according to their
deﬁnition in function of a constant of reference [6]. We
recall for example that the vector potential is an electro-
magnetic impulsion that is a diﬀerence of electromagnetic
momentum. In mechanics, a momentum is indetermined
as it is deﬁned with respect to a reference but the im-
pulsion constructed from this momentum has a deﬁnite
value so is not indetermined...

[1] Henneaux M. & Teitelboim C., Quantization of gauge
systems, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1992.
[2] Jackson J.D., Classical Electrodynamics, third edition,

John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1998.

[3] Jackson J.D. & Okun L.B., Historical roots of gauge in-
variance, Reviews of Modern Physics, Vol. 73, p. 663-680,
2001.

[4] Rousseaux G. & Guyon E., A propos d’une analogie entre
la m´ecanique des ﬂuides et l’´electromagn´etisme, Bulletin
de l’Union des Physiciens, 841 (2), p. 107-136, f´evrier,
2002.
(Article available online at :
http ://www.udppc.asso.fr/bup/841/0841D107.pdf).
[5] Rousseaux G., On the physical meaning of the gauge
conditions of Classical Electromagnetism : the hydro-
dynamics analogue viewpoint, Annales de la Fondation
Louis de Broglie, Volume 28, Num´ero 2, p. 261-270,
2003.
(Article available online at :
http ://www.ensmp.fr/aﬂb/AFLB-282/aﬂb282p261.pdf)
[6] Rousseaux G., Sur la th´eorie de Riemann-Lorenz de
l’´Electromagn´etisme Classique, Bulletin de l’Union des
Professeurs de Physique et de Chimie, Vol. 98, 868 (2),
p. 41-56, Novembre 2004.

[7] Rousseaux G. & Domps A., Remarques suppl´ementaires
sur l’approximation des r´egimes quasi-stationnaires en
´electromagn´etisme, Bulletin de l’Union des Professeurs
de Physique et de Chimie, Vol. 98, 868 (2), p. 71-86,
Novembre 2004.
(Article (not printable) available online at :
http ://www.udppc.asso.fr/bup/868/0868D071.pdf)
[8] Le Bellac M. & L´evy-Leblond J.-M., Galilean Electro-
magnetism, Il Nuevo Cimento, Vol. 14B, N. 2, 11 Aprile,
p. 217-233, 1973.

[9] De Broglie L., Diverses questions de m´ecanique et de
thermodynamique classiques et relativistes, Springer,
End of Chapter 3, 1995.

5

[10] Costa de Beauregard O., Un ´enonc´e de Vaschy et une
exp´erience de Blondel revisit´es : la tension d’Amp`ere,
Annales de la Fondation Louis de Broglie, Volume 28,
Num´ero 1, p. 77, 2003.

[11] Dassios G. & Lindell I.V., Uniqueness and reconstruction
for the anisotropic Helmholtz decomposition, Journal of
Physics A : Mathematical and General, 35 (24), p. 5139-
5146, 2002.

[12] Feynman R., Leighton R. & Sands M., The Feynman
Lectures on Physics, Addison Wesley, Reading, Ma., Vol.
2, p. 15-7/15-14, 1964.

[13] Tonomura A., The quantum world unveiled by electron

waves, World Scientiﬁc, 1998.

[14] Guyon E., Hulin J.P., Petit L. & Mitescu C.D., Physical

Hydrodynamics, Oxford University Press, 2001.

[15] Mead C., Collective Electrodynamics : Quantum Foun-

dations of Electromagnetism, M.I.T. Press, 2002.

[16] Kholmetskii A.L., Remarks on momentum and energy
ﬂux of a non-radiating electromagnetic ﬁeld, Annales de
la Fondation Louis De Broglie, Volume 29, Num´ero 3, p.
1-33, 2004.

[17] Mourier G., L’invariance de jauge et la notion de
syst`eme isol´e : que signiﬁe l’invariance de jauge pour
un exp´erimentateur ?, Annales de la Fondation Louis De
Broglie, Volume 26, Num´ero sp´ecial, p. 345-351, 2001.

