5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
0
2
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On a natural deﬁnition of the kilogram and
the ampere

Savely G. Karshenboim
D. I. Mendeleev Institute for Metrology (VNIIM), St. Petersburg 190005, Russia

and Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik, 85748 Garching, Germany

Email: sgk@vniim.ru, sek@mpq.mpg.de

February 2, 2008

Abstract

We consider a recent proposal [1] to redeﬁne the kilogram in terms
of natural constants. In our opinion, the main objective of the redef-
inition should be to build such a version of the SI system in which
the electric measurements are possible with the highest accuracy in
SI units, and not in practical units as now. We emphasize that this
objective can be achieved only with a simultaneous redeﬁnition of the
kilogram and ampere. This redeﬁnition must be in terms of ﬁxed val-
ues of the Planck constant h and the elementary charge e. Certain
details of the possible redeﬁnition are considered.

This paper considers the recent proposal [1] to redeﬁne the SI kilogram
and possibly the ampere in terms of ﬁxed values of fundamental physical
constants. This would change the International System of units (the SI) [2],
which is a commonly accepted coherent system for all branches of macro-
scopic measurements in education, sciences and technology. The redeﬁnition
[1], which has been suggested in terms of fundamental constants, also in-
directly involves certain natural quantum phenomena, which should appear
due to realizations of the redeﬁnition.

Some time ago the SI was changed in a similar matter by ﬁxing a value
of the speed of light c [3]. However, the present situation is very diﬀerent.
To our opinion the major problem now is that the present high-accuracy

1

measurements in mechanics and electricity are performed in two diﬀerent
versions of the SI. While macroscopic mass measurements are performed
in terms of the SI kilogram, the most accurate electric measurements are
performed in terms of the practical units ohm-90 and volt-90. These latter
are apparently not consistent with the SI.

Microscopic mass measurements, however, are related to mass determined
in uniﬁed atomic mass units and in frequency units, i.e., dealing with a value
of mc2/h instead of the mass m. Thus, they are measured in units closely
related to the ohm-90 and volt-90. For instance, the SI value of h has a
larger uncertainty than microscopic mass comparisons, while in the practical
units-90 the numerical value of h is known exactly.

The proposal [1] and its numerous considerations in various international
commissions have been focussed on the desirability of replacing the deﬁnition
of the unit for mass measurements, now based on the last artefact of the SI,
the kilogram prototype kept at the BIPM in S`evres, by a deﬁnition which is
stable and independently reproducible. That mainly focuss attention on the
kilogram alone, while a redeﬁnition of the ampere is considered as one of a
number of unnecessary collateral options.

On contrary, we believe that the gap between the present version of the
SI and the system based on the ohm-90 and the volt-90 is a crucial reason to
consider such a redeﬁnition. The modern version of the SI [2] was introduced
in 1983 by ﬁxing the value of the speed of light c by CIPM [3], while in 1988
CIPM recommended a departure from the SI by introducing the practical
electric units [4] which have been in eﬀect since 1990.

The desirability of resolving the inconsistency between units used in preci-
sion electric and macroscopic mass measurements and restoring the SI system
as the only system of units for precision macroscopic measurements drives us
to a possible redeﬁnition of the kilogram and the ampere at the same time.
We note that the gap appeared because the requirement for performing the
most precise electric and mass measurements in the SI units was partly in-
consistent. It still is and may remain for an uncertain period of time.

The present version of the SI is based on the kilogram prototype and a
ﬁxed value of the magnetic constant µ0, while the practical units are based
on ﬁxed values of the von Klitzing constant RK and the Josephson constant
KJ (see Table 1 for the values). If we intend to deﬁne a version which allows
the derivation of ﬁxed values of RK = h/e2 and KJ = 2e/h, we have to ﬁx
values of two fundamental constants, e.g., the Planck constant h and the
elementary charge e. To ﬁx two values, we must redeﬁne two units at the

2

same time.

Thus, the necessary requirement for the redeﬁnition to resolve the incon-
sistency is to redeﬁne two units by ﬁxing values of two fundamental constants
at the same time. The redeﬁnition of the kilogram alone would be of a re-
duced importance.

Most of the fundamental constants are related to microscopic physics
(atomic, nuclear or particle physics) and their numerical values are of two
kinds being a result of

• a pure microscopic comparison (e.g., a value of me/mp);

• a comparison between microscopic and macroscopic values (e.g., a value

of the electron mass in kilograms or eV/c2)

The pure microscopic data are more accurate than the data which involve
also macroscopic physics and that is mainly a consequence of the limited
accuracy of measurements linking macroscopic and atomic physics. Very few
numerical values, such as for the gravitation constant G, comes from pure
macroscopic experiments, and these play only a marginal role in precision
measurements.

Apparently, without any new experiments we cannot improve the links
between the microscopic and macroscopic physics. However, the numeri-
cal values of the fundamental constants play an important role as anchor
reference data. For instance, it is customary to express results for X-ray
transitions rather in units of energy (eV) than in terms of the frequency or
wave length. To interpret the frequency as an energy (in eV), one has to
apply a value of h/e. We note that the accuracy of comparisons of two tran-
sitions is higher than that of the available numerical value of h/e in the SI
units [5]. By changing the basis of the deﬁnition of the SI units of mass and
charge we can improve quality of the reference data, and the characterization
of the X-ray transition in terms of electron-volts would be adequate. This
could be achieved by deﬁning the units of mass and charge, which are now
macroscopic, in microscopic terms, i.e., in terms of h and e.

For the SI, the most questionable link between macroscopic and micro-
scopic physics is related to experiments on determination of the Planck con-
stant h. There is currently an unresolved discrepancy of 1 ppm between
values of the Planck constant derived from the watt-balance experiments
and from the X-ray crystal density (XRCD) determination (see, e.g., [5]).
The results of all other measurements together produce a third value that is

3

Table 1: Numerical values of the involved fundamental constants. Here, ur
is a relative standard uncertainty. We used units derived from Ω90 and V90,
90 s/Ω90, kg90 = J90 s2/m2 etc. The references are [5] for
such as J90 = V2
CODATA and [4] for CIPM. The exact SI values are from [2]. The values
marked with the asterisk (*) are derived from related references.

Constant Value

m(K)

Unit
kg
1
1 − 1.0(17) · 10−7
kg90
m/s
299 792 458
4π · 10−7
N/A2
4π · 10−7 × (1 − 17.4(3.3) · 10−9) N90/A2
90
1.602 176 53(14) · 10−19
1.602 176 49(66) · 10−19
1.602 176 492 . . . · 10−19
6.626 069 3(11) · 10−34
6.626 068 9(38) · 10−34
6.626 068 854 . . . · 10−34
25 812.807 449(86)
25 812.807 0(25)
25 812.807
483 597.879(41) · 109
483 597.9(2) · 109
483 597.9 · 109
6.022 141 5(10) · 1023
3.990 312 716(27) × 10−10

C
C
C90
J s
J s
J90 s
Ω
Ω
Ω90
Hz/V
Hz/V
Hz/V90
1/mol
J s/mol

Comment
SI

[1.7 · 10−7] CODATA∗

ur
exactly

exactly
exactly

SI
SI

[3.3 · 10−9] CODATA∗
[1.7 · 10−7]
CODATA
CIPM∗
[4.1 · 10−7]
CIPM
exactly
[1.7 · 10−7]
CODATA
CIPM∗
[5.7 · 10−7]
CIPM
exactly
[3.3 · 10−9]
CODATA
[1 · 10−7]
CIPM
CIPM
exactly
[8.5 · 10−8]
CODATA
[4 · 10−7]
CIPM
CIPM
exactly
[1.7 · 10−7]
CODATA
[6.7 × 10−9] CODATA

c
µ0

e

h

RK

KJ

NA
h NA

4

competitive in accuracy with the XRCD result and is in a perfect agreement
with the watt-balance values (see Fig. 1). The importance of this third result
is often underplayed.

CIPM-90

Vm(Si)

NPL-90

NIST-98

others

6.626 0700

6.626 0750

The value of the Planck constant h [10-34 J s]

Figure 1: Present determinations of the Planck constant h. The watt-balance
values (NIST-98 and NPL-90) and XRCD result (Vm(Si)) are taken directly
from [5] and labelled in the same way as there. Others stands for the average
values of the rest of the data and was communicated to me by Peter Mohr
on base of [5]. The vertical line indicates a numerical value of h in practical
units [4].

These experiments determine a link between the macroscopic mass unit,
the kilogram, and the electric power unit expressed in terms of volt-90 and
ohm-90. This is the crucial link for the realization of the SI ampere in the
present version of the SI. In the proposed version of the SI [1], based on
the kilogram unit deﬁned by a ﬁxed value of the Planck constant h or the
Avogadro constant NA, these experiments determine the mass of the kilogram
prototype.

Recently a number of international commissions and committees consid-
ered this issue. They emphasized the importance of the problem related to
this link and its undesirable eﬀect on accuracy in mass measurements in the
case of the redeﬁnition. Their concerns are based on an assumption that it
is up to those who decide on the redeﬁnition to involve this link into the SI
or not. We agree that this link is a great problem. But we unfortunately

5

disagree that this link can be avoided by, e.g., postponing the redeﬁnition
of the kilogram. This link, as we mention above, is crucial in present-day
realizations of the ampere (and the volt) of the SI. In other words, it has
been used at least from 1990 for the realization of the SI ampere and there
is no way to avoid this troubled link.

We also raise a question about the conceptual diﬀerence between a constant-

based unit and an artefact-based unit. In the latter case, the deﬁnition can
have fundamental problems, but it is very instructive. It is clear in a practi-
cal sense what the unit is and, in the most of comparisons, the method of the
comparison is also obviously ﬁxed. There is not much room for any variety
In the former case, when a unit is based on a
in realizing the standards.
constant and certain relations to other quantities (i.e. certain physical laws),
there are a number of ways to realize the deﬁnition and, as in the case of any
scientiﬁc experiment, the results may disagree. A substantial diﬀerence for
a constant-based unit and an artefact-base unit is due to possible system-
atic eﬀects. For the artefact, the systematic eﬀects may take place, but be
reproducible. That is an advantage of the artefact from a practical point of
view. However, such a systematic eﬀect, being invisible, can produce a drift
of the unit or a reproducible systematic shift (if a way of comparison is com-
promised). Various diﬀerences in possible realizations of the constant-based
units may produce a discrepancy but that would allow detection of a possible
problem. The very opportunity to discover the problem, even accompanied
by possible discrepancies, is an advantage.

In the case of a constant-based unit, the systematic eﬀects may be dif-
ferent. For instance, for determination of the Planck constant, which is the
realization of the SI ampere (presently) and of the SI kilogram (in the case
of the redeﬁnition), these eﬀects are diﬀerent and particular results disagree
with each other. Relative mass measurements and relative electric measure-
ments are more accurate than the link. For the electric units, CIPM has
chosen a clear strategy. A conservative result for the Planck constant (and,
consequently, for the realization of the SI volt and ampere) has been accepted
[4]1, while the most accurate measurements are to be performed in practical
1We have to note that any legal adoption of any scientiﬁc result (as, e.g., various mise
en pratique) is an introduction of a non-SI unit. The SI is a closed system of deﬁnitions.
Adoption of anything else as a part of the SI changes the system, while adoption of
anything beyond the SI leads to practical units.
In particular, once the accuracy for
the SI values of KJ and RK is adopted, we arrive at a contradiction between the CIPM
recommendation [4] and the accuracy determined by scientiﬁc means [5], which is a result

6

units. The same approach should be used for the kilogram in the case of the
redeﬁnition.

In principle, after the redeﬁnition of the kilogram and progress in its real-
ization, another situation could take place. It may happen that uncertainty
of best realizations and even their discrepancy (if any) could be smaller than
uncertainty related to the prototype. What strategy should be used to deal
with a possible discrepancy (which in principle could appear from time to
time for any constant-based units)? As long as one particular method could
provide us with reproducible results we should accept it to deﬁne a practical
unit, while the related SI unit would be still deﬁned in a conservative way.

Let us to look now into possible consequences of the redeﬁnition. First,
we need to stress that the only reasonable version of such a redeﬁnition is
to ﬁx h and e. We can present certain advantages in ﬁxing h instead of
NA for the redeﬁnition of the kilogram only.
In particular, the variety, a
relatively low degree of interdependence, and the level of accuracy that has
been achieved makes watt-balance experiment more desirable than the XRCD
measurement. The watt-balance experiment would be a preferred realization
of the kilogram if the Planck constant h is ﬁxed. On the other hand, the
XRCD technique is the most natural choice for the kilogram based on a ﬁxed
value of NA.

One should not overestimate importance of these straightforward prefer-
ences, which are rather educational and practical. However, they may become
of practical importance if the accuracy of mass measurements increases. As
shown in Table 1, the uncertainty of the molar Planck constant h NA is be-
low 10 ppb. If we ﬁx one of these two constants, this value would be the
uncertainty of the other. At the present level of accuracy in maintaining the
kilogram, in mass measurements and in the link between the kilogram and
the electric units, this uncertainty is as good as zero. The accuracy of the
link (i.e. of the present-day determinations of h and NA separately) for a
number of experimental reasons should be substantially lower than that of
the h NA for a long but uncertain period of time. For a redeﬁnition of the
kilogram alone, it does not much matter which of these two constants to ﬁx.
However, we have to redeﬁne the kilogram and the ampere at the same
time. We should clearly choose a redeﬁnition that will produce ﬁxed values
of RK and KJ to preserve the advantages of using the present-day practical
units. There is no way to do that unless we ﬁx h and e, and we consider

of direct application of the original SI deﬁnitions [2].

7

this scenario below. In contrast, if the values of NA and e are ﬁxed instead,
the electrical community would still need practical units of resistance and
potential. The accuracy of the SI measurements of those quantities would
increase in comparison with the present situation, but still would be below
the one accessible in terms of the practical units.

If the value of h and e were ﬁxed, then the uncertainties of the Avogadro
constant, the mass of the electron, proton, and various atoms and nuclei
would be substantially smaller. The uncertainties of the Rydberg constant
and various other frequencies expressed in eV would be greatly improved
as well. The uncertainties of the many electrical measurements in SI units
would be obviously substantially smaller.

Unfortunately, the proposal would have an undesirable eﬀect on the macro-
scopic mass measurements in SI units. The consequences of such eﬀects
should be prevented by using the existing prototype of the kilogram in a way
similar to the way the quantum Hall and Josephson standards are used now.
Measurements in terms of the unit determined by the existing prototype
would be considered measurements in conventional units recommended by
CIPM for a transition period. Macroscopic mass measurements in SI units
could be performed by comparison to the existing prototype together with
its calibration by the measurements which now serve as determinations of
the Planck constant.

How large could the undesirable eﬀects be? At one time it was assumed
that a 10-ppb uncertainty in experiments relating macroscopic and micro-
scopic masses would be desirable in order to implement a redeﬁnition of the
kilogram. However, it is now felt that this is not realistic or necessary, partic-
ularly in view of the instability of the mass of the kilogram. In fact, its mass
changed by more than 60 ppb when it was last washed in the veriﬁcation
in 1988–1992 (see, e.g., [1]). However, this level of accuracy is needed only
for experiments like determination of h and NA. Accuracy, needed for prac-
tical applications is at the level of few parts in 107. Indeed, we should like
to have more accurate standards to perform various tests, but such tests on,
e.g., consistency of various national standards, may be performed in practical
units.

Since the current deﬁnition of the SI ampere was essentially abandoned
by the electrical community when conventional values of the von Klitzing and
Josephson constants were introduced in 1988, there would be no discontinuity
in the electrical units if the ampere were redeﬁned to make the elementary
charge e exact and the kilogram were deﬁned via a ﬁxed value of h. In fact,

8

there would be a signiﬁcant gain in precision of SI electrical units, because
the SI ohm and volt would be exactly deﬁned in terms of the quantum Hall
and Josephson eﬀects. The present CIPM recommendations [4] on the ohm-
90 and volt-90 set the uncertainty at the level of one and four parts in 107,
respectively, while the most accurate measurements in practical units are
done at the level of few parts in 109 and such measurements are of practical
interest.

The accuracy, continuity, and stability of the units and of the fundamental
constants is critical to the scientiﬁc community. In principle the requirement
for the continuity of various units and constants may be controversial. In
particular, the suggested units, obtained by ﬁxing h and e, will not neces-
sarily be the same as conventional units, since corrections to the standard
expressions for RK and KJ in terms h and e of are possible.

There are basically two options.

• We can set new ohm and new volt to be the same as volt-90 and ohm-90
(except for the necessity of rounding the values in the deﬁnitions). In
this case all results in practical units will be accepted as the SI results,
while value of the kilogram and certain fundamental constants will
jump (numerical values of some constants in the SI units and units-90
are presented in Table 1).

• We can choose an option to adopt values of h and e as they are in
the CODATA paper [5] (or the newest available CODATA results at
the time of the redeﬁnition). That will reduce a possible jump2 in the
kilogram of SI and values of the fundamental constants.

Technically we can ﬁx ﬁrst RK and KJ , calculate h and e, and round
2The very existence of the jump becomes questionable and some believe that there
would be no jump at all. We choose here to use a common word ‘jump’ instead of ‘discon-
tinuity’ because in a sense there would be no discontinuity, but there should be a certain
jump. The jump would be a result of a two-step action. For instance, we use an exact
value of µ0 [2]. With the redeﬁnition, we make it measurable. Once we use the CODATA
data (see Table 1), the new result for µ0 = 2αRK/c should have an uncertainty. The new
result may be consistent with the presently ﬁxed value of µ0 [2]. Nevertheless, sooner or
later with improvement of accuracy, a value of µ0 would depart from the previously ﬁxed
numerical value. There is no chance that we can guess the values for e and h in such a
way that the measurable µ0 would be exactly the same as before. That is the same as
trying to guess an exact value of the ﬁne structure constant α. So, eventually a certain
jump would take place, but in each step we should have no discontinuity.

9

them properly at the end. It is more transparent to discuss consequences of
ﬁxing diﬀerent values of RK and KJ than of h and e.

At present, CODATA’s {RK}SI diﬀers from CIPM’s {RK}90 by approxi-
mately ﬁve standard deviations (see Table 1) and we have to choose between
them. On the other hand, CODATA’s {KJ }SI diﬀers from CIPM’s {KJ }90
by less than one standard deviations (see Fig. 1) and we can choose either of
them without any serious consequences.

A choice between diﬀerent values of RK would aﬀect a value of µ0 and
a possible departure of the new SI ohm from the present SI ohm.
If we
choose the CIPM’s value, the new ohm SI would be related to ohm-90 and
to the present CIPM central value of the SI ohm (we cannot discuss here the
SI ampere because its deﬁnition involve µ0 and the kilogram, which is also
a subject of changes). A value of µ0 would depart from its present value,
but it is not particularly important for precision measurements. The only
experiments are with calculable capacitors, but there are very few of them
around the world and a shift at the level below 20 ppb is not important at
their present level of realization.

In principle, impact of choice between diﬀerent values of KJ could be
more important. Diﬀerent KJ would lead to diﬀerent values of the kilogram,
the volt and the ampere and diﬀerent numerical values of various important
fundamental constants such as h, e, particle masses in kilograms and eV/c2,
and energy of various atomic and nuclear transitions in electron volts. Fortu-
nately, as we mention above, CODATA’s {KJ }SI and CIPM’s {KJ}90 agree
to each other within a standard deviation (the diﬀerence is approximately
half a deviation) and perhaps, because of this agreement, we should choose
the CIPM’s value. A change in a value of the fundamental constants within
one sigma is not a discontinuity, and we would prefer to set the redeﬁned SI
units to be equal to the practical units.

That does not downplay the importance of the CODATA values. The
CODATA evaluation will determine a recommended value of the magnetic
constant µ0 and a value of the mass of the prototype m(K). The situation
with KJ may change by 2007 and with new watt-balance and XRCD results
the CODATA’s {KJ}SI could depart from {KJ }90. If the diﬀerence would
be above one standard deviation we will need to make a real choice between
CODATA’s and CIPM’s values.

We believe that the kilogram and the ampere should be redeﬁned and that
they should be redeﬁned at the same time by ﬁxing values of the fundamental
constants h and e. Two open practical questions are related to choice for the

10

ﬁxed values (discussed above) and to a proper time for the redeﬁnition.

A choice for the timing should consider the following.

• Any decision (positive or negative) on the redeﬁnition will have beneﬁts

and expenses. These have to be examined carefully.

• Some disadvantages (discontinuity in values of units and numerical val-
ues of the constants, worsening of accuracy of measurements in SI units,
etc.) may be unavoidable.
It is necessary to take into account that
postponing a necessary decision could increase expenses.

Considering the advantages and disadvantages we point that

• from the point of view of mass metrology, the redeﬁnition of the kilo-
gram will be successful once the Planck constant is reliably determined
with a standard uncertainty less than about 50 ppb;

• from the point of view of electric measurements, the redeﬁnition will be
successful even now because of the immediate improvement in accuracy
of precision electric measurements in SI units;

• the ﬁnal decision on the proper time for the redeﬁnition of the kilo-
gram and the ampere can be made when there is a net gain based on
a careful comparison of the advantages and disadvantages. Careful ex-
amination should be given to the relative importance to the ﬁelds of
electric and mass measurements (accuracy, volume of measurements,
area of applications etc.) where the changes would take place.

The standards themselves have no value if they are not needed for actual or
future applications. For this it is most important for us is to consider the
consequences outside of the standards community. Metrologists are trained
to deal with diﬀerent units (the SI units and various practical units), while
outside people are not. There is a limited number of scientiﬁc experiments
Improvement of the reference
were such a level of accuracy is important.
data is clearly an advantage for outsiders.

We hope that a real study on the practical importance of precision mass
and electric measurements with uncertainty below a 100 ppb will be done.
Up to now, despite numerous considerations of the redeﬁnition, this question
has not been discussed at all, or at least the results of such a discussion have
not been made available.

11

This paper is an extended version of document CCU/05-27, a working
document of the 17th meeting of of Consultative Commitee for Units. Dur-
ing discussions there and at the preceding meeting of the CODATA task
group on fundamental constants, it became clear for me that the accuracy
actually demanded in precision electric measurements are about two orders
of magnitude higher than in mass measurements. Still, examination of the
problem is necessary, because a question is not only accuracy, but also num-
ber of the measurements.

To conclude this paper let us suggest wording for the redeﬁnition of the
kilogram: “The kilogram is the mass of a body whose rest energy is equal
to the energy of 299 792 458 · 1027 optical photons in vacuum of wavelength
of 66.606 9311 nanometres.” The explicit indication of the number of the
photons is necessary3. The kilogram is a macroscopic quantity, while we try
to link it to a microscopic object. With a single microscopic object we arrive
at the situation when the energy is bigger than the Planck energy or the
wave length is shorter than the Planck length.

Concerning the ampere, a redeﬁnition in terms of the elementary charge
is rather trivial. Still, it should be mentioned, that, when the deﬁnition
of the ampere was adopted, its direct realization was possible. Now, we
see that there are two units (the ohm and the volt), which we can realize
directly and two units (the ampere and the coulomb) which are related to
more fundamental quantities but cannot be realized directly. In former time,
the ampere was a good choice. Now, if we like to make a practical choice
it should favors the volt (potential is more fundamental than resistance),
and if we like to make a physical choice we should prefer the coulomb (in
particular, because of its educational advantages). There are no advantages
for the ampere anymore.

The author is grateful to R. Davis, J. Flowers, P. J. Mohr, L. B. Okun, L.
Pendrill, B. N. Taylor and B. M. Wood for useful and stimulating discussions.
3I discussed the issue on the number of the photons with Peter Mohr and it resulted in
footnote 2 in [1]. I need to mention that I am impressed by elegancy of the solution there
of another problem of the deﬁnition, which is avoiding of a multiplication and division of
numerical values of constants c and h in such a combination as {c}2/{h}. The version
presented here is somewhat diﬀerent from that in [1]. From a point of view of relativistic
physics it is preferable to speak in terms of the rest energy rather than the rest mass (see,
e.g., [6]).

12

References

[1] I. M. Mills, P. J. Mohr, T. J. Quinn, B. N. Taylor and E. R. Williams,

Metrologia 42, 71 (2005)

[2] The International System of Units (SI). BIPM, S`evres, 1998.

[3] Metrologia 20, 25 (1983).

[4] T. J. Quinn, Metrologia 26, 69 (1989) (see p. 70);
T. J. Quinn, Metrologia 38, 89 (2001) (see p. 91);
T. J. Quinn, Metrologia 26, 69 (1989) (see p. 69).

[5] P. J. Mohr and B. N. Taylor, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 1 (2005).

[6] L. B. Okun Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 110 (2002) 151.

13

