5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
1
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Non-transitive maps in phase synchronization

M. S. Baptista1,2 T. Pereira2 J. C. Sartorelli2 I. L. Caldas2

1 Universit¨at Potsdam, Institut f¨ur Physik Am Neuen Palais 10, D-14469
Potsdam, Deutschland
2 Instituto de F´ısica, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo
Caixa Postal 66318, 05315-970 S˜ao Paulo, SP, Brasil

Abstract

Concepts from the Ergodic Theory are used to describe the existence of non-
transitive maps in attractors of phase synchronous chaotic systems. It is shown
that for a class of phase-coherent systems, e.g. the sinusoidally forced Chua’s cir-
cuit and two coupled R¨ossler oscillators, phase synchronization implies that such
maps exist. These ideas are also extended to other coupled chaotic systems. In ad-
dition, a phase for a chaotic attractor is deﬁned from the tangent vector of the ﬂow.
Finally, it is discussed how these maps can be used to real time detection of phase
synchronization in experimental systems.

Key words: , Chaotic phase synchronization, Ergodic Theory, Temporal mappings
PACS: 05.45.-a, 0.5.45.Xt, 05.45.-r, 02.45.Ac

1 Introduction

Interacting chaotic systems are recently calling much attention due to the
veriﬁcation that they might be useful to the understanding of many interesting
natural chaotic coupled systems like ecological systems [1], coupled neurons
[2], economic models [3], an array of coupled heteroclinic systems [4], coupled
lasers [5], and ensembles of neuron model oscillators [6]. It is been veriﬁed that
despite the higher dimensionality of the chaotic net, the coupling among the
elements might make the elements to synchronize [7,8], reducing the dynamics
of the net to a few degrees of freedom.

Email address: murilo@agnld.uni-potsdam.de, Phone: +49 30 1977-1432,

FAX: +49 30 1977-1142 (M. S. Baptista1,2).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

21 February 2014

In this work, we focus our attention into the phenomena of phase synchro-
nization (PS), which describes the appearance of a phase synchrony behavior
between two interacting chaotic systems [9], i.e., given two chaotic systems
their phase diﬀerence remains bounded, despite the fact that their amplitudes
might be uncorrelated. This phenomena is particularly interesting due to the
fact that it can arise from very small coupling strength [9], and it is closely
related to many interesting natural and physical systems, ﬁrst experimentally
demonstrated in electronic circuits [10], and latter on [11] for electrochemical
oscillators. Phase synchronization is also found in plasma [12], in the Chua’s
circuit [13], and there are also evidences of phase synchronization in commu-
nication process in the Human brain [14,15] .

It is relevant to develop tools such that one can measure phase synchroniza-
tion in general systems. At the present moment, there is still not a unique way
of deﬁning the phase of a chaotic system [16], and the applicability of each
one depends on particular characteristics of the system studied. So, in order
to detect phase synchronization, it would be important to understand well
a fundamental property of phase synchronous systems, that could be easily
experimentally veriﬁed. This property, that here we argue that is a general
property of phase synchronous systems, was ﬁrst noticed in a chaotic system
that is phase synchronized with a periodic forcing [17]. It was reported that a
stroboscopic map of the trajectory was a subset of this attractor. Stroboscopic
maps are always a subset of the attractor, but, in the case PS exists, these
subsets have a peculiar property. They occupy only partially the region occu-
pied by the attractor. This property was then used to detect experimentally
phase synchronization between Chua’s circuit and a sinusoidally forcing [13].

The stroboscopic map can be generalized to the conditional Poincar´e map
[18], which can be used to detect PS, also in coupled systems. If the set of
discrete points generated by this conditional map do not visit any arbitrary
region of especial projections of the chaotic attractor, we call this set a basic
set. This property of the conditional Poincar´e map is called non-transitivity
[19], i.e., an initial condition under the conditional Poincar´e map does not
transit everywhere in a subspace of the attractor. So, given two systems, at
least one being chaotic, the existence of a basic set indicates that there is a
special way of looking at the attractor, by events in one of the systems.

In this work, we introduce the conditional Poincar´e map and the basic set.
Then, we show their relevance to an alternative approach to detect phase syn-
chronization, without actually having to measure the phase. We theoretically
and numerically show that if there is PS, these basic sets can be found either in
the forced Chua’s circuit [20], in the coupled R¨osller system, or in similar sys-
tems that presents phase-coherent properties [21]. The contrary is not always
true. For the forced Chua’s circuit a basic set almost always exist, and PS ex-
ists only if a special type of basic set exists. In the case of the coupled R¨ossler

2

oscillator, we show that whenever a basic set is found, thus, it is also true
that PS exists. Thus, we discuss the relation between the basic set appearance
and PS in other non-identical coupled systems. We introduce the phase of a
chaotic trajectory to be a quantity related to the amount of rotation of the
tangent vector. This deﬁnition can be used to arbitrary ﬂows, independently
whether they have phase-coherent or non phase-coherent dynamics.

This work is organized as follows: in Sec. 2, we deﬁne a way to measure the
phase of the chaotic ﬂow, and discuss the relation between the average return-
ing time and the average angular frequency of phase synchronous oscillators,
and then, in Sec. 3, we discuss the conditions for PS states, in terms of the
phase and of the average returning time of the chaotic attractor. We describe
the phenomena of PS in the forced Chua’s Circuit in Sec. 4, that motivated us
in doing this Ergodic approach. We also introduce the notion of a basic set,
which is better deﬁned in Sec. 5. In Sec. 6, we show the appearance of basic
sets in the forced Chua’s Circuit and in Sec. 7, we show the appearance of
these sets in the coupled R¨ossler oscillator. Further, we discuss the extension
of this interpretation of PS, in terms of basic sets to more general systems
in Sec. 8. In Sec. 9, we make some remarks and the conclusions of this work.
In Appendix A, we formally introduce the conditional Poincar´e map and the
basic set, and in Appendix B, we demonstrate that for a class of systems with
strong phase-coherent dynamics, if there is PS, there can be found a basic set.

2 Phase, frequency and average returning time of a chaotic attrac-

tor

The phase of a especial projection j of a chaotic attractor (a subspace) is
deﬁned to be an integral function of the type

φj(t) = Z

′

)

′

|dt

t

|

dθ(t
dt′

0
with dθ(t) being an inﬁnitesimal displacement of the tangent vector of the
ﬂow, from time t to time t + dt, and dt → 0. Note that in Eq. (1), we are
measuring the amount of rotation, per unit time, of a projection of the tangent
vector of the ﬂow, on the same subspace j where the phase is deﬁned. We call
this subspace Pj. The attractor X , projected on the subspace Pj is regarded
as Xj. The instantaneous angular frequency of the trajectory in Xj, named Wj
is given by dφj
and, the average angular frequency
hWji is

dt . So, from Eq. (1), Wj =

dθ
dt (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(1)

(2)

h
hWji = lim
t→∞

dφj
dt

i,

3

h−i represents the average. Equation (2) can be put into the form hWji =
φj(t)
t

.

Whenever a Poincar´e section can be deﬁned, the average period of the chaotic
attractor on the subspace Pj is calculated by

where ∆τ i
the subspace Pj makes the i-th crossing with this Poincar´e section.

j represents the time at which the trajectory in

j , and τ i

j − τ i

j = τ i+1

We also deﬁne h∆φji to be the average displacement of the phase for a typical
period as

with φj(N) being the phase associated to the subspace Pj at the moment that
the N-th crossing between the trajectory and the Poincar´e section happens.

Thus, we can put Eq. (2) as

N
i=0 ∆τ i
j
hTji = P
N

,

h∆φji =

φj(N)
N

,

hWji =

h∆φji
hTji

.

(3)

(4)

(5)

For the forced Chua’s circuit, the subspace P1 is deﬁned by a suitable pro-
jection of the circuit variable. We have that h∆φ1i = 2π. So, Eq. (5) can be
written as hW1i = 2π
hT1i. For the coupled R¨ossler oscillator, the quantities in
Eq. (5) can be calculated in two subspaces, one associated to the variables of
one R¨ossler, the subspace P1, and the subspace P2, associated to the variables
of the other R¨ossler system. As shown in [22], h∆φ1i might slightly diﬀer from
2π, and thus, hWji = h∆φj i
hTj i .

So, Eqs. (2) and (5) relate the average period, the average angular frequency,
and the phase of the chaotic trajectory. This shows that the average period
(recurrence) and the average angular frequency are intimately connected in
phase synchronous chaotic systems, and both these quantities can be calcu-
lated from the phase, as it happens in periodic systems for which the phase,
φ, the frequence, f , and the period, T , are connected by the relations φ= 2π
T
and f = 1
T .

4

3 Phase Synchronization

Having deﬁned phase, PS exists whenever the following conditions are satisﬁed

|φ1(t) − rφ2(t)| < h∆φ1i.

(6)

The minimal bound for the phase diﬀerence, h∆φ1i, was theoretically es-
timated in Ref. [22]. Equation (6) means that the phase diﬀerence between
the two coupled systems is always bounded, and r in this work is a rational
constant [23].

Also,

hW1i − rhW2i = 0.
For the forced Chua’s circuit hW2i = ω, with ω = 2πf , representing the
angular frequency of the forcing. There is PS, if hW1i=ω. Therefore, hT1i=1/f .
Note that Eq. (7) is derived from Eq. (6), assuming that the average value of
the derivative of the instantaneous phase diﬀerence is zero. In this work, we
will consider only cases for which r=1. For the coupled R¨ossler, if PS exists,
hW1i = hW2i, hR1i=hR2i, and h∆φ1i=h∆φ2i, and therefore, we could have in
the right term of Eq. (6) h∆φ2i, instead of h∆φ1i.

(7)

4 The sinusoidally forced Chua’s circuit

The circuit is represented by:

C1

= g(X2 − X1) − iN L

= g(X1 − X2) + X3

= −X2 − V sin (ωt)

dX1
dt
dX2
dt
dX3
dt

C2

L

(8)

(9)

(10)

where X1, X2, and X3 represent, respectively, the tension across two capacitors
and the current through the inductor (See [13] for more details), ω is the
angular frequency and V the amplitude of the forcing. The piecewise-linear
function iN L is given by:

iN L = m0X1 + 0.5(m1 − m0)[|X1 + Bp| + |X1 − Bp|]
where we have chosen the parameters C1=10, g=0.574, C2=1, L=6, m0=-0.5,
and m1=-0.8, such that we obtain a R¨ossler-type attractor, for V =0.

(11)

5

To clarify the use of Eq. (1) to calculate the phase of the chaotic trajectory,
we ﬁrst deﬁne the subspace P1 to be given by the pair of variables (X1, X2).
Then, in Fig. 1, we show the diﬀerence between the phase of the chaotic
circuit [as calculated by Eq. (1)] and the phase of the forcing, ωt. In (a), the
phase diﬀerence is bounded and the average period of the chaotic attractor,
deﬁned as the average recurrence time of trajectories that cross the section
X2 = 0, is equal to hT1i=3.57015, which is equal to 1/f, since f =0.2801.
The average angular frequency can be calculated using Eq. (5), which gives
us hW1i=1.75992. Or, from Eq. (2), which gives us hW1i=1.75992. Note that
the average growing of the phase [calculated by Eq. (1)] for a typical average
period is 6.28318 . . . which is 2π. In Fig. 1(b), we have that hT1i=3.57006
which is diﬀerent from 1/f , since f =0.279. So, in (b) there is no PS.

Fig. 1. (a) Phase diﬀerence is always smaller than 2π, so PS exists between the
circuit and the forcing, for f =0.2801 and V =0.0015. (b) PS is not present and the
phase diﬀerence grows bigger than 2π.

In Ref. [13] we detected P S experimentally in the forced Chua’s circuit, when-
ever stroboscopic maps could be constructed for a time interval equal to
∆τ1 = 1
f , such that this map, projected into the same subspace considered
to calculate the phase, do not occupy the region occupied by the attractor
projected in this same subspace.

To understand this technique, we assume that φ1(t), the phase of the chaotic
trajectory, is the angle (on the lift) described by the vector position of this
trajectory (R¨ossler-Like attractor), and φ2(t)=ωt the phase of the forcing. If
Eq. (6) is satisﬁed at any time, then it is satisﬁed at multiples of the period
of the forcing τ i
1) − 2πi| < 2π, which means that a
stroboscopic map has to be concentrated in an angular section smaller than 2π.
The stroboscopic map, which is already a subset of the chaotic ﬂow, projected
into the same subspace considered to calculate the phase, does not occupy
the whole region occupied by the attractor projected in this same subspace.

f . So, we get |φ1(τ i

1 = i

6

Another property of the stroboscopic map is that points in it are mapped into
it by looking at the trajectory after a time interval given by ∆τ1, so, it is a
subset that is recurrent to itself.

Using this technique, and for the same parameters of [13], we show in Fig.
2(a) the experimental synchronization region of the forced Chua’s circuit in
the parameter space V × f . The triangular shaped region represents the pa-
rameters for which the stroboscopic map has the points concentrated in an
angular section smaller than 2π. The bump at the bottom right side of the
PS region is due to non-synchronous states that present a long bounded phase
diﬀerence. By a typical observation time of the experiment, which was of the
order of 40,000 cycles, the system seemed to be phase synchronized, i.e., lo-
calized stroboscopic maps were found. In fact, we have detected these maps
even for observation times corresponding to 150,000 cycles, in the region of
the bump. In a short, the bump region is an extended structure in the circuit
parameter space, that presents intermittent behavior in the phase diﬀerence
[25], but with a long laminar regime, even for parameters far away from the
border between the PS and the non PS region. This intermittency diﬀers from
the usual one, observed in the transition to PS, in the fact that this latter
happens very close to the border between the PS and the non PS region. The
reason for this intermittency is due to the presence of a periodic window, close
to the region of the bump.

Simulation is shown in Fig. 2(b), where black points represent perturbing pa-
rameters for which Eq. (6) is satisﬁed, with φ1 deﬁned in Eq. (1). One sees
that the P S region resembles a triangle. The triangular shaped region, de-
noted by the light gray dashed line, represents the region where the system is
not phase synchronized, but the phase diﬀerence remains bounded for a long
time interval, that might be longer than 100,000 cycles of the systems. So, we
reproduce numerically the same atypical intermittency observed experimen-
tally, i.e., long laminar regime in the phase diﬀerence, for parameter regions
away from the border between PS and non PS states. This happens associated
with a periodic window, as the one shown in Fig. 2(b).

The shape of the synchronization region in Fig. 2(b) is equivalent to the region
in the experiment, constructed by detecting the stroboscopic maps contained
within a small angular section. This shows the equivalence between the ex-
istence of a recurrent subset and the veriﬁcation of Eq. (6). Inside the syn-
chronization region, a stroboscopic map appears like in Fig. 3(a), where the
light gray points represent the attractor, and the dark ﬁlled circles, the map.
Outside of the P S region, there are parameter sets for which the stroboscopic
maps do not occupy the region occupied by the attractor, at the projection in
which the phase is calculated. As one sees in Fig. 3(b) [for the parameters rep-
resented by the cross in Fig. 2(b)] there is a region of the projected attractor
(pointed by the arrow) for which the stroboscopic map never visits.

7

Fig. 2. (a) Experimental P S parameter space. (b) Simulated P S parameter space.
Black points represent parameters for which Eq. (6) is satisﬁed for 120,000 crossings
of the trajectory at X2=0. In both ﬁgures, the horizontal axis represents the forcing
frequency f and the vertical axis its amplitude V . Variables in (b) are dimensionless
and f0 is the main frequency of the non-forced circuit.

The diﬀerence between the stroboscopic map that appears while there is PS
in (a), and the stroboscopic map that appears while there is not PS in (b),
is that points of the stroboscopic map in (a) are all concentrated into an
angular section of the attractor. So, one could say that PS exists whenever
stroboscopic maps appears in a localized angular section of the attractor.
However, the stroboscopic map technique can only exclusively be used for
periodically forced/perturbed chaotic systems. So, we introduce the notion
of the conditional Poincar´e map, a generalization of the stroboscopic map,
that also presents typical properties in phase synchronous systems, which can
be advantageously used to detect PS in the coupled systems, as the coupled
R¨ossler system.

As a way to better characterize the PS phenomena in the Chua’s circuit, we
calculate the Lyapunov exponents. As usually expected, the transition to PS
is associated to one of the exponents becoming smaller than zero. Since there
is already one exponent that is smaller than zero, PS induces the creation of
a second stable direction in the Chua’s circuit. Previous to the transition to
phase synchronization, this exponent was zero. In Fig. 4 we show the exponent
(and the error bars) associated to PS in black, and the quantity hW1i − ω in
gray, for a ﬁxed amplitude of V =0.0015, and a varying frequency. In the region
the exponent becomes smaller than zero, hW1i=ω, satisfying Eq. (7).

8

Fig. 3. A projection of the attractor in light gray, and its stroboscopic map in
dark gray. The parameters are f =0.2801 and V =0.0015, in (a), and f =0.28063 and
V =0.0016, in (b).

Lyapunov exponent
W1-ω

0.002

0.001

0

-0.001

-0.002

-0.003

0.2796

0.2798

0.2804

0.2806

0.2808

0.28

0.2802
frequency - f

Fig. 4. The Lyapunov exponent (and the error bars) associated to PS in black, and
the quantity hW1i − ω in gray, for a ﬁxed amplitude of V =0.0015 and a varying
frequency.

5 Basic set

Now, we introduce the basic set, which is a discrete set constructed from a
chaotic attractor, by the conditional Poincar´e map. The mathematical ideas
behind these sets are discussed in Appendix A. In here, we deﬁne it using a
more physical language.

The conditional Poincar´e map is a map of the attractor, construct by observing

9

it for speciﬁc times at which events occur in the subsystems Xj. In the case
of periodically forced chaotic systems, an event may be deﬁned to happen
whenever the forcing reaches an speciﬁc value, the conditional Poincar´e map
is the usual stroboscopic map, because the time interval between two events is
constant. Analogously, in coupled chaotic systems, the event can be consider to
be given when the trajectory of one subsystem crosses some Poincar´e section.
So, the time interval between two successive events is supposed to be no longer
constant.

We deﬁne a time series of events τ i

j , by the following rule:

• τ i

• τ i

1 represents the time at which the i-th crossing of X2 happens in some
Poincar´e plane.
2 represents the time at which the i-th crossing of X1 happens in some
Poincar´e plane.

The discrete set of points observed at the times τ i
j is called set D. This set,
projected at the subspaces Pj, is named Dj. The conditional Poincar´e map is
j . So, we say that Dj is the set of points generated by T τ i
represented by T τ i
j .

The next step is to analyze the equivalence between the set Dj and Xj.

The notion of equivalence of sets is here developed in terms of neighborhoods.
We say the discrete subset Dj is equivalent to Xj if for every small neighbor-
hood of points, in Xj, there is always a point that belongs to Dj. From here
we can construct the notion of a basic set, which is a set that is not equivalent
to the attractor. So, a discrete set Dj is considered to be a basic set, if for
balls of length δ, centered in all points of Xj, one does not ﬁnd points of Dj
inside of all these balls. More details, see Appendix A.

So, a basic set exists if the conditional Poincar´e map is not transitive on Xj [19].
That is, the ﬂow, observed by the times for which the conditional Poincar´e
map is deﬁned, does not visit arbitrary regions of Xj. Note that however,
the attractor is chaotic, and therefore, the chaotic set is always transitive
through the ﬂow (vector ﬁeld). So, given a set of initial conditions, its evolution
through the ﬂow eventually reaches arbitrary open subsets of the original
chaotic attractor.

It is appropriate to classify the sets Dj in the following way:

type-a The set Dj is not a basic set. The conditional map T τ i

j is transitive

type-b Dj is a basic set, but hT1i 6= hT2i. The conditional map T τ i

j is NOT

in Xj.

transitive in Xj.

type-c Dj is a basic set and there is PS, therefore, hT1i = hT2i. The condi-

10

tional map T τ i

j is NOT transitive in Xj.

The sets Dj play an important rule in PS. First, it can be shown that PS
implies a type-c basic sets, as shown in Sec. 4 and Appendix B. Second, its
detection can be easily experimentally implemented. Third, the existence, or
not, of a type-c basic set, in PS, does not depend on the phase deﬁnition
[16]. Fourth, the detection of a basic set, in addition to the veriﬁcation of the
average times hTji seems to imply PS. So, one could implement a real time
experiment do detect PS, i.e., type-c basic set, based on these facts, as we
actually have done. So, PS could be detect without measuring the phase, but
rather if the basic set exists and if hT1i = hT2i. Note that this is a consequence
of Eq. (7).

A basic set Dj is said to have length 1, if the set is constructed by the time
series of the same events. Deﬁning the event to be given by the crossing of the
trajectory to a Poincar´e plane, the corresponding time series of events Mj(1)
is given by τ i
, . . .. For this basic set, points in Dj are mapped
in Dj, after one application of the conditional Poincar´e map.

j , τ i+1
j

, τ i+3
j

, τ i+2
j

j

j

,

, τ i+1
j

j +τ i+1
τ i
2

j +τ i+2
τ i+1
2

A basic set is said to have length 2, if it is obtained by a time series of two
diﬀerent events. So, a basic set can be constructed from more complex series
of events. We construct a length-2 basic set using a time series of events Mj(2)
given by τ i
, . . . [26]. As an example, for the perturbed
j ,
Chua’s circuit, the length-2 basic set is constructed by a stroboscopic map that
collects points every half period of the forcing. A length-2 basic set is assumed
to be composed of two other subsets, named minimal sets, the subsets D0
j and
D1
j . They have the property that if a point x0 is such that x0 ∈ D0
j , this point,
iterated by the conditional Poincar´e map, goes to the minimal set D1
j , and if
x0 is such that x0 ∈ D1
j , this point, iterated by the conditional Poincar´e map,
goes to the minimal set D1
j are mapped to itself after 2
applications of the conditional Poincar´e map. The minimal set D1
j is said to
be disjoint to the set D2
j = ∅. For some
systems that present a strong phase-coherent state, as the ones here studied,
in which the instantaneous trajectory velocity does not diﬀer too much from
the average velocity on typical orbits, it is possible to ﬁnd length-2 basic set,
with disjoint minimal sets, when PS is present.

j , if they do not intersect, i.e., D1

j . Thus, points in D1

j ∩ D2

Our results indicate that in the forced Chua’s circuit and in the coupled R¨ossler
oscillator, whenever PS exists, basic sets can be found. In both the forced
Chua’s circuit and the coupled R¨ossler, a type-c length-1 basic set implies
PS. For the forced Chua’s circuit, a type-b length-1 basic set is commonly
found for parameters for which no PS is found, and therefore, this basic set
does not imply PS. For the coupled R¨ossler, a type-b length-1 basic set was
not observed for parameters outside of the PS region, and therefore, it seems

11

that this basic set imply PS.

The existence of a length-2 basic set, with disjoint minimal sets, implies PS.
That is due to the fact that at the moment the trajectory of X2 reaches the
Poincar´e plane, the trajectory of X1 is in the minimal set D0
1. So, in average,
the growing of the phase in the subsystem X1, h∆φ1i is equal h∆φ2i, the
phase diﬀerence will be always bounded, and the events in both subspaces
will occur almost simultaneously, with a small time lag diﬀerence, such that
Eq. (7) is valid. Therefore, whenever a type-b length-1 basic set is found, a
length-2 basic set with disjoint minimal sets cannot be found. Whenever a
type-c length-1 basic set is found, a length-2 basic set with disjoint minimal
sets might (systems with strong phase-coherent dynamics) or not be found.

6 Basic set in the Chua’s circuit

For applying our formalism to the forced Chua’s circuit, the event times are
τ i
1 = iτ , with τ representing the forcing period. The time series for the length-2
basic set is given by 1/2τ, τ, 3/2τ, 2τ, 5/2τ, 3τ, . . .. Everywhere inside the P S
region, we ﬁnd length-1 [as an example, see Fig. 3(a)] and length-2 [as an
example, see Fig. 5(a)] type-c basic sets, this latter with disjoint minimal
sets. In the P S region of Fig. 2(b), it is also true that hT1i=τ and hW1i
= 2π
τ . To our numerical precision, we have checked that there are not basic
sets beneath the Synchronization region tip. Which means that type-a set is
present for very small but ﬁnite amplitude forcing. Outside the P S region,
there is type-b basic set, i.e., a non-transitive conditional Poincar´e map on
the chaotic attractor that creates a basic set D, of X , such that Dj 6≡ Xj. In
this case, Eq. (7) is not satisﬁed. More examples of length-Q basic sets in the
phase synchronous forced Chua’s circuit can be seen in [27].

So, for the forced Chua’s circuit (these results are also supported by the peri-
odically forced R¨ossler oscillator), the existence of a basic set is not suﬃcient
to identify the existence of PS. A suﬃcient condition seems to be given by an
extra condition, in addition to the existence of a basic set. Either the existence
of a length-2 basic set, with disjoint minimal sets, or the validation of Eq. (7).

7 Basic set in the coupled R¨ossler system

One can use the formalism of the conditional Poincar´e map to understand,
also, coupled chaotic systems, like the two coupled R¨ossler oscillators given
by:

12

2

1

-1

-2

0

5

0

-5

2

X

0

1

D1

0

D1

2

6

8

1

D2

2

x

(a)

(b)

4

X1

0

y2

0

D2

-10

-20

-10

10

20

Fig. 5. (a) Length-2 basic set with disjoint minimal sets, in the forced Chua’s circuit,
for the parameters f = 0.2801 and V = 0.001. The basic set is constructed by
the time series M1(2). (b) Length-2 basic set with disjoint minimal sets, in the
coupled R¨ossler oscillator, for the parameters ǫ=0.01 and δα = 0.001. The basic set
is constructed by the time series M2(2).

˙x1,2 = −α1,2y1 − z1 + ǫ(x2,1 − x1,2)
˙y1,2 = α1,2x1 + 0.15y1
˙z1,2 = 0.2 + z1(x1 − 10)

(12)
(13)
(14)

with α1 = 1, and α2 = α1 + δα. The index denotes systems 1 and 2. The
subspaces Pj are deﬁned by Pj=(xj, yj). In a coupled chaotic system, τ i
1 (τ i
2)
does not increase uniformly, but it is given by the time the trajectory crosses
the Poincar´e plane y2=0 (y1=0). For these times we construct the sets D1
(D2). For the parameters ǫ=0.01 and δα = 0.001, in Fig. 5(b), we show a
length-2 basic set with disjoint minimal sets.

In fact, this length-2 basic set with disjoint minimal sets is found everywhere
in the PS region, as shown in Fig. 6. In it, ﬁlled squares represent parameters
for which these special basic sets are found, and empty circles parameters for
which PS exists, thus Eq. (6) is satisﬁed. In the PS region, it is also true that
hR1i =hR2i. So, events in the subsystem 1 (the crossing of the trajectory in the
section y2=0) are synchronous with events in the subsystem 2 (the crossing of
the trajectory in the section y1=0).

A basic set of length-Q (with Q=1,2) is detected using in Eq. (A.2) DQ−1
,
from which we can check whether DQ−1
occupies (type-a discrete set D) or
not (D is a basic set) the whole space occupied by X1. The set Bℓ(x) in Eq.
(A.2) is constructed assuming squares of size ℓ = 1.5, in points of the set
DQ−1
2

. The result can be seen in Fig. 6.

2

2

13

0.002

0.0015

ε

0.001

0.0005

0
-0.002

-0.001

0
δ α

0.001

0.002

Fig. 6. Empty circles show parameters for which PS exists, detected by Eq. (6), and
ﬁlled squares represent parameters for which a length-1 basic set appears simul-
taneously with a length-2 basic set with disjoint minimal sets. So, in the coupled
R¨ossler system, we ﬁnd simultaneously type-b and type-c basic sets, when PS ex-
ists. Horizontal axis represents parameter mismatch and vertical axis, the coupling
amplitude.

In Fig. 7(a), we show the attractor in the subspace P1, the subset X1 in gray,
and the discrete set D1 in dark empty circles . In (b), we show a magniﬁcation
of the box in (a). Note that neighborhoods of arbitrary points in the trajectory
of X1 (gray) always contain a point of the discrete set D1 (dark empty circles).
So, the set X1 is equivalent to the set D1 and, therefore, D1 is not a basic set.

Diﬀerently from the Chua’s circuit, the R¨ossler coupled system presents no
basic sets for parameters outside of the PS region, i.e., only a type-a discrete
set D is found through the conditional Poincar´e map T τ i
j . Therefore, in the
coupled R¨ossler system, only the veriﬁcation that a basic set exists is already
suﬃcient to say that PS exists.

8 Extension to other coupled chaotic systems

For topologically equivalent coupled (non-identical) chaotic systems that present
PS, we do not expect (in general) to ﬁnd a length-2 basic set with disjoint
minimal sets, but rather with minimal sets that intersects themselves. How-
ever, we do expect to ﬁnd a basic set. At the parameters for which PS is not
present, we do not expect (in general) to ﬁnd a basic set from the conditional
Poincar´e map T τ i
j , but rather only a discrete set D whose projected set Dj
occupies the whole region occupied by the set Xj. Thus, we expect to ﬁnd
outside of the PS region a type-a dynamics. Therefore, we believe that the

14

Fig. 7. We show a situation where PS is not found for ǫ=0.01 and δα = 0.00001.
In (a), we show the attractor in the subspace P1, the subset X1 in gray, and the
discrete set D1 in dark empty circles. In (b), we show a magniﬁcation of the box in
(a).

presence of a basic set indicates that PS is present for this class of coupled
chaotic systems. Our believe of the fact that outside the PS region only a
type-a discrete set is found is based on the following argumentation.

First, we quote numerical results described in [22], about the emergence of
PS in two non-identical coupled neurons. As expected, when PS is not found,
basic sets are not found and when PS is found, basic sets are found.

Second, we give arguments based on the synchronicity of events in the sub-
spaces P1 and P2. If the two non-identical coupled chaotic systems (topo-
logically similar) are not phase synchronized, a chaotic trajectory does not
make simultaneous events in both subspaces P1 and P2. Which means that
at the N-th crossing of the orbit with the plane in the subspace P1, only
the event (N − m)-th had already happen in the subspace P2, and the event
(N − m + 1)-th will eventually happen. m is an arbitrary integer and as a
consequence, while at the subspace P2, the trajectory is positioned at the
speciﬁed Poincar´e plane, at the subspace P1, the trajectory is everywhere in
this subspace.

15

9 Conclusion and Remarks

A chaotic set is always transitive through the ﬂow (vector ﬁeld). So, given a set
of initial conditions, its evolution through the ﬂow eventually reaches arbitrary
open subsets of the original chaotic attractor. However, a stroboscopic map of
the ﬂow, whose generalization is here called conditional Poincar´e map, might
not possess the transitive property. That is, given a set of initial conditions, its
evolution through this conditional map might not reach arbitrary open subsets
of the chaotic attractor.

The introduction of the term “conditional” in the map nomenclature comes
from the unconventional and non rigidly way we adapt the established def-
inition of a stroboscopic Poincar´e map. This conditional map is constructed
based on events, conveniently chosen at the same subspaces where the phase
of a chaotic system is deﬁned. In addition, the application of this map through
the ﬂow, which results in a discrete set, is inspected not in the whole phase
space, but also in the same subspaces where the phase is deﬁned.

If phase synchronization exists in the periodically forced Chua’s circuit, in the
coupled R¨ossler oscillator, and in other more general (topologically equivalent)
coupled chaotic systems, this conditional map generates a special discrete set,
named basic set. A set is a basic set if it does not occupy the same region visited
by projections of the attractor, at the same subspace where the basic set is
deﬁned. So, the basic set represents the “order” inside phase synchronization.
Thus, the conditional Poincar´e map oﬀers one an appropriate way of observing
a chaotic systems that presents phase synchronization.

The identiﬁcation of a basic set, however, does not always imply phase syn-
chronization. For the forced Chua’s circuit (similar results were also found for
the periodically forced R¨ossler oscillator) phase synchronization only exists, if
a special type of basic set is found, a length-2 basic set, with elements that do
not intersect each other. Another alternative approach to detect phase syn-
chronization, in terms of the deﬁned basic sets, would be to detect a basic set
together with the veriﬁcation that the average period of the attractor (deﬁned
in the subspace that the phase is deﬁned) is equal to the period of the forc-
ing. For the coupled R¨ossler, and we argue for other topological equivalent
but non-identical coupled chaotic systems, only the observation of a basic set
seems to be suﬃcient to imply phase synchronization.

We have also introduced the phase as a quantity that measures the velocity
of rotation of a projection of the tangent vector along the trajectory. This
deﬁnition can be used to arbitrary ﬂows, independently whether or not they
present a coherent or non-coherent phase dynamics.

Finally, our formalism of the conditional Poincar´e map can be used in coupled

16

maps (or forced) to detect synchronous behavior (not phase synchronization)
between the systems (or between the forcing), for the case where one does not
ﬁnd full synchronization between the maps. One particular example where that
happens is in the periodically forced Logistic equation [28] or for a system of
coupled Logistic maps [29], where one can ﬁnd a ﬁnite number of synchronous
chaotic subsets, the basic sets.

Acknowledgment Research partially ﬁnanced by FAPESP, Alexander Von
Humboldt Foundation, and CNPq.

A The conditional Poincar´e map and the basic set

Next, we present some formalism using elements of the Ergodic Theory in
order to introduce the conditional Poincar´e map and a basic set, a map that
always appears in the studied systems when PS is present. The terminology of
“basic set” was initially introduced in [30] to describe sets in Axiom A systems.
However, due to the similarity between our deﬁnition, and the deﬁnition used
in [30], we have borrowed this terminology to the sets observed in forced
chaotic systems and coupled chaotic systems.

Given a ﬂow Ft, we call X the chaotic attractor. A subset of the attractor is
its projection on the subspace Pj, that we call Xj. We assume X ∈ Rd

j . So, given two points, ~x(t) and ~x(t+τ i

The notion of stroboscopic map of a ﬂow can be generalized to any tempo-
ral translation on the trajectory. We deﬁne the temporal translation to be a
transformation represented by T τ i
j ) in a
trajectory, separated by a time distance of τ i
j , the initial condition ~x(t) is iter-
ated under the temporal transformation T τ i
j , to the point ~x(t + τ i
j ). Applying
the transformation T τ i
j , τ i+1
,
j
τ i+2
) is the point
j
j − τ i
~x(τ i
j . Applying
the transformation T τ i
j , that is i = 1, 2, 3, . . . , ∞,
gives us a discrete set that we call D. The projection of D on the subspace Pj
is named Dj.

j ), ~x(τ i+1
, give us the points ~x(τ i
j
j ) integrated by the ﬂow for a time interval given by τ i+1

j in a typical trajectory, for the time sequence τ i

j , for an inﬁnite series of τ i

), and ~x(τ i+2

). So, ~x(τ i+1

j

j

Now, we introduce the notion of transitivity. Let us assume we have a discrete
chaotic set A (not an attractor), composed of two disjoint subsets B and C.
So, B ∩ C = ∅. There is a transformation T that generates the set A, with
the property that T (B) = C and T (C) = B. So, clearly the transformation T
and its n-fold application (T n) can always place an arbitrary initial condition,
belonging either in B or C, anywhere in the set A. This property makes the
transformation T to be transitive in the set A. In continuous descriptions, a

17

ﬂow that generates a chaotic set is always a transitive transformation in this
chaotic set. However, auxiliary dynamics of the transformation T , as well as,
of the ﬂow, might not anymore be transitive to a given set. For example, in the
case of the 2n-fold of the transformation T , i.e., T 2n. Given an initial condition
in the set B, its iteration by T 2n will never reach the set C. Therefore, the
auxiliary dynamics T 2n is not a transitive transformation in the set A. In the
case of ﬂows, we have seen that the temporal transformation represented by
T τ i
j , whenever PS is present, does not place arbitrary points of the attractor
everywhere in the subsets Xj of the chaotic attractor. Therefore, if PS is
present the transformation T τ i
j is not transitive to this subset of the attractor.
We are ready to formalize the notion of transitivity to the conditional Poincar´e
map T τ i
j .

T τ i

j is topologically transitive in a set A [31] if for any two open sets B, C ⊂ A,

∃τ i

j / T τj

i

(B) ∩ C 6= ∅.

(A.1)

To detect the existence of a transitive or not conditional Poincar´e map in some
subset, we introduce the notion of equivalence. Two sets A and B are (not)
equivalent [equivalence is represented by the symbol ≡, and non equivalence
by 6≡] if they (do not) occupy the same neighboring space. In a more general
way:

Deﬁnition 1 Two sets A and B are equivalent, A ≡ B, if ∀x ∈ A, a set C
can be constructed by the union of open sets Bℓ(x), open Rd volumes centered
at x with length ℓ, such that ∀y ∈ B =⇒ y ∈ C, and A 6≡ B if y /∈ C.

Deﬁnition 2 The set D is a basic set of X if Xj 6≡ Dj, and Dj it is formed
j , and for each Di
by a union of open invariant and minimal sets D1
j
there is a x ∈ Di
j which, under the conditional Poincar´e map has a dense orbit
on Di
j cannot be further decomposed [30].

j. So, a minimal set Di

j , . . . , DN

j , . . . DQ−1
j , D1
Deﬁnition 3 If Dj can be decomposed into a collection Dj = D0
of subsets of Xj, with Q ≥ 1, such that a point in Di
j iterated by the auxiliary
dynamics goes to Di+1(modQ)
j as a recurrent
decomposition. In the particular case we have τ i+1
j = τ (constant) this
minimal set is a periodic decomposition. The number of sets Q is called length
of the decomposition [32].

, we refer to each minimal set Di

j − τ i

j

j

Proposition 1 If T τ i

j is transitive on Xj, then Dj ≡ Xj.

Proposition 2 If T τ i
structed, such that A ⊂ Xj and A 6≡ Xj.

j is non transitive in Xj, then a subset A can be con-

18

Proofs of Propositions 1 and 2 can be done by using Eq. (A.1) and the deﬁni-
tions.

j

, τ i+3
j
j +τ i+2
τ i+1
2

j , τ i+1
j
j +τ i+1
τ i
2

In a more friendly way, Deﬁnition 3 can be understood by the basic sets of
length-1 and length-2 considered in this work. If the length-1 basic set is
constructed by the time series τ i
, . . ., the length-2 is obtained

, τ i+2
j
, τ i+1
by the time series given by τ i
j ,
, . . . [26]. For the particular
,
j
case of a periodically forced system, τ i+1
1 − τ i
1=1/f , and so, the length-1 basic
set is the standard stroboscopic map, that collects point every period of the
forcing. The length-2 basic set is constructed by a stroboscopic map that
collects points every half period of the forcing. For the length-2 basic set, we
j , with the property that if x0 ∈ D0
have two minimal sets, the sets D0
j and D1
j ,
this point iterated by the auxiliary dynamics goes to D1
j goes to D0
j ,
under the auxiliary dynamics.

j and D1

j

j and D2

D1
doing the following.

j are minimal sets of a basic set if Dj 6≡ Xj. This can be veriﬁed by

For x ∈ Xj it exists y ∈ Dj such that

y ∩ Bℓ(x) = ∅,

(A.2)

where Bℓ(x) is a open ball of radius δ centered at the point x. Formally, δ is
an arbitrarily small positive value. However, numerically, δ can assume values
not arbitrarily small.

B Existence of the basic set in PS

Given a dynamical system Y′ = G(Y), let F t be the ﬂow and X the attractor
generated by it, we suppose that we have a chaotic dynamics now on. Let
Σj be the Poincar´e section in the subspace Pj, and let Πj be the Poincar´e
map associated to the section Σj, such that given a point xi
j ∈ Σj, thus
xi+1
j = Πj(xi
j) (a temporal translation of the ﬂow). From now
on we use a rescaled time t′ = t/hT1i. For a slight abuse of notation we omit
the symbol ′.

j) = F ∆τ i+1

(xi

j

The time interval associated to the return of the point xi
is ∆τ i+1
j , with τ i+1
crosses the Poincar´e section Σj, in the subspace Pj.

j to the point xi+1
being the times at which the subsystem Xj

j = τ i+1

j − τ i

j

j

As already introduced, the average return time is given by hTji =
τ N
j
N , and the time is rescaled, such that hT1i = 1. Our hypothesis is that the

=

P

N

i=0 ∆τ j
N

1

19

subsystem Xj has a phase-coherent oscillation, so there is a number δj for
which holds:

τ N
j − N| ≤ δj.
The number δj < 1 measures the coherence in the phase oscillation, and is
linked to the phase diﬀusion [7,33]. This equation holds for all N, so it implies
that for a single oscillation is also true that |∆τ i
j − hTji| ≤ δj. In the case of
two systems that present PS, it holds [22]:

(B.1)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

1 − τ N
τ N
2 (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
with δ3 < 1. This equation implies |∆τ i
1−∆τ i
2| ≤ δ3, which states that the time
(cid:12)
intervals in a single oscillation are strongly related in phase synchronization.

≤ δ3,

(B.2)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Proposition 3 If two subsystems, X1 and X2, have a phase synchronous
state, then one can construct a type-c basic set in the subsystem P1 (resp.
P2) using the returning times in the subsystem P2 (resp. P1).

Let us introduce a new variable that measures the diﬀerence between the time
interval of two events in X1 and X2. This new variable is ∆τ i
2 − ∆τ i
1,
from Eq. (B.2), it is true that |∆τ i

2,1 = ∆τ i

2,1| ≤ δ3.

Now, we analyze one typical oscillation. Given the following initial conditions
x0
2 ∈ Σ2, we evolve both until x0
1 ∈ Σ1 and x0
1 returns to Σ1. In other words, we
2 . So, F ∆τ 1
evolve both initial conditions for a time ∆τ 1
1 ∈
Σ1. Analogously, F ∆τ 1
2 (x0
2).

1) = Π2(x0
1 (x0

2 (x0
2,1 • F ∆τ 1

1) = x1
2,1(x1

2) = F ∆τ 1

2) = F ∆τ 1

2) = F ∆τ 1

2,1(x0

1 +∆τ 1

Now, we use the fact that |∆τ i

2,1| < δ3, and write that

F ∆τ 1

(B.3)
So, given an initial condition in Σ1 (subsystem X1) evaluated by the time
initial conditions return in the section Σ2 (of subsystem X2), it returns near
the section Σ1, and vice-versa.

2)δ3.

2) ≈ x1

2 + G(x1

2,1(x1

For a general case, we have to show that an initial condition, on the section
Σ1, evolved by the ﬂow for the time
2,1 still remains close to this
section. In other words, we have to show that the approximation in Eq. (B.3)
is valid for an arbitrary number of events N in the subspace X2. Now, noting
that
1 , from our hypoteses of phase coherent dynamics
P
N
i=0 ∆τ N
1 | < δ3. The same arguments used to derive Eq. (B.3)
|
P
for one oscillation, can be extended to an arbitrary number N.

2,1 = τ N
2,1| = |τ 2N − τ N

2 − τ N

N
i=0 ∆τ i

N
i=0 ∆τ i

P

This result shows that a basic set of type-c can be constructed in PS states.
Moreover, for the coupled R¨ossler-like systems, this result states that this basic
stays conﬁned in an angular region.

20

To see the relation between the constant δ3 and the size of the type-c basic set,
we do the following. By the time normalization, average time interval between
points in phase space are proportional to their distances. So, from Eq. B.3 we
write δ3 = |H|/G(x0
2), with H being the average half length of the basic set.
A rough calculation shows that in our experiment with the Chua’s circuit, we
have that δ3 ≈ 1/2.5, and for the coupled R¨ossler oscillators, we have that
δ3 ≈ 1/2.1. This results completely agree with the theoreticall approach done
in [22].

References

[1] B. Blasius, L. Stone, Nature 406 (2000) 846; Nature 399 (1999) 354.

[2] R. D. Pinto, P. Varona, A. R. Volkovskii, A. Szucs, H. D. I. Abarbanel, M. I.

Rabinovich, Phys. Rev. E 62 (2000) 2644.

[3] P. De Grauwe, H. wachter, and M. Embrechts Exchange Rate Theory: Chaotic

Models of Foreign Exchange Markets, Blackwell, Oxford, 1993.

[4]

I. Leyva, E. Allaria, S. Boccaletti, et al. Phys. Rev. E 68 (2003) 066209.

[5]

I. Fischer, Y. Liu, P. Davis, Phys. Rev. A 62 (2000) 011801.

[6] M. V. Ivanchenko, G. V. Osipov, V. D. Shalfeev, and J. Kurths, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 93 (2004) 134101.

[7] A. Pikovsky, M. Rosenblum and J. Kurths, Synchronization: A Universal
Concept in Nonlinear Sciences, Cambridge University Press, 2001; S. Boccaletti,
J. Kurths, G. Osipov, D. Valladares and C. Zhou, Phys. Rep. 366 (2002) 1.

[8] S. Strogatz, Sync: The Emerging Science of Spontaneous Order, New York,

[9] M.G. Rosenblum, A.S. Pikovsky and J. Kurths, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, (1996)

[10] U. Parlitz, L. Junge, W. Lauterborn, and L. Kocarev, Experimental observation

of phase synchronization, Phys. Rev. E 54 (1996) 2115.

[11] I. Z. Kiss, J. L. Hudson, Phys. Rev. E, 64 (2001) 046215.

[12] C. M. Ticos, E. Rosa, Jr., W. B. Pardo, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 2929.

[13] M. S. Baptista, T. P. Silva, J. C. Sartorelli, et al., Phys. Rev. E 67 (2003)

[14] J. Fell, P. Klaver. C. E. Elger, G. Fernandez, Rev. in the Neurosciences 13

Hyperion, 2003.

1804.

056212.

(2002) 299.

[15] F. Mormann, T. Kreuz, R. G. Andrzejak, P. David, K. Lehnertz, C. E. Elger,

Epilepsy Research 53 (2003) 173.

21

[16] phase can be deﬁned as a Hilbert transformation of a trajectory component, as
the angle of a trajectory point into a special projection of the attractor, as a
function that grows 2π every time the chaotic trajectory crosses some speciﬁc
surface, or as the angle of the projected vector ﬁeld into some subspace with
respect to some rotation point.

[17] A. Pikovsky, M. Rosenblum, G. V. Osipov, J. K¨urths, Physica D 104 (1997)

219.

[18] By conditional Poincar´e map, we mean a time-translation transformation, in

which the time might not always increase uniformly.

[19] A chaotic set is always transitive through the ﬂow (vector ﬁeld). So, given a set
of initial conditions, its evolution through the ﬂow eventually reaches arbitrary
open subsets of the original chaotic attractor. However, stroboscopic auxiliary
dynamics of the ﬂow, that we conveniently call conditional Poincar´e map, might
not possesses the transitive property. That is, given a set of initial conditions,
its evolution through this map might not reaches arbitrary open subsets of the
especial projections of the chaotic attractor.

[20] The results presented here for the sinusoidally forced Chua’s circuit were also

veriﬁed in the sinusoidally coupled R¨ossler system.

[21] V. G. Osipov, H. Bambi, C. Zhou, V. M. Ivanchenko, and J. Kurths. Phys. Rev.

Lett. 91 (2003) 024101.

[22] M. S. Baptista, T. Pereira, J. Kurths, “Inferior bounds

for phase

synchronization”, submitted for publication.

[23] Traditionally, r is considered to be a rational. However, as shown in Ref. [24],
PS, as deﬁned by the boundness of the phase diﬀerence was found in two chaotic
systems for a ﬁnite but very large time interval, as r approaches an irrational.
Therefore, although in this work we consider r to be rational, we should make
the remark that for the especial situation as the one presented in Ref. [24],
Eq. (6) can only be satisﬁed for a ﬁnite but large time if r is assumed to be
irrational.

[24] M. S. Baptista, S. Boccaletti, K. Josi´c, and I. Leyva, Phys. Rev. E 69 (2004)

056228.

[25] The intermittency observed in the phase diﬀerence is characterized as an usual
intermittency, by the alternance between a laminar regime and a burst regime.
If the phase diﬀerence remains bounded in the interval [0, h∆φ1i], we say that
we have a laminar regime. If the phase diﬀerence leaves this interval, we have
a burst, also known as phase slip. As one approaches the border between the
PS and the non PS region, the laminar regime in the phase diﬀerence becomes
longer.

[26] The choice of these time intervals is not unique. It depends on what type of
event one wants to identify in the system. A length-1 basic set is constructed
by measuring time intervals between the occurrence of two events of the same

22

type. A length-2 basic set is constructed by measuring the time interval between
the occurrence of an event A and an event B, and then, between the event B
and ﬁnally the event A, and so, on.

[27] M. S. Baptista, T. Pereira, J. C. Sartorelli, I. L. Caldas, J. Kurths, 742 AIP
Proceedings of the 8-th Experimental Chaos Conference, American Institute of
Physics (2004).

[28] M. S. Baptista, I. L. Caldas, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 7, 325 (1996); M. S.

Baptista, I. L. Caldas, Int. J. Bifurcation and Chaos, 7 (1997) 447.

[29] A. Shabunin, V. Demidov, V. Astakhov, et al., Phys. Rev. E 65 (2002) 056215.

[30] J. P. Eckmann, D. Ruelle, Rev. Mod. Phys. 57, (1985) 617.

[31] S. Wiggins, Introduction to Applied Nonlinear Dynamical Systems and Chaos,

Springer, New York, 1996.

[32] J. Banks, J. Ergod. Th. and Dynam. Sys. 17 (1997) 505.

[33] K. Josi´c and M. Beck, Chaos 13, 247 (2003); K. Josi´c and D. J. Mar, Phys.

Rev. E 64 (2001) 056234.

23

