5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
9
0
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Faraday’s law in the presence of magnetic monopoles

M. Nowakowski and N. G. Kelkar
Departamento de Fisica, Universidad de los Andes, Cra.1 No.18A-10,
Santafe de Bogota, Colombia

Abstract

We show that if we consider the full statement of Faraday’s law
for a closed physical circuit, the standard Maxwell’s equations in the
presence of electric and magnetic charges have to include in their in-
tegral form a mixed term of the form ρmv⊥
e where ρm is the magnetic
charge density and v⊥
e the perpendicular component of the velocity
ve of the electric charge.

PACS: 03.50.-z, 03.50.De, 14.80.Hv

Maxwell’s electrodynamics with its model role for a fundamental theory [1]
and its numerous applications is one of the most successful theories in physics
[2, 3]. The equivalence between Maxwell’s laws in integral and diﬀerential
form is evident in the derivation of the latter from the former and manifest in
the claim that the Maxwell’s equations in diﬀerential form together with the
Lorentz force encompass the whole of electromagnetism. The integral form of
Faraday’s law plays a special role in this context. Let us consider a real closed
physical circuit with moving boundaries. If we wish to include the motional
induced electromotive force (emf) in the Faraday’s law, the boundary of the
surface integral in this law becomes time dependent. In such a situation the
velocity vpull which is controlled externally can depend both on position and
time, i.e., vpull = vpull(t, r). It is not diﬃcult to start with the Faraday’s law
with a time dependent boundary which encompasses the motional induced
emf to derive the third Maxwell’s equation in diﬀerential form. However,
this procedure requires a mathematical identity for diﬀerentiating surface
integrals in which the divergence of the magnetic ﬁeld will appear. One of the
reasons why the above mentioned general equivalence of the diﬀerential and

1

integral form of Faraday’s law (including motional emf) can be proved, is the
validity of the second Maxwell’s equation, ∇ · B = 0, i.e., the non-existence
of magnetic monopoles. One would of course expect that motional emf is
also included in the Maxwell’s equations valid for electric and speculative
magnetic charges [4, 5, 6, 7] as the former is an experimental fact. However,
the presence of magnetic charges, i.e. ∇ · B 6= 0, requires a reanalysis which
leads to a novel result as shown below.

We ﬁrst touch upon the standard case of Maxwell’s electrodynamics to
clarify certain tacit features about the explicit inclusion of motional emf into
Maxwell’s equations. Although not always a common practice in literature,
it is in general known that to include the motional emf case in the integral
form of Faraday’s law, the latter has to be written in the following form
[2, 8, 9] :

1
e IC

IC

FLorentz, e · dl = −

ΦB = −

(1)

d
dt

IC

B · dA ,

d
dt ZS
e × B) · dl = −

d
dt ZS

B · dA

(E + ve × B) · dl =

(E + v⊥

where FLorentz, e = e(E + ve × B), is the usual Lorentz force on an electric
charge e and C denotes the closed path around the surface S. The velocity
(ve) of the electric charge, e, has been split according to ve = v⊥
e + v||
e
with v||
e parallel to dl and v⊥ the perpendicular component which, in most
applications of the electromotive force, is the velocity vpull with which the
rod is pulled. The second line in (1) is to indicate that only the term in v⊥
e
survives. By writing equation (1) we explicitly allow for variable boundaries.
It is of some importance to stress that the velocity ve can be, in general, a
velocity ﬂow vector ﬁeld i.e. dependent on time and position vector (ve =
ve(t, r)). This is so because vpull is controlled by an external agent. The
mathematical identity to handle such a general case is [8]

d
dt ZS

∂G
∂t

ZS(cid:20)

G · dA =

+ (∇ · G)v − ∇ × (v × G)

· dA

(2)

(cid:21)

for an arbitrary vector ﬁeld G [10]. Specializing to G = B together with
∇ · B = 0 and applying Stokes’s theorem to (1), we get from (1) the third
Maxwell’s equation

(3)

∇ × E = −

∂B
∂t

.

2

If in the above discussion we are talking about electron’s velocity ve, we then
have explicitly in mind that the path C is a closed physical circuit in which
the electrons move. Technically, we can also consider the case where C is a
geometrical path moving in space with velocity v relative to the observer [2].
Then in (1) we need only to replace ve by v without changing the meaning of
Faraday’s equation. Of course, v is then an ‘artiﬁcial’ construct and should
not enter e.g. the diﬀerential relation between ﬁelds which is the case in (3).
Similarly the velocity v of the imaginary loop is irrelevant in interpreting the
induced emf as Eemf = −dΦB/dt.

From the mathematical point of view, it might be possible to derive many
integral identities from (3). The point is of course that the integral law (1)
has a direct physical meaning: the left hand side is the measured induced
emf, Eemf . For instance, in a conducting material, the induced current would
be I = Eemf /R, with R the resistance of the material.

C E·dl and
H

S[∇×(ve×B)]·dA =
R

The equivalence between (1) and (3) is established by integrating the
S(∇×
diﬀerential law over a surface S and using Stokes’s theorem in the form
C(ve×B)·dl. Again the absence
E)·dA =
R
of magnetic monopoles is one of the main assumptions if we want to recover
H
(1) from (3). In view of this result it is legitimate to put forth the question of
how can one ensure the equivalence of the diﬀerential and integral laws once
the magnetic monopoles are introduced into electromagnetism. Of course,
this question should also take into account the full statement of Faraday’s
law which mathematically manifests itself in the total time derivative of the
magnetic ﬂux ΦB. With standard notation for charge and current densities,
the following set of Maxwell’s equations

∇ · E =

ρe
ǫ0

∇ · B = µ0ρm
∂B
∂t

∇ × E = −

− µ0 Jm

∂E
∂t

∇ × B = ǫ0µ0

+ µ0Je

(4)

is believed to govern the whole of electromagnetism, once electric (e) and
magnetic (g) charges [6] are introduced. Going back from the third Maxwell’s
equation in (4), like from (3) to (1), one would intuitively expect to get the
integral law, 1
S Jm · dA. This is however not
e
R

C FLorentz, e · dl = − d
H

dt ΦB − µ0

3

the case. The correct integral law follows from ∇ · B = µ0ρm and the math-
ematical identity (2). In the presence of magnetic monopoles, the induced
emf, Eemf is,

1
e IC

FLorentz, e · dl = −

ΦB − µ0

Jm · dA + µ0

ιm, e · dA

(5)

ZS

ZS

d
dt

with an unusual mixed term

ιm, e = ρmv⊥
e ,

(6)

We remind the reader that v⊥
e is the perpendicular component of the elec-
tron’s velocity ve with respect to the loop (obviously it is also the velocity
of the loop). Note that we insist here on the interpretation of C as a closed
physical circuit. Otherwise, in the case of C being an imaginary loop, the
measurable quantity Eemf would depend on an unphysical variable v. By
itself it is a remarkable fact that in the presence of magnetic monopoles, it
does not make much sense to allow C to be a moving imaginary loop as can
be the case in (1). Indeed, (5) is meant as a mathematical expression of Fara-
day’s experiment in a circuit with moving boundaries. This is an interesting
diﬀerence as compared to the standard case. The diﬀerence is technical and
of course, in a physical situation, where the charges move solely according
||) the term with ιm, e in (5) vanishes as it
to the Lorentz force (i.e ve = ve
should be.

Two points are worth mentioning regarding this new term. Firstly, ιm, e
is in general not a current density like Je = ρeve and Jm = ρmvm where vm is
the velocity of the magnetic charges unless we are talking about dyons whose
case will be discussed below. The mixing of a magnetic (ρm) property with
an electric one (ve) is unusual, but a straightforward consequence if we insist
on including the motional emf into the integral law with monopoles. The
fact that the mixed term in (6) is not a current density gets also reﬂected
in the diﬀerence between the microscopic deﬁnitions of Je and ιm,e. In the
microscopic version of Je, namely,

Je(r, t) =

eava(t)δ(3)(r − ra(t)) ,

(7)

a
X

we sum all properties of electrons over all electrons. The microscopic analog
a gaδ(3)(r − ra(t)) where ga is the individual magnetic charge.
of ρm(r, t) is

P

4

Hence we can write

ιm,e(r, t) =

gaδ(3)(r − ra(t))v⊥

e (r, t)

(8)

a
X

There is no sum in connection with the velocity and it is not necessary to
‘discretize’ the velocity as the latter is the velocity of the loop and hence the
same for each electron in the circuit at the position r and at a time t. The
best way to visualize it is to consider a constant loop velocity of a straight
piece of loop (like in the standard motional emf experiment) in which case all
electrons in this part of the circuit will have the same perpendicular velocity.
The second remark concerns the signiﬁcance of such a term. It is beyond
the scope of this letter to give a full account of this issue. We can, however,
ιm, e · dA cancels
draw the reader’s attention to the fact that although
S
e (∇ · B) · dA in − dΦB
against −
(see (2)), this does not mean that
dt
such a term has no signiﬁcance. The contrary is the case. Either for a
given magnetic ﬁeld B we calculate the magnetic ﬂux and its time derivative
ιm, e · dA or by using the
directly, which leaves us with the mixed term
identity

S v⊥

R

R

S

R

∇ × (k × G) = k(∇ · G) − G(∇ · k) + (G · ∇)k − (k · ∇)G

(9)

we can convince ourselves that

−

dΦB
dt

ZS

−

∂B
∂t

ZS "

+ µ0

ιm, e · dA =

+ µ0ιm, e − (v⊥

e · ∇)B

· dA (10)

#

where for simplicity we assumed that the velocity depends only on time t.
In simple words, the mixed term ιm, e is also contained in ∇ × (v⊥

e × B).

Suppose that we perform the standard motional emf experiment known
from textbooks, but now in the presence of very heavy (static) magnetic
monopoles. This assumption entitles us to put Jm approximately to zero.
Then naively one might suspect that − dΦB
is the only contribution to the
dt
emf. The above results show, however, that ρm and ve combined in ιm, e give
an additional contribution which is unconventional and worth pointing out.
One of the motivation to introduce magnetic monopoles was to obtain the
symmetric form of the Maxwell’s equations. One can establish a completely
symmetric form of Maxwell’s equations for magnetic monopoles also in the
integral form. Especially, we have in mind a symmetry between the new

5

(11)

(13)

Faraday’s law (5) and the Ampere-Maxwell law. If we make use of the force
FLorentz, g acting on magnetic charges g, i.e.

dpm
dt

B
µ0

"

= g

− ǫ0vm × E

,

#

we can write for the integral Ampere-Maxwell law

1
g IC

FLorentz, g · dl = ǫ0

ΦE +

Je · dA −

ιe, m · dA

(12)

d
dt

ZS

ZS

with

ΦE =

E · dA

ZS

ιe, m = ρev⊥
m .

Then (12) is in perfect symmetrical analogy to (5) and equivalent to the
fourth diﬀerential equation in (4). Of course, in the presence of magnetic
monopoles, (5) is necessitated by the experimental fact of motional emf
whereas such support is lacking for (12). We base (12) on the fact that
the Maxwell equations are symmetric with regard to electric and magnetic
charges and so should be any conclusion drawn from them, unless this sym-
metry is broken from outside. The real relevance of (12) is indeed in inter-
preting the left hand side of it as an induced magnetomotive force (mmf)
(in analogy to emf), resulting in an induced magnetic ﬁeld in an experiment
analogous to the motional emf one. Hence, similar to (5), ιe, m appears only if
the magnetic ﬁeld is induced motionally. Interestingly, for the case of dyons
for which we have ve = vm, such a symmetry of Maxwell’s equations in the
integral form would result into a very simple form

1
gi IC

FLorentz, gi · dl = −ǫi

Φi

(14)

d
dt

where i = E, B, ǫE = −ǫ0, ǫB = 1 and gE = e, gB = g. Indeed, the surface
integrals over the current densities Je and Jm, then emerge automatically
from − dΦE

dt , respectively.

dt and − dΦB

From a purely mathematical point of view, there is at least in principle,
yet another possibility to reconcile the integral laws with the diﬀerential ones
when both electric and magnetic charges are present. We can also incorporate

6

the mixed term(s) directly into the diﬀerential law(s). The modiﬁed third
Maxwell’s equation in (4) could read

∂B
∂t

∂E
∂t

∇ × E = −

− µ0 Jm − µ0ιm, e

(15)

(16)

and eventually guided by symmetry principles as before, the fourth one could
read

∇ × B = ǫ0µ0

+ µ0Je + µ0ιe, m .

In such a situation the corresponding equivalent integral laws are (5) and
(12), but without the mixed terms on the right hand sides which explicitly
demonstrates that the physics of Faraday’s law would be diﬀerent from (5)
in this case. With (15) and (16) the equivalence between diﬀerential and
integral laws is again restored and the motional manifestation of Faraday’s
law still included in the laws. We note, however, that the second possibility
deﬁned through equations (15) and (16) has some drawbacks. First of all the
continuity equations take now the form

∂ρe
∂t
∂ρm
∂t

+ ∇ · (Je + ιe, m) = 0

+ ∇ · (Jm + ιm, e) = 0

(17)

which leave the global conservation of the electric and magnetic charges un-
touched, but are diﬃcult to interpret locally. Secondly, if the usual dual
transformations are supplemented by the rule that ιm, e transforms as Jm
and ιe, m as Je we still ﬁnd the Maxwell’s equations (15) and (16) covariant
under such a transformation, but it is not possible to ‘transform away’ ρm,
Jm, ιm, e and ιe, m simultaneously. From a physical point of view, the mod-
iﬁcations (15) and (16) have two defects. As already stated, the continuity
equations (17) cannot be interpreted locally. For instance, the change in
charge density with time is accounted by the term ∇ · Je and the remain-
ing term in (17) cannot be interpreted. Therefore, we refute (15) and (16)
on physical grounds and recognize (5) and (12) as the correct integral laws
which take the diﬀerential form as in (4).

In summary, we have shown that the general Faraday’s law (i.e. the one
which encompasses also the electromotive case) in the presence of magnetic
monopoles, requires the mixed term ιm, e as a source term in the integral

7

version of the Maxwell’s equations. To achieve fully symmetric equations in
the integral form requires also the introduction of the corresponding term
ιe, m. The choice to include such terms in the diﬀerential form results in a
continuity equation which locally seems to lack a simple interpretation. The
change in the magnetic charge density with time, is still compensated by an
outgoing ﬂux, but the latter contains the mixed term ιm, e. It is clear that
such a mixed term in the integral form of Faraday’s law changes its physical
content as discussed in the text.

References

sity Press, 1997.

1998.

[1] L. O’Raifeartaigh, “The Dawning of Gauge Theory”, Princeton Univer-

[2] J. D. Jackson, “Classical Electrodynamics”, John Wiley & Sons Inc.,

[3] J. Schwinger, L. L. DeRaad, Jr., K. A. Milton and W.-Y. Tsai, “Classical
Electrodynamics”, Perseus Books 1998; F. Rohrlich, “Classical Charged
Particles: Foundations of Their Theory”, Perseus Books 1990; D. J.
Griﬃth, “Introduction to Electrodynamics”, Prentice Hall 1998.

[4] P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 133 (1931) 60.

[5] For a review article see J. Preskill, Annu. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 34 (1984)
461; see also R. A. Carrigan and W. P. Trower, “Magnetic Monopoles”,
Kluwer Academic Pub. 1983; A. Goldhaber, “Magnetic Monopoles: Se-
lected Reprints”, American Association of Physics Teachers 1990.

[6] For possible experimental signals, see Z. Fang et al., Science 302 (2003)

92; B. Cabrera, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48 (1982) 1378.

[7] Description of detection techniques and limits on magnetic monopoles
can be found in R. D. Gardner, B. Cabrera, M. E. Huber and M. A.
Taber, Phys. Rev. 44 (1991) 622; D. E. Groom, Phys. Rep. 140 (1986)
325; G. Giacomelli and L. Patrizi, “Magnetic Monopoles Searches”, Lec-
tures given at the Summer School on Astroparticle Physics and Cosmol-
ogy, ICTP, Trieste, Italy 2002, hep-ex/0302011.

8

[8] T. Frankel, “The Geometry of Physics: An Introduction”, Cambridge

[9] S. M. Lea and J. Burke, “Physics: The Nature of Things”, Thomson

University Press, 1997.

Learning 1997.

pending only on time.

[10] The identity can also be found in [2] where it is used for velocity de-

9

