5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
5
2
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Classiﬁcation of electromagnetic resonances in ﬁnite
inhomogeneous three-dimensional structures

Neil V. Budko
Laboratory of Electromagnetic Research, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and Computer Science,
Delft University of Technology, Mekelweg 4, 2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands∗

Alexander B. Samokhin
Department of Applied Mathematics, Moscow Institute of Radio Engineering, Electronics,
and Automatics (MIREA), Verndasky av. 78, 117454, Moscow, Russian Federation†
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We present a simple and uniﬁed classiﬁcation of macroscopic electromagnetic resonances in ﬁnite
arbitrarily inhomogeneous isotropic dielectric 3D structures situated in free space. By observing the
complex-plane dynamics of the spatial spectrum of the volume integral operator as a function of
angular frequency and constitutive parameters we identify and generalize all the usual resonances,
including complex plasmons, real laser resonances in media with gain, and real quasi-static reso-
nances in media with negative permittivity and gain.

It is hard to overestimate the role played by macro-
scopic electromagnetic resonances in physics. Phenom-
ena and technologies such as lasers, photonic band-gap
materials, plasma waves and instabilities, microwave de-
vices, and a great deal of electronics are all related or
even entirely based on some kind of electromagnetic res-
onance. The usual way of analysis consists of deriving
the so-called dispersion equation, which relates the wave-
vector k or the propagation constant |k| of a plane elec-
tromagnetic wave to the angular frequency ω. The solu-
tions of this equation may be real or complex. In the ﬁrst
case we talk about a real resonance, i.e. such that can
be attained for some real angular frequency and there-
fore, in principle, results in unbounded ﬁelds. In reality,
however, ampliﬁcation of the ﬁelds is bounded by other
physical mechanisms, e.g. nonlinear saturation. If solu-
tion is complex, then we have a complex resonance and,
depending on the sign of the imaginary part, the asso-
ciated ﬁelds are either decaying or growing with time.
This common approach is rather limited and does not
include all pertaining phenomena. Indeed, more or less
explicit dispersion equations can only be obtained for in-
ﬁnite (unbounded) homogeneous media, as often done
in plasma and photonic studies. Other approaches im-
pose explicit boundary conditions and can handle res-
onators and waveguides with perfectly conducting walls,
and idealistic piece-wise homogeneous objects (e.g. plane
layered medium, circular cylinders, a sphere). On the
other hand, very little can be said in the general case of
a ﬁnite inhomogeneous dielectric object situated in free
space. Due to the absence of an explicit dispersion equa-
tion and explicit boundary conditions, even the existence
and classiﬁcation of resonances in such objects is still an
open problem.

We describe here an alternative mathematically rig-
orous approach to electromagnetic resonances, based on
the volume integral formulation of the electromagnetic
scattering, also known as the Green’s function method

and the domain integral equation method. This formu-
lation is equivalent to the Maxwell’s equations and is
perfectly suited for bounded inhomogeneous objects in
free space. Despite its generality, nowadays the volume
integral equation is mostly used as a numerical tool, for
instance, in near-ﬁeld optics and geophysics. The main
limitation seems to be the implicit mathematical struc-
ture of this equation resisting any straightforward anal-
ysis and interpretation. Recently, however, we have suc-
ceeded in deriving useful mathematical bounds on the
spatial spectrum of the volume integral operator proving,
in particular, that along with the usual discrete eigenval-
ues this operator has a dense essential spectrum as well
[1]. Below we reiterate our results and show how to use
them in the analysis of resonances. Then, we proceed
with a step by step classiﬁcation of all known complex
and real resonances. In particular, we generalize the no-
tion of a complex plasmon, real laser resonance, and a
real quasi-static resonance in an exotic material contain-
ing a negative permittivity part and a part with gain.
Recently, several authors have suggested [2]–[6] that this
type of material may be an answer to some urgent tech-
nological questions ranging from surface plasmon lasers
(SPASER) to loss compensation in media with negative
refraction (perfect lens). We believe that our analysis
provides a necessary generalization and a handy analyt-
ical tool for these and other studies, especially in what
concerns the resonant light conﬁnement.

The frequency-domain Maxwell’s equations describing
the electromagnetic ﬁeld in a non-magnetic isotropic in-
homogeneous object occupying ﬁnite spatial domain D
lead to the following strongly singular integral equation:

Ein(x, ω) =

I +

(cid:20)

1
3

χ(x, ω)
(cid:21)

E(x, ω)

(1)

− lim
ǫ→0

Z
x′∈D\|x−x′|<ǫ

G(x − x′, ω)χ(x′, ω)E(x′, ω) dx′,

2

where I denotes a unit tensor (3 × 3 identity matrix),
whereas the explicit form of the Green’s tensor G is of no
importance here, but can be found in [7] and [8]. Here,
Ein is the incident ﬁeld in vacuum background, where the
wavenumber is k0 = ω/c, and the total electric ﬁeld in
the conﬁguration is denoted by E. Constitutive parame-
ters of the object are contained in the so-called contrast
function χ(x, ω) = εr(x, ω) − 1, where εr is the relative
dielectric permittivity of the object. In operator notation
equation (1) can be written simply as

unit, since it is the relative permittivity of vacuum, and
a curve or even an area of the complex plane emerging
from the real unit and running through all other values,
which macroscopic εr takes inside the object. This part
of the spectrum does not depend on the object’s size or
shape, or even the relative volume occupied by diﬀerent
inhomogeneities.

In addition to the essential spectrum operator A has
the usual discrete eigenvalues located within the follow-
ing wedge-shaped bounds:

The spatial spectrum of operator A is deﬁned as a set
σ(λ) of complex numbers λ for which operator

Im εr(x, ω) [1 − Reλ] +
[Re εr(x, ω) − 1] Imλ ≤ 0, x ∈ D.

(5)

Au = uin.

[A − λI]−1

(2)

(3)

fails to exist in one or another way. We need to distin-
guish here two cases. The ﬁrst is when for some λ the
homogeneous equation [A − λI]uλ = 0 has a nontrivial
solution uλ 6= 0. In addition, this solution has a ﬁnite
norm, i.e. kuλk < ∞. If the latter condition is satisﬁed,
then λ is called an eigenvalue and the corresponding uλ
– an eigenfunction (eigenmode). It happens that eigen-
values constitute, although possibly inﬁnite, but discrete
subset of the complex plane – a set of isolated points, in
other words.

The second case is when equation [A − λI]uλ = 0 is
formally satisﬁed by some uλ, which either does not have
a bounded norm, i.e. kuλk → ∞, or is localized to a sin-
gle point in space. The set of λ’s corresponding to such
cases is often a dense subset of the complex plane, some-
times referred to as essential spectrum. An even more
rigorous analysis would also require distinction between
the continuous and the residual spectra, however, so far
we cannot come-up with a simple formal rule to identify
and separate them in the electromagnetic case. It is quite
easy to ﬁnd the physical interpretation of kuλk → ∞. For
example, in the L2 norm suggested by the electromag-
netic energy considerations (Pointing’s theorem), such
functions are a plane wave and the Dirac’s delta func-
tion, which both have inﬁnite L2 norms. The essential
spectrum associated with plane waves is common for in-
ﬁnite periodic structures, where it surrounds photonic
band gaps, and in inﬁnite plasma models, where it gives
rise to certain types of plasma waves.

In [1] we prove that the strongly singular integral oper-
ator of equation (1) has both the dense essential spectrum
and the discrete eigenvalues. Moreover, for any inhomo-
geneous object with χ(x, ω) H¨older-continuous in R3 (i.e.
inside the object as well as across its outer boundary) the
essential spectrum λess is given explicitly as

λess = εr(x, ω),

x ∈ R3

.

(4)

In other words λess will consist of all values of εr, which
it admits in R3. Thus it will always contain the real

It is also known that |λ| ≤ kAk, and that kAk < ∞
for any χ, H¨older-continuous in R3. Exact distribution
of eigenvalues in the complex plane is unknown to us
and depends on the object’s shape. The eigenfunctions
(modes) associated with these eigenvalues are global (not
localized) and, in general, can only be found numerically.

To use these results in the analysis of electromagnetic
resonances we note that both the essential spectrum and
the eigenvalues are parametric functions of the angular
frequency ω. In general, a perfect (real) resonance would
occur, if for some ω the spatial spectrum of A would ac-
quire a zero eigenvalue. If, on the other hand, for some ω
the spatial spectrum does not contain zero, but gets close
to it, while moves away for other ω’s, then we have a com-
plex resonance. With this in mind, one should try to vi-
sualize the dynamics of the spatial spectrum as it ‘moves’
in the complex plane, paying attention to the eigenvalues
and portions of essential spectrum, which ﬁrst approach
zero and then move away from it. Expression (4) is very
important in this respect as it tells us that the motion
of essential spectrum is explicitly related to the temporal
dispersion of the relative permittivity. We also know (see
below) that the eigenfunctions related to this spectrum
are highly localized. Thus from (4) and the known spa-
tial distribution of εr(x, ω) we can immediately tell where
exactly in D would a local resonance occur. The motion
of discrete eigenvalues, on the other hand, is quite un-
predictable, with the general tendency to spread out at
higher frequencies. While doing so, some of these eigen-
values may pass through or close to zero, which will be
an indication of a global resonance. We propose here a
useful rule of thumb for visualizing the eigenvalue bound
(5). Imagine a line drawn through the real unit and any
value of εr inside the object. If you now stand in the com-
plex plane and look from the real unit towards that value
of εr, then the eigenvalues can only be to your right.

Finally, we have also been able to prove that in the
static limit ω → 0 or D → 0 all discrete eigenvalues are
located within the convex envelope of essential spectrum

3

FIG. 1: Known resonances as seen in the numerical spectrum for various inhomogeneous objects. Left: object with losses
(complex wave-like resonances). Middle: object with strong anomalous dispersion (complex plasmon resonance). Right: object
with lossy and gain parts (real wave-like laser resonance).

[9], and are given by

εr(x, ω)|∇ϕλ(x)|2 dx

|∇ϕλ(x)|2 dx

,

(6)

λ = Rx∈D

Rx∈D

where ϕλ is a scalar static mode. Formally, our essential
spectrum (4) can be derived from this expression as well,
by taking |∇ϕλ(x)|2 ∼ δ(x − x′). This also proves that
the eigenfunctions associated with the essential spectrum
are highly localized in space. Another important observa-
tion is about the discrete eigenvalues outside the convex
envelope of essential spectrum. Since those do not ex-
ist in the quasi-static regime and appear only at higher
frequencies and object sizes, we may conclude that the
corresponding eigenfunctions are not of static type, but
more of the wave-like type, i.e. oscillating in space.

Now, we have everything we need for a uniﬁed descrip-
tion of resonances. We shall illustrate our conclusions
by numerically computed spectra for an inhomogeneous
cube consisting of two equal halves with diﬀerent permit-
tivity values. The side of the cube is half of the vacuum
wavelength.

In objects consisting of lossy dielectric materials only
complex resonances can be observed. For example, in
Fig. 1 (left) we show the spectrum for the case of a lossy
dielectric with both Re εr > 0 and Im εr > 0. The ac-
tual values of relative permittivity and the real unit are
given as circles. Numerical equivalent of essential spec-
trum (there is no such thing as dense or continuous spec-
trum with matrices) always looks like a set of line seg-
ments emerging from the real unit [1]. One should simply
keep in mind that in a continuously inhomogeneous ob-
ject this spectrum may be a rather arbitrary curve or an
area. Other, oﬀ-line eigenvalues are within the bounds
prescribed by (5). As the angular frequency varies, some
of these latter oﬀ-line eigenvalues may get close, but not
equal to zero. These are the complex resonances, corre-
sponding to complicated global wave-like spatial modes.

In Fig. 1 (middle) we illustrate the case where due to
strong anomalous dispersion one of the object’s parts has
Re εr < 0 and Im εr > 0 at a certain angular frequency.
The line of essential spectrum proceeds close to the zero
of the complex plane. For other angular frequencies this
line will move away from zero. It is well-known that this
combination of materials supports complex plasmon reso-
nances. Hence, we may safely conclude that we deal here
with one of them. As an extra conﬁrmation we see that
this resonance is related to the highly localized modes
of essential spectrum. Further we conclude that, in gen-
eral, complex plasmons may exist not only at an inter-
face between two homogeneous objects, but along rather
arbitrary surfaces inside a continuously inhomogeneous
object with strong anomalous dispersion. The precise lo-
cation of this surface is determined by that value of εr
inside D, which appears to be the closest to zero.

Recalling the rule of thumb about the location of eigen-
values we realize that a discrete eigenvalue can be equal
to zero, only if the relative permittivity at some point
inside the object happens to have a negative imaginary
part, i.e. Im εr < 0. This corresponds to the so-called
negative losses or gain as in pumped laser media.
In
Fig. 1 (right) the numerical spectrum for a cube with
one lossy half and another half with gain is shown. Two
of the discrete eigenvalues are very close to zero, mean-
ing that the whole conﬁguration is in the vicinity of a
real laser resonance. It is, however, very hard to come-
up with an exact real resonance in this way. For a given
temporal dispersion of the medium, one has to optimize
the geometrical parameters of the object until the reso-
nance is achieved, which is a very challenging numerical
problem. One thing we can be sure about, though: for
such conﬁgurations the zero eigenvalue will always be
outside the convex envelope of the essential spectrum.
Therefore, real laser resonances correspond to wave-like
spatial modes and, thus, can only be achieved in struc-
tures whose size is comparable to or greater than the

4

mode of this real resonance indeed look diﬀerent. Note
also that the angular frequency of this resonance may
in practice coincide with the one of plasmon. There is
an important diﬀerence, though, between the real laser
resonances described above and the present resonance.
If the medium parameters are such that the zero of the
complex plane is situated inside the convex envelope of
the essential spectrum, then a real quasi-static resonance
can be achieved. Hence, the mode may be conﬁned to
a very small volume, if the object’s volume is small. It
may even be enough to reduce the volume of the part
with gain only to achieve conﬁnement.

In summary, we have presented a uniﬁed approach to
macroscopic electromagnetic resonances in ﬁnite inhomo-
geneous three-dimensional objects. We have analyzed the
dynamics of the spatial spectrum of the pertaining vol-
ume integral operator as a function of the angular fre-
quency and constitutive parameters, and were able to
recover and generalize all known resonances in this way.
In addition, we have conﬁrmed the possibility and estab-
lished conditions for the existence of a real quasi-static
resonance in media with negative permittivity and gain
leading to the volume-dependent light conﬁnement.

∗ Electronic address: n.budko@ewi.tudelft.nl
† This research is supported by NWO (The Netherlands)

and RFBR (Russian Federation).

[1] N. V. Budko and A. B. Samokhin, (under review) SIAM
J. Sci. Comp., also see Arxiv version: math-ph/0505013
(2005).

[2] M. I. Stockman, S. V. Faleev, and D. J. Bergman,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 167401 (2001).

[3] D. J. Bergman and M. I. Stockman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,

[4] M. P. Nezhad, K. Tetz, Y. Fainman, Optics Expres,. 12,

[5] J. Seidel, S. Grafst¨om, L. Eng, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 177401

[6] S. A. Ramakrishna and J. B. Pendry, Phys. Rev. B 67,

027402 (2003).

4072–4079 (2004)

(2005).

201101(R) (2003).

1754 (2000).

[7] J. Rahola, SIAM J. Sci. Comp., Vol. 21, No. 5, pp. 1740–

[8] A. B. Samokhin, Integral Equations and Iteration Methods

in Electromagnetic Scattering, VSP, Utrecht, 2001.

[9] N. V. Budko and A. B. Samokhin, (accepted) Diﬀerential

Equations, (2005).

FIG. 2: Real quasi-static resonance in an object with negative
permittivity and gain.

medium wavelength. This is conﬁrmed by the standard
theory of lasers.

As we already mentioned in the beginning, combina-
tion of a negative permittivity material and a material
with gain is an attractive candidate for several applica-
tions. In the quest for a perfect lens [6] the gain is sup-
posed to compensate for the inevitable losses in the fre-
quency band where the negative permittivity is achieved.
Plasmons, which are considered to be ideal candidates
for the sub-wavelength manipulation of light, suﬀer from
losses as well. Here too, combination with a gain medium
is supposed to compensate for the losses. Some authors
argue that in this way the surface plasmon ampliﬁcation
by stimulated emission of radiation (SPASER) can be
achieved, similar to the usual laser [2]–[5]. While all this
is true, and our bounds show that real resonances may ex-
ist in such media, we can explicitly show that these reso-
nances are not necessarily the localized lossless plasmons,
but may as well be associated with global modes. Con-
sider the spatial spectrum corresponding to this case –
see Fig. 2. The upper branch of the essential spectrum is
indeed approaching zero as with the usual complex plas-
mon. In a continuously inhomogeneous object there may
be essential spectrum going right through zero in this
case. Hence, perfect real plasmons are possible in classi-
cal electromagnetics (at least mathematically). However,
in Fig. 2 it is the discrete eigenvalue, which is now the
closest to zero, and it has a global eigenfunction associ-
ated with it, not a localized one. Our numerical calcu-
lations conﬁrm that the complex plasmon mode and the

