Against Pointillisme about Geometry

J. Butterﬁeld1

All Souls College
Oxford OX1 4AL

Abstract

5 December 2005: a shorter version is forthcoming in Proceedings of the 28th Ludwig
Wittgenstein Symposium, ed. F. Stadler and M. St¨oltzner

This paper forms part of a wider campaign: to deny pointillisme. That is the
doctrine that a physical theory’s fundamental quantities are deﬁned at points
of space or of spacetime, and represent intrinsic properties of such points or
point-sized objects located there; so that properties of spatial or spatiotemporal
regions and their material contents are determined by the point-by-point facts.
More speciﬁcally, this paper argues against pointillisme about the structure
of space and-or spacetime itself, especially a paper by Bricker (1993). A com-
panion paper argues against pointillisme in mechanics, especially about velocity;
it focusses on Tooley, Robinson and Lewis.

To avoid technicalities, I conduct the argument almost entirely in the con-
text of “Newtonian” ideas about space and time. But both the debate and my
arguments carry over to relativistic, and even quantum, physics.

5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1email: jb56@cus.cam.ac.uk; jeremy.butterﬁeld@all-souls.oxford.ac.uk

Contents

1 Introduction

2 The wider campaign

2.1 Connecting physics and metaphysics

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.1.1 Avoiding controversy about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction . .

2.1.2 Distinction from three mathematical distinctions . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Classical mechanics is not pointilliste, and can be perdurantist . . . . .

2.2.1 Two versions of pointillisme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2.2 Two common claims

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2.3 My contrary claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3

In more detail ...

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

3 Can properties represented by vectors be intrinsic to a point?

3.1 Prospectus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2 Humean supervenience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3 Accommodating space and spacetime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.1 An agreed concession . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.2 The length of a line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.3 Accommodating more geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Accommodating tangent vectors and the metric tensor

4.1 Bricker and others

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2 Bricker’s three claims about metrical structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.1 Bricker’s metaphysical framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.2 Bricker’s three claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3 The standard metric is extrinsic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.4 Vetoing perfectly natural extrinsics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.4.1 Trouble with local duplicates

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.4.2 Alleged trouble with intrinsic duplicates

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.5 A heterodox but intrinsic metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.6 Anti-pointilliste reply . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

4

4

5

6

8

8

9

9

13

13

14

15

15

17

19

21

21

22

22

24

25

27

28

29

30

31

1

5 References

33

1 Introduction

This paper forms part of a wider campaign: to deny pointillisme. That is the doctrine
that a physical theory’s fundamental quantities are deﬁned at points of space or of
spacetime, and represent intrinsic properties of such points or point-sized objects lo-
cated there; so that properties of spatial or spatiotemporal regions and their material
contents are determined by the point-by-point facts.2

I will ﬁrst describe this wider campaign (Section 2). Then I will argue against
pointillisme as regards the structure of space and-or spacetime itself (Sections 3 and
4). A companion paper (2006) argues against pointillisme in mechanics, especially as
regards velocity.

I will argue that the geometrical structure of space, and-or the chrono-geometrical
structure of spacetime, involves extrinsic properties of points, typically properties that
I shall call ‘spatially extrinsic’. The main debate here is whether properties of a point
that are represented by vectors, tensors, connections etc. can be intrinsic to the point;
typically, pointillistes argue that they can be. After formulating this debate in Section
3, I will in Section 4 focus on Bricker’s (1993) discussion. For it is an unusually
thorough pointilliste attempt to relate vectors and tensors in modern geometry to the
metaphysics of properties. But Bricker exempliﬁes a tendency I reject: the tendency
to reconcile pointillisme with the fact that vectorial etc. properties seem extrinsic to
points and point-sized objects, by proposing some heterodox construal of the properties
in question. Thus Bricker proposes that we should re-found geometry in terms of
Abraham Robinson’s non-standard analysis, which rehabilitates the traditional idea of
inﬁnitesimals (Robinson 1996). I reply that once the spell of pointillisme is broken,
such proposed heterodox foundations of geometry are unmotivated.

In saying this, I do not mean to be dogmatic. I of course agree that the nature
of the continuum is an active research area, not only historically (Mancosu (1996,
Chapters 4f.), Leibniz 2001, Arthur 2006) but also in mathematics and philosophy.
Indeed there are several heterodox mathematical theories of the continuum that are
technically impressive and philosophically suggestive. In this paper we will only make
contact with one of them, viz. non-standard analysis, as invoked by Bricker. This
is for the simple reason that all the other theories oﬀer no support for my target,
pointillisme. More precisely: so far as I know, these theories do not suggest that
fundamental quantities represent intrinsic properties of points or point-sized bits of
matter; because either they do not attribute such quantities to points, or they even
deny that there are any points.3

2I think David Lewis ﬁrst used the art-movement’s name as a vivid label for this sort of doctrine:

a precise version of which he endorsed.

3Broadly speaking, the second option seems more radical and worse for pointillisme; though in

2

But it is worth glimpsing at the outset the philosophical interest of these theories;

so I here list the main ideas of some of them.

(1): Two theories that are essentially revisions of analysis (calculus) are non-
standard analysis, and a diﬀerent rehabilitation of inﬁnitesimals (smooth inﬁnitesimal
analysis; McClarty 1988, Bell 1998).

(2): Two other approaches are based on the idea of a space with no points, and so
are no friends of pointillisme. That is: the collection of the space’s parts, ordered by
parthood, has no atoms, i.e. no elements that themselves have no parts.

(i): The ﬁrst is essentially a revision of measure theory, and is mainly motivated
by its avoidance of the measure-theoretic paradoxes, like the Banach-Tarski paradox.
(It was pioneered by Caratheodory (1963); for philosophical introductions, cf. Skyrms
(1993), Arntzenius (2000, Section 5, pp. 201-205; 2004, Section 11); we will touch
on the measure-theoretic paradoxes in Section 3.3.2, but for a full account cf. Wagon
(1985).)

(ii): The second is essentially a revision of topology: topology is characterized
by relations between regions taken as primitive. (Cf. Menger (1978), Roeper (1997);
for a philosophical introduction, cf. Arntzenius (2004, Section 8-10).)

Finally, three comments about the connections between, and signﬁcance of, such

theories.

(a): These theories have various connections, which this quick list does not bring
out. For example, Nelson (1987) shows that a modicum of non-standard analysis
greatly simpliﬁes a rigorous development of the theories of measure and probability.

(b): All the theories mentioned have been developed largely without regard to ap-
plications in physics. But Arntzenius discusses the prospects for doing physics, even
quantum physics, in these spaces (ibid.; and for (2i), his 2003). (Of course, within quan-
tum physics there is a tradition of speculation about discrete space or time (Kragh and
Carazza 1994): for a rigorous non-relativistic quantum theory on a discrete space that
is empirically equivalent to the conventional theory, cf. Davies (2003).)

(c): As regards philosophy rather than physics, the main topic connected to the
above theories is mereology: which has been discussed especially in connection with
the measure-theoretic paradoxes, and (2i). Recent work includes Arntzenius and
Hawthorne (2006, especially Sections II, IV) and Forrest (2004, especially Sections
3-6; 2002, especially Sections 5-10).

So I am very open to suggestions about heterodox treatments of the continuum.
It is just that I ﬁnd the philosophical doctrine of pointillisme an insuﬃcient reason
for rejecting the orthodox treatment. Similarly in my companion paper (2006) about
mechanics; though with the diﬀerence that the proposals by the targeted authors,
Tooley, Robinson and Lewis, do not invoke any well-established mathematical theory.
That is: I again ﬁnd pointillisme an insuﬃcient reason for rejecting orthodoxy.

I will conduct the discussion almost entirely in the context of “Newtonian” ideas

such theories, the structure of a set of points is often recovered by a construction, e.g. on a richly
structured set of regions.

3

about space and time. This restriction keeps things simple: and at no cost, since
both the debate and my arguments carry over to the treatment of space and time in
relativistic, and even quantum, physics.

2 The wider campaign

As I mentioned, this paper is part of a wider campaign, which I now sketch. I begin with
general remarks, especially about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction among properties
(Section 2.1). Then I state my main claims; ﬁrst in brief (Section 2.2), then in more
detail (Section 2.3).

2.1 Connecting physics and metaphysics

My wider campaign aims to connect what modern classical physics says about matter
with two debates in modern analytic metaphysics. The ﬁrst debate is about pointil-
lisme; but understood as a metaphysical doctrine rather than a property of a physical
theory. So, roughly speaking, it is the debate whether the world is fully described
by all the intrinsic properties of all the points and-or point-sized bits of matter. The
second debate is whether an object persists over time by the selfsame object existing at
diﬀerent times (nowadays called ‘endurance’), or by diﬀerent temporal parts, or stages,
existing at diﬀerent times (called ‘perdurance’).

Endeavouring to connect classical physics and metaphysics raises two large initial
questions of philosophical method. What role, if any, should the results of science have
in metaphysics? And supposing metaphysics should in some way accommodate these
results, the fact that we live (apparently!) in a quantum universe prompts the question
why we should take classical physics to have any bearing on metaphysics. I address
these questions in my (2004: Section 2, 2006a: Section 2). Here I just summarize my
answers.

I of course defend the relevance of the results of science for metaphysics; at least
for that branch of it, the philosophy of nature, which considers such notions as space,
time matter and causality. And this includes classical physics, for two reasons.

First, much analytic philosophy of nature assumes, or examines, so-called ‘common-
sense’ aspects and versions of these notions: aspects and versions which reﬂect classical
physics, especially mechanics, at least as taught in high-school or elementary univer-
sity courses. One obvious example is modern metaphysicians’ frequent discussions of
matter as point-particles, i.e. extensionless point-masses moving in a void (and so
interacting by action-at-a-distance forces), or as continua, i.e. bodies whose entire vol-
ume, even on the smallest scales, is ﬁlled with matter. Of course, both notions arose
in mechanics in the seventeenth and eighteenth century.

Second, classical physical theories, in particular mechanics, are much more philo-
sophically suggestive, indeed subtle and problematic, than philosophers generally re-

4

alize. Again, point-particles and continua provide examples. The idea of mass con-
centrated in a spatial point (indeed, diﬀerent amounts at diﬀerent points) is, to put
it mildly, odd; as is action-at-a-distance interaction. And there are considerable con-
ceptual tensions in the mechanics of continua; (Wilson (1998) is a philosopher’s intro-
duction). Unsurprisingly, these subtleties and problems were debated in the heyday
of classical physics, from 1700 to 1900; and these debates had an enormous inﬂuence
on philosophy through ﬁgures like Duhem, Hertz and Mach—to mention only ﬁgures
around 1900 whose work directly inﬂuenced the analytic tradition. But after the quan-
tum and relativity revolutions, foundational issues in classical mechanics were largely
ignored, by physicists and mathematicians as well as by philosophers. Besides, the
growth of academic philosophy after 1950 divided the discipline into compartments,
labelled ‘metaphysics’, ‘philosophy of science’ etc., with the inevitable result that there
was less communication between, than within, compartments.4

Setting aside issues of philosophical method, pointillisme and persistence are clearly
large topics; and each is the larger for being treatable using the very diverse methods
and perspectives of both disciplines, metaphysics and physics. So my campaign has to
be selective in the ideas I discuss and in the authors I cite. Fortunately, I can avoid
several philosophical controversies, and almost all technicalities of physics.5

But I need to give at the outset some details about how I avoid philosophical
controversy about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction among properties, and about how
this distinction diﬀers from three that are prominent in mathematics and physics.

2.1.1 Avoiding controversy about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction

My campaign does not need to take sides in the ongoing controversy about how to
analyse, indeed understand, the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction. (For an introduction,
cf. Weatherson (2002, especially Section 3.1), and the symposium, e.g. Lewis (2001),
that he cites.) Indeed, most of my discussion can make do with a much clearer dis-
tinction, between what Lewis (1983, p. 114) dubbed the ‘positive extrinsic’ properties,
and the rest. This goes as follows.

Lewis was criticizing Kim’s proposal, to analyze extrinsic properties as those that
imply accompaniment, where something is accompanied iﬀ it coexists with some wholly
distinct contingent object, and so to analyze intrinsic (i.e. not extrinsic) properties as
4Thus I see my campaign as a foray into the borderlands between metaphysics and philosophy of
physics: a territory that I like to think of as inviting exploration, since it promises to give new and
illuminating perspectives on the theories and views of the two communities lying to either side of
it—rather than as a no-man’s-land well-mined by two sides, ignorant and suspicious of each other!

5Though persistence is not this paper’s topic, I note that among the philosophical issues my
campaign avoids are several about persistence, such as: (a) the gain and loss of parts (as in Theseus’
ship); (b) the relation of “constitution” between matter and object (as in the clay and the statue);
(c) vagueness, and whether there are vague objects. Agreed, there are of course connections between
my claims and arguments, and the various issues, both philosophical and physical, that I avoid:
connections which it would be a good project to explore. But not in one paper, or even in one
campaign!

5

those that are compatible with being unaccompanied, i.e. being the only contingent
object in the universe (for short: being lonely). Lewis objected that loneliness is it-
self obviously extrinsic. He also argued that there was little hope of amending Kim’s
analysis. In particular, you might suggest that to be extrinsic, a property must either
imply accompaniment or imply loneliness: so Lewis dubs these disjuncts ‘positive ex-
trinsic’ and ‘negative extrinsic’ respectively. But Lewis points out that by disjoining
and conjoining properties, we can ﬁnd countless extrinsic properties that are neither
positive extrinsic nor negative extrinsic; (though ‘almost any extrinsic property that a
sensible person would ever mention is positive extrinsic’ (1983, p. 115)).

This critique of Kim served as a springboard: both for Lewis’ own preferred anal-
ysis, using a primitive notion of naturalness which did other important work in his
metaphysics (Lewis 1983a); and for other, metaphysically less committed, analyses,
developed by Lewis and others (e.g. Langton and Lewis 1998, Lewis 2001).

But I will not need to pursue these details. As I said, most of my campaign can
make do with the notion of positive extrinsicality, i.e.
implying accompaniment, and
its negation. That is, I can mostly take pointillisme to advocate properties that are
intrinsic in the weak sense of not positively extrinsic. So this makes my campaign’s
claims, i.e. my denial of pointillisme, logically stronger; and so I hope more interest-
ing. Anyway, my campaign makes some novel proposals about positive extrinsicality:
in this paper, I distinguish temporal and spatial (positive) extrinsicality; and in the
companion paper against pointillisme in mechanics, I propose degrees of (positive)
extrinsicality.

2.1.2 Distinction from three mathematical distinctions

Both the murky intrinsic-extrinsic distinction, and the clearer distinction between
positive extrinsics and the rest, are diﬀerent distinctions from three that are made
within mathematics and physics, especially in those parts relevant to us: viz. pure
and applied diﬀerential geometry. The ﬁrst of these distinctions goes by the name
‘intrinsic’/‘extrinsic’; the second is called ‘scalar’/‘non-scalar’, and the third is called
‘local’/‘non-local’. They are as follows.

(i): The use of ‘intrinsic’ in diﬀerential geometry is a use which is common across all
of mathematics: a feature is intrinsic to a mathematical object (structure) if it is deter-
mined (deﬁned) by just the object as given, without appeal to anything extraneous—in
particular a choice of a coordinate system, or of a basis of some vector space, or of
an embedding of the object into another. For example, we thus say that the intrinsic
geometry of a cylinder is ﬂat; it is only as embedded in IR3 that it is curved.

(ii): Diﬀerential geometry classiﬁes quantities according to how they transform
between coordinate systems: the simplest case being scalars which have the same value
in all coordinate systems.
(Nevermind the details of how the other cases—vectors,
tensors, connections, spinors etc.—transform.)

(iii): Diﬀerential geometry uses ‘local’ (as vs.

‘global’) in various ways. But the

6

central use is that a mathematical object (structure) is local if it is associated with
a point by being determined (deﬁned) by the mathematical structures deﬁned on any
neighbourhood, no matter how small, of the point.
In this way, the instantaneous
velocity of a point-particle at a spacetime point, and all the higher derivatives of its
velocity, are local since their existence and values are determined by the particle’s
trajectory in an arbitrarily small neighbourhood of the point. Similarly, an equation
is called ‘local’ if it involves only local quantities. In particular, an equation of motion
is called ‘local in time’ if it describes the evolution of the state of the system at time t
without appealing to any facts that are a ﬁnite (though maybe very small) time-interval
to the past or future of t.

I will not spell out seriatim some examples showing that the two philosophical
distinctions are diﬀerent from the three mathematical ones. Given some lessons in
diﬀerential geometry (not least learning to distinguish (i) to (iii) themselves!), providing
such examples is straightforward work. Suﬃce it to make three comments, of increasing
relevance for this paper.

(1): It would be a good project to explore the detailed relations between these
distinctions. In particular, the mathematical distinction (i) invites comparison with
Vallentyne’s (1997) proposal about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction. Besides, there are
yet other distinctions to explore and compare: for example, Earman (1987) catalogues
some dozen senses of ‘locality’.

But in this paper and its companion, two of the various diﬀerences amongst these

distinctions are especially relevant.

(2): The ﬁrst is the diﬀerence between mathematical locality, (iii) above, and philo-
sophical intrinsicality. The diﬀerence is clear for the case of instantaneous velocity. This
is the main topic of my (2006); but the idea is that velocity has implications about the
object at other times, for example that it persists for some time. So most philosophers
say that instantaneous velocity is an extrinsic property. I agree. But emphasising its
extrinsicness tends to make one ignore the fact that it is mathematically local, i.e. de-
termined by the object’s trajectory in an arbitrarily small time-interval. And in pure
and applied diﬀerential geometry, it would be hard to over-estimate the importance
of—and practitioners’ preference for!—such local quantities and local equations involv-
ing them. (It is this locality that prompts me to speak of instantaneous velocity (and
other local quantities) as ‘hardly extrinsic’.)

(3): In this paper, we will also note the diﬀerence between being a mathematical
scalar, (ii) above, and being philosophically intrinsic. Thus philosophers tend to think
that any scalar quantity represents an intrinsic property of the points on which it is
deﬁned; (so that the pointilliste has only to worry about whether vectors, tensors etc.
can represent intrinsic properties). But as we shall see in Section 4.4.1, that is wrong.
For the scalar curvature R at a point p is surely extrinsic in the philosophical sense,
since it gives information about the geometry of neighbourhoods of p. (R is also local
and mathematically intrinsic; i.e. on the “intrinsic side” of all three mathematical
distinctions, (i)-(iii).)

7

2.2 Classical mechanics is not pointilliste, and can be perdu-

rantist

2.2.1 Two versions of pointillisme

To state my campaign’s main claims, it is convenient to ﬁrst distinguish a weaker and
a stronger version of pointillisme, understood as a metaphysical dosctrine. They diﬀer,
in eﬀect, by taking ‘point’ in pointillisme to mean, respectively, spatial, or spacetime,
point.

Taking ‘point’ to mean ‘spatial point’, I shall take pointillisme to be, roughly, the
doctrine that the instantaneous state of the world is fully described by all the intrinsic
properties, at that time, of all spatial points and-or point-sized bits of matter.

As I said in Section 2.1, my campaign can mostly take ‘intrinsic’ to mean ‘lacking
implications about some wholly distinct contingent object’; in other words, to mean
the negation of Lewis’ ‘positive extrinsic’ (i.e. his ‘implying accompaniment’). But for
this version of pointillisme, I will take ‘intrinsic’ to mean ‘spatially intrinsic’. That is,
attributing such a property to an object carries no implications about spatially distant
objects; but it can carry implications about objects at other times. (Such objects might
be other temporal parts of the given object.) So I shall call this version, ‘pointillisme
as regards space’.

On the other hand: taking ‘point’ to mean ‘spacetime point’, I shall take pointillisme
to be, roughly, the doctrine that the history of the world is fully described by all
the intrinsic properties of all the spacetime points and-or all the intrinsic properties
at all the various times of point-sized bits of matter (either point-particles, or in a
continuum). And here I take ‘intrinsic’ to mean just the negation of Lewis’ ‘positive
extrinsic’. That is, it means ‘both spatially and temporally intrinsic’: attributing such
a property carries no implications about objects at other places, or at other times. I
shall call this stronger version, ‘pointillisme as regards spacetime’.

So to sum up: pointillisme as regards space vetoes spatial extrinsicality; but pointil-

lisme as regards spacetime also vetoes temporal extrinsicality.

On either reading of pointillisme, it is of course a delicate matter to relate such
metaphysical doctrines, or the endurance-perdurance debate, to the content of speciﬁc
physical theories. Even apart from Section 2.1’s questions of philosophical method,
one naturally asks, for example, how philosophers’ idea of intrinsic property relates to
the idea of a physical quantity. For the most part, I shall state my verdicts about such
questions case by case. But one main tactic for relating the metaphysics to the physics
will be to formulate pointillisme as a doctrine relativized to (i.e. as a property of)
a given physical theory (from Section 2.3 onwards). Anyway, I can already state my
main claims, in terms of these two versions of pointillisme. More precisely, I will state
them as denials of two claims that are, I think, common in contemporary metaphysics
of nature.

8

2.2.2 Two common claims

Though I have not made a survey of analytic metaphysicians, I think many of them
hold two theses, which I will dub (FPo) (for ‘For Pointillisme’) and (APe) (for ‘Against
perdurantism’); as follows.

(FPo): Classical physics—or more speciﬁcally, classical mechanics—supports pointil-
lisme: at least as regards space, though perhaps not as regards spacetime. There are
two points here:—

(a): Classical physics is free of various kinds of “holism”, and thereby anti-
pointillisme, that are suggested by quantum theory. Or at least: classical mechanics
is free. (With the weaker claim, one could allow, and so set aside, some apparently
anti-pointilliste features of advanced classical physics, e.g. anholonomies in electromag-
netism and the non-localizability of gravitational energy in general relativity: features
rich in philosophical suggestions (Batterman 2003, Belot 1998, Hoefer 2000)—but not
for this paper!)

(b): The concession, ‘perhaps not as regards spacetime’, arises from the endurance-

perdurance debate. For it seems that pointillisme as regards spacetime must construe
persistence as perdurance; (while pointillisme as regards space could construe it as
endurance). And a well-known argument, often called ‘the rotating discs argument’,
suggests that perdurance clashes with facts about the rotation of a continuum (i.e. a
continuous body) in classical mechanics. So the argument suggests that classical me-
chanics must be understood as “endurantist”. Besides, whether or not one endorses the
argument, in classical mechanics the persistence of objects surely can be understood
as endurance—which conﬂicts with pointillisme as regards spacetime.

(The considerations under (a) and (b) are usually taken as applying equally well to
non-relativistic and relativistic classical mechanics: an assumption I largely endorse.)

I also think that many metaphysicians would go further and hold that:
(APe): Classical mechanics does indeed exclude pointillisme as regards spacetime:
their reason being that this pointillisme requires perdurance and that they endorse the
rotating discs argument. So they hold that in classical mechanics the persistence of
objects must be understood as endurance, and that this forbids pointillisme as regards
spacetime.

2.2.3 My contrary claims

I can now state the main position of my wider campaign. Namely, I deny both claims,
(FPo) and (APe), of Section 2.2.2. I argue for two contrary claims, (APo) (for ‘Against
Pointillisme) and (FPe) (for ‘For perdurantism’), as follows.

(APo): Classical mechanics does not support pointillisme.
By this I do not mean just that:

(a) it excludes pointillisme as regards spacetime.

Nor do I just mean:

9

(b) it allows one to construe the persistence of objects as endurance.

(But I agree with both (a) and (b).) Rather, I also claim: classical mechanics excludes
pointillisme as regards space. That is: it needs to attribute spatially extrinsic properties
to spatial points, and-or point-sized bits of matter. (But this will not be analogous to
the kinds of “holism” suggested by quantum theory.)

(FPe): Though (as agreed in (APo)) classical mechanics excludes pointillisme as re-
gards spacetime (indeed, also: as regards space): classical mechanics is compatible with
perdurance. That is: despite the rotating discs argument, one can be a “perdurantist”
about the persistence of objects in classical mechanics. The reason is that once we
reject pointillisme, perdurance does not need persistence to supervene on temporally
intrinsic facts. In fact, perdurantism can be defended by swallowing just a small dose
of temporal extrinsicality.

So to sum up my wider campaign, I claim that:—
(APo): Classical mechanics denies pointillisme, as regards space as well as space-
time. For it needs to use spatially extrinsic properties of spatial points and-or point-
sized bits of matter, more than is commonly believed.

(FPe): Classical mechanics permits perdurantism. It does not require temporally
extrinsic properties (of matter, or objects), in the sense of requiring persistence to
be endurance: as is commonly believed. A mild dose of temporal extrinsicality can
reconcile classical mechanics with perdurance.

To put the point in the philosophy of mind’s terminology of ‘wide’ and ‘narrow’
states, meaning (roughly) extrinsic and intrinsic states, respectively: I maintain that
classical mechanics:

(APo): needs to use states that are spatially wide, more than is commonly believed;

and

(FPe): does not require a speciﬁc strong form of temporal width, viz. endurance.
With a small dose of temporal extrinsicality, it can make do with temporally quite
narrow states—and can construe persistence as perdurance.

2.3

In more detail ...

So much by way of an opening statement. I will now spell out my main claims in a bit
more detail: ﬁrst (APo), and then, more brieﬂy, (FPe).

2.3.A Four violations of pointillisme I will begin by stating pointillisme as a
trio of claims that apply to any physical theory; and making two comments. Then I
list four ways in which (chrono)-geometry and classical mechanics violate pointillisme:
three will form the main topics of this paper and its companion.

The trio of claims is as follows:
(a): the fundamental quantities of the physical theory in question are to be deﬁned

at points of space or of spacetime;

10

(b): these quantities represent intrinsic properties of such points;
(c): models of the theory—i.e. in physicists’ jargon, solutions of its equations, and
in metaphysicians’ jargon, possible worlds according to the theory—are fully deﬁned
by a speciﬁcation of the quantities’ values at all such points.

So, putting (a)-(c) together: the idea of pointillisme is that the theory’s models
(or solutions or worlds) are something like conjunctions or mereological fusions of
“ultralocal facts”, i.e. facts at points.

Two comments. First: the disjunction in (a), ‘at points of space or of spacetime’,
corresponds to Section 2.2’s distinction between pointillisme as regards space, and as
regards spacetime. Nevermind that it does not imply the convention I adopted in Sec-
tion 2.2, that pointillisme as regards spacetime is a stronger doctrine: since it vetoes
temporally extrinsic properties, as well as spatially extrinsic ones. The context will
always make it clear whether I mean space or spacetime (or both); and whether I mean
spatially or temporally extrinsic (or both).

Second: Though I have not made a systematic survey, there is no doubt that pointil-
lisme, especially its claims (a) and (b), is prominent in contemporary metaphysics of
nature, especially of neo-Humean stripe. The prime example is David Lewis’ metaphys-
ical system, which is so impressive in its scope and detail. One of his main metaphysical
theses, called ‘Humean supervenience’, is a version of pointillisme: I will return to it
in Section 3.2.

When we apply (a)-(c) to classical mechanics, there are, I believe, four main ways in
which pointillisme fails: or, more kindly expressed, four concessions which pointillisme
needs to make. The ﬁrst three violations (concessions) occur in the classical mechanics
both of point-particles and of continua; the fourth is speciﬁc to continua. And the ﬁrst
two are addressed in this paper; the third is discussed in the companion paper (2006).

(1): The ﬁrst violation is obvious and minor. Whether matter is conceived as point-
particles or as continua, classical mechanics uses a binary relation of occupation, ‘...
occupies ...’, between bits of matter and spatial or spacetime points (or, for extended
parts of a continuum: spatial or spacetime regions). And this binary relation presum-
ably brings with it extrinsic properties of its relata: it seems an extrinsic property of a
point-particle (or a continuum, i.e. a continuous body) that it occupy a certain spatial
or spacetime point or region; and conversely.

Agreed, there is more to be said about this claim (as always in philosophy!): both
about (a) the connections between the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction among properties
and the classiﬁcation of relations, and (b) how the individuation of spatial or spacetime
points or regions might depend on matter (the “relational conception” of space or
spacetime). I will discuss (a) and (b), albeit brieﬂy in Sections 3.3. But anyway, I will
there endorse the claim. That is: the concession will remain in force: the pointilliste
about classical mechanics should accept this binary relation of occupation, and the
modicum of extrinsicality it involves.

(2): Classical mechanics (like other physical theories) postulates structure for space
and-or spacetime (geometry or chrono-geometry); and this involves a complex network

11

of geometric relations between, and so extrinsic properties of, points. This concession
is of course more striking as regards space than time: three-dimensional Euclidean
geometry involves more structure than does the real line. This will be the main topic
of this paper.

(3): Mechanics needs of course to refer to the instantaneous velocity or momentum
of a body; and this is temporally extrinsic to the instant in question, since for example
(But it is also local in the sense of
it implies the body’s existence at other times.
(iii), Section 2.1.2.) So this second violation imposes temporal, rather than spatial,
extrinsicality; i.e. implications about other times, rather than other places.

This is the main topic of Butterﬁeld (2006). But I should stress here that this third
violation is mitigated for point-particles, as against continua. For a pointilliste can
maintain that the persistence of point-particles supervenes on facts that, apart from
the other violations (i.e. about ‘occupies’ and (chrono)-geometry), are pointillistically
acceptable: viz. temporally intrinsic facts about which spacetime points are occupied
by matter. In ﬁgurative terms: the void between distinct point-particles allows one
to construe their persistence in terms of tracing the curves in spacetime connecting
points that are occupied by matter. I develop this theme in my (2005). On the other
hand: for a continuous body, the persistence of spatial parts (whether extensionless or
extended) does not supervene on such temporally intrinsic facts. This is the core idea
of the rotating discs argument, mentioned in Section 2.2.2.

To sum up: the rotating discs argument means that pointillisme ﬁts better with
point-particles than with continua. To put the issue in terms of Section 2.2’s two
forms of pointillisme: the strong form of pointillisme, pointillisme as regards spacetime,
fails for the classical mechanics of continua, even apart from the other concessions
mentioned.

(4): Finally, there is a fourth way that the classical mechanics of continua violates
i.e., a fourth concession that pointillisme needs to make. Unlike the
pointillisme:
rotating discs argument, this violation seems never to have been noticed in recent
analytic metaphysics; though the relevant physics goes back to Euler. Namely, the
classical mechanics of continua violates (the weaker doctrine of) pointillisme as regards
space, because it must be formulated in terms of spatially extended regions and their
properties and relations. But in this paper, I set this fourth violation aside entirely;
my (2006a) gives details.

So to sum up these four violations, I claim (APo): classical mechanics violates
pointillisme. This is so even for the weaker doctrine, pointillisme as regards space. And
it is especially so, for the classical mechanics of continua rather than point-particles.

2.3.B For perdurantism I turn to Section 2.2.3’s second claim, (FPe): that once
pointillisme is rejected, perdurantism does not need persistence to supervene on tem-
porally intrinsic facts, and can be defended for classical mechanics provided it swallows
a small dose of temporal extrinsicality.

About (FPe) I can be much briefer, since this paper will not need details. I will

12

it is the extrinsicality of the third violation of pointil-
just identify this small dose:
lisme above—in particular, the presupposition of persistence by the notion of a body’s
instantaneous velocity. Thanks to the rotating discs argument, ‘body’ here means es-
pecially ‘point-sized bit of matter in a continuum’; since for point-particles we can
construe persistence as perdurance without having to take this dose. Elsewhere (2004,
2004a, 2006) I argue that for a “naturalist” perdurantist, this dose is small enough to
swallow.

3 Can properties represented by vectors be intrin-

sic to a point?

3.1 Prospectus

I turn to the geometrical structure of space, and-or the chrono-geometrical structure
of spacetime. I will argue that this structure involves extrinsic properties, especially
spatially extrinsic properties. I will undertake three speciﬁc tasks, in Sections 3.2, 3.3,
4 respectively.

In Section 3.2, I present Lewis’ version of pointillisme. Though this version is in
some ways logically stronger than I need, it is important to present it. Not only has it
been a focus of recent metaphysical discussion; it is also needed for Section 4.

In Sections 3.3 and 4, I argue in detail that pointillisme needs to be qualiﬁed
I think the need for this
to accommodate the structure of space and-or spacetime.
qualiﬁcation is uncontentious; in particular, it is agreed by Lewis. But how exactly to
state the qualiﬁcation is a matter that is both important and unresolved.

It is important for three reasons. First, all physical theories of course appeal to
space (and-or spacetime). Second, they all represent the properties that encode the
structure of space or spacetime, with mathematical entities such as vectors, tensors,
connections etc. So the question arises: can properties that are so represented be
intrinsic to a point? The third reason is taken up in the companion paper (2006): it is
that physical theories also represent the other properties they mention, i.e. properties
of matter such as velocity, momentum etc., by such mathematical entities as vectors,
tensors, connections etc.

So the question—can properties represented by vectors, tensors etc. be intrinsic to
a point?—is at the centre of this paper (and its companion). First, in Section 3.3, I will
lead up to this question by discussing, in a broadly metaphysical way, how to represent
the structure of space or spacetime. (I will concentrate on the notion of length, and so
on space rather than spacetime; but this discussion carries over intact to the case of
spacetime.) Once the question is posed, Section 4 addresses it in detail, using as a foil
Bricker’s (1993).

As I said in Section 1, Bricker’s paper illustrates how strongly some contemporary

13

metaphysicians are attracted by pointillisme. For recognizing that they must accept
vectorial properties in physical theories, and that these seem not to be intrinsic to
points, they propose to save pointillisme by advocating a heterodox construal of the
property. Thus in Section 4, Bricker will construe the metric tensor of diﬀerential
geometry in terms of non-standard analysis. (And in the companion paper, Tooley
and others will construe instantaneous velocity as intrinsic.) My own view will of
course be that there is no need for such heterodoxy: instead, we can and should reject
pointillisme.

My discussion will be simpliﬁed by a restriction.

I will consider only properties
represented by vectors and tensors, which I will for short call vectorial properties and
tensorial properties: not those represented by other mathematical entities such as
connections. This restriction will be natural, in that:

(i) vectors and tensors are about the simplest of the various mathematical entities
that physical theories use to represent properties and relations—so they are the ﬁrst
case to consider;

(ii) the restriction is common in the literature; in fact most of the authors I discuss

(here and in the companion paper) consider only vectorial properties.

3.2 Humean supervenience

I will assume familiarity with the main ideas of Lewis’ metaphysical system, above all
his notions of possible world and natural property. Central to this system is Lewis’
version of pointillisme, which he says (1994, p. 494) is inspired by classical physics. He
calls this doctrine ‘Humean supervenience’. It is stronger than pointillisme as deﬁned
in Section 2.3, in that it is not relative to a theory. Roughly, it is relative to a possible
world; (of course a metaphysician like Lewis who accepts the idea of a law of nature can
link relativizations to a theory and to a possible world using the idea of the “complete”
theory of a world, say as an axiomatization of all its laws of nature). And Lewis claims
that it holds at the actual world.

The idea of Humean supervenience is that all truths supervene on truths about
matters of local particular fact: where ‘matters of local particular fact’ is to be under-
stood in terms of Lewis’ metaphysics of natural properties, with the properties having
spacetime points, or perhaps point-sized bits of matter, as instances. Thus he writes
that Humean supervenience

. . . says that in a world like ours, the fundamental relations are exactly
the spatiotemporal relations: distance relations, both spacelike and time-
like, and perhaps also occupancy relations between point-sized things and
spacetime points. And it says that in a world like ours, the fundamen-
tal properties are local qualities: perfectly natural intrinsic properties of
points, or of point-sized occupants of points. Therefore it says that all else
supervenes on the spatiotemporal arrangement of local qualities throughout

14

all of history, past and present and future. (1994, pp. 225-226.)6

Humean supervenience, so deﬁned, is not widely believed—few philosophers sign
up to all the notions deployed in its statement. But it has been a natural focus of
metaphysicians’ attention in the last twenty years, not least because Lewis has been
the pre-eminent neo-Humean. In the literature, we can distinguish three broad groups
of topics:

(i) Issues about whether to analyse law, causation, chance etc., and “higher-level”
concepts about mind and language, in terms of the notions of Lewis’ framework. Lewis
(1986, p. xi-xiv) sketches how his work on all these topics provides a “battle-plan”: i.e.
roughly, a sequence of supervenience claims for these concepts. More generally, much
literature of neo-Humean stripe is concerned with how truths using familiar central
concepts of common-sense knowledge and belief—concepts such as law, causation, the
persistence of objects and mental and semantic concepts, such as belief and reference—
might supervene on a basis acceptable to Humeans, though perhaps not exactly the
basis proposed by Lewis. (For example:
for laws, cf. Earman and Roberts (2006).)
And some of these truths pose a challenge in that they seem not to thus supervene; cf.
(iii) below.

(ii) General metaphysical issues about the notions of Lewis’ framework, in particular
possible worlds and natural properties, and-or about related notions. For example, one
well-known issue is: can possible worlds and natural properties be construed less “re-
alistically” than Lewis proposes (e.g. Taylor 1993), and yet do the philosophical work
they are meant to do? More relevant to us will be Lewis’ view of the intrinsic-extrinsic
distinction, viz. that it can be analysed in terms of perfectly natural properties; (details
in Section 4.2). But as discussed in Sections 2.1.1 and 2.2.1, I can for the most part
use only a much clearer distinction, viz. between the positive extrinsic properties and
the rest, sub-divided in terms of temporal and spatial implications (or lack of them).
(iii) Direct threats to Humean supervenience. There are two main examples. First,
chance; which Lewis addresses in detail in (1986, pp. xiv-xvi, 121-131), and to his
greater satisfaction in (1994). Second, persistence. For Lewis as a Humean wants
to be perdurantist, as well as pointilliste in the sense of Humean supervenience: this
means that he faces the rotating discs argument.

In this paper, I can set aside all of (i) and (iii), and all of (ii) except for the

intrinsic-extrinsic distinction.

3.3 Accommodating space and spacetime

3.3.1 An agreed concession

As I mentioned, pointillisme’s need to accommodate the structure of space and-or
In both the quotations
spacetime is agreed by all parties:

in particular, by Lewis.

6Cf. also his (1986, pp. ix-x).

15

above, Lewis includes relations of spatiotemporal distance (spacelike and timelike) in
the supervenience basis. So his Humean supervenience is not so pointilliste, at least as
regards the structure of space and/or spacetime, as it might at ﬁrst seem.

But no doubt even the most ardent pointilliste will ﬁnd the inclusion sensible. That
is: no one will hold that the structure of space and/or spacetime, in particular spatial
and/or spatiotemporal metrical relations, is to supervene on intrinsic properties of
points.7

The natural thing to say is, instead, that the points and these metrical relations
(and maybe also some spatiotemporal but non-metrical relations) form collectively a
background, or canvas, on which other physical quantities taking various values get
“painted”. And it is to these latter that pointillisme’s doctrines are to apply.

But there is no consensus (indeed, not much discussion) about how precisely to state
the concession. More’s the pity, since apart from the concession’s own importance,
it leads to the more general question (taken up in the following Subsections) how
pointillisme can accommodate vectorial and tensorial properties.

I begin with a preliminary issue. The concession obviously relates to the debate
between relationist and substantivalist views of space and spacetime; and though I will
not pursue this debate, I should register that this concession is not meant to prejudge
it. There are two points here.

(i): Though I spoke like a substantivalist, about a canvas of points, with various
metrical and non-metrical relations between them, it is safe to assume that a relation-
ist would appeal to similar relations holding between items of their preferred ontology,
i.e. bodies. (I set aside whether Leibniz’s monads with only their intrinsic properties
might be enough to subvene all spatial and spatiotemporal facts!)

(ii): Similarly, my talk of a canvas of points, with metrical and non-metrical rela-
tions between them, was not meant to deny that the metric (or the other relations)
could be dynamical, i.e. inﬂuenced by matter, in the way they are in general relativity.

So our question is what exactly metrical (and other geometrical) structures require.
As physical geometry has developed in the last two hundred years, these requirements
have not only become subtler but have also become bound up with other properties
and relations, especially of matter, in ways which threaten pointillisme. This issue
will extend to Section 4. But let us start by raising the issues involved in as simple a
context as possible: the length of a straight line in elementary geometry.

7Here I recall this paper’s restriction to classical mechanics. So I of course set aside speculations in
quantum gravity that classical spacetime structure emerges somehow from a “quantum pre-geometry”:
speculations which, I agree, might have this structure emerge from (or even supervene on) intrinsic
properties of some point-like objects. But I doubt it: most schemes for quantum pre-geometry are
thoroughly “relational” rather than pointilliste. For surveys of such speculations, cf. e.g. Monk
(1997), Butterﬁeld and Isham (1999, Sections 1-4; 2001, Section 5); for a brief discussion in relation
to Lewis’ Humean supervenience, cf. Oppy (2000, p. 88, 91-94).

16

3.3.2 The length of a line

The length of a line is the topic of a venerable paradox. The length of a straight line
should surely be the sum of the lengths of a decomposition, i.e. an exhaustive set
of mutually non-overlapping parts; and it seems legitimate to take as these parts the
line’s constituent points; but the length of each point is zero, and the sum of all these
zeroes is presumably (though a continuously large sum) zero—what else could it be?
So the length of the line is zero!

I stated this paradox in its most familiar form, as about summing lengths. But
of course it can also be stated in philosophical terms, as about supervenience: the
length of a line surely does not supervene on the lengths of its points, on pain of
being zero. That is no doubt why, as discussed in Section 3.3.1, no pointilliste holds
that lengths (or other metrical properties of lines, or indeed metrical relations between
points) supervene on intrinsic properties of points.8

This paradox is of course one of many that eventually prompted the development
of measure theory. And as noted in (2i) and (c) of Section 1, measure theory invites
philosophical scrutiny because (i) it has some well-nigh paradoxical results of its own,
like the Banach-Tarski paradox, and (ii) it is connected to mereology. But I shall not
need details about these topics. I only need to present:

(a): a philosophical reply to this paradox; though it does not block the paradox, it

introduces an important metaphysical trichotomy among relations;

(b): the main idea of the technical measure-theoretic reply to this paradox.

3.3.2.A The philosophical reply The philosophical reply is just that length is a
property of the line as a whole, where ‘line as a whole’ can be taken to mean either
the set, or the mereological fusion, of its points (or of its extended parts). That is,
the length does not supervene on the properties of the points (or other parts). This
is surely true, so far as it goes. But it is not enough to block the paradox, since it
does not pinpoint what is wrong with the premise that the length of a straight line is
the sum of the lengths of an exhaustive set of mutually non-overlapping parts. (The
technical reply will do this.)

However, this reply prompts a trichotomy among relations corresponding to the
intrinsic-extrinsic dichotomy among properties: a trichotomy that will be useful in
what follows. Lewis states the trichotomy clearly (1983a, p. 26 fn. 16; 1986a, p. 62);
and I shall adopt his proposed terminology (which has become widespread). Though he
explains it in terms of his preferred understanding of intrinsic and extrinsic properties
(viz. deﬁned in terms of his natural properties), the trichotomy can be explained in the
very same words, using other understandings of intrinsic and extrinsic. In particular,
8There is of course a similar failure of supervenience for an extensive quantity such as mass, applied
to a continuous body. For the point-sized parts of such a body have zero mass, so that the mass of the
body is not the (uncountable) sum of the masses of those parts. Hawthorne notes this, while assessing
how Lewis’ metaphysics treats quantities (2006); and we will return to it in Section 4.6.

17

it can be thus explained using Section 2.1.1’s suggested understanding of ‘extrinsic’ as
‘positive extrinsic’ and ‘intrinsic’ as ‘not positive extrinsic’; (or using Lewis’ “second
favourite” analysis developed by Langton and him (1998, p. 129)). The trichotomy
also uses the idea of the mereological fusion, or composite, of objects: an idea I am
happy to accept, and for which there is a powerful argument (Lewis 1986a, pp. 212-213,
developed by Sider 2001, pp. 121-139).

(1) An internal relation is determined by the intrinsic properties of its relata. So
if xRy, and x′ matches x in all intrinsic properties, and y′ matches y in all intrinsic
properties, then we must have x′Ry′. So any relation of similarity or diﬀerence in
intrinsic respects is internal; for example, if height is an intrinsic property, then ‘being
taller than’ is an internal relation.

(2) On the other hand, there are relations, notably relations of spatiotemporal dis-
tance, that are not internal, but do supervene on the intrinsic nature of the composite
(mereological fusion) of the relata. Thus suppose x, y are point-particles 1 metre apart.
Then it seems reasonable to say both of the following:—

(i): There could be point-particles x′, y′ that intrinsically match x and y respec-
tively, and that are 2 metres apart—so that distance is not internal. But on the other
hand:

(ii): Any object intrinsically matching the fusion or composite of x and y would

have two parts intrinsically matching x and y, 1 metre apart.

Accordingly, Lewis calls relations that supervene on the intrinsic nature of the
fusion of the relata, external; and he takes (ii) to show that spatiotemporal relations
are external.

(3) Finally, there are relations that do not supervene even on the intrinsic nature of
the composite of the relata; i.e. relations that are neither internal nor external. Lewis’
example is the relation having the same owner: x and y could intrinsically match x′ and
y′ respectively, and their composites might also match; and yet x and y might have the
same owner, while x′ and y′ do not. But more relevant to us than ownership, geometry
and mechanics provide many examples of such relations. The objects x, y, x′, y′ could
be solid bodies, again with each pair, x, x′ and y, y′, intrinsically matching, and the
composites x + y, x′ + y′ also matching—and yet the centre of mass of x and y might
be a certain distance from a body of some kind Z, while the centre of mass of x′ and
y′ is not.

3.3.2.B The technical reply The technical reply to the paradox of length comes
from measure theory. It blocks the paradox by denying the premise that the length of a
straight line is the sum of the lengths of any decomposition (exhaustive set of mutually
non-overlapping parts) of the line.
It upholds this only for certain decompositions.
The main idea is to consider only decompositions containing points and intervals, and
to accept the additivity of length for at most denumerably large sums. These ideas
give a rich theory which can be extended to cover area and volume, as well as length;
and which underpins the theory of integration.

18

But we do not need further details of measure theory. For us the point is that, even
in the elementary geometry of Euclidean space (IR, IR2 etc.), we cannot say all that
is true in terms just of intrinsic properties of points. For we need to assign lengths
to spatial intervals. And—to use Lewis’ terms—the length of an interval is surely
not an internal relation between the interval’s end-points, since any two points seem
to match in intrinsic properties. Besides, the length of an interval does not seem to
be an internal relation between all the interval’s uncountably many points, since: (i)
the points of any two intervals seem to match pairwise in intrinsic properties, and (ii)
additivity of length fails for an uncountable set.

intervals matching in their intrinsic properties are congruent; (cf.

On the other hand, it seems reasonable to say, as Lewis does, that:
(a): intervals are composites or fusions of their points; and
(b):
above).
If we say (a) and (b), then it follows that the length of a straight interval is an ex-
ternal relation among the interval’s points. (So far, this is a relation of uncountable
polyadicity: the next Subsection will ask whether the relation can be taken to be just
a dyadic relation between the interval’s two end-points.)

(2) (ii)

To sum up: to describe length, even the length of a straight interval in euclidean
geometry, pointillisme must concede that it needs to go beyond intrinsic properties of
points, and even relations that are internal in Lewis’ sense. But so far, it seems (cf.
(2)(ii) in Section 3.3.2.A, and (b) above) it can manage with what Lewis calls external
relations.9

3.3.3 Accommodating more geometry

The further development of geometry, including more general geometries than the
Euclidean line or plane, reinforces the point that we cannot say all that is true in
terms just of intrinsic properties of points. But as we shall see, it is doubtful that we
can manage with just Lewis’ category of external relations. That is, it is doubtful that
all pointillisme needs to do, in order to accommodate spatial and spacetime structure,
is to admit the network of external relations of spatial and spatiotemporal distance.

Talk of ‘spatial and spatiotemporal relations’ tends to suggest that space or space-
time is a metric space, in the usual mathematical sense that (given a unit of length)
there is a real-valued function on pairs of points: to any pair of points x, y is assigned
a distance d(x, y) ∈ IR. (So each real number determines a binary relation on points;
and for a relativistic spacetime, d need not be positive-deﬁnite.) But the development
9Incidentally, returning to the original paradox of length: the practice of measure theory seems

indiﬀerent between the following options (and surely metaphysicians can be as well):

a) to allow ab initio that each point has a length, viz. zero; and avoid paradox by denying uncount-

able additivity of length;

b) to ascribe length primarily only to sets of points in a certain well-behaved family of sets.

But the technical need for the family to have certain closure properties is likely to lead to singleton
sets of points being included—as in the usual choice of family, the Borel sets.

19

of geometry and physics has shown that this is much too limited a conception of spatial
(or spatiotemporal) structure. One needs to distinguish various subtly related levels of
structure: for example, geometers distinguish topological structure, diﬀerential struc-
ture, metrical structure, and many more. Besides, most of these kinds of structure
include deﬁnitions of irreducibly global features of the space concerned; for example, a
space can have the global topological feature of being simply connected, i.e. such that
all closed curves can be continuously deformed to a point.

But here I will focus only on “local” metrical structure.10 Even without developing
the formal details (which go back to Gauss and Riemann), we will be able to see that
geometry (and more generally physics) needs to attribute to points both vectorial and
tensorial properties—raising the question, pursued in the next Subsection, whether
pointillisme can accommodate such properties.

Gauss and Riemann proposed that we take as the primary notion, the length of
a curve between two points; (so since a pair of points is in general connected by
inﬁnitely many curves, any such pair is associated with inﬁnitely many lengths, not
just one). This proposal is adopted by modern spacetime theories, in particular by the
most successful such theory, general relativity. So an advocate of pointillisme (or some
similar doctrine of local supervenience, such as Humean supervenience) would do well
to formulate their doctrine so as to incorporate, or at least allow for, this proposal.

At ﬁrst sight, it seems that the pointilliste can manage just ﬁne. She only needs to
apply Lewis’ idea of external relations (or perhaps, some similar notion), not to the end-
points of a straight interval or to all the points of a straight interval, but to all the points
of an arbitrary curve. Thus she can take an arbitrary curve as the fusion of its points,
and the length of the curve as an external relation, albeit of uncountable polyadicity,
among the points: an external relation which determines an intrinsic property of the
fusion. I presume that Lewis, who was well aware of the Gauss-Riemann conception of
geometry, would have said this. That is, he would have taken ‘spatiotemporal distance
relations’ in his deﬁnition of Humean supervenience to allow for this conception—and
not to be committed to the idea of a metric space.11

Besides, the structure required to deﬁne the lengths of all curves is given “locally”
in a way that at ﬁrst sight seems congenial to a pointilliste. In particular, it seems that
the pointilliste does not need to postulate continuously many external relations, each
of uncountable polyadicity, one for each congruence-class of curves. For:

(i): measure theory can be extended to apply to this kind of geometry, so that the

length of a curve is the sum of the lengths of a countable decomposition of it;

(ii): similarly, calculus can be extended to apply to this kind of geometry, so that
the length of a curve is given by an integral along it—intuitively, an uncountable sum
10I put ‘local’ in scare-quotes, since I here intend a vaguer meaning than that of (iii) of Section
2.1.2. But in what follows, the meaning will always be clear from the context. Note also that though
I will discuss only space, all I say carries over intact to spacetime.

11But Lewis seems never to have pursued the question exactly what relations he should propose as
fundamental for modern geometry and topology; and we shall shortly see trouble for him, as for other
pointillistes.

20

of inﬁnitesimal contributions one for each inﬁnitesimal element of the curve.

These features, (i) and (ii), reﬂect the fact that the Gauss-Riemann conception
of metrical structure presupposes topological and diﬀerential structure: which make
sense, respectively, of the notions of continuous function, and diﬀerentiable function.

But there is a devil in the details. The details of how to deﬁne the length of a curve
require us to attribute vectors and tensors to a point. A bit more precisely: we need
to attribute:

(i) to any point on any curve, the tangent vector to the curve at that point; and so
(ii) to any point, the set of all such tangent vectors at it (which form a vector space,

called the tangent space);

(iii) to any point, a metric tensor which maps pairs of tangent vectors at the point
(More

to real numbers—generalizing the elementary scalar product of two vectors.
details about (i)-(iii) in the next Subsection.)

Thus the pointilliste has to face—already in geometry, even before considering
physics’ description of matter— the question announced in Section 3.1: can a property
represented by a vector or a tensor be intrinsic to a point?

4 Accommodating tangent vectors and the metric

tensor

4.1 Bricker and others

As I announced in Section 3.1, my main eﬀort in this Section will be to report and
criticise Bricker’s (1993) discussion of this question, for metrical properties. I choose
him for two reasons.

(i): His paper is an unusually thorough and perceptive attempt to relate vectors
and tensors, as they are treated in modern geometry, to the modern metaphysics of
properties. So it repays detailed scrutiny.

(ii): His paper illustrates the tendency that, as I said at the end of Section 3.1, I want
to reject: the tendency of some contemporary metaphysicians to reconcile pointillisme
with physical theories’ use of vectorial properties, which seem extrinsic to points, by
proposing some heterodox construal of the properties in question. Bricker proposes
that in order to understand space’s or spacetime’s metrical structure as intrinsic, we
should appeal to non-standard analysis. I will deny this heterodoxy: instead, we can
and should reject pointillisme.

But before going into the details of Bricker’s discussion, I should register that
other metaphysicians have also addressed our question; though (so far as I know) more
brieﬂy and with less attention to technicalities than Bricker. (Besides, they are not all
attracted by pointillisme, or by the above tendency.)

For example, Robinson maintains that the directionality of a vector forbids it from
representing an intrinsic property: ‘direction seems to me an inherently relational mat-

21

ter’ (1989, p. 408). And he would presumably say the same about tensorial properties.
(His paper is about the rotating discs argument; I discuss its proposals in 2006.) Robin-
son gives an argument for this, using Lewis’ notion of duplicates, i.e. objects that share
all their intrinsic properties. He also credits Lewis for the argument; so presumably
Lewis himself thought at the time (ca. 1988) that vectorial properties could not be
intrinsic. The argument combines two intuitions:

(a): It seems that a vectorial property could not be instantiated in a zero-dimensional
world consisting of a single point; though since arbitrarily close points deﬁne a direction,
there is of course no lower limit to the “size” of a world in which a point instantiates
a vectorial property.

(b): But it also seems that, since a point in an extended world that instantiates a
vectorial property is indeed a point, it could have a duplicate that existed on its own,
i.e. was the only object in its world.

Taken together, (a) and (b) imply that duplicate points might diﬀer in their vecto-

rial properties; so that any such property is not intrinsic.12

But for anyone who is attracted by pointillisme, and is aware of physical theories’
use of vectorial properties, this is a very uncomfortable conclusion. Lewis himself is
a case in point. Indeed, he seems to have come round to believing that vectors can
represent intrinsic properties of points, sometime between ca. 1988 and ca. 1993. For
in a discussion of Humean supervenience (1994, p. 474), he says he is inclined to think
that vectorial properties are, or at least can be, intrinsic: ‘any attempt to reconstrue
them as relational properties seems seriously artiﬁcial’. But, so far as I know, that is
all Lewis says by way of defending the idea; (though in his (1999) he used the idea to
try and reply to the rotating disc argument—unsuccessfully I maintain (2006)). In any
case, I now turn to Bricker’s extended struggle to avoid the uncomfortable conclusion.

4.2 Bricker’s three claims about metrical structure

4.2.1 Bricker’s metaphysical framework

Bricker’s (1993) overall aim is metaphysical understanding of spatial (or spatiotem-
poral) relations. He adopts a metaphysical framework very close to Lewis’—with of
course all due acknowledgement (1993, pp. 273-5). The ingredients we need are:—

(i) He speaks of possible worlds and perfectly natural properties and relations. He
applies mereology freely to points of space and spacetime; (in fact, substantivalism
about space and spacetime is widespread among analytic metaphysicians). And so he
12Other metaphysicians also maintain that vectorial properties are extrinsic to points. For example,
Black (2000, p.103) holds that vectorial properties can be intrinsic only for the special case of vectors
on a manifold with a ﬂat connection; i.e. roughly, a manifold in which there is a unique preferred way
to compare vectors located at diﬀerent points. (His discussion is briefer than Robinson’s; since the
topic is less relevant to his paper’s main aims, than it is to Robinson’s.) And Zimmerman (1998, p.
277-278) and Oppy (2000, pp. 79-82) are similarly inclined; though they also discuss sympathetically
the opposing view.

22

takes worlds and parts of worlds as possibilia.

(ii) He says that any two possibilia X, Y are duplicates iﬀ there is a one-to-one
correspondence between their parts that preserves all perfectly natural properties and
relations. He calls any such correspondence an (X, Y ) counterpart relation, and corre-
sponding parts are (X, Y )-counterparts of each other. (So in this Subsection, ‘coun-
terpart’ is tied to ‘duplicate’ and so will not have the usual Lewisian connotations of
allowing vagueness and extrinsicness.)

(iii) He says that a property is intrinsic iﬀ any two duplicates both have it or both

lack it. (Otherwise the property is extrinsic.) It follows that:

(a) the class of all possibilia is partitioned by the equivalence relation of being

duplicates; and

(b) an intrinsic property corresponds to a union of cells of this partition; and
(c) all perfectly natural properties are intrinsic.

He extends the notion of intrinsic to relations by saying that a relation is intrinsic
iﬀ it is either internal or external in the senses of Lewis (deﬁned in Section 3.3.2.A);
otherwise the relation is extrinsic.

(iv) He assumes (following Lewis 1986a, pp. 86-92) a principle of recombination
for spatial or spacetime points. This is a principle of modal plenitude, inspired by a
Humean denial of necessary connections between distinct existences: “anything can
follow anything”. Stated for spatial points, it holds: for any points p and q, perhaps
from spaces of diﬀerent worlds, there is a world whose space is a duplicate of the space
of p, except that it contains a duplicate of q where the duplicate of p would be (1993,
p. 290); and similarly for spacetime.

I do not endorse this framework. But in discussing Bricker, I will use it (and a
variant of it considered by him). Though it would be a good project to ascertain how
well Bricker’s arguments fare under a diﬀerent framework (in particular, under weaker
assumptions about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction), it is not a project for this paper.
Here it must suﬃce to note that if we used my distinction between positive extrinsics
and the rest, advocated in Section 2.1.1, the main points of my critique of Bricker
below, would carry over intact. But I shall not spell this out point by point, from now
on. I just note here that:

(a): Since my distinction takes ‘intrinsic’ to mean ‘not positively extrinsic’, it yields
more intrinsic properties than does Bricker’s (or Lewis’) framework; and so a logically
stronger notion of duplicatehood as sharing of all intrinsic properties.

(b): Bricker’s argument for the spacetime metric being extrinsic to points (Section
4.3) remains valid on my distinction’s construal of ‘extrinsic’ as ‘positive extrinsic’. For
Bricker’s argument implicitly appeals to positive extrinsicality.

(c): My anti-pointilliste reply to Bricker (Section 4.6) is unaﬀected by adopting my

distinction.

Bricker goes on to connect his framework with the Gauss-Riemann conception of
distance, as endorsed by general relativity. His discussion includes aspects (1993, pp.
275-286) which we can skip, in particular: (a) a comparison with two other conceptions
of distance (which he dubs the ‘naive’ and ‘intrinsic’ conceptions); and (b) a discussion

23

of how the principle of contact-action (denial of action-at-a-distance) bears on the
the Gauss-Riemann conception. Setting these aside, I read Bricker as connecting his
metaphysical framework with the Gauss-Riemann conception, as follows. He assumes
that:

(i) the perfectly natural properties and relations, that are instantiated at a possible
world that has laws of nature, ﬁgure in that world’s laws (however the notion of a law
of nature is to be analysed);

(ii) general relativity is a logically possible theory, giving the gravitational and

metrical laws of some possible worlds;

(iii) general relativity can be “formulated locally”; which is taken to imply, as

regards metrical structure, formulated in terms of local metrical relations.

Taking these assumptions together, he concludes that the property of having such-
and-such a local metric tensor is a perfectly natural property, and is instantiated at
points in general relativistic worlds.

So far, Bricker is in a position like the one we articulated at the end of Section 3.3,
in which the pointilliste seemed well able to manage local metrical structure. Bricker
also notes (as we did) that since even topology brings in irreducibly global properties
of space like being simply connected, there can be no sweeping supervenience of the
global on the local. So he formulates a doctrine he calls Einsteinian supervenience, on
analogy with Lewis’ Humean supervenience: there is ‘a manifold of spacetime points
... and a distribution of perfectly natural local properties (including local metrical
properties) over those points; all else supervenes on that’ (1993, p. 288).

4.2.2 Bricker’s three claims

Bricker then notices what I called ‘the devil in the details’, i.e. the fact that local met-
rical structure attributes vectorial and tensorial properties to points; and he goes on to
address the question whether such properties are intrinsic, in terms of his metaphysical
framework (1993, pp. 288f.). He argues for the following three claims (in order, with
my added mnemonic labels).

(MetrExtr): The metric tensor, as standardly conceived in diﬀerential geometry,

represents an extrinsic property of a point.

(VetoExtr): The obvious (and anti-pointilliste) response to the conﬂict between this
and the metric being perfectly natural—viz. that some but not all perfectly natural
properties are intrinsic—does not work. For, Bricker argues, it clashes with the Humean
principle of recombination for spacetime points. That is, Bricker rejects this response
as engendering necessary connections between distinct existences, viz. a point and its
surrounding space.

So Bricker claims we do better to revise our conception of the metric tensor, as

follows.

(Heterodox): We should take the metric to represent an intrinsic property of an
inﬁnitesimal neighbourhood of a point. Bricker cites Robinson’s non-standard analysis

24

as justifying taking such neighbourhoods as genuine mathematical objects, rather than
as a facon de parler for calculus’ standard notion of limit as “∀∃∀” (e.g.
for a real
sequence {an}: ∀ ε > 0 ∃N ∀m, n > N | am − an |< ε).

So Bricker’s overall conclusion is radical: that in order to save pointillisme, we
should revise the foundations of diﬀerential geometry. In the next three Subsections, I
will report his arguments for (MetrExtr) to (Heterodox). Then in the last Subsection
(Section 4.6), I will deny his conclusion. Since I hold no brief for pointillisme, I see no
reason to pay his price of revising the foundations of diﬀerential geometry.

4.3 The standard metric is extrinsic

Bricker’s argument for (MetrExtr)—the metric tensor, as standardly conceived, rep-
resents an extrinsic property of a point—is not absolutely precise. But it uses more
technicalities about local metrical structure than I have introduced so far, in particular
diﬀerential geometry’s idea that the tangent vectors at a point be taken to be direc-
tional derivative operators. So I need to review this; I shall give rather more detail
than Bricker does.

(i): First, the set of spatial or spacetime points is assumed to form a manifold
M. The deﬁnition of ‘manifold’ is elaborate, and was only given in its modern formal
guise in the 1930s—and fortunately I can skip it! It suﬃces to say that the deﬁnition
gives sense to various crucial ideas such as the dimension of a manifold, its boundary
(if any), its global topological structure (e.g. being simply connected), the idea of a
smooth scalar function i.e. a smooth real-valued function deﬁned on a subset of the
manifold—and most important for us, the idea of a smooth curve in the manifold,
which is taken as a map q from an interval of real numbers I ⊂ IR to M.
(Here
‘smooth’ refers to diﬀerentiability a speciﬁed number of times.) As I said in Section
3.3, the pointilliste will be hard pressed to account for this manifold structure: but I
will not labour this point.

(ii): Any curve q thus includes in its deﬁnition its real-number parameter, λ say. So,
understanding the tangent vector to the curve at the point q(t), t ∈ I, in an intuitive
the tangent vector speciﬁes a directional derivative of any scalar function f
way:
deﬁned on a neighbourhood, N say, of the point q(t), f : N ⊂ M → IR. (For the
direction of the curve at q(t), together with the “rate at which λ ticks away”, deﬁnes
an “instantaneous rate of change” of f .)

(iii) It is convenient to identify the tangent vector to the curve q at the point q(t)
with the directional derivative operator acting on the set, R say, of all scalar functions
deﬁned on some neighbourhood of the point q(t):

dλ |q(t): f ∈ R 7→ df

dλ |q(t)∈ IR.

Why is it convenient? In short: because the directional derivative operators
behave just like tangent vectors. For example, for an n-dimensional manifold M, the
directional derivative operators at any point p ∈ M form an n-dimensional vector
space, just as one would want the tangent vectors to do: think of the 2-dimensional
tangent plane at a point p on the surface of a sphere. This vector space is called the

d

25

tangent space at p, Tp.

(Other equivalent identiﬁcations are also used: some presentations identify a
tangent vector at p ∈ M with an equivalence class of curves through p—intuitively,
curves that are all tangent to each other at p and with parameters “ticking” at the
same rate.)

(iv): To deﬁne the length of a curve requires still further structure: structure which
is not ﬁxed by the postulation of a manifold, with all its tangent vectors V ∈ Tp at
each point p. Namely, it requires a metric tensor g, which is an assignment to each
point in p ∈ M of a mapping from pairs of vectors hU, V i with U, V ∈ Tp to IR: a
mapping of a certain sort that generalizes the elementary scalar product of vectors. So
g : hU, V i 7→ g(hU, V i) ∈ IR. This metric tensor applied to the pair hV, V i, where V is
the tangent vector to a curve q passing through p, gives in eﬀect the squared length of
the “inﬁnitesimal part” of the curve at p. Now, if we let p vary from one point of the
curve to another and add up the corresponding contributions, we are performing an
integration. So integrating (the square-root of) g(hV, V i) gives the length of the curve.
One can prove that (as one would want) the length of a curve depends on the metric
tensor used, but not on how the curve is parameterized.

To connect (i)-(iv) with Bricker’s claim (MetrExtr), one needs some “bridge-principles”

between the mathematical constructions and philosophical notions such as that of an
intrinsic property. For this, Bricker proceeds as follows. He deﬁnes (1993, p. 289) a
property P of points to be local iﬀ for any points p, q, any neighbourhood N of p and
any neighbourhood M of q:

if N is a duplicate of M, and p is an (N, M)-counterpart of q, then P holds
either of both p and q or of neither (i.e. p and q match as regards P ).

So, roughly speaking, Bricker calls a property P of points ‘local’ if whether a point
p possesses P is wholly determined by the intrinsic nature of any arbitrarily small
neighbourhood of p. So, modulo the use of metaphysical ideas of intrinsic property,
duplicatehood etc., this usage clearly corresponds to mathematicians’ use of ‘local’ (cf.
(iii) in Section 2.1.2).

It follows that for Bricker any intrinsic property of points is local, since counterpart
points, being duplicates of each other, share all their intrinsic properties. But, Bricker
maintains, the converse fails: there are local but extrinsic properties of points. These
he dubs neighbourhood-dependent.

He brieﬂy discusses as examples from elementary calculus, derivatives of functions,
in particular instantaneous velocity. He says the instantaneous velocity of a point-
particle at position x at time t, i.e. at a spacetime point p, depends on where the
particle is at other times; and so is a neighbourhood-dependent, but not intrinsic,
property of p. The ‘so’ here is not spelt out precisely, i.e. by justifying the implicit
premise about duplicate spacetime regions containing the particle (or its counterpart).
But Bricker’s intuition is clear enough: as we emphasised already in Section 2.1.2 and
2.3.B, instantaneous velocity and momentum are temporally extrinsic since for example

26

they imply the object’s existence at other times. Besides, the intuition is shared by
others—as we will see when we return to instantaneous velocity in the next Section.

Bricker goes on to claim by analogy that in diﬀerential geometry all the tangent
vectors at a point p ‘give information not just about p, but about the space immediately
surrounding p ... in short ... neighbourhood-dependent information about p’. To which
‘since the local metric at p is an operator on tangent vectors, it inherits
he adds:
neighbourhood-dependence from its operands’ (1993, p. 289).

Again, Bricker’s argument here is not entirely precise. He cannot really prove that
any property represented by an element of tangent space is extrinsic; for his metaphys-
ical apparatus does not tie its notions of perfectly natural property, and so duplicate,
and so (X, Y )-counterparthood, suﬃciently tightly to the notions of diﬀerential geom-
etry. A footnote admits that (as in my (iii) above), tangent vectors are directional
derivative operators; but again there is no justiﬁcation for the implicit premise about
duplicate spacetime regions. But fair enough, I say: his intuition is again both clear
and shared by others.

And the intuition is enough to deliver Bricker his problem. That is: the metric’s
being neighbourhood-dependent contradicts the previous claim that it is perfectly nat-
ural (i.e. perfectly natural because mentioned in the laws of general relativity)—once
we recall that according to his metaphysical framework, all perfectly natural properties
are intrinsic.

In response, Bricker considers two tactics for escape from contradiction: an obvious
one which he rejects in the second stage of his argument (Section 4.4); and an unobvious
one which he endorses in the last stage (Section 4.5).

4.4 Vetoing perfectly natural extrinsics

Bricker now argues for:

(VetoExtr): The obvious anti-pointilliste response to the contradiction between
that some but
the metric being neighbourhood-dependent and perfectly natural—viz.
not all perfectly natural properties are intrinsic—clashes with the Humean principle
of recombination for spacetime points. That is:
it engenders necessary connections
between a point and its surrounding space.

Bricker ﬁrst considers saying that some but not all perfectly natural properties are
intrinsic. So the idea is that the perfectly natural but extrinsic properties of points
include vectorial and tensorial properties, like having a metric tensor with such and
such features.

Bricker notes that this response implies that his previous deﬁnition of ‘duplicate’
bifurcates into a weaker and a stronger notion. The weaker notion is that of intrinsic
duplicates: this requires only that the one-one correspondence between the parts of
objects X and Y preserve the intrinsic perfectly natural properties and relations. (Re-
call that Bricker calls a relation ‘intrinsic’ iﬀ it is internal or external in Lewis’ sense,

27

given in Section 3.3.) The stronger notion, which Bricker calls local duplicates, has the
same deﬁnition, word for word, as the previous deﬁnition of duplicates: X and Y are
local duplicates iﬀ there is a one-one correspondence between their parts preserving all
perfectly natural properties and relations. Bricker proposes that we now deﬁne a local
property as one that never diﬀers between local duplicates. So it is now built in to the
deﬁnitions that perfectly natural properties are local—just as previously it was built
in that they were intrinsic. Returning to geometry, the idea will be that such perfectly
natural, and so local, properties include vectorial and tensorial properties, like having
a metric tensor with such and such features.

So far, so good. But there is a clash with Bricker’s Humean principle of recombi-
nation for points ((iv) of Section 4.2.1): that for any points p and q, there is a world
whose space is a duplicate of the space of p, except that it contains a duplicate of q
where the duplicate of p would be. More precisely: Bricker says there is a dilemma.
For this principle must now refer either to (A) local duplicates, or to (B) intrinsic du-
plicates: and on either interpretation, Bricker sees trouble. I will reply that the second
interpretation, (B), is ﬁne—provided one is not a pointilliste.

4.4.1 Trouble with local duplicates

If the principle of recombination refers to local duplicates, then it will yield contradic-
tory worlds when p and q have contrary perfectly natural, extrinsic (but of course local)
properties. Bricker gives as his example positive and negative curvature. He writes:
‘suppose that p is surrounded by positively curved space, q by negatively curved space.
Then a world whose space is a duplicate of the space of p but with a local duplicate of q
in p’s place must be both positively and negatively curved in the immediate neighbour-
hood of q’ (1993, p. 290; the last phrase of course means ‘immediate neighbourhood
of the duplicate of q’).

Here I should amplify Bricker’s example—and point out a problem raised by it.
Given a metric, one can deﬁne a scalar function, in the usual mathematical sense
of ‘scalar’ (viz. a function from the manifold M to IR, so that its value at a point
p ∈ M is the same, independently of any choice of coordinate system), called the
scalar curvature R, that has the following remarkable property: although it is a scalar,
at each point p its value R(p) is a numerical measure of how curved is the geometry
in a neighbourhood of p. (In fact a metric is suﬃcient but not necessary to deﬁne R:
a connection also allows one to deﬁne scalar curvature.) So Bricker is no doubt here
assuming that:

(i): p and q have positive and negative scalar curvature, respectively, i.e. R(p) > 0
and R(q) < 0; (and if we like, we can take him to assume that all points in their
respective neighbourhoods have positive and negative scalar curvature);

(ii): the scalar curvature R is perfectly natural but extrinsic: (more precisely, it is
a determinable whose determinates, given by speciﬁc values R( ) = 5 etc., are perfectly
natural but extrinsic).

28

Assumption (ii) raises a problem. Hitherto, we have implicitly assumed that scalar
functions represent intrinsic properties of points: our worries have concerned only
vectorial and tensorial properties. Now we see there is also a gap between:

(a): the mathematical notion of a scalar, which is a matter of how a quantity

transforms (viz. trivially: it takes the same value in all coordinate systems); and

(b): the metaphysical idea of intrinsicness.

That is: some scalars can ‘give information not just about p, but about the space
immediately surrounding p’—to quote Bricker’s words from his discussion of tangent
vectors (quoted in Section 4.3’s discussion of Bricker’s (MetrExtr)).

So Bricker owes us a discussion of how exactly being a scalar, and being intrinsic,
relate. But this is not to say that the onus is only on Bricker. So far as I know, this is
a lacuna in the whole metaphysical literature. (Cf. comment (a) at the end of Section
2.1.2.)

To sum up: the metaphysical literature assumes that any scalar represents an
intrinsic property of points, so that the pointilliste need “only” worry whether vectors,
tensors etc. do as well. But now we see that pointillistes should also worry about
scalars such as the scalar curvature.

4.4.2 Alleged trouble with intrinsic duplicates

On the other hand, suppose the principle of recombination refers to intrinsic duplicates.
Then contradictory worlds are avoided; but, says Bricker, the principle is now too weak
to capture the spirit of the Humean denial of necessary connections between distinct
existences. For the principle now rules out necessary connections between the intrinsic
natures of distinct objects. But on the present response, an object’s “nature” can
include more than its intrinsic nature, viz.
its perfectly natural extrinsic properties.
So, says Bricker, the principle’s free combinability of intrinsic natures is not enough to
prevent unwanted necessary connections.

I reply that this second horn of Bricker’s dilemma has force only for a pointilliste.
To see the point, let us take an example. Bricker does not give one: but he could add
to the above example of p and q, as follows. If one scalar function, say temperature
θ, represents an intrinsic property, while the scalar curvature R represents a perfectly
natural extrinsic property (and for simplicity, there are no other scalar, vector or ten-
sor functions to consider), the principle of recombination yields a world that has in p’s
place an intrinsic duplicate of q—i.e. a point with:

(a) the same temperature θ that q has (in its world), but
(b) the scalar curvature R that p has (in its world), i.e. a positive value, not q’s

negative value.

In short, the fact that the neighbourhood of this point is a duplicate of p’s neigh-
bourhood forces the duplicate of q going into p’s place to “shed” its negative scalar
curvature.

I take it that Bricker would see this as an unacceptable un-Humean necessary

29

connection between the point p and its surrounding space. But I claim that the wise
Humean has no worries here: the necessary connection merely reﬂects the extrinsicality
of scalar curvature, so that the value of the scalar curvature in the surrounding space
can constrain its value in p’s place.13 Besides, I would say that only someone in the
grip of pointillisme—an explicit advocate like Lewis, or someone feeling its lure—would
be uneasy at having fundamental (if you like, in Lewisian terms: perfectly natural)
quantities that are extrinsic to a point. And so much the worse for pointillisme!

But to return to Bricker: he believes that both horns of the dilemma are unacceptable—

and so his own preference is ...

4.5 A heterodox but intrinsic metric

Bricker thinks we should retain his original metaphysical framework, with its claim that
all perfectly natural properties are intrinsic; and we should escape the contradiction
at the end of Section 4.3, by giving up the idea that the metric is a perfectly natural
property of a point. That is, he proposes:

(Heterodox): We should take the metric tensor to represent an intrinsic property
of an inﬁnitesimal neighbourhood of a point, taking such neighbourhoods as genuine
mathematical objects.
More precisely, we should hold that the metric, an extrinsic and not perfectly natural
property of a point, is “grounded” in another intrinsic, perfectly natural property of a
neighbourhood (Bricker’s scare-quotes).

Since Bricker presents this preferred solution brieﬂy, and I shall object to it, it is

both clearest and fairest to quote him at length. He writes

To illustrate the sort of grounding I have in mind, consider mass density.
If one assumes that each neighbourhood of a point has some determinate
(ﬁnite) mass and volume, then the mass density at a point can be charac-
terized as the limit of the ratio of mass to volume, as volume shrinks to
zero. So characterized, mass density is an extrinsic property of points. But
it is customary in physics, when considering a continuous matter ﬁeld, to
instead take mass density to be a primitive scalar ﬁeld: a function that as-
signs to each point a real number representing (given appropriate units) the
intrinsic mass density at the point. Given intrinsic mass density, and an
assumption about its smooth distribution, mass can be deﬁned by integra-
tion. Extrinsic mass density thus supervenes upon intrinsic mass density.
And, thanks to a fundamental theorem of integral calculus, the values of
13A mollifying side-remark:— On the other hand, I see no worries, even for Bricker and other
advocates of a principle of recombination, lurking in the fact that laws typically require the values of
quantities, including scalar intrinsic quantities (such as temperature in my example), to be continuous,
or even diﬀerentiable a speciﬁed number of times. For the principle says only that a world given by
recombination is logically possible—not that it obeys the laws of either of the worlds of the “recombined
ingredients”.

30

extrinsic and intrinsic mass density coincide . . . The suggestion, then, is to
say something analogous about the local metric: the extrinsic local metric
supervenes on an intrinsic local metric (plus manifold structure).(1993, p.
290-1.)

But, he then says, there is a problem.

How can a tensor be intrinsic to a point? Points are spatially simple. Ten-
sors, being operators on vector spaces, are spatially complex. It is repug-
nant to the nature of a point to suppose that a local metric, which is a
tensor, could be intrinsic to a point . . . [the intrinsic local metric] had bet-
ter be intrinsic not to a point, but to something spatially complex. (1993,
p. 291.; with a footnote endorsing Robinson’s argument which I reported
in Section 4.1, that vectorial properties must be extrinsic to a point.)

He immediately goes on

No sooner said than done. If we are willing to postulate perfectly natural
properties on theoretical grounds, we should be willing to posit appropri-
ate entities to instantiate those properties:
in this case, entities that are
spatially complex. I propose that we reify talk of the “inﬁnitesimal neigh-
bourhood” of a point. The tangent space at a point is now conceived as
the inﬁnitesimal neighbourhood of the point “blown large” . . . it no longer
depends for its existence on the manifold structure. Tensor quantities are
intrinsic . . . to the inﬁnitesimal neighbourhoods of points.
. . . space (or
spacetime) has a “non-standard” structure. There are “standard” points,
and there are “non-standard” points that lie an inﬁnitesimal distance from
standard points. The points along a path in space are ordered like the non-
standard continuum of Abraham Robinson’s non-standard analysis (ibid.)

4.6 Anti-pointilliste reply

My reply is clear from what I said in Section 4.4.2. Namely, I think Bricker’s principle
of recombination is a poor reason for proposing non-standard analysis. Though of
course non-standard analysis is impressive and fascinating, the fact that vectorial and
tensorial properties are extrinsic to a point gives no good reason to adopt non-standard
analysis as a metaphysical foundation for diﬀerential geometry: only pointillisme makes
one think so.

The errors of pointillisme also show up in what Bricker says about his motivating
example, mass density;
in particular, his saying ‘it is customary in physics, when
considering a continuous matter ﬁeld, to instead take mass density to be a primitive
scalar ﬁeld’.

31

I reply that this is a mistake. That is: the classical mechanics of continua (whether
ﬂuids or deformable solids) conceives mass density exclusively as a limit of a ratio of
mass to volume, and so as extrinsic—in just the way Bricker says at the start of the
ﬁrst quotation. And it is right to do so. For use of a primitive mass density scalar ﬁeld
leads to conceptual conundrums. (Agreed, under suitable conditions of smoothness,
such a ﬁeld meshes as regards the mathematics with the usual deﬁnition as a limit—as
Bricker mentions.)

As a very simple example of such a conundrum,

imagine that the unit square
[0, 1]2 ⊂ IR2 is a sheet of continuous material, with a uniform mass density ρ(x, y) = 1
(so that the total mass is also 1). Now suppose the material is expanded to four times
its original area, by a uniform stretch, so as to cover the set [0, 2]2. That is, there is a
stretching function f :

f : (x, y) ∈ [0; 1]2 7→ (2x, 2y) ∈ [0; 2]2

(4.1)

The conservation of mass requires that after the expansion ρ(x, y) = 0.25 for all (x, y).
But if as Bricker suggests, the mass density ρ is primitive, it is natural to ask: how
does the point-sized bit of matter at a point (x, y) “know” how to decrease its value of
ρ between the initial and ﬁnal times, say t0 and t1: ρ(x, y; t1) = 1
4 ρ(x, y; t0)? After all,
each point is mapped by f to just one point, not to four points!

On the other hand, there is no such conundrum (in this example, or countless
others) if we ﬁrst state the conservation of mass in terms of extended regions, and then
treat mass density as a derived concept.

In fact, we have here come full circle: we have returned to Section 3.3.2’s paradox of
the length of a line, which launched our discussion of whether pointillisme can accom-
modate the structure of space or spacetime. For rigorous presentations of continuum
mechanics (e.g. Truesdell 1991, pp. 16-19, 92-94) treat mass and mass density in ex-
actly this way. That is: they postulate a mass measure that assigns values of mass to
(an appropriate subset of all) spatial regions. Mass density is then introduced as a de-
rived concept (essentially the limit of the ratio of mass to volume, as mentioned above),
subject to certain conditions that ensure that its integral yields back the original mass-
measure for regions. The full details of this treatment require modern measure theory:
(for example, the conditions for the density’s integral to equal the original measure are
given essentially by the Radon-Nikodym theorem; for details, cf. e.g. Kingman and
Taylor (1977, Theorem 6.7)).

But I do not need to rehearse these details: here it is enough to give a non-rigorous
statement of how this treatment, applied to the unit square example, avoids the co-
nundrum of how ρ can “know” how to decrease.14

In this example, we postulate that all regions R of a suitable kind K are assigned
14I also admit that (as mentioned in Section 1 and 3.3.2) measure theory has some well-nigh para-
doxical results of its own. But neither swallowing those results, nor avoiding them by revising measure
theory, gives any support to pointillisme.

32

a mass m(R, t) at a time t, which is conserved under the stretching in the sense that

∀R ∈ K, m(R, t0) = m(f (R), t1).

(4.2)

We also postulate that each region R is assigned an area a(R); and that the kind K is
rich enough in the sense that for each point (x, y), there is a sequence of regions {Rn}
which all contain (x, y) but whose areas descend to 0—which we write as Rn → (x, y).
Then we deﬁne the mass density at (x, y) as the corresponding limit of the ratio of
mass to area: we assume here that this limit exists, for all (x, y). That is:

ρ(x, y; t) := limRn→(x,y)

m(R, t)
a(R)

.

(4.3)

(4.4)

The conservation of mass, represented fundamentally by eq. 4.2, can then be re-
expressed in terms of the integral of the density

ρ(x, y; t0) dxdy =

ρ(x, y; t1) dxdy

Zf (R)

ZR

And from this, it follows that ρ must decrease uniformly by a factor of 4: i.e. ρ(x, y; t0) =
4ρ(x, y; t1). That is “how ρ knows” how to decrease!15

Acknowledgements:— I am grateful to audiences at Florence, Kirchberg, Leeds,
London, Oxford, and Princeton; and to A. Elga, G. Belot, P. Forrest, J. Hawthorne,
S. Leuenberger, L. Lusanna, M. Pauri, H. Price, J. Uﬃnk, and B. van Fraassen for
conversations and comments.

5 References

Arntzenius, F. (2004), ‘Gunk, topology and measure’, available at: http://philsci-
archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001792.
Arntzenius, F. and Hawthorne, J (2006), ‘Gunk and continuous variation’, forthcom-
ing.
Arthur, R. (2006) ‘Leibniz’s syncategorematic inﬁnitesimals, smooth inﬁnitesimal anal-
ysis and Newton’s proposition 6’, forthcoming.
Batterman, R. (2003), ‘Falling cats, parallel parking and polarized light’, Studies in
the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 34B, pp. 527-558.
Bell, J. (1998), A Primer of Inﬁnitesimal Analysis, Cambridge University Press.
Belot, G. (1998), ‘Understanding electromagnetism’, British Journal for the Philoso-
phy of Science 49, pp. 531-555.

15Of course, conundrums like this about the unit square can be formulated not only about mass
and mass density, but about arbitrary measures and their densities. And the solution provided by
modern measure theory is the same: take the measure, with its assignment to extended regions, as
primary, and take the density as a derived concept, viz. as a limit of the ratio of the measure to a
volume or area measure.

33

‘On the Persistence of Homogeneous Matter’, available at:

Black, R. (2000), ‘Against Quidditism’, Australasian Journal of Philosophy 78, pp.
87-104.
Bricker, P. (1993), ‘The fabric of space:
intrinsic vs. extrinsic distance relations’, in
ed.s P.French et al., Midwest Studies in Philosophy 18, University of Minnesota Press,
pp. 271-294.
Butterﬁeld, J. (2004),
physics/0406021: and at http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00002381/
Butterﬁeld, J. (2004a), ‘The Rotating Discs Argument Defeated’, forthcoming in British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science; available at:
http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00002382/
Butterﬁeld, J. (2005) ‘On the Persistence of Particles’, in Foundations of Physics 35,
pp. 233-269, available at: physics/0401112; and http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001586/.
Butterﬁeld, J. (2006), ‘Against Pointillisme about mechanics’, forthcoming in British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science; available at http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu.
Butterﬁeld, J. (2006a), ‘Against Pointillisme: a call to arms’, in preparation.
Butterﬁeld, J. and Isham, C. (1999), ‘On the Emergence of Time in Quantum Gravity’,
in ed. J Butterﬁeld, The Arguments of Time, British Academy and Oxford University
Press, pp. 111-168; available at: gr-qc/9901024.
Butterﬁeld, J. and Isham, C. (2001), ‘Spacetime and the Philosophical Challenge of
Quantum Gravity’, in ed.s C. Callender and N. Huggett, Physics meets Philosophy at
the Planck Scale, Cambridge University Press pp. 33-89; available at: gr-qc/9903072.
Caratheodory, C. (1963) Algebraic Theory of Measure and Integration, trans. F. Lin-
ton, New York: Chelsea Publishing Company.
Davies, E. (2003) ‘Quantum mechanics does not require the continuity of space’, Stud-
ies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 34B, pp. 319-328.
Earman (1987), ‘Locality, non-locality and action-at-a-distance: a skeptical review of
some philosophical dogmas’, in Kelvin’s Baltimore Lectures and Modern Theoretical
Physics, eds. R. Kargon and P. Achinstein, Cambridge Mass: MIT Press.
Earman and Roberts (2006), ‘Contact with the Nomic: a challenge for deniers of
Humean supervenience about laws of nature’, Philosophy and Phenomenological Re-
search forthcoming.
Forrest, P. (2002), ‘Non-classical mereology and its application to sets’, The Notre
Dame Journal of Formal Logic 43, pp. 79-94.
Forrest, P. (2004), ‘Grit or gunk:
Monist 87, pp. 351-384.
Hawthorne, J. (2006), ‘Quantity in Lewisian Metaphysics’, forthcoming in his Meta-
physical Essays, Oxford University Press.
Hoefer, C. (2000), ‘Energy Conservation of in GTR’, Studies in the History and Phi-
losophy of Modern Physics, 31B pp. 187-200.
Kingman, J. and Taylor, S. (1977), Introducton to Measure and Probability, Cambridge
University Press.
Kragh, H. and Carazza, B. (1994), ‘From time atoms to spacetime quantization: the
idea of discreet time 1925-1926’, Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics 25, pp. 437-462.

implications of the Banach-Tarski paradox’, The

34

Langton, R. and Lewis, D. (1998), ‘Deﬁning ‘intrinsic”, Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research 58, pp. 333-345; reprinted in Lewis (1999a), page reference to reprint.
Leibniz, G. (2001), The Labyrinth of the Continuum: writings on the continuum prob-
lem 1672-1686, ed. sel. and transl. R. Arthur, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Lewis, D. (1983), ‘Extrinsic properties’, Philosophical Studies 44, pp. 197-200; reprinted
in Lewis (1999a); page references to reprint.
Lewis, D. (1983a), ‘New Work for a Theory of Universals’, Australasian Journal of
Philosophy 61, pp. 343-77; reprinted in Lewis (1999a), page reference to reprint.
Lewis, D. (1986), Philosophical Papers, volume II, New York: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D. (1986a), On the Plurality of Worlds, Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, D. (1994), ‘Humean Supervenience Debugged’, Mind 103, p 473-490; reprinted
in Lewis (1999a), pp. 224-247; page reference to reprint.
Lewis, D. (1999), ‘Zimmerman and the Spinning sphere’, Australasian Journal of Phi-
losophy 77, pp. 209-212.
Lewis, D. (1999a), Papers in Metaphysics and Epistemology, Cambridge: University
Press.
Lewis, D. (2001), ‘Redeﬁning ‘intrinsic”, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
63, pp. 381-398.
McLarty, C. (1988), ‘Deﬁning sets as sets of points of spaces’, Journal of Philosophical
Logic 17, pp. 75-90.
Mancosu, P. (1996), Philosophy of Mathematics and Mathematical Practice in the Sev-
enteenth Century, Oxford: University Press.
Menger, K. (1978), ‘Topology without points’, in Selected papers in Logic and Founda-
tions, Didactics, Economics, Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 80-107.
Monk, N. (1997), ‘Conceptions of spacetime: problems and possible solutions, Studies
in the History and Philosophy of Physics 28, pp. 1-34.
Nelson, E. (1987), Radically Elementary Probability Theory, Princeton University Press.
Oppy, G. (2000), ‘Humean supervenience?’, Philosophical Studies 101 pp. 77-105.
Robinson, A. (1996), Non-standard Analysis, Princeton University Press.
Robinson, D. (1989), ‘Matter, Motion and Humean supervenience’, Australasian Jour-
nal of Philosophy 67, pp. 394-409.
Roeper, P. (1997), ‘Region-based topology’ Journal of Philosophical Logic 26, pp. 251-
309.
Sider, T. (2001), Four-Dimensionalism, Oxford University Press.
Skyrms, B. (1993), ‘Logical atoms and combinatorial possibility’, Journal of Philoso-
phy 90, pp. 219-232.
Taylor, B. (1993), ‘On natural properties in metaphysics’, Mind 102, pp. 81-100.
Truesdell, C. (1991), A First Course in Rational Continuum Mechanics, volume 1;
second edition; Academic Press.
Vallentyne, P. (1997), ‘Intrinsic properties deﬁned’, Philosophical Studies 88, pp. 209-
219.
Wagon, S. (1985), The Banach-Tarski Paradox, Cambridge: University Press.
Weatherson, B. (2002), ‘Intrinsic vs. extrinsic properties’, Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, http://plato.stanford.edu/intrinsic-extrinsic.

35

Wilson, M (1998), ‘Classical mechanics’; in The Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
D. Zimmerman (1998), ‘Temporal parts and supervenient causation: the incompatibil-
ity of two Humean doctrines’, Australasian Journal of Philosophy 76, pp. 265-288.

36

