5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
2
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Search for monopoles using superconducting quantum
interference device (SQUID)

Y. H. Yuan∗
(Dated: December 22, 2005)

The discovery of magnetic monopoles would be of fundamental signiﬁcance in the research of
modern physics.
In this paper, we present a short review of the history of magnetic monopole
research. The theoretical work and experimental technique in the search for magnetic monopoles
using SQUID (superconducting quantum interference device) are investigated. We also discuss the
properties of magnetic monopole and propose a possible experimental test based upon the Faraday
induction method.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The existence of the magnetic monopole was one of
the open questions of modern physics. In 1931, P. Dirac
made the ﬁrst convincing proposal that the existence of
even a single magnetic monopole may explain the quan-
tization of electric charge. According to the quantiza-
tion condition of a system of an electron and a magnetic
monopole with charge g due to Dirac[1, 2],

eg = n

~c
2

(1.1)

where ~ = h
2π , c is the speed of light and n is an inte-
ger. We should modify this quantization condition by a
factor of 3 if free quarks are found. Moreover, the intro-
duction of magnetic monopole would bring a symmetry
to the Maxwell’s equations of electromagnetism. Such
appealing proposal exhilarated a number of experimen-
tal investigations since then. Just as J. D. Jackson has
described in his famous book [3] on Classical Electrody-
namics:

“chieﬂy because of an early, brilliant theoretical argu-
ment of Dirac, the search for monopoles is renewed when-
ever a new energy region is opened up in high energy
physics or a new source of matter, such as rocks from
the moon, becomes available”.

New eﬀorts to search for magnetic monopoles have
been motivated considerably when Grand Uniﬁed Theory
(GUT) of strong and electroweak interactions predicted
the magnetic monopoles as well. In 1974, ’t Hooft and
Polyakov [4, 5] pointed out that a uniﬁed gauge theory
in which electromagnetism is embedded in a semisimple
gauge group would predict the existence of the magnetic
monopole as a soliton with spontaneous symmetry break-
ing. To be more speciﬁc, a semisimple non abelian gauge
group may break into its subgroups including U(1) which
essentially describes magnetic monopole in the frame-
work of GUT. Numerous experimental searches for mag-
netic monopoles in cosmic radiation and for magnetic
monopoles trapped in matter for example at accelerator

have been carried out.[6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. Thanks
to the proposal due to Dirac. Although we have not
observed magnetic monopoles, the elusive monopole has
found its application to a number of diﬀerent research
areas in physics, such as in particle physics, condensed
matter physics, string theory, strophysics and cosmology.

II. DETECTIONS OF MAGNETIC
MONOPOLES

Various techniques of detection in the experiments to
search for magnetic monopole have been developed since
the 1930s. In this paper, we concentrate on the induction
technique by exploying the Magnetometer SQUID (su-
perconducting quantum interference device). As Tassie
showed in his paper [13] that when moving through a
superconducting loop, a magnetic monopole would in-
duce a supercurrent in the loop because of the change
in magnetic ﬂux through the loop surface. The passage
of a magnetic monopole through superconducting loop
would result in a magnetic ﬂux change of 2 φ0, where
φ0 = hc
2e = 2 × 10−7 G · cm2 is the ﬂux quantum. To be
more speciﬁc, let us consider a monopole with charge g
passing along the axis of a superconducting loop. Due to
the Maxwell’s equation involving the magnetic monopole
current ~Jm,

∂ ~B
∂t

1
c

+ ∇ × ~E = − 4π
c

~Jm.

(2.1)

After integrating over the area in the plane of the loop,

we obtain

1
c

d
dt

Z

~B · d~S = −

~E · d~l − 4π
c

Z

I

~Jm · d~S

(2.2)

where path l is the boundary of area S. According to the
theory of superconductivity[14], the ﬂuxoid φc is

∗E-mail: henry@physics.wisc.edu

φc =

~B · d~S + c

Λ~j · d~l

(2.3)

Z

I

where constant parameter Λ is related to the penetration
depth λL which is the characteristic length of supercon-
ductor.

λL =

mc2
4πn′e2
s

s

=

Λc2
4π

m = 2me
es = 2e

r
where n′ is the number of the carriers of the supercurrent
per unit volume, m and es are the mass and charge of
the carriers of the supercurrent respectively. According
to the BCS theory, the carriers of the supercurrent are
Cooper pairs which are paired electrons. So we obtain

(2.4)

(2.5)

where me and e are the mass and electric charge of an
electron. The value of the penetration depth depends on
the temperature.

Following Tassie’s assumpation that the initial and ﬁ-
nal conditions are stationary, therefore when a monopole
passing through the superconducting loop the change in
the ﬂuxoid is

∆φc = −4πg

(2.6)

In addition the change in the magnetic ﬂux through
the superconducting loop is approximately the same as
the change in the ﬂuxoid especially in case that the su-
perconducting loop is suﬃciently thick, so we have

∆φ ≈ ∆φc
= −4πg

(2.7)

where ∆φ denote the change in the magnetic ﬂux.
In experiments, the Magnetometer SQUID is needed to
monitor the small induced supercurrent in the supercon-
ducting loop due to a monopole. Shielding from magnetic
ﬁelds by using superconductors is of great importance for
the operation of SQUID because the motion of the mag-
netic ﬂux quanta trapped in the SQUID sensor may pro-
duce signals mimicking the magnetic monopole events.
As a matter of fact, in experiments, both SQUID and
detector loops should be placed in the space bounded by
superconducting shields.

Searches for magnetic monopole should based upon the
properties of magnetic monopole. Therefore we sum-
marize the properties of magnetic monopole next.
It
is an electrically neutral particle unlike dyon, due to
Schwinger, which is both electrically and magnetically
It diﬀers from light quanta in not travelling
charged.
In addition, magnetic charge
with the speed of light.

2

density is a pseudoscalar. When looking at a magnetic
monopole from both the right-handed coordinate system
and the left-handed coordinate system, we ﬁnd the signs
of a magnetic charge are opposite in the two coordinate
systems. Therefore the space inversion of an interaction
involving a magnetic monopole would be violated. As J.
D. Jackson pointed out in his famous book [3] on Clas-
sical Electrodynamics: “... it is a necessary consequence
of the existence of a particle with both electric and mag-
netic charges that space inversion and time reversal are
no longer valid symmetries of the laws of physics. It is
a fact, of course, that these symmetry principles are not
exactly valid in the realm of elementary particle physics,
but present evidence is that their violation is extremely
small and associated somehow with the weak interac-
tion.” This behavior of the magnetic monopole is quite
similar to the behavior of neutrino1. As a matter of fact,
parity violations[15, 16? ] always take place in weak
interactions whenever there are neutrinos involved. We
suggest that the elusive neutrino has magnetic charge.
The ﬂavor change of neutrino is the direct consequence
of this proposal[17] and we may also explain the long-
standing solar neutrino puzzle easily. Before completing
this section, we give a possible experimental test based
upon the Faraday induction method. Place a radioac-
tive source at the center of an enclosed superconducting
sphere rather than superconducting loops. Whenever β-
decay of the radioactive source happens, an anti-neutrino
is released which would induce the supercurrents on the
superconducting sphere due to the proposal. A SQUID
connected to the sphere is exploited to monitor the su-
percurrents. To eliminate any unwanted inﬂuence of elec-
trically charged particles, an absorbent layer would be
introduced between the radioactive source and the en-
closed superconducting sphere. Even though, the sensi-
tive devices in the experiment are vulnerable to spurious
signals, it is still an ideal way to detect the monopole
since the method is independence of the particle’s mass
and velocity[18]. The detectors should be placed inside a
magnetic shield made up of lead or mumetal to protect
the detectors from external magnetic ﬁelds.

III. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

The search for the magnetic monopole would be of
fundamental signiﬁcance in modern physics. A great
deal of eﬀorts have been made to detect magnetic
monopole since the prediction of existence of the mag-
netic monopole by Dirac. We have presented a short
review of history of magnetic monopoles. The theoret-
ical work and experimental technique in the search for
magnetic monopoles using SQUID are investigated in the

1 In this paper, neutrino means electron neutrino only except when

speciﬁed.

present paper. The change in ﬂuxoid as well as in mag-
netic ﬂux have been discussed when a magnetic monopole
moves through the superconducting loops. We have also
studied the properties of magnetic monopole and pro-
posed a possible experimental test based upon the Fara-

day induction method. This year is the unprecedented
World Year of Physics which marks the hundredth an-
niversary of the pioneering contributions of Albert Ein-
stein. We dedicate this paper to Albert Einstein.

3

[1] P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. A133, 60 (1931).
[2] P. A. M. Dirac, Phys. Rev. 74, 817 (1948).
[3] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 2nd edition

(John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1975).
[4] G. ’t Hooft, Nucl. Phys. B79, 276 (1974).
[5] A. M. Polyakov, JETP lett. 20 194 (1974).
[6] K. Kinoshita, R. Du, G. Giacomelli, L. Patrizii, F.
Predieri, P. Serra, M. Spurio and J. L. Pinfold, Phys.
Rev. D46, R881 (1992).

[7] R. D. Gardner, B. Cabrera, M. E. Huber and M. A.

Taber, Phys. Rev. D 44, 622 (1991).

[8] J. Incandela, M. Campbell, H. Frisch, S. Somalwar, M.
Kuchnir, H. R. Gustafson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 2067
(1984).

[9] P. B. Price, S. L. Guo, S. P. Ahlen and R. L. Fleischer,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 1265 (1984).

[10] R. Ross, P. Eberhard, L. Alvarez and R. Watt, Phys.

Rev. D 8, 698 (1973)

[11] H. Jeon and M. J. Longo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1443

(1995).

[12] G. Kalbﬂeisch, W. Luo, K. Milton, E. Smith and M.

Strauss, Phys. Rev. D 69, 052002 (2004)
[13] L. J. Tassie, Nuovo Cimento 38, 1935 (1965).
[14] F. London, Superﬂuids, Macroscopic Theory of Super-

conductivity, vol. 1, (New York, 1960)

[15] T. D. Lee and C. N. Yang, Phys. Rev. 104, 254, (1956).
[16] C. S. Wu, E. Ambler, R. W. Hayward, D. D. Hoppes and

R. P. Hudson, Phys. Rev. 105, 1413, (1957).
R. L. Garwin, L. M. Lederman and M. Weinrich, Phys.
Rev. 105, 1415, (1957).

[17] Y.H. Yuan
[18] S. Bermon, C. C. Chi, C. C. Tsuei, J. R. Rozen, P.
Chaudhari, M. W. McElfresh and A. Prodell, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 64, 839 (1990).

