Against Pointillisme about Mechanics

J. Butterﬁeld1

All Souls College
Oxford OX1 4AL

Abstract

5 December 2005: forthcoming in British Journal for the Philosophy of Science

This paper forms part of a wider campaign: to deny pointillisme. That is the
doctrine that a physical theory’s fundamental quantities are deﬁned at points
of space or of spacetime, and represent intrinsic properties of such points or
point-sized objects located there; so that properties of spatial or spatiotemporal
regions and their material contents are determined by the point-by-point facts.
More speciﬁcally, this paper argues against pointillisme about the concept of
velocity in classical mechanics; especially against proposals by Tooley, Robin-
son and Lewis. A companion paper argues against pointillisme about (chrono)-
geometry, as proposed by Bricker.

To avoid technicalities, I conduct the argument almost entirely in the context
of “Newtonian” ideas about space and time, and the classical mechanics of point-
particles, i.e. extensionless particles moving in a void. But both the debate and
my arguments carry over to relativistic physics.

5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1email: jb56@cus.cam.ac.uk; jeremy.butterﬁeld@all-souls.oxford.ac.uk

Contents

1 Introduction

2 The wider campaign

2.1 Connecting physics and metaphysics

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.1.1 Avoiding controversy about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction . .

2.1.2 Distinction from three mathematical distinctions . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Classical mechanics is not pointilliste, and can be perdurantist . . . . .

2.2.1 Two versions of pointillisme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2.2 Two common claims

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2.3 My contrary claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3

In more detail ...

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3.1 Four violations of pointillisme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3.2 For perdurantism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Velocity as intrinsic?

3.1 Can properties represented by vectors be intrinsic to a point? . . . . . .

3.2 Orthodox velocity is extrinsic but local

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2.1 A question and a debate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2.2 The verdict

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3 Against intrinsic velocity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.1 A common view—and a common problem . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.2 Tooley’s proposal; and his arguments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3.3 Tooley’s further discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 “Shadow velocities”: Lewis and Robinson

4.1 The proposal

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2 Criticism: the vector ﬁeld remains unspeciﬁed . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3 Avoiding the presupposition of persistence, using Hilbert’s ε symbol . .

4.4 Comparison with Robinson and Lewis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 References

2

3

3

5

6

7

7

8

9

10

10

12

13

13

14

14

16

18

18

20

26

28

29

31

32

36

39

1

1 Introduction

This paper forms part of a wider campaign: to deny pointillisme. That is the doctrine
that a physical theory’s fundamental quantities are deﬁned at points of space or of
spacetime, and represent intrinsic properties of such points or point-sized objects lo-
cated there; so that properties of spatial or spatiotemporal regions and their material
contents are determined by the point-by-point facts.2

I will ﬁrst describe this wider campaign (Section 2). Then I will argue against
pointillisme as regards the concept of velocity in classical mechanics (Sections 3 and
4). A companion paper (Butterﬁeld 2006) argues against pointillisme about (chrono)-
geometry. In both cases, the main debate is about whether properties of a point that
are represented by vectors, tensors, connections etc. can be intrinsic to the point;
typically, pointillistes argue that they can be. In both papers, I focus on contemporary
pointillistes who try to reconcile pointillisme with the fact that vectorial etc. properties
seem extrinsic to points and point-sized objects, by proposing some heterodox construal
of the properties in question.

The concept of velocity in mechanics provides two illustrations of the lure of pointil-
lisme, and this tendency to reconcile it with vectorial properties by reconstruing phys-
ical quantities.

(a): Tooley and others argue that for the sake of securing that a particle’s instan-
taneous velocity is intrinsic to it at a time, we should not construe velocity in the
orthodox way as a limit of average velocities—but instead reconstrue it along lines
they propose. Again, my view is that there is no need for such heterodoxy: instead,
we can and should reject pointillisme: (Section 3).

(b): Robinson and Lewis argue that for the sake of securing a perdurantist account
of identity over time (persistence), we should postulate vectorial properties numeri-
cally equal to velocity, but free of velocity’s presupposition of the notion of persistence.
I maintain that if we reject pointillisme, the perdurantist has no need of such novel
properties: (Section 4).

In similar vein, Bricker (1993) proposes to reconcile pointillisme with modern geom-
etry’s need for vectorial and tensorial properties by re-founding geometry in terms of
non-standard analysis, which rehabilitates the traditional idea of inﬁnitesimals (Robin-
son 1996). In (Butterﬁeld 2006), I reply that once the spell of pointillisme is broken,
these heterodox foundations of geometry are unmotivated.

So in both papers I defend orthodoxy about the foundations of both geometry and
mechanics. But I do not mean to be dogmatic. As to geometry, I of course agree that
there are several heterodox mathematical theories of the continuum that are technically
impressive and philosophically suggestive. Butterﬁeld (2006) gives some references; but
I do not discuss details, since these theories oﬀer no support for my target, pointillisme.
More precisely: these theories do not suggest that fundamental quantities represent
2I think David Lewis ﬁrst used the art-movement’s name as a vivid label for this sort of doctrine:

a precise version of which he endorsed.

2

intrinsic properties of points or point-sized bits of matter; because either they do not
attribute such quantities to points, or they even deny that there are any points.3 So
the upshot is that although I am open to suggestions about heterodox treatments of
the continuum, these treatments do not support pointillisme. Accordingly, I ﬁnd the
philosophical doctrine of pointillisme an insuﬃcient reason for rejecting the orthodox
treatment.

Similarly in this paper for mechanics: though with the diﬀerence that mathemati-
cians have not developed a handful of heterodox theories of mechanics, or of velocity,
as they have of the continuum—one of which Tooley and the other authors might hope
to invoke, to provide their heterodox new foundations of mechanics.4 So the upshot
is the same as for geometry: I will again ﬁnd pointillisme an insuﬃcient reason for
rejecting orthodoxy—though I am open to suggestions!
In this spirit, I will end by
oﬀering a sort of peace-pipe to Robinson and Lewis. I will formulate a cousin of their
proposal—a cousin that is not pointilliste—and compare it with their original (Section
4.3).

I will conduct the discussion almost entirely in the context of “Newtonian” ideas
about space and time, and the classical mechanics of point-particles, i.e. extensionless
point-masses moving in a void (and so interacting by action-at-a-distance forces). This
restriction keeps things simple: and at no cost, since both the debate and my arguments
carry over to relativistic physics. The restriction also has another merit. Broadly
speaking, of the various physical theories, it is the classical mechanics of point-particles
that pointillisme ﬁts best: other theories have further anti-pointilliste features. So it is
worth emphasising that even for classical point-particles, pointillisme fails.

2 The wider campaign

As I mentioned, this paper is part of a wider campaign, which I now sketch. I begin with
general remarks, especially about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction among properties
(Section 2.1). Then I state my main claims; ﬁrst in brief (Section 2.2), then in more
detail (Section 2.3).

2.1 Connecting physics and metaphysics

My wider campaign aims to connect what modern classical physics says about matter
with two debates in modern analytic metaphysics. The ﬁrst debate is about pointil-
lisme; but understood as a metaphysical doctrine rather than a property of a physical
3Broadly speaking, the second option seems more radical and worse for pointillisme; though in
such theories, the structure of a set of points is often recovered by a construction, e.g. on a richly
structured set of regions.

4As we shall see, the proposals by Tooley and others have slight mathematical aspects; but these

aspects do not amount to any such theory.

3

theory. So, roughly speaking, it is the debate whether the world is fully described
by all the intrinsic properties of all the points and-or point-sized bits of matter. The
second debate is whether an object persists over time by the selfsame object existing at
diﬀerent times (nowadays called ‘endurance’), or by diﬀerent temporal parts, or stages,
existing at diﬀerent times (called ‘perdurance’).

Endeavouring to connect classical physics and metaphysics raises two large initial
questions of philosophical method. What role, if any, should the results of science have
in metaphysics? And supposing metaphysics should in some way accommodate these
results, the fact that we live (apparently!) in a quantum universe prompts the question
why we should take classical physics to have any bearing on metaphysics. I address
these questions in my (2004: Section 2, 2006a: Section 2). Here I just summarize my
answers.

I of course defend the relevance of the results of science for metaphysics; at least
for that branch of it, the philosophy of nature, which considers such notions as space,
time, matter and causality. And this includes classical physics, for two reasons.

First, much analytic philosophy of nature assumes, or examines, so-called ‘common-
sense’ aspects and versions of these notions: aspects and versions which reﬂect classical
physics, especially mechanics, at least as taught in high-school or elementary univer-
sity courses. One obvious example is modern metaphysicians’ frequent discussions of
matter as point-particles, or as continua (i.e. bodies whose entire volume, even on the
smallest scales, is ﬁlled with matter): of course, both notions arose in mechanics in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

Second, classical physical theories, in particular mechanics, are much more philo-
sophically suggestive, indeed subtle and problematic, than philosophers generally re-
alize. Again, point-particles and continua provide examples. The idea of mass con-
centrated in a spatial point (indeed, diﬀerent amounts at diﬀerent points) is, to put
it mildly, odd; as is action-at-a-distance interaction. And there are considerable con-
ceptual tensions in the mechanics of continua; (Wilson (1998) is a philosopher’s intro-
duction). Unsurprisingly, these subtleties and problems were debated in the heyday
of classical physics, from 1700 to 1900; and these debates had an enormous inﬂuence
on philosophy through ﬁgures like Duhem, Hertz and Mach—to mention only ﬁgures
around 1900 whose work directly inﬂuenced the analytic tradition. But after the quan-
tum and relativity revolutions, foundational issues in classical mechanics were largely
ignored, by physicists and mathematicians as well as by philosophers. Besides, the
growth of academic philosophy after 1950 divided the discipline into compartments,
labelled ‘metaphysics’, ‘philosophy of science’ etc., with the inevitable result that there
was less communication between, than within, compartments.5

Setting aside issues of philosophical method, pointillisme and persistence are clearly
large topics; and each is the larger for being treatable using the very diverse methods
5Thus I see my campaign as a foray into the borderlands between metaphysics and philosophy of
physics: a territory that I like to think of as inviting exploration, since it promises to give new and
illuminating perspectives on the theories and views of the two communities lying to either side of
it—rather than as a no-man’s-land well-mined by two sides, ignorant and suspicious of each other!

4

and perspectives of both disciplines, metaphysics and physics. So my campaign has to
be selective in the ideas I discuss and in the authors I cite. Fortunately, I can avoid
several philosophical controversies, and almost all technicalities of physics.6

But it will clarify the purposes of this paper to give at the outset some details about
how I avoid philosophical controversy about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction among
properties, and about how this distinction diﬀers from three that are prominent in
mathematics and physics.

2.1.1 Avoiding controversy about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction

My campaign does not need to take sides in the ongoing controversy about how to
analyse, indeed understand, the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction. (For an introduction,
cf. Weatherson (2002, especially Section 3.1), and the symposium, e.g. Lewis (2001),
that he cites.) Indeed, most of my discussion can make do with a much clearer dis-
tinction, between what Lewis (1983, p. 114) dubbed the ‘positive extrinsic’ properties,
and the rest. This goes as follows.

Lewis was criticizing Kim’s proposal, to analyze extrinsic properties as those that
imply accompaniment, where something is accompanied iﬀ it coexists with some wholly
distinct contingent object, and so to analyze intrinsic (i.e. not extrinsic) properties as
those that are compatible with being unaccompanied, i.e. being the only contingent
object in the universe (for short: being lonely). Lewis objected that loneliness is it-
self obviously extrinsic. He also argued that there was little hope of amending Kim’s
analysis. In particular, you might suggest that to be extrinsic, a property must either
imply accompaniment or imply loneliness: so Lewis dubs these disjuncts ‘positive ex-
trinsic’ and ‘negative extrinsic’ respectively. But Lewis points out that by disjoining
and conjoining properties, we can ﬁnd countless extrinsic properties that are neither
positive extrinsic nor negative extrinsic; (though ‘almost any extrinsic property that a
sensible person would ever mention is positive extrinsic’ (1983, p. 115)).

This critique of Kim served as a springboard: both for Lewis’ own preferred anal-
ysis, using a primitive notion of naturalness which did other important work in his
metaphysics (Lewis 1983a); and for other, metaphysically less committed, analyses,
developed by Lewis and others (e.g. Langton and Lewis 1998, Lewis 2001).

But I will not need to pursue these details. As I said, most of my campaign can
implying accompaniment, and
make do with the notion of positive extrinsicality, i.e.
its negation. That is, I can mostly take pointillisme to advocate properties that are
intrinsic in the weak sense of not positively extrinsic. So this makes my campaign’s
claims, i.e. my denial of pointillisme, logically stronger; and so I hope more interesting.
6I note that among the philosophical issues my campaign avoids are several about persistence, such
as: (a) the gain and loss of parts (as in Theseus’ ship); (b) the relation of “constitution” between
matter and object (as in the clay and the statue); (c) vagueness, and whether there are vague objects.
Agreed, there are of course connections between my claims and arguments, and the various issues,
both philosophical and physical, that I avoid: connections which it would be a good project to explore.
But not in one paper, or even in one campaign!

5

Anyway, my campaign (even in this paper) makes some novel proposals about positive
extrinsicality: namely, I distinguish temporal and spatial (positive) extrinsicality, and
propose degrees of (positive) extrinsicality.

2.1.2 Distinction from three mathematical distinctions

Both the murky intrinsic-extrinsic distinction, and the clearer distinction between
positive extrinsics and the rest, are diﬀerent distinctions from three that are made
within mathematics and physics, especially in those parts relevant to us: viz. pure
and applied diﬀerential geometry. The ﬁrst of these distinctions goes by the name
‘intrinsic’/‘extrinsic’; the second is called ‘scalar’/‘non-scalar’, and the third is called
‘local’/‘non-local’. They are as follows.

(i): The use of ‘intrinsic’ in diﬀerential geometry is a use which is common across all
of mathematics: a feature is intrinsic to a mathematical object (structure) if it is deter-
mined (deﬁned) by just the object as given, without appeal to anything extraneous—in
particular a choice of a coordinate system, or of a basis of some vector space, or of
an embedding of the object into another. For example, we thus say that the intrinsic
geometry of a cylinder is ﬂat; it is only as embedded in IR3 that it is curved.

(ii): Diﬀerential geometry classiﬁes quantities according to how they transform
between coordinate systems: the simplest case being scalars which have the same value
in all coordinate systems.
(Nevermind the details of how the other cases—vectors,
tensors, connections, spinors etc.—transform.)

(iii): Diﬀerential geometry uses ‘local’ (as vs.

‘global’) in various ways. But the
central use is that a mathematical object (structure) is local if it is associated with
a point by being determined (deﬁned) by the mathematical structures deﬁned on any
neighbourhood, no matter how small, of the point.
In this way, the instantaneous
velocity of a point-particle at a spacetime point, and all the higher derivatives of its
velocity, are local since their existence and values are determined by the particle’s
trajectory in an arbitrarily small neighbourhood of the point. Similarly, an equation
is called ‘local’ if it involves only local quantities. In particular, an equation of motion
is called ‘local in time’ if it describes the evolution of the state of the system at time t
without appealing to any facts that are a ﬁnite (though maybe very small) time-interval
to the past or future of t.

I will not spell out seriatim some examples showing that the two philosophical
distinctions are diﬀerent from the three mathematical ones. Given some lessons in
diﬀerential geometry (not least learning to distinguish (i) to (iii) themselves!), providing
such examples is straightforward work. Suﬃce it to make two comments; the second
is relevant to this paper.

(1): It would be a good project to explore the detailed relations between these
distinctions. In particular, the mathematical distinction (i) invites comparison with
Vallentyne’s (1997) proposal about the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction. Besides, there are

6

yet other distinctions to explore and compare: for example, Earman (1987) catalogues
some dozen senses of ‘locality’.

(2): Instantaneous velocity, conceived in the orthodox way as a limit of average
velocities, has implications about the object at other times, for example that it persists
for some time. (I will discuss this in more detail below, especially Section 3.2.) So
most philosophers say that instantaneous velocity is an extrinsic property. I agree. But
emphasising its extrinsicness tends to make one ignore the fact that it is mathematically
local, i.e. determined by the object’s trajectory in an arbitrarily small time-interval
(cf. (iii) above). It is this locality that prompts me to speak of instantaneous velocity
(and other local quantities) as ‘hardly extrinsic’. And in pure and applied diﬀerential
geometry, it would be hard to over-estimate the importance of—and practitioners’
preference for!—such local quantities and local equations involving them. Similarly,
the fact that we often ﬁnd that diﬀerential equations of very low order determine the
temporal course of quantities of interest, is very important—and very fortunate.7

2.2 Classical mechanics is not pointilliste, and can be perdu-

rantist

2.2.1 Two versions of pointillisme

To state my campaign’s main claims, it is convenient to ﬁrst distinguish a weaker and
a stronger version of pointillisme, understood as a metaphysical dosctrine. They diﬀer,
in eﬀect, by taking ‘point’ in pointillisme to mean, respectively, spatial, or spacetime,
point.

Taking ‘point’ to mean ‘spatial point’, I shall take pointillisme to be, roughly, the
doctrine that the instantaneous state of the world is fully described by all the intrinsic
properties, at that time, of all spatial points and-or point-sized bits of matter.

As I said in Section 2.1, my campaign can mostly take ‘intrinsic’ to mean ‘lacking
implications about some wholly distinct contingent object’; in other words, to mean
the negation of Lewis’ ‘positive extrinsic’ (i.e. his ‘implying accompaniment’). But for
this version of pointillisme, I will take ‘intrinsic’ to mean ‘spatially intrinsic’. That is,
attributing such a property to an object carries no implications about spatially distant
objects; but it can carry implications about objects at other times. (Such objects might
be other temporal parts of the given object.) So I shall call this version, ‘pointillisme
as regards space’.

On the other hand: taking ‘point’ to mean ‘spacetime point’, I shall take pointillisme
to be, roughly, the doctrine that the history of the world is fully described by all
the intrinsic properties of all the spacetime points and-or all the intrinsic properties
at all the various times of point-sized bits of matter (either point-particles, or in a
continuum). And here I take ‘intrinsic’ to mean just the negation of Lewis’ ‘positive
7Of course, we sometimes need equations of higher order than we at ﬁrst think and hope. For an

important case of this in population biology, cf. Colyvan and Ginzburg (2003).

7

extrinsic’. That is, it means ‘both spatially and temporally intrinsic’: attributing such
a property carries no implications about objects at other places, or at other times. I
shall call this stronger version, ‘pointillisme as regards spacetime’.

So to sum up: pointillisme as regards space vetoes spatial extrinsicality; but pointil-

lisme as regards spacetime also vetoes temporal extrinsicality.

On either reading of pointillisme, it is of course a delicate matter to relate such
metaphysical doctrines, or the endurance-perdurance debate, to the content of speciﬁc
physical theories. Even apart from Section 2.1’s questions of philosophical method,
one naturally asks for example, how philosophers’ idea of intrinsic property relates to
the idea of a physical quantity. For the most part, I shall state my verdicts about such
questions case by case. But one main tactic for relating the metaphysics to the physics
will be to formulate pointillisme as a doctrine relativized to (i.e. as a property of)
a given physical theory (from Section 2.3 onwards). Anyway, I can already state my
main claims, in terms of these two versions of pointillisme. More precisely, I will state
them as denials of two claims that are, I think, common in contemporary metaphysics
of nature.

2.2.2 Two common claims

Though I have not made a survey of analytic metaphysicians, I think many of them
hold two theses, which I will dub (FPo) (for ‘For Pointillisme’) and (APe) (for ‘Against
perdurantism’); as follows.

(FPo): Classical physics—or more speciﬁcally, classical mechanics—supports pointil-
lisme: at least as regards space, though perhaps not as regards spacetime. There are
two points here:—

(a): Classical physics is free of various kinds of “holism”, and thereby anti-
pointillisme, that are suggested by quantum theory. Or at least: classical mechanics
is free. (With the weaker claim, one could allow, and so set aside, some apparently
anti-pointilliste features of advanced classical physics, e.g. anholonomies in electromag-
netism and the non-localizability of gravitational energy in general relativity: features
rich in philosophical suggestions (Batterman 2003, Belot 1998, Hoefer 2000)—but not
for this paper!)

(b): The concession, ‘perhaps not as regards spacetime’, arises from the endurance-

perdurance debate. For it seems that pointillisme as regards spacetime must construe
persistence as perdurance; (while pointillisme as regards space could construe it as
endurance). And a well-known argument, often called ‘the rotating discs argument’,
suggests that perdurance clashes with facts about the rotation of a continuum (i.e. a
continuous body) in classical mechanics. So the argument suggests that classical me-
chanics must be understood as “endurantist”. Besides, whether or not one endorses the
argument, in classical mechanics the persistence of objects surely can be understood
as endurance—which conﬂicts with pointillisme as regards spacetime.

(The considerations under (a) and (b) are usually taken as applying equally well to

8

non-relativistic and relativistic classical mechanics: an assumption I largely endorse.)

I also think that many metaphysicians would go further and hold that:
(APe): Classical mechanics does indeed exclude pointillisme as regards spacetime:
their reason being that this pointillisme requires perdurance and that they endorse the
rotating discs argument. So they hold that in classical mechanics the persistence of
objects must be understood as endurance, and that this forbids pointillisme as regards
spacetime.

2.2.3 My contrary claims

I can now state the main position of my wider campaign. Namely, I deny both claims,
(FPo) and (APe), of Section 2.2.2. I argue for two contrary claims, (APo) (for ‘Against
Pointillisme) and (FPe) (for ‘For perdurantism’), as follows.

(APo): Classical mechanics does not support pointillisme.
By this I do not mean just that:

(a) it excludes pointillisme as regards spacetime.

Nor do I just mean:

(b) it allows one to construe the persistence of objects as endurance.

(But I agree with both (a) and (b).) Rather, I also claim: classical mechanics excludes
pointillisme as regards space. That is: it needs to attribute spatially extrinsic properties
to spatial points, and-or point-sized bits of matter. (But this will not be analogous to
the kinds of “holism” suggested by quantum theory.)

(FPe): Though (as agreed in (APo)) classical mechanics excludes pointillisme as re-
gards spacetime (indeed, also: as regards space): classical mechanics is compatible with
perdurance. That is: despite the rotating discs argument, one can be a “perdurantist”
about the persistence of objects in classical mechanics. The reason is that once we
reject pointillisme, perdurance does not need persistence to supervene on temporally
intrinsic facts. In fact, perdurantism can be defended by swallowing just a small dose
of temporal extrinsicality.

So to sum up my wider campaign, I claim that:—
(APo): Classical mechanics denies pointillisme, as regards space as well as space-
time. For it needs to use spatially extrinsic properties of spatial points and-or point-
sized bits of matter, more than is commonly believed.

(FPe): Classical mechanics permits perdurantism. It does not require temporally
extrinsic properties (of matter, or objects), in the sense of requiring persistence to
be endurance: as is commonly believed. A mild dose of temporal extrinsicality can
reconcile classical mechanics with perdurance.

To put the point in the philosophy of mind’s terminology of ‘wide’ and ‘narrow’
states, meaning (roughly) extrinsic and intrinsic states, respectively: I maintain that
classical mechanics:

(APo): needs to use states that are spatially wide, more than is commonly believed;

9

and

(FPe): does not require a speciﬁc strong form of temporal width, viz. endurance.
With a small dose of temporal extrinsicality, it can make do with temporally quite
narrow states—and can construe persistence as perdurance.

2.3

In more detail ...

So much by way of an opening statement. I will now spell out my main claims in a bit
more detail: (APo) in Section 2.3.1 and (FPe) in Section 2.3.2.

2.3.1 Four violations of pointillisme

I will begin by stating pointillisme as a trio of claims that apply to any physical
theory; and making two comments. Then I list four ways in which (chrono)-geometry
and classical mechanics violate pointillisme: three will form the main topics of this
paper and its companion.

The trio of claims is as follows:
(a): the fundamental quantities of the physical theory in question are to be deﬁned

at points of space or of spacetime;

(b): these quantities represent intrinsic properties of such points;
(c): models of the theory—i.e. in physicists’ jargon, solutions of its equations, and
in metaphysicians’ jargon, possible worlds according to the theory—are fully deﬁned
by a speciﬁcation of the quantities’ values at all such points.

So, putting (a)-(c) together: the idea of pointillisme is that the theory’s models
(or solutions or worlds) are something like conjunctions or mereological fusions of
“ultralocal facts”, i.e. facts at points.

Two comments. First: the disjunction in (a), ‘at points of space or of spacetime’,
corresponds to Section 2.2’s distinction between pointillisme as regards space, and as
regards spacetime. Nevermind that it does not imply the convention I adopted in Sec-
tion 2.2, that pointillisme as regards spacetime is a stronger doctrine since it vetoes
temporally extrinsic properties, as well as spatially extrinsic ones. The context will
always make it clear whether I mean space or spacetime (or both); and whether I mean
spatially or temporally extrinsic (or both).

Second: Though I have not made a systematic survey, there is no doubt that pointil-
lisme, especially its claims (a) and (b), is prominent in recent analytic metaphysics of
nature, especially of neo-Humean stripe. The prime example is the metaphysical sys-
tem of David Lewis, which is so impressive in its scope and detail. One of his main
metaphysical theses, which he calls ‘Humean supervenience’, is a version of pointillisme.
I will return to this in Section 4.

When we apply (a)-(c) to classical mechanics, there are, I believe, four main ways in
which pointillisme fails: or more kindly expressed, four concessions which pointillisme
needs to make. The ﬁrst three violations (concessions) occur in the classical mechanics

10

both of point-particles and of continua; the fourth is speciﬁc to continua. The ﬁrst two
violations are discussed in the companion paper (2006); the third is the topic of this
paper.

(1): The ﬁrst is obvious and minor. Whether matter is conceived as point-particles
or as continua, classical mechanics uses a binary relation of occupation, ‘... occupies
...’, between bits of matter and spatial or spacetime points (or, for extended parts
of a continuum: spatial or spacetime regions). And this binary relation presumably
brings with it extrinsic properties of its relata:
it seems an extrinsic property of a
point-particle (or a continuum, i.e. a continuous body) that it occupy a certain spatial
or spacetime point or region; and conversely.

(2): Classical mechanics (like other physical theories) postulates structure for space
and-or spacetime (geometry or chrono-geometry); and this involves a complex network
of geometric relations between, and so extrinsic properties of, points. This concession
is of course more striking as regards space than time: three-dimensional Euclidean
geometry involves more structure than does the real line. This is the main topic of
(2006).

(3): Mechanics needs of course to refer to the instantaneous velocity or momentum
of a body; and this is temporally extrinsic to the instant in question, since for example
it implies the body’s existence at other times.
(But it is also local in the sense of
(iii), Section 2.1.2.) So this second violation imposes temporal, rather than spatial,
extrinsicality; i.e. implications about other times, rather than other places.

This is the main topic of this paper. But I should stress that this third violation
is mitigated for point-particles. For a pointilliste can maintain that the persistence of
point-particles supervenes on facts that, apart from the other violations (i.e. about
‘occupies’ and (chrono)-geometry), are pointillistically acceptable: viz.
temporally
intrinsic facts about which spacetime points are occupied by matter.
In ﬁgurative
terms: the void between distinct point-particles allows one to construe their persistence
in terms of tracing the curves in spacetime connecting points that are occupied by
matter. I develop this theme in my (2005). On the other hand: for a continuous body,
the persistence of spatial parts (whether extensionless or extended) does not supervene
on such temporally intrinsic facts. This is the core idea of the rotating discs argument,
mentioned in Section 2.2.2.

To sum up: the rotating discs argument means that pointillisme ﬁts better with
point-particles than with continua. To put the issue in terms of Section 2.2’s two
forms of pointillisme: the strong form of pointillisme, pointillisme as regards spacetime,
fails for the classical mechanics of continua, even apart from the other concessions
mentioned.

(4): Finally, there is a fourth way that the classical mechanics of continua violates
pointillisme:
i.e., a fourth concession that pointillisme needs to make. Unlike the
rotating discs argument, this violation seems never to have been noticed in recent
analytic metaphysics; though the relevant physics goes back to Euler. Namely, the
classical mechanics of continua violates (the weaker doctrine of) pointillisme as regards

11

space, because it must be formulated in terms of spatially extended regions and their
properties and relations. But in this paper, I set this fourth violation aside entirely;
my (2006a) gives details.

So to sum up these four violations, I claim (APo): classical mechanics violates
pointillisme. This is so even for the weaker doctrine, pointillisme as regards space. And
it is especially so, for the classical mechanics of continua rather than point-particles.

2.3.2 For perdurantism

I turn to Section 2.2.3’s second claim, (FPe): that once pointillisme is rejected, per-
durantism does not need persistence to supervene on temporally intrinsic facts, and
can be defended for classical mechanics provided it swallows a small dose of temporal
extrinsicality.

Now I can identify this small dose. It is the extrinsicality of Section 2.3.1’s third
violation of pointillisme; in particular, the presupposition of persistence by the notion
of a body’s instantaneous velocity. Thanks to the rotating discs argument, ‘body’ here
means especially ‘point-sized bit of matter in a continuum’. For as we noted in Section
2.3.1, for point-particles we can construe persistence as perdurance without having to
take this dose.

Elsewhere (2004, 2004a) I argue that for a “naturalist” perdurantist, this dose is
small enough to swallow. For this paper (especially Section 4) I only need to state the
argument’s two main ideas:

(i): If the perdurantist rejects pointillisme, she can reject instantaneous temporal

parts, i.e. believe only in temporal parts with some non-zero duration.

(ii): She can thereby avoid the rotating discs argument. For the argument urges
that facts temporally intrinsic to instants cannot distinguish two obviously diﬀerent
states of motion for a continuous body. But the anti-pointilliste perdurantist has access
to non-instantaneous facts, and so can “thread the worldlines together”.

But I should also stress that I do not claim to refute endurantism, even for so
limited and sharply-deﬁned a class of objects as the point-particles and continua of
classical mechanics. The metaphysical debate about persistence is too entangled with
other debates in the philosophy of time, and in ontology and semantics, for me to claim
that. I claim only that in classical mechanics at least, perdurantism is tenable. In fact,
I think that in classical mechanics, the cases for endurantism and perdurantism are
about equally strong: the honours are about even. That is an ecumenical conclusion—
but one worth stressing since for continua, perdurantism has got such a bad press,
thanks to the rotating discs argument.

12

3 Velocity as intrinsic?

3.1 Can properties represented by vectors be intrinsic to a

point?

Classical mechanics represents the properties that encode the structure of space or
spacetime, and the properties of matter such as velocity, momentum etc., using mathe-
matical entities such as vectors, tensors, connections etc. (Of course, so do all physical
theories.) So the question arises: can properties that are so represented be intrinsic to
a point? This question is central to pointillisme, and to our other topic, persistence:
and will be at the centre of this paper.

But my discussion will be simpliﬁed by two drastic restrictions. First, I will consider
only properties represented by vectors, which I will for short call vectorial properties:
not those represented by other mathematical entities such as tensors and connections.
Though drastic, this restriction is natural, in that:

(i) vectors are about the simplest of the various mathematical entities that classical
mechanics (like other theories) uses to represent properties and relations—so they are
the ﬁrst case to consider;

(ii) the restriction is common in the literature: of the authors I discuss in this paper
and its companion, all consider only vectorial properties, except for Bricker (1993) who
also considers tensors.

Second, I will concentrate on instantaneous velocity. For the pointilliste authors I
will criticize (mainly Tooley, Robinson and Lewis) do so; though both they and I will
also brieﬂy comment on momentum, force and acceleration.

As announced in Section 1, the discussion will illustrate how strongly some con-
temporary metaphysicians are attracted by pointillisme. They reconcile the apparent
extrinsicality of a vectorial property, speciﬁcally velocity, with pointillisme by propos-
ing to reconstrue the property. Thus in Section 3.3, Tooley and others will reject the
orthodox idea of instantaneous velocity as a limit of average velocities, and reconstrue
it in order to make it an intrinsic property. And in Section 4, Robinson and Lewis will
make a similar proposal. My own view will of course be that there is no need for such
heterodoxy: instead, we can and should reject pointillisme.

So the plan of battle for the rest of this paper is as follows. I will undertake four

projects: the ﬁrst two in this Section, and then two in Section 4:—

(1): I will endorse the view that instantaneous velocity is extrinsic, in particular
temporally extrinsic. But I will also emphasise that because it is local ((iii) of Section
2.1.2), it is hardly extrinsic; (Section 3.2).

(2): I will criticize the heterodox view of Tooley and others that we should recon-

strue velocity so as to make it intrinsic; (Section 3.3).

(3): I will criticize the view of Lewis and Robinson that a moving object has a
vectorial property numerically equal to velocity, but free of velocity’s presupposition
of the notion of persistence; (Sections 4.1 and 4.2).

13

(4): I end by oﬀering a peace-pipe to Robinson and Lewis. I formulate a cousin of
their proposal—a cousin that is not pointilliste—and end by comparing it with their
original; (Section 4.3).

So while the second and third projects are critical, the ﬁrst and fourth are more
positive. In particular, Section 4.3 reﬂects Section 1’s admission that heterodox treat-
ments of the continuum and of physical quantities are of course worth developing.

3.2 Orthodox velocity is extrinsic but local

3.2.1 A question and a debate

To lay out the ground, let us begin by asking: Is a particle’s velocity intrinsic to it at
the time in question? The ﬁrst thing to say is of course that this question, and similar
ones e.g. whether a particle’s velocity counts as part of its instantaneous state, have a
long history. Although ‘intrinsic’ is a philosophical term of art (especially nowadays,
cf. Section 2.1.1), and although instantaneous velocity was ﬁrst rigorously deﬁned only
with the advent of the calculus, the vaguer notion of “velocity at a time” was involved
in all debate about the nature of motion from Zeno’s time onwards.

I will not go in to details details about this long history. Here it must suﬃce to
say that its “highlights” include: Zeno, Ockham’s ‘at-at’ theory of motion, medieval
impetus theory, the apparent resolution of Zeno’s paradoxes provided by the calculus
(at least as rigorized by Cauchy and Weierstrass, if not by its seventeenth century
inventors), the philosophical discussion of that resolution by analytic philosophers like
Russell, and the recent development, in mathematics, of heterodox theories of the
continuum—for example, the two modern vindications of the idea of inﬁnitesimals,
non-standard analysis and smooth inﬁnitesimal analysis.
for the
history, Mancosu (1996, Chapters 4f.), Leibniz (2001), Arthur (2006); for the recent
work on inﬁnitesimals, Robinson (1996), Bell (1998).)

(Sources include:

So I set aside both the history and contemporary inﬁnitesimals; and I postpone
heterodox philosophical treatments of velocity to the next Subsection. Here I will give
the details of the orthodox answer to our question. Namely, as announced in Section
2.3.1: instantaneous velocity is extrinsic, in particular temporally extrinsic, but local.
Though this answer is, I submit, straightforward, and the underlying mathematics is
elementary, it is worth pausing over; for it has been the topic of some recent debate
(between Albert, Arntzenius and Smith).

So let us consider the orthodox notion of instantaneous velocity for a point-particle.
This is the limit of the particle’s average velocity as the time-interval around the point
in question tends to zero. To be precise, we will require the two one-sided limits and
the two-sided limit to all exist and be equal: we say, in an obvious notation,

If

limε→0+

q(t + ε) − q(t)
ε

= limε→0+

q(t − ε) − q(t)
ε

=

14

limε→0+,δ→0+

q(t + ε) − q(t − δ)
ε + δ

,

then v(t) := this common limit.

(3.1)

If we now ask our question—is velocity, deﬁned by eq. 3.1, intrinsic to the particle at
t?—intuition pulls in two directions.

On the one hand, one wants to say Yes, because an attribution of velocity (even
of a speciﬁc value v) implies no categorical information about the particle’s velocity,
or location, at other times. Having instantaneous velocity v at a point q at time t is
compatible with any values for the particle’s instantaneous velocity and its location, at
any other instant t′ in time, as near as you please to t. Indeed in classical mechanics,
the compatibility is not just logical, but also nomic, since classical mechanics gives no
upper bound to either the speed or the acceleration of a particle.

To put the same point in other words: there is no time-interval around t (in partic-
ular, no minimal time-interval) for which the course of values of the particle’s location
and-or velocity, or some proposition about the possibilities for these courses of values,
are equivalent to the particle’s instantaneous velocity at t. So the instantaneous ve-
locity is surely not a property of the particle during a time-interval around t—which
suggests that it is intrinsic to the particle at t.

But on the other hand, one wants to say No, for two reasons. First, the particle’s
velocity is relative to a frame of reference. This surely makes it a relation between
the particle and an object stationary in (or perhaps in some other way representing)
the frame.
(Or at least, the velocity is an extrinsic property that the particle has
because of such a relation.) Though this reason is important, it tends to be ignored in
discussions about whether velocity is intrinsic; so it will be clearest to postpone it to
Section 3.3.1.B, where I brieﬂy discuss the two authors who mention it.

The second reason for answering No is recognized in the literature. It is that the
particle’s instantaneous velocity v at t codes a lot of information about what its velocity
and location is at nearby times—but not “categorical information”. The information
is conditional or hypothetical information about average velocities (and consequently,
locations). The information is given precisely by eq. 3.1. And it is given roughly,
by saying that for nearby times the collection of average velocities must be so “well-
behaved” as to have a single limit, v, as the times get closer to t; or in spacetime terms,
by saying that the nearby history of locations (the local segment of the worldline) must
be smooth enough to have at t a tangent vector (a 4-velocity determined by v).

These diverse intuitions are clearly in evidence in the recent debate between Albert,
Arntzenius and Smith. I will not arbitrate this debate in detail: that would require
extended quotation and textual exegesis. But a short summary will suﬃce to bring
out the diverse intuitions; and I submit, to make clear that the right answer to our
question is ‘No: velocity is extrinsic though local’.

The debate runs as follows:—
(i): Albert (2000, pp. 9-10, 17-18) and Arntzenius (2000, Section 3, especially pp.
192-195) do not address exclusively our question. Their attention is predominantly on
the similar question, whether a particle’s instantaneous velocity as deﬁned by eq. 3.1

15

should count as part of its instantaneous state. They argue that it should not, since
they require that an object’s instantaneous state should not imply, in virtue of logic and
deﬁnition alone, any constraints on its instantaneous states at other times. And velocity
clearly does imply such constraints: roughly, that for some time-interval around t,
maybe very short, the particle’s average velocities are suitably “well-behaved”; cf. the
‘No’ answer above.

(ii): Smith (2003, pp. 269-280; especially pp. 274-277) replies that instantaneous
velocity should count as part of the instantaneous state at t, essentially because for
any other time the state (in particular the location and velocity) could be anything;
cf. the ‘Yes’ answer above.8

(iii): In his brief reply, Arntzenius (2003) emphasises that his and Albert’s main
idea is the requirement reported in (i), that an instantaneous state should not imply,
by just logic and deﬁnitions, any constraints on instantaneous states at other times.
And he argues that velocity’s implications about other times surely make it extrinsic.
(iv): In a yet briefer rejoinder (2003a), Smith: (a) is sceptical about metaphysicians’
intrinsic-extrinsic distinction; and (b) rejects Albert’s and Arntzenius’ requirement,
since ‘physicists have not chosen to adhere to that requirement, and in the absence of
a good reason ... we ought to stick with physics here’ (2003a, p. 283).

3.2.2 The verdict

Surveying this debate, I think the verdict is clear. Ultimately, it is of course just a
verbal matter whether to impose Albert’s and Arntzenius’ requirement as part of the
meaning of ‘instantaneous state’; though ceteris paribus, one is well-advised to follow
the usage of the discipline concerned—and so, in this case, to join the physicists in not
imposing it.

But similarly, ‘intrinsic’ and ‘extrinsic’ are established philosophical terms. And
there is no doubt that an attribution of instantaneous velocity (either the determinable
or a determinate value) has implications for other times (not least that the object exists
then), and so is extrinsic, indeed positive temporally extrinsic; (cf. Section 2.1.1 and
In short: once the meaning of ‘extrinsic’ is settled, it is
the ‘No’ answer above).
uncontentious that velocity is extrinsic.

On the other hand, the “grain of truth” in the ‘Yes’ answer is that velocity is local
in the sense of (iii) Section 2.1.2: whether the particle has a velocity at t, and if so
what it is, is determined by its positions at times in an arbitrarily short time interval
around t. Again this is uncontentious.9

One might add to this verdict that the physicists’ usage, that velocity is part of
the instantaneous state, ﬁts dynamics, as well as kinematics (i.e. as well as velocity’s
8Smith (pp. 264-268) also corrects the common view that Russell in his (1903) took the calculus
to vindicate the idea of instantaneous velocity as intrinsic to the object at the time. In fact, Russell’s
version of the “at-at” theory of motion denies that there are instantaneous states of motion (and more
generally: of change). Tooley (1988: Sections 1, 2.2) makes the same point.

9But terminology varies. Bricker (1993, p. 289) calls such a property ‘neighbourhood-dependent’;

similarly, Arntzenius (2000, p. 193) suggests calling them ‘neighbourhood properties’.

16

being local). For in a deterministic theory like mechanics, the laws of motion are to
determine all later states from the present state (‘initial data’); and since these laws
are second-order in time, the initial data must include the velocity, as well as the
position.10

Though uncontentious, this verdict is important for the debate about whether per-
sistence is endurance or perdurance; and in particular, for my pro-perdurantist claim
(FPe) (Section 2.3.2). Thus one way in which velocity is extrinsic is its implication
that the object exists at other times; and this has prompted a consensus that the per-
durantist’s reply to the rotating discs argument cannot appeal to diﬀerent velocities (or
angular velocities). But extrinsicality, though usually discussed as an all-or-nothing af-
fair, comes in degrees (Lewis 1983, p. 111): a property is more extrinsic, the more that
its ascription implies about the world beyond the property’s instance. Since velocity is
local, it is hardly extrinsic; and this means that a perdurantist who swallows this small
dose of temporal extrinsicality can invoke velocity in her reply to the rotating discs
argument. More precisely, an anti-pointilliste perdurantist who vetoes instantaneous
temporal parts can do so. (Butterﬁeld (2004, Sections 4.2.2 and 7.4; 2004a, Sections
2.2.2, 4.5) gives details.)

Finally, two technical remarks which will be needed in Section 3.3. (1): In eq. 3.1
and the ensuing discussion, we have implicitly assumed that the particle exists through-
out a time interval around t, not least because textbooks of analysis deﬁne continuity
and diﬀerentiability at a point t only for functions deﬁned on a neighbourhood of t. But
philosophers, concerned with logical as well as nomic possibilities, sometimes consider
particles that come in and out of existence (e.g. Tooley and others discussed in Section
3.3). So it is worth noticing that the usual deﬁnitions of continuity and diﬀerentiability
at a point t ∈ IR can be carried over to any function deﬁned on a subset of IR that has
t as a limit point from both above and below. For example, one can talk about the
continuity and diﬀerentiability at zero of a function deﬁned on zero together with the
reciprocals of integers, i.e. deﬁned on {1/n : n an integer } ∪ {0}.

(2): The orthodox account of velocity can also be liberalized, as regards one-sided
limits. There is no reason to insist that a “rate of motion” deserves the name ‘velocity’
only if both one-sided limits exist and are equal to the two-sided limit (cf. eq. 3.1).
Thus it is common practice to call the limit from above (eq. 3.1’s ﬁrst term) v+(t);
and to call the limit from below (eq. 3.1’s second term) v−(t); and to talk of one-sided
velocities in a case where v+(t) 6= v−(t). Combining this idea with (1) above, we see
that a one-sided limit at a point t only requires the function’s domain to have t as a
limit point from that side.

So much for the orthodox notion of velocity. From now on, I will consider, and

rebut, heterodox views:—

(1): in Section 3.3, a view of velocity as intrinsic, which has been advocated without
10This point is not speciﬁc to Newton’s laws, with force proportional to acceleration d2q/dt2. Suit-
ably generalized (to substitute momentum for velocity), it applies to both Lagrangian and Hamiltonian
formulations of classical mechanics; and to relativistic generalizations.

17

regard to the debate about persistence; and

(2):

from Section 4, a view that accepts orthodox velocity but proposes that to
understand persistence we need to postulate another vectorial quantity, always equal
in value to orthodox velocity, but free of its presupposition of persistence.

3.3 Against intrinsic velocity

3.3.1 A common view—and a common problem

3.3.1.A The view Several authors have sketched a heterodox view of instantaneous
velocity as intrinsic: Tooley (1988, p. 236f.), Bigelow and Pargetter (1989, especially
pp. 290-294; 1990, pp. 62-82)11 and Arntzenius (2000: pp. 189, 196-201). As we shall
see, a dozen or so philosophers have commented on this heterodox view, and often
sympathetically. But so far as I know, these authors’ arguments for their view have
not received detailed scrutiny—or rebuttal. So that will be my purpose until Section
4.

These authors’ proposals seem to be mutually independent: the three later authors

do not cite the previous work. But they share a common view, as follows:

(i): Velocity should be an intrinsic property of an object at a time that (together
with the position, and the regime of impressed forces) causes, and so explains, the
object’s position at later times.

(ii): Causation should be understood in a broadly neoHumean way, as a contingent
relation between ‘distinct existences’. This means that the orthodox notion of velocity,
being a “logical construction” out of the object’s positions at other times (cf. Section
3.2) cannot do the job required by (i).

But the proposals diﬀer in detail. For example, Tooley presents his proposal by
applying Lewis’ (1970) tactic for functional deﬁnition of theoretical terms to a version
of “Newton’s laws of motion”. Or to use another jargon: he “Ramsiﬁes” some accepted
laws of motion. I presume that by thus “piggy-backing” on the accepted laws, Tooley’s
approach can readily secure that its intrinsic velocity is a vector; (though Tooley does
not go into this). On the other hand, Bigelow and Pargetter develop the view without
using details about the laws of motion:
instead, they appeal to the metaphysics of
universals and the logic of relations to argue that their intrinsic velocity is vectorial.

Another diﬀerence concerns how to treat vectorial quantities other than velocity.
Tooley proposes to treat force in a similar way to velocity but is content with an
orthodox account of acceleration as “just” d2q/dt2 (1988, p. 249). But Bigelow and
Pargetter (1989, pp. 294-295) propose heterodoxy for both force and acceleration;
though not for higher derivatives of position, which, they assert, play no explanatory
role.12

11I will only cite the former, since the latter is almost identical.
12For all three, the shared view (i) and (ii) exempliﬁes a characteristically Australian realism,
and endorsement of inference to the best explanation. Thus Tooley elsewhere proposes a functional
deﬁnition of causation (1987, Chapters 1.2, 8); and even proposes that a spacetime point causes later

18

There are also diﬀerences as regards connections to other topics. Thus Bigelow,
Pargetter and Arntzenius, but not Tooley, suggest the view is a descendant of some
medieval views (about impetus and ﬂux). And Arntzenius (2000, pp. 198-201) connects
the view to time-reversal, and so to Albert’s heterodox allegation (2000, pp. 14-15,
20-21) that electromagnetism is not time-reversal invariant.13

In this Subsection, I will focus on Tooley, and so speak of ‘Tooleyan velocities’. My

reasons for this focus are that:—

(i): So far as I know, his arguments for the view are the most developed; but as I

mentioned, they seem not to have received detailed scrutiny.

(ii): This focus enables me to avoid Bigelow and Pargetter’s contentious metaphys-

ical territory of universals.14

3.3.1.B The problem The view that velocity is intrinsic faces an obvious problem,
which I mentioned in Section 3.2.1. Namely, velocity being intrinsic conﬂicts with
velocity being relative to a frame of reference. For the latter surely makes velocity a
relation between objects, viz. the given one and an object stationary in (or in some
other way representing) the frame; or perhaps, a corresponding extrinsic property: in
any case, not intrinsic.

Among advocates of the view, only Tooley, so far as I know, addresses this problem;
and among commentators, only Zimmerman (1998, pp. 276-277). In Section 3.3.3, I
shall criticize Tooley’s response to this problem; which is in any case brief. Here I want
just to emphasise two points which force the problem on any advocate of intrinsic
velocity.

(1): The problem is not speciﬁc to special relativity; (as Tooley’s response and
Zimmerman’s discussion both suggest). Classical mechanics no less than relativity can
be formulated without postulating absolute rest, so that velocity is indeed relative to a
frame of reference. (For the idea, think of the galilean transformations. For a rigorous
formulation along these lines, one uses a neoNewtonian conception of spacetime: for
philosophical expositions cf. e.g. Sklar (1974: Chapter III.D.3, pp. 202-206), Earman
(1989, Chapter 2.4, p. 33).)

(2): The problem takes us back to the distinction between the philosophical and
the mathematical notions of intrinsic, where the latter means in particular, coordinate-
(i) of Section 2.1.2). To be precise, this distinction clariﬁes the
independent (cf.
problem—and shows that any advocate of intrinsic velocity faces it. Thus it is not

ones, and that in the context of relativity, this is a linear non-branching relation, providing a version
for discussion, cf.
of relativity theory with an absolute simultaneity (1997, pp. 338-344, 354-355:
Dainton 2001, pp. 278-281). Bigelow and Pargetter elsewhere defend a realist view of forces as a
species of causation (Bigelow, Ellis and Pargetter, 1988).

13Earman (2002), Arntzenius (2004) and Malament (2004) are replies to Albert.
14Besides, I will reply en passant to their three principal arguments for distinguishing intrinsic
velocity from orthodox velocity, since they are similar to arguments of Tooley’s which I discuss.
Another discussion of Tooleyan velocities which emphasises causation more than I will, but whose
verdict, like mine, is broadly negative, is Le Poidevin (2006).

19

enough for the advocate to point out that rigorous formulations of mechanics, whether
classical or relativistic, associate a mathematically intrinsic notion of 4-velocity to an
object such as a point-particle, viz. the tangent vector to the object’s worldline. For
that fact does not imply that the 4-velocity is philosophically intrinsic, and thereby ﬁt
(by the advocate’s lights) to do the jobs of causing and explaining later positions. And
even if the 4-velocity is philosophically intrinsic, that would not imply that a 3-velocity,
i.e. an ordinary spatial velocity of the sort all the advocates discuss, is philosophically
intrinsic and so “ﬁt for work”. For to deﬁne the 3-velocity from the 4-velocity, one has
to choose a frame of reference—in either a neoNewtonian or a relativistic theory: and
so face the problem.15

So this problem is substantial. Nevertheless, metaphysicians seem to still consider
the view a live option; (e.g. Zimmerman (1998, pp. 275-278) and Sider (2001, pp. 35,
39, 228). And I will also set the problem aside, apart from brieﬂy reporting Tooley’s
response (in Section 3.3.3). After all, the view is so far only a sketch: none of these
authors makes their heterodox account of velocity part of a mathematically elaborated
theory of motion (and-or causation).16 But my setting this problem aside is not just
an act of charity. There will be plenty else to comment on—and criticize!

3.3.2 Tooley’s proposal; and his arguments

3.3.2.A Tooley’s proposal As I mentioned, Tooley proposes that velocity is an
intrinsic property that is functionally deﬁned by the laws of motion, in the manner
of Lewis (1970: especially Section IV). So, roughly speaking: Tooley says that the
velocity of object o at time t is that unique intrinsic property of o at t that is thus-
and-thus related to other concepts, as spelled out in the usual formulas of kinematics
and dynamics. More precisely, Tooley gives a kinematic formula and a dynamical one,
which he labels T1 and T2, Writing q(t), v(t) for the position and velocity at t of the
15These comments apply equally to classical and relativistic mechanics. For the present topic, they
only diﬀer in the metrical properties attributed to a 4-velocity:
in a neoNewtonian theory it has
only a temporal length, while in a relativistic theory, it has a spatiotemporal length. Incidentally,
Zimmerman’s comment (1998, pp. pp. 276-277) amounts to: (i) my (2), but applied only to relativity
theory; (ii) the suggestion that 4-acceleration is a ‘much better candidate for an intrinsic state of
motion’ (p. 267). Le Poidevin (2006: Section 6) also makes the suggestion (ii). I agree with (ii),
not least because in both theories, 4-acceleration has a coordinate-independent length. But it would
take us too far aﬁeld to assess whether Tooley and his ilk could or should adapt the proposal and
arguments in Section 3.3.2 to acceleration instead of velocity: their project, not mine! Similarly, as
regards adapting them to 4-velocity, rather than 3-velocity.

16Tooley (1988, pp. 231-2) brieﬂy considers whether his account could be formalized using non-

standard analysis’ inﬁnitesimals; but concludes that it cannot be.

20

object o with mass m, and F (t) for the force impressed on o at t, these formulas are:17

T1 :

q(t2) = q(t1) +

v(t) dt;

T2 :

v(t2) = v(t1) + Z

F (t)/m dt.

t2

Z

t1

t2

t1

(3.2)

(3.3)

So velocity is to be implicitly deﬁned in Ramsey-Lewis style, as the unique intrinsic
property with the functional role enjoyed by the term v in T1&T2.

As Tooley interprets this proposal, it diﬀers both mathematically and philosoph-
ically from the orthodox account of eq. 3.1. Let us ﬁrst address the mathematical
diﬀerence; which is minor.

t2

Eq. 3.1 requires q to be diﬀerentiable. But T1&T2 (indeed T1) implies only that q
t1 v dt is a continuous function of its limits)18; not
is continuous (since the integral
that it is diﬀerentiable, since v in T1 is not deﬁned as dq
dt . Thus Tooley considers the
case of a particle initially at rest at the origin, with v(t) = 0 for all t < 0 and v(t) = 1
for all t > 0, so that q(t) = 0 for all t < 0 and q(t) = t for all t > 0. Because of the
corner at t = 0, q is not diﬀerentiable at t = 0; and however we might choose to deﬁne
v(0), v will be discontinuous at 0. Yet T1 holds good: in particular, v in integrable.

R

There are good mathematical questions hereabouts. For example: how “well-
behaved” must v be in order to be integrable (on either the Riemann or the Lebesque
deﬁnition)? And as a consequence: how well-behaved must the integral i.e. q be? These
questions are addressed in integration theory. But Tooley does not pursue them;19 and
nor will I. For us it is enough to note that Tooley’s T1&T2 is a mathematically mild
generalization of eq. 3.1’s orthodox account: in short, the diﬀerence is that whereas or-
thodoxy takes position as primitive and velocity as its derivative, T1&T2 takes velocity
as primitive and position as its integral.

3.3.2.B Tooley’s arguments Turning to philosophy, Tooley gives six arguments
for his proposal, which together bring out how he interprets it; (his Sections 4.1-4.6,
with further discussion and replies in Sections 5 and 6). He admits that the arguments
vary in strength, and that they need a variety of deniable premises. These premises
are typical of contemporary analytic metaphysics of nature. They concern such topics
as:

(a) whether there can be “action at a temporal distance”: i.e. roughly, a cause at
t1 of an eﬀect at t2, without causally relevant states of aﬀairs at all the times between
17Cf. Tooley (1988, pp. 238-239). For brevity, I have suppressed universal quantiﬁers and a
variable for the object o; and I have simpliﬁed T2 so as to assume a constant mass; Tooley’s T2 tries
to accommodate relativity’s velocity-dependence of mass by writing m(t). Both Tooley and I simplify
to one spatial dimension: the generalization to three spatial dimensions, q(t), v(t) etc. is trivial.

18Tooley makes a slip here (p. 238), saying that T1&T2 do not even imply that q is continuous: no

matter.

cf. (2) in Section 3.3.2.B below.

19But Tooley does deploy the above example in one of his philosophical arguments for his proposal;

21

t1 and t2; or

(b) whether motion can be discontinuous.

And as one might expect, the arguments also depend on less explicit, but again deni-
able, premises (“intuitions”), articulating a broadly neoHumean view of causation; (cf.
(ii) in Section 3.3.1.A).

I will not try to state all Tooley’s arguments; but will concentrate on the arguments
and premises that seem most important. (This will cover three arguments given by
Bigelow and Pargetter; cf. footnote 14.) This means I will focus on the arguments of
his Sections 4.2, 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6. But it will be clearer to discuss his 4.5 before his 4.4;
for 4.4 and 4.6 share a common premise, that motion could be discontinuous. It will
also be clearest to reply to the arguments seriatim, so as to avoid having to refer back
to arguments.

But I can already state the general tenor of my reply. I will criticize Tooley’s (and

Bigelow and Pargetter’s) arguments as either:

(i): not justifying a crucial premise, or “intuition” about a thought-experiment;

and-or

(ii) under-estimating the resources of the orthodox account.

I would add that (i) and (ii) both arise from the arguments and thought-experiments
being by and large too far removed from the details of mechanics. But of course a
philosopher of physics would say that to a metaphysician!

(1): Tooley’s Section 4.2:—

The argument of Tooley’s Section 4.2 assumes a denial of “action at a temporal dis-
tance” ((a) above), which he calls the ‘principle of causal continuity’. We do not need
the exact formulation of the principle, but only this consequence of it:

If there is a causally suﬃcient condition of some state of aﬀairs, however
complex the condition and however gappy it may be [i.e. spread across
disconnected intervals or instants of time—JNB], there must also be some
instantaneous state of aﬀairs which is also a causally suﬃcient condition of
the state of aﬀairs in question. (p. 242)

Tooley accepts that the principle of causal continuity is not a necessary truth, but
holds that it is ‘reasonable’ to believe it true of ‘our world’ (1988, p. 242). Presumably
he would say the same about this consequence. In any case, he then says

In either a Newtonian or a relativistic world ... the state of the world at an
instant cannot be a causally suﬃcient condition of later states unless veloc-
ity (or, alternatively, something to which velocity is deﬁnitionally related,
such as momentum) characterizes the instantaneous states of objects.
If
therefore the principle of causal continuity is accepted, the Russellian [i.e.
orthodox] analysis of velocity must be rejected. (p. 242)

In the ﬁrst sentence here, Tooley is of course referring to the fact noted in Section 3.2’s
verdict on the Albert-Arntzenius-Smith debate: that since in Newtonian or relativistic

22

mechanics the laws of motion are second-order in time, the initial data of a solution
must include the velocity or momentum, so that it is natural to call velocity part of
the instantaneous state. So far, so uncontentious: at least in so far as we go along with
Tooley in regarding the determination of the later state by the present one (the initial
data) as a case of causal suﬃciency.

But the second sentence is contentious. Here, Tooley assumes that an orthodox
velocity cannot count as part of the instantaneous state—at least if ‘instantaneous
state’ is understood as causally suﬃcient for a later state. Thus his view is like that
of Arntzenius and Albert (cf. Section 3.2), though more explicit and more detailed in
its commitment to a neoHumean view of causation. So my reply is: why should we
accept this assumption? So far, I see no reason: especially in the light of Section 3.2’s
verdict that orthodox velocity, though extrinsic, is local and part of the instantaneous
state.20

(2): Tooley’s Section 4.5:—

The argument of Tooley’s Section 4.5 uses Section 3.3.2.A’s example of a particle which
is at rest and then moves with velocity v(t) = 1 at all t > 0. Tooley argues that though
orthodoxy dictates that v(0) is undeﬁned, the intuitive verdict about the case is that
v(0) = 0. For since (as he argues elsewhere: 1987, pp. 207-212) cause and eﬀect cannot
be simultaneous, the motion’s cause, viz. an instantaneous impulsive force acting at
t = 0, can only have an eﬀect (viz. v = 1) later. Tooley then also assumes that
his functional deﬁnition of velocity using T1&T2 will imply this result, i.e. that if the
particle’s movement is due to an impulsive force acting instantaneously, then v(0) = 0
(p. 246, paragraph 4). Finally, he says that in a world in which impulsive forces
act “at a temporal distance”, e.g. with a time delay of one second, and in which an
appropriate21 instantaneous impulse is impressed on the particle at time t = −1 s.,
the velocity at t = 0 would be 1: v(0) = 1. And again he assumes that his functional
deﬁnition will imply this result (p. 246-247).

I reply that while Tooley’s judgments about the intuitive values of velocity, in the
light of various postulated causal stories, may well be defensible in an elaborated the-
ory of causation and motion, they are debatable (i) in general and (ii) in the context
of his T1&T2.

(i): Philosophers with other views of causation might well disagree. And not only
philosophers who are sceptical about causal talk: philosophers who “believe in” causa-
tion, but see little connection between causation and classical mechanics, in particular
velocity, might well disagree.

(ii): In particular, these judgments do not just follow from T1&T2, or from a func-
20The same reply works against Bigelow and Pargetter’s similar, but more free-wheeling, argument.
They go so far as to say that the extrinsicality of orthodox velocity amounts to action at a temporal
distance! Thus they allege that the orthodox description of an impact, e.g. a meteor striking Mars,
requires the meteor’s past positions to exert a force now; so they remark incredulously that ‘this
requires the meteor to have a kind of ‘memory’–what it does to Mars depends not only on its current
properties but also on where it has been’ (1989, p. 296). I submit that Section 3.2’s discussion and
verdict scotches this argument.

21Namely, the mass of the particle times 1 unit of velocity.

23

tional deﬁnition obtained from them. For the transition from orthodoxy, eq. 3.1, to
treating velocity as primitive and position as its integral, i.e. T1&T2, cannot settle
disputed matters of causation—causal relations are too misty a subject to be settled
by such a mathematically mild generalization.22

The arguments of Tooley’s Sections 4.4. and 4.6 both assume that a particle’s
spatial trajectory could be discontinuous (not just non-diﬀerentiable) so that it “jumps
about” in space.

(3): Tooley’s Section 4.4:—

In Section 4.4, Tooley adds to discontinuous motion the idea of a world in which
a particle’s present position gives only probabilities for its later positions, and then
asks us to consider a particle with just happens to have a spatial trajectory that is
throughout some time interval a diﬀerentiable function of time. In short, we are to
consider what Tooley dubs ‘accidentally orderly movement in a probabilistic world’ (p.
243).

Tooley now urges the intuition that such a particle would not have a velocity at
any time in the interval in question, because ‘the velocity of an object at a time should
be causally relevant to its positions at later times’ (p. 244).

Tooley also points out that the same example threatens any view that takes velocity
to be determined by (supervenient upon) the history of positions; e.g. a liberalization
of eq. 3.1 which required only that the one-sided limit, from earlier times, of average
velocities, should exist. For the accidentally orderly history of position in Tooley’s
imagined probabilistic world could match exactly a particle’s history in a deterministic
(say, classical mechanical) world. And the latter particle, says Tooley, does have a
velocity—it is part of the instantaneous state and causally relevant to later positions.
So if we accept Tooley’s intuition that the accidentally orderly particle lacks a velocity,
then the worlds match as to the particles’ positions but diﬀer as to their velocity: and
not just as to what the value of velocity is, but as to whether there is a value.

I make two replies, analogous to those for Tooley’s Section 4.5 ((2) above). First,
22Bigelow and Pargetter’s argument for Tooleyan velocity diﬀering from orthodox velocity is dif-
ferent. They present a case where both are deﬁned but diﬀer, for an instant, in value (1989, pp.
292-293). Suppose two perfectly rigid spheres, B and C, are at rest and touching; then B is struck
along the line between their centres by a third such sphere, A, at velocity v. Supposing the spheres
are of equal mass, ‘theory tells us that A will stop, B will not budge, and C will move oﬀ with velocity
v’ (1989, p. 293); (think of a “Newton’s cradle”). Bigelow and Pargetter assert that at the instant of
impact, B has a Tooleyan velocity v: ‘the velocity of A is transferred from A, through B, to C’ (ibid.).
I reply that this is a case where everyday or philosophers’ intuitions are too far removed from the

details of mechanics: in two ways.

(i): That ‘A will stop, B will not budge, and C will move oﬀ’ is only an approximate description,
based on the idealization of perfect rigidity. This is a very strong idealization: by assuming forces, and
ﬁnite impulses, are transmitted instantaneously through bodies, it forbids any account of processes
within bodies. And this can be philosophically misleading; for example, in the rotating disc argument
(Butterﬁeld 2004: Section 5.5.2; 2004a: Section 3.2), and in the metaphysics of causation (Wilson
2004).

(ii): Even if we assume perfect rigidity, it does not follow that B has a velocity, even a heterodox

one for just an instant. It only follows that a ﬁnite impulse is transmitted through B.

24

intuitions clash. I have no hesitation in judging, contra Tooley, that the particle moving
accidentally in an orderly way has a velocity—even if I try to forget my previous
inclination to the orthodox view! Nor am I alone; cf. Smith (2003, p. 279 fn 14).
So far, this is a stalemate. But second, as in (2)(ii) above: Tooley’s T1&T2, and a
functional deﬁnition obtained from them, do not imply that the accidentally ordered
particle lacks a velocity. Why should the unique realizer of that functional role have
the causal properties and relations Tooley intuitively wants?23

(4): Tooley’s Section 4.6:—

In Section 4.6, the imagined discontinuous motion is much more extreme. Tooley asks
us to

consider the following case. The world contains a rather unusual force
ﬁeld that causes objects to “ﬂash” in and out of existence. Speciﬁcally,
any object [it had better be a point-particle!—JNB] that enters this ﬁeld
exists only at points whose distance from the center of the ﬁeld, measured
in terms of a certain privileged unit of length, is given by an irrational
number. Thus, if an object is moving along, and enters the ﬁeld, it blinks
in and out of existence an inﬁnite number of times in any interval, however
short. ... Given that the object is progressing through the ﬁeld, it is natural
to describe it as being in motion. Moreover, given that Achilles would, we
can suppose, pass through a given ﬁeld more quickly than the tortoise, it
seems natural to say that objects have diﬀerent velocities as they move
through the ﬁeld ... [But] the standard account of velocity [will not] assign
a velocity to objects that are ﬂashing along through [this] peculiar force
ﬁeld.
In contrast, if velocity is a theoretical property of an object at a
time, there would seem to be no reason why objects could not possess a
velocity as they move along, blinking in and out of existence. (p. 247-248)

In reply, I think many philosophers of physics will ﬁnd this thought-experiment so phys-
ically unrealistic that they will be happy to discount any “intuitions” about whether
there is motion and velocity in it. Fair enough, say I. But there is also a more speciﬁc
response, which builds on my earlier comments.

We noted at the end of Section 3.2 that the orthodox account of velocity could be
readily generalized to attribute velocity at a time that was a limit point (or even a
one-sided limit point) of a domain of deﬁnition of a position function q. In Tooley’s
thought-experiment, this is of course exactly what occurs—all the time! Thus Tooley
is presumably imagining the simplest sort of case where the discontinuous worldline of
the particle is a dense subset of a smooth curve in spacetime. To put the case heuris-
23Bigelow and Pargetter’s argument for the same conclusion, that an object can have orthodox
velocity without Tooleyan velocity, is that movie-images and spots of light have orthodox velocity
but no Tooleyan velocity, for lack of an appropriate causal link (1989, p. 293-294). I reply: you are
at liberty to introduce a notion of velocity stronger than the orthodox one by requiring some causal
link, and your notion may mesh better with everyday use of ‘velocity’. But that hardly counts as a
criticism of the orthodox notion.

25

tically in terms of counterfactuals: the particle would have had the smooth curve as
its worldline, and so an orthodox velocity, were it not being “ﬂashed out of existence”
when at rational distances from the center of the ﬁeld. For this sort of case, the or-
thodox account can be readily generalized: the discontinuous worldline determines a
unique smooth curve, so that at each time when the particle exists it can be attributed
unambiguously the velocity associated with that point on the curve. (The same com-
ment could of course be made using the discontinuous spatial trajectory rather than
the worldline.)

Again, there are good mathematical questions hereabouts: viz. about the condi-
tions under which “bad” curves, e.g. discontinuous ones, have “good” e.g. diﬀerentiable
extensions. But Tooley does not pursue these questions; and nor will I. He just says,
as I quoted above, that his kind of account of velocity as a theoretical property would
surely attribute a velocity to the “ﬂashing” particle. So be it, say I. But I deny that
this merit is thanks to features speciﬁc to Tooley’s account (such as velocity being a
cause or eﬀect, or being functionally deﬁned). The reason his account could, or would,
attribute velocity is the simple mathematical one: that even the orthodox account can
easily be generalized to do this; and since Tooley’s T1&T2 is a mathematically mild
generalization of the orthodox account, it also can be thus generalized. Nothing speciﬁc
to Tooley’s account seems relevant.24

3.3.3 Tooley’s further discussion

I turn to Tooley’s further discussion in his Sections 5, 6. I shall consider two of his
topics. (Footnote 24 replied en passant to a third.)

(1): Tooley’s Section 5.1:—

The ﬁrst is his account’s explanation of why the orthodox account works as well as it
does (his 5.1). Tooley thinks it likely that in the actual world the two accounts will
always coincide, in the sense that the orthodox and Tooleyan velocities will:

(a) be deﬁned in all the same cases and
(b) be equal.

He argues for (a) by saying:

(i): T2 ‘ensures that an object’s velocity at a time is causally relevant to its velocity
at later times, and this means that the sort of situation where an object has an [or-
thodox] velocity, but fails to have a [Tooleyan] velocity—namely, cases of accidentally
orderly movement—cannot arise in our world’ (p. 249).

(ii): On both accounts, velocity changes require forces. This

... together with plausible hypotheses about how forces depend upon other
factors, such as the distance between the objects in question, entails that
24In Section 6.1, Tooley admits that for the particle’s velocity function, which is deﬁned on the
dense subset of the worldline, to be integrable, as T1 demands, his account needs to interpret T1 as
using the Lebesque rather than Riemann theory of integration. Fair comment: but the orthodox
account can equally adopt Lebesque integration.

26

velocity, in our world, cannot change in a discontinuous fashion. Accord-
ingly, the sorts of cases where an object can have a [Tooleyan] velocity, but
fail to have an [orthodox] velocity [i.e. cases like the particle which is at
rest and then moves with velocity v(t) = 1 for all t > 0, in his Section
4.5.—JNB], cannot occur in our world (p. 249).

Finally Tooley argues for (b) by saying that since both orthodox velocities and his
velocities satisfy T1, they must be equal whenever both are deﬁned.

In reply: I applaud Tooley’s seeking an argument why the orthodox account works
as well as it does: better an argument than just postulating a law of nature that the
two accounts always coincide.25 But I ﬁnd Tooley’s argument unpersuasive as regards
(a) and (b): only a much more elaborated theory of causation and motion could sustain
the inferences needed.

Thus, as to (i): why believe that accidentally orderly movement is the only way to
have an orthodox but not Tooleyan velocity?. Tooley’s (ii) obviously does not purport
to be more than a sketch. But whatever the ‘plausible hypotheses’ might be, there
are basic problems about the strategy of the argument. Why should discontinuous
changes in velocity be the only way to have a Tooleyan velocity but not an orthodox
one? After all, the latter requires non-diﬀerentiability of position, not discontinuity of
its derivative. Besides, discontinuous changes in forces mean discontinuities in acceler-
ation: which need not spell discontinuities in velocity.

Finally, even if (a) were established, (b) would not follow just from the fact that
both orthodox and Tooleyan velocities satisfy T1. After all, integration is an aver-
aging operation and so “loses information”. So even if q(t) is diﬀerentiable, so that
indeed q =
dq/dt dt, there are still countless other functions v 6= dq/dt such that
q =
v dt: for example, v could be a “scarring” of a smooth dq/dt by inserting some
discontinuities.

R

R

(2): Tooley’s Section 6.2:—

The second topic is the problem I emphasised at the outset (Section 3.3.1.B) as con-
fronting all advocates of Tooleyan velocities: the conﬂict between Tooleyan velocities
being intrinsic, and velocity being relative to a frame of reference.

Tooley treats this brieﬂy in his Section 6.2 (p. 251). He sees it as a matter of rec-
onciling his proposal with special relativity. He admits that ‘philosophical criticisms
of scientiﬁc theories do not have an extraordinarily impressive track record’, but con-
jectures that a heterodox interpretation of special relativity which adds a relation of
absolute simultaneity may be tenable, for example because it better allows a tensed
account of the nature of time. (He develops this conjecture in his (1997); cf footnote
12.)

In reply, I will not repeat Section 3.3.1.B’s endorsement of the problem. But I would
make two further comments, speciﬁcally about Tooley’s answer to it. First, I would be
much less willing than Tooley to let metaphysical views determine the interpretation
25As Arntzenius (2000: p. 196) and Bigelow and Pargetter (1989, p. 294) do: admittedly, in much

briefer discussions.

27

of physical theories, and in particular to adopt a tensed account of time. Second I
emphasise that relativity’s denial of absolute simultaneity is irrelevant to the problem.
As noted in (1) of Section 3.3.1.B, classical mechanics no less than relativity can be
formulated with velocity being relative to a frame of reference. So the problem arises
already on Tooley’s chosen “home-ground” of classical mechanics.

So to sum up this and the previous Subsection’s critique of Tooleyan velocities: I
have argued that Tooley and other authors (i) do not justify crucial premises of their
arguments for these velocities, and (ii) under-estimate the resources of the orthodox
account.

4 “Shadow velocities”: Lewis and Robinson

I turn to a proposal of Lewis and Robinson that is similar in some ways to Section 3.3’s
proposed intrinsic velocity. In short, they propose that a moving object has a vectorial
property (i.e. a property represented by a vector) which is intrinsic to the object, and
whose vector is equal to the velocity vector. But this property is not itself velocity:
hence this Section’s title. For velocity presupposes the persistence of the moving object;
and this property is to be intrinsic, not merely (as we have emphasised, especially in
Section 3.2) “almost intrinsic”. In fact, Robinson (1989) ﬂoats the proposal but does
not endorse it; Lewis (1999) endorses it. (As we shall see, this diﬀerence between them
turns on our central question, familiar since Section 3.1: can vectorial properties be
intrinsic to a point?)

But unlike Tooley, Lewis and Robinson are concerned about persistence. Specif-
ically, they take their proposal to provide the perdurantist, especially the advocate
of Humean supervenience (Lewis 1986, pp.
ix-x; 1994, pp. 225-226), with a reply
I discuss persistence as a context for their proposal
to the rotating disc argument.
elsewhere (2004, Section 4.3). So in this paper, I will mostly leave aside this context:
my pro-perdurantist claim (FPe) in Sections 2.2.3 and 2.3.2 will suﬃce. (I also leave
aside how even a simple quantity such as mass deﬁned on the points and regions of a
continuous body causes trouble for pointillisme, in particular Humean supervenience:
cf. Butterﬁeld (2006) or Hawthorne (2006: Section 2).)

I will ﬁrst present the proposal, in Section 4.1. Then in Section 4.2 I will criticize
it. Then the last two Subsections try to oﬀer a peace-pipe to Lewis and Robinson. In
Section 4.3, I use Hilbert’s ε operator to deﬁne a quantity which is like their proposed
quantity, in being analogous to velocity yet not presupposing persistence. I will call
it ‘welocity’. Finally in Section 4.4, I brieﬂy ask whether welocity satisﬁes Lewis’ and
Robinson’s goals: but again my conclusion is negative—it would not.

28

4.1 The proposal

Recall the rotating disc argument. The perdurantist is challenged to say what distin-
guishes two rigid congruent utterly homogeneous discs, one rotating and one stationary.
It seems that the perdurantist, with her meagre resources, in particular “qualitative”
facts intrinsic to temporal instants, cannot do so: she cannot “thread the worldlines
together” correctly.

Robinson (1989; p. 405 para 2, p. 406 para 2 to p. 408 para 1) ﬂoats the following
reply. It combines the idea of a “cousin” of velocity that is intrinsic and does not pre-
suppose persistence, with the idea (endorsed by many philosophers) that persistence is
determined (“subvened”) by relations of qualitative similarity and causal dependence
between events. To be precise, the reply has ﬁve components; as follows:

(i) a vectorial property at a point can be an intrinsic property of that point;
(ii) the propagation of continuous matter through spacetime involves such a prop-

erty at every spacetime point; and

(iii) these properties distinguish the rotating and non-rotating discs, since the vec-
tor that represents the property at a point is timelike, and points in the same direction
as the instantaneous four-dimensional velocity vector at that point;

(iv) the distribution of these properties, from point to point, determines (subvenes)
the relations of qualitative similarity between points, and especially the relations of
causal dependence between events at those points; and

(v) the distribution of these properties, by determining the lines of causal depen-

dence, determines the lines of persistence.

But Robinson himself has second thoughts about this proposal. His doubts concern
the ﬁrst component, (i): i.e. the Yes answer to Section 3.1’s question. He thinks the
directionality of a vector forbids it from representing an intrinsic property; and he
backs this up with an argument about a point and a duplicate of it, which he credits
to Lewis in discussion.26

On the other hand, Lewis believed (at least by about 1993) that vectorial properties
could be intrinsic to points (1994, p. 226). And in a ﬁnal short paper on the rotat-
ing disc argument (replying to Zimmerman’s critique of perdurantism, 1998), Lewis
endorsed Robinson’s proposal; (Lewis 1999, p. 211).27

So the idea of the proposal is that the diﬀerence in the properties postulated by (ii)
26Similar doubts are expressed by other contemporary metaphysicians, some sharing a Lewisian

approach to the intrinsic-extrinsic distinction. Butterﬁeld (2006: Section 4.1) gives references.

27My (2004, Section 4.3.1) gives more details about how Lewis came around (ca. 1998) to this

proposal, after espousing for a while (ca. 1986-1994) a more “stone-walling” reply.

Note also that the proposal is clearly similar in spirit to Tooley’s heterodoxy about velocity, as in
Section 3.3. Robinson does not refer to Tooley et al.: the work was of course contemporaneous. But
Zimmerman (1998, p. 281, p. 284) and Sider (2001, p. 228) both see the similarity. Zimmerman ﬁrst
discusses reading Robinson’s proposal as the same as Tooley’s (p. 281), and then discusses reading
it as just similar (p. 284, note 65). Sider reads the proposals as similar. More speciﬁcally, Sider and
Zimmerman’s second reading both see Robinson’s proposal as going with an orthodox, or “Russellian
at-at”, account of motion. So also (implicitly) does Lewis’ discussion.

29

and (iii) amounts to a diﬀerence in the ‘local arrangement of qualities’ as demanded
by Humean supervenience. Thus Lewis (1999, p. 211) begins by approvingly quoting
Robinson, suggesting we should

. . . see the collection of qualities characteristic of the occupation of space
by matter as in some sense jointly self-propagating; the fact of matter
for the matter going on
occupying space is itself causally responsible ...
occupying space in the near neighbourhood immediately thereafter. ... [The
posited vectors] ﬁgure causally in determining the direction of propagation
of [themselves as well as] other material properties.
(Robinson 1989, p.
406-407.)

Lewis then goes on to formulate the proposal more formally, as a putative law that
partially speciﬁes a vector ﬁeld V . The speciﬁcation is partial, both in (i) being ad-
mitted to be a “ﬁrst approximation”, and (ii) specifying only the direction but not
the length of the vector at each point. But (ii) hardly matters:
it will be obvious
that Robinson and Lewis could frame their proposal entirely in terms of postulating
a timelike direction ﬁeld (i.e. a speciﬁcation at each point of continuous matter of a
timelike direction), rather than a vector ﬁeld. But I shall follow them and talk of a
vector ﬁeld.

In giving this formulation, Lewis’ aim is partly to avoid various objections or limita-
tions. In particular, the formulation should not invoke either persistence or causation,
since these are meant to supervene on the local arrangement of qualities, taken of
course as including facts about the vector ﬁeld V . Thus the formulation is to avoid
circularity objections that had been urged by Zimmerman (1998) against some related
proposals.

So in particular: the vector ﬁeld V cannot simply be the instantaneous (four-
dimensional) velocity (orthodox, not Tooleyan!) of the matter at the point in question.
For V is to contribute to an analysis of (or at least to a supervenience basis for) per-
sistence and thereby of velocity.

Similarly, since Lewis agrees that causation is crucial to persistence (‘the most im-
portant sort of glue that unites the successive stages of a persisting thing is causal
glue’: 1999, p. 210), causation cannot be invoked in the course of specifying the vector
ﬁeld V .

Lewis proposes that (for a world with continuous space and time), the speciﬁcation

of V ‘might go something like this’:

Let p be any spacetime point, and let t be any smooth timelike trajectory
through spacetime with p as its ﬁnal limit point. Let each point of t before
p be occupied by matter with its vector [i.e. vector of the vector ﬁeld V ]
pointing in the direction of t at that point.
[So in the jargon of modern
geometry, t is an integral curve of V .] Then, ceteris paribus, there will be
matter also at p. (1999, p. 211.)

30

Here, the ‘ceteris paribus’ clause is to allow for the fact that the point-sized bit of
matter might cease to exist before p, because of ‘destructive forces or self-destructive
tendencies’ (ibid.).

Lewis also stresses that this proposal is to be read as a law of succession, not of
causation. This means, I take it, that the ‘Then, ceteris paribus’ is to be read as a
material conditional.

4.2 Criticism: the vector ﬁeld remains unspeciﬁed

I claim that Lewis’ proposal fails. It is too weak: it does not go far enough to specify
V . For it only says, of any timelike open curve that is an integral curve of V , that the
future end-point p of this curve will, ceteris paribus, have matter at it.

But every suitably smooth vector ﬁeld U deﬁned on a open region R of spacetime
has integral curves throughout R; (which are timelike, by deﬁnition, if U is). (To be
‘suitably smooth’ is none too demanding: all we need is that U be C 1, i.e.
precise:
the partial derivatives of its components exist and are continuous.) So suppose Lewis
stipulates, that the ﬁeld V is to be timelike and C 1 on an open set R which is its
domain of deﬁnition (say, the spatiotemporal region occupied by continuous matter):
which (“giving rope”) we can assume to be a legitimate, in particular non-circular,
stipulation. Then his proposal says that, ceteris paribus, every point p ∈ R has matter
at it.

But that claim hardly helps to distinguish V from the countless other (timelike
smooth) vector ﬁelds U. For however exactly one interprets ‘ceteris paribus’, the claim
is surely true of p regardless of the integral curve one considers it as lying on. So the
claim about p does not constrain the vector ﬁeld. Indeed, if Lewis sets out to specify
V on the spatiotemporal region occupied by continuous matter, the claim is thereby
assumed to be true for all p in the region, regardless of vector ﬁelds. So again, we have
said nothing to distinguish V from the countless other vector ﬁelds U.

Agreed, Lewis puts forward his proposal as a “ﬁrst approximation” to specifying
V . But so far as I can see, his discussion doesn’t contain any ingredients which would,
for continuous matter, help distinguish V from other vector ﬁelds.28

I should note here that Zimmerman (1999) makes a somewhat similar objection to

Lewis’ proposal. But his exact intent is not clear to me.

He maintains that in some seemingly possible cases of continuous matter, Lewis’
proposal does not specify a unique vector ﬁeld V —indeed hardly constrains V at all. He
28Nor can I guess how I might have misinterpreted Lewis’ proposal. The situation is puzzling:
and not just because Lewis thought so clearly, and my objection is obvious. Also, the objection is
analogous to what Lewis himself says (p. 210) against the naive idea that V should point in the
direction of perfect qualitative similarity: viz. that ‘in non-particulate homogeneous matter, ... lines
of qualitative similarity run every which way’.

An anonymous referee suggests that Lewis’ attempted speciﬁcation of V might succeed if the prop-
erty is required to be natural, in Lewis’ sense; or at least, might succeed if the environment around
the region R is also suﬃciently heterogeneous. I confess I do not see how naturalness and-or a het-
erogeneous environment will help Lewis; but I discuss the latter in the sequel.

31

says (p. 214 para 1 and 2) that in possible worlds with a physics of the sort Descartes
might have envisaged, i.e. where there is nowhere any vacuum, and only one kind of
(continuous homogeneous) stuﬀ ﬁlls all of space: ‘every vector ﬁeld will satisfy [Lewis’]
law.’

Thus Zimmerman assumes that:

(i): the worlds with which he is concerned are wholly ﬁlled with the one kind of

stuﬀ; and

(ii): these worlds are thus ﬁlled as a matter of law, not happenstance (in the

jargon: as a matter of physical or nomic necessity).

He also says (p. 214-5) that he needs to assume (i) and (ii) in order to criticize
Lewis’ proposal, together with obvious modiﬁcations of it which allow for diﬀerent
types (“colours”) of continuous matter. That is: Zimmerman thinks Lewis’ proposal
works, or could be modiﬁed to work, for worlds in which:

(i’) continuous matter does not ﬁll all of space and-or comes in various types; or
(ii’) continuous matter of just one type ﬁlls all of space, but only as a matter of

happenstance.

In view of my own objection, I do not understand why Zimmerman feels he needs
to assume (i) and (ii) in order to object to Lewis. He does not explicitly say why he
does so. Maybe it is to block some Lewisian rejoinder, that would better specify V , by
adding constraints of either or both of two kinds:

(i”): constraints about the spatiotemporal relations of the continuous matter in a

bounded volume (say, one of our discs) to other matter outside the volume;

(ii”): constraints about the nomic or modal properties of matter.

But it remains unclear how the details of (i”) and (ii”) might go.

To sum up: For all I can see, my objection, that V is not distinguished from
countless other vector ﬁelds, applies to Lewis’ proposal (and thereby: the spirit of
Zimmerman’s objection also applies) for the case that Lewis intended it—i.e. the discs
of the original rotating discs argument.

4.3 Avoiding the presupposition of persistence, using Hilbert’s

ε symbol

Since Section 3.3, my discussion has been critical. Now I try to be more constructive!
I propose to make precise the idea that velocity, understood in the orthodox way, is
hardly extrinsic. Elsewhere (2004, Section 4.2.2; 2004a, Section 4.5) I make this precise
in two related ways. Here I develop a third way.

Namely, I will deﬁne a quantity which will be like Robinson and Lewis’ proposal
from Section 4.1, in that it is (“usually”) equal to instantaneous velocity, and yet does
not presuppose persistence. But unlike their proposal, it has no pointilliste motivations:
in fact, it is adapted from the orthodox deﬁnition of velocity. After presenting it, I will
end by comparing it with their proposal (Section 4.4).

I will call my new-fangled quantity welocity, the ‘w’ being a mnemonic for ‘(log-

32

ically) weak’ and-or ‘without (presuppositions)’. So my goal is that welocity is to
reﬂect, in the way its values are deﬁned, this lack of presupposition. That is: the
values are to be deﬁned in such a way that it is impossible to infer from the value of
the welocity of the object o at time t that o in fact exists in a neighbourhood of t, and
has a diﬀerentiable worldline at t: an inference which, as we have just seen, can be
made from the value of velocity as orthodoxly understood.

There are three preliminary points to make about this goal: the ﬁrst philosophical,
the second mathematical and the third physical. But only the ﬁrst represents a limi-
tation of scope for what follows.

First, presupposition is often taken to be a subtler notion than just ‘necessary con-
dition’. So I admit that for a property ascription to lack a presupposition of persistence,
it is perhaps not enough that the ascription fails to imply that the instance persists.
But I will set this aside: I will aim only for the modest goal of avoiding the implication
(if not, perhaps, the presupposition stricto sensu) of persistence.

Second, I just said that o’s having an orthodox velocity at t implies o’s existing
in an open neighbourhood of t, and its position in space q(t) being diﬀerentiable at
t. Indeed, that is orthodoxy. But as I remarked at the end of Section 3.2.2, one can
generalize so as to imply only that o exists at a set of times for which t is a limit point
(and that its average velocities go to a common limit at t). But to avoid cumbersome
phrasing, I will from now on not repeat this generalization.

Third, as I stressed (against Tooley and others) in Sections 3.3.1 and 3.3.3: ortho-
dox velocity is relative to a frame of reference. And one cannot expect that avoiding
an implication of o’s persistence will also make for avoiding the implication of, and
relativity to, a frame. Agreed: and indeed, ascriptions of welocity will be just as obvi-
ously relative to a frame (and so in that way extrinsic) as are ascriptions of velocity.
But in order to engage better with authors such as Tooley, Robinson and Lewis, I will
not emphasise this aspect.

Developing this idea—values of a quantity like velocity, but which do not imply
o’s persistence nor its worldline’s diﬀerentiability—takes us to a familiar philosophical
territory: viz., rival proposals for the semantics of empty referring terms. In our case,
the empty terms will be expressions for o’s instantaneous velocity at t; and, as just
discussed, they can be empty because either:

(NotEx): o does not exist for an open interval around t, or
(NotDiﬀ): o does exist for an open interval around t, but its position q is not

diﬀerentiable at t; (roughly: there is a “sharp corner” in the worldline).

(And similarly for acceleration and higher derivatives; but I shall discuss only

velocity—tempting though words like ‘wacceleration’ are!)

In fact, it will be clearest to lead up to my proposal for welocity by ﬁrst considering a
simpler one, which is modelled on Frege’s proposal that (to prevent truth-value gaps)
empty terms should be assigned some “dustbin-referent”, such as the empty set ∅.
Thus if one sets out to deﬁne a quantity that is like velocity but somehow avoids its
presupposition of persistence, one naturally ﬁrst thinks of a quantity, call it u, deﬁned
to be

33

(a): equal to the (instantaneous) velocity v, for those times t at which o has a

velocity; and

(b): equal to some dustbin-referent, say the empty set ∅, at other times t;
i.e. times such that either (NotEx): o does not exist for an open interval around t;
or (NotDiﬀ): o does exist for an open interval around t, but its position x is not
diﬀerentiable at t.

Of course, variations on (b) are possible. One could select diﬀerent dustbin-referents
for the two cases, (NotEx) and (NotDiﬀ), (say, ∅ and {∅}) so that u’s value registered
the diﬀerent ways in which an instantaneous velocity could fail to exist. And instead
of using a dustbin-referent, one could say that the empty term just has no “semantic
value”, or “is undeﬁned”: (a contrast with dustbin-referents which would presumably
show up in truth-value gaps, and logical behaviour in general).

Agreed, this deﬁnition is natural. But it does not do the intended job. For this
quantity u, whether deﬁned using (b) or using the variations mentioned, does not
avoid, in the way intended, the presupposition of persistence. For u’s value (or lack of
it, if we take the no-semantic-value option) registers whether or not the presupposed
persistence holds true. That is: we can infer from the value of u (or its lack of value)
whether (a) o has a velocity in the ordinary sense, or (b) the presupposition has failed
in that (NotEx) or (NotDiﬀ) is true. In short: u’s individual values tell us too much.

But there is an appropriate way of assigning semantic values to empty terms, i.e. a
way of deﬁning a quantity, welocity, that is like velocity but whose values do not give the
game away about whether the presupposition has failed, i.e. about whether (NotEx)
or (NotDiﬀ) is true. In order not to give the game away, welocity must obviously take
ordinary values, i.e. triples of real numbers (relative to some frame of reference), even
when the presupposition has failed. But how to assign them?

The short answer is: arbitrarily. The long answer is: we can adapt schemes devised
by logicians in which a deﬁnite description, whose predicate has more than one instance,
is assigned as a referent any one of the objects in the predicate’s extension. (The ﬁrst
such scheme was devised by Hilbert and Bernays; but we will only need the general
idea.) Such a scheme applies to our case, because we can write the deﬁnition of welocity
in such a way that when the presuppositions fail (i.e. (NotEx) or (NotDiﬀ) is true),
the predicate (of triples of real numbers) in the deﬁnition is vacuously satisﬁed by all
such triples; so that forming a deﬁnite description, and applying semantic rules like
Hilbert-Bernays’, welocity is assigned an arbitrary triple of real numbers as value.

Thus we get the desired result: if you are told that the value of welocity for o at t
is some vector in IR3, say (1,10,3) relative to some axes and choice of a time-unit, you
cannot tell whether:

(a): (NotEx) and (NotDiﬀ) are both false (i.e. the presuppositions of velocity hold),

and o has velocity (1,10,3); or

(b): Either (NotEx) or (NotDiﬀ) is true, the predicate is vacuously satisﬁed by all
triples, and (1,10,3) just happens to be the triple assigned by semantic rules taken from
Hilbert-Bernays’ (or some similar) scheme.

34

The details are as follows.

(1): Hilbert and Bernays introduced the notation
(εx)(F x) for the deﬁnite description ‘the F ’, with the rule that if F had more than one
instance, then (εx)(F x) was assigned as referent any such instance, i.e. any element
of F ’s extension. (We need not consider their rule in more detail than this; nor their
rule for what to say when F has no instances; nor their rules’ consequences for the
semantics and syntax of singular terms. For details, cf. Leisenring (1969).)

(2): Next, we observe that the velocity of an object o at time t relative to a given
frame can be deﬁned with a deﬁnite description containing a material conditional
whose antecedents are the presuppositions of persistence and diﬀerentiability. That is:
velocity can be deﬁned along the following lines:—

The velocity of o at time t (relative to a given frame) is the triple of real numbers v
such that:

for some (and so any smaller) open interval I around t:
{[o exists throughout I] and [o’s position x(t) is diﬀerentiable in I]} ⊃
[v is the common limit of average velocities for times t′ ∈ I, compared with
t, as t′ → t from above or below].

This deﬁniens uses a material conditional. So it will be vacuously true for all triples
v, if the antecedent is false for all open intervals I around t, i.e. if (NotEx) or (Not-
Diﬀ) is true: in other words, if velocity’s presuppositions of continued existence and
diﬀerentiability fail.

(3): Now we put points (1) and (2) together. Let us abbreviate the displayed
deﬁniens, i.e. the open sentence with v as its only free variable, as F (v). Then I
propose to deﬁne the welocity of o at t by the singular term (εv)(F v): which is, by
Hilbert-Bernays’ semantic rule:

(a): equal to the (instantaneous) velocity of o, for those times t at which o has

a velocity; and

(b): equal to some arbitrary triple of real numbers, at other times t; i.e. at times
such that either (NotEx): o does not exist for an open interval around t; or (NotDiﬀ):
o does exist for an open interval around t, but its position x is not diﬀerentiable at t.

Welocity, so deﬁned, has the desired features: its values do not give the game away

about whether (NotEx) or (NotDiﬀ) is true.

That is all I need to say about welocity, for this paper’s purposes; and in particular,

for Section 4.4’s comparison with Robinson’s and Lewis’ proposal.

But I end this Subsection by noting that there are of course various technical
questions hereabouts, even apart from the logical questions about the ε symbol. For
example, a natural question arises from letting o be a point-sized bit of matter in
a continuum, and letting the presuppositions of velocity fail for various such bits of
matter: some such bits may fail to exist, and some may have a non-diﬀerentiable
worldline. One then asks: how widely across space, and in how arbitrary a spatial
distribution, can these bits fail to exist, or have a non-diﬀerentiable worldline—i.e. how

35

widely and arbitrarily can the presuppositions of velocity fail—while yet the welocity
ﬁeld might not “give the game away”, in that the arbitrary values can be assigned at
all the points where the presuppositions fail, so as to give a smooth (e.g. continuous
or even diﬀerentiable) welocity ﬁeld? This is in eﬀect a question about the scope and
limits of regularization of singularities in real vector ﬁelds: a good question—but not
one for this paper!

4.4 Comparison with Robinson and Lewis

I shall compare welocity with Robinson’s and Lewis’ proposal in two stages; the ﬁrst
more speciﬁc than the second.

(1): Is welocity intrinsic?:—

In the light of Section 3.1’s central question, this is the obvious question to ask about
welocity! But in asking this, I will set aside the fact that welocity, like velocity, is
relative to a frame. This sets aside the existence of other objects representing the
frame, and focuses attention on extrinsicality arising from implications about the other
temporal parts of o itself. This tactic will make for a less cumbersome comparison with
Robinson and Lewis, and authors like Tooley; who, as we have seen, tend to ignore the
frame; (cf. the third preliminary point at the start of Section 4.3).

The question whether welocity is intrinsic returns us to Section 2.1.1’s idea of pos-
itive extrinsicality, i.e. the idea of implying accompaniment. Recall that according to
Lewis (1983) and almost all succeeding authors, this is a species of extrinsicality, since
a property like being unaccompanied (more vividly: being lonely) is itself extrinsic; and
that this species, positive extrinsicality, is agreed to be a good deal clearer than the
genus, extrinsicality. Similarly for the negations: the negation of positive extrinsical-
ity, i.e. not implying accompaniment (i.e. compatibility with being lonely), is weaker
than—and a good deal clearer than—intrinsicality. So we might call it ‘weakened in-
trinsicality’. And as announced in Section 2.1.1, my campaign against pointillisme can
mostly take pointillisme to advocate weakened intrinsic properties.

Once we set aside frame-relativity and any extrinsicality ensuing from that, it is
clear that both an ascription to o at t of some or other value of welocity, and an
ascription of a speciﬁc value of welocity, are not positive extrinsic. For thanks to
welocity allowing for (NotEx), each ascription is compatible with o’s temporal part
at t being lonely:
i.e. compatible with o’s not existing at other times. So the two
ascriptions are weakened intrinsic.

Besides, having some welocity or other (again setting aside frames and other ob-

jects) is a necessary property. For o has a welocity at t iﬀ: either

(1) o at t is lonely, i.e. (NotEx); or
(2) o’s worldline is not diﬀerentiable at t, i.e. (NotDiﬀ); or
(3) o’s worldline is diﬀerentiable (and so o has a velocity).

This disjunction is obviously equivalent to o’s merely existing at t; so that having some
welocity or other is a necessary property.

36

Now on Lewis’ preferred analysis (1983a) and several alternatives (e.g. his “fall-
back” analysis in Langton and Lewis (1998)) an intrinsic property is one that does not
diﬀer between duplicate objects—where duplication is deﬁned as sharing a certain elite
minority of properties. Clearly, on any such analysis, any necessary property is intrin-
sic: for it will not diﬀer between duplicates. (More generally: on any such analysis,
intrinsicality is not hyperintensional. That is, necessarily co-extensive properties are
alike in being intrinsic, or not.)

But on the other hand, having a speciﬁc welocity, say 5 ms−1 North, is of course
not necessary. If this property applies to o at t, while yet (1) and (2) are both false,
then o has a velocity 5 ms−1 North.

Indeed, I claim this property is extrinsic (though as just established, weakened

intrinsic—setting aside frames). The argument is a general one; as follows.

Consider a property P deﬁned along the lines: o is P iﬀ: either (1’) o is lonely, or
(2’) if o is accompanied, then o and some accompanying objects satisfy some condition
which is not necessary and which involves them all “non-redundantly”. Can we con-
clude that P is intrinsic? Or extrinsic? Or can we make no conclusion?

The intuitive verdict is surely that P is extrinsic. Intuitions apart, P is certainly ex-
trinsic according to several analyses, e.g. by Lewis (1983a), Langton and Lewis (1998),
Vallentyne (1997) and Lewis (2001). For example, for the ﬁrst two analyses the reason
is essentially that P is a disjunction whose disjuncts are a positive extrinsic, viz. (2’)
and what Lewis (1983, p. 114) dubbed a negative extrinsic, i.e. a property implying
loneliness, viz. (1’).

This common verdict suggests that not only welocity, but any quantity that is

analogously deﬁned with a disjunct like (1’), will be extrinsic.

To sum up:— We have established that having a speciﬁc value of welocity is a
weakened intrinsic property; and that having some welocity or other is a necessary
property, and so according to several analyses, intrinsic. On the other hand, having
a speciﬁc value of welocity seems intuitively to be extrinsic; and certainly is extrinsic,
according to several analyses.

(2): Rounding oﬀ:—

To conclude: already in Sections 2 and 3, I announced my denial of pointillisme, and so
antipathy to Humean supervenience; and more specﬁcally, my view that velocity was
“almost” intrinsic. In Section 4.3, we saw my peace-pipe for the pointilliste: at least,
for the pointilliste who advocates weakened intrinsic properties. Namely, I deﬁned
a quantity, welocity, which is weakened intrinsic, and in that sense avoids velocity’s
implication of persistence.

But I am afraid Lewis would not smoke my peace-pipe! For ﬁrst, he would presum-
ably be unimpressed by velocity’s being almost intrinsic. For Humean supervenience
is so central to his neoHumean metaphysical system that he sets great store by intrin-
sicality. So he would probably say that as regards failing to be intrinsic, a miss is as
good (i.e. bad!) as a mile.

Similarly, I expect that he would not welcome welocity. I agree that he might be

37

“envious” of its being well-deﬁned (modulo the freedom to assign referents associated
with the ε operator), since his own proposal, the intrinsic vector V , is yet to be success-
fully deﬁned (Section 4.2). But Lewis is an advocate of intrinsicality, not just weakened
intrinsicality; and as we have just seen, by Lewis’ lights, welocity is extrinsic.

Acknowledgements:— I am grateful to audiences at Florence, Kirchberg, Leeds,
London, Oxford, and Princeton; and to F. Arntzenius, A. Elga, G. Belot, P. Forrest, J.
Hawthorne, R. Le Poidevin, S. Leuenberger, J. Uﬃnk, B. van Fraassen, D. Zimmerman
and an anonymous referee, for helpful conversations and comments.

38

5 References

Albert, D. (2000) Time and Chance, Harvard University Press.
F. Arntzenius (2000), ‘Are there really instantaneous velocities?’, The Monist 83, pp.
187-208.
F. Arntzenius (2003), ‘An arbitrarily short reply to Sheldon Smith on instantaneous
velocities’, Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 34B, pp. 281-282.
Arntzenius, F. (2004), ‘Time reversal operations, representations of the Lorentz group,
and the direction of time’, Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
35B, pp. 31-44.
Arthur, R. (2006) ‘Leibniz’s syncategorematic inﬁnitesimals, smooth inﬁnitesimal anal-
ysis and Newton’s proposition 6’, forthcoming.
Batterman, R. (2003), ‘Falling cats, parallel parking and polarized light’, Studies in
the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 34B, pp. 527-558.
Bell, J. (1998), A Primer of Inﬁnitesimal Analysis, Cambridge University Press.
Belot, G. (1998), ‘Understanding electromagnetism’, British Journal for the Philoso-
phy of Science 49, pp. 531-555.
Bigelow, J., Ellis, B. and Pargetter, R. (1988), ‘Forces’, Philosophy of science 55, pp.
614-630.
Bigelow, J. and Pargetter, R. (1989), ‘Vectors and Change’, British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science 40, pp. 289-306.
Bigelow, J. and Pargetter, R. (1990), Science and Necessity, Cambridge University
Press.
intrinsic vs. extrinsic distance relations’, in
Bricker, P. (1993), ‘The fabric of space:
ed.s P.French et al., Midwest Studies in Philosophy 18, University of Minnesota Press,
pp. 271-294.
Butterﬁeld, J. (2004),
physics/0406021: and at http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00002381/
Butterﬁeld, J. (2004a), ‘The Rotating Discs Argument Defeated’, forthcoming in British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science; available at:
http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00002382/
Butterﬁeld, J. (2005) ’On the Persistence of Particles’, in Foundations of Physics 35,
pp. 233-269, available at: physics/0401112; and http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001586/.
Butterﬁeld, J. (2006), ‘Against Pointillisme about geometry’, forthcoming in Proceed-
ings of the 28th Ludwig Wittgenstein Symposium, ed. F. Stadler and M. St¨oltzner;
available at: http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive.
Butterﬁeld, J. (2006a), ‘Against Pointillisme: a call to arms’, in preparation.
Colyvan, M and Ginzburg, L. (2003), ‘The Galilean turn in popoulation ecology’, Bi-
ology and Philosophy 18, pp. 401-414.
Dainton, B. (2001), Time and Space, Acumen Publishing.
Earman, J. (1987), ‘Locality, non-locality and action-at-a-distance: a skeptical review
of some philosophical dogmas’, in Kelvin’s Baltimore Lectures and Modern Theoretical
Physics, eds. R. Kargon and P. Achinstein, Cambridge Mass: MIT Press.

‘On the Persistence of Homogeneous Matter’, available at:

39

Earman, J. (1989), World Enough and Spacetime, MIT Press.
Earman, J. (2002), ‘What time reversal is and why it matters’, International Studies
in the Philosophy of Science 16, pp. 245-264.
Earman, J. and Roberts, J. (2006), ‘Contact with the Nomic: a challenge for deniers
of Humean supervenience about laws of nature’, Philosophy and Phenomenological Re-
search forthcoming.
Hawthorne, J. (2006), ‘Quantity in Lewisian Metaphysics’, forthcoming in his Meta-
physical Essays, Oxford University Press.
Hoefer, C. (2000), ‘Energy Conservation of in GTR’, Studies in the History and Phi-
losophy of Modern Physics, 31B pp. 187-200.
Kingman, J. and Taylor, S. (1977), Introducton to Measure and Probability, Cambridge
University Press.
Kragh, H. and Carazza, B. (1994), ‘From time atoms to spacetime quantization: the
idea of discreet time 1925-1926’, Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics 25, pp. 437-462.
Langton, R. and Lewis, D. (1998), ‘Deﬁning ‘intrinsic”, Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research 58, pp. 333-345; reprinted in Lewis (1999a), page reference to reprint.
Leibniz, G. (2001), The Labyrinth of the Continuum: writings on the continuum prob-
lem 1672-1686, ed. sel. and transl. R. Arthur, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Leisenring, A. (1969), Mathematical Logic and Hilbert’s ε Symbol, London: Macdonald
Technical and Scientiﬁc.
Le Poidevin, R. (2006) ‘Motion, Cause and Moment’, in preparation.
Lewis, D. (1970), ‘How to deﬁne theoretical terms’, Journal of Philosophy 67, pp. 427-
446.
Lewis, D. (1983), ‘Extrinsic properties’, Philosophical Studies 44, pp. 197-200; reprinted
in Lewis (1999a); page references to reprint.
Lewis, D. (1983a), ‘New Work for a Theory of Universals’, Australasian Journal of
Philosophy 61, pp. 343-77; reprinted in Lewis (1999a).
Lewis, D. (1986), Philosophical Papers, volume II, New York: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D. (1986a), On the Plurality of Worlds, Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, D. (1994), ‘Humean Supervenience Debugged’, Mind 103, p 473-490; reprinted
in Lewis (1999a), pp. 224-247; page reference to reprint.
Lewis, D. (1999), ‘Zimmerman and the Spinning sphere’, Australasian Journal of Phi-
losophy 77, pp. 209-212.
Lewis, D. (1999a), Papers in Metaphysics and Epistemology, Cambridge: University
Press.
Lewis, D. (2001), ‘Redeﬁning ‘intrinsic”, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
63, pp. 381-398.
Malament, D. (2004), ‘On the time reversal invariance of classical electromagnetic the-
ory’, Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 35B, pp. 295-315.
Mancosu, P. (1996), Philosophy of Mathematics and Mathematical Practice in the Sev-
enteenth Century, Oxford: University Press.
Robinson, A. (1996), Non-standard Analysis, Princeton University Press.
Robinson, D. (1989), ‘Matter, Motion and Humean supervenience’, Australasian Jour-

40

nal of Philosophy 67, pp. 394-409.
Russell, B. (1903), The Principles of Mathematics, London: Allen and Unwin.
Sider, T. (2001), Four-Dimensionalism, Oxford University Press.
Sklar, L. (1974), Space, Time and Spacetime, University of California Press.
S. Smith (2003), ‘Are instantaneous velocities real and really instantaneous?’, Studies
in the History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 34B, pp. 261-280.
S. Smith (2003a), ‘Author’s response’, Studies in the History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics 34B, pp. 283.
Tooley, M. (1987) Causation: a Realist Approach, Oxford: University Press.
M. Tooley (1988), ‘In Defence of the Existence of States of Motion’, Philosophical Top-
ics 16, pp. 225-254.
Tooley, M. (1997) Time, Tense and Causation, Oxford: University Press.
Vallentyne, P. (1997), ‘Intrinsic properties deﬁned’, Philosophical Studies 88, pp. 209-
219.
Weatherson, B. (2002), ‘Intrinsic vs. extrinsic properties’, Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, http://plato.stanford.edu/intrinsic-extrinsic.
Wilson, M (1998), ‘Classical mechanics’; in The Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Wilson, M. (2004), ‘Theory facades’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 78, pp.
271-286.
D. Zimmerman (1998), ‘Temporal parts and supervenient causation: the incompatibil-
ity of two Humean doctrines’, Australasian Journal of Philosophy 76, pp. 265-288.
Zimmerman, D. (1999), ‘One really big liquid sphere: reply to Lewis’, Australasian
Journal of Philosophy 77, pp. 213-215.

41

