‘Why does not a spinning top fall down?’ : Intuitive explanations

Won-Young Hwang∗
Department of Physics Education, Chonnam National University, Kwangjoo 500-757, Republic of Korea

We give intuitive explanations about why a spinning top does not fall down. Our explanations
consider actual trajectories of some parts of a top. They clearly show which forces supports the top.
Our explanations can be easily applied to other motions of the top due to other initial conditions.

6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
7
0
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

I.

INTRODUCTION

‘Why does not a spinning top fall down?’ This problem
have puzzled every physicist although a solution can be
found in textbooks, e.g. Refs.
[1, 2, 3]: Torque on a
top is given such that angular momentum vector of the
top makes a closed loop around the vertical axis. The
solution is simple and rigorous. However, the solution is
unsatisfactory in that it is not intuitive enough. This is
an important point because many physicists still do not
think they understand motions of top even after knowing
the solution.

Eastman [4] gave an intuitive explanation about mo-
tions of tops. (A similar one was given by Edwards [5]
later.) Although his explanation is very interesting, it is
somewhat misleading and thus confusing. This point will
be dealt with in section IV.

The purpose of this paper is to give explanations that
resolve the unsatisfactory points: Our explanation are
very intuitive. It considers actual trajectories of parts of
a top and it clearly shows what force supports the top:
Loosely speaking, what supports a top is internal force
by some parts of the top. (A loose but short explanation
for impatient readers is given in Fig. 3 and section II.)
Furthermore, our explanations can be easily applied to
motions of the same top but with diﬀerent initial condi-
tions, as we discuss in Section III.

This paper is organized as follows. In section II, we
give our explanations. In section III and IV, we discuss
and conclude, respectively.

II. WHY DOES NOT A SPINNING TOP FALL
DOWN?

In the subsection A, we consider a simple illustrating
example, a rotating object in Fig.1. We give standard ex-
planations (Explanation-1 and Explanation-2) and ours
(Explanation-3 and Explanation-4) of the example.
In
subsection B, we give our explanations, Explanation-5
and Explanation-6, for the spinning top. Explanation-5
and Explanation-6 are very close to Explanation-3 and
Explanation-4, respectively, in their spirit.

A. A rotating object

Let us consider a rotating object composed of a mass-
point with mass m and a massless rod in Fig.1. For this

O

α

O'

 rod

T (tension) 

f   (centrifugal force) 

mg  (gravity)    

FIG. 1: A rotating object composed of mass-point with mass
m and a massless rod. Centrifugal force f makes ﬂoating force
since the other end of rod is ﬁxed.

case, the same question can arise: Why does not the
object move downward by gravity? This question can be
answered in two standard ways.

Explanation-1: Newton’s laws explain the motion,
without using centrifugal forces: A net force on the mass-
point, namely the sum of mg + T of gravity mg and ten-
sion T accelerate the mass-point inwardly such that it
makes a circular motion [1].

Explanation-2: We adopt a non-inertial frame co-
moving with the mass-point. In the non-inertial frame,
there exist artiﬁcial forces [3], in this case the centrifugal
force f . The centrifugal force f balances two other forces
such that net force is zero, that is, mg + T + f = 0.

Here the centrifugal force f can be interpreted to give
ﬂoating force for the mass-point: Since the other end of
the rod is ﬁxed, the mass-point would move upward if
what is exerted on the mass-point is only the centrifugal
force f .

Let us give our explanations. Our explanations are
closely related to the Explanation-2, but there are dif-
ferences. First, we adopt inertial frame, not non-inertial
frame as in the Explanation-2. Second, we take a view-
point of ‘the rod’ not a compound object of the rod plus
the mass-point as in the second explanation.

Let us consider the case where the gravity is removed
from the situation in Fig.1. In order to know motion of
the rod, we should know force on the rod. In order to
ﬁnd force on the rod, we make the following analysis.
It is clear that the net force on the mass-point is −f ,
that is, a force toward O′ with the same magnitude as
f , as long as the object makes the circular motion in

Fig.1. In this case, because there is no external force the
net force is solely provided by internal force by the rod.
Therefore, due to the third law of Newton, the internal
force on the rod by the mass-point is the opposite of the
internal force on the mass-point by the rod. That is, the
mass-point exerts a force f on the rod. However, without
any other force, the rod would get inﬁnite acceleration
because of the ﬁnite force f on the massless rod. This
is not consistent with the motion. Therefore, there must
be another force on the rod to balance the force f . This
balancing force can be mechanically provided at the hinge
O. For example, if we rotate the rod with our hand such
that the motion in Fig. 1 is maintained then the hand
gives a force that exactly balance the force f on the rod
by the mass-point. Then, net force on the rod is zero,
which is consistent with the motion [6].

Let us give an intuitive interpretation. We consider
what will happen when the balancing force is removed.
Then, the force f on the rod would give a torque that
gives upward acceleration to the rod because the other
end of the rod is ﬁxed at the hinge O. Thus the rod will
move upward while rotating. The role of the balancing
force by hand is to give downward acceleration to avoid
this ‘ﬂoating’ of the rod. However, it can be interpreted
as the following. Although the hand at the hinge gives a
torque that would give downward acceleration of the rod,
the rod does not move downward thanks to the opposite
torque by the mass-point that would give upward accel-
eration on the rod. In this sense, the mass-point gives
’ﬂoating force’ to the rod.

Let us consider the case where the gravity is restored.
In this case, our analysis above changes as the following.
There can be no change in the net force on the mass-point
since the motion of mass-point is the same. However,
constitutions of the net force is diﬀerent. In above case
the net force on the mass-point is solely provided by the
internal force of the rod. In this case, the net force on the
mass-point is a sum of an internal force of the rod and
an external force on the mass-point, namely the gravity
mg. Therefore, the internal force of the rod must change
by an amount of −mg to be a force T , denoted as the
tension T in Fig.1. However, due to the third law of
Newton, the internal force of the mass-point on the rod
is an opposite of the internal force T of the rod on the
mass-point. Therefore, the internal force of the mass-
point on the rod is −T . Here, as we can see, torque on
the rod is zero. Thus the rod will move neither upward
nor downward, which is consistent with the motion.

Let us compare the two cases above, a case without
In the former case, the
gravity and that with gravity.
mass-point gives upward force to the rod by giving a
torque by the internal force f . The upward force is can-
celed by the downward force by torque given by hands.
In other words, the downward force due to hands is bal-
anced by the ﬂoating force by the internal force f . Let
us consider the latter case. As we have seen above, the
internal force on the rod in the latter case is diﬀerent
from that in the former case, due to the gravity. The

2

amount of change is mg. That is, the internal force on
the rod by the mass-point in the latter case is f + mg.
However, there is no external force (the gravity) on the
rod because the bar is massless. Therefore, the internal
force on the rod by the mass-point is just the net force
on the rod. Therefore,

Fact-1: The net force on the rod is given by sum of
the internal force f by the mass-point in the former case
and the gravity mg, that is, the net force is f + mg.

From Fact-1 we can get the following explanations for
the question why the rod does not move downward due
to the gravity.

Explanation-3: The net force f + mg = −T gives
zero torque on the rod. Thus the rod does neither move
upward nor downward.

However, if the force f and the gravity mg were sepa-
rately exerted on the rod, the rod would get upward and
downward force, respectively. Therefore, it is interesting
to give an explanation as the following.

Explanation-4: The downward force on the rod due
to the gravity mg is balanced by the ﬂoating (upward)
force due to f . Thus the rod does neither move upward
nor downward.

One might not

think that Explanation-3 and
in comparison with the
Explanation-4 are so useful
Explanation-1 and Explanation-2. However, explana-
tions as the former are very useful in understanding the
motion of the top intuitively, as we see subsequently.

B. A spinning top

Our arguments here are in parallel with those in the
previous subsection. The diﬀerence is in that we deal
with a spinning top as in Fig. 2: The top is a simpliﬁed
one that is composed of four mass-points with mass m
and a massless frame. Initially when t = 0, four mass-
points are in the same x − y plane, the top spins about z
axis with angular speed ω, and the top precesses about
y axis with angular speed Ω. As usual, we consider sit-
uations where angular speed ω is much greater than the
precession angular speed Ω, that is, ω >> Ω. The frame
is composed of a stem with length R and four branches
with length r. Initial velocity v of the mass-point a is
given by v = RΩ + rω.

Let us consider the case where the gravity is removed
from the situation in Fig.2, as in the previous subsection.
What we do here is to calculate how forces are exerted
on the frame by the four mass-points if the motion in
Fig. 2 is maintained anyhow. The force on the frame
by the mass-point is opposite of that on the mass-points
by the frame, due to the third law of Newton. Thus we
need to calculate force on the mass-points by the frame.
However, since there is no external force, the gravity,
the force on the mass-points by the frame is just a net
force on the mass-points.
In order to get net force on
the mass-points, we should calculate accelerations of the
mass-points. In order to calculate the accelerations, we

y

z

x

Ω

d

c

R

ω

b

r

a

m

v

3

x

y

O

R

(0)
  

R(t)
Ω

t = Θ

y

R

y'

x

r

(0)

x'

r(t)

z'

ω t = θ 

a

z

r

a

m

f

FIG. 2: A simpliﬁed top composed of four mass-points of
mass m and a massless frame. The frame is composed of a
stem with length R and four branches with length r. Four
mass-points are in the same plane. The top spins about z
axis with angular speed ω. The top precesses about y axis
with angular speed Ω. Initial velocity v of the mass-point a
is given by v = RΩ + rω.

should know trajectories that the mass-points make. Let
us set up coordinate systems as in Fig. 3, where unit
vectors x, y, z and x′, y′, z′ are instantaneous rectangu-
lar coordinate systems co-moving with the stem. The
relationship between the two coordinate systems is given
by

y′

= y,

x′

= cos Θx − sin Θz,

(1)

as we see.

Using the coordinate systems we calculate trajectory of
each mass-point. First, we calculate trajectory of mass-
point a, as shown in Fig. 3. Let us denote the trajectory
of mass-point a as ~La(t). The vector ~La(t) is sum of
a location vector ~R(t) = R R(t) and a location vector
~r(t) = r r(t), that is,

~La(t) = ~R(t) + ~r(t),

(2)

where R(t) and r(t) are unit vectors as shown in Fig. 3.
We can see that

~R(t) = R R(t) = R cos(Ωt) z + R sin(Ωt) x,

(3)

and that

~r(t) = r sin(ωt) x′

− r cos(ωt) y′

= r sin(ωt)[(cos Θ) x − (sin Θ) z] − r cos(ωt) y
= r sin(ωt)(cos Ωt) x − r cos(ωt) y

FIG. 3: A trajectory that the mass-point a makes. The
trajectory is curved toward origin O as well as toward a point
(0, +∞, 0). Thus net force on the mass-point a along the
z direction is non-zero. Reaction of the mass-point on the
branch along the z direction on the branch, f , is the opposite
of the net force. However, the other end of the stem is ﬁxed
at the origin O and the frame composed of the stem and four
branches is a solid body. Thus, the frame would rotate upward
(or ﬂoat) due to the torque by the reaction f . (f is denoted
as f ′
a(0) in text of this paper.) Here unit vectors x, y, z and
′
′
x
are instantaneous rectangular frames co-moving with
, z
, y
the stem.

′

where Eq. (1) is used. By combining Eqs. (2)-(4), we
obtain

~La(t) = [R sin(Ωt) + r sin(ωt)(cos Ωt)] x

−r cos(ωt) y
+[R cos(Ωt) − r sin(ωt)(sin Ωt)] z.

(5)

From Eq. (5), we obtain

d2~La(t)
dt2

= [−RΩ

(sin Ωt) − rω

sin(ωt) cos(Ωt)

2

2

2

sin(ωt) cos(Ωt)] x

2

cos(ωt) y

−2rωΩ cos(ωt) sin(Ωt) − rΩ
+rω
+[−RΩ
cos(Ωt) + rω
−2rωΩ cos(ωt) cos(Ωt)
sin(ωt) sin(Ωt)] z.
+rΩ

2

2

2

sin(ωt) sin(Ωt)

(6)

What we consider is the situation when t = 0. From Eq.
(6), we get

d2~La(0)

dt2 = rω

2 y + [−RΩ

2

− 2rωΩ] z.

(7)

−r sin(ωt)(sin Ωt) z,

(4)

Thus the net force ~fa(0) on the mass-point a when t = 0

is given by

~fa(0) = m

d2~La(0)
dt2
2 y + m[−RΩ

2

= mrω

− 2rωΩ] z.

(8)

(8). The ﬁrst
Let us give an interpretation of Eq.
term, mrω2 y,
is due to the rotation involved with
angular speed ω, usually. However, the second term,
m[−RΩ2 − 2rωΩ] z, is due to combination of both ro-
tations, that involved with angular speed ω and that in-
volved with angular speed Ω.
It is due to the second
term that the force ~fa(0) along z direction is non-zero.
The fact that the force ~fa(0) along z direction is non-zero
can also be seen from trajectory shown in Fig. 3: The
trajectory is curved toward origin O as well as toward a
point (0, +∞, 0). Before we proceed more, let us give a
loose but very short explanation.

A loose explanation: Because of the non-zero force
~fa(0) along z direction on the mass-point a, a reaction
f ′
a(0) = − ~fa(0) is exerted on the branch. However, the
other end of the stem is ﬁxed at the origin O and the
frame composed of the stem and four branches is a solid
body. Thus, the frame would rotate upward (or ﬂoat) due
to the torque by the reaction f ′

a(0).

Similarly, we can calculate net forces on other mass-

points when t = 0:

− rΩ

] x + m[−RΩ

] z,

(9)

2

2

~fb(0) = m

d2~Lc(0)
dt2
2
= m[−rω

~fc(0) = m

d2~Lc(0)
dt2
= −mrω

4

(13)

and (12), we can see that there is non-zero torque on the
frame by mass-points a and c, that is, τa + τc = 4mr2ωΩ.
Therefore, there is non-zero torque τ on the frame given
by

τi = 4mr

ωΩ.

2

τ = X
i

As in the case of previous subsection, however,
it
means that the frame gets inﬁnite acceleration because
the frame is massless. Therefore, we should assume that
there is another torque τ ′ = −τ that balances the torque
τ . The balancing torque τ ′ should be mechanically pro-
vided at the hinge O in order to maintain the rotation in
Figs. 2 and 3.

Now let us consider the case where external force, the
gravity, is restored. We can calculate forces on the frame
by the mass-points in the same order as we followed in the
previous subsection. Clearly, the net force on the mass-
points are invariant whether there is external force or not,
as long as the motion is not changed. In order to maintain
the same net force on the mass-points, therefore, internal
forces on the mass-points by the branches must change
by an amount of −mg. Thus, reaction on the branches
by the mass-points change by an amount of +mg, due to
the third law of Newton.

Now we can calculate net torque τnet on the branches
by thus changed reactions of the mass-points. We can see
from above arguments that diﬀerence between the net
torque τnet and the torque τ is simply a torque 4mgR
due to the gravity +4mg of four mass-points,

τnet = τ + 4mgR.

(14)

2 y + m[−RΩ

2

+ 2rωΩ] z,

(10)

In order to avoid inﬁnite acceleration of the frame, the
net torque τnet must be zero, from which we obtain a
condition,

and

~fd(0) = m

d2~Lc(0)
dt2
2

2

= m[rω

+ rΩ

] x + m[−RΩ

] z.

(11)

2

Note that ~fa(0) and ~fb(0) have similar forms as those of
~fc(0) and ~fd(0), respectively. Due to the third law of
Newton, reaction ~f ′
i (0) on branch by each mass-point is
negative of each net force ~fi(0), where i = a, b, c, d. That
is,

′
i(0) = − ~fi(0).
~f

(12)

Now we are prepared to calculate torque τi that is ex-
erted on the frame by reaction of each mass-point. By in-
specting spatial arrangement of vectors in Eqs. (9), (11),
and (12), we can see that torques by mass-points b and
d cancel each other, that is, τb + τd = 0. However, by in-
specting spatial arrangement of vectors in Eqs. (8), (10),

2

r

|ωΩ| = gR.

(15)

Surprisingly, this is the condition for the precession of the
top found in text books [1]. Now we give our explanation.
Explanation-5: The net torque τnet gives no torque
on the frame. Thus the frame does neither move upward
nor downward.

However, the other end of the stem is ﬁxed at the origin
O and the frame composed of the stem and four branches
is a solid body. Thus, if the net torque τnet and the
torque due to the gravity mg were separately exerted on
the frame, the frame would get upward and downward
force, respectively: Therefore, it is interesting to give an
explanation as the following.

Explanation-6: The downward force on the frame
due to the torque, 4mgR, by gravity is balanced by the
ﬂoating (upward) force due to the torque τ by mass-
points. Thus the rod does neither move upward nor down-
ward.

III. DISCUSSIONS

A. Other motions of a top

It is interesting to see that our explanations can be
applied to other motions of the top, motions involved
with nutation [2].

Contrary to our simple-minded notion, even a spinning
top does fall down depending on situation. Let us con-
sider a motion described in Ref. [2]. ” If we were to hold
the axis absolutely ﬁxed, so that it cannot process in any
manner (but the top is spinning) then there is no torque
acting, not even a torque from gravity, because it is bal-
anced by our ﬁngers. But if we suddenly let go, then there
will instantaneously be a torque from gravity. Anyone in
his right mind would think that top top would fall, and
that is what it starts to do, as can be seen if the top is
not spinning too fast. The gyro actually does fall, as we
would expect. ...” How can we explain the ‘falling down
of spinning top with (temporarily) ﬁxed axis’ ? (In Ref.
[2], we can ﬁnd discussions on this point, too. Although
the discussions appear to be similar to our explanations
or the one by Eastman [4, 5]. But what they say is that
anyhow force must be applied to each mass-point in the
same direction as that of acceleration of the mass-point.
This is not the same as our or Eastman’s points.) This
is a quite perplexing problem. However, we can ﬁnd an
explanation of the Explanation-6 type for the problem.
Explanation-7: Because the spinning axis is (tem-
porarily) ﬁxed, as we can see, there is no ﬂoating force
that can be obtained by precession of the axis. Therefore,
the top falls down due to downward force by gravity.

However, the falling down of spinning top with (tem-
porarily) ﬁxed axis does not last so long. The top would
begin to move horizontally such that the top makes a cy-
cloid, as described in Fig. 20-5 of Ref. [2]. We can also
give an explanation for this motion.

Explanation-8: The falling down makes the top ’pre-
cess’ toward −y direction temporarily. However, as we
have seen in section II, a precession toward +x direction
induces a force toward −y direction on the frame. By
the same mechanism, the precession toward −y direction
induce a force toward +x direction on the frame. There-
fore, the falling top accelerates in +x direction also.

Combining the Explanation-7 and Explanation-8, we
can understand why the top makes a cycloid at least
qualitatively.

B. Eastman’s model

We brieﬂy review the Eastman’s model [4, 5] in Fig. 4,
before we discuss diﬃculties of the model. Assume that
impulses, F and −F , are applied during a time duration
∆t, to a spinning top. These impulses induces forces
along the z axis, h and −h, on the mass-points a and c,
respectively. The forces, h and −h, then change velocities
v(a) and v(c) of mass-points a and c to v′(a) and v′(c),

5

y

z

x

v(c)

v'(c)

d

c

- h

-F

ω

F

  h

a

m

b

v'(a)

v(a)

FIG. 4: The Eastman’s model [4, 5]. Assume that impulses,
F and −F , are applied during a time duration ∆t, to a spin-
ning top. These impulses induces forces along the z axis,
h and −h, on the mass-points a and c, respectively. The
forces, h and −h, then change velocities v(a) and v(c) of
mass-points a and c to v
(c), respectively. Here
(c) = v(c) − (h/m)∆t are sat-
v
isﬁed. Here m is mass of each mass-point. As a result, the
spinning axis of the top is rotated by an angle that v(a) and
v′(a) make. That is, the axis of the top precesses in a direction
that is perpendicular to the impulses.

(a) = v(a) + (h/m)∆t and v

(a) and v

′

′

′

′

respectively. Here v′(a) = v(a) + (h/m)∆t and v′(c) =
v(c) − (h/m)∆t are satisﬁed. Here m is mass of each
mass-point. As a result, the spinning axis of the top
is rotated by an angle that v(a) and v′(a) make. That
is, the axis of the top precesses in a direction that is
perpendicular to the impulses.

Let us discuss diﬃculties of the Eastman’s model.
First, it is not clear how the impulses, F and −F , in-
duces forces, h and −h. It seems that what the authors
of Refs. [4, 5] had in mind is the following. The impulses
make mass-points a and c move slightly along z direc-
tion, ﬁrst. These movements induces the forces h and
−h. (This is in contrast with that the impulses do not
make mass-points b and d move and thus no forces are
induced on the mass-points b and d.) However, even this
argument is not suﬃciently explaining why the move-
ments can be identiﬁed with the forces h and −h. Fur-
thermore, actual movements of the mass-points a and c
are not along the z axis but along the x axis in the case
of usual precession dealt with in section II.

Second, actual trajectories of mass-points are not
taken into account in the Eastman’s model. However,
actual trajectories at the initial time decides initial con-
dition. Therefore, the Eastman’s model cannot explain
the fact that the same spinning top either does or does

not fall down depending on initial condition, as seen in
the previous subsection.
In other words, according to
the Eastman’s model the direction of precession is un-
changed as long as the direction of impulses are the same.
However, the impulses are provided by the gravity, and
thus the impulses do not depend on the initial condition.
This implies that the spinning top would never fall down,
which contradicts facts.

6

trajectories of some parts of a top. They clearly show
which forces supports the top. Our explanations can be
easily applied to other motions of the top due to other
initial conditions.

IV. CONCLUSION

Acknowledgments

We gave intuitive explanations about why a spinning
top does not fall down. Our explanations consider actual

for helpful discussions.

I am grateful to Profs. Intaek Lim and Jongwon Park

[*] Email address: wyhwang@chonnam.ac.kr
[1] D. Halliday, R. Resnick, J. Walker, Fundamentals of
Physics, 4th ed., (John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York,
1993).

[2] R. Feynman, M. Sands, and R. Leighton, The Feynman
Lectures on Physics, (Addison Wesley Longman, 1963)
[3] S. T. Thornton, Classical Dynamics of Particles and Sys-
tems, 4th ed., (Harcourt Brace and Company, Florida,
1995).

[4] P. C. Eastman, Am. J. Phys. 43, 365 (1975).

[5] P. L. Edwards, Am. J. Phys. 45, 1194 (1977).
[6] In the actual case where mass of the rod is non zero al-
though very small, the forces should be diﬀerent from what
we give in this paper. However, the diﬀerences can be made
arbitrarily small by making mass of the rod small. There-
fore, the situation in the actual case with very small mass
approaches to those in the hypothetical case with zero
mass. For simplicity of discussion, we deal with the latter
case.

