Connecting Blackbody Radiation, Relativity, and Discrete Charge

in Classical Electrodynamics

Timothy H. Boyer

Department of Physics, City College of the City

University of New York, New York, NY 10031

Abstract

It is suggested that an understanding of blackbody radiation within classical physics requires the

presence of classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation, the restriction to relativistic (Coulomb)

scattering systems, and the use of discrete charge. The contrasting scaling properties of nonrela-

tivistic classical mechanics and classical electrodynamics are noted, and it is emphasized that the

solutions of classical electrodynamics found in nature involve constants which connect together the

scales of length, time, and energy.

Indeed, there are analogies between the electrostatic forces for

groups of particles of discrete charge and the van der Waals forces in equilibrium thermal radiation.

The diﬀering Lorentz- or Galilean-transformation properties of the zero-point radiation spectrum

and the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum are noted in conection with their scaling properties. Also, the

thermal eﬀects of acceleration within classical electromagnetism are related to the existence of

thermal equilibrium within a gravitational ﬁeld. The unique scaling and phase-space properties

of a discrete charge in the Coulomb potential suggest the possibility of an equilibrium between the

zero-point radiation spectrum and matter which is universal (independent of the particle mass),

and an equilibrium between a universal thermal radiation spectrum and matter where the matter

phase space depends only upon the ratio mc2/kBT . The observations and qualitative suggestions

made here run counter to the ideas of currently accepted quantum physics.

6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
0
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Although blackbody radiation, relativity, and discrete charge are rarely connected in

the physics literature, they are intimately connected in nature.

Thus,

for example,

Planck’s blackbody spectrum appears as the equilibrium spectrum associated with uniform

proper acceleration through a Lorentz-invariant spectrum of random classical electromag-

netic radiation.[1][2][3][4] Furthermore, the charge of the electron and Stefan’s blackbody

radiation constant can be combined to give a universal dimensionless constant. On the other

hand, the many attempts to understand blackbody radiation within classical physics using

nonrelativistic statistical mechanics or nonrelativistic mechanical scattering systems with

a small-charge coupling limit all lead to the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum with its ultraviolet

divergence. On this account most physicist believe that the blackbody radiation spectrum

arises from a charge of arbitrary size in any (nonrelativistic) mechanical potential because of

Boltzmann statistics and the quantum nature of energy exchanges. Here we reexamine the

classical electromagnetic description of radiation equilibrium. We suggest that the observed

Planck spectrum of blackbody radiation may have nothing to do with energy quanta and

everything to do with the symmetries of relativistic classical electron theory with discrete

charges.[5]

The physicists who investigated blackbody radiation near the beginning of the twenti-

eth century were unfamiliar with the implications of special relativity and so interpreted

”classical physics” to mean ”nonrelativistic classical mechanics.” Furthermore, the discrete

electronic charge was viewed (and still is today) as a curiosity unrelated to blackbody ra-

diation. Thus the normal modes of oscillation of the electromagnetic ﬁeld were treated as

mechanical waves using nonrelativistic classical statistical mechanics[6] or the electric dipole

oscillator in contact with the radiation ﬁeld was treated by nonrelativistic classical statis-

tical mechanics[7] or the scatterer of radiation was a nonrelativistic classical mechanical

scatterer.[8] Researchers around 1900 wondered how the variety of nonrelativistic mechani-

cal systems could possibly lead to the observed universal spectrum for radiation equilibrium

which was unrelated to the details of the matter producing the equilibrium.

Finally

around 1910 it was noted that the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum always seemed to appear from

treatments using nonrelativistic classical mechanics, and moreover nonrelativistic classical

mechanics does not include any fundamental constant which could lead to a departure from

2

the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum.[9]

Indeed, the principles of nonrelativistic classical mechan-

ics (involving independent scalings of length, time, and energy) simply can not support a

fundamental constant like Stefan’s constant as connecting the energy density u of thermal
radiation and the absolute temperature T , u = asT 4.

Today relativistic physics is regarded as fundamental, not nonrelativistic mechanics.

In

particular, the relativistic Coulomb interaction between discrete point charges allows a sep-

aration between particle mass and the particle phase space distribution which is not possible

for any other potential. Therefore it ﬁts qualitatively with the Planck spectrum of electro-

magnetic radiation as nonrelativistic mechanics does not.

Indeed, it is one of the ironies of

the history of physics that blackbody radiation, special relativity, and discrete electronic

charge all came to prominence at the beginning of the 20th century yet these were not con-

nected. Thus at the same time that Lorentz invariance was recognized as a symmetry of

electromagnetic waves, the interaction of radiation and matter was treated by nonrelativis-

tic mechanics for particles of arbitrarily small charge.

It was only half-a-century later that

blackbody radiation and special relativity began to be related in connection with the Lorentz

invariance of zero-point radiation[10][11] and the thermal behavior associated with uniform

acceleration through zero-point radiation.[1][2][3][4] However, even today the textbooks of

modern physics hark back to the years of disconnection of a century ago, while classical elec-

tromagnetic theory is taught as though relativistic particle motion was not important and

as thought electric charge had no smallest value.

It is our unproven suggestion that within

classical physics, the crucial appearance of the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum or the Planck spec-

trum has nothing to do with classical versus quantum physics but rather is a reﬂection of

the diﬀering correlations allowed by nonrelativistic or relativistic classical scattering systems

with continuous or discrete charge.

A. Outline of the Discussion

This article is an attempt to exploring all the suggestive evidence for a classical expla-

nation of blackbody radiation and to understand why the currently-accepted arguments are

misleading. We start by pointing out the contrasting scaling properties of nonrelativis-

tic classical mechanics and classical electrodynamics.

It is emphasized that the solutions

of classical electrodynamics found in nature involve constants which connect together the

3

scales of length, time, and energy.

Indeed, there are analogies between the forces found in

the electrostatics of discrete point charges and those found between materials in equilibrium

random classical radiation. Second we consider equilibrium classical radiation and note the

diﬀering transformation properties of the zero-point spectrum and the Rayleigh-Jeans spec-

trum. Also, we remark on the appearance of thermal eﬀects of acceleration within classical

electromagnetism and relate them to the existence of thermal equilibrium in a gravitational

ﬁeld. Third, we note the unique scaling properties of the Coulomb potential and the unique

separation between the phase space distribution and the particle mass. Fourth we discuss

the interaction between radiation and matter. We note that the Coulomb potential with a

discrete charge allows an interaction with random radiation which connects the phase space

of the matter with the phase space of the radiation variables in a universal connection.

Finally, we discuss our current understanding of the blackbody radiation spectrum within

classical physics.

II. SCALING AND UNIVERSAL CONSTANTS

The contradictions between nonrelativistic mechanics and electromagnetism can be seen

immediately from the contrasting scaling symmetries of nonrelativistic classical mechanics

as compared to classical electrodynamics with relativistic particles of discrete charge. Thus

attempts to explain blackbody radiation based upon nonrelativistic classical statistical me-

chanics or nonrelativistic classical scattering systems are doomed to failure.

A. Scaling for Nonrelativistic Mechanics

Within nonrelativistic mechanics, length, time, and energy all scale independently. The

symmetries of classical mechanics allow separate dilatation factors σl, σt, σE for length, time
and energy, l → l′ = σll, t′ → σtt, E → E′ = σEE, where the three separate dilatation

factors range over all positive real numbers. Thus for any nonrelativistic mechanical system,

there exists, in principle, a second system which is twice as large, has a period three times as

long, and contains four times the energy. Since nonrelativistic mechanics allows independent

scalings of length, time, and energy, nonrelativistic mechanics can have no fundamental

constants connecting length, time, and energy. The existence in the nineteenth century of

4

independent standards of length, time, and energy reﬂects the independent scalings found

in nonrelativistic classical mechanics.

B. Scaling for Classical Electromagnetism

In the electromagnetic evidence accumulated during the last half of the nineteenth cen-

tury, this absence of any universality within nonrelativistic classical mechanics stood in
startling contrast with the appearance of a universal wave speed c = 3 × 1010cm/sec in
Maxwell’s equations, a universal energy-length-related constant as/k4
B = 6.25 × 1064(erg −
cm)−3 (Stefan’s constant divided by the fourth power of Boltzmann’s constant) for black-
body radiation, and a second energy-length-related constant e2 = 2.304 × 10−19erg − cm

corresponding to a smallest electric charge e. Thus in contradiction to the separate scalings

found in nonrelativistic mechanics, classical electromagnetism has the scales of length, time,

and energy all connected. Maxwell’s equations themselves contain the speed of light c in

vacuum, and this fundamental constant couples the scales of length and time. Thus if we

ﬁnd an electromagnetic wave in vacuum with wavelength λ, then we know immediately that

the frequency ν of the wave is given by ν = c/λ. Furthermore, the solutions of Maxwell’s

equations found in nature during the nineteenth century involve two other fundamental con-

stants, one for radiation and one for matter: Stefan’s constant as for blackbody radiation

and a smallest electric charge e. Stefan’s constant as divided by the fourth power of Boltz-

mann’s constant kB (this last connects absolute temperature T to energy) can be regarded

as coupling together length and energy through the relation for the electromagnetic thermal
energy U in a cubic volume of side l at temperature T given by U/(kBT )4 = (as/k4

B)l

3. Similarly, the smallest (nonzero) electric charge e couples the scales of length

and energy for matter. Thus if two smallest charges e are separated by a distance r, then
the electrostatic potential energy is given by U = e2/r. Within classical electromagnetism,

there is only one independent scaling in nature; the dilatation symmetry allows only one

scale factor σltE−1 giving

l → l′ = σltE−1l,

t′ → σltE−1t,

E → E′ = E/σltE−1

(1)

where the dilatation factor σltE−1can assume all positive real values. Given any classical

electromagnetic system, there exists, in principle, a second electromagnetic system where

5

all the lengths, times, and inverse energies are σltE−1 times as large.

C. Electrostatic Energy-Length Scaling Due to Discrete Charge e

The existence of a fundamental energy-length connection in electromagnetism limits the

possible energy of an electrostatic conﬁguration. Thus if we are told the number of elemen-

tary charges involved and the shape of the charge distribution, then we know the product of

the electrostatic energy times a characteristic length of the distribution. Two elementary

examples immediately come to mind. A parallel-plate capacitor with square plates of side

L separated by a distance L/100 and charged with N elementary charges (spread uniformly

on each plate but of opposite sign for the two plates) has an electrostatic energy U where
UL = {[1/(8π)][4πNe/L2]2L3/100}L = N 2e2/50; a spherical conducting shell of outer ra-

dius a which contains N elementary electric charges (spread uniformly over the spherical
shell) has an electrostatic energy U where Ua = N 2e2/2.
In every case, the energy times
the characteristic length equals a shape-dependent geometrical factor times N 2e2. In every

case, there is a smallest nonvanishing energy when N = 1.

D. Electromagnetic Energy-Length Scaling Due to Stefan’s Constant

Now it is found in nature[12] that there are van der Waals forces between macroscopic

materials, and, at the absolute zero of temperature T = 0, these forces assume their smallest

values for a given geometrical conﬁguration.

It turns out that the smallest force at T = 0

gives a fundamental connection between energy and length which involves Stefan’s constant

and is completely analogous to that noted above in electrostatics where a minimum charge

is involved.[13] Thus if we are told the shape of a distribution of conductors, then we know

the product of the electromagnetic energy times a characteristic length of the distribution

at absolute zero. Again two elementary examples come to mind At temperature T = 0, an

uncharged parallel-plate capacitor[14] with square plates of side L separated by a distance
B)]−1/3; a spherical con-
L/100 has an energy U where UL = −(π2 × 106/360)[120as/(π2k4
B)]−1/3. In
ducting shell[15] of outer radius a has an energy U where Ua = 0.09[120as/(π2k4
every case, the energy times the characteristic length equals a shape-dependent geometrical
factor times (as/k4

B)−1/3.

6

E. Existence of a Dimensionless Universal Constant

Since nature gives us two universal electromagnetic constants connecting the scales of

energy and length, it follows that their ratio must be a dimensionless constant. Thus for
example, the charge of the electron is e = 4.80 × 10−10 esu, so e2 = 2.304 × 10−19erg − cm
while Stefan’s constant is as = 7.56 × 10−15erg · cm−3 · K −4 and Boltzmann’s constant is
kB = 1.38 × 10−16erg · K. Accordingly, we note that

e2(as/k4

B)1/3 = 0.00063487

This ratio involving nineteenth-century physical constants is not usually presented in the

physics literature.

It suggests the possibility that a discrete electronic charge is connected

to blackbody radiation.[16]

In the analysis to follow, we will frequently use the blackbody constant (as/kBT )−1/3.

Therefore it is convenient to introduce Stefan’s second constant bs where[17]

The constant bs has the units of energy × length, just the same as e2.

bs =

1/3

π2
120

k4
B
as (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(2)

(3)

III. EQUILIBRIUM CLASSICAL RADIATION

A. Classical Zero-Point Radiation

Pure classical electromagnetic radiation is a homogeneous solution of Maxwell’s equa-

tions. Classical radiation therefore contains the length-time connection given by the wave

speed c in vacuum of Maxwell’s equations, but makes no connection between energy and

length or between energy and time. For example, an electromagnetic plane wave solution of

Maxwell’s equations in vacuum of wavelength λ must have a frequency ν given by ν = λ/c,

but it may have any energy per unit volume associated with the electric ﬁeld amplitude E0.

It follows that any fundamental connection between energy and length involving electromag-

netic radiation within classical physics must come not from Maxwell’s equations themselves

but from a fundamental boundary condition on Maxwell’s equations.

Nature indeed provides a fundamental boundary condition on Maxwell’s equations. All

of the experimentally observed van der Waals forces[12] between macroscopic objects can be

7

described in terms of classical electromagnetic forces due to random classical electromagnetic

radiation.[18] The experimentally observed van der Waals forces require that at temperature

T = 0, there is present in space a Lorentz-invariant spectrum[10] of random classical elec-

tromagnetic radiation with an average energy Uλ per normal mode of wavelength λ = 2πλ

given by

Uλ(0) = [(120/π2)(as/k4

B)]−1/3/λ = bs/λ

(4)

where bs is Stefan’s second constant given in Eq. (3). The randomness of the radiation can

be described in terms of random phases for the radiation[19] and the radiation itself can be

described in terms of normal modes with action-angle variables and an associated probability

function Pλ for the action variable Jλ of the radiation mode of wavelength λ[20][21]

c
bs
We notice in Eq. (5) that the probability function Pλ(Jλ, 0) at temperature T = 0 is the

Jλc
bs (cid:21)

Pλ(Jλ, 0) =

exp

(5)

−

(cid:20)

same for every radiation mode independent of the wavelength λ of the mode.

We expect that the entropy associated with any classical system should be related to the

probability distributions of its action variables since the entropy is related to the probability

distribution on phase space. The action-angle variables of multiply periodic systems give

a natural division of phase space. The distribution in the angle variables is uniform, so

that the only probability distribution of relevance is the action variables. By the third law

of thermodynamics, we expect the thermodynamic entropy to vanish at T = 0. Therefore

the probability distribution at T = 0 given in Eq. (5) corresponds to zero entropy for each

radiation mode.[22]

B. Thermal Radiation

At ﬁnite temperature, the observed spectrum of blackbody radiation (including the zero-

point radiation required by the observed van der Waals forces) can be written as an energy

Uλ(T ) per normal mode

Uλ(T ) =

coth

bs
λ

bs
λkBT

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

with the probability function Pλ for the action variable Jλ of a radiation normal mode of

wavelength λ becoming a function of temperature,[21]

(6)

(7)

Pλ(Jλ, λT /bs) =

c
bs coth[bs/(λkBT )]

exp

−

(cid:20)

Jλc
bs coth[bs/(λkBT )]

(cid:21)

8

Even at ﬁnite temperature, the van der Waals forces for a conducting-walled container

due to random classical radiation still hold a strong analogy with the electrostatic forces due

to discrete charges in their dependence upon dimensionless and scaling parameters. We

saw above that an electrostatics problem was uniquely speciﬁed by giving the number of

elementary charges, the shape of the charge container holding uniformly spaced charges, and

one scale-determining length.

In the thermal radiation problem for van der Waals forces,

the pure number N (number of elementary charges) of the electrostatics problem is replaced

by the pure number S/kB corresponding to the entropy of the radiation in the container.

(As usual, we have removed the inessential unit of temperature by dividing out Boltzmann’s

constant.) Thus nature shows that thermal radiation in a container of given shape (speciﬁed

by dimensionless parameters) is determined by exactly two parameters; viz, the volume V
(which corresponds to setting the length scale l = V 1/3 of the container of given shape) and

the scale-independent entropy S/kB. All the other parameters are now ﬁxed. For thermal
radiation in a large spherical container, the radiation temperature is T = [3S/(4asV )]1/3,
the total thermal radiation energy in the container is U = asV [3S/(4asV )]4/3 = asT 4, the

energy per normal mode Uλ in the long wavelength (low frequency) modes is given by Uλ =
kB[3S/(4asV )]1/3 = kBT, and the wavelength where the thermal radiation spectrum has its
maximum is given by Wien’s displacement law λmax = const × [4asV /(3S)]1/3 = const/T.

Now classical electromagnetism is invariant under σltE−1 scaling symmetry and even under

conformal symmetry.[23] Therefore an adiabatic change in the volume of the container (while

maintaining its shape) is the same as a σltE−1 change of scale. For the electrostatic situation,

the energy U changes as the scaling length l changes while the number of elementary charges

remains ﬁxed. For the radiation case, the thermal energy in the container changes as the

radius of the container changes while the scale-invariant entropy S/kB is unchanged.
If
we imagine a spherical container, the change in the radius of the container r → r′ =
ltE−1V, temperature T → T ′ =
σltE−1r, leads to a consistent change of volume V → V ′ = σ3
T /σltE−1, and energy U → U ′ = U/σltE−1, while the entropy is unchanged S → S′ = S.
All the laws of blackbody radiation hold both before and after the scale change. The

probability function Pλ(Jλ, T ) → Pλ

λkBT = (σltE−1λ)(kBT /σltE−1) = λ

′, T ′) in Eq.

′(Jλ

(7) is unchanged since the product
kBT ′ is unchanged under the scale change or adiabatic

′

change, and this invariance is appropriate for the invariance of the radiation entropy.

The equivalence between adiabatic change in the size of a container (which retains its

9

shape) of electromagnetic energy and a σltE−1 scale transformation of the situation is some-

thing that can hold only for pure electromagnetic ﬁelds and not when particle masses m

are involved. We do not think of particles in a container as changing mass m during an

adiabatic change, whereas the the numerical value of mass is rescaled under a σltE−1 scale
change, m → m′ = m/σltE−1.

(8)

(9)

C. Electric Field Correlation Functions in the High- and Low-Temperature Limits

In the high-frequency or short-wavelength limit, the blackbody radiation spectrum (6)

involves coth[x] → 1 for large x and goes over to the zero-point energy limit

Uλ(0) = Uω(0) = bs/λ = (bs/c)ω

In the long-wavelength or low-frequency limit, the blackbody spectrum (6) involves

coth[x] → 1/x for small x and goes over to the the Rayleigh-Jeans equipartition energy

URJλ = URJω = kBT

This latter spectrum corresponds to the energy (with associated entropy) of traditional

nonrelativistic classical statistical mechanics per normal mode.

It is interesting to see the

electromagnetic ﬁeld correlation functions for these two limiting spectra (8) and (9), and to

note the role played by the speed of light c. The electric ﬁeld correlation function for the

zero-point spectrum of random radiation is given by[24]

< Ei(r, t)Ej(r′, t′) >T =0=

δij
c2

∂
∂t

∂
∂t′ −

∂
∂xi

∂
∂x′

−2bs/π
c2(t − t′)2 − (r − r′)2

(10)

(cid:19)

j (cid:19) (cid:18)
The other electromagnetic ﬁeld correlation functions
F µν(x)F µ′ν′

(x′)

(cid:18)

can be obtained by changing the space and time indices in Eq. (10).[24]

in the four-tensor expression

The electric ﬁeld correlation function involves space and time derivatives of the Lorentz-
(cid:10)
invariant spacetime interval c2(t − t′)2 − (r − r′)2 between the ﬁeld points (r,t) and (r′, t′).

(cid:11)

This indeed denotes the Lorentz-invariant character of the random radiation spectrum. Now

we expect, but have not proved, that relativistic scattering systems which themselves main-

tain the Lorentz invariance of spacetime intervals will leave this spectrum invariant. We

suggest that it is unreasonable to expect that nonrelativistic mechanical scattering systems,

10

which do not share the Lorentz symmetry of the zero-point spectrum, should leave the

Lorentz-invariant zero-point spectrum unchanged.

The electric ﬁeld correlation function for the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum takes the form[25]

< Ei(r, t)Ej(r′, t′) >RJ =

δij
c2

∂
∂t

∂
∂t′ −

∂
∂xi

∂
∂x′

kBT
|r − r′|

j (cid:19)

(cid:18)

θ(|r − r′| − c |t − t′|)

(11)

We notice immediately that this correlation function depends not only on the Lorentz-
invariant spacetime interval c |t − t′| − |r − r′| but also on the Galilean-invariant interval
|r − r′| . Thus the right-hand side is Galilean invariant but not Lorentz invariant. We

expect that the spectrum will be preserved by electromagnetic scattering systems which

maintain the invariance of the nonrelativistic invariant spatial interval. This is seen in

several scattering calculations.[8] The correlation function in Eq. (11) vanishes for time-like

separations, an aspect which appears from the Lorentz-covariance of the radiation itself,

not from the information carried in the radiation spectrum . The only correlations in time

involve δ-function correlations and so involve no connection between energy and time, as is

true in nonrelativistic mechanics.

D. Limiting Field Correlations Functions as c → ∞

In order to emphasize the distinction between zero-point radiation and the Rayleigh-Jeans

spectrum, we will consider the limit c → ∞ so as to eliminate c from Eqs. (10) and (11).
The c → ∞ limit is possible only when t = t′. Then the zero-point radiation correlation

function (10) becomes

< Ei(r, t)Ej(r′, t) >T =0=

∂
∂xi

∂
∂x′

(cid:18)

j (cid:19) (cid:18)

−2bs/π
(r − r′)2

(cid:19)

while that for the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum becomes

< Ei(r, t)Ej(r′, t) >RJ =

∂
∂xi

∂
∂x′

(cid:18)

j (cid:19)

−kBT
|r − r′|

(12)

(13)

The diﬀerent functional dependence upon the the spatial interval |r − r′| seen in Eqs. (12)

and (13) is a reminder of the coupling between energy and length in zero-point radiation and

the complete decoupling between energy and length found in the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum.
Thus the electric ﬁeld (think of E = e/r2) scales as two inverse powers of the dilatation

11

factor σltE−1. The left-hand sides of Eqs.

(12) and (13) scale as (1/σltE−1)4 and have

units of energy per unit volume. For the zero-point radiation spectrum in Eq. (12), there

are four powers of length on the right-hand side so that bs must have units of energy ×

length and can be a fundamental constant relating energy and length which is invariant

under scaling by σltE−1. On the other hand, the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum in Eq. (13) has

only three powers of length on the right-hand side, and therefore the parameter kBT must
have the units of energy and is subject to scaling by σltE−1, kBT → kBT ′ = kBT /σltE−1.
Thus the energy parameter kBT can take on any non-negative value. The Rayleigh-Jeans

spectrum reﬂects the completely independent scaling of energy and length which is typical of

nonrelativistic mechanics.

Indeed, when van der Waals forces between macroscopic objects

are calculated using the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum, one ﬁnds that there is no net change in

the electromagnetic energy with position of the objects;[26] all the forces are associated with

changes of entropy through the Helmholtz free energy. This ﬁts exactly with the absence

of any energy-length connection within the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum.

E. Thermal Eﬀects of Acceleration within Classical Theory

One of the surprising realizations of the last quarter of the twentieth century was that

the ﬁeld correlation functions of Planck’s blackbody spectrum appear when a system under-

goes uniform acceleration through zero-point radiation.[1][2][3][4] Although this appearance

without any apparent application of statistical mechanics has provided a profound quandary

for quantum physics, it seems a natural result within classical electrodynamics with classical

zero-point radiation.[27]

The equivalence principle connects accelerations to gravitational phenomena, while accel-

eration through classical zero-point radiation is found to connect zero-point radiation with

the Planck spectrum of thermal radiation. Thus it seems relevant to consider our sketch of

relativistic classical electrodynamics with discrete charge in connection with gravitational ef-

fects. The simplest system to consider is the Rindler frame[28] involving a time-independent

coordinate system where each spatial point undergoes a uniform proper acceleration through

Minkowski spacetime. We expect that thermal radiation equilibrium can exist within a

gravitational ﬁeld. Thus we expect thermal equilibrium to exist for the Rindler frame. Now

12

the Rindler frame involves uniform proper acceleration

for a spatial point a distance z from the event horizon at z = 0. The smallest density of

b

b

random classical radiation is that given by zero-point radiation. The essential aspect is its

Lorentz-invariant spectrum which can be written as

a =

ka =

kc2/z

Uω = const × ω

(14)

(15)

for the energy Uω of a normal mode of frequency ω, where there is an arbitrary multiplicative

constant const.

It has been shown[2][3][4] that the correlation function for the random

classical electromagnetic ﬁelds as observed at a ﬁxed spatial point in the Rindler frame no

longer corresponds to a Lorentz-invariant spectrum but rather to a spectrum

Uω = const × ω coth(πωc/a)

(16)

This result can be obtained by considering the uniform proper acceleration of a harmonic

electric dipole system of ﬁxed angular frequency ω0 taken in the point dipole limit as the

mass of the oscillator particle goes to inﬁnity. We notice that the expression for the radiation

energy Uω at frequency ω involves the hyperbolic cosine function with a dependence upon

ωc/a. The proper acceleration a takes the place of the temperature in the blackbody

radiation spectrum.

For frequencies ω small compared to a/c, ω << a/c, the spectrum is proportional to the

acceleration a and independent of frequency, just like the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum in Eq.

(9). For large frequencies ω >> a/c, the spectrum is still the Lorentz-invariant spectrum

(15) which increases linearly with frequency ω. The result in Eq. (16) is entirely classical,

depends crucially on the Lorentz-invariance of the original spectrum (15) in Minkowski

spacetime, and has nothing to do with any fundamental constant except the speed of light

in vacuum c. The multiplicative scale of the of the Lorentz-invariant spectrum is given by

the arbitrary constant here labeled ”const.” If we choose the constant so as to ﬁt with the

experimentally observed spectrum of classical zero-point radiation, then const = bs/c and
the associated temperature is given by kBT = bsa/(πc2). The ﬂuctuations of the radiation

can be obtained from the random phases of the radiation modes.[19]

13

From Wien’s displacement theorem (which holds even in gravitational ﬁelds), we know

that thermal equilibrium at any temperature T is of the form Uω = ωf (ω/T ) or Uλ =

cf (c/λT )/λ where f is a universal function.

In an inertial frame, we may take the limit

T → 0, and recover the zero-point spectrum given in Eq. (4) or (15).

In the Rindler frame

involving uniform acceleration, the function f must follow from Eq. (16) which was found

from the acceleration through zero-point radiation. Thus comparing Eq. (16) with the

zero-temperature limit where the const = bs/c, we ﬁnd that proper acceleration a through

zero-point radiation corresponds to a lowest possible temperature Tmin in a gravitation ﬁeld

a given by

and any additional random radiation will increase the energy per normal mode Uω according

to the functional behavior

kBTmin = bsa/(πc2)

Uω =

ω coth

bs
c

(bs/c)ω
kBT

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(17)

(18)

IV. BEHAVIOR OF MATTER

Classical electromagnetic radiation within a container with perfectly reﬂecting walls will

never come to thermal equilibrium. Rather, there must be some interaction between ra-

diation and matter which brings the radiation to equilibrium.[29] The state of thermal

equilibrium for the radiation will reﬂect some fundamental aspects of the matter which

causes the equilibrium. This conviction was expressed clearly by Lorentz back in the early

1900s when he writes,[30] ”...we may hope to ﬁnd in what manner the value of this constant

[λT = const] is determined by some numerical quantity that is the same for all ponderable

bodies.” Here we are proposing that the discrete electric charge e and use of relativistic

interactions are the crucial elements for matter. Relativistic electromagnetic interactions

begin with the Coulomb potential which involves unique properties related to scaling,[31]

phase space, and radiation emission, and these unique properties encourage the possibility

of a classical explanation for blackbody radiation.

14

A.

σltE−1 Scaling for a Central Potential

Suppose we consider a charged particle e in a central potential of the form U(r) = −k/rn.

Now under the σltE−1 scaling of classical electromagnetism, the potential energy U transforms
as U → U ′ = U/σltE−1 while the distance r transforms as r → r′ = σltE−1r so that k′/r′n =
k′/(σltE−1r)n = (k/rn)/σltE−1 and hence we must have k′ = σn−1
ltE−1k. This means that if
in the collection of allowed systems there is a potential U = −k/rn with strength k, then
there must also be a potential U = −k′/rn of strength k′ = σn−1
ltE−1k. Thus only in the
case of the Coulomb potential where n = 1 (and k = e2 has the units of energy × length)
do we have the possibility of a scale-independent coupling k′ = k. For all other potentials
U(r) = −k/rn, n 6= 1, the coupling constant must allow all real values k. Thus only for the

Coulomb potential do we preserve the σltE−1 scaling of classical electromagnetic theory rather

than being forced into the traditional scaling of nonrelativistic mechanics with separate,

independent scalings for energy and length. Whereas a point charge of smallest charge e at

a distance r in a Coulomb potential of elementary strength e always has a potential energy
U = e2/r where e is a universal value, we have no such information for a particle at radius

r in a general potential U(r) = −k/rn because the potential strength k is freely changeable

so that U = k/rn can be any real number. Thus a fundamental connection between energy
and length is given by the elementary charge e2 and a fundamental connection between
energy and time is given by e2/c. Accordingly within relativistic theory, a particle of mass
m and smallest charge e is connected to the characteristic energy mc2, the characteristic
length e2/(mc2) , and the characteristic time e2/(mc3).

B. Dependence of Orbit Speed on Action Variables

In addition to allowing a unique, σltE−1 scale-independent smallest coupling constant, the

Coulomb potential also involves a unique separation between orbital speed and mass for

ﬁxed angular momentum J, which separation is not possible for any other central potential

U(r) = −k/rn.

If we consider a point charge e in a circular orbit of radius r in a central

potential U(r) = −k/rn, then the equation of motion F =dp/dt and the angular momentum

J are given by

mγv2/r = nk/rn+1 and

J = mrγv

(19)

15

while the system energy is given by H = mγc2 − k/rn. If we connect the equation of motion

and the angular momentum J in Eq. (19) so as to eliminate the orbital radius r, then we
have mγv2 = nk(mγv/J)n or γ1−nv2−n = nkmn−1/J n. Thus only for n = 1 (corresponding
to the Coulomb potential k = e2) does the particle mass m disappear from this last equation

so that we have the orbital speed v of the particle determined solely by the action variable
J, v = e2/J. For every other potential U(r) = −k/rn, the orbital speed v is determined by
both J and the product kmn−1 where k (as seen above) can not be a universal constant but

must be a free scaling parameter.

C. Relativistic Coulomb Motion

Not only does the Coulomb potential have very special relations with σ2

ltE−1 scaling and
phase space, it is also the only mechanical potential which has been extended to a fully

relativistic theory. Thus the fundamental electromagnetic system of relativistic classical

electrodynamics is an elementary point charge e of mass m in a Coulomb potential of strength

−e.

In this case, the motion of the mechanical system can be described by action angle

variables J1, J2, J3, with an energy[32]

H = mc2

1 +

(cid:18)

(e2/c)2

{J3 − J2 + [J 2

2 − (e2/c)2]1/2}2

−1/2

(cid:19)

(20)

Under the single-parameter scaling σltE−1 which leaves classical electromagnetism invariant,

only the mass m and energy H are rescaled, m → m/σltE−1, H → H/σltE−1. The action

variables Ji ( with units of energy × time) as well as the constants e and c are all invariant

under the σltE−1 scaling of lengths, times, and energies given in Eq.(1). Thus from Eq.
(20), the hamiltonian divided by the mass-energy, H/mc2, is a dimensionless function which

describes the shape of the particle orbit as well as the speed of the particle and is completely

independent of any rescaling of the form given by a dilatation factor σltE−1. The Coulomb

potential allows the decoupling of the phase-space behavior given by the Ji from the particle

mass m, and hence allows the possibility of a universal spectrum of blackbody radiation in

classical physics.

In the case of a restriction to circular orbits of angular momentum J, J1 = J2 = J3 = J,

16

the energy becomes[33]

the orbital radius is

and the orbital frequency is

1/2

2

H = mc2

1 −

"

(cid:18)

#

(cid:19)

r =

e2
mc2

Jc
e2

(cid:18)

(cid:19) (cid:18)

"

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

#

(cid:19)

1/2

2

e2
Jc

1 −

2

3

e2
Jc

e2
Jc

ω =

mc3
e2

e2
Jc

1 −

(cid:18)

(cid:19) (cid:18)

"

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

#

(cid:19)

−1/2

2

while the orbital speed is simply

v = rω = e2/J

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

We note that Eq. (20) contains a singularity at J2 = e2/c. In the circular orbit equations
(21)-(24), the lower limit for the action variable J corresponds to J → e2/c giving particle

speed approaching the speed of light v → c, frequency diverging ω → ∞, orbital radius

approaching zero r → 0, and total energy going to zero H → 0. We also emphasize that

here for the Coulomb potential (in contrast to all other mechanical potentials), the need for

relativity has nothing to do with the magnitude of the mass m, but rather is completely
controlled by the ratio J2/(e2/c). Furthermore, for a relativistic particle m in the Coulomb

potential, the total energy H in Eq. (20) for a bound particle takes on values between 0
and mc2; thus a relativistic particle in a Coulomb potential can radiate away at most a
ﬁnite amount of energy mc2. In contrast, a nonrelativistic particle in the Coulomb potential
(where for a nonrelativistic circular orbit E = H − mc2 → −(1/2)m(e2/J)2, r → J 2/(me2),
ω → me4/J 3, v = e2/J) can radiate away an inﬁnite amount of energy as J → 0.
In the
nonrelativistic limit, J2 >> e2/c → 0, the constant e2/c vanishes so that now both v and J

can assume all positive real values between 0 and ∞. The nonrelativistic Coulomb problem

is like the rest of nonrelativistic mechanics in having no fundamental connection between

energy and time.

17

V. MATTER-RADIATION CONNECTION

A. Equilibrium at Absolute Zero

First we consider thermal equilibrium at the absolute zero of temperature T = 0. We

have seen above that the description of van der Waals forces between macroscopic objects

within classical physics requires the presence of classical electromagnetic radiation with the

Lorentz-invariant spectrum given by Eq. (4) or (15).

It seems natural to expect that a

Lorentz-invariant theory of classical electrodynamics would be required to accommodate

a Lorentz-invariant spectrum of random radiation, and we anticipate that an elementary

charge e in a Coulomb potential −e treated within relativistic classical electron theory will

leave invariant the Lorentz-invariant spectrum of classical zero-point radiation.

Indeed, the Coulomb potential has all the qualitatively correct aspects for this invariance.

If we consider an elementary charge e of mass m in a circular Coulomb orbit described by

angular momentum J, then from Eqs.

(22)-(24) the charge radiates a power Prad given

by[34]

Prad =

2
3

e2
c3 ω4γ4r2 =

2
3

(mc2)

mc3
e2

8

e2
cJ

1 −

"

e2
cJ

−3

2

#

(cid:19)

(cid:18)
or dividing by the characteristic energy per unit characteristic time

(cid:19) (cid:18)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

Prad
(mc2)(mc3/e2)

=

2
3

−3

2

8

e2
cJ

1 −

e2
cJ

(cid:18)

"

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

#

(cid:19)

The last equation is invariant under σltE−1 scaling and the right-hand side depends only on

the action variable J. Furthermore the particle will emit radiation into the harmonics of

the frequency ω of the mechanical motion. The radiation per unit solid angle emitted into

the nth harmonic is given by[35]

dPrad
dΩ

=

e2ω4r2
2πc3 n2

dJn(nβ sin θ)
d(nβ sin θ)

2

+

(cot θ)2
β2

((cid:20)

(cid:21)

2
[Jn(nβ sin θ)]

)

(27)

The energy radiated into the nth harmonic has a multiplicative factor of n2ω4r2 times a

function of nβ. Since in the Coulomb potential the circular orbital velocity is a function

of the action variable J alone and is independent of the particle mass m, the ratios of

energy radiated into the diﬀerent harmonics depend only upon the action variable J (or

equivalently on the particle velocity) and not on the mass m.

Indeed, the radiation into

18

(25)

(26)

each of the individual modes associated with the vector spherical multipole radiation has

been calculated and has the same behavior.[36]

Now in thermodynamic equilibrium, we expect the probability distribution for action

variables Jmatter of the matter to be related to the action variables Jλ of the radiation. For

the harmonic dipole oscillator of frequency ω0 evaluated in the inﬁnite-mass limit,[29] all

the radiation is exchanged with the radiation modes at the fundamental frequency ω0, and

the phase space probability distribution Pω0(Jω0) is exactly the same as that given in Eq.

(5) for the radiation mode of frequency ω0[21]

Pω0(Jω0) =

exp

−

c
bs

Jω0c
bs (cid:21)

(cid:20)

(28)

Thus for the point harmonic oscillator, the phase space distribution P (J) for matter is

universal in the sense that it is independent of the scale-giving parameter ω0. Indeed, one

can show that this holds generally for point mechanical systems without harmonics.[21]

However, all such systems are idealized in their interaction with radiation because they have

no ﬁnite size or velocity.

In contrast with these idealized point systems with no harmonics, a charged particle in

the Coulomb potential represents a realistic mechanical system of ﬁnite size and particle

speed which allows this same separation of the phase space from the scale-giving parameter

m.

For a particle of mass m and charge e in the Coulomb potential, the probability

distribution PC(Ji, 0) depends upon the exchange of energy with all the radiation modes at

frequencies ωn = nω which are multiples of the fundamental frequency ω; however, the ratios

of the power absorbed and radiated in the nth harmonic compared to the fundamental ω are

completely independent of the mass m or of the frequency of the fundamental. But then

the probability distribution PC(Ji, 0) for the action variables Ji of the matter will reﬂect

information about the radiation action variables Jλ and will be independent of the particle

mass m.

In addition to suggesting that the Lorentz-invariant and scale-invariant zero-

point radiation spectrum is invariant under scattering by a charge e in a Coulomb potential,

this dependence of the Ji on the Jλ alone ﬁts exactly with our idea that at temperature

T = 0, the particle should have a probability distribution which reﬂects zero entropy and is

independent of mass m. Thus we have

PC(Ji, 0) = F

Ji
e2/c

,

e2
bs (cid:19)

(cid:18)

19

(29)

where F is at present an unknown function. The entropy S/kB (divided by Boltzmann’s

constant kB) which follows from this probability distribution on phase space would also be

independent of any σltE−1 scaling and independent of the mass m.

These ideas hold not only for circular orbits but for arbitrary orbits for an elementary

charge in the Coulomb potential. In all cases, the radiation balance at zero temperature and

the probability distribution for the action variables is independent of the particle mass m.

Indeed, classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation is both scale invariant and conformal

invariant. The only available scale is given by the particle mass m. For a relativistic

Coulomb potential, considerations of scaling alone dictate that the mass m can not enter the

probability distribution at zero temperature. This is a ﬁrst crucial step in understanding

how the thermal radiation pattern can be universal within classical physics despite the

interaction with matter involving various masses.

It is the crucial separation of the mass

parameter from the underlying conformal structure which should make possible a universal

radiation equilibrium within relativistic classical physics.[37]

B. Equilibrium at Finite Temperature

If a charged particle in the Coulomb potential is placed in a large container with con-

ducting walls where there is a ﬁnite amount of energy above the zero-point radiation, then

the relativistic Coulomb system will scatter the radiation and presumably produce a state

of thermal equilibrium. In thermal equilibrium, the available energy U above the zero-point

energy has been shared between the scattering system and the thermal radiation in the con-

tainer.

If the container is large enough, then the scattering system will absorb a negligible

fraction of the available energy U.

In equilibrium, we do not expect that the scattering

system will respond to the container’s total energy U (the extensive variable), but rather to

the local energy per unit volume U/V (the intensive variable). Under dilatation, this energy

per unit volume scales with four powers of the scaling parameter σltE−1, one power of σltE−1

coming from the energy and three more powers of σltE−1 from the volume. Thus if we want

to obtain an energy which scales with one power of σltE−1 and is an intensive variable, then
B)]1/4 where as is Stefan’s constant. Of course, this corresponds
we must choose [U/(V aS/k4
B)]1/4 from Stefan’s law. Now the probability distribution
exactly to kBT = [U/(V aS/k4
Pλ(Jλ, λkBT /bs) for the action variable Jλ of the radiation mode of wavelength λ is given

20

by Eq. (7). The probability distribution is no longer the same for all wavelengths λ, but

rather involves a function of the dimensionless quantity λkBT /bs connecting the wavelength

of the radiation mode and the energy kBT associated with the thermal radiation. Since

the frequency of the radiation mode is directly connected to the wavelength, ω = c/λ, the

functional dependence could just as well be expressed as involving (bs/c)ω/(kBT ).

The scattering situation at ﬁnite temperature is very similar to that at zero-temperature.

For an elementary charge e in a Coulomb potential, the only parameter which scales with

the the dilatation factor σl,t,E−1 of electromagnetism is the particle mass m. Thus comparing
matter and thermal radiation, the ratio of characteristic energies involves mc2/(kBT ), the
ratio of characteristic lengths involves [e2/(mc2)]/[bs/kBT ], and the ratio of characteristic
times involves [e2/(mc3)]/[bs/(ckBT )]. Every one of these ratios involves universal constants
multiplying the dimensionless ratio kBT /(mc2) = [U/(V aS/kB)]1/4/(mc2) or its inverse.

Thus the probability distribution for the action variables Ji of the mechanical system of

mass m is of the form

PC(Ji, kBT /mc2) = G

Ji
e2/c

,

e2
bs

,

kBT
mc2

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

(30)

where G is at present an unknown function which goes over to the unknown function
F (Ji/(e2/c), e2/bs) in Eq.
m enters Eq. (30) only in the ratio kBT /(mc2).

(29) when T = 0. The crucial thing here is that the mass

We should note the crucial parallel between radiation and matter which exists in rel-

ativistic classical electron theory with a discrete charge. Thermal radiation at absolute

zero involves the same distribution (5) in the action variables Jλ for each radiation mode

λ, independent of the mode wavelength.

In parallel fashion, hydrogen-like Coulomb scat-

tering systems at absolute zero also all involve the same distribution (29) in their action

variables Ji independent of the mass m. However, the average energy Uλ for each radiation

mode is diﬀerent, Uλ =< Jλ > c/λ =< Jλ > ωλ, because the energy Uλ involves both the

scale-giving parameter λ and the average over the distribution of action variables Jλ, while
the energy Um for each Coulomb system is diﬀerent, Um = mc2 < f (Ji) >, because the

energy Um involves both the scale-giving parameter m times an average over the distribu-

In thermal radiation, the Jλ-distribution for radiation depends on
tion of action variables.
(bs/c)ωλ/kBT = bs/(λkBT ) and the Ji-distribution for matter depends upon mc2/(kBT ); in

each case the single scale-giving parameter (ω = c/λ or m) of the system is related to the

21

temperature T.

We should emphasize that, in a Coulomb potential, large and small masses act diﬀerently

in thermal radiation because they couple to diﬀerent radiation modes. Thus a small mass m

is coupled to low-frequency radiation modes since for ﬁxed action variables Ji, the frequencies

ωi (for example, in Eq. (23)) vary directly as the particle mass m. It is these low frequencies

where the thermal radiation predominates. On the other hand, a large mass m is associated

with high frequencies where the zero-point radiation dominates, and the thermal radiation

will have little inﬂuence on the particle’s motion in its Coulomb orbit. Thus for particles

in a Coulomb potential in thermal radiation, there is a transition which can be associated

with the particle mass m, just as as there is a transition in the radiation modes which can

be associated with the frequency ωλ of the radiation modes. We notice that this situation is

completely diﬀerent from that of a nonrelativistic mass in a harmonic potential well where
the natural oscillation frequency is given by ω0 = (K/m)1/2, and, for ﬁxed spring constant

K, decreases with increasing mass.

The situation for radiation equilibrium is enormously simpliﬁed for the relativistic

Coulomb potential. Thus if radiation equilibrium exists for one mass m in a Coulomb

potential in zero-point radiation, then it exists for all masses m since the phase space distri-

bution PC(Ji, 0) must be independent of m, and the interaction with radiation is determined

by the phase space distribution. Furthermore, if equilibrium exists for one mass m in the

Planck spectrum (6) at all temperatures T, then the equilibrium is valid for all masses m
since the phase space distribution PC(Ji, kBT /mc2) depends only upon the ratio kBT /(mc2)..

This simpliﬁcation will not hold for any non-Coulomb potential function.

VI. DISCUSSION

Despite all the claims to the contrary, the blackbody radiation problem is still an unsolved

problem within classical physics. Today, the textbooks and orthodox physics literature claim

that classical physics can not explain the observed Planck spectrum of blackbody radiation.

Indeed it was the apparent inability of classical physics to account for this spectrum which

led to the introduction of quantum theory in the years after 1900. We believe that the

perspective on blackbody radiation current in the physics community today arises because

the physicists at the beginning of the twentieth century missed three essential aspects of

22

classical electrodynamics.

First, they were unaware of classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation. Classical elec-

tromagnetic zero-point radiation enters classical electromagnetic theory as the homogeneous

boundary condition on Maxwell’s equations and is required to account for the experimentally

observed van der Waals forces between macroscopic objects.[12] However, in the research of

the early twentieth century, there were no direct measurements of van der Waals forces and

the homogeneous solution of Maxwell’s equations was taken to vanish.

In his work on clas-

sical electron theory, Lorentz speciﬁcally assumes[38] that all radiation arises at ﬁnite time;

there is no classical zero-point radiation. Historically, zero-point radiation entered physics

only after the advent of quantum theory and even today plays an ambiguous role. Some

physicists are sure that any idea of zero-point energy must involve quantum mechanics.

It

is only in the second half of the twentieth century that classical electromagnetic zero-point

radiation was developed in the classical description of nature.[39][40]

Second, the physicists at the beginning of the twentieth century did not take seriously

the requirements of special relativity.

Special relativity was (and still is) regarded as a

specialty subject which needs to be considered only for high-speed particles. Thus Lorentz’s

classical electron theory involved point charges in nonrelativistic potentials and discussions

of atomic physics were all in the context of nonrelativistic mechanics.

Indeed quantum

mechanics was developed as a subterfuge to ﬁx the connection between nonrelativistic me-

chanics and electromagnetic radiation, and Heisenberg-Schroedinger quantum mechanics

remains a nonrelativistic theory to the present day.

In this same vein, even the physicists

who recently developed the ideas of classical electron theory with classical electromagnetic

zero-point radiation[39] into a theory designated as stochastic electrodynamics, SED, failed

to appreciate the importance of relativity for the mechanical scattering systems. Thus, for

example, a review article in 1975 considers arbitrary nonrelativistic potentials and states

that Newton’s second law in the nonrelativistic form F = ma is to be used in the analysis

of particles interacting with classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation.[11]

Third, physicists have continued the nineteenth century conception of a continuous scale

of electric charge, repeatedly dealing with small electric charges in connecting radiation and

matter, rather than exploring the implications of the discrete charges in nature. Thus

Planck considered harmonic oscillators in the walls of the blackbody cavity, but the charge

on the oscillators was merely regarded as very small and cancelled out in his ﬁnal result. It is

23

true that in the early years of the twentieth century Planck did hope to connect the electron
charge e to his own constant h since he noted that e2/c and h have the same units.[41]

However, Lorentz, even in his account of classical electron theory in 1915, is still looking for
a constant analogous to Planck’s constant without remarking that e2/c provides just such
a constant.[42] Lorentz does not note the suitability of e2/c because he is looking within

nonrelativistic classical mechanics, not within classical electrodynamics. Furthermore, in

the last third of the twentieth century, the developers of classical electron theory with

classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation always have taken the small charge limit so as

to deal with quasi-Markov stochastic processes for matter.[39]

The blackbody radiation problem within classical physics has been explored repeatedly.

In addition to the old derivations of the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum given by the renowned

physicists at the beginning of the twentieth century, there have also been repeated derivations

of Planck’s spectrum.

In the presence of classical zero-point radiation, the Planck spectrum

within classical physics has been derived using various ideas of classical physics: energy

equipartition of nonrelativistic translational degrees of freedom in the large mass limit,[43]

thermal ﬂuctuations above zero-point radiation,[44] comparisons between diamagnetic and

paramagnetic behavior,[45] the acceleration of point electromagnetic systems through zero-

point radiation,[2][3][4] and entropy ideas connected with Casimir forces.[26] Most of these

derivations involve harmonic oscillator-like systems which interact with radiation at a sin-

gle frequency in the inﬁnite-mass-and-zero-velocity limit. All show a natural connection

between classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation and Planck’s spectrum of thermal

radiation. None involves a full relativistic scattering calculation. However, all the in-

sights of these derivations have been rejected by physicists who insist on the validity of the

scattering calculations which have used nonrelativistic, nonlinear, mechanical systems[8] to

scatter classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation toward the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum.

Despite the fact that one might expect only a relativistic scattering system to maintain

the invariance of the Lorentz-invariant spectrum of classical electromagnetic radiation, most

physicists are so conﬁdent of the universal applicability of nonrelativistic physics that they

ﬁnd it hard to conceive of the possibility that relativity might be required for appropriate

scatterers for thermal radiation.[46] However, the thermal eﬀects of acceleration through

the Lorentz-invariant spectrum of classical zero-point radiation point unambiguously in the

direction of a relativistic theory for blackbody radiation. And a relativistic scattering calcu-

24

lation using the Coulomb potential has never been done but has all the qualitative aspects

appropriate to blackbody equilibrium.

It is our guess that (just as is found from uniform acceleration through the classical zero-

point vacuum) the blackbody radiation spectrum has nothing to do with energy quanta and

everything to do with the conformal symmetries of classical electromagnetism. In the present

work, we have tried to suggest why relativity and discrete electric charge are probably crucial

to understanding blackbody radiation within classical electromagnetic theory. Indeed, zero-

point radiation, relativity, and discrete charge within classical physics are probably crucial

to a deeper understanding of much more of atomic and statistical physics.

[1] Thermal eﬀects of acceleration appeared ﬁrst in work on quantum ﬁeld theory by P. C. Davies,

”Scalar particle production in Schwarzschild and Rindler metrics,” J. Phys. A 8, 609-616

(1975) and by W. G. Unruh, ”Notes on black hole evaporation,” Phys. Rev. D 14, 870-892

(1976).

[2] T. H. Boyer, ”Thermal eﬀects of acceleration through random classical radiation,” Phys. Rev.

D 21, 2137-2148 (1980); ”Thermal eﬀects of acceleration for a classical dipole oscillator in

classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation,” Phys. Rev. D 29, 1089-1095 (1984).

[3] T. H. Boyer, ”Derivation of the blackbody radiation spectrum from the equivalence principle

in classical physics with classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation,” Phys. Rev. D 29,

1096-1098 (1984). ”Thermal eﬀects of acceleration for a classical spinning magnetic dipole in

classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation,” Phys. Rev. D 30, 1228-1232 (1984).

[4] D. C. Cole, ”Properties of a classical charged harmonic oscillator accelerated through classical

electromagnetic zero-point radiation,” Phys. Rev. D 31, 1972-1981 (1985).

[5] Some aspects of the symmetries have been given by J. Haantjes, ”Die Gleichberechtigung

gleichformig beschleunigter Beobacter f¨ur die electromagnetischen Erscheingungen,” Koninkl.

Ned. Akad. Wetenschap. Proc. 43, 1288-1299 (1940) and by T. H. Boyer, ”Blackbody radi-

ation, conformal symmetry, and the mismatch between classical mechanics and electromag-

netism,” J. Phys. A 38, 1807-18221 (2005).

[6] See, for example, R. Eisberg and R. Resnick, Quantum Physics of Atoms, Molecules, Solids,

Nuclei, and Particles, 2nd ed, (Wiley, New York 1985), p. 12.

25

[7] See, for example, B. H. Lavenda, Statistical Physics: A Probabilistic Approach, (Wiley,

New York 1991), pp. 73-74, and F. Reif, Fundamentals of Statistical and Thermal Physics,

(McGraw-Hill, New York 1965), pp. 251-252.

[8] J. H. Van Vleck, ”The Absorption of Radiation by Multiply Periodic Orbits, and its Relation

to the Correspondence Principle and the Rayleigh-Jeans Law. Part II Calculation of Absorp-

tion by Multiply Periodic Orbits,” Phys. Rev. 24, 347-365 (1924). T. H. Boyer, ”Equilibrium

of random classical electromagnetic radiation in the presence of a nonrelativistic nonlinear

electric dipole oscillator,” Phys. Rev. D 13, 2832-2845 (1976). T. H. Boyer, ”Statistical

equilibrium of nonrelativistic multiply periodic classical systems and random classical electro-

magnetic radiation,” Phys. Rev. A 18, 1228-1237 (1978).

[9] T. S. Kuhn, Black-Body Theory and the Quantum Discontinuity 1894-1912, (Oxford U. Press,

New York 1978), Chapter VIII.

[10] T. W. Marshall, ”Statistical Electrodynamics,” Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 61, 537-546 (1965); T.

H. Boyer, ”Derivation of the Blackbody Radiation Spectrum without Quantum Assumptions,”

Phys. Rev. 182, 1374-1383 (1969).

[11] T. H. Boyer, ”Random electrodynamics: The theory of classical electrodynamics with classical

electromagnetic zero-point radiation,” Phys. Rev. D 11, 790-808 (1975).

[12] M. J. Sparnaay, ”Measurement of the attractive forces between ﬂat plates,” Physica 24, 751-

764 (1958). S. K. Lamoreaux, ”Demonstration of the Casimir force in the 0.6 to 6 µm range,”

Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 5-8 (1997); 81, 5475-5476 (1998). U. Mohideen, ”Precision measurement

of the Casimir force from 0.1 to 0.9 µm,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4549-4552 (1998). H. B.

Chan, V. A. Aksyuk, R. N. Kleiman, and F. Capasso, ”Quantum mechanical actuation of

microelectromechanical systems by the Casimir force,” Science 291, 1941-1944 (2001). G.

Bressi, G. Carugno, R. Onofrio, and G. Ruoso, ”Measurement of the Casimir force between

parallel metallic surfaces,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 041804(4) (2002).

[13] The analogy between the electrostatic scaling behavior and the electromagnetic scaling be-

havior provides the basis for Casimir’s model of the electron; H. B. G. Casimir, ”Introductory

remarks on quantum electrodynamics,” Physica 19, 846-849 (1956). It was not realized that

the scaling analogy holds very generally.

[14] The parallel-plate calculation was ﬁrst made by H. B. G. Casimir, ”On the attraction between

two perfectly conducting plates,” Koninkl. Ned. Akad. Wetenschap, Proc. 51, 793-795 (1948).

26

[15] The spherical case was ﬁrst calculated by T. H. Boyer, ”Quantum electromagnetic zero-point

energy of a conducting spherical shell and the Casimir model for a charged particle,” Phys.

Rev. 174, 1764-1776 (1968).

[16] Because of historical accident, Stefan’s constant is usually rewritten using as = k4

Bπ2/(15~3c3).
See, for example, P. H. Morse, Thermal Physics, 2nd ed., (Benjamin/Cummings Publish-

ing, Reading, Mass. 1969), p. 339. Then the dimensionless universal constant is given as
B}1/3 = (π2/15)[e2/(~c)] = 0.00063487. Thus we recog-

B)1/3 = e2{[π2k4

B/(15~3c3)]/k4

e2(aS/k4

nize the dimensionless constant as related to Sommerfeld’s ﬁne-structure constant. However,

for many physicists (including both the physicists of the early twentieth century and also

recent referees), the use of Planck’s constant ~ rather than Stefan’s constant as serves as an

overwhelming distraction. The appearance of Planck’s constant seems to cause an immediate

ﬁxation on ideas of energy quanta. There are no ideas of energy quanta in the present anal-

ysis, and such ideas have no place in classical physics. Actually, Planck’s constant does not

necessarily have any connection to energy quanta; it can serve as the scale factor for classical

electromagnetic zero point radiation without in any way implying energy quanta. See, for

example, ref. 11.

[17] Readers will recognize bs in terms of currently familiar constants as bs = (1/2)~c. We em-

phasize that no energy quanta whatsoever are used in our classical analysis.

[18] See, for example, L. L. Henry and T. W. Marshall, ”A classical treatment of dispersion forces,”

Nuovo Cimento 41, 188-197 (1966); T. H. Boyer, Van der Waals forces and zero-point energy

for dielectric and permeable materials,” Phys. Rev. A 9, 2078-2084 (1974).

[19] S. O. Rice, in Selected Papers on Noise and Stochastic Processes, edited by N. Wax (Dover,

[20] See, for example, E. A. Power, Introductory Quantum Electrodynamics (American Elsevier,

New York, 1954), p. 133.

New York 1964), pp. 18-22.

1238-1245 (1975).

[21] T. H. Boyer, ”Connection between the adiabatic hypothesis of old quantum theory and clas-

sical electrodynamics with classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation,” Phys. Rev. A 18,

[22] The existence of energy ﬂuctuations which involve no entropy requires ideas of special relativity

and is foreign to nonrelativistic classical statistical mechanics.

[23] E. Cunningham, ”The Principle of Relativity in Electrodynamics and an Extension Thereof,”

27

Proc. London Math. Soc. 8, 77-98 (1910); H. Bateman, ”The Transformation of the Electro-

dynamical Equations,” Proc. London Math. Soc. 8, 223-264 (1910).

[24] T. H. Boyer, ”Conformal symmetry of classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation,” Found.

Phys. 19, 349-365 (1989), Eq. (40).

[25] The correlation function can be obtained by following the same pattern as given in

ref. 24 except that we replace (1/2)~c |k| by kBT in Eq. (39). The integral then in-

volves

(d3k/ |k| cos[k · (r − r′) − c |k| (t − t′)] =

dk

dθ sin θ

dφ cos[k(R cos θ − cτ )] =

∞

π

Z0

Z0

2π

Z0

Z

∞

(dk/k){sin[k(R− cτ )]+ sin[k(R+ cτ )]}. Finally the deﬁnite integral gives

dx(sin mx)/x =

∞

Z0

Z0
π/2 if m > 0, 0 if m = 0, and −π/2 if m < 0.

[26] T. H. Boyer, ”Conjectured derivation of the Planck radiation spectrum from Casimir energies,”

J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 36, 7425-7440 (2003), Section 6.

[27] As far as the quantum theorists are concerned, the introduction of quanta solved the blackbody

problem in conjunction with statistical mechanics. Thus they are surprised when the Planck

spectrum appears without the use of quantum statistics. The point of view presented here

is entirely classical and is quite diﬀerent.

In the classical perspective present here, classical

statistical mechanics plays no role but rather is a derived concept, derived from the randomness

of random phases of waves, in the sense of ref. 19. The connection between conformal motions

and gravity is crucial in connecting the Planck spectrum to thermal radiation. Thus if thermal

radiation exists in equilibrium in a gravitational ﬁeld, it must correspond to the radiation

associated with uniform acceleration through zero-point radiation plus perhaps additional

radiation. The ﬁnite temperature radiation must ﬁt on top of the spectrum from acceleration

through zero-point radiation. In order to satisfy Wien’s displacement theorem, the additional

radiation must follow the same pattern which already appeared from the acceleration through

[28] W. Rindler, Essential Relativity: Special, General, and Cosmological, 2nd ed. (Springer-

classical zero-point radiation.

Verlag, New York1977), pp 49-51.

[29] During the early years of the twentieth century, the nonrelativistic harmonic oscillator was

often connected to radiation by a very small charge q. See, for example, M. Planck, The

Theory of Heat Radiation (Dover, New York 1959). The electric dipole oscillator was said

28

to come to equilibrium with an energy U equal to the energy Uω0 of the radiation mode at

the same frequency as the natural frequency of the oscillator, U = Uω0. This equality held

for ﬁxed ω0 whether the mass m and spring constant K of the oscillator were both large

and the velocity and amplitude were both small, or whether m and K were both small with

the velocity and amplitude large, perhaps the velocity even exceeding c. However, classical

electromagnetic radiation does not treat these two possible radiating systems alike because

ﬁnite velocity and amplitude means that radiation will be emitted into the higher harmonics

of the fundamental frequency. The traditional classical calculations are accurate only in the

limit m → ∞ where the velocity and amplitude vanish; in this limit, the oscillator interacts

with radiation only at its fundamental frequency and so does not scatter radiation toward

equilibrium.

edition of 1915.

225-240 (1989).

Goldstein’s text.

[30] H. A. Lorentz, The Theory of Electrons and its Application to the Phenomena of Light and

Radiation Heat, 2nd ed. (Dover, New York 1952), p. 96. This is a republication of the 2nd

[31] T. H. Boyer, ”Scaling Symmetry and Thermodynamic Equilibrium for Classical Electromag-

netic Radiation,” Found. Phys. 19, 1371-1383 (1989). D. C. Cole, ”Classical Electrodynamic

Systems Interacting with Classical Electromagnetic Random Radiation,” Found. Phys. 20,

[32] See, for example, H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics, 2nd ed., (Addison-Wesley Publishing,

Reading, Mass. 1981), p. 498. We are using action variables which are 1/(2π) times those in

[33] T. H. Boyer, ”Unfamiliar trajectories for a relativistic particle in a Kepler or Coulomb poten-

tial,” Am. J. Phys. 72, 992-997 (2004).

[34] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, 2nd. ed., (Wiley, New York 1975), p. 664.

[35] See ref. 34, p. 695.

[36] L. M. Burko, ”Self-force approach to synchrotron radiation,” Am. J. Phys. 68, 456-468 (2000).

[37] A complete classical electromagnetic calculation of radiation equilibrium for a relativistic

particle in the Coulomb potential at zero temperature should give the value of the ﬁne structure

constant. The probability distribution for the action variables Ji involves two diﬀerent scales;
e2/c and bs/c. The scale e2/c is related to the relativistic mechanical behavior and provides

a limit at small J2. See ref. 33. The scale bs/c involves the energy balance with the random

29

zero-point radiation. Roughly, when the action variables Ji are larger than bs/c, then the

hydrogen system is losing more energy by radiation emission than it is picking up from the

zero-point radiation; when the Ji are smaller than bs/c, the reverse is true. See section D2
of ref. 11. We note that if bs/c were too small, bs/c < e2/c, then no hydrogen atom would

exist because the energy-conserving orbits at this angular momentum would spiral into the

nucleus. See ref. 33. In nature, the value is bs/c ≈ 68e2/c.

[38] See ref. 30, note 6, p. 240, which gives Lorentz’s explicit assumption on the boundary condition.

[39] A review of most of the work on classical zero-point radiation is presented by L. de la Pena

and A. M. Cetto, The Quantum Dice - An Introduction to Stochastic Electrodynamics (Kluwer

Academic, Dordrecht 1996).

[40] D. C. Cole and Y. Zou, ”Quantum Mechanical Ground State of Hydrogen Obtained from

Classical Electrodynamics,” Phys. Letters A 317, 14-20 (2003). Cole and Zou’s numerical

simulation calculations suggest that classical zero-point radiation acting on the classical model

for hydrogen (a point charge in a Coulomb potential) produces a steady-state probability

distribution which is ﬁnite and which seems to approach the ground state obtained from

solution of the Schroedinger equation for a point charge in the Coulomb potential. Cole and

Zou have no adjustable parameters in their calculations. See also, T. H. Boyer, ”Comments

on Cole and Zou’s calculation of the hydrogen ground state in classical physics,” Found. Phys.

Letters 16, 613-617 (2003).

[41] See ref. (Kuhn) p. 132.

[42] On page 78 of ref. 30, Lorentz writes, ”Now, if the state of radiation is produced by a ponder-

able body, the values of the two constants [in the blackbody spectrum] must be determined

by something in the constitution of this body, and these values can only have the universal

meaning of which we have spoken, if all ponderable bodies have something in common.”

[43] T. H. Boyer, ”Derivation of the Blackbody Radiation Spectrum without Quantum Assump-

tions,” Phys. Rev. 182, 1374-1383 (1969); T. W. Marshall, ”Brownian motion of a mirror,”

[44] T. H. Boyer, ”Classical Statistical Thermodynamics and Electromagnetic Zero-Point Radia-

Phys. Rev. D 24, 1509-1515 (1981).

tion,” Phys. Rev. 186, 1304-1318 (1969).

[45] T. H. Boyer, ”Derivation of the Planck radiation spectrum as an interpolation formula in

classical electrodynamics with classical electromagnetic zero-point radiation,” Phys. Rev. D

30

27, 2906-2911 (1983); ”Reply to ’Comment on Boyer’s derivation of the Planck spectrum,’”

Phys. Rev. D 29, 2418-2419 (1984).

[46] See R. Blanco, L. Pesquera, and E. Santos, ”Equilibrium between radiation and matter for

classical relativistic multiperiodic systems. Derivation of Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution from

Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum,” Phys. Rev. D 27, 1254-1287 (1983); ”Equilibrium between radi-

ation and matter for classical relativistic multiperiodic systems II. Study of radiative equi-

librium with Rayleigh-Jeans radiation,” Phys. Rev. D 29, 2240-2254 (1984). These articles

suggest that a relativistic classical scatterer again leads to the Rayleigh-Jeans spectrum. The

calculations involve a general class of potentials. The mechanical momentum of the particle

is calculated relativistically but the class of potentials excludes the Coulomb potential and

all purely electromagnetic scattering systems. Many physicists do not realize that such me-

chanical systems do not satisfy Lorentz invariance. It is the Coulomb potential and only the

Coulomb potential which has been incorporated into a fully relativistic classical electron the-

ory. A general potential (unextended to involve new acceleration-dependent forces and new

radiation speciﬁc to the potential) violates the center-of-energy conservation laws which are

directly related to the generator of Lorentz transformations. See T. H. Boyer, ”Illustrations

of the relativistic conservation law for the center of energy,” Am. J. Phys. 73, 953-961 (2005).

31

