6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
9
1
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Foundations of Special Relativity and the Principle of Conservation of Information

C. Pombo and Th. M. Nieuwenhuizen
Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Amsterdam,
Valckenierstraat 65, 1018 XE Amsterdam, The Netherlands

The theory of special relativity can be generalized by means of a new principle called Conservation
of Information. This allows a derivation of the constancy of the velocity of light with respect to
moving frames, and, consequently, of Einstein’s special relativity. The analysis is based on a review
of the concept of observer. It is put forward that observers are not uniquely deﬁned and that an
observational asymmetry, deﬁned by the diﬀerent ways in which light inﬂuences observations, lies
at the origin of the non-absolutism of time. This observational diﬀerence is a kinematic condition,
not an exclusive result for light, implying that non-absolutism of time may have a cause diﬀerent
from the electromagnetic nature of light. The Lorentz transformations are rederived and diﬀerent
concepts of the velocity of light, relative to diﬀerent classes of observers, are considered.

PACS numbers: 03.30.+p, 03.65.Ca, 04.20.Cv

I.

INTRODUCTION-1

The theory of special relativity is based mainly on
three principles. The ﬁrst is the statement of the rec-
tilinear uniform movement. The second is the constancy
of the velocity of light as it was named by Einstein. The
third is a generalization of Newtonian dynamics. The
two ﬁrst laws are pure kinematic in their nature. Alone,
they can be represented by means of the two well known
fundamental Lorentz transformations for time and space
1:

and

t =

t′
p1 − v2/c2

s = s

′

p1 − v2/c2.

If analyzed correctly, these expressions alone already
have the answer for a question which has been occupy-
ing the minds of many physicists and philosophers since
Einstein. This is the question about the origin of the
constancy of the velocity of light, whether it is due to its
electromagnetic nature or not. We will explain, in simple
terms, why the answer is certainly not.

1 The question why these laws can be stated by means of transfor-
mations can be easily explained. Laws are statements for classes
of phenomena, not for individual events. Then, considered as a
set of measures, a relation connecting the sets can be interpreted
as a transformation. But it can also be interpreted as the de-
scription of a speciﬁc event, with respect to an arbitrary system
of reference.
In this way, a transformation also represents the
arbitrarily or generality of the event. The ﬁrst relation involv-
ing times, comes from the assumption of the constancy of the
velocity of the light in the expression of the relative velocity, as
it is usually done. From c2t2 − v2t2 = w2t2, making wt = ct,
we get the ﬁrst transformation. The second one is just obtained
by applying the invariance of v, or conservation of the rectilinear
uniform movement, for both observers. These correspondences
can be found in many text books and articles. See references.

In pure classical physics, these transformations should
be replaced by the Galilean transformations, which do
not involve the velocity of the light. If we assume that
t′ and s′ are sequences of measures of proper time and
proper length, which are just names for the classical mea-
sures, we are also assuming that these measures do not
depend on light, but on classical relations and standard
units of measurements. Then the equations state that
the other two sets of measures, s and t, depend on the
velocity of the light. Consequently, there are diﬀerent
classes of measures, the ones depending on the velocity
of the light and the others which do not depend, imply-
ing diﬀerent ways of observing. And, if this is the case,
there emerges the question of why certain observations
depend on the velocity of the light and others do not.

Before to focus on this question, two aspects of these
relations deserve careful attention. Firstly, they only in-
volve the velocity of what, in separated words, is said to
be the velocity of the light. Because velocity is a pure
kinematic concept, in that concept of velocity c there
is no indication about what moves. In general, velocity
of wave is deﬁned by means of wavelength and time, as
vw = n(t)λ/t, where n(t) is the number of waves consid-
ered in an interval t. Since in this expression there is no
signal of electromagnetism, we can assume that, in those
expressions of Lorentz transformations, the velocity c is
not necessarily the velocity of an electromagnetic wave.
Measures of spatial distance are based on systems of
reference and Galilean relativity teaches us that expres-
sions of trajectories are relative to the velocity of the
reference systems. This does not involve change of unit
or transformation of coordinates, which can be ﬁxed with
respect to all systems of reference. Comparison between
measures also presupposes a common units. But when
distances become dependent on an extra parameter such
as a velocity, there can be a change of unit, speciﬁed by
the movement of a certain entity.

If this is not the case, the unit is ﬁxed, then the new
parameter represents a new object of reference and there
emerges the question of the uniqueness of the event, when
described by diﬀerent observers. This is the second as-

pect to notice, brought by the transformations above. If
one observer describes an event including a certain en-
tity, while the other point of view does not, in which
sense can we say that the diﬀerent points of view are
about a unique event? In this case, the observations are
qualitatively diﬀerent, so we must speak about classes
of observers and we cannot deﬁne uniqueness, unless we
deﬁne a new class of observers, integrating both classes
already present, unifying them. In this case, those trans-
formations simply say that the uniqueness of events, with
respect to diﬀerent classes of systems of reference, or ob-
servers, does not occur at the same time. Considering a
speciﬁc event, observations not depending on the travel of
the light happen during a certain interval of time, while
observations depending on light happen during another
interval of time. The diﬀerent classes of observation hap-
pen with diﬀerent time durations.

These two aspects of the transformations only point
to the optical nature of light, independently of its elec-
tromagnetic nature. As an optical entity, light can be
a means for observations of distant events.
In princi-
ple, this does not depend on dynamical aspects of the
events and, consequently, of their electromagnetic fea-
tures. Originally, the rate v/c, which rules the fundamen-
tal conversion of measures, is only a signal of conversion,
an observational term, not representing any term of inter-
action between the systems of reference involved. It does
not take in account the physical nature of what is being
transfered between the observers. In conclusion, we do
not have any a priori reason to assume that the funda-
mental Lorentz transformations of space and time have
an electromagnetic origin. This is the reason why Ein-
stein never derived his special relativity from anything
else but postulated it. The choice of the formulation, if
by means of the two laws or by means of two fundamen-
tal Lorentz transformations, is irrelevant for us since they
are equivalent to each other. The fact that special rel-
ativity and Maxwell’s electromagnetism are both based
on the non-absolutism of time only shows that Maxwell’s
theory is a relativistic theory.

In order to derive special relativity from another basis,
Einstein had to explain the origin of the non-absolutism
of time, independently of the constancy of the velocity of
the light itself. This was his intention, when he discussed
the relativism of the simultaneity in his book ‘Relativ-
ity’ [1]. There, Einstein introduces the question of simul-
taneity by means of an experiment which became known
in the literature as the ‘train/embankment experiment’.
The experiment involves two beings named observers, one
localized in the train and the other on the embankment.
The train moves and these beings are reached by light
coming from two separated but simultaneous lightnings
striking the train. Einstein assumes that he explains the
relativity of the simultaneity by means of analyzing the
way in which light reaches the bodies of the physical per-
sons he considers as observers. However, a careful anal-
ysis of his experiment, shows that several of Einstein’s
remarks about what these beings observe, are impossi-

2

ble to occur to physical observers in the conditions he
describes.

The main problem in Einstein’s discussion was the hy-
pothetical localization of the observers, as argument for
what they observe. This idea of localization generates se-
rious misunderstandings because it suggests to the read-
ers that our ways of thinking in physics can be a result of
the places in which our bodies are settled. After Einstein,
the vast literature concerning special relativity adopted
the localization of observers as a didactic method2. The
localization of an observer as a physical person is sup-
posed to explain why a local measure can be known by a
speciﬁc person and not by a second one supposed to be
far from the ﬁrst. In this explanatory context, a measure
can be known from a register without the need of trans-
mission of light, because the person, who is the one who
knows, is so near the register that can see, touch or hear
it without delay in time or any kind of distortion due to
relative movement. Another person cannot perceive the
same signal, at the same time, because depends on recep-
tion of light for this. The problem in this argument is that
to perceive is not the same as to know. To know, which in
the context of physics is the same as to observe, is more
than to measure or count. To know accounts for what
is done or thought about the measures. A pure measure
is always an arithmetic element, without a physical con-
text and, consequently, it is not a physical observation.
One single set of measures can give rise to more than
one physical concept and this is the main reason why the
localization of measures does not give rise to speciﬁc ob-
servations. Two physical persons, in diﬀerent places, can
think diﬀerently about the same set of measures but a
single person can interpret the same numbers in diﬀerent
ways, consequently, it is not localization of persons what
produces diﬀerent observations. In this way, a single per-
son can play as two diﬀerent observes and, consequently,
an observer is not a physical person. So, localization of
persons is far from explaining the fundamental point of
relativity. As far as we know, no analysis was carried out
to elucidate the question of the non-absolutism of time as
an observational fact. In the literature, special relativity
starts from the non-absolutism as a postulate, otherwise
the constancy of the velocity of the light is the starting
point.

Localization is not a condition of physical observers,
but it can be a condition of other kinds of observation.
Physical observations are physical statements and de-
pend on systems of reference, not on interaction between
bodies of persons and events, as it is the case for per-
ceptions. The latter are observations of the senses, not
of physical events outside. In both cases of observation,
physical and perceptual, reception of light can be a neces-
sary element and these observers belong to the class of the

2 There is a vast literature concerning special relativity. We cite a
few standard textbooks, in the end of the section of references.

receivers of light. But, because reception of light takes
for granted light which is locally registered, receivers of
light cannot describe light waves or light rays which are
in the space around the register. This is the reason why
this class of observers never describes or observes light
in space, but only far events which emit or reﬂect light.
To register and to observe are not the same process, ob-
servations can happen by means of light or without light
and, while reception of light is local, observation is not.
This is why localization of observers does not play role
on observations.

In the train-embankment experiment, Einstein did not
discriminate between classes of observers, because con-
sidering that something more than registration was nec-
essary for observations, it could generate doubt about the
nature of the observers, if they actually could be replaced
by registers and machines. However, registration alone
does not give rise to associations between local measures
and nonlocal ones, such as trajectories that are associa-
tions between the sequence of local cycles of a clock and
far distances. Einstein interpreted local reception of light
from distant sources as the knowledge of distant source,
without realizing that this only can happen for receivers
of light. In this way he assumed a direct correspondence
between non simultaneity of local reception of light from
two distant sources and non simultaneity of the separated
emissions at the sources. But this does not happen if one
can observe the travel of the light. In his explanations,
he went further by considering vision as element of phys-
ical observation, stating that his observers could see rays
of light. This assumption is a serious mistake, frequently
found in the literature, and it only led to contradictions
in his exposition. Light is a medium for vision, never
an object of sight. Observers can observe light but not
by means of reception of light and consequently not by
means of sight.

There are diﬀerent classes of observers in special rela-
tivity and this is the ﬁrst reason for the non absolutism
of time. For instance, there are classical, semi-classical,
and non-classical observers, all coexisting in the relativis-
tic experience. Relativistic phenomena are integrations
of diﬀerent kinds of phenomena. This is the same as to
say that relativistic observations are integrations of dif-
ferent kinds of observation. To be more precise, a unique
atomic object emitting light can be considered as a clock
or as an indirect means for observation of material pro-
cesses or movement of bodies, but it can also be taken as
an objective material event, independently of the light
which it produces. This means that diﬀerent messages
arise from the same set of numbers of cycles of light.
The point to be kept in mind is that if light is a means
for observation, it cannot be objectively observed consid-
ering a single observer, these two roles are antigonic. It
is based on this kind of antagonism that diﬀerent classes
of observer have to be deﬁned.

3

servers, sensors, perceivers, thinkers and experimenters,
only show the necessity of a fundamental revision of the
concept of observer [2]. Observers are beings in trans-
formation, inside a developing physics.
It is not only
in relativity that we ﬁnd observational changes. Physics
developed in the direction of more sophisticated theo-
ries, but the physical world became somehow detached
from the experience of the physical world, expelling the
observer.
It is a common saying in the physical envi-
ronment that physical phenomena can be derived from
abstractions, such as Minkowski space, wave functions
etc. These abstractions are not considered to be physi-
cal phenomena and, consequently, they are not physical
entities. Not worrying with the fact that, not being phys-
ical, they still must have a nature, many scholars do not
realize that in this way they can be deriving physical re-
sults from the metaphysical world. So, if we do not ﬁnd
the observers of the physical worlds, it becomes very dif-
ﬁcult to explain physical phenomena. Without physical
observers the world has no physical meaning.

The organization of this paper is as follows. Section II
is about the several concepts of observer and Einstein ex-
periment. Section II-A discusses diﬀerent kinds of obser-
vation comparing perception with physical observation.
Section II-B recalls the setup of the train/embankment
experiment and its main points concerning the present
work.

Section III is about the observations of Einstein exper-
iment. Subsection III-A is about the basic observational
concepts. Subsection III-B describes the conditions of
the observer who, in the opinion of Einstein, should be
inside the train. Subsection III-C describes the observa-
tions of a person who was considered by Einstein as being
on the embankment.

Section IV is about observation depending on recep-
tion of waves. Subsection IV-A discusses common points
in observations depending on reception of material waves
and on reception of light waves. Subsection IV-B shows
that diﬀerent kinds of observation correspond to diﬀerent
concepts of velocity for light. Subsection IV-C explains
how diﬀerent measures of time can arise for diﬀerent ob-
servers.

Section V is about relativistic observation. Subsec-
tion V-A comments on the origins of the equivalence of
Galileo. Subsection V-B introduces a generalization for
the Galileo equivalence. Subsection V-C introduces a
principle of conservation of information. Subsection V-
D ﬁnally presents the derivation of the constancy of the
velocity of the light.

In the conclusion, we add a with few comments about

the relativistic observer.

So, it is not because observers are inside or outside
the train that they ﬁnd classical, non-classical or rela-
tivistic results. All these misunderstandings about ob-

And in the Appendix we present a model of observer,
based on the ideas of Jung, Weyl and Carnap, which
underlies our reasoning.

II. ABOUT OBSERVERS, RECEIVERS OF
LIGHT AND PERCEIVERS IN THE
EXPERIMENT OF EINSTEIN.

A. The various concepts of observer

Observation is a process of description. There are
many kinds of observation and consequently of phe-
nomenon. Physical observers correspond to physical phe-
nomena, and are expressions of speciﬁc physical lan-
guages with their own concepts and expressions. Psy-
chological observers also exists and they are responsible
for the psychological phenomena, described by means of
their speciﬁc language too. 3 Perception, or observation
of the senses, is not a physical phenomenon but a psy-
chological event and it depends on the position of the ob-
server. Because the sensorial experiences originate from
the interaction of our body with the environment, per-
ception depends o the spatial localization of our body.
Vision and hearing, among many others, are modalities
of perception. And, because two physical persons are
not identical, and neither can be at the same place at
the same time, perceptions are individual and subjective
experiences.

Vision, which is one between the several modalities
of perception, is the result of a combination of many
processes of diﬀerent nature. It is a psychological phe-
nomenon but it also has a physical base. Real vision only
happens with the physical stimulation of the retina and
consecutive processes in the body of the perceiver. The
retina is a structure of cells with a layer of photo-receptor
cells. From the physical point of view, we may assume
that space is ﬁlled with a non-homogeneous spatial and
temporal distribution of matter, which produces, absorbs
and reﬂects radiation. In this picture we also can consider
the existence an open and ﬁnite surface layer (which can
be a retina) of a certain body inside the space, also con-
sidering radiation constantly reaching the surface. Light
reaching this physical retina produces a distribution of
energy inside the material of the retina, corresponding to
the of intensities on the surface. This superﬁcial pattern
is due to the luminosity which results from the distribu-
tion of sources. Then, there is a correspondence between
the energetic distribution inside and the distribution of
matter outside. The resulting processes inside the ma-
terial retina are propagated to the interior of the body
and these processes all depend on the kind of matter and
material structure of the ﬁrst layer and interior of the
body.

If the physical outside can now be considered only one,
In sensorial terms, the

the retina has two functions.

3 The same can be said for other kind of phenomena such as so-
cial, biological, political, economical and so on. In principle, the
existence of all these observers do not rely imply on theories or
truth about what is observed. This is another level of discussion
that we shall not enter.

4

retina becomes a superﬁcial distribution of brightness.
While luminosity is purely a physical concept, brightness
is a sensorial experience. Psychophysical measurements,
relating reports of people to physically controlled stimuli,
account for relations between brightness and luminosity.
The perceptual world of vision starts with distribution of
brightness and ends with distribution of bodies in space.
But these are not physical bodies or a physical space.
The contrast in brightness is one between the sensorial
and non-sensorial elements forming the perception of in-
dividual bodies and emptiness that is interpreted as bod-
ies in space.

In spite of the fact that perception of space is not only
a visual acquisition but has internal origins, visual per-
ception always includes space and it is not yet completely
understood. With spatial perception, a geometrical con-
ﬁguration emerges and the experience of a distant object
occurs, which actually does not coincide with the physical
picture of the facts. It is well known from psychophysical
experiments that perception and physical observation do
not share a common geometry. Although the notion of
space, as emptiness, seems to be a single and innate idea,
perceptual space and physical space are not the same
concept. Then, we can assume that these two spaces,
the perceptual and the physical, are separated from the
beginning. This means that when we say that we see
the outside, we are only speaking about the perceptual
outside which, in the end, is a representation of inter-
nal processes of our body. The physical outside can be
known but it cannot be seen.

Vision is only one among the several kinds of observa-
tion based on reception of light. The retina is just a ma-
terial register, like all physical registers and, due to this
fact, it shares with all registers the property of not being
able to account for processes which are not registered.
Whatever can be registered, only becomes registered by
means of the matter of the register. All this gives us the
certainty that we are not able to see what is physically
outside, as light waves must be, in order to make our vi-
sion. The concept of light wave is a pure physical concept
and, if we conceived it, it cannot be because someone saw
it.

Contrary to perceptions, physical observations are ob-
jective experiences in the highest degree. Experiences of
a single person do not play any role in physics, what one
single person observes is what everybody in all places,
even moving with respect to each other, can observe.
Therefore it is clear that a physical observer cannot be
a person perceiving. To really understand physical ob-
servers, it is necessary to know that not everything we
know happens to us because of the interaction of our
body with the external world.
It is not only through
sensations that we know the physical reality, on the con-
trary 4.
It is a very known fact that we humans, not

4 We are able to describe objective experiences not produced by

only are able to experience much beyond our individual
circumstances, but we are also able to know aspects of
the physical world without the help of experimental pro-
ceedings. The history of Knowledge is full of these cases,
the ideas of rectilinear uniform movement, the existence
of atoms and composition of matter, are a few examples.
In the context of Einstein’s experiment, the only com-
mon point between perceivers and the physical observers,
of classical physics, is that both are receivers of light. By
deﬁnition, a receiver of light is a being that only observes
or knows about processes or events producing light, by
means of light emitted from them. Receivers cannot ob-
serve the light traveling in space, because for this, they
would have to receive (or register) light instantaneously
from the complete light wave spread and traveling in
space. This cannot be, because this would imply that
two diﬀerent kinds of light, one traveling with inﬁnite
velocity and another with its usual velocity should be
present together. As a consequence of the fact that they
do not observe light traveling in space, they do not know
that they receive light to observe far events, they only
observe these events.

The main diﬀerence between a classical observer and
a visual observer is in which way distances are deﬁned.
In case of
In both cases, registration of light is local.
visual perception, distances are not necessarily quanti-
ﬁed and when it happens, quantiﬁcation does not mean
an objective proceeding. This means that distances are
subjective and locally deﬁned. But in the physical case,
distances are deﬁned by physical means, independently
of reception. And an observation is not a registration
but a continuous association between registrations and
objective distances, making the physical observation a
non-local phenomenon. The objectivity of the distances
comes from the physical knowledge of the rectilinear uni-
form movement, which is an a priori element of classical
observation. Due to this fact, even for receivers and clas-
sical observers within relativity, observation is nonlocal
since distance is nonlocal by principle.

But this is not all about physical observers. When light
reaches a register, it can be interpreted as a reception of
light if one accounts for the fact that a wave of light
was emitted from a source, reaching the register. But it
can also be interpreted as a material process of a distant
object, when one doesn’t account for the travel of the
light wave. The ﬁrst case clearly implies the existence of
another kind of observer, the one who is able to describe

any kind of stimulation triggered by the eﬀect of the physical
outside on our sensorial organs. With this we are not saying that
thoughts can exist without brains. What we say is that there are
thoughts, occurring concomitantly with the stimulation of the
neural system, which are not originating together with sensation
and perception. This is not at all an original assumption, it is
well known in neuro psychology. But the main interest of the
sciences inﬂuenced by the logical positivism, dominating the last
century, was to deny the existence of this kind of thought. Special
relativity was the main representative of these sciences.

5

the movement of the light wave, without reception.

With the observation emerging from sensation, we have
perception, and the perceptual concept of brightness. In
the physical domain a new kinematic quantity, charac-
terizing reception, must be deﬁned. This cannot involve
the concept of luminosity, which in the end, is a dynamic
concept, measuring the eﬀect of the radiation on a sur-
face register. But considering that the retina can reg-
ister oscillations of brightness, we may consider that in
the speciﬁc case of measuring numbers, perception and
physical observation are coincident. In analogy with the
perceptual case, we may assume the concept of physical
brightness, represented by the number of waves reaching
a detector or retina, as an observational feature of the
physical object. In this sense we may say that our body
can also act as a physical register, having other means to
observe, in the physical sense, the source of light. Oth-
erwise, we cannot be sure that there is indeed a source
somewhere else and the sensation of brilliance cannot be
taken as objective.

The term “physical brightness” is only an analogy since
the spatial localization of persons does not inﬂuence ob-
servations. From a device receiving light, the number of
received waves would be the signal of the existence of the
oscillatory object at distance. Brightness here is just a
name for what becomes the signal, or representation, of
the object. The possibility to connect these two distant
realities, does not imply in the physical localization of a
person, but implies the existence of a person. Actually,
this connection is the mark of the human being: the fact
is that we make these connections. Here we do not ex-
plain them but only take them for granted. Moreover, we
also can avoid them, and it is exactly what we do when
we interpret the same data, from the same device, as a
pure local event. And it is not a question of our physical
presence whether we tell one or another story about the
same data.

So, Einstein could also have considered a large crowd
spread on an limited embankment as well as a limited
train ﬁlled with many beings. The measurements in the
embankment and the ones in the train could be known
by each and every one, independently of being in the em-
bankment or in the train. Neither was the movement
the reason for the observational diﬀerence. What actu-
ally produced the diﬀerence was the way in which data
made by light were interpreted in the description of the
facts. The physical world, that is, the set of all physical
experiences, is not the perceptual world of our daily ex-
periences, the one we can see, smell and touch, as people
usually suppose, but the one we know by means of phys-
ical observations. Physical observers 5 are not beings to
be found inside the physical space, measuring or doing
something else. Actually, this observer of the physical lit-

5 The expression ‘physical observer’ does not mean ‘observer with

physical body’ but ‘observer of the physical world’.

erature is just a name given for a special kind of thinking
representing a speciﬁc collectivity.

B. Einstein’s train/embankment experiment

The train/embankment experiment was introduced by
Einstein to explain special relativity. In essence, the situ-
ation discussed is the following: there is an embankment
and at a certain initial moment t = 0 the origin Otrain
of a train passes through the origin Oemb of the embank-
ment, with a constant velocity ve. At Oemb, there is a
source of light. 6

An observer7, named observer−train, is located in the
train and employs its three-dimensional walls, with origin
at Otrain, as his inertial reference frame. Another person,
named observer−emb, is at the embankment, with origin
Oemb, using it as his inertial reference frame. It is said
that because the velocity of the train approaches the ve-
locity of light, relativistic eﬀects are noticeable, between
the two observers, such as discrepancies in measurements
of space and time.

But, in his experiment, observer − train is a genuine
classical observer, measuring his ‘proper time’. Conse-
quently, he cannot know that his time is diﬀerent from
the embankment time and neither can he use the con-
stancy of the velocity of light to know where the moving
object is, because this is a condition of special relativity
only, not of classical physics. It is important to notice
that, in Einstein’s exposition, the embankment has no
limit in size, the experiment has no limit in time and the
embankment clock serves the whole embankment. This
means that observer−emb, describing all the sequence of
positions of the train, uses only one clock. Consequently,
for this observer there is no sense in the concept of local
time and he has no reason to suspect that inside the train
there could be another time, not even if he is able to read
oﬀ a clock moving with it.

Based on conventional ideas about what observation
is8, we assume that observers only measure distances and
intervals of time. Trying to understand this, we assume
that we only can be in the conditions of one or another
observer. And, because both do not understand each
other, we ﬁnish not understanding the relativistic reason-
ing. One of the problems in the exposition of Einstein
is that it does not explain the true origin of the non-
absolutism of time, that is the observational diﬀerence.
Because of this, he does not tell us that the relativistic

6 Though we shall follow Einstein in considering light, our discus-
sion would be easier to follow when speaking about the equivalent
case of radio waves, because then the wavelengths exceed the size
of human bodies, etc.

7 We repeat Einstein with the idea of persons as observers oth-
erwise we cannot discuss his experiment. But the reader can
always think of many persons describing the same observations

8 The assumption that to observe is to measure.

6

conclusions are only due to the existence of a speciﬁc ob-
servational entity, the relativistic observer, who deﬁnes
his own relativistic concepts and whose conclusions are
coded in the equations of special relativity.

The non-absolutism of time is the ﬁrst serious discrep-
ancy introduced by special relativity. Discrepancy means
diﬀerence or disagreement, also implying comparison or
a certain level of equivalence. In our opinion, there are
discrepancies in measures of lengths and time, ﬁrst of
all, because the two observers are diﬀerent and remain
diﬀerent. They do not know the discrepancies and are
separated from the beginning. But their measures can
be compared by someone else, in other conditions. Time
is non absolute only for this third observer.

In our experiment, observer − train measures time
from a near clock but depends on reception of light for
observing objects at distance. But he cannot observe the
light waves he receives. We will show that it corresponds
to the situation of a classical observer.

The other observer, supposed to be on the embank-
ment, measures time from a clock at the embankment,
observes the movement of the train, the wave of light in
the usual three dimensional space, but he does not need
reception of light for observation of light. This one is
named the “semi-classical” observer.

When the two origins are at rest together, they agree
with all their measures of space and time. However, when
moving away from each other, these measures do not co-
incide. In all what follows, we make the hypothesis that
light as a wave phenomenon, consists of a series of pulses
in space. To simplify matters we consider monochromatic
waves only.

III. THE TWO TYPES OF OBSERVER

A. Physical concepts and observational elements

We ﬁnd in the physical literature, concerning relativ-
ity, distinctions in concepts of time such as proper time
and relativistic time. The proper time is usually deﬁned
as a local measurement of time, not depending on opti-
cal means.
It is used in this sense that light does not
convey information from the clock to the observer. But
the so called relativistic measurements, are also measured
by a local (in the same sense) clock, usually serving the
whole space of the experiment. This is the case for rela-
tivistic events inside laboratories. Only one clock on the
walls can be used to measure the so called relativistic
time. Therefore this distinction, based on distance from
the clock to the observer 9, does not give a meaning for
proper time.

9 Frequently in the literature, the authors think of observers as
beings with bodies, who can measure and disappear when con-
venient.

As we explained before, an observer is not a localized
physical person perceiving events and making the mea-
surements, but the one who describes events, by associ-
ating data 10.
In general, a phenomenon (an event in
development, or just an event) is a continuous succession
of happenings in time. A basic feature of physical events
is that time is a quantitative reference for them.

Time is quantiﬁed by means of units or cycles. Cycle is
the common feature of all devices named clock. The cycle
is a unit of time, and, for this reason, it is not a spacial
entity. However, clocks can have spatial dimensions. A
clock is a reference for time, a physical event with the
property of being cyclic. There can be several references
of time, based on the same unit of time. The observation
of a physical event is based on an association between at
least two events, one of them being the clock.

A wave is another entity which has a spatial dimension,
it cycles and moves in speciﬁc directions. The origin of
a wave is a cyclic event, independent from the wave it-
self. As a pure kinematic entity, it combines a spatial
dimension to cycles, making moving pulses, transferring
cycles from place to place. But the description of a wave
is based on the usual references, including a clock, inde-
pendent of the wave. The pattern of cycles carried by
the wave can vary with respect to moving references and
can be compared in diﬀerent places with respect to the
same ﬁxed pattern of cycles of the original clock.

Diﬀerences in measures of cycles of a wave due to move-
ment, are called the Doppler eﬀect. The diﬀerence be-
tween the so-called classical Doppler eﬀect and the rela-
tivistic Doppler eﬀect lies in the uniqueness of the origi-
nal pattern of cycles, generating the waves. In the non-
relativistic case, the observation of these original cycles
does not depend on reception of waves while in the rela-
tivistic situation, due to the diﬀerentiation in the classes
of observers, this original pattern is not observed inde-
pendently of the reception of waves. Then, an extra cor-
rection in the observation of the cycles must be made.

Now we study the diﬀerent ways of observing the move-
ment of sources and waves and then compare them. In
our discussion, the origin of the embankment is Oemb,
where there is also an atomic clock 11, from which elec-

10 In a physical sense, the observer (when considering the body of
a human being) can be replaced by a photo camera, even read
oﬀ by a computer program, as is standardly done in high energy
physics. But somewhere down the line, someone has to organize
and interpret the data, reproducing the event by integrating the
concepts. This ﬁnal result is what expresses events such as uni-
form motion, movement of light, etc.

11 An atomic clock is a high-stability oscillator based on atomic
transitions. The second is standardly deﬁned as the duration
of 9,192,631,770 cycles of microwave light absorbed or emitted
by the hyperﬁne transition of Cesium-133 atoms in their ground
state, undisturbed by external ﬁelds. In this deﬁnition we ﬁnd
the word duration. But ‘duration’ is not something which exists
per se, without the physical object which deﬁnes it. This is
exactly the same as in the case of lengths, in which we must
have the physical object to be the standard measure. The length

7

tromagnetic pulses originate. This clock is a cyclic event
of the same nature as a lamp

There is also an origin Otrain inside the train, in which
another clock is localized. We also consider that at a cer-
tain moment t = 0 the point Otrain of the train coincides
with Oemb of the embankment.

In other examples with two observers, Einstein as-
sumes that each observer must have a lamp. We consider
lamps and clocks as identical objects, concerning their de-
scriptions as cyclic phenomena. Atomic clocks also emit
light. A lamp is just a name for speaking about an atomic
process emitting light and for this reason it can be used
as a clock or vice versa. In our discussion, the cyclicity of
these objects is their most relevant observational feature.
Our interest is to study each observer, how he counts
cycles or pulses of light, how he interprets them and what
light is for him, pointing to the diﬀerences in the ways of
observing. We are going to put forward show that these
diﬀerences are, in fact, the origin of the non-absolutism
of time.

B. The observer in the train

We start by assuming that the observer in the train,
is a classical observer12. This just
observer − train,
means that he only describes the movement of the em-
bankment, or of an origin in the embankment, with re-
spect to his inertial frame of spatial references at rest
with respect to the train. And this is done according to
the time measured by his clock inside the train 13

At this point we just assume that, if this observer were
alone, classical physics would be the context of his obser-
vations.

About observer − train, we state the following condi-

tions:

1-1) He is able to count the number of waves;
1-2) He uses a clock to measure time;
1-3) He is a classical observer. Consequently, his only
expression has the usual shape of a rectilinear uniform
trajectory:

st = vttt

(1)

where st and vt are the position and velocity of Oemb,
respectively, with respect to the train, and tt is the time
in the train measured e.g. using his Ce-clock at Otrain.

is the object in the same sense that the duration is the object
too, in this case the speciﬁc atom. So, the word duration makes
the deﬁnition circular and should be omitted.

12 We could alternatively assume that observer 2 is a classical ob-

server, with the same results.

13 What we mean with ‘classical observer’ cannot be fully explained
at this moment. Our method is to state the classical conditions,
from a non-classical, but not yet relativistic, deﬁnition of the
relativistic context of observation.

C. The observer on the embankment

The second observer, observer − emb, describes the
cyclic event at the origin of the embankment, the trans-
mission of the waves from there, and their detection in
the train. There is a clock at the origin of the embank-
ment. Observer − emb thinks of the embankment as be-
ing at rest and also describes the movement of the train.
For this observer, light is an objective event, happening
concomitantly with the other ones, but it is not a means
to observe.

The crucial diﬀerence between this observer and the
previous one is that he can describe light objectively.
This means that he knows where the light wave is in
space, without the need of detecting it, to observe it.
Experiments may have been done previously, in order to
give him the certainty of the velocity of the light with
respect to Oemb. He can also arrange things in order to
know, in advance, all the times and positions from the
beginning to the end of the experiment. But, in this ex-
periment, he does not receive (detect) light, from any
point and moment of the light trajectory, in order to
know where it is. This would be in complete contra-
diction with the fact that the velocity of light is ﬁnite.
Light is not and cannot be a means for observing (it-
self), in any case. In this sense, an observer of light is
not classical because, in classical experiences, objects at
remote distance can be known without considering recep-
tion of light, what means without knowing that reception
may play a role on measures of time and consequently of
distances. A classical observer who receives light is not
aware of this condition, and cannot know light as it is.
For reasons which will be more clear later, we assume
that observer − emb is a semi-classical observer. 14

2-1) The equation 15

se = vete

(2)

is also his form of the movement, where te is measured
according to next deﬁnition, 2-2).

2-2) At Oemb there is also a source of light or a lamp.
The production of light is described by a frequency that
is deﬁned by an association of a cyclic event with a clock,
which is another cyclic event. Frequency is the number
of cycles per time.
In this way deﬁned, this is not a
ﬁxed number but counted as time goes by, therefore it

14 A classical observer cannot observe light by deﬁnition. An object
with the properties of an electromagnetic wave does not obey the
Galilean rules and consequently is not classical. It is important
to realize that expressions such as ‘classical aspects of light’ are
just ways of speaking, without correspondence with any physical
language. But, since we describe the movement of a wave light,
we have to assume that we can also observe non-classically. This
is what we assume here.

15 To avoid complications in notation, we assume that observer −
train and observer − emb count their lengths and velocities in
opposite directions, such that st, vt, se and ve are all positive.

is numerical function of time. Without the two events
being compared, neither the number of cycles nor the
frequency can be measured.

For observer − emb, the original cycles of the atomic
event are described by means of a time reference that
is also based on production of light from cycles.
It is
possible to deﬁne a generic standard unit of time ul, by
means of the emission of a light pulse according to chosen
material conditions and speciﬁcations 16,

The original cycles in Oemb are atomic transitions with

frequency:

f e
cy,oe =

N e

cy,oe(te)
te

,

where ‘cy’ stands for ‘cycles’, oe for origin of the embank-
ment and e for observer − emb.

In this equation, N e

cy,oe(te) is a pure numerical func-
tion, growing linearly with time, describing the number
of cycles during an interval of time te, as counted by the
observer. Because time for us is an ordered succession
without end, this expression does not mean just a ﬁxed
number but a process of successive numeration, consid-
ering a speciﬁc interval of time. For observer − emb, the
original event in Oemb is observed by counting cycles and
measuring time.

2-3) In principle, the light wave is a spatially extended
phenomenon, distinct from the material object producing
the pulses. The frequency of the wave is given by

f e
w,oe =

N e

w,oe(te)
te

,

with subscript w denoting wave.

It just holds that the number of cycles made by the
lamp equals the number of cycles of generated light,
N e
w,oe(te) = N e
cy,oe(te), so, in this case, we also have the
same frequency:

w,oe = f e
f e

cy,oe.

As it is well known, a wave is not completely described
by a frequency, but also by the wavelength and the am-
plitude. While a cyclic phenomenon can be localized in
a point, a wave is an extensive object. The distance
reached by the wave front in the embankment frame
equals

where ce = c is the velocity of the light wave front with
respect to the embankment. This velocity can be given
by

re
oe = cete

ce =

N e

cy,oe(te)λe
te

,

8

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

16 The usual second is deﬁned as described in footnote 10.

where λe is the wavelength. Measuring ce in the embank-
ment frame, the wavelength can be found from:

sequence of cycles M e
of the clock at Oemb.

w,ot(te) and the sequence of cycles

ce = f e

w,oeλe.

(8)

2-4) We assumed that Observer−emb is not a classical
observer but he is also far from supporting a relativistic
result: he can observe the relative movement between the
wave front and the train. He knows that the velocity of
the train is approaching the velocity of transmission of
the pulses and that, for this reason, there is a decrease in
the frequency of the wave measured at se(te), given by

f e
w,ot =

M e

w,ot(te)
te

(9)

where M e
the train. M e
functions of te, M e

w,ot(te) is the number of cycles at the origin of
w,oe(te) are diﬀerent numerical
w,oe(te) for every te.

w,ot(te) and N e

w,ot(te) < N e

Observer − emb can describe the velocity of the wave

front relatively to the train by means of the speed

ot = ce − ve,
ce

(10)

where ce is given by equation (8), and ve velocity of the
train. It is important to notice that, for this observer,
the relation (10) is an initial condition which does not
change with respect to the increasing distances to the
train.

And, according to this semi-classical observer, this ve-

locity should be given by

Substituting equations (9) and (11) in equation (10), we
ﬁnd

ot = f e
ce

w,otλe,

w,ot = (1 − ve
f e
ce

)f e

w,oe.

(11)

(12)

This frequency, on the left side of the equation, is a con-
cept made by associating two sets of measures, the se-
quence of times and the sequence of numbers M e
w,ot(te).
Both sequences happen independently for observer −
emb. He measures the numbers M e
w,ot(te) just by count-
ing cycles arriving at Otrain. We will show that f e
w,ot
is not measured in the train. But we will also show
that the sequence of numbers M e
w,ot(te) is measured by
observer − train. The relation between frequencies can
be taken from

M e

w,ot(te) = (1 − ve
ce

)N e

w,oe(te).

(13)

Equation (12) shows that, in spite of observing light,
Observer−emb is limited to the clock at the embankment
and he can describe the situation as a normal classical
Doppler shift.

This result is not completely classical because a clas-
sical observer would not observe light waves. But it is
also not relativistic, since it was deduced from a limit in
which there is a direct (classical) association between the

9

Equation (13) does not depend on equation (12) but
derives directly from equation (10). This last relation is
integral part of the relativistic description and the origin
of factors like (1 − ve
ce ), resulting from relative
velocities.

ce ) or (1 + ve

IV. NON-CLASSICAL ANALYSIS

A. Considerations about the two observers

To say that a wave is observed in space and its behav-
ior described, is the same as to say that all regions of
the space ﬁlled with the undulatory entity are known si-
multaneously and that this instantaneous information is
continuously received, or continuously kept in some way,
during the period of observation. This is not only for
waves in space but it is true for every extensive body and
objects of any kind, such as a distribution of numbers,
matter and so on. The word ‘simultaneity’ is used for
this property of global observations, associating two or
more regions of events, or even non-spatial events, with
one time. It implies a diversity in the associated objects,
without implying any condition on the physical nature of
these associated objects.

Going back to our situation, there are oscillations be-
ing counted in the train. According to observer − emb,
the frequency of oscillation is given by equation (9). We
can reconsider this, picturing the positions of each object
in the embankment time and focusing our attention on
observer−train ’s measures and thoughts. It is true that
he knows very well the sequence of numbers M e
w,ot(te),
registered on his apparatus or detector. But he cannot
agree on the same relation (12) with observer − emb.

Equation (12) is known to be a relation between
frequencies of the same object (the wave) observed
under diﬀerent conditions with respect to movement.
Observer−emb knows the whole extension of the wave, in
the sense explained above and consequently he observes
the relative movement between the train and the wave.
But observer − train lacks this knowledge of unity of
the wave and even of the wave itself, which is so natural
for observer − emb . This is not due to the nature of
the wave, in ﬁrst place, but to his condition as observer
depending on the reception of the waves to observe far
objects.

One single wave cannot convey its own pattern of dis-
tribution in space. This object we name ‘wave’ exists be-
tween diﬀerent regions of space and may grow in distance
but it does not transport itself between these regions. We
mean that a wave conveys something else, not informa-
tion about itself, except if its existence is already known
In order to
independently of detecting its oscillations.
know the pattern of distribution of a wave it is necessary
to have another wave, or other means of knowledge. And
this holds for all kinds of waves.

Exactly like a sailor in a boat, observer − train mea-
sures the cycles of the wave at se(te). But the observation
of these cycles in the boat (only up and down) does no
inform him about the distribution of waves on the wa-
ter, far from the boat, already settled at each moment
he measures the cycles. Unless he could know the wave
distribution on the whole surface of the water, by other
means much faster than the wave whose cycles he mea-
sures, he cannot know the relative velocity between the
boat and the wave and neither the frequency of the orig-
inal source Oemb. In the end, he only knows the number
of his local cycles. Equation (12) again does not apply
to this case. Implicitly in this equation is the simultane-
ous knowledge of the diﬀerent regions of the wave, and
consequently their diﬀerent frequencies, or the relative
movement between the wave and the moving reference
Otrain.

But we know that waves on water are very slow in com-
parison to light. All the problem of observation of the
water waves would be solved by reception of electromag-
netic waves, giving very fast (practically instantaneous)
information about the positions of the source or the trav-
eling pattern of waves on the water and consequently of
the velocity of the water wave. In the absence of another
wave, the observer in the boat would have only the se-
quence of cycles of his apparatus to consider. Being used
as a clock, the measure of received cycles would represent
another notion of time17.

For the case of electromagnetic waves as the faster
medium, exactly the same could happen. The electro-
magnetic wave is produced by a cyclic atomic event, also
used as a clock, and it is the faster known medium which
can convey the information of these cycles. The atomic
cycles which appear in the measuring apparatus of a mov-
ing reference, correspond to the original cycles. But, in
the absence of another process, these same cycles must
be used as a clock, representing a new unity of time. For
someone counting the cycles from his local apparatus and
also making from it a reference for measuring time, in
the absence of another reference, there appears a diﬀer-
ence in the measurement of time as well, with respect to
the original measures. The problem is that observers in
these situations do not have means of knowing their mu-
tual diﬀerences in outcomes of measurements. As soon as
the spatial frames of reference separate from each other,
they loose information with respect to time and the only
means of communication takes time to reach the other.
These are situations which may happen but they do
not fall under the description of equation (12). Observers
depending on these moving references, would not have
complete information about physical facts, such as the
processes which generate the waves. This does not de-
pend on the kind of wave but only on the dependence of

17 This situation applies for organisms such as jelly-ﬁsh, if this an-
imal is not capable to use his biological processes as a clock.

10

the observer on the wave. In the case of light, it would be
a lack of knowledge about the atomic processes produc-
ing light, independently of its propagation, what actually
would mean subjectivity. This is a condition which can-
not be accepted.

The diﬀerence in time arising from this situation can
be expressed by a proportionality between the two times.
But these diﬀerent measures of time do not necessar-
ily mean an independence of the references, in the sense
of a genuine new dimension of time, to be named non-
absolutism of time. We must reserve this term ‘non-
absolutism’ for a situation in which we can be sure about
the objectivity of both observations, what is not yet the
case of the situations above described. The fact that
moving references exist, with speed comparable to the
speed of light, requires a solution for the problem of ob-
jectivity.

B. The various concepts of velocity of light.

In the previous analysis there was no remark about
what observer−train knows about the train itself, which
remains the same entity as time goes by. Since the train
is a material object, we have to assume that Otrain con-
sists of atoms. In principle, this system of atoms does
not interact with Oemb, neither is it inﬂuenced by the
existence of the embankment in any way. Emitting light,
these atoms in transition also form a cyclic object. We
can assume that, with respect to this inertial system, the
light emitted from Otrain moves away from it with veloc-
ity ct.

Now, to avoid misunderstandings, we recall all possible
velocities of the waves until now involved in the discus-
sion. In our new notation, the inferior indices represent
the origin and the reference of the velocity of wave, re-
spectively. The superior index refers to the observer. We
have:
ce
oe,oe = ce, the velocity of the light emitted from Oemb,

relative to Oemb, according to observer − emb.

oe,ot = ce − ve, the velocity of the wave emitted from
ce
Oemb, relative to the train, according to observer − emb;
ce
ot,ot = ct, the velocity of the wave emitted from
Otrain, relative to Otrain, according to observer − emb.
ce
ot,oe = ct + ve, the velocity of the wave emitted
from Otrain, relative to the embankment, according to
observer − emb.

The fact that Otrain is a cyclic event can be known
by observer − train. And, for what matters, we do not
need to consider extra Cesium atoms coupled to Otrain,
because the relation between the cycles of both would
be ﬁxed from the beginning and it would not add extra
information about the cyclic state and the movement of
Oemb, for observer − train. We just consider Otrain as
a material sample, identical in all senses to Oemb, not
inﬂuenced by the light wave from Oemb. This implies
that observer − train can share with observer − emb the
same number N e

cy,oe(te), when observing Otrain.

According to observer − emb, light from Oemb reaches
the position se(te) of the train with velocity ce
oe,ot =
ce−ve and light produced in the train moves with velocity
ce
ot,ot = ct + ve, with respect to Oemb. That these light
waves produced in the train may leave it with velocity
ct = ce, with respect to the train, is not the point of our
discussion. We assumed an Otrain physically identical
to Oemb, in all senses. The real point of our discussion
is to understand the relativistic claim, which prohibits
the existence of relative velocities of light with respect to
moving detectors or sources. Special relativity does not
say anything about the reason why the value of the ve-
locity of the light in vacuum, with respect to its source at
rest, is c = 299, 792, 458meterspersecond. Consequently,
we must assume that ce = ct = c, since since these are
the concepts of velocity, deﬁned with respect to their cor-
responding sources at rest. Instead, the theory says that
light from Oemb reaches the train with velocity ce and the
light from the train, which in principle should be inde-
pendent from the one made at Oemb, also leaves it with
velocity ce, with respect to Oemb. According to the ax-
ioms of special relativity, the concepts of relative velocity
of light in vacuum, here represented by ce
ot,oe,
do not exist and, consequently, observer − emb does not
exist or is mistaken.

oe,ot and ce

Usually, people interpret the facts as if observer−train
could observe light arriving from Oemb with velocity ce,
but, according to our interpretation, it is not observer −
train who arrives at such a conclusions, and neither is
observer − emb mistaken. Because observer − train is
not an observer of light, his registration of the wave com-
ing from Oemb has not the meaning of the arrival of a
wave but it has another interpretation. And in the case
of observer − emb, we must consider the fact that with-
out considering a registration (or reception) of the wave
at the train, there is no meaningful relation between the
movement of the wave and the movement of Otrain which
could justify a change in its velocity. For observer − emb
alone, the increasing diﬀerence between the positions of
the wave front and Otrain suﬃces for an observation of a
relative velocity between them. There cannot be a trans-
formation in the velocity of the wave inside the embank-
ment, only due to the fact that it shares the space with
a moving body, with which light does not even interact.
Then, in our opinion, observer − emb is free to keep his
way of thinking. Something else must happen, and we
focus on the meaning of this light for observer − train.
With these same waves arriving at the position of the
train, another kind of observation can happen. Because a
wave can be broken in independent pieces of information,
considering its features separately, they can be combined
diﬀerently, showing something completely diverse. We
need to understand what is the meaning of the arriving
light for observer − train.

From one point of view, we know that light reaches
Otrain, but from another it is not necessarily the case.
For Observer − train, who knows nothing about the spa-
cial existence of the wave, what is out there is a bright

11

Oemb. This is a conclusion which we take only by ana-
lyzing our own ways of observing, as classical beings, and
comparing them with the situation here present. When
observing, we do not say that light is in between. If we
drown in the condition of the classical observer, we have
to conclude, liking or not, that light waves disappear as
such between Oemb and Otrain. 18

In place of this light which disappears, another concept
of light must emerge, and this is in fact what happens
with the appearance of a cycling feature in the object.
Reception of waves has a meaning by itself introducing a
physical correlate of brightness, the kinematic brightness,
which in this case, does not depend on the characteristics
of the wave, but only of the number of waves, as explained
in the introduction. And, for the receiver, the number of
received waves is a feature attached to the objects at dis-
tance, replacing the absent wave. Here, this concept only
belongs to receivers of light, not to observers of light. Re-
ception generates a new concept of body, the cyclically
shining body, deﬁning the receiver of light. What we
mean with reception of light is not a process indepen-
dent from the observation, or causing observation. Re-
ception is a process which happens together with the cor-
responding observation, furnishing part of the features of
the observation. This cyclicity of the body, coming with
reception, is not a ‘thing’ but a process, a body event,
having the duration of the observed event. So, reception
is a physical process and a physical concept, involving
physical elements, as every physical event, but it is not
described by the receiver, who only gets a new concept
of body from it.

The ‘brightness’ has no physical relation or interaction
with the cyclic Otrain, which is a reference for observ-
ing the object Oemb. It is by means of counting cycles
of Otrain and combining it with the reception of waves
from Oemb, that observer − train observes the movement
of the body, which now becomes more than the simple
kinematic object from the pure classical physics. As we
know from our own experience, if we think as classical
observers, the ﬁnal observation could be just the contin-
uous trajectory of a cyclically shining object, without any
physical medium other than the empty space between the
points of the trajectory and the origin of the system of
reference. A pure classical body could also be described
as moving object only, without necessity of any bright-
ness. But here this feature is the new insight introduced
by an observer receiver of light, before the classical limit.
His situation is not yet classical, which is a particular
case of receiver of light resulting from additional condi-
tions on the process of reception.

As we can notice,

light can actually have diﬀerent
meanings for diﬀerent types of observer. While one de-

18 Until now, the expression “bright object” could be exchanged by
“sounding object, ” considering material waves instead of light.
We discuss the diﬀerence later.

scribes the wave light, the other, by means of the same
light, observes a bright body, which is a completely dif-
ferent concept. For observer − train, light, as a wave,
is beyond observation. Consequently, for this observer,
light does not cross Otrain because it never enters his
observational space, staying there with the body as an
integral feature of it. In this way, the disappearance of
one entity is partially compensated by the emergence of
another one. It is not completely compensated, because
brightness is local and the wave is not. Then, something
is still lacking and we have to ﬁnd the light which arrives
and leaves Otrain with the velocity c. Until now, what
we know for sure is that if this light actually exists, obey-
ing the relativistic claims, it can only be observation of
someone else.

C. The two measures of time

Let us recall some aspects of observer − emb’s obser-
vations. Equation (13) relates two varying quantities,
which are numbers of occurrences or events, by means
of a constant. The number of occurrences and relations
between such numbers can be physical observations, in
the same sense that relations between time, lengths, ve-
locities and other quantities can be considered. Deﬁning
βe = ve/ce, we rewrite equation (13) as:

M e

w,ot(te) = (1 − βe)N e

w,oe(te).

(14)

We read in this equation that the relation between the
two varying quantities, is valid for each and every time.
There is no speciﬁcations about the kind of the event
whose number is growing in time, neither an indication of
a wave spread in space, there is only number of cycles 19.
The name cycle here is used in the sense that the occur-
rences are identical to each other. This is implicit in the
numerical description. Then, we can imagine ﬁguratively
the whole phenomenon, as a conjunction of two ‘closed’
distributions of spots, moving between themselves and
keeping increasing in number. In the observational con-
text of observer − emb, the physical nature of these spots
is only speciﬁed by their number. This is a clear case in
which counting is a physical description and number a
physical concept. And we must understand this fact di-
rectly from reading the statement of equation (14), not
from external arguments.

Physical observations are expressions of the physical
reality only, not explanations about causes of phenom-
ena. Kinematics suﬃces for the description and this is
the reason why dynamical quantities, related to interac-
tions, and explanatory arguments are absent from obser-
vations. The kinematics here involves not only numbers
but temporal conjunction of numbers. The existence of

12

the number of occurrences without an indication of the
physical nature of these occurrences, is very common in
physical descriptions. 20

Now, forgetting observer−emb, we think as observer−
train observing Oemb, with respect to the train, which
has its own independent source of light Otrain at the
origin of his reference system. Oemb is observed to move
away from it, as it happened for the previous observer.
The diﬀerence now is that observer − train observers
the cyclic emissions from Oemb, but at the place of Oemb
by means of reception at Otrain, while observer − emb
did not depend on local reception. This is a condition
of receivers of light and it implies that the number of
cycles of Oemb, counted by observer − train cannot be
the number of cycles of Oemb corresponding to time te.
Local reception has a proper meaning, which does not
imply the existence of someone in the train or with par-
ticles, as we usually read on the texts. The meaning
appears with observational statements, when we make
associations of far distances with local registers, when
light takes time to reach the register. While building
these associations we make the meaning, without being
speciﬁcally in the place of the register. Since light actu-
ally travels with ﬁnite velocity from Oemb to Otrain, this
takes time and what can be counted as cycles of Oemb
at Otrain, only can be a previous amount of the cycles,
considering the time te. This is the meaning of the quan-
tity M t
w,ot(te), in the observational
context of observer − train. Now, the cyclic state of
the object, which is a material process, is measured by
means of light and it ﬁxes, objectively, the time of the
receiver. The number of waves from Oemb counted at
Otrain is the same for both observers, as we already said
in the section IV-B, but this unique number has diﬀerent
meanings, corresponding to the diﬀerent observers.

w,ot(tt), instead of M e

We can write a similar relation, for observer − train,

M t

w,ot(tt) = (1 − βt)N t

cy,ot(tt),

(15)

where

N t

cy,ot(tt) = N e

cy,oe(te).

With the introduction of this correction, we can also

assume that there is a certain factor γ such that

(16)

(17)

te = γtt.

For both observations, considering both observers, the
physical existence of those numbers of cycles is not to be
explained as a result of any kind of interaction. The pic-
torial spots can also be thought as eﬀects of the passage of

19 For observer − emb, the existence of the wave is stated indepen-
dently by means of equations (8) and (11), in subsection III-C.

20 The distribution function of events, extensively used in physics
of many-body system, is another example of a numerical concept
in physics.

V. SPECIAL RELATIVITY

A. Relativistic arguments

obtain

an undulatory medium, without considering interaction
between a register and the medium. We assume that this
is not a physical eﬀect but just an observational eﬀect,
in the sense that no interaction is involved which could
make of γ a function of time. This is an argument to
consider γ as a constant.

This factor γ is the mark of the observational diﬀer-
ence. The introduction of this temporal diﬀerence, brings
again the question of the objectivity. But, partially, it is
solved with the assumption that at Otrain there is an
independent source of light. The other aspect of the
problem involves the observation of the movement and
consequently of the velocity, for observer − train. This
problem has to be solved by shaping the ﬁnal trajectory
of Oemb for observer − train and comparing it with the
trajectory of Otrain for observer − emb. In other words,
the solution of this problem depends on conditions in
which the receiver becomes a classical observer.

Until now we ﬁnd that the origin of the time diﬀerence
is not in diﬀerent clocks but it is in the diﬀerent ways
of observing.
In principle, this would still hold if we
exchange the shining object by a sounding object.

It is interesting to notice that the classical and semi-
classical regimes of observation, of section III are never
subjective or wrong. The classical observation, equation
(1), st = vttt, is objective and correct in all senses. It is
so that, for tt = te in quantity, it agrees completely with
equation (2), se = vete, from Observer − emb language.
And nobody can aﬃrm that Observer − emb is wrong,
by deﬁning the relative velocity of equation (10), ce
ot =
ce −ve. For every te there is actually a diﬀerence between
the position of the wave front and the position of the train
such that equation (10) can be assumed as valid.

The problem is that equation (10) does not necessarily
imply equation (12), which describes a rate of emission
of a wave light, considering a certain position. Equation
(10) and equation (11) are independent equations. Rig-
orously, the relative velocity of equation (10) and the
velocity of equation (11), ce
w,otλe, are not the
Inside the limited context of
same physical concept.
Observer − emb, this fact is not explicit.

ot = f e

Equation (11) does not hold for the receiver because
his measure of time is another and consequently the fre-
quency is not the same. Therefore there must be a gen-
eral equation, instead of equation (12), that integrates
both observers. About a comparison between the two
observations, it is also interesting to notice that the ob-
servations of observer − train are not under the observa-
tional domain of observer − emb. A comparison implies
the knowledge of invariant quantities by means of which
the two observations can be related. Until now, equa-
tions (14) and (15) are completely independent. Since

13

we do not know the quantity M t
know tt.

w,ot(tt), we also do not

B. Postulate I: Generalization of Galilean
equivalence.

Now, we recall that ct = ce, because these are the
velocities of the light deﬁned with respect to the corre-
sponding sources at rest.

We also recall that special relativity is based on the
assumption of the conservation of the rectilinear uniform
movement. But it is important to notice that, in general,
reception of light does not imply in the conservation of
the relative velocity, between Oemb and Otrain, given by
vt = ve. So, here, we ﬁrst assume that

M t

w,ot(tt) = M e

w,ot(te).

(18)

This expresses the conservation of the number of cycles
counted at Otrain, for both observers. Then, using equa-
tions (15) and (16), we ﬁnd

βt =

=

= βe.

vt
ct

ve
ce

(19)

We can substitute these results in equation (14), to

M t

w,ot(tt) = (1 − βe)N e

w,oe(te).

(20)

This equation, which relates explicitly the two ob-
servers, is the fundamental form for the generalization
of Galilean equivalence, for diﬀerent observers. It relates
the number of wave cycles which vary in time, between
moving objects, for diﬀerent observers, in an unique ob-
servational experience.

We can divide both sides of equation (20) by te ﬁnding:

M t

w,ot(tt)
tt

= γ(1 − βe)

N e

w,oe(te)
te

.

Now we have a relation between the two separated fre-
quencies in space, not depending on time.

w,ot = γ(1 − βe)f e
f t

w,oe,

where the left side of this equation is the frequency of
cycles of Oemb, for observer − train. And now we can
discuss the other relation of observer − train with the
original source Oemb.

(21)

(22)

C. Postulate II: Conservation of information.

The second postulate is about the classical observer as
a limit case of receiver. In classical physics, there is no
loss of information concerning material processes. This
means that the number of cycles of Oemb, independently
of the number of emitted waves, is invariant with respect

to the observers. This invariance is named conservation
of information about material facts.
In general, infor-
mation is knowledge and, in the present context, it can
be taken as meaning any content of observation21. But
here, the observation of the object, detached from its
trajectory, consists only of number of cycles. Then, we
name material information, or information, only its ma-
terial (although not interactive) feature, which consists
of number of cycles.

Now we may consider that, in the point of view of
observer −train, a register of waves at Otrain can also be
considered as a source at rest. The embankment has no
limit in length and this permits to consider an arbitrary
second point O′
emb approaching Otrain, with velocity ve,
in both points of view, according to the arguments of the
previous section V-B. Then, at this arbitrary point on
the embankment, it is possible to deﬁne a quantity given
by

M t

w,o′e(tt) = (1 + βe)M t

w,ot(tt).

(23)

As in equation (15), there is no diﬀerence in time since
we are in the classical limit. We can substitute the ex-
pression of M t

w,ot(tt), given by equation (20), yielding

M t

w,o′e(tt) = γ(1 + βe)(1 − βe)N e

w,oe(te).

(24)

Knowing that all these numerical functions are linear
functions of time, we have

N e

w,oe(te) = γN e

w,oe(tt),

(25)

and substituting this result in equation (24), we ﬁnd

M t

w,o′e(tt) = γ2(1 + βe)(1 − βe)N e

w,oe(tt).

(26)

Using the principle of conservation of information, we

must have

M t

w,o′e(tt) = N e

cy,oe(tt)

(27)

This equation means that the observation of the num-
ber of cycles of Oemb, as material process, does not de-
pend on position, nor on transmission of light, neither on
class of observers22.

Using the fact that

N e

w,oe(te) = N e

cy,oe(te),

(28)

for all times, we can substitute these two last equations
in equation (26), to arrive at

γ2 =

1
(1 + βe)(1 − βe)

.

(29)

Substituting this expression in equation (17), we have
the so called Lorentz transformation for times, in its fun-
damental form:

te =

tt
(1 − v2
e
c2
e

.

1
2

)

14

(30)

D. The Constancy of the Velocity of Light

Now, that we found the ﬁrst Lorentz transformation,
independently of the constancy of the velocity of the
light, we can actually derive the constancy by calculating
the velocities of approaching and leaving the train in the
relativistic point of view.

As we assumed by principle, observer − train is a clas-
sical observer and by this reason he cannot measure rel-
ativistic eﬀects such as constancy of the velocity of the
light. This constancy is only found when one calculates
the velocities of the light approaching and leaving Otrain
in an unifying point of view. To complete the previous
list of concepts of velocity of light, we must include the
following concepts:

cr
oe,ot is the velocity of the light approaching Otrain

from Oemb with respect to the reference tt.

oe,ot is the velocity of the light reaching O′
cr

Otrain with respect to the reference tt.

emb from

To deﬁne and calculate these velocities, we must start
from the relation ce = ct, where the right side is the
velocity of the wave emitted from Otrain, with respect
to Otrain, in both points of view, including the classical
view of Observer − train. Consequently, we can assume
that there is a λt such that

=

λe
λt

te
tt
holds. And substituting equation (30) in the last equa-
tion, we also ﬁnd a relativistic correction for the wave
length:

(31)

,

λe = γλt

(32)

Substituting these results, the ﬁrst velocity is given by

M e

= ce

cr
oe,ot =

w,ot(te)(1 + βe)λe/γ
tt
where the coeﬃcient (1+βe) of λe is the classical increase
on the wave length because of the movement of the source
away from Otrain and the factor γ is the relativistic eﬀect
on the wavelength. And the second velocity only includes
a relativistic correction for the wave length, since the
source is at rest. It is given by

(33)

cr
oe,ot =

N t

cy,ot(tt)(λe/γ)
tt

= ce.

(34)

21 This does not diﬀer from the usual concept of information, only

that here it is taken in a very fundamental sense

22 This condition is not valid for material waves, only for light.

We ﬁnally derived the constancy of the velocity of the
light, showing that it is a relativistic result only, not
shared by the other points of view.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

In our set-up we discriminate three classes of ob-
servers: observers of light represented by the equations
of observer − emb; receivers of light represented by the
equations of observer − train; and relativistic observers,
represented by the unifying equations. The constancy of
the velocity of the light is a relativistic result only. And
the only one who observes the relativistic phenomena is
the relativistic observer. But if the classical and the semi-
classical observers do not exist, the relativistic observer
disappears too. And the relativistic world vanishes with
him.

The train/embankment experiment is a prototype of
relativistic phenomena not including interaction. The
basic set up of the experiment of Michelson and Morley
is the same situation. We can consider the same train
carrying two mirrors, at equal distances from the origin
Otrain of our train. One mirror is localized on a line
perpendicular to the velocity of the train while the other
is in the direction of the movement.
In this situation,
light from the origin O′ of the train is sent back and forth
a great number of times from this origin, which moves
with velocity v. According to the experiment, there is no
diﬀerence in phase between the two perpendicular beams
when they meet back in the origin.

In this experiment, the Earth corresponds to the train.

15

Its tangential velocity corresponds to our v. The com-
plete experiment is done under our single conventional
Earth time, and we are the classical observers inside the
train. Consequently, what the experiment conﬁrms is
that under its conditions, the classical limit holds. And,
what is the classical limit? It is just the condition in
which discrepancies in the velocity of light are not shown.
Then, the ﬁrst step to measure a discrepancy in the veloc-
ity of the light is by not taking its constancy for granted.
But, in this case, we must ﬁnd new ways to recognize, at
remote distances, the objects of observation, because the
constancy is just a theoretical tool for this.

In this paper we showed that because classical ob-
servers are receivers of light the velocity of light in vac-
uum is absolute. We did not show that classical observers
exist as absolute beings.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Igor Volovich for stimulating dis-
cussions and Peter Keefe for a careful reading of the text.
C. Pombo also thanks Jose Thadeu Cavalcante, Eduardo
Paquet, Carlos Baladron Garcia, David P. Costa and Aad
van den Enden for inspiring discussions on the relation
between physics and psychology.

[1] A. Einstein, Relativity (New York: Three Rivers Press,

New York, 1981 )

[2] C. Pombo, Th. M. Nieuwenhuizen, Observers of Physical

cations, 1962 )

1961).

Worlds, to appear.

[13] M. Born, Einstein’s Theory of Relativity (Dover Publi-

[14] R. Resnick, Introduction to Special Relativity (John Wi-

ley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1968 )

[3] C. Pombo, Th. M. Nieuwenhuizen, Observational Deriva-
tion of Einstein’s “Law of the Constancy of the Velocity
of Light in Vacuo” (AIP Conf. Ser. 810, G. Adenier, A.
Yu. Khrennikov and Th. M. Nieuwenhuizen eds., Ameri-
can Institute of Physics, Melville, NY, 2006), pp.393.
[4] C.G. Jung, The Symbolic Life (CW VOL.VI Routledge
and Kegan Paul Ltd, London, 1959); Symbols of Trans-
formation (CW VOL.V Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd,
London, 1959).

[5] W. Pauli and C. G. Jung, Dialogs (Springer-Verlag 1995).
[6] H. Weyl, Philosophy of Science and Natural Sciences
(Princeton University Press, 1949); Writings on physics
and philosophy (Springer-Verlag, 1995).

[7] E. Kant, The Critique of Pure Reason (London: Macmil-

lan, 1929).

[8] L. E. J. Brouwer, On the Foundations of Mathematics

(Thesis Amsterdam, 1907).

[9] K. Evers-Fahey, The Ego Concept in the Works of C. G.
Jung (Publication number: C817111 PhD Thesis, Uni-
versity of Essex, 2004).

[10] R. Carnap, The Methodological Character of Theoretical
(Minnesota studies in philosophy of science,

Concepts
Vol. I University of Minnesota press, 5 ed. 1964).

[11] K. Popper, Objective Knowledge- An Evolutionary Ap-

proach (Oxford at the Claredon Press, 1974).

[12] W. Pauli, Theory of Relativity (Dover Publications, Inc.,

Appendix: A model for physical observers

The purpose of this appendix is to discuss a model
for physical observers borrowing elements from analytical
psychology and philosophy. In doing so, we shall partly
follow steps of physicists like Pauli, who introduced this
psychology in the interpretation of classical physics, and
mathematicians like Weyl, who concluded that the ulti-
mate essence of the concept of the Ego is the system of
reference.

Physicists usually consider observation identical to ac-
quisition of data. This opinion has been rather disorient-
ing, considering the level of antagonism still present in
the literature in discussions about relativistic and quan-
tum realities. Collection of data is not what observation
is, although sets of discrete or continuous data can be
considered elements of physical observations. A physical
observation is an expression of a language made of ob-

servational concepts. 23 This language is made by sets
of sentences such as equations, specifying the way these
concepts are organized and related. In the simplest case,
when the concepts are physical quantities, the relations
are just associations between sets of data. The simplest
examples of observation are equations of trajectories of
moving particles.

But with sets of positions and measures of time alone
one cannot arrive at these equations, because a trajec-
tory involves a third element which is the movement of
a body. It is the movement that settles the association
and these trajectories are observed independently of the
existence of any theory. Newtonian mechanics, which
is a complete theory and does not only consist of ob-
servational expressions, was the ﬁrst theory made for ex-
plaining these trajectories. Soon thereafter, new concepts
emerged to describe global aspects of classical behavior
of many bodies, in which the concept of trajectory does
not play the main role. Observation of continuous dis-
tributions of matter such as ﬂuids and waves produced
other classical theories. From this point, physics devel-
oped in the direction of much more complex organization
of data. Therefore it is very diﬃcult to avoid the conclu-
sion that physical observations are human acquisitions of
language, where these languages are not the conventional
ones but expressions of a collectivity, in the sense which
we explain below.

Linguistic expressions are psychological phenomena.
To observe is to think or have thoughts which can be
linguistically expressed. Thoughts are complex forma-
tions of psychological elements existing and developing in
intervals of time. This gives another meaning for a sen-
tence of language, not as a ﬁxed object made of signals,
but as a constraint between elements during an interval
of time. Consciousness has deep relations with language
and therefore observers can also be considered from a
psychological point of view, as conscious experiences, be-
longing to speciﬁc classes of conscious phenomena. Not
only, physical observations must be understood as a spe-
cial case of human expressions, in which all the subjective
aspects of our existence are eliminated.

For these reasons, we take the term ‘psychological’
strictly from the Analytical Psychology of Carl Gustaf
Jung, because this is the only psychological theory in-
volved with a collective basis of the human thought [4].
In this theory, consciousness is a process made of func-
tions such as thinking, intuition, feeling, sensation and
perception. The totality of the conscious experience can
have elements from many diﬀerent functional sources,
that means, descriptions involving sensations with feel-
ings, between others.

Thinking is one of the functions of consciousness, the
one which associates ‘names’ and ‘meanings’ to experi-

23 These observational concepts need not be physical quantities,

but we will restrict ourselves to the case where they are.

16

ences. According to Jung there are two kinds of think-
ing:
fantasy and language. This second kind of think-
ing can also include descriptions of subjective experiences
involving sensation and emotions which are also experi-
ences related to the body of the observer. But it can also
be involved only with objective elements. The function
named perception would be thinking of sensations and
it can also include physical concepts. However, these
experiences are always grounded on the spatial point of
views of observers, what makes these reports subjective.
This is not a feature of physical observations which are
grounded on physical (objective) systems of reference. In
our model we focus on ‘physical thoughts’, eliminating all
the other functions, to relate to the equations represent-
ing the physical observations.

The main feature of analytical psychology, which is
also a sine qua non condition for any model of observer
in physics, is the fact that it assumes an archetypal or
collective base for the consciousness and consequently for
thinking. In the context of this psychology, certain man-
ifestations of consciousness are not acquisitions of indi-
vidual humans but of the psychic history of human kind.
This makes a great diﬀerence between analytical psychol-
ogy and all other psychologies, including psychoanalysis
of Sigmund Freud. It postulates the existence of an au-
tonomic psyche, without any inﬂuence of the individual
consciousness, from which the conscious experience takes
its deepest meanings. This psychic level does not consist
of formed experiences but only of fundamental meanings
or ‘frames’ for organizing them, the so called ‘archetypal
patterns’. And this permits the deﬁnition of objective
experiences in a collective sense, only made by special
concepts directly related to these patterns. This objec-
tivity based on collective agreement is the main feature
of physical observations. Actually, physical experiences
are the most clear manifestations of the collective psyche.
[5] wrote about the inﬂuence of
archetypal patterns on the ideas of Kepler and on the
foundations of classical physics. But who made the most
clear connection between physical and psychological ex-
periences was the mathematician Herman Weyl, who rec-
ognized the psychic nature of the physical system of ref-
erence
[6]. He just identiﬁed our ‘physical frames of
reference’ with ‘components of the ego’. And the center
of the consciousness, in analytical psychology, is the col-
lective essence of the Ego, made mainly by the archetypal
patterns (which are the psychological correlates of the in-
nate ideas of Immanuel Kant [7] and of the intuitions of
Luitzen Brouwer [8]). Considering only the patterns in-
volved with physical experiences, we may use the expres-
sion ‘physical ego’ only for a sector of the ego as deﬁned
by Jung. This deﬁnition of physical ego, generating col-
lective experiences, gives rise to experiences which could
be interpreted as belonging to a collective consciousness.
The existence of the latter can be considered as paradox-
ical, and was ﬁrstly rejected by Jung. But during his life,
Jung reﬁned several times the concept of ego [9], reaching
this ﬁnal conception in which the ego is a collective and

Wolfgang Pauli

structural base for experiences.

The ego (or physical ego) is the set of physical ref-
erences, forming the building blocks of physical experi-
ences and consequently of the physical world. They form
a closed structure in itself, classifying physical experi-
ences. Here the term ‘world’ accounts for the inﬁnite set
of all possible descriptions of a class of observers. For
Weyl, there could be no objective experience detached
from the ego. “The objectivation, by elimination of the
ego ... does not fully succeed, and the coordinate system
remains ...” [6] This idea of Weyl makes it also possi-
ble to diﬀerentiate between classes of physical observers
based on diﬀerent classes of references. Not only, it also
permits to understand the relation between these classes
in a psychological context. The concept of complex, also
introduced by Jung, is the key for this analysis. For
Jung, a complex is a set of experiences limited by a spe-
ciﬁc ego. Diﬀerent complexes can be related to diﬀerent
egos. In our context, the diﬀerent complexes are related
to diﬀerent classes of reference.

The main issue of the body of the present paper has
been to point at diﬀerent concepts of observers and the
emergence of another one (the relativistic observer). The
last can be interpreted as an integration of complexes,
forming its own set of experiences.

Diﬀerent kinds of systems of reference correspond to
diﬀerent classes of observers. The experiences of a class
becomes a complex, in a Jungian sense. And these diﬀer-
ent complexes can be integrated and organized in struc-
tures giving rise to a new one. This explains the emer-
gence of the relativistic observer, as a new complex of
ego, with his own identity. In this sense, a psychological
analysis reveals the process of development of physical
observers, facing the development of physics.
In New-
tonian physics, for example, these references only con-
sist of the set of real numbers, three spacial axes, time
and movement. With these fundamental ingredients, the
classical world is formed. With special relativity a new
reference emerges, which results in a deep change of re-
ality. These new experiences are the observations of an-
other kind of observer, named the relativistic observer,
see Section V.

But this is not all, because physics does not consist
only of observational languages. Another crucial con-
tribution for this model of observer adopted here, comes
from the philosopher R. Carnap [10], who stressed the lin-
guistic nature of physical observations. For him, physical
observations form ‘worlds of languages’ by producing spe-
ciﬁc languages. These so called observational languages
ought to be detached from the theoretical languages, in-
side speciﬁc theories. But the propose of Carnap appar-
ently failed in practical terms because of the diﬃculty to
ﬁnd general criteria for separating observational concepts
from the theoretical ones. He was the ﬁrst to recognize
this fact, pointing to the divergences of opinion on this
matter.

For ﬁnding the observational languages we need two
criteria. The ﬁrst is to separate observational terms in-

17

side a speciﬁc theory diﬀerentiating observational and
theoretical languages. We adopt a historical guidance
and simply postulate the primary references from an
analysis of Newtonian trajectories. Then we separate
from the observational language all statements with con-
cepts not built exclusively by these primary references.
The second criterion is to deﬁne diﬀerent theories by
means of recognizing diﬀerent observational languages.
This can be done by assuming that a change in the num-
ber of primary references, not considering changes in the
physical meaning of the references, means a diﬀerent ob-
servational language.

From an integration of these ideas we conclude that
to observe is to describe, focusing our analysis on the
equations. The description is a kind of organization of
the reality. An observer is represented or manifested by
the report, not by the body of a person. For this reason,
observations do not depend on the position of persons
(bodies of persons) neither observers have physical inﬂu-
ence on the world. Another aspect of observers and of
these archetypal references here discussed is that these
references are not choices from human beings. Accord-
ing to analytical psychology, the unconsciousness has its
own dynamics, independent from the consciousness. The
development of the ego, considering its collective essence,
is not under the domain of consciousness. In this speciﬁc
aspect, the development of knowledge does not obey our
will.

The question of the nature of the psyche, whether it
is a metaphysical entity and whether observers only can
be human, 24 deserves careful discussions but it can be
avoided here, at the expense of understanding that lan-
guage, as strongly emphasized by Karl Popper [11], has
an objective feature, which is independent of single hu-
man physical existences. Although being a product of
human culture, it is made outside individuals. For this
reason, in case of physical languages, observational in-
formation can be conveyed by instruments (but it is not
to be misunderstood as being the instrument) indepen-
dently of a physical presence of a speciﬁc person to read
it. The only diﬀerence introduced here from analytical
psychology is in the collective or archetypal nature of the
observational concepts, with respect to the human ob-
server, which contrasts with the opinion of Popper. This
contrast is more related to the way in which we know and
understand these concepts, whether from experimenta-
tion or not. But this is a very old philosophical discus-

24

If history had developed diﬀerently by not having the world dom-
inated by us, homo sapiens-sapiens, it might have been necessary
to question whether Neanderthaliens or the Homo Erectus could
have served as good ’observers’ in the sense discussed here. In re-
ality, there remains this question about the more clear cut case
chimpanzees and other great apes. Though the answer seems
that they are not ‘good observers’ of the type we discussed, un-
derstanding of their language would be of great help to reach a
deﬁnite conclusion.

sion which we also do not need to enter. We just take for
grant that these physical concepts of space and time have
a collective meaning, that they do not belong to speciﬁc
cultures but to the totality of the human kind. Lastly,

we assume that for the situations discussed here, these
observations consist of continuous associations between
these concepts, what cannot be made by instruments or
machines.

18

