6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
7
2
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Liberties in Nature

P. H´aj´ıˇcek
Institute for Theoretical Physics
University of Bern
Sidlerstrasse 5, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland
hajicek@itp.unibe.ch

August 2006
Preliminary version

Abstract

The concept of liberty is introduced and the weak causality principle is
formulated after some analysis of physical theories is carried out to motivate
these steps. The principle is compatible with a version of general relativity
that diﬀers from the usual one by a reinterpretation of spacetime. Some
aspects of our concept of time are elucidated. Then, the notion of freedom
of living organisms is deﬁned as the ability to utilize a liberty. The most
important liberties are those of mutation, of motion and of portable neural
representation. The corresponding structures are studied and the relevant
processes are classiﬁed into the so called realization, selection and memory.
While the realization has an ample space for chance, the selection is causal.
The freedom of will follows the same general pattern as all other freedoms and
it is explained by giving account of the underlying liberty and processes. The
experiments of Libet and the role of consciousness are studied. One conclusion
is that the freedom is not just an illusion.

1 Introduction

The aim of the present paper is to introduce the notion of liberty, to make hy-
potheses about existence of the liberties in Nature and to study features of diﬀerent
liberties. We start with physical phenomena and then jump to living organisms.
The hypotheses will enable us to ﬁnd relations, order, and explanation of certain
observations including the impression of freedom that is peculiar to man.

The paper is necessarily more a sketch of a research project rather than a complete
scientiﬁc analysis considering all details and aspects. But we shall try hard to
formulate the main ideas as clearly and distinctly as possible.

The plan of the paper is as follows. Sec. 2 is dedicated to physics and asks
the question which physical phenomena are strictly tied by unique rules and which
freedom remains after the physical laws are accepted. We ﬁnd that the freedom is
large even in Newton mechanics: the choice of system and the choice of its initial
data is free. We give this freedom a slightly diﬀerent interpretation than is usually
adopted. Then, a short account of quantum mechanics will show that there is even
more freedom there and that the additional freedom does not concern only and
exclusively the micro-world. This motivates the formulation of the weak causality
principle and the corresponding notion of time that form a basis of the conceptual
framework of this paper. Finally, we ﬁnd that this notion of time is not compatible
with general relativity, but that a subtle change in the interpretation of spacetime
can make the framework logically coherent. This reinterpretation does not inﬂuence
any observable property.

The examples met in physics motivate the introduction of the central notion of
the paper, the liberty, in Sec. 3. We distinguish liberty and freedom. Liberties
can be found even in physics but freedom concerns only the living organisms—even
bacteria, so our language is a little diﬀerent from the common use. The concept
of freedom involves structures and processes in living organisms by means of which
they take advantage of liberties.

The ﬁnal section lists examples of important liberties that concern living organ-
isms. It is the liberty of mutation, of motion and of portable neural representative.
While the ﬁrst two are simple and well deﬁned, the last one remains a little obscure
as to its actual structure within the nervous system. We analyze some experiments
by Jim Gould to show that what is represented as well as the existence of such repre-
sentation by neural structures is much less obscure. Several freedoms are described
and the respective structures are studied. We ﬁnish with the notorious freedom of
will, which turns out to have the same general structure as all other freedoms. We
discuss the experiments by Libet and the role of consciousness in this particular
case.

The paper will formulate not only testable hypotheses but also claims that are not

1

testable, such as the weak causality principle. The question may be asked whether
or not such and similar claims can be considered as a part of science. Some people
require that scientiﬁc claims must be testable, but the nature of science seems to be
more complicated.

In general, each basic scientiﬁc theory consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part is
a conceptual framework1, such as the conceptual framework of Newton mechanics
or quantum theory. The framework ought to be suﬃciently simple and general so
that it enables to describe, to explain and to order many diﬀerent empirical facts
lucidly but it does not itself yield any numerical values. To get numbers that could
be conﬁrmed or disproved by measurements, speciﬁc models within the framework
have to be invented, and the measurement then can only prove or disprove the
model. The zoo of models forms the necessary second part of the theory.

If a model is disproved, then a better model can mostly be found but it is usually
more involved2. As empirical material grows, the number of very diﬀerent and more
complicated models may start to increase in such a way that the original simplicity
and ordering force of the conceptual framework is lost. The framework itself cannot
thus be disproved but once the time comes that another conceptual framework is
invented such that the order and simplicity is regained and everybody switches over
to it.

2 What the laws of physics do not bind

We start with the physics not just because the author is a theoretical physicist and
has thus a clear advantage here but also because the laws of physical theories have
a rigorous and general form. If any liberty can be found under these conditions of
rigorosity and generality then it seems that it had to exist everywhere. Finally, the
physics can be considered as a basis of our knowledge about Nature. Any claims of
liberty in Nature may be more convincing if they do not contradict physics.

In the present section, an attempt will be made to explain the relevant physics
in a way that can also be followed by non physicists. It will therefore be necessarily
simpliﬁed and many details that are dear to the heart of a physicist will have to be
skipped.The language that will be used will often diﬀer from the specialist’s jargon.
I apologize to physicists and hope that the text can be still understood by them.

Considering the laws of the theories such as Newton mechanics, quantum mechan-
1Some philosopher would unpretentiously say “language”
2A well known example of modelling one and the same domain of experience using diﬀerent
conceptual frameworks is the non-relativistic quantum mechanics described, on one hand, in the
usual framework of quantum mechanics, on the other, by the De Broglie and Bohm wave-pilot
theory within the framework of Newton mechanics.

2

ics and general relativity we can see that there is a basic common structure. We
can explain this structure and a lot more by using Newton mechanics as an example
and by comparing other theories with it. What is generally known as mechanics is
called Newton mechanics here in order to distinguish it from quantum mechanics.

2.1 Old but nor dead: Newton mechanics

The main question of this section is: how much is controlled and ruled by the laws
of physics? If we are going to understand this more or less clearly, we need a few
abstract and general notions: system, dynamical equation, state and space of states.
The system in Newton mechanics consists of particles with given masses, on
which given forces act. Only after the system is chosen (the number of particles,
their masses and forces), the theory give us its dynamical equation, i.e, the law that
every motion of the system must fulﬁl. The law itself however does not determine
the motion. To obtain a unique motion, a state of the system must be chosen at a
given instant of time, mostly at the beginning of the motion and then evolved by
the dynamical equation. The state in Newton theory is constituted by the position
and velocity of each particle. All possible states form the so-called space of states.
Let us consider an example. The trajectory of a bullet depends on the position
from which it is shot, on the direction of the gun and on the amount of powder
loaded. The position can be described by three coordinates (three numbers), the
direction by two angles (two numbers) and the amount of powder is tantamount to
the velocity of the bullet, which is one number. In this way, six numbers are suﬃcient
to describe the initial state of the bullet. The resulting ballistic curve of the shot
is unique in principle. It can be also calculated from the dynamical equation. The
bullet is then at some position, it has one direction of motion and some velocity at
every time instant after the shot, that is exactly one state. As every state is given
by six numbers, the state space can be viewed as the set of all number six-tuples.

This is the general logical structure of the laws. What remains undetermined
by the theory? First, the choice of the system does. The choice determines what
is the dynamical equation and what is the state space. Then, any state from the
state space is freely eligible and only such a choice makes the motion unique. Isaac
Newton was aware of this feature. For instance, the fact that all planets known to
his time moved in the same plane around the Sun could not be derived from his
equations and he wrote [1]: ”Deus corpora singula ita locavit.” In our language,
God has chosen the initial state.

The freedom in the choice of state is usually considered as a mathematical prop-
erty or it is understood in a passive sense as the generality of the dynamical equation,
that is, its applicability to many diﬀerent situations that can be found, that already
occur spontaneously in Nature. It seems, however, that one can go a step further

3

and interpret the freedom as an active liberty of physicists. The assumption can be
formulated as follows.

The physicists are free to choose a system from a broad system class and
a state of the system from the corresponding state space. Then, they
can set out this system in this state in a laboratory (or elsewhere) at an
arbitrary time.

We can call this hypothesis Realizability of Physical States. The liberty that
Newton attributed to God in the large is so attributed to physicists in the small.
There is a saying that everything not explicitly allowed is forbidden in German-
speaking countries while everything not explicitly forbidden is allowed in English-
speaking ones. Accordingly, we adopt the Anglo-Saxon standpoint here.

I could not ﬁnd a direct formulation of the realizability of physical states in the
literature. It seems that it is always tacitly assumed in the work of experimental
physicists.
In any case it is completely compatible with empirical praxis as well
as with everyday laboratory work. As concerns the trajectories of the bullets, the
hunters have the experience that they can carry their guns everywhere in order to
shoot from there in any direction they like. The hunt would not be much fun else.
One of the basic principles of statistical mechanics can be viewed as a statement
about a diﬀerent kind of liberty. To explain this principle, let us limit ourselves to
thin gas in equilibrium. Such a system contains an enormous number of particles.
It is practically impossible to determine the state of such a system by some mea-
surements, or to realize a chosen state of it in the lab. The available information
about the system includes only values of some overall quantities such as total en-
ergy, particle number and volume. There are many states that are compatible with
such description. Now, the principle that we are explaining says that all states that
are compatible with ﬁxed energy, particle number and volume are equally proba-
ble. (The name of this principle is Micro-canonical Distribution). More precisely,
if we set up very many vessels that have the same volume and that contain the
same number of gas particles with the same total energy in each vessel, then every
allowed state appears with the same frequency. Independently of how the vessels
with the gas are manufactured, all of the allowed states are present with the same
probability. Thus, we can realize any of them although we do not know and, in fact,
cannot ﬁnd, which. Still, the principle has many interesting consequences and is
very useful.

2.2 Rise and fall of determinism

An important feature of Newton mechanics is that the values of all observable me-
chanical properties of a system are uniquely determined by the state. In our example,

4

the energy, momentum, angular momentum etc. of the bullet to a given time can be
calculated from its position, motion direction and velocity at the same time. Assume
that the entire world is mechanical, that is, it can be reduced in its entirety to a sys-
tem of massive particles and forces between them so that all properties of all objects
could be calculated from their mechanical properties, then a surprising consequence
follows. If the state of the world were known at some time, then everything what
can be known about the world at any other time could be calculated in terms of the
world dynamical equation. Even if no such complete knowledge or calculation were
possible, be it for practical or principal reasons, but if the world were a mechanical
system, then it would still follow that everything what ever happens including every
detail is predetermined (or post-determined). The only liberty that remained would
be the freedom in the choice of an initial state from the (huge) state space of the
world. This view of the world is called determinism.

Determinism was popular in the nineteen century because of the great progress
being made then in the project of reducing all physical properties to the purely
mechanical ones. For example, temperature can be so explained and calculated, if
one assumes that macroscopic bodies consist of invisibly small particles—atoms or
molecules—and that these particles move according to mechanical laws. It turns
then out that the temperature of a body is proportional to the average one-particle
energy of its constituent particles. However, in the ﬁrst quarter of the next century,
the more basic quantum theory emerged, and this theory does not support the
deterministic view (we shall study quantum theory in the next subsection).

Newton mechanics, if cut down to size, remains valid. If we restrict ourself to
systems of macroscopic bodies that are well isolated from the non-controllable inﬂu-
ence of the quantum micro-world, then the bodies would move with high precision
according to Newton mechanics.

Now, some further aspects of the principle of realizability of physical states from
the previous subsection can be explained. There, the natural question might have
arisen as to what is the role of the ”physicists” in the formulation of the principle.
Indeed, the principle seems to be not exclusively about mechanics but contains also
a human factor. Why? It may break the isolation of the macroscopic mechanical
system considered there so that the inﬂuence of quantum micro-world can show
itself. The living organisms may be eﬀective ampliﬁer of microscopic motions to
macroscopic ones. Thus, the apparent contradiction between the principle, which
is there applied to Newton mechanics, and the deterministic character of the same
mechanics could be avoided.

5

2.3 What we learn from quantum mechanics

Quantum mechanics has the same basic logical structure as Newton mechanics.
Again, there is an aﬄuence of various quantum systems. With each system a dy-
namical equation and a space of states is associated. Given a state at a time instant,
then the state at any other time can be calculated from the dynamical equation and
is unique.

And again, the choice of system and state is not restricted by any rule in quantum
mechanics, only by practical feasibility. The only diﬀerence is that the realizability of
physical states is explicitly formulated in some textbooks of quantum mechanics. For
example [2], P. 48, contains the realizability as a part of the so-called superposition
principle.

There are however some important features that make quantum mechanics very
diﬀerent from Newton mechanics. We cannot explain all, but two of them will
play an important role later. These are the indistinguishability of quantum systems
and the statistical character of quantum mechanics. The ﬁrst means that quantum
systems of the same kind such as all photons, all hydrogen atoms or all molecules
with the same compositions are utterly and absolutely equal. Two products of some
mass production factory may look equal, but they can be recognized from each
other, we can, e.g., make a mark on one, there is no question which of them is here
and which is there, etc. This is impossible with quantum systems even to such an
extent that any physically sensible state of a system containing two particles of the
same kind must be invariant with respect to their exchange. Moreover, there is a
relatively small number of diﬀerent kinds while systems of each kind occur in an
unimaginably huge number. This reducibility of the micro-world to few absolutely
equal building blocks has no analogy in the classical world. It will turn out to be
important to the biology and to the freedom of living organisms.

The statistical character is not apparent at the level of dynamical equation, which
determines the states completely and is sometimes classiﬁed as deterministic, but
is rather associated with the state3. Given a ﬁxed state, then there are quantities
the measurements of which always give the same value from some set that is called
spectrum of the quantities. One says that such a quantity have a sharp value in the
state. Most quantities however are said to have no values in the state in spite of their
measurability. That is to say, their measurements give diﬀerent results even if the
state on which the measurements are done remains the same. Only the distribution
3This is in fact analogous to the statistical mechanics, where states can be identiﬁed with
distribution functions. The dynamical law is the so-called Liouville equation and it also determines
the distribution function at any instant of time completely if it is known at one. The values
of measurable quantities however are not determined uniquely, only their probabilities can be
calculated from the distribution function.

6

of these values can be calculated from the state, i.e., each value from the spectrum
has a ﬁxed probability determined by the state. Let us show typical details by means
of an example.

As our system, we choose a single photon. Of course, we can never observe
a single photon in the everyday life. What we know as light is always a cloud
of a huge number of photons. To create a single photon requires a sophisticated
technique (which need not be described now). The photon can moreover be created
in a state, say, in which its momentum has a sharp value. According to the well-
known Heisenberg uncertainty relation, the position of the photon is then totally
”unsharp”. What does this mean for the measurement of the position?

The spectrum of position is the whole space. We can measure the position from
a subset of the spectrum by a photographic plate. The basic property is that a
single photon can create only a single black point on the plate if it hits it. Hence,
”totally unsharp” cannot indicate a large smeared smudge on the plate made by a
single photon. Instead, it says that repeated measurements will result in many black
points and that the distribution of the points, after very many measurements have
been done, is uniform. The following interpretation can, may be, help. The photon
in our state does not have any position at all before hitting the plate. The position is
”created” only by its interaction with the plate. The interaction cannot be controlled
and gives diﬀerent results in each run. Of course, one cannot readily imagine some
object without a position; one of the main principles of some philosophical theories of
existence is that existing objects must have positions. However, there is no diﬃculty
of principle: one can simply imagine that it is the state of the photon that is smeared
throughout the space. An ocean is an object, the position of which is very extended
indeed. Only, the physicists prefer to speak of the photon as not having any position
to saying that its position is the whole space because the position is a speciﬁc well-
deﬁned quantity in quantum mechanics and the possible values of this quantity are
points (in our language, its spectrum is a set of points).

More generally, the account of any quantum experiment is as follows. First, the
experiment itself consists of a number of runs. In each run, we obtain a single quan-
tum system (here the photon) from a source, which is some macroscopic apparatus.
The source is constructed in such a way that the photon obtained from it in each run
is in the same quantum state. The arrangement of the source and the measuring
apparatus (here the plate) is the same for each run. The runs are performed at
diﬀerent times and have therefore some time order. In each run, we obtain a certain
value from the spectrum which can be read oﬀ at the measuring apparatus (here,
the black points at the plate). If the experiment has suﬃciently many runs then the
distribution of the values obtained is well approximated by the probabilities that
are calculated from the state according to rules of quantum mechanics.

7

In eﬀect, everything done by an experimentalist is to manipulate and observe
some macroscopic devices. From that, an interesting conclusion follows. The ac-
count of the experiment can be completely reduced to description of the behavior of
macroscopic objects without omitting anything indispensable for its understanding.
It is the macroscopic structure of the source that says the physicist whether it sends
out photons or whether it will be electrons, as well as what is the state of the par-
ticles. And it is a macroscopic change of the measuring apparatus that disclose to
him which value of the measured quantity has been found. Hence, the unpredictabil-
ity is not just hidden in the micro-world without any relation to our macro-world.
It is here, in the macro-world to be clearly visible by everybody. Hence, it is the
macroscopic behavior that is not always predictable.

It is also important to realize that, for the photon experiment, the quantum
mechanics does identify a cause of each run giving a single macroscopic black point
at the plate: a single photon has been sent. But it does not specify any cause of a
particular run giving a particular black point and not another one.

2.4 Causality principle

Causality is an ancient assumption. For instance, Platon’s formulation in Timaeos
is:

Everything that happens must happen because of a cause; for it is im-
possible that anything comes into being without cause.

However, we have seen that the most basic of physical theory today, the quantum
mechanics, keeps silence about cause of something that happens. How can this be
explained?

Roughly, there are two possible explanations. The ﬁrst is to keep the causality
principle and to assume that quantum mechanics is incomplete: the causes do exist
but are not captured by quantum mechanics. The second is to accept that the
quantum mechanics is complete and to abandon the causality principle: the causes
do not exist. This is what most physicists but not all underwrite. For example,
Albert Einstein was unable to accept the completeness.

If one accepted the incompleteness then one ought to propose a speciﬁc alternative
theory, in which the description of states is quantitatively more detailed than in the
quantum mechanics.
In this way, the causes could be described as diﬀerences in
the values of some additional parameters, the so-called hidden variables. Such a
theory had to be necessarily more involved than quantum mechanics but it must
simultaneously reproduce all its measurable results. In spite of great eﬀort of many

8

years, no such theory has been found or not even shown to exist.4

Accepting the completeness of the quantum mechanics does not imply that we
have to abandon the causality principle altogether. There certainly are causes for a
vast number of events that happen. Everything we need is to modify the principle:

Something that happens must happen because of a cause. The rest of
what happens can, however, come into being without a cause so that
there is a free choice between more possibilities. What has a cause and
what is free is not arbitrary but strictly regulated.

Let us call this Weak Causality Principle. A model of such a regularity is quantum
mechanics. The causes and liberties are strictly regulated so that we always know
what is predictable, what is not and what are then the alternative possibilities. More
everyday model are the rules of chess. There are some rules according to which the
stones must be moved but there is, in every position, more or less freedom in the
choice of the move compatible with these rules.

Can the weak causality be included into a coherent picture of the whole world?
In particular, is it compatible with the rest of physics? We have seen that what
happens within the Newton mechanics satisﬁes the (strong) causality principle, but
we have also mentioned that the validity of the Newton mechanics is limited and
this removes possible contradictions. Quantum mechanics, of course, is all right.

2.5 A subtle change in the interpretation

of general relativity

However, there is another modern theory called General Relativity, which describes
the world on the large scale. An important theoretical concept of general relativity
is that of space time. This is a four dimensional manifold so that there are four
independent directions at each point, three space-like and one time-like and the
space-time includes all space points at all times. The manifold carries the so-called
space-time geometry that determines distances and time intervals. There is no mark
on the space-time that would distinguish the present instant from all the other
ones and there is consequently no diﬀerence between past and future. The usual
interpretation is to say that this diﬀerence is purely subjective and that the present
instant can be anywhere depending on where is the observer, while the space-time
is considered as an observer-independent description of the total reality. The reality
is thus ﬁxed for all times. This deterministic conception of world is called Block
Universe by philosophers [3].

4There are deterministic models of some restricted kind (non-relativistic) of quantum mechanics

such as pilot-wave theory.

9

The global character of general relativity is quite essential if we are to compare it
with Newton or quantum mechanics. There does not seem to be much choice of the
system now especially when the theory describes the whole world for all times. Still,
the mathematical structure of general relativity is similar to that of the Newton
theory. Again, it admits a large number of diﬀerent worlds in evolution, or, as one
says, universes. We can at most say that they represent diﬀerent models of the
universe. Again, there are states ﬁlling up certain state spaces that are diﬀerent
for diﬀerent universes. It is, however, diﬃcult to require from physicists to set up
an arbitrary state of this kind in their laboratory at an arbitrary instant of time.
Again, there is a dynamical equation that rules the evolution of the states. The
evolution of a state may but need not be unique depending on the model we choose.
To explain this, we need more detail.

Each universe model has two aspects: the space-time geometry and the matter.
An essential feature of general relativity is that gravity and space-time geometry
are two aspects of one and the same structure. Then, because matter creates and
inﬂuences the gravity, the space-time geometry must depend on the matter. The
equation that couples the matter and the space-time geometry is called the Einstein
equation. If the model contains no matter, then the Einstein equation can serve as
the dynamical equation of gravity.

Now, in constructing a universe model, we are free to choose various kinds of
matter and this can also be done in such a way that the evolution of matter depends
on some random variables taking values from a set of possibilities5. Then, the
corresponding dynamical equation will not be deterministic. A state of the universe
at one instant of time together with its dynamical equation do not determine its
state at the next one unless the next values of the random parameters are chosen.
There is a whole set of possibilities, so the evolution is not unique.

It seems that the evolution of such a model can be imagined as follows. At each
time instant, the values of the random parameters are chosen. Then, the state at the
next instant is determined. After a ﬁxed amount of such steps, a piece of universe
will result, that is a space-time with ﬁxed space-time geometry and unique matter
evolution and which is a past of some time instant. The future of the time instant
is free to the extent the model allows. G. F. R. Ellis has called such an evolution [4]

Evolving Block Universe (EBU) model of reality, with space-time ever
growing and incorporating more events as time evolves along each world
line. This then does indeed represent how time progresses, events hap-

5More precisely, the state equation of the matter contains some parameters such that any time
dependence of the parameters is compatible with the Einstein equation and can be considered as a
part of the evolution. Such a construction can easily be performed for homogeneous and isotropic
cosmological models.

10

pen, and history is shaped. Things could have been diﬀerent, but second
by second, one speciﬁc evolutionary history out of all possibilities is cho-
sen, takes place, and gets cast in stone.

A diﬃculty with this ”model of reality” is that it cannot be described in an
objective way. Does the ”block” really exist? If it does not, then what relevance has
Ellis’ theory to the observable reality? If it does, then the really existing universe
”block” had to have (possibly more or less fuzzy) future boundary, a ”presence”,
that moved so that the block grows towards the future. The universe in the past of
any such boundary were already existent, while what were to its future did not yet
exist. However, what shape has such a boundary at any time instant, and what is a
time instant at all? We know from general relativity that such notions have not any
objective meaning6, that is a meaning determined by some observer-independent
structures.

Let us try to rework Ellis’ proposal focusing on what can be actually observed
and what can be assumed to be real. It seems obvious that what is really existent
exists only during or within its presence, e.g., within the time instant it can just
be observed. This presence can be looked upon as a larger or smaller neighborhood
of space-time, containing material objects and (possibly) observers. Thus, this so-
called local presence does not form a boundary of any part of space-time. The
local presences are the source of our evidence about reality. We assume that local
presences have an objective, that is observer independent, real existence.

From inside our local presence, we can observe what is just happening further
away, for example at the Andromeda nebula. What we can see is going on within
some momentary local presences there, which have to to be arranged along our past
light cone and are shifted by some millions of years from our local presence because
of the distance and the velocity of light. In this way, we arrive at the subjective
extended presence as it can be observed by a local family of observers. The extended
presence seems to be a boundary of some space-time region which lies in the past
of it.

However, what is the past? Clearly, the past exists only as a memory (i.e., a
speciﬁc arrangement of synaptic strengths in some brain) or other kind of record
that an observer, or a family of observers, can make about the observations done
within each of their progressing extended presences. Only in this indirect way does
the past have to do with reality.

The records are analyzed, compared and ordered: processed, and this is an im-
portant part of the game. Certain entities can be found that seem to be always there
(such as space-time events, speciﬁc classes of objects and ﬁelds). For certain aspects

6Unless in homogeneous and isotropic cosmological models.

11

of the entities, causal or spatial relations seem to be valid, for instance, the arrange-
ment of space-time events into a smooth manifold with some geometry. Some causal
relations can be summarized and generalized in the form of evolution laws. Other
aspects of the entities can exhibit a kind of liberty. In this way, a picture of some
broader space-time structure emerges: the diﬀerent pasts of other observers can be
included into a unique one that contains more than has been observed, namely a
logically coherent set of explaining and ordering hypotheses.

The past as a (processed) record seems to be ﬁxed in all aspects and details.
There are two very diﬀerent reasons for that. First, the choice between alternatives
of all liberties has been done and no change is any more possible. Second, we
usually suppose that diﬀerent observations or observations of diﬀerent observers
concerning these already done choices can ﬁnally be put into agreement, or that their
contradictions can be satisfactorily explained. In particular, any small neighborhood
inside of a past describes what happened when it was a presence and it can be
considered as a local presence of an observer being then in it, and the assumption is
that his observations within this local presence will not in principle contradict ours.
This is a rather non trivial hypothesis on which, in fact, all of the science is based; it
has a natural explanation in the philosophical realism (we use the notion of realism
as explained, e.g., by [5]). We call this hypothesis The Uniqueness of History.

It is important to realize that there is no proof using only raw evidence and
pure logic that the entities really exist, that the laws are really valid and that
the pasts can be ordered into a unique history. These existence and validity are
nothing more than hypotheses. Hypotheses, however, must be made or else there
would be no use of any past experience7. Besides the evidence, the explaining and
ordering hypotheses form the second buttress of science. It starts as a guess but is
not just and only a guesswork. After, say, a law is guessed there must be a lot of
subsequent work on it. Its self-consistence, its logical compatibility with all other
as yet accepted hypotheses and its agreement with further evidence is continuously
checked and upgraded. A way to general acceptance (never proof) of hypotheses is
thorny and long. A good example is the existence of molecules and the corresponding
story starting from Demokritos’ and Epikouros’ guess and practically ﬁnalized by
Boltzmann’s and Einstein’s detailed quantitative work.

Now, much more can be said about our notion of presence. Our extended presence
has a form of thickened inverted light cone together with everything that is just
happening at its space-time points. However, any space-time neighborhood in the
past with matter objects in it is a report about what happened there when it was
a presence. This suggests that extended presences may in principle have almost
any form. One such form can be obtained by pasting together local presences along

7The relevance of this experience to the future is a hypothesis.

12

a space-like hyper-surface within our past.
In each of the neighborhoods, there
could be in principle an observer and all these observers have seen things happening
and choices being made independently of each other. Such a generalization of the
subjective extended presence is sensible just because the common pasts of all such
presences must in principle coincide according to the uniqueness of history.

Finally, what is the future? The very existence of future is a hypothesis based
on the analysis of the records which conﬁrm that, as yet, the presences have always
progressed. Similarly, we can extrapolate the existence of the entities and the validity
of the laws to where we cannot make direct observations, in particular into the future
of each respective cone. Only in this way, we can make predictions. On the other
hand, the predictions concern always only a part of the future. As we have seen,
there are also unpredictable aspects. Thus, some part of the world is newly created
(”chosen by Nature” under more possibilities) at the presences, another part is
determined by the past.

In my opinion, our ideas are nearest to Popper’s [6].

A similar asymmetry between future and past has been accepted by some philoso-
phers.
I have found some
elements of them also at Heidegger and especially at Sartre but their existentialism
is very diﬀerent from our view in other aspects.

The ideas described up to now are also supported by the contemporary knowledge
of how brain neocortex works, even in mice. It constructs a structured, i.e., already
processed, memory record of all experienced (interesting aspects of) presences and
uses this material to create expectations (cf.
[7]). Similarly, the human science is
being made, at least in principle and in rough features, analogously, leading from
records to predictions, too. We can say: What really exists are only the local
presences. The past as well as the future are nothing but products of neocortex.

We have seen that the assumptions of a coupling between the matter and the
space-time geometry on one hand and the existence of random aspects of the mat-
ter on the other necessarily lead to the conclusion that not even the space-time
geometry is determined, or existing, in the future8. To see the point more clearly,
let us contrast it with some theoretical model containing a background space-time
geometry.

For example, the scattering theory of elementary particles uses the ﬂat space-time
as a given, ﬁxed arena for all times. The matter in the form of any quantum ﬁeld (if
it is not very heavy so that its gravitational ﬁeld can be neglected) can propagate on
it. For any initial state of the ﬁeld, which can be chosen arbitrarily, the probabilities
of the possible outcomes are then determined. There are both evolution laws and
liberty. Each individual scattering that has already had taken place has, however, a
unique and deﬁnite outcome and can be considered as a whole block universe with

8If the gravity is quantized then it also contributes to the randomness

13

space-time, ﬁelds and objects. This complete unique history with all details is a
past of an completed inﬁnite evolution (inverted light cone of a complete time-like
world line). The space-time geometry remains the same in each such experiment,
it is ﬁxed and universal, the liberty is only contained in the quantum ﬁeld. Such
net separation is impossible in general relativity, unless as an approximation that is
valid under special conditions.

Thus, we arrive at a rather awkward picture of a universe in evolution which seems
to be diﬃcult to describe. The Nature makes choices at any local presence and there
is a mess of local presences. One could describe a kind of minimal evolution in the
form of the changes in our inverted cone or any other family of chosen subjective
extended presences. But such a description is necessary subjective. Only a common
past of all evolutions within diﬀerent extended presences yields a unique picture of
what has really happened.

This gives us a hint on the problem of how the universes of general relativity are
to be interpreted. The space-time of any universe is just an idealized past, that is,
the unique history of an assumed completed evolution (cf. [4]). The word ”assumed”
of course means that we do not claim the real history and the real universe to be
already completed.

The above is only a subtle reinterpretation of general relativity because it does not
seem to lead to changes in any calculation and any discussion concerning measurable
properties within general relativity and with the Einstein equation done as yet. The
reason is, that such calculations and discussions can primarily apply only to past
evidence and hypotheses formed primarily about the past, as it has been explained
above. If we accept this change in interpretation of general relativity, then the weak
causality principle becomes compatible with the whole of the contemporary physics.

3 How liberty can be deﬁned

The discussion of the foregoing section has already suggested the conception of
liberty as a choice among diﬀerent possibilities that is compatible with the laws
of physics. To see the existence of such a liberty is still not easy because of what
we have called the uniqueness of history. The records of the past are unique and
hence there does not seem to be any freedom. Even if there is such a freedom, the
possibilities have already been chosen and the history cannot be changed. How did
we come to think that there is any freedom?

Recall how the described experiment revealed the liberty in the position of the
photon. The experiment consisted of many runs performed at diﬀerent times, each
of them giving a diﬀerent result. The conditions of each run were speciﬁed so that
the experimentalist could say: Each run started under the same relevant conditions.

14

This is the crucial point. Apparently, the time of the run does not belong to the
relevant conditions. Then, it becomes meaningful to say that the same experiment
is repeated and that it gives the same or diﬀerent result as a previous one. This
motivates the following deﬁnition:

The liberty of a system is associated with certain reproducible conditions
and it is deﬁned as the list of diﬀerent possibilities that are open to the
system under the conditions.

The important words ”system”, ”reproducible conditions” and ”possibilities” have
here a more general meaning than in the photon experiment and are explained below.
The two words ”liberty” and ”freedom” will distinguish two diﬀerent concepts in
what follows. The liberty as deﬁned above is a relatively simple notion that can be
applied even to photons. The freedom will be applicable to living organisms and will
denote the fact that the organisms are equipped with the structures, mechanisms
and methods that enable them to utilize liberties 9.

The term ”system” need not be a simple physical system such as a photon or a
bullet, but can denote more complex objects such as living organisms. The speciﬁ-
cation of the object that appears as the system in the deﬁnition can be a part of the
”relevant conditions”. This has been the case in the photon experiment, where the
nature of the source has constituted a part of the conditions and guaranteed that a
photon in a particular state has been sent out.

The term ”reproducible conditions” expresses the main idea of our deﬁnition. A
liberty is always understood in relation to certain conditions. In principle, broader
or narrower conditions allow more or less liberty. However, the choice of conditions is
not arbitrary. We assume that the same set of conditions is often fulﬁlled in diﬀerent
cases, may this happen spontaneously in Nature or may it be suﬃciently easy to be
arranged by people. A complete list and a clear description of the relevant conditions
must enable the check whether the same conditions are satisﬁed in diﬀerent cases
or not. The reproducibility is the property that makes the liberties empirically
manageable and theoretically derivable, similarly as the laws of Nature are.

The ”possibility” ought to really exist as opposed to a purely thought one, in
the sense that it can be observed as a real evolution at least in some cases in which
It can be an eﬀect of a cause that lies outside the
the conditions are satisﬁed.
condition set so that each separate possibility has its own cause. It can be as well
an evolution allowed by the conditions for which no cause can be found and even
need not exist, such as it has been assumed in quantum mechanics and stated by
9Thus, the meaning of both words is appreciably extended in comparison with their current
use. I apologize for this violence, but I could not ﬁnd better words and shall accept any better
proposal.

15

the weak causality principle. Or it may be a mixed case, it happens sometimes
by a cause and sometimes without. We shall see complex examples with a lot of
interesting structure later. The number or some other measure of the amount of all
possibilities can even serve as a numerical value of liberty. For example, if there are
N diﬀerent possibilities, we can deﬁne ln N to be the value of the liberty.10

Let us recall some examples from the physics section. The conditions of the liberty
observed in the photon experiment are that the nature of the source is to sends out
photons in the state of sharp momentum, second, that the measurement apparatus
is a photographic plate of certain kind and third, that the devices are arranged
in a ﬁxed way. All conditions concern only macroscopic properties of the devices,
but the standard interpretation of quantum mechanics considers them as maximally
narrow: no further conditions exist that would be relevant. That is; other possible
accompanying circumstances such as e.g., the time and location of the measurement,
the conjunction of planets and stars, the mood of the boss, the state of the stock
exchange, etc. can indeed be shown to have no observable inﬂuence on the course
and results of the experiment. The possibilities are the points at the plate that can
become black. These are all points of the plate, forming in this way a well deﬁned
list of possibilities. The liberty could be measured, e.g., by the logarithm of the area
of the plate.

Some liberties are important and useful even if their conditions do not form a
maximally narrow sets. That is, further conditions could be added, at least in
principle, so that the number of possibilities will decrease. Such liberties do not
logically contradict the (strong) principle of causality or the determinism. The
statistical physics of thin gases in equilibrium yields an example. The conditions
are that the total energy, the total volume and the total number of molecules in
the vessel have certain values at certain time t. Such conditions are compatible
with a huge number of mechanical states of the gas molecules at t. The number
of possibilities equals the number of possible states. If any such state really occur
at t then there can be a cause of it in the past to t that has nothing to do with
the conditions. These conditions could in principle be narrowed so that just one
arbitrary ﬁxed mechanical state would be allowed at the time t. Then, there would
be only one possibility.

The last two examples are showing that our deﬁnition of liberty is more general
than just the absence of causes. If something that happens does not have a cause
it is usually called chance. Thus, our liberty can but need not have anything to do
with chance.

10If each possibility has its own probability, then the Shanon formula for entropy could be used.

16

4 How living organisms

take advantage of liberties

The limited knowledge of the author in the ﬁelds of biology, ethology and brain
research may make the following deliberations somewhat uncertain. He apologizes
for irritating inaccuracies that a specialist surely would ﬁnd if any happened to read
this section. Still, it seems that the main idea ought not to be completely wrong in
particular also because it is little more than a reformulation of Darwinism built on
the notion of liberty. We shall see how the notion of liberty can throw some fresh
light on a number of facts of life.

4.1 Liberty of mutation

Let us start by a short story how a species of bacteria called staphyloccocus aureus
develops a resistance to a new antibiotic. The antibiotic reacts with some molecule
of the bacterium cell in such a way that some metabolic or cell-division process is
disturbed. Thus, this molecule ought to be changed so that it does not react lethally
with the antibiotic any more. Of course, the structure of the cell must be suﬃciently
ﬂexible so that all life processes can also run with the new molecule. Changes that
satisfy the second condition are called mutations. All allowed mutations can be
considered as the possibilities of a liberty. We call it the liberty of mutation. All
conditions of this liberty is just the ability to live of the mutated staphiloccocus cell.
The resistance can develop only if the liberty of mutation is suﬃciently large.

How do mutations come about in the ﬁrst place? It seems that this is more or less
random process that works all the time and that has no plan or aim. Bombardment
by some radiation such as cosmic rays, disturbance by some contingent chemistry
and physics, or even some contact with other bacteria and viruses can be eﬀective.
Mutations occur with single molecules and it seems that quantum mechanics is
important for them.
It is true
that the mutation that would protect the bacterium from the antibiotic has non-
zero but very low probability that it really occurs. However, there is a very large
number of staphyloccocus around. This number multiplies the probability, making
the mutation feasible.

In any case, there is enough space for chance.

The cell with the mutation must be there before the antibiotic is applied. The
antibiotic then kills all cells except for those that exhibit the advantageous mutation.
We can say that the antibiotic makes a selection, a choice among the possibilities of
the liberty.

Finally, the trick must be remembered in some way so that it can be applied
against each future antibiotic attack. The mechanism working in bacteria is the

17

following. Every cell has a genetic blueprint, written down in a particular molecule
of deoxyribonucleinacid (DNA). The mutation must ﬁrst appear in the molecule of
DNA in one cell, and only then, as the result of the cell division, it is referred to
the molecule that reacts with the antibiotic in another cell. That is because the
new blueprint is used for the construction of new cells in the process of cell division.
Each of them also inherits a copy of the blueprint.
In this way, the mutation is
completed, remembered and proliferated.

DNA is a chain of four kinds of building blocks, the nucleotides. The ability of
DNA to carry information is based on the indistinguishability of diﬀerent nucleotides
of the same kind and so on quantum mechanics. The most important property is
that the sequence of nucleotides can be arbitrary. Each sequence, of any length and
order, can be joint into a stable molecule of DNA. This is a kind of chemical liberty
with the possibilities being the diﬀerent sequences, and it is restricted only by the
problem of keeping very long chains undisturbed and accessible.

We can identify three essential processes in how living organisms utilize liberties.
First, there must be a real liberty in our sense, that is, its conditions are fulﬁlled
suﬃciently often and all its possibilities can really occur that is, they can be realized;
we call this process realization. The possibilities are realized in processes including
pure chance, contingency as well as causal laws. The liberty must be suﬃciently
large to contain some advantageous possibilities. Second, the choice between the
possibilities must be done so that the advantageous one prevails; we call this process
selection. Third, the advantageous possibility must be remembered for future use;
we call this process memory. Realization, selection and memory are very general
processes that always constitute the strategy of living organisms with respect to
liberties.

It seems that the existence of liberties is necessary for the adaptation of living
organisms to their environment and its changes. In this sense, it is necessary for
Darwinian type of evolution. Some deﬁnitions of life are based on the evolution as
the essential feature. Then one could say that liberties are necessary for life. In any
case, suﬃciently large liberties seem to be advantageous for living organisms. The
three-billions-of-years evolution of bacteria might even go in two opposite directions:
not only in increasing the number of very narrow specializations (of which there is
a large evidence) but also in improving ﬂexibility, that is in enhancing the liberty
of mutation (which seems to be a natural hypothesis). The two tendencies need not
exclude each other if e.g. each of them concerns a diﬀerent part of DNA.

An example of how the realizability concerning the mutation liberty can be im-
proved in complexer organisms than bacteria is the phenomenon of sex. Of course,
the claim that sex would enhance human liberty may seem preposterous! However,
we have in mind the liberty of mutation rather than the freedom of will.

18

Let us give a simpliﬁed introduction to sex phenomenon that will be suﬃcient
for understanding which liberty is improved by sex and how it works. We will draw
upon [8] to a large extent. First, within the whole genetic material of an organism,
its DNA, shorter pieces called genes can be found each of which code for some
property, such as the color of eyes, say. Within all individuals of a ﬁxed species,
more genes with the same function but diﬀerent results can be found. In this way,
more genes, like the brown eye and the blue eye gene, are rivals for the same slot
on the DNA; such rivals are called alleles. The origin of the alleles lies in a step
by step mutations occurring in diﬀerent evolution sequences of many generations of
individuals. There is a sense in which the genes of the population including all alleles
resulting in this way can be regarded as a gene pool. The population is constituted
by all contemporary individuals of a species. In this sense, the pool is a propriety
of a species at a given time.

Now, there are many ways in which a possible gene combinations forming a whole
DNA molecule that would encode for a viable individual could in principle be chosen
from the pool. All these combination possibilities form a part of what we have called
the liberty of mutation. But could such combinations come about in a reasonable
time? It turns out that the phenomenon of sex does just that.

Each cells of an individual contains the blueprint for the whole body, not only for
the cell itself. In the species that can reproduce sexually, most cells of an individual
contain exactly two copies of it, one from the father and one from the mother of
the individual. Only the sexual cells of the individual, eggs or sperms, contain just
one copy. During the manufacture of these cells, some bits of each parental DNA
physically detach themselves and change places with exactly corresponding bits of
maternal DNA. The process of swapping bits of DNA is called crossing-over.
It
seems that the choice of the points on the DNA where the pieces have their ends is
utterly random. It is, moreover, diﬀerent in each sexual cell of the same individual.
The density of the points at which the DNA is broken by crossing-over is suﬃciently
large for something to happen at all and suﬃciently small so that there is a large
probability for clusters of several genes to stay together and to be copied truly.

Because of sex and crossing-over the gene pool is kept well stirred, and the genes
partially shuﬄed. Thus, the realization of very diﬀerent possibilities of mutation
liberty is accelerated so that the incidence of bold changes is strongly enhanced. In
the whole process starting from the choice of sexual partner through the crossing-
over in each sexual cell to the combination of a sperm with an egg, something is
subject to causal laws but a lot is purely accidental. This is often so with the
realizability.

The selection mechanism works only on the level of individuals. It is driven by
the success or failure of whole individuals. This means that the selection does not

19

act on the genes directly. As far as a gene is concerned, its alleles are its deadly
rivals, but other genes are just a part of its environment. The eﬀect of the gene
depends on its environment. Sometimes a gene has one eﬀect in the presence of a
particular other gene, and a completely diﬀerent eﬀect in the presence of another
set of companion genes.

The memory that would be necessary to remember the best combinations of alleles
is worsened by the sex. The necessary random break up of the whole combination
comes about independently of how advantageous the DNA of the mother or of the
father has been. Only those pieces of DNA can be copied truly that are short enough
so that their break up during crossing-overs has a very low probability. These can
be clusters of just a relatively small number of genes. That is why single genes or
relatively small clusters of genes are units of heredity in the sexually reproducing
organisms rather than the whole DNA as in bacteria.

Hence, the long-term consequence of non-random individual death and reproduc-
tive success are manifested in the form of changing gene frequencies in the gene
pool. Evolution is the process by which some genes become more numerous and the
others less numerous. On one hand, sex greatly improves the realizations, on the
other, it subtly impairs the memory. Sex is a delicate phenomenon!

4.2 The liberty of motion

Some multicellular organisms such as animals possess an additional liberty that we
shall call liberty of motion. This means that parts of animal body, e.g., trunks, legs
or wings, can take diﬀerent relative positions to each other without inhibiting other
functions of the body. The change of this relative position, if there are no external
hindrances, can be carried out with various velocities and the external bodies can be
shifted thereby with various forces. This deﬁnes a list of possibilities—the liberty—
that can in principle be realized by each individual body. Plants can also perform
limited motions and have some choice, for instance between diﬀerent possibilities of
growing, but these are not included in our deﬁnition.

It seems that animal motions are always organized with the help of some nervous
system. ”Useful” sequences of motions such as running or ﬂying are carried out by
specialized sets of nerves connected in a particular way. Moreover, some inﬂuence
of sense data on motions are made possible by the corresponding connections of
nerves. These nervous structures and their way of functioning is to a great part
inherited, it is saved in the DNA and the liberty in the choice of certain sequence
of motions can in these cases be reduced to the liberty of mutation. Thus, there are
three structures associated with the liberty of motion: the locomotory system, the
nervous system and the DNA.

The hereditary part of the liberty of motion has of course little to do with the

20

liberty of individual organism as it may be understood by philosophers. An example
thereof is the experiment with the insect species sphex ichneumoneus [9], P. 82:

When the time comes for egg laying, the wasp Sphex builds a burrow
for the purpose and seeks out a cricket which she stings in such a way
as to paralyze but not kill it. She drags the cricket into the burrow, lays
her eggs alongside, closes the burrow, then ﬂies away, never to return.
In due course, the eggs hatch and the wasp grubs feed of the paralyzed
cricket, which has not decayed, having been kept in the wasp equiva-
lent of deep freeze. To the human mind, such an elaborately organized
and seemingly purposeful routine conways a convincing ﬂavor of logic
and thoughtfulness—until more details are examined. For example, the
wasp’s routine is to bring the paralyzed cricket to the burrow, leave it
on the threshold, go inside to see that all is well, emerge, and then drag
the cricket in. If the cricket is moved a few inches away while the wasp
is inside making her preliminary inspection, the wasp, on emerging from
the burrow, will bring the cricket back to the threshold, but not inside,
and will then repeat the preparatory procedure of entering the burrow
to see that everything is all right. If again the cricket is removed a few
inches while the wasp is inside, once again she will move the cricket up to
the threshold and re-enter the burrow for a ﬁnal check. The wasp never
thinks of pulling the cricket straight in. On one occasion this procedure
was repeated forty times, always with the same result.

This account also shows that the motion sequence is ﬁxed by heredity only in rough
features. The details can still be adapted to the sensory data in each speciﬁc situa-
tion. Hence, even such an easily cheated nervous system does not look very simple.

4.3 Liberty of portable neural representatives

Let us turn attention to the new element that has appeared together with the
locomotive system, to the nervous system. Its role, to marshal complicated sequences
of motions into useful and energy-saving chains and to select chains that are suitable
to match the received sense data in each situation, can only be successfully performed
if the system is able to provide the relatively large amount of memory directly and
independently of the DNA, even if the whole structure representing the stuﬀ to
remember would be built up according to the DNA blueprint. The nervous system
must be suﬃciently ﬂexible to allow for neural representatives of diﬀerent sequences
of motions and for suitable connections that select sequences of motion for given
sensory data. Thus, some features necessary for utilizing liberties (memory and
selection) slumber within each nervous system.

21

From here, a step (an evolution one?)

is conceivable to a direct mechanism
within nervous system for saving also the information that occurs during the life of
individual organisms. Then, only some suitable basics had to be contained in the
DNA including the blueprint for the nervous structure that enables such learning.
In this manner, many things could be found after birth and they can be useful if the
gained ”knowledge” could help to select the best chains of motions in some situation.
Clearly, thus equipped organisms would be better adapted to the conditions of their
possible diﬀerent speciﬁc environments. In fact, the existence and activities of such
improved nervous system even in insects has been strongly suggested by famous
Gould’s experiments with honeybees. The following description is borrowed from
[10].

The bees seem to remember some aspects of the environment of their hive and
are also able to describe routes within this environment to each other by a kind of
body language, the so-called dance.

...ﬁnding food depends less on luck and more on sampling from rela-
tively well known foraging sites, areas where food availability depends
on seasonal variation in polen. When a honeybee forager returns and
dances, other hive mates pay attention. Depending on information in
the dance and the current needs of the hive with respect to ﬁnding food
as opposed to storing it, the observers will either stay put or go out on
their own foraging expedition. The observer must therefore process the
information in the dance and then place it within a system of spatial
representation...

...Gould observed a hive that has been maintained near a lake for a long
period of time. This provided some insurance that the honeybees were
familiar with the local environment. Each day, one group of foragers
was trained to move from a release spot away from the hive to a boat
on land, stashed with nectar; once they loaded up on a meal, they were
captured and prevented from returning to the hive. Over the course of
several days, the boat was displaced further and further from the release
site until one day it was square in the middle of the lake. At this point,
the foragers were allowed to collect nectar from the boat and then return
home. When the foragers arrived at the hive, they danced, indicating the
location of the nectar-ladden boat. Although the hive paid attention to
the dance, virtually no one ﬂew out of the hive. Gould suggests that the
honeybees responded to the forager’s dance by referencing their cognitive
map. As for this colony, the map fails to reveal a ”Food Here” sign in
the middle of the lake. Sceptical of the dancer’s message, hive members
wait for a more reliable dancer. (PP. 77-78.)

22

The information about the environment is represented and stored in the honeybee
nervous system forming thus a real entity diﬀerent from the environment itself.
It has to be created during the life of individual honeybees rather than built in
from the inherited DNA. Moreover, this representative is apparently used in the
process of selecting the motion sequences before any actual motions are done. The
representatives of sensory data, of motion sequences and of environments concerning
Gould’s honeybees are examples of what we shall call portable neural representative,
(PNR). It is a neural representative formed during the life of an individual and
the nervous system is able to work directly with these representatives; the word
”portable” is to distinguish it from the ﬁxed neural representatives of, say, sequences
of motions that have been inherited.

In Gould’s experiment, some neural representative of the food source and the way
to it forms in the forager honeybee nervous system from the sensory data and its
own motions during the ﬂight. The dance reexpresses it as a sequence of motions
that can be ”understood” by the hive mates. That is, observing the dance they
can build a PNR of the food way in their nervous systems. These nervous systems
are then clearly able to compare the message PNR with the memory containing the
PNR of the environment in order to see whether one is to stay put or to go out.

What is the relevant liberty? The ability of nervous systems to form in principle
more or less arbitrary analogies of PNR without disturbing the function of the system
is similar to the liberties of mutation or motion and we call it liberty of portable
neural representatives. Roughly speaking, it is the ﬂexibility of nervous systems.
However, some more speciﬁc account of this liberty similar to the previous two is
diﬃcult because very little is known about the actual structure of PNR in nervous
systems. Neural network models of nervous systems might probably be used to get
some insight. In any case, this part of Sec. 4 is more hypothetical than the previous
one.

This experiment shows how the memory enters the process at many points, we
can also ﬁnd a well-deﬁned selection, but we have only a nebulous idea of what drives
the realization of the two speciﬁc possibilities from which the selection is done.

After the choice of a PNR for going out or staying put, the nervous system brings
about an actual sequence of motions compatible with it. Thus, the liberty of PNR is
associated with the liberty of motion in a similar way as the liberty of mutation is,
but it is a distinctly diﬀerent kind of liberty. By it, the choice procedure is shortened
from the time interval necessary for several generations to a time interval shorter
than one individual life. In such a way, the nervous system that might originally
just serve to organize motions into suitable sequences becomes the most powerful
instrument for utilizing liberties by living organisms.

23

4.4 The freedom of will

The freedom of will is usually understood as the freedom to select in mind consciously
an idea of an action and then to carry out the action. The action can be a sequence
of motions, but it also can be another mental action. The consciousness component
distinguishes this freedom from the others. We assume that every idea has a portable
neural representative that is conscious and leave open the question whether the PNR
and the idea are one and the same things in some strict sense. Then we can eﬀectively
restrict ourselves to PNR and the liberty underlying the freedom of will is again the
liberty of PNR .

What is exactly the consciousness, in particular, how it is represented by any
nervous processes in the brain, seem to be not known. However, some phenomeno-
logical understanding is possible and it will be suﬃcient for our purposes. Of course,
recent ﬁndings support strongly the idea that unconscious processes are very impor-
tant and ubiquitous in all cerebral activities. Accordingly, the role of the freedom
of will must be smaller that some people would like to think. But we are going to
argue that a kind of this freedom does exist.

To start, it may be interesting to observe that consciousness has a strong memory
component. Not only is one aware of something (that is, conscious of it), but one
must also be aware of what one was aware in the past, so that the well known roughly
continuous, time ordered, stream of consciousness results. This so called declarative
memory can later be used by consciousness as a source of ideas. However, the
process of getting directly aware of something is independent from the process of
storing ideas in the memory.

The crucial hypothesis of this subsection says that the consciousness is a tool
that enables one to better use one’s liberty of PNR because it is essentially an
instrument for complicated symbol manipulations or scenario runnings as well as for
the utilization of the calculation results for the choice of actions. The unconscious
brain is usually not able to do such calculations alone because it has originally had a
diﬀerent purpose and this may partially explain that all conscious thinking is rather
awkward, energetically expensive and relatively slow. The consciousness may be
slow for other reasons, too [11].

It is interesting that digital computers are also tools to make complicated cal-
culations. Thus, the consciousness can be understood as a method by which we
can make our brain emulate a digital computer. This aspect of consciousness is
a relatively simple one, and I admit that the question remains open, whether the
phenomenological concept of consciousness is, at least in main features, exhausted
by it or is not. In any case, it has some bearing on the freedom of will.

This is not to say that brain solves complicated mathematical problems in the
same way as a computer would do. Actually, we do not maintain that unconscious

24

processes are excluded from the whole solution process. Just the opposite is well
known to be true. However, conscious processes are necessary at some stages simi-
larly as computers are useful at some points of a modern research project.

4.4.1 The experiments by Libet

Our hypothesis has several agreeable properties. One of them is that it gives a nice
and unexpected interpretation to the celebrated experiments by Benjamin Libet
[11]. Libet’s experiments are ingenious and very enlightening for everybody studying
consciousness, but we do not accept all Libet’s interpretations. A short account of
relevant material that will be suﬃcient for our purposes can be found in the Foreword
to [11]:

Libet’s work has focused on temporal relations between neural events
and experience. He is famous in part for discovering that we uncon-
sciously decide to act well before we thing we’ve made the decision to
act. ... Libet asked people to move their wrist at a time of their choos-
ing. The participants were asked to look at moving dot that indicated
the time, and note the precise time when they decided to ﬂex their wrist.
The participants reported having the intention about 200 milliseconds
before they actually began to move. Libet also measured the ”readiness
potential” in the brain, which is revealed by activity recorded from the
supplementary motor area of the brain (which is involved in controlling
movements). This readiness potential occurred some 550 milliseconds
before the action began. The brain events that produced the movement
thus occurred about 350 milliseconds before the participant was aware of
having made the decision. Libet shows that this disparity is not simply
due to extra time required to note and report the time.

Let us compare the experiment by Gould with that by Libet. In both cases, it
is the nervous system that selects some PNR and starts the action. In both, the
liberty of PNR and of motion is utilized. In any case, from the behavioristic point
of view, the two freedoms do not seem to diﬀer much.

From the evolutionary (that is, natural selection) point of view, the conscious
component in selecting PNR would have both advantages and disadvantages. On one
hand, it enables complicated deliberations and calculations ﬁnding and comparing
diﬀerent possibilities for a way in which an action is to be carried out, on the other, it
consumes a lot of energy and time. Now, if we look at the action asked for in Libet’s
experiment, it itself does not require any calculations, it is a simple choice of time
instant. Still, consciousness has been used by the participants before the experiment
in order to understand the task, to reduce it to the simple choice of time instant

25

and to prepare it thus for the performance. Then, when the experiment is running,
it seems natural that the unconscious brain does not switch in the consciousness
because no complicated scenarios are to be elaborated. It is satisﬁed, after it has
done the work itself, with merely dropping a notice to the consciousness to enable
a possible veto, and to the consciousness journal (declarative memory) to save this
information for possible later use.

Our conclusion from Libet’s experiments is therefore diﬀerent from that of rel-
atively many philosophers or natural scientist. They seem to ﬁnd there a strong
suggestion, or even a proof, that there is no freedom whatsoever and that one’s
impression of having some is just an illusion. We want to maintain that there is a
lot of freedom, even, say, for the honeybees and that human freedom is even larger
because people can ﬁnd more possibilities for PNR with the help of conscious cal-
culations. In our language, the realizability is enhanced. In eﬀect, we insist that
freedom is not an illusion, but we give the consciousness a smaller role in it.

4.4.2 An example: playing chess

Playing chess is an activity that clearly shows the value of conscious calculations.
There is a well deﬁned liberty: all moves that are allowed by the rules of the game
in a given position. Moves are understood as ideas, not actual motions of the stones
(a move is a whole class of such motions), and we again assume that each move
corresponds to some conscious PNR.

As a beginner, one is happy to do the ﬁrst move which pops into one’s conscious-
ness in each position and looks promising, but that leads mostly to a disaster. What
is to do is to consciously calculate developments to which such an idea would lead
without carrying out the moves on the chessboard; a number of such developments
quickly grows if the analysis is extended to the depth of three or more moves and the
situation becomes rather messy. Thus, it is no miracle that many digital computers
play chess better that most people.

The selection between possible moves is done according to the purpose that one
is following. Even if one just wants to win, one’s choices might be diﬀerent in
the same positions because of changing skills or because one adapts the choice to
one’s knowledge of one’s opponent. It is also conceivable that one does not need
to win. For example, one would like to teach one’s child to play the game, etc. In
any case, there is a reason for one’s choice and we can say that each move that
is actually performed by a given player has a cause within the player, at least in
regular circumstances.

This idea is rather similar to the philosophy of compatibilism, which attempted
to make freedom of will compatible with determinism (see, e.g., [9]). Although we
have rejected determinism, this particular idea of compatibilism is fully taken over

26

here. Hence, the essence of our freedom is not in the randomness of our moves. Of
course, we can decide to make our moves with the help of dices, but this possibility
does not exhaust the concept of our freedom. We agree with the compatibilists that
the player is the cause of the player’s moves but we do not follow them further in
excluding that the corresponding causal chain could start within the player.

It is when we are getting at a suﬃciently large pool of trial move ideas from
which the actual move is to be selected where the randomness often plays a role.
The problem is that the computer of our consciousness is not able to do a systematic
analysis even in chess. (Today’s digital computer cannot calculate the game all the
way to the end, either.) We are therefore looking for some move idea that is based
on the properties of the position over which we are sitting. Diﬀerent ideas occur
to us in a way that is not completely systematic. Trying to calculate through each
of them, we learn more about the position so that after rejecting one idea, we are
likely to get another, etc.; it is the method of trial and error (cf. [6]). Our conscious
mind’s work need not obey any algorithm and systematic calculations are mixed
with coincidence as well as with some input of the unconscious brain. It seems that
the way we arrive at the choice of the move does not form a strictly causal chain11.
In spite of the unconscious component of getting trial ideas, the deﬁnitive move
selection is always conscious and it is indeed the cause of the move that is actually
carried out.

The ﬁnal point is that after calculating through the scenarios and choosing among
them consciously, the act of actually moving the stone may contain unconscious
elements. The choice exactly when, how rapidly and along which trajectory the move
is to be done can be, and mostly is, done without any consciousness. However, this is
another liberty. The liberty of the choice between possible chess move ideas is used
with the help of the conscious calculator. The choice between possible stone moves
compatible with a given chess move idea is a diﬀerent one, which is not relevant
to our problem. The question if the conscious mind directly moves the body hand
seems to be less important than whether the body hand moves in accordance with
the mind plan or not.

The game of chess is, of course, a strongly simpliﬁed model of life. It provides,
however, all the relevant features of conscious decisions and gives thus an example
that ﬁts the above deﬁnition of the free will.

To summarize, freedom is not an illusion but it is a more complicated phenomenon
than is usually assumed. The whole concept of freedom of living organisms has been
separated into several diﬀerent notions. First, a kind of relevant liberty has been
11There is some analogy here to the way the mutation liberty is used by bacteria: the trial ideas
are similar to mutations that come about in a partially random way and the selection in both cases
is causal.

27

deﬁned, e.g. the liberty of motion. This is a relatively simple concept that can be
described in precise terms and that can be understood easily. Second, there are ways
and methods of how organisms make use of the liberty. For this an involved, many
levels (DNA, nervous and locomotive systems) structure evolved which supports
both random processes (in realizations) and causal laws (in selections) and contains
a relatively large memory. Apparently, such a large apparatus is handy because
living with freedom is not comfortable.

References

[1] I. Newton, Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica, Lib. III, Scholium

generale, Le Senret et Jacquier, Genovae 1742. P. 672.

[2] A. Peres, Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods, Kluver, Dordrecht 1995.

[3] D.H.Mellor, Real Time II, Routledge, London, 1998.

[4] G. F. R. Ellis, Physics in the Real Universe: Time and Spacetime,

gr-qc/0605049.

[5] B. Russell, The Problems of Philosophy, Oxford University Press, Oxford 1959.

[6] K. R. Popper, Objektive Erkenntnis, translated and improved version of Ob-
jective Knowledge, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1972, Chapt. 6, Ueber Uhren und
Wolken, Ex Libris, Zurich, 1985; the English original is the second Arthur Holly
Compton Memorial Lecture, On Clouds and Clocks, St. Louis, Miss., Washing-
ton University 1966; Ausgangspunkte. Meine intellektuelle Entwicklung, Chapt.
28, Begegnung mit Albert Einstein, Hoﬀmann und Kampe, 1979; translated
and improved version of Unended Quest. An Intellectual Biography,.Fontana
and Collins, London, 1974.

[7] J. Hawkins and S. Blakeslee, On Intelligence, Times Books, New York, 2004.

[8] R. Dawkins, The selﬁsh Gene, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1989.

[9] D. Dennet, Elbow Room, The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting, The MIT

Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts 1984.

[10] M. D. Hauser, Wild Minds. What Animal Really Think, Henry Holt and Co.,

New York 2000.

[11] B. Libet, Mind Time. The Temporal Factor of Consciousness, Harvard Univer-

sity Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts 2004.

28

