L. Peliti

E-mail: peliti@na.infn.it

gas mixture

Dipartimento di Scienze Fisiche, INFN–Sezione di Napoli, CNISM–Unit`a di Napoli
Universit`a “Federico II”, Complesso Monte S. Angelo, 80126–Napoli (Italy)

Abstract. A reﬁnement of an argument due to Maxwell for the equipartition of
kinetic energy in a mixture of ideal gases with diﬀerent masses is proposed. The
argument is elementary, yet it may work as an illustration of the role of symmetry and
independence postulates in kinetic theory.

6 On the equipartition of kinetic energy in an ideal
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
8
1
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Submitted to: Eur. J. Phys.

PACS numbers: 05.20.Dd

Equipartition in gas mixtures

1. Introduction

2

The intuitive appeal of the classical kinetic theory of gases in the teaching of the basics of
statistical mechanics is undeniable. However, one often ﬁnds that it is hard to continue
along the kinetic trail without becoming entangled either in too diﬃcult mathematics, or
in too subtle arguments, which make the subject less glamorous than it should. I found
the sections of the Feynman lectures dedicated to the kinetic theory [1, secs. 39, 40]
remarkable in balance and scope, in the attempt to derive the essentials of the Gibbs
approach to statistical mechanics by kinetic considerations which are usually associated
with Boltzmann. One of the original points of Feynman’s approach is the fact that
equipartition is taken as a starting point to derive Maxwell’s velocity distribution and
the Boltzmann factor, rather than as a consequence. Equipartition could be inferred
by putting together the expression of the gas pressure as a function of the mean kinetic
energy—obtained by the classic Bernouilli [2, sec. X] reasoning—and the ideal gas law.
However a derivation of equipartition requires something more.
In particular it is
necessary to show that if a mixture of gases of diﬀerent masses is held in the same vessel,
the mean kinetic energy per particle for each kind of gas is the same at equilibrium.
The argument given by Feynman is not totally convincing, as he himself remarks:

This argument, which was the one used by Maxwell, involves some subtleties.
Although the conclusions are correct, the result does not purely from the
considerations of symmetry that we used before, since, by going to a reference
frame moving through the gas, we may ﬁnd a distorted velocity distribution.
We have not found a simple proof of this result.

It is my aim in the present note to provide such a simple proof—at the level of rigor
of the remainder of Feynman’s discussion. My argument is basically a reﬁnement of
the admittedly weak one put forward by Maxwell in his 1860 memoir [3], rather than
the more sophisticated one introduced in the 1867 memoir On the Dynamical Theory
of Gases [4]. Both papers are accessible in S. G. Brush’s collection Kinetic Theory [5,
vol. 1, n. 10; vol. 2, n. 1].

2. Maxwell’s argument of 1867

In his 1867 paper, Maxwell considers the velocity distribution for particles of the two
kinds at equilibrium. Let us denote by v1 the velocity of a particle of the ﬁrst kind and
by v2 that of one of the second kind. After the collisions, let us denote the respective
velocities by w1,2. Then, at equilibrium, the number of collisions going from (v1, v2) to
(w1, w2) should be balanced by those going from (w1, w2) to (v1, v2). Maxwell argues
in the following way that the balance should be detailed, velocity pair by velocity pair
(I slightly changed the notations):

Suppose that the number of molecules having velocity v′ increases at the
expenses of v. Then since the total number of molecules corresponding to v′

Equipartition in gas mixtures

3

remains constant, w must communicate as many to v′′, and so on till they
return to v.

Hence if v, v′, v′′ be a series of velocities, there will be a tendency of each
molecule to assume the velocities v, v′, v′′, etc. in order, returning to v. Now
it is impossible to assign a reason why the successive velocities of a molecule
should be arranged in this cycle, rather than in the reverse order. If, therefore,
the direct exchange between v and v′ is not equal, the equality cannot be
preserved by exchange in a cycle.

If the velocities of particles of the two kinds are independent, and if we denote by f1,2(v)
the respective velocity distributions, we have at equilibrium
f1(v1)f2(v2) = f1(w1)f2(w2).

(1)
But the only connection between the pairs (v1, v2) and (w1, w2) is that the total kinetic
energy is conserved. Thus both sides of eq. (1) can only depend on the total kinetic
energy. This implies that fi(v) (i = 1, 2) can only depend on the kinetic energy of each
particle, and moreover that it must be of the form

fi(v) ∝ e− β

2 miv2

,

where mi is the mass of particles of kind i, and β is a positive constant. Equipartition
follows immediately.

This is an argument of great elegance, but it is probably a bit too abstract for an
introductory lecture. In particular, it focuses on a necessary condition for equilibrium,
while it could be more appealing to consider at least hypothetically the approach to
equilibrium. Such an argument was ﬁrst considered by Maxwell in his 1860 memoir.

3. Maxwell’s argument of 1860

In his 1860 paper, Maxwell considers the eﬀect of one collision between one particle
of kind 1 and one of kind 2, animated by velocities equal, in modulus, to the mean
velocity of each kind, and whose directions are perpendicular to each other. Indicating
by vi (i = 1, 2) the modulus of the velocity of the particle of kind i, let us denote by
wi (i = 1, 2) the corresponding moduli after impact. Then, by solving the problem of
impact between hard spheres in this geometry, Maxwell shows that

m1w2

1 − m2w2

2 =

2

m1 − m2
m1 + m2 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:16)

m1v2

1 − m2v2
2

.

(cid:17)

Thus the diﬀerence between the kinetic energies of the two kinds of particles is reduced
by such an impact, by a ratio that depends only on the masses of the two particles.
Maxwell then argues that it should vanish at equilibrium.
S. G. Brush [6, § 10.4] makes the following comment:

It seems amazing to me that Maxwell should have thought he was proving a
tendency toward equalization of kinetic energies by this argument, or that any
of his contemporaries who bothered to examine the argument in detail should

(2)

(3)

Equipartition in gas mixtures

4

have accepted it. All Maxwell has done is to pick out one very special kind
of collision for which the kinetic energies become more nearly equal and then
claim that the same result will follow for all collisions.

It seems clear to me that one cannot hope to derive the tendency toward
equipartition without some additional statistical assumptions: after all, microscopic
reversibility stands in the way. But it is possible to reﬁne this argument in order to
show that if the velocity distribution of the particles is such that the center-of-mass
motion is correlated with the relative motion of colliding particles, this correlation is
reduced for the outgoing particles after the collision. Then, if the velocities of the
colliding particles are independent (the molecular chaos hypothesis) this result implies
that the diﬀerence between the kinetic energies of the particles of the two kinds are
indeed reduced by collisions. This is explained in the next section.

4. Equipartition in a gas mixture

Let us consider a mixture of two gases, kind 1 with mass m1 and kind 2 with mass
m2. We assume that the range of interactions among the particles is ﬁnite, and much
smaller than the interparticle distance, so that it is safe to assume that the particles
do not interact among themselves except for the very short time in which they collide.
The collisions are elastic, and conserve the momentum. Let us now consider a collision
between a particle of kind 1, animated by velocity v1, and one of kind 2, animated by
velocity v2. Let us denote by w1 and w2 the respective velocities after the collision.

The laws of conservation of momentum and energy stipulate

= m1w1 + m2w2;

m1v1 + m2v2
1
2

m1v2

1 +

1
2

m2v2

1
2
As a consequence of these relations, the absolute value of the relative velocity remains
the same before and after the collision. Setting V = v2 − v1 and W = w2 − w1, we
have

m2w2
2.

m1w2

2 =

1 +

(5)

1
2

(4)

(6)

|W | = |V |.

Thus the eﬀect of collisions, as seen in the center-of-mass frame, amounts to a change
in the direction of the relative velocity. It is natural to assume that the great number of
collisions that take part in the medium make the distribution of V isotropic, i.e., that
the probability that the direction of V belongs to a solid angle dΩ depends only on the
size of the solid angle.

We now show that collisions can only reduce the correlation between vcm and V .
Let us assume that, at a given time, there is a certain joint distribution f (vcm, V, θ)
of the center-of-mass velocity vcm, the modulus V of the relative velocity and of the
angle θ between V and vcm for molecule pairs that are about to collide. Thus one has

hvcm · V i =

dvcm

Z

dV

Z

Z

sin θ dθ dφ f (vcm, V, θ) vcmV cos θ.

Equipartition in gas mixtures

5

Note that the assumed isotropy of V does not imply that hcos θi = 0, because vcm
determines a special direction. On the other hand, it does imply that the distribution
is invariant with respect to rotations around vcm, i.e., that the distribution does not
depend on φ.

Note that each collision leaves vcm and V unchanged, and thus its eﬀect can be
summarized by giving the direction (θ1, φ1), in polar coordinates, of the relative velocity
W of the outgoing particles with respect to the relative velocity V of the ingoing ones.
Invariance with respect to rotations around V intimates that the probability distribution
density PV (θ1, φ1) of (θ1, φ1) does not depend on φ1. On the other hand, PV (θ1, φ1) is
determined only by the laws of the collision, and should satisfy galelean invariance: thus
it cannot depend on vcm. We can now evaluate the average of (vcm · V ) by integrating
over the relative direction (θ1, φ1) of W with respect to V , then on the relative direction
of V with respect to vcm, and ﬁnally over V and vcm. Denoting by Θ the angle between
vcm and W , we have

cos Θ = cos θ cos θ1 − sin θ sin θ1 cos φ1.

(7)

This result can be obtained by considering ﬁgure 1. The simplest way is to write down
the vector W as a function of (θ1, φ1), by setting the z-axis in the direction of V , and
then applying a rotation by an angle θ around the y-axis to the result. When we average

z

θ

θ1

V

Θ

W

x

α

φ1

y

Figure 1. Particle scattering. The z-axis lies along vcm and the xz-plane is deﬁned
by vcm and V . We deﬁne θ as the angle between vcm and V . Then V and W
deﬁne the plane α, which forms the angle φ1 with the xz-plane. Then, θ1 is the angle
between W and V . Thus the cosine of the angle Θ between W and vcm is given by
cos θ cos θ1 − sin θ sin θ1 cos φ1.

upon φ1, the second term vanishes. Thus, when vcm and V are ﬁxed, we have

hcos Θi = hcos θ cos θ1i = hcos θihcos θ1i,

6

(8)

(9)

(10)

Equipartition in gas mixtures

and thus

|hcos Θi| ≤ |hcos θi| .

This holds true also when we average over vcm and V . Thus

|hvcm · W i| ≤ |hvcm · V i| .

Since collisions reduce correlations, we may conclude that correlations should vanish

at equilibrium:

hvcm · V ieq = 0.

From now on, we can follow Feynman’s argument. Since
m1v1 + m2v2
m1 + m2

vcm =

,

we have

hvcm · V ieq =

hm2v2

2 − m1v2

1ieq + (m2 − m1)hv1 · v2ieq

m1 + m2

.

(11)

The right hand side is proportional to the diﬀerence in kinetic energies of the two kinds
of particles if we assume that the velocities of the colliding particles are independent,
so that hv1 · v2ieq vanishes. Now this is one form of the celebrated molecular chaos
hypothesis. If it holds at any given time, we have just shown that the diﬀerence between
the mean kinetic energies is reduced. If it holds at equilibrium, the only possibility is
that the diﬀerence vanishes:
1
2

(12)

m2

m1

1
2

v2
1

v2
2

=

.

D

Eeq

Eeq

D

It is satisfactory to see that the argument does not hold in one dimension: in this

case the only recoil possibility corresponds to W = −V , and thus |hcos θi| = 1.

5. Discussion

From a didactical point of view, I guess that the best course would be to ﬁrst
introduce Maxwell’s symmetry arguments leading to the velocity distribution, and then
to demostrate by the present argument or a similar one that the distribution is left
invariant by collisions, provided that some form of molecular chaos hypothesis is made.
It would be nice to point out that without such an hypothesis it will always be possible
to arrange the molecules in such a way as to increase the kinetic energy diﬀerence, e.g.,
by reversing the velocities of the particles outgoing a collision. This should clarify the
diﬀerent roles of mechanical laws and statistical assumptions in the derivation of the
basics of statistical mechanics.

Acknowledgments

I am grateful to F. Di Liberto and G. Gaeta for their interest in this work.

Equipartition in gas mixtures

References

7

[1] R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures in Physics, Vol. 1 (Reading:

Addison-Wesley, 1963).

[2] D. Bernouilli, Hydrodynamica (Argentorati, 1738).
[3] J. C. Maxwell, Phil. Mag. 19, 19–32; 20, 21–37 (1860).
[4] J. C. Maxwell, Phil. Trans. Royal Soc. London, 157, 49–88 (1867).
[5] S. G. Brush, Kinetic Theory (Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1966).
[6] S. G. Brush, The Kind of Motion We Call Heat (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1966).

