6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
9
2
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Arnold Tongue Mixed Reality States in an Interreality System

Vadas Gintautas∗ and Alfred W. H¨ubler†
Center for Complex Systems Research, Department of Physics,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

We present experimental data on the limiting behavior of an interreality system comprising a
virtual horizontally driven pendulum coupled to its real-world counterpart, where the interaction
time scale is much shorter than the time scale of the dynamical system. We present experimental
evidence that if the physical parameters of the virtual system match those of the real system within
a certain tolerance, there is a transition from an uncorrelated dual reality state to a mixed reality
state of the system in which the motion of the two pendula is highly correlated. The region in
parameter space for stable solutions has an Arnold tongue structure for both the experimental data
and for a numerical simulation. As virtual systems better approximate real ones, even weak coupling
in other interreality systems may produce sudden changes to mixed reality states.

Although increasingly sophisticated real-time com-
puter simulations of the real world are created every day,
to date there has been little to no research done on the
physics of the pairing of a virtual system and its real-
world counterpart, often referred to as an “interreality”
system [1]. Virtual systems are often created to model
real systems as accurately as possible, with great pains
taken to eke out additional realism. Aside from virtual
worlds designed for entertainment, examples of accurate
virtual models of the real world abound in high-energy
physics accelerator work [2]. Furthermore, a computer
simulation can feature unidirectional coupling to the real
world, as in the case of a simulation of a ﬁnancial sys-
tem being used to make automated transactions in a real
market [3]. Similarly in biology, the dynamic clamp is
a method to control the time-dependent conductance of
real neurons by coupling them to computer models of
neurons that display the desired conductance dynam-
ics [4]. Yet to the authors’ knowledge, the use of bidirec-
tional coupling in an interreality system to control a me-
chanical real world system has been largely overlooked.

As real-time virtual reality becomes more common-
place, understanding the physics of interreality systems
can facilitate control of the real world in new ways. In
the case of data-driven modeling, live measurement data
is incorporated into an executing application. This uni-
directional coupling to simulation has been used for such
applications as creating accurate, real-time models of
complex vortex ﬂow [5], muon cooling rings [6], and even
a human cancer cell [7]. Bidirectional coupling between
a real system and virtual system is the next step in using
simulations such as these to control the real world.

Parametric resonance has been long studied, as early
as the days of ´Emile Mathieu [8]. This has continued to
be an active area of research throughout the last century
and in present day [9]. An Arnold tongue is a character-
istic region of phase-locked synchronization in parameter

∗Electronic address: vgintau2@uiuc.edu
†Electronic address: a-hubler@uiuc.edu

space [10]. This particular type of synchronization has
been observed for various coupled systems such as self-
oscillating semiconductor lasers [11] and Josephson junc-
tion arrays [12]. A recent paper examines how Arnold
tongues in human cardiorespiratory systems can be ex-
ploited for more precise control under anesthesia [13]. If
similar phenomena are observed for similar systems of
paired real and virtual oscillators, this may lead to real-
time, sophisticated control of real-world systems.

In this Letter we present experimental evidence for a
transition from a dual reality state to a mixed reality
state in an interreality system. The experimental phase
diagram is in the form of an Arnold tongue. There is
good agreement between the experimental data and sim-
ulation.

As an example of a virtual system coupled to a real one,
we choose a horizontally driven physical pendulum as the
real system. The horizontally and vertically driven phys-
ical pendulum has been described in the literature [14].
The known equations of motion accurately model the dy-
namics of the system; to create a physically accurate vir-
tual pendulum we need only to make a real-time simula-
tion based on these equations. The experimental physical
pendulum is a lightweight, very thin wooden rod with a
length l = 15.37 cm, a diameter of 2.3 mm, and a mass of
0.4 g. The pendulum is connected directly to the roller
of a digital angular encoder. The data from the angu-
lar encoder is sent to a computer; this provides a simple
and robust measure of the instantaneous angular position
of the pendulum. Forcing for the physical pendulum is
provided by an ampliﬁer and a PASCO actuator (model
SF-9324) with a maximum displacement of 0.3 cm. The
pendulum is attached to a lever arm that allows it to be
driven with a greater amplitude xdrive, up to a maximum
of 5.75 cm. The computer controls the voltage to the ac-
tuator via an analog DAQ. Figs. 1(a) and 1(b) show the
experimental setup.

We calculate the equation of motion for a horizontally
driven physical pendulum in the usual way. See Phelps
and Hunter for a detailed derivation [14]. We deﬁne θ
as the angle through which the real pendulum oscillates
as measured from the vertical, and we deﬁne φ to be

2

the real pendulum. A voltage proportional to fr,n is sent
to the actuator driving the real pendulum. The distance
from the pivot point along the lever arm determines ar
[see Fig. 1(b)]. Since the measurement, integration, and
feedback are easily completed by the computer in a time
δtcomputer with δtcomputer < ∆t
1/ω0, the program
then waits to integrate again until the internal timer
reaches n∆t after the initial starting time for the ﬁrst
integration. Since it is impractical to attempt to release
the real pendulum from precisely the same starting po-
sition each time the program is run, instead the virtual
pendulum is started with zero initial velocity but with a
nonzero initial position. The real pendulum is started at
rest, with θn=0 = 0. Two typical sets of position versus
time data are plotted in Fig. 2.

≪

≡

FIG. 2: The top plot shows position versus time for the ex-
perimental data point ¯ω = 0.98, ¯a
√avar = 0.19 (Region
I, mixed reality state). This plot is an example of the system
exhibiting stable, phase-locked periodic motion. The bottom
plot has ¯ω = 0.72 and ¯a = 0.22 (Region II, dual reality state).
This is an example of the system ending in the stable equilib-
rium position φ = θ = 0. For both plots, the solid and dashed
lines correspond to θ (the position of the real pendulum) and
φ (the position of the virtual pendulum), respectively.

With ∆t = 35 ms, the bidirectional feedback is ef-
fectively instantaneous; the eﬀect is that of a real-time
virtual pendulum simulation that immediately responds
to any motion of the real pendulum and vice versa. This
works because ∆t is much shorter than the characteristic
time scales of the dynamical system. The natural fre-
quency of the real pendulum is approximately 1.57s−1.
With no feedback, the motion of either pendulum ceases
after less than 10 s due to friction in the real pendulum
and damping in the equation of motion of the virtual
pendulum. We allow the system to run for 45 s, long
enough for any transient dynamics to vanish, and then
we evaluate the ﬁnal dynamics of the system. We ﬁnd
that there are two equilibrium states of the system when
av and ar are restricted to a range appropriate to weak
coupling (av, ar < 0.4). We label these the “dual reality”
state and the “mixed reality” state. In the dual reality
state, the oscillations of both pendula are uncorrelated
and decrease in amplitude until both come to rest at the

FIG. 1: Experimental apparatus. Fig. 1(a) shows a side view
detail of the pendulum housing: pendulum (A) is attached to
slotted disk of angular encoder (B) in housing (C). Fig. 1(b)
shows a top view of the apparatus: pendulum (A) in housing
(C) is attached to lever arm (D) with pivot points (E), driven
by actuator (F). The pendulum has a length of l = 15.37
cm and the adjustable distance 5.1 cm
25 cm from
the pendulum to the pivot point controls the strength of the
dimensionless coupling constant 0.17
0.67. As indi-
cated, θ is the angular displacement of the real pendulum as
measured from the vertical.

ar

≤

≤

≤

≤

x

the corresponding angle for the virtual pendulum. Then
the equation of motion for the horizontally driven vir-
tual pendulum with an arbitrary time-dependent driving
function f is

¨φ + 2β ˙φ + (¯ωω0)2 sin φ + av ¨fv cos φ = 0,

(1)

≡

±

∝

≡

I −1mlxdrive

where β is the damping coeﬃcient, ω0 ≡
2πωr is the nat-
ωv/ωr
ural angular frequency of the real pendulum, ¯ω
is the dimensionless ratio of the natural frequencies of the
two pendula. In terms of the pendulum moment of iner-
tia I and mass m, we deﬁne a
xdrive/l
to be the dimensionless coupling constant that sets the
scale of the coupling term. Weak coupling corresponds
1. For our real pendulum the measured value
to a
≪
0.2, while the measured natural frequency
of β is 0.45
0.01s−1. These are
of the real pendulum ωr is 1.57
the values used for β and ωr in each calculation. In this
work, an overbar on a variable denotes a normalized, di-
mensionless quantity. Also, the subscripts v and r refer
to variables associated with the virtual pendulum and
the real pendulum, respectively. A standard ﬁfth-order
Runge-Kutta routine is used to integrate this equation.
We let f scale with the angular displacement of the real
pendulum: fv(θ)
θ. At the n-th time step of duration
∆t, the measured positions of the real pendulum at the
current and two previous time steps determine the value
of ¨f :

±

≡

θn

2θn−1 + θn−2

¨fv,n =

(cid:18)

−

∆t2

(cid:19)

(2)

Using these values, the integrator returns φn, which is
φn for
used to determine the driving amplitude fr,n

≡

stable position φ = θ = 0. The two pendula behave as
separate oscillators in the dual reality state, with reality
and virtual reality interacting but coexisting individually.
In the mixed reality state, the two pendula exhibit highly
correlated stable, phase-locked periodic motion. In this
mixed reality state of the system, the real pendulum and
the virtual pendulum move together as one. These are
illustrated in Fig. 2.

We model this coupled system by removing the real
pendulum entirely and replacing it with a routine in the
code that separately integrates

¨θsim + 2β ˙θsim + ω2

0 sin θsim

ar ¨fr cos θsim = 0,

(3)

−

−

an independent and equivalent equation of motion that
) sign with the
represents the real pendulum. The (
ar term is necessary because the lever arm is mounted
on a pivot that eﬀectively reverses the direction of the
movement of the actuator [see Fig. 1(b)]. Since only the
position of the real pendulum is measured in the experi-
mental setup, the integration of Eq. (3) returns the posi-
tion θsim. The velocity is calculated using the position at
the previous time step, and ¨fr is evaluated analogously
to Eq. (2). The virtual pendulum routine independently
integrates

¨φsim + 2β ˙φsim + (¯ωω0)2 sin φsim + av ¨fv cos φsim = 0 (4)

at each time step. The only diﬀerence between the exper-
imental system and the simulation system is that instead
of measuring the position of the real pendulum, the sim-
ulation integrates an equation of motion to calculate that
position. The feedback works exactly the same way as
before, except instead of an output voltage the program
simply provides a feedback amplitude coeﬃcient to the
modeled real pendulum’s integrator at each time step.
This simulation can also run at real time, but suppress-
ing the delay between integrations returns precisely the
same results in a fraction of the time required.

≤

≡

→

→

→

0 or ar

We now work with the reduced parameter space de-
scribed by ¯ω and ¯a
√avar, where ¯a is the geomet-
ric mean of the forcing amplitudes. ¯a characterizes the
0
strength of the bidirectional coupling; necessarily ¯a
as av
0. For weak coupling, we have
0
¯a < 0.4. ¯ω characterizes the quality of the model.
For the virtual pendulum to be an accurate model of the
real pendulum, ¯ω has to be near 1. We ﬁnd that there
are two distinct regions in this parameter space, corre-
sponding to two qualitatively diﬀerent limiting behaviors
of the system. These are depicted in Fig. 3. Region I cor-
responds to the mixed reality state of the system. The
oscillations are about the ﬁxed point of each pendulum,
and occur at frequencies close to the natural frequency
of the real pendulum (see the top plot in Fig. 2). Region
II corresponds to the dual reality state of the system. In
this region, both pendula initially oscillate but the sys-
tem is unable to sustain this uncorrelated motion and
loses kinetic energy until both pendula are at rest (see
the bottom plot in Fig. 2). Region I has the Arnold

3

tongue structure for mode-locked solutions in parameter
space, as seen in Fig. 3. For each data set we wait until
t = 25 s, which is long enough for the transient dynamics
to vanish, then we measure the maximum amplitude of
the real pendulum X
max (θ) over several oscillation
cycles for each pair of parameters ¯ω and ¯a. We deﬁne
X as the maximum amplitude of the real pendulum in
the experimental system and Xsim as the maximum dis-
placement of the simulated real pendulum. X and Xsim
are plotted against ¯ω for ¯a = 0.364 in Fig. 4. This curve
shows the phase transitions from Region II to Region I,
then back to Region II.

≡

FIG. 3: Limiting behavior phase transition diagram with
Arnold tongue structure for the two parameters ¯a and ¯ω. The
solid, dashed, and dotted lines indicate the critical points ¯ωc
in the experiment, simulation, and linear theory, respectively.
These critical points are the boundary between Regions I and
II in this parameter space. Region I corresponds to stable,
phase-locked oscillations of the center of mass of each pendu-
lum; this is the mixed reality state. Region II corresponds
to both pendula ending at the stable equilibrium position
φ = θ = 0; this is the dual reality state.

Dropping the sim subscripts, to linear order Eqs. (3)

and (4) become

ar ¨φ = 0,
¨θ + 2β ˙θ + ω2
0θ
0φ + av ¨θ = 0.
¨φ + 2β ˙φ + ¯ω2ω2

−

(5)

(6)

By taking successive derivatives of Eq. (5) and substi-
tuting these into the second derivative of Eq. (6), this
system can be written as the following decoupled linear
fourth-order diﬀerential equation:

(1 + ¯a2)θ(4) + 4βθ(3) + (4β2 + γ2)¨θ + 2βγ2 ˙θ + ¯ω2ω4

0θ = 0.
(7)
θ(4) = θ(3) = ¨θ = 0 at t = 0 comprise the initial condi-
0(1+ ¯ω2). The general solution
ω2
tions, and we deﬁne γ
to this system is in the form

≡

θ(t) =

cieλit,

4

Xi=1

(8)

Where the ci are constants determined from the initial

4

1.

simulation data. Region I in the simulation data extends
further in the direction of small ¯a than in the experimen-
tal data (Fig. 3). Since the general shape of Region I is
very similar for both sets of data, this onset of phase-
locked oscillations for smaller ¯a appears to reﬂect the
greater eﬃciency of the simulation. In the real system,
there are inevitable small delays and noise in the elec-
tronics and computer control, as well as additional fric-
tion terms beyond the linear damping term in Eq. (3).
Peters and Pritchett [15] have demonstrated that more
sophisticated models of friction are necessary to repro-
duce pendulum dynamics accurately. Nonetheless, the
virtual pendulum in Eq. (1) suﬃciently models the real
pendulum, giving rise to the mixed reality state when
¯ω

≈
This work presents experimental data from an interre-
ality system comprising a virtual pendulum and its real-
world counterpart. There is bidirectional, instantaneous
coupling between the two pendula. We ﬁnd that if the
dynamics of the virtual system approximate those of the
real one within a small tolerance, there is a phase transi-
tion in the behavior of the system. The interreality sys-
tem makes a transition from a dual reality state in which
reality and virtual reality are uncorrelated to a mixed re-
ality state in which reality and virtual reality are highly
correlated. For both the experimental data and a numer-
ical simulation, the region of mixed reality mode-locked
solutions in parameter space is an Arnold tongue. As
virtual systems better approximate real ones, even weak
coupling in other interreality systems may produce sud-
den changes to mixed reality states.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the National Science
Foundation Grant No. NSF PHY 01-40179, NSF DMS
03-25939 ITR, and NSF DGE 03-38215.

FIG. 4: This ﬁgure shows the response amplitudes X and
Xsim versus ¯ω. The solid and dashed lines correspond to the
experimental and simulation data, respectively. These are
response curves for the system with ¯a = 0.364. As indicated,
for the experiment, the interval in ¯ω where X > 0 corresponds
to Region I, while the interval in ¯ω where X = 0 corresponds
to Region II. Likewise, for the simulation, the interval in ¯ω
where Xsim > 0 corresponds to Region I, while the interval
in ¯ω where Xsim = 0 corresponds to Region II (see Fig. 3).

conditions and the λi are the four solutions of the char-
acteristic equation

(1 + ¯a2)r4 + 4βr3 + (4β2 + γ2)r2 + 2βγ2r + ¯ω2ω4

0 = 0. (9)

→

→ ∞

0 as t

If, for all i, λi < 0, then we have θ(t)
.
→ ∞
However, even if for one eigenvalue we have Re(λi) > 0,
then the solution is no longer bounded: θ(t)
0 as
t
. For a given ¯a, there are two values for ¯ω such
that Re(λi) = 0 for one eigenvalue. We deﬁne these to
be the critical points ¯ωc that mark the boundaries of the
phase diagram in Fig. 3. As shown in this ﬁgure, the
phase diagram of the linear system in Eqs. (5) and (6)
closely matches that of the full system in Eqs. (3) and (4).
There are diﬀerences between the experimental and

→

[1] J. van Kokswijk, Hum@n, Telecoms & Internet as Inter-
face to Interreality (Bergboek, The Netherlands, 2003).
[2] J. Qiang, R. D. Ryne, S. Habib, and V. Decyk, J. Com-

put. Phys. 163, 434 (2000).

[3] J. Bennell and C. Sutcliﬀe, Int. J. of Intel. Sys. in Acct.,

[8] ´E. Mathieu, J. Math. Pure Appl. 13, 137 (1868).
[9] Y.-C. Lai et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 214101 (2005).
[10] R. V. Jensen, Am. J. Phys. 70, 607 (2002).
[11] R. Vicente et al., Phys. Rev. E 73, 047201 (2006).
[12] J. S. Lim, M. Y. Choi, J. Choi, and B. J. Kim, Phys.

Fin. and Mgmt 12, 243 (2004).

Rev. B 69, 220504(R) (2004).

[4] A. A. Prinz, L. F. Abbott, and E. Marder, TRENDS in

[13] M. McGuinness, Y. Hong, D. Galletly, and P. Larsen,

Neuroscience 27, 218 (2004).

Chaos 14, 1 (2004).

[5] A. G. Rossberg, K. Bartholom´e, and J. Timmer, Phys.

[14] I. F. M. Phelps and J. J. H. Hunter, Am. J. Phys. 33,

[6] A. Klier and G. G. Hanson, Nuc. Phys. B (Proc. Suppl.)

[15] R. D. Peters and T. Pritchett, Am. J. Phys. 65, 1067

Rev. E 69, 016216 (2004).

155, 277 (2006).

(2004).

[7] R. Christopher et al., Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1020, 132

285 (1965).

(1997).

