6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
0
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A remark on an ansatz by M.W. Evans and the so-called

Einstein-Cartan-Evans uniﬁed ﬁeld theory

Friedrich W. Hehl

Institute for Theoretical Physics,

University at Cologne,

50923 K¨oln, Germany

and

Department of Physics and Astronomy,

University of Missouri-Columbia,

Columbia, MO 65211, USA

(Dated: 2006-12-01, ﬁle ECE1.tex)

M.W. Evans tried to relate the electromagnetic ﬁeld strength to the torsion of a

Riemann-Cartan spacetime. We show that this ansatz is untenable for at least two

reasons: (i) Geometry: Torsion is related to the (external) translation group and

cannot be linked to an internal group, like the U (1) group of electrodynamics. (ii)

Electrodynamics: The electromagnetic ﬁeld strength as a 2-form carries 6 indepen-

dent components, whereas Evans’ electromagnetic construct F α is a vector-valued

2-form with 24 independent components. This doesn’t match. One of these reasons

is already enough to disprove the ansatz of Evans.

PACS numbers: 03.50.Kk; 04.20.Jb; 04.50.+h

Keywords:

I.

INTRODUCTION

In 2005, Evans [2] related electromagnetism to the torsion of spacetime. We came across

this paper in the context of a refereeing process. We immediately recognized that the ansatz

of Evans is shaky; in fact, it will turn out to be incorrect.

As a convenient starting point for our discussion, we can take the viable Einstein-Cartan

theory of gravity. There the torsion becomes very transparent from a geometrical as well

as from a physical point of view (Sec.II). Then, we come to the Evans ansatz (Sec.III) and

show that it represents an overkill for the only 6 components of the electromagnetic ﬁeld

strength.

As a historical note we add that attempts in the direction of the Evans ansatz started

in 1925 by Eyraud [3] and in 1926 by Infeld [8] and were shown to lead to nowhere, see

Goenner [4] and Tonnelat [10].

II. EINSTEIN-CARTAN THEORY OF GRAVITY (ECT)

It is known from the literature that the Einstein-Cartan theory of gravity, see, for instance,

[7, 11], is a viable theory of gravitation. Torsion, which geometrically is related to translations

(it describes closure failures of inﬁnitesimal parallelograms), is, according to the second ﬁeld

equation of the ECT, proportional to the spin angular momentum density of matter. This

is not an ansatz, but the result of a variational principle of the Hilbert-Einstein type and

of the Noether procedure identifying the right-hand-sides of the ﬁeld equations as energy-

momentum and spin angular momentum, respectively.

Let us shortly sketch the formalism, for details see [5]. We start form the coframe ϑα, the

metric g = gαβ ϑα ⊗ ϑβ, and the connection Γα

β. Here α, β, ... = 0, 1, 2, 3 are anholonomic

or frame indices. With the connection, we can deﬁne an exterior covariant derivative D. In

the ECT, one assumes vanishing nonmetricity

The torsion T α and the curvature Rα

β are deﬁned by

Qαβ := −Dgαβ = 0 .

These two quantities fulﬁll the ﬁrst and the second Bianchi identities:

T α := Dϑα = dϑα + Γβ

α ∧ ϑβ ,

Rα

β := dΓa

β − Γα

γ ∧ Γγ

β .

DT α ≡ Rβ

α ∧ ϑβ ,

DRa

β ≡ 0 .

Both can be decomposed irreducibly under the local Lorentz group [6]. We deﬁne the

1-form ηαβγ := ⋆(ϑα ∧ ϑβ ∧ ϑγ), where the star denotes the Hodge operator. From (4) we

pick the irreducible piece with 6 independent components,

DT γ ∧ ηγαβ ≡ Rδ

γ ∧ ϑδ ∧ ηγαβ ,

2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

3

(7)

(8)

(9)

and from (5) one with 4 independent components,

DRβγ ∧ ηβγα ≡ 0 .

We will come back to these equations below. The equations (1) to (7) are purely geometrical

equations that, at this stage, have no relation to physics.

Studying small loops at some point of the manifold and parallelly transporting vectors,

we learn that torsion is related to a translational misﬁt (→ dislocations) and curvature

to a rotational (or Lorentz) misﬁt (→ disclinations), see [9], for example.

In this sense,

torsion and curvature are related to external groups, namely to the translation and to the

Lorentz groups. A closer discussion shows that a Riemann-Cartan geometry can be gotten

by studying the gauging of the Poincar´e group, the semi-direct product of the translation

and the Lorentz group. In other words, a Riemann-Cartan geometry is interrelated with

the Poincar´e group of the tangent Minkowski space. These geometrical facts deﬁnitely

exclude the possibility to relate torsion to an internal group, like the U(1)-phase group

of electrodynamics, for example. A proper understanding of geometry excludes such a

possibility.

Physics is brought into the Riemann-Cartan spacetime by specifying a gravitational La-
⋆
(cid:0)ϑα ∧ ϑβ(cid:1)∧Rαβ, where

grange 4-form as of the Hilbert-Einstein type according to Lgrav = 1
2κ

κ is Einstein’s gravitational constant. Then we ﬁnd the following two ﬁeld equations:

1
ηαβγ ∧ Rβγ = κΣα ,
2
1
2

ηαβγ ∧ T γ = κταβ .

Here Σα is the energy-momentum 3-form of matter and ταβ the spin angular momentum

3-form of matter. Upon substitution of (8) and (9) into the irreducible pieces of the Bianchi

identities (6) and (7), respectively, we recover the energy-momentum and the angular mo-

mentum laws [6]. In this way we see again the close connection of the ECT to the Noether

theorem and the Poincar´e group. Clearly, all this couldn’t work if torsion (or curvature)

would be identiﬁed with some electromagnetic ﬁeld. Energy-momentum and angular mo-

mentum are related to translations and Lorentz rotations and under no circumstances to an

internal group.

The ECT predicts the existence of a very weak spin-spin-contact interaction proportional

to the gravitational constant. It doesn’t show up at ordinary laboratory conditions. For

4

(10)

(11)

vanishing material spin, ταβ = 0, one recovers general relativity.

III. THE ANSATZ OF EVANS

Evans takes over the equations (1) to (5) without a proper motivation. As we pointed

out above, in the framework of the ECT, the motivation lies in taking the Poincar´e group of

Minkowski space (which yields the mass-spin classiﬁcation of elementary particles) as basis
and then one gauges this group. This was exactly what ´Elie Cartan had in mind [1] when

he called a Riemann-Cartan space as a space with Euclidean connection. In the small, the

Riemann-Cartan space is just a Minkowski space. And these small Minkowski “grains” of a

Riemann-Cartan space are translated and Lorentz rotated with respect to each other.

Evans instead just formally takes the equations (1) to (5) and brings in his physics

by assuming that the coframe, apart from a constant scalar factor A(0), is related to an

“electromagnetic potential” by the ad hoc ansatz

In coordinate components, we have

Aα = A(0)ϑα .

Ai

α = A(0)ei

α .

One should compare [2], Eq.(12). Evans denotes the components of the coframe by qa

µ.

Clearly, the Evans potential Aα has 16 independent components, quite in contrast to the 4

components of the electromagnetic potential A of Maxwell’s theory. Of course, the zeroth

component of Aα, namely A0, is not covariant under frame transformations and cannot

feature as the Maxwellian potential. The same is true for A1, A2, or A3 likewise. According

to Evans, we have then for the Evans ﬁeld strength

F α = DAα

or

F α = A(0) Dϑα = A(0) T α .

(12)

(i) Apart from the geometrical arguments which I gave, namely that torsion is related

to the translation group (and not to the U(1)), (ii) it is also impossible to relate the 6

components of the Maxwell ﬁeld strength 2-form F := dA (here A and F are the quantities

in Maxwell’s theory) to the 24 components of the torsion 2-form T α: They just don’t match.

And to take only one component of the torsion T 0 = Tij

0 dxi ∧ dxj won’t help either: It is

not a covariant relation, in spite of Evan’s claim to the contrary (see [2], page 10).

5

One could think that one decomposes the torsion T α into its 3 irreducible pieces and

attributes the Maxwellian F to one of these pieces. However, this is not possible since

these pieces have 16+4+4 independent components, respectively. No irreducible piece has

6 independent components. Hence this possibility is ruled out.

“The Maxwell Heaviside theory is further restricted by the fact that it implicitly sup-

presses an index a, meaning that only one unwritten scalar components of the tangent bundle

spacetime is considered, and then only implicitly” we are told ([2], page 10, last paragraph).

It is clear that one cannot implicitly suppress the index α in (12) (in Evan’s notation the

index a) and then somehow get a covariant equation. This is just wishful thinking. With

the frame eα one could build the expression eα⌋(DT α) and would ﬁnd 6 independent com-
ponents. However, we were still left with the 24 components of T α without being able to

reduce them in a covariant way to just 6 independent components.

The ansatz (10) is not only nonsensical from a geometric point of view, it has nothing to

do with electrodynamics and with Maxwell’s theory either.

[1] ´E. Cartan: On Manifolds with an Aﬃne Connection and the Theory of General Relativity,

English translation of the French original (Bibliopolis, Napoli 1986).

[2] M.W. Evans, The spinning and curving of spacetime: The electromagnetic and gravitational

ﬁelds in the Evans uniﬁed ﬁeld theory, pdf-ﬁle supplied by M.W. Evans, dated 6 April 2005,

obviously Found. Phys. Lett. 18 (2005) 431-454 (with a changed title).

[3] Eyraud, H., La Th´eorie aﬃne asym´etrique du champs ´electromagn´etique et graviﬁque et le

rayonnement atomique, C. R. Acad. Sci. (Paris) 180 (1925) 1245–1248.

[4] H.F.M. Goenner, On the History of Uniﬁed Field Theories, Living Rev. Relativity 7 (2004)

(cited on 01 Dec 2006); http://www.livingreviews.org/lrr-2004-2H.Goenner

[5] F. Gronwald and F.W. Hehl, On the gauge aspects of gravity, in Proc. Int. School of Cosm. &

Gravit. 14th Course: Quantum Gravity. Held in Erice, Italy. Proceedings, P.G. Bergmann et

al. (eds.). World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1996) pp. 148–198; arXiv.org/gr-qc/9602013.

[6] F.W. Hehl and J.D. McCrea, Bianchi identities and the automatic conservation of energy–

momentum and angular momentum in general-relativistic ﬁeld theories, Found. Phys. 16

(1986) 267–293.

6

[7] F.W. Hehl, P. von der Heyde, G.D. Kerlick, and J.M. Nester, General relativity with spin and

torsion: Foundations and prospects, Rev. Mod. Phys. 48 (1976) 393–416.

[8] L. Infeld, Zur Feldtheorie von Elektrizit¨at und Gravitation, Phys. Zeitschr. 29 (1928) 145–147.

[9] M.L. Ruggiero and A. Tartaglia, Einstein-Cartan theory as a theory of defects in space-time

[10] M.A. Tonnelat, La th´eorie du champ uniﬁ´e d’Einstein et quelques-uns de ses d´eveloppements,

Am. J. Phys. 71 (2003) 1303–1313.

Gauthier-Villars, Paris (1955).

[11] A. Trautman, Einstein-Cartan theory, in Encyclopedia of Math. Physics, J.-P. Francoise et

al., eds., Elsevier, Oxford (2006) pp. 189–195; arXiv.org/gr-qc/0606062.

=======

