The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

Chun Wa Wong, Seo Ho Youn and Kosuke Yasui
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Los Angeles,
CA 90095-1547, USA

E-mail: cwong@physics.ucla.edu

Abstract. A uniform, ﬂexible and frictionless chain falling link by link from
a heap by the edge of a table falls with an acceleration g/3 if the motion is
nonconservative, but g/2 if the motion is conservative, g being the acceleration
due to gravity. Unable to construct such a falling chain, we use instead higher-
dimensional versions of it. A home camcorder is used to measure the fall of a three-
dimensional version called an xyz-slider. After frictional eﬀects are corrected for,
its vertical falling acceleration is found to be ax/g = 0.328 ± 0.004. This result
agrees with the theoretical value of ax/g = 1/3 for an ideal energy-conserving
xyz-slider.

PACS numbers: 01.55.+b,01.65.+g,01.50.Zv

6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
2
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

2

Figure 1. (a) The falling chain called the xy-slider that has one end ﬁxed at
the origin O of the coordinate system. The chain slides along the table edge after
release. The falling chain is called an xyz-slider when the stationary segment on
the table parallel to the edge is set back from the edge by a distance z = d. (b)
The forces acting on the chain bend of the xy-slider at a sharp table edge.

1. Introduction

A uniform, ﬂexible and frictionless chain falling link by link from a heap by the
edge of a table is a popular example or problem that appears in many textbooks
of classical mechanics [1]. The solution given in these books is almost always the
energy-nonconserving one where the chain falls with an acceleration of a = g/3, g
being the acceleration due to gravity. This solution was given as early as 1857 by
Cayley [2, 3, 1]. Recently, Villarino [4] has called our attention to a footnote in
Routh’s treatise on dynamics [5] that refers to problems of this type involving systems
with variable masses being solved in the private lecture room of the famed Cambridge
tutor Hopkins as long ago as 1850. The footnote also mentions a solution to our
falling-chain problem published in 1856 in a treatise on dynamics by Tait and Steele
[6]. For this reason, we shall call the chain falling from a heap at the table edge the
Hopkins-Tait-Steele-Cayley (HTSC) falling chain.

Mikhailov [7] has given a history of dynamics problems involving variable masses,
especially those that like the HTSC falling chain were made up for or studied by
undergraduates in Cambridge in the second half of the 19th century in connection
with the Cambridge Mathematical Tripos Examination [8]. It thus seems useful to
extend the review given in Wong and Yasui [1] on the HTSC chain in order to clarify
the historical circumstances under which these dynamics problems were studied in
Cambridge. This extended review will be given in section 2.

Wong and Yasui [1] have taken issue with the energy-nonconserving solution of
g/3 for the acceleration of the HTSC chain. They point out that the full Lagrange
equation of motion contains an extra term not given by the solution of Cayley and of
Tait and Steele. This missing term gives the chain tension with which the falling chain
is pulling on the falling link. When this term is included, the solution becomes energy-
conserving and the falling acceleration is increased to g/2. The diﬀerence in physics
between the energy-conserving and nonconserving solutions will also be described in
section 2.

It is thus of interest to determine experimentally which of these two solutions for
the HTSC falling chain is correct. We immediately run into the diﬃculty that a heap
or coil of chain on a table cannot be built in a reproducible way, for every heap seems

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

3

unique. After much thought, we discover a two-dimensional realization of the falling
chain called the xy-slider that is easily reproducible. This is a chain stretched out
on the table parallel to the table edge and very close to it, as shown schematically in
ﬁgure 1(a). One end of the chain is held ﬁxed on the table with the ﬁngers of one hand
while the other end overhangs the table slightly. When the overhanging end is allowed
to fall, the chain is found to slide along the slightly round table edge to the ﬁxed end,
as shown in the ﬁgure. The reason for holding down one end is to ensure that the
resting ‘heap’ on the table (now represented by a straight chain segment parallel to
the table edge) remains stationary on the table while the rest of the chain falls. It also
makes the chain less susceptible to perturbations caused by the release of the falling
end. The chain motion then becomes more easily reproducible.

The motion of a uniform, ﬂexible and frictionless xy-slider is described in section 3,
using Lagrangian mechanics. Such an ideal chain experiences no dissipation so that
its energy is conserved during the chain fall. For the special case where the fallen
chain segment is a straight line at a constant angle θ to the horizontal table edge, the
theoretical falling acceleration a is found to be constant in time, with

θ = cos

−1(1/3) = 70.5
,
¨s = g/√8 = 0.354g,

◦

a
ax = a sin θ = g/3,

≡

(1)

(2)

where s is the length of the fallen chain segment.

We now need to determine experimentally how an actual xy-slider falls. In the
rest of the paper, we shall show that the required measurements can be made using
only simple equipment found at home, so that the interested reader can readily repeat
our measurement. We shall begin, in section 4, by showing that an inexpensive home
camcorder [9] recording at 30 frames a second has suﬃcient resolution to time the fall
of chains. We verify its capability by measuring the known value of g for the free fall
of a metal object. The measurement on the xy-slider is ﬁnally described in section 5.
We explain why a three-dimensional version of the slider called an xyz-slider is used.
The results roughly corrected for friction in the air, on the table, and at the table edge
are

◦

◦

,

2

= 70

θ
±
ax/g = a sin θ/g = 0.328
a/g = 0.350

0.006.

±

0.004,

±

The corrected motion of a real xyz-slider is thus found to agree with that of the ideal
energy-conserving xy-slider. Our result thus gives indirect experimental support that
the ideal HTSC chain is also energy conserving, and can be expected to have a falling
acceleration of g/2.

2. The history and physics of the HTSC falling chain

According to Mikhailov [7], rocket propulsion by the continuous emission of masses was
studied as early as 1810 by Moore. A Lagrange equation of motion for a more general
mechanical system with variable mass was given by Buquoy in 1812, and re-written in
a more modern form by Poisson in 1819. We are interested here in the variable-mass
problem of a ﬂexible and frictionless chain falling link by link from a heap at the table
edge. This problem is a special case of the following problem described and solved by

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

4

Figure 2. The falling chain of Tait and Steele [6].

Tait and Steele in a textbook on classical dynamics published in 1856 [6, 8, 4]: ‘One
end, B, of a uniform heavy chain hangs over a small smooth pulley A, and the other
end is coiled up on a table at C. If B preponderates, determine the motion.’ This
falling chain is shown in ﬁgure 2.

Tait and Steele solve the problem by using Newton’s force law written in the form

d
dt

[ρ(x + h)v] = ρg(x

h),

−

where ρ is the uniform linear mass density of the chain, x is the length AB, the chain
end as measured from the pulley, h is the length AC, the height of the pulley above
the table, and v = dx/dt. By multiplying both sides of the equation by (x + h)v, (3)
can be integrated immediately to give

1

2 (x + h)2v2 = g

3 (x

x0)(x2 + x0x + x2

3h2),

0 −

−

if initially x = x0 and v = 0. If x0 = 2h also holds, the acceleration becomes constant
in time, a = g/3. Our falling HTSC chain corresponds to the special case h = x0 = 0
of this problem, the case of a bare chain without the pulley.

If the total mechanical energy of the falling chain is conserved, however, the result
would have been v2 = gx, with a = g/2. Sommerfeld in his textbook on mechanics [10]
calls the missing mechanical energy ∆E = ρx2g/6 Carnot’s energy loss to emphasize
the picture that the missing energy is lost when a falling link from the table falls by
sticking onto the falling chain in an inelastic collision. Inelastic impacts where the
masses stick together after the impact are known to lose total mechanical energy, a
result ﬁrst described by Lazare Carnot in a work published in 1783 [10, 11, 12].

A year after the publication of the treatise of Tait and Steele, Cayley wrote a
paper [2] in which the same equation of motion (3) is obtained from the Lagrangian

(3)

(4)

(5)

(x, v) =

xv2 +

L

ρ
2

ρg
2

x2.

We are unable to follow Cayley’s arguments, and shall just describe his ﬁnal result.
His version of Lagrange’s equation contains the same term describing the rate of
momentum change as the left-hand side of (3), but the part where the variable mass
of the falling chain is diﬀerentiated is obtained in a diﬀerent way with the help of

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

another function (denoted K in his paper). His prescription is such that in calculating
the generalized force

5

(6)

∂

L

(x, v)
∂x

= ρgx + T,

the x dependence of the variable mass of the ﬁrst (or kinetic-energy) term of the
Lagrangian is not to be diﬀerentiated. The consequence is that the Wong-Yasui
tension T = ρv2/2 that comes from such a diﬀerentiation does not appear. As a result,
Cayley’s equation agrees with (3) of Tait and Steele. Cayley nevertheless considers his
method more general. Mikhailov [7] has pointed out, however, that Cayley’s unusual
prescription of selective diﬀerentiation has not been adopted by any subsequent worker
in the ﬁeld.

It is interesting that Cayley did not mention the Tait-Steele solution in his
paper. Cayley was very knowledgeable, of course, about theoretical developments
in dynamics. In fact, earlier in 1857 he wrote a rather detailed and very well-received
42-page report on theoretical dynamics that summarized the progress of the subject
since Lagrange’s M´ecanique Analytique of 1788. In this report, Cayley discussed the
work of Lagrange, Poisson, Hamilton, Jacobi, Liouville, Bertrand, Denkin and others,
up to early 1857 [13, 14], all by name. We believe that the probable reason Cayley
did not refer to Tait and Steele is that both the problem and its solution were so well
known in Cambridge circles that a reference to Tait and Steele seemed unnecessary,
and perhaps even unjustiﬁed.

In this connection, it is worth pointing out that according to Routh [5], problems
of impact or inﬁnitesimal
impulse like that attributed to our falling chain had
been studied as early as 1850 in the private lecture room of William Hopkins, a
popular private tutor (‘coach’ in Cambridge undergraduate slang [15]) to Cambridge
undergraduates preparing for the Mathematical Tripos examination. Cayley, Tait and
Routh were all coached by Hopkins, who helped them win the highest score in the
Mathematical Tripos of 1842, 1852 and 1854, respectively [16]. (The highest scorer
in the Mathematical Tripos each year was known for life as the Senior Wrangler,
Wranglers being holders of ﬁrst-class Cambridge B.A. degrees in mathematics.) Since
Routh was a student in Hopkins’s lecture room before the Mathematical Tripos Exam
of 1854, the date 1850 given in his footnote on Hopkins’s work on variable-mass
problems can be considered reliable.

On the other hand, Cayley took the Tripos exam eight years earlier in 1842. So it
appears likely that he did not, like Routh and Tait, learn about this class of problems
with variable masses directly from Hopkins in the latter’s lecture room. We should
add that after a four-year fellowship at the Trinity College, Cayley left Cambridge
in 1846 to study law in London [17, 18]. However, Cayley in his London days was
in touch with Cambridge. He served as a Cambridge college examiner in the years
1848-51 [17]. In 1852, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society with the help of
many Cambridge supporters, including William Thompson (Lord Kelvin), Stokes and
Hopkins [18]. He also served as the Senior Examiner of the Mathematical Tripos that
year. Tait, the Senior Wrangler that year, became one of his friends [17]. Cayley’s 1857
paper, received by the journal on 18 June, 1857, begins with the sentence ‘There are a
class of dynamical problems which, so far as I am aware, have not been considered in
a general manner.’ His paper was therefore written about a year after the publication
of the Tait and Steele book on dynamics [6], where Tait’s Preface was dated January,
1856, and written from Queen’s College in Belfast where he was the professor of
mathematics since 1854. We give all these historical details in order to suggest that

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

6

Cayley did not acknowledge Tait and Steele perhaps because the problem and the
solution were not invented by them. We are not sure if this is true, because we have
not been able to ﬁnd any earlier reference on this falling-chain problem.

Wong and Yasui [1] have given a list of other textbooks on mechanics where the
energy-nonconserving solution for the HTSC falling chain can be found. Since the
problem is so closely connected to the Cambridge Mathematical Tripos Examination,
it is interesting to add to this list of books the 1878 second edition of Wolstenholme’s
popular problem collection [19] for the Mathematical Tripos exams, Jeans’s textbook
on theoretical mechanics [20] and Lamb’s book on dynamics [21]. Wolstenholme (Third
Wrangler of 1850), Lamb (Second Wrangler of 1872 and a student of Routh) and Jeans
(Third Wrangler of 1898) all took the Mathematical Tripos Examination [22].

3. Motion of the xy-slider

We have noticed that the xy-slider shown in ﬁgure 1(a) falls in a very special way. Soon
after release, the falling chain assumes an equilibrium shape in which a rather straight
falling chain segment slides along the table edge at a constant angle θ. Depending on
the chain and on the manner of release, there are in general some transverse vibrations
and distortions from the linear shape. We shall limit ourselves to the simple case
where these complications are either absent or small, and the fallen chain segment
is approximately a straight line of length s at an angle θ to a sharp table edge, as
illustrated in the ﬁgure. For a chain of length L, the coordinates of the falling chain
end as seen from the ﬁxed end O are

(x, y, z) = (s sin θ, L

(7)
Using the two-dimensional form (ρs/2)( ˙x2 + ˙y2) of the kinetic energy of the fallen
chain segment, we ﬁnd the two-dimensional Lagrangian

s + s cos θ, 0).

−

2(s, v = ˙s) = ρsv2(1

cos θ) +

s2 sin θ,

L

−

ρg
2

(8)

where ρ is the uniform linear mass density of the chain, and v = ˙s. There is no
contribution from the stationary chain segment on the table as its kinetic energy
vanishes, and its potential energy can be taken to be zero. Our model is thus greatly
simpliﬁed from the general case of two-dimensional motion, for which each term of
the Lagrangian is an integral in ds.

The two-dimensional Lagrangian (8) is, like its one-dimensional counterpart, not
an explicit function of the time t. Hence the total mechanical energy of the system is
conserved. If initially s = 0 and v = 0, then
g
2

v2 =

cos θ

sin θ

(9)

s.

1

−
Such a velocity comes from the constant acceleration
g
4

cos θ

sin θ

¨s =

a

1

≡

−

along the longitudinal direction of the falling chain segment. These solutions for v2
and a satisfy the Lagrange equation of motion
2s¨s + ˙s2
(cid:0)

To understand the preferred direction θ of the xy-slider, we consider ﬁrst a plumb
s)/dt2 =

line whose support moves horizontally with the same acceleration g′

sg sin θ = 0.

cos θ)

(11)

(1

−

−

(cid:1)

y = d2(L

−

(10)

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

a as the bend of the chain at the table edge. In the laboratory frame, this plumb
−
line does not point vertically downward, but at an angle θ to the table edge such that

cot θ =

=

,

or

sin θ

(3 cos θ

4(1
1)(cos θ

cos θ)
1) = 0.

−
−

a
g

−

The solution cos θ = 1 or θ = 0 is unphysical because it requires a =
solution is θ = cos−1(1/3) = 70.5◦.

∞

. The physical

It can be expected intuitively that the chain actually falls along the modiﬁed
plumb direction g′ found here. To show that this is indeed the case, we concentrate
on the variable-mass chain segment of length s that has already fallen below the table
edge. If the chain bend at the table edge is sharp, the fallen chain segment is acted
on simultaneously by its own downward weight, an upper chain tension Tu along the
negative y-axis, and a lower tension Tℓ (if any) pointing up at an angle θ above the
horizon, as shown in ﬁgure 1(b). Its Lagrange equations in the x- and y-directions are
then

ρsg

Tℓ sin θ =

(ρs ˙x),

Tℓ cos θ =

(ρs ˙y).

−
Tu −

−

d
dt
d
dt

They can be simpliﬁed to the Newton equations

ρsg
∆

TN sin θ = ρs¨x = ρsa sin θ,

−
TN cos θ = ρs¨y =

cos θ),
Tu + ρ ˙s2 and the lower Newtonian tension

ρsa(1

−

−

−

where ∆ =

−

TN = Tℓ + ρ ˙s2

is an eﬀective force that diﬀers in general from the Lagrangian tension Tℓ. These
Newton equations can be solved for a and TN :

The magnitude Tu of the upper chain tension at the table edge satisﬁes the Newton

equation Tu = ρL

¨Y
, where Y is the y-coordinate of the center of mass:
|
|
Y =

cos θ)].

s2(1

[L2

1
2L

−

−

Hence

where use has been made of (9). These expressions when inserted into (18) give

a = g cot θ

,

∆
ρs
−
cos θ

1

−
sin θ

TN = ρsg

+ ∆.

Tu = 3ρas(1
∆ = ρas(3 cos θ

−

cos θ),

1).

−

a =

g
3 sin θ
TN = 2ρas,

,

or ax =

or Tℓ = 0.

g
3

,

We have thus shown that the Lagrangian chain tension vanishes below the chain
bend. The equation of motion (13) then becomes identical to that for the incorrect

7

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)
(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

8

energy-nonconserving solution of the one-dimensional HTSC chain. This is why the
energy-conserving xy-slider has the same downward acceleration g/3 as the incorrect
solution of the one-dimensional HTSC chain. We recall that the correct result of g/2
for the energy-conserving HTSC chain is obtained only with the help of a nonzero
downward-pointing Lagrangian tension that has been called the Wong-Yasui tension
in section 2.

The constant acceleration a of the xy-slider must also satisfy (10) because of

energy conservation:

a =

g
3 sin θ

=

g sin θ

.

4(1

cos θ)

−

This requirement can be used to show that the angle θ satisﬁes the same condition
(12) as the plumb line. The chain thus falls along the plumb direction. When this
happens, the Newtonian chain tension below the sharp bend has the same magnitude
as the tension Tu above the bend, namely TN = Tu, while ∆ vanishes.

4. Testing the experimental setup for free fall

We now have to measure experimentally the acceleration of a real xy-slider. The
falling time over a distance x under a constant acceleration a is

(22)

(23)

t =

2x
a

.

r

For x = 0.5 m, the falling time is t = 0.32 (0.45, 0.55) s when a = g (g/2, g/3). For
a camcorder recording at 30 frames a second, the event lasts 9.5 (13.5, 16.5) frames.
Such a camcorder thus appears adequate for our timing needs.

To test the camcorder as a timer, we ﬁrst measure the falling time of several
identical 5/16′′ steel nuts (as in nuts and bolts) over a height of 1.1-1.3 m. A small
golden plastic bead is tied to each nut to improve its visibility in the video record.
The nut is initially held between two ﬁngers, one from each hand. At t = 0, the ﬁngers
are pulled away horizontally from each other. By extrapolating the recorded ﬁnger
separations in two succeeding frames, we can estimate the starting time to about 0.2
frame, or 0.007 s. A convenient ﬁnal frame is then chosen and the falling distance
shown in it is measured.

The distance measurement can be done by transferring the 2.5′′ LCD screen image
to a PC using the camcorder manufacturer’s software. The metal nuts are dropped
just in front of a lunch counter. The known height of the counter from table top to
the top of the footrest both showing in the picture allows the measurements to be
converted into actual distances in meters.

The falling positions are measured from the video record by two persons
(After the
independently. They both report a reading uncertainty of 0.004 m.
measurements are completed, we ﬁnd that the PC images can be captured by another
software and enlarged for more accurate readings.) All results and errors reported
here are the averages from these two independent readings.

The observed acceleration calculated from the total elapsed time turns out to be
larger than expected. To ﬁnd out the reason, we measure the falling position x(t)
frame by frame in the video recording. The data are ﬁtted well by the functional form

x(t) = c0 + c1t + c2t2.

(24)

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

9

Table 1. The vertical acceleration measured for free fall and for the xyz-slider.
The position of the ﬁxed end of the xyz-slider is also noted. The measurements
on the xyz-slider are described in section 5.

Quantity a

Simple mean a(δa) Weighted mean a(δ0a, δka)

Free fall g
xyz-slider ax:

Left
Right
Average

9.820 (0.034)

9.818 (0.017, 0.033)

3.149 (0.013)
3.136 (0.016)
3.144 (0.010)

3.147 (0.013, 0.011)
3.129 (0.014, 0.014)
3.139 (0.009)

The ﬁt gives a small initial downward velocity c1 > 0 in all runs, thereby showing
that the person releasing the steel nut does not do it cleanly. The acceleration due
to gravity obtained from g = 2c2 represents the value after correcting for the initial
velocity. The corrected values are found to be more consistent between runs by a
factor of 2 than the values obtained from the total elapsed time.

A simple (unweighted) average over N = 14 runs gives the experimental result of
0.03 ms−2 shown in table 1. Here δg is the standard deviation for the
δg = 9.82

±

±

g
mean of N measurements:
s2
g
N

(δg)2 =

N

=

1
N (N

1)

g)2,

(gi −

Xi=1
where sg is the standard deviation for a single measurement. This δg contains only
statistical contributions. No systematic errors will be estimated for free fall. The
camcorder timer is assumed to have the accuracy 6

10−6 of a quartz clock [23].

−

A more sophisticated estimate of g is possible. The least-square ﬁt to the frame by
frame data for each free fall gives a ﬁtting uncertainty δg0i, taken to be the standard
deviation or ‘standard error’ calculated by the Mathematica linear-regression function
Regress [24]. The weighted mean and its raw standard error are then calculated from
the formula [25]

×

g

δ0g =

i wigi
i wi ±
±
with the weights wi = (δg0i)−2.
measurements,

P
P

wi)

−1/2,

(
Xi

χ2 =

wi(gi −

g)2,

Xi

The goodness-of-ﬁt parameter for all N

turns out to be larger than N
1, the number of degrees of freedom. This means that
the ﬁt is poor, or that the estimated errors are too small. Following standard practice
[25], all errors are next increased by a scale factor

−

so that the re-computed value of χ2/(N
our ﬁnal report, we use the larger of the two errors δ0g and

−

1) becomes exactly 1 after the scaling. In

1/2

k =

(cid:20)

N

1 (cid:21)

χ2

−

δkg = kδ0g

for any k.

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

10

Table 1 shows that the weighted mean agrees very well with the simple mean
in both value and uncertainty. Their close agreement occurs because the values of
both gi and δg0i are clustered together, thus indicating that the experimental data
0.03 ms−2 agrees
are consistent from run to run. The measured value of g = 9.82
with the known sea-level value at Los Angeles (33◦56′ N ) of g = 9.796 ms−2 [26]. The
use of our camcorder as a timer is thus validated.

±

5. Result for the xyz-slider

A real falling xy-slider diﬀers in many ways from the theoretical idealization described
in section 3. First of all, we need to use a rounded table edge to make sure that the
chain links round it smoothly. The chain must then fall over the rounded table edge
link by link rather than collectively. Such a controlled fall is achieved by setting the
chain back from the rounded table edge by a parallel distance d. The setback xy-slider
is thus an xyz-slider, with the z-axis on the table and perpendicular to the table edge,
as shown in ﬁgure 1(a). Initially the chain runs along the y-axis from the ﬁxed end at
the origin O. It then turns 90◦ to run along the z-axis for a distance d before it runs
over the table edge to overhang the table top a distance x0 along the vertical x-axis.
On release, the moving chain rapidly assumes a shape shown in the ﬁgure where the
setback segment makes an angle ψ with the table edge, and has length

sd =

d
sin ψ

.

The falling chain segment in the xy-plane has length s and soon makes an angle θ
with the table edge. The length of the stationary chain segment on the table along
the y-axis is L

sd, assuming a sharp table edge for simplicity.
We now show that a setback d of the chain from the table edge can be compensated
by a proper choice of the initial overhang x0. With a sharp table edge, the chain
Lagrangian for the xyz-slider is

−

−

s

3(s, v)

ρ(s + sd)v2(1

cos θ) +

s2 sin θ,

L

≈

−
where we have ignored the diﬀerence between the angles ψ and θ and have treated the
segment sd as a continuation of s in the kinetic energy. Energy conservation can be
used to ﬁnd the longitudinal velocity v = ˙s of the fallen chain segment:

ρg
2

v2

2a

≈

s2
s2
0
−
s + sd

,

cos θ) is the constant acceleration without setback or
where a = (g/4) sin θ/(1
overhang. We see that for the choice s0
x0/ sin θ = sd, the chain falls with the same
constant acceleration a as the xy-slider without setback. (32) can then be written
more simply as

≡

−

x

x0

−

≈

1

2 (a sin θ)t2,

assuming that the overhang angle θ is constant in time.

The sharp table edge used in our theoretical analysis greatly simpliﬁes all
formulas, but it is mathematically diﬀerent from the rounded table edge used in the
experiment. In the motion of another chain sliding as a whole oﬀ the table edge, we
have studied equations of motion for both sharp and rounded edges and shown that
while they are mathematically distinct, they give states of motion that are very close

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

11

to each other numerically [27]. Hence the use of a sharp table edge in our theoretical
analysis is acceptable.

A real xyz-slider also experiences frictional drags as it moves. There are at least
four sources of friction: (1) between the table surface and the setback chain segment
of length sd on the table, (2) between the table edge and the chain rounding it, (3)
between neighboring chain links at the bends both on the table and at the table edge
(bending friction), and (4) air friction resisting the horizontal and vertical motions of
the falling chain segment. The inﬂuence of both setback and frictional forces can in
principle be compensated by a proper choice of the initial overhang x0 of the chain.
Frictional force # 1 is just the usual

F1 = µkρgsd,

(34)

where µk is the coeﬃcient of kinetic friction. The other frictional eﬀects are much
more complicated. They will be described in Appendix A.

We have used a variety of light ball and cable chains in our measurements, each
chain about a meter long. We have used a steel desk, a marble counter top, and
construction lumber with edges routed to diﬀerent radii of curvature. Our most
consistent results are those where the falling chain shows the least amount of transverse
distortion and vibrations. They are obtained with a light steel cable chain used for
making necklaces and jewellery. A small golden plastic bead (of diameter 3/16′′
0.48
cm) is tied to the falling end to make it more visible in the camcorder picture. Chain
and bead together is 0.949 m long, 11.744 g in mass, to which the bead contributes
0.0569 g. The chain has 316 links, making the average link 0.299 cm long, and 0.0370
g in mass. The bead is about 1.5 chain links both in mass and in length.

6′′
The table edge used in the reported result is made from a piece of 2′′
construction lumber (hereafter referred to as ‘the table’) with the edge routed by
a 1/4′′
0.64 cm (radius) router bit. Both the edge and the wood surface on which
the chain slides are covered by Teﬂon tapes [28] to reduce friction. The use of wet
lubricants on our light chains seems to increase friction through surface tension rather
than to reduce it. The use of dry graphite powder reduces friction marginally, but
we decide that it is not worth the mess. So all measurements are done on a dry
unlubricated surface. Our experience is that construction lumber made of ﬁr is too
soft and grainy to make a good table edge. We recommend using pine or oak instead.
For a semi-quantitative demonstration, however, the choice of a table edge is not
critical.

≈

×

≈

The levelness of the tabletop is adjusted by shimming with folded pieces of paper
and checked by using an inexpensive level embedded in a heavy 4-foot plastic yardstick.
The frictional coeﬃcient µk for our chain and surface is measured by placing the chain
on the table in a straight line perpendicular to the edge and partially overhanging
it. The overhanging length is then varied until the whole chain begins to move. The
resulting static frictional coeﬃcient is µs = 0.16 without tapping, and 0.15 with gentle
tapping of the table. The kinetic frictional coeﬃcient can be a complicated function
of the velocity [29, 30], but is usually considered to be signiﬁcantly smaller than µs
[30]. We shall use a relatively large value of µk = 0.13.

In our measurements, we ﬁrst arrange the oﬀset segment along the z-direction
and the overhang segment in the vertical direction. The chain is held at the bend
on the table with a pen controlled by hand. The chain is released by rapidly moving
the pen upwards in a vertical direction. The starting time is determined by linear
extrapolation of the vertical position of the releasing pen in two succeeding video

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

12

100

80

60

40

20

L
s
e
e
r
g
e
d
H

L
t
H
Θ

frames.

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

t HsecondL

Figure 3. Time dependence of the overhang angle θ(t) in one of the runs of the
xyz-slider. The initial value of θ is 90◦.

The theoretical ‘edge’ of the rounded table edge is deﬁned to be the line parallel
23◦ from the upward vertical (negative x-axis).
to the y-axis at an angle of φ0
This angle is obtained as follows: A point mass initially at rest at φ0 moving on a
frictionless circle that is the rounded edge in cross section will fall oﬀ the circle and
fall down by gravity to the horizontal position of φ = π/2. The angle φ0 is so deﬁned
that the falling time of the mass is the same as the time of free fall from the table top
through a vertical distance that is the radius of the circle to the same ﬁnal height.

≈

≈

In doing the measurements, we feel most comfortable working with an oﬀset of
1.2 cm. The initial overhang is thus x0 = d = 4 links for the
4 chain links, or d
45◦ as
initial values of θ = ψ = 90◦. The equilibrium shape after release has ψ
estimated by eye, and an overhang angle of θ = 70◦
2◦ as measured from the video
recording. The compensatory overhang at the equilibrium shape would have been
6 links. Since we cannot change the overhang once the chain is
x0 = d sin θ/ sin ψ
released, we use a middling value of 5 links and add another 0.5 link for friction. After
the measurements, a more detailed study of frictional eﬀects shows that this frictional
correction is too small. So an additional correction will be applied to the measured
result.

±

≈

≈

On release, the change in chain shape begins at the bend on the table with the
45◦. This chain direction extends to below the
angle ψ rapidly taking the value of
chain bend at the table edge before enough of the chain has fallen down to enforce the
70◦. The time dependence of θ(t) for one of the runs measured
equilibrium value of θ
by one reader is shown in ﬁgure 3. We can see an initial transient in overhang angle
that lasts 0.2 second. The slight modulation of θ(t) after 0.2 s indicates vibration
caused by edge imperfections or disturbance on release.

≈

≈

It is hard to ensure that our chain release is clean. Furthermore, the larger static
friction acting initially may also aﬀect the result. To reduce these uncertainties, we ﬁt
the falling distance x(t) frame by frame to the three-term power series (24) used for
free fall. This ﬁt corrects speciﬁcally for diﬀerences in initial position and velocity in
diﬀerent runs, while random errors in the ﬁtted acceleration itself will be reduced by
averaging over several runs. We do 10 runs with the left chain end held ﬁxed on the
table and 10 runs with the right chain end held ﬁxed, to average out any unlevelness
of the table.

A ﬁnal complication is that the vertical scale of the video image is not exactly

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

13

the same from left to right. This change of scale is handled by measuring the vertical
falling position x in each frame relative to the ﬁducial distance (between the table top
and the top of the footrest) at the appropriate y-position of the moving chain end seen
in that frame. The results for ax from the two independent readers agree well, in fact
better than the results for free fall. Again, all reported values of ax are the averages
of the results from the two readers. The accelerations obtained by ﬁtting x(t) to (24)
are summarized in table 1. The average of the two sets of runs with diﬀerent ﬁxed
end gives ax = 3.139
0.0010, where the uncertainties
are statistical only.

0.009 ms−2 or ax/g = 0.3204

±

±

We now turn to systematic corrections and errors. The analysis is rather lengthy,
and shall be given in Appendix A. The conclusion is that the main source of energy loss
is air friction on the sliding chain and that the raw acceleration should be increased
by 2.5%
0.004,
and a/g = 0.350
0.006. We have not included a correction for vibrations and other
transverse motions of the chain that is likely to bring the result closer to the theoretical
value of ax = g/3 for the ideal frictionless chain.

0.04 ms−2 or ax/g = 0.328

1.2% to the value of ax = 3.22

±

±

±

±

Our error analysis shows that some of the reﬁnements used are not necessary in
a semi-quantitative demonstration since we have obtained quite good results with the
many tables used. Further improvement of the quantitative result obtained will require
a better correction for air friction, a cleaner method of chain release to reduce chain
distortion and vibrations, a correction for the energy lost to these transverse motions
and a better table edge. The eﬀect of the initial transient in chain shape should be
understood. It would be great to automate the reading of the falling position x(t)
for it is a rather tedious job. However, our error analysis shows that we have enough
position resolution.

Appendix A. Systematic errors and corrections

≈

The length of the moving chain segment on the table is sd = d = 4 links initially, but
sd = d/ sin ψ
6 links on reaching equilibrium shape. A middling value of 5 links is
used for the purpose of data analysis. We estimate that this choice has an uncertainty
of 0.5 link. The resulting uncertainty on the experimental acceleration aexp can be
found by writing (32) in the form
s + s0
s + sd

araw = aexp

(A.1)

,

where araw is the raw acceleration calculated under the assumption of exact
compensation between overhang and setback. This equation shows that if the overhang
s0, then the measured araw is too small. It
s0 is too small by an amount ∆s0 = sd −
should be increased by the fractional amount

∆a
araw

=

∆s0
s + s0

.

(A.2)

Taking s to be half of the average falling distance, or (0.37/ sin θ) m = 0.39 m, we ﬁnd
an uncertainty of ∆a/araw =

0.4%.

Of the frictional forces acting on the xyz-slider, the simplest is the kinetic friction
F1 = µkρgsd on the moving chain segment on the table. Using the equilibrium value
0.78 link in units of ρg. The frictional
of sd = 6 links, we ﬁnd a result of µksd ≈
force at the table edge is F2 = µkN , where the normal force N lies in the xz-plane
for any angle ψ. (The fact that Ny vanishes for an ideal table edge that is uniform

±

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

14

in the y-direction comes about because there is no preference for either the positive
or the negative y direction.) This normal force is well approximated by a single force
acting at a sharp table edge at an angle φN = 45◦ from the upward vertical direction.
In the absence of any friction on the table or at the table edge, N is related to the
z-component Tz of the chain tension just above the table edge as

N cos φN ≈

Tz = ρL ¨Z = ρd

g
√8

,

(A.3)

where Z is the z-coordinate of the center of mass of the chain. Hence N
ρdg/2.
If table and edge frictions are included in the force balance in the z-direction, the
resulting expression is considerably more complicated, as we shall show in Appendix B.
The normal force is then increased to 0.85ρdg, and yields the table edge frictional
0.85µkd = 0.44 link worth of chain weight. In the experiment, we have
force of F2
allowed only 0.5 link for these frictional forces. There is thus a shortfall of 0.72 link.
Consequently the raw acceleration araw should be increased by 0.5%.

∝

≈

To understand air friction F4 on the sliding chain moving in air, we study its
eﬀect on the motion of a certain falling chain studied experimentally by Tomaszewski,
Pieranski and Geminard [31] (TPG) and shown in their ﬁgure 6(a). This chain is a
light ball chain that is initially stretched taut in the form of a horizontal ﬂat catenary.
One end is then released while the other end is held ﬁxed. The falling end is found to
be part of a horizontal chain segment that is falling freely. The length of this freely
falling horizontal chain segment decreases until it merges completely into the swinging
arm attached to the ﬁxed support. The almost straight swinging arm at that moment
has swung down from the horizontal direction by an angle of roughly 80◦. This is just
after frame # 22 in TPG ﬁgure 6(a) where the (vertical, horizontal) displacement of
the chain end from its initial position is (h, w) = (0.96, 0.76) m.

To isolate the eﬀect of air friction on this TPG falling ﬂat chain, we note that
the time of free fall to frame # 22 is tFF =
2h/g = 0.442 s. We ﬁnd from TPG
ﬁgure 5(a) that the their theoretical falling time for that frame is smaller than their
experimental time by ∆t = 0.0026
0.0003 s. The TPG theory already contains
bending friction between links in the chain, but not air friction. Hence the fractional
eﬀect of air friction is

p

±

∆t
texp

= 0.0059 =

∆a
2a

,

−

(A.4)

where a (= g here) is the constant vertical acceleration. (We do not use the free-fall
curve in TPG ﬁgure 5(a) to estimate air friction for the reason that this TPG chain
actually falls slightly faster than g because its initial position is not exactly horizontal.)
The TPG falling ﬂat chain is simply related to our xy-slider. The xy-slider also
has a horizontal chain segment, the part still on the table, that diminishes in length
as the chain falls. However, the xy-slider is ﬁxed at the end of the horizontal segment,
while the falling ﬂat chain is ﬁxed at the end of the swinging arm. So they look very
much like an upside-down version of each other, but with some important diﬀerences.
The angle θ of the swinging arm in the falling ﬂat chain changes continuously, instead
of being constant for a signiﬁcant part of the fall. What is much more important to
us is that these chains have diﬀerent falling accelerations: the TPG chain falls with
a vertical acceleration g, but the xy-slider falls with a vertical acceleration g/3. How
does this change in acceleration aﬀect the fractional change in the falling time when
the retarding eﬀect of air friction is removed from the experimental result?

This question is easily answered for a mass m falling down vertically with
constant acceleration a = ¨x that experiences an additional weak frictional force 2βmv

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

15

proportional to the instantaneous velocity v = ˙x like that acting on the Millikan
falling oil drop. The resulting acceleration change, ∆a =
2βv, can be expressed as
the fractional change

−

∆a
|
a

|

2x
a

.

f (a)

= 2βt = 2β

≡

r
Hence the fractional acceleration changes of the same mass falling through the same
vertical distance x in the same medium under two diﬀerent accelerations a1 and a2
are related as

(A.5)

√a2f (a2) = const = √a1f (a1).

If the TPG chain falls vertically like this mass, we shall have
f (g/3) = √3f (g) = 0.020.

(A.6)

(A.7)

This results holds for the xyz-slider also if its frictional coeﬃcient β is the same as
that for the TPG chain.

The TPG chain is a light ball chain, while ours is a cable chain that is shorter
in length and smaller in mass, 0.95 m and 12 g instead of 1.02 m and 21 g. Their
cross sectional dimensions are comparable, but their cross sectional shapes are not the
same. However, both our xyz-slider and the TPG ﬂat chain are falling at roughly the
same angle to the vertical direction when air friction is strongest, i.e., when the falling
speed is greatest towards the end of the measured fall. So their eﬀective cross sections
are quite similar in spite of the diﬀerences in shapes and in falling conﬁgurations.
We conclude that their β coeﬃcients are likely to be quite similar, and that our
experimental vertical acceleration should be increased by 2.0% before comparison
with the theoretical value for a frictionless chain.

Adding the small 0.5% correction for the uncompensated part of the friction on
the table and the table edge, we ﬁnd a total correction of 2.5%. The uncertainty
of this correction is hard to estimate, but our gut feeling is that the correction is
semi-realistic and that it is better to make it than not. We choose a relatively large
uncertainty of 1.2% in order to allow for the other neglected eﬀects mentioned in this
appendix. This uncertainty is much greater than the uncertainty of 0.4% in the initial
overhang position of the chain from the table edge. The latter uncertainty can thus
be neglected.

Appendix B. Chain tension, normal and frictional forces

If the table is not smooth, two forces of kinetic friction act on the xyz-slider. They
are (a) a horizontal force acting on the moving chain segment of length sd = d/ sin ψ,
and (b) a tangential force perpendicular to the normal force N at the table edge.
These forces will be referred to in the following as the table friction and the edge
friction, respectively. We shall show in this appendix that their eﬀect on our measured
acceleration is quite small. Nevertheless, their proper treatment requires a certain
appreciation of the dynamics of our falling chains that is interesting in its own right.
Consider ﬁrst the simpler xy-slider whose vertically falling motion is illustrated in
ﬁgure B1(a), where the triangle shown can be of any size. The links on the horizontal
side of the triangle shown in the ﬁgure as a dotted line are originally part of the
horizontal and stationary chain segment at the table edge. These links then fall along
the side of the triangle shown by the directed dashed line. Hence the chain appears to
fall along the third side of the triangle shown as a solid line in the ﬁgure. The triangle

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

16

Figure B1. Link and chain motions for (a) the xy-slider, and (b) the on-table
chain segment of the xyz-slider.

is thus an isosceles triangle with the apical angle θ deﬁned in section 3, and two equal
base angles

α1 = 1

2 (π

θ).

−

The linear motions of links and chain occur everywhere on the falling chain if the
apical angle θ remains constant in time.

Very much the same situation also appears on the table for the setback xyz-slider.
Here a short chain segment of length sd is sliding on the table with the links moving
along the directed dashed side of the triangle shown in ﬁgure B1(b), while the chain
itself appears to move along the solid side of the triangle. The triangle has an apical
angle ψ and two equal base angles

α2 = 1

2 (π

ψ).

−

The table friction in the laboratory frame is thus opposite in direction to the directed
dashed side of the triangle .

≈

We now turn to the friction at the table edge. Experience shows that the chain
45◦ actually persists for some distance around and below
direction deﬁned by ψ
70◦ ﬁnally takes over. Thus one may
the table edge before the overhang angle θ
visualize ﬁgure B1(b) to be folded around the table edge and to continue for some
distance below it before the apical angle changes to θ. The plane containing the edge
friction at the sharp table edge can be obtained by ﬁrst placing ﬁgure B1(b) on the
45◦ until its
table top and then rotating it about the table edge by an angle φN ≈
normal direction coincides with the direction of the normal force N. Edge friction is
then opposite in direction to the directed dashed side of that rotated isosceles triangle
whose lower base angle is located at the point where N acts. Just for the sake of
notational transparency, we shall denote this new base angle α3.

≈

We are now in a position to decompose forces along diﬀerent laboratory coordinate

axes. For the z-components at the table edge of the xyz-slider, we ﬁnd

N cos φN −

µkN cos φN sin α3

µkρsdg sin α2
−
= Tz = ρL ¨Z = ρd¨s

for a chain whose center-of-mass position is (X, Y, Z). This equation can be solved for
the normal force:

ρdg

cos φN (1
0.85ρdg,

−

N =

≈

µk sin α3) (cid:18)

¨s
g

+ µk

sin α2
sin ψ (cid:19)

where the numerical value is calculated for µk = 0.13, ψ = 45◦, and α3 = α2.

(B.1)

(B.2)

(B.3)

(B.4)

(B.5)

The falling chain of Hopkins, Tait, Steele and Cayley

As another example, the chain tension acting on the ﬁxed chain end at the origin

O of the xyz-slider is

T = Ty = ρL ¨Y + µkN cos α3 + µkρdsg cos α2,

where the terms can be calculated in terms of ¨s and the various parameters. The
numerical result is T

0.71ρsg.

17

(B.6)

≈

References

[1] Wong C W and Yasui K 2006 Falling chains Am. J. Phys. 74 490–496 arXiv: physics/0508005
[2] Cayley A 1857 On a class of dynamical problems Proc. Roy. Soc. London 8 506–511 Reprinted

in Ref. [32] Vol IV pp 7–11

[3] Irschik H and Holl H J 2004 Mechanics of variable-mass systems—Part 1: Balance of mass and

linear momentum App. Mech. Rev. 57 145–160

[4] Villarino M B 2006 email communications 30 January
[5] Routh E J 1898 A Treatise on Dyamics of a Particle (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)

pp 80–81

[6] Tait P G and Steele W J 1856 A Treatise on Dyamics of a Particle (london: MacMillan & Co)

pp 250–251; 1900 7th edn pp 334–335

[7] Mikhailov G K 1984 The dynamics of mechanical systems with variable masses as developed at
Cambridge during the second half of the nineteenth century Bull. Inst. Math. Appl. 20 13–19
[8] Warwick A 2003 Masters of Theory, Cambridge and the Rise of Mathematical Physics (Chicago:

University of Chicago Press) pp 157–158
[9] Sony Model DCR-HC65 NTSC Serial No. 1327219

[10] Sommerfeld A 1952 Lectures on Theoretical Physics, Vol. I, Mechanics (New York: Academic

Press) pp 28–29, Problem I.7 p 241, and solution p 257

[11] Rouse Ball W W 1960 A Short Account of the History of Mathematics (New York: Dover) p 428
[12] Gillispie C C 1971 Lazare Carnot Savant (Princeton: Princeton University Press) p 57, where
an English translation is given of the relevant sentences from Carnot L 1783 Essai sur les
machines (Dijon, Burgundy) Article LIX pp 91–92

[13] Cayley A 1857 Report on the recent progress of theoretical dynamics Brit. Assoc. Report 1–42

Reprinted in Ref. [32] Vol III pp 156–204

[14] Crilly A J 2006, Arthur Cayley: Mathematician Laureate of the Victorian age (Baltimore: Johns

Hopkins) pp 222–3

[15] Warwick A [8] p 89
[16] Warwick A [8] pp 87 231
[17] Forsyth A R 1895 Arthur Cayley Obit. Notices, Proc. Roy. Soc. London i–xliii
[18] Crilly T 1998 The young Arthur Cayley Notes and Records Roy. Soc. London 52 267–282
[19] Wolstenholme J Mathematical Problems, 2nd edn (London: Macmillan & Co) (We have access
only to the 3rd edition of 1891 where problems related to the HTSC falling chain problem
appear as Problems 2354 and 2355 on p 419. A notice in the book states that the third edition
is essentially a reprint of the second edition with most of the errors corrected.)

[20] Jeans J M 1907 An Elementary Treatise on the Theoretical Mechanics (Boston: Ginn and Co)

pp 236–237

[21] Lamb H 1914 Dynamics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) pp 143–144
[22] Warwick A [8] pp 156 260 514 520
[23] Sony Electronics has declined to provide any information on their timer accuracy because their

‘engineering data is proprietary’.

[24] Wolfram S 1999 The Mathematica Book 4th edn (Wolfram Media/Cambridge University Press)
[25] Rosenfeld A H 1975 The Particle Data Group: Growth and Operations-Eighteen Years of Particle

Physics Ann. Rev. Nucl. Sci. 25 555–598 (The use of scale factors is described on p 580.)

[26] Lide D R (ed) 1991 Handbook of Chemistry and Physics 72 edn (Boca Raton: CRC Press) p 14-7
[27] Wong C W, Yasui K and Youn S H unpublished
[28] Uline 3 mil Teﬂon tape Catalog No. S-7196 uline.com
[29] Persson B N J 2000 Sliding friction (Berlin: Springer) pp 9–19
[30] http://www.roymech.co.uk/Useful Tables/Tribology/co of frict.htm
[31] Tomaszewski W, Pieranski P and Geminard J-C 2006 The motion of the freely falling chain tip

Am. J. Phys. 74 776–783 arXiv: physics/0510060

[32] Cayley A 1989–97 The Collected Mathematical Papers of Arthur Cayley (Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press)

