7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
8
0
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Laboratory experiments on the generation of internal tidal beams over steep slopes

Louis Gostiaux and Thierry Dauxois
Laboratoire de Physique, ENS Lyon, CNRS,
46 All´ee d’Italie, 69364 Lyon c´edex 07, France

(Dated: January 3, 2014)

We designed a simple laboratory experiment to study internal tides generation. We consider a
steep continental shelf, for which the internal tide is shown to be emitted from the critical point,
which is clearly amphidromic. We also discuss the dependence of the width of the emitted beam
on the local curvature of topography and on viscosity. Finally we derive the form of the resulting
internal tidal beam by drawing an analogy with an oscillating cylinder in a static ﬂuid.

Keywords: Stratiﬁed ﬂuids – Internal waves – Internal tides

PACS numbers: 47.55.Hd Stratiﬁed ﬂows. 47.35.+i Hydrodynamic waves.

Over the past two decades it has become apparent that
substantial internal tides can be generated by tidal cur-
rents over ridges and other rough topography of the ocean
ﬂoor. This problem is of paramount importance since
baroclinic tides, generated by barotropic currents over
ocean ridges and seamounts, are an important source of
the ocean interior mixing.
Indeed, recent observations
suggest that mixing in the abyssal oceans is rather weak,
except in localized regions near rough topography.
It
explains the discrepancy between the observed intensity
of mixing in the interior of the oceans and is required
to satisfy models of ocean circulation [7]. This suggests
that these topographic eﬀects must be incorporated into
realistic climate and circulation models.

This question has been studied theoretically and nu-
merically, while related oceanic observations have been
reported. Baines showed [2] ﬁrst that points where the
topographic slope coincides with the angle of propagation
might be an eﬀective generator of internal wave. Such a
point is referred to as the critical point (see Fig. 1). In-
ternal beams emanating from the continental slope have
been observed recently [1, 9, 14, 15, 17]. On the the-
oretical side, let us mention several interesting descrip-
tions [16, 18] of abrupt discontinuity cases such as a to-
pographic step, a knife-edge ridge (zero width ridge as a
simple model for tall ridges such as the Hawaiian one),
a tent-shaped ridges, or smooth ridges (gaussian, poly-
nomial). Finally, recent numerical reports have also pro-
vided some new insight about this mechanism [9, 10].

All these works converge to conclude that beams of
internal tides energy arise due to the interplay between
oscillating currents and bathymetric features. Of partic-
ular interest is the location where the slope is critical, i.e.
where the direction of the wave beam is tangent to the
slope. In the remaining of the paper, we experimentally
study the location of emission and the form of the in-
ternal beam which is emitted. We also explain how this
form can be predicted by drawing an analogy between
the emission of an internal tide from a static topography,
and the emission of internal waves by an oscillating cylin-
der in a static ﬂuid. The agreement is very good, even
quantitatively.

The experiment was performed in a rectangular-
shaped tank (length 120 cm, height 40 cm and width
10 cm) as sketched in Fig. 1. A curved thin (0.5 cm) PVC
plate, introduced before ﬁlling, played the role of the con-
tinental shelf. The experiment was performed with a lin-
ear stratiﬁcation, pure water at the free surface while
highly salted water at the bottom, resulting in a con-
stant Brunt-Vais¨al¨a buoyancy frequency N ≃ 0.81 rad/s.
In the absence of rotation, the dispersion relation of in-
ternal gravity waves reads ω = N sin θ, where θ is the
angle of the beam with respect to the horizontal.

FIG. 1: Sketch of the experimental set-up. A PVC plate is os-
cillating between the solid and dashed oblique lines indicated
on the right, creating the tide. The continental shelf consists
of two planar PVC plates connected by a quarter of cylinder
of radius R = 3.3 cm. The upper plate is nearly horizontal,
◦
while the downgoing one makes an angle α = 78
with the
horizontal. The aspect ratio h/H is 2/3, for a total water
height h + H = 19 cm. The critical point C indicates the
location where the internal tide generation is supposed to oc-
◦
cur, i.e. where the internal beam inclined at an angle θ = 23
with the horizontal is tangent to the topography. The dot-
ted rectangle indicates the zone captured by the camera and
presented in Fig. 2a.

The tidal current was generated by a second PVC plate
localized far from the continental slope, i.e. in the region
corresponding to the abyssal plane or to the open ocean.
This plate was ﬁxed at its bottom end, with its top end
oscillating horizontally. The oscillation A sin(ωt) was
monitored by a position control motor of a printer ap-

2

a)

b)

paratus driven by a sinusoidal electronic signal delivered
by a Kepco ampliﬁer. The phase origin at t = 0 corre-
sponds to a vertical position of the paddle and the move-
ment is initiated leftwards towards the topography. Sev-
eral forcing tidal frequencies and amplitudes were tried
out. The tidal frequency ω was satisfying the condition
0 < ω < N , so that internal tides may be freely radiat-
ing. Results and ﬁgures discussed throughout this paper
correspond to ω/(2π) = 0.050 Hz for which θ = 23◦, and
A = 0.5 cm.

The density gradient ﬁeld within the tank was ﬁnally
obtained with the standard synthetic Schlieren tech-
nique [5] by acquiring successive side views with a CMOS
AVT Marlin F131B Camera. A sheet of paper with
points randomly scattered was located 150 cm behind
the tank. Successive images (1280 × 300 pixels) of those
points obtained with the camera located 280 cm in front
of the tank were adequately treated by a homemade soft-
ware. A correlation image velocimetry algorithm [6] was
applied between a reference image taken prior to the ex-
periment and the diﬀerent snapshots. As we used 21 × 21
pixels correlation boxes with a 75% overlap, the reso-
lution for the two dimensional density gradient ﬁeld is
256 × 60.

Figure 2a show a snapshot of the vertical density gra-
dient. To facilitate the visualization, a narrower domain
than in the experiments is shown. It corresponds to the
dotted rectangle depicted in Fig. 1. To increase the visi-
bility, we ﬁltered at the excitation frequency ω the time
series of the density gradient ﬁeld over one experimen-
tal tidal period (see Ref. [12] for more details about this
method).

An internal tide is clearly seen to emanate from the
upper part of the slope and radiate away from the shelf-
break in both directions. However, it is important to
stress the absence of a third beam radiated transversally
to the topography. This contradicts Baines analytical
theory [2] in which this third beam reﬂects on the surface
and is present in the general solution for the downward
propagating wave. The explanation presumably lie in the
presence of a singular point in Baines’ case or in Saint
In numerical
Laurent et al numerical simulation [18].
experiments with a smooth slope and a typically shallow
continental shelf [9], no such beam was found and the
presence of this third beam was already ambiguous in
previous experiments [3].

The amplitude of the vertical density gradient is
given in terms of variations of the squared Brunt-
V¨ais¨al¨a frequency. If one considers the original value of
N 2 = 0.66 rad2/s2, the measured amplitude of ∆N 2 =
±0.005 rad2/s2 for the internal wave is a very small per-
turbation of the original stratiﬁcation. Using the mass
conservation relation

iω(ρ − ¯ρ) = w

d ¯ρ
dz

,

(1)

where ρ is the perturbated density, ¯ρ(z) the initial density
and w the vertical density, we obtain typical vertical ve-
locities of order ±0.11 mm/s, corresponding to vertical

FIG. 2: (Color online) Panel a presents the two-dimensional
vertical density gradient, while panel b shows the phase. Both
plots have been averaged over one tidal period of the experi-
ment around t = 3T . Horizontal and vertical distances are in
cm. The generation point C appears to be an amphidromic
point around which the phase of the wave rotates.

displacements of ±0.15 mm. This is one of the inter-
ests of the synthetic Schlieren technique that allows to
measure very weak perturbations of the buoyancy ﬁeld
and thus to investigate weakly nonlinear regimes. This
vertical amplitude has to be compared to the barotropic
elevation of the water induced by the forcing. The paddle
oscillates with an A = 0.5 cm amplitude, and the width
of the free water volume in the tank is 90 cm for a height
of H = 12 cm. The corresponding elevation of the water
at the level of the slope is thus ∆H = 0.7 mm. The baro-
clinic component observed is thus still a perturbation of
the barotropic tide.

To the right of the generation point C, energy propaga-
tion is downward while, to the left, it is upward. As a con-
sequence of the internal waves propagation law for which
group and phase velocities are orthogonal with opposite
vertical components, phase propagation is thus upward
to the right and downward to the left. One can conclude
from this simple observation that the phase has to rotate
around C, which is therefore an amphidromic point. Our
ﬁltering technique allows to evaluate the phase of the
wave [12], which is plotted in Fig. 2b. One can clearly
see that the isophase lines converge on a single point pre-
viously referred as the generation point C, around which
the phase rotates uniformally.

Whereas the location and the inclination of the inter-
nal tide are well understood, the selection mechanism of
the width of the beam was not yet clearly identiﬁed by

previous studies. Several length scales can be consid-
ered in this problem. The ﬁrst one corresponds to the
thickness of the oscillating boundary layer δ = (ν/ω)1/2
where ν is the kinematic viscosity. In the present case,
δ = 1.8 mm. The second one is the local radius of cur-
vature of the continental shelf R = 3.3 cm. At last, the
dimensions of the shelf itself (h, H...) that play a role [2]
in the “ﬂat-bump” geometry for which α < θ happen to
be irrelevant in the conﬁguration of a steep topography.
Our understanding is directly inspired from the gen-
eration of internal waves by oscillating cylinders. One
can therefore try to draw an analogy between the inter-
nal tide generation by a curved static topography of a
given radius of curvature R and the internal waves gen-
eration by an oscillating cylinder of the same radius R in
a stratiﬁed ﬂuid.

a)

b)

FIG. 3: (Color online) Comparison between experiment (a)
and theory (b) for the vertical density gradient ﬁeld. Panel (a)
has been averaged over one tidal period around 3T . We use
the Hurley and Keady analytical solution [13] for oscillating
cylinders to modelize the internal wave beam. We consider
the tangential circle at the shelf break as the generating cylin-
der section and compute the analytical solution isolating the
upper right emission point. Vertical dashed lines correspond
to the cross section plotted in Fig. 4.

In their seminal theoretical work [13], Hurley and
Keady showed how to get the velocity proﬁle of the beams
generated by such a cylinder. First, they proposed to
consider a dimensionless parameter λ = ν/(2R2ω cot θ)
which is proportional to the squared ratio of the oscilla-
tory boundary layer thickness δ that surrounds the cylin-
der to its radius R. The cylinder emits the four beams of
the well known St Andrew’s conﬁguration. Each beam
is considered independently. Then, the longitudinal ve-

3

locity component vs for each beam is shown to be given
by

+∞

vs(s, σ) = V0 Z

0

J1(K) exp(−λsK 3/R + iσK) dK,

(2)
where J1 is the Bessel function of the ﬁrst kind of or-
der 1 and s (resp. σ) the longitudinal (resp. transversal)
coordinate along (resp. across) the beam. V0 is the pro-
jection of the oscillation velocity along the beam. In the
domain δ = (ν/ω)1/2 ≪ R, this function happens to be
localized on the characteristics σ = ±R corresponding to
the lines of slope tan θ, tangential to the cylinder. In this
limit case, 2 × 4 = 8 beams are emitted from the four
critical points of the cylinder.

In our case, we only consider the upper characteristic
corresponding to the single critical point C of the prob-
lem. Hurley and Keady’s expression restricted to this
single characteristic happens to ﬁt very well our exper-
In the tidal experiment, λ ≃ 6.3 10−4.
imental data.
We estimate the buoyancy perturbation of the stratiﬁ-
cation by means of Eq. (1). By appropriately taking
into account the inclination of the beam, one gets a ﬁnal
expression for the vertical density gradient that can be
compared to our experimental data.

Fig. 3 compares the vertical density gradient ﬁeld in
the experimental (a) and the theoretical (b) cases. The
analytical solution of Hurley and Keady is computed on
an imaginary cylinder tangential to the shelf break re-
gion. The amplitude of oscillation of the cylinder corre-
sponds to the amplitude of the tidal ﬂow. The agreement
is qualitatively very good. The phase opposition between
the two parts of the beams is also well described by the
model.

To get a more quantitative comparison between exper-
iment and theory, we plot on Fig. 4 ﬁve vertical cross sec-
tions (indicated in Fig. 3) of the vertical density gradient
ﬁeld at x = −6, −3, 6 and 9 cm relative to the generation
point. The quantitative agreement between the experi-
mental and the theoretical proﬁles is very good, which
conﬁrms that the structure of the emitted beam only de-
pends on the viscous boundary layer thickness δ and on
the local radius of curvature of the shelf R.

First of all, this experiment proves that the internal
tide generation conditions are met when the radiated
tidal beam is aligned with the slope of the topography,
corresponding to a critical point of emission which hap-
pens to be amphidromic. We clearly demonstrate the
absence of any transverse emission at that point that
It
is supposed to occur in Baines analytical study [2].
is however important to emphasize that this disagree-
ment might come from the absence of any sharp corner
in the shelf break, contrary to what has been considered
in Refs [2, 3, 18]. Following this observation, we derive
a simple analytical model derived from the theoretical
work of Hurley and Keady [13] and show that we can
quantitatively estimate the density perturbation proﬁle
as a function of the viscosity and the local radius of cur-

4

vature of the topography.

Since this paper focuses on the internal tide genera-
tion, we dot not consider the evolution of the internal
tides as they propagate further into the deep ocean. Sur-
face reﬂections, in particular, are expected to generate
internal solitary waves by creating local disturbances at
the seasonal thermocline [8, 15].

Moreover, the emitted internal wave of tidal period
often breaks up into internal waves of shorter period. In-
deed, and very interestingly, a recent numerical report
has emphasized that parametric subharmonic resonance
may come into play in the rotating case [10]. Experimen-
tal work along those lines is in progress.

Acknowledgments

FIG. 4: Vertical cross sections of the measured vertical density
gradient (thin line) and its theoretical prediction using Hurley
and Keady’s theory (bold line). From top to bottom, the cross
sections correspond to the abscisse x = −6, −3, 3, 6 and 9 cm.

We thank F. Petrelis and S. Llewellyn Smith for help-
ful discussions. Comments to the manuscript by Denis
Martinand are deeply appreciated. This work has been
partially supported by the 2005 PATOM CNRS program
and by 2005-ANR project TOPOGI-3D.

[1] A. Azevedo, J. C. B. da Silva and A. L. New. On the
generation and propagation of internal solitary waves in
the southern Bay of Biscay. Deep-Sea Research I 53: 927-
941 (2006).

[2] P. G. Baines. On the internal tide generation models.

Deep-Sea Research 29:307-338 (1982).

[3] P. G. Baines and F. Xin-Hua, Internal tide generation
at a continental shelf/slope junction: a comparison be-
tween theory and a laboratory experiment. Dynamics of
Atmospheres and Oceans — 9:297 (1985).

[4] S. Cardoso and J. C. B. Da Silva. Generation sites of
internal waves observed by ERS SAR oﬀ the SW coast
of Portugal. Interesting results concerning ray reﬂection.
XVII International Conference for Physics Students, Bu-
dapest, Hungria (2002).

[5] S. B. Dalziel, G. O. Hughes and B. R. Sutherland. Whole
density ﬁeld measurements by synthetic schlieren. Exper-
iments in Fluids 28:322 (2000).

[6] A. Fincham and G. Delerce. Advanced optimization of
correlation imaging velocimetry algorithms. Experiments
in Fluids, 29:13, 2000.

[7] C. Garrett. The dynamic ocean in Perspectives in Fluid
Dynamics, G. K. Batchelor, H. K. Moﬀatt, and M. G.
Worster (Eds.) Cambridge University Press, 2005.

[8] T. Gerkema. Internal and interfacial tides: beam scat-
tering and local generation of solitary waves. Journal of
Marine Research 59:227-255 (2001).

[9] T. Gerkema, F.-P. A. Lam and L. R. M. Maas. Internal
tides in the Bay of Biscay: conversion rates and seasonal
eﬀects. Deep-Sea Research II 51:2995-3008 (2004).
[10] T. Gerkema, C. Staquet and P. Bouruet-Aubertot. De-

cay of semi-diurnal
internal tide beams due to sub-
harmonic resonance. Geophysical Research Letters 33,
L08604 (2006).

[11] L. Gostiaux, PhD Thesis, ENS Lyon (2006).

´Etude
exp´erimentale des ondes internes: g´en´eration, propaga-
tion et r´eﬂexion.

[12] L. Gostiaux, T. Dauxois, H. Didelle, J. Sommeria and S.
Viboux. Quantitative laboratory observations of internal
wave reﬂection on ascending slopes. Physics of Fluids 18,
056602 (2006).

[13] D. G. Hurley and G. Keady. The generation of internal
waves by vibrating elliptic cylinders. Part 2. Approximate
viscous solution. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 351, 119-
138 (1997).

[14] N. J´ez´equel, R. Maz´e and A. Pichon.

Interaction of
semidiurnal tide with a continental slope in a continu-
ously stratiﬁed ocean. Deep-Sea Research I 49:707-734
(2002).

[15] A. L. New and R. D. Pingree. Local generation of internal
soliton packets in the central Bay of Biscay. Deep-Sea
Research 39:1521-1534 (1992).

[16] F. Petrelis, S. Llewellyn Smith and W. R. Young, Tidal
conversion at a submarine ridge. Journal of Physical
Oceanography 36: 1053-1071 (2006).

[17] R. D. Pingree and A. L. New, Abyssal penetration and
bottom reﬂection of internal tidal energy in the bay of
biscay. Journal of Physical Oceanography 21:28-39 (1991)
[18] L. St. Laurent, S. Stringer, C. Garrett and D. Perrault-
Joncas. The generation of internal tides at abrupt topog-
raphy. Deep-Sea Research I 50:987 (2003).

