7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
1
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An assessment of Evans’ uniﬁed ﬁeld theory I

Friedrich W. Hehl∗

08 March 2007, ﬁle AssessI06.tex, fwh

Abstract

Evans developed a classical uniﬁed ﬁeld theory of gravitation and elec-
tromagnetism on the background of a spacetime obeying a Riemann-Cartan
geometry. This geometry can be characterized by an orthonormal coframe
ϑα and a (metric compatible) Lorentz connection Γαβ. These two potentials
yield the ﬁeld strengths torsion T α and curvature Rαβ. Evans tried to infuse
electromagnetic properties into this geometrical framework by putting the
coframe ϑα to be proportional to four extended electromagnetic potentials
Aα; these are assumed to encompass the conventional Maxwellian potential
A in a suitable limit. The viable Einstein-Cartan(-Sciama-Kibble) theory of
gravity was adopted by Evans to describe the gravitational sector of his the-
ory. Including also the results of an accompanying paper by Obukhov and
the author, we show that Evans’ ansatz for electromagnetism is untenable
beyond repair both from a geometrical as well as from a physical point of
view. As a consequence, his uniﬁed theory is obsolete.

PACS numbers: 03.50.Kk; 04.20.Jb; 04.50.+h
Keywords: Electrodynamics, gravitation, Einstein-Cartan theory, Evans’ uniﬁed ﬁeld theory

∗Institute for Theoretical Physics, University at Cologne, 50923 K¨oln, Germany and Depart-
ment of Physics and Astronomy, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO 65211, USA

1

1 Introduction

One of the problems in evaluating Evans’ uniﬁed ﬁeld theory is that its content is
spread over hundreds of pages in articles and books of Evans and his associates.
There is no single paper in which the fundamentals of Evans’ theory are formu-
lated in a concise and complete way. Nevertheless, we can take Evans’ papers
[23, 24], which subsume also work done earlier, as a starting point. Now and then,
when additional information is required, we will use other publications of Evans
and collaborators, too [19, 25–28]. We will try to put the fundamental equations
of Evans’ theory in a way as condensed as possible; in fact, we will come up with
the nine equations from (78) to (86) that characterize Evans’ theory. Incidentally,
we came across Evans’ uniﬁed ﬁeld theory in the context of a refereeing process.
And in the present paper, we will formulate our assessment in considerable detail.
We use, as Evans does in [24], the calculus of exterior differential forms. A
translation for Evans’ notation into ours is given in Table 1 (at the end of the
Introduction).

b = kT a

The evaluation of Evans’ theory is made more demanding since his articles
contain many mathematical mistakes and inconsistencies, as has been amply shown
by Bruhn [2–10] and Rodrigues et al. [18, 58]. Let me just illustrate this point with
two new examples. I take Evans’ “Einstein equation” in [24], App.4, Eq.(11),
namely Ra
b . According to Evans’ deﬁnition [24], Eq.(16), the left hand
side represents the curvature 2-form in a Riemann-Cartan geometry (i.e., Rαβ =
−Rβα) and the right hand side is proportional to the components of the canonical
energy-momentum tensor T a
b . Clearly, this equation is incorrect since a 2-form
µνb dxµ ∧ dxν/2 with its 36 components cannot be equated to the 16 com-
Ra
ponent of a second rank tensor. If we generously interpreted Ra
b as Ricci tensor,
even though Evans denotes the Ricci tensor always as Rµν, the equation would be
wrong, too. A second example, we can ﬁnd nearby: In [24], App.4, Eq.(10),
Evans claims that the energy-momentum of his generalized Einstein equation
obeys D ∧ T a
b = 0. It is well-known, however, that in a spacetime with torsion
there can be no zero on the right-hand-side, rather torsion and curvature dependent
terms must enter, see [35], Eq.(3.12). Similar examples can be found easily.

b = Ra

One may argue, as I will do in future, that a scientist educated as chemist
may have a great idea in physics even if the mathematical details of his articles
are not quite sound. Accordingly, I sometimes followed not only that subclass of
Evans’ formulas that deemed correct to me, but also his prose in oder to under-
stand Evans’ underlying “philosophy”.

It is clear from [24] that the 4-dimensional spacetime in which Evans’ the-

2

ory takes place obeys a Riemann-Cartan geometry (RC-geometry) [35] or, in the
words of Evans, a “Cartan-geometry”. We decided to take what Evans calls an
antisymmetric part of the metric ϑαβ := ϑα ∧ ϑβ (here ϑα is the coframe of the
RC-spacetime) not seriously as a part of the metric, see Bruhn [7] for a detailed
investigation. The quantity ϑαβ = −ϑβα is an antisymmetric tensor-valued 2-form
with 36 independent components and it is a respectable quantity, but it certainly
cannot feature as a metric. Since Evans very often claims to use a RC-geometry,
we take his word for it. Then, an asymmetric metric is ruled out. One cannot have
both, RC-geometry and an asymmetric metric. Both are mutually exclusive.

In a RC-geometry, a linear connection Γ and a metric g with Minkowskian
signature (+ − − −) are prescribed, furthermore metric compatibility is required.
This guarantees that lengths and angles are integrable in RC-geometry. Evans
arrives at a RC-geometry by means of what he calls the “tetrad postulate”, see
[24], Eqs.(32) and (33), and Rodrigues et al. [58].

In Sec.2 we will display the geometric properties of a RC-geometry in the 4-
dimensional spacetime in quite some detail. In particular, we deﬁne torsion and
curvature and decompose torsion irreducibly under the local Lorentz group. We
introduce the contortion and the Ricci 1-forms and the curvature scalar. Moreover,
the two Bianchi identities are displayed and two irreducible pieces projected out
leading to the Cartan and Einstein 3-forms. The Ricci identity will be mentioned
shortly.

In Sec.3 we will take Evans’ ansatz relating the coframe ϑα to a generalized
electromagnetic potential Aα according to Aα = a0 ϑα, where a0 is a scalar factor
of the dimension magnetic ﬂux /length SI= Wb/m = V s/m, see Evans and Eckardt
[28], p.2. We will point out that in this way one ﬁnds four Lorentz-vector valued 1-
forms or, in other words, extended electromagnetic SO(1, 3)-covariant potentials
Aα with 16 components, in contrast to what Evans ﬁnds, namely O(3)-covariant
potentials. Then the extended electromagnetic ﬁeld strength F α is deﬁned and the
generalized Maxwell equations displayed and discussed.

In Sec.4 we show that Evans just adopted the viable Einstein-Cartan theory
(EC-theory) of gravity for his purpose literally. His generalized Einsteinian ﬁeld
equation is the same as the ﬁrst ﬁeld equation of EC-theory. As a consequence
of the angular momentum law, Evans also used the second ﬁeld equation of EC-
theory, even though he used it only in words in identifying torsion with the spin of
matter. Then we display the energy-momentum and angular momentum laws. It is
pointed out that the so-called Evans wave equation for the coframe ϑα is a redun-
dant structure since the dynamics of ϑα is already controlled by the generalized

3

Notion

coframe

connection

torsion

curvature

Ricci tensor/1-form

Evans’ elmg. potential

Evans’ elmg. constant

Evans’ elmg. ﬁeld strength

Evans’ hom. current

Evans’ inh. current

can. energy-mom. density

spin ang. mom. density

Hodge duality

Evans

qa = qa
ωa
b = ωa
2 T a
2 Ra

µdxµ
µbdxµ
µνdxµ ∧ dxν
bµνdxµ ∧ dxν
Rµν
Aa

T a = 1
b = 1

Ra

here

αdxi

ϑα = ei
β = Γiα

βdxi

Γα
T α = 1

Rα

β = 1

2 Tij
2 Rijα
Ricα = eβ⌋Rα
Aα

αdxi ∧ dxj

βdxi ∧ dxj

β = Ricβαϑβ

a0
F α

J α

hom
J α
inh
Σα = Tα

ταβ = Sαβ

⋆Ψα

βηβ
γηγ

Table 1: Translation of Evans’ notation into ours. Note that ηα = ⋆ϑα. In Evans’
work, T a
b is also sometimes used as symmetric energy-momentum tensor.

Einstein equation together with the Cartan equation.

In Sec.5 we collect the fundamental equations of Evans’ theory in the nine
equations from (78) to (86). We will explain what exactly we call Evans’ uniﬁed
ﬁeld theory.
In an accompanying paper by Obukhov and the author [41], we
propose a new variational principle for Evans’ theory and derive the corresponding
ﬁeld equations of Evans’ theory. It turns out that for all physical cases we can
derive the vanishing of torsion and thus the collapse of Evans’ theory to Einstein’s
ordinary ﬁeld equation. We discuss our ﬁndings, including the results of [41], and
summarize our objections against Evans’ uniﬁed theory.

A few historical remarks may be in order. Cartan himself noticed in a letter
to Einstein, see [17], page 7, that one irreducible piece of the torsion T “has
precisely all the mathematical characteristics of the electromagnetic potential”; it

A(0)

F a

jν

J ν

T a
b

?

Ψa

e

4

is apparently the vector piece Tvec that he determined earlier, between 1923 and
1925, in [14]. Thus he discussed Tvec ∼ A, where A is the potential of Maxwellian
electrodynamics. Note that this assumption is totally different from Evans’ ansatz
ϑα ∼ Aα. Moreover, Cartan did not develop a corresponding electromagnetic
theory. In fact, in the same papers [14], he linked, within a consistent theoretical
framework, torsion to the spin of matter. He laid the groundwork to what we
call nowadays the EC-theory of gravity [1, 35, 68]. This excludes the mentioned
identiﬁcation of a piece of the torsion with the electromagnetic potential.

Later Eyraud [29] and Infeld [45] and, more recently, Horie [44] tried to link
torsion to the electromagnetic ﬁeld. But these attempts did lead to nowhere. For
more details, one may consult Tonnelat [66] and Goenner [31].

2 Geometry: Riemann-Cartan geometry of space-

time

2.1 Deﬁning RC-geometry

We assume a 4-dimensional differential manifold. At each point, the basis of
the tangent space are the four linearly independent vectors eα = ei
α∂i , here
α, β, ... = 0, 1, 2, 3, the (anholonomic) tetrad indices, number the vectors and
i, j, k, ... = 0, 1, 2, 3, the (holonomic) coordinate indices, denote the components
of the respective vectors. The basis of the cotangent space is span by the four
linearly independent covectors or 1-forms ϑβ = ej
β dxj . The bases of vectors
and covectors are dual to each other. Consequently, we have ei
α and
α ei
ei
j. We call collectively the eα’s and the ϑβ’s also tetrads. We follow the
conventions1 speciﬁed in [37].

β = δβ

β = δi

β ej

On our manifold we impose a connection 1-form Γα

βdxi that allows
us to deﬁne the parallel transport of quantities. Accordingly, we have a covariant
exterior derivative operator D := d+Γα
β represents the behavior
of the quantity under linear transformations. Additionally, we impose a symmetric

β , where f α

β = Γiα

β f α

1 We build from the coframe ϑα by exterior multiplication and by applying the Hodge
star the following expressions: ϑαβ := ϑα ∧ ϑβ , ϑαβγ
etc.; η :=
⋆1 (volume 4-form) ,
ηα := ⋆ϑα , ηαβ := ⋆ϑαβ , etc., see [37, 38]. We denote antisymmetriza-
tion by brackets [ij] = (ij − ji)/2 and symmetrization by parentheses: (ij) = (ij + ji)/2. Anal-
ogously for more indices, as, e.g., for [ijk], where we have [ijk] = (ijk − jik + jki − + · · · )/3!,
see Schouten [60, 61].

:= ϑαβ ∧ ϑγ ,

5

metric g = gij dxi ⊗ dxj, with gij = gji. Referred to a tetrad, we have gαβ =
ei

β gij.

αej

Metric and connection are postulated to be metric compatible, that is, the non-
metricity 1-form Qαβ := −Dgαβ is postulated to vanish: Qαβ = 0. This guaran-
tees that lengths and angles are constant under parallel transport. In accordance
with this fact, it is convenient to choose the tetrads to be orthonormal once and
for all. Then, gαβ = diag(+1, −1, −1, −1) =: oαβ, where oαβ is the Minkowski
metric. If we raise the α-index of the connection, then Γαβ = −Γβα. This is
known as the Lorentz (or spin) connection, since the indices α and β transform
locally under the Lorentz group SO(1, 3). Hence, the variables ϑα and Γαβ, i.e.,
coframe and Lorentz connection, specify the geometry completely.

∂xi′ ej

α. Under local SO(1,3) Lorentz rotations Λβ

In the subsequent section, we need to discuss the transformation properties
of the coframe ϑα. Under a coordinate transformation, it behaves like a 1-form,
in components, ei′ α = ∂xj
, it
transforms as a Lorentz vector ϑα′
ϑβ. The spatial rotation group O(3) is
a subgroup of SO(1, 3). But the Lorentz group includes also the boosts. In other
words, whereas a spatial O(3)-rotation of ϑα is an allowed procedure, the theory
is only locally Lorentz covariant — and thus takes place in a RC-geometry — if
the coframe ϑα transforms under the complete SO(1, 3). If a theory admitted only
an O(3) transformation, then it would violate Lorentz invariance.

= Λβ

α′

α′

The geometry deﬁned so far is called a RC-geometry. It is also clear from
the statements of Evans that he uses exactly the same geometry. Thus, we have
a secure platform for our evaluation. In four dimensions, RC-geometry was ﬁrst
used in the viable Einstein-Cartan(-Sciama-Kibble) theory of gravity, for short
EC-theory [34, 35, 49, 62, 63, 67, 68].

2.2 Torsion and curvature

From our variable ϑα and Γa
the curvature 2-forms, respectively:

β, we can extract two Lorentz tensors, the torsion and

T α := Dϑα = dϑα + Γβ
γ ∧ Γγ
Rα

:= dΓα

β − Γα

β

α ∧ ϑβ ,
β .

(1)
(2)

In RC-geometry, we have, because of the metric compatibility, Γαβ = −Γβα, and
thus, Rαβ = −Rβα. In four dimensions, torsion and curvature have 24 and 36
independent components, respectively.

6

If one applies a Cartan displacement (rolling without gliding) around an in-
ﬁnitesimal loop in the manifold, then torsion is related to the translational misﬁt
and the curvature to the rotational misﬁt; a discussion can be found in [15], see
also Sharpe [65], our book [38], Sec.C.1.6, and the recent article of Wise [70].
Alternatively, one may build up an inﬁnitesimal parallelogram, then the transla-
tional closure failure is proportional to the torsion. This is important: Geometri-
cally, from the point of view of RC-geometry, torsion has nothing to do with spin,
but rather with translations. It is for this reason that torsion can be understood
as the ﬁeld strength of a translational gauge theory, see Gronwald [32]. Conse-
quently, when Evans treats torsion and spin (Spin of matter? Spin of gravity?
Spin of electromagnetism?) synonymously, as he does in all of his articles on his
theory,2 then this can only be understood as an additional dynamical assumption
that is independent from the RC-geometry of the underlying spacetime. We will
see further down in detail that this is, indeed, the case.

The torsion 2-form T α can be contracted by eα⌋ to a covector eα⌋T α and
multiplied by ϑα to yield a 3-form ϑa ∧ T α or, using the Hodge star, to a covector
with twist ⋆ (ϑa ∧ T α). These expressions correspond to the vector and the axial
vector pieces of the torsion. More formally, we can decompose the torsion tensor
irreducibly under the local Lorentz into three pieces:

The second and the third pieces correspond to the mentioned vector and axial
vector pieces, respectively,

T α = (1)T α + (2)T α + (3)T α .

(2)T α :=

ϑα ∧ (eβ⌋T β) ,

(3)T α :=

eα⌋(ϑβ ∧ T β) ,

1
3
1
3

whereas the ﬁrst piece can be computed by using (3).

For a comparison with Riemannian geoemtry, it is often convenient to de-
compose the connection 1-form into a Riemannian part, denoted by a tilde, and a
tensorial post-Riemannian part according to

Γα

β =

Γα

β − Kα

β .

2 “There are two fundamental differential forms...that together describe any spacetime, the
torsion or spin form and Riemann or curvature form.” See Evans [24], p.434. Just by the choice of
Evans’ language, torsion is always identiﬁed with spin. We are not told what sort of spin we have
to think of. In Sec.4 we will see that it has to be the total spin of all matter and the electromagnetic
ﬁeld, with exception of gravity.

e

7

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

In RC-geometry, the Kα
contortion 1-form as [37]

β can be derived by evaluating Dgαβ = 0. We ﬁnd the

Kαβ := 2e[α⌋Tβ] −

eα⌋eβ⌋(Tγ ∧ ϑγ) = −Kβα .

1
2

Resolved with respect to the torsion, we have T α = K α

β ∧ ϑβ.

The curvature 2-form yields, by contraction, the Ricci 1-form

Ricα := eβ⌋Rα

β = Ricβα ϑβ = Rγβα

γϑβ.

In a RC-geometry, the components of the Ricci 1-form are asymmetric in general:
Ricαβ 6= Ricβα. By transvection with the metric, we ﬁnd the curvature scalar

R := gαβ Ricαβ = gαβeα⌋Ricβ = eα⌋eβ⌋Rαβ = −eα⌋

eβ⌋ ⋆

⋆Rαβ

.

(9)

After some algebra, see [38], p.338, we ﬁnd for the curvature scalar, with ηαβ =
⋆ (ϑα ∧ ϑβ), the following:

(cid:2)

(cid:0)

(cid:1)(cid:3)

R = eα⌋eβ⌋Rαβ = ⋆

ηαβ ∧ Rαβ
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

.

The expression under the star can be taken as a Lagrangian 4-form of the gravita-
tional ﬁeld.

The curvature 2-form can be decomposed into 6 different pieces, see [37].
Among them, we ﬁnd the symmetric tracefree Ricci tensor, the curvature scalar,
and the antisymmetric piece of the Ricci tensor.

2.3 Bianchi identities

If we differentiate (1) and (2), we ﬁnd the two Bianchi identities for torsion and
curvature, respectively:

(7)

(8)

(10)

(11)
(12)

DT α = Rβ
β = 0 .
DRα

α ∧ ϑβ ,

Incidentally, Evans agrees that he and we use the same RC-geometry.3

3M.W. Evans states in his internet blog http://www.atomicprecision.com/blog/2006/12/08/
endorsement-of-ece-by-the-profession/ the following: “The two Cartan structure equations, two
Bianchi identities and tetrad postulate used by Carroll, Hehl and myself are the same.” See, how-
ever, a note of Bruhn [8] on some mistake in the corresponding considerations of Evans.

8

Both Bianchi identities can be decomposed irreducibly under the local Lorentz
group into 3 and 4 irreducible pieces, respectively; for details, see [36, 37, 53]. We
remind ourselves of the 1-form ηαβγ = ⋆(ϑα ∧ ϑβ ∧ ϑγ), where the star denotes
the Hodge operator. Then, by exterior multiplication of the Bianchi identities with
this 1-form, we can extract from (11) an irreducible piece with 6 independent
components,

DT γ ∧ ηγαβ = Rδ

γ ∧ ϑδ ∧ ηγαβ ,

and from (12) one with 4 independent components,

We deﬁne the Cartan and the Einstein 3-forms,

DRβγ ∧ ηβγα = 0 .

:=

Cαβ

1
2
1
2
respectively. Now we shift in (13,14) by partial integration the 1-form ηαβγ under
D. After some algebra, we ﬁnd,

ηαβγ ∧ Rβγ ,

ηαβγ ∧ T γ ,

Gα :=

(15)

(16)

DCαβ = −η[α ∧ Ricβ] ,
1
2

DGα =

ηαβγδ Rβγ ∧ T δ .

Thus, the Cartan 3-form Cαβ and the Einstein 3-form Gα are important quantities
since they appear in the two contracted Bianchi identities (17) and (18) under the
differentiation symbol.

Using (16) and the formula ϑ[α ∧ Gβ] = η[α ∧ Ricβ], Eq.(17) can be rewritten
in terms of Gα. Thus, ﬁnally we have for the two contracted Bianchi identities,
see also [54, 55],

DCαβ + ϑ[α ∧ Gβ] = 0 ,
1
2

DGα =

ηαβγδ Rβγ ∧ T δ .

We will come back to these 6 + 4 independent equations below. Note that (20)
is only valid in four dimensions. In three dimensions — then Gα is a 2-form —
the term on the right-hand-side of (20) vanishes,4 see [36], that is, DGα = 0 (for
α = 1, 2, 3).

4 ´E. Cartan [12, 13] worked very intuitively. One of his goals in analyzing Einstein’s theory was

9

(13)

(14)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

2.4 Ricci identity

If we differentiate covariantly the vector-valued p-form Ψα, we ﬁnd, because of
the Poincar´e lemma dd = 0, the Ricci identity

This is particularly true for the coframe,

DDΨα = Rβ

α ∧ Ψβ .

DDϑα = Rβ

α ∧ ϑβ .

(21)

(22)

Evans is calling the Ricci identity (22) simply “Evans’ lemma”, see [25], p.464.
However, he made a calculational mistake and found for the right-hand-side of
(22) effectively the expression R ⋆ϑα, instead of the correct Rβ

α ∧ ϑβ.

3 Electromagnetism: Evans’ ansatz for extended elec-

tromagnetism

3.1 Evans’ ansatz

Up to now, everything is quite conventional. The RC-geometry, which Evans is
using, has been introduced earlier in gauge theories of gravity and is well un-
derstood, see [33]. However, in the electromagnetic sector, Evans has a highly
unconventional ad hoc ansatz. He assumes the existence of an extended electro-
magnetic potential Aα that is proportional to the coframe ϑα,

Aα = a0 ϑα

or

Ai

α = a0 ei

a ,

(23)

see Evans [24], Eq.(12). Here a0 denotes a scalar constant of dimension [a0] =
magnetic ﬂux /length; it has supposedly to be ﬁxed by experiment.

to get a geometrical understanding of the Einstein tensor, that is, to get hold of the Einstein tensor
without using analytical calculations. He achieved that for three dimensions, where DGα = 0.
Obviously Cartan’s intuition worked with three dimensions. There is evidence for this, namely,
he constructed a special 3-dimensional model of a RC-space [12, 13], the Cartan spiral staircase;
for a discussion, see Garcia et al. [30], Sec.V. Apparently over-stretching his intuition, Cartan also
assumed DGα = 0 for four dimensions and run into difﬁculties with his gravitational theory. We
go into such details here, since Evans [25], p. 464, commits the same mistake as Cartan did and
assumes DGα = 0 for four dimensions, whereas, in fact, (20) is correct. The comparison between
the four-dimensional EC-theory and a three-dimensional continuum theory of lattice defects has
been reviewed by Ruggiero & Tartaglia [59].

10

Due to the omnipresence of the coframe ϑα, an extended electromagnetic po-
tential Aα is created by (23) everywhere. Thus, one may call such an ansatz
pan-electromagnetic. The constant a0 must be thought of as a universal constant.
Otherwise a geometric theory, which supposedly describes a universal interaction,
looses its raison d’ˆetre. The dimension of a0 doesn’t point to its universality. Re-
member that universal constants usually have the dimensions of qn1 hn2, where
q denotes the dimension of a charge and h that of an action, see Post [57] and
[40]. Constants built according to this rule, are 4-dimensional scalars, since q
and h carry exactly this property. Observationally it turns out that n1 and n2 are
integers. Examples for such dimensionful 4-scalars are

q → electric charge ,

→ magnetic ﬂux ,

h
q

h
q2 → electric resistance . . .

(24)

Thus, n1, n2 = 0, ±1, ±2, . . . . Accordingly, the impedance of free space Ω0 =
µ0/ε0, for example, is a 4-dimensional scalar and a universal constant, whereas
ε0 and µ0 for themselves are no 4-scalars. And for a0, we have [a0] = h/(q ×
p
length). This doesn’t smell particularly universal. The constant a0 is not expected
to qualify as a 4-scalar, since it deﬁes the scheme (24).

Evans has the following to say5 ([24], p.435): “Here A(0) denotes a ˆC neg-
ative scalar originating in the magnetic ﬂuxon ~/e, a primordial and universal
constant of physics.” From [22], p.2 we learn that we have “...a scalar factor A(0),
essentially a primordial voltage.” In fact, the dimension of a0 is neither that of a
magnetic ﬂux nor that of a voltage. Thus, the meaning of this constant is not clear
to us.

For convenience we can parametrize a0 with the help of the magnetic ﬂux
quantum h/(2e). Here h is the Planck constant and e the elementary charge.
Then,

a0 =

h
2eℓE

.

(25)

Thus, the length ℓE, the E stands for Evans, is the new unknown constant. Ac-
cording to Evans, it should be negative.

The extended electromagnetic potential Aα is represented four 1-forms,

A0 = Ai

0 dxi , A1 = Ai

1 dxi , A2 = Ai

2 dxi , A3 = Ai

3 dxi .

(26)

Thus, it has 16 independent components, quite a generalization as compared to
the Maxwellian potential A = Ai dxi with only 4 independent components. Evans

5 We denote Evans’ constant A(0) by a0, see our Table.

11

doesn’t give a Lorentz covariant prescription of how to extract from Aα the Max-
wellian potential A. According to (23), Aα transforms under a local Lorentz trans-
formation Λβ

like the coframe:

α′

Aα′

= Λβ

α′

Aβ .

(27)

Suppose we try to identify the Maxwellian A with A0. Then, under a local Lorentz
transformation, this identiﬁcation is mixed up:

A0′

0′

= Λβ

Aβ = Λ0

A0 + Λ1

A1 + Λ2

A2 + Λ3

0′

0′

0′

0′

A3 .

(28)

In the new frame, indicated by a prime, A0′
cannot be identiﬁed with A since it
contains three non-Maxwellian admixtures. However, for the physical description
the new frame is equivalent to the old one. In other words, the identiﬁcation of
A0 as Maxwellian potential is not Lorentz covariant and has to be abandoned.
This is an inevitable consequence of the fact that Aα transforms as a vector under
the Lorentz group SO(3, 1), as it does, according to Evans’ ansatz (23). Similar
considerations apply to A1, A2, and A3.

One could try to kill the α-index in Aα by some contractions procedure, such
as ϑα ∧ Aα or eα⌋Aα; however, the former yields a 2-form, the latter a 0-form.
Also the Hodge star doesn’t help, since ⋆ϑα ∧ Aα, e.g., represents a 4-form. Since
Maxwell’s theory in a RC-spacetime is locally Lorentz covariant, the extraction
of Maxwell’s potential 1-form A from Aα doesn’t seem to be possible.

Evans also considers 3-dimensional spatial rotations ρβ

. The corresponding
rotation group O(3), is a subgroup of the Lorentz group SO(1, 3). Hence we can
study the behavior of Aα under these rotations:

α′

Aα′

= ρβ

α′

Aβ .

(29)

This equation is contained in (27), which, additionally, encompasses boosts in
three linearly independent directions. Clearly, the O(3) is not the covariance
group of Aα. It is just a subgroup of the SO(1, 3). An O(3) covariant electro-
magnetic potential cannot be derived from the ansatz (23) in a Lorentz covariant
way — in contrast to what Evans claims [24].

Thus, instead of the desired O(3)-covariant extended electrodynamics, Evans
in fact, due to his ansatz (23), constructed willy nilly a SO(1, 3)-covariant ex-
tended electrodynamics. Still, he insists that the O(3)-substructure has a meaning
of its own; however, certainly not in a Lorentz covariant sense.

12

If we differentiate Evans’ ansatz, we ﬁnd for the extended electromagnetic

F α := DAα = dAα + Γβ

α ∧ Aβ

(30)

ﬁeld strength

the relation6

F α = a0 T α .
Now we have 6×4 components of the extended electromagnetic ﬁeld strength. As
we have shown in Sec.2, the torsion T α is a quantity related to translations and,
accordingly, to energy-momentum. On the left-hand-side, we have an extended
electromagnetic quantity that is eventually related to hypothetical extended elec-
tric currents. Also F α, like the potential Aα, transforms as a vector under Lorentz
transformations:

(31)

F α′

= Λβ

α′

F β .

Before we turn to the extended electromagnetic ﬁeld equations of Evans, let us
ﬁrst remind ourselves of the fundamental structure of Maxwell’s theory. With the
ﬁeld strength 2-form F = B + E ∧ dt and the excitation 2-form H = D − H ∧ dt,
the homogeneous and the inhomogeneous Maxwell equations read, respectively,

dF = 0 ,

dH = J .

Here J = ρ − j ∧ dt is the electric current 3-form. The homogeneous equation
dF = 0 corresponds to magnetic ﬂux conservation and the inhomogeneous one
dH = J is a consequence of electric charge conservation dJ = 0. Both equations
correspond to separate physical facts and are thus independent from each other,
see [38], where a corresponding axiomatic framework was set up.

In order to complete the theory, we have to specify, in addition to the Maxwell
In vacuum, that is, in free space without space

equations, a constitutive law.
charges, the ﬁeld strength and the excitation are related by

where Ω0 =
for vacuum can be put into the form7

p

µ0/ε0 is the impedance of free space. Now the Maxwell equations

dF = 0 ,

d ⋆F = Ω0 J .

6As we mentioned in the Introduction, Cartan observed that the vector piece of the torsion
eα⌋T α has the same transformation behavior as Maxwell’s potential A. In contrast, in (31) the
ﬁeld strength F α is involved and not the potential Aα.

7 For no obvious reason, Evans writes d ⋆F = µ0 J instead. Apparently the ε0 got lost.

H =

⋆F ,

1
Ω0

13

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

Note that in no sense the inhomogeneous equation is the “dual” of the homoge-
neous one, or vice versa, provided J 6= 0.

3.2 Lorentz force density

In analogy to Maxwell’s theory, we should have as Lorentz force density

fα = (eα⌋F β) ∧ Jβ

(?),

(36)

with a Lorentz covariant electric current Jα, which we will discuss below. How-
ever, we didn’t ﬁnd a corresponding deﬁnition in Evans’ work. Hence we marked
this formula by a question mark.

3.3 “Homogeneous” ﬁeld equation of extended electromagnetism

The exterior covariant derivative of the extended ﬁeld strength (30) reads

DF α = Rβ

α ∧ Aβ

or

dF α = Rβ

α ∧ Aβ − Γβ

α ∧ F β .

(37)

This Ricci identity for Aα poses in Evans’ uniﬁed ﬁeld theory as the extension of
the homogeneous Maxwell equations. Eq.(37)1 is the analog of the Maxwellian
dF = 0.

If we follow Evans and substitute Evans’ ansatz (23) into the right-hand-side

of (37)2, we have

with what Evans [20] calls the homogeneous current

dF α = Ω0 J α

hom ,

J α

hom :=

Rβ

α ∧ ϑβ − Γβ

α ∧ T β

.

(cid:1)

a0
Ω0 (cid:0)

Eq.(37)1 coincides with Evans [24], Eq.(20). However, [23], Eq.(29), which is
also claimed to represent the homogeneous equation, seems simply wrong. We
are not sure why Evans substitutes his ansatz only into the right-hand-side of (37)2
and not completely into the whole equation, but this is just the way he did it in
order to ﬁnd his ﬁeld equation.

It is strange that the “current” (39) depends on the torsion and thus on the
extended electromagnetic ﬁeld strength itself: F β = a0 T β. Moreover, this cur-
rent is not Lorentz covariant since its right-hand-side depends on the connection
explicitly. The pseudo-conservation law

(38)

(39)

(40)

dJ α

hom = 0 ,

14

which follows from (38), is not Lorentz covariant either. Whereas the whole equa-
tion (38) is Lorentz covariant, as we recognize from (37)1, its left-hand-side and
its right-hand-side for themselves are not Lorentz covariant.

We differentiate (37)1 covariantly and recall the second Bianchi identity (12):

DDF α = Rβ

α ∧ F β .

(41)

For reasons unknown to us, Evans [24], p.442, calls this equation “the generally
α ∧ F β = 0 — this corresponds to 4 conditions
covariant wave equation”. If Rβ
— he speaks of the condition for independent ﬁelds (no mutual interaction of
gravitation and electromagnetism).
α = 0, and (ii) the frames are suitably chosen,
If (i) the curvature vanishes, Rβ
α ∗
= 0, then the ﬁeld equation (37) of Evans’ theory is really homogeneous:
Γβ
dF α ∗
= 0. Otherwise we have to live with inhomogeneous terms. However, Evans
claims the following ([24], p.440): Experimentally it is found that (37)2 “must
split into the particular solution”

dF α = 0 ,
α ∧ F β = Rβ

Γβ

α ∧ Aβ .

(42)
(43)

Clearly, Eqs.(42) and (43) represent an additional assumption. But note, neither
(42) nor (43) is covariant under local Lorentz transformations of the frame and,
accordingly, they are of very dubious value.

Since torsion is proportional to the extended electromagnetic ﬁeld strength,
the ﬁrst Bianchi identity (11) and its contractions (17) and (19) are alternative
versions of (37), provided one substitutes (31). Eq.(19) then reads

D (ηαβγ ∧ F γ) + 2a0 ϑ[α ∧ Gβ] = 0 .

(44)

Now the Evans ansatz is exploited and, in order to get the extension of the

inhomogeneous Maxwell equation, Evans had to invest a new idea.

3.4 Inhomogeneous ﬁeld equation of extended electromagnetism

According to our evaluation, Evans’ recipe amounts simply to take the homoge-
neous equation (37)1 and to apply the substitution rule

F α → ⋆F α

and Rα

β → ⋆Rα

β

(45)

15

to it. Then one ﬁnds

D ⋆F α = ⋆Rβ

α ∧ Aβ

or

d ⋆F α = ⋆Rβ

α ∧ Aβ − Γβ

α ∧ ⋆F β .

(46)

Since F α as well as Rα
analog of the sourceless inhomogeneous Maxwell equation d ⋆F = 0.

β are both 2-forms, the recipe is consistent. Eq.(46)1 is the

We substitute the ansatz (23) only into the right-hand-side of (46) and ﬁnd

with the inhomogeneous current

d ⋆F α = Ω0 J α

inh ,

J α

inh :=

⋆Rβ

α ∧ ϑβ − Γβ

α ∧ ⋆T β

.

(cid:1)

a0
Ω0 (cid:0)

Evans [20] claims that (47) can be derived from (38) by applying the Hodge star
to (38). However, this is not possible. Inter alia, he supposes erroneously that
⋆dF α = d ⋆F a, see also the slides of Eckardt [19]. The inhomogeneous equation
represents a new assumption that can be made plausible by the substitution rule
(45).

As with the homogeneous current, we have again a pseudo-conservation law

dJ α

inh = 0 ,

which is not Lorentz covariant either. We apply a Lorentz transformation to the
left-hand-side of (49),

The last term destroys Lorentz covariance. If we substitute (49), we ﬁnd

Λβ

α′

(dJ α

inh) = dJ α′

inh − (dΛβ

α′

)J β

inh .

dJ α′

inh − (dΛβ

α′

)J β

inh = 0 .

Clearly, the law (49) is not Lorentz covariant. Analogous equations are true for
J β

hom.

If we write the inhomogeneous ﬁeld equation in analogy to the inhomogeneous

Maxwell equation with source d ⋆F = J, we have

D ⋆F α = J α

with

J α := a0

⋆Rβ

α ∧ ϑβ .

(52)

The Lorentz covariant current J α seems to be the only current that could enter the
deﬁnition (36) of the Lorentz force density. The currents J α
inh don’t seem

hom or J α

(47)

(48)

(49)

(50)

(51)

16

to qualify because of their lack of being Lorentz covariant; see, however, the next
section. We differentiate J α covariantly:

(D ⋆Rβ
(cid:2)

DJ α = a0

α) ∧ ϑβ + ⋆Rβ

α ∧ ⋆T α

.

(53)

(cid:3)

It is not conserved. Local electric charge conservation of classical electrodynam-
ics dJ = 0 (note that we have only an exterior derivative here) is substituted by
the four extended charge non-conservation laws (53). Local electric charge con-
servation, a law that is experimentally established to a high degree of accuracy
(see Particle Data Group [56], p.91, and also L¨ammerzahl [52]), is irretrievably
β get
lost since the connection Γα
involved in (53). In Maxwell’s theory no such thing happens for dJ = 0.

β as well as the torsion T α and the curvature Rα

3.5 Lorentz force density revisited

We discussed the Lorentz force density earlier, see (36), since it represents the
key formula for the operational deﬁnition of the electromagnetic ﬁeld strength.
This should be also true in Evans’ framework. However, Evans supplied no corre-
sponding formula and, accordingly, his ﬁeld strength F α has no operational sup-
port. However, after deﬁning the homogeneous and the inhomogeneous currents,
the following observation8 helps:

The homogeneous current J hom

of Evans is of a magnetic type, whereas J inh
is of an electric type. Now we recall that in Maxwell’s theory, if an independent
magnetic current 3-form K is allowed for, the Maxwell equations read

α

α

(54)

(55)

dH = J ,

dF = K ,

compare (33). If the Lorentz force density is adapted to this new situation, then
we ﬁnd, see Kaiser [48] and [39],

fα = (eα⌋F ) ∧ J − (eα⌋H) ∧ K .

Let us translate this into Evans’ framework,

F → F α , K → Ω0J hom

α

, H →

⋆F α ,

J → J inh

α

,

(56)

1
Ω0

that is,

fα = (eα⌋F β) ∧ J inh

β − (eα⌋⋆F β) ∧ J hom

β

.

(57)

8 I owe this observation to Robert G. Flower (private communication). It is also mentioned in

Eckardt’s workshop slides [19], as I found out later.

17

We substitute the currents (48) and (39):

fα =

(eα⌋F β) ∧ (⋆Rγβ ∧ ϑγ − Γγβ ∧ ⋆T γ)

a0
Ω0 (cid:2)

−(eα⌋⋆F β) ∧ (Rγβ ∧ ϑγ − Γγβ ∧ T γ)

.

(58)

The noncovariant, connection dependent terms on the right-hand-side of (58) drop
out, provided we substitute the Evans ansatz F α = a0 T α. We are left with

(cid:3)

fα =

[(eα⌋F β) ∧ ⋆Rγβ ∧ ϑγ

−(eα⌋⋆F β) ∧ Rγβ ∧ ϑγ

] .

(59)

a0
Ω0

el.type cur.
}
{z
|
This formula ﬁlls the bill. The currents are those on the right-hand-sides of the
covariantly extended Maxwell equations (46)1 and (37)1, respectively.

mg.type cur.
|
}
{z

Eq.(59) represents the Lorentz force formula in Evans’ theory. At the same
time (59) supports our earlier conclusions that J hom
α , being non-covariant,
have no legitimate place as physical observables in Evans’ theory. The “real cur-
rents” can only be read off from the right-hand-sides of the covariant electromag-
netic ﬁeld equations (46)1 and (37)1.

and J inh

α

4 Gravitation: Evans adopted Einstein-Cartan the-

ory of gravity

4.1 First ﬁeld equation of gravity

According to Evans, the Einstein equation of general relativity needs to be gener-
alized such the on the left-hand-side we have an asymmetric Einstein tensor based
on RC-geometry and on the right-hand-side an asymmetric canonical energy-
momentum tensor, see [25], p.103, Eq.(5.31). Then his generalized Einstein equa-
tion, valid for a spacetime obeying a RC-geometry, reads (in exterior calculus)

Gα = κ Σα

(ﬁrst ﬁeld eq.),

(60)
where Gα is the Einstein 3-form (16) and κ := 8πG/c3 (called k by Evans),
with G as Newton’s gravitational constant and c the velocity of light. Accord-
ing to Evans, we have to understand Σα as canonical energy-momentum that “has
an antisymmetric component representing canonical angular energy9/angular mo-
mentum” (see Evans [24], p. 437). Thus, we take the antisymmetric piece of (60),

ϑ[α ∧ Gβ] = κ ϑ[α ∧ Σβ] .

(61)

9Whatever angular energy may mean in this context.

18

4.2 Second ﬁeld equation of gravity

It is known from special relativistic ﬁeld theory, see Corson [16], Eq.(19.23a),
that angular momentum conservation, with the canonical spin angular momentum
current of matter ταβ and the canonical energy-momentum current of matter Σα,
can be expressed as10

Dταβ + ϑ[α ∧ Σβ] = 0 .

In this form the law is also valid in a RC-spacetime, see [37].

Let us now take a look at the contracted ﬁrst Bianchi identity (19). Then (19)

and (62), substituted into (61), yield

(62)

(63)

D (Cαβ − κ ταβ) = 0 .

In this derivation, we invested the asymmetric Einstein equation `a la Evans
(rather `a la Sciama-Kibble, see below), the generally accepted angular momentum
law, and the contracted ﬁrst Bianchi identity. Consequently, up to a gradient term,
we ﬁnd

Cαβ = κ ταβ

(second ﬁeld eq.).

(64)

Now we recall Evans’ insistence that spin and torsion are equivalent (rather pro-
portional to each other, we should say). Provided we drop the gradient term men-
tioned, we arrive at (64) — and this, indeed, expresses the proportionality of spin
and torsion. Therefore, we have shown that (64), which is sometimes called Car-
tan equation, represents a hidden tacit assumption of Evans’ theory. This propor-
tionality between spin and torsion, which is not a geometrical property of torsion,
but rather the result of picking (60) as one ﬁeld equation for gravity, is always ad-
vocated by Evans in slogans, but never stated in an explicit formula, as far as I am
aware. Because of the angular momentum law (62), it is clear that the spin ταβ in
(64) is the spin of all matter, including that of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. Similarly,
the energy-momentum Σα in (62) and (60) represents the energy-momentum of
all matter, including that of the electromagnetic ﬁeld.

10 Corson [16] formulates angular momentum conservation in tensor calculus in Cartesian
k − 2T[ij] = 0. Here i, j, ... = 0, 1, 2, 3 are holonomic coordinate in-
coordinates as ∂kSij
k and Tij, in Corson’s notation, canonical spin angular momentum and canoni-
dices and Sij
cal energy-momentum, respectively. If we deﬁne the 3-forms of spin and energy-momentum as
γηγ and Σα = Tαβ ηβ, respectively, and substitute the partial by a covariant exterior
ταβ = Sαβ
γ and Tαβ are ordinary
derivative, then Corson’s relation can be translated into (62). Note that Sαβ
tensors here, not, however, tensor densities. We use the Gothic T for energy-momentum in order
not to confuse it with the T of the torsion.

19

Evans’ states repeatedly that, within his theory, electromagnetism is an effect
of spin. Let us translate that prose into a quantitative relation. For this purpose we
have to resolve the second ﬁeld equation11 (64) with respect to the torsion T γ:

T α = κ ηβγδε

δα
β (eγ⌋τδε) −
(cid:20)

1
4

ϑα ∧ (eβ⌋eγ⌋τδε)

.

(cid:21)

(65)

Using Evan’s ansatz (31), this transforms into a relation between the extended
electromagnetic ﬁeld F α and the spin τγδ:

F α = a0κ ηβγδε

δα
β (eγ⌋τδε) −

ϑα ∧ (eβ⌋eγ⌋τδε)

(66)

.

(cid:21)

(cid:20)

1
4

As soon as we have a source with spin, whatever the source may be, then, as a
consequence of Evans’ ansatz (80), an extended electromagnetic ﬁeld is created
via (66).

We would like to stress that (64) and (60) are the ﬁeld equations of the Einstein-
Cartan theory of gravity12 (1961). In other words, without stating this explicitly
anywhere, Evans just adopted, knowingly or unknowingly, the two ﬁeld equations
of the Einstein-Cartan theory. This insight makes a lot of his considerations more
transparent.

In the EC-theory, the gravitational ﬁeld variables are coframe ϑα and Lorentz
connection Γαβ = −Γβα. The ﬁrst ﬁeld equation corresponds to the variation of a
Hilbert type Lagrangian with respect to the coframe and the second ﬁeld equation
with respect to the Lorentz connection. Consequently, the dynamics of ϑα and
Γαβ is controlled by the two ﬁeld equations (60) and (64).

11We multiply (64), with Cαβ substituted according to (15), from the left with eδ⌋,

1
2

1
2

(eδ⌋ηαβγ) ∧ T γ −

ηαβγ eδ⌋ ∧ T γ = κ eδ⌋ταβ .

We have eδ⌋ηαβγ = ηαβγδ, see [37, 38]. Moreover, in order to kill the free indices α, β, δ, we
multiply with ηαβδµ and note ηαβγ = ηαβγν ϑν :

−

ηαβδµηαβδγ ∧ T γ −

ηαβδµηαβγν ϑν ∧ eδ⌋T γ = −κ ηµβγδeβ⌋τγδ .

1
2

1
2

After some algebra with the products of the η’s, we ﬁnd

T α = −ϑα ∧ eβ⌋T β + κ ηαβγδeβ⌋τγδ .

We determine the trace eα⌋T α of the last equation and re-substitute. This yields the desired result.

12Evans calls (60) generously the “Evans ﬁeld equation of gravity”, see [25], p.465.

20

4.3 Trace of the ﬁrst ﬁeld equation

The trace of the ﬁrst ﬁeld equation (60) plays a big role in Evans’ publications.
Hence we want to determine it exactly. We multiply (60) by ϑα. Then we get a
scalar-valued 4-form with only one independent component:

ϑα ∧ Gα =

ϑα ∧ ηαβγ ∧ Rβγ = κ ϑα ∧ Σα .

1
2

After some light algebra, we ﬁnd the 4-form (recall Σa = Tα

βηβ)

ηβγ ∧ Rβγ = κ ϑα ∧ Σα = κ Tη ,

α. By taking its
with the trace of the canonical energy-momentum tensor T := Tα
Hodge dual, remembering (10) and ⋆η = ⋆⋆1 = −1, we can put it into the scalar
form

R = −κ T .

This is the generalization of Einstein’s trace of his ﬁeld equation

R = −κ t to
the more general case of EC-theory. With a tilde we denote the Riemannian part
of a certain geometrical quantity (not to be confused with Evans’ Hodge duality
symbol). In general relativity, the source of Einstein’s equation is the symmetric
α. The
Hilbert energy-momentum tensor tαβ = tβα; its trace we denote by t := tα
corresponding 3-form is σα = tα

βηβ.

e

In order to make a quantitative comparison with general relativity, we decom-
pose, within a RC-spacetime, the canonical Noether energy-momentum Σα =
Tαβ ηβ into the symmetric Hilbert energy-momentum σα and spin dependent terms
according to [37]

Σα = σα − eβ⌋(T β ∧ µα) + Dµα .

(70)

The spin energy potential µα, a 2-form, is related to the spin angular momentum
3-form as follows: τ αβ = ϑ[α ∧ µβ]. Similarly, we decompose the curvature scalar
R into its Riemannian part
R and torsion dependent terms. The calculations are
quite involved. We defer them to the Appendix. We end up with the ﬁnal relation

e

Rαβ ∧ ηαβ = κ

ϑα ∧ σα + K αβ ∧ ταβ

.

Here K αβ is the contortion 1-form deﬁned in (7). The scalar version of (71) reads

e

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

(67)

(68)

(69)

(71)

(72)

R = −κ

t + ⋆(ταβ ∧ K αβ)
(cid:2)

(cid:3)

.

e

21

R of the curvature
Thus we recognize that in the EC-theory the Riemannian piece
scalar R obeys a relation like in general relativity, however, the Einsteinian source
t has to be supplemented by a spin-contortion term.

e

Our trace formula (72) of the ﬁrst ﬁeld equation, which is an exact conse-
quence of the EC-theory, should be distinguished from Evans’ corresponding
hand-waving expression like, e.g., [21], Eq.(17). The T in Evans’ formula changes
its meaning within that paper several times; moreover, he uses the “Einstein
R = −κ t) even though he is in a RC-
Ansatz” R = −k T (in our notation
spacetime, where (72) should have been used instead.

e

4.4 Energy-momentum and angular momentum laws

Within the EC-theory, the energy-momentum law reads, see [35, 37, 55],

DΣα = (eα⌋T β) ∧ Σβ + (eα⌋Rβγ) ∧ τβγ .

(73)

Evans assumes incorrectly (as did Cartan in his original papers) that there has to be
a zero on the right-hand-side of (73), see Evans [25], p. 464. This basic mistake,
which has far-reaching consequences, if (73) is compared with (20), apparently
induced Cartan to abandon his gravitational theory in a RC-spacetime. We rec-
ognize from (73) that, instead of a zero, there rather emerge gravitational Lorentz
type forces of the structure mass × torsion + spin × curvature. Remember, in
electrodynamics we have charge × ﬁeld strength.

The angular momentum law, as we saw in (62), keeps its form as in ﬂat space-

time, namely

Dταβ + ϑ[α ∧ Σβ] = 0 .

(74)

4.5 Evans’ wave equation as a redundant structure

It is puzzling, besides the structure we discussed up to now, Evans provides ad-
ditionally a wave equation for the coframe ϑα. He derives it, see [25], p.149,
Eq.(8.8), from the gravitational Lagrangian (in his notation)

LEv = −

(∂µqa

ν )(∂µqν

a) +

c2
k (cid:20)

1
2

R
2

qa
ν qν

a (cid:21)

.

(75)

It is astonishing, Evans presupposes a RC-spacetime; nevertheless, he takes partial
derivatives that are not diffeomorphism invariant. In order to translate (75) into a
respectable Lagrangian, we (i) substitute the partial by covariant derivatives ∂µ →

22

Dµ, (ii) interpret Dµqa
have (in our notation)

ν as 2D[µqa

ν], and (iii) insert a missing factor13 1

4. Then we

(76)

(77)

LEv′ = −

(Dϑα ∧ ⋆Dϑα + ⋆R) .

1
2κ

With the deﬁnition of torsion and with (10), we can rewrite it as

LEv′ = −

T α ∧ ⋆Tα + ⋆(ϑα ∧ ϑβ) ∧ Rαβ

.

(cid:3)

1
2κ

(cid:2)

It is now obvious, this is a purely gravitational Lagrangian; note also the ap-
pearance of the gravitational constant in it. Lagrangians of this type have been
widely investigated in the framework of the Poincar´e gauge theory of gravity, see
[33, 54]. There, in contrast to EC-theory with its R-Lagrangian, propagating tor-
sion occurs. However, for Evans’ theory, (77) is an incorrect Lagrangian. Only if
we dropped the quadratic torsion term, would we recover the generalized Einstein
equation (60) that Evans used from the very beginning. Therefore the Lagrangian
LEv′ is false. But it is more, it is a redundant structure at the same time.

Our argument is independent of the details of our translation procedure from
(75) to (76). Evans’ Lagrangian (75) depends on the gravitational constant and
the only ﬁeld variables present are ϑα and Γαβ, i.e., it is a gravitational ﬁeld La-
grangian. However, since Evans postulates the validity of the generalized Einstein
equation (60) and of the Cartan equation (64), the dynamics of the variable ϑa is
already taken care of by (60) and (64). There is no place for a further wave equa-
tion.

In the framework of Evans’ theory, the subculture that developed around Evans’
wave equation, is largely inconsistent with Evans’ theory proper, the latter of
which will be deﬁned exactly in Sec.5.2. Apparently, Evans is misunderstand-
ing his own theory.

5 Assessment

5.1 Summary of the fundamental structure of Evans’ theory

Since the publications of Evans and associates are not very transparent to us, we
distilled from all their numerous papers and books the “spirit” of Evans’ theory.

13Evans equates his expression qa

ν qν
α = 4. The trace of the unit matrix in 4 dimensions is 4.

eα⌋ϑα = δα

a always consistently to 1, whereas 4 is correct, namely

23

Geometry: Spacetime obeys a RC-geometry that can be described by an or-
thonormal coframe ϑα, a metric gαβ = diag(+1, −1, −1, −1), and a Lorentz con-
nection Γαβ = −Γβα.
In terms of these quantities, we can deﬁne torsion and
curvature by, respectively,

T α := Dϑα ,
Rα

:= dΓα

β

β − Γα

γ ∧ Γγ

β .

The Bianchi identities (11,12) and their contractions (19,20) follow therefrom.

Electromagnetism: Evans’ ansatz relates an extended electromagnetic potential
to the coframe,

The electromagnetic ﬁeld strength is deﬁned according to

Aα = a0 ϑα .

F α := DAα .

The extended homogeneous and inhomogeneous Maxwell equations read in

Lorentz covariant form

DF α = Rβ

α ∧ Aβ

and

D⋆F α = ⋆Rβ

α ∧ Aβ ,

(82)

respectively. Alternatively, with Lorentz non-covariant sources and with partial
substitution of (80) and (81), they can be rewritten as

dF α = Ω0 J α

hom ,

d ⋆F α = Ω0 J α

inh ,

J α

hom :=

J α

inh :=

a0
Ω0 (cid:0)
a0
Ω0 (cid:0)

Rβ

α ∧ ϑβ − Γβ

α ∧ T β

⋆Rβ

α ∧ ϑβ − Γβ

(cid:1)
α ∧ ⋆T β

,

.

(cid:1)

Gravitation: Evans assumes the EC-theory of gravity. Thus, the ﬁeld equations
are those of Sciama [62, 63] and Kibble [49], which were discovered in 1961:

1
2
1
2

ηαβγ ∧ Rβγ = κ Σα = κ

ηαβγ ∧ T γ = κ ταβ = κ

α + Σelmg

α

Σmat
(cid:0)

αβ + τ elmg
τ mat

αβ

(cid:16)

,

.

(cid:1)

(cid:17)

Here ηαβγ = ⋆(ϑα ∧ ϑβ ∧ ϑγ). The total energy-momentum of matter plus elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld is denoted by Σα, the corresponding total spin by ταβ.

(78)
(79)

(80)

(81)

(83)

(84)

(85)

(86)

24

5.2 Five cornerstones deﬁne Evans’ uniﬁed ﬁeld theory

In order to prevent misunderstandings, I’d like to deﬁne clearly what I understand
as Evans’ uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. Such a statement, which overlaps with the last sub-
section, seems necessary since there are numerous inconsistencies and mistakes in
Evans’ work, see Bruhn [2–11] and Rodrigues et al. [18, 58], such that it is neces-
sary to distiguish between the relevant and the irrelevant parts of Evans’ articles.
Let me formulate what I consider to be the ﬁve cornerstones of Evans’ theory:

1. Physics takes place in a Riemann-Cartan spacetime, see (78) and (79).

2. The extended electromagnetic potential is proportional to the coframe, see
(80), and the extended electromagnetic ﬁeld strength to the torsion, see (81).

3. The extended Maxwell equations are given by (82).

4. The Einstein equation gets generalized such that on its left-hand-side we
have the asymmetric Einstein tensor of a Riemann-Cartan spacetime and on
its right-hand-side, multiplied with the gravitational constant, there acts as
source the asymmetic canonical energy-momentum tensor of the extended
electromagnetic ﬁeld plus that of matter, see (85).

5. Torsion is proportional to spin.

One may wonder what Evans understood exactly as spin. However, since he spec-
iﬁed the canonical energy-momentum tensor under cornerstone 4, we concluded
that he opts likewise for the corresponding spin angular momentum tensor under
cornerstone 5. This all the more, since Evans [24], p. 437, mentioned the canoni-
cal spin explicitly. Starting from cornerstone 4, we were able to show, using only
the angular momentum law and a piece of the ﬁrst Bianchi identity, that corner-
stone 5 implies the second ﬁeld equation (86).

There is not more than these ﬁve cornerstones. Our conclusions in this paper
and the one accompaying it [41] are derived only from these 5 cornerstones by the
use of the appropriate mathematics.

We disregarded the following two main points:

A) The antisymmetric part of the metric. Evans has some small talk about it
mixed with partially incorrect formulas, see Bruhn [7]. Because of cornerstone 1,
an asymmetric metric is excluded. Hence we didn’t follow this train of thoughts
of Evans any longer.

25

B) Evans derived a wave equation for the coframe in a not too transparent
way, see [25], p.149, Eq.(8.5). All the results in the context of this wave equation
we don’t consider to belong to Evans’ theory proper, as deﬁned above. Since the
generalized Einstein equation of cornerstone 4, together with cornerstone 5, rules
already the dynamics of the coframe — after all, one can ﬁnd the generalized
Einstein equation by variation of the curvature scalar with respect to the coframe
— there is no place for a further equation of motion for the coframe.

In the accompanying paper [41] we propose a variational principle for Evans’
theory that reproduces the facts mentioned in cornerstones 1 to 5. In this context,
there emerges an additional piece D ⋆Tα on the right-hand-side of the general-
ized Einstein equation, which, because of D ⋆Tα = D ⋆Dϑα, is, indeed, in the
linearized version a wave operator applied to the coframe. And this structure is
reminiscent of those in Evans’ wave equation. However, our result was achieved
by just taking the ﬁve cornerstones for granted and by constructing an appropriate
Lagrangian. We didn’t use any additional assumption, whereas Evans introduces
his wave equation as an ad hoc structure without consistent motivation.

5.3 Points against Evans’ theory

5.3.1 Electrodynamics has nothing to do with the geometry of spacetime

In gravity the experimentally well established equality of inertial and gravitational
mass min = mgr is a fundamental feature. It is the basis of Einstein’s equivalence
principle and of a geometric interpretation of gravity in the framework of general
relativity. The universality of this feature is decisive. Since there is no physical
object without energy-momentum, the equivalence principle applies equally well
to all of them, without any known exception.

Is there a similar physical effect known in electromagnetism? No, not to my
knowledge. Rather, the decisive features of electromagnetism are electric charge
and magnetic ﬂux conservation (yielding the Maxwell equations [38]). And these
conservation laws have nothing to do with spacetime symmetries, whereas energy-
momentum, the source in Einstein’s gravitational theory, is related, via Noether’s
theorem, to translations in spacetime. In the Maxwell-Dirac theory (Maxwell’s
theory with a Dirac electron as source), electric charge conservation emerges due
to the U(1) phase (gauge) invariance of the theory, that is, due to an internal
symmetry (unrelated to external, i.e., spacetime symmetries). Moreover, charge
conservation is universally valid. However, it has nothing to say about electrically
and magnetically neutral matter, as, e.g., the neutrinos νe, νµ, ντ , the photon γ, the

26

gauge boson Z, the neutral pion π0, etc.

Evans provides no new insight into this question. His only argument is that any
ansatz (like his Aα = a0ϑα) must be permitted and only experiments can decide
on its validity. However, Evans’ ansatz Aα = a0ϑα presupposes that electro-
magnetism, like the coframe ϑα, is a universal phenomenon, which it isn’t, since
neutral matter is exempt from it. The lack of universality of electromagnetism
makes its geometrization a futile undertaking.

This argument is sufﬁcient for me to exclude Evans’ theory right from the
beginning. However, some people, like Evans himself, don’t ﬁnd it so convincing.
Therefore we collect more evidence.

5.3.2 Uncharged particles with spin and charged particles without spin cause

unsurmountable problems for Evans’ theory

Take a neutrino, say the electron neutrino νe. It has no electric charge ( < 10−14
electron charges), no magnetic moment (< 10−10 Bohr magnetons), and no charge
radius squared [< (−2.97 to 4.14) × 10−32 cm2], see [56]. Hence the νe is elec-
tromagnetically neutral in every sense of the word. But is carries spin 1/2. Conse-
quently, according to Evans’ doctrine, see (66), it should create an electromagnetic
ﬁeld, But halt, this cannot be true! A neutrino creating an electromagnetic ﬁeld?
Even Evans abhors such an idea. And his remedy? For a neutrino we have to put
a0 = 0, is Evans’ stunning answer to a corresponding question, see Evans’ blog.14
A uniﬁed ﬁeld theory of geometric type that switches off a coupling constant for
a certain type of matter, doesn’t it lose all credentials?

Complementary is the charged pion π±. It carries electric charge but no spin.

Evan concludes15 that it cannot carry an electromagnetic ﬁeld either!

Of course, according to Evans’ ansatz Aα = a0ϑα, electromagnetism is as-
sumed to be an universal phenomenon. Since this assumption is incorrect, Evans’
theory must run into difﬁculties for neutral and for spinless matter willy nilly.

14http://www.atomicprecision.com/blog/2007/02/19/elementary-particles-charge-and-spin-of-

15http://www.atomicprecision.com/blog/2007/02/19/elementary-particles-charge-and-spin-of-

ece-theory-2/

ece-theory/

27

5.3.3 There doesn’t exist a scalar electric charge, electric charge conserva-

tion is violated

In Maxwell’s theory the current J integrated over a (3-dimensional) spacelike
In Evans’ theory
hypersurface Ω3 yields a 4-dimensional scalar charge
no such structure is available since any current J α, because it is vector-valued,
doesn’t qualify as an integrand. Accordingly, in Evans’ theory, a global electric
charge cannot be deﬁned in a Lorentz covariant way.

Ω3 J.
R

By the same token, as was shown in (53), electric charge conservation is vi-
olated: DJ α 6= 0. Under such circumstances even the concept of a test charge
is dubious. Charge conservation is a law of nature. Exceptions are not known,
see the experimental results collected by the Particle Data Group [56]. Therefore
Evans’ theory grossly contradicts experiment.

hom or J α

hom = 0 and dJ α

To take Evans’ J α
inh as a substitute for a decent conserved current is
hom and J α
impossible, even when dJ α
inh = 0. They both, J α
inh,
depend explicitly on the connection and don’t transform as Lorentz vectors. Their
physical interpretation, as given by Evans, since not Lorentz covariant, is null and
void. The expression dJ α
hom is not Lorentz covariant
hom − Γβ
either and thus unsuitable for the formulation of a law of physics, in contrast to
Evans’ claims to the opposite. An analogous consideration applies to J α

hom = DJ α

α ∧ J β

inh.

5.3.4 There doesn’t exist a well-deﬁned Maxwellian limit, the superposition

principle is violated

According to our considerations in Sec.3.1, we cannot extract from the SO(1, 3)
electrodynamics proposed by Evans in a Lorentz covariant way an O(3) sub-
electrodynamics, the latter of which Evans claims to be a physical theory. More-
over, we have shown that the index α in Aα cannot be compensated in a Lorentz
covariant way such as to ﬁnd the Maxwellian potential A in some limit. Thus, we
have a potential Aα with 16 independent components and we don’t know what to
do with them, provided we insist on Lorentz covariance.

Bruhn [3] has even shown explicitly that a plane wave in Evans’ O(3) electro-
dynamics, if subject to a Lorentz transformation, will not be any longer a plane
wave. A proof cannot be more telling. In addition, Bruhn [10] pointed out in
detail how Evans suppresses the undesired A0 component of his potential in order
to arrive at his O(3) structure, compare also Bruhn and Lakhtakia [11, 51].

Wielandt [69] demonstrated that the superposition principle, valid in Maxwell’s
theory, breaks down in Evans’ O(3) electrodynamics. In a non-linear theory this

28

is inevitable. However, the superposition principle cannot even be recovered for
small amplitudes and under suitable supplementary conditions.
In this sense,
Maxwell’s theory as a limiting case seems to be excluded.

5.3.5 Evans’ theory is not really uniﬁed

The energy-momentum and spin angular momentum 3-forms of matter Σmat
and
τ mat
αβ , entering the two ﬁeld equations (85) and (86), have to be determined form
other physical theories, like from Dirac’s electron theory. Thus Evans’ theory is
not really uniﬁed.

α

On top of these ﬁve main counterarguments — remember that one conclu-
sive counterargument is enough to kill a theory — we were able to formulate a
variational principle for Evans’ theory:

5.3.6 Evans’ theory is trivial and collapses to general relativity in all physi-

cal cases

As Obukhov and the author have shown in an accompanying paper [41], Evans
theory can be characterized by a dimensionless constant

ξ :=

a2
0κ
Ω0

,

(87)

a fact that was apparently overlooked by Evans. If Evans’ ansatz for a uniﬁed
ﬁeld theory is to be taken seriously, then certainly one would expect a0, and thus
ξ, to be an universal constant that cannot be adjusted freely (see, however, Evans’
treatment of the neutrino that was discussed above).

We proposed a variational principle [41] with a Lagrange multiplier term that
enforces Evans’ ansatz. This approach reproduces all features of Evans’ theory.
We ﬁnd two ﬁeld equations with 10 + 24 independent components, respectively.
The second ﬁeld equation, it is (64) with the spin of the Aα ﬁeld on its right-hand-
side, is algebraically linear in torsion and can be solved. In all physical cases,
the torsion vanishes completely and, because of F α = a0 T α, Evans’ extended
electromagnetic ﬁeld vanishes, too. Consequently, in all physical cases Evans’
theory collapses to the Einstein vacuum ﬁeld equation.

Probably Evans will argue that he doesn’t like our variational principle and that
our principle ammends the inhomogeneous electromagnetic ﬁeld equation (82)2
and the ﬁrst gravitational ﬁeld equation (85) with terms induced by the Lagrangian

29

multiplier. And that these terms are not contained in his original theory. This is
true. However, we have shown a consistent way (we believe, it is the only way) to
include Evans’ ansatz Aα = a0 ϑα into the the electromagnetic and gravitational
ﬁeld equations of Evans’ theory. If Evans rejects our variational principle, he will
have a problem. If he substitutes his ansatz into the extended Maxwell equations
(82), he will get ﬁeld equations for ϑα and Γαβ, which are of second order in ϑα
(basically wave type equations); if he substitutes his ansatz also into the gravita-
tional ﬁeld equations (85) and (86), which, after an elimination prodecure, are also
of second order in ϑα, how will he guarantee that these two different sets of wave
type equations are consistent with each other? Clearly, this cannot be guaranteed.
However, our Lagrange multiplier method does guarantee consistency.

We put this point at the end of our list, since this consequence is not inevitable.
By abolishing a Hilbert type Lagrangian and going over to a Lagrangian quadratic
in torsion and/or in curvature (“Poincar´e gauge theory”), one could ameliorate
this situation, see, e.g., Itin and Kaniel [46, 47], Obukhov [54], and Heinicke et
al. [43]. However, we won’t do that because the reasons given above exclude an
approach `a la Evans. Still, for more than 20 years it is known of how to make
torsion a propagating ﬁeld, see Sezgin and van Nieuwenhuizen [64] and Kuhfuss
and Nitsch [50]. Evans’ theory just documents that his author is not clever enough
to propose a nontrivial model.

6 Conclusion

Around the year 2003, Evans grafted his ill-conceived O(3)-electrodynamics on
the viable Einstein-Cartan theory of gravity, calling it a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. The
hybrid that he created has numerous genetic defects; some of them are lethal.

Acknowledgments

I am most grateful to several people for greatly helping me to understand the
physics and the mathematics of Evans’ work and for guiding me to the relevant
literature. In particular, I would like to mention Gerhard W. Bruhn (Darmstadt),
Robert G. Flower (Applied Science Associates), Yuri Obukhov (Cologne/Moscow),
and Erhard Wielandt (Stuttgart). This work has been supported by the grant HE
528/21-1 of the DFG (Bonn).

30

7 Appendix: Decomposing the trace of the ﬁrst ﬁeld

equation

We start from (70), namely

Σα = σα − eβ⌋(T β ∧ µα) + Dµα ,

and from τ αβ = ϑ[α ∧ µβ]. The inverse of the latter relation reads [37]

µα = −2eβ⌋τα

β +

ϑα ∧ (eβ⌋eγ⌋τ βγ) ,

1
2

and its contraction is

ϑα ∧ µα = 2eα⌋(ϑβ ∧ τβ

α) .

Now we recall, see (68), that we only need the contraction of (88) with ϑα:

ϑα ∧ Σα = ϑa ∧ σα + eβ⌋

− d (ϑα ∧ µα) .

(91)

(cid:1)
This will be substituted in (68). By using (90), we ﬁnd

ϑα ∧ µα ∧ T β
(cid:0)

Rαβ ∧ ηαβ = κ

T α ∧ eβ⌋(ϑγ ∧ τγβ)

(cid:3)

(92)

Obviously, we can now eliminate the spin ταβ by contracting the second ﬁeld
equation (64),

ϑα ∧ σα + 2eα⌋
(cid:2)
(cid:8)
α)
eα⌋(ϑβ ∧ τβ
−2d
(cid:2)

.

(cid:3)(cid:9)

κ ϑβ ∧ τβα = ηαβ ∧ T β ,

and substituting it in (92). This yields

Rαβ ∧ ηαβ = κ ϑα ∧ σα + 2eα⌋

T α ∧ eβ⌋(ηβγ ∧ T γ)
(cid:2)

(cid:3)

β ∧ T β)

.

−2d

eα⌋(ηα
(cid:2)

(cid:3)

Some algebra shows that the second term on the right-hand-side vanishes and that
eα⌋(ηα

β ∧ T β) = ϑα ∧ ⋆Tα. Thus,

Rαβ ∧ ηαβ = κ ϑα ∧ σα − 2d (ϑα ∧ ⋆Tα) .

This is a remarkably simple formula. The ﬁrst term κ ϑα ∧ σa is the Einsteinian
trace, the second one represents a correction by torsion and hence by spin.

(88)

(89)

(90)

(93)

(94)

(95)

31

We can now study the effect of spin on the Riemannian piece

R of the cur-
vature scalar R. For that purpose, we start from the geometrical decomposition
formula [37, 42, 54]

e

Rαβ ∧ ηαβ =

β ∧ ηαβ − K αβ ∧ T γ ∧ ηαβγ

Rαβ ∧ ηαβ + K αµ ∧ Kµ
−2d(ϑα ∧ ⋆Tα) .
e

The second and the third terms on the right-hand-side can be collected. Then,

Rαβ ∧ ηαβ =

Rαβ ∧ ηαβ −

K αβ ∧ T γ ∧ ηαβγ − 2d(ϑα ∧ ⋆Tα) .

(97)

1
2

The latter equation is substituted into (95). The derivatives drop out and we are
left with

Rαβ ∧ ηαβ = κ ϑα ∧ σα −

ηαβγ ∧ T γ ∧ K αβ .

1
2

Clearly, the second ﬁeld equation can be re-substituted and we arrive16 at

e

(96)

(98)

(99)

Rαβ ∧ ηαβ = κ

ϑα ∧ σα + K αβ ∧ ταβ

.

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

e

e

References

UK (2002).

[1] M. Blagojevi´c: GravitationandGaugeSymmetries, Institute of Physics Publishing, Bristol,

[2] G.W. Bruhn, No energy to be extracted from the vacuum, Physica Scripta 74 (2006) 535–536.

[3] G.W. Bruhn, No Lorentz property of M W Evans’ O(3)-symmetry law, Physics Scripta 74

(2006) 537–538.

[4] G.W. Bruhn, On the non-Lorentz invariance of M.W. Evans’ O(3)-symmetry law,

arXiv.org/physics/0607186 (3 pages).

[5] G.W. Bruhn, The central error of M.W. Evans’ ECE theory - a type mismatch,

arXiv.org/physics/0607190 (6 pages).

[6] G.W. Bruhn, Refutation of Myron W. Evans B(3) ﬁeld hypothesis,

http://www.mathematik.tu-darmstadt.de/

bruhn/B3-refutation.htm

16Often exterior calculus is more effective and straightforward than tensor calculus. However,
when the connection is split in a Riemannian and a post-Riemannian piece, then computations in
tensor calculus are usually more direct and simpler. This is also the case in the derivation of (99)
or rather of (72).

e

32

[7] G.W. Bruhn, Comments on M.W. Evans’ preprint Chapter 2: Duality and the Antisymmetric

Metric (p.21 - 30)
http://www.mathematik.tu-darmstadt.de/

bruhn/Comment-Chap2.htm

[8] G.W. Bruhn, Remarks on Evans’ 2nd Bianchi Identity,

e

http://www.mathematik.tu-darmstadt.de/

bruhn/EvansBianchi.html

[9] G.W. Bruhn, Comments on Evans’ Duality,
e

http://www.mathematik.tu-darmstadt.de/ bruhn/EvansDuality.html

[10] G.W. Bruhn, ECE Theory and Cartan Geometry,

http://www.mathematik.tu-darmstadt.de/ bruhn/ECE-CartanGeometry.html

[11] G.W. Bruhn and A. Lakhtakia, Commentary on Myron W. Evans’ paper “The Electromag-

netic Sector ...”,

[12]

[13]

[14]

e

bruhn/EvansChap13.html

http://www.mathematik.tu-darmstadt.de/
´E. Cartan, Sur une g´en´eralisation de la notion de corbure de Riemann et les espaces `a tor-
sion, C. R. Acad. Sci. (Paris) 174 (1922) 593–595.
´E. Cartan, On a generalization of the notion of Riemann curvature and spaces with torsion.
Translation of [12] from the French by G.D. Kerlick. In: Cosmology and Gravitation, P.G.
Bergmann, V. De Sabbata, eds. Plenum Press, New York (1980) Pp. 489–491; see also the
remarks of A. Trautman, ibid. pp. 493–496.
´E. Cartan: On Manifolds with an Afﬁne Connection and the Theory of General Relativity,
English translation of the French original, Bibliopolis, Napoli (1986).

[15] E. Cartan, Riemannian Geometry in an Orthogonal Frame, trans. from Russian by V.V. Gold-

berg, World Scientiﬁc, Hackensack, NJ (2001), Sec.87.

[16] E.M. Corson, Introduction to Tensors, Spinors, and Relativistic Wave-Equations, Blackie,

London (1953).

[17] R. Debever (ed.), Elie Cartan – Albert Einstein, Lettres sur le Parall´elisme Absolu 1929–
1932, original letters with translations in English, Palais des Acad´emies, Bruxelles (1979),
also Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

[18] A.L.T. de Carvalho, W.A. Rodrigues, Jr, The non sequitur mathematics and physics of the
‘New Electrodynamics’ of the AIAS Group, Random Operators and Stochastic Equations 9
(2001) 161–206; arXiv.org/physics/0302016.

[19] H. Eckardt, Slides from the ﬁrst workshop on ECE theory,
http://aias.us → publications → Results of ﬁrst workshop

[20] M.W. Evans, Solutions of the ECE ﬁeld equations, paper 50 of Evans’ theory;

http://www.aias.us/documents/uft/a50thpaper.pdf

[21] M.W. Evans, Wave mechanics and ECE theory, paper 54 of Evans’ theory;

http://www.aias.us/documents/uft/a54thpaper.pdf

33

[22] M.W. Evans, Generally covariant dynamics, paper 55 of Evans’ theory;

http://www.aias.us/documents/uft/a55thpaper.pdf

[23] M.W. Evans, A generally covariant ﬁeld equation for gravitation and electromagnetism,

Foundations of Physics Letters 16 (2003) 369–377.

[24] M.W. Evans, The spinning and curving of spacetime: The electromagnetic and gravitational

ﬁelds in the Evans ﬁeld theory, Foundations of Physics Letters 18 (2005) 431–454.

[25] M.W. Evans, Generally Covariant Uniﬁed Field Theory, the Geometrization of Physics Vol.I,

Arima Publishing, Suffolk, UK (2005).

[26] M.W. Evans, Generally Covariant Uniﬁed Field Theory, the Geometrization of Physics

Vol.II, Abramis Academic Publishing, publisher@abramis.co.uk (2006).

[27] M.W. Evans, Generally Covariant Uniﬁed Field Theory - The Geometrization of Physics -

Volume III, Amazon.com (2006).

[28] M.W. Evans and H. Eckardt, The resonant Coulomb law of Einstein Cartan Evans theory,

paper 63 of Evans’ theory;
http://aias.us/documents/uft/a63rdpaper.pdf

[29] Eyraud, H., La th´eorie afﬁne asym´etrique du champs ´electromagn´etique et graviﬁque et le

rayonnement atomique, C. R. Acad. Sci. (Paris) 180 (1925) 1245–1248.

[30] A.A. Garcia, F.W. Hehl, C. Heinicke and A. Macias, Exact vacuum solution of a (1+2)-
dimensional Poincar´e gauge theory: BTZ solution with torsion, Phys. Rev. D67 (2003)
124016 (7 pages); arXiv:gr-qc/0302097.

[31] H.F.M. Goenner, On the History of Uniﬁed Field Theories, Living Rev. Relativity 7 (2004)

(cited on 01 Dec 2006); http://www.livingreviews.org/lrr-2004-2H.Goenner

[32] F. Gronwald, Metric-afﬁne gauge theory of gravity. I: Fundamental structure and ﬁeld equa-

tions, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D6 (1997) 263–304; arXiv.org/gr-qc/9702034.

[33] F. Gronwald and F.W. Hehl, On the gauge aspects of gravity, in Proc. Int. School of Cosm.
& Gravit. 14th Course: Quantum Gravity. Held in Erice, Italy. Proceedings, P.G. Bergmann
et al. (eds.). World Scientiﬁc, Singapore (1996) pp. 148–198; arXiv.org/gr-qc/9602013.

[34] F.W. Hehl, On the kinematics of the torsion of space-time, Foundations of Physics 15 (1985)

451–471.

[35] F.W. Hehl, P. von der Heyde, G.D. Kerlick, and J.M. Nester, General relativity with spin and

torsion: Foundations and prospects, Rev. Mod. Phys. 48 (1976) 393–416.

[36] F.W. Hehl and J.D. McCrea, Bianchi identities and the automatic conservation of energy–
momentum and angular momentum in general-relativistic ﬁeld theories, Foundations of
Physics 16 (1986) 267–293.

[37] F.W. Hehl, J.D. McCrea, E.W. Mielke, and Y. Ne’eman: Metric-Afﬁne Gauge Theory of
Gravity: Field Equations, Noether Identities, World Spinors, and Breaking of Dilation In-
variance, Phys. Rep. 258 (1995) 1–171.

34

[38] F.W. Hehl and Yu.N. Obukhov, Foundations of Classical Electrodynamics: Charge, Flux,

and Metric, Birkh¨auser, Boston, MA (2003).

[39] F.W. Hehl and Y.N. Obukhov, Electric/magnetic reciprocity in premetric electrodynamics
with and without magnetic charge, and the complex electromagnetic ﬁeld, Phys. Lett. A323
(2004) 169–175; arXiv.org/physics/0401083.

[40] F.W. Hehl and Yu.N. Obukhov, Dimensions and units in electrodynamics, General Relativity

Gravitation 37 (2005) 733–749; arXiv.org/physics/0407022.

[41] F.W. Hehl and Yu.N. Obukhov, An assessment of Evans’ uniﬁed ﬁeld theory II, to be pub-

[42] C. Heinicke, Exact solutions in Einstein’s theory and beyond, PH.D. thesis, University of

lished (2007).

Cologne (2005).

[43] C. Heinicke, P. Baekler and F.W. Hehl, Einstein-aether theory, violation of Lorentz invari-
ance, and metric-afﬁne gravity, Phys. Rev. D72 (2005) 025012 (18 pages); arXiv.org/gr-
qc/0504005.

[44] K. Horie, Geometric interpretation of electromagnetism in a gravitational theory with
torsion and spinorial matter, Ph.D. thesis, University of Mainz (1995); arXiv.org/hep-
th/9601066.

[45] L. Infeld, Zur Feldtheorie von Elektrizit¨at und Gravitation, Phys. Zeitschr. 29 (1928) 145–

[46] Y. Itin and S. Kaniel, On a class of invariant coframe operators with application to gravity,

J. Math. Phys. 41 (2000) 6318–6340; arXiv.org/gr-qc/9907023.

[47] Y. Itin, Energy-momentum current for coframe gravity, Class. Quant. Grav. 19 (2002) 173–

189; arXiv.org/gr-qc/0111036.

[48] G. Kaiser, Energy-momentum conservation in pre-metric electrodynamics with magnetic

charges, J. Phys. A37 (2004) 7163–7168; arXiv.org/math-ph/0401028.

[49] T.W.B. Kibble, Lorentz invariance and the gravitational ﬁeld, J. Math. Phys. 2 (1961) 212–

147.

221.

[50] R. Kuhfuss and J. Nitsch, Propagating modes in gauge ﬁeld theories of gravity, Gen. Rel.

[51] A. Lakhtakia, Is Evans’ longitudinal ghost ﬁeld B(3) unknowable? Foundations of Physics

Grav. 18 (1986) 1207–1227.

Letters 8 (1995) 183–186.

[52] C. L¨ammerzahl, A. Macias and H. Mueller, Lorentz invariance violation and charge (non-
)conservation: A general theoretical frame for extensions of the Maxwell equations, Phys.
Rev. D71 (2005) 025007 (15 pages); arXiv.org/gr-qc/0501048.

[53] J.D. McCrea, F.W. Hehl, and E.W. Mielke, Mapping Noether identities into Bianchi identities
in general relativistic ﬁeld theories of gravity and in the ﬁeld theory of static lattice defects,
Int. J. Theor. Phys. 29 (1990) 1185–1206.

35

[54] Y.N. Obukhov, Poincar´e gauge gravity: Selected topics, Int. J. Geom. Meth. Mod. Phys. 3

(2006) 95–138; arXiv.org/gr-qc/0601090.

[55] Y.N. Obukhov and G.F. Rubilar, Invariant conserved currents in gravity theories with lo-
cal Lorentz and diffeomorphism symmetry, Phys. Rev. D74 (2006) 064002 (19 pages);
arXiv.org/gr-qc/0608064.

[56] Particle Data Group, Review of Particle Physics, J. Phys. G33 (2006) 1–1231.

[57] E.J. Post, Formal Structure of Electromagnetics – General Covariance and Electromagnet-

ics, North Holland, Amsterdam (1962) and Dover, Mineola, New York, (1997).

[58] W.A. Rodrigues, Jr. and Q.A. Gomes de Souza, An ambiguous statement called ‘tetrad pos-
tulate’ and the correct ﬁeld equations satisﬁed by the tetrad ﬁelds, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D14
(2005) 2095-2150; arXiv.org/math-ph/0411085.

[59] M.L. Ruggiero and A. Tartaglia, Einstein-Cartan theory as a theory of defects in space-time

Am. J. Phys. 71 (2003) 1303–1313.

[60] J.A. Schouten, Ricci Calculus, 2nd ed., Springer, Berlin (1954).

[61] J.A. Schouten, Tensor Analysis for Physicists, 2nd ed. reprinted, Dover, Mineola, New York

[62] D.W. Sciama, On the analogy between charge and spin in general relativity, in: Recent

Developments of General Relativity, Pergamon, London (1962) pp. 415–439.

[63] D.W. Sciama, The physical structure of general relativity, Rev. Mod. Phys. 36 (1964) 463–

(1989).

469; 1103(E).

[64] E. Sezgin and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, New Ghost Free Gravity Lagrangians With Propagat-

ing Torsion, Phys. Rev. D21 (1980) 3269–3280.

[65] R.W. Sharpe, Differential Geometry: Cartan’s Generalization of Klein’s Erlangen Program,

[66] M.A. Tonnelat, La th´eorie du champ uniﬁ´e d’Einstein et quelques-uns de ses d´eveloppe-

[67] A. Trautman, On the structure of the Einstein-Cartan equations, Symp. Math. (Academic

Springer, New York (1997).

ments, Gauthier-Villars, Paris (1955).

Press, London) 12 (1973) 139–162.

[68] A. Trautman, Einstein-Cartan theory, in Encyclopedia of Math. Physics, J.-P. Francoise et

al., eds., Elsevier, Oxford (2006) pp. 189–195; arXiv.org/gr-qc/0606062.

[69] E. Wielandt, The superposition principle of waves not fulﬁlled under M.W. Evans’ O(3)

hypothesis, Phys. Scripta 74 (2006) 539–540; arXiv. org/physics/0607262.

[70] D.K. Wise, MacDowell-Mansouri gravity and Cartan geometry, arXiv.org/ gr-qc/0611154.

36

