Lebedev Physical Institute RAS, Moscow, Russia

Branch of Nuclear Physics and Astrophysics

Department of High Energy Physics

——————————————–

English version of the Preprint FIAN No 35, 1997
enlarged by Appendix, some comments and foot-notes

E.G.Bessonov

To Foundations of Classical Electrodynamics

Moscow 1997

7
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
0
8
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

In the present work a number of questions concerning foundations of the classical
electrodynamics is discussed. First of all they are the law of the energy conservation
and the introduction of particles in the classical electrodynamics. We pay attention to
a logic error which takes place at an interpretation of the Poynting’s theorem following
from the equations of Maxwell-Lorentz as the law of conservation of energy. It was shown,
that the laws of conservation of energy and momentum of the system of electromagnetic
ﬁelds and charged particles does not follow from the equations of electrodynamics and
the violation of these laws is displayed at the energy change of particles. Particular
examples are considered which make it possible to restrict a possible kind of ﬁelds of
a non-electromagnetic origin. We hope that this work will permit to produce a more
comprehensive analysis and to stimulate the next step to the development of the bases of
the classical and quantum electrodynamics.

Originally the main part of this paper was published as the Internal Report FIAN in
1975, the Preprint FIAN No 196, 1980 and in the preprint FIAN No 35, 1997 (enlarged
by a spectrum of opinions). This paper is the Preprint FIAN No 35, 1997 enlarged by
Appendix, some comments and foot-notes.

3

Contents

1 Introduction

2 The laws of conservation in electrodynamics

2.1 Example 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Example 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 About introduction of particles in electrodynamics

3.1 Example 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Example 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Conclusion

5 Appendix

6 Spectrum of opinions

5

5
8
9
9

11
11
13

14

15

18

4

1 Introduction

Usually speaking about diﬃculties arising in classical electrodynamics, for ex-
ample, at introduction in it particles, establishment of the equation of a motion
of particles in view of radiation reaction forth and other it is emphasized that
these diﬃculties are non-principle, that classical electrodynamics is the consis-
tent relativistic theory. In addition everybody refer to the laws of conservation
of energy, linear and angular momentum for particles and ﬁelds.

In the present work it is pointed out on a typical logic mistake made in the
textbooks on a classical electrodynamics at the proof of the law of conserva-
tion of energy or Pointing’s theorem for a system of electromagnetic ﬁelds and
particles. It is shown, that from the equations of electrodynamics the laws of
conservation does not follow. Two private examples are considered which allow
to impose certain restrictions on a possible form of ﬁelds of non-electromagnetic
origin. Thus we transfer the essence of diﬃculties of electrodynamics deeper in
its foundations.

2 The laws of conservation in electrodynamics

We shall present the typical proof of the law of conservation of energy in elec-
trodynamics of Maxwell-Lorentz for a system consisting of an electromagnetic
ﬁeld and charged particles. Then we shall specify in this proof a logic error. In
the proof there are three basic moments [1, p.106]-[4].

1. It is proved, that from Maxwell equations an equation follows

∂
∂t Z

| ~E|2 + | ~H|2
8π

dV + Z

~j ~EdV = 0,

where ~E, ~H are vectors of an electric and magnetic ﬁeld strengths, ~j = ρ~v
vector of a current density, ρ a particle charge density, ~v vector of velocity of
a motion of the given element of volume of a charge of the particle, and the
integration is made over the whole space.

2. From a relativistic equation of a motion of a charged particle and deﬁnition

of work the law of energy change of a particle is derived

It is considered that the energy of a particle is the value

(1)

(2)

(3)

dε
dt

ε =

= Z ρ ~E~vdV.

mc2
1 − v2/c2

,

q

5

where m is a mass of a particle, v a velocity of a particle, c a velocity of
light. The dependence of the particle’s energy on velocity is determined by the
requirements of the special theory of relativity. At introduction of particles in
electrodynamics it is usually postulated, that the energy of a particle consists
partially on the energy of it’s own electromagnetic ﬁeld connected with a particle
εem, and partially from the energy of it’s ﬁeld of a non-electromagnetic origin
εnot em (ε = εem + εnot em).

3. It is postulated, that the value

W =

| ~E|2 + | ~H|2
8π

(4)

(5)

is the density of the energy of an electromagnetic ﬁeld.

4. By elimination of the value

ρ~v ~EdV from the equations (1)
~j ~EdV =
and (2) we will obtain the expression (d/dt)εΣ = 0. It follows from this equation
that the value

R

R

εΣ = Z

| ~E|2 + | ~H|2
8π

dV +

εi = const,

Xi

where εi is the energy of a particle with an index i, εΣ the total energy of a
system which is a sum of energies of an electromagnetic ﬁeld and particles in the
hole space. The expression (5) is treated as the law of conservation of energy
in electrodynamics.

Vectors of the electrical and magnetic ﬁelds ~E, ~H in (5) represent a total
electromagnetic ﬁeld created by a system of particles. Volume integral of the
energy density of the electromagnetic ﬁeld represents a system of a self-energy
(inertial energy) of particles, an electromagnetic interaction energy of particles
(potential energy) and an energy of free ﬁelds radiated by particles. In a general
case these components of energy are not separated. The radiation ﬁeld can be
selected only in a wave zone.

The error in the presented proof consist in uniﬁcation of physically incon-
sistent equations (1) - (4) in one system. This inconsistency occurs because of
non-consistent introduction of particles in electrodynamics. Namely, if we start
from the Maxwell equations and postulate (4), then we should adopt, that the
energy of a charged particle εi in (5) partially consists of an energy of own elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld created by it. But the energy of a particle is included in the
ﬁrst term of this equation1. It means, that the energy of own electromagnetic
ﬁeld of a particle is contained in the equation (5) twice, and the energy of a

1It remains in a case of one uniformly moving particle

6

non-electromagnetic origin only once. Just this fact leads to the logic error in
the proof of the law of conservation of energy and because of which the equation
(5) conﬂicts with the initial equations.

It is not diﬃcult to understand the reason according to which this error was

not exposed for a so prolonged time.

1. Usually the relativistic expressions of energy, momentum and mass of
particles are introduced within the framework of the special theory of relativity.
From this theory follows, that the energy and momentum of particles should
have certain transformation properties regardless to a nature of an origin of
these values. Mass acts in a role of coeﬃcient of proportionality between vectors
of a momentum and velocity of particles.

2. In the electrodynamics the received values of energy and momentum of
particles are introduced through the equations of a motion. The joint solution
of the equations of motion for ﬁelds and particles reduces to the expression (5),
which is treated as the law of conservation of energy. At this it is postulated
that the value (4) is a density of the energy of an electromagnetic ﬁeld.

3. The nature of mass, energy and momentum of particles are discussed later,
when the electrical and magnetic ﬁelds created by a uniformly moving particle
and connected with these ﬁelds an energy and momentum of the particle of an
electromagnetic origin are derived. It turned out that these values have not cor-
rect transformation properties following from the special theory of relativity2.
For this purpose and with the purpose of holding of a particle charge in equilib-
rium it is necessary to introduce attraction ﬁelds of non-electromagnetic origin,
the energy and momentum of which have wrong transformation properties of
the other form. It is postulated, that in a sum the ﬁelds of an electromagnetic
and non-electromagnetic origin reduce to experimentally observable values of
energy and momentum of particles3.

If after these remarks we return to an expression (5) then it is not diﬃcult
to notice, that the energy of particles of an electromagnetic origin is intro-
duced in this expression twice, and consequently the standard treatment of this
expression is incorrect.

2Besides a correct factor 1/

Unfortunately, the laws of conservation, as a rule, were proved only to em-
1 − v2/c2 there is an incorrect factor (1 + v2/3c2) in energy
of particles and an incorrect factor (4/3) in a momentum of particles of an electromagnetic
origin[2].

3In the case of a non-uniform motion the concepts of energy and momentum of an electromagnetic origin
were not discussed. Non-obviously they are taken equal to the appropriate values for the particles moving with
the same velocity

q

7

phasize the consistency of the electrodynamics its perfection and in that form,
in which they were received they did not usually used since on the basis of
only the laws of conservation it is possible to solve a small number of simple
problems, not representing practical interest4. Therefore the error in the proof,
which would be possible to establish by a comparison of the solutions following
from the laws of conservation and from the equations of a motion, on particular
examples was not detected. It is useful to illustrate it now on a number of such
examples.

2.1 Example 1

There is an immovable spherically symmetrical charge q, on distance a from
which a motionless particle with a charge e and mass m is available. In some
moment of time the particle start to move and, being accelerated, leaves to
inﬁnity. Compare the energy of a particle calculated from the law of the energy
conservation (5) and from the equations of a motion.

Let us write down the expression (5) for an initial and a ﬁnal states of the
system and equate received expressions. Then we shall determine the kinetic
energy of a particle

T = Mc2(γ − 1) =

− εem

rad − (εem

e − εem

e0 ),

(6)

eq
a

q

1 − v2/c2, eq/a is the initial potential energy of the particle, εem
where γ = 1/
rad
the energy of an electromagnetic ﬁeld radiated by the particle, εem
e0 the
energy of the own electromagnetic ﬁeld of the moving particle and the particle
at rest accordingly.

e and εrad

Calculation of a kinetic of energy of a particle by the solution of the equation
of a motion of the particle in a given ﬁeld of the charge q will lead to an
expression

T =

− ε

em
rad.

eq
a

(7)

As was to be expected, an extra term appeared in (6) which is equal to
a diﬀerence between own energies of electromagnetic ﬁelds of accelerated and
4It is possible to point out only on close questions connected, for example, with renormal-
ization of mass in a classical electrodynamics (see [1], § 65, Problem 1, where in the expression
for a sum of energies of particles and ﬁelds created by them and written down with accuracy
of up to the terms of the second order of v/c without the analysis of legitimacy the energy of
particles of an electromagnetic origin is rejected).

8

motionless particles and equal, for example, for the spherically symmetric dis-
tribution of particle’s charge to the value εem
e0 [γ(1 + v2/3c2) − 1]
[2].

e0 = εem

e − εem

2.2 Example 2

Investigate the transformation properties of the energy εΣ determined by the
expression (5).

For the case of one uniformly moving particle the value εΣ depends on ve-
locity by the law which is diﬀer from (3) as it has not correct transformation
properties since this properties has the second, but has not the ﬁrst term of
expression (5) which is equal to the electromagnetic self-energy of a particle
[2]. The similar statement is valid for the beam of charged particles, where
the situation is intensiﬁed in addition by the circumstance that besides the
electromagnetic self-energy of particles the ﬁrst term in (5) will include the
electromagnetic energy of interactions of particles which have incorrect trans-
formation properties as well.

Thus, transformation properties of the energy εΣ do not satisfy to the re-

quirements of the special theory of relativity.

2.3 Remarks

1. In the case of pointlike particles the ﬁrst term in (5), and consequently the
value εΣ are inﬁnite. They are changed to the inﬁnitely large value when the
particle’s velocity change is ﬁnite. Since in the process of the evolution of a
system the velocity of particles can be simultaneously increased or decreased
then contrary to (5) in this case εΣ 6= const. On the other hand for the pointlike
particles the proof of the laws of conservation, operating with indeﬁnitely large
values, cannot be correct.

It is interesting to know why did not anybody pay attention to this moment
till now? For example, in the textbook [1, p.266] the law of conservation of
energy is proved for pointlike particles, but in the process of the proof there is no
scientiﬁc substantiation of the correctness of the mathematical operations with
the indeﬁnitely large values. At the same time later discussing the diﬃculties
which appear in the electrodynamics when the runaway solutions appear we
can read in this textbook: ”A question can arise. How the electrodynamics
satisfying to the law of conservation of energy can lead to an absurd result
when a free particle increases it’s energy by unlimited way. The roots of this

9

diﬃculties are, actually, in the mentioned earlier inﬁnite electromagnetic ”mass”
of elementary particles. When we write ﬁnite mass of a charge in the equations
of motion we as a matter of fact add to it formally an inﬁnite negative ”mass” of
non-electromagnetic origin which together with an electromagnetic mass would
result in ﬁnal mass of a particle. Since, however, the subtraction of one from
another of two inﬁnities is not quite correct mathematical operation then it
lead to a number of further diﬃculties including to the speciﬁed one here”.

The logic however suggests that it is necessary the reasoning about non-
correctness of mathematical operations to transfer to the proof of the law of
conservation of energy instead of to base on this law.

2. In electrodynamics of Maxwell-Lorentz there could not be a model of par-
ticles with pure electromagnetic nature of mass. Diﬀerently all energy would
have electromagnetic nature and the second term in (5) should be absent.
On the other hand, the energy of charged particle ε cannot have pure non-
electromagnetic nature, since in a case, for example, of one particle the energy
of extraneous forces applied to a particle will be transformed not only to the
value ε and to the energy of the emitted radiation, but also to the electromag-
netic self-energy εem of the particle.

From the equations of electrodynamics instead of (5) a conclusion about
conservation of a sum of energies of electromagnetic and non-electromagnetic
origin possessing the correct transformation properties should follow. From
these energies on certain unknown for the present principles it could be possible
to select the energy of particles.

3. When the equations of a motion and (2) are solved by practice then one
take into account only an external and a part of an electromagnetic self-ﬁeld
of a particle corresponding to a radiation reaction forth and at the same time
the inertial ﬁeld of the particle is rejected5 since it is considered that the ﬁelds
of the non-electromagnetic origin produce a ﬁeld of force equal to it by value
but with the opposite sign6. Such ”volitional” renormalization of a mass in
the equations of motion of particles, and also the rejection of the terms in the
individual examples similar to the last term in (6) are illegal, since it contradict
to a general principles which are guided at a derivation of (5).

In avoidance of misunderstanding we shall emphasize, that the mentioned
5In a non-relativistic case the electric ﬁeld strength corresponding to the radiation reaction
forth is proportional to the derivative of the particle acceleration and the electric ﬁeld strength
corresponding to the inertial ﬁeld is proportional to the particle acceleration.

6In case of the pointlike particles the energy of the inertial ﬁeld and the electromagnetic

mass are inﬁnitely large values.

10

inconsistency of the equations takes place only in the electrodynamics of ﬁelds
and particles and is displayed at the energy change of particles. For example,
in the case of macroscopic electrodynamics the inconsistency of the introduced
equations with the equations the electromagnetic ﬁeld does not appear.

So, if the material bodies are motionless then it is possible to write down

the current density in them as

~j = λ( ~E + ~Eextra

),

where λ is a factor the electrical conductivity, ~Eextra the vector of the electric
ﬁeld strength of the extraneous forces.

In this case the expression (1) can be presented as

∂
∂t Z

| ~E|2 + | ~H|2
8π

dV = Z

~j ~EextradV − Z

|~j|2
λ

dV,

according to which it follows, that the increment of the energy of an electro-
magnetic ﬁeld is equal to an excess of the work of the extraneous electromotive
forces over the heat generation. This is the law of the conservation of energy
in electrodynamics including the motionless bodies [5].

In this case the proof is strict since the energy of the material bodies of an

electromagnetic origin is absent or in the case of charged bodies is constant.

(8)

(9)

3 About introduction of particles in electrodynamics

In the previous section we have shown, that expression (5), does not express
the law of conservation of energy in electrodynamics Maxwell-Lorentz. In the
present paragraph two particular examples are considered allowing directly i.e.
without basing on expression (5) to illustrate inconsistency of the equations of a
motion of particles and ﬁeld in electrodynamics of Maxwell-Lorentz or, at least,
to impose certain restrictions on a possible type of ﬁelds of non-electromagnetic
origins. In this case we shall proceed from the existence of the law of conser-
vation energy for the electromagnetic ﬁeld and particles in unknown for the
present form which is diﬀer from (5).

3.1 Example 3

Two identical charged particles are brought closer to each other with equal
constant velocities by extraneous forces along an axis x up to distance a1. Then
the extraneous forces are switched oﬀ and particles being decelerated continue

11

to be brought closer by inertia until they will stop on some distance a2 < a1.
After the stop of particles the extraneous forces are switched on again to keep
particles in the state of rest.

Show, that, contrary to the law of conservation energy7 the energy of the
considered system in the ﬁnal state is more than the energy spent by extraneous
forces on acceleration of particles and their further bringing closer.

The idea of this example is the next. The electrical ﬁeld of a uniformly
moving particle is ﬂattened in the direction of motion such a way that on the
axis of a motion at a distance a it’s value E = E|| = | ~E| γ2 times less then
the electrostatic ﬁeld of a charge at rest being at the same distance from the
observation point [1]-[4]

E

mov
|| =

1
γ2 E

rest
|| =

e2
γ2a2

To transform to particles the initial velocity and bringing closer them up to

a distance a1 the extraneous forces must transform them the energy

ε1 = 2mc2(γ − 1) +

e2
γ2a1

+ ε

em
1rad,

where εem

rad is the energy radiated by particles in the process of acceleration.

The energy of system in the ﬁnal state is equal

ε2 =

+ ε

em
1rad + ε

em
2rad,

e2
a2

2rad is the energy of radiation emitted by particles at the process of

where εem
deceleration.
The value

ε2 − ε1 =

−

e2
a2

e2
γ2a1

+ ε

em
2rad − 2mc2(γ − 1),

which is equal to a diﬀerence between the energy transformed by charged parti-
cles to extraneous forces at separation of these particles and energy transformed
by extraneous forces to particles to bring closer the particles.

It follows from (13) and conditions εem

2rad > 0, a2 < a1 that in this case there

is an excess in energy ∆ε = ε2 − ε1 > 0 which is diﬀer from zero at least at

γ + 1
2γ2 ,
7As the repulsive forces between moving particles eEmov

A1 < re

are weakened γ2 times in comparison
with a static case then on a principle of bringing closer of particles to each other with relativistic
velocities and subsequent separation them under non-relativistic velocities one could construct
the perpetum mobile.

||

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

12

where re = e2/mc2 is the classical radius of a particle.

The function ∆ε(a1) is obviously analytic one8. It means that ∆ε 6= 0 at
arbitrary a1 (it is diﬃcult to conform this aﬃrmation by analytical calculations).
In this case if we start from the low of conservation of energy of the unknown
for the present form which is diﬀer from (5) then we are forced to impose restric-
tions on the range of applicability of the Maxwell equations and in particular
on the Coulomb’s low at small distances a ≤ re. It is possible also to conclude
that the ﬁelds of a non-electromagnetic origin can not be short-range one. After
a stop of particles these ﬁelds lead to an attraction between them on distances
a ≤ re with forces comparable with electrostatic repulsive forces. It means, that
in this case the classical electrodynamics cannot be built without the account of
forces of a non-electromagnetic origin or that it is necessary all at once to build
the uniﬁed theory of ﬁelds where the ﬁelds of non-electromagnetic origin on the
same level with electromagnetic ﬁelds will be described by deﬁnite equations9.
It is possible to assume also, that the size of particles should be comparable
with the size re. Then the position of particles can not be determined by three
coordinates and at the description of the particle’s motion which draw closer
to one another up to a distance a ∼ re it is necessary to take into account their
internal structure.

3.2 Example 4

Show that the energy of an electromagnetic ﬁeld radiated by a particle moving
along a line of forces of a homogeneous electrical ﬁeld of a capacitor under
deﬁnite value of the ﬁeld strength can be more than the energy transformed by
the ﬁeld of the capacitor to the particle and ﬁnd the value of the ﬁeld.

The energy of an electromagnetic ﬁeld radiated by a particle is equal

εem
rad =

2e4E2
3m2c3 ∆t,

(15)

8Remind that if two analytical functions coincide within some range of functions then they

are identically equal through the whole range of these functions.

9It is possible to accept that in the equations of a motion of charged particles and further
in expressions (2),(5) a mass mi and energy εi have a non-electromagnetic origin. In this case
it would be possible to interpret the inertial term automatically arising in the equation of a
motion of particles as a mass of an electromagnetic origin and the energy of particles in (5)
would be composed from a part of an energy of electromagnetic origins (ﬁrst term) and from an
energy εi of non-electromagnetic origin. However such approach would be an acceptable way
of the introductions in the electrodynamics of Maxwell-Lorentz of ﬁelds of non-electromagnetic
origin (the way, based on a postulated law of conservation of energy), but would not be the
proof of existence of this law in the framework of the Maxwell-Lorentz Electrodynamics.

13

where ∆t = (cm/eE)
the capacitor of the length l [1-4].

q

(eEl/mc2 + 1)2 − 1 is the time of the particle motion in

The energy transferred by the electrical ﬁeld to the particle is equal

It should have follow from the law of conservation of energy that this work is
equal to a sum of the emitted energy εem
rad and the kinetic energy of a particle
mc2(γ − 1) or

∆ε = εem

rad + mc2(γ − 1).

But the relation (17) cannot be valid at any ﬁelds E in view of the fact that

∆t > l/c, mc2(γ − 1) > 0, εem

rad ∼ E2, ∆ε ∼ E. It is violated at the ﬁelds

∆ε = eEl.

E >

3e
r2
e

.

(16)

(17)

(18)

The energy of the electromagnetic radiation emitted by the particle in the
capacitor at such ﬁeld strengths will be higher than the energy that one needs
to move it from one capacitor plate to another, which contradicts to the law of
the conservation of energy.

It is possible to eliminate this contradiction if to assume that particles in the
classical electrodynamics have the ﬁnal dimensions always. In this case in (16)
there will appear the coherence factor of the radiation which is decreased when
the value E is increased. To assume that the radiation reaction forth appear in
the homogeneous electrical ﬁeld for charged particles, which is increased with
increasing of the value E is impossible without the conﬂict with the equations
of motion [1, 6].

4 Conclusion

In electrodynamics there are many ”open” or ”perpetual” problems such as
the problem of the self-energy and momentum of particles, the nature of the
particle’s mass, the problem of the runaway solutions. There is a spectrum of
opinions concerning the importance and the ways of a ﬁnding of the answers
on these questions. A number of these opinions we shall give below.

Unfortunately the eﬀorts of the majority of the authors are directed more
often to avoid similar questions than to solve them.
In addition they base
themselves on the laws of conservation ostensibly following from the electro-
dynamics in the most general case and presenting it as the consistent theory.

14

In such stating the arising questions do not have a physical subject of prin-
ciple and the diﬃculties in their solution are on the whole in the ﬁeld of the
mathematicians.

It is shown in the present work that a relation (5) does not express the law
of conservation of energy in electrodynamics of Maxwell-Lorentz. The error
in the treatment of this expression is the consequence of insuﬃciently precise
deﬁnitions of the basic concepts of the theory and logically inconsistent of it’s
construction. It is shown also that this electrodynamics is incompatible with the
concept of pointlike particles even in that case, when a correct transformation
properties are attached to them.

It follows, in particular, that in the process of any discussion of the existing
diﬃculties of the theories it is impossible to refer on the law of conservation
of energy in electrodynamics in the form, which was done, for example, in the
textbooks [1, 6, 7].

We suppose that the present work will allow to produce a more comprehen-
sive analysis of the bases of the classical electrodynamics and will be useful to
development the quantum theory of the considered processes.

5 Appendix

The electromagnetic ﬁeld in vacuum is described by the Maxwell equations

Rot ~E = −

∂ ~H
∂t
Div ~H = 0,

,

Rot ~H =

~j +

4π
1
c
c
Div ~E = 4πρ

∂ ~E
∂t

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

The typical proof of the law of conservation of energy in electrodynamics is

derived according the following scheme [1].

Let us multiply both parts of the equation (19) on ~H and both parts of the

equation (21) on ~E and subtract the received equations term by term

( ~E

1
c

∂ ~E
∂t

1
c

∂ ~H
∂t

) +

( ~H

) = −

~j − ( ~Hrot ~E − ~Erot ~H).

(23)

4π
c

15

Using the known formula of the vector analysis div[~a~b] = ~brot~a − ~arot~b we

rewrite this relation in the form

∂
∂t

| ~E|2 + | ~H|2
8π

= −~j ~E − div ~S,

(24)

(25)

(26)

where ~S = (c/4π)[ ~E ~H] is the Pointing vector.

Let us integrate (24) through some volume and apply the Gauss theorem to

the second term from the right. Then we shall receive the equation

∂
∂t

| ~E|2 + | ~H|2
8π

Z (

+ ~j ~E)dV = − I

~Sd ~f ,

where d ~f = ~nd f is a vector of an element of a surface determined by the
area d f and unit vector ~n normal to the surface and directed outside of the
closed volume. If the system consists of charged particles then, according to
~j ~EdV is written down in the form of a sum corresponding
(2), the integral
R
dεi/dt. In this case (25) is
to all particles of system of a form
transformed in

e~Vi ~E(~ri) =

P

P

∂
∂t

(Z

| ~E|2 + | ~H|2
8π

dV +

Xi

εi) = − I

~Sd ~f .

H

The value

~Sd ~f is a ﬂow of the energy of the electromagnetic ﬁeld through a
surface limiting the volume. If the integration is made through the total volume
of the space, i.e., if a surface of integration is withdrawn to inﬁnity then the
surface integral is disappeared (all ﬁelds and particles remain in space and do
not go outside of the limits of the surface of integration) [1].
It follows the
expression (5).

Notice that at the derivation of the expression (5) the expression (2) was
used which is derived in the frameworks
relativistic mechanics before an intro-
duction of the Maxwell equations and consequently concepts of the density of
the energy of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, energy and mass of particles of electro-
magnetic origins [1]. It is natural, that in this case the mass and the energy of
particles continue to be considered as some mechanical characteristics of par-
ticles and the fact is lost that with the charged particle the led self-ﬁelds are
connected extending to the whole space, having an energy of an electromagnetic
origin included in the ﬁrst term of the expression (5), causing at acceleration
the inertial and radiation reaction forces.

After introduction of the Maxwell equations and postulate (4) it would follow
to postulate the law of conservation of energy for particles and ﬁeld and being

16

based on this base to search for ways of introduction of particles to classical
electrodynamics just as it was done by Abraham and Lorentz [3] or to search
the equations for ﬁelds of a non-electromagnetic origin and also the other ways
of the solution of the problem.

References

[1] Landau, L. D., and E. M. Lifshitz, Teoriya polya, Izdatelstvo ”Nauka”,
Moscow, 1967; The Classical Theory of Fields, 3rd Reversed English edi-
tion, Pergamon, Oksford and Addison-Weskey, Reading, Mass. (1971).

[2] D. Ivanenko, A. Sokolov, Klassicheskaya teoriya polya, Gostechizdat, M.-L.,

1951; the Classische Feldtheorie, Akademie-Verlag, Berlin (1953).

[3] J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, John Wiley &. Sons, 1975.

[4] A. A. Sokolov, I. M. Ternov, Relyativistskii electron, Science, Moscow, 1974.

[5] I. E. Tamm, Fundamentals of the Theory of Electricity, Mir Publishers,

Moscow, 1957, p.463.

[6] V. L. Ginzburg, Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk, v.98,(3), p.569 (1969).

[7] M. A. Markov, Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk, v.29, (3-4), p.269, (1946).

17

6 Spectrum of opinions

For some reason, the controversies which relate to the problems in understand-
ing the basic principles of the theory of relativity and of quantum mechanics
usually take a particularly acute form.
they often ”become personal,” with
mutual accusations of ignorance, etc.

E. L. Feinberg, Sov. Phys. Uspekhi, Vol. 18, No 8, (1976)

In the ﬁeld theory the authors come, for example, to a conclusion that ”ele-
mentary particles cannot have of the ﬁnal dimensions and should be considered
as geometrical points.” Such conclusion is hardly comprehended physically and
philosophically and in any case, requires physical, and philosophical comment
especially in the textbooks. Otherwise the reader of the textbook, a physicist
or philosopher may do the conclusion that for Landau and Lifshitz ”space is
not the form of existence of matter” or that the elementary particles does not
exist as there is nothing in a mathematical point. .....

Our duty is to achieve the state when in each general and special guide of
physics - I mean in particular printed textbooks on physics - the philosophical
base will ﬁnd it’s clear expression. For the reader it is necessary the compre-
hensive organic penetration of correct philosophy into a speciﬁc matter.

S. I. Vavilov, Philosophskie voprocy sovremennoi physiki,

Izdat. AN, SSSR, Moscow, 1952

18

Before it has become clear, many theorists (Helmholtz, Hertz, Zommerfeld
and other) have written multivolume, not to tell monstrous, works about elec-
tromagnetic self-energy of the hard electron .... Nowadays all these eﬀorts seem
to be vain; the quantum theory has replaced this point of view and now the
tendency consists rather in avoiding of a problem of self-energy, than to solve
it. But there will come a day, when it will become central one again.

., Lecture read in Bern 16.7.1955 at
an International conference, devoted to 50 years
of the theory of relativity (Naturwiss. Rundschaw), 1956
(from A. A.Typkin, Principle of relativity, Atomizdat,
Moscow, 1975, p.23).

There is one strange moment in the previous consideration. Classical elec-
trodynamics is a relativistic covariant theory. That is why it is possible to
wait that correct calculation of any value the requirements of the Lorentz co-
variance will not be violated. Nevertheless in the Abraham-Lorentz model,
apparently, such violation is available. The non-covariant electromagnetic part
of self-energy and momentum of a charged particle is counterbalanced in this
model by the non-covariant part made dependent on Poincare stresses such a
way that the result has a relativistic covariance. Certainly it is possible to say
that since for a stable state of a limited distribution of a charge the retained
forces of a non-electromagnetic origin and corresponding ﬁelds are necessary,
then only total forces have a physical sense. A question is nevertheless natural
- Is it possible to determine the purely electromagnetic part of self-energy and
momentum such a way that it has the relativistic covariance? Such determina-
tion would have not only aesthetic value but would separate at least formally
the question of stability from a question of Lorentz invariance.

Dzh. Dzhekson, Classicheskaya electrodynamica, World, Moscow,
1965, p.651; see also: J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics,
John Wiley &. Sons, 1962.

19

... a completely satisfactory treatment of the reactive eﬀects of radiation
does not exist. The diﬃculties presented by this problem touch one of the most
fundamental aspects of physics, the nature of an elementary particle. .... one
might hope that the transition from classical to quantum-mechanical treatments
would remove the diﬃculties. While there is still hope that this may eventually
occur, the present quantum-mechanical discussions are best with even more
elaborate troubles than classical ones. It is one of the triumphs of comparatively
recent years (∼1948-1950) that the concepts of Lorentz covariance and gauge
invariance were exploited suﬃciently cleverly to circumvent these diﬃculties in
quantum electrodynamics. ... From a fundamental point of view, however, the
diﬃculties still remain.

J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, John Wiley &. Sons, 1975, p.781

In physics there are many ”perpetual problems, ” the discussion of which

contains for decades in the scientiﬁc literature, let alone in textbooks.

The problem of radiation from a uniformly accelerated charge and most of
other ”perpetual problems ” are undoubtedly of no major signiﬁcance, and
this is precisely why they have remained insuﬃciently well explained for so long
time. On the other hand, however, neglect of such methodical types of problems
sometimes incurs vengeance.

V. L.Ginzburg, Soviet Physics Uspekhi, v.12, No 4, p.565 (1970)

See also: R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leyghton, and M. Sands, The Feynman
Lectures on Physics, v.2, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass. (1963).

20

Signed to print April 25, 1997
Order No 145. 50 copies printed. P.l. 1
————————————–
Printed in RIIS FIAN.
Moscow, W-333, Leninsky prospect, 53.

21

