An Uncontrolled Toy That Can Walk But Cannot Stand Still

Michael J. Coleman and Andy Ruina
Department of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-7501 USA
Submitted to Physical Review Letters, June 14, 1997
(revised September 16, 2013)

7
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
0
1
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

We built a simple two-leg toy that can walk stably with
no control system. It walks downhill powered only by gravity.
It seems to be the ﬁrst McGeer-like passive-dynamic walker
that is statically unstable in all standing positions, yet is sta-
ble in motion. It is one of few known mechanical devices that
are stable near a statically unstable conﬁguration but do not
depend on spinning parts. Its design is loosely based on simu-
lations which do not predict its observed stability. Its motion
highlights the possible role of uncontrolled nonholonomic me-
chanics in balance.

Introduction. Human walking on level ground involves
dynamic balance which, if viewed in a course–grained way, is
presumably asymptotically stable. This observed stability of
walking must depend on some combination of neurological
control and mechanical features. The common view is that
neuro-muscular control is responsible for this balance. To
what extent is neuro-muscular coordination of animal loco-
motion, say human walking, really necessary? The bold pro-
posal of McGeer [1,2,3,4,5,6] is that much of the stabilization
of walking might be understood without control.

The possibility that asymptotically stable balance can be
achieved without control is somewhat unintuitive since top-
heavy upright things tend to fall down when standing still
or, more generally, since dynamical systems often run away
from potential energy maxima. Two mechanics issues that
bear on such stability considerations are that: 1) Hamiltonian
(conservative and holonomic) dynamical systems cannot have
asymptotic stability, and 2) conservative nonholonomic sys-
tems can have asymptotically (exponentially) stable steady
motions in some variables while at most mildly unstable in
the others, as recalled in Zenkov, et al. [7].

Since before the clever patent of Fallis in 1888 [8] (the oldest
reference we have), there have been two and four leg passive-
dynamic walking toys that either walk downhill or that walk
on level ground when pulled by a string. All such toys that
we know about are statically stable when they are not walk-
ing. While their motion is engaging to watch, their dynamic
stability is perhaps not so great a surprise.

McGeer’s passive-dynamic walkers.
Inspired by
a double pendulum simulation of swinging legs
[9] and by
simple walking toys, McGeer successfully sought and found
two-dimensional, straight-legged and kneed walking model de-
signs that displayed graceful, stable, human-like walking on
a range of shallow slopes with no actuation (besides gravity)
and no control. McGeer termed the motions of these ma-
chines passive-dynamic walking. All of McGeer’s successful
designs, as well as those of his imitators thus far [10,11,12],

have been more-or-less constrained against falling over side-
ways so that their dynamic balance is fore-aft only. These
machines cannot stand stably upright except when their legs
are spread fore and aft. The dynamic stability of these devices
could be dependent on the static stability of this spread-leg
conﬁguration which is visited momentarily during walking.

While human walking motion is mostly in the sagittal (fore-
aft and vertical) plane, the stability of out-of-plane (sideways)
motions is an issue important to a more complete understand-
ing of three-dimensional walking. McGeer’s [4] numerical 3-D
studies only led to unstable periodic motions. Fowble and
Kuo [13] numerically simulated a passive-dynamic 3D model
of walking but also did not ﬁnd stable passive motions.

Our recent investigations of walking balance have been
based on attempts to design mechanisms that vaguely mimic
human geometry and walk without control. This paper de-
scribes one such primitive design (ﬁrst reported in [14]) which
extends to three dimensions, at least experimentally, the re-
markable two-dimensional walking mechanisms of McGeer.

Spinning parts and nonholonomic constraints.
Humans are notably lacking in gyros, ﬂywheels or other spin-
ning parts. Things with spinning parts, like tops and gyros,
are well known to be capable of balancing near a potential
energy maximum. The common model of an energy conserv-
ing point-contact gyro, however, does not have asymptotic
stability since it is Hamiltonian. Adding a rounded tip to the
top, with nonholonomic rolling contact, is not stabilizing. A
spinning top with dissipation, however, can be asymptotically
stable in a transient sense in that, over a limited time until
the spinning rate has slowed too much, vertical motion is ap-
proached exponentially. The observed asymptotic stability of
rolling coins and the like also depends on dissipation.

We know of only a few uncontrolled three-dimensional de-
vices that can have asymptotically stable steady motions at
or near a potential energy maximum, without depending on
fast spinning parts. These devices are all nonholonomically-
constrained and conservative: (1) a no-hands bicycle with
massless wheels (say skates) and a special mass distribu-
tion [15,16]; (2) closely related to the bicycle is a rolling disk
with eccentric masses that bank and steer but do not pitch
with the disk [16,11]; (3) a no-hands tricycle (where gyro-
scopic terms from the spinning wheels are not relevant for
balance because of the three point support) with a mildly soft
de-centering (negative spring constant) spring on the steer-
ing [17,18]; (4) a rigid rider attached appropriately to a mov-
ing skate-board [19]; and (5) a statically unstable boat with
an ideal keel, acting as a nonholonomic constraint, that is
steered by the boat lean similarly to how a bicycle front wheel
is steered by bike lean [20]. Certain gliding aircraft might also
be considered as an example, but the deﬁnition of a potential
energy maximum is less clear for planes since there is no well

1

deﬁned reference for measuring potential energy.

All of these devices diﬀer from walking mechanisms in that
they are constrained against fore-aft tipping (the walking de-
vices have fore-aft dynamics), they conserve energy (the walk-
ers lose energy at joint and foot impacts and use up gravita-
tional potential energy), and they are nonholonomically con-
strained (most of the walkers are well modeled as piecewise
holonomic).

Intermittent contact and nonholonomicity. Me-
chanical systems that are asymptotically stable must be non-
Hamiltonian. Two mechanisms for losing the Hamiltonian
structure of governing equations are dissipation and nonholo-
nomic constraints. The primary examples of nonholonomic
constraint are rolling contact and skate-like sliding contact.
For these two smooth constraints, and other less physical non-
holonomic constraints, the set of allowed diﬀerential motions
is not integrable. That is, the constraints are not equiva-
lent to a restriction of the space of admissible conﬁgurations.
For smooth nonholonomic systems, the dimension of the con-
ﬁguration space accessible to the system is greater than the
dimension of the velocity space allowed by the constraints.

An intermittent non-slipping contact constraint can also
cause the dimension of the accessible conﬁguration space to
be greater than the dimension of the accessible velocity space.
As suggested by one simple example [21], this discrete non-
holonomicity may account for exponential stability of some
systems. The walking models we study are all nonholonomic
in this intermittent sense (and also in the conventional sense
if they have rounded feet). They can, for example, translate
forwards by walking although the contact constraint does not
allow forward sliding.

Dynamical modeling. Fig. 1 shows a 3D model
which probably captures the essential geometric and mass-
distribution features of the physical model presented here.
The device, at least at the level of approximation which we
believe is appropriate, is a pair of symmetric rigid bodies (leg
1 = stance leg, leg 2 = swing leg) that have mass m, symmet-
rically located (in the rest state) centers of mass G1,2, and
mirror-symmetry related moment of inertia matrices with re-
spect to the center of mass I1,2. The legs are connected by
a frictionless hinge at the hip with center point H and ori-
entation ˆn normal to the symmetry plane of the legs. Each
of the two legs can make rolling and collisional contact with
the ground (slope = α) with no contact couples. The gravi-
tational acceleration is g.

The (reduced) dynamical state of the model is determined
by the orientations and angular velocities of the legs. The
stance leg orientation is determined by standard Euler angles
ψ, θst, φ for lean, pitch and steer. The conﬁguration of the
swing leg is described by the angle θsw. The absolute position
of the walker on the plane does not enter into the governing
equations. The instantaneous point of contact of the stance
leg with the ground is C and the point of the impending
contact is D. We assume ground collisions are without bounce
or slip.

The unreduced accessible conﬁguration space is

six-
dimensional (the above angles plus position on the slope)
whereas at any instant in time the accessible velocity space is
four-dimensional (the four dynamical state variables). Hence
the overall nonholonomicity (6 > 4) of this system which is
smooth and holonomic at all but instants of collision. The

(cid:3)

(1)

(cid:9)
(2)

model is also dissipative due to kinetic energy loss at the col-
lisions.

The model is well-posed since the governing equations for
rigid bodies in hinged, rolling, and plastic-collisional contact
are well established. The equations which govern the evolu-
tion of the state of the system q = {φ, ˙φ, ψ, ˙ψ, θst, ˙θst, θsw, ˙θsw}
follow from angular momentum balance (or other equivalent
principles). Between collisions, we have angular momentum
balance for the whole system about the contact point C

rGi /C × mg =

rGi/C × mai + ωi × (Iiωi) + Ii ˙ωi

X
i=1,2

X
i=1,2 (cid:2)

where rGi /C ≡ rGi − rC , the center of mass velocities and
accelerations are v1,2 and a1,2, and the angular velocities are
ω1,2. Angular momentum balance for the swing leg about the
hip axis ˆn is

ˆn ·

rG2 /H × mg = rG2/H × ma2 + ω 2 × (I2ω 2 ) + I2 ˙ω 2
(cid:8)

The eight collisional jump conditions come from continuity of
conﬁguration through the collision, conservation of angular
momentum of the system about the new contact point D,

X
i=1,2

rGi /D × mvi + Iiωi(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

=

−

X
i=1,2

rGi /D × mvi + Iiω

i

(3)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

+

and conservation of angular momentum for the swing leg
about the swing hinge axis

ˆn ·n rG1 /H × mv1 + I1ω 1(cid:12)
(cid:12)

− = rG2 /H × mv2 + I2ω 2(cid:12)
(cid:12)

+o

(4)

where the respective sides are to be evaluated just before (−)
and after (+) foot collision with the ground. The second
jump condition Eqn. (4) is being applied to the same leg as
it switches from stance (subscript 1) to swing (subscript 2).
Both jump conditions, Eqns. (3) and (4) also assume no colli-
sional impulse from the ground to the leg which is just leaving
the ground.

The governing equations and jump conditions above are
expressed in terms of positions, velocities, and accelerations,
which are all complicated functions of the state variables.
As a result, the governing equations are massive expressions
(pages long). We assembled the kinematic expressions and
governing diﬀerential equations using symbolic algebra soft-
ware (MAPLE).

· Rω∗

where ω∗

The no-slip rolling condition is that the velocity of the ma-
terial point in contact at C is zero. The acceleration of this
point, needed to calculate the accelerations of G1,2, is given
by ω∗
is the in-the-contact-plane part of the
angular velocity and R is the inverse of the local surface cur-
vature matrix. So far, we have only studied a simpliﬁcation
with point-contact feet (r1 = r2 = 0, R is the zero matrix)
and no hip spacing (w = 0). In this case, when a foot is on
the ground, the contact acts like a ball-and-socket joint and
the only nonholonomy is that of intermittent contact.

2

In order to study the stability of such systems, following
McGeer, we represent an entire gait cycle by a Poincar´e map

f (qk) = qk+1

(5)

from the state of the system qk just after a foot collision to the
state qk+1 just after the next collision of the same foot (two leg
swings and two foot collisions per map iteration). We evalu-
ate f using numerical integration of Eqns. (1) and (2) between
collisions and applying the jump conditions Eqns. (3) and (4),
at each foot collision. For this model, the map is seven-
dimensional (8 − 1), but we treat it as eight-dimensional for
numerical convenience.

Fixed points of the return map f (q with f (q) = q) cor-
respond to periodic gait cycles (not necessarily stable). We
ﬁnd ﬁxed points by numerical root ﬁnding on the function
f − q, sometimes using ﬁxed points from models with nearby
parameter values to initialize searches.

We determine the stability of periodic motions by numer-
ically calculating the eigenvalues of the linearization of the
return map at the ﬁxed points.
If the magnitudes of some
of the eigenvalues are less than one (with all others equal to
one), then the ﬁxed point is asymptotically stable in those
variables. Because there are a family of limit cycles at dif-
ferent headings one eigenvalue is always one. Because we use
eight instead of seven dimensions in our map, one eigenvalue
is always zero.

To date, like McGeer [4] and Fowble and Kuo [13] who
studied similar simulations, we have found only unstable pe-
riodic motions, though less unstable than theirs. A nearly sta-
ble case from our numerical studies has maximum eigenvalue
modulus of about 1.15, one of exactly one, and the other six
less than one. Fore-aft balance has already been achieved with
two-dimensional walking models whose stable ﬁxed points we
use as starting points for the 3D analysis. Thus the eigenvec-
tor associated with the maximum eigenvalue corresponds to
falling over sideways (i. e., is dominated by ψ, ˙ψ component)
as expected. The most stable mass distributions we have
found do not have very human-like parameters; each leg has
a center of mass closer to the foot than the hip, and laterally
displaced at about 90% of the leg length.

In this almost-stable case, the walker’s legs have a mass
distribution corresponding roughly to laterally extended bal-
ance bars, like what might be used for walking on a tight-
rope. In the limit, as the lateral oﬀset of the center of mass
gets very large, the device approaches, for sideways balance,
an inverted pendulum with large rotational inertia. The step
periods remain bounded. Negligible falling acceleration can
thus occur in one step and the modulus of the maximum eigen-
value of the linearized step–to–step map asymptotically ap-
proaches one, or apparent neutral stability, from above. Thus
the closeness of the largest map eigenvalue modulus to one
is not a complete measure of closeness to stability. However,
when averaged over a step cycle, this model does fall more
slowly than a corresponding inverted pendulum and the low
eigenvalue is not just a result of slowed falling due to large
rotary inertia.

The toy. As a non-working demonstration of the kine-
matics and mass distributions in our simulations, and not for
walking experiments, we assembled a device similar to the one
shown in Fig. 2. It has two straight legs, separated by simple

hinges at the hips, laterally extending balance mass rods, and
rounded feet. Playing, with no hopes of success, we placed
the toy on a ramp. Surprisingly, it took a few serendipitous, if
not very steady or stable, steps. After some non-quantiﬁable
tinkering, we arrived at the functioning device shown.

Our physical model is constructed from a popular Ameri-
can child’s construction toy, brass strips to round the feet bot-
toms, and various steel nuts for balance masses. The walking
ramp has about a 4.5 degree slope and is narrow enough to
avoid making contact with the balance masses as the walker
rocks side-to-side. Another more complex assembly of similar
toy parts (not described here) walks on a wide ramp.

Aside: construction details. The device is built us-
ing the Playskoolr Tinkertoyr Construction System: Colos-
sal ConstructionsTM, 1991 set. One leg is made from a yel-
low spool, a light green rod, and a dark green hinge (plus ‘+’
shaped) glued together. Then, we slid the legs onto a red rod
(loose ﬁt) which acts as an axle. The green hinges are sep-
arated and kept from sliding apart by three orange washers
friction-ﬁt to the red axle. The legs and red axle can rotate
independently.

To support the side weights, we glued a yellow spool rigidly
to the end of a red rod and inserted the other end into the
side of a yellow foot with a friction ﬁt to allow for rotational
adjustment.

We assembled each balance mass from two stacked steel
nuts held together between two washers by a nut and bolt.
Each nut assembly has a mass of about 50 grams. Then, each
balance mass assembly was located on the yellow spools at the
end of the balance rods and held in place with vinyl electrical
tape. The balance mass assembly is tilted behind the leg. As
a result, the legs have low mass centers located laterally at
a distance comparable to the leg length, above the center of
curvature of the feet, and just behind the leg axes. The mass
of the fully assembled walking device is about 120 grams, only
20 grams more than the two balance masses. When the toy is
in its unstable-equilibrium standing position the nominally-
vertical legs are approximately orthogonal to the ramp.

Because a yellow spool has holes located radially around
its circumference to accept rods, a small ﬂat section is on the
bottom at the foot contact point. To ensure that the walker is
statically unstable (cannot stand on the ﬂat sections or in any
other way), a small (0.50 cm wide) strip of thin (0.013 cm)
brass shim stock material was fastened over the ﬂat section
contacting the ﬂoor so as to restore its curvature there.

Observed motion. Because the center of mass is above
the center of curvature of the round feet, we cannot stably
stand this device with parallel or with splayed legs. When
placed aiming downhill on a ramp, tipped to one side, and re-
leased, the device rocks side-to-side and, coupled with swing-
ing of the legs, takes tiny steps. When a foot hits the ground,
it sticks and then rolls, until the swinging foot next collides
with the ground. Except at the moment of foot collision, only
one foot is in contact with the ground at any time. When the
swinging foot collides with the ground, the trailing leg leaves
the ground. The gait is more-or-less steady; after small dis-
turbances the toy either falls or stumbles a few steps while
returning to near-periodic gait. At a slope of 4.5 degrees, it
takes a step about every 0.47 seconds and advances forward
about 1.3 cm per step, where a step is measured from a foot

3

collision to the next collision of that same foot. The side-to-
side tilt is about 4 degrees, there is no visible variation in φ
during a step, but there is slight directional drift (one way or
another) over many steps. The rounded metal strips at the
feet bottom deform during foot collision in a way that may
or may not be essential; we do not know.

Conclusions. We have constructed a device which can
balance while walking but cannot stand in any conﬁguration.
Although our new machine does not have a very human-like
mass distribution, it does highlight the possibility that uncon-
trolled dynamics may not just contribute to fore-aft walking
balance, as indicated by previous McGeer models, but also
to side-to-side balance. The mechanism joins a small collec-
tion of statically unstable devices which dynamically balance
without any rapidly spinning parts.

Our too-simple mathematical/computational model does
not explain this behavior. We do not yet know what key
modeling features need be included to predict the observed
dynamic stability. An open and possibly unanswerable ques-
tion is whether the stability of this intermittently dissipative
system can be explained, in part, by the fact that its piece-
wise holonomic constraints act somewhat like nonholonomic
constraints.

Acknowledgments. Thanks to Les Schaﬀer, Saskya

van Nouhuys, and Mariano Garcia for editorial comments.

[1] T. McGeer, in Proc., IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, IEEE (IEEE, Piscataway, NJ,
1989), pp. 1592–7.

[2] T. McGeer, Intern. J. Robot. Res. 9, 62 (1990).
[3] T. McGeer, in Proc., 1990 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, IEEE (IEEE, Los Alamitos,
CA, 1990), pp. 1640–5.

[4] T. McGeer, in Proc., Experimental Robotics II: The 2nd
International Symposium, edited by R. Chatila and G.
Hirzinger (Springer–Verlag, Berlin, 1992), pp. 465–90.
[5] T. McGeer, in Mechanics of Animal Locomotion, Vol. 11 of
Advances in Comparative and Environmental Physiology,
edited by R. M. Alexander (Springer–Verlag, Berlin, 1992),
Chap. Principles of Walking and Running.
[6] T. McGeer, J. theor. Biol. 163, 277 (1993).
[7] D. Zenkov, A. Bloch, and J. Marsden, Technical report,

University of Michigan (unpublished).

[8] G. T. Fallis, Walking Toy (‘Improvement in Walking

Toys’), U. S. Patent, No. 376,588, 1888.

[9] S. Mochon and T. McMahon, Math. Biosci. 52, 241 (1980).
[10] M. Garcia, A. Chatterjee, A. Ruina, and M. J. Coleman,

ASME J. Biomech. Eng. (1997), in press.

[11] M. J. Coleman, Ph.D. thesis, Cornell University, Ithaca,

NY, 1997, in preparation.

[12] B. Thuillot, A. Goswami, and B. Espiau, in Proc., 1997
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa-
tion, IEEE (IEEE, New York, NY, 1997), pp. 792–8.
[13] J. V. Fowble and A. D. Kuo, in Biomechanics and Neu-
ral Control of Movement, Engineering Foundation Confer-

4

ences (EFC, Mount Sterling, OH, 1996), pp. 28–9.

[14] M. Coleman et al., in press, Proc., IUTAM Chaos ‘97 Sym-

[15] R. S. Hand, Master’s thesis, Cornell University, Ithaca,

posium (unpublished).

NY, 1988.

[16] J. Papadopoulos, private communication (unpublished).
[17] Y. Rocard, General Dynamics of Vibrations, 3rd ed. (Fred-

erick Ungar Publishing Co., New York, 1960).

[18] R. S. Sharp, in Proc., 8th IAVSD–Symposium; The Dy-
namics of Vehicles on Roads and Tracks, IAVSD–IUTAM,
edited by J. K. Hedrick (Swets and Zeitlinger B. V., Lisse,
1983), pp. 564–77.

[19] M. Hubbard, J. Appl. Mech. 46, 931 (1979).
[20] T. Cardanha and R. Bennet, Cornell University Engineer-
ing Undergraduate Research Project (unpublished).
[21] A. Ruina, submitted to Reports on Mathematical Physics

(unpublished).

g

m, I2

G2

y

swing leg
(leg 2)

z

x

sw

w

H

st

X

Y

n

m, I1

G1

l

Z

r1

r2

D

C

stance leg
(leg 1)

FIG. 1. A rigid body model of the simple walker. Param-

eters and state variables are described in the text.

dark green hinge

4.44

balance mass
assembly

light green rod

13.65
orange
 washer

24o

red rod

10.16

yellow spool

red rod

     Balance mass assembly
1/4" - 28 x 1 1/4"
allen-head bolt
1/2 " - #20 nut 
1/4 " flat washer 
1/4 " - #28 nut

brass strips

     Side view, yellow spool

spool center

R 2.54

flat section

0.05 

brass strip

FIG. 2. The 3D Tinkertoyr walking model with hard-
ware description and dimensions (in centimeters, not drawn to
scale). The balance masses and the brass strips are fastened
with black electrical tape (not shown).

a
a
q
q
y
f
