8
9
9
1
 
r
a

M
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
0
3
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Hamiltonian structure of hamiltonian chaos

X. Z. Tang ∗
Department of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, The University at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794
and Department of Applied Physics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027

A. H. Boozer
Department of Applied Physics, Columbia University, New York, NY, 10027
and Max-Planck Institut f¨ur Plasmaphysik, Garching, Germany
(November 16, 2008)

From a kinematical point of view, the geometrical informa-
tion of hamiltonian chaos is given by the (un)stable directions,
while the dynamical information is given by the Lyapunov
exponents. The ﬁnite time Lyapunov exponents are of par-
ticular importance in physics. The spatial variations of the
ﬁnite time Lyapunov exponent and its associated (un)stable
direction are related. Both of them are found to be deter-
mined by a new hamiltonian of same number of degrees of
freedom as the original one. This new hamiltonian deﬁnes
a ﬂow ﬁeld with characteristically chaotic trajectories. The
direction and the magnitude of the phase ﬂow ﬁeld give the
(un)stable direction and the ﬁnite time Lyapunov exponent
of the original hamiltonian. Our analysis was based on a 1 1
2
degree of freedom hamiltonian system.

PACS numbers: 05.45.+b

I. INTRODUCTION

Many systems that are chaotic such as the stochastic
magnetic ﬁeld line in toroidal plasma conﬁnement de-
vices have a hamiltonian representation [1,2]. The KAM
theorem [3] deals with the onset of chaos in hamiltonian
systems, and the description of the kinematics of devel-
oped chaos involves the ergodic theorem [4]. Hamiltonian
dynamics naturally give rise to a diﬀerentiable dynami-
cal system where the multiplicative ergodic theorem of
Oseledec is applicable [5]. Oseledec’s theorem gives two
aspects of chaos. First the sensitivity of the dependence
on initial conditions is measured by various inﬁnite time
Lyapunov exponents, i.e., the dynamical information of
chaos. Secondly the characteristic directions associated
with these Lyapunov exponents give the geometrical as-
pect of chaos. That is: if two points are separated along
diﬀerent directions at the initial time, they can diverge
or converge exponentially at diﬀerent characteristic Lya-
punov exponents.

Ergodic theory treats the time asymptotic limit, in
which the inﬁnite time Lyapunov exponents are constants
and the characteristic directions are functions of position
only. For ﬁnite time, there is a convergence issue for
both the Lyapunov exponents and their associated char-
acteristic directions. The convergence of the characteris-
tic directions is exponential, so the geometrical aspect of

chaos at ﬁnite time is well described by its time asymp-
totic limit. This is not the case for Lyapunov exponents.
Finite time Lyapunov exponents suﬀer from a notoriously
slow convergence problem [6]. Its spatial and temporal
dependence was discussed by Tang and Boozer [7], who
gave a direct link between the convergence function in
ﬁnite time Lyapunov exponent and the geometry of the
vector ﬁeld deﬁned by the corresponding characteristic
direction.
It should be emphasized that most applica-
tions of practical interest involve a ﬁnite duration of time.
Hence the ﬁnite time properties of chaos, rather than the
asymptotic properties of chaos, are of real concern.

In [7] we found that the spatial variation of the ﬁnite
time Lyapunov exponent and the corresponding charac-
teristic direction are not independent of each other. The
exact relation was shown in [7] and is restated later in
this paper, equations (7,8,9). Besides its practical im-
portance such as those in transport studies [7], it also
leads to a conceptual advance in the understanding of
chaos. The ﬁnite time Lyapunov exponent (e.g. λ) and
its characteristic direction (e.g. ˆs∞) can be described by
another hamiltonian in the same phase space with the
same number of degrees of freedom as the original hamil-
tonian. If one constructs the corresponding vector ﬁeld
(necessarily divergence-free) associated with the phase
space trajectory of this new hamiltonian, the magnitude
of this vector ﬁeld gives the local ﬁnite time Lyapunov
exponent while the direction of the vector ﬁeld gives the
corresponding characteristic direction. The new hamil-
tonian is also chaotic in the same region as the parent
hamiltonian. One could characterize the chaos in this
new hamiltonian by invoking a third generation hamil-
tonian. Consequently, a hierarchy of hamiltonian can be
bootstrapped from the original hamiltonian of a conser-
vative system that is chaotic.

II. GLOBALLY DIVERGENCE-FREE FIELDS
AND HAMILTONIAN MECHANICS

A large class of conservative systems which exhibit
chaotic behavior has a hamiltonian representation. Two
of the well known examples are the magnetic ﬁeld B and
the velocity ﬁeld v of a divergence-free ﬂuid [8]. An arbi-
trary divergence-free vector G(x, y, z) can be written in
the so-called canonical form,

1

G =

ψ

θ +

φ

χ.

∇

× ∇

∇

× ∇

(1)

The function χ(ψ, θ, φ) is the hamiltonian of the G ﬁeld
lines. The G ﬁeld line is the trajectory x(τ ) given by
equation

Despite the lack of a rigorous theory [9], these new nu-
merical evidence and the simple Markov transport model
put forwarded by Meiss should boost our conﬁdence in
the ergodicity of hamiltonian chaos.

dx
dτ

= G(x).

(2)

III. MULTIPLICATIVE ERGODIC THEOREM IN
LAGRANGIAN COORDINATES

To ﬁnd the G ﬁeld line in ψ, θ, φ coordinates, one has to
invert the transformation equation x(ψ, θ, φ). Combin-
ing the transformation equation x(ψ, θ, φ) and the ﬁeld
line trajectory, equation (2), one arrives at the familiar
Hamilton’s equations,

dψ
dφ

=

∂χ
∂θ

,

−

dθ
dφ

=

∂χ
∂ψ

,

(3)

where χ is the hamiltonian, θ the canonical position,
ψ the canonical momentum, and φ the canonical time
1. Since continuous transformation, such as x(ψ, θ, φ),
preserve topological properties, questions regarding the
integrability of the ﬁeld line are then answered by the
hamiltonian χ(ψ, θ, φ) alone.

It should be noted that only a globely divergence-free
ﬁeld can be represented by the form of equation (1), a
requirement set by Poincare’s lemma [11]. Furthermore,
the divergence-free ﬁeld G should not vanish in the region
of interest.

A hamiltonian representation of such a vector ﬁeld is
desirable since an array of well developed techniques from
hamiltonian mechanics are available. For example, the
hamiltonian description of a magnetic ﬁeld has played a
major role in the theory of toroidal plasmas [8].

Before we proceed to the next section which is on the
ergodic theorem, a digression on the applicability of the
multiplicative ergodic theorem to hamiltonian chaos is
useful. A hamiltonian ﬂow, even when it is chaotic, can
not support a nonuniform invariant density on its ergodic
subcomponent in phase space. However, numerical sim-
ulations appear to oﬀer a contradictive picture: there are
concentrations, or spikes, of the phase space density near
the boundary of chaotic zones [10]. One might question
the ergodicity of the chaotic sea (the irregular component
[9]) and hence the applicability of Oseledec’s theorem. A
recent study by Meiss in the case of the standard map
[9] appears to reconcile this conﬂict. Meiss found that
these density spikes are transient and they can be ex-
plained by a Markov tree model taking into account the
eﬀects of islands-around-islands structure. Hence earlier
numerical ﬁndings [10] are not in contradiction to an in-
variant measure, and the phase space density can be uni-
form on an irregular component of hamiltonian systems.

1

In this extended ‘phase’ space, there are three independent

coordinates and hence three Lyapunov exponents.

The multiplicative ergodic theorem of Oseledec [5]
complements KAM theorem [3] in understanding hamil-
tonian chaos, especially the limiting case in which the
regular components occupy a small portion of the phase
space. This theorem can be understood in terms of a
general coordinate transformation [11] between ordinary
space x and the Lagrangian coordinates ξ, a widely used
coordinate system in ﬂuid mechanics. A point with La-
grangian coordinates ξ is related to x in ordinary space
by the integral curve of dx/dt = G(x) from initial time
t0 to later time t with the initial condition x(ξ, t0) = ξ.
For a pair of ﬁxed (t0, t), there is a one-to-one mapping
between ξ and x(ξ, t). There is freedom in the choice of
Lagrangian coordinates ξ due to the arbitrariness of t0,
a point that we will revisit in section IV. Of course,
t0 should be ﬁxed for any chosen set of Lagrangian co-
ordinates.
t0 is usually set to zero for convenience of
bookkeeping.

·

In addition to a set of coordinates, one needs a met-
ric to specify the physical distance between two neigh-
boring points. Let x be ordinary Cartesian coordinates,
then its metric is a unit matrix, dl2 = dx
dx = dxidxi.
The same diﬀerential distance can also be speciﬁed in
Lagrangian coordinates, dl2 = gijdξidξj, where gij ≡
∂x/∂ξi
∂x/∂ξj is the metric tensor of the Lagrangian
coordinates ξ. Since x(ξ, 0) = ξ, one could also under-
stand (dx)2 = gijdξidξj as an equation which relates the
initial separation dξidξj between two neighboring points
to their later separation (dx)2. Once this is understood,
the interpretation of the metric tensor gij in Oseledec’s
multiplicative ergodic theorem becomes transparent, i.e.,
gij is the Oseledec matrix Λij (for its deﬁnition, see [5]
or [4]).

·

Instead of taking the limit of limt→∞(Λij)1/2t = Λ and
diagonalizing the matrix Λ, we diagonalize the matrix gij
ﬁrst and then take the limit of t
. Since gij is a
positive deﬁnite and symmetric matrix, it can be diago-
nalized with positive eigenvalues and real eigenvectors,

−→ ∞

gij = Λlˆeˆe + Λm ˆm ˆm + Λsˆsˆs,

Λs > 0. There are three Lyapunov
with Λl ≥
characteristic exponents associated with vector ﬁeld G,

Λm ≥

∞
l = lim
λ
t→∞

ln Λl
2t

, λ

∞
m = lim
t→∞

ln Λm
2t

, λ

∞
s = lim
t→∞

ln Λs
2t

.

For a divergence-free ﬁeld with a hamiltonian represen-
tation, λ∞
m = 0. These are usu-
ally called inﬁnite time Lyapunov exponents and they are

s > 0 and λ∞
λ∞

l =

−

2

constants in one ergodic region. The eigenvectors ˆe, ˆm, ˆs
have well-deﬁned time-asymptotic limits as well, but they
are position dependent, ˆe∞(ξ), ˆm∞(ξ), ˆs∞(ξ). There is a
stable manifold theorem in the vicinity of an arbitrary
point ξ [4]. The ˆs∞(ξ) is the tangent vector of the local
stable manifold associated with the Lyapunov character-
istic exponent λ∞
s , the so-called stable direction. There
is also an unstable direction which is tangent to the lo-
cal unstable manifold. The unstable direction is deﬁned
using the time-reversed dynamics,

dx
dt

=

G(x),

−

l

ij

ˆe(−)ˆe(−) + Λ(−)

ij dξidξj and g(−)

in which dl2 = (dx)2 = g(−)
=
m ˆm(−) ˆm(−) + Λ(−)
Λ(−)
s ˆs(−)ˆs(−). The lo-
cal stable manifold for the backward time dynamics de-
ﬁnes the local unstable manifold for the forward time dy-
namics. Two linearly independent vectors deﬁne a plane.
The intersection of two planes gives rise to another vec-
tor. One can use the intersection of plane (ˆs∞, ˆm∞) and
plane (ˆs(−)
∞ ) to construct another vector ¯m. For the
case we are interested in this paper, λ∞
m = 0 and ¯m is
tangent to the center manifold. In the general case λ∞
m
could be nonzero, ¯m is then the tangent vector of another
local (un)stable manifold, corresponding to a (positive)
m . In either case, these three vectors ˆs∞, ˆs(−)
negative λ∞
∞ ,
and ¯m span the three dimensional space.

∞ , ˆm(−)

The negative Lyapunov exponent means neighboring
points converge exponentially in time, while a positive
Lyapunov exponent means neighboring points diverge ex-
ponentially in time. The ones of most importance are
the most negative and the most positive Lyapunov expo-
nents. In applications, one is concerned with the ﬁnite
time Lyapunov exponents.
In the case studied in this
paper, there are two of them and they are deﬁned as

(4)

]/2t.

λs ≡
λ(−)
s ≡ −

[ln Λs]/2t
[ln Λ(−)
(5)
s
Obviously λs is the negative Lyapunov exponent and λ(−)
is the positive Lyapunov exponent for forward time. It
is easy to see that any theory for ˆs∞ and λs would be
applicable to ˆs(−)
∞ and λ(−), since they are deﬁned for the
same ﬂow except for a reversal of the direction of time.
From now on we concentrate on the set of (λs, ˆs∞) and
let

s

≡ −
for convenience in notation.

λ(ξ, t)

λs(ξ, t)

(6)

IV. THE HAMILTONIAN NATURE OF THE
THEORY OF FINITE TIME LYAPUNOV
EXPONENTS

Before we proceed, it is useful to summarize the main
results of ergodic theorem. Chaos means sensitive de-

pendence on initial conditions. There are two aspects of
chaos which are captured by the multiplicative ergodic
theorem of Oseledec. The ﬁrst one is the dynamical as-
pect, i.e., how sensitive is the dependence on initial con-
ditions? This is answered by the Lyapunov characteristic
exponents. The second one is on geometry. Along diﬀer-
ent directions, neighboring points do behave diﬀerently,
i.e., diﬀerent Lyapunov exponent corresponds to diﬀer-
ent characteristic directions. As signiﬁed by its name,
ergodic theorem treats the time-asymptotic limit or long
time average. Hence the Lyapunov exponents in ergodic
theorem are also called inﬁnite time Lyapunov exponents
which are constants in a chaotic sea. The geometrical in-
formation that is given by the ergodic theorem is always
local, i.e., ˆs∞(ξ) is a function of position. The smooth-
ness of G(x) implies the smoothness of ˆs∞(ξ) as a vector
ﬁeld. The ﬁeld line of ˆs∞(ξ) is of great importance in
transport of advection-diﬀusion type. For example, the
rapid diﬀusive relaxation of an externally imposed scalar
or vector ﬁeld occurs only along the ˆs lines [7].

In applications where ﬁnite time is of concern, one
needs to understand the properties of the ﬁnite time Lya-
punov exponents. The ﬁnite time Lyapunov exponent
has both a time and space dependence. It is also called
local Lyapunov exponent for that reason. Since, for ex-
ample, both λ(ξ, t) and ˆs∞(ξ) are local, one might feel
that there could be some relationship which relates the
spatial variation of these two. This was addressed by our
work on ﬁnite time Lyapunov exponent [7]. We found
that the ﬁnite time Lyapunov exponent λ(ξ, t) can always
be asymptotically decomposed into three main parts with
the addition of an exponentially small fourth (correction)
term

λ(ξ, t) = ˜λ(ξ)/t + f (ξ, t)/√t + λ

∞

+ O(exp[

2λ(ξ, t)t]),

−

(7)

(8)

(9)

where

ˆs∞
· ∇0˜λ(ξ) +

· ∇0f (ξ, t) = 0,
ˆs∞ = 0,

ˆs∞

∇0 ·
and λ∞ is the inﬁnite time Lyapunov exponent. We note
that ˜λ(ξ) is a smooth function of position due to the
smoothness of vector ﬁeld ˆs∞.

The correction to the asymptotic decomposition, i.e.,
the fourth term in equation (7), becomes exponentially
small as t becomes large. The rate of the exponential
decay is given by the magnitude of the local Lyapunov
exponent. Hence the correction term becomes negligible
on a time scale of a few local Lyapunov time. It should
be emphasized that what we presented here is an asymp-
totic form of a local expression (ﬁnite time Lyapunov
exponent is an explicit function of position and time). In
diﬀerent regions of a chaotic component, the local Lya-
punov exponent can vary signiﬁcantly. For example, the
stochastic layer would have a much smaller ﬁnite time
Lyapunov exponent and hence a longer period during

3

which the exponentially small correction is still impor-
tant. However that time length is ﬁxed on the order of
a few local Lyapunov time, which is the characteristic
time scale over which the stochasticity of a chaotic tra-
jectory starting from a particular location is of practical
importance. This should be contrasted with a statistical
description of the ﬁnite time Lyapunov exponent, whose
practical applicability would be aﬀected by the extremely
long transients for hamiltonian systems to reach to an
invariant distribution by following one chaotic trajectory
[9].

Because f (ξ, t) does not vary along the ˆs direction,
thus to exponential accuracy the variation of the ﬁnite
time Lyapunov exponent along the stable manifold is de-
termined by the geometry of the stable manifold alone,
func-
equation (9). Notice that everything is local, i.e.
tions of position. In particular, ˜λ(ξ) and ˆs∞(ξ) do not
have a time dependence. That is: they represent time
asymptotic structures. They are of great practical im-
portance because the equation (9) accurately describes
the spatial variation of the ﬁnite time Lyapunov expo-
nent along the stable manifold on a time scale of a few
local Lyapunov time. The eﬀect of geometry on a dy-
namical quantity like the ﬁnite time Lyapunov exponent
is captured by the function ˜λ(ξ) alone, a function that is
completely determined by the G(x) ﬁeld.

The main points of Tang and Boozer’s work on ﬁnite
time Lyapunov exponents [7] are the function ˜λ and its
relationship with ˆs∞. These results actually ﬁnd their
roots in hamiltonian dynamics. To see that, one can
construct a new vector ﬁeld

S(ξ)

˜λ(ξ)ˆs∞(ξ).

e

≡

Obviously S(ξ) does not vanish anywhere and is glob-
ally deﬁned in a chaotic region, or using Meiss’s term, on
an ergodic irregular component. More importantly, S is
divergence-free because of equation (9). All the necessary
information on chaos in ﬁeld G(x) associated with nega-
tive Lyapunov exponent for forward time, are contained
in this new vector ﬁeld S.

On a regular component in phase space, i.e. KAM
surface, S is also well deﬁned and divergence-free. The
property of a trajectory on a KAM surface is determined
by the rotational transform ι(ψ). In explicit form, the
trajectory follows

ψ = ψ0; φ = φ0 + ν0(ψ)t; θ = θ0 + ι(ψ)ν0(ψ)t

(10)

with ν0(ψ) the Jacobian of (ψ, φ, θ) coordinates. The
form of equation (10) is generic for integrable trajectories
[13]. An explicit construction of the proper coordinate
system which gives rise to equation (10) can be found in
[12]. The ˆs∞ introduced earlier now takes the form

ˆs∞

∝

(0, ν

′
′
0, ι

ν0 + ιν

′
0).

(11)

where prime denotes a derivative with respect to ψ, the
action. A detailed derivation of equation (11) can be

found in [12]. Vanishing ψ component of ˆs∞ means that
ˆs∞ vector is tangent to the KAM surface. By deﬁnition,
two neighboring points along ˆs∞ direction will converge,
but quadratically in time, which should be contrasted to
an exponential rate in a chaotic region. The S vector can
be simply given by

S = (0, ν0,

(ιν0)′
ν′
0

ν0).

This would correspond to an integrable trajectory with
rotational transform (ιν0)′/ν′
0 on the constant action ψ0
surface. In other words, if one writes the original ﬁeld as

G =

ψ

θ +

φ

χ

∇

× ∇

∇

× ∇

and on the constant ψ0 surface

ι(ψ0) = ∂χ/∂ψ

|ψ=ψ0,

then the ˆS ﬁeld will be

ˆS =

ψ

θ +

φ

˜χ

× ∇
and the hamiltonian ˜χ for the ﬁeld line of ˆS satisﬁes

× ∇

∇

∇

′

′

/ν

∂ ˜χ/∂ψ

0|ψ=ψ0 .

|ψ=ψ0 = (ιν0)
Cautions should be taken regarding the derivative with
respect to ψ. The surviving KAM tori are parameterized
on a fractal set of action ψ in a perturbed hamiltonian
system. The proper deﬁnition of derivative with respect
to ψ on the surviving KAM tori invokes Whitney’s no-
tion, which was discussed in detail by P¨oschel [14].

It should be noted that so far we have established
divergence-free ˆS ﬁeld separately in chaotic region and
KAM region. To achieve divergence-free globally, it ac-
tually only requires the smoothness of the direction of ˆS
ﬁelds when crossing the last KAM surface. A jump in
the magnitude of ˆS is allowed since its gradient is per-
pendicular to ˆS (
ˆs∞). Although
f
∇
an analytical proof has not been found, numerical results
have been obtained to support the continuity of the di-
rection of ˆs∞ at the border between order and chaos.

fˆs∞ =

ˆs∞ + f

∇ ·

∇ ·

·

As pointed out in section II, a globally divergence-
free ﬁeld admits a hamiltonian representation. Hence
the ﬁeld line of S (and ˆs) is described by a hamilto-
nian χ1(ψ1, θ1, φ1) with θ1 the canonical position, ψ1
the canonical momentum, and φ1 the canonical time. In
other words, the characteristics of chaos in the hamilto-
nian χ are now contained in a new hamiltonian χ1. χ1 has
the same degrees of freedom as χ and the ﬁeld lines of S
are chaotic just as those of G. Similarly, one could repre-
sent chaos in ˆS (χ1) by another hamiltonian χ2 associated
with another divergence-free vector ﬁeld S′. Henceforth
a hierarchy of hamiltonians is constructed for describing
the chaos in G.

One might be concerned as to the proper counting of
the degrees of freedom if G is time dependent. In actual-
ity, S becomes time dependent through ˆs∞. This comes

4

[2] J. R. Cary and R. G. Littlejohn, Annals of Physics, 151,

1 (1983).

[3] A. N. Kolmogorov, Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR 98 527
(1954); V. I. Arnold and A. Avez, Ergodic Problems
of Classical Mechanics (Benjamin, New York, 1968); J.
Moser, Stable and Random Motions in Dynamical Sys-
tems, Annals of Mathematical Studies 77 (Princeton
University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1973).

[4] D. Ruelle, Elements of Diﬀerentiable Dynamics and Bi-
furcation Theory (Academic Press, San Diego, 1989); J.-
P. Eckmann and D. Ruelle, Rev. Mod. Phys. 57, 617
(1985).

[5] V. I. Oseledec, Moscow Math. Soc. 19, 197 (1968).
[6] Y. Aizawa, Y. Kikuchi, T. Harayama, K. Yamamoto, M.
Ota, and K. Tanaka, Progree in Theoretical Physics, Sup-
plement 98, 36 (1992); S. Habib and R. D. Ryne, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 74, 70 (1995).

[7] X. Z. Tang and A. H. Boozer, Physica D 95 283 (1996);
X. Z. Tang and A. H. Boozer, “Advection and diﬀusion
in a three dimensional chaotic ﬂow,” preprint (1996).
[8] A. H. Boozer, Plasma Conﬁnement in Encyclopedia of
Physical Science and Technology, Volume 13, Page 1
(Academic Press, New York, 1992).
[9] J. D. Meiss, Physica D 74 254 (1994).
[10] L. A. Smith and E. A. Spiegel, Strange accumulators,
Chaotic Phenomena in Astrophysics, Edited by J. R.
Buchler and H. Eichhorn (New York Academy of Sci-
ences, New York, 1987).

[11] B. F. Schutz, Geometrical Methods of Mathematical
Physics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1980).
[12] X. Z. Tang, Ph.D. Dissertation, The College of William

and Mary in Virginia, 1996.

[13] V. I. Arnold, V. V. Kozlov, and A. I. Neishtadt, Dynam-
ical Systems III, Encyclopedia of Mathematical Sciences
(Springer Verlag, New York, 1988).

[14] J. P¨oschel, Communications on Pure and Applied Math-

ematics, Vol. XXXV, 653 (1982).

from the fact that the speciﬁcation of Lagrangian coordi-
nates depends on the choice of initial time t0, as discussed
in last section. For a time-dependent ﬁeld G, the vector
ˆs∞ is a function of position and time ˆs∞(ξ, t0). If G(x, t)
is periodic in time t, ˆs∞(ξ, t0) will be periodic in time t0.
The hamiltonian χ1 has the exactly same degrees of free-
dom as χ. This small subtlety holds the key to a correct
understanding of a time dependent ﬁeld in two dimen-
sions G(x, y, t) which has chaotic ﬁeld lines. The time
dependence in ˆs∞(ξx, ξy, t0) assures that the correspond-
ing S ﬁeld has a time dependence and the hamiltonian
χ1 for S is of one and a half degrees of freedom. Hence
chaos is allowed for the ﬁeld line of ˆs∞(ξx, ξy, t0) and one
ˆs line ﬁlls the entire irregular component of G.

∞ , λ(−)

As stated earlier, there is a symmetry between (ˆs∞, λs)
and (ˆs(−)
). Hence one could construct a set of hamil-
tonian to describe the chaos associated with the positive
Lyapunov exponent and unstable direction for the for-
ward time dynamics, in analogy to what we have done
for the negative Lyapunov exponent and stable direction.

s

V. SUMMARY

In this paper we study the interrelations of divergence-
free ﬁeld, hamiltonian dynamics, multiplicative ergodic
theorem in hamiltonian chaos, general coordinate trans-
formation, and the theory of ﬁnite time Lyapunov ex-
ponents. We argue that ﬁnite time Lyapunov exponents
and its associated characteristic directions are the most
important information on chaos for the purpose of phys-
ical applications. Unlike the inﬁnite time Lyapunov ex-
ponents, spatial variation of the ﬁnite time Lyapunov
exponent is directly related to the geometry of its cor-
responding characteristic direction. Both are found to
be given by one single new hamiltonian of same degrees
of freedom. The magnitude of the phase ﬂow ﬁeld of
the new hamiltonian determines the ﬁnite time Lyapunov
exponent, while the direction of the phase ﬂow gives the
corresponding characteristic direction. The new hamilto-
nian is chaotic on the irregular component of the original
hamiltonian. We hope the point of view presented here
could stimulate new insights into hamiltonian chaos.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

One of the authors (Tang) was supported by a NSF
University-Industry Postdoctoral fellowship in Mathe-
matical Sciences through SUNY Stony Brook.

[1] A. H. Boozer, Phys. Fluids 26, 1288 (1983).

5

