8
9
9
1
 
y
a
M
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
0
5
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Reply to the Comment on “Theorem on the proportionality of
inertial and gravitational masses in classical mechanics”

Andrew E. Chubykalo and Stoyan J. Vlaev
Escuela de F´ısica, Universidad Aut´onoma de Zacatecas
Apartado Postal C-580 Zacatecas 98068, ZAC., M´exico
(January 7, 2014)

In a preceding Comment, the author declares that we claim that the
ratio of inertial mass to gravitational mass can be derived ex nihilo and that
our paper was published by mistake. In this “Reply” we dispute the point
of view of the author.

PACS numbers: 03.50.-z, 03.50.De

In the preceding Comment [1], B. Jancovici tries to argue why in his opinion our proof

makes no sense: “Reading the paper, one realized that it contains irrelevant calculations

... aiming to prove that η is a constant for one given body: how could the ratio of two

constants be something else?” The point is that after reading our paper, anyone can realize

that we do not use a postulate of classical mechanics that mass of a body is a constant. In

other words, we prove that ratio η of inertial mi to gravitational mg is a constant without

postulating that masses mi and mg are absolute constants. To be more speciﬁc, let us

compare postulates used by a generally accepted classical mechanics (GACM) with the

postulates used in our proof.

Postulates of GACM:

(a0) any body with non-zero inertial mass possesses also non-zero gravitational mass;

(a) (the Equivalence principle) the inertial mass of the body is proportional to the gravi-

tational mass of the same body and a constant of the proportionality is the same for all

(b) the masses of bodies (inertial and gravitational) are absolute constants (invariant);

bodies;

(c) masses obey the principle of additivity.

Note: In GACM the claim that

from (a0) + (b) + (c) ⇒ (a)

(1)

is not quite obvious from a theoretical point of view:

for example,

let us consider

two concrete bodies with the diﬀerent masses m1 and m2. Their constant masses

mi1, mi2, mg1, mg2, obviously, must obey the relations

1

mi1/mg1 = η1

and

mi2/mg2 = η2

but, generally speaking, it is not obvious that

η1 = η2.

(2)

(3)

So in GACM one considers Eq.(3) as an experimental fact. However, after one applies

our arguments (see Eqs. (15)-(21) in [7]) one can prove the validity of the claim (a) (or

Eq.(3)).

An important remark about the postulate (b): in his famous book [2] E.Mach

convincingly shows (analyzing Newton’s well-known experiment with the “revolving pail”)

that all experimentally veriﬁable equations of Newtonian classical mechanics do not

change if one supposes that inertial mass of a body is not an absolute constant (in-

variant) and, generally speaking, it can depend on the location of a body in space. So

many scientists (see, e.g., [3-5]), following Mach’s ideas, expect that the principle of the

proportionality of mi and mg may not be valid for classical mechanics. That is why when

constructing general relativity, Einstein started with the Mach principle, but had to re-

ject it thereafter (e.g.,see [6]) because of its disagreement (as Einstein believed) with the

Equivalence principle. And that is why a proof of the postulate (a) also in the framework

of Mach’s ideas is of great interest.

Our postulates:

(a0) any body with non-zero inertial mass possesses also non-zero gravitational mass;

(b1) the masses of bodies (inertial and gravitational) do not depend explicitly on time but

they can depend on their location in space;

(c1) both inertial and gravitational masses obey the principle of additivity.

It is obvious that our postulates are weaker than the former ones. One can see that

we do not conserve the point (a) as a postulate, bat what’s more, our postulate (b1)

suﬃciently diﬀers from the postulate (b). The validity of the point (a) from the postulates

(a0), (b1), (c1) also (compare with Eq.(1)) is not obvious, because mi and mg may depend

on location in diﬀerent ways. This is so, because mi and mg have a diﬀerent origin in

classical mechanics.

In our paper we proved that from our postulates (a0), (b1) and (c1) one infers the

claim (a). Actually, we proved that if according to the Mach principle, the inertial mass

2

of a body can change from point to point in space, then the gravitational mass of the

same body must also change by the same law, i.e. mi and mg are linear dependent

(proportional) one-to-one functions. In other words, we show that even in the framework

of the Mach principle the proportionality of inertial and gravitational masses must take

place.

In the last paragraph of the Comment, the author advances his most serious critical

remark. However, at this point he misses an implicit but very important factor:

Indeed, after one applies our arguments (see [7], Eqs. (6)-(11)), and provided that one

neglects electromagnetic radiation, we can formally obtain an expression

mi = const qm,

(4)

(where qm is a charge of the given body m) for a concrete body with a given inertial mass

and a given velocity. But we cannot apply the subsequent arguments (see [7], Eqs.(15)-

(21)) in order to “prove” that all particles have the same charge-to-mass ratio. The point

is that in our speculations we implicitly use the postulate a0, namely, “any body with

non-zero inertial mass possesses also non-zero gravitational mass”. In other words, after

Eq. (11) (in [7]) we can claim that for bodies having the same mass, their mi satisfy

Eq.(11) from [7]. But we cannot claim this in the discussion concerning “inertial mass-

charges” relation.

In the latter case one should postulate that any body with non-zero

inertial mass possesses also non-zero charge. It is obvious that such a “postulate” does

not follow from the experiment.

As a ﬁnishing remark, let us note that reading the Abstract of the “Comment”, a

reader might come to the conclusion that our paper was published by mistake, after being

rejected by the Editorial Board. In fact, the paper was published with minor modiﬁcations

following a positive report by an anonymous referee selected by the Board. However, we

recognize that the critical remarks contained in the “Comment” are partly justiﬁed: we

should have explicitly deﬁned our postulates.

[1] Jancovici B 1998 “Comment on ...” Eur. J. Phys.

3

[2] Mach E 1960 ”The Science of Mechanics. A Critical and Historical Account of Its Develop-

ment” (Open Court Publishing Co., La Salle)

[3] Sachs M 1976 ”On the Logical Status of Equivalence Principles in General Relativity Theory”

Brit. J. Phil. Sci. Vol.27 225

[4] Graneau P 1990 ”The Riddle of Inertia” Electronics World and Wireless World Vol.96 60
[5] Assis A 1989 ”On Mach’s Principle” Found. Phys. Lett. Vol.2 301
[6] Einstein A 1949 Autobiographical notes (Illinois).
[7] Chubykalo A and Vlaev S 1998 Eur. J. Phys. Vol.19 1

4

