8
9
9
1
 
g
u
A
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
0
8
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Lengths on rotating platforms

A. Tartaglia

Dip. Fisica, Politecnico, Torino, Italy

E-mail tartaglia@polito.it

The paper treats the issue of the length of a rotating circumference as

seen from on board the moving disk and from an inertial reference frame. It

is shown that, properly deﬁning a measuring process, the result is in both

cases 2πR thus dissolving the Ehrenfest paradox. The same holds good when

considering that, for the rotating observer, the perceived radius coincides with

the curvature radius of a space-time helix and a complete round trip corre-

sponds to an angle which diﬀers from the one seen by the inertial observer.

The apparent contradiction with the Lorentz contraction is discussed.

I. INTRODUCTION

There is a problem in special relativity which runs across all the history of the develop-

ment of this fundamental theory up to our days: it concerns length and time measurements

on a simple uniformly rotating platform.

A special relativistic approach, moving from the Lorentz contraction along the direction

of motion and the possibility of describing events happening in accelerated frames in the

instantaneously comoving inertial frame, lead Einstein himself [1] and many others [2] to the

conclusion that the ratio between the length of a rotating circumference and its radius, either

as seen by an inertial observer at rest with respect to the rotation axis or by a co-rotating

observer, cannot be 2π. A problem then arose because this result would imply that the

space of a rotating disk is curved, but an observer on board the disk would not perceive any

curvature since in his reference frame both circumference and radius would have remained

the same: this is known as the Ehrenfest paradox [3].

1

In the literature the issue continued to be discussed now and then, mostly assuming

as a fact the Lorentz contraction of the circumference of the rotating disk either as seen

from the inertial reference frame or as seen on board the disk itself. Moving from this start

inevitably some kind of paradox arises; the last one, pointed out by Selleri [4], challenges

the very foundation of special relativity. Selleri’s case is solved when considering a fully

four-dimensional scenario [5], but the question about what the length of the circumference

in the various reference frames actually is, remains open.

People who move from a ”hard ” interpretation of the Lorentz contraction are lead to

discuss the space curvature of the disk and sometimes to consider ”relativistic stresses” and

physical deformations or to ﬁnd dynamical explanations [6], which, far from solving the

problem, introduce new elements of contradiction and ambiguity.

Here the problem is being rediscussed starting from what a direct length measurement is

and from what one actually measures when looking at a moving target. Any real measure-

ment, in particular any measurement concerning the geometry of the disk, is an operation

on an extended region of space, whereas in accelerated reference frames special relativistic

formulae are merely local: the results obtained by generalizing them globally are most often

ﬂawed by contradictions and paradoxes.

The author’s view is that the inertial observer can only measure lengths and time intervals

using rods and clocks of his own reference frame. He simply infers results relating to the

rotating platform on the basis of some mental operation performed starting from the actual

measurements. Starting with this approach and adopting a speciﬁc operational procedure

to measure times and lengths we shall see that the paradox disappears.

II. MEASURING THE CIRCUMFERENCE AND THE RADIUS

Consider a non rotating platform in an inertial reference frame. Suppose the platform

is lodged within a coaxial circular hollow with a negligibly greater radius, dug in a plane

plate. An observer places a set of rulers tail to head both along the rim of the platform and

2

the rim of the hole: their number is a practical measure of the length of the circumference

and, considering the circumstances, the result is essentially the same both as seen from the

plate and as seen from the platform (be it L0). Rulers are similarly laid down along one

radius of the platform: the ratio between the number along the rim and the number along

the radius (this we shall call R0) is close to 2π (it would be exactly 2π if the rulers were

inﬁnitesimal in length). To mark the origin along both circumferences (on the disk and on

the ﬁxed base) a couple of poles are put up vertically.

FIG. 1. Fig.1 Equal meter sticks are laid along two almost identical circumferences, one of which

is the rim of a disk to be successively set in motion at a constant angular speed. A couple of vertical

stick mark the site of the origin of both circumferences.

A. The inertial observer

Now the observer boards the platform and a friend of his remains on the static ﬂoor,

then the platform is set into steady rotation.

Let us start considering what the inertial friend sees and measures. First he notices that

the tiny gap between the rim of the turntable and its ﬁxed circular housing is always the same

as before and consequently he concludes that the diameter of the rotating table is unchanged:

2R0. Then our fellow sets out to measure the length of the rotating circumference or, at

least, to compare the rotating circumference, globally taken, with a circumference at rest

with respect to him, whose length he knows. This procedure by comparison is, after all, the

standard one that is used for direct measurements. Again the fact that the radial distance

between moving and ﬁxed circumference is unmodiﬁed makes him conclude that the sought

for length is the same as the one of the ﬁxed circle and consequently the same as before:

L0 . The ratio between circumference and radius length is still roughly 2π. On the inertial

observer’s opinion nothing happened to the geometry of the turntable because of the rotation

(we are going to discuss this point later on).

Finally our experimenter takes a good clock and stands by the ﬁxed origin pole to

3

measure the rotation time of the moving platform. Actually he registers the time interval

between two successive passages of the rotating pole in the vicinity of the ﬁxed one and

ﬁnds, let’s say, T0. The conclusion is that the rotation speed of the platform is ω0 = 2π
T0 .

The peripheral velocity is of course v0 = ω0R0 = 2πR0
T0

fully consistent with a circumference

length equal to 2πR0. Indeed, since the pole on the disk is practically moving along the

ﬁducial (static) circumference, the length it came across when reaching back the ﬁxed origin

is most naturally 2πR0.

If

the traditional view according to which the circumference is contracted to

2πR0

1
q

−

ω2R2
0
c2 had been maintained, the peripheral speed would have been

However, by deﬁnition, it is also v = ωR0. Solving then (1) for ω one obtains

v =

2πR0

1
T0 s

−

ω2R2
0
c2

ω =

2π

T 2
0 +

4π2R2
0
c2

q

(1)

(2)

Expression (2) shows an interesting behaviour with T0 since when it tends to zero ω goes

to c/R0 which is the maximum allowable angular velocity. Unfortunately however there

is also a dependence of ω on R, which should show up throughout the disk. Any inertial

observer easily veriﬁes that there is no diﬀerential rotation and, by the way, time for him is a

coordinated (global) time. Now, since what is really measured by direct comparison with a

(circular) meter is the global length and since time is read on perfectly synchronizable clocks

giving the same result at any point in space, the easiest is to conclude that the circumference

length has not changed.

Those (including Einstein) who, in the past, agreed with this conclusion were lead, to

account for the Lorentz contraction, to conclude also that the length of the circumference

seen on board the turntable ought to be longer than before, then, since the radius should

remain the same, the ratio between circumference and radius in the rotating frame should

be greater than 2π. Let us see whether this is true or not, but in any case we must remark

that the inertial observer cannot use the measuring rods of another (moving) reference frame

4

to measure lengths in his own reference frame nor attribute length measurements in another

reference frame using the unit rods of that frame as seen in his own.

B. The rotating observer

Let us consider the view point of the observer on the rotating platform. To measure the

length of the rim of the turntable he counts the number of rulers along it: this could not

change when the disk was set in motion, nor could (for symmetry reasons) change the fact

that the rulers were and are tail to head (each of them cannot contract or expand). Result:

in our friend’s opinion the length of the circumference is, as before, L0.

The same conclusion and for the same reasons is attained regarding the radius, which

turns out still to be R0. The ratio L0/R0 is of course 2π: in the rotating observer’s view

nothing happened to the geometry of the platform as a consequence of the rotation.

At this point the moving observer decides to determine the rotation speed of his platform.

For this he stands near the moving origin pole bearing a clock identical to his inertial friend’s

one. Our experimenter measures the time interval between two successive passages of the

pole on the platform by the ﬁxed inertial one: the result is T (R) which now diﬀers from the

measure obtained in the inertial reference frame: T (R) < T0. For the passenger on the rim

of the turntable the rotation speed is ω (R) = 2π/T (R) > ω0.

The measurement of the rotation period may be repeated, with the same technique, at

diﬀerent radii on the platform. For 0 < r < R the result is T (R) < T (r) < T0, then also

ω (R) > ω (r) > ω0. Only at the center of the disk it is T (0) = T0 and ω (0) = ω0. Our

rotating experimenter however easily veriﬁes that the relative angular separation between the

points used to determine, at diﬀerent radii, the angular speed is not varying with time: the

platform under his feet is and remains solid. He then concludes that there is no diﬀerential

rotation on the disk, but instead identical clocks tick diﬀerently at diﬀerent radii: they run

slower on the rim than at the center, where the time intervals coincide with those in the

inertial frame.

5

Empirically or, to say better, experimentally (though with thought experiments) the

only thing on the turntable which is aﬀected by the rotation is time. This picture in any

case is in principle falsiﬁable by experiment.

III. FULL SPACE-TIME VIEW

Once facts have been established, we may turn to the theoretical interpretation adopting

a special relativistic attitude. This means looking at the situation from a four-dimensional

viewpoint; actually 2 + 1 dimensions is enough: the z, or axial coordinate of the disk, is

irrelevant.

Now we know that clocks measure ”lengths” along the timelike worldline of the clock

itself. This means that the time interval shown by an inertial clock at rest with respect to

the axis of the disk corresponds to a straight vertical line in a typical space-time diagram

(see ﬁg.2). Viceversa the worldline of a clock on the rim of the rotating turntable is a helix

(ﬁg.2) whose line element is [5]

dτ =

dθ
ω0

1
q

−

β2 = dt

β2

1
q

−

Here θ is the rotation angle as measured in the inertial frame, β = ω0R/c and t is the

inertial time. The total round trip time is found integrating over 2π, which amounts to

coming back to the (quasi) intersection with the vertical worldline of the static clock:

T (R) =

2π
ω0

1
q

−

β2 = T0

1
s

−

ω2
0R2
c2

(3)

FIG. 2. Fig.2 2 + 1 dimensional view of the rotating disk and its static counterpart. The vertical

line is the world line of an observer on the rim of the ﬁxed circumference; the reading of his clock

is proportional to the length of the vertical segment. The helix is the world line of an observer on

the rim of the rotating platform; his clock measures a time proportional to the length of the helix.

The broken line is the locus of events ”simultaneous” to the origin.

6

Of course if the moving clock is placed at a diﬀerent radius r < R it is

T0 > T (r) = T0

ω2
0r2
c2 > T (R)

1
s

−

(4)

This is perfectly consistent with special relativistic formulae (time dilation) and is due to

the fact that the ﬂat space-time is Minkowskian and the helixes describing the points of the

rotating platform are steeper close to the center than at the periphery. The (apparent) local

angular speed ω represents geometrically the instantaneous rotation speed along a space-like

helix, orthogonal to the world line of the observer, and around its curvature center

since, in complex space-time, it is

ω (r) =

ω0

ω2
0r2
c2

1
q

−

γ =

√1

β2 = cosh χ

1

−

where χ is the inclination angle of the helix with respect to a space hyperplane orthogonal

with respect to the inertial time axis.

As far as the actual length measurements which have been performed, they do not

correspond to determining the length of spacelike lines in 2 + 1 dimensions. Rather they

are counting operations. To clarify this point let us consider the world lines representing

the midpoint of each ruler: whoever is measuring the distance between a point on the rim

and the center of the disk is in fact counting the number of such worldlines he crosses on his

way from the periphery to the center. There is indeed a given number of coaxial cylinders

between center and rim, on which the helixes corresponding to the midpoints of the rulers

are wrapped: this number is invariant with respect to the angular velocity and does not

depend on the path one follows i.e. on the kind of synchronization. Of course the ﬁrst move,

when the disk was at rest in the inertial frame, was to measure the length of the radius as

a segment of a space geodetic.

Similar considerations hold true when moving along the rim to determine its length,

though this time the line to be measured was not and is not a geodetic, but was and remains

a constant curvature line.

7

This measuring procedure, which seems quite natural for experimenters living on the

platform, does not produce the length of the locus of events simultaneous, according to the

standard synchronization criterion, with the one assumed as the origin. That locus is a

portion of a helix and its length is [5]

This quantity however may only be reckoned in a full space-time perspective; it is not

directly accessible to any observer. Nonetheless for the physicist on the platform that could

be thought to be the rim of the disk, the more when it is a constant curvature line. From

elementary geometry we see that the curvature radius of a helix in euclidean space (α is the

tilt angle of the instantaneous rotation axis along the helix) is

lo =

2πR

√1

β2

−

ρe =

R
cos2 α

which, in our case (Minkowski space-time), is translated into:

ρ =

R0
2
cosh

χ

= R0

1
(cid:16)

−

β2

(cid:17)

(5)

Now our physicist perceives our threedimensional constant curvature space-time helix as

a constant curvature bidimensional line, i. e. a circumference, whose radius is the radius of

the osculating circle1 in a point of the helix, ρ. When describing his round trip survey of the

rim he does the same as if he moved along the osculating circle, though the latter, during

the tour, is precessing around the axis of the cylinder on which all helixes are wrapped. Of

course in our friend’s view the round trip corresponds to a 2π angle; to work out the relation

between his angles, θ∗, and the inertial rotations θ one must consider ﬁrst the elementary

length of a portion of the simultaneity helix, dl0 = R0dθ/√1

β2 [5], then the fact that

−

1To say better we can speak of an osculating circumference only in complex space-time and for a

spacelike world line. In real space-time and for timelike world lines the osculating curve is actually

a hyperbola.

8

dθ∗ =

dθ
β2)

3/2

(1

−

dL = ρdθ∗

dL =

R0dθ

√1

β2

a complete round trip of the rotating experimenter corresponds to the inertial rotation

2π/ (1

β2). Compounding together these two facts leads to:

−

The elementary arc length along the rim is for the moving observer

and, since ρ is a constant, it is seen as a circumference element; the fact that the numerical

value attributed to ρ is still R0 does the rest. Converting (7) into inertial frame variables

via (5) and (6) gives

−
which means that the length of the osculating circle is, for the inertial observer, clearly

diﬀerent from 2πR0, but to him it is also manifest that this is not the length of the circum-

ference, that he measures to always be precisely 2πR0.

IV. METRIC ON THE DISK

According to our approach, the observer on board the disk, measures the time τ , the

radial distance referred to the curvature center of a space like helix ρ and azimuthal distances

along the border of the osculating circle. As a consequence of all this, the metric in his

vicinity will be expressed by the line element

ds2 = c2dτ 2

dρ2

∗2

ρ2dθ

−

−

Translating (9) to the coordinates of the stationary inertial observer gives

ds2 = c2dt2

ω2
0r2
c2

1

 

−

dr2

1

 

−

3ω2
0

! −

2

r2
c2

!

−

1

dθ2

r2
ω2
0r2
c2

−

This metric belongs to the class of the stationary cylindrically symmetric vacuum solu-

tions of the Einstein equations [7]. It allows the inertial observer to recover the length of

the osculating circle of the many times mentioned spacelike simultaneity helix of the disk,

likewise the length of the radius of the said circle.

9

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

V. DISCUSSION

The long and old controversy regarding the length of a rotating circumference appears

to have here its simplest solution: nothing happens. What about the Lorentz contraction

and its eﬀects?

The point is that all measurements described in this paper and naturally corresponding

to what anybody would probably do, are performed at one point in space and do not need

any particular choice regarding synchronization of clocks in diﬀerent places, since the clock

used is always one and the same. The Lorentz contraction is a manifestation of the relativity

of simultaneity in diﬀerent inertial frames: when no synchronization is needed no contraction

appears.

Suppose a ﬁnite number of inertial observers are placed at equal intervals along the

hollow within which the rotating platform is lodged. They should synchronize their clocks,

then they should read time when a given ruler on the turntable (let us say the one having

the same color as the ﬁxed one before their feet) passes in front of them: the rulers too are

equally spaced along the rotating contour. When considering the results, they see that the

registered events appear not to be simultaneous, rather there is an increasing delay in the

sense of rotation and, extrapolating the reading of the last of them toward the ﬁrst one,
they ﬁnd he too should be delayed with respect to himself by a time t0 = 2πω0R2
0R2 !
c2−ω2

Actually in his reference frame an observer directly measures lengths by comparison with

a gauge; doing so he compares the stationary circumference with the rotating one and ﬁnds

they are equal. Then the observer can check the positions in space-time of some events

which, in his frame, should be simultaneous: on the basis of this simultaneity he infers the

fact that the moving unitary rods, as he sees them, are contracted. Now multiplying the

contracted unit lengths for the number of rods he is led to contradiction with the direct

measurement of the circumference. To solve the contradiction he must conclude that there

is something to be clariﬁed concerning time measurements and the relativity of simultaneity.

In fact when the same simultaneity criterion is used on the disk as in the inertial reference

10

frame the studied events are distributed along a spacelike helix whose pitch is precisely t0

[5]: the clocks of the inertial observers are measuring the ”lengths” of vertical segments

intercepted between the horizontal inertial simultaneity hyperplane and the points of the

said helix. The relevant portion of the helix is the one going from the origin back to the

world line of the rotating observer, winding, in order to reach the intersection, for more

than 2π. When this wrapped-for-more-than-2π helix is projected along the world line of

the rotating observer to produce the result seen by the inertial observer, one actually has a

contraction that leads back precisely to a 2πR length.

Even in translational motion the Lorentz contraction can be interpreted this way . Now

the need for a full space-time view is made evident by the fact that the considered trajectory

is closed, which actually means wrapped about an axis.

We can summarize things still another way. The physicist on the disk always measures

the radius as the curvature radius of the constant curvature line he sees as the (circular) rim

of the disk. When the disk is at rest this radius coincides with R0, the one of the cylindrical

world tube representing the contour of the platform. When the disk rotates the curvature

radius changes according to (5), but the same change intervenes to the meter sticks the

experimenter uses, then the ﬁnal numerical result remains the same as in the static case.

As for the static inertial observer, he lives and performs measurements on a horizontal

hyperplane and necessarily ﬁnds the length of the circumference given by the right inter-

section of his hyperplane with the world tube of the rim of the (rotating or nonrotating)

Only a fully four dimensional observer (able to perceive globally spacelike as well as

timelike intervals) equipped with invariant fourdimensional meter sticks will see the rim as

an open portion of a helix and ﬁnd that its length is of course diﬀerent from 2πR0. On the

other hand he will perfectly be able to relate his ﬁndings to the previous results without any

disk.

contradiction.

Up to this moment we considered two points of view: one for the accelerated observer

on the platform, another for the inertial experimenter at rest with respect to the rotation

11

axis. There is however a third viewpoint usually considered either explicitly or implicitly:

it is the one of an inertial observer instantaneously comoving with the man on the platform.

To this observer the non rotating disk would no longer appear as circular, rather it would

be elliptical in shape. If the platform is rotating the situation does not change: the contour

is elliptical and being practically coincident with the ellipse of the rim of the non rotating

lodgement, its length, as well as all other geometrical parameters are the same. Once again

the rotation does not aﬀect the geometry, simply the simultaneity hyperplanes of the new

observer are skew with respect to the axis of the cylinder on which the worldlines of points

on the rim of the turntable wrap, their sections of the cylinder are consequently elliptical.

These pictures, though the initial argument was independent from a speciﬁc convention

about synchronization, are based on the standard one, the one which Minkowski [8] himself

considered as ”necessary” 90 years ago.

More formally the procedure that lead traditionally to the idea of a shortened circum-

ference is based on a twofold passage: ﬁrst, pass from the (unique) accelerated (rotating)

reference frame to one locally comoving inertial frame; second, pass from the comoving in-

ertial frame to the inertial frame of the static observer. The point which seems to be the

origin of the interpretation diﬃculties is in the fact that the two extreme reference frames

are unique, whereas the intermediate is an inﬁnity of diﬀerent comoving inertial frames.

What our treatment evidences is the questionability of the integration procedure based on

this inﬁnity of diﬀerent frames, or at least the possibility to interpret the result of this in-

tegration as the length of the rim of the rotating disk: the result of a calculation, though

correct, cannot be considered equivalent to an actual measurement unless all phases of the

calculation have a deﬁnite physical meaning and are formally licit.

The actual lack of synchrony between clocks at diﬀerent radii is indeed diﬃcult to check

directly, there is however a well known phenomenon, whose simplest explanation is found in

the time lag accumulated along any round trip about the central axis of the rotating disk.

[9] [10] [5]: this is the Sagnac eﬀect, discovered and studied since 1913 [11] and now used

also in laser gyroscopes [12]. This eﬀect which was implicitly described even in the famous

12

1905 Einstein paper which gave start to the relativistic era [13]2, has an unquestionable

experimental basis.

In general what we have seen is that, in the case of a steadily rotating disk, the only

phenomenology truly irreconcilable with an old style absolute space and time interpretation

is in the behaviour of clocks. Once this is established (and conﬁrmed by experiment) other

geometrical ”paradoxes” and diﬃculties can perfectly be managed in a special relativistic

frame, one must simply be careful not to loose contact with operative determination of the

physical quantities one is interested in.

VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT

I am indebted to my colleague Guido Rizzi for many valuable discussions and precious

suggestions.

[1] A. Einstein, ”The meaning of relativity”, Princeton, (1950)

[2] A few examples: L. Landau, E. Lifshitz, ”Th´eorie du champ”, Mir, (1966), Moskow; V.

Cantoni, Nuovo Cimento, 57 B, 220 (1968); C. Møller, ”The theory of relativity”, Oxford

University Press, Oxford (1972); A. A. Logunov, Yu. V. Chugreev, Sov. Phys. Usp. 31, 861

(1988); B. Mashhoon, Phys. Let. A, 145, 147 (1990).

2In sect. 4 of his paper Einstein considers two identical initially synchronized clocks, one ﬁxed

at point A, the other moving at the constant speed v and a period t along a closed line passing

through A. When the second clock comes back to A it is late with respect to the static one there

by (”up to magnitudes of fourth and higher order”) 1

2 tv2/c2. Now in the case of a circular path it

is t = 2π/ω, v = ωR, then the delay is πR2

c2 ω, which, dispensing with a factor of 2, is the Sagnac

delay.

13

[3] P. Ehrenfest, Phys. Zeitschrift, 10, 918, (1909)

[4] F. Selleri, Found. Phys. Lett., 10, 73 (1997)

[5] G. Rizzi, A. Tartaglia, Found. Phys., in press (1998)

[6] G. Cavalleri, Nuovo Cimento, 53 B, 415 (1968); Ø. Grøn, Found. Phys., 9, 353 (1979), Found.

Phys., 10, 499 (1980); A. Gr¨unbaum, A. I. Janis, Found. Phys., 10, 495 (1980); T. E. Phipps,

Found. Phys., 10, 289 (1980), 10, 811 (1980); D. Dieks, Eur. J. Phys., 12, 253 (1991)

[7] D. Kramer, H. Stephani, M. MacCallum, E. Herlt, ”Exact solutions of Einstein’s ﬁeld equa-

tions”, Cambridge University Press, 1980 (Cambridge)

[8] H. Minkowski, ”Space and time”, speech delivered at the 80th Assembly of German Natural

Scientists at Physicians, Cologne (1908), translated by W. Perrett and G. B. Jeﬀery and

reprinted in ”The principle of relativity”, Dover Publications, p. 79, 1952 (New York).

[9] H. Arzeli´es, ”La cin´ematique relativiste”, Gauthier-Villars, (1955), Paris

[10] J. Anandan, Phys. Rev. D, 24, 338 (1981)

[11] G. Sagnac, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 157, 708 (1913)

[12] G. E. Stedman, Rep. Prog. Phys., 60, 615 (1997)

[13] A. Einstein, Ann. der Physik, 17, (1905), translated by W. Perrett and G. B. Jeﬀery and

reprinted in ”The principle of relativity”, Dover Publications, 1952 (New York).

14

This figure "figur2.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9808001v1

This figure "Figure12.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/9808001v1

