Newtonian approach for the Kepler-Coulomb
problem from the point of view of velocity space

H. N. N´u˜nez-Y´epez†
Instituto de F´ısica ‘Luis Rivera Terrazas’, Benem´erita Universidad Aut´onoma de
Puebla, Apartado Postal J-48, C P 72570, Puebla Pue., M´exico

E. Guillaum´ın-Espa˜na, A. Gonz´alez-Villanueva, R. P. Mart´ınez y Ro-
mero‡, A. L. Salas-Brito
Laboratorio de Sistemas Din´amicos, Departamento de Ciencias B´asicas, Universidad
Aut´onoma Metropolitana-Azcapotzalco, Apartado Postal 21-726, C P 04000, Coyoa-
c´an D. F., M´exico

Abstract

The hodograph of the Kepler-Coulomb problem, that is, the path traced by its
velocity vector, is shown to be a circle and then it is used to investigate the properties
of the motion. We obtain the conﬁguration space orbits of the problem starting from
initial conditions given using nothing more than the methods of synthetic geometry
so close to Newton’s approach. The method works with elliptic, parabolic and
hyperbolic orbits; it can even be used to derive Rutherford’s relation from which
the scattering cross section can be easily evaluated. We think our discussion is both
interesting and useful inasmuch as it serves to relate the initial conditions with the
corresponding trajectories in a purely geometrical way uncovering in the process
some interesting connections seldom discussed in standard treatments.

8
9
9
1
 
p
e
S
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
2
0
9
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

† On sabbatical leave from Departamento de F´ısica, UAM-Iztapalapa
‡ On sabbatical leave from Facultad de Ciencias, UNAM

1

Resumen

Demostramos que la hod´ografa del problema de Kepler-Coulomb, esto es, la trayecto-
ria que sigue su vector velocidad, es una circunferencia y la usamos para establecer
geom´etricamente otras propiedades del movimiento. Obtenemos la relaci´on entre
la hod´ografa y la ´orbita en el espacio de las conﬁguraciones para el problema de
Kepler-Coulomb partiendo de condiciones iniciales dadas y empleando nada m´as
que los m´etodos de la geometr´ıa sint´etica tan caros a Newton. El m´etodo que pro-
ponemos incluye tanto a las ´orbitas el´ıpticas, como a las parab´olicas e hiperb´olicas
y puede tambi´en usarse para deducir la relaci´on de Rutherford, la que es la clave
para obtener la secci´on eﬁcaz de dispersi´on. Pensamos que nuestro enfoque es tanto
interesante como ´util ya que permite trazar las trayectorias usando s´olo m´etodos
geom´etricos y, adem´as, reconocer algunas relaciones que no son evidentes en los
tratamientos m´as usuales.

Classiﬁcation Numbers: 03.20.+i, 95.10.C

2

1. Introduction

We have been analysing an approach to solve the Kepler-Coulomb problem employ-
ing the properties of its hodograph and its relationship to their orbits [1–4]. Please
recall that hodograph is the name given to the path traced by the velocity vector of
a system in velocity space. In this work we purport to express all our arguments in
geometric terms in a sort of Newtonian fashion. The hodograph as a mean towards
understanding the dynamics of a system was introduced by Hamilton [5] —he even
invented the term— during the last century. Hamilton was able to show that the
hodograph under an inverse squared centre of force [5–7] or, as we call it here, in
the Kepler-Coulomb problem is always a circle. It is curious to notice that Hamil-
ton proved that, in a way, the ancient Greek astronomers were right, the motion
of planets around the sun is indeed circular, they just got wrong the space since
the hodograph inhabits velocity rather than conﬁguration space. However, even if
one knows that the Kepler-Coulomb hodograph is circular in shape, it is natural to
wonder how can that circle be related with the well-known orbits in conﬁguration
space. Let us note that the problem is easily solved in an analytical treatment since
we can use the polar angular coordinate in the plane of the orbit, θ, for relating the
trajectory in v-space with the trajectory in r-space [2–4]. Furthermore, let us point
out that the problem posed has been already solved geometrically, since there exist
beautiful methods developed by Maxwell [6] and by Feynman [8] to solve it.

In this work we discuss a —we expect— novel geometric approach to the re-
lationship between the hodograph and the orbit of the Kepler-Coulomb problem.
We begin establishing the circular shape of the problem’s hodograph using stan-
dard analytical methods and then rework the path from the hodograph to the orbit
using techniques that —we think— are akin to those in the Principia [9]. In our
view, this geometric approach uncovers the geometrical beauty associated with the
physics of the problem which no doubt contributed to the attraction felt towards it
by many people trough the centuries, from the ancient Mayan astronomers to their
modern counterparts. We do think this type of approach contributes to a better
understanding of the interplay between the geometry and the physical properties
of the solution to the Kepler-Coulomb problem. It is to be noted that, mostly, the
constructions presented here require no more than straight edge and compass to be
realized. But, before embarking in the discussion, let us convene that the trajectory
in conﬁguration space be always called the orbit whereas the trajectory in velocity
space be always called the hodograph.

2. The hodograph of the Kepler-Coulomb problem

The equation of motion of a particle interacting with an inverse squared centre of
force is,

m

dv
dt

= −

α
r2 ˆer,

3

(1)

where m, α, v and ˆer are, respectively, the mass of the particle, a constant charac-
terizing the interaction strenght (which is positive if the interaction is attractive or
negative if it is repulsive), the velocity vector, and the unit vector in the radial direc-
tion in conﬁguration space. In the Kepler-Coulomb problem, described by equation
(1), the energy E and the angular momentum L = mr × v = mr2 ˙θˆez = Lˆez are
conserved (we choose the direction of L as z-axis). The motion is thus seen to be
conﬁned to a plane orthogonal to L. In this orbital plane we may choose a polar
coordinate system with unit vectors ˆer and ˆeθ = ˆez × ˆer, for describing the motion.
Given this information, showing that the hodograph is a circle is not diﬃcult, this
has been done by Fano and Fano [10] using a nice but not completely geometrical
approach. As posing and solving dynamical problems in geometrical terms is, how-
ever, very unfamiliar to modern readers, we have decided to start the discussion
using conventional diﬀerential equation techniques; according to this, we begin by
giving an standard proof of the hodograph’s main properties [2]:

If we multiply (1) times L, the equation of motion becomes

Lm

= −

dv
dt

α

r2 (mr2 ˙θ)ˆer = αm ˙ˆeθ,

where we used ˙ˆeθ = − ˙θˆer. From (2), it must be clear that the Hamilton vector
[2,11]

(2)

(3)

h = v −

ˆeθ

α
L

is a constant of motion in the Kepler-Coulomb problem. As can be seen in this
equation, the Hamilton vector is always parallel to the velocity at pericentre vp [4,
12]. The magnitude of the Hamilton vector

α2
L2 ,

+

(4)

h = r

2E
m
increases when the energy E increases or when the magnitude of the angular mo-
mentum L decreases. Moreover, as follows from (3), the velocity lays in a circular
arc with radius Rh ≡ α/L and whose centre is at the tip of h in velocity space.
The Coulomb-Kepler hodograph is a circle whose centre is at the tip of h and,
therefore, the Hamilton vector deﬁnes a dynamical symmetry axis of the hodograph
—dynamical symmetry in the sense that it is not only a geometrical property, the
interaction intervenes directly; for comparison note that the rest of the diameters
are just geometric symmetry axes. This property of the hodograph shows that the
orbit has also a dynamical symmetry axis; such axis is found by geometric means in
section 3 below.

As the hodograph is a closed curve —at least when it happens to be the whole
circle, i.e. in precisely the case of bounded orbits— then all the bounded orbits of the
problem have to be necessarily periodic. How are other features of the hodograph

4

related to the properties of the orbit? As we exhibit below in sections 4.1 to 4.5,
the geometric shape and the bounded or unbounded nature of the orbits change
according to where the v-space origin is positioned in relation to the hodograph.
Many of these features are discussed in modern language for the case of an attractive
interaction in [2] and for the scattering case in [3–4].

3. From the initial conditions to the hodograph

If we are given the position r0 and the velocity v0 at a certain time t0, how can we
construct the Hamilton vector and the hodograph? In this section we show how this
can be done using a very simple geometrical construction. Before beginning with
the geometrical construction, we ﬁrst need to calculate the lenght of the angular
momentum vector: L = mr0v0 sin δ, where 0 ≤ δ ≤ π is the angle between the
initial position and velocity. But, L is just the area of the rectangle spanned by
r0 and the component of v0 orthogonal to r0 times m, that is, it is twice the areal
velocity of Kepler second law. We also need the ‘length’ Rh = α/L —remember
that this ratio has really dimensions of velocity.

To understand the geometrical construction that follows it is convenient to keep
ﬁgure 1 in sight. Let the point Q be the position of the centre of force. Draw the
line segment QR corresponding to the initial position r0 (in fact, this is always the
name given to the line segment representing the initial position in all the discus-
sions that follow). Extend the segment QR up to an arbitrary point O —this just
corresponds to choosing the origin in velocity space. From the v-space origin O,
draw the line segment OP corresponding to v0 (OP is always the name of the line
segment representing the initial velocity in all the discussions that follow) and draw,
perpendicular to QR, a line segment OO′ of lenght Rh —that is, we are drawing
−α/L ˆeθ (recall that we deﬁned ˆeθ = ˆez × ˆer, where ˆez ≡ L/L). Notice that the
previous construction assumes both an attractive interaction and all the conventions
mentioned. To analyse a repulsive interaction the point O′ had to be chosen in the
opposite direction (i.e. in such case we should draw +α/L ˆeθ).

Using the parallelogram rule, sum OP to OO′ to get the point C. The line seg-
ment OC represents the Hamilton vector. Having obtained h, to get the hodograph
draw, with centre at C, a circle of radius Rh; this represents the hodograph.

The above geometrical construction besides giving h and the hodograph tell us
about the bounded or unbounded nature of the orbit. It is only a matter of noticing
whether O is located inside the circle of the hodograph or not; if it is inside, the
orbit is bounded and the energy has to be negative, if not, the orbit is unbounded
and the energy is positive. Figure 1 illustrates a case in which O is inside, that is,
a motion with E < 0. What about the case E = 0? As it is easy to see from (4),
or just from the continuity of the descriptions, this case only happens when O sits
precisely on the circle, that is, when h = Rh = α/L [2].

It is also easy to obtain the dynamical symmetry axis of the orbit from the

5

given initial conditions. We just need to draw the line segment QS, which is a
line perpendicular to OC passing through the centre of force Q. This follows from
the paralellism of h and the velocity at pericentre vp. The line QS so drawn, is
the orbit’s dynamical symmetry axis. Notice also that vp can be drawn by simply
prolonguing the segment OC until it intersects the hodograph. This intercept is
marked X in ﬁgure 1. If, as happens in ﬁgure 1, there are two intersections with
the hodograph and not just one, the velocity space origin O is, necessarily, inside
the hodograph, that is, the energy is necessarily negative. The second intercept,
labeled X ′ in ﬁgure 1, deﬁnes the segment OX ′ corresponding to the velocity at the
apocentre of the orbit, that is, to the point on the orbit farthest from the centre of
force and therefore with the least magnitude. A such point obviously does not exist
in the E > 0 case when O is outside the hodograph.

In all the section 4, we assume that the symmetry axis has been drawn as
described before the geometric discussion begins. The just found dynamical symme-
try axis corresponds to the direction of the Laplace-Runge-Lenz vector AAA = h × L
[13–14] which always points towards the pericentre of the orbit.

4. From the hodograph to the orbit

In this section we show how given the hodograph, constructed from the initial con-
ditions as explained in section 3, the orbit in conﬁguration space can be obtained
and all its geometrical properties established.

4.1 The case of an attractive interaction with the v-origin inside the hodograph

Let us assume that the origin of coordinates in velocity space is within the circle
of the hodograph; this is the case whose realization from initial conditions was
previously discussed in section 3 and was illustrated in ﬁgure 1. Please refer to
ﬁgure 2 for the schematic representation of the geometric steps that follow and as
an aside note that every single step can be accomplished using only straight edge
and compass.

The points Q, R, O, O′, P and C in ﬁgure 2 have exactly the same meaning
as in ﬁgure 1, that is, they serve to construct the Hamilton vector OC and the
hodograph centered at C given the initial conditions r0 (the straight line QR) and
v0 (the straight line OP ), and the vector −ˆeθRh (the straight line OO′). In fact, we
will always assume this meaning for the labeling of points in ﬁgures 2–5, in ﬁgure 6
the naming of points is similar excepting that O′ is not found to be necessary.

To locate any point in the orbit, extend the straight line P O until it again
intercepts the hodograph at point T (see ﬁgure 2a). Trace a perpendicular to CT
passing through the point R, this line intercepts the symmetry axis (constructed
as in section 3) at the very important point Q′. To locate the point on the orbit
corresponding to any given point on the hodograph, let us notice that we have
already one such pair of points, the initial conditions: the points R and P . Let us

6

choose another point P ′ on the hodograph; to begin, draw the straight line OP ′,
extend it until it intersects the hodograph at point T ′. Draw two straight lines
perpendicular to CP ′ and to CT ′ passing through Q and Q′ respectively; we assert
that this two perpendiculars meet at the required point R′ on the orbit, as was the
case with the perpendiculars to the straight segments CP and CT , related to the
initial conditions and meeting at R. To draw the complete orbit, we have to repeat
the same procedure starting from each and every point on the hodograph, in this
way drawing, point by point, the whole orbit—which is shown as the gray curve
which includes the points R and R′ in ﬁgure 2a.

What are the properties of the just constructed orbit? The easiest way to
answer this question is by establishing the orbital shape. To do this, let us ﬁrst
draw the circular arc Q′W centered at R with a radius equal to the lenght of RQ′.
This arc intercepts the straight line QO at the point W (see ﬁgure 2b). Next, trace
the circular arc W W ′ centered at Q with radius QW . It is now easy to see, just
by noticing that the shaded triangles △P ′T ′C and △W ′Q′R′ are both isosceles
and similar to each other (this happens by construction), that the point R′ on the
orbit is at the same distance from the arc W W ′ than from the point Q′. We can
see thus that the radius of the circular arc W W ′ is the sum of the lenghts of QR′
and Q′R′ and, therefore, that in the case E < 0 the orbit is necessarily an ellipse
with major axis 2a equal to the lenght of the line segment QW . The auxiliary
point Q′ is thus one of the foci of the ellipse, the other one coinciding with the
centre of force Q. The line QS can be seen to be the symmetry axis of the ellipse
as we have anticipated. In fact, the eccentricity of the ellipse is easily calculated
as ǫ = h/Rh = OC/CP [2]. Thus, the famous Laplace-Runge-Lenz vector can be
drawn as a straight line segment of lenght αǫ parallel to SQ —as the segment labeled
A in ﬁgure 2a illustrates. It is to be noted that the circle W W ′W ” can be identiﬁed
with the circle used by Maxwell and by Feynman in their respective discussions of
the Kepler-Coulomb problem [6,8].

4.2 The case of an attractive interaction with the v-origin on the hodograph

Let us now assume that the origin of coordinates in velocity space happens to be
precisely on the circle of the hodograph, as shown in ﬁgure 3. The symmetry axis
QS, as described in section 3, is the line perpendicular to OC which passes through
the point Q. For the construction, we also need the auxiliary line SW , paralell to
OC and whose distance from the initial point R (RW ) is equal to the lenght of the
segment QR.

To construct the orbit, we ﬁrst, just for the sake of convenience, translate the
centre of the hodograph to the point Q. That is, the hodograph’s centre is relocated
to coincide with the centre of force. See ﬁgure 3. All references to points on the
hodograph from now on, assume this new location for it. Let us choose an arbitrary
point P ′ on the hodograph and draw the straight line segments OP ′ (the velocity)

7

and QP ′ (i.e. the vector ˆeθRh). Draw a perpendicular to OP ′ passing through Q
and intercepting the auxiliary line SW at the point W ′. Erect W ′R′ perpendicular
to SW and trace QR′ perpendicular to QP ′ passing through Q. This line intercepts
W ′R′ at R′, a point on the orbit. We assert that any point constructed in this way
belongs to a parabola which thus corresponds to the shape of the orbit in the case
in which the v-origin sits on the hodograph, that is, in the E = 0 case. In fact,
the assertion can be checked just by noting that the initial conditions are related in
exactly the same way as we did in the previous section.

The proof that the orbit is a parabola is similar to that given for the elliptic
case of subsection 4.1, based as it is on the similarity of the shaded isosceles triangles
△QP ′O and △R′QW ′ in ﬁgure 3 (please remember that we are always referring to
points in the displaced (continuous) hodograph). This similarity is enough to show
that the lenghts of QR′ and of R′W ′ are the same, thus establising the orbit as
the locus of points equidistant from both the point Q and the straight line SW .
Therefore, Q is seen to be the focus and the segment SW the directrix of the
parabola. Notice that the directrix is deﬁned by the direction of the Hamilton
vector h, being thus also parallel to the velocity at pericentre CX (vp). Notice also
that both the hodograph and the orbit exhibit that the speed at pericentre (the
lenght of CX, vp) is always greater than any other speed in the problem.

4.3 The case of an attractive interaction with the v-origin outside the hodograph

Let us now assume that the origin of coordinates in velocity space O is outside the
circle of the hodograph as shown in ﬁgure 4. The Hamilton vector is OC and the
hodograph is the circle centered at C with radius CP . A very important diﬀerence
with the cases of subsections 4.1 and 4.2, is that here the hodograph is not the whole
circle since, in this case, this is the only way of guaranteeing that every point in the
orbit came from just one and only one point, i.e. every point corresponds to just one
velocity. In this way we also guarantee that every other speed v is always less than
the speed at pericentre vp [3–4]. This implies that, in the attractive case considered
here, the hodograph is the arc of the circle ‘farthest’ from the origin —shown as a
continuous line in ﬁgure 4a. As in the previous two subsections, the symmetry axis
QS, is the line perpendicular to OC and passing through the centre of force Q as
illustrated in ﬁgure 4a.

For constructing the orbit, we ﬁrst need to locate the auxiliary point Q′ (ﬁgure
4a). To locate Q′ ﬁrst trace the straight line CT , were T is the unphysical intercept
of the hodograph with the line OP , then erect on R a perpendicular to CT . The
intercept of this last line with the symmetry axis QS is precisely the auxiliary point
Q′. With these geometric data we can begin the construction of the orbit.

Let us select any point P ′ on the hodograph, trace the straight lines CP ′ and
CT ′. Erect perpendiculars to them passing through Q and Q′, respectively, the
intersection of these lines is another point R′ on the orbit. It is now obvious that

8

for constructing the whole orbit you have to repeat this procedure over and over
again, starting from each point on the hodograph, you can check that the initial
conditions are related by this same procedure. The asymptotic velocities and the
speed at inﬁnity are also easy to obtain. To this end just trace, starting from the
v-origin O, the straight line segments, OB and OB′, tangent to the hodograph.
These segments correspond, respectively, to the asymptotic velocities v−∞ and v∞
(as follows from angular momentum conservation), therefore, as can be seen in ﬁgure
4b, their common lenght is the sought after speed v∞ =

h2 − R2
h.

p

We are just left with the task of establishing the shape of the orbit. To this
end, trace the circular arc QW centered at R with radius QR, this arc intercepts
the segment Q′R at the point W . See ﬁgure 4b. Next, trace a circle centered at the
auxiliary point Q′ and radius Q′W . Given the similarity of the two shaded isosceles
triangles △CP ′T ′ and △R′QW ′, we can assert that any point R′ is at the same
distance from Q and from the circle W W ′ (shown as a continuous dark circle in
ﬁgure 4b), where W ′ is the intercept of this last circle with Q′R′. From the fact
that any point on the orbit is at the same distance from the point Q and from the
circle W W ′, we can establish that the diﬀerence between the distances from R′ to
Q and from R′ to Q′, is equal to the radius of the circle W W ′ and, therefore, it is
a constant. But this is precisely the deﬁnition of an hyperbola, which is thus the
shape of the orbit in the E > 0 attractive case. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 4b.

4.4 The case of a repulsive interaction

In the previous sections we have been addressing the construction of orbits in the
case of an attractive interaction in equation (1), i.e. the case with α > 0; however,
the sign of α does not really matter for the shape of the hodograph, it is always a
circle. But, as we already know [13], there are nevertheless diﬀerences in the kind
of motions in conﬁguration space that are allowed. How can we understand such
diﬀerences starting from just the hodograph? Finding a sort of geometric answer to
this question is one of the purposes of this section.

Notice that, in the case at hand and as shown in ﬁgure 5a, both points O and
P are on the same side of the straight line segment QR, therefore the length of OL
(the Hamilton vector h) is greater than OP (the initial velocity v0) and that OO′
(the hodograph radius is less than OP , this means that the origin of coordinates
in velocity space is always outside the circle of the hodograph. That is, whenever
α < 0 and since v0 · ˆeθ could not be negative nor vanish, the only possibility for the
v-space origin is to be outside the hodograph. In the ‘modern’ language of classical
mechanics, if α < 0 then the only possible motions have a necessarily positive energy.

The points Q, R, O, O′, P , T and C in ﬁgure 5 have exactly the same meaning
as in the previous ﬁgures 1 to 4, that is, they serve to construct the Hamilton vector
OC and the hodograph centered at C, given the initial conditions r0, the straight
line QR, and v0, the straight line OP , and the vector −ˆeθRh, represented by the

9

straight line OO′, This case is similar to that of section 4.3 since the hodograph
is not the whole circle; this can be argued using essentially the same argument as
in that section [2–4].
In the repulsive case considered here the hodograph is the
circular arc ‘closer’ to the origin —which is shown as a continuous line in ﬁgure 5.
As in the previous subsections, the symmetry axis QS is the line perpendicular to
OC and passing through the centre of force Q.

To ﬁnd the orbital shape we need the auxiliary point Q′, which is the intercept
of a perpendicular to CT going through R with the symmetry axis QS. Now is just
a matter of choosing an arbitrary point P ′ on the hodograph, and prolonguing the
straight line segment OP ′ until it again meet the hodograph at point T ′. Trace the
straight line segments CP ′ and CT ′ and erect perpendicular segments going through
Q and Q′, respectively. The intercept of these perpendiculars is the corresponding
point R′ on the orbit. Repeating the procedure for every point on the hodograph
we can obtain the whole orbit. The orbit is again, as in section 4.4, an hyperbola
with foci Q and Q′, as can be shown by considering that any point on the orbit is
at the same distance from the ﬁxed point Q′ and from the auxiliary circle W W ′
centered at Q, deﬁned as in section 4.4. The complete argument uses the similar
isosceles triangles △CP ′T ′ and △R′W ′Q′ and essentially repeats the argument of
the previous section.

4.5 The Rutherford problem

Let us pick the point Q as the location of the repulsive centre of force. To describe
geometrically a scattering situation, we have basically the same situation of sections
4.3 and 4.4, the only diﬀerence being that, here we are given the velocity v−∞,
i.e. the velocity evaluated at a time in ‘the inﬁnitely distant past’ and the impact
parameter b, not the velocity and the position at a certain ﬁnite time t. See ﬁgure
6. With the data just mentioned and from the location of the centre of force Q,
draw the line segment OK parallel to v−∞, starting from the arbitrary point O but
passing at a distance b oﬀ the centre of force.

If on OK we choose the segment OB to represent v−∞, the point O would have
been implicitly selected to play the role of the v-origin. Then, from the point B,
erect a perpendicular straight line segment, of lenght Rh, up to the point C. Next,
centered at C draw a circle with radius CB, a part of this circle is the hodograph of
the problem. If we draw the tangent to the circle OB′, this represents the asymptotic
outgoing velocity at inﬁnity v∞; the hodograph is thus the circular arc BP B′ and
the Hamilton vector is the line segment OC bisecting the angle 6 B′OB. This angle
In fact, the right triangle △OBC gives
is usually called the deﬂection angle ξ.
immediately the Rutherford relation between ξ/2 and L

tan

=

ξ
2

Rh
h2 − R2
h

=

α
v−∞L

,

p

10

(6)

which can be used as the starting point to derive the famous Rutherford scattering
formula [3,8,13]. See also [4] where the Rutherford problem is discussed taking a
velocity space point of view from the start.

5. Conclusions

We have exhibited that the orbits of the Kepler-Coulomb problem can be obtained
and classiﬁed (basically in terms of the energy) starting from the hodograph and
using techniques of synthetic geometry requiring no more than straight edge and
compass. We have exhibitted that the Hamilton vector is crucial for deciding geo-
metrically if the orbits are bounded or not and, furthermore, that with its help, we
can draw point by point any orbit whatsoever. On the other hand, speaking on the
purely geometrical content of the paper, we have managed to oﬀer an admittedly
not very systematic proof of an elementary but not widely known geometric result,
namely, that the conic sections can be deﬁned as the locus of points equidistant from
both a ﬁxed point and a ﬁxed circle. The geometric method can be further justiﬁed
as in [15].

We have learnt a lot in trying to do mechanics using the nowadays non-standard
methods of Newton. We hope that this article may convey to the readers the aes-
thetic pleasures we discovered in the geometric structure of Newton’s mechanics.
We think these considerations are enough to justify the approach presented in this
article which exhibit the enormous power of geometric reasoning in classical mechan-
ics [16]. However, we have to emphasize that Newton’s geometric methods go far
beyond the simple results obtained here; it has been discovered, for example, that
the Principia contains, among other things, astonishing geometric proofs of deep
results on the properties of Abelian integrals [17].

Acknowledgements

This work has been partially supported by CONACyT (grant 1343P-E9607). ALSB
and HNNY want to acknowledge very interesting discussions with Leticia Fuchs
G´omez. We must also thank our colleagues D. Moreno, J. A. Gonz´alez Men´endez,
and R. W. G´omez Gonz´alez for their very useful comments. This paper is dedicated
with thanks to Q. Kuro, Q. Sieri, M. Tlahui, M. Miztli, G. Tigga, B. Caro, Ch. Ujaya,
U. Sasi and F. C. Minina. AGV wants to express his thanks to Luis Gonz´alez y
Gonz´alez and Armida de la Vara for all the support and encouragement they have
always given him. We should also thank a careful referee that pointed out several
misprints and omissions in the original version of the article and that shared with
us our love for geometric argumewnts.

11

References

[1] O. Campuzano-Cardona, H. N. N´u˜nez-Y´epez, A. L. Salas-Brito and G. I. S´anchez-
Ortiz, Eur. J. Phys. 16 (1995) 220.

[2] A. Gonz´alez-Villanueva, H. N. N´u˜nez-Y´epez and A. L. Salas-Brito, Eur. J. Phys.
17 (1996) 168.

[3] A. Gonz´alez-Villanueva, H. N. N´u˜nez-Y´epez and A. L. Salas-Brito, Rev. Mex.
Fis. 44 (1998) 183.

[4] A. Gonz´alez-Villanueva, E. Guillaum´ın-Espa˜na, H. N. N´u˜nez-Y´epez and A. L.
Salas-Brito, Rev. Mex. Fis. 44 (1998) 303.

[5] W. R. Hamilton, Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. 3 (1846) 344.

[6] J. C. Maxwell Matter and motion, New York, Dover (1952) 107.

[7] W. Thomson and P. G. Tait, Treatise on natural philosophy, New York, Dover
(1962) §37–§38.

[8] D. L. Goodstein and J. R. Goodstein, Feynman’s lost lecture. The motion of
planets around the sun, New York, Norton (1996) Ch 4.

[9] I. Newton, Principios matem´aticos de la ﬁlosof´ıa natural, Barcelona, Altaya
(1993) Libro I.

[10] U. Fano and L. Fano, Basic physics of atoms and molecules, New York, John
Wiley (1959) Appendix III.

[11] D. Moreno, Gravitaci´on Newtoniana, M´exico D. F., FCUNAM (1990).

[12] R. P. Mart´ınez-y-Romero, H. N. N´u˜nez-Y´epez, and A. L. Salas-Brito, Eur. J.
Phys. 14 (1993) 71.

[13] L. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Mechanics, Pergamon, Oxford (1976), Chap. IV.

[14] A. L. Salas-Brito, R. P. Mart´ınez-y-Romero, H. N. N´u˜nez-Y´epez, Intl. J. Mod.
Phys. A 12 (1997) 271.

[15] A. Gonz´alez-Villanueva, E. Guillaum´ın-Espa˜na, R. P. Mart´ınez-y-Romero, H.
N. N´u˜nez-Y´epez, A. L. Salas-Brito, Eur. J. Phys.

(1998) in press.

[16] T. Frankel, The geometry of physics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
(1997).

[17] T. Needham, Am. Math. Month. 100 (1993) 119.

12

Figure Captions

Figure 1
The geometrical procedure for obtaining the Hamilton vector and the hodograph
from given initial conditions r0 and v0 is illustrated. O labels the origin of coordi-
nates in velocity space or v-origin and Q labels the location of the centre of force.
To draw the segment OO′, corresponding to −ˆeθα/L, we assumed that L points
outside the plane of the paper. The Hamilton vector is the line segment OC, the
circle X ′P X centered at C is the hodograph. The straight line segments SX and
QS correspond, respectively, to the dynamical symmetry axis of the orbit and of the
hodograph. The discussion related to this ﬁgure can be found in section 3.

Figure 2
2a. The procedure for reconstructing the orbit when the hodograph encompass the
v-origin is illustrated. The meaning of the points marked Q, R, O, O′, P and C is
illustrated. Notice that the orbit is indeed closed; furthermore, notice that despite
appearances the point S does not necessarily correspond to the vertex of the ellipse.
For the detailed discussion of this case see the section 4.1.

2b. To demonstrate the orbit is indeed an ellipse we need to recognize that the two
shaded isosceles triangles △Q′R′W ′ and △CP ′T ′ are similar to each other.

Figure 3
The procedure for reconstructing the orbit when the v-origin is precisely on the
hodograph is illustrated. For the sake of convenience, let us ﬁrst translate the whole
hodograph from its original place centered at C to a new location centered at Q (the
centre of force). All references to points on the hodograph are to be understood at
its displaced location. To demonstrate that the orbit is a parabola we only need to
recognize that the two shaded isosceles triangles △QP ′O and △R′QW ′ are similar
to each other. Notice that the straight line segment SW ′W corresponds to the
auxiliary circle of the previous ﬁgure. Thus, from this point of view, the directrix is
just a degenerate circle with inﬁnite radius. See the discussion in section 4.2.

Figure 4
4a. The procedure for reconstructing the orbit when the v-origin is outside the
hodograph is illustrated. The points P and P ′ on the hodograph correspond to the
points R and R′ on the orbit.See section 4.3

4b. To demonstrate that the orbit is an hyperbola whose internal focus coincides
with the centre of force, we only need to recognize that the two shaded isosceles
triangles △CP ′T ′ and △R′QW ′ are similar to each other.

Figure 5
The procedure for reconstructing the orbit starting with ﬁnite initial conditions.
Here we consider the case when the v-origin is outside the hodograph and the in-

13

teraction is repulsive. The two shaded triangles are important for the discussion in
section 4.4.

Figure 6
The Rutherford relation between ξ and L can be simply obtained from the hodograph
as we illustrate in this ﬁgure. We also exhibit the procedure for reconstructing the
orbit in a scattering situation. We consider the case when both the v-origin is outside
the hodograph (i.e. the case E > 0) and the interaction is repulsive (i.e. α < 0). For
a brief discussion see section 4.5. A complete discussion from the point of view of
velocity space can be found in Ref. 4.

14

