8
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
0
0
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

From circular paths to elliptic orbits: A
geometric approach to Kepler’s motion

A Gonz´alez-Villanueva†, E Guillaum´ın-Espa˜na†, R P Mart´ınez-y-Ro-
mero†‡, H N N´u˜nez-Y´epez§¶, A L Salas-Brito†+

†Laboratorio de Sistemas Din´amicos, Departamento de Ciencias B´asicas, Universi-
dad Aut´onoma Metropolitana-Azcapotzalco, Apartado Postal 21-726, C P 04000,
Coyoac´an D F, M´exico

§ Instituto de F´ısica ‘Luis Rivera Terrazas’, Benem´erita Universidad Aut´onoma de
Puebla, Apartado Postal J-48, C P 72570, Puebla Pue, M´exico

The hodograph, i.e. the path traced by a body in velocity space, was introduced by
Hamilton in 1846 as an alternative method for studying certain dynamical prob-
lems. The hodograph of the Kepler problem was then investigated and shown to
be a circle, it was next used to investigate some other properties of the motion.
We here propose a new method for tracing the hodograph and the corresponding
conﬁguration space orbit in Kepler’s problem starting from the initial conditions
given and trying to use no more than the methods of synthetic geometry in a sort
of Newtonian approach. All of our geometric constructions require straight edge
and compass only.

Abstract

Resumen

La hod´ografa, i.e. la curva recorrida por un cuerpo en el espacio de las velocidades,
fu´e propuesta por Hamilton en 1846 como una alternativa para investigar algunos
problemas din´amicos. Se demostr´o entonces que la hod´ografa del problema de
Kepler es una circunferencia y posteriormente se la us´o para establecer algunas otras
propiedades del movimiento. En este trabajo proponemos un m´etodo geom´etrico
semi newtoniano para construir una ´orbita el´ıptica partiendo de sus condiciones
iniciales y de la correspondiente hod´ografa, empleando para ello m´etodos de la
geometr´ıa sint´etica que requieren de la regla y del comp´as ´unicamente.

Classiﬁcation Numbers: 03.20.+i, 95.10.C

‡ On sabbatical leave from Departamento de F´ısica, Facultad de Ciencias,

Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico,
e-mail: rodolfo@dirac.fciencias.unam.mx

¶ On sabbatical leave from Departamento de F´ısica, UAM-Iztapalapa,

e-mail: nyhn@xanum.uam.mx

+ Corresponding author,

e-mail: asb@hp9000a1.uam.mx or asb@data.net.mx

1

1. Introduction

The Kepler problem has a great deal to oﬀer whenever diﬀerent approaches to its
solution are sought (Rosales et al 1991, Sivardi`ere 1992, Mart´ınez-y-Romero et al
1993); this follows since it is a member of the very limited class of superintegrable
system (Evans 1990, Mart´ınez-y-Romero et al 1992, Salas-Brito et al 1997). One of
the simpler approaches to solve the problem starts by constructing its hodograph
(Gonz´alez-Villanueva et al 1996, 1998a,b); let us recall that the hodograph is just
the path traced by the velocity of a body as function of time. In this work we aim
to go from Kepler’s hodograph to the corresponding conﬁguration space orbit in
a geometric quasi-Newtonian fashion. Besides the intrinsic beauty of geometrical
arguments, we think our approach can contribute to a better understanding of
the interrelations between the initial conditions and the properties of the Kepler
problem solutions.

The hodograph was introduced by Hamilton in the XIX century as an alterna-
tive for solving dynamical problems; perhaps the greatest triumph of the method
was in the analysis of Kepler motions (Hamilton 1846, Maxwell 1877, Thomson and
Tait 1879). However, even if one discovers, as Hamilton did, that the hodograph is
circular in such a case, it is natural to wonder how can it be related to the conic
section orbits. The problem is easily solved in the analytical treatment (Gonz´alez-
Villanueva et al 1996, 1998a) but there also exist beautiful geometric approaches
for ﬁnding such relation developed by Maxwell (1877) and by Feynman (Goodstein
and Goodstein 1996). In this work we want to explain our own version of the geo-
metric relationship between the hodograph and the orbit, but we understand that
this approach ‘cannot substantially diﬀer from what any other [. . . ] student can
construct’ (Chandrasekhar 1995, p xxiii).

2. Kepler’s hodograph is circular

To establish the circularity of the Kepler hodograph, let us start from the equation
of motion of a particle in a ﬁxed Newtonian ﬁeld at the origin

m

dv
dt

= −

GM m

r2 ˆer,

where m, M , G, v and ˆer are, respectively, the mass of the particle, the mass of the
attracting body, the Newtonian gravitational constant, the velocity and the unit
radial vector. As in any central problem, the energy E and the angular momentum
L = mr × v = mr2 ˙θˆez = Lˆez are conserved —the L-direction deﬁnes our z-
axis. Please note our convention that the trajectory in conﬁguration space is the
orbit whereas the trajectory in velocity space is the hodograph. The Kepler orbits
are thus conﬁned to a plane orthogonal to L which includes the origin; a polar
coordinate system with unit vectors ˆer and ˆeθ = ˆez × ˆer is chosen in this plane.
Moreover, just from the polar identities ˙ˆer = ˙θˆeθ, and ˙ˆeθ = − ˙θˆer, it is easy to see
that equation (1) can be rewritten as (Moreno 1990)

(1)

(2)

˙v =

α/m
r2 ˆer =

α
L

˙ˆeθ,

2

where we introduced the positive constant α ≡ GM m. From (2), it should be clear
that the velocity can be written as (Gonz´alez-Villanueva et al 1996)

v = h +

ˆeθ

α
L

(3)

(4)

where the Hamilton vector h is a constant of motion. As (3) makes obvious, the
velocity traces a circle with radius Rh = α/L; the hodograph is thus a circle cen-
tered at h. Then h points along the dynamical symmetry axis of the hodograph—
dynamical since it is not only a geometrical property, the interaction intervenes
directly; we have found that h deﬁnes what we call the hodograph’s dynamical di-
ameter, the line XXs shown in ﬁgure 1. By extension, equation (3) also shows that
every orbit has a dynamical symmetry axis, which is found geometrically in section
3 below. Notice that XXs can also serve to construct the notorious Laplace or
Runge-Lenz vector AAA ≡ h × L (Landau and Lifshitz 1976), see section 3 and ﬁgure
2, which points toward the pericentre of the orbit. In what follows, we measure an-
gles in r-space counterclockwise from AAA, and in v-space, from h. The circularity of
the hodograph implies that the orbit is both periodic and symmetric and that those
points on the hodograph where the velocities are antiparallel must be symmetric
on the orbit. Notice also that the energy in any Kepler motion can be related to
the magnitude of h as follows

E =

(cid:0)h2 − α2/L2

(cid:1) ;

m
2

as can be seen in (4), the bounded or unbounded nature of the motions change
according to where the v-space origin is positioned in relation to the hodograph. It
suﬃces that the v-origin be within the hodograph (i.e. Rh > h) to assure that the
hodograph is the whole circle and that the orbit is elliptic (Gonz´alez-Villanueva et
al 1996, 1998a). How to draw the orbit in this case once the hodograph is known
is discussed below in section 4.

3. Drawing the hodograph

To draw the hodograph given the initial position r0 and velocity v0, we need to ﬁx
the magnitude of the angular momentum L = mr0v0 sin δ, where 0 ≤ δ ≤ π is the
angle between the initial position and velocity (see δ in ﬁgure 4); we also need to ﬁx
the quantity Rh = α/L. Please keep an eye on ﬁgure 1 while reading the following.

Let the point F be the position of the centre of force (hence, the r-origin).
Draw the line segment F R as the initial position r0; extend it up to an arbitrary
point O —we are here just choosing the origin in velocity space. From the v-origin
O, draw the line segment OV corresponding to v0 and erect, perpendicular to F R,
a line segment OO′ of lenght Rh —that is, we are drawing −α/L ˆeθ (recall that
we deﬁned ˆeθ = ˆez × ˆer, where ˆez ≡ L/L). Notice that the previous construction
assumes an attractive interaction. Now sum OV to OO′ to get the point C. The line
segment OC, as follows from equation (3), represents the Hamilton vector. Having
obtained h, just draw with centre at C a circle of radius Rh to get the hodograph.
This geometrical procedure, besides giving h and the hodograph, informs us about

3

the energy of the motion. It is only a matter of noticing whether O is within the
hodograph or not; if it is within, the energy is negative, if not, the energy is positive.
Figure 1 illustrates a case in which O is within, that is, a motion with E < 0; as
follows from equation (4), E = 0 occurs when O is located precisely on the circle,
i.e. when h = Rh = α/L.

To draw the dynamical symmetry axis of the orbit (i.e. the line on which the
Laplace vector AAA lays) from the given initial conditions, just draw the line segment
F S, which is perpendicular to OC going through the centre of force F ; as the
segment labeled A in ﬁgure 2 illustrates. This follows from the paralellism of h and
the velocity at pericentre vp. The line F S so drawn, is the dynamical symmetry
axis of the orbit. Notice also that vp can be drawn by prolonguing the segment
OC until it intersects the hodograph. This intercept is marked X in ﬁgure 1. If, as
happens in ﬁgures 1, 2, and 3, there are two intersections with the hodograph and
not just one, the velocity space origin O is necessarily inside the hodograph, that
is, it always corresponds to the case E < 0. The second intercept, labeled Xs in
ﬁgure 1, deﬁnes the segment OXs corresponding to the velocity at the apocentre
of the orbit, i.e., at the point on the orbit farthest from the centre of force where
the speed is the lowest possible.

4. How to trace the elliptic orbit

Let us assume that the origin of coordinates in velocity space happens to be inside
the circle of the hodograph; this is the case whose realization from initial conditions
was discussed in section 2 and illustrated in ﬁgure 1. Please refer to ﬁgure 2 for
the schematic representation of the geometric steps that follow. The points F , R,
O, O′, V and C in ﬁgure 2 have exactly the same meaning as in ﬁgure 1, that is,
they serve to construct the Hamilton vector OC and the hodograph centered at C
given the initial conditions r0 (the straight line F R, which makes an angle θ with
A), and v0 (the straight line OV ) and the vector −ˆeθRh (the straight line OO′).
The initial velocity also helps to deﬁne the segment CV making the same angle θ
with h. In fact, we will always assume this meaning for the labeling of points in
ﬁgures 2–4.

To locate any point on the orbit, ﬁrst extend the straight line OV until it again
intercepts the hodograph at Vs (see ﬁgure 2). Then trace a perpendicular to CVs
passing through R, this line intercepts the symmetry axis (drawn as in section 3)
at the auxiliar point F ′. To locate the point on the orbit corresponding to any
given point on the hodograph, let us ﬁrst notice that we have already one such
pair of points, the initial conditions: point R and point V . Let us choose another
point V ′ on the hodograph, then draw the straight line OV ′ and extend it until
it intersects the hodograph at point V ′
s . Draw two straight lines perpendicular to
s passing through F and F ′, respectively; we assert that these two
CV ′ and to CV ′
perpendiculars meet at the required point R′ on the orbit, as was the case with the
perpendiculars to the segments CV and CVs, related to the initial conditions and
meeting at R. To draw the complete orbit, i.e. the gray curve in ﬁgure 3, we have
to repeat the procedure starting from each point on the hodograph.

4

To decide the shape of the constructed orbit, draw the circular arc F ′W cen-
tered at R with a radius equal to the lenght of F ′R; this arc intercepts the straight
line F O at the point W (see ﬁgure 3). Next, trace the circular arc W W ′ centered at
F with radius F W . It is now easy to see, just by noticing that the shaded triangles
△V ′V ′
s C and △W ′F ′R′ are both isosceles and similar to each other, that the point
R′ on the orbit is at the same distance from the point W ′ than from the point F ′.
We can see thus that the radius of the circular arc W W ′ is the sum of the lenghts
of F R′ and F ′R′ and, therefore, that in the case E < 0 the orbit is necessarily an
ellipse whose major axis 2a equals the lenght of the line F W . The auxiliary point
F ′ is thus seen to be the second focus of the ellipse, the ﬁrst one coinciding with
the centre of force F . The line F S is parallel to the symmetry axis of the ellipse
as we had anticipated. In fact, the eccentricity of the ellipse is easily calculated as
ǫ = h/Rh = OC/CV (Gonz´alez-Villanueva et al 1996). Thus, AAA, is the line seg-
ment parallel to F S of lenght αǫ pointing towards the pericentre. The construction
performed here also shows that F R′ always makes the same angle with AB than
CV ′ with OC (ﬁgures 2 and 3). Geometric methods for reconstructing the orbit in
the cases E ≥ 0 are described in detail in (Gonz´alez-Villanueva et al 1998c).

5. Why the method works

Let us ﬁrst pinpoint the uniqueness of the elliptic orbit drawn in ﬁgure 3; this
follows since the initial conditions, r0, v0, uniquely especify both L and h. These,
in turn, are the necessary and suﬃcient conditions to obtain AAA and, hence, both the
dynamical symmetry axis and the orbit (Gonz´alez-Villanueva et al 1996, 1998b).
But, even with the uniqueness established, the relationship of the hodograph with
the orbit, and the lines used in section 3, can still remain obscure. How can we
ascertain that the velocity at any point on the hodograph is parallel to the tangent
at the corresponding point on the ellipse? An attempt to explain the situation is
in ﬁgure 4, which re-elaborates ﬁgure 3 removing certain unnecesary features, and
in the explanation that follows:

Let us assume that the construction of section 3 has been carried out. To start
the explanation, draw a circle (see ﬁgures 3 and 4) with radius F W (i.e. radius 2a)
centered at F (this corresponds to the arc W W ′W ′′ in ﬁgure 3); trace the straight
line AB, corresponding to the ellipse’s dynamical symmetry axis, on this line mark
the second focus F ′. Next, pick an arbitrary point R on the orbit and trace the
segment F R making an angle θ with AB and extend it until the intercept W on the
circle. This deﬁnes the segments F ′W and its continuation F ′Ws. Now trace their
perpendicular bisectors M R and MsRs, these lines intercept F W and F Ws at R
and Rs, respectively. Extend F Ws until it intercepts the circle at W ′′ and trace the
lines F W ′′ and W W ′′. Thence the triangles △F W W ′′, △RW F ′ and △RsF ′Ws,
are isosceles, simililar to each other and with common angles δ and π − 2δ. From
this, it is easy to see that WsRs = RsF ′ and F ′R = RW , i.e. they belong to the
same ellipse. Besides, the lines F ′R and F Rs are parallel by construction, the same
is true of lines RsF ′ and F R, therefore F Rs and F ′R make the same angle ξ with
AB.

5

Notice that △W WsW ′′ is a right triangle by construction thence, W W ′′ and
the perpendicular bisectors M R and MsRs are parallell to each other. Notice that
the perpendicular bisector to segment W Ws also bisects the angle 6 W F Ws and
therefore that the lines M R and MsRs are tangent to the ellipse at R and at Rs.
This establishes that, in eﬀect, the tangent at every point on the orbit is parallel
to the corresponding velocity on the hodograph and, at the same time, that every
pair of symmetric points on the hodograph, where the velocities are antiparallel,
corresponds to a pair of symmetric points on the orbit.

It is now easy to see that if we rescale the circle W W ′W ′′ in ﬁgure 3, or AW W ′′
in ﬁgure 4, by the factor α/2aL we get essentially the hodograph but rotated π/2
respect that in ﬁgure 1; furthermore, under these same rescaling and rotation, the
lines F ′F , F ′W and F ′Ws in ﬁgure 4, become, respectively, the Hamilton vector
and the velocities at V and Vs, all shown in ﬁgure 3.

6. Concluding remarks

We have shown how the bounded orbits of the Kepler problem can be drawn starting
from the initial conditions—and the hodograph—using no more than straight edge,
compass and a few lines in a piece of paper. We have also exhibitted that the
hodograph and h are crucial for deciding geometrically if the orbits are bounded
or not and, furthermore, that with their help, we can draw any orbit starting from
arbitrary initial conditions. Although we have not shown it here, these elementary
geometrical techniques can be quite useful for discussing orbital manoeuvres and
other features of the motion in a Newtonian ﬁeld. This means that our approach
can provide a very convenient method for addressing the interplay between the
physics and the geometry of Kepler’s problem in a kind of Newtonian fashion.

The need to make the construction presented more accesible has prompted us to
program our construction of the orbits using The Geometer’s Sketchpad3 c(cid:13) a very
nice piece of software for doing geometrical constructions which can be obtained at
http://www.keypress.com/product info/sketch-demo.html in a demo version. The
demonstration of our constructions has been succesful with the students. Any inter-
ested reader may try to reproduce the method using the simple language associated
with the Sketchpad.

As a ﬁnal remark, we must say that our main motivation for this work must be
found on the amusement side. We have had a lot of fun in trying to do mechanics
without using most of the usual analytic techniques of contemporary physics. We
hope this article may convey to the readers the sense of enjoyment we discovered
in the geometric beauty of dynamics. In our eyes at least—though beauty is in
the eyes of the beholder!— these considerations are enough to justify the quasi-
Newtonian approach presented in this article. To ﬁnalise, we found convenient to
paraphrase Chandrasekhar’s paraphrasing of Ben Johnson (Chandrasekhar 1995,
Epilogue) since it clearly summarizes our viewpoint: Newton’s methods were not
of an age, but for all time!

6

Acknowledgements

This work has been partially supported by CONACyT (grant 1343P-E9607). We
want to thank E Pi˜na-Garza for inspiration; we also wish him a quick and complete
recovery. We thank our colleagues L Fuchs-G´omez, R G´omez, D Moreno, K Quiti,
and J L del-R´ıo-Correa for their useful comments and/or advice. Thanks are also
due to members of the Taller de Matem´aticas of the Facultad de Ciencias-UNAM
for sharing with us their knowledge of the The Geometer’s Sketchpad3 c(cid:13). This
work is dedicated to the memory of A P Pardo, M Mina, Q Motita, M Kuro, B
Minina, M Miztli, M Tlahui and B Kot. Last but not least AGV wants to express
his warmest thanks to Armida de la Vara and Luis Gonz´alez y Gonz´alez for all the
support and encouragement of the last 12 years.

7

References

Chandrasekhar S 1995 Newton’s Principia for the common reader (Oxford: Claren-
don Press)

Evans N W 1990 Phys. Rev. A 41 5666

Gonz´alez-Villanueva A, N´u˜nez-Y´epez H N and Salas-Brito A L, 1996 Eur. J. Phys.
17 168

—— 1998a Rev. Mex. Fis. 44 (1998) 183

Gonz´alez-Villanueva A, Guillaum´ın-Espa˜na E, N´u˜nez-Y´epez H N and Salas-Brito
A L, 1998b Rev. Mex. Fis. 44 (1998) 380

Gonz´alez-Villanueva A, Guillaum´ın-Espa˜na E, Mart´ınez-y-Romero R P, N´u˜nez-Y´e-
pez H N and Salas-Brito A L, 1998c FC-UNAM preprint

Goodstein D L and Goodstein J R, 1996 Feynman’s lost lecture. The motion of
planets around the sun (New York: Norton) Ch 4

Landau L and Lifshitz E M 1976 Mechanics (Oxford: Pergamon)

Hamilton W R 1846 Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. 3 344

Mart´ınez-y-Romero R P, N´u˜nez-Y´epez H N, and Salas-Brito A L 1992 Eur. J. Phys.
13 26

—— 1993 Eur. J. Phys. 14 1–3

Maxwell J C 1877 Matter and motion 1952 reprint (New York: Dover) 107

Moreno D 1990 Gravitaci´on Newtoniana (M´exico City: FCUNAM)

Rosales M A, del-R´ıo-Correa J L, Castro-Quilant´an J L 1991 Rev. Mex. Fis. 37
349

Salas-Brito A L, Mart´ınez-y-Romero R P, N´u˜nez-Y´epez H N 1997 Intl. J. Mod.
Phys. A 12 271

Sivardi`ere J 1992 Eur. J. Phys. 13 64

Thomson W and Tait P G 1879 Treatise on natural philosophy 1962 reprint (New
York: Dover) §37–§38

8

Figure Captions

Figure 1
The geometrical procedure for obtaining both the Hamilton vector and the hodo-
graph from given initial conditions r0 and v0 is illustrated. O labels the origin of
coordinates in velocity space or v-origin and F labels the location of the centre of
force or r-origin. To draw the segment OO′, corresponding to −ˆeθα/L, we assumed
that L points outside the plane of the paper. The Hamilton vector is the line seg-
ment OC, the circle XsV X centered at C is the hodograph. The straight segments
SF and SX correspond, respectively, to the dynamical symmetry axes of the orbit
and of the hodograph. The discussion related to this ﬁgure can be found in section
3.

Figure 2
The procedure for reconstructing the orbit when the hodograph encompass the v-
origin is illustrated. F , corresponds to the position of the centre of force, O is the
v-origin, V and R are an arbitrary velocity on the hodograph and its corresponding
position on the elliptic orbit, and C is the geometric centre of the hodograph. A
represents the Laplace (or Runge-Lenz) vector. For a detailed discussion of the
method for reconstructing the orbit see section 4.

Figure 3
To prove that the orbit is indeed an ellipse (the only case considered in this article),
we need the help of an auxiliary circle with radius 2a, equal to the lenght of WsW ′′,
and to recognize that the two shaded isosceles triangles △R′W ′F ′ and △CV ′V ′
s are
similar to each other.

Figure 4
This is essentially ﬁgure 3 excepting for some details unnecessary for the explanation
in section 5. The purpose of this ﬁgure is to explain the reasoning behind the method
used to construct the orbit starting from the hodograph. The circle AW W ′′ (with
radius 2a) corresponds to the circle W W ′W ′′ in ﬁgure 3 and, after a π/2-rotation
and a rescaling by α/2aL, it also corresponds to the hodograph in ﬁgures 1, 2 and
3. It is convenient to remember that a conic can be deﬁned as the locus of points
being at the same distance from both a ﬁxed point (F ′) and a ﬁxed circle (the arc
W W ′W ′′). The angle between the initial position and the initial velocity is δ.

9

