8
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
0
0
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Locality, QED and Classical Electrodynamics

Dirk Kreimer∗
Mainz University

February 2, 2008

Abstract

We report on some conceptual changes in our present understanding
of Quantum Field Theory and muse about possible consequences for the
understanding of v > c signals.

1

Introduction

This paper is a musing about the role which locality might have to play in
the understanding of the phenomena which we gathered to discuss at this con-
ference. Locality has always been the crucial property in one’s approach to
Quantum Field Theory (QFT). Mainly, there are two lines of thought. One is
to maintain locality. One then can follow the standard derivation of Feynman
rules and obtains a QFT which suﬀers from UV-divergences. These divergences
unavoidably reﬂect the presence of local quantum ﬁelds, operator-valued distri-
butions which, when we clumsily try to multiply them at coinciding space-time
points, produce these UV-divergences.

A QFT as popular as Quantum Electrodynamics is the archetypical example
of such a theory.
Its merits are indisputable though. No experimental fact
which is in conﬂict with its predictions (and with its natural successor at higher
energies, the Standard Model of particle physics) has yet been found, and the
theory is rightly praised for the accuracy with which it describes nature.

Nevertheless, the price is high. The theory is formulated in form of a highly
dubious perturbative expansion: not only do we have to ignore that this expan-
sion in the coupling constant is by no means convergent (even its Borel transform
is in doubt), but we also are confronted with the fact that at each order in this
expansion we have to manage ill-deﬁned mathematical expressions, due to the
very presence of UV-divergences, and thus being a direct consequence of work-
ing with a local QFT. Physicists found a way how to handle these ill-deﬁned

∗dirk.kreimer@uni-mainz.de

1

expressions, known as renormalization. Renormalization is often regarded at
best a technical rather than an illuminating device.

But their guilty conscience, for working with a priori ill-deﬁned quantities,
often let physicists to abandon local QFT, by either turning away completely
from these issues, or, and this is the other line of thought, trying to seek recourse
in other solutions. Most prominent here is string theory and its many gener-
alizations, which all replace the point-particle concept by somewhat extended
objects, and henceforth avoid UV divergences. Unfortunately, these approaches
so far fail dramatically to describe nature.

Thus, it is no surprise that a theory like QED was rarely taken as a guide
in subtle conceptual questions, its own foundations seemingly being built on
unsecure ground.

This seems to change recently. What we see emerging from the art of cal-
culation of Feynman diagrams is the mathematics which enables us to reconcile
the practical successes of local QFT with a mathematical foundation which is
well-deﬁned and promising.

In the next section, I will describe some of the features of this mathemat-
ical backbone of a local QFT and in the ﬁnal section draw some conclusions
concerning the topic of this workshop.

But before I stretch your patience with a rush through the math of local
QFT, let me ﬁrst give you a hint how a QFT might have something to say of
relevance for what Prof. Low called the Nimtz anomaly [1] in his talk.

What Low showed us was how one can establish a simple calculus which
correctly describes the data delivered by the Nimtz experiment [2]. His cal-
culus showed that the Nimtz anomaly is completely determined by height and
length of the barrier, and showed the Nimtz anomaly as a function of these two
variables.

To have a manageable calculus, Low did a step which is everyday practice
for someone working in local Quantum Field Theory: he eliminated negligible
contributions which stem from unmeasurable internal high frequencies, a step
which was mandatory to arrive at the desired calculus, and which was justiﬁed
by the fact that the abandoned contributions were small with repect to the
problem in question. Nevertheless it is far reaching, as such tiny modiﬁcations
can have drastical conceptual consequences.

To me, it seems that it is indeed a well-posed question to ask what the precise
message is which local QFT has in store for us in the context of conceptualization
of notions like signal, frequency band limitations and so on. Admittedly, one
can regard classical ﬁeld theory as detached from local QFT for such classical
phenomena as the propagation of a microwavesignal to a (quenched) waveguide.
But then, classical electrodynamics ought to be the limit of QED in some yet
to be deﬁned sense, and thus, if QED lives in a universe in which a frequency
band limitation, more usually dubbed UV cut-oﬀ in the jargon of a practitioner
of QFT, is unavoidable, it might be that there is a message which QFT has
indeed in store for us: to be careful to ﬁnd those solutions to the classical equa-

2

tions of motions which remain stable under negligible modiﬁcations of internal
(unobserved) high frequency components.

So what is then the conceptual backbone which underlies local QFT and its
need for a cut-oﬀ at high frequencies, which became covariant renormalization
in modern terminology?

2 The concept of renormalization

The basic idea is to trace back the concept of renormalization to the structure
of a Hopf algebra. In so doing, one recovers that the process of renormalization
has a well-deﬁned mathematical meaning and is related to the study of the
diﬀeomorphism group of spacetime [3].

Fig.(1) summarizes some basic notions. Especially, we indicate how to calcu-
late the coproduct of a rooted tree. In so doing, we cut the tree in pieces. Each
of these pieces will correspond to a local counterterm in an analytic expression
which renders a certain subdivergence ﬁnite.

In particular, this Hopf algebra has an antipode, which maps to Feynman

diagrams as their local counterterm.

Fig.(2) gives a diagrammatic explanation of this Hopf algebra, and shows
how the combinatorics of the renormalization procedure derives from this Hopf
algebra.

The universal structure of the Hopf algebra [3] guarantees that it can be
applied as long as we can render a theory ﬁnite by local counterterms: locality
of the theory and its Hopf algebra structure are two sides of the same coin.

Let us also stress that the appearance of this Hopf algebra structure in QFT
establishes a link to recent developments in mathematics. Quite the same Hopf
algebra turned up in the work of Alain Connes and Henri Moscovici on the
noncommutative index theorem. The relation is by now made precise, and puts
local QFT on a ﬁrm mathematical ground [3].

The renormalized Green function can be recovered by the map

Γ → m[(SR ⊗ id)(φ ⊗ φ)∆(TΓ)].

This map associates to the Feynman graph Γ the renormalized Feynman integral
[3].

Indeed, this map can be written as

where

Γ → Γ − τR(Γ) + (id − τR)

ZγΓ/γ





X
γ⊂Γ

,





SR(φ(Tγ)) ≡ Zγ = −τR(γ) − τR





X
γ′⊂γ

Zγ′γ/γ′


,

3

(1)

(2)

−>

admissible

non-adm.

Cuts

∆(

)=

x

1 + 1

x

+

x

+

x

S(

)= -

+

+

-

-

+

+

-

Figure 1: The Hopf algebra of rooted trees. We deﬁne it using admissible cuts on
the trees, and give the coproduct ∆ in terms of admissible cuts. An admissible
cut allows for at most one single cut in any path from any vertex to the root
[3].

4

−

+

+

−

Figure 2: The Hopf algebra of renormalization. We indicate how to assign a
decorated tree to a diagram. On such trees we establish the above Hopf algebra
structure. Each black box corresponds to a cut on the tree, and these cuts are in
one to one correspondence with the forest structure. We calculate the antipode
on the tree, and represent the results on Feynman diagrams, to ﬁnd that the
antipode corresponds to the local counterterm.

5

and this map is induced by the antipode

S[Tγ] = −Tγ −

S[γ′]γ/γ′.

X
γ′⊂γ

(3)

Hence, in accordance with [3] we ﬁnd the Z-factor of a graph γ as derived from
the antipode in the Hopf algebra of rooted trees.

3 Conclusions

What is now the message which we can learn from this structure of perturbative
QFT? It seems to me that the only message is that we shall be not so certain in
which function space to look for classical solutions. The above described math-
ematics relate local QFT to functional analysis and noncommutative geometry.
The question to which extent undetected high frequency components are al-
lowed to contribute is of direct relevance for the space of solutions considered,
and a mathematical rigorous treatment will have to explore the mathematics
of functional analysis and operator algebras, the very disciplines in which a
local QFT has its basis anyhow. The correct asymptotic behaviour of a local
QFT, characterized by the unimportance of high frequency components, will
have meaning for the limit to classical ﬁeld theory. A quantiﬁcation of this
statement and hence a derivation of the Nimtz anomaly will have to wait until
our understanding of QFT has reached maturity.

Acknowledgements

It is a pleasure to thank the organizers of the v >? c workshop for support and
hospitality.

References

[1] A. Enders, G. Nimtz, J.Phys.I (France), 2 (1992);

G. Nimtz, W. Heitmann, Prog.Quant.Elec.21, 81 (1997).

[2] F.E. Low, talk given at this workshop;

F.E. Low (MIT, LNS), P.F. Mende, Annals Phys.210, 380-387 (1991).

[3] D. Kreimer, Adv.Theor.Math.Phys.2, 303-334 (1998), q-alg/9707029;

A. Connes, D. Kreimer, Hopf Algebras, Renormalization and Noncom-
mutative Geometry, IHES-M-98-60, to appear in Comm.Math.Phys., hep-
th/9808042;
D. Kreimer, How useful can knot and number theory be for loop calculations,
talk given at Rheinsberg 98, to appear in Act.Phys.Pol., hep-th/9807125.

6

