8
9
9
1
 
c
e
D
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
0
2
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Causal, psychological, and electrodynamic
time arrows as consequences of the
thermodynamic time arrow

Hrvoje Nikoli´c
Theoretical Physics Division, Rudjer Boˇskovi´c Institute,
P.O.B. 1016, HR-10001 Zagreb, Croatia
hrvoje@faust.irb.hr

February 2, 2008

Abstract

A clear explanation is given on how the causal, psychological, and electrodynamic

time arrows emerge from the thermodynamic time arrow.

Most of physicists agree that the causal, psychological, and electrodynamic time-arrows are
consequences of the thermodynamic time-arrow. For example, such a viewpoint is explic-
itly expressed in famous books [1], [2] (see also [3] for some other references). However,
it is our feeling that the existing literature does not explain the relations among various
manifestations of the time arrow in a suﬃciently clear way, and that there is still a lot of
misunderstanding among some physicists about the true origin of the time arrow. We be-
lieve that we are able to clear up how the causal, psychological, and electrodynamic time
arrow emerge from the classical, deterministic physical laws and the assumption that disorder
increases with time.

Let us start with the causality principle. By causality we understand a “fact” that
“causes” happen before “consequences”. Such a claim does not make any sense at the
fundamental level because the state of a physical system at any instant t can be viewed
as a “cause” of states for all other instants, larger or smaller than t, in the sense that it
uniquely determines these states via the equations of motion. However, it does make sense
at some eﬀective, macroscopic level. This is connected with the fact that, in practice, we
try to draw conclusions about the future and about the past without knowing details of the
present state. Thus, our conclusions are to a great extent based on statistical arguments.
And since disorder increases with time, statistical arguments can determine the past much
better than the future. Thus it is easy to see a connection between the presence and the
past, but it is not so easy to see a connection between the presence and the future. That

1

is why we can consider the past as a “cause” of the presence, whereas can not consider the
future as a “cause” of the presence.

This can also explain the psychological time-arrow. Our psychological feeling that the
time lapses is a consequence of the fact that we remember, i.e., our brain possesses the
information about the events that do not refere to the present time. The problem of the
origin of the psychological time-arrow is reduced to the question why we remember the past,
but not the future.

The general mechanism of memorizing is the following: Some event in the past causes
some permanent consequence. Recalling is just observation of this consequence at an ar-
bitrary later instant. In other words, by observing the present state of a system, we may
draw the conclusion about its past, i.e., about the event that caused the present permanent
consequence. As we have already discussed, we cannot so easily draw conclusions about its
future, except that the permanent consequence will keep its form yet for some time, which
is not the information about any event in the future.

Let us now discuss the status of causality in classical electrodynamics (similar arguments
can also be applied to all other classical ﬁeld theories). We consider a system which consists
of charged currents and electromagnetic ﬁelds, both being time dependent. We usually
assume that the vector potential Aµ(x) is given by the retarded solution of the equation

2Aµ(x) = J µ(x) .

(1)

It is usually argued that we have to take the retarded solution because of the causality princi-
ple, i.e., because the cause (moving charges) must precede the consequence (electromagnetic
ﬁelds). However, the essential tacit assumption is that the charges are the cause and that the
electromagnetic ﬁelds are the consequence. Such a viewpoint is partly inﬂuenced by equa-
tion (1), where it is tacitly assumed that J µ(x) is some known function, whereas Aµ(x) is a
function to be determined from (1). However, this is only an idealization. Electrodynamics
is actually a system of equations, one of which is (1), whereas the other is the diﬀerential
equation for charged “matter” ﬁelds, interacting with electromagnetic ﬁelds. This system
should actually be solved self-consistently, so there is no separation of ﬁelds into “causes”
and “consequences” at the fundamental level. The electromagnetic ﬁeld is the cause of mo-
tion of the charge equally as the motion of the charge is the cause of the electromagnetic
ﬁeld.

Furthermore, advanced solutions are not unphysical at all. For example, it is possible
to construct a large spherical source of electromagnetic waves which emits waves from the
sphere to the inner area. When these waves come to the center, they force the positive and
negative charges in the center to oscillate. In the inner area of the sphere this looks just as
the advanced solution of (1).

However, there is one peculiarity with this picture. One could argue that this would be
inconsistent if positive and negative charges were not present in the center at the begin-
ning. However, it is clear that there is no incosistency from the point of view of quantum
electrodynamics; the strong ﬁelds in the center can create electron-positron pairs. This is
also consistent with the classical ﬁeld theory of charged matter, because nothing prevents
induction of local charge densities as long as the total charge is conserved.

Although the advanced solutions are not unphysical, it is still true that the retarded
solution is the appropriate one for most of practical purposes. This is because in practice

2

it is rather diﬃcult to prepare such initial conditions (such as a large spherical source)
that would correspond to the advanced solution in a large volume V . This can also be
explained by the principle of disorder increase; in a typical physical situation, the energy is
ﬁrst concentrated inside the small lumps of matter (small disorder) and then dissipated all
around via electromagnetic waves (large disorder).

Finally, let us stress that the fact that disorder is growing with time is equivalent to the
statement that the Universe was quite ordered in the past. Thus, the only real problem with
the time arrow is to explain why the Universe was so ordered at some instant of time of its
evolution. There is still no convincing explanation of this, except the anthropic principle [4].

This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of the Republic of
Croatia under Contract No. 00980102.

Acknowledgement

References

[1] R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics

(Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass. 1963).

[2] S. W. Hawking, A Brief History of Time (London: Bantam 1988).

[3] J. L. Lebowitz, “Microscopic reversibility and macroscopic behavior: physical explana-
tions and mathematical derivations,” in Lecture Notes in Physics, edited by J. J. Brey,
J. Marro, J. M. Rubi, and M. San Miguel (Springer 1995); cond-mat/9605183.

[4] S. W. Hawking, R. Laﬂamme, and G. W. Lyons, “The Origin of Time Asymmetry,”

Phys. Rev. D 47 (12), 5342-5356 (1993).

3

