9
9
9
1
 
r
a

M
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
3
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Note on the Time Reversal Asymmetry
of Equations of Motion

H. D. Zeh

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Universit¨at Heidelberg,
Philosophenweg 19, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
e-mail: zeh@urz.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract

Rohrlich’s recent claim that the equation of motion for a point
charge be symmetric under time reversal is shown to be the
result of an unusual deﬁnition. The equation of motion for a
charged sphere of ﬁnite size, which is claimed, in contrast, to
be asymmetric because of the ﬁnite propagation time of its (re-
tarded) self-forces, is shown to possess the same asymmetry (or
the same symmetry, depending on the deﬁnition) as that for a
point charge. Similar arguments apply to other equations of mo-
tion.

Key words:
versibility, decoherence.

radiation reaction, Lorentz-Dirac equation,

irre-

To be published in Foundations of Physics Letters

Rohrlich argued recently[1] that the Lorentz-(Abraham)-Dirac (LAD)
equation for a point charge moving with four-velocity vµ(τ ) along its world
line,

m ˙vµ =

(¨vµ − vµ ˙vν ˙vν ) + F µν

in vν

,

(1)

2e2
3

be invariant under time reversal. Here, m is the renormalized (physical)
mass, while F µν
in is an external Maxwell ﬁeld. Rohrlich’s claim may appear
surprising, since this equation contains terms proportional to the velocity
and to the ﬁrst time derivative of the acceleration, both of which change
sign under time reversal — similar to the terms responsible for friction in
the equation of motion for a mass point. These two terms describe the loss
of energy that must balance the emission of radiation (Dirac’s radiation
reaction) and the ill-deﬁned self-acceleration that leads to exponentially in-
creasing velocity. Both terms arise from the presumed retardation (the
absence of the advanced ﬁelds of the point charge).

It may appear even more surprising when Rohrlich also insists that the

Caldirola-Yaghjian (CY) equation[2, 3] for a charged sphere of radius a,

2e2
3a

+ F µν

m0 ˙vµ(τ ) =

vµ(τ − 2a) + vµ(τ )vν (τ )vν (τ − 2a)
2a
with bare mass m0 = m − 2e2/3a, be asymmetric, even though the former
equation can be obtained from the latter in the limit a → 0 under a time-
symmetric though divergent mass renormalization. Apparently, the idea
underlying these claims is that only the retarded self-forces within the sphere
create an asymmetry, which must then disappear in the point limit. I will
now argue that this picture is wrong.

in vν(τ )

(2)

,

What Rohrlich does in fact prove in the ﬁrst part of his paper (and also
in his book[4]) is the invariance of the LAD equation under time reversal
provided this is deﬁned to include a simultaneous interchange of incoming
and outgoing ﬁelds. However, this symmetry of the global situation merely
reﬂects that of the complete theory; it does not represent the behavior under
time reversal of a point charge that would always be allowed freely to create
its retarded radiation. Although the claim is then formally correct, it is based
on a very unusual and misleading deﬁnition of time reversal for an equation
of motion. This becomes obvious when the deﬁnition is correspondingly
applied to friction, which would also be time reversal invariant if the second
law were simultaneously reversed (that is, if dissipated heat were replaced
with heat focussing on the mass point instead of the retarded ﬁelds being

1

replaced with advanced ones in the case of the charge). In the same sense,
the Lorentz force is symmetric under time reversal if its magnetic ﬁelds are
simultaneously reﬂected in space. These three situations diﬀer only in the
complexity of their “environments”, and hence in the practical diﬃculties
of time-reversing them for this Loschmidt-type argument. Their symmetry
is thus trivial (as Rohrlich correctly points out for the LAD equation), but
essentially of mere theoretical importance in the ﬁrst two cases.

Rohrlich’s symmetry of the LAD equation is based on the general equiv-
alence of the two familiar representations of an arbitrary ﬁeld, viz. either
as a sum of incoming and retarded ﬁelds (of the sources in the considered
spacetime volume) or of outgoing and advanced ﬁelds. Their essential dif-
ference is that it is easy to control incoming ﬁelds, but hard to manipulate
outgoing ones. Moreover, incoming ﬁelds often vanish before the sources
are turned on, while they do not after the sources are turned oﬀ. This fa-
miliar fact is a consequence of the general presence of absorbers with their
thermodynamical arrow of time[5].

This equivalence of diﬀerent representations may also be applied to the
nonsingular case of a charged sphere of ﬁnite size. One may either add its
retarded ﬁeld to a given incoming ﬁeld or the advanced ﬁeld to the outgoing
one in order to satisfy the Maxwell equations. The ﬁrst choice leads to
the CY equation (2), while the second one would mean that the retarded
arguments τ − 2a in (2) have to be replaced with τ + 2a because of the
advanced self-forces that are now required to act within the charged sphere.
Instead of this replacement, Rohrlich leaves this expression in its retarded
form in spite of his deﬁnition of time reversal, since “advanced interactions
are never observed” and “should not be possible”. However, the interchange
of incoming and outgoing ﬁelds required in his deﬁnition of time reversal
should then neither be possible. (In practice, one would have to prepare
the complete though time-reversed retarded ﬁeld coherently as an incoming
ﬁeld.) Retardation or advancement are here a consequence of the chosen
representation — not of the empirical situation in our world. When formally
ﬁxing outgoing ﬁelds, one has to use advanced ﬁelds of the considered sources
everywhere. Advanced external ﬁelds would be inconsistent in conjunction
with retarded internal ﬁelds.

One may then consider the limit a → 0 in the CY equation by using the
Taylor expansion vµ(τ ∓ 2a) = vµ(τ ) ∓ 2a ˙vµ(τ ) + 2a2¨vµ(τ ) + . . . and the
condition vµvµ = −1 together with its time derivatives (that is, vµ ˙vµ = 0
and vµ¨vµ = − ˙vµ ˙vµ). The ﬁrst order of this Taylor expansion gives the mass
renormalization ∆m = 3e2/2a, while the second one leads precisely to the

2

LAD equation, with signs of the retardation diﬀering in the two cases. The
limit a → +0 is thus nontrivially diﬀerent from the limit a → −0. (This
is related to the well known fact that master equations are trivial in ﬁrst
order of the interaction.) Therefore, the LAD equation and the CY equation
possess the same asymmetry under time reversal in the usual sense, and the
same symmetry in the sense of Rohrlich.

Equivalent concepts of time reversal are valid for other equations of
motion[6]. They can also be applied to the master equation of a mass point
described quantum mechanically under the eﬀect of decoherence[7, 8],

∂ρ(x, x′, t)
∂t

i

=

1
2m  

∂2
∂x′2 −

∂2
∂x2

!

′
ρ − iλ(x − x

2
)

ρ ,

(3)

where ρ is the density matrix. This equation is again asymmetric in the usual
sense, since it reﬂects the formation of retarded entanglement (quantum
correlations). All these equations of motion are asymmetric if regarded by
themselves, since their dynamical objects (such as mass points) are strongly
coupled to a time-directed environment, while they would be symmetric if
they were time-reversed together with their environment.

In the case of decoherence, time reversal of the environment would re-
quire recoherence, that is, the conspiratorial presence of previously unob-
served but presicely matching Everett components (“parallel worlds”). How-
ever, a fundamental collapse of the wave function (if it existed as a dynamical
law) would not even theoretically allow the environment to be time-reversed.
While all these situations may reﬂect the same master arrow of time[5] (that
is, the same cosmic initial condition), it remains open whether there is a
boundary somewhere that separates reversible from irreversible physics in a
fundamental (law-like) way. Most physicists appear ready to accept such a
boundary in conjunction with equation (3), that is, for quantum mechanical
measurements or related “probabilistic quantum events” — wherever the
precise boundary between this collapse of the wave function and the realm
of the Schr¨odinger equation may be located.

3

References

[1] F. Rohrlich, Found. Phys. 28, 1045 (1998).

[2] P. Caldirola, Nuovo Cim. 3, Supp. 2, 297 (1956).

[3] A.D. Yaghjian, Relativistic Dynamics of a Charged Sphere (Springer,

[4] F. Rohrlich, Classical Charged Particles (Addison-Wesley, Reading,

Berlin, 1992).

1965).

[5] H. D. Zeh, The Physical Basis of the Direction of Time, 3rd edn.

(Springer, Berlin, 1999).

[6] T.C. Quinn and R.M. Wald, Phys. Rev. D56, 3381 (1997).

[7] D. Giulini, E. Joos, C. Kiefer, J. Kupsch, I.-O. Stamatescu, and H.D.
Zeh, Decoherence and the Appearance of a Classical World in Quantum
Theory (Springer, Berlin, 1996).

[8] R. Omn`es, Phys. Rev. A56, 3383 (1997).

4

