9
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
0
0
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Possible Self-Organised Criticality and Dynamical Clustering of Traﬃc ﬂow in Open
Systems

M. E. L´arraga, J. A. del R´ıo
Centro de Investigaci´on en Energ´ıa,
Universidad Nacional Aut´onoma de M´exico,
A.P.34, 62580 Temixco, Mor. M´exico
email: antonio@servidor.unam.mx

Anita Mehta∗
Oxford Physics, Clarendon Laboratory,
Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, U.K.
email: a.mehta@physics.ox.ac.uk

We focus in this work on the study of traﬃc in open systems using a modiﬁed version of an existing
cellular automaton model. We demonstrate that the open system is rather diﬀerent from the closed
system in its ’choice’ of a unique steady-state density and velocity distribution, independently of the
initial conditions, reminiscent of self-organised criticality. Quantities of interest such as average
densities and velocities of cars, exhibit phase transitions between free ﬂow and the jammed state, as
a function of the braking probability R in a way that is very diﬀerent from closed systems. Velocity
correlation functions show that the concept of a dynamical cluster, introduced earlier in the context
of granular ﬂow is also relevant for traﬃc ﬂow models.

I. INTRODUCTION

The ﬂow of traﬃc in congested urban conditions is a subject of burgeoning interest in many disciplines at the
present time; on the one hand traﬃc scientists [1], [2] are concerned with the formulation of models which could
study and with luck, ease, congestion problems in the real world, while physicists see the subject as an interesting
paradigm for complex systems [3]. Typically such studies have considered the behaviour of closed systems, that is,
systems with periodic boundary conditions which are isolated in the sense that the number of cars is conserved. Here
by contrast we focus on the study of open systems where nonequilibrium conditions greatly modify the underlying
physics, via the introduction and disappearance of cars at the two ends. Even in the steady state, we ﬁnd that the
construction of the phase diagram is totally diﬀerent, involving as it does an expansion of the phase space, from the
socalled ’fundamental’ diagram obtained for the closed version [1].

The present study is based in the context of the extensively studied model of Nagel and Schreckenberg [1], [4];
this involves four cell-updating steps involving braking, stochastic driver reaction, and car movement/acceleration.
Most studies including stochasticity, as in the above models, have been for closed systems with periodic boundary
conditions, with open systems studied mainly [5] in deterministic models.

Here we study the eﬀect of open boundary conditions (as occurs in actual traﬃc ﬂow) on a modiﬁed Nagel-
Schreckenberg model. The modiﬁcation involves stochastic changes to the car occurring before the braking step, to
model the behaviour of an ’anticipatory’ driver. Our results include i) a qualitative change of the phase diagram, with
a unique steady state for a given braking parameter R, reached from a variety of initial conditions. This is reminiscent
of ideas of self-organised criticality (SOC) [6], introduced earlier in the context of sandpiles. ii) the manifestation of
a peak in velocity correlation functions, at speciﬁc values of R, reminiscent of the dynamical clustering that has been
observed in granular media [7].

The NS model has also been developed recently [8] to show metastable states [9] of very high ﬂow. However we have
focused on (a modiﬁed verions of) the simpler, classic NS model to show, in a well-studied context, that open boundary
conditions induce qualitatively new SOC-like behaviour, as well as interesting aspects of dynamical clustering. These
could, in principle, be of conceptually useful relevance to more complex models of traﬃc ﬂow.

This paper is organised as follows. In the ﬁrst section we present our model. In the next section we present the
results concerning the steady-state regime in the open systems under study. Lastly we discuss our results and compare
our predictions with observations on real traﬃc.

∗

Present and permanent address: S N Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Block JD, Sector III, Salt Lake, Calcutta 700

091, INDIA, email: anita@boson.bose.res.in

1

II. THE MODEL

In the real world, traﬃc ﬂow always occurs in open systems, i.e. those where cars are always interchanged between
some local environment and its surroundings; thus for example, the number of cars is not conserved in general in any
section of a highway. However most studies involving cellular automata modelling of such systems have sought to
focus on the evolution of traﬃc in closed systems subjected to periodic boundary conditions. In this study we seek
to model more closely some situations in traﬃc ﬂow by looking at systems with open boundaries where, as in reality,
the number of cars is not conserved.

We base our model on the Nagel-Schreckenberg [4] cellular automaton model, but with the addition of an important
modiﬁcation involving the order of the operators. Before discussing this, we deﬁne the model in its conventional form:
The model consists of a one-dimensional array of cells each of which can be occupied by a car with velocity v
between vmin and vmax, with vmin = 1 and vmax ∈ {1, .., 5}. Subject to the non-overlapping of cars, the rules for traﬃc
ﬂow are formulated as follows (we assume that the updating time t = 1 ):

P. Proximity step
For cars i, i − 1, if vi + xi ≤ vi−1 + xi−1, then v′

i−1 → vi−1, where the primes represent
the updated velocities. In words, this implies that the driver of a car brakes if the car in front is close enough to
cause a collision, but not otherwise. Put another way, the driver would like to be at the maximal possible velocity
consistent with the avoidance of collisions.

i−1 → vi + xi − xi−1 − 1; else v′

N. Noise step
This reﬂects the stochastic element which, in the original model, allows for the random deceleration of a fraction
R of the cars by one unit of velocity. Thus for example in the case of the ith car, the velocity vi may either stay the
same or, if it is part of the randomly selected fraction R of cars, decrease its velocity by one unit; thus, v′
i → vi − 1
(except if vi = vmin).

M. Movement step
This updates in parallel the positions of the cars; once again for the ith car, say, this implies x′
A. Acceleration step
This updates in parallel the velocities of the cars by one unit: thus, v′
We emphasise that the above represents the original form of the model in [1], [4], and now proceed to discuss our
modiﬁcation to it, which involves the order of the operators. Our initial investigations indicated that the order of
rules PNMA led to several unphysical conﬁgurations, whereas the order NPMA did not. The reason for this is that
with the noise being applied after the proximity step, cars are unable to adjust to the noise-reduced velocities of the
traﬃc in front. This could lead to an artiﬁcial jam, arising from the order of the rules rather than from the real
dynamics of the system. Also, importantly, our choice of rules could be said to model the behaviour of anticipatory
drivers rather than, as in the case of the PNMA ordering, reactive drivers.

i → vi + 1 (except if vi = vmax).

i → vi + xi.

III. THE STEADY STATE IN AN OPEN SYSTEM: RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

In this section we describe both qualitative and quantitative features of our results for the steady state of traﬃc
ﬂow in an open system, as described by the model in the preceding section. First of all, we chose the system size
L, randomly generated an initial distribution of car positions and velocities, and then introduced a car with velocity
v = 5 at the origin at every time step. Next we updated the individual car velocities and positions in accord with
the rules of the above model and waited for the system to asymptote to its steady-state density (where we used the
χ - squared rule to ensure that this limit was obtained). Finally we recorded the densities and velocities of cars at
diﬀerent positions for use in our later analysis. We mention below some of the speciﬁc features of our procedure to
ensure convergence to the steady state:

• We chose system sizes L from 200 to 10, 000 units, and found that although the time required to reach the
steady state was enormous as the system size was increased, the steady-state densities or velocities so obtained
did not vary appreciably. In fact we found that for the really large system sizes of say 10, 000 units, most of
the cars after a distance of ∼ 400 units showed the behaviour trivially to be expected of that value of R, i.e.
they were either jammed or free-ﬂowing, and thus no longer impacted by the initial car. We thus present in this
paper only data obtained for L = 200, 400.

• We varied the rules governing the introduction of the initial car, for example, choosing to introduce such a car
at alternate rather than consecutive timesteps, and found that this made no signiﬁcant diﬀerence to our results.

2

• Lastly we varied the ’seed’ conﬁgurations to do with initial densities and velocities on the line, and found that
this made absolutely no diﬀerence to our results. The results presented in this work involve averages over 1000
realisations of the experiment.

A. Qualitative results

Our ﬁrst step is to compare the spacetime diagrams for the case of closed boundary conditions and open ones, on
the former of which one of us has carried out extensive investigations [10]. We present below the spacetime diagrams
for an open system with R = 0.7 in Fig. 1 and a system with periodic boundary conditions with the same R in Fig.
2. We note that while the speciﬁcation of an initial density by deﬁnition determines the ﬁnal density in the closed
system (since cars cannot be ’lost’ in the presence of closed boundaries) it does no such thing in the case of the open
system, where, in the example shown in Fig. 1, the system evolves from an initially low-density conﬁguration to a
jammed state. In some sense we see already the signs that the open system ’chooses’ its own ﬁnal density, while the
closed system simply maintains its initially chosen one.

Next we examine the proﬁle of the velocity distribution in the open (Fig. 3a) and closed (Fig. 3b) systems for
the same initial density and value of R in both cases. For the closed system, we ﬁnd a relatively larger proportion
of high-velocity cars persisting even after a long time has elapsed, compared to the open system, where the number
of cars with velocities greater than 1 decays to zero after an initial transient. (It is important to emphasise that the
value of the ’most probable’ velocity in each case will depend on R). Additionally, while there is a kind of periodicity
that is evident in the case of the closed system, with ’waves’ of cars of a given velocity appearing and disappearing,
separated by local ’spurts’ in their value, no such phenomenon is observed in the open system, where the number
of cars with velocity 1 gradually increases with time to span the system (although there is an interesting rise in the
number of cars with velocity 2, till its decay to zero at t ≈ 500). We emphasise once again that these examples are
chosen only to bring out the diﬀerences between the closed and open systems, and that for example a diﬀerent value
of R would result in qualitatively similar but quantitatively diﬀerent conclusions.

Next, in Figs. 4 and 5, we show that for the open system, initial conditions involving diﬀerent densities and diﬀerent
randomly generated conﬁgurations, all converge to the unique densities and velocities characterising the steady state
for R = 0.3 and 0.7 respectively. We note that the time required by the open system to converge to the steady state is
about 10 × L, where L is the system size [11], with the exception of the region around the jamming transition, where
the transient time can be about 100 × L. We show, for comparison, the situation for the closed system in Figure 6;
here the initial densities are maintained, and the value of the steady-state velocity depends strongly on the value of
the density, unlike the case of the open system. Also, in comparison with the open system, the convergence times are
virtually instantaneous.

We see thus that in the open system, arbitrary initial densities and velocity distributions evolve towards a unique
steady state for a given R characterised by a ﬁnal mean density and velocity distribution. The consequences of this
apparently simple statement are profound; for example the fundamental ﬂux vs. density diagram obtained in the case
of the closed system [12] for a given value of R collapses to a point in the open system, since there is only one possible
value of density ρ and velocity v in the latter case.

We discuss this unique ’selection’ by the open system of steady-state densities and velocities later, but for the
present, simply assert that this convergence enables us to work with average densities and velocities (obtained by
averaging over time, in the steady state, as well as space, and ﬁnally over diﬀerent initial conﬁgurations and noise
realisations of the system) in the next subsection.

B. Densities, velocities and correlation functions: a quantitative analysis

We next present and interpret quantitative results on average velocities and densities of cars in the steady state,
in addition to examining their ﬂuctuations via correlation functions. In Fig. 7a, the mean density and velocity for
systems of size L = 200, 400 are plotted as a function of R. As is evident, the curves are coincident, reﬂecting our
contention that the steady state obtained in our work is not system-size dependent beyond about L = 200. We see
strong evidence of a phase transition which arises around Rc ∼ 0.55, ρc ∼ 0.55. (These numbers are obtained from an
analysis of dρ
dR vs R , which is shown in Fig. 7b ; we will have more to say about the latter graph and its implications
later on).

We notice that the density curve is a smooth S-shaped function while that for the velocity is a smooth inverse
S-shaped function. Their intersection indicates the likely neighbourhood of the phase transition observed between
regions of low ρ and high v (’freely ﬂowing traﬃc’) on the one hand, and regions of high ρ and low v (’congested’

3

or ’jammed’ traﬃc) on the other. Earlier work on closed systems seems to categorise phase transitions in traﬃc ﬂow
as being of ﬁrst order [12] but we are unable to state this deﬁnitively in the context of our ﬁnite-size investigations
on open systems. In particular the ’selection’ by the system of steady state densities and velocities for a given value
of R is rather reminiscent of the phenomenon of self-organised criticality, [6], where the system organises itself into
a unique state for a given value of a parameter. On this basis R would seem to be analogous to a temperature-like
variable which then determines the density ρ, whose thermodynamic analogue is the system energy.

However, a deeper examination of this issue is relegated to future work, as for example the shape of dρ

dR vs R
(analogous to the temperature dependence of the speciﬁc heat of a thermodynamic system) depicted in Fig. 7b,
could equally well represent a second-order transition for a ﬁnite system, or for example a kind of lambda transition,
reminiscent of the ﬁrst-order transition in glassy systems [13].

We now turn to the discussion of ﬂuctuations via the analysis of correlation functions. Clearly the < ρxρx′ >
correlation function is not very informative at least in its ’bare’ version (i.e. where its value is either 0 or 1 at a site);
on the other hand, the < vxvx′ > correlation function is meaningful. (Since we look only at the steady state behaviour
here, time correlation functions such as < vtvt′ > are likewise not meaningful). In Fig. 8 we present the behaviour
of this as a function of position, for diﬀerent values of R. We note that the behaviour is generic, with well- deﬁned
ﬁrst and second neighbour ’shells’, particularly for values of R well away from the transition point. Additionally, we
remark on the speciﬁc meaning of such dynamical correlations; in analogy with earlier work on granular ﬂow [7], we
deﬁne a dynamical cluster for a given R as being the number of sites which are within the ﬁrst shell of the velocity
correlation function . The physical import of a dynamical cluster is that it reﬂects the range over which cars are
correlated in their velocities; we observe that the size of a dynamical cluster increases as R decreases. In other words,
as fewer cars face random obstacles, more and more of them develop velocity correlations, i.e. they begin to ’move
together’ in clumps. Returning to the analogy with granular ﬂow, this mirrors the situation found in earlier work [7]
where a decrease in external perturbations applied to a granular system causes an increase in the size of a typical
dynamical cluster of grains.

IV. DISCUSSION

We have examined traﬃc ﬂow in open systems, and found that the nature of the phase diagram is completely
altered with respect to the more usual case of periodic boundary conditions. In particular, the fundamental diagram
of ﬂux versus density as a function of the parameter R presented recently for closed systems by Eisenblatter et al [12]
collapses to a point in the case of an open system; thus, at a given R, traﬃc ﬂow in an open system is characterised
by a unique density and velocity distribution, independently of initial conditions.

This unusual and very robust feature leads us to suggest some thermodynamic analogies for the key quantities
in traﬃc ﬂow in open systems: thus, for example the thermodynamic analogues of density ρ and braking probability
R are respectively energy and temperature. Following this line of reasoning, we speculate that traﬃc ﬂow in open
systems could either be a paradigm of self-organised criticality, or on the other hand be representative of a ﬁrst-order
phase transition in a ﬁnite system. The transition in question, that between jammed and free ﬂow, appears to be
characterised by a discontinuity in the analogue of the speciﬁc heat as a function of R, i.e. dρ
dR plotted vs R shows a
lambda-transition which could be characteristic either of glassy behaviour of indeed of self-organised criticality.

Various special cases of traﬃc ﬂow modelled by cellular automata have been examined and found to exhibit self-
organised criticality [11]; for example, the case of the outﬂow region of a big traﬃc jam under cruise control conditions
[14] was found to exhibit this. However, we reiterate that our work is to our knowledge the ﬁrst to investigate the
speciﬁc issue of the phase diagram as a function of the braking probability R under the most general conditions. Our
striking ﬁndings regarding the selection by the system of a unique density and velocity distribution for arbitrary initial
conditions suggest that it may well be a rather general paradigm of self-organised criticality, though future work is in
progress to investigate this.

Lastly, we mention that in recent experimental work [9] there has been a suggestion that in addition to the transition
between jammed and free ﬂow, there could be a transition to ’synchronised’ ﬂow where cars neither move freely, nor
stay jammed, but continue moving by synchronising their velocities. Our ﬁndings with regard to the dynamical cluster
mentioned in the earlier section appear to be in accord with this, in that dynamical clusters, as discussed earlier in
the context of granular ﬂow [7], are clusters whose constituents are strongly correlated in their velocities. We hope
to explore some of these issues elsewhere.

4

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

AM acknowledges the generous hospitality, over many visits, to the Centro de Investigaci´on en Energ´ia in Temixco,
where a large portion of this work was carried out. This work was partially supported by DGAPA-UNAM under
project IN117798. We are very grateful to Subodh Shenoy for a careful reading of the manuscript.

[1] K. Nagel and M. Schreckenberg, J. Phys. I (France) I2, 2221 (1992).
[2] Traﬃc and Granular Flow, eds. D.E. Wolf, M. Schreckenberg, and A. Bachem (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996).
[3] see for example papers on the asymmetric exclusion process (ASEP), such as C. Godreche, J.M. Luck, M. E. Evans, D.

Mukamel, S. Sandow and E. R. Speer, J. Phys. A 28, 6039 (1995).
[4] A. Schadschneider and M. Schreckenberg, J. Phys. A 26, L679 (1993).
[5] B. S. Kerner and W. Konhauser, Phys. Rev. E 50, 50 (1994).
[6] P. Bak, C. Tang and K. Wiesenfeld Phys. Rev. A 38, 368 (1988).
[7] G. C. Barker and Anita Mehta, Phys. Rev. A 45, 3435 (1992); Anita Mehta and G. C. Barker Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 394

(1991); Granular Matter: An Interdisciplinary Approach, ed. Anita Mehta (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1994).

[8] R. Barlovic, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider and M. Schreckenberg, Eur. Phys. J. B 5, 793 (1998).
[9] B.S. Kerner and H. Rehborn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 4030 (1997).
[10] M. E. L´arraga, ”Simulaci´on del Transito Vehicular en Carreteras Usando Aut´omatas Celulares”, Thesis Benemerita Uni-

versidad de Puebla (M´exico, 1997).
[11] T. Nagatani, J. Phys. A 28, L119 (1995).
[12] L. Eisenbl¨atter, L. Santen, A Schadschneider and M. Schreckenberg, Phys. Rev. E 57, 1309 (1998).
[13] G.S. Grest and S.R. Nagel, J. Phys. Chem. 91, 4916 (1987); R.M. Ernst, S. R. Nagel and G.S. Grest, Phys. Rev. B 43,

8070 (1991).

[14] K. Nagel and M. Paczuski, Phys. Rev. E 51 , 2909 (1995).

VI. FIGURE CAPTIONS

Figure 1. Spacetime diagram for traﬃc ﬂow in an open system corresponding to a braking probability R = 0.7,

and starting with an initial density ρi = 0.2.

a density ρ = 0.2.

Figure 2. Spacetime diagram for traﬃc ﬂow in a closed system corresponding to a braking probability R = 0.7, and

Figure 3. Proﬁle of the velocity distribution for traﬃc ﬂow in a) an open system and b) a closed system corresponding

to a braking probability R = 0.7, and starting with an initial density ρi = 0.2.

Figure 4. Plots of the time evolution of the a) density and b) average velocity of traﬃc in an open system for two
initial densities ρi = 0.2 and ρi = 0.7, and braking probability R = 0.7. Both initial conditions evolve to a single
density characteristic of the jammed state.

Figure 5. Same as Figures 4 but with braking probability R = 0.3; the ﬁnal state is, as expected, characteristic of

free ﬂow in this case.

Figure 6. Evolution of the time dependent averaged velocity for closed systems with two initial densities ρ = 0.2
and ρ = 0.7, and braking probability R = 0.3. In this case we notice that the ﬁnal state depends strongly on the
(initial) values of the density.

Figure 7. a) The ’fundamental diagram’ of traﬃc ﬂow in open systems; the free-ﬂow to jamming transition occurs
in the vicinity of the intersection of the density and velocity curves as a function of braking probability R. b) plot of
dρ
dR vs R; note the strong resemblance to the lambda transition in glassy systems. Triangles indicate the results for a
system of length L = 200 while open circles indicate the data for a system size L = 400.

Figure 8. Velocity-velocity correlation functions < vxvx′ > corresponding to a range of diﬀerent values of the

braking probability R.

5

