9
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
s
s
a
l
c
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
1
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Evolved-Vacuum Model of Redshifts

Eugene I. Shtyrkov

February 2, 2008

Abstract

A new interpretation of cosmological redshifts is proposed to construct
the evolved-vacuum model of this phenomenon.The physical vacuum was
considered to be a real matter with time-dependent permittivity and per-
meability.Time variation of these parameters ( ∆ε
per
year) was shown on the base of Maxwell’s equations and Hubble’s law
to obey the exponential behavior causing step-by-step decrease of light
velocity with a rate of about 2.7 m/s over 100 years.Cosmological aspects
are discussed to explain some features of reality of the Universe evolution.

∆µ
µ = 9 · 10

ε =

−11

1 Introduction

It was experimentally established early in this century that the fainter distant
galaxies and quasars are, the larger their shift of spectral lines toward the red
region is. Assuming a plausible faintness-distance function, Hubble [1] discovered
that there is a linear dependence between a redshift and distance L

Z(L) =

λshif t − λo
λo

=

Ho
co (cid:19)

(cid:18)

L

(1)

In this relation, Z(L) is the relative spectral shift,λo is the wavelength of a
spectral line from a source in the laboratory which is at rest relative to the Earth,
λshif t is the wavelength of the same line emitted by a quasar and measured by
a terrestrial observer in the laboratory, Ho is the Hubble constant and co is
the free space velocity of light. Until now, such spectral observations yielding
information about extremely distant objects were being the only experimental
clues to support an understanding of the Universe. This is because only such
gigantic distances (of about 1022 km) and time intervals (109 years) suﬃce
to reveal the small changes that occur while light is traveling through space.
Therefore, a correct interpretation of such spectral observations to ascertain the
real origin of redshifts and bring the Universe to light is especially important.
At present, there are several alternative models to explain the redshift phe-
nomenon. Usually, this one is interpreted as a Doppler eﬀect which ﬁnally

1

implies recession of galaxies and expansion of the Universe (the ”Big Bang”
model).There are some doubts, however, about this interpretation .Really, there
is no physical explanation for singularities due to inﬁnite density of matter at
the point of creation, and some recession velocities appear to be extremely large.
For example, for quasar Q01442+101 (at Z = 3, 3) the recession velocity derived
from this model is about of 0.9co . Moreover, some super-clusters of galaxies
seem to be older than the age of the Universe derived from this model. It was
experimentally established recently that very extended objects (the huge sheets
of galaxies stretching more than 200 million l.y. (light-years) across , 700 million
l.y. long and 20 million l.y. thick ) are like the super-clusters of galaxies mapped
by Tully earlier [?] .Still larger objects (”Cosmic Ladder”) stretching across a
distance of about seven billion light-years have been discovered [3]. Because the
maximal velocities of any objects experimentally observed in astronomy to be
not more than 500 km/s it takes about 150 billion years to form this structure
– more than seven times the number of years since the Big Bang to form the
Universe [3].

Besides the Big-Bang there are also alternative approaches based on ideas
of time evolution of matter/light parameters, either the fundamental physical
constants (Plank’s constant, charge and mass of elementary particles, the elec-
tromagnetic parameter co , and so on) or the electromagnetic characteristics of
the physical vacuum.
The variation of fundamental physical constants as a possible origin of the red-
shifts has been discussed widely since Dirac [4] put forward the idea of ”Great
Numbers”. Recently, however, some of the atomic constants was really shown
to be constant in time.For instance,Potekhin and Varshalovich [5] have studied
the ﬁne splitting of the doublet absorption lines in quasar’s spectra. They ana-
lyzed 1414 doublets (CIV, NV, CVI, MgII, AlIII, and SiIV) in the wide range
of redshifts (0.2 < Z < 3.7). Their statistical analysis reveals no statistically
signiﬁcant time variation of the ﬁne structure constant α = e2
on time scale of
hco
about ten billion years.We can conclude from here that, at least, such the param-
eters as charge of electron e, Plank’s constant h and electromagnetic coeﬃcient
co should be considered as constant ones and, hence, can have no inﬂuence on
redshifts. As for variation of the mass of elementary particles, this idea discussed
by Arp [6] in the intrinsic-redshift model to prove that redshifts are supposedly
related to the age of the objects. This idea, however, do not obey the redshift-
distance relation (1) at constant Ho [7] . Moreover, constancy of the electron
mass in time appears to follow from the results of [5] as well.Really,because the
ﬁne splitting of energy levels δE depends on Ridberg’s constant R = 2π2me4
as
coh3
well we should conclude that m is also constant on a very large time scale.

There are also alternative models of redshifts which obey the redshift-distance
relation and based on an idea of gradual change of light parameters due to in-
teraction between light and matter while the light is traveling gigantic distances
through space for a very long time. There are two candidate ways for such inter-

2

action to cause redshifts: gradual energy loss by the photon due to absorption
during propagation of light with a constant velocity (tired-light model,see,for
instance, [8]) and propagation of light with the variable velocity and without
absorption in free space (variable-light-velocity models).
Tired-light mechanism, however, results in obvious contradictions between quan-
tum and classical description based on the Maxwell’s equations. In fact, assum-
ing that energy of a single photon is gradually decreasing due to absorption,
we may conclude that volume energy density of N photon ﬂow with this same
frequency and,hence,its intensity are also decreasing ones. From the electrody-
namics point of view, it means that electric ﬁeld strength E should gradually
be decreased while this wave is traveling through space . Quantum descrip-
tion says about simultaneous decreasing of frequency at changing of photon en-
ergy.However,it is not diﬃcult to be convinced that no such a combination, i.e.
the simultaneous decaying space-dependent functions E(x) and ω(x) , obeys
this same wave equation with stationary boundary conditions which is cur-
rently used in quantum electronics and physical optics to adequately describe
the propagation of light at constant velocity in any non-conductors,including
vacuum (see Appendix) . The electromagnetic coeﬃcient co , which bridges the
electric and magnetic phenomena, has the dimension of speed, and has been
historically identiﬁed with a constant free space light velocity. In any media,
however, the light velocity depends on its permittivity ε and permeability µ as
well. At present, vacuum has been experimentally established to be not a void
but it is some material medium with deﬁnite but not so far investigated features.
It was really conﬁrmed by observation of several vacuum eﬀects, for instance,
zero oscillations and polarization of vacuum, generating the particles in vac-
uum due to electromagnetic interaction. Therefore, it was reasonable to assume
that this real matter-physical vacuum can possess internal friction due to its
small but a real viscosity to result in variation of light-matter interaction. That
is, vacuum can aﬀect on the light wave because of certain resistance. Because
physical vacuum is a real material with real characteristics the light velocity
can be non-constant, since it depends both on co and ε, µ of the vacuum ,all of
which could have been space/time-dependent functions, in principle. This may
be a reason for the redshifts observed. For example, the situation with space
variable ε(x) and µ(x) at constant electromagnetic parameter was discussed in
[9] where a wave equation with the term analogous to one for a damped simple
oscillator was derived from Maxwell’s equations. Solution of this equation leads
to a gradual increase of a wavelength ( redshifts at constancy of the frequency)
and variable light velocity. A drawback of the last approach is what one need to
consider the permittivity and permeability rather as parameters of interaction
but not just the characteristics of vacuum as real matter. This inconvenience
was overcame in [10] where this same result was obtained, but at constant per-
mittivity/permeability and the space-dependent electromagnetic parameter co .
However, following the publication of the work [5] followed by conclusion about
constancy of co the last model [10] must be obviously abandoned . In the present

3

paper we will consider more promising variable light velocity model of redshifts
which let us join electrodynamical approach with the cosmological principle and
empirical data to be available in order to explain some features of reality.

2 Evolved-vacuum model (EVM) of cosmolog-

ical redshifts

This model is based on classical electrodynamics with taking the time-dependent
permittivity and permeability into account [11]. Let us make only one assump-
tion that, in compliance with the cosmological principle, the variation of the
physical vacuum parameters occurs simultaneously and identically at any point
of the inﬁnite evolving Universe. Then the permittivity and permeability of the
physical vacuum at the moment when light is leaving a distant galaxy (one point
of space) would be diﬀerent from what it would be when this light is reaching
the Earth (the other point of the Universe) to be a reason for shifts of spectral
lines. Let us consider this point in more detail by writing Maxwell’s equations
for the plane-polarized monochromatic wave propagating along the OX-axis and
ε(t) and µ(t) as the functions of time

∂E
∂x
∂H
∂x

= − 1
co
= − 1
co

∂B
∂t
∂D
∂t

B = µ(t)H
D = ε(t)E

(2)

Consideration of the light wave as a plane one here is due to quasars removed
on inﬁnity are practically point sources of light with ﬂat wave fronts near the
Earth. The simplest way of analyzing the situation under these conditions is to
write down a wave equation for the induction wave D instead of the electric
ﬁeld strength E. One can argue that wave characteristics of induction have the
same phase behavior as for the electric ﬁeld. However, solving the induction
wave equation and then making use of the material relations in (2) to ﬁnd the
electric ﬁeld strenth is much simpler. The wave equation for induction can be
derived from a chain of substitutions

ε

∂
∂x (cid:18)

∂E
∂x (cid:19)

= − ε
co

∂2B
∂x∂t

=

ε
c2
o

∂
∂t (cid:18)

µ

∂D
∂t (cid:19)

drawn from Eqs.2 by means of taking a partial derivative of the left part of the
ﬁrst equation with respect to x and using the second equation in (2). This leads

4

to the wave equation for electric induction

∂2D
∂x2

− εµ
c2
o (cid:18)

∂2D
∂t2 +

1
µ

∂µ
∂t

∂D
∂t (cid:19)

= 0

with the boundary and initial conditions :
at x = 0 and t = ts ( ts is the start instant when the light left the remote source)
the electric ﬁeld strength in the wave zone is
E(0, ts) = Eo exp ıωots ,
where the amplitude and frequency are constant, and

One can see from (3) that the vacuum propagation velocity of the induction
wave is a time-dependent function

p
and this must be the same as the light velocity. Let us seek a solution of Eq.3
as a quasi-periodic function with variable phase

The induction is an electric ﬁeld strength in a void,i.e. without any matter
(including physical vacuum) ﬁlling a space.Because there is no ﬁeld-matter in-
teraction in the void the amplitude of iduction in (5) can be considered as a
constant. Diﬀerentiating (5), inserting into (3) and separating real and imagi-
nary parts, we obtain two equations

D(0, ts) = ε(ts)E(0, ts)

c(t) =

co
ε(t)µ(t)

D = a exp ıφ(x, t)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

∂φ
∂x

= ± 1
c
∂φ
∂t

∂φ
∂t

= 0

∂2φ
∂x2

− q(t)

− p(t)

∂2φ
∂t2

µ(t)

c2(t) and p(t) = q

dµ(t)
where q(t) = 1
. In order to admit time dependence
dt
for both permeability and permittivity, we should repeat the same analysis for
the magnetic induction wave equation. Following the diﬀerentiating of the left
side of the second equation (2) with respect to x and making the necessary
substitutions using the ﬁrst one we obtain the same equation as (3) but with B
in place of D and ε in place of µ in the bracket in the third term. Obviously, the
solution is formally the same as (6), but with ε in place of µ in the deﬁnition of
p(t). Using this conclusion, and the deﬁnition of c in (4) , we obtain

dc(t)/dt
c(t)

= − dµ(t)/dt

= − dε(t)/dt

= Q

µ(t)

ε

(7)

5

where Q is either an as-yet unknown function on time or a constant. Taking it
into account we can rewrite the Eqs. (6) as follows
= ± 1
c
∂φ
∂t

∂φ
∂x
dc
dt (cid:19)

− 1
c2

∂2φ
∂t2

∂2φ
∂x2

∂φ
∂t

1
c3

= 0

(8)

−

(cid:18)

It is seen from (7) that the behavior of the light velocity is the same as
permeability and permittivity time behavior at any point of space (in compliance
with the cosmological principle as well).This means that an observer at any
concrete space point on the light path sees the wave as a periodic function
whose period depends on the light velocity at this epoch. In other words, the
light frequency perceived by the observer depends on time alone. Thus, the right
part of the ﬁrst equation (8), which keeps the frequency ( ∂φ
∂t ) and light velocity,
depends only on time. Therefore, let us seek the phase of the light in the form
φ(x, t) = ς(t) ± η(x). Inserting this form into the ﬁrst equation (8), we derive
= ± 1
c
Since η(x) depends only on space and ς(t) depends only on time, the parameter
k must be constant. It follows from solving the Eq.9 that η(x) is a linear function
of x ,that is η(x) = ±kx + φo . It is easy to show that this form will obey the
second of Eqs. (8) as well. Thus the parameter k is a spatial derivative of phase,
or a spatial frequency,i.e. a well-known wave number k = 2π
λ .Thus we have for
phase

dη(x)
dx

dς(t)
dt

= k

(9)

φ(x, t) = ς(t) ± kx
Thus we come to a very important conclusion: the induction wave, and hence
the light one, must travel in vacuum with conservation of wave length even
when the parameters are time dependent. This wave length is determined by
the initial and boundary conditions (at the point of a quasar location at the
moment of start of the light wave ,i.e. when light is leaving the quasar)

(10)

λ(ts) =

=

2π
k

2πc(ts)
ω(ts)

= λshif t = const

(11)

where ω(ts) = ωo - the frequency of the atomic transition in question,ts is
the start instant, when light left the source, c(ts) - the velocity of light at
the concrete epoch of the Universe evolution. The time dependent frequency
ω(t) = ∂φ/∂t,then, can be inferred from (8), given c(t) , which can in turn be
inferred from (7), given Q(t). To determine this, let us refer to the redshift-
distance relation (1). The distance covered by light depends on ts and to-the
observation time (our epoch at the Earth) and can be written as

L(to, ts) =

c(t)dt

(12)

to

Z

ts

6

Taking this and (11) into account, we can rewrite the relation (1) in the form

Z(ts, to) =

λ(ts)
λo

− 1 =

to

Ho
co Z

ts

c(t)dt

where initial conditions for the wave lengths of light are (11) for a remote source
(at ts) and (14) for a terrestrial source (at our epoch )

λo =

2πco
ωo

dc(t)
dt

= −Hoc(t)

In the relation (13) the light velocity co = c(to) and Ho , measured at our epoch
to, should be taken the same for diﬀerent remote objects observed. Hence, the
start moment should be an integration variable. Inserting (11) and (14) into
Eq.13, diﬀerentiating it with respect to ts , using (12) to infer that dL(to, ts)/dts =
−c(ts) and replacing ts → t , we obtain a simple diﬀerential equation for the
light velocity

This result is in accord with the Eqs.7 derived from the wave equation with
parameter Q set to minus the Hubble’s constant Ho.Solving these equations in
the range ts < t < to with our initial conditions, we obtain an exponential law
of time variation of the light velocity, permittivity and permeability:

−Ho(t−ts)
c(t) = c(ts)e
ε(t) = ε(ts)eHo(t−ts)
µ(t) = µ(ts)eHo(t−ts)

ς(t) =

1 − e

−Ho(t−ts)

ωo
Ho h

i

Using (16) in (9) with the initial condition (11) and k = 2π/λ(ts) , we obtain
the time-dependent part of the phase for the time range of ts < t < to as follows

Because the time derivative of this phase is the frequency of the light wave we
obtain the same behavior for frequency as for light velocity at the same time
range

ω(t) = ωoe

−Ho(t−ts)

Thus the induction wave which obeys the wave equation (3) has a constant am-
plitude,the wavelength shifted initially and the variable frequency due to gradual
time variation of the vacuum parameters equaled throughout the Universe. The
behavior of the electric ﬁeld strength can be derived from the last material re-
lation in (2) with taking into account (5),(16) and the initial conditions in (3)
as follows

E(x, t) = Eoe

−Ho(t−ts) exp ıφ(x, t)

(19)

7

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

where the amplitude of the electric ﬁeld is seen to decline with time,and the
phase is

φ(x, t) =

1 − e

−Ho(t−ts)

− kx

(20)

ωo
Ho h

i

We may use expressions (18),(19),(20) for any source in dependence on situation.
For instance, in order to compare the parameters of light arrived on the Earth
with ones measured for terrestrial source at the same instant to (our epoch) we
should put t = to in using of (16) and (18) . As a result we have the following.

remote source The wave length for the light arrived from a galaxy (g − label)

is λg(to) = 2πc(to)
ωg(to)
where the light velocity at our epoch is c(to) = co (from Ex.16 at t = to )
and frequency this light perceived by an observer is ωg(to) = ωo exp [Ho(to − ts)]
(from Ex.18 at t = to )

terrestrial source For light from the terrestrial source (t − label) at this same
time is λt(to) = 2πc(to)
ωt(to) where frequency of this source is ωt(to) = ωo (from
Ex.18 at t = to = ts ,because there is no time interval between emitting
and observing the terrestrial source wave)

comparison Using this, we obtain the relation λg (to)

λt(to) = ωo

ωg(to) = eHoτo where

τo = to − ts. Thus, in compliance with experiment, there is the redshift

λshif t = λg(to) = λoeHoτo

Although reproducing the conclusions of the tired-light model, namely, about
simultaneous decreasing the electric ﬁeld strength and frequency, this model
has a diﬀerent physical interpretation. Instead of energy loss due to absorp-
tion at constant light velocity,this mechanism is based on gradual change of the
vacuum parameters that results in declining of the electric ﬁeld strength. The
electromagnetic wave is gradually slowing down, with conservation of the ini-
tially shifted wavelength λshif t. The frequency perceived by observers at any
point on the light path depends on the light velocity at the observation time.

3 Cosmological aspects

The cosmological principle implies that the Eqs.16 derived for the interval τo =
to − ts can be extrapolated from present observation time to to any future or
past one.If we take our epoch as zero point on the time scale the light velocity
in the Exp.16 can be rewritten as follows

c(t) = coe

−Ho(t−to)

(21)

8

where t < to serves to deﬁne history of the Universe before our epoch. For t > to
we have future of the Universe.The exponential dependence implies no partic-
ular points or singularities on the time axis.That is, all of the variations of the
Universe parameters have neither beginning nor end but occur always and ev-
erywhere, identically. Such variation is very small (for instance, as follows from
Ex.21 for light velocity at co = 3·108m/s it is about of 2.7 m/s for the interval of
100 years).But it is quite measurable with contemporary techniques. Recently,
Montgomery and Dolphin [12] performed a statistical analysis of extensive ex-
perimental data to argue that light velocity is variable in time. This analysis
shows the measured value of light velocity to have decreased slightly over the
past 250 years. Such behavior of the light velocity can permit a steady-state
cosmology with the boundless Universe that has always existed, and is homo-
geneous on the very large scale. Making use of (12) with (16), we can ﬁnd the
distance r covered by light for any moment of time after the start time when
the light left the quasar

r(t) =

1 − e

−Ho(t−ts)

c(ts)
Ho h

i

(22)

Unlike the constant light-velocity model, this model says that the distance ap-
proaches a certain limit in a certain interval of time τh = th − ts . At, the
τh

∼
= (5 ÷ 6)/Ho distance reaches the limit

Lh

∼
=

c(ts)
Ho

This limit distance is due to total declining the electric ﬁeld strength (19) and
can be interpreted as a spatial cosmological horizon for light. If we take this
horizon into account the photometric Olbers’ paradox [13] has a natural expla-
nation. Indeed, the light from a galaxy cluster cannot possibly reach the Earth
if the Earth is situated beyond the light horizon that is available for this clus-
ter.In other words, a terrestrial observer can see only some remote clusters the
horizons of which are in excess of the look-back time τo = to −ts , i.e. for τo < τh
. It is interesting that the earlier light has been emitted, the larger its horizon is,
because of larger light velocity at this moment of start. Hence the light horizon
for quasars associated with the younger Universe is larger than that for more
recent ones. Using (16) and (22) at t = to and (1) where L = L(τo) = r(to) we
obtain the relative shift

Z(τo) =

L(τo) = eHoτo − 1

(23)

Ho
co

It follows from evaluation in (23) that the maximal Z, being for the horizon
∼
= (5 ÷ 6)/Ho) is in the range of about 150-500. However, no empirical
(τh
Z measured up to now exceed 5. If we take a real declining of light intensity
into account this can be explained in the following way. In reality, we have a

9

spherical wave front from the point source (remote galaxy) intensity of which is
as the inverse square of the distance. In fact, the relation

∇2V =

1
r

∂2(rV )
∂r2

is valid for any function V(r) where the radius of a spherical wave is r =
x2 + y2 + z2 (see, for instance, [14]). Therefore, we may place the product
(rD) instead of D into the Eq.3 without changing of it (at the same direc-
p
tions of the light beam r and x). Thus, we obtain the induction in a wave zone
(r >> λ/2π ) as a spherical wave and,hence, the electric ﬁeld strength has a
form

E(r, t) =

−Ho(t−ts) exp [ıφ(r, t)]

e

Eo
r

where φ(x, t) is the phase in (20). The intensity of this wave is

I(r, t) =

c(t)ε(t)
4π

∗

EE

=

coεo
4π (cid:18)

Eo
r (cid:19)

2

e

−2Ho(t−ts)

In order to estimate decreasing intensity with distance and look-back time let
us use of (16) and (22) at t = to with inserting the parameters of our epoch
c(to), ε(to) and L(τo) = r(to) into (25). Following the substitutions we have

I(L, τo) = Io

Ho
co

(cid:18)

2

· e−Hoτo
eHoτo − 1 (cid:19)

o

o

.

4π

4π

= coεo)E2

where Io = c(ts)ε(ts)E2
Let us compare this one with the intensity of this wave taken at some previous
point of optical path from the source I(r1, τ1) where r1 = r(τ1) and τ1 =
t1 − ts. The distance r(τ1) is chosen much shorter than L(τo) but long enough
to consider the galaxy as a point source. With aim to compare we derive the
relation β = I(L, τo)/I(r1, τ1)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

β =

2

Hoτ1e−Hoτo
eHoτo − 1 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

o

where we have taken τ1 << H −1
into account at series expansion of the ex-
ponent. According to current data, the Hubble’s constant is in the range of
60−140kms−1M pc−1. Making use of Ho = 100kms−1M pc−1 ,i.e. 2, 9·10−18s−1 ,
and τ1 = 5·106 years (at r1 = 100d where d is a size of the typical galaxy equaled
of 50kps) to estimate β(τo) and Z(τo) for diﬀerent look-back times we obtain
the following table
where β = (τ1/τo)2 for the situation with constant light velocity

Table

10

H −1

τo (look-back time)
o = 1.08 · 1010years
2H −1
o
3H −1
o
4H −1
o
5H −1
o
6H −1
o

Z (redshift)
1.8
6.8
21
60
170
480

β (at variable c)
1.5 · 10−11
1.2 · 10−13
2.1 · 10−15
3 · 10−17
4.5 · 10−19
7 · 10−21

β (at constant c)
2 · 10−7
5 · 10−8
2.2 · 10−8
1.2 · 10−8
8 · 10−9
5 · 10−9

It is seen from here that intensity of light is falling more abruptly in the case
of the variable light velocity compared to the constant light velocity situation.
This appears to result in very strong restriction of the visible horizon to make
measuring of Z more than 6 practically impossible at sensitivity of up-to-day
equipment.

4 Conclusion

A new model of cosmological redshifts developed on the base of classical electro-
dynamics and experimental Hubble’s law is discussed in this paper.In distinction
from the usual wave equation the modiﬁed one (3) obtained here has the third
term taking into consideration interaction the light with physical vacuum as a
real matter.The light was concluded from solving this equation to propagate in
vacuum with a constant wavelength shifted initially (11) and variable velocity
(16) caused by gradual changing of permittivity and permeability of physical
vacuum (a relative rate of about 10−10 per year).Actually,for very long time
of travel of the light in space from a quasar to the Earth,the wavelength of
a terrestrial source is being shifted due to evolution of the Universe resulting
in fractional redshifts.For this same reason the frequency of the traveling light
perceived by the observer on the Earth is a function of time
(18 ) to be diﬀerent from the frequency ωo speciﬁed by the energy transition
which remains constant in time at any point of the Universe for any atom in
question. In distinction from the tired-light model,decreasing of the amplitude
of the electric ﬁeld strenth (19) during the travel trough space is due to not ab-
sorption.From this EVM such a behavior is a result of time evolution of physical
vacuum. This model oﬀers novel explanations not only for the redshift origin but
also for several other observed features of reality,for instance, Olber’s paradox
and limitation of Z.

11

5 Appendix

Consider the usual wave equation [14] with stationary boundary conditions

∂2E
∂x2

−

εµ
c2
o (cid:19)

(cid:18)

∂2E
∂t2 = 0

at Eo, ωo, co, εo and µ - constant
and E(0, t) = Eo exp ıωot to study the propagation of light at constant velocity in
any non-conductors,including vacuum. In order to discuss the tired-light model
let us seek a solution of this equation as a quasi-periodic function with variable
phase and x-dependent amplitude

Inserting this into the equation and separating real and imaginary parts we
obtain two following equations

E = b(x) exp ıφ(x, t)

′
′′ − b(φ

b

)2 + b

εµ
c2
o (cid:19)
′
′
φ

(cid:18)
2b

( ˙φ)2 = 0

′′
+ bφ

= 0

where ˙φ = ωo = const.
Taking φ′ = k = 2π

λ into account the second one can be rewritten as follows

′

′
λ − bλ

2b

= 0

It follows from here that b/λ = 2b′/λ′.Because the left side is always positive
one the x- derivative signs for b and λ should be this same.It means that either
we have redshifts (λ′ > 0) with increasing of the amplitude (that is absurd)
or decreasing amplitude (b′ < 0) and violetshift (λ′ < 0,in no compliance with
experiments).
Thus the situation of tired-light model (λ′ > 0 with b′ < 0) is not acceptable
for the usual wave equation with stationary conditions.

References

[1] E.P.Hubble, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 15, 168 (1929).

[2] R.Brent Tully, Astrophysical Journal,303,25(1986).

R.Brent Tully,J.R.Fisher,Atlas of Nearby Galaxies,(Cambridge:Cambridge
University Press,1987)

12

[3] E.J.Lerner, The Big Bang never happened,(Simon & Schuster

Ltd,London,1992).

[4] P.A.M. Dirac, Nature 139,323 (1937).

[5] A. Potekhin,D. Varshalovich, Astronomy and Astrophysics Supplement

104,89 (1994).

[6] H. Arp,Progress in New Cosmologies,(Plenum Press, New York,1,1993).

[7] H.

Arp,Quasars,

Redshifts

and

Controversies,Interstellar

Media,(Berkeley,1987).

[8] L.De Broglie,Cahiers de Physique,16,425 (1962).

[9] E.I.Shtyrkov,Gal.Electrodynamics,3,66 (1992).

[10] E.I.Shtyrkov,Progress in New Cosmologies, Plenum Press, New York,327

(1993).

[11] E.I.Shtyrkov,Gal. Electrodynamics,8,3,57 (1997).

[12] A.Montgomery,L.Dolphin,Gal.Electrodynamics 5,93 (1993).

[13] H.W.M.Olbers,Edinburg New Philosophical Journal,1,141 (1826).

[14] M.Born,E.Wolf,Principles of optics,(Pergamon Press,New York,1964)

13

