0
0
0
2

 
r
a

 

M
6
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
3
0
3
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Will the Population of Humanity in the Future be Stabilized?

L.Ya.Kobelev, L.L.Nugaeva

Department of Physics, Urals State University
Lenina Ave., 51, Ekaterinburg 620083, Russia

E-mail: leonid.kobelev@usu.ru

A phenomenological theory of growth of the population of humankind is proposed. The theory
based on the assumption about a multifractal nature of the set of number of people in temporal
axis and contains control parameters. In particular cases the theory coincide with known Kapitza ,
Foerster, Hoerner phenomenological theories .

01.30.Tt, 05.45, 64.60.A; 00.89.98.02.90.+p.

I. INTRODUCTION

The problem of mankind population growth is the one
of the global problems concerning the development of
the mankind and its future. Will the demographic ex-
plosion existing now at the mankind population of the
whole world stop as already it has stopped in the most
developed countries? Will the population of the Earth
will be stabilized as it follows from S.Kapitza’s theory
(see [1])near 12 billions, or it will continue its growth
at slower rate? What are the driving parameters that
govern the development of mankind (such as presents
in non-linear open system (see [2])? Are these param-
eters genetically predetermined or can they be changed
and controlled by means of human activity? Stabiliza-
tion of the mankind population of earth in the future is
a sad prospect for mankind, because the absence of the
numerical increasing of any biological population almost
always leads, early or late, to cessation of any develop-
ment (the examples are many species of insects, e.g. ter-
mites, frozen in development for millions years). Hence,
the appearance of more active biological species becomes
in that case quite probable. These active form of life
will dominate the mankind and may force it out from its
present ecological niche. The aim of the present paper
is to introduce a new parameter in the phenomenologi-
cal theories of humankind growth describing the devel-
opment of mankind population if regard humankind as
a large non-linear multifractal system. Namely, the frac-
tal dimension of the whole mankind number in arbitrary
moment of time - the local fractional dimension d(t) (the
fractional dimension for whole population of mankind).
The introducing of this parameter allows to receive, as
a special cases, the results of theories (see [1]), [3]- [4]),
and several new scenarios of the mankind’s future as well.
Alongside with probable increasing of the mankind pop-
ulation, the scenario of ruin of the present civilization -
diminution of its number down to zero - is shown to be
possible. We note, that correct analysis of dynamics of
multifractal sets (see [5]) requires the introduction of the
mathematical concept of fractional derivatives (see [6]-
[7]), which allow to take into account partly the memory

of system about the past (in this case it is the memory,
that includes genetic memory of mankind about its past
development).

II. FRACTIONAL DIMENSION QUANTITY OF

MANKIND ON TIME AXIS

We assume that the dynamics of the human population
can be described within the framework of fractal geom-
etry concepts and mathematical formalism of fractional
diﬀerential equations (see [6]- [7]). For this purpose let
us consider the set of all people as a multifractal set N (t)
(0 ≤ t ≤ ∞) consisting of N (t) of elements at the given
time t. Following the Kapitza theory (see [1]), assume for
a certain interval of time the existence of a self-similarity
of this set characterized by its fractal dimension and in-
troduce a local fractional dimension (LFD) d(t) which de-
scribes the fractal properties of the set at the time t. This
local fractional dimension is determined by those vari-
ables and their functions (these variables will be deﬁned
later) , that are treated as the driving (control) parame-
ters of the human community development. Among such
parameters there can be parameters of genetic origin (for
example, probably, density of the population in cities per
unit urban area, etc.) and ”external” parameters (e.g., a
possibility of supplying the mankind population of earth
by necessary amounts of food, water and energy or quick
climate changes or pollution of the environment and the
atmosphere, etc.). We shall characterize an alteration
of the mankind population N (t) over a small time in-
terval by the generalized fractional Riemann - Liouville
derivative [7] (which coincides with the usual Riemann -
Liouville derivative if d=const.)

D1+ν(t)

+,t N (t) =

∂α
∂tα

t

Z

0

N (t′)dt′

Γ(α − d(t′))(t − t′)d(t′)−α+1

, (1)

d(t) = 1 + ν(t) > 0

1

ν(t) ≡ ν(X1(t), X2(t)...Xi(t)), i = 1, 2, ..., α = {d} + 1
(2)

In (1) ν(t) is the fractional quantity and deﬁnes the
diﬀerences between the derivatives of integer order and
fractional derivatives (1) thus being the driving parame-
ter for the growth of mankind as a whole, {d} is equals
to the integer part of d(t) > 0 (α − 1 ≤ d(t) < α) , α = 0
for d < 0 , and the set Xi are the control parameters
determining all external and internal inﬂuences on the
mankind population growth .

The explicit information about the function ν and,
hence, about LFD can be obtained only after a care-
ful investigations and processing the statistical data of
diﬀerent events, circumstances and situations impact on
the development of a human population. The fractional
derivative using, as deﬁned in (1), instead of the integer
ﬁrst derivative allows to introduce and take into account
an obvious thing - a certain kind of mankind’s memory
of the past and memory about the development rates
over the past years (integration with a weight function
over all times till t beginning from a ﬁxed moment). It
gives a way of considering of diﬀerent parameters Xi
that inﬂuence at the mankind’s development by means
of LFD’s dependence upon them. The present theory, as
well as ( [1]), is a phenomenological theory and the ex-
act deﬁnition of function ν(t) form is beyond its scope.
We note that it has sense to consider ν(t) 6= 1, ap-
parently, only for times greater than T ′
1 because before
a certain time, introduced in ( [1], [3]- [4]) (the time
of demographic transition T = T ′
1), the theories men-
tioned describe the empirical data about the number and
progress of the mankind population quite well. More-
over, we shall restrict ourselves in this paper to analyzing
growth of the mankind population for three special cases
of ν(t) : ν(t) = 0, ν(t) = 1 and ν(t) = −1.

III. FOERSTER,HOERNER, KAPITZA

THEORIES

It is known, that growth of the population of earth
from ancient times untill now is well approximated by an
empirical relation suggested by Foerster Von H. (see [3])
and improved by H. von Xoerner (see [4])

N (t) =

C

T1 − T ′

,

d(N (t))

dt

=

C

(T1 − T )2

(3)

(4)

C = 2.1011, T1 = 2025
The reasonable generalization (3),(4) for future time
(suitable for T > T ′
1 that not gives as result an inﬁnite
value N (t) for values T = T1) was given in the phe-
nomenological theory of the population S.Kapitza (see

[1]) with the help of introducing of the mean people’s
lifetime τ (τ =42 of years). In this theory the relation
for N (T ) (with C’=1,86.1011, T ′

1 = 2007) takes place

∂N (t)

dt

=

C ′

(T ′

1 − T )2 + τ 2

(5)

From (5) the restriction of the mankind population
of earth by quantity 14.109 follows. Unfortunately, the
theory of the population S.Kapitza does not take into
account neither exterior nor interior control parameters
(even in simple form) basing only at the self-similarity of
growth of a population of the people.

IV. GENERALIZATION OF FOERSTER,

HOERNER AND KAPITZA THEORIES FOR
MULTIFRACTAL SET OF A QUANTITY OF

MANKIND N (T )

Let us assume the hypothesis about a fractal nature of
set N (t) (maintaining assumption about selfsimilar the
sets N (t)). In that case derivative on time ∂
∂t in equation
(5) should be substitute for fractional derivative D1+ν(t)
.
This operation take into account the memory of mankind
about the past development. The right part (5) must be
changed too for including in (5) an inﬂuence of the fractal
dimension. So, instead of (5), obtain an equation

+,t

D1+ν(t)

+,t N (t) =

C ′

1 − T|2+ν(t) + 2+ν(t)
|T ′

2

τ 2+ν(t)

(6)

The equation (6) can be considered as the basic equa-
tion of the phenomenological theory of development
mankind’s population oﬀered in this paper. The selection
of diﬀerent functions of fractional corrections for ν(t) al-
lows to estimate character of changing N (t) as functions
of time.

V. FORECASTS OF THE FUTURE

DEVELOPMENT OF MANKIND POPULATION
FOR SPECIAL CASES OF THE FRACTIONAL

DIMENSION CHOICE

Some simple special cases forecasting of growth of the
mankind’s population of earth are considered below at
the basis of the equation (6). The meanings a fractal
dimension, for simplicity , chosen as integer.

a. Case ν(t) = 0
At ν(t) = 0 the fractional derivative D coincides with
∂
∂t derivative and the equation (6) coincides with equa-
tion (5) (hence, (6) includes S.Kapitza theory (see [1])
as a special case). It corresponds, probably, a compensa-
tion the positive and the negative control parameters Xi
(including exterior and ”interior” parameters), driving
population of mankind.

b. Case ν(t) → −1

2

The selection ν(t) → −1 corresponds to a dominance
of the negative tendencies in the future development of
mankind and it is stipulated, for example, occurrence
of irreversible changes in molecules DNA (owing to epi-
demic AIDS, etc.), irreversible cosmic cataclysmic (for
example, drop on earth of meteorites of huge mass), im-
possibility for mankind to cope with negative factors of
biogeozinos results in by eﬀects of development of a tech-
nical civilization. In this case the equation (6) reduce to
equation

N (t) =

2C ′
1 − T| + τ

2|T ′

(7)

From (7) the presence of the maximum of number of
mankind follows at T = T ′ (i.e. in 2007) and it is equal
8, 86.109 (if τ is not changed). After transition through
a maximum N (t) the number of mankind decreases (if
the scenario will not vary) and in 2107 year N (t) will be
equal 1, 54.109. By the year 3007 the number of mankind
will decrease down to 182.106, i.e. the mankind popula-
tion of all earth will be equal to number of the people
is occupying a dozen of large modern cities. The com-
plete degenerating of mankind, as a result of decreasing of
mankind population in the considered scenario and sub-
sequent leaving mankind from biological arena may be
expected through millions years ( not large time from bi-
ological point of view). By then population the mankind
of earth will decrease up to several thousand.

c. Case ν(t) = −2.
The equation (6) for this case is transformed into an
integral equation at maintenance of the general tendency
to accumulation of the negative factors resulting in to
negative value d(t) . At negative values d(t) the integral
equation gives the prompt diminution of mankind popu-
lation and extinction of existence of mankind as a species
is follows. So, at d(t) → −1 equations (6) transforms to
a

T

Z

T ′

N (t)dt = C ′

(8)

supposing the absence the mankind at the earth (in
that case equation (8) has no solution for N (t) 6= 0
thou for ν > −2 solution of equation (6) is exist (so
N (t) → 0 for ν → −2). The time interval (necessary
for disappearance mankind) is determined in this case
by time for which d(t) will transfer from value equal to
unity (status of mankind now) to value equal to nega-
tive unity. This time interval can be very short:
from
several years (cosmic cataclysmic) to about several cen-
turies (virus pandemia with lethal change of a heredity,
increasing of the mean temperature of earth on some de-
grees owing to throw out of carbonic gas etc.). It is nec-
essary to pay attention on possibility of change of the
negative scenario of mankind development stipulated by
appearance and dominance of the positive control factors

Xi (including those factors that due to conscious activity
of mankind). In that case the inevitability of diminution
of mankind population and destruction of mankind are
not inevitable.

d. case ν = 1.
We shall consider the optimistic scenario of change of
mankind population. It relevant to a dominance of pos-
itive driving parameters: d(t) > 1. So, e.g. for d(t) = 2
(ν = 1) from (6) the equation follows

∂2
∂t2

N (t) =

C ′

|T ′ − T|3 + 1, 5τ 3

(9)

The precise solution of an initial value problem of this
equation is unwieldy, so we shall note , that at T >> τ
the quantity N (t) will increase faster then ﬁrst degree
of time (N (t) ∼ (T − T1)). The mankind population
is increase and it characterizes in this case by following
form (if there will not be includes appearance of a factors
of conscious mankind activity which change the scenario
and restricts unlimited growth of population)

N (t)|t→∞ ∼

C ′(T − T ′
1)
2, 29τ 2

ln

(T − T ′
1)

τ

(10)

τ

So, at 3000 years, at the rate of increasing of the popu-
lation deﬁned by (10) (with the allowances that the cor-
rections to N (t) of value ln[ (T −T ′
1)
] are dropped) popula-
tion of mankind will increase up to 150 billions. That is
improbable large, though, but it is may be not unreason-
able because of future technical possibilities of mankind
(probably, this number is the upper number for existence
mankind population occupying the earth). For fractional
values LFD d(t), increasing or decreasing of a population
of the mankind will be characterized by intermediate de-
pendencies between the received for the whole values d(t).
In case of a periodic dependencies d(t) from time the pop-
ulation of the world will change periodically depending
on a concrete choice of d and N (t) and will not be a
monotonous function of time.

The examples are considered allow to determine the
interval of change of fractional dimension d(t) in rea-
son boundary for number of quantity mankind in future:
−1 < d < 2. The boundary values (d = −1, d = 2) are
result in or to ruin of mankind, or to so large mankind
population that Earth may not endure. The last case
must result in to change of scenario and it consist in the
change in correlation between positive and negative com-
ponents of control parameters Xi towards increasing of
inﬂuence of negative parameters.

Let the basic equation (6) is replaced by generalization
of the S.Kapitza equation (5). Basic equation in that case
reads

∂1+ν(t)
∂t1+ν(t)

n(t) = K sin2 n(t)
K

=

1
K

,

(11)

n =

N (t)

K

, t =

3

T − T ′

1

τ

, K = √C ′τ −1

world.

[1] Kapitza S.P., Uspehi Fizicheskih Nauk (Russia), 1966,
vol.166, No.1, pp.63-79; Kapitza S.P., How Many People
Lived, Live and are to Live in the World. An essay on
the theory of growth of humankind, Moscow, Inst. Phys.
Problem RAS, 1999,238p.

[2] Klimontovith Yu.L., Statistical Theory of Open Systems.
Vol.1, Moscow, Yanus, 1995, 686p. (in Russian); Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1995; Klimontovich
Yu.L., Statistical Physics of Open systems. Vol.2, Moscow,
Yanus, 1999, 450p. (in Rusian).

[3] Foerster, Von H. et al., Science, v.132, p.1291 (1960)
[4] Hoerner, von SJ., British Interplanetary Society, v.28, 691,

(1975)

[5] Mandelbrot

B.,

Fractal Geometry

of Nature,

W.H.Freeman, San Francisco, 1982

[6] Samko S.G, Kilbas A.A., Marithev I.I., Integrals and
Derivatives of the Fractional Order and Their Applica-
tions, (Gordon and Breach, New York, 1993).

[7] Kobelev L.Ya, Fractal Theory of Time and Space, Ekater-
inburg, Konros, 1999, 136p. (in Russian);Kobelev L.Ya.,
What Dimensions Do the Time and Space Have:
In-
teger or Fractional?
arXiv:physics/0001035; Kobelev
L.Ya., Can a Particle’s Velocity Exceeds the Speed of
Light in the Empty Space? arXiv:gr-qc/0001042; Kobelev
L.Ya.,Physical Consequences of Moving Faster than Light
in Empty Space, arXiv:gr-qc /0001043 ;Kobelev L.Ya.,
Multifractality of Time and Space, Covariant Derivatives
and Gauge Invariance,arXiv:hep-th/ 0002005; Kobelev
L.Ya.,Generalized Riemann -Liouville Fractional Deriva-
tives for Multifractal Sets, arXiv:math. CA/0002008,; Ko-
belev L.Ya., The Multifractal Time and Irreversibility in
Dynamic Systems, arXiv:physics/0002002; Kobelev L.Ya.,
Is it Possible to Transfer an Information with the Veloc-
ities Exceeding Speed of Light in Empty Space?,arXiv:
physics/ 0002003; Kobelev L.Ya., Maxwell Equation,
Shroedinger Equation, Dirac Equation, Einstein Equation
Deﬁned on the Multi fractal Sets of the Time and the
Space, arXiv:gr-qc/0002003

It gives for N (t) the qualitative eﬀects analogous to
results obtained from the equation (6). So, in this con-
nection, a selection for describing the future increasing
the population of mankind by equation (6), as the basis,
or equation (11), containing, as well as the equation (6),
driving parameters Xi in fractional dimension d(t), is not
simple. As one of advantages of use of the equations (6)
or (11) for describing demographic problems (with some
of them the mankind already has confronted now) we
shall stress an opportunity of insert and account in the
theory many factors (such as , incurable illnesses, natural
cataclysmic etc.) deﬁning future of mankind as a result
of inﬂuences the control parameters Xi (included in the
dimension d(t) of fractal set for number’s distribution of
the people in the time axis).

VI. CONCLUSIONS

1.The main purpose of this paper was to analyze pos-
sibility of introducing mankind’s population driving pa-
rameters Xi
in the phenomenological theories of the
mankind population of the earth ( [1], [3], [4]) by method
of attributing to set of the people N (t) the fractional di-
mension d(t), depending from these parameters. At a
choice d(t) = 1 the numbered theories are a special case
of this phenomenological theory. The consideration of
examples with integer meanings of d(t) is caused only
by their mathematical simplicity and gives a reasonable
meaning of fractal dimensions (−1 < d < 2) for describ-
ing the time dependence of population of mankind.
2. In case when the interpretation the fractal proper-
ties of set of the homosapience given in this paper cor-
responds to a reality, ( more real cases correspond to
fractional meanings d(t)) the future of mankind is not
so mournful as in the case of the S.Kapitza theory (see
[1]) and the exposition of change of number of mankind
within the framework of the phenomenological theories
of the population can be reduced to a selection of control
parameters and ﬁlling them by the concrete contents.

3. The change of number of mankind (described in
the framework a phenomenological theories of the pop-
ulation) can be adjusted by such choice of control pa-
rameters (and ﬁlling the fractal dimension d(t) by the
concrete contents of dependencies of them) at which the
population of mankind will grow so slowly, that overpop-
ulation and the problems connected with it will do not
arise in the foreseen future. Last will allow the theory
be more realistic for predicting and menaging the future
growth population of mankind as one of biological species
occupying our world.

4. The growth of mankind population regulation (in-
cluded in the parameters Xi) will allow to avoid degen-
erating of mankind and to keep as much as long time
the main ecological niche at Earth occupied by mankind.
Last will give time for more realistic forecasting of the
future mankind as one of biological kinds occupying our

4

