0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
1
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
3
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The INT at Age Ten

Wick Haxton

Institute for Nuclear Theory, Box 351550

University of Washington
Seattle, Washington 98195

Abstract

The history of the Department of Energy’s Institute for Nuclear Theory,
located on the campus of the University of Washington, is reviewed on the
occasion of the INT’s tenth anniversary.

To appear in Nuclear Physics News.

1

The US Department of Energy’s Institute for Nuclear Theory (INT) be-
gan operations on the campus of the University of Washington in March,
1990.
In the decade following, the INT has played an important role in
helping the ﬁeld of nuclear physics through a period of rapid change. With
the relativistic heavy ion programs at CERN and Brookhaven, the precision
electroweak eﬀorts at Jeﬀerson Lab, and rapid evolution of sophisticated so-
lar neutrino experiments, the ﬁeld’s frontiers have broadened to include the
substructure of the nucleon, the properties of QCD at high temperature and
baryon density, and the nature of physics beyond the standard model. With
this evolution, the intersections of nuclear physics with sister subﬁelds – as-
trophysics, particle physics, condensed matter, and atomic physics – have
become both richer and more entangled. Theory in particular has proﬁted,
attracting young phenomenologists who would previously have carried some
other label, and becoming enriched with new intellectual challenges like eﬀec-
tive ﬁeld theory, the pattern of neutrino masses, and color superconductivity.
Thus, on this tenth birthday of the INT, it is appropriate to look back at the
role the Institute has played in these changing times, and speculate on how
it might continue to help the ﬁeld in the coming decade.

The History

The creation of the INT was the culmination of a process begun by the
Koonin Committee, a subcommittee of the Nuclear Science Advisory Com-
mittee (NSAC). NSAC, which advises the US Department of Energy (DOE)
and National Science Foundation (NSF), asked the Koonin Committee to
assess the health of nuclear theory and recommend steps that could be taken
to strengthen it, given the coming challenges of JLab and RHIC. One of
the recommendations included in its 1988 report was “. . . The creation of
one or more nuclear theory centers. Such centers must be truly national in
character, must have a signiﬁcant interdisciplinary component, and must be
viewed and funded as an important complement to the strengthened indi-
vidual programs.” In response to the subsequent DOE announcement, ﬁve
collaborations submitted proposals for establishing the INT, which were re-
viewed by a DOE-appointed selection committee that visited the proposed
sites. In its selection of the Seattle proposal, the committee cited its strong
and coherent management plan, its emphasis on young people and visitor
programs, its focus on interdisciplinary problems involving nuclear physics,

2

and the strong local commitment. This commitment included a substantial
start-up grant by the Murdock Charitable Trust and a promise by the Uni-
versity of Washington to create permanent quarters for the INT within its
planned new building for physics and astronomy.

The INT opened in the spring of 1990 with a three-month program on
Quarks and Nuclei. Ernest Henley, who had been instrumental in bring-
ing the INT to Seattle, served as Director until September, 1991, and was
succeeded by Wick Haxton, the current Director.

Both the staﬃng of the INT and visitor program selection were (and are)
guided by the INT’s National Advisory Committee (NAC). The NAC con-
sists of nine members who broadly represent the nuclear physics community,
including areas of intersection with other physics subﬁelds. The NAC has
traditionally included several European or Asian members, who provide an
international perspective and help maintain closer ties with sister institutes
like those at Trento and Adelaide. New members, appointed for three year
terms, are nominated by current NAC members, who seek input from the
physics community, including the Division of Nuclear Physics of the Amer-
ican Physical Society. Nominees must be approved by the Director of the
Division of Nuclear Physics of the DOE. The NAC traditionally meets each
August to review program and workshop proposals received from the com-
munity, advising the Director on their timeliness and merit, and providing
constructive suggestions for promising but unsuccessful proposals. The NAC
chooses its own chair. Steve Koonin, John Negele, Jim Friar, Berndt M¨uller,
and Vijay Pandharipande have served in this role. Although NAC members
volunteer their time, all 30 invitations extended in the past decade have been
accepted.

After assisting the University of Washington with the appointment of
Haxton as Director in 1991, the NAC turned to the question of the INT’s
other permanent faculty. The goal was to create a small but strong “in
house” group who would have broad interests in nuclear physics and related
ﬁelds, could contribute to the vigor of the INT’s visitors program, and would
stimulate the postdocs and other young people working at the INT. The
NAC’s 1992 search for the INT’s ﬁrst Senior Fellow resulted in the appoint-
ment of George Bertsch, previously holder of the Hannah Professorship at
Michigan State University.
In 1994 David Kaplan joined the INT as the
second Senior Fellow. David had been Associate Professor of physics at the
University of California, San Diego. The INT faculty hold tenured positions

3

in the University of Washington Department of Physics.

This faculty hiring was a component of the ﬁve-year start-up plan for
the INT that had been negotiated by the DOE and University of Washing-
ton. It paralleled similar increases in INT visitor activities, the postdoctoral
program, and the administrative staﬀ. The INT became complete with the
opening of its permanent quarters in the new Physics/Astronomy building
on August 15, 1994. One weekend in the middle of an adaptly named sum-
mer program (Applications of Chaos), the INT moved from its temporary
quarters in Henderson Hall. The new facilities included 22 oﬃces, a sem-
inar room, and a conference room. Most important, the INT’s immediate
neighbors where now the Physics Department’s nuclear, condensed matter,
and particle theory groups. This greatly increased interactions among INT
visitors and the department’s faculty, and led to much more frequent par-
ticipation in INT programs by department experimentalists and non-nuclear
theorists. (The department’s nuclear theorists, undeterred by the four-block
walk to Henderson Hall, had been active participants in the INT from the
beginning.)

Much of the vitality of the INT derives from its young people. Generally
the INT hosts two Fellows, young researchers appointed for ﬁve-year terms
who hold the rank of Research Assistant Professor in the Physics Department.
The original siting committee for the INT argued strongly for these positions:
they anticipated that the visibility of the position would enhance the careers
of the Fellows, and that the Fellows would help mentor the INT’s postdocs.
Three of the four veterans of this position already hold tenured university
positions. The current occupants are Paulo Bedaque (formerly a postdoc
in the Center for Theoretical Physics, MIT) and Lev Kaplan (formerly a
Harvard junior fellow).

In addition, the INT typically hosts ﬁve or six postdocs, about half of
whom are supported by various international fellowships. The INT’s young
people are generally quite active in the visitor programs, and have, on a
number of occasions, taken lead roles in the organization of workshops. For
example, Lev Kaplan teamed with INT postdoc Thomas Papenbrock to or-
ganize the INT’s March, 2000, Workshop on Complex Systems and Quantum
Chaos.

The INT faculty endeavor to select postdocs based on research promise
and potential for independence, and give little emphasis to the candidate’s
overlap with the local research program. There is a willingness to consider

4

relevant talent from particle physics, astrophysics, nonlinear dynamics, and
other subﬁelds with connections to nuclear phyics. The underlying philos-
ophy is that promising, independent researchers will become intellectually
engaged in our visitor and local activities, and thus in the challenges facing
nuclear physics. While there is some risk in this approach, the successes ap-
pear to outweigh the failures. A large fraction of the INT’s former postdocs
have already found assistant professor and staﬀ positions in strong depart-
ments (Colorado, Minnesota, Stony Brook, Brookhaven, and Los Alamos).

Although the INT’s original plan made no provision for the faculty to
supervise local graduate students, it soon became apparent that this had been
an oversight. At the time of the INT’s ﬁrst renewal – the supporting DOE
grants cover ﬁve year periods – two inadvertent barriers to local graduate
student involvement in the INT were removed. The second 5-year grant
permitted the support of graduate students as research assistants and also
made it easier for INT faculty to teach, if they desired. Graduate students
are now a vital part of the INT research eﬀort.

Programs, Workshops, and Schools

The three annual programs are the center of INT activities. Typically
running for about three months, a program brings visiting physicists to the
INT to focus on some forefront issue facing the ﬁeld. Approximately one-
third of the program proposals submitted by community members succeed
on ﬁrst submission. Successful proposers are then asked to organize their
programs, helped and guided by the INT’s administrative staﬀ, which handles
matters such as visas, housing, and space and budget projections. The staﬀ
endeavors to free the organizers from as much clerical detail as possible,
leaving the physicists to focus on matters requiring their scientiﬁc judgment
(such as which applications to accept and which seminars to schedule).

A typical program involves 60-70 visitors (though on occasion the total
has approached or exceeded 100). The average participant spends 3-4 weeks
at the INT, though each program has a few key participants that remain in
residence throughout the program. Weekly attendence thus is about 18, close
to the INT’s capacity. There is signiﬁcant particpation by experimentalists,
who typically visit for shorter periods. Overseas participants account for
30-40% of the total. Organizers are asked to encourage the participation of
women physicists and others from underrepresented groups.

5

Programs attempt to provide participants with long periods for concen-
trated individual research and for collaborative work with others. The pri-
mary mechanism for stimulating collaborations is the morning seminar, where
newcomers are quickly assimilated into the group and where many discus-
sions begin. Small working groups often form to continue discussion into the
afternoon and, not infrequently, after dinner. Participants have keys allowing
access to the INT and to the physics library 24 hours a day.

The programs are scheduled for spring, summer, and fall, with a two-
month break from mid-December to late February. Traditionally programs
with strongly interdisciplinary themes are scheduled in the summer, e.g.,
subjects such as neutrino physics, eﬀective ﬁeld theory, and neutron stars.
An important success of the INT has been its popularity in the general
physics community, with strong participation by astro, particle, atomic, and
condensed matter physicists as organizers and visitors. Summers appear to
be the time when non-nuclear participants are most easily attracted to the
INT.

The INT also organizes frequent shorter workshops and miniworkshops,
more intense activities involving a series of seminars and working group dis-
cussions, and lasting typically from two days to a week. Some of these are
organized as part of and in conjunction with programs. For example, organiz-
ers may designate the ﬁrst week of a program as an introductory workshop,
enlarging the program participation for that week. Others are independent
of the programs. Over the last ﬁve years, an average of four such “stand
alone” workshops have been held each year.

Two highly successful eﬀorts are the JLab/INT and RHIC annual work-
shops. Both have a similar goal: to bring together roughly equal numbers of
theorists and experimentalists to focus on speciﬁc aspects of the programs
at these two major facilities. Traditionally there has been an emphasis on
young researchers, both as participants and as workshop organizers. The
JLab/INT series, now in its seventh year, is jointly supported by Jeﬀerson
Laboratory and the INT, with the location generally alternating between
these two sites. The community is invited to suggest topics (and volun-
teer as organizers). The RHIC Winter Workshops, now in their ﬁfth year,
are jointly sponsored by Brookhaven National Laboratory, Lawrence Berke-
ley National Laboratory, and the INT. The site usually alternates between
LBNL and the INT. A steering committee, comprised of BNL, LBNL, and
INT physicists, is responsible for selecting topics and recruiting appropri-

6

ate organizers. Although originally envisioned as small and very focused
workshops involving 25-30 participants, it has proven impossible to limit at-
tendance, given the strong interest in the JLab and RHIC programs. While
some of the workshops have grown to 100 or more participants, the schedule
of talks is controlled so that the emphasis remains on discussions, rather then
formal presentations.

The remaining “stand alone” workshops are generaly one-time eﬀorts fo-
cused on speciﬁc topics. While proposals can be made to the NAC, often
workshops are approved quickly by the Director, so that the workshop lead
time is reduced. As the cost of a workshop is typically 5-10% that of a pro-
gram, this is a cost-eﬀective way of addressing speciﬁc “hot topics” arising in
nuclear physics. Often these workshops are organized in collaboration with
outside institutes or universities. Recent examples include Harvard’s Insti-
tute for Theoretical Atomic and Molecular Physics (ITAMP) [Hyperspherical
Harmonic Methods]; Caltech [Nuclear Physics with Eﬀective Field Theory];
Santa Barbara’s Institute for Theoretical Physics (ITP) [Time-Dependent
Density Functional Theory]; and Argonne National Laboratoy [Pion Pro-
duction Near Threshold]. In such cases the collaborating institution often
provides the site and logistical support, in addition to partial funding.

In order to make the results of selected workshops available to a wider
audience, the INT entered into an agreement with World Scientiﬁc to publish
proceedings. The eleventh volume of the INT series is now in production.
Another mode of communicating and publishing occurs via the INT’s web
site. Workshop transparencies can be scanned into the web site. An audio
option will soon be added. Applications to attend workshops and programs
are now also handled online.

In addition to programs and workshops, the INT is involved in several
programs that encourage students to pursue physics and nuclear physics.
These eﬀorts grew out of discussions between the DOE, INT, and NAC at
the time of the DOE’s ﬁrst ﬁve-year review of the INT, and reﬂected concerns
about the declining interest of US students in physics generally.

One eﬀort began in 1995 under the auspices of the NSF’s program, Re-
search Experiences for Undergraduates. Undergraduates from colleges across
the US, most of whom have completed their junior years, are brought to the
University of Washington for a 10-week period of intensive research under
the direction of a faculty mentor. The program is administered by the INT
and operated jointly with the physics department’s various research groups.

7

The program is very popular, this year generating about 230 applications for
12 positions, with an acceptance rate of nearly 90% for ﬁrst oﬀers. Now in
its sixth year, the program has served more than 80 students, about half of
whom have chosen to do projects in nuclear physics. One interesting demo-
graphic is the large number of applications from women: nearly 40% of our
REU students are female. Approximately 20% of the class later returns to
graduate school at the University of Washington, and many others are doing
advanced studies elsewhere. One goal of the program is to introduce students
to nuclear physics in the hope that this will inﬂuence future education and
career choices.

A second eﬀort is the National Summer School in Nuclear Physics, now
in its 13th year. Sponsored by the NSF, the school is intended for advanced
graduate students and beginning postdoctoral researchers. Community mem-
bers volunteer to host and organize the school. There is a steering commit-
tee, selected by the Executive Committee of the Division of Nuclear Physics,
American Physical Society, that is responsible for oversight.

Following an unfortunate cancellation of one school seven years ago, the
steering committee invited the INT to take over the school’s administration,
hoping this step would help stabilize the eﬀort. This administrative help –
secretarial support, advertising, mailing, and poster production, etc. – is
provided through the INT’s DOE grant. The INT has also hosted the school
twice. The INT has pledged to continue its support through at least 2004.
The school attracts 40-50 students each year. The year 2000 school will be
held July 3-14 on the campus of the University of California, Santa Cruz.

Outlook at Age Ten

The scale of activities at the INT, ten years after its founding, is remark-
ably diﬀerent from that envisioned in the original proposal. That proposal
described three annual programs attracting approximately ten visiting scien-
tists each. Today the INT attracts 350 visitors each year. The list of Aﬃliates
– previous visitors and those wanting to be kept informed of INT activities
– now numbers nearly 2000. (Many of these are younger researchers, an em-
phasis of the INT that was envisioned in the original proposal.) The strength
of the participation by physicists from other ﬁelds, from overseas, and from
experiment was not foreseen. Nor was the community’s enthusiasm for the
INT’s topical workshops, many of which are organized collaboratively with

8

other institutes, laboratories, and universities. Finally, the original proposers
wondered how long the community could support three annual programs. Yet
the INT receives an average of ten program proposals each year, the quality
of which has risen steadily. The INT’s most common problem is its inability
to accommodate the numbers of applicants who wish to attend the programs.
The success of the INT – as well as that of its European counterpart
the ECT* – likely results in part from a sound “formula” and in part from
changes in the way nuclear physics is now done. The INT’s emphasis on
the intersections with other ﬁelds and on collaboration resonates with the
changes occurring in our ﬁeld due to JLab, RHIC, and SNO. These facilities
address issues relevant to nuclear, particle, and astrophysics. There is much
anecdotal evidence that the INT’s eﬀorts to expose this physics to a wider
community has led to a broader appreciation of our ﬁeld. Similarly, the the-
ory questions arising from the new facilities are often far more complex than
those of previous times. The INT’s emphasis on collaboration - among the-
orists and with experimentalists - has helped theorists focus their collective
energies on diﬃcult but crucial questions.

The INT has evolved in ten years from an interesting experiment to one
of the institutions most responsible for the renewed optimism in our ﬁeld. Its
success derives from the support it has received from the community, from
the program proposers who oﬀer their ideas, from the participants who “vote
with their feet” by coming to Seattle, and from DOE program oﬃcers who
were willing to back this experiment with consistent funding. The INT will
endeavor to respond as the community’s needs continue to evolve, and as our
ﬁeld moves forward.

Readers who would like to learn more about the INT – from its history
to its current and future programs and workshops – are invited to visit its
web site, http://int.phys.washington.edu.

9

