Basic Constituents of the Visible and Invisible Matter — A Microscopic View

of the Universe

TIFR/TH/00-37

D.P. Roy

Department of Theoretical Physics

Tata Institute of Fundamental Research

Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai - 400 005, India

Abstract

One of the greatest achievements of twentieth century physics is the discovery of a very
close link between the microcosm and the macrocosm. This follows from the two basic
principles of quantum mechanics and relativity, the uncertainty principle and the mass energy
equivalence, along with the standard big bang model of cosmology. As we probe deeper into
the microcosm we encounter states of higher mass and energy, which were associated with the
early history of the universe. Thus discovery of the atomic nucleus followed by the nuclear
particles, quarks & gluons and ﬁnally the W & Z bosons have recreated in the laboratory the
forms of matter that abounded in the very early universe. This has helped us to trace back
the history of the universe to within a nanosecond of its creation. Finally the discovery of
the Higgs and supersymmetric particles will help to solve the mystry of the invisible matter,
which abound throughout the universe today, as relics of that early history.

0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

0
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
2
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Introduction

Our concept of the basic constituents of matter has undergone two revolutionary changes
during the twentieth century. The ﬁrst was the Rutherford scattering experiment of 1911,
bombarding Alpha particles on the Gold atom. While most of them passed through straight,
occasionally a few were deﬂected at very large angles. This was like shooting bullets at a
hay stack and ﬁnding that occasionally one would be deﬂected at a large angle and hit a
bystander or in Rutherford’s own words “deﬂected back and hit you on the head”! This
would mean that there is a hard compact object hiding in the hay stack. Likewise the
Rutherford scattering experiment showed the atom to consist of a hard compact nucleus,
serrounded by a cloud of electrons. The nucleus was found later to be made up of protons
and neutrons.

The second was the electron-proton scattering experiment of 1968 at the Stanford Linear
Accelerator Centre, which was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1990. This was essentially a
repeat of the Rutherford scattering type experiment, but at a much higher energy. The
result was also similar as illustrated below. It was again clear from the pattern of large angle
scattering that the proton is itself made up of three compact objects called quarks.

Fig. 1. The SLAC electron-proton scattering experiment, revealing the quark structure of

the proton.

We now know from many such experiments that the nuclear particles (proton, neutron and
mesons) are all made up of quarks – i.e. they are all quark atoms.

The main diﬀerence between the two experiments comes from the fact that, while the
dimension of the atom is typically 1A◦ = 10−10 m that of the proton is about 1 fm (fermi
or femtometer) = 10−15 m. It follows from the famous Uncertainty Principle of Quantum
Mechanics,

∆E · ∆x > ¯hc ∼ 0.2 GeV.fm,

(1)

that the smaller the distance you want to probe the higher must be the beam energy. Thus
probing inside the proton (x ≪ 1 fm) requires a beam energy E ≫ 1 GeV(109 eV), which
is the energy acquired by the electron on passing through a billion (Gega) volts. It is this
multi-GeV acceleration technology that accounts for the half a century gap between the two
experiments.

2

It is customary in quantum physics to use the so called natural units, where one sets
both the Plank’s constant ¯h and the velocity of light c equal to unity. Thus the mass of
particle is same as its rest mass energy (mc2). The GeV is commonly used as the basic unit
of mass, energy and momentum. The proton mass is nearly 1 GeV.

The Standard Model:

As per our present understanding the basic constituents of matter are a dozen of spin-
1/2 particles (in units of ¯h) called fermions, along with their antiparticles. These are the
three pairs of leptons (electron, muon, tau and their associated neutrinos) and three pairs
of quarks (up, down, strange, charm, bottom and top) as shown below. The masses of the
heaviest members are shown paranthetically in GeV units.

Basic Constituents of Matter

leptons

νe

νµ

ντ

e

µ

τ (2)

0

-1

quark

u

d

c

s

t(175)

2/3

b(5) −1/3

The members of each pair diﬀer by 1 unit of electric charge as shown in the last column –
i.e. charge 0 and -1 for the neutrinos and charged leptons and 2/3 and -1/3 for the upper
and lower quarks. This is relevant for their weak interaction. Apart from this electric charge
the quarks also possess a new kind of charge called colour charge. This is relevant for their
strong interaction, which binds them together inside the nuclear particles.

There are four basic interactions among these particles – strong, electromagnetic, weak
and gravitational. Apart from gravitation, which is too weak to have any perceptible eﬀect,
the other three are all gauge interactions. They are all mediated by spin 1 (vector) particles
called gauge bosons, whose interactions are completely speciﬁed by the corresponding gauge
groups.

3

Basic Interactions

Interaction

Strong EM Weak

Carrier

g

γ

W ±&Z 0

Gauge Group SU(3)

U(1) SU(2)

|

{z

}

The strong interaction between quarks is mediated by the exchange of a massless vector
boson called gluon. This is analogous to the photon, which mediates the electromagnetic
interaction between charged particles (quarks or charged leptons). The gluon coupling is
proportional to the colour charge just like the photon coupling is proportional to the electric
charge. The constant of proportionality for the strong interaction is denoted by αs in analogy
with the ﬁne structure constant α in the EM case, as shown in equations (2) and (3) below.
And the theory of strong interaction is called quantum chromodynamics (QCD) in analogy
with the quantum electrodynamics (QED). The major diﬀerence of QCD with respect to
the QED arises from the nonabelian nature of its gauge group, SU(3). This essentially
means that unlike the electric charge the colour charge can take three possible directions in
an abstract space. These are rather whimsically labelled red, blue and yelow as illustrated
below. Of course the cancellation of the colour charges of quarks ensure that the nuclear
particles composed of them are colour neutral just like the atoms are electrically neutral.

ur
p+

ub

dy

db

ur

n

dy

ur
πο
_
ur

ur
k+
_
sr

Fig. 2. The quark structure of proton, neutron, π and K mesons along with their colour

charges (the bar denotes antiparticles and the subscripts denote colour charge).

A dramatic consequence of the nonabelian nature of the QCD is that the gluons them-
selves carry colour charge and hence have self-interaction unlike the photons, which have no
electric charge and hence no self-interaction. Because of the gluon self-interaction the colour
lines of forces between the quarks are squeezed into a tube as illustrated below.

4

ub

r

dy

p+

r

_
e

Fig. 3. The squeezed (1-dimentional) lines of force between colour charges contrasted with

the isotropic (3-dimentional) lines of force between electric charges.

Consequently the number of colour lines of force intercepted and the resulting force is con-
stant, i.e. the potential increases linearly with distance

VS = αsr.

(2)

Thus the quarks are perpetually conﬁned inside the nuclear particles as it would cost an
inﬁnite ammount of energy to split them apart.
In contrast the isotropic distribution of
the electric lines of force implies that the number intercepted and hence the resulting force
decreases like 1/r2, i.e. the potential

VE =

.

(3)

α
r

αW
r

Finally the weak interaction is mediated by massive vector particles, the charged W ±
and the neutral Z 0 bosons, which couple to all the quarks and leptons. The former couples
to each pair of quarks and leptons listed above with a universal coupling strength αW , since
they all belong to the doublet representation of SU(2) (i.e. carry the same gauge charge).
Because of the mass of the exchanged particle MW the weak interaction is restricted to a
short range of 1/MW , i.e.

VW =

e−rMW .

(4)

One can understand this easily from the uncertainty principle (1), since the exchange of a
massive W boson implies a tansient energy nonconservation ∆E = MW c2, corresponding to
a range ∆x = ¯h/MW c.

The weak and the electromagnetic interactions have been successfully uniﬁed into a
SU(2) × U(1) gauge theory. This is the famous electroweak theory of Glashow, Salam and
Weinberg for which they were awarded the 1979 Nobel Prize. This theory predicts the W
and Z boson masses from the relative rates of the weak and the electromagnetic interactions,
i.e.

MW = 80 GeV and MZ = 91 GeV.

(5)

5

Discovery of the Fundamental Particles

As mentioned earlier, the up and down quarks are the constituents of proton and neutron.
Together with the electron they constitute all the visible matter of the universe. The heavier
quarks and charged leptons all decay into the lighter ones via weak interaction analogous
to the nuclear Beta decay. So they are not freely occurring in nature. But they can be
produced in laboratory or cosmic ray experiments. The muon and the strange quark were
discovered in cosmic ray experiments in the late forties, the latter in the form of K meson.
Next to come were the neutrinos. Although practically massless and stable the neutrinos
are hard to detect because they interact only weakly with matter. The νe was discovered
in atomic reactor experiment in 1956, for which Reines got the Nobel Prize in 1995. The
νµ was discovered in the Brookhaven proton synchrotron in 1962, for which Lederman and
Steinberger got the Nobel Prize in 1988. The ﬁrst cosmic ray observation of neutrino came
in 1965, when the νµ was detected in the Kolar Gold Field experiment.

The rest of the particles have all been discovered during the last 25 years, thanks to the
advent of the electron-positron and the antiproton-proton colliders. First came the windfall
of the seventies with a quick succession of discoveries mainly at the e+e− colliders: charm
quark (1974), Tau lepton (1975), bottom quark (1977) and the gluon (1979). This was
followed by the discovery of W and Z bosons (1983) and ﬁnally the top quark (1995) at the
¯pp colliders. Richter and Ting got the Nobel prize for the discovery of charm quark, while
Martin Pearl got it for the Tau Lepton and Carlo Rubbia for the W and Z bosons.

Fig. 4. Production of charm quark, tau lepton, bottom quark and gluon at the e+e−

collider (upper line) and W and Z bosons at the ¯pp collider (lower line).

Fig. 4 illustrates the pair production of charm and bottom quarks as well as the tau lepton

6

at the electron-positron collider. The typical life time of these particles is of the order of a
picosecond (10−12 sec.), corresponding to a range of a few hundred microns (fraction of a
milli meter) at relativistic energies. Thanks to the high resolution silicon detectors available
now, one can identify these particles before they decay. On the other hand the W and Z
bosons, being very heavy, decay practically at the instant of their creation. Nontheless they
can be recognised by the unmistakable imprints they leave behind in their decay products.
The same is true about top quark production (not shown).

Thus we have seen all the basic constituents of matter and the carriers of their interactions
by now. But the story is not yet complete because of the mass problem – i.e. how to give mass
to the weak gauge bosons (and also matter fermions) without breaking the gauge symmetry
of the Lagrangian.

Mass Problem (Higgs Boson):

It is a remarkable property of gauge theory that the interaction dynamics is completely
determined by the symmetry of the Lagrangian under the gauge transformation – i.e. ro-
tation in some abstract space deﬁned by the gauge group. This is similar to the rotational
symmetry of the Lagrangian in ordinary space, leading to the conservation of angular mo-
mentum, except that in this case you assume the rotation angles to vary from point to point
(i.e. be localised). Then it predicts not only the conservation of gauge charges but also the
presence of massless vector particles (gauge bosons) along with their couplings to the matter
fermions. But the mass term of the gauge bosons (as well as those of the matter fermions)
can be easily seen to break the gauge symmetry of the Lagrangian. On the other hand
the scalar (spin-0) particle masses are symmetric under gauge transformation. This can be
exploited to give mass to the weak gauge bosons as well as the matter fermions through the
back door – i.e. they acquire mass by absorbing scalar particles (like a snake acquiring mass
by swallowing a frog).

This is the famous Higgs mechanism. One assumes a scalar particle of negative mass
imaginary mass. This leads to a spontaneous symmetry breaking – i.e. the
square, i.e.
ground state of energy is not symmetric under gauge transformation unlike the Lagrangian.
As a result the gauge bosons, W and Z, can acquire mass. Besides the physical scalar particle
acquires a real mass, comparable to W and Z masses. This is the so called Higgs boson,
whose detection will conﬁrm this mechanism of generating particle masses. It may be noted
here that one can have a consistent gauge theory of electroweak interaction in the presence
of spontaneous symmetry breaking, since the Lagrangian retains the gauge symmetry. This
was demonstrated by t’Hooft and Veltman in the early seventies, for which they got the
Nobel prize last year.

There are many examples of spontaneous symmetry breaking in physics, the most familiar
one being that of magnetism. At high temperature the electron spins of a Ferromagnet are
randomly oriented. But as we cool it below a critical temperature the electron spins get
alligned with one another because that corresponds to a lower state of energy (ground state).
Thus while the Lagrangian posseses a rotational symmetry, this is not shared by the ground
state. The same thing happens in the Higgs mechanism, except that the rotation is to be
done in an abstract space instead of the ordinary space.

7

The Standard Model of Cosmology:

A phase transition similar to the Ferromagnetic one had taken place soon after the big
bang, when the universe was only about a nanosecond (10−9 sec.) old and its radius (ct) only
about 30 cm. It was an extremely hot and dense ﬁre ball, with an ambient temperature of
about 100 GeV. Now the eﬀective mass of a particle depends on the property of the medium.
And as the universe cooled down below a critical temperature the eﬀective squared mass of
the scalar particle became negative, resulting in a spontaneous breaking of the electroweak
symmetry. At this stage the W and Z bosons acquired mass along with the quarks and
the leptons. The life time of the universe varies inversely as the square of its temperature.
By the time the universe was a few microsecond (10−6 sec.) old, and its radius a few km,
the ambient temperature had dropped to about 1 GeV and all the W and Z bosons had
decayed along with the heavy quarks and leptons into the light ones. At this stage a second
(QCD) phase transition took place, which conﬁned the light quarks (u and d) into protons
and neutrons. It may be noted here that the ongoing heavy ion collision experiments are
trying to recreate such a QCD phase transition in the laboratory; and there are already some
early indications of success.

By the time the universe was a few minutes (102 sec.) old the temperature had dropped
to a few MeV, which is the typical binding energy of nuclei. At this stage Helium and other
light nuclei were formed. After about one lakh (105) years the temperature dropped down to
the atomic binding energy level of a few electron volts. At this stage the electrons combined
with the nuclei to form neutral atoms. Thus the matter decoupled from radiation and the
universe became transparent. After this the matter particles experienced the gravitational
attraction resulting ﬁnally in the formation of galaxies and stars. The present age of the
universe is about 15 billion years and the ambient temperature about 3 K (1 eV = 12000
K).

Hierarchy Problem (Supersymmetry):

But this is not the end of the story because of the so called hierarchy problem – i.e. how to
control the Higgs boson mass in the mass range of W and Z bosons (around a hundred GeV)?
This is because the scalar particle mass has a quadratically divergent quantum correction
unlike the fermion and gauge boson masses, since it is not protected by any symmetry.
Thanks to the uncertainty principle, the vacuum in quantum mechanics is not empty, but
it can contain an unlimited amount of energy and matter. And the quantum correction
represents the eﬀect of this medium on the mass of a particle. Being a divergent eﬀect it
would push up the scalar particle mass to inﬁnity (or a very high cutoﬀ scale of the theory).
So the question is how to keep it down in the desired mass range of W and Z bosons?

That the scalar mass is not protected by any symmetry was of course used above to give
mass to gauge bosons and fermions via Higgs mechanism. The hierarchy problem encountered
now is the ﬂip side of the same coin. The most attractive solution is to invoke a protecting
symmetry – i.e. the supersymmetry (SUSY), which is a symmetry between fermions and
bosons. As per SUSY all the fermions of the Standard Models have bosonic Superpartners
and vice versa. They are listed below along with their spins S, where the Superpartners are
indicated by tilde. The presence of the Superpartners ensure cancellation of the divergent

8

quantum corrections.

quarks & leptons

S Gauge bosons

S Higgs

S R-parity

q, ℓ

˜q, ˜ℓ

1/2

γ, g, W, Z

1

0

˜γ, ˜g, ˜W , ˜Z

1/2

h

˜h

0

1/2

+1

-1

The standard particles are distinguished from the supersymmetric ones by a multiplicative
quantum number called R-parity, which is +1 for the former and −1 for the latter. Thus
the supersymmetric particles have to be produced in pair and the lightest supersymmetric
particle (LSP) has to be stable for R-parity conservation. In most SUSY models the LSP
is the photino ˜γ, or in general mixture of ˜γ and ˜Z, with a mass of again about a hundred
GeV. Thus it interacts only weakly with matter and hence hard to detect like the neutrino.
Indeed the LSP is the leading candidate for constituting the invisible or dark matter of the
universe, which will be the last topic of this article.

The Invisible (Dark) Matter:

There is a large number of indirect evidences suggesting that the bulk of the matter of
the universe is invisible or dark – i.e. it has gravitational but no electromagnetic interaction!
The strongest evidence comes from the rotational velocity of the isolated stars or hydrogen
cloud on the outskirts of galaxies. One can predict this velocity by balancing the centrifugal
acceleration with the gravitational one,

v2
rot
r

=

GN M(r)

r2

, i.e. vrot =s GN M(r)

r

,

(6)

where r is the distance of the tracer star from the galactic centre and M(r) is the galactic
mass enclosed within this distance. Fig. 5 shows the rotation curve for a nearby dwarf spiral
galaxy M33, superimposed on the optical image. If there were no galactic matter outside the
visible disk the rotation velocity curve would have gone down like 1/√r. Instead it continues
to rise towards a constant value, way beyond the visible disk, suggesting that there is a lot
of invisible matter in and around the galaxy. Similar rotation curves have been observed for
about a thousand galaxies, including our own. And they suggest the mass of the invisible
matter to be a over an order of magnitude larger than the mass of visible matter.

9

Fig. 5. observed rotation curve of the nearby dwarf spiral galaxy M33, superimposed on its

optical image (adopted from E. Corbelli and P. Salucci, astro-ph/9909252, 1999).

The invisible mass could of course come from nonluminous bodies like small stars or
Jupitor, which are more aptly described as dark rather than invisible matter. But such
objects act as gravitational lense, which distort the image of distant stars lying behind
them by gravitational bending of light. And it is clear from these gravitational lensing
experiments that such massive compact objects can not be a major source of the invisible
matter. The contribution from gas is also very small.
In principle the neutrinos could
constitute the invisible matter; but their masses are too small to account for the required
density of invisible matter. The leading candidate for this is the lightest supersymmetric
particles (LSP), which are weakly interacting like the neutrino but carry a mass of about
a hundred GeV. These particles were in thermal equillibrium with W , Z and Higgs bosons
along with the quarks and leptons when the universe had a temperature of about a hundred
GeV. But as the temperature dropped by about an order of magnitude, the density of LSP
came down to a level, where their annihilation rate could not keep up with the expansion
rate of the universe. The latter took them away from one another before they could mutually
annihilate. Thus the total mass of the LSPs at this (freeze out) temperature has remained
the same ever since. Indeed this scenario predicts the right size of the invisible matter density
we observe today.

Presumably these invisible particles played a pioneering role in galaxy formation. Being
neutral particles they would have experienced gravitational attraction long before the forma-
tion of neutral atoms, when the ordinary matter started experiencing this attraction. Thus
it is quite plausible that the local concentrations of invisible matter had already formed by
the time of formation of the neutral atoms, to which the latter were gravitationally attracted
to form the galaxies. Indeed such a scenario of structure formation is supported by strong
observational evidence.

10

Thus the invisible matter is a very important component of the universe. There are
multiprong experimental eﬀorts for detection of these invisible particles. Extremely high
precission detectors are being set up in deep underground experiments to record their inter-
action with ordinary matter by measuring the recoil energy of the target nuclei. A square
kilometer size neutrino telescope is being setup in the polar ice cap of Antartica to look for
the high energy neutrinos coming from the pair annihilation of these invisible particles, a
large concentration of which is gravitationally trapped at the solar core. Most importantly
a large proton-proton collider of 27 km circumfurence is being built by an international
collaboration near Geneva to produce these particles in the laboratory by recreating the
extremely high temperature and energy density, that existed after a nanosecond of the big
bang. Assuming these invisible particles to be the LSP one can be reasonably conﬁdent of
producing them at this collider along with the Higgs boson. Thus one hopes to ﬁnally solve
the mystry of the invisible matter of the universe as well as to understand how the visible
matter acquires mass.

11

