2
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
4
0
1
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

How Is Nature Asymmetric ?

1. Discrete Symmetries in Particle Physics and
Parity Violation

B. Ananthanarayan, J. Meeraa, Bharti Sharma,
Seema Sharma and Ritesh K. Singh

This two-part article considers certain fundamen-
tal symmetries of nature, namely the discrete
symmetries of parity (P), charge conjugation (C)
and time reversal (T), and their possible viola-
tion. Recent experimental results are discussed
in some depth. In the ﬁrst part of this article we
present a general background and discuss parity
violation.

Introduction

In day-to-day life when we use the word symmetry, we
mean a geometric property of an object by virtue of
which it remains unchanged on performing some trans-
formation on it. For example, a square looks the same
when rotated by 90◦, a circle remains unchanged when
rotated by any angle about its center, a regular hexagon
looks indistinguishable when rotated by multiples of 60◦.

In physics, if equations of motion for a given physical
system remain unchanged after some kind of transfor-
mation on the system, then it is said to be symmetric on
the basis of its physical behaviour which is unaﬀected by
these transformations. Furthermore, we need to know
the symmetries appropriate to a physical system because
all conservation laws in physics are consequences of some
underlying symmetries. For example, the law of conser-
vation of linear momentum is a consequence of the ho-
mogeneity of space, i.e., translational symmetry of space.
This is possible only in the absence of external forces.
If there is an external force then the point at which it

2

acts is a special point and it is not physically identical
with other points. Thus homogeneity of space ensures
the absence of external forces and, along with the law
of inertia, establishes the law of conservation of linear
momentum.

Knowledge of conservation laws is very important for
studying any system or solving physical problems. Hence
the study of symmetries of the system is equally impor-
tant. We deﬁne symmetry thus :

If a physical system undergoes certain transformations
(e.g., translations, rotations), and if the transformed
system looks identical (on the basis of physical observ-
ables) to the untransformed one, then those transforma-
tions will be called symmetry transformations and the
system will be said to posses those symmetries.

Symmetries are of two types : continuous and discrete.
Continuous symmetry transformations are labelled by
parameters each of which can take any value in a given
range. On the other hand, discrete symmetry trans-
formations are labelled by a set of integers or discrete
numbers. The translational symmetry of empty space
is a continuous symmetry because translation by any
amount leaves the space unchanged. Rotation of a cir-
cle in its plane is also a continuous symmetry. Rotation
of a square is a discrete symmetry as only rotations by
n × 90◦, for all integer n, leaves the square unchanged.

In this article we shall be concerned with symmetries
of the laws that describe and govern the interactions of
elementary particle physics (see Box 1). We will be deal-
ing with the implications of certain bilateral symmetries
(see next section) to these interactions and their possi-
ble violations.

Bilateral Symmetries

3

Those discrete symmetry transformations whose double
operation is the same as no operation are called bilateral
symmetries. For example, mirror reﬂection is a bilateral
transformation since mirror reﬂection of a mirror reﬂec-
tion is as good as no reﬂection. In 3-dimensions, if the
mirror is kept parallel to xy- plane, then the reﬂection
will reverse the direction of z axis while reﬂection of
this reﬂected image brings the z-axis back to its initial
conﬁguration. If we denote the bilateral transformation
operator which acts on the system S by B then we have

B(B S) = S

which means for all bilateral operators, B2= Identity.

In the following we will talk about three kinds of bi-
lateral symmetries namely, parity or spatial inversion
(P), charge conjugation (C) and time reversal (T).

(a) Parity - the left-right symmetry

Parity transformation refers to the inversion of spatial
co-ordinates with respect to the origin, i.e.,

x −→ −x,

y −→ −y,

z −→ −z

which is the same as ~r → −~r. From this deﬁnition,
it is clear that parity is a bilateral transformation. In
3- dimensions, parity is also called left-right symmetry.
If you align the thumb, fore ﬁnger and the middle ﬁn-
ger of your right hand perpendicular to each other with
thumb and fore ﬁnger in the plane of your palm, then
this describes a right-handed co-ordinate system with x,
y and z axes pointing along thumb, foreﬁnger and mid-
dle ﬁnger respectively. After inversion of co- ordinates,
if you try to align your thumb and fore ﬁnger with x and
y axes, then the middle ﬁnger will point opposite to z
axis. But if you try the same with your left hand, you
will ﬁnd that all the three axes match with the ﬁngers.
This co-ordinate system is left-handed. Thus, parity be-
ing a good symmetry of a physical system implies that

4

the system is left-right symmetric.

Under parity operation P , a function f (r) transforms
to f (−r), and if these two functions are the same upto
a sign then the function f (r) will be said to have deﬁnite
parity. For example,

cos(x)

P−→ cos(−x) = cos(x)

even parity

sin(x)

P−→ sin(−x) = − sin(x)

odd parity

If f (−r) and f (r) are of diﬀerent forms then the function
deos not have deﬁnite parity. The solutions of parity
symmetric physical equations may be of deﬁnite par-
ity. In the context of elementary particle physics it be-
comes necessary to assign such parity quantum numbers
to particle states (wave functions). The parity of the
wave-function of single particle state is called its intrin-
sic parity.

(b) Charge Conjugation - C

Charge conjugation reverses the sign of electric charge
of a particle along with all of its other internal quan-
tum numbers, such as, strangeness, baryon number, lep-
ton number, and leaves all other quantum numbers un-
changed. Symmetry under C means that interaction of
two particles is independent of the sign of their internal
quantum numbers and charge. In other words, this sym-
metry implies interaction of two particles is exactly iden-
tical to interaction of the corresponding anti-particles,
where we deﬁne anti-particles as the charge conjugate
counterpart of the corresponding particles (see Table 1
below).

Table 1 : Particles and anti-particles

5

strange-
ness
0
0
0
0
1
-1

1
-1
0
0
0
0

lepton
baryon
number number

particle/
anti-particle
electron
positron
proton
anti-proton
K +
K −

electric
charge
-e
e
e
-e
e
-e

0
0
1
-1
0
0

(c) Time Reversal - T

Time reversal means reversing the direction of the time
co-ordinate, i.e.,

T−→ −t

t

Symmetry of a physical system under time reversal sim-
ply means that all the processes in the system are re-
versible.

Physical systems involving only strong and electromag-
netic interactions are symmetric under all three bilateral
transformations listed above. But in nature, other types
of interactions, namely, weak and gravitational interac-
tions exists. Weak interactions are known to violate P
as well as T . We will discuss P and T violations later
on in this article.

CPT - theorem

If we take the whole universe as one system, which in-
volves all four kinds of interacions, then surely the sys-
tem is not symmetric under P , C and T separately. In
fact, the system violates all three symmetries. Then
one may ask, “ Is the system symmetric under certain
combinations of these transformations ? ”, to which
the answer turns out to be “yes”. Under the combined
operation of all three transformations physical laws re-
main unchanged. More acurately, invariance under the
combined action of C, P and T is a consequence of rel-

6

ativistic invariance or Lorentz invariance of the law of
physics. Certain consequences of this theorem are :

• the mass of a particle and its anti-particle are ex-

actly the same,

• the total life-time, τ , of an unstable particle and

its anti- particle are exactly the same,

• the magnetic moment is equal and opposite for

particle and anti-particle.

For example, mass of electron and positron are exactly
same, the life-time of K + is same as that of K − etc.
Till date all the test for CP T violation has yielded in
negative results.

Parity violation

Before 1950’s, parity was assumed to be a good sym-
metry of natural forces. But in the early 50’s the “τ − θ
puzzle” posed a question on parity symmetry. Two par-
ticles, then named as τ and θ, were found to be identical
in almost every respect, such as their masses, life-times,
charges, spins, except their weak decay into pions,

θ −→ π+π0

τ −→ π+π+π−

P = +1

P = −1

Based on intrinsic parity of pions (Pπ = −1), conser-
vation of angular momentum and conservation of par-
ity, it was inferred that θ is even- parity particle and τ
is odd-parity particle. The puzzle was “ How can two
particles with otherwise identical kinematical properties
have diﬀerent parities ? ” This puzzle was solved by C.
N. Yang and T. D. Lee, who proposed that the weak
interaction does not conserve parity and that the τ and
θ are the same particle, now renamed as K +. Yang and
Lee then suggested experiments to search for parity vi-
olation, later conﬁrmed by C. S. Wu in β-decay of 60Co

7

nuclei. In the experiment the 60Co atoms were located in
a thin surface layer of a single crystal of Ce-Mg-nitrate,
which was cooled to 0.003 K to reduce any thermal vi-
brations and the whole system was placed in a strong
magnetic ﬁeld to align the nuclear spin of 60Co nuclei.
If parity was a good symmetry then the out coming β-
particles should come in a symmetric way with respect
to the spin alignment of the nuclei. But it was observed
that the β-particles are emitted preferentially in a di-
rection opposite to that of nuclear spin. Further study
of β-decay of 60Co indicated that parity is not only vi-
olated, but is violated maximally. Neutrinos produced
in β-decay are found to be left-handed only, and left-
handed anti-neutrino was not observed. This indicates
that P is violated along with violation of C symme-
try such that CP is conserved. These properties of the
weak interactions have been tested at very high preci-
sion and at very low to very high energies for several
decades. Nevertheless a certain eﬀect has only been re-
cently experimentally observed (see Box 2) although it
was predicted soon after the work of Yang and Lee.

CP , ﬁrst thought to be conserved in weak interactions,
was later found to be violated minutely in the neutral
kaon system, and more recently in the neutral B-meson
system. We will discuss CP violation and T violation
in the second part of this article.

Box 1: History of Elementary Particle Physics

It is very diﬃcult to say exactly when elementary parti-
cle physics (EPP) came into being. The ﬁrst elementary
particle to be discovered was the electron by J.J. Thom-
son in 1897. Radioactivity was discovered in 1896 by
Becqurel, which is considered as the begining of nuclear
physics and EPP was a subset of it in early years. It
might be fair to say that EPP separated from nuclear
physics around 50’s.

8

Since the begining of the last century the experimental-
ist started probing into the atom and in 1911 Ruther-
ford found it to be composed of electrons and positively
charged nucleus and the nucleus of hydrogen atom was
identiﬁedas the proton. Then in 1932 Chadwick discov-
ered the neutron and now the nucleus is understood to
be a bound state of protons and neutrons. Study of
unstable nucleii hinted existence of massless chargeless
particle, called the neutrino, which was postulated by
Pauli in 1931 and experimentally observed by Reines
and Cowan in 1956. The stability of nucleii against
Coulomb repulsion was explained by Yukawa in 1935
by introducing π-mesons as mediators of nuclear inter-
action and which were ﬁrst observed by Powell in 1947.
After that a large number of mesons were discovered.
The existence of anti-particles was predicted by Dirac
in 1928 and the positron, the anti-particle of the elec-
tron was discovered by Anderson in 1932. The heavier
cousin of the electron, the muon was discovered in Ned-
dermeryer and Anderson in 1937.

By mid 50’s a big list of baryons, the heavy particles,
mesons, the medium mass particles and leptons, the
light particles, faced the theorists which was then cate-
gorised based on their masses, spin, electric charge, in-
trinsic parity etc. The quantum numbers of particles
were found to have a pattern in the categorised lists and
hinted that all baryons and mesons must have further
constituents called quarks. The ﬁrst quark model talked
about only three quarks, namely, up, down and strange
but latter this was extended to six quarks, where the
sixth quark, the top quark was discovered as late as in
1995. In late 60’s weak interaction were postulated to
be caused by exchange of massive bosons, namely, W ±
and Z which were observed in collider experiments from
1983. Today observed matter is understood to be made
of six quarks, three leptons and three neutrinos inter-
acting among themselves via exchange of photons, three
massive bosons and eight gluons (carriers of strong in-

9

teraction) along with one spin-0 massive boson called
higgs which is not yet discovered.

Box 2: The nuclear anapole moment

Soon after the proposal that the weak interactions vio-
late parity and its experimental conﬁrmation in the 60Co
system, Zel’dovich and Vaks proposed that the weak in-
teraction should induce an observable nuclear “anapole”
moment, at a level that became possible to detect with
technology that was available only as recently as 1998.

The ﬁrst term in the multipole expansion of the po-
tential due to a electric charge distribution, at a point
outside the distribution is called the monopole moment.
The same term is called anapole moment when the po-
tential is expanded at a point inside the charge distribu-
tion. The anapole moment is zero if parity is a good
symmetry of the interaction among the charged par-
ticles. But in the case of nuclei, the quarks interact
among themselves via parity violating weak interaction
along with parity conserving strong and electromagnetic
interactions, and the anapole moment is non-zero and
proportional to the nuclear spin I. Experimentally it
is very diﬃcult to measure the nuclear anapole moment
(NAM) because it is caused by higher order weak inter-
actions among the quarks. Further, its contribution to
parity non-conserving (PNC) transition in atoms goes
to zero when the exchanged photon is real. A very
high precision experiment (more than 1% accuracy) on
PNC transitions is required to see the contribution from
NAM. Other contributions to PNC transitions are in-
dependent of the nuclear spin while NAM contributions
depend on I. Thus to measure the NAM one has to
separate the I dependent part from comparatively large
I independent part, which became possible only as re-
cently as 1998.

This example illustrates that while the electro-weak in-

10

teractions have been tested to very great precision at ac-
celerator experiments, there continue to be experimental
challenges at the level of table top experiments.

Suggested Readings
A very inspiring book on the subject of symmetries is
the following classic:

• H. Weyl, Symmetry, Princeton University Press,

Princeton, NJ, USA, 1952

Standard introductory reference to nuclear and elemen-
tary particle physics are, e.g.,

• B. Povh, K. Rith, C. Scholz and F. Zetsch, 2nd
edn., Particles and Nuclei, An Introduction to the
Physical Concepts, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999.

• D. Griﬃths, Introduction to Elementary Particle
Physics, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1987

• G.D. Coughlan, J.E. Dodd The Ideas of Particle
Physics : An Introduction for Scientists,Cambridge
Univ. Pr., UK, 1993

The following articles in Resonance would provide the
reader with accounts on some of the subjects disccused
here:

• Ashoke Sen, Resonance, Vol.5, No.1, p.4 2000

• Rohini Godbole, Resonance, Vol.5, No.2, p.16 2000

• Sourendu Gupta, Resonance, Vol.6, No.2, p.29 2001

A detailed treatment of the Cobalt experiment has al-
ready been made available to the readers of Resonance
in:

• Amit Roy, Resonance, Vol.6, No.8, p.32 2001

