THE QUANTUM MECHANICAL
FOUNDATIONS OF PHILOSOPHY

Cihan Sa¸clıo˜glu1,2

1Physics Department, Bo˜gazi¸ci University
80815 Bebek–˙Istanbul, Turkey
and
2Feza G¨ursey Institute
Bo˜gazi¸ci University–TUBITAK
81220 C¸ engelk¨oy, Istanbul– Turkey

Abstract

Many of the most familiar features of our everyday environment, and
some of our basic notions about it, stem from Relativistic Quantum Field
Theory (RQFT). We argue in particular that the origin of common names,
verbs, adjectives such as full and empty, the concepts of identity, similar-
ity, Plato’s Universals, natural numbers, and existence versus non-existence
can be traced to the space-time and gauge symmetries and quantum prop-
erties embodied in RQFT. These basic tools of human thought cannot
arise in a universe strictly described by classical Physics based on Planck’s
constant being exactly equal to zero.

2
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
9
0
6
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1. Introduction:

A more accurate version of the title, requiring the sacriﬁce of the obviously

intended reference to some well-known titles [1], would have been “The Relativis-

tic Quantum Field Theoretical Foundations of Philosophy”. To put it brieﬂy, the

majority of works in which the words “Philosophy” and “Quantum Mechanics”

appear simultaneously focus on the aspects of Quantum Mechanics that seem to

be in conﬂict with common sense and everyday (i.e., non-laboratory) experience,

whereas the aim here is to argue the opposite proposition that our everyday ex-

periences and common sense are shaped by Relativistic Quantum Field Theory

in a quite direct way.

Although the more familiar subject, which often goes under titles such as

“The Philosophical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics”, is thus unrelated to

the issues we intend to address here, it is perhaps worthwhile to start with a few

remarks about it in order to delineate more clearly the domain of our argument.

At the risk of considerable simpliﬁcation, one may say that the basic issue in works

along the lines of [1] is the reconciliation of our usual idea of “existing objective

reality” with the Quantum Mechanical picture of diﬀerent “potential realities”

that simultaneously coexist prior to the observation-induced collapse of the wave

function. The intellectual climate among physicists has only relatively recently

become tolerant towards suggestions that the Copenhagen Credo (in terms of

which the preceding sentence has been formulated) could perhaps be modiﬁed or

2

improved upon, and this has led to signiﬁcantly more detailed understanding of

how the passage from a Quantum Mechanical probability amplitude to classical,

objective probability occurs through decoherence [2].

In short, some 70 years

after the formulation of the Copenhagen interpretation, the examination of the

philosophical concepts underlying Quantum Mechanics (QM) continues, but the

“paradoxes” typically arise only in situations where a coherent sum of states or

amplitudes is involved.

Returning to, and somewhat rephrasing, the ﬁrst paragraph, the aim of the

present note is to investigate the roughly reverse question of to what extent some

of our most basic everyday notions, and the philosophical and mathematical

concepts that are abstracted from them, owe their existence to QM, or more

precisely, to a body of physical facts that ﬁnd their most natural mathematical

expression in Relativistic Quantum Field Theory (RQFT). These physical facts

involve none of the controversial issues addressed in [1] and [2], or the diﬃculties

connected with the renormalization procedure in RQFT. Instead, they are based

on the most fundamental and commonly accepted aspects of RQFT. The reason

we are not in the habit of relating our everyday experiences to RQFT is twofold:

(a) The very familiarity of these experiences blunts our curiosity; furthermore,

as is often the case, this familiarity is confused with our supposed ability to

describe everyday macroscopic phenomena in terms of classical physics. (b) Most

physicists (and even RQFT practitioners) only deal with RQFT in the context of

3

speciﬁc scientiﬁc problems, reinforcing the perception of the theory as something

rather esoteric and far removed from everyday phenomena.

In order to understand points (a) and (b) in more detail, it is instructive

to review the way this outlook is imparted to Physics students. One starts by

studying non-relativistic and then relativistic Classical Mechanics (CM), followed

by classical wave motion and Classical Electrodynamics (CED). One can even

learn General Relativity (GR), still without any mention of quantum physics.

One is then usually given the impression that almost all macroscopic physical

phenomena can be described very successfully within this classical framework,

except for isolated shortcomings such as its inability to account for a few ob-

scure experimental facts involving black-body radiation (curiously, the reason

the Rayleigh-Jeans prediction truly deserves to be called a catastrophe is not

suﬃciently emphasized-the classical theory predicts that not only black-bodies,

but all substances at non-zero temperature continually emit an inﬁnite amount

of energy!), photoelectric and Compton eﬀects, and the discrete emission and ab-

sorption spectra of elements. In order to solve these problems supposedly limited

to atomic or sub-atomic scales, where classical physics fails, QM is invoked. The

removal of ﬁner discrepancies between experiment and the predictions of non-

relativistic QM require corrections based ﬁrst on relativistic QM, and only then

ﬁnally on RQFT. These are accompanied by increasing degrees of conceptual

and computational diﬃculty. Given this order of exposition, one can easily come

4

away with the idea that RQFT is a formidably complex theory with little direct

relevance to our everyday experience, which is carelessly claimed to be adequately

described by Classical Physics. This view is bolstered by formal demonstrations

that the classical laws of Physics are recovered in the limits of quantum num-

bers tending to inﬁnity and Planck’s constant h going to zero. In the course of

such arguments, one is sometimes inclined to forget that Planck’s constant, while

small on a macroscopic scale, is not exactly zero, and the macroscopic world is

actually shaped by that fact.

The picture summarized in the last paragraph, while perhaps free from er-

rors of commission, seriously suﬀers from a major error of omission: It com-

pletely overlooks the fact that direct manifestations of RQFT are at the root

of our everyday experiences. An independent inaccuracy stems from the popu-

lar but false assertion according to which Quantum Mechanics is relevant only

for physical events on a microscopic (atomic or subatomic) scale, without refer-

ring to the phase relationships in the problem. A more accurate classiﬁcation

of physical phenomena must take into account not only whether they occur on

a macroscopic or a microscopic scale, but also whether there is coherence or

decoherence. This gives rise to four combinations which we may label as (i)

macroscopic-coherent, (ii) microscopic-coherent, (iii) microscopic-incoherent and

(iv) macroscopic-incoherent. Lasers, Bose-Einstein-condensation, superconduc-

tivity and superﬂuidity are examples of the ﬁrst, double-slit experiments with

5

electron sources examples of the second, and any Quantum Mechanical prob-

lem in the microscopic domain, described successfully with random phases, is an

example of the third. Finally, everyday macroscopic phenomena involving the

participation of something on the order of Avogadro’s number of particles with

uncorrelated phases belong to the last category. It is often claimed that classi-

cal physics suﬃces to describe this domain. We will argue later that quite the

opposite is the case: Attempting to imagine a universe truly and strictly based

upon classical physics leads to a world far stranger than the one we live in. Our

familiar environment and the way we think about it are shaped by macroscopic

manifestations of RQFT; it is only the phases that are washed out by decoherence.

2. Some childlike questions concerning identity, similarity, integers,

common names and verbs :

One possible way to start removing the lifelong accumulation of curiosity-

deadening layers of familiarity with the everyday world is to ask questions similar

to those sometimes raised by children, and then to address in turn the new

questions raised by the ﬁrst round of answers. Let us start with the following :

Q1: Why are identical twins identical?

Q2: Why do we encounter categories of objects that we can classify in groups

such as spoons, cats and clouds?

Q3: What is the origin of the concept of natural numbers?

Q4: How does a glass of water get ﬁlled, and, more generally, why do objects

6

in the condensed state occupy well-deﬁned volumes?

These innocent-sounding questions are actually intimately linked to timeless

philosophical and scientiﬁc issues. For example, the question of identity men-

tioned in Q1 has been examined by Leibniz [3], while Plato tried to answer Q2 in

terms of “Universals”. This roughly means that spoons, cats and clouds are only

imperfect copies of an Ideal Spoon, an Ideal Cat and an Ideal Cloud existing in

a “higher” and physically inaccessible realm, of whose existence we nevertheless

have an imperfect awareness [4]. After Plato, the question of Universals contin-

ued to be a central concern in medieval scholastic philosophy and, in modiﬁed

forms, is debated even today among philosophers. Whatever one thinks of Plato’s

explanation, it is a fact that we not only recognize such categories, but even in-

corporate them into our conscious or unconscious mental processes, and indeed

into our language, with which we formulate philosophical problems.

Turning to Q3, one may wonder how the concept of natural numbers could

have arisen without the existence of the above categories. In fact, Frege [5] tried

to deﬁne, say, the natural number 3, as the property common to sets of three

spoons, three cats and so on; it is diﬃcult to imagine how such a notion could

have emerged in a universe consisting of amorphous objects, each unlike any

other. The fact that this deﬁnition involves set-theoretic paradoxes that had to

be resolved by Russell and Whitehead [6] is an irrelevant complication for the

purposes of our speciﬁc argument.

7

Having noted that the concept of number is linked to the existence of common

(as opposed to proper) names, and traced the origin of at least some of the com-

mon names to the very strong physical similarities of the objects they represent,

we can carry out a parallel analysis about verbs, with parallel conclusions. For

example, we can recognize the action of eating in many life-forms and classify all

such activity under the verb “to eat”. Essentially, since the agents of the actions

fall into categories labelled by common names, so do the actions.

Finally, Q4 is obviously related to fundamental notions of “full” and “empty”,

which not only are basic to our everyday thinking, but lead to questions concern-

ing the deﬁnitions of “Matter” versus “Nothingness”; let us call this question

Q5. Descartes’ claim that Nature abhors a vacuum is only one example in a

series of changing pictures of empty space conceived by philosophers and sci-

entists. Physicists have gone from Newton’s vacuum to Maxwell’s luminiferous

Aether [7] supporting electromagnetic waves, then back to a plain empty vacuum,

and ﬁnally to modern versions of Aether-like media constituted of the Dirac sea,

vacuum expectation values of Higgs ﬁelds, and superpositions of topologically

inequivalent vacua. We can see RQFT themes already appearing in this last

sentence; it will soon become clear that this is no accident.

Finally, it is certainly not far-fetched to assume that many of our geometrical

ideas originate from the study of shapes of objects formed by matter in the

condensed state; we will see in detail later on that many essential properties of

8

the condensed state are direct consequences of the RQFT of electrons.

A disclaimer is perhaps in order at this point: our arguments do not preclude

the possibility, or indeed the certainty, that there is a deeper physical theory

which yields RQFT as an approximation at lengths much bigger than the Planck

length q

hG
c3

; in fact, the absence of a quantum-level explanation of gravitation

points to the need for such a theory. However, such a theory, if and when found,

must also necessarily reproduce the successful features of RQFT pertinent to the

main line of thought pursued here.

3. Some answers and more questions:

Let us start with Q1, which could not have been handled prior to the un-

derstanding of DNA’s role in heredity. The modern and conclusive answer is of

course the identity of twins’ DNAs. This of course also provides a less fantastic

explanation of the obvious similarities between cats than Plato’s postulation of

an Ideal Cat in the World of Forms: Ignoring minor variations corresponding

to diﬀerent colors and sizes and so on, cat DNAs are very alike in containing

instructions for one cat nose, one pair of cat eyes and one pair of cat ears per cat.

To turn to question Q2 of the previous section, clearly, the “Platonic spoon” can

be similarly explained: Since all human mouths and hands are similar in size and

function, and since only a ﬁnite number of chemical substances are suitable for

being formed into spoons, an “induced universality” operates even in the case of

such man-made objects. Even a member of a category such as “rocks”, consist-

9

ing of relatively amorphous objects, is classiﬁable (a) because rocks are obtained

from a limited number of elements via a limited number of geological processes,

(b) our perceptions of their salient characteristics such as hardness are bound

to be similar, given the similarity in human bodies and, in particular, in human

sensory equipment.

These remarks immediately raise other questions such as why DNA is so stable

and how it happens that the DNAs of identical twins are practically identical at

the molecular level. To our knowledge, such questions were ﬁrst addressed by

Schr¨odinger in his very inﬂuential book ”What is Life?” [8]. His answer is based

essentially on the discreteness of molecular energy levels for quantum mechanical

bound systems and the diﬀerences ∆Eij between energy levels Ei and Ej of a

DNA molecule typically being considerably bigger than the thermal energy kT

per degree of freedom. Very schematically, we might say that if the level Ei

corresponds to a cat with one nose and the higher level Ej to one with two noses,

random thermal and most other environmental inﬂuences will very rarely be able

to cause a transition resulting in a two-nosed cat. There are more modern and

detailed explanations of the stability of DNA that are based on its being copied

by enzymes from a template and other enzymes correcting errors, etc., but for

our purposes these may be regarded as elaborations rather than refutations of

Schr¨odinger’s fundamental insight.

While Schr¨odinger’s argument accounts for the stability of a single lone DNA

10

molecule in the entire universe, accounting for the existence of other identical

DNA molecules obviously requires that we now explain why all the atoms of a

given chemical element are perfectly identical. This is essentially impossible in

Classical Mechanics, and even Quantum Mechanics by itself provides only a par-

tial explanation: For example, given a single proton and an electron, Quantum

Mechanics predicts, via the Schr¨odinger equation, a deﬁnite set of discrete en-

ergy levels for a single Hydrogen atom, but does not explain why there are other

electrons and protons with exactly the same properties, combining to form other

Hydrogen atoms. It hardly needs to be emphasized that the existence of cate-

gories of non-living things such as spoons and rocks that we mentioned earlier

also rely on all the atoms of a given element being identical with all the others;

hence we must next see what lies behind the identity of the constituents of atoms.

Let us introduce the argument by focusing upon electrons in particular. It is

well known that Wheeler attributed the identity of electrons to there being only

one electron in the universe [9]. This is of course based on Dirac’s Hole Theory,

with Wheeler’s additional observation that a positron travelling from the past to

the future can be thought of as a negative energy electron travelling from the

future to the past. The intersection points of a constant-time hyperplane with

a single electron world-line going back and forth in time (with photons attached

to the vertices) then represent simultaneously present electrons and positrons.

Although this is a fascinating, and even useful idea (having led as a practical

11

consequence to the Feynman propagator), it cannot even describe all the physi-

cal processes involving only electrons, positrons and photons. As an example of

a process requiring a second electron unrelated to the ﬁrst, consider adding to

the zig-zagging electron picture a spacetime diagram of Delbr¨uck scattering at

lowest order. The diagram consists of an electron going around a square, with

a photon at each corner. The inability of Wheeler’s scheme to account for such

processes is of course a manifestation of the fact that combining Special Relativ-

ity with Quantum Mechanics inevitably leads to a many-particle theory. RQFT

is intrinsically suited to describing such many-particle systems, and we thus need

not dwell any longer in Wheeler’s halfway house on the way to QED, attrac-

tive though it is. Nevertheless, given our basic theme of relating fundamental

philosophical concepts to RQFT, we should take note of the completely radical

ontological switch implied by Hole Theory: What is normally regarded as empty

space is identiﬁed with a negative energy electron sea of inﬁnite negative charge

and energy, while a hole in this sea appears to be a physical particle of positive

energy and charge. Also, although we have not yet fully gone over to RQFT,

we should take note of two fundamental ingredients, namely, Special Relativity

and the Pauli Exclusion Principle (PEP), which already play an essential role in

the above arguments. Hole theory is based on taking the negative sign in the

relativistic expression E =

√p2c2 + m2c4 seriously. The existence of ordinary

±

positive energy electrons then depends on all the negative energy levels already

12

being full, and the ﬁlling process in turn is made possible by the PEP, without

which the negative levels would turn into a bottomless pit (we should note in

passing that this ingenious argument of Dirac implicitly assumes the existence of

a minimum energy level, which, inexplicably, is never mentioned).

Finally, the PEP is an essential part of the answer to Q4 of the previous

section. Filling a glass of water, surely one of our most ordinary everyday ex-

periences, is a purely Quantum Mechanical phenomenon: The electrons of one

water molecule are kept away from those of the other by the PEP. The molecules

themselves are mostly ”empty” in the sense that all but a few ten-thousandths

of a molecule’s mass is in the nucleus, which typically occupies only about one

million billionth of the volume of the molecule (the volume of the Sun relative

to the volume deﬁned by the Earth’s orbital radius is vastly bigger!). The rea-

son an individual atom does not collapse down to the size of its nucleus again

involves both the PEP and the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle (HUP). Thus

our very basic notions of “full” and “empty” are seen to be based entirely on two

fundamental Quantum Mechanical rules, the HUP and the PEP. When we speak

of ﬁlling the electronic levels in an atom, we are not just using an everyday idea

as a metaphor for a phenomenon involving subatomic particles; it is the micro-

scopic phenomenon that is responsible for our having the adjective “full” in our

vocabulary. It is hard to imagine the idea of fullness ever arising in a universe

consisting of bosons, which are not subject to the PEP.

13

A more dramatic example is provided by the numerous suicides that take place

near Bo˘gazi¸ci University, where I work, every year. The majority of the people

jumping oﬀ the nearby bridge linking Asia and Europe die from the impact of

their bodies hitting the water. Given that both the region within their bodies and

the water they fail to displace suﬃciently rapidly consists essentially of empty

space, the deaths are directly attributable to two basic Quantum Mechanical

principles, the HUP and the PEP again. We will later see that both ﬁnd their

most natural expressions in RQFT.

4. RQFT:

In order to explain the identity of electrons in terms of RQFT, we observe ﬁrst

that the main dynamical entity in a Field Theory is the ﬁeld itself [10]. This is a

very diﬀerent viewpoint than the “particle picture”, which, even after relativistic

and Quantum Mechanical reﬁnements and modiﬁcations, still uses the idea of a

pointlike particle in the presence of external forces as its basic ingredient. In con-

trast, whether classical or quantum, relativistic or non-relativistic, a typical ﬁeld

is thought of as a dynamical system pervading all of space for all times. The fur-

ther qualifying words “relativistic” and “quantum” have very speciﬁc meanings:

By “relativistic” here we mean a theory in which the ﬁelds and states transform as

well-deﬁned representations of the Poincar´e group. We thus limit the discussion

to ﬂat Minkowski space and neglect eﬀects of space-time curvature. This descrip-

tion holds to an excellent approximation in our everyday physical environment.

14

The quantum nature of the theory can be represented in a number of diﬀerent

and more or less equivalent ways such as canonical or path-integral quantization.

We will adopt the canonical approach based on equal-time commutators or anti-

commutators, as it expresses most directly the features we intend to emphasize.

Dirac [11] aptly calls these (anti)commutators “the quantum conditions” since it

is through them that quantum characteristics are imparted to a theory initially

formulated in classical terms. The HUP is in fact a consequence of the quantum

conditions in particle Quantum Mechanics; turning this around, we might say

that ﬁeld quantization via the canonical method amounts to extending the HUP

from particle Quantum Mechanics to Field Theory.

The building of a RQFT within the above framework makes use of a number

of fundamental theorems and mathematical techniques such as Wigner’s method

of obtaining and classifying the representations of the Poincar´e group, Pauli’s

Spin-Statistics theorem[12], derivation of the Bargmann-Wigner [13] equations

for ﬁelds of a given spin and Noether’s theorem. To the extent it is possible,

we will try to rely on qualitative arguments in tracing the questions of section 2

to this formidable-sounding collection of mathematical physics results. This will

also be helpful in allowing us to see direct consequences of the formalism in the

everyday world without being lost in sophisticated and abstract mathematics.

Let us start with the Poincar´e group. As emphasized by Klein and Weyl[14],

a group is a collection of operations leaving a certain “object” unchanged. This

15

amounts to classifying the symmetries of the object. When the “object” in ques-

tion is the laws of Physics in a space-time with negligible gravitation-induced

curvature, the symmetries can be classiﬁed as follows:

(i) No point in four-

dimensional space-time is privileged, hence one can shift or translate the origin

of space-time arbitrarily in four directions. Noether’s theorem then implies there

are four associated conserved quantities, namely the three components of space

momentum and the energy. These four quantities naturally constitute the com-

ponents of a 4-vector Pµ, µ = 0, 1, 2, 3. (ii) No direction is special in space; leading

to three conserved quantities Ji, i = 1, 2, 3. (iii) There is no special inertial frame;

the same laws of Physics hold in inertial frames moving with constant speed in

any one of the three independent directions.

As we suggested above, it is possible to get a non-mathematical insight into

Noether’s theorem relating symmetries to conserved quantities; in fact the argu-

ment we will present, due to John Philoponus [15], dates back to the 6th century

AD! Consider a single particle moving in a completely homogeneous space. It

cannot come to a stop or change its velocity because this would have to happen at

some particular point, but all points being equal, it is impossible to choose one.

Hence the particle has no choice but to move at constant velocity or, in other

words, to conserve its linear momentum, which Philoponus called “impetus”. It

is easy to extend the argument to a rotating object in an isotropic space and

conclude that it cannot come to a stop at any particular angle since there is no

16

special angle; hence its angular momentum is conserved.

It is well-known that (ii) and (iii) amount to covariance of the laws of physics

under rotations in a four-dimensional space with a metric that is not positive-

deﬁnite. The squared length of a 4-vector deﬁned via this metric must then be an

important invariant independent of the orientation or the velocity of the frame.

Indeed, for the 4-vector Pµthis is the squared mass m2 of the particle, and it is

one of the two invariant labels used in specifying the representation. The other

label is the squared length of another 4-vector called the Pauli-Lubanski vector.

It then follows from the algebra of the group that this squared length takes on

values s(s + 1) and that in contrast to m2, which assumes continuous values,

s can only be zero, or a positive integer, or half a positive odd integer. The

unitary representation of the Poincar´e group for a particle of mass m and spin

s provides its relativistic quantum mechanical wave function. The equation of

motion the wave function must obey also comes with the representation; it is

the Bargmann-Wigner equation for that spin and mass. The procedure of sec-

ond quantization then naturally promotes the wave functions to quantized ﬁeld

operators, and in a sense demotes the particles to quanta created or destroyed

by these operators. Pauli’s spin-statistics theorem, based on a set of very general

requirements such as the existence of a lowest energy vacuum state, the positiv-

ity of energy and probability, microcausality, and the invariance of the laws of

Physics under the Poincar´e group, leads to the result that the only acceptable

17

quantum conditions for ﬁeld operators of integer-spin particles are commutation

relations, while those corresponding to half-integer spin must obey anticommu-

tation relations. The standard terms for the two families of particles are bosons

and fermions, respectively. The PEP, or the impossibility of putting two electrons

into the same state, is now seen to be the result of the anticommutation relation

between electron creation operators: to place two fermions in the same state, the

same creation operator has to be applied twice. The result must vanish, since

the operator anticommutes with itself.

We have thus seen that the symmetries of space-time are reﬂected in the

ﬁelds which are representations of the symmetry groups; a quantum mechanical

recipe called quantization then turns these ﬁelds into operators capable of creating

and destroying quanta (or particles, in more common parlance) at all space-time

points. Actually, the framework we have described only suﬃces to describe “Free

ﬁelds” which do not interact with each other. In order to incorporate interactions,

one has to resort to another kind of symmetry called gauge symmetry, which

operates in an “internal” space attached to each point of space-time. While the

identity of masses and spins of, say, electrons can be attributed to space-time

symmetries, the identities of additional quantum numbers such as charge, isospin

and “color” can only be explained in terms of the representations of these gauge

groups.

5. The answers:

18

We are now in a position to relate the questions of sections 2 and 3 to RQFT.

Electrons are identical because they are created by the same electron quantum

ﬁeld. Since this ﬁeld embodies Poincar´e invariance, it operates in the same way at

all space-time points and in diﬀerent Lorentz frames; thus the electrons created

by it must always have the same spin, mass and charge. The same obviously

holds for other fermions such as the quarks, which are ﬁrst bound together by

bosonic ﬁelds called gluons to form protons and neutrons. These nucleons then

combine to form atomic nuclei through Van der Waals-like residual gluonic forces.

At suitable densities and temperatures, such as 300, 000 years after the Big Bang,

hydrogen and helium nuclei can bind electrons by photon ﬁelds and form atoms.

Heavier atoms result from processes of stellar evolution and collapse. Atoms

chemically bond with other atoms, producing ever more complex molecules and,

ﬁnally, intelligent life which tries to understand its environment. Every step in

the dynamical processes outlined above involves not only the forces, but also the

constraints imposed by the commutation and/or anticommutation relations of

the ﬁelds. The stability of matter, in particular, is in large measure due to the

PEP. Free neutrons undergo β-decay with a lifetime of about ten minutes, but

live practically forever in stable nuclei because the proton that would result from

the decay cannot move into energetically available but already occupied proton

states. The arrangement of electrons in atoms and the formation of molecular

bonds, both ionic and covalent, is dictated by the PEP. The near-incompressibility

19

of most condensed matter, the stability of white dwarf and neutron stars, are

among its macroscopic consequences. These qualitative statements are supported

by rigorous arguments and computations [16]

To recapitulate:

in section 2, we raised some questions about the origins of

common names (or, equivalently, the Platonic concept of Universals) and verbs

(Q1 and Q2)), the idea of whole numbers (Q3), and our perception of regions of

space as “full” and “empty” (Q4). Q5, which was related to Q4, concerned the

relation between “being” and “nothingness”, the former in the speciﬁc example

of, an electron, and the latter, the vacuum. In section 3, we gave partial answers

based on Non-Relativistic and then Relativistic Quantum Mechanics, supplanted

by the PEP, which had to be introduced as an additional, empirically-based

input. The answers were partial in the sense that while, for example, the identity

of the energy levels in two hydrogen atoms could be explained, the identity of

all electrons, or all protons, had to be assumed as a starting fact. In relation to

question Q5, we gave an example of a theory where the vacuum is represented

by a full medium, while holes in the medium are detected by experimenters as

positively charged versions of the electrons. Finally, in section 4, we saw that

the identity of fundamental particles is a direct consequence of the symmetries

of space-time and the quantum conditions in RQFT. Furthermore, the PEP was

revealed to be nothing but the quantum conditions for fermion ﬁelds; hence we can

now quite accurately pinpoint the fundamental cause of death when people jump

20

oﬀ the Bosphorus bridge: The killer is the equal-time anticommutation relation of

the quantized electron ﬁeld. We hope to have convinced the reader that RQFT,

far from being a theory limited to explaining esoteric subatomic phenomena,

shapes both the world we directly experience and our most fundamental concepts

about it.

So far we have limited ourselves to a picture in which a disembodied intelli-

gence acquires ideas about the external world as a result of its experiences. Let

us now make assumption, by no means universally accepted by philosophers, that

all mental events are rooted in biochemical brain events, and delve into the actual

workings of the human brain on the basis of that assumption. While brain science

is in its infancy, one of the known facts is that electrical signals are sent among

nerve cells along channels through variations in the concentrations of Na+, K +

and Cl− ions inside and outside the channels [17]. Given that the code for con-

structing the brain is encoded in the DNA which we argued owes it stability and

repeatable features ultimately to RQFT, and that the same holds for the ions

used in the signalling, we see that human minds, great or not, think alike not

just because of the similarities in the data they receive from a RQFT-shaped

environment, but because they themselves are also ultimately shaped by RQFT.

6. A truly classical universe?

Let us now try to imagine a Universe in which Planck’s constant h is not

merely small compared to macroscopic actions or angular momenta, but truly

21

and strictly zero. The laws of classical Physics that can be derived formally

from their quantum mechanical versions by focusing on expectation values and

letting h go to zero (even General Relativity, whose quantum origins are not yet

completely understood, has a tentative microscopic version in String theory) will

now, for the sake of argument, be regarded as being “exact” and “fundamental”.

These laws consist of (i) Einstein’s ﬁeld equations, with the stress-energy tensors

of the electromagnetic ﬁeld and of massive particles on the right-hand side, (ii)

geodesic equations for the motion of particles (ignoring the question of how such

particles may come into being within classical physics) in gravitational and elec-

tromagnetic ﬁeld backgrounds and (iii) Maxwell’s equations in curved space for

electromagnetic ﬁelds, with charge-current sources again on the right-hand side.

Such a system of equations has well-known problems such as runaway solutions

and inﬁnite self-energies for particles, so in a sense it is not entirely logical to

pursue this line of thought. Nevertheless, let us temporarily ignore these objec-

tions in order to sketch the qualitative aspects of the physical environment the

equations predict. A basic feature of such a universe must be the loss of energy

of accelerating matter through electromagnetic or gravitational radiation. The

slowed-down masses with or without charges will then tend to clump together

under attractive gravitational and electromagnetic forces. Unlike in quantum

physics, there will be no counterbalancing eﬀects such as the HUP or the PEP,

and collapses are bound to occur even if they may be delayed by initial veloci-

22

ties and angular momenta. The only imaginable result is a collection of Black

Holes, each one of which has angular momentum, mass and charge unlike any

other. There being no Planck’s constant, such Black Holes cannot evaporate via

Hawking radiation. The initial conditions will then determine whether the Black

Holes will eventually diverge from each other in an open universe or all will col-

lapse into a single hole. Provided it is physically possible at all, this is the likely

actual picture of Nature envisaged by “Classical Physics”, but it is clearly does

not resemble the world we are a part of.

Acknowledgements

I am grateful to Ali Alpar and Erdal In¨on¨u for helpful discussions and en-

couragement.

References

[1] Reichenbach, H. ”Philosophic foundations of Quantum Mechanics”, Univ. of

California Press (1965); Heisenberg, W. ”Physics and Philosophy”, Harper

Torchbooks (1966). .

[2] Zurek, W.H., Physics Today44(Oct. 1991), p.36; Giulini, D.,Joos, E., Kiefer,

C., Kupsch, J., Stamatescu, I. and Zeh, H.D. ”Decoherence and the appear-

ance of a classical world in Quantum theory”, Springer-Verlag (1966).

23

[3] Leibniz, G.W., Correspondence with Burcher de Volder (1698-1706), in ”The

Cambridge dictionary of Philosophy”, Audi, R. (ed.), Cambridge University

Press (1995). .

(1955).

[4] Plato, in ”Phaedo”, transl. by R. Hackforth, Cambridge University Press

[5] Frege, G. ”Die grundlagen der Arithmetik, Jena, (1884); Russell, B. ”History

of western Philosophy”, Unwin University Books (1961), p. 784.

[6] Russell, B. and Whitehead, A.N., ”Principia Mathematica”, Cambridge Uni-

versity Press (1910-1913).

Nelson, London (1958), p. 203.

[7] Whittaker, E. ”A history of the theories of Aether and electricity”, Vol.1,

[8] Schrodinger, E. ”What is life”, Cambridge University Press (1944).

[9] Feynman R. P., Nobel Lecture ”The development of the space-time view of

Quantum Field Theory”, Science 153 p. 702 (1966); Stueckelberg,E.C.G.,

Helv. Phys. Acta 14 p. 588 (1941).

[10] Einstein, A. and Infeld, L., ”The evolution of Physics”, Cambridge Univer-

[11] Dirac, P.A.M., ”Principles of Quantum Mechanics”, Oxford University

sity Press (1938).

Press, p.391 (1989).

24

[12] Pauli, W., Phys. Rev.58 716 (1940).

[13] Bargmann, V. and Wigner E.P., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.(USA)34 p.21 (1948).

[14] Weyl, H. ”Symmetry”, Princeton University Press (1952).

[15] Clagett, M. ”The science of mechanics in the Middle Ages”, Madison, Wisc.,

Univ. of Wisconsin Press (1959); Clagett, M. ”Greek sciences in antiquity”,

Part II, New York (1955); Nasr, S. H., ”Science and civilization in Islam”,

Harvard University Press (1968).

[16] Lieb, E. and Thirring, W., Phys. Rev. Lett.35 p.687 (1975); Lieb, E. ”The

stability of matter”, Rev. of Mod. Phys.48 p. 553 (1976); Lieb, E. ”From

atoms to stars”, 1989 Gibbs Lecture, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 22 p.1 (1990).

[17] Penrose, R. ”The Emperor’s new mind”, Oxford Univ. Press p.391 (1989).

25

