2
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
9
0
8
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

RESEARCH NEWS :
DIRECT OBSERVATION OF NEUTRINO OSCILLATIONS AT THE
SUDBURY NEUTRINO OBSERVATORY

B. Ananthanarayan and Ritesh K. Singh
Centre for Theoretical Studies, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560 012, India

A brief description of the path-breaking evidence for the observation of neutrino oscillations at the
Sudbury Neutrino Observatory is presented and the experimental principles and theory thereof are
brieﬂy discussed.

The Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (SNO), located
in Canada, has recently announced evidence for the
direct observation of oscillation of neutrino ﬂavors [1].
The observations indicate that during the ﬂight from
the interior of the sun to the earth, the neutrinos
produced as electron type neutrinos change their
ﬂavor. Neutrinos are fundamental particles that
come in three types (ﬂavors): electron, muon and
tau denoted by νe, νµ and ντ respectively. Electron
type (anti-)neutrinos are produced,
for instance,
in radioactive decays of certain heavy nuclei, and
are also produced copiously in stars during the
It may be recalled that
process of nucleosynthesis.
a long standing problem, called the “solar neutrino
problem”, associated with the shortfall in the number
of neutrinos observed on the earth as compared to
the number expected from calculations based on
the standard solar model and the standard model
of elementary particle physics. The solar models
happen to be very stringently constrained and the
ﬂux of neutrinos produced in the sun is known to
practically no uncertainty, due to extreme sensitivity
of the ﬂux to the values of the parameters going
into the solar model. As a result, it has been long
believed that any solution to the problem must
come from the elementary particle physics sector,
such as the oscillation of ﬂavors, or the possible
interaction of the neutrinos with the solar magnetic
ﬁelds which might signiﬁcantly scatter away the
neutrinos that were directed towards the earth. A
ﬂavor oscillation necessarily implies that the neutri-
nos are massive particles and was ﬁrst pointed out
a long time ago by the Italian born Soviet scientist
Bruno Pontecorvo. Whereas there are constraints
on the masses of the electron, muon and tau type
neutrinos (mνe ≤ 2.8 eV/c2, mνµ ≤ 170 keV/c2 and
mντ ≤ 18.2 MeV/c2), the oscillation can, in principle
probe diﬀerences of the squares of the masses and the
probability of conversion from one ﬂavor into another
depends on the path length between production
and observation, and on the kinetic energy of the
neutrino that is being observed. The observation
from SNO deﬁnitively shows that the electron type
neutrino oscillates into an admixture of the other
two ﬂavors. The SNO collaboration also reports a
possible day-night eﬀect [2], in that there seems to
be some indication that the probability of conversion
of the electrons depends on the path length which
depends on whether the observation is made during
the day or during the night.

The experiment is based on the principle of de-
tecting interactions of neutrinos with matter in an
ingenious manner, which uses heavy water as the
medium in which the interactions take place and
in which the reaction products are detected. This
diﬀers from earlier measurements which used normal
water, at Kamiokande and the super-Kamiokande
experiments, and from those based on radiochemical
measurements which used interactions of the neutri-
nos with nuclei of chlorine in carbon tetrachloride
or with gallium nuclei. For completeness, we note
that the solar neutrino problem was ﬁrst established
by the historic chlorine experiment of Ray Davis at
the Homestake Mine in South Dakota, USA, which
employs the following reaction to detect neutrinos

37Cl + νe → 37Ar + e−.

The Gallium experiments use the reaction

71Ga + νe → 71Ge + e−

The neutrinos that are observed at SNO are produced
in the core of the sun in the following reaction,

8B → 8Be + e+ + νe.

The kinetic energy of the neutrinos produced in this
reaction could vary from as little as a fraction of
an MeV to approximately 15 MeV. These neutrinos
interact with the water molecules in a variety of ways.
The normal water detector detects this neutrino
from its elastic scattering (ES) with the electrons
in the water molecules. The ES measurements are
predominantly sensitive to the electron type ﬂavor
only. The measurements of super-Kamiokande had
established from the event rates they observed, a
shortfall in the expected event rate, consistent with
the earlier radiochemical measurements which had
led to the classical solar neutrino problem. These
observations were based on the charged current (CC)
reactions. The full electroweak theory of Glashow,
Salam and Weinberg has established that the theory
also has, in addition to the conventional electromag-
netic interaction, what is called the neutral current
(NC) interactions. All the interactions arise from
the exchange of (virtual) intermediate vector bosons,
the CC interactions from W ±, the NC interactions
arise from a neutral boson called Z 0,
just as the
electromagnetic interactions arise from the photon.

Here we note that the main principle in both the
normal and heavy water detectors for the observation
of the scattered electron in the ES or the produced
electron in the CC reaction is that of the detection
of ˇCerenkov light produced by the ultra-relativistic
electron during its motion with its velocity exceeding
that of light in the medium (water). The ˇCerenkov
light is detected by photomultiplier tubes at the
boundary of containers. Note also that the water
has to be of extraordinary purity in order to prevent
attenuation of the light during it travel from the elec-
tron source to the detector. The measurements of the
ES and CC reaction rates by the SNO Collaboration
were reported earlier [3], which further conﬁrmed the
solar neutrino problem.

The remarkable advantage of
the heavy water
detector is its capability to observe the NC inter-
actions as well,
in addition to observing the CC
interactions. It must be mentioned that the construc-
tion of the SNO experiment was directly inspired
by an important paper by the late Herb Chen [4].
The crucial property of the heavy water detector
arises from the fact that the deuterium nucleus has a
remarkably small binding energy of 2.225 MeV. This
may be contrasted with the typical binding energies
of 8-9 MeV/nucleon for most nuclei. As a result, the
kinetic energy of the neutrinos is suﬃciently large so
as to induce the following reactions
νe + 2D → e− + 2p
(CC)
νl + 2D → νl + p + n, l = ν, µ, τ (NC)

The reason why the CC reaction above is sensitive
only to the electron-type neutrino is that kinetic
energy of the neutrinos produced in the boron
reaction is
suﬃcient only to produce electrons
(me = 0.511 MeV/c2), in accordance with Einstein’s
mass-energy equivalence, whereas the muons and the
tau-leptons are too massive to be produced in this
reaction (mµ = 105.7 MeV/c2, mτ = 1777 MeV/c2).
The NC reaction does not have this kinematic
constraint and is therefore sensitive to all ﬂavors.
The combination of the small binding energy of the
deuterium nucleus with the NC reaction is capable
of producing a characteristic signal which can be
detected when the deuterium nucleus is shattered
and the neutron is liberated. Nevertheless, the heavy
water detector observed the CC reaction above and

2

the ES reaction rates by 2001, but had to wait until
2002 to observe the NC. The latter required that
ultra-pure common salt (NaCl) be introduced into the
heavy water so that the neutrons produced in the NC
reactions could be absorbed by the Cl nuclei and then
produce a characteristic 8.6 MeV gamma ray signal.
Otherwise neutrons were detected by characteristic
6.25 MeV gamma ray when they get absorbed by
deuterium in heavy water. The neutron absorption
probability in heavy water is about 25% which in-
creased to 85% by addition of ultra-pure NaCl. This
was achieved and the results subsequently reported in
Ref. [1]. The ﬁnal numbers quoted therein translate
to 2/3 of the electron-type neutrinos oscillating
into muon and tau type ﬂavors. Furthermore, the
observation of a non-vanishing day night eﬀect shows
that there may be some regeneration of the electron
type neutrino ﬂux in the passage of the neutrinos
from the sun through the earth.
Such an eﬀect,
known as the Mikheyev-Smirnov-Wolfenstein eﬀect,
has been studied in the past and is now likely to be
constrained quite eﬀectively, or alternative vacuum
oscillation scenarios are likely to be constrained as
well. For a recent discussion of the impact of the
SNO measurements on theoretical scenarios, we refer
to ref. [5].

It must be mentioned again that the advantages
of the heavy water also leads to the possibility of
large backgrounds.
In fact, the SNO experiment is
located deep underground in nickel mines in Canada,
and the heavy water which is stored in a large acrylic
container is also surrounded by jackets containing
normal water in order to absorb radiation from the
surrounding rock and also from cosmic ray sources
which could easily generate spurious signals which
serve as a background.

In conclusion, we note that the remarkable ex-
periment at SNO based on the deep insights of Chen
has resolved the solar neutrino problem in favor of
a solution arising from neutrino oscillations, rather
than from unknown inadequacies of the standard
solar model. The SNO collaboration is expected to
improve its statistics and bring down uncertainties
in their measurements and will pave the way to
conﬁrming and constraining theoretical
scenarios
which account for neutrino oscillations.

[1] Q. R. Ahmad et al. [SNO Collaboration], Phys. Rev.

Lett. 87, 071301 (2001)

[2] Q. R. Ahmad et al. [SNO Collaboration], Phys. Rev.

Lett. 89, 011301 (2002)

Lett. 89, 011302 (2002)

[3] Q. R. Ahmad et al. [SNO Collaboration], Phys. Rev.

[4] H. H. Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 1534 (1985).
[5] J. N. Bahcall, M. C. Gonzalez-Garcia and C. Pena-

Garay, arXiv:hep-ph/0204314.

