2
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
8
0
0
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Science In Trauma

Bhag C. Chauhan∗
Centro de F´isica das Interacc¸ ˜oes Fundamentais (CFIF)
Departmento de Fisica, Instituto Superior T´ecnico
Av. Rovisco Pais, 1049-001, Lisboa-PORTUGAL

February 21, 2014

Abstract

Quantum theory has been proved as an outstanding mystery in modern
science. The predictions of science have turned out to be probabilistic. The
principle of determinism has failed. For systems like weather, earthquakes,
rolling dices etc... and of course human behaviour it has proved impossible,
for science, to describe a state of the system accurately for a long time
into the future. Moreover, modern cosmology has to rely on philosophical
assumptions. In the present work, it is argued –by taking into account of
the views of learned scientists and philosophers– that modern science can
never explain everything and it is totally impossible to discover the “Theory
Of Everything”. All these facts and results put a big question-mark (?) on
the grass-root level working of science. All scientiﬁc researches are based
upon ordinary sense perception, which keeps the outer physical universe
as a separate entity, that is something quite independent of the observer.
Basically, it is the observer –the knower– which makes perception possible.
The knower –human mind– is not included in our scientiﬁc theories.
It
seems that there is a serious ﬂaw resting at the base of our understanding
of nature. One should not forget: human-being (human mind) is a part of
nature and an essential component of our observations. There is a challenge
for the scientists to include this entity –the real observer– in their theories,
in order to recover the science from this drastic state of trauma.

1

1 Determinism is Killed

Introduction of quantum theory in modern science was shocking to the classical
perspective of understanding nature. Niels Bohr –one of the founders of the theory–
said: “Anybody not shocked by quantum theory has not understood it”. In this
quantum view of understanding nature –which is also called “Quantum Physics”–
the matter at its foundation does not behave like a machine. This completely
topples our classical framework of physics. The experimental evidences have
given recognition to quantum physics as a modern way of understanding nature.
So this is also called as “Modern Physics”. The fundamental understanding of
nature, with modern physics, is one of the most profound mysteries outstanding in
modern science. A pioneer scientist of the last century– Albert Einstein –in his old
age, said: “I used to think when I was young that sooner or later all the mysteries
of existence would be solved, and I worked hard. But now I can say that the
more we know, the more our existence turns out to be mysterious. The more we
know, the less we know and the more we become aware of the vastness... Science
has failed in de-mystifying existence, on the contrary it has mystiﬁed things even
more”.

For systems like weather, earthquakes, rolling dices etc... and human behaviour
(of course) it has proved impossible, scientiﬁcally, to describe a state of the system
accurately for a long time into the future. Instead, probabilities can be derived to
describe a state of the system which might happen in future. John Bahcall (a learned
astrophysicist) says [1]: “Science is Unpredictable”. The claim of determinism is a
failure in science. In quantum physics, determinism has been killed completely by
postulating the “Principle of Uncertainty”. Albert Einstein bothered much with
this principle and said: “God does not play dice”. According to this principle, “It
is impossible to measure every physical variable, of a microscopic particle, with
full accuracy”. This principle was highly controversial in the beginning but later
the experimental results have proved it. Accepting the uncertainty as a principle
clearly shows the inability of science to discover “The Ultimate Reality” which is
“Absolute” and requires the exactness/ perfectness of measurements.

2 Modern Cosmology on a Philosophical Base

As far as the origin and evolution of this universe –cosmology– is concerned, the
most popular theory in modern science is the “Big Bang Theory”. Although this

2

theory has passed some scientiﬁc tests, there are still many more trials which it
must undergo successfully. Scientiﬁc evidence strongly supports that the universe
had a deﬁnite beginning a ﬁnite amount of time ago. According to the big bang
theory there was nothing before the big bang and all the space-time must have
originated there and then. No matter/energy could exist before this bang as there
was no space and time for it to be in. In the context of a recent test of this theory,
John Bahcall writes [2]: “I am happy that the big bang theory passed this test,
but it would have been more exciting if the theory had failed and we had to start
looking for a new model of the evolution of universe”. In fact, there are many
domains of modern cosmology which are far from being settled. The biggest
problem of the big bang theory of the origin of the universe is philosophical –
perhaps even theological– what was there before the bang? [3]. This stands as
an embarrassing situation for the scientists. Robert Jastrow –the ﬁrst chairman
of NASA’s Lunar Exploration Committee– himself admitted [4]: “Astonomers
try not to be inﬂuenced by philosophical considerations. However, the idea of a
universe that has both a beginning and an end is distasteful to the scientiﬁc mind”.
To avoid this initial difﬁculty the idea of singularity was introduced in which
the universe expands from a singular point and collapses back to the singular
point and repeats the cycle indeﬁnitely [3]. The idea was appreciated to avoid the
philosophical –rather theological– base of the theory but the available experimental
evidences indicate that this type of oscillating universe is a physical impossibility
and facts support that the universe will expand for ever [5]. The attempts behind
this idea to avoid theistic beginning of the universe all fail [6]. Arthur S. Eddington
–a brilliant astronomer– once said: “The universe no longer looks like a thing but
like a thought”. The philosophical origin of the big bang cannot be denied.
Moreover, it has been known for some time that the fundamental constants of
physics (particle masses, coupling constants of the various forces etc...), in the
universe, are within a narrow range and ﬁne-tunned for life to exist. In the words
of a learned scientist –Steven Weinberg [7]: “It is almost irresistible for humans
to believe that we have some special relation to the universe, that human life is not
just a more-or-less farcial outcome of the chain of accidents reaching back to the
ﬁrst three minutes, but that we were somehow built in from beginning”.

3

3 Human Brain: A Mystery

For the last ﬁve decades there has been a dramatic advancement in neuroscience.
A variety of techniques has been developed to study which parts of the brain are
specialized for different tasks. Scientists can locate the speciﬁc regions in the brain
which become active when we read or write words, or solve equations, or move
any part of our body, or have a good or bad taste, or listen to music etc... But still
the working of the brain is an outstanding mystery in modern science. A model
brain is a hierarchy of self-organised parallel computers, where chaos theory is
also relevant [8]. A network of just a few neurons and a dozen connections could
merely learn a simple task like distinguishing between a dog and a cat. The human
brain is supposed to have about ten billion neurons, each with about ten thousand
connections. To understand the mechanism of such a complex system is not an
easy task and remains a mystery. The complicated human behaviour is a result
of the complexity in the working of the brain. Recent advances in physics and
neuroscience have reduced the hope that a machine mechanism would survive at
the grass-root level working of brain itself [8].

The subtle form of brain is “Mind”. Roger Penrose –a famous astrophysicist–
argued: “The mind is fundamentally quantum in nature and cannot ever be repli-
cated by a machine.” The science of mind is not well understood. So the future
predictions of the human behaviour have turned out to be impossible. At this stage
nothing concrete can be concluded about the working of human mind/ brain unless
the persisted mystery is solved. Although there is no direct evidence that quantum
computing occurs in the brain, there exist proposals to build quantum computers
which may eventually turn into sentient beings.

4 Fallacy in Perception

It is a well known fact that to make a perception possible, three basic elements must
be present: ﬁrst, the observer; second, the observable and third, the connection
between the ﬁrst and second. In order to understand nature we consider the human
body –a frame with the ﬁve sense organs and a brain– as the observer, an event
happening in nature as the observable and the electromagnetic wave spectrum as
the connection. A total perception of the observable, or the true knowledge of the
nature, is only possible if the observer is super-sensitive and error free and the
connection is full and perfect. Basically, it is only the capability of the observer

4

which is responsible for the perfectness of his/her connection with the observable.
In fact, if the observer is free from limitations –which the development of science
is trying to do– then new means of communication are possible and thereby the
strength in the connection is obvious.

It is well acknowledged that the human body is having a limited ability of
perception of the outside material world. It has ﬁve senses of perception: vision,
hear, taste, smell and touch. Nature has granted a narrow band of the electromag-
netic spectrum, for connection with the observables, to this body: a visible band of
light and partly to the infra-red region. Because of its limitations, this body is also
called by some philosophers as: “A Limited Instrument,”. It is true that with the
development of science we could expand our vision –communicate better with the
observables– and thereby understand nature better. The window of perception, em
spectrum, is being broaden by our scientiﬁc knowledge: the scientiﬁcally detected
(known) part of the spectrum extends from a low frequency of power induction to
a high frequencies of cosmic rays (λ ≈ 105 cm − 10−13 cm). But what lies
beyond, on either side of the band, we are not aware of.

It is quite evident that we can have the full information of the object and
thereby, the knowledge of ultimate reality of nature, only if the communication is
total. The total communication can be achieved by also using the knowledge of
the part of spectrum which lies beyond either side of the currently known range.
It is reasonable to speculate that only the total information of the observables and
the complete understanding of both sides of the communicating em spectrum can
project the ﬁnal –ultimate– reality of the nature. As the spectrum is unbounded, so
the understanding beyond either side of it up to any ﬁnite extension –which we are
doing– will always incomplete.It seems impossible to understand the completeness
of this unbounbed em spectrum and, thereby, obtain a total connection. There
persists always an error in perception. Therefore the efforts that are being made
to attain the complete knowledge of the universe, life and entire existence are not
going to be fulﬁlled with such a fallacy in perception.

5 TOE: Impossible

Certainly, the main goal of the modern science is to ﬁnd the ultimate answer;
to discover a “Theory Of Everything (TOE)”. But before thinking something
ultimate, let us ask a question from a learned scientist –Steven Weinberg : “Can
science explain everything?” He replied [9]: “Clearly not. There certainly always

5

will be accidents that no one will explain, not because they could not be explained
if we knew all the precise conditions that led up to them, but because we never
will know all these conditions”. He further added: “It seems likely that we will
never be able to prove that the most fundamental laws of nature are mathematically
consistent.”

This is the most difﬁcult phase science is passing through. As discussed earlier,
at this stage, science is suffering with the lack of the determinism. It is difﬁcult to
claim a perfectness in this probabilitistic, unpredicted environment of science. By
taking into account the above discussed facts and the views of leading scientists
it has become clear that, at the present stage, modern science is unable to hit its
ultimate target. There is no chance to touch the “The Ultimate Truth”. And the
discovery of “TOE” is an impossible situation.

6 Hammer of Nature

No doubt the progress of science has been much better in the 20th century and
very likely this progress will be intensiﬁed in future; yet, it does’t mean that the
culmination of science is nearby. If we forget about the above discussed difﬁculties
that modern science is waging with, and be highly optimistic (assuming that the
climax of science –the stage when science can explain everything– is not far off)
even then there is another problem ready to interupt the progress of science and
from which the science can never escape. And that is the repercussion of nature.
The nature will certainly take revenge of the damage that we have done and are still
doing to it. There is something which bothers me at this stage of high alert: the
way the nuclear weapons are being developed, the way the environment is being
polluted and the resources of earth are being exploited, the way the restlessness
of the world is growing are not going to wait for the science to ﬂourish upto
its climax. So, even then there is no certainty whether that culmination would
ever be reached. In fact, before that perfectness the modern civilization might be
destroyed by natural calamities, dangerous weapons and radiation hazards.

The advancement of science has changed all the spheres of life: social, eco-
nomical, political etc... The development of physical comfort has raised the level
of human happiness. To be happy one needs a lot of luxury. One’s desires have
been increased excessibly. As a result, there has been an incredible growth in
various vices like; anger, lust, ego, greed and selﬁshness etc... In order to enjoy
these immoral habits, one negatively beneﬁted the advancement of scientiﬁc tech-

6

nology: developed nuclear weapons, polluted the green earth environment and
nourished a criminal world. The human civilization is full of terror and hatred.
In the words of a famous American Civil-Rights Leader –Martin Luther King, Jr.:
“Our scientiﬁc power has outrun our spiritual power. We have guided missiles and
misguided men”. If we are awake then we could see there, a hammer of nature
ready to destroy modern civilization and, of course, science. “The fourth world
war will be fought with bows and arrows” a famous quote of Albert Einstein. And
there will be nobody to ask the question: “Is the climax of science, nearby?”

A Diagnosis

There is a serious need of introspection –to realise: what we have done; what
we are doing and what is going to happen. “The exploration of this ﬁnal frontier
has now become imperative. It is clear that most of the problems we face today
–global, social, and personal– stem from human thinking, perception and values.
The crisis is at its roots, a crisis of consciousness. Now, more than ever, we
need to understand our own minds and how to liberate ourselves from the limiting
egocentric modes of thinking so that we can achieve our true inner potential.
Nothing in current science can account for consciousness, yet consciousness is the
one thing we can not deny”: a revolutionary futurist, Peter Russell, says [10]. Well,
in my opinion, there is only one way which could solve all the above discussed
difﬁculties of science and let the science ﬂourish up to its climax: that is totally
related with the understanding of human consciousness. This awareness must
happen at the common mass level and not restricted only up to the scientists.

A serious ﬂaw seems to be resting at the grass-root level working of science. It
will be wise to understand fully the working of this objective method of scientiﬁc
studies which is only relying upon the sense perception of human body. All
scientiﬁc researches are based upon ordinary sense perception, which keeps the
outer physical universe as a separate entity, to be an independent existence, that
is something quite independent of the observer. Basically , we are separating the
real observer from the observation. To make a perception possible there must be
a subject –the knower– who can observe a phenomenon or an event with the help
of a connecting principle. It is not the physical part of human brain which acts as
the observer (the knower) and makes the perception possible, but there is a subtle
playback entity: human consciousness – “Mind”. The human mind is the doer,
the observer which interprets the messages collected from outside by the brain

7

with the help of sense organs and instruments. It makes a scientist to recognize or
refute the existence of an object or a phenomenon.

According to Eugene Wigner –American Physicist, Nobel Laureate: “The next
revolution in physics will occur when the properties of mind will be included in the
equations of quantum theory”. The most creative physicists have always empha-
sized that human consciousness is at the foundation of the scientiﬁc method behind
physics. Luis De Broglie –who proposed the idea of the wave-nature of particle–
said: “The structure of the material universe has something in common with the
laws that govern the working of the human mind”. This is the biggest challenge
for the scientists, namely to include the real knower –human consciousness– in
their theories. An important thing that I want to add here is: the human mind is
subjective only in its superﬁcial layers, however, it retains objectivity at all the
rest part of it. The objectivity property of the mind, dramatically simplify the
understanding of it. Moreover, the subjectivity at the superﬁcial levels is quite
understandable in neuro studies and in behavioural sciences. However, it can
prove tough for the scientiﬁc community to consider the great importance of this
human element in doing science but it is worth doing and enjoyable. Science is
“fun” [1].

It seems that the electromagnetic spectrum is “Eternal” in nature. By the
eternity of spectrum, I mean: it is always existing and independent of time. This
is there in hidden form and beyond our sense of perception. Only a part of it is
known to us and the rest is covered with our ignorance. It looks also sensible that
the spectrum has an inﬁnite spread, as nobody can deny its inﬁnite extensions on
both sides (large wavelength region and small wavelength region). The scientiﬁc
knowledge is just uncovering a region of its, hidden, unboundedness step-by-step
and, consequently, understanding the nature more and more. The understanding
of human mind can help science to know the completeness of unbounded em
spectrum and, thereby, to repair the fallacy in perception of the observables.

Everything we see around in nature is relative to each other. There is nothing
big and nothing small. The macroscopic and microscopic worlds are just our
classiﬁcation of the objects and the phenomena associated with them. These
classiﬁcations should not be treated as fundamental ones, since this division is
purely based on the observations recorded by the observer. It is the limitation of
our body, the observer, and thereby, the fallacy in perception which requires the
formulation of quantum mechanics, where classical mechanics fails, to describe
the physics of microscopic world. It can be nicely argued that the ultimate real
picture of nature can be only seen and explained with a single theory only if the

8

limitations of the observer are completely elliminated. In fact, the human mind has
this power of ellimination. The inclusion of the human consciousness in scientiﬁc
to solve the mystery of quantum theory and, thereby,
theories has a potency:
reabilitate the principle of determinism –which is currently lost in the mystery of
the theory itself. So, only the total inner potential of a human being –which will be
explored by full understanding of human consciousness– is capable of developing
the theory of everything (TOE). In my opinion, this is the only diagnosis which
can recover the modern science from this drastic state of trauma and enable it to
fulﬁll its ultimate goal.

References

[1] John Bahcall, “Two Secrets”; http://www.sns.ias.edu/∼jnb/.

[2] John Bahcall, “The Big Bang is Bang On”; Nature vol. 408, 2000.

[3] John Gribbin, “Oscillating Universe Bounces Back”; Nature vol. 259, 1976.

[4] Robert Jastrow, “Until the Sun Dies”; New York: W.W. Norton, p.31, 1977.

[5] Joseph Silk, “The Big Bang”, San Francisco, CA: W.H. Freeman, p.309,
1980; John Gribbin, “Genesis: The Origins of Man and the Universe”, New
York: Delacorte, p.316, 1981; Robert Jastrow, “God and the Astronomers”,
New York: W.W. Norton, p.123, 1978; E.J. Chaisson, “Early Results from
the Hubble Space Telescope”, Scientiﬁc American vol. 266[6], 1992.

[6] Hugh Ross, “The Fingerprint of God”; Orange, CA: Promise Publishing,

[7] Steven Weinberg, “First Three Minutes”; London: ANDRE DEUTSCH,

p.105, 1991.

1977.

[8] Jeffrey Satinover, “Quantum Brain”; John Wiley, 2001.

[9] Steven Weinberg, New York Review of Books; May 31, 2001.

[10] Peter Russell, http://www.peterussell.com/pete.html.

9

