3
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
8
0
2
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Mona Lisa - ineﬀable smile of quantum
mechanics

Slobodan Prvanovi´c
Institute of Physics, P.O. Box 57, 11080 Belgrade, Serbia

Abstract

The portrait of Mona Lisa is scrutinized with reference to quan-
tum mechanics. The elements of diﬀerent expressions are ﬁrstly recog-
nized on her face. The contradictory details are then classiﬁed in two
pictures that, undoubtedly representing distinct moods, conﬁrm di-
chotomous character of the original. Consecutive discussion has lead
to conclusion that the mysterious state Mona Lisa is in actually is
coherent mixture - superposition, of cheerfulness and sadness.

State of the physical system is among the most important concepts of
quantum mechanics. Being the primitive concept of the theory, it is usually
left undeﬁned. However, by state we mean a list of some relevant charac-
teristics of the system in question. More or less exact information about
the quantities pertaining to the system are on this list, telling us how it is
prepared. For operational reasons, state of the quantum mechanical system
is represented by some vector of the Hilbert space. Precisely, rays represent
states, while quantities are represented by the Hermitian operators acting in
this Hilbert space of states.

The spectral decomposition of the Hermitian operator, in the simplest

possible case when the spectrum is discrete and nondegenerate, reads:

ˆA =

ai|aiihai|,

N

X
i=1

(1)

where N is dimension of Hilbert space. In this expression we have used Dirac
notation: |aiihai| is the projector on the vector |aii - a formal representative

1

of the state. The real numbers ai, being the eigenvalues - characteristic
values, of the operator ˆA, represent possible numerical realizations of some
quantity (which is represented above by ˆA). Here, we are interested only in
one quantity - observable, and to each of its quantitative realizations ai there
corresponds appropriate state of the system described by |aii and projector
|aiihai|.

Measurement is a process of acquisition of knowledge about the value of
some observable and about the state of the system. Measurements are per-
formed by some specially designed and, usually complicated physical systems
- apparatus. They interact with measured systems and, on the other side,
display numbers as results. And as the result of particular measurement
of ˆA, one can get only some eigenvalue ai. Apparatus, or part of it, has
to be classical mechanical system. Otherwise, observer would not be able
to obtain understandable information about the value of measured quantity,
which would be against the purpose of apparatus.

In classical theory, when one performs the same experiment on equally
prepared systems whose state is completely known, one always obtains the
same results, i.e., there is no probability argument. Quantum mechanics,
on the other hand, is essentially probabilistic theory. Probability is intrinsic
characteristic of this theory since there are situations when one performs the
same experiment on equally prepared systems in completely known state and
obtains diﬀerent outcomes. In such cases, it is impossible to predict which ai
will result from particular measurement. Knowledge of |ψi enables prediction
of probability of ﬁnding system in the state |aii only. It is given by:

hψ|aiihai|ψi = Tr(|ψihψ| · |aiihai|),

(2)

where, according to the Dirac notation, h | i stands for the scalar product
of involved vectors. This a priori calculated probability matches with the
relative frequency of ai (number of occurrences of this event divided by the
total number of performed measurements) if the number of performed exper-
iments tends to inﬁnity. The set of equal, but independent systems used in
these experiments are called ensemble. More on the formalism of quantum
mechanics one can ﬁnd in [1-2].

In case when the system is in state |ψi 6= |aii, while ˆA is being measured,
more than one outcome will happen due to nonvanishing probability. On
the other hand, these probabilities are unavoidable, they do not follow from

2

some observers fault or imperfection of instruments. Their existence is not
due to the subjective, but to objective reasons.

Of course, as in classical mechanics, observer can be somewhat ignorant
regarding the state of quantum system. In this way additional probability
argument is being introduced into play. But, this incomplete information
probability is avoidable in principle, so it has to be distinguished from the
above-discussed one.

Formalism of quantum mechanics enables accurate reﬂection of all possi-
bilities when the preparation of a system is under question. Firstly, concepts
of pure and mixed states are distinguished. Pure state is the one that is
completely known and for which ensemble of systems cannot be divided into
subsets of diﬀerently prepared systems. Otherwise, if we are not in position
to control precisely preparation of systems or ensemble splits into inequiv-
alent subensembles, we are talking about mixed state. Secondly, in order
to enlighten diﬀerence between these types, instead of vectors, operators are
used to represent states. Then, pure state is given by projector, e. g., |ψihψ|.
It is obviously in one-to-one correspondence with |ψi. In case of mixed or
impure state we know probability distribution over pure states: we know that
there is probability w1 that system is in |ψ1ihψ1|, w2 that it is in |ψ2ihψ2| and
n
so on. Standard notation for mixed state is ˆρ = P
j=1 wj|ψjihψj|, (n ≤ N).
n
Of course, for probabilities (weights) wj it holds P
j=1 wj = 1. If the operator
is idempotent(ˆρ2 = ˆρ) then the corresponding state is pure while, otherwise,
it is mixed.

For our purpose, it is interesting to distinguish coherent from noncoherent
mixtures. Despite of its name, coherent mixture is pure state, while nonco-
herent mixture is proper mixed state. Diﬀerence is best seen on concrete
2
example. Coherent mixture of, say |a1i and |a2i is |ψi = P
i=1 ci|aii or, in
the operator form, it is given by:

Noncoherent mixture of the same states is:

Former state is pure and latter is not. Purity of coherent mixture rests on
presence of the so-called oﬀ-diagonal, i 6= j, elements. Due to these terms,

(3)

(4)

2

2

X
i=1

X
j=1

cic∗

j |aiihaj|.

2

X
i=1

wi|aiihai|.

3

operator (3) is projector (idempotent). All systems in the ensemble repre-
sented by (3) are in the same state - |ψi. For (4) situation is diﬀerent; fraction
of the ensemble, equal to w1, is in |aii and the rest is in |a2i. Coeﬃcients
ci, appearing in (3), are probability amplitudes, while wi of (4) are probabil-
ities of appropriate states. Probability to obtain ai, when system is in state
(3), is cic∗
i , while for (4) this probability is wi (these two probabilities might
be equal for particular choice of ci and wi). Occurrence of |aii in case of
coherent mixture is conﬁrmation of intrinsic probability and since this state
is assumed to be linear combination of the eigenstates of measured observ-
N
able, i.e., |ψi = P
i=1 ci|aii, one ﬁnds that intrinsic probability of quantum
mechanics is closely related to the superposition principle.

It could be said that, according to the superposition principle, if |aii
are allowed states of quantum system, then such is every linear combination
N
i=1 ci|aii where, of course, choice of ci ensures that |ψi has the norm
|ψi = P
N
equal to one (hψ|ψi = 1). When system is in state P
i=1 ci|aii, it is not in
one of |aii, while, in some sense, it occupies all those states for which ci 6= 0.
This is, perhaps, the most intriguing feature of quantum mechanics; so to
say, something can be here and there simultaneously, without being here or
being there exactly.

There are many experiments in quantum mechanics demonstrating this
strange existence. Without going into technical details, let us describe double-
slit experiment in brief. It shows that some micro system behaves like a wave
during undisturbed propagation along the interference device. Namely, by
repeating the experiment many times, as an accumulated result observer gets
so-called interference pattern. Its undulating character indicates that each
system from the ensemble went through both slits simultaneously, i. e., that
2
i=1 ci|aii during propagation. (Vector |a1i means ‘sys-
systems were in state P
tem went through the ﬁrst slit’ and vector |a2i means ‘system went through
the second slit’.)

It is possible to construct slightly diﬀerent experimental settings for which
each system passes through only one slit, despite of that both are at disposal.
System behaves like a particle then being localized in a very small region
around one of the slits. As was mentioned above, it is impossible to predict
through which of the slits system will go. Measurement of path gives the
answer to that question in particular case. But, this measurement, on the
other hand, destroys interference pattern - it causes collapse of state: state
(3) that describes correctly ensemble before the measurement changes into

4

state (4) after the measurement.

Collapse or reduction of state is another novelty of quantum mechanics
closely related to superposition of states. It is discontinuous change of state
and occurs when quantum system interacts with classical one (measuring
device) and that in case when state of measured system is superposition of
the eigenstates of measured observable. Reduction is transition from coherent
to noncoherent mixture of involved states. Potential existence of superposed
properties before the collapse become actual after it; before the collapse all
systems of the ensemble are in the same state, afterwards ensemble splits
into subensembles of systems in diﬀerent states. Thorough analysis of the
collapse one can ﬁnd in [3].

Superposition as a typical quantum phenomenon is hard to understand
because we are familiar with classical objects, not quantum, and our minds
operate according to the classical logic. If some particle like system of our
everyday experience can be in one of |aii, then that is all, it certainly cannot
be in some superposition of these states. With waves of classical world we
do not have intuitive problems since for these collective phenomena we have
not noticed some sort of spontaneous collapse. That is, our problems with
superposition come from the fact that reality of both |aii’s and their linear
combinations have to be treated on equal footing. We are faced with particle
like objects, for which |aii’s can be observed and not their linear combinations
and waves to which only |aii’s in linear combination could be attached, but
neither of them can appear separately.

How to understand superposition of states when the world we live in is the
world of macroscopic objects for which this concept does not apply? How,
then, to feel the novelty brought by quantum mechanics? Is it possible to ﬁnd
some instructive example without invoking physics of micro systems; example
that will demonstrate superposition and related topics in a way understand-
able even to inexpert? These and similar questions can be summarized in
the following one: can fundamental elements of quantum mechanics be found
out of physics?

The answer could be, we believe, aﬃrmative. Optimism is based on that
there is the whole world of symbols. It is true that, as macroscopic material
objects, they behave according to the laws of classical mechanics, but their
meaning need not to be constrained by this theory. They could be organized
in a way that corresponds to quantum logic. This would be diﬃcult, but it
is not impossible. The art oﬀers great many possibilities for doing that since

5

there are no limits on its expressive power. The piece of art can lead us to
some well organized world which has nothing in common with the one of our
everyday experience.

What we shall try to show here is that this has already been done. Pre-
cisely, we shall try to show that expression of Mona Lisa by Leonardo da
Vinci [4], Fig. 1, the famous smile, actually is superposition of two diﬀerent
expressions. But, before going into detailed elaboration, few remarks are in
order.

First of all, and this is a commonplace, Leonardo was extremely gifted
person with extraordinary skills. Because of his aesthetic sensibility, deep
providence and patience in work, due to the investigations in anatomy and
awareness of laws of nature, especially optics, it is impossible that Mona
Lisa’s expression and the whole painting, is accidental or consequence of
uncontrolled gesture. It is result of precise intention and tremendous eﬀort.
Second remark is that Leonardo was interested in combining things, about
which one can ﬁnd beautiful lines in the novel Resurrected Gods by Dimitry
Sergeyevich Merezhkowsky. Juxtaposition of diﬀerent or contradictory enti-
ties, as it is well known, rises tension or confrontation among them. So, the
piece of art gets new quality; object is no longer static and stable, it is in
latent motion, has a sort of vitality.

Finally, let us stress that we are not interested here in whom, if any, was
a person that posed for Leonardo. (Some believe that picture is a kind of
self-portrait since Gioconda has the artists scull.) We are not interested in
why Mona Lisa has such expression as well. (Doctor Filippo Surano believes
that Mona Lisa suﬀered from bruxism - an unconscious habit of grinding the
teeth; so the reason for smile is in compulsive gnashing of teeth. On the other
hand, Janusz Walek [5], in order to prove that the smile is in accordance with
the contemporary manners, quotes Agnolo Firenzuola who advised women
of Gioconda’s time how to smile in charming way.) We only want to address
the question why Mona Lisa’s smile is mysterious.

The whole collection of various impressions regarding Mona Lisa’s smile
‘.
one can ﬁnd in [6]. There is quotation of Th´eophile Gautier’s opinion:
.
. but the expression, wise, deep, velvety, full of promise, attracts you
irresistibly and intoxicates you . . .’ Ernst Hans Gombrich [7] continues by
saying that ‘What strikes us ﬁrst is the amazing degree to which Lisa looks
. Like a living being, she seems to change before our eyes and to
alive .
. Sometimes
look a little diﬀerent every time we come back to her.

.

.

.

6

.

.

.

.

‘The eyes have the brightness and moisture of the living ones.

she seems to mock at us, and then again we seem to catch something like
sadness in her smile. All this sounds rather mysterious and so it is, .
’
This is in accordance with Giorgio Vasari’s description, given in Lives of the
Artists:
.
. The opening of the mouth, .
, seemed not to be colored, but to be
living ﬂesh. . . . The picture is considered the most splendid work, nearly
alive.’ Neuroscientist Margaret Livingstone conﬁrms this by claiming that
the viewer sees Mona Lisa’s face as constantly changing, it has a ‘ﬂickering
quality - with smile present and smile gone - which occurs as people move
their eyes around Mona Lisa’s face.’ Roy McMullen [6] explains this by
claiming that ‘ .
. the Mona Lisa is certainly a very undecided sort of
creation . . . the painting is self-contradictory not only in its details but also
in its message: the ambiguity is both a part of the subject and in a sense the
whole of it.’

.

.

Enigmatic, mysterious and incomprehensible are often used epithets of
Gioconda’s remarkable portrait and her opaque, vague or simply ineﬀable
smile. Abandoning oneself, spectator goes through perplexing transforma-
tion of impressions. Sensation that she is smiling is instantaneously repelled
by her melancholy; cheerfulness becomes sadness and vice versa. Mona Lisa
irritates us for she is changing moods and this perpetual change is what makes
us to believe that she is alive. On the other hand, if observer scrutinizes de-
tails, then striking dissimilarity among elements indicating Gioconda’s feel-
ings appears. One can classify them in distinguished sets: one pertaining
to smiling, cheerful Mona Lisa, one reﬂecting melancholy or disappointment
and one containing elements that connect previous producing complete and
realistic face.

For example, there is a shadow at the right corner of Gioconda’s mouth,
oriented downwards and suggesting sadness, see Fig. 2. Beside it, there is
a dark area on the right cheek starting from the end of the lips and going
upwards at some angle. This, of course, designates cheerful mood. So, these
two shades certainly have opposite eﬀects on spectator and the picture is full
of such narrative pieces. Instead of enumerating them, let us point out that
Leonardo has linked these contradictory elements in a kind of dark and long
strip. It consists of these shades at the ends and a hardly noticeable spot
that is approximately at the same horizontal level as the mouth, being at its
right. Purpose of this spot is to integrate signs of unequal meaning in an
indivisible entity, making smooth transition among them without belonging

7

completely to any of these two.

One can proceed in this way by analyzing picture piece by piece: shadow
above her left eye designate sorrow, lightened region between temple and left
eye lifts up the cheek giving contribution to the opposite impression etc. We
believe that much better than listing cheerful and cheerless elements, is to
present visually ﬁnal result. This is done by Fig. 3. On one side, all details
spoiling the impression that Gioconda is sad are covered, while, at the other
side, excluded are those that disturb us in seeing her cheerfulness. (Needless
to say, covering the original with white squares was the only intervention
taken.) Like damaged frescos, these faces, we believe, oﬀer enough material
necessary for their understandings. First one shows Mona Lisa in a state of
calm contemplation on some unhappy events. This is conﬁrmed almost im-
mediately, just after our imagination straightforwardly interpolates residual
pieces. The other one shows her plain or maybe malicious smile; certainly,
there is no dolor in her eyes at this picture.

.

Before discussing these pictures from the point of view of physics, let us
comment original and try to explain how it was possible to incorporate two
distinguished expressions into single portrait. In Leonardo’s own words, given
in one of his recommendations to painters [8], ‘. . . laughing and weeping,
.
. are very similar in the motion of mouth, the cheeks, the shutting of
. ’ So, for the great master,
the eyebrows and the space between them . .
it was not a priori impossible to combine even mutually exclusive emotions.
But, this similarity could only be necessary, deﬁnitively not suﬃcient for
designing such combination. Since Leonardo studied anatomy with both
artistic and scientiﬁc intention, he was capable to create the most adequate
face. (For instance, there are claims that Mona Lisa had swellings on lower
jaw, which strongly inﬂuenced distribution of shades on her cheeks.) Then
comes his treatment of light and shadow. As stressed in [9], Leonardo avoided
above all light which casts a dark shadow. He preferred so-called diﬀuse
light - the one that comes from many sources, which are usually of low
intensity. What is more important, according to Kenneth Clark, for Leonardo
shadow was an adjunct of form. This means that delicate modiﬁcations of
shape with purpose of introducing and then balancing discrepancies could be
accomplished with a proper use of light and shadow. Closely connected to
this is the manner in which the painting has been executed. In [7] it is said
about this that ‘If the outlines are not quite so ﬁrmly drawn, if the form is
impression of
left a little vague, as though disappearing into shadow, .

.

.

8

dryness and stiﬀness will be avoided. This is Leonardo’s famous invention,
which Italians call sfumato - the blurred outline and mellowed colors that
allow one form to merge with another and always leave something to our
imagination.’ And further ‘.
. what we call its expression rests mainly
in two features: the corners of the mouth and the corners of the eyes. Now
it Are precisely these parts which Leonardo has left deliberately indistinct,
by letting them merge into a soft shadow. That is why we are never quite
certain in which mood Mona Lisa is really looking at us.’

.

.

Regarding quantum mechanics and its terminology, system under investi-
gation is a female face. Measured observable is the mood of portrayed person.
Among many of its eigenstates, we are here interested only in two of them,
say sadness and cheerfulness. (Perhaps one can ﬁnd more adequate terms to
name the appropriate moods of Mona Lisa, but that is not important here
for their purpose is just to refer to the pictures given in Fig. 3.) How it looks
like when the system is in one or the other of these eigenstates we have tried
to demonstrate by Fig. 3. To be precise, there given pictures only indicate
what are Gioconda’s pure states of sadness and cheerfulness. However, we
ﬁnd them suﬃciently suggestive - after few moments our imagination pro-
vides complete image. (It would be hard task to ﬁnish them because it has
to be done in a manner that imitates Leonardo’s, i. e., it demands skills
which present author does not possess. Therefore, we ignore the fact that
complete and incomplete pictures of the same face might be taken as diﬀerent
systems.)

When the ensemble of systems is in one of the eigenstates of the measured
observable, then one always obtains the same result after measuring that
observable. Exactly this happens with pictures of Fig. 3. Namely, if the ﬁrst
picture is under consideration, one has the impression that Mona Lisa is sad
while looking at the second one always leads to the same conclusion - Mona
Lisa is smiling. In each of these two cases, ensemble consists of the picture we
are looking at, perceiving it dozens of times in a second. At one instant we
notice some detail on the picture and conclude that she is in particular mood,
then we look again, notice some other detail, make the same conclusion and
so on. Looking at the picture is nothing else but repetition of measurement
and the absence of doubt about the expressions at the end means that there
are no deviations, i. e., all results of observations coincide.

Since these two pictures have been extracted from the original, it is plau-
sible that the Gioconda’s portrait is dichotomous. Her disquieting smile is a

9

mixture of two pure states and the question is whether it is coherent or non-
coherent one. We shall try to convince the reader that it is coherent mixture
- superposition. For that purpose, we ﬁrstly have to propose some criterion
or procedure how to distinguish coherent from noncoherent mixture of the
same states. (It is futile to try to measure some other observable, which does
not commute with the considered one. All our sensual perceptions mutually
commute; otherwise, it would be ease to understand quantum mechanics.)

Diﬀerence between coherent and noncoherent mixtures is in that the for-
mer are pure states, while the latter are not. For every pure state - vector
of the Hilbert space, there is one vector orthogonal to it if the space is two-
dimensional. This is not the case for mixed states in such spaces. So, the
procedure how to distinguish mentioned mixtures could be the following: is it
possible to ﬁnd state that is orthogonal to considered one or not? Here, this
is it possible to imagine, or perhaps paint, portrait with expression
reads:
opposite to the Mona Lisa’s, where opposite means as opposite as are those
given in Fig. 3. We believe that the answer is aﬃrmative. It is possible, but
its realization demands artist of talent and skills comparable to Leonardo’s.
That mysteriously crying Gioconda would be as provocative as is the
original since there would be some happiness in her dolorous eyes. And this
would be the only similarity; her undecided expression would not be in any
respect close to the Mona Lisa’s, on the contrary.

However, since this way of convincing the reader that portrait shows
superposition of two moods rests on hardly feasible process, let us propose
the other one. As mentioned above, formal diﬀerence between coherent and
noncoherent mixture of the same states is in presence of so-called oﬀ-diagonal
terms in the former state. Due to them, this state is idempotent, i. e., pure.
So, if Mona Lisa’s expression is coherent mixture, then there should be some
oﬀ-diagonal elements.

What could be those oﬀ-diagonal elements? In order to answer this ques-
tion, let us start with Fig. 3. The pictures of this ﬁgure undoubtedly display
certain well-known moods. This means that these pictures present Mona
Lisa’s pure states: ﬁrst one shows Mona Lisa in the pure state of sadness,
say |a1i, while the other shows her in the pure state of cheerfulness, say |a2i.
To have a portrait showing some pure state presumes that all its narrative
elements are in adequate position. Therefore, all details of the ﬁrst picture
are in state |a1i, while those of the second are in |a2i or, in the operator
form, |a1iha1| and |a2iha2|, respectively. So, diagonal elements are details

10

of the portrait that undoubtedly designate certain emotion or mood. Then,
oﬀ-diagonal elements |a1iha2| and |a2iha1| can only be those details of the
portrait that somehow reﬂect two moods, those that are at one side related
to the ﬁrst and at the other side to the second mood or those that connects
parts of opposite meaning. And Mona Lisa’s portrait contain such two-sided
details, e. g., mentioned dark spot beside the mouth.

All items of Leonardo’s painting that are between signs of explicit cheer-
fulness and explicit sadness are examples of these oﬀ-diagonal elements. Con-
necting opposite, |aiihaj| (i 6= j) details make Gioconda’s expression smooth,
they provide continuous ﬂow from parts of one to those of the other mood.
Due to them, Mona Lisa is in pure state. We take her portrait as realistic just
because of these oﬀ-diagonal elements; they make her expression somehow
compact, persistent or impenetrable.

Mona Lisa is in pure state that is unusual combination of cheerfulness
and sadness, i. e., her state is coherent mixture or superposition of cheerful-
ness and sadness - it is (3) and not (4). Without |aiihaj| (i 6= j) elements,
Mona Lisa’s portrait would be collection of unrelated dissonant pieces with
noticeable discontinuity among them. It would not be irresistible at all; no
one would be confused or irritated by such senseless assemblage. Literally,
it would be noncoherent mixture. (It is easy to make such picture by gluing
together pieces of two photos of the same person in diﬀerent moods.)

Finally, if one has agreed that Gioconda’s portrait is superposition of two
states, then one might wonder what happens when we look at her. If we do
it unintentionally, at one instant we notice some suggestive detail and make
conclusion about her mood. That is, we ﬁnd result of measurement. At next
moment, we repeat observation and make new conclusion and so on. We
notice diﬀerent parts of the picture randomly, so our impression varies; it is
unpredictable what shall draw our attention at particular moment. In this
way her expression is being projected either to cheerful or cheerless state,
depending on what we have just seen. While we look at her, Mona Lisa’s
expression spontaneously collapses from (3) into one of two possible states
- to watch her means to make measurement of her mood and this causes
reduction of the state she is in. States like (4) in adequate way summarize
our opinions about which we may say that more often we ﬁnd Gioconda
clearly smiling than being sad, so w1 < w2. With state such is (4) we can
represent ensemble of our impressions and what is astonishing is that, in
the aggregate, we end with Mona Lisa in mixed state (noncoherent mixture)

11

despite of the fact that we are confronted with static object.

Our attempt to avoid these reductions results in puzzle. If we try to catch
Gioconda’s real mood without rushing into conclusion, we notice |a1iha1|,
then |a1iha2| leads us to |a2iha2| and |a2iha1| takes us back.
Instead to
conquer her, we do not know what to think about her at all; by trying to
comprehend her expression in toto, we actually discover state (3). And we
are less satisﬁed with it than with changeable impression since we are unable
even to entitle this state. What we see is not just beyond our experience,
this expression is graspable in its true meaning, it evades our ﬁnal judgment
leaving us in confusion. And what we have to do is not to look for trivial
resolution of the problem, with experience of Mona Lisa’s smile we should
transcend limits of our cognitive power.

To conclude, enigmatic smile of Mona Lisa shows that, beside the clas-
sical logic, the underlying logical structure of quantum mechanics can be
implemented in creating the piece of art as well. It is an example of superpo-
sition of two diﬀerent states. Leonardo’s masterpiece is a visual illustration
of coherent mixture (3), it could be an emblem of these mixtures. On the
other hand, the only way to understand entirely Mona Lisa’s expression and
our consecutive impressions is by referring to quantum mechanics. If we do
not employ subtle formalism of this theory, it seems to be impossible to ﬁnd
convincing and full explanation of our mental journey. Since our minds oper-
ate according to classical logic, just described processes are normal reactions;
we have to simplify her expression by projecting it to well known ones or we
shall be driven along the M¨obius strip.

References

[1] P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Oxford Univer-

sity Press, London, (1947)

[2] A. Messiah, Quantum mechanics I, North-Holland, Amsterdam, (1961)

[3] S. Prvanovi´c and Z. Mari´c, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 39, 1467 (2000)

[4] L. da Vinci, Mona Lisa, 1503-1506, Oil on wood, 77 x 53 cm, Louvre,

Paris

12

[5] J. Walek, Female Portraits by Leonardo da Vinci, Wydawnictwo Anna,

[6] R. McMullen, Mona Lisa: The Picture and the Myth, Honghton Miﬄin,

Krak´ow, (1994)

Boston, (1975)

[7] E. H. Gombrich, The Story of Art, Phaidon Press Inc., London, (1995)

[8] L. da Vinci, Trattato della Pittura, Editore Carabba, Lanciano, (1914)

[9] K. Clark, Leonardo da Vinci, Penguin Books, London, (1989)

13

This figure "Fig1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0302089v1

This figure "Fig2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0302089v1

This figure "Fig3.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0302089v1

