IMAFF-FM-03/16
physics/0308078

3
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
7
0
8
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Brane Worlds, the Subanthropic Principle and the
Undetectability Conjecture

Beatriz Gato-Rivera

Instituto de Matem´aticas y F´ısica Fundamental, CSIC,
Serrano 123, Madrid 28006, Spain ∗

ABSTRACT

In the recent article ‘Conﬂict between anthropic reasoning and observa-
tion’ (gr-qc/0303070) Ken D. Olum, using some inﬂation-based ideas and the
anthropic premise that we should be typical among all intelligent observers
in the Universe, arrives at the puzzling conclusion that ‘we should ﬁnd our-
selves in a large civilization (of galactic size) where most observers should be,
In this note we discuss the intriguing possibility
while in fact we do not’.
whether we could be in fact immersed in a large civilization without being
aware of it. Our conclusion is that this possibility cannot be ruled out pro-
vided two conditions are met, that we call the Subanthropic Principle and the
Undetectability Conjecture. The Subanthropic Principle states that we are
not typical among the intelligent observers from the Universe. Typical civi-
lizations of typical galaxies would be hundreds of thousands, or millions, of
years more evolved than ours and, consequently, typical intelligent observers
would be orders of magnitude more intelligent that us. The Undetectability
Conjecture states that, generically, all advanced civilizations camouﬂage their
planets for security reasons, so that no signal of civilization can be detected
by external observers, who would only obtain distorted data for disuasion
purposes. These conditions predict also a low probability of success for the
SETI project. We also argue that it is brane worlds, and not inﬂation, what
dramatically could aggravate the ‘missing-alien’ problem pointed out ﬁrst by
Enrico Fermi.

August 2003

∗e-mail addresses: t38@nikhef.nl, bgator@imaﬀ.cfmac.csic.es

Innumerable suns exist; innumerable earths revolve
around these suns in a manner similar to the way
the seven planets revolve around our sun.
Living beings inhabit these worlds.

Giordano Bruno, 1584

1 Preliminaries

Do mountain gorillas know that their ‘civilization’ is embedded in a larger ‘civilization’
corresponding to a much more evolved and intelligent species than themselves? Do they
know that they are a protected species inhabitating a natural reserve in a country inside
the African continent of planet Earth? The answer to these questions is certainly no,
they do not know nothing about our social structure, our countries, borders, religions,
politics, ..... nor even about our villages and cities, except perhaps for those individuals
living in a zoo, or adopted as pets.

In the same way, the human civilization of planet Earth could be immersed in a
much larger civilization unknowingly, corresponding to much more evolved and intelligent
species than ourselves. After all, the sun is only a young star among thousands of millions
of much older stars in our galaxy and the possible existence of such advanced civilizations
is only a question of biological evolution doing its job, slowly but relentlessly through
the millennia. If this happens to be the case it is quite sensible to assume that these
individuals regard our planet as a natural reserve, full of animal and vegetal species, the
Solar System being nothing but a small ‘province’ inside their vaste territory.

In this situation, the answer to the usual remark ‘if there are advanced extraterrestri-
als around, why they do not contact us openly and oﬃcialy and teach us their science and
technology?’ seems obvious. Would any country in this planet send an oﬃcial delegation
to the mountain gorilla territory to introduce themselves ‘openly and oﬃcially’ to the
gorilla authorities? Would they shake hands, make agreements and exchange signatures
with the dominant males? About teaching us their science and technology, who would
volunteer to teach physics, mathematics and engineering to a bunch of gorillas? In ad-
dition one has to take into account the limits of the brain capabilities, independently of
the culture or education. For example, let us ask ourselves how many bananas would be
necessary for the most intelligent gorillas to understand the Maxwell equations of elec-
tromagnetism (even if they watch TV or listen to the radio). In the same way we may
wonder how many sandwiches, potato chips or cigarretes would be necessary for the most
intelligent among our scientists to understand the key scientiﬁc results of a much more

1

advanced civilization. Our intellectual faculties and habilities are limited by our brain
capabilities that are by no means inﬁnite. Therefore it is most natural and sensible to
assume that there may exist important key scientiﬁc concepts and results whose under-
standing is completely beyond the brain capabilities of our species, but is within reach
of much more evolved and sophisticated brains corresponding to much more advanced
civilizations.

The motivation for this idea has been the recent article ‘Conﬂict between anthropic
reasoning and observation’ by Ken D. Olum [1]. In this article the author presents some
computations regarding the probabilities that typical intelligent observers belong to a
large (galactic size) civilization at the present time. The underlying idea is that in the
observable Universe, because of the existence of thousands of billions of stars older than
the Sun, there must be huge civilizations much older than ours which could have spread
widely through the Universe. (Although not mentioned in [1], Enrico Fermi was probably
the ﬁrst scientist to consider similar arguments, leading to some ‘missing-alien’ problem
or paradox∗.) In particular, using the assumption of an inﬁnite Universe, like in models
of eternal inﬂation, and doing some conservative computations, Olum predicts that ‘all
but one individual in 108 belongs to a large civilization’. Then he invokes the anthropic
premise that we are typical individuals and, as a result, he predicts that there is a
probability of 108 versus 1 that we belong to a large civilization. Dropping the inﬁnite
Universe assumption, but keeping still inﬂation, the author claims that the predictions are
not very diﬀerent than for the previous case. After analysing several possibilities of where
the problem might lie the author concludes: ‘A straightforward application of anthropic
reasoning and reasonable assumptions about the capabilities of other civilizations predict
that we should be part of a large civilization spanning our galaxy. Although the precise
conﬁdence to put in such a prediction depends on one’s assumptions, it is clearly very
high. Nevertheless, we do not belong to such a civilization. Thus something should be
amiss....... but then what other mistakes are we making.....?’

In this note we present what we think is the simplest possible solution to Olum’s and
Fermi’s ‘missing-alien’ problems and paradoxes. As we will discuss in detail, we could
well be part of a large civilization spanning our galaxy (or a large region of it) without
being aware of it. Therefore one obviously natural solution is that we do belong to a
large, very advanced civilization, but we are not ‘citizens’ of it because of our primitive
low status. The two major mistakes of Olum’s, therefore, would have been to assume:
ﬁrst, that we are typical intelligent observers, and, second, that to belong to a civilization
implies to be a citizen of it.

Besides, Olum’s arguments implying that inﬂation must necessarily aggravate the
(very serious) ‘missing-alien’ problem do not seem very convincing and it is some brane
world scenarios[2], in our opinion, what could in fact aggravate dramatically this problem.

∗We thank Juan Luis Ma˜nes and Cumrun Vafa for pointing out this fact to us.

2

The reason is the following. If there exist thousands, or millions, of parallel universes
separated from ours through extra-dimensions, it would be natural then to expect that
some proportion of these universes would have the same laws of physics than ours (pre-
sumably half of these would be of matter and the other half of anti-matter), and many of
the corresponding advanced civilizations would master the techniques to travel or ‘jump’
through (at least some of) the extra dimensions. This opens up enormous possibilities
regarding the expansion of advanced civilizations simultaneously through several parallel
universes with the same laws of physics, resulting in multidimensional empires. It could
even happen that the expansion to other parallel galaxies through extra dimensions could
be easier, with lower cost, than the expansion inside one’s own galaxy†.

In many other universes, however, the laws of physics would be diﬀerent, correspond-
ing perhaps to diﬀerent vacua of the ‘would be’ ultimate Theory of Everything, resulting
probably in ‘shadow matter’ universes with respect to ours. This means that shadow mat-
ter would only interact with our matter gravitationally, in the case it would be brought
to our Universe using appropiate technology. This does not mean, however, that the
shadow universes would be necessarily empty of intelligent beings. If some of them had
advanced civilizations, some of their individuals could even ‘jump’ to our Universe....
but we could neither see, nor talk to, the shadow visitors (and the other way around),
although they could try to communicate with the ‘would be’ intelligent beings of our
Universe through gravitational waves, for example. Regarding anti-matter universes, the
intelligent anti-observers would not send colonizers either‡.

We must also point out that in [1] there is a continuous, repeatedly use of the concept
‘intelligent observer’ without a deﬁnition of its meaning. This fact makes diﬃcult to
follow Olum’s arguments and computations properly. For example, do the Cro-Magnon
and Neandertal mankinds qualify as civilizations of intelligent observers? How about the
very primitive human beings living nowadays in some forests? Do they qualify? Do they
belong to ‘the civilization’ of planet Earth even if they know very little about it?

For the discussion in next sections we will use the following intuitive deﬁnitions:

Primitive civilizations: Are those civilizations that have a remarkable use of technol-
ogy in everyday life but are uncapable to leave their planets to colonize other ones in
diﬀerent stellar systems. Their scientiﬁc knowledge can have many degrees, ranging from
zero to remarkable high levels. In our planet it seems that only the groups of human
beings from, approximately, the last 20.000 years qualify as primitive civilizations, corre-

†The ﬁrst scientists to consider extra-dimensions and parallel universes were probably Maxwell and
Faraday in the 19th century. Outside the scientiﬁc realm this idea is many thousands of years old. At
present we are still in a very premature phase in the study of brane worlds and we do not know whether
these ideas are in fact realistic. Cumrun Vafa thinks that the fact that we do not see aliens around could
be the ﬁrst proof of the existence of brane worlds: all advanced aliens would have emigrated to better
parallel universes (our Universe has zero measure)[3].

‡although they could send unwanted anti-prisoners, their arrival being known as gamma-ray bursts.

3

sponding to what anthropologists call the Modern Man, not so the groups of the various
versions of the Early Man, who would only qualify as very primitive civilizations. We
call the individuals of the primitive civilizations primitive intelligent observers.

Advanced civilizations: Are those civilizations technologically capable to colonize
other planets from diﬀerent stellar systems, ranging from a few planets until thousands of
them or more in the case of very advanced civilizations. Depending on their technological
level they could even travel through extra dimensions (if they exist) and they could visit
and colonize planets located in ‘would be’ nearby galaxies in parallel universes. In this
case, they could even expand and colonize more eﬃciently through some extra dimensions
than inside their own galaxies. We call the individuals of these civilizations advanced and
very advanced intelligent observers, respectively.

2 The Main Ideas

Let us discuss in detail the possibility that our small terrestrial civilization is embed-
ded in a large civilization unknowingly. This will lead very naturally to the the proposal
of two major ideas that we call the ‘Subanthropic Principle’ and the ‘Undetectability
Conjecture’.

To start let us come back to the main argument. In our galaxy there are thousands
of millions of stars much older than the Sun. Therefore, it seems most natural to expect,
without the need to invoke inﬂation, that in a reasonable amount of stellar systems
technological civilizations should have appeared, and a fraction of them (even tiny) should
have survived enough to spread to, at least, large regions of the galaxy. It is then very
remarkable the fact that the Solar System has never been encountered or colonized by
any advanced civilization,..... or has it?

In our opinion there is an important ﬂaw in Olum’s (implicit) assumptions about the
relations between the diﬀerent civilizations put into contact in the process of expansion.
Although he does not mention this crucial issue, one gets the impression that he believes
that the more advanced civilizations will push the less advanced ones to their own level in
order to integrate them, or rather they will exploit, damage, or annihilate them in order
to conquer the planet, in the case of aggressive colonizers. We fully agree that aggressive
advanced civilizations will exploit/damage/annihilate the less advanced civilizations as
much as it is convenient for them. In the case of non-aggressive advanced civilizations,
however, the possibility that they will integrate the less advanced ones only makes sense
if those ones are not that inferior. That is, if the gap between the two civilizations is not
very big, then it is realistic to expect that the superior civilization will push the inferior
one to their own level, to some extent at least. In some cases, however, the non-aggressive

4

advanced civilizations will encounter planets with primitive or very primitive civilizations,
with an enormous gap (technologically, scientiﬁcally and genetically) between them. In
particular, the diﬀerences between their brain capabilities and those of the primitive
individuals could be pathetic. In these circumstances, it is completely unrealistic and
naive to expect that the advanced individuals will try to integrate the primitive ones into
their own civilizations. They rather will behave ‘ecologically’ towards them, treating
them as sort of ‘protected species’ and not interfering (or only very discretely) with their
natural evolution.

With this insight it is now much easier to accept the possibility that the Solar System
could have been encountered or colonized many thousands, or even millions, years ago
by, at least, one non-aggressive advanced civilization, who treated and still treat our
planet as some protected natural reserve. As a matter of fact, they could have even
brought many plants and animals to planet Earth, including our ancestors, presumably
to improve their life conditions (they could have been in danger of extinction in their own
planet, for example). Perhaps the Solar System has been visited by aggressive colonizers,
as well as non-aggressive ones, resulting in battles or just paciﬁc negotiations between
them. Perhaps the aggressive losers will come back in the future, to try again ....

This view about ourselves, a small primitive civilization immersed in a large, advanced
civilization, leads straightforwardly to the realization that we could ﬁnd ourselves not
among the typical intelligent observers of our galaxy, but only among a small proportion
of primitive intelligent observers instead, completely ignorant of their low status. The
typical intelligent observers would be the citizens of the advanced and very advanced
civilizations who would ‘own’ the galaxy. But our galaxy is just one typical galaxy from
our observable Universe. This leads very naturally to our ﬁrst proposal:

The Subanthropic Principle: We are not typical among the intelligent observers from
the Universe. Typical civilizations of typical galaxies would be hundreds of thousands, or
millions, of years more evolved than ours and, consequently, typical intelligent observers
would be orders of magnitude more intelligent that us.

Observe that the Subanthropic Principle is almost equivalent to the proposal that,
at present, all typical galaxies of the Universe are already colonized (or large regions of
them) by advanced, or very advanced, civilizations, a small proportion of their individuals
belonging to primitive subcivilizations, like ours. Whether the primitive subcivilizations
know or ignore their low status will, most likely, depend on the ethical standards of
the advanced civilization in which they are immersed.
If the standards are low, the
individuals of the primitive subcivilizations will be surely abused in many ways, in the
same way that in our civilization large groups of human beings abuse other human beings
in weaker positions, as well as animals in general. Therefore, in this case the primitive
individuals will be painfully aware of their low status. If the ethical standards of the
advanced individuals is high instead, then very probably they will respect the natural

5

evolution (biological, social, cultural) of the primitive subcivilizations, treating them
‘ecologically’ as some kind of protected species. In this case, that we think could well
describe the situation of the terrestrial civilization, the primitive individuals would be
completely unaware of the existence of the large advanced civilization in which they are
immersed.

Now there is an important remark: if the Solar System is part of the territory of an
advanced civilization, why we do not detect any signal of civilization in any of the solid
planets and large satellites in it? It would be most natural if they had built bases all
along the Solar System (including underground and submarine bases in planet Earth)
and maybe some colonies here and there on, or beneath, the surface of some solid planets
and large satellites (this is exactly what we plan to do in the future ourselves!). The
simplest answer would be that they do not ﬁnd the Solar System attractive enough
to live themselves and, as a consequence, they have only a few tiny bases diﬃcult to
detect. However, independently of whether or not they ﬁnd the Solar System attractive
to build colonies, we believe that all advanced civilizations must be necessarily aware
of the existence of aggressive advanced civilizations and, as a result, they should have
developped very sophisticated camouﬂage systems, so that no signals of civilization can
be detected by any external observers (neither by their space probes). Probably, in many
cases they even manipulate and distort the global data of their planets (temperature, air
composition, etc.), to fool external observers for disuasion purposes§. This is the content
of our second proposal:

The Undetectability Conjecture: Generically, all advanced enough civilizations cam-
ouﬂage their planets for security reasons, so that no signal of civilization can be detected
by external observers, who would only obtain distorted data for disuasion purposes.

Observe that, if this conjecture turns out to be true, then we cannot be sure whether
the terrestrial civilization is the unique civilization inhabitating the Solar System, as we
ﬁrmly believe (this statement is independent, in fact, of whether or not our civilization is
embedded in a large advanced civilization, we only needed to have ‘advanced neighbors’).
In fact, the inconsistency in the scientiﬁc reasoning used in the astronomical observations
of planets and satellites is remarkable. One uses as input the non-proved assumption that,
at the sources, there are no intelligent beings manipulating the data that we receive, and
then one concludes that there is no signal of intelligent life, as the data prove. But this
assumption could turn out to be wrong. The right claim would be in this case that

§It may sound strange that advanced civilizations would need to protect themselves against aggres-
sors. However, there is not a single proof or indication that the ethical development of a civilization
or an individual, grows in parallel with their level of material well-being or with their technological
and scientiﬁc development. One may also argue that advanced aggressive civilizations must annihilate
themselves, what seems a sensible guess. The crucial issue, however, is not whether they will annihilate
themselves but how much damage they can produce to other civilizations (primitive as well as advanced)
before they annihilate themselves.

6

there is no signal of primitive civilizations, like ours, who would allow themselves to be
detected by external observers, but nothing can be said about the possibility of advanced
civilizations, capable to fool our telescopes, detectors and space probes, and who would
not allow themselves to be detected.

Finally, we must mention that the ﬁrst scholar, at least in western history, who
suggested that many stars out there could have planets similar to ours: with plants,
animals, people, etc., was Giordano Bruno, in the 16th century. He claimed that the
Sun was only one star among the many thousands, and therefore, like the Sun, many
other stars would also have planets around and living beings inhabitating them[4]. To
appreciate the genius of Giordano Bruno one has to take into account that he lived at
the time when more than 99% of the intellectuals believed that the Earth was the center
of the Universe, and a few others, like Copernico and Galileo, believed that it was the
Sun, instead, the center of the Universe, the stars being some bright heavenly bodies of
unknown nature¶. Nowadays we know that the Universe has no center and that our planet
is only a tiny particle of dust in its inmensity. In spite of this, for many human beings the
Earth is still the center of the Universe, the chosen planet inhabited by the most perfect
and intelligent beings all over the Universe: the Crown of the Creation. (There are even
regular scientists and ‘intellectuals’ who wonder whether the whole Universe was created
just for us, terrestrial human beings, to exist!).

3 Conclusions and Final Remarks

We have discussed the possibility that our civilization could be embedded in a large
advanced civilization spanning (at least) a large region of our galaxy. This should be
expected, in fact, since in our galaxy there are many thousands of millions of stars much
older that the Sun. Using two simple and natural assumptions we see that this possibility
cannot be ruled out.

The ﬁrst assumption explains why the members or citizens of the large civilization
would not interact and socialize with us (openly and oﬃcially, at least). The reason
would be that we do not qualify as full members, neither as associates, nor to be in
the queue for applications, although we perhaps qualify as pets or ‘little friends’. This
situation we generalize, taking into account that we live in a typical galaxy, resulting
in the Subanthropic Principle that states that we are not typical among the intelligent
observers from the Universe, but much below the standards.

The second assumption, that we call the Undetectability Conjecture, explains why we

¶For these and other ideas Giordano Bruno was imprisoned eight years and ﬁnally burned at the stake
in Rome, in piazza Campo di Fiori, the 17th February 1600. The catholic church, which some years ago
apologized for the treatment given to Galileo, has never apologized, however, for the treatment received
by Giordano Bruno.

7

do not detect any signals of this large civilization in which we would be immersed. The
reason would be that, generically, all advanced civilizations are undetectable for security
reasons, due to the existence of aggressive advanced civilizations. In any case, why would
advanced civilizations allow alien civilizations to watch their cities, laboratories, militar
installations, etc., when they could fool them very easily instead?

The Subanthropic Principle is almost equivalent to the proposal that all the typi-
cal galaxies of the Universe are already colonized (or at least large parts of them) by
advanced, or very advanced, civilizations, which is a most natural guess taking into ac-
count the very old age of many thousands of millions of stars which populate the typical
galaxies.
In these large advanced civilizations there would always exist, generically, a
small percentage of individuals which belong to primitive subcivilizations. If the ethical
standards of the advanced individuals are low, then the primitive individuals will be
abused in many ways (maybe even annihilated). If the ethical standards of the advanced
individuals are high instead, then probably they will treat the primitive individuals in
an ecological way; that is, like a protected species living in a natural reserve.
In this
case, which could well describe the situation of our civilization, most of the primitive
individuals would completely ignore the existence of the advanced civilization in which
they are immersed.

We have also argued that the idea of brane worlds, although still in very premature
stage, could in fact aggravate enormously the ‘missing-alien’ problem pointed out ﬁrst by
Enrico Fermi. The reason is that, if other parallel universes exist with the same laws of
physics than ours, it could happen that advanced civilizations could be technically capable
to ‘jump’ through the extra dimensions to our galaxy for expansion and colonization
purposes. As a result, it could even happen that the ‘owners’ of the Solar System (if
they exist) had come from another universe and had created a huge multidimensional
empire, with large pieces of territory in several ‘parallel’ galaxies. It could also happen
that advanced civilizations would ﬁnd more eﬃcient (cheaper, energetically preferable)
to expand along extra dimensions than inside their own galaxy.

Finally, in the Appendix we discuss the issue of possible contacts and interactions
between advanced civilizations or individuals and primitive civilizations or individuals.
It seems very unlikely that non-aggressive advanced civilizations would ‘introduce them-
selves’ to any primitive civilization. Nevertheless, we have identiﬁed three major causes
or reasons which could motivate individuals of advanced civilizations to seek interactions
or relationships with primitive individuals: scientiﬁc purposes, entertainment purposes
and criminal purposes. We also point out that the Subanthropic Principle and the Unde-
tectability Conjecture predict a rather low probability of success for the SETI project, the
reason being the low percentage of technological civilizations susceptible to be detected
(the period of detectability of an average civilization could last less than 500 years).

8

Appendix

In what follows we will discuss the possible sources of contacts and interactions be-
tween advanced civilizations or individuals and primitive civilizations or individuals. As
we argued in the preliminaries, it is very unlikely that a non-aggressive advanced civi-
lization would contact any primitive civilization ‘openly and oﬃcially’ (at least until the
latter reaches a remarkable degree of development that our civilization has not reached
yet). Aggressive advanced civilizations, however, would ‘introduce themselves’ before,
after, or during the strike, for their own convenience. (The fact that our civilization has
never been attacked by aggressive aliens, as far as history knows, could be indeed a clue
that we belong to an advanced civilization which protects planet Earth, as part of its
territory).

If we now consider possible contacts and relationships between individuals of advanced
civilizations and primitive individuals, rather than between their civilizations, many more
possibilities appear. Trying to identify which advanced individuals could seek interactions
or relationships with primitive individuals, and for which reasons, leads us to distinguish
three main sources of contacts:

1) Scientiﬁc research by regular scientists related to life-sciences, such as biologists,
medical researchers, anthropologists, sociologists, psychologists, etc. Whether or not the
corresponding research activities could damage the primitive individuals (physically or
mentally), would depend on the legal regulations of the advanced civilizations regarding
ethical treatment towards individuals of primitive civilizations.

2) Entertainment, aﬀection, etc. That is, one reason for an individual of an advanced
civilization to establish contact with primitive individuals could be simply to have fun
and relax. The advanced individual could have, with respect to the primitive individuals,
the kind of feelings that push us to interact and play with cats and dogs and many other
animal species. In addition, if in our planet there are millions of cat-lovers and millions
of dog-lovers, and there are even snake, pig, .... and gorilla-lovers, it is most natural to
expect that there may exist some terrestrial-human-lovers among advanced aliens. Why
not? This would apply specially to those advanced individuals who must spend long
periods of time working in primitive planets, living in underground or submarine boring
bases, which surely would exist in our planet in the case that our civilization is embedded
in a large civilization (the workers in the bases being the ‘guards’ or militars that take
care of the planet).

3) Criminal purposes of all kinds, including activities by regular scientists which
would be forbidden by their legal ethical regulations. We can imagine dozens of diﬀerent
criminal purposes for which the primitive individuals could be kidnapped, tortured and
even killed, including abject topics such as ‘high gastronomy’ and sadist games. To be

9

realistic, one only has to think of the treatment that some cruel human beings give to their
victims, be either other human beings (often children) or animals. The point is that the
ethical level of an individual, or a civilization, does not necessarily grow in parallel with
their technological and scientiﬁc achievements, or with their level of material well-being.
In the case that our civilization is embedded in a large civilization, one of the tasks of
the ‘guards’ living in the bases would be, undoubtely, to chase away the human-hunters
and other outlaws.

Regarding the SETI - search for extraterrestrial intelligence - project, if the Unde-
tectability Conjecture turns out to be true, then SETI turns into SETPI: search for
extraterrestrial primitive intelligence. The reason is that, in this case, only primitive civ-
ilizations could be detected by external observers. On the other hand, if the Subanthropic
Principle is correct, then the primitive civilizations would be very scarce compared to the
total amount of technological civilizations, and even more scarce would be the ones with
an appropriate technological level to produce electromagnetic emissions to be detected by
distant civilizations. (Observe that the period of ‘detectability’ of an average civilization
could last less than 500 years). Therefore the probability for one primitive civilization
to detect another one would be very small. For these reasons the Subanthropic Principle
and the Undetectability Conjecture predict a rather low probability of succes for the
SETI projectk.

Finally we should mention that, already for twenty years or more, there are regular
scientists who take very seriously some claims of alledged extraterrestrial contacts, to
the extent to even orient their own research in lines suggested by the alien intelligences.
This is, for example, the case of the french physicist Jean-Pierre Petit, from CRNS, who
ﬁrmly believes, or believed, in the alien authenticity of the ‘planet Ummo documents’:
thousands of typed pages received by ordinary mail during the sixties and seventies
(mainly), by many astonished citizens all over the world (several of them in Spain, where
the Ummo-aﬀaire attracted very much the attention of the media, but also in many
other countries including Japan). Jean-Pierre Petit has written two books[5] about this
strange issue. Let us notice that this case would correspond to some ‘SEUI’ (search

kMaybe the SETI-experts should join the competition for collaboration: the ‘human antennas’ or
‘alternative-SETI’-experts, who claim to have long-term, well established contacts with alien partners,
some of them ‘sitting at home’ in their own planets and some others living temporarily in our planet in
underground or submarine basis. The guiness record in such relations is probably held by the spanish
‘grupo Atzlan’ from Madrid, which for more than twenty years gather every saturday night to establish
(what they claim to be) telepathical communications with a group of sociologists of planet Apu, orbiting
Alpha Centauri, which are sitting at home, or in the oﬃce. Giants more than three meters tall, white
skin and white long hair, the apunians would had colonized Apu, with no natural life of its own, around
100.000 years ago. One million years more advanced than us, their life span would be about 1.200
terrestrial years (the Apu-year being very unaccurate, they say, because they have two suns). With
three more glands in the brain than us, they would master telepathy, which propagates at almost
inﬁnite speed and is their unique means of communication (that is, they do not speak with the mouth).

10

for extraummita intelligence) project since the claim is that they would have come to
our planet for exploration and scientiﬁc research attracted by our electromagnetic junk∗∗.
(Observe that if the ummitas are extraterrestrials, then we are extraummitas!).

A last remark is that we have never done any investigation in the subject of alledged
alien contacts. As a result we have essentially no opinion about the true or false alien
nature of the ummitas, the apunians, and several other species circulating through the
media. Nevertheless, we believe that it must be an impossible task to identify true alien
contacts (if they exist at all) just by reading the reports given to, or written by, their
terrestrial partners. The reason is that, for our intuition, the claims of civilizations much
more advanced than us must necessarily sound ridiculous, hilarious, crazy, science ﬁction
ideas. But the same would have happened if we had described our TV sets, our planes,
our microwave ovens, our computers, etc .....to people only 100 years ago!. Let us also
notice that many persons, including many scientists, have a very deep rooted reluctance
and aversion to accept the possibility of the existence of extraterrestrial species much
more advanced and intelligent than us, who could even visit our planet. We call this
prejudice the ‘Crown of the Creation Syndrome’ (CCS), for obvious reasons. Curiously,
whereas many religious persons are not CCS suﬀerers, many atheists are (the reason
could well be that they grew in very religious families which implanted in their children’s
minds strong impressions of the greatness and uniqueness of the human species).

References

[1] K. Olum, ‘Conﬂict between anthropic reasoning and observation’, gr-qc/0303070.

[2] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos and G.R. Dvali, Phys. Lett. B429, 263, 1998; Phys.

Rev. D 59, 86004, 1999; Phys. Today 55N2, 35, 2002.
L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4690, 1999.

[3] C. Vafa, private communication.

[4] G. Bruno, On the Inﬁnite Universe and Worlds, 1584.

[5] J.P. Petit, Enquˆete sur des extraterrestres qui sont d´ej`a parmi nous, 1991; Le Myst`ere

des Ummites, 1995.

∗∗Landing on the french Alps around 1956, after a six-month trip from Ummo (Wolf constellation, 14
light years distance), they would have spent several years learning our culture and some of our languages.
Then they had started typing letters explaining their culture, history, science, technology, metaphysics,...
and sending them to average, normal citizens, making sure that our belief in their existence would spread
very slowly in order not to disturb our social structure. About 2.500 years more advanced than us, their
technology and communications would rely heavily on the use of gravitational waves, the electromagnetic
waves being only for ‘beginners’. They claim that our Universe is embedded in a ten-dimensional Cosmos.

11

