3
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
0
2
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Point-Contact Spectroscopy

Translation from the russian edition: Moskwa, Izdatelstwo ”Znanije”, Serija ”Fizika”, N12, (1989)

Yu. G. Naidyuk, I. K. Yanson
B. Verkin Institute for Low temperature Physics and Engineering
National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine,
61103 Kharkiv, Ukraine

February 2, 2008

Abstract

8 How to measure the second derivative 13

The history is described of how one of the most
commonly used electric circuit components, an ordi-
nary electric contact, has become a powerful tool for
the physicists to study various mechanisms of elec-
tron scattering in metals. The physical principles of
spectroscopy of quasi-particle excitations in metals
by means of point contacts (PCs) whose dimensions
range from only a few to tens of nanometers are pre-
sented in a popular form.

9 Point contact instead of reactor

10 Study of electron-phonon interaction

11 Magnons and excitons

12 From pure metals to alloys and compounds 18

13 Contact heating

14 Electrical ﬂuctuations in PCs

PACS 73.40.Jn

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Contacts Around Us

3 Electrons and Phonons

4 Waste recovery

15 PCs in a high-frequency electromagnetic ﬁeld 25

16 Study of PCs on semimetals and semiconductors 26

17 Spectroscopy of superconductor

18 New trends of research

19 Conclusion

14

15

16

20

24

28

29

31

5 What happens inside the contact

1

Introduction

6 Some theoretical fundamentals

7 Procedures for PCs creating

The most interesting events and phenomena both in
everyday life and science are those which should be
characterized by the preﬁx ’super’. This is usually the

1

2

3

6

7

9

11

1

case when the objects in question are under extreme
conditions. Thus, on the verge of XX century, a great
impression was made, for example, by the discovery
of all-penetrating invisible X-rays or the phenomenon
of resistance loss (superconductivity) in some metals
at low temperatures. Today the problem of controlled
thermonuclear fusion is constantly kept in the focal
point.
Its solution, however, involves heating and
conﬁnement of plasma at a superhigh temperature of
hundreds million degrees.

As to the solid state physics, one of the aspects of
which is dealt with in this booklet, the most striking
results have been obtained when studying superpure
and perfect or highly disordered (amorphous), high-
quality laminated structures and other compounds of
complex composition. In the ﬁrst place, the greatest
achievements are gained if the substance under in-
vestigation undergoes the extreme aﬀects of a high
magnetic ﬁeld, low and super low temperatures, ex-
tra high pressure or electromagnetic radiation.

If all the events described above are associated with
the preﬁx ”super”, how to make them compatible
with the word ”point” used in our case ? It becomes
clearer if one deciphers the word ”point” as super
small, i.e. a point contact (PC) stands for a contact
between two substances over a very small area. A
question arises, how small is that area and what it can
be compared with. Naturally, a lower bound is set by
the interatomic spacing in a solid, an upper bound
being less clearly deﬁned to within one micrometer.
Since in this case we are interested in the current
passage through such contacts, the term ”super” can
be also employed to estimate the density of current.
Thus the current densities of 109 to 1010 A/cm2 are
achieved in PCs without substantial heating, though
bulk conductors would momentarily evaporate under
these conditions.

The other word, spectroscopy, probably, does not
require any detailed explanation. In a more general
sense, spectroscopy is a method of measuring the en-
ergy spectrum of a given object. For example, when
analyzing the emission or absorption spectra of an
atom, one can determine the positions of its energy
levels. A spectrum of diﬀerent collective excitations
also exists in solids since the atoms are united into a
single ensemble. Such expressions as the energy spec-

trum of electrons, phonons, magnons, etc., are well-
known in the solid-state physics. Therefore, the term
”point-contact spectroscopy” can be interpreted as a
method of measuring the elementary excitation spec-
tra in conductive solids with the aid of PCs of super
small size. In this method, the contact itself seems to
play the role of analytical instrument, a certain kind
of spectrometer.

The point-contact spectroscopy has proved to be a
comparatively simple, available and highly informa-
tive method. Within the last decade, very impressive
results have been obtained in this rapidly developing
ﬁeld by physicists in many countries of the world, as
will be described below.

2 Contacts Around Us

In our everyday life, we permanently deal with diﬀer-
ent electric contacts by means of which current from
the source is transmitted to the user and distributed
over the circuit. Undoubtable, in number of cases the
operation of electrical appliances depends on reliable
contacts connecting diﬀerent sections of electric cir-
cuits. Consequently, the requirements for trouble free
and stable operation of the contacts are growing from
day to day. This problem has become especially top-
ical due to the rapid growth of microelectronics when
the number of separate elements per unit volume has
increased by a factor of tens of thousands.

From the very inception of electrical engineering,
researchers began to study the electric properties of
contacts between conductors. The results of these
activities were summed up by the German scientist
R.Holm in his basic work ”Electric Contacts Hand-
book” published in 1961. Scientists and engineers
have noticed that the electrical resistance of two
pieces of metal tightly pressed to each other is appre-
ciable higher than could be expected assuming that
the electric conductivity at contact is the same as
that inside the conductors. The following reasons
have been advanced. The ﬁrst one is connected with
the fact that any real surface, even when polished
mirror-like, has some microscopic irregularities, as a
result of which in the contact region the electrodes
come in contact only at separate sections. Hence, the

2

true contact area can be considerably smaller than
the apparent size of contact. The other reason is that
the surfaces of metallic electrodes are always coated
with a thin layer of oxides or other compounds ad-
sorbed by atoms from the air, organic molecules and
other ’dirt’. All these substances, as a rule, possess
either dielectric or semiconductor properties. As a re-
sult of it a direct electric contact is far less than the
total area of mechanical contact between two conduc-
tors. Current will not ﬂow in those places where the
dielectric ﬁlm is suﬃciently thick; if the ﬁlm thick-
ness does not exceed a few nanometers, part of the
current will pass due to the tunneling eﬀect; metallic
conductivity will be eﬀected only at the part of con-
tact area which is free from ﬁlm and ’dirt’ because
of their damage or absence. No matter how simple
the contact between two electrodes may look, the real
picture can be rather complicated.

The interest in the study of small-size contacts is
connected not only with their technical applications.
They proved to be a most sensitive tool in the hands
of scientists. Thus, in the middle of sixties Academi-
cian Yu. V. Sharvin from the Institute of Physical
Problems of the Russian Academy of Sciences pro-
posed to make experiments in which PCs were used
to inject electrons into thin metallic plates. Then a
magnetic ﬁeld was applied, the injected beam was
focused on the opposite surface of the plate where
the second similar contact was placed to act as a de-
tector. By changing the magnetic ﬁeld intensity and
relative positions of contacts on the sample surface,
one can observe the focusing of electrons both along
and across the ﬁeld lines. As to the later case, such
experiments were ﬁrst made by V. S. Tsoi at the Insti-
tute of Solid-State Physics of the Russian Academy
of Sciences. The detector was capable of register-
ing both the electrons emitted directly by the injec-
tor and those once or repeatedly reﬂected from the
surface. The results of such studies yielded helpful
information on the Fermi surface geometry and elec-
tron scattering by the sample boundary. However,
to describe further investigations more substantially,
we will present some fundamentals of the electronic
theory of metals in the next chapter.

3 Electrons and Phonons

An atom is known to possess a deﬁnite set of en-
ergy levels at which the electrons reside. When the
atoms combine to form a solid, the wave functions
(or orbits for simplicity) of the valence electrons of
neighboring atoms overlap. Thus, the electrons can
move along a crystal, i.e. they actually become col-
lective and are no longer bound to a deﬁnite atom.
According to the quantum picture, the product of
particle energy uncertainty δε and the lifetime in a
particular state δτ is a constant proportional to the
Planck’s constant ¯h, i.e. δεδτ
¯h. Therefore, the
lifetime δτ of an electron on a stationary atomic or-
bit is large, and thus the energy uncertainty δε is
small, i.e. the energy level is narrow enough. The
valence electrons in a solid are no longer bound with
speciﬁc atoms, δτ becomes the smaller, the closer are
the ions and the easier it is for the electrons to pass
from one site to another. As a result of it the value of
δε increases respectively and the atomic energy lev-
els become the energy bands δε wide. If a substance
consists of N atoms, this band will contain N energy
levels at which all the collective electrons reside.

≃

In the quantum mechanics, the microparticle be-
havior depends on whether they have an integer (0,
1, 2, ...) or half-integer (1/2, 3/2, 5/2, ...) spin. A
spin is a quantum characteristics of a particle which
is associated with its intrinsic angular momentum.
The number of particles being in the same state with
the same energy is unlimited for those with an inte-
ger spin named bosons. On the contrary, only one
particle with a half-integer spin, a fermion, can ex-
ist in a state with similar parameters. Electrons are
fermions with a 1/2 spin, as a result of which only
two electrons with opposite spins can be located at
the same energy level. According to this principle, at
a temperature close to absolute zero all the electrons
cannot reside at the minimum energy level and are
forced to successively ﬁll the higher-lying energy lev-
els in the allowed band. Coming back to the band in
a monovalent solid consisting of N atoms comprising
N states, it becomes clear that this band can hold N
collective electrons starting from the minimum en-
ergy level (band bottom) and up to the half-height
(Fig. 1). The highest level occupied by electrons at

3

to left, being exactly equal to the number of those
moving in the opposite direction, while the state of
the system remains unchanged due to the quantum-
mechanical indistinguishability of the particles. To
create current in the crystal, it is necessary to trans-
fer part of electrons into a state in which they can
move under the action of the ﬁeld. Since the num-
ber of atoms in a solid is about 1022 per 1 cm3 and
the Fermi energy is 1 to 10 eV or 104 to 105K, the
distance between the nearby levels proves to be very
10−21 to 10−22 eV or 10−17 to
small, equal to εN ≃
10−18 K. Thus, the electrons residing at the Fermi
level under the action of the ﬁeld move to the near-
est free higher lying level separated by an extremely
small energy gap of about 10−18 K, i.e. can easily
increase their energy or accelerate. Such substances
with unﬁlled electron band readily conduct the elec-
tric current and are metals. As to the dielectrics,
their bands are ﬁlled and, as a rule, the nearest va-
cant band is separated by an energy gap of a few
electron-volts. This is possible when two electrons of
each atom enter the band. Now the electrons cannot
change their states under the action of the ﬁeld as in
this case they have to ”jump over” a large energy gap
and there will be no current. Note that the contri-
bution into conduction is made only by the electrons
residing near the Fermi level while the lower-lying
ones cannot change their states since the higher lying
levels are occupied. Therefore, all the kinetic proper-
ties of conductors are mainly determined by a small
group of electrons residing near the Fermi level in a
layer with a width about the thermal smearing kBT .
Now we will try to obtain an expression for calcu-
lating the conductivity of metals. The current den-
sity j can be written as a product of average velocity
of ordered electrons motion
, their density n and
i
charge e: j = ne
. In a ﬁeld with the intensity E
i
an electron acquires acceleration a = F/m = eE/m,
aτ = eEτ /m,
whence
where τ is the mean free time of electrons between
their scattering by impurities, defects, phonons, etc.
As a result, the current density can be written as
j = ne2τ E/m = E/ρ, where ρ = m/ne2τ is the re-
sistivity of metal. It can be seen that the current in
metals is proportional to the applied ﬁeld, i.e. the
well-known Ohm’s law holds. Let us rewrite the ex-

can be estimated as

i ≃

v
h

v
h

v
h

v
h

i

Figure 1: a) Electron distribution over the energy levels
in a solid consisting of N atoms on condition that each
atom gives away one electron into the conduction band.
According to the Pauli principle, each level can accom-
modate two electrons with opposite spins, then the con-
duction band will be half-full and Fermi level separating
the ﬁlled states from the free ones passes in the middle
of the band. b) The Fermi surface for free electron gas
in a solid in the momentum space. At T = 0 it is an
isoenergetic surface separating the ﬁlled electron states
from the free ones.
In real metals the Fermi surface is
close to a sphere only in some alkali metals, in the other
it has more complicated topology and can consist of sev-
eral parts. The geometrical characteristics of the Fermi
surface, its shape, curvature, extreme crossections values
determine the main electronic properties of metals, thus
enabling reconstruction of its form from the experimental
data.

T = 0 was called the Fermi level, and the energy of
this level - the Fermi energy εF which corresponds
to the Fermi momentum 1 pF = (2melεF )1/2.
In
the momentum space, the Fermi level is an isoen-
ergetic surface (Fermi-surface) which separates the
occupied states from the vacant ones. For the case
of the isotropic dispersion law, when the energy de-
pends only on the momentum magnitude, but not on
its direction, the Fermi surface is a sphere with the
radius pF (Fig. 1(b)).

The electrons can move within the lattice, the
number of particles moving, for example, from right

1It should be noted that the electron behavior in a lattice
is quite diﬀerent from that in a vacuum.
In fact, one can-
not consider a separate electron in a solid, but rather refer to
electron-like excitations, i.e. quasi-particles with a charge sim-
ilar to that of a free electron and a close mass. This is why the
dispersion law includes the eﬀective mass value. Further on we
shall use the term ’electrons’ implying thesequasi-particles.

4

pression for ρ in the form

ρ = m/ne2τ = mvF /ne2τ vF = pF /ne2l

(1)

where vF is the Fermi velocity, l = vF τ is the mean
free path (mfp) of electrons. It evidently follows from
Eq. (1) that the less is the mfp of electrons in the
lattice, the higher is its resistance.

On which factors does the mfp depend? It has
been already mentioned that the electrons are scat-
tered by the impurity atoms, defects, sample surface,
etc. At ﬁrst glance, it appears that electrons should
rather ”stumble” on ions in the lattice. However, it
turns out that according to the laws of quantum me-
chanics the electrons are scattered only by thermal
vibrations of atoms - the phonons. In a strictly pe-
riodical perfect lattice at T = 0 the electrons move
without collisions as if they do not notice the ionic
framework. This is another consequence of the fact
the properties of conduction electrons in a solid dif-
fer but radically from those of free electrons in the
vacuum.

−1
i + τ −1

The probability of electrons scattering is propor-
tional to the frequency of their collisions, i.e.
to
the inverse relaxation time τ −1. Considering all the
scattering mechanisms as independent ones, the total
probability of scattering under the actions of all fac-
tors will be equal to the sum of separate probabilities
τ −1 = τ
e + . . ., or, which is the same,
ρ = ρi + ρp + ρe + . . . as τ −1
ρ. Here ρi, ρp and ρe
are resistivity associated with the scattering by im-
purities and defects (i), by phonons (p), by electrons
(e). We have obtained the so-called Matthiessen rule
according to which the total electrical resistivity is
the sum of contributions due to separate scattering
mechanisms.

p + τ −1

∼

We will be more interested in the term ρp determin-
ing the resistivity due to the electron-phonon interac-
tion. First of all, we must make clear what a phonon
is. The vibrations of lattice atoms can be presented in
the form of excitation waves propagating in a crys-
It is appropriate here to draw on the analogy
tal.
with waves on the surface of water. A ﬂoat immersed
in the water will move up and down during the wave
propagation, i.e. it will vibrate. Thus, the vibrations

F(e )

L

T

2

T

1
p h/a q

0

0

(a)

k
(b)

D

Figure 2: a) Phonon dispersion law in metals with one
atom per unit cell. Two lower curves correspond to the
transverse vibration of atoms with two polarization, the
upper curve corresponds to the longitudinal vibrations,
compression-extension waves. b) Typical phonon spec-
trum for a solid. The boundary Debye energy εD is de-
termined by the maximum possible frequency of atom
vibrations in the lattice. As a rule, the maxima associ-
ated with low group velocity phonons v ∼ dε/dq → 0.
In Fig. 2(a) it corresponds to the phonons with maximum
momentum qmax = π¯h/a.

of atoms in a solid are described in the language of
waves. According to the quantum mechanical dual-
ism, each wave can be compared to a particle and the
thermal vibrations of lattice atoms can be described
in terms of quasiparticles - the phonons. The wave
vector of the wave k corresponds to the momentum
of particle 2q = ¯hk. In such a model the electrons
scattering by thermal vibrations of the lattice can be
considered as the interaction of quasi-particles, elec-
trons and phonons, making use of the familiar laws
of conservation of energy and momentum.

The energy of phonon εph, as well as that of elec-
tron, depends on its momentum. The dispersion law
for phonons, i.e. the εph dependence on q, is more
complicated than for electrons for which the formula
ε = p2/2mef f gives a fairly good approximation. It
is not easy to describe this law analytically over the
whole range from 0 to qmax and it is usually obtained

2Since the wavelength λ of atom vibrations in the lattice
cannot be smaller than the interatomic distance a, namely
λmin = 2a, the maximum momentum of phonons is qmax =
¯hkmax = ¯h2π/λmin = ¯hπ/a. For metals qmax ∼ pF .

5

e
e
e
experimentally. Besides, the phonon dispersion law
depends not only on the value of q but also on its
direction. Fig. 2(a) shows the dispersion curves for
metals with one atom in the unit cell and one di-
rection in a crystal. A more convenient and more
often used characteristics of phonons in a solid is the
so-called phonon spectrum F (ε). This dependence
reﬂects the phonon density of states or, in more de-
tail, indicates which part of phonons has the par-
ticular energy. Fig. 2(b) shows the typical form of
the F (ε) curve in a crystal. The ﬁrst two maxima
are generally due to transverse vibrations of atoms
in two perpendicular directions (polarizations) while
the third maximum is due to more energized longi-
tudinal vibrations since their excitation in a crystal
causes the compression and extension waves. As is
seen from Fig. 2(a) there exists a maximum energy of
phonons, or in the wave language, the boundary (De-
bye) frequency of vibrations ωmax(¯hωmax = εmax).
The Debye frequency expressed in degrees is close to
so-called Debye temperature.
It has a very simple
physical meaning: This is a temperature at which
the whole vibrational spectrum of metal, up to the
highest-energy phonons, is excited.

The phonon spectrum is an important character-
istic of a solid. It enables determination of thermal
characteristics of the lattice, the heat capacity and
heat conductivity, plays a decisive role in kinetic phe-
nomena stipulated by the electron-phonon interac-
tion.

4 Waste recovery

Such a heading would be most suitable for popular-
scientiﬁc literature on economy or ecology. It occurs,
however, that sometimes the ”waste” can be utilized
in scientiﬁc research as well. Turning closer to the
point, we will ﬁrst describe one of wonderful phenom-
ena - the tunneling eﬀect. One of the paradoxical pre-
dictions of quantum mechanics which appeared at the
beginning of this century was the possibility of mi-
croparticle penetration through a potential barrier.
In the common language it would mean that, for ex-
ample, a ball strikes against a wall and passes through
it without causing any injuries. This phenomenon

was called tunneling, naturally bearing in mind that
no hole is left after the particle passage. The proba-
bility of tunneling is the higher, the smaller are the
thickness and height of potential barrier (wall thick-
ness and hardness) to be overcome. The tunneling
eﬀect was immediately used to explain such micro-
cosm phenomenon as α-decay of radioactive nuclei.
However, the most striking manifestation of tunnel-
ing could be observed in solid-state physics of the last
sixties.

Let us see what will occur when a potential diﬀer-
ence is applied to two metallic plates arranged like in
a capacitor and then the interplate distance is grad-
ually decreased. Let the plate potential be not very
high to avoid electric breakdown or suppose they are
in vacuum. It turns out that at a certain plate separa-
tion when they are not yet in contact, current appears
due to electrons tunneling through the gap, which in
this case serves as a potential barrier. The interplate
distance at which these eﬀects arise proves to be very
small, not greater than a few nanometers (10−9m). It
is rather diﬃcult to create and stationarily maintain
such a vacuum gap between conductors 3 , therefore
physicists ﬁrst took a diﬀerent line. The gap between
two evaporated ﬁlms of metal was formed from dielec-
tric oxides, one being oxidized before evaporating the
other. The oxide layer on a metal, as a rule, is few
nanometers thick and serves as a good and strong di-
electric. This structure was called a sandwich or a
tunneling contact. The latter proved to be interest-
ing not only due to the observation of the tunneling
eﬀect, but also as a tool of physical research.

When two metal come in contact, their Fermi lev-
els coincide for otherwise the electrons would transfer
from the metal with a higher energy to the metal with
a lower one. If a voltage V (Fig. 3) is applied to the
tunneling contact, the Fermi level will shift with re-
spect to one another by the value eV . The electrons

3It should be noted that in the beginning of eighties it be-
came possible to make precision instruments where tunneling
proceeds through a vacuum or air gap between a ﬂat surface
and a sharp needle. As the tunneling current strongly depends
on the amount of gap, by moving the needle over the surface
and simultaneously approaching it to or withdrawing it from
the sample at constant tunneling current, one can take surface
relief with a superhigh resolution (not worse than 10−10m).
Such instruments were called tunneling scanning microscopes.

6

will be stipulated not by tunneling but by current
ﬂowing throw the metallic shorts. Such contacts are
naturally to be rejected for they are no good for tun-
neling investigations.

One of the authors (I. K. Yanson) has been engaged
with the problems of tunneling spectroscopy for a
long period of time. At a certain stage he paid atten-
tion to this rejected tunneling contacts with metallic
shorts ”wasted” from the tunneling measurements.
It turned out that the current-voltage characteris-
tics of shorted-out contacts also displayed deviations
from the Ohm’s law.
In contrast to the tunneling
contacts where current increased more rapidly than
linearly, i.e.
the contact resistance decreased with
the increase of the voltage, in shorted-out samples
the resistance increased. One day, while investigated
a shorted-out tunneling contact made of lead, the
scientist found out that the second derivative of its
current-voltage characteristics looked amazingly sim-
ilar to the phonon density of states in this metal
(Fig. 4). It could not happen accidentally since when
in-
shorting out this contact by current pulses, i.e.
creasing the constriction dimensions, the picture did
not change and the maxima retained their positions.
Later on this was checked on shorted-out contacts
from other metals: copper, silver, gold, tin, etc. Sim-
ilar pictures were observed in all cases :
the sec-
ond derivative of the current-voltage characteristics
reminded of the phonon density of states in metals
under investigation.

5 What happens

inside the

contact

The question arises why the above-mentioned shorts
revealed such spectroscopic properties, what kind
they are and what size they have. One may sup-
pose that in shorted out tunneling contacts the size
of ’holes’ is comparable to the dielectric thickness,
that is a few nanometers. But the size of a metallic
constriction can be determined more precisely by the
its resistance.

Consider PC model in the form of a thin, electron-
opaque partition with a hole d (Fig. 5(a)). The ex-

Figure 3: Energy scheme of the tunnelling contact
formed between two metals separated by a thin layer of
dielectric to which the potential diﬀerence V is applied.
Two possible channels of electron tunnelling are show: the
elastic one with energy conservation and inelastic with
energy loss and phonons or molecules excitation in the
barrier or on its surface.

residing on the left can tunnel into the right metal
as there are free states on the right. The Ohm’s law
holds in such a contact even at not very high cur-
rent voltages. The situation slightly diﬀers if in the
process of tunneling the electron changes its energy
after the interaction with, for example, molecules ab-
sorbed on the dielectric layer surface, phonons in the
bulk metal or in oxides separating the metals. After
the energy loss an electron tunnels to other states,
i.e. it obtains a wide choice of places to get to. Such
processes will result in the tunneling current increase
and deviations from the Ohm’s law. Such correc-
tion is small and for its exact observation one can
usually plots not current-voltage characteristics but
their derivatives which make it possible to determine
the energy of quasi-particles or excited molecules in-
teracting with electrons. This method of study was
called tunneling spectroscopy and has been widely
used in solid-state physics. The most complicated
thing in this technique is to create a thin dielectric
layer between the metals. If the oxidation is strong,
the layer will be thick and the tunneling current negli-
gibly small. If one tries to reduce the oxidation time,
the appearance of ’holes’ becomes possible, i.e. the
dielectric ﬁlm will be discontinuous and conductivity

7

Pb

1

0.5

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
2
I
d
/
V
2
d

0

0

0.3 W

5.8 W

83 W

314 W

TA

LA

5
Voltage (mV)

10

15

Figure 4: Second derivatives of current-voltage char-
acteristics of a shorted out tunnelling contact of lead
recorded with its resistance decrease from 314 to 0.3 Ohm.
The spectral maxima correspond to those of the phonon
density of states in Pb marked by arrows.

≪

pression for the resistance of such contact proved to
be dependent on the ratio of its size d and the elec-
tron mfp l. The case of l
d was considered by
the famous physicist J. Maxwell already at the end
of the XIX century. The resistance of such contacts
with large diameters or contacts formed by metals
with short electron mfp is expressed rather simply as
RM = ρ/d.
In the case of the reverse ratio, when
d, the so-called ballistic regime of the electrons
l
they pass through an oriﬁce
ﬂight is realized, i.e.
along rectilinear trajectories.
In this case, as was
shown by Yu. V. Sharvin in the middle of sixties,
R = 16ρl/3πd2. The expression for contact resis-
tance at random l/d ratio was obtained in 1966 by
G. Wexler

≫

R = Γρ/d + 16ρl/3πd2

(2)

Here the value of Γ varies from 0.7 to 1 with the
decrease of l/d ratio from
to zero. It can be seen
that the Wexler formula is actually the algebraic sum
of two resistances, those of Maxwell and Sharvin.

∞

Let us evaluate the size of lead contact mentioned
in the previous chapter. The contact resistance was
314 Ω and from Eq. (2) we will ﬁnd that its diameter
is about 2 nm or 20 ˚A, i.e.
it is really close to the

Figure 5:
a) Model of PC in the form of a thin
electron-non-transparent screen separating two metallic
half-spaces with the oriﬁce diameter d. b) Central sec-
tion of the Fermi surface in the center of PC to which
the voltage V is applied. c) The same in a homogeneous
conductor with the electric ﬁeld intensity E. here under
the ﬁeld eﬀect the whole fermi surface is shifted by eEl (l
is the electron mfp) which is much smaller then eV.

thickness of oxide 4.

We have already considered the factors responsi-
ble for the mfp l, but to compare it with the contact
size one should ﬁnd its absolute value.
In metals
at low temperatures, in the absence of phonons and
other quasi-particle excitations, l is determined by
scattering due to various lattice defects : impurities,
dislocations, sample boundaries. In extremely pure
and perfect single-crystalline samples at helium tem-
peratures mfp may reach fantastic values of tens and
hundreds thousands of interatomic distances, i.e. be
measured in millimeters. With the increase of tem-
perature and phonons excitation, the electron mfp
decreases due to scattering by phonons. At this time
l can reduce to tens of nanometers.

It was noticed in the initial experiments on the
investigation of PCs that the spectrum was most
distinctly visible for contacts with higher resistance
whose size was of a few nanometers, respectively. At
the same time, the spectral features smeared and

4When calculating,

the value of ρl was set equal to
10−11Ωcm2 and ρ ∼ 10−6Ωcm. These values can be used
for most metals.

8

gradually disappeared in the case of large-size low-
resistance contacts (Fig. 4). It become clear that dis-
tinct features were observed in samples for which the
electron mfp was greater than the contact size, or
when the electrons ﬂew through contacts along the
ballistic trajectories.

If the electrons ﬂow through the contact without
scattering, the contact resistance is expressed by the
Sharvin formula, the current-voltage characteristics
will be linear, its second derivative will be equal to
zero and, naturally, there will be no spectrum. The
situation changes if we take into account that part
of electrons are scattered by phonons in the con-
tact neighborhood. According to the calculations,
the probability of this scattering is proportional to
d/le−ph, where le−ph is the length of electron-phonon
interaction. At low temperatures, when the num-
ber of phonons is small, the processes of excitation
(generation) of phonons by electrons near the con-
striction predominate. As a result of it part of elec-
trons will not get into the hole and the total current
will decrease. This means that the contact resistance
will rise due to the electron-phonon interaction, thus
causing deviations from the Ohm’s law and the signal
appearance in the second derivative.

∝
∆V /∆I,

Qualitative considerations are also appropriate
here. At the increase of voltage by ∆V , the change
of resistance ∆R will be proportional to the prob-
ability G(ε) of excitation by electrons in the con-
tact zone of a phonon with the energy ε, i.e. ∆R
G(ε)∆V or, taking into account that R
we shall evaluate the second derivative as d2V /dI 2
∝
∆R/∆V
G(ε). Thus, the second derivative of the
current-voltage characteristics reﬂects the probabil-
ity of phonons emission G(ε). The latter, in its turn,
is proportional to the phonon density of states F (ε)
multiplied by the so-called square of the electron-
phonon interaction α2
P C (ε) taking into account the
”force” of electrons interaction with one or another
group of phonons and the contact geometry. There-
fore we can write

∝

∝

d2V /dI 2

G(ε) = α2

P C (ε)F (ε)

(3)

∝

This expression was later rigorously substantiated in
theoretical works described below. It turned out that

the α2(ε) dependence is ”smoother” function of en-
ergy compared with F (ε), so the shape and peculiar-
ities (maxima, minima) of d2V /dI 2 are to a greater
extent dictated by the phonon spectrum behavior.
Now it is clear why the spectra for lead and other
metals remind us the phonon density of states.

6 Some theoretical fundamen-

tals

The theory of point-contact spectroscopy has been
developed by I. O. Kulik and his coworkers A. N.
Omelyanchuok and R. I. Shekhter. Their principal
result was rigorous derivation of the expression for
d2V /dI 2 of PC in the ballistic regime and its relation
to the function F (ε). A model chosen for PC was an
oriﬁce in a thin opaque to electrons partition separat-
ing two metallic half-spaces (Fig. 5(a)). Later on it
has been demonstrated that the result is noncritical
with respect to the contact geometry. The expression
obtained theoretically has the form

d2V
dI 2 ≃ −
K
h

i

d2I
dV 2 ∝ h

K

−1d3N (εF )G(ε)
i

(4)

is the PC geometry factor equal to 0.25 for
where
the oriﬁce model, d is the contact diameter, N (εF ) is
the electron density of states at the Fermi surface.

The nonequilibrium function of electrons distribu-
tion in the center of contact is shown in Fig. 5(b).
When voltage is applied to the contact, the electrons
are separated into two groups arriving from the right
and the left regions, correspondingly. Maximum en-
ergies of these groups at T = 0 diﬀer precisely by
the amount of eV .
It becomes important that the
energy diﬀerence between any two states of electrons
at the Fermi surface is equal to eV or zero.
It is
this circumstance that enables us to use PCs as an
unusual energy ”probe” to determine the energies of
other quasi-particles.

Fig. 5 shows that the electrons distribution func-
tion in PC diﬀers but greatly from a similar one in
the case of current ﬂowing through a homogeneous
sample. In this case it is impossible to impart a con-
siderable excess energy to the electrons that is com-
It turns
parable to the energy of Debye phonons.

9

I

 

I
d
/
V
d

 

2

I

/

d
V

 

2
d

V

V

V

V

5.4 kT

0

ph

Figure 6: Current-voltage characteristics I(V ), its ﬁrst
and second derivatives for PC of hypothetic metal in
which all phonons have the same energy εph. The peak
in the second derivative will have the width 5.4kB T due
to the Fermi level smearing (see Chapter 8).

out that for the electron energy acquired in the elec-
tric ﬁeld to reach the characteristic phonon energies,
the current energy should exceed 109 A/cm2. Such
current densities in the bulk metal are unattainable
because of the Joule heating and melting. It is not
the case with PCs as due to their small size the heat is
quickly ’sucked oﬀ’ into the cold bulk metal. In other
words, the contact area remains cold as a result of a
large mfp of phonons compared with the contact side:
the phonons have time enough to depart and transfer
their energy into the surrounding medium.

For better understanding of scattering processes in
PC, consider the case of a certain hypothetic metal
in which only the phonons with the same energy εph
are present. If the electrons passing through the ori-
ﬁce have the excess energy eV < εph they are unable
to excite the phonons and the electron trajectories
are straight lines without scattering. The contact re-
sistance is precisely equal to the Sharvin’s one, and

10

the current-voltage characteristics will be rectilinear
(Fig. 6). When the electrons obtain the energy εph,
they begin to excite phonons, scatter, and will not
get into the oriﬁce, so the current through the con-
tact will build up with voltage more slowly than in
the absence of scattering. It is clear that the current-
voltage will have a break at this point. The diﬀer-
ential resistance Rd = dV /dI dependence will make
a step, and the second derivative d2V /dI 2 will dis-
play a sharp peak at a speciﬁc energy (Fig. 6).
If
the metal possesses several groups of phonons with
deﬁnite energies, then the d2V /dI 2 curve will have a
maximum for each of them. In the general case at
continued phonon spectrum the second derivative of
the current-voltage characteristics will be similar to
this curve.

As has been already mentioned, d2V /dI 2 does not
merely reﬂect the phonon spectrum but is propor-
tional to the probability G(ε) of emission of phonon
with the energy ε. The G(ε) function is gener-
ally called the PC spectral function of the electron-
In the case of conductors,
phonon interaction.
the transport and thermodynamic functions of the
electron-phonon interaction are also distinguished.
The former is connected with the current ﬂow in met-
als, the latter determinates the eﬀective mass, veloc-
ity, and electron density of states changes due to the
electron-phonon interaction.

−

The PC spectral function G(ε) introduced by anal-
ogy with the above ones is a variety of transport func-
tion of the electron-phonon interaction and diﬀers by
a stronger dependence on the angle of electrons scat-
tering in the contact. In the oriﬁce model this depen-
θ/ tan θ),
dence is determined by the expression (1
where θ is the scattering angle of electron momen-
tum.
It is seen that at θ = π, when the electron
reverses its motion direction this expression diverges,
i.e. such processes give maximum contribution into
the PC spectrum and are most signiﬁcant. This es-
sentially distinguishes the situation in contacts from
scattering in a homogenous conductor resulting in
normal resistance or from electron-phonon interac-
tion responsible for superconductivity. In the former
case the scattering eﬃciency increases with the angle
as (1
cos θ), in the latter case it is independent of the
angle at all. Thus, all the functions in question can

−

e
be written in the form of Eq.(4), but with diﬀerent
α2(ε) dependencies.

7 Procedures for PCs creating

We have already mentioned one of the techniques
used to obtain micro contacts in the tunneling struc-
tures. The schematic representation of a contact with
a short in the dielectric layer is shown in Fig.7a. Such
a conducting bridge often appears spontaneously as a
result of metallic dendrites intergrowth through weak
spots or defects of the dielectric ﬁlm. The bridge can
be created artiﬁcially by means of mechanical loads
causing the oxide ﬁlm damage or by means of electric
breakdown. In the former case use is made of a sharp
needle creating high local stresses, in the latter case
the electric voltage is raised up to the level exceed-
ing the breakdown value at the weakest spot of the
dielectric. The latter case resembles electric microw-
elding when metal is instantaneously melted in the
constriction and is puriﬁed from foreign inclusions.
Certainly depending on the ﬁlm material, dielectric
interlayer properties, magnitude and duration of the
current pulse, the degree of structure perfection and
the purity of metal in the constriction can vary in a
wide range. Using the ﬁlm technology, one can ob-
tain rather small PCs only of a few nanometers with
suﬃciently high mechanical stability and vibration
resistance.

However, the fabrication of ﬁlm PCs involves
rather awkward technique of vacuum deposition of
metals. Besides, the structure of metal in the ﬁlms is
usually less perfect than in the bulk samples. That is
why the creation of pressure contacts between bulk
electrodes gave an impetus to the development of re-
search in this ﬁeld. A pressure contact of the needle-
anvil type is shown in Fig.7b. It is obtained by grad-
ually approaching two electrodes directly in liquid
helium by means of precision mechanism. Gener-
ally, the radius of curvature of the needle tip is a
few nanometers. Before measurement the electrodes
are processed mechanically, then chemically or elec-
trochemically, to obtain clean unperturbed surfaces
of required shape. At this time the surface is coated
by a thin ﬁlm of oxide or other non-conductive com-

Figure 7: Method of PC preparation a) A ﬁlm of metal
is deposited in vacuum onto a dielectric substrate, a thin
dielectric layer is formed on the ﬁlm by oxidation or other
methods, on top of this layer the second ﬁlm of metal is
deposited. The technology is selected in such a way that
contacts should be formed spontaneously in the process
of preparation or as a result of subsequent mechanical or
electrical eﬀects. b) ”Needle-anvil” method: a specially
processed metallic electrode in the form of thin needle is
slightly pressed to the ﬂat surface of the other electrode
by means of precision mechanism. Here one can con-
trol the resistance or size of contact, decrease or increase
them. c) Shear method - the contact is formed by slightly
bringing together the edges of two electrodes which can
have random shapes and then by shifting one electrode
along the other. As a result, contacts can be obtained in
many places and due to the shear stresses the metal de-
formations and contaminations near the constriction are
less than in the preceding case.

pound. Due to the dielectric layer, at the ﬁrst light
touch of electrodes the contact conductivity is often
of the tunneling character, i.e. the contact resistance
decreases with the increase of voltage. A metallic
bridge appears at the increase of pressing force either
as a result of dielectric cracking or of breakdown by
the current pulse. The presence of dielectric ﬁlm on
the electrode is necessary to stiﬀen the whole struc-
ture. In this case the mechanical contact area is much
greater than the size of metallic constriction.

In the needle-anvil conﬁguration, the metal in the
contact area is obviously deformed and polluted with
pressed-in oxide residues, as well as with various im-
purities absorbed on the surface. Better results are
obtained if the pressure contacts are created by the
technique shown in Fig.7c. In this instance the elec-

11

trodes are brought together till touching, then they
are shifted relative to one another in the plane of
their crossing. As a result of it, the deformation of
metal here is much less while the oxide and surface
impurities are carried out of the contact area. Thus,
constrictions are formed in those places where the
cleaned areas of electrodes come in contact. With
this technique, the samples can take the form of small
bulk cylinders or blocks of metal, as well as ﬁlms
deposited on dielectric rods. By shifting the elec-
trodes independently in the mutually perpendicular
directions or rotating them about their axes, one can
change the places of contact and obtain a number
of shorts with diﬀerent resistances within the same
measurement cycle.

The point-contact spectroscopy would be impossi-
ble if the characteristics to be measured were criti-
cally dependent on the constriction geometry which
cannot be controlled due to the small size of short.
However, experience has shown that if the contacts
were chosen properly by means of experimental crite-
ria, the the reproducibility of PC spectra is not worse
than in tunneling spectroscopy where these choice is
generally accepted. Let us formulate the quality cri-
teria of PCs which meet the requirements of the the-
oretical clear oriﬁce model, the oriﬁce being much
smaller than the electron mfp. We shall take a PC
spectrum of one of simple metals, sodium (Fig. 8) as
an example.

1. For pure metals, the contact resistance is within
1 to 100 Ω and the constriction has the metallic
conductivity, i.e. its resistance increases with the
increase of voltage so that d2V /dI 2 > 0 over the
whole energy range.

2. Sharp peaks or other distinct features are ob-
served in the second derivative (PC spectrum)
at the energies from zero to the Debye one
¯hωmax reproduced for diﬀerent contacts of
εD ≃
the particular metal. For the energies eV > εD
the spectrum assumes a certain constant value
called the background. The background param-
eter γ = B/A (Fig. 8) should be small enough,
diﬀerent for each metal, but as a rule not greater
than 0.5.

6

3

)
s
t
i

n
u

 
.

b
r
a
(
 
 
2
I

d

 
/
 

V
2
d

0

0

LA

TA2

TA1

A

B

10

hw
Energy (meV)

20
 max

Figure 8: Point-contact spectrum of one of simple metals,
Na (solid curve). The curve clearly reveals three features
due to the electron excitations of phonons in two trans-
verse (TA) and one longitudinal (LA) branches. Compar-
ing the spectrum with the phonon density of the states
(dashed curve) one can see that in this case electrons in-
teraction with transversely polarized phonons is consider-
ably suppressed which is due to the closed Fermi surface
of this metal.

3. Relative variation of diﬀerential

resistance
within the spectrum should be maximum (from
ones to tens per cent) at minimum γ. The ini-
tial portion of the d2V /dI 2 curve at the energies
εD is smooth and has no features.
eV

≪

The above attributes make it possible, judging by
the form of the PC spectrum, to estimate the contact
suitability for further investigations of the electron-
phonon interaction function. Applying these criteria
to the spectra shown in Fig. 4, one can see that they
are satisﬁed by curves 1 and 2.

12

8 How to measure the second

derivative

One of the widely used methods of measuring the
current-voltage characteristics derivatives is the mod-
ulation technique. It consists in the following. Be-
sides the measuring direct current I, the sample is
supplied with a deﬁnite frequency ω ac current. In
this case the contact voltage can be presented as a
Taylor series

+

dV
dI

i cos(ωt) +

+

dV
dI

i cos(ωt) +

V (I + i cos(ωt)) = V (I) +

1
2

d2V
dI 2 i2 cos2(ωt) +
d2V
dI 2 i2(1 + cos(2ωt)) +

1
4

· · ·

= V (I) +

· · ·

If the current i is suﬃciently small, the higher-
order in i terms can be neglected. It can be seen that
the signal measured at the frequency ω will be pro-
portional to the ﬁrst derivative dV /dI of the current-
voltage characteristics, while at the frequency 2ω it
will be proportional to the second derivative d2V /dI 2.
The next problem is to measure this weak voltage
at the frequency ω and 2ω. This is achieved by a
spectrometer whose schema is shown in Fig. 9. The
sample (1) is held in a cryostat with liquid helium
which is immersed into an outer cryostat with liquid
nitrogen to reduce the heat input and coolant evapo-
ration. Connected to the sample are four wires, a pair
of which serves as an electric circuit, through which
the contact is supplied with direct current from the
source (2) and the alternating signal from the har-
monic voltage generator (3). The direct voltage V
created at the sample by current I is applied to the X-
coordinate of the recorder (6) by means of the other
pair of wires. This pair is also used for measuring the
ac voltage of the second harmonic of modulating sig-
nal which requires a special circuit for its ampliﬁca-
tion and separation from noise. The circuit comprises
the ﬁlter (4) and lock-in ampliﬁer (5). When register-
ing this signal, proportional to d2V /dI 2, the ﬁlter is
tuned to resonance to a required frequency 2ω. The
ﬁlter also serves for matching the low-resistance sam-
ple with the high-resistance input of the ampliﬁer.

(5)

Figure 9: Schema of the spectrometer: 1 - sample, 2 -
DC source, 3 - AC source, 4 - ﬁlter, 5 - look-in ampliﬁer,
6 - plotter.

Besides, the ampliﬁer receives a 2ω generator signal
used as a reference voltage. As a result of it, not only
the signal is ampliﬁed but also the required frequency
is separated. The voltage is converted into the direct
one and applied to the Y-coordinate of the recorder.
Thus, when a linearly increasing current from source
(2) passes through the sample, the recorder will auto-
matically record the second derivative of the current-
voltage characteristics as a function of voltage.

As is seen from Eq.(5) the signal at the frequency
2ω is proportional to the square of the modulat-
ing current or ﬁrst harmonic voltage amplitude Vω.
Therefore, it seems there are no special problems in
measuring this signal by merely increasing the alter-
nating component Vω. However, it cannot be made
arbitrarily large as the ac voltage amplitude deter-
mines the instrumental resolution of this technique.
Exact calculations indicate that an inﬁnitely nar-
row spectral feature when measuring d2V /dI 2 by the
modulation technique will be smeared to form a bell-
shaped maximum 1.7Vω wide. In real experiments,
the value of Vω is as a rule not greater than a few
millivolts, and in separate cases it can be equal to
several tens of millivolt.
In this case the value of
measured signal which characterizes the nonlinearity

13

of current-voltage characteristics associated with the
electron-phonon interaction is of the order of micro-
volts. At the same time the measuring circuit sensi-
tivity is two orders of magnitude higher which makes
it possible to reliably register the PC spectra.

It should be also noted that the point-contact spec-
troscopy resolution is dependent on the temperature
T due to the Fermi level smearing by about kBT .
Therefore, to obtain distinct spectral features, the
condition kBT
εD should be satisﬁed, i.e. mea-
surements should be taken at temperatures consider-
ably lower that the Debye ones. Under the action of
the instrumental and temperature factors, the result-
ing resolution is expressed by

≪

δ = [(5.4kBT /e)2 + (1.7Vω)2]1/2

(6)

Generally, measurements are taken in liquid helium
at a temperature of 1.5 to 4.2 K and modulating sig-
nal of 0.3 to 1.5 mV. As a result of it, the resolution
calculated by Eq.(6) is 0.9 to 2.9 mV or, expressed
in degrees, 10 to 34 K. This is at least an order of
magnitude below the Debye temperatures of typical
metals which enables obtaining a suﬃciently detailed
spectrum of electron-phonon interaction.

9 Point contact instead of reac-

tor

Obviously, the headline of this section is rather adver-
tising than true to life. A long time will pass till a nu-
clear reactor can be replaced by a competitive source
of energy or research tool. Our headline is used in
the sense that PC can compete with the reactor in
certain ﬁelds of solid-state physics. We shall consider
the experimental techniques of phonons investigation
in metals and the determination of phonon spectrum.
One of the principal methods used for determining
the phonon dispersion law ε(q) is the study of neutron
scattering in a crystal. The source of neutrons is usu-
ally a reactor. For this purpose use is made of the so-
called thermal neutrons with the energy of 30 meV or
3000 K and, respectively, the de Broglie wavelength
comparable to the lattice constant. Knowing the mo-
mentum and energy of incident neutrons, then mea-
suring their energy and momentum after scattering,

≤

≪

on the basis of conservation laws one can determine
the energy and momentum of phonon by which the
neutron was scattered. Thus one obtains the disper-
sion curves shown in Fig.2a. Since the law of phonons
dispersion in a crystal is anisotropic, the dispersion is
more often measured only for few principal crystallo-
graphic directions as the measuring procedure itself
is rather long and requires a powerful source of neu-
trons. To obtain a phonon spectrum, one needs the
dispersions in the lattice, then one should calculate
all the phonons whose energy falls within the inter-
val from εk to εk + ∆ε = εk+1 (where ε
εD and
εD), then plot this value (Fig.2b). Then re-
∆ε
peat this procedure for the next interval from εk+1
to εk+1 + ∆ε, etc. The less the interval ∆ε, the more
accurate is the F (ε) curve. But, as mentioned above,
it takes a long time to measure the dispersion curves,
and they are available only for several principal crys-
tallographic directions in the lattice. To obtain the
dispersion law for a maximum number of directions,
use is made of theoretical calculations describing the
lattice thermal vibrations. The formulas employed
for this purpose include the parameters which have
deﬁnite values for one or another solid. These param-
eters are found by ﬁtting the theoretically calculated
dispersion curves to the experimental ones. The ob-
tained parameters make it possible to calculate the
dispersion curves for any direction and, therefore, to
calculate the energy of phonons with any momentum
value both in magnitude and direction, and to plot
the F (ε) curve. The required calculations are rather
bulky, voluminous and need the use of a powerful
computer. Besides, the result depends on the model
selected, i.e. on how accurately the theory takes into
account the real processes of atoms interaction in the
lattice. In principle, it is possible to obtain the in-
formation on the phonon density of states in a more
direct ”modelless” way. For some metals one can
use the one-phonon incoherent scattering of neutrons
when the directly measured scattering cross-section
of neutrons with a speciﬁc energy is proportional to
the phonon density of states. However, the latter
technique is not suitable for all metals and does not
have high resolution.

How can the point-contact spectroscopy be of any
help here and how can it substitute the reactor? We

14

the number of maxima, their positions with respect
to energy and relative intensities.

10 Study of electron-phonon

interaction

It has already been mentioned that the spectral func-
tion G(ε) is a kind of transport function of the
electron-phonon interaction. By comparing G(ε)
with phonon spectra for various metals, one can study
the Fermi surface eﬀect on the dynamics of electron-
phonon interaction. Thus, in alkali metals Na and
K the Fermi surface is practically a sphere. At such
an isoenergetic surface, it is diﬃcult for electrons to
interact with transversely polarized phonons. In fact,
the features associated with scattering by transverse
(T) phonons are strongly suppressed in the PC spec-
tra of sodium (Fig. 8) and potassium. On the con-
trary, the Fermi surface in noble metals is open which
is favorable for interaction with transverse phonons,
so in the PC spectra of copper (Fig. 12), gold, silver
the peaks corresponding to these phonons prevail. Fi-
nally, in the polyvalent non-transition metals:
lead,
tin, magnesium, berillium (Fig. 12), etc., the Fermi
surface is of intricate conﬁguration and few phonons
of one or another polarization are released. In this
case the G(ε) function shape is closed to the depen-
dence of phonon densities of state, i.e. one can as-
sume that the parameter α2(ε) in the formula (3) is
weakly dependent on energy.

On the other hand, the electron-phonon interac-
tion function itself is of fundamental importance. It
determines the properties of metals stipulated by the
electron-phonon interaction, in particular the possi-
bility of superconducting transition, as well as various
kinetic parameters characterizing the charge and en-
ergy transfer. The point-contact spectroscopy yields
detailed information on the relative force of elec-
trons binding with some groups of phonons, e.g.
with those transversely or longitudinally polarized.
Thus, it becomes clear which phonons play more im-
portant role in various processes. For normal non-
superconducting metals, the study of PC spectra is
the only experimental technique which enables direct

Figure 10: Mendeleev’s periodic table containing only
those elements which have been studied by point-contact
spectroscopy (until 1988).

have demonstrated that the form of electron-phonon
interaction function G(ε) is dictated by the phonon
density of states. It turn out that for practically all
metals under investigation the spectrum extrema are
stipulated by their presence in F (ε). Moreover, for
some metals, mainly polyvalent ones, such as Pb,
In, Sn, Mg, Be, etc., these two dependencies G(ε)
and F (ε) practically coincide in form. Therefore, the
point-contact spectroscopy can be referred to as a
new method of phonon spectroscopy in metals.
It
should be mentioned that the PC experiments are
simple and accessible for any physical laboratory.
One should only have liquid helium for low tempera-
ture measurements and ordinary electronic engineer-
ing equipment. It is noteworthy that PCs can be cre-
ated by means of very small amounts of a substance,
a few cubic millimeters of which being suﬃcient. It
becomes especially important for studying rare sub-
stances available only in small quantities.

To date, the PC spectra have been obtained for al-
most four tens of pure metals indicated in Fig. 10. If
we drop the rare-earth elements, we have to measure
yet of about ten metals, basically highly active alkali-
earth and alkali ones. By means of point-contact
spectroscopy, it became possible to reﬁne the posi-
tions of extrema and other features of the F (ε) func-
tion. For a number of metals it was possible to de-
termine the shape of the whole curve, i.e. to ﬁnd out

15

measurement of energy dependence of the spectral
function of electron-phonon interaction.

11 Magnons and excitons

From the very childhood we have used to metals
breaking down into magnetic and nonmagnetic ones
without thinking on the nature of such diﬀerence.
This classiﬁcation of metals has been explained in
terms of quantum theory. Generally speaking, mag-
netism is a purely quantum-mechanical phenomenon
that cannot be explained in the framework of classi-
cal theory. As one of the well-known physicist said,
if the Planck constant had gone to zero, there would
have been no science of magnetism.

As is known from the atomic physics, an electron
has its moment of momentum, the spin. Besides, an
electron in an atom has an orbital magnetic moment
due to the motion about the nucleus. To determine
the total magnetic moment of an atom, one should
consider its electronic structure. If the atoms with
a magnetic moment are united in a lattice, it is not
enough to make the whole material magnetic. Ev-
erything will depend on the actual interaction of mo-
ments in which the so-called exchange forces play an
important role. These forces arise due to quantum
indistinguishability of particles and the Pauli prin-
ciple. The exchange forces are not connected with
direct interaction of spin magnetic moments which is
weak but are dependent on their relative positions.
The exchange interaction just makes the magnetic
moments of separate atoms feel one another and line
up in a certain way: in parallel or in antiparallel di-
rection. In the former case we obtain a ferromagnet,
in the latter case antiferromagnet.

Consider, for example, a ferromagnetic metal in
which the magnetic moments of atoms have the same
direction. Let for some reason, for example due to
thermal vibrations, one atom reverse the direction
of its moment. Then the neighboring atom will be
aﬀected by a force tending to change over the direc-
tion of its magnetic moment too, etc. Hence, a wave
of magnetic moment reversals will pass through the
crystal. This wave was called the spin wave. The spin
reversal events in magnetic materials are usually con-

sidered in the language of spin waves convenient for
the theory. According to the quantum mechanical
principle of dualism, the waves can be substituted by
quasi-particles and, by analogy with a phonon, the
spin oscillation wave was called a magnon.

Thermal vibrations ”rock” the magnetic moments
and with the increase of temperature the number of
atoms with reversed spins, or, in other words, the
number of magnons increases. When the energy of
thermal vibrations becomes equal to that of exchange
interactions, there will be no ordering of magnetic
moments and the magnetic metal will become non-
magnetic. The temperature at wich it occurs was
called the Curie temperature Θc. The latter is simi-
lar to the Debye temperature for phonons: there can
be no magnons with the energy above kBΘc in metal.
Magnons are quasi-particles similar to phonons.
They carry heat, scatter the conduction electrons, i.e.
aﬀect the kinetic properties of metals. Therefore, it is
quite reasonable to suppose that the electrons scat-
tering by magnons or, more precisely, the magnons
excitation by electrons in a PC should cause non-
linearity of current-voltage characteristics, as is the
case with phonons, and the PC spectrum will display
the features associated with the electron-magnon in-
teraction. Indeed, such features were registered when
investigating the PC spectra of rare-earth metals Gd,
Tb, Ho which are ferromagnetics at low tempera-
tures. A question arises why rare-earth metals were
investigated but not less exotic well-known ferromag-
netics, such as Fe, Ni, Co. The matter is that in these
metals the Curie temperature, and consequently the
energy of magnons, is considerably greater than those
of phonons. At this time it turns out that the
electron-phonon interaction essentially decreases the
electrons mfp and the ballistic regime in a contact is
disturbed before reaching the energy of characteristic
magnon frequencies. On the contrary, in the above
mentioned rare-earth metals the Curie temperature
is less than the Debye temperature and the electron-
magnon interaction features show up at lower ener-
gies than the phonon ones.

In a solid, the conduction electrons can also in-
teract with other elementary excitation or ”-ons”.
Let us dwell on one of such quasi-particles, an exci-
ton, representing the electronic excitation in a crystal

16

of semiconductor or dielectric. As a result of inter-
atomic interaction, an exciton propagates over a crys-
tal in the form of a wave without carrying charge or
mass. Excitons are most intensively emitted from
semiconductors and dielectrics where they present
a bound state of the conduction electron and hole.
However, there exist some exciton-like excitations in
metals as well.

Thus, in the compound PrNi5 the main nine-fold
degenerated state of Pr3+ ion is split by the intracrys-
talline electric ﬁeld of lattice atoms into six energy
levels, three of which remain doubly degenerate, the
other three presenting a separate level of energy (see
diagram in Fig. 11. When the Pr3+ ion is excited, it
can reside in one of the higher-lying states, for exam-
ple Γ5A, in which it has a magnetic moment. Such
an excited state is transmitted from ion to ion, i.e. it
can be treated as a magnetic exciton. The processes
of Pr3+ ions excitation by electrons should obviously
cause the PC spectrum features at corresponding en-
ergies.

At low temperatures, the Pr3+ ion is in the ground
state Γ4 with minimum free energy. When the ion
is excited, it can move to the above-mentioned level
Γ5A, as well as to the higher-energy levels Γ3 and Γ5B.
Other transition to the levels Γ1 and Γ6 are forbid-
den by the selection rules. However, in an external
magnetic ﬁeld this exclusion is lifted (it remains only
for one high-symmetrical direction along the hexago-
nal axis), and the Zeeman splitting of spin-degenerate
levels occurs (see Fig. 11).

The processes of Pr3+ ion excitation by electrons,
as a result of which the ion moves to a higher-lying
level, bring about their inelastic scattering and man-
ifest themselves in the PC spectrum as peaks at the
corresponding energies. In the zero ﬁeld the PrNi5
spectrum distinctly reveals three features associated
with the transitions shown in Fig. 11(lower panel).
The most intensive peak corresponds to the Pr3+ ion
excitation to the state Γ5A. Evidently, these pro-
cesses will make maximum contribution into the re-
sistance of this substance. The probability of other
transitions and, respectively, their inﬂuence on elec-
tric conductivity and other kinetic and thermody-
namic properties of PrNi5 is appreciable less. These
are the simplest qualitative conclusions that can be

17

Figure 11: Above: Point-contact spectrum of PrNi5 in
a zero magnetic ﬁeld and in a ﬁeld of 11 Tesla. Ar-
rows indicate the peculiarities due to the Pr3+ ion tran-
sitions between the energy levels split by the intracrys-
talline ﬁeld. Below: scheme of the Pr3+ energy levels
in the intracrystalline electric ﬁeld and their additional
splitting in the external magnetic ﬁeld. Arrows indicate
the allowed transitions marked on the PC spectra. The
transitions marked by dashed lines are weakly probable
in the magnetic ﬁeld and are not visible on the spectra.

made directly from the form of PrNi5 PC spectrum.

12 From pure metals to alloys

The probability of transition to previously forbid-
den levels manifests itself in the magnetic ﬁeld and
Zeeman splitting of the remaining degenerate levels
occurs. Consequently, the PC spectra should change
when the magnetic ﬁeld is switched on,which can be
seen in Fig. 11(upper panel). An especially notice-
able evolution occurs with most intensive maximum.
Here, together with the peak splitting at 4 meV, one
can see additional features connected with the tran-
sitions to the levels Γ6 and Γ1. Hence, instead of
one maximum several maxima appear in the mag-
netic ﬁeld. Note that these features can be distinctly
observed only in a suﬃciently high magnetic ﬁeld.
Thus, for example, the amount of splitting evaluated
by the formula E = 2gµH (where g is Lande factor,
µ is the Bohr magneton) should be greater than the
resolution of this technique which is about 1 meV.
As a result of it, the magnetic ﬁeld amplitude should
exceed 4-5 Tesla and the higher the amplitude, the
more distinct are the features. That is why PrNi5
was studied in a ﬁeld of up to 21 Tesla, while the
ﬁgure, by way of example, shows the spectrum for an
intermediate ﬁeld.

It should be noted that measurements were carried
out on single-crystalline samples of PrNi5 for three
principal crystallographic directions, which made it
possible to detect also the anisotropy of Zeeman split-
ting. When doing so, we for the ﬁrst time obtained
the experimental data on the exact positions of levels
the transitions to which are forbidden in zero ﬁeld.
These data were used for comparison with theoretical
calculations which allowed us to determine the pa-
rameters characterizing the intracrystalline ﬁeld in a
particular compound. The above results can serve as
an example of how new data were obtained by point-
contact spectroscopy which enabled the construction
of a quantitative model of the intracrystalline eﬀects
inﬂuence on the PrNi5 properties.

18

and compounds

In principle, any energy-dependent mechanism of
electrons scattering in metals can be studied by
means of point-contacts. To put it in another way,
the processes inﬂuencing the inelastic mfp of elec-
trons in the lattice will be reﬂected in the point-
contact spectra. This can be easily proved using the
already mentioned Wexler formula (2) for the con-
tact resistance. The second term in this formula, the
Sharvin resistance, is a constant for the product of ρl
is constant. The Maxwell resistance can be rewritten
as RM = ρl/d (1/l) where the ﬁrst cofactor is also
constant and the second 1/l, is energy- dependent if
there exist the electron scattering processes aﬀecting
the electron mfp, i.e. l = l(ε) = l(eV ). For the sec-
ond derivative of the current-voltage characteristics
we shall write d2V /dI 2
R dR/dV . Substituting in-
stead of R its expression from Eq.(2) we obtain that

∼

d2V /dI 2

ρl/d d/dV [1/l(eV )]

(7)

∼

Thus, the second derivative will have extrema at
those energies at which the mfp of electrons changes
rapidly. In the case of electron-phonon scattering the
electron mfp considerably decreases at those energies
at which there exist a large number of phonons, i.e.
at the phonon spectrum maxima. That is why a peak
can be expected in this place of d2V /dI 2.

It has been previously noted that the spectral
regime is realized only in very small contacts, such
that the electron mfp should exceed the constriction
size. There are two mfp of electrons in conductors:
the elastic mfp le after passing which the electron
changes its momentum or direction of motion, and
the inelastic mfp li at which the electron changes
its energy, le is independent of the excess energy of
electrons and, according to Eq.(7), should not aﬀect
the point-contact spectrum form. A question arises
whether the point-contact spectroscopy is possible if
the elastic mfp becomes less than the short size. This
question is not idle since many alloys and compounds
have rather small le. The positive answer makes it
possible to apply the point-contact spectroscopy tech-
nique not only to pure metals whose number, though

≪

large, is limited, but also to practically unlimited col-
lection of more or less complex alloys or compounds
of diﬀerent metals. It turned out that the technique
works under less strict conditions, namely if the in-
elastic relaxation length during the diﬀusion motion
of electrons in the contact lD which in the case of
alloys is determined by lD = (leli/3)1/2 is greater
than the size of contact. The condition d
lD can
in many cases be satisﬁed for PCs made of complex
substances and the spectral information on electron
scattering mechanisms can be obtained. The regime
lD is met was called
at which the condition le ≪
the diﬀusion regime. In this case, as was shown by
theorists, the proportionality between d2V /dI 2 and
the spectral function G(ε) is preserved, only in the
right-hand part of Eq.(4) an additional factor ap-
pears that is proportional to the le/d ratio and leads
to the decrease of point- contact spectrum intensity,
for le/d

≪

≪

1.

d

If impurities are introduced into a perfect lattice,
it will cause the decrease of elastic electron mfp
li < le, d, which is the smaller, the higher concentra-
tion of the impurity. At this time the point-contact
spectra will not change at low impurity concentra-
tions (up to several per cent), only their absolute in-
tensities drop. A more interesting case is when the
mass mi of the impurity atom substantially diﬀers
from the mass M of lattice atoms. Thus, for exam-
M , there arise the so-called local oscil-
ple, if mi ≪
lations of the impurity atom with a frequency higher
than the maximum one of the host lattice vibrations.
M , the quasi-local os-
At the inverse relation mi ≫
cillations with a frequency essentially lower than the
Debye one appear in the spectrum of lattice frequen-
cies. It can be readily understood qualitatively if we
recall that the frequency of oscillator (pendulum) os-
cillations is inversely proportional to the square of
its mass. It appears that the electrons scattering by
local and quasi-local oscillations occurs inelastically,
i.e. with the change of energy. Hence, the peculiari-
ties connected with such oscillations can be expected
in the point-contact spectra.

Fig. 12 shows the spectrum of beryllium, as well
as the CuBe alloy containing 4.2 atomic percent of
Be. One can see that an additional feature has ap-
peared in the d2V /dI 2 curve. This feature cannot be

CuBe

1

A
L
/
V
L

0

0

c  (at%)

2

4

LA

LV

2

1

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
2
I
d
/
V
2
d

0

0

25

50
Voltage (mV)

75

100

Figure 12: Point-contact spectrum of copper alloy with
4.2 at.% of beryllium. It is seen that in the Cu spectrum
(between 0 and 30 mV) has developed a new maximum
(LV) at 40 mV which is absent both in the spectrum of
pure copper and beryllium (dashed curve). It is connected
with local vibrations of the Be atoms in the Cu lattice.
Inset shows increasing of LV maximum intensity relative
to LA phonon peak in Cu with beryllium content rise.

found either in the spectrum of copper or in that of
beryllium. This is exactly the band of local oscilla-
tions. In this case the impurity atoms are seven times
lighter than the copper ones. Another example of an
alloy with quasi-local oscillations is magnesium with
the admixture of lead atoms. Here the diﬀerence in
masses is 8.5 times. The point-contact spectra of this
alloy also reveal a feature that could be expected in
the region of energies essentially lower than the De-
bye one.

The other impurities which strongly scatter the
electrons are the atoms of rare-earth metals of iron
group which retain their magnetic properties when
added to a normal metal. The electrons scattering
by such elementary magnetics in a bulk conductor
causes an abnormal for metals rise of resistance at

19

low temperatures known as Kondo eﬀect. PC has
proved to be a very sensitive indicator for detecting
magnetic impurities in metal. Thus, when adding
only 0.01% of iron or manganese atoms to copper,
the point-contact spectrum will display distinct addi-
tional features in the energy range 1-2 meV which are
connected with the electrons scattering by localized
magnetic moments. One can evaluate the number of
impurity atoms getting into the contact area at the
above concentration c = 10−4. The total number of
atoms in a constriction with size d will be V /θ, where
d3 and θ is the volume per atom. The number of
V
impurity atoms Ni is estimated as a value of the order
10−23cm3, and the size
of cV /θ. For copper θ = 1.17
10−6 cm. There-
of PCs in question is about 1 to 2
fore, we obtain the value of Ni equal to 8-70 atoms.
It is of interest that the PC area contains a mea-
gre number of atoms whose eﬀect is, however, notice-
able in the measured characteristics. Thus, we can
say that the point-contact spectroscopy is a unique
method of studying the electrons scattering by single
microscopic centers.

×

×

≃

13 Contact heating

≤

So far we consider PCs whose dimensions are small
in comparison with the electron mfp. As has been
shown, in this case a highly nonequilibrium function
of electrons distribution is realized and there exist
two groups of electrons whose energies diﬀer by eV .
Relaxation of such a nonequilibrium state leads to the
excitation of quasi-particles with the energy ε
eV
and to the nonlinearity point-contact current-voltage
characteristics which contains spectral information
about the energy distribution of quasi-particles un-
der investigation. It turned out that even in the case
of small elastic mfp the spectroscopic capabilities of
contacts remain. For this purpose it is only necessary
that the diﬀusion length of energy relaxations should
be greater than the size of constriction. It is of in-
terest what will happen if the elastic and inelastic
lengths will be considerably smaller than the size of
contact. In other words, what will happen if the con-
tact dimensions are large or when studying the sub-
stances with suﬃciently short relaxation lengths. It

appears that in such constrictions the ﬂow of current
of the required density leads to conventional Joule
heating. The heat removal from such large contacts
with small mfp is less eﬃcient than in the ballistic
regime. Since in metals the heat removal from the
hot region to the bulk of the sample is principally ef-
fected by the conduction electrons, it can be shown
that when the Wiedemann-Franz law holds, the volt-
age drop at the contact and the metal temperature
at the center Tpc are related as

(kBTpc)2 = (kBT0)2 + (eV )2/4L

(8)

where T0 is the measurement temperature, L is the
Lorentz number. If measurements are taken at low
temperatures,
i.e. T =0, the contact temperature
will be linearly dependent on its voltage kBTpc =
eV /2√L. Substitute the known Lorentz number and
3.2 K/mV, i.e. a voltage of 1 mV
obtain that Tpc ≃
raises the temperature at the contact center by 3.2
degrees. The situation seems paradoxical: the sam-
ples are at a temperature of liquid helium, but if we
apply to the contact a voltage of only 100 mV or
0.1 V, the temperature of the contact becomes higher
than the room temperature. Is it possible and how
to verify this conclusion? Yes, it is, and rather sim-
If we take the above-mentioned ferromagnetic
ply.
metals, at the Curie temperature the transition from
ferromagnetic into paramagnetic state occurs. As a
result of it, an inﬂection appears in the electrical re-
sistivity curve, i.e., magnons and associated scatter-
ing disappear. As noted above, the contact resistance
is expressed by the Maxwell formula RM = ρ/d, so
when reaching the Curie temperature in the contact,
its resistance curve will have features similar to that
of ρ(T ). These peculiarities, which must show up still
deﬁnitely in the second derivative of current-voltage
characteristics d2V /dI 2
dR/dV . Such features of
≃
the point-contact spectrum for ferromagnetic met-
als were observed at voltages equal, for example for
Ni, to about 200 mV. This corresponds, according
to Eq.(8), to the known Curie temperature of nickel
equal to 630 K (Fig. 13). When adding beryllium
atoms to Ni, Tc of this alloy decreases and the feature
of d2V /dI 2 also shifts to the region of lower voltages
in full agreement with the above formula. This testi-
ﬁes of the fact that, actually, the temperature reached

20

600

)

K

(
 

c
T
500

c (at%)

0

3

6

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
 
2
I
d
/
V
2
d

 

0

100

Voltage (mV)

200

Figure 13: Second derivative for PCs of nickel (up-
per curve) and its alloys with beryllium Ni1−xBex x ≃
0.01, 0.03, 0.06 (bottom curves) far above the phonon en-
ergies. The observed sharp features are due to the near-
contact metal transition from the ferromagnetic state to
the paramagnetic one when heating by current up to the
Curie temperature. The shift of features towards smaller
voltages (see inset) when adding beryllium to nickel is
due to the Curie temperature decrease in the alloy and
proceeds according to Eq.(8).

at the contact center causes the metal transition from
the magnetic to the nonmagnetic state.

The criterion of thermal regime is also the depen-
dence of the above anomaly position on the bath tem-
perature T0. At this time it can be observed with-
out making measurements in helium. The anomalies
were found out for nickel contacts at room tempera-
ture, only they were shifted towards smaller voltages.
It follows from Eq. (8) that the required temperature
in the contact is reached at the lower voltages, the
higher the measurement temperature T0. Thus, all
kinds of d2V /dI 2 anomalies, if they are of thermal
nature, will shift over the voltage scale depending on
the measurement temperature. At the same time the

21

spectral features of d2V /dI 2 do not change their posi-
tions with temperature, they only broaden according
to Eq. (6).

One of the straightforward and easy-to-grasp ex-
amples of the experimental evidence of temperature
increase inside the contact was its critical voltage ob-
servation. This critical voltage cannot be exceeded no
matter how the current rises. The nature of this phe-
nomenon consists in that each metal has the so-called
”softening” temperature, about one-third of the melt-
ing one, at which the metal readily lends itself to plas-
tic deformation. When the contact voltage reaches
the corresponding ”softening” value, under the ac-
tion of pressing force the contact spot will increase
or the contact resistance will decrease, so that at the
current build-up a certain critical voltage cannot be
exceeded. This was observed for many metals with
diﬀerent melting temperatures in which they corre-
lated with the contact critical voltages.

In the above thermal regime, the current-voltage
characteristics nonlinearity is governed by the tem-
perature dependence of resistivity, as the contact re-
sistance is ρ(T )/d and its temperature is voltage-
dependent. This enables obtaining the ρ(T ) behav-
ior by low-temperature measurements of the con-
tact resistance as a function of voltage, i.e. with-
out direct measurements of ρ(T ). The advantages of
this technique are the possibility of direct measure-
ments dρ(T )/dT derivatives proportional to dR/dV
or d2V /dI 2, the possibility of using small quantities
of substances, the absence of need in the systems for
controlling and stabilizing the sample temperatures.
The above technique was called modulation tempera-
ture spectroscopy since when measuring the current-
voltage characteristics the sample is supplied with a
low modulation voltage and the contact temperature
in the thermal limit is changed (modulated) in step
with the voltage. Note that in this case the contact
size has no upper bound and the result is independent
of the constriction geometry. It is only necessary that
the heat should be removed from the contact mainly
by electrons.

Another convincing proof of metal heating inside
the contact in the thermal regime was the detec-
tion and explanation of current-voltage characteris-
tics asymmetry in a number of heterocontacts de-

pending on the applied voltage polarity. Consider an
electric circuit comprising a heterocontact formed be-
tween diﬀerent metals and a potentiometer connected
to it by two wires. Let the sample temperature be T0,
the instrument is kept at room temperature Troom
and the wires have the temperature gradient from
Troom to T0. This will cause the electron diﬀusion
from a hotter end to a colder one and the appear-
ance of thermoelectromotive force 5. However, the
gradient exists only in wires which are identical and
equal quantities of electrons per unit time will ar-
rive at the cold ends of wires. The potentials will be
the same and the outside device will read the voltage
(potential diﬀerence) equal to zero. The situation
will change if the contact region will heat up and
the temperature will become other than T0. A sim-
ilar diﬀusion of electrons from the hot region to the
cold one will start in metals making up the hetero-
contact. As the metals are diﬀerent, in one of them
the diﬀusion will proceed faster than in the other.
As a result of it, the potentials at cold ends will dif-
fer and the device will read some potential diﬀerence
due to thermoelectromotive force. To describe the
thermoelectric phenomena quantitatively, we will in-
troduce the Seebeck coeﬃcient S.
It indicates, for
example, what potential diﬀerence will exist at the
ends of a conductor if a temperature diﬀerence of one
degree is maintained between them.
If one knows
S of each metal in a heterocontact, one can calcu-
late the potential diﬀerence between the cold ends
of metals making up the heterocontact. The poten-
tial at one end will be S1(TP C −
T0), at the other
T0) and the potential dif-
end it will be S2(TP C −
ference registered by the outside instrument will be
T0). To be more precise, we shall note
(S1−
that the above considerations are valid if the coeﬃ-
cient S is temperature- independent. Otherwise, the
sample under study should have been divided into
small sections at which the temperature diﬀerence is
suﬃciently small to treat S as a constant, and then
to sum up the thermoemf of all these sections. This
actually implies integration and ﬁnally one can write

S2)(TP C −

5In real metals the thermoelectric phenomena are connected
not only with the electron diﬀusion but also with more compli-
cated processes, such as phonon drag, etc., which should not
be necessarily taken into account in this consideration.

TP C
T0

(S1 −

the well-known formula Vtemf = R
S2)dT to
determine the thermoemf in a contact of two metals.
What will be the eﬀect of thermoemf when mea-
suring point-contact characteristics of heterocontacts
in the thermal regime? The answer is rather ob-
vious:
it causes the asymmetry of current-voltage
characteristics depending on the polarity of voltage
applied to the contact. The reason of it is as fol-
lows. In one polarity denoted by, say (+), the voltage
applied to the contact will coincide with Vtemf and
add to it while in the other polarity denoted by (-)
the applied voltage will be subtracted. As a conse-
quence, at current I through the contact, its voltage
in the former polarity will be V (+) = IRP C + Vtemf ,
and in the latter polarity V (−) = IRP C −
Vtemf ,
where RP C is the contact resistance at zero volt-
age. Thus, the resistance dependence in one polarity
R(+) = V (+)/I = RP C + Vtemf /I will diﬀer from the
other one R(−) = V (−)/I = RP C −
Vtemf /I and will
cause the asymmetry of current-voltage characteris-
tics. This asymmetry can be more clearly observed on
the current-voltage characteristics derivative, for ex-
ample diﬀerential resistance RD = dV /dI. Here, by
analogy, we shall write R(+)
D = 2dVtemf /dI =
D −
2d/dI R
(S1 −
(S1 −
≃
S2)dT . As mentioned above, in the thermal regime
there exists a linear relation kBT = eV /2L1/2 be-
TP C) and
tween the contact temperature (at T0 ≪
voltage. That is why the above expression can be
simpliﬁed after substituting the diﬀerentiation vari-
able V by T as
R(−)

R(−)
2RP Cd/dV R

TP C
T0

TP C
T0

S2)dT

R(+)

[S1(TP C )

S2(TP C )]

(9)

D

D −
RP C

=

e
kB√L

−

Thus, the asymmetry of diﬀerential resistance of
heterocontacts in the thermal regime is proportional
to the Seebeck coeﬃcients diﬀerence of the contacting
metals. A more rigorous theory which appeared later
on conﬁrmed this qualitative analysis.

The current-voltage characteristics asymmetry of
heterocontacts is especially clearly deﬁned in sub-
stances with short mfp and large Seebeck coeﬃ-
cients. These systems include heavy fermion com-
pounds, Kondo lattices,
intermediate-valence sys-
tems. The measurements of current-voltage charac-

22

teristics asymmetry in such conductors may give in-
formation of thermoemf behavior therein. For this
purpose one should use the second electrode of nor-
mal metal whose Seebeck coeﬃcients are considerably
S2.
smaller than in the above compounds, i.e. S1 ≫
Hence, the RD asymmetry will be directly propor-
tional to the Seebeck coeﬃcient (see Eq. (9)) in the
substance under study. This is of not only the aca-
demic interest, for it can be used for analyzing the
S behavior in the sample, especially when studying
substances available in small quantities for which the
traditional methods of determining the Seebeck coef-
ﬁcient are hard to apply.

We have considered the cases of contact heating
under the action of transport current. Naturally, this
does not exhaust all thermal eﬀects which are inter-
esting when investigating PCs. Another important
trend is the study of heat conductivity in shorts when
instead of (or together with) the potential diﬀerence a
temperature gradient is applied to the contact. The-
oretical treatment of heat transfer through PC in the
ballistic regime brought about a rather unexpected
result. The second derivative of the heat ﬂux versus
voltage proved to be directly related to the electron-
phonon interaction function. It is not that simple to
measure this derivative and it has not yet been done
experimentally.

However, some studies conﬁrm the speciﬁc features
of heat conductivity in PCs. One of the contacts
making electrodes was attached to a heat exchanger
while the other was held in vacuum. Both electrodes
carried miniature pickups to check the electrode tem-
peratures depending on the contact voltage. The
temperature was found to rise slightly with voltage
in each electrodes, this temperature being diﬀerent
for various polarities. When the temperature diﬀer-
ence versus voltage curve was plotted, it was close
in shape to the electron-phonon interaction function
of the contacting metals. Therefore, the above ex-
periments evidence the electron-phonon interaction
eﬀect on the heat conductivity of PCs and conﬁrms,
though not directly, some theoretical conclusions. It
should be noted that the measured temperature dif-
ference has a ﬁner structure that can be related to the
peculiarities of phonon scattering and enables their
investigation.

Now let us see what happens if a contact is af-
fected only by the temperature gradient. Let one
electrode be held at helium temperature T0 and the
other at T , the inequality T0 < T being held.
In
this case the heat will be transferred from the heated
part through a constriction to the colder part.
In
other words, phonons will propagate from the hot
place where their number is large to the cold place
where their number is smaller. The electron diﬀusion
will proceed in the same direction, thus causing the
emf. However, when the contact is formed by elec-
trodes of the same metal, as stated previously, the
potentiometer connected to the ends of electrodes
should read zero voltage. Nevertheless, an experi-
ment made according to this scheme demonstrated
that this not quite the case. Even if the contact is
homogeneous and the electrodes are maintained at
diﬀerent temperatures, a potential diﬀerence will de-
velop between their ends. This occurs because in this
case there is a circuit of homogeneous in composition
but strongly geometrically inhomogeneous materials
due to PC where kinetic processes are speciﬁc. Thus,
for example, the ﬂow of phonons directed from the
hot part to the cold one drags” the electrons. This
causes thermal emf of the so-called phonon drag. It is
”hard” for the phonons to drag the electrons through
the bottleneck of PC and the drag thermoelectro-
motive force is suppressed 6. In the case concerned
total thermoemf will be written as a diﬀerence be-
tween the bulk and contact contribution. The lat-
ter is strongly suppressed in the contact, so only the
bulk contribution remains. Hence, the potentiometer
connected to the sample leads will read the voltage
to a higher extent governed by the drag thermal emf.
This oﬀers probably a unique possibility of measuring
the absolute coeﬃcient of thermal emf in a material-
homogeneous electric circuit.

6As shown by theoretical treatment, the diﬀusion part of
thermal emf will be also suppressed in PC, but less than asso-
ciated with drag.

23

14 Electrical ﬂuctuations

in

PCs

Noises present an important problem in science and
technology since they dictate the sensitivity of exist-
ing radio-electronic devices which, in its turn, limits
the magnitude and accuracy of measurements, the
quality of processing various signals. The investiga-
tion of sources and nature of noise makes it possible
not only to measure it, but also to suppress it, thus
increasing the signal-to-noise ratio for particular mea-
surements or devices.

What is noise? It is an unwanted voltage or cur-
rent of ﬂuctuation nature generated by the electronic
device or some circuit component. If this voltage is
applied to an audio-frequency ampliﬁer, this voltage
gives rise to a hiss in the loudspeaker. Hence the
name ”noise” which is applied to such ﬂuctuation
processes, though in most cases we do not actually
hear it.

What are the current or voltage ﬂuctuations due
to? First of all, the current carriers in a conductor
are in constant motion. As a result of it, ﬂuctuation
emf appears at the conductor ends. At each par-
ticular moment of time this emf will have a deﬁnite
value, but averaged over a longer time it will be equal
to zero. This noise was called thermal or Nyquist
noise, while the average square emf
arising at
the resistance R and temperature T in the frequency
range ∆f can be written as 4kBT R∆f . The other
type of noise is connected with the discreteness of
current carrier charge. Thus, for example, the events
of electron ﬂying out of the cathode (emitter) of elec-
tronic tube (transistor) form a sequence of indepen-
dent events, occur at random times and lead to the
so-called shot noise. At this time
eIR/C, e
being the electron charge, C the system capacity, i.e.
the shot noise is proportional to the current.

V 2
n i ∝
h

V 2
n i
h

In an impurity-free semiconductor electrons and
holes can appear and disappear at random due to
their generation and recombination. This also causes
in the sample called generation-
ﬂuctuation emf
recombination noise.

One more source of noise attracted attention ﬁrst
in the electron vacuum tubes. It was attributed to

the average emission rate alteration causing micro-
scopic current ﬂuctuations. The emission rate al-
teration can be treated as some eﬀect of collective
interaction of electrons, as a result of which such os-
cillations or ﬂicker of current occur. This noise is
known as ﬂicker noise. It is also characterized by the
fact that the spectral power of ﬂicker noise density
SV =
/∆f is frequency dependent close to the
1/f law, that is why it is also called 1/f noise. The
nature of this noise is not quite clear to date. Dif-
ferent models are suggested, particularly recently the
ﬂicker noise in solids has been explained in terms of
two-level system which serve as elementary disorder
carriers in the crystal lattice.

V 2
n i
h

The noise in electric contacts was studied rather
in detail. In 1969 Hooge obtained an empirical for-
mula for the spectral density of contact noise at the
frequency f : SV = αV 2/N f where α is a constant,
N is the total number of charge carriers in the con-
tact. The latter value can be found from the formula
N = nv where v is the constriction volume, n is the
carriers concentration. v can be easily estimate from
d3 = (ρ/R)3 using the Maxwell
the resistance v
formula mentioned above. As a result we will obtain
a more convenient expression for SV , viz.

≃

SV ≃

R3V 2
nρ3f

.

≃

V t where t

The spectral densities of noise have been also mea-
sured for PCs. Thus, for the thermal regime of cur-
2 at
rent ﬂow it was show that SV ∼
contact voltages up to a few millivolts, whereas at
higher voltages SV exponentially increases. The lat-
ter fact is attributed to highly nonequilibrium state
of electrons and phonons in the vicinity of the contact
when the characteristic phonon energies are reached.
The SV dependence on the sample resistance also ap-
peared close to R3. Consequently, the noise behav-
ior in PCs under thermal regime has no peculiarities
compared to those already known.

However, the study of SV dependence for con-
tacts in the ballistic regime yielded some new un-
usual information.
It turned out that in PC with
d the spectral density of noise does not in-
le, li ≫
crease monotonously but consists of a number of ex-

24

V 2
n i
h

at eV < εD
hand, the positions of maxima in
coincide with the minimum energy of phonons for
which the scattering with Umklapp is possible. Such
scattering correspond to the Bragg reﬂection of the
electron wave from the atomic plane in the lattice.
At this time the electron momentum changes by the
inverse lattice vector 2π¯h/a, i.e. equal to the double
maximum momentum of phonon. The above pro-
cesses are non-correlated because not only phonons
but the lattice as a whole participate in the elec-
tron scattering events and the noise increases. The
observed reproducibility of extrema position on the
for contacts of diﬀerent resistance and
curve
their relation to the characteristic phonon energies
more precisely to the singular points of the phonon
dispersion curves, makes it possible to speak about
the noise spectroscopy of separate groups of phonons
in metals.

V 2
n i
h

15 PCs

in a high-frequency

electromagnetic ﬁeld

For a considerably long time PCs have been used in
microwave engineering as detectors, mixers and har-
monic signal sources. Such contacts are formed by
means of thin wire pressed against a smooth metal
surface. The wire serves as a kind of antenna through
which the high-frequency current penetrates in the
bulk of the contact. As is already known, the current-
voltage characteristics of PCs deviate from the Ohm
law both in the ballistic and thermal regimes. This is
why the contact is a nonlinear element and possesses
the above detecting and other properties. However,
the physics of processes proceeding in the contact un-
der the action of microwave irradiation is of consid-
erable interest.

The ﬁrst thing done by researchers was to analyze
the form of current-voltage characteristics derivatives
at high frequencies. The experimental technique in
this case diﬀers a little from that described in Chap-
ter 8 and used for audio frequencies. As is seen
from Eq. (7), in addition to the signal proportional
to d2V /dI 2 at the frequency 2ω, there is a dc sig-
nal of the second derivative. To detect this constant

Figure 14: Above: point-contact spectrum of a tin con-
tact recorded at the temperature 4.2 K. Below: ”noise”
spectrum for the given contact. In addition to the mono-
tonic growth of noise, the curve display a number of
maxima and minima attributed to the peculiarities of
electron-phonon interaction in the contact.

V 2
n i
h

trema, both maxima and minima (Fig. 14). In this
case the minima positions in
at eV > εD corre-
sponded to the energy of multiphonon scattering of
electrons.
It was suggested that such multiphonon
generation in the constriction corresponds to the es-
tablishment of some coherent (ordered) regime of
phonon emission at the realization of which the noise
decreases. For the energies eV < εD the
also has
some minima attributed to the one-phonon normal
electron scattering in the coherent regime. It turned
out that the positions of minima correspond to the
energy at which the phonon dispersion curves cross
the Brillouin zone boundary, i.e. the wave vector of
phonons is maximum and their velocity is minimum.
The latter circumstance promotes the accumulation
of phonons in the vicinity of contact and the estab-
lishment of coherent regime of emission. On the other

V 2
n i
h

25

component of d2V /dI 2, the microwave signal is mod-
ulated by means of some chopper. For example, use is
often made of a rotating disc with holes to pass radi-
ation. Then, using a circuit similar to that described
in Chapter 8, the signal proportional to d2V /dI 2 is
separated at the chopping frequency.

−

Naturally, the PC resistance is much lower then
that of the surrounding medium, so when microwave
ﬁeld is applied, a high-frequency current will ap-
pear in the constriction and will play the role of
modulation signal. Therefore, for a contact in the
ballistic regime one can measure the second deriva-
tive proportional to the electron-phonon interaction
function, but only at high frequencies. Such ex-
periments were carried out and showed that the
d2V /dI 2 obtained in this way was identical to the
second derivative recorded at low frequency. Dis-
tinctions appeared when the frequency became as
high as giga- and tera hertz or the period of oscil-
lation reached 10−9
10−12s. Here d2V /dI 2 began
to change: ﬁrst the background level decreased, then,
at still higher frequencies, the spectral features began
to broaden. These change in d2V /dI 2 curve can be
understood if we compare the microwave signal pe-
riod with times of quasi-particles relaxation in the
contact. Thus, the electron-phonon scattering oc-
curs within 10−13 to 10−14 s which can be readily
obtained dividing the mfp the Fermi velocity of elec-
tron. The phonon-electron scattering processes are
as many times slower as sound (phonon) velocity is
smaller than the Fermi one and are characterized by
times 10−9 to 10−10 s. They also aﬀect the point-
contact spectrum causing the presence of phonon
component background therein. Consequently, when
the irradiation frequency approaches 109 Hz that is
comparable with the frequency of phonon-electron re-
laxation, the phonon reabsorption processes will slow
down because they will not be able to trace rapid
oscillations of the electron gas under the action of
emf induced by external radiation. As a result the
background level in the d2V /dI 2 curve recorded at
microwave frequency should decrease. With further
frequency increase to the level comparable with the
frequency of electron-phonon interaction (in this case
the energy quantum of radiation is comparable to the
phonon energies) the processes in the contact should

be considered in terms of corpuscular theory as the
absorbtion and emission of phonons under the action
of radiation quanta. As a result of it further increase
of frequency will cause smearing of d2V /dI 2 phonon
spectral features and the appearance of satellites at
higher frequencies.

When passing to the thermal regime, the nonlin-
earity of point-contact conduction is connected with
the eﬀect of heating. In this case the characteristic
time is determined by thermal relaxation processes in
the contact. It depends on the contact size d, speciﬁc
heat capacity c, heat conduction of material λ and
can be evaluated by the formula τ = cd2/λ. At char-
acteristic size of contact 10−8 m, heat capacity and
heat conductivity of metals the value of τ is about
10−9 s. Therefore, in the frequency range 109 Hz
and higher the d2V /dI 2 curve should change its form
as compared with that obtained at low frequencies.
This is caused by the fact that at the frequencies
above those of thermal relaxation the contact temper-
ature no longer traces the modulating high-frequency
current. As a result the possibilities of temperatures
modulation spectroscopy described in Chapter 13 are
limited by the above frequency.

Thus, the study of contact conductivity at high
frequencies makes it possible to clear out the nature
of various non-stationary processes in metals, to de-
termine the time of phonon-electron collision, to elu-
cidate the quantum limit eﬀect in detecting for the
ballistic regime. In the thermal regime it enable the
investigation of thermal relaxation processes in small-
size conductor.

16 Study of PCs on semimetals

and semiconductors

The distinctive features of substances relating to
semimetal and semiconductor is, ﬁrst of all,
low
concentration of charge carriers as compared with
common metal. Thus, in typical semimetals, bis-
1017
muth, antimony and arsenic, it changes from 3
1020 (As) per 1 cm3, whereas in met-
(Bi) to 2
×
als it is 1022
1023. In semiconductors these value
can be still lower by several orders of magnitudes.

−

×

26

Accordingly, the Fermi energy decreases from sev-
eral electron-volts in metals to millielectron-volts in
semimetals. Secondly, the eﬀective mass of charge
carriers in semimetals, due to the peculiarities of their
band structure, can be more then an order of magni-
tude lower then its value in common conductors. The
latter, together with low Fermi energy, causes the in-
crease of the de Broglie wavelength in semimetals up
it becomes comparable
to tens of nanometers, i.e.
with the contact dimensions. Thirdly, small eﬀective
mass leads to the fact that the Larmor radius of elec-
tron trajectory decreases to hundreds of nanometers
already in an easily attainable magnetic ﬁeld about
1 Tesla. Thus, an interesting situation is created in
semimetals when all the above lengths become com-
parable with the constriction dimension. This leads
to the inﬂuence of quantum interference eﬀects on
the conductivity of contact since due to a large wave-
length the quasi-particles can no longer be considered
as point ones and their wave properties should be also
taken into account. Besides, the magnetic ﬁeld eﬀect
on the charge carrier trajectories in the vicinity of
the contact should be appreciable, which will also af-
fect the characteristics being measured. Thus, for
example, under the ﬁeld eﬀect we observed transfor-
mation of the electron-phonon interaction spectrum
in antimony: the change of intensity, half-width and
energy position of maxima depending on the relation
between the Larmor radius of carriers and their mfp
and contact size.

On the other hand, a number of antimony contact
displayed the change of spectrum sign, i.e., d2V /dI 2
became negative but the extrema due to the electron-
phonon interaction were retained. Such contacts were
distinguished by small elastic mfp which was of the
same order as the de Broglie wavelength. As a result,
due to the quantum interference of electron waves,
the current carriers are localized and the system con-
ductivity decreases. The electron-phonon interaction
processes destroy localization and increase conduc-
tivity which corresponds to the decrease of diﬀeren-
tial resistance and, consequently, to the negative sign
of d2V /dI 2. This mechanism is most eﬀective at the
energies with many phonons, i.e. at the phonon spec-
trum maxima. Finally, under the localization regime
for the above contacts the recorded spectrum shape

will be close to the common one as if turned upside
down. As stated above, this interesting eﬀect was ob-
served for contacts made of antimony which provide
to be suﬃciently convenient and workable material
for making shorts.

Let us dwell on the point-contact study of semi-
conductors where so far only the ﬁrst steps are made.
Note that this problem is much greater tackled the-
oretically than experimentally where the investiga-
tion can be counted on the ﬁngers of one hand. The
matter is that the above technology of making PCs
between metals is not well suitable for semiconduc-
tors. This is due to the much stronger sensitivity of
the surface properties of semiconductors to deforma-
tion, pressure, imperfect structure, impurities which
are always present to some extent when the contact
is formed mechanically. Even a perfect surface is a
”defect” relative to the bulk material because the
boundary atoms on the one hand interact with the
like ones, and on the other hand interact with the
atoms of the surrounding medium. In this way the
surface state appear on the atomically pure surface
of the semiconductor whose energy levels lie in the
forbidden zone (Tamm or Schottky levels).
In real
crystals, along with the above levels, the additional
ones appear due to the impurities, defects, adsorbed
atoms, etc. The density of such levels depends on
surface boundary and can vary in wide range. The
presence of surface energy levels result in the forma-
tion of near-surface layer of the space charge whose
thickness is determined by the screening distance rS
7 depending on the carriers concentration. At this
time layer with the main carriers concentration other
than in the bulk appears on the surface. As a result
of it, when mechanically contacting two semiconduc-
tors, the point-contact properties will be to large ex-
tend determined by the surface layer properties and
diﬀer from the bulk ones. To avoid it, the lattices
should perfectly coincide during the mechanical con-
tact which hardly probable. For this reason the char-

7In conductor, the electron gas screens separate charges
whose radius of action is in this case limited by the distance
rS depending on electron concentration as rS ∼ n−1/2.
In
metals the screening distance is only a few decimal fractions
of ˚A, while in semiconductors it can reach tens and hundreds
of ˚A.

27

acteristics of semiconductor PCs strongly vary from
contact to contact and are poorly reproducible, thus
impeding the studies. Nevertheless, attempts to ad-
vance in this direction are continued. Thus, technique
of creating micro-constrictions has been implemented
in semiconductor heterocontacts. Two-dimensional
micro-constrictions less then one micron in size have
been obtained by electron-beam lithography.

transition Tc displayed the features associated with
the electron-phonon interaction. At this time the
form of the spectrum practically coincide with simi-
lar dependence for the same contacts in the normal
state. Only at the energies low compered with the
Debye one there appear sharp features due to the en-
ergy gap manifestation. But they do not greatly dis-
tort the electron-phonon interaction spectrum since
the phonon are located at higher energies.

17 Spectroscopy of supercon-

ductor

So far we considered the current-voltage character-
istics of contacts formed by normal metals. How-
ever, at low temperatures many metals and alloys
It should be noted that
become superconducting.
researchers began to study contacts between two su-
perconductors long before the advent of point-contact
spectroscopy. To tell the truth, the scientists were
more interested in the properties of superconducting
condensate formed by Cooper pairs. To break pair,
it should be given some energy equal to or greater
then the energy gap 8 in the electron density of
states equal not more than several millielectron-volts.
The current-voltage characteristics of superconduct-
ing contacts ﬁrst of all reveal the features connected
with the presence of the energy gap. Such features
were studied by many experiments in all simple su-
perconducting metals.

A question arises whether the phonon features
will show up in the second derivatives of current-
voltage characteristics of superconducting contacts,
i.e. whether the point-contact spectroscopy of super-
conducting state is possible. The answer proved to
be positive. For simple superconducting metals (Pb,
Sn) it was demonstrated that the point-contact spec-
tra taken bellow the temperature of superconducting

8In common superconductors the electrons interact via
phonon and form the so-called Cooper pairs which ensure a
non-dissipative charge transfer. As the pairs are Bose-particles
with the spin equal to zero, they are all ”condensed” at Fermi
level. The energy required for breaking a pair is equal to the
energy gap arising in the electron density of states in super-
conductor at the Fermi level. The energy gap value, as well as
those of critical temperature and other parameters, is one of
the most important superconductor characteristics.

At the ﬁrst sight it seems that point-contact spec-
troscopy in the superconducting state yield no new
information. However, not all the metals, especially
alloys and compounds with high critical parame-
ters: superconducting transition temperature, criti-
cal magnetic ﬁeld, can be studied at low tempera-
tures in the normal state. Therefore, the principal
possibility of the point-contact spectroscopy appli-
cation for investigation the superconductors consid-
erably extends its scope of use to the study of the
high-temperature superconductors.

It is noteworthy that the point-contact spec-
troscopy of superconductors has oﬀered new oppor-
tunities. It tuned out that in some metals and alloys
whose point-contact spectra in the normal state do
not display any spectral features due to the short
electron mfp, in the superconducting state there ap-
pear peaks arranged in the region of characteristics
phonon frequencies. This was found out experimen-
tally when measuring contacts of Nb, Ta, Nb3Sn,
NbSe2. The nature of these features is somewhat
diﬀerent from that in the ballistic contact. They
are connected with the inﬂuence of nonequilibrium
phonons generated by electrons on the supercon-
ducting properties of metal near the constriction.
The phonons with small group velocities more slowly
emerge from the contact vicinity, cause local over-
heating and decrease of the energy gap. Therefore,
at these energies features will appear in the current-
voltage characteristics derivative. This makes it
possible to carry out the spectroscopy of ”slow”
phonons which correspond to the ﬂattening of dis-
persion curves where dε/dq tends to zero (see Fig.
2a).

28

18 New trends of research

In the preceding chapters we discussed the possi-
bilities of point-contact spectroscopy when studying
mainly simple metals and some alloys. It was shown
that this technique makes it possible to obtain de-
tailed (spectroscopic) information on the mechanisms
of electron scattering in conductor. At the same time
the recent advances of solid-state physics are asso-
ciated with the synthesis and study of new classes
of compounds. These include the heave-fermion and
mixed-valence systems, so-called Kondo lattices, new
high-temperature superconductors and many others.
Naturally, the most promising trends in point-contact
spectroscopy are also connected with their study.

The substances in question are noted for the fact
that the conventional band scheme proceeding from
the concept of free electrons in the conduction band
and the localized nearly atomic states of lower-lying
shells is not suitable for their description. In these
substances the inner shells near the Fermi level lose
their stability and their electrons acquire a partially
band character. As a result the electron density of
states strongly increases and can have a sharp max-
imum near the Fermi level. In a number of case the
presence of such narrow maximum in Kondo lattices
is attributed of many-particle Abrikosov-Suhl reso-
nance caused by the interaction between localized f-
or d-electrons and conducting electrons. A high in-
crease of the electron density of states corresponds
to the appearance of electrons with a larger eﬀec-
tive mass.
In simple terms, these conduction elec-
trons are not fully ”untied” from the atoms and their
ﬁeld-eﬀected motion is more hindered. The presence
of such electrons stipulates the unusual properties of
these materials.

Theoretical treatment of the kinetic properties of
such substances is based on taking into account their
electronic spectrum peculiarities near the Fermi level.
It is impeded by the absence of direct experimental
data on the electron density of states in a narrow layer
on the Fermi surface. The scientists were tempted by
the idea to use PC for recording the energy spectra
not only of phonons but also of electrons.

A number of research groups abroad are investigat-
ing the compounds with heavy fermions and interme-

diate valence in heterocontact with normal metal. It
was discovered that for the substances with a maxi-
mum electron density of states N (ε) near the Fermi
energy εF the point-contact diﬀerential resistance
RD(V ) curve has deep minimum at V = 0. At the
same time, a sharp maximum of RD at V = 0 appear
in the substances with a low density of states or with
∆ < ε < εF + ∆ where 2∆
gap, i.e. N (ε) = 0 at εF −
is the gap width. It also appeared that the widths
of RD(V ) maxima or minima is close to the assumed
widths of N (ε) features. This suggested the possi-
bility of registering the N (ε) features near the Fermi
level in such substances using the point-contact spec-
troscopy. However, not everything is so simple in
this problem. Firstly, the electron mfp in the sys-
tems under consideration are small enough and one
should take into account the thermal eﬀects occur-
ring in PCs. Secondly, there is not microscopic the-
ory that allows for the eﬀect of electronic spectrum
peculiarities on the point-contact kinetic phenomena.
The experiments carried out by other groups showed,
however, that the thermal regime is realized in the
contacts of such materials and that the main non-
linearity of the current-voltage characteristics is de-
termined by the temperature-depended part of sub-
stance resistance. Thus, for example, the RD(V ) be-
havior for contacts made of number of heavy-fermion
compounds, such us CeCu2Si2, UPt3, UBe13 and oth-
ers, precisely duplicates the ρ(T ) dependence in bulk
material. Thus, the relation of V and T in a con-
tact, typical on the thermal regime, is evident. Be-
sides, it was shown that one should be very careful
when treating the result obtained on heterocontacts 9
between a normal metal and speciﬁc substances, for
here one should also successively take into account
the thermoelectrical eﬀects considered in Chapter 13.
There is probably only one convincing example
of how the authors managed to obtain well-deﬁned
spectral
features in the point-contact spectra of
intermediate-valence compound CeNi5. Such sub-
stances contain rare-earth atoms with partially ﬁlled
4f shell and +3 valence. Since the ion states with

9This experimental geometry is often used since the above
compounds are frequently rather small samples and cannot be
adequately shaped, so it is simple to make a needle of another
material.

29

ﬁlled or empty shell are most stable, the state Ce3+
will compete with the state Ce4+ when the f-shell in
cerium is empty. Thus, the Ce3+ ions in the com-
pound CeNi5 can also exist in the Ce4+ state, giving
out the excess electron. As a result, there is con-
stant competition between these two state, Ce3+ and
Ce4+, so the valence of Ce ions is between 3 and 4
is called intermediate. There exists a model accord-
ing to which the energy levels of the Ce3+ and Ce4+
states are arranged near the Fermi level but on the
opposite sides, thus increasing the density of state
at the corresponding energies. The electrons take
part in the transitions between these states or lev-
els with diﬀerence valence. These transitions aﬀect
the conductivity of substance and should be observed
on the point-contact spectra. Actually, among with
the phonon features, the d2V /dI 2 curves of CeNi5
contacts reveal small maxima in the low energy re-
gion. These maxima can be related with scattering by
diﬀerent-valence conﬁguration of the Ce ion. In this
case the d2V /dI 2 curve of CeNi5-normal metal het-
erocontact displays a large asymmetry of features in
question depending on the voltage polarity. In terms
of the model under consideration, this is attributed
to the resonance scattering by diﬀerent-valence state
of the Ce ion with allowance for the speciﬁc form of
the electron distribution function in PC (see Fig. 5b).
On the other hand, there is an alternative approach
to the explanation of mentioned features observed in
the PC spectra of CeNi5. This approach is connected
with taking into account strong spin correlations in
this compound. Their important role was indicated
by the low temperature behavior of CeNi5 resistance
proportional to T 2 attributed to the scattering by
spin ﬂuctuation or paramagnons. The latter should
lead to the linear dependence of the initial d2V /dI 2
section that was observed on all curves in the absence
of negative ”zero-bias” anomaly, which, as noted in
Chapter 7, indicates low quality of contacts.

As to the d2V /dI 2 asymmetry in heterocontacts
based on CeNi5, the detailed study on single crys-
tals has demonstrated its greater relation to the ther-
moelectric eﬀects. This evidence by the fact that
the asymmetry corresponds to the thermoemf sign in
CeNi5 and its value for the two principal directions
correlates with that of the Seebeck coeﬃcient. Thus,

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
 
2
I
d
/
V
2
d

0

La1.8Sr0.2CaCuO

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
)

(
 
F

0

20

40

60

80

100

Voltage (mV)

Figure 15: Point-contact spectrum of high-temperature
superconductor La1.8Sr0.2CuO4 (solid curve). A number
of narrow spectral lines and the spectrum boundary near
80 mV are well deﬁned. The initial spectral part up to 10
mV contain powerful bursts due to the manifestation of
the superconductor energy gap not shown in the ﬁgure.
Neutron phonon density of states (symbos) is shown for
comparison.

further investigation of CeNi5 by means of PC will
enable better understanding of these interesting sys-
tems.

Nevertheless,

it should be noted that the dis-
cussed possibility of reﬁning the band structure of the
compounds under consideration by means of point-
contact spectroscopy is of interest due to a high reso-
lution about 1 meV. The traditional X-ray or photo-
electron techniques used for the study of band struc-
ture operate in signiﬁcant larger energy scales with
resolution not higher than hundreds of millielectron-
volts.

The point-contact technique did not stand of
the events associated with the discovery of high-
temperature superconductors. One of the ﬁrst com-
pounds of this kind, La1.8Sr0.2CuO4 was studied
It was
by means of point-contact spectroscopy.
rather simple to obtain the point-contact spectrum
of phonons (Fig. 15). It was found that it extends up
to the energies of about 80 meV and comprises six

30

w
sharp peaks corresponding to the phonons with the
small group velocities. The electron-phonon interac-
tion estimated by the relative diﬀerential resistance
increase of PC when the energy rises to εD has shown
this interaction to be almost the order of magnitude
stronger than in common superconductors. Conse-
quently, the superconductivity in the compound in
question is more than likely due to the electron-
phonon interaction. On the other hand, the analy-
sis of current-voltage characteristics of contact from
such superconductors below the critical temperature
enables the determination of their energy gap. The
information obtained thereat relates to the substance
region with the size about the contact diameter di-
rectly adjacent to the constriction. This makes it
possible to investigate the properties of separate su-
perconducting clusters whose sizes measure only hun-
dreds ˚A. The knowledge of the contact dimensions en-
able us to estimate the critical current densities. It
turned out that this density reaches 108A/cm2 in the
superconducting clusters investigated by the point-
contact spectroscopy, whereas in the bulk sample the
critical current density does not exceed 103A/cm2.
Apparently, the latter fact points to the presence of
weak contacts between superconducting granules in
such systems. Therefore, PC can be also used as an
eﬃcient probe which enables the study of cluster and
other polyphase compounds.

It is necessary to note the even growing interest
to the study of heterocontacts including those be-
tween pure metals. It is clear that the point-contact
spectrum of heterocontact between diﬀerent metals
should contain the peculiarities due to one and an-
other electrodes, i.e. as a result the d2V /dI 2 de-
pendence can be presented as a sum of spectrum
from each materials. Such experiments were made
soon after obtaining ﬁrst point-contact spectra. The
researchers observed the change the partial contri-
bution into the spectrum from one or another sub-
stance for various contacts with diﬀerent resistances.
This was attributed to the fact that the point-contact
vicinity can be at random mostly ﬁlled with one or
another metal. However, theoretical works in this
ﬁeld have demonstrated that the heterocontacts have
their own physics. Firstly the intensities of one or
another metal spectra in the heterocontacts are in-

in
versely proportional to the Fermi velocity, i.e.
other words, to the time of electrons transit or inter-
action in the contact. Secondly, the eﬀects of electron
trajectories reﬂection or refraction appear in the het-
erocontact (due to the diﬀerent electron momenta) as
is the case when the light passes through the bound-
ary between two media. As a result, as shown by
the estimates, it can lead to a considerable change in
the metal spectrum both in intensity and shape. The
detailed comparison of theoretical calculations with
experiments on heterocontacts yields information on
the electron scattering at the metals interface.

Besides, the heterocontacts develop a whole num-
ber of other interesting eﬀects connected with the
observation of spectrum asymmetry 10 depending on
the applied voltage polarity. One of such eﬀects de-
tected recently is related to the electron drag in the
contact by the nonequilibrium phonons which enable
the study of their relaxation processes with the aid
of PCs.

19 Conclusion

(Note, it was written 15 years ago.)

The above examples explain the achievements and
prospects of the development of point-contact spec-
troscopy for the study of the electron and phonon
system kinetics which determines the main electrical
properties of conductors. This technique is becoming
a powerful and eﬃcient tool for the study of highly
nonequilibrium phenomena in conductors, especially
those with limited space dimensions. The latter is
of interest for modern microelectronics where the di-
mensions of separate components are already below
the micron range.

Note that the point-contact measurements are also
helpful in all the case when one deals with constric-
tions of diﬀerent types. Thus, they enable obtaining
information on the state of metal in the regions of
current concentrations, mean free paths, contact di-
mensions, etc., i.e. to have some ”rated” characteris-
tics of contact, the knowledge of what researcher or
engineer is dealing with.

10In this case the asymmetry is not connected with the ther-

mal emf since the contacts are in the ballistic regime.

31

The best evidence of the eﬃciency and importance
of work carried out in this ﬁeld is the wide geogra-
phy of point-contact spectroscopy research. Thus,
in the USSR both the experimental and theoretical
studies are extensively carried out at the Institute
for Low Temperature Physics and Engineering of the
Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, which takes the lead-
ing place in the world in this respect. This is the
birthplace of the point-contact technique where fur-
ther fruitful research is under way.

Experimental groups of ”point-contact” physi-
cists successfully work in the Kurchatov Institute
of Atomic Energy and the Institute of Solid-State
Physics of USSR Academy of Sciences. Their princi-
pal interests is connected with transition metals and
alloys on their base. There are also groups of the
theorists dealing with the calculation of the point-
contact spectra.

A number of important results have been obtained
by Dutch scientists from the University of Nijmegen
who, in particular, proposed the ”needle-anvil” tech-
nique. Now this group has moved to Grenoble, to
the Laboratory of High Magnetic ﬁelds in the Insti-
tute of Solid-State Physics of the Max-Planck Soci-
ety. The principal attention here is paid to the study
of PCs on the base of compounds with rare-earth
ions and their behavior in high magnetic ﬁelds. The
researchers of the University of Cologne (Germany)
use PCs for the investigation of heavy-fermion com-
pounds, Kondo lattices and mixed-valence systems.
The group from the Higher Technical School (ETH)
in Z¨urich (Swiss) works in the same direction.

The physicists in the USA and Canada are actively
working on the theory of point-contact spectroscopy
and calculation of point-contact spectra of simple
metals. Experimental study of PCs from some semi-
conductors and pure rare-earth metals are carried out
in the Cavendish laboratory in Cambridge (England).
At the Institute of Experimental Physics in Kosice
(Czecho-Slovakia) scientists are successfully develop-
ing various trends in point-contact spectroscopy in
close collaboration with the researchers from the In-
stitute for Low Temperature Physics and Engineer-
ing of the UkrSSR Academy of Sciences. Recently,
the scientists of Japan joined in the point-contact
studies. The group in Tokyo and Sendai are engaged

in the point-contact spectroscopy of Kondo lattices.
There are number of other places where scientists are
not only interested in these technique but are trying
to use it. Within the last 15 years of its develop-
ment, the point-contact spectroscopy, together with
the other spectroscopic techniques, has become in-
separable part of physical research. More than two
hundreds papers on this subject have been already
published in the leading physical journals all over the
world. The papers devoted to point-contact spec-
troscopy are presented at practically all conferences
dealing with the electronic properties of solid. It is
hardly too much to say that the point-contact spec-
troscopy method has been adopted by physicists all
over the world.

Literature

Holm R., Electric contacts handbook. M., Foreign
Literature Publishers, 1961 (in Russian).

Kaganov M.I., Electrons, phonons, magnons. M.,

Nauka, 1979 (in Russian).

Khotkevich A. V. and Yanson I. K., Atlas of Point
Contact Spectra of Electron-Phonon Interaction in
Metals, Kluwer Academic Publisher, Boston, 1995.

Kittel C., Introduction to Solid State Physics by

John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1971.

Verkin B.I., Point-contact spectroscopy of metals

and alloys, Priroda, No. 10, 1983 (in Russian).

Topical reviews (added)

Duif A., Jansen A. G. M. and Wyder P., J. Phys.:

Condens. Matter 1 3157 (1989).

Jansen A. G. M., van Gelder A. P. and Wyder P.,

J. Phys. C 13 6073 (1980).

Naidyuk Yu. G. and Yanson I. K., J. Phys.: Con-

dens. Matter 10 8905 (1998).

Yanson I. K., Sov. J. Low Temp. Phys. 9 343

Yanson I. K., Sov. J. Low Temp. Phys. 17 143

Yanson I. K. and Shklyarevskii O. I., Sov. J. Low

Temp. Phys. 12 509 (1986).

(1983).

(1991).

32

33

Figure 16: Original brochure cover.

