4
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
0
3
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Bowl Championship Series:
A Mathematical Review

Thomas Callaghan, Peter J. Mucha, and Mason A. Porter∗

February 2, 2008

Introduction

On February 29, 2004, the college football Bowl Championship Series (BCS)
announced a proposal to add a ﬁfth game to the “BCS bowls” to improve
access for mid-major teams ordinarily denied invitations to these lucrative
postseason games. Although still subject to ﬁnal approval, this agreement is
expected to be instituted with the new BCS contract just prior to the 2006
season.

There aren’t too many ways things could have gone worse this past
college football season with the BCS Standings that govern which teams
play in the coveted BCS bowls. The controversy over USC’s absence from
the BCS National Championship game, despite being #1 in both polls,
garnered most of the media attention [11], but it is the yearly treatment
received by the “non-BCS” mid-major schools that appears to have ﬁnally
generated changes in the BCS system [14].

Created from an abstruse combination of polls, computer rankings, sched-
ule strength, and quality wins, the BCS Standings befuddle most fans and
sportswriters, as we repeatedly get “national championship” games between
purported “#1” and “#2” teams in disagreement with the polls’ consensus.
Meanwhile, the top non-BCS squads have never been invited to a BCS bowl.
∗Thomas Callaghan is an undergraduate majoring in applied mathematics, Peter
Mucha is an assistant professor of mathematics, and Mason Porter is a VIGRE visit-
ing assistant professor, all at Georgia Institute of Technology. This work was partially
supported by NSF VIGRE grant DMS-0135290, as a Research Experiences for Under-
graduate project, and by a Georgia Tech Presidential Undergraduate Research Award.
The simulated monkeys described herein do not know that they live on Georgia Tech
computers. No actual monkeys were harmed in the course of this investigation.

1

Predictably, some have placed blame for such predicaments squarely on the
“computer nerds” whose ranking algorithms form part of the BCS formula
[6, 13]. Although we have no part in the BCS system, and the moniker may
be accurate in our personal cases, we provide here a mathematically-inclined
review of the BCS. We brieﬂy discuss its individual components, compare
it with a simple algorithm deﬁned by random walks on a biased graph, at-
tempt to predict whether the proposed changes will truly lead to increased
BCS bowl access for non-BCS schools, and conclude by arguing that the
true problem with the BCS Standings lies not in the computer algorithms,
but rather in misguided addition.

Motivation for the BCS

The National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) neither conducts a
national championship in Division I-A football nor is directly involved in
the current selection process. For decades, teams were selected for ma-
jor bowl games according to traditional conference pairings. For example,
the Rose Bowl featured the conference champions from the Big Ten and
Pac-10. Consequently, a match between the #1 and #2 teams in the na-
tion rarely occurred. This frequently left multiple undefeated teams and
co-champions—most recently Michigan and Nebraska in 1997. It was also
possible for a team with an easier schedule to go undefeated without having
played a truly “major” opponent and be declared champion by the polls,
though the last two schools outside the current BCS agreement to do so
were BYU in 1984 and Army in 1945.

The BCS agreement, forged between the six major “BCS” conferences
(the Pac-10, Big 12, Big Ten, ACC, SEC and Big East, plus Notre Dame
as an independent), was instituted in 1998 in an attempt to ﬁx such prob-
lems by matching the top two NCAA Division I-A teams in an end-of-season
BCS National Championship game. The BCS Standings, tabulated by The
National Football Foundation [17], selects the champions of the BCS con-
ferences plus two at-large teams to play in four end-of-season “BCS bowl
games,” with the top two teams playing in a National Championship game
that rotates among those bowls. Those four bowl games—Fiesta, Orange,
Rose, and Sugar—generate more than $100 million annually for the six BCS
conferences, but less than 10% of this windfall trickles down to the other
ﬁve (non-BCS) Division I-A conferences [12]. With the current system only
guaranteeing a BCS bowl bid to a non-BCS school that ﬁnishes in the top
6 in the Standings, those conferences have complained that their barrier to

2

appearing in a BCS bowl is unfairly high [18]. Moreover, the money directly
generated by the BCS bowls is only one piece of the proverbial pie, as the
schools that appear in such high-proﬁle games receive marked increases in
both donations and applications.

Born from a desire to avoid controversy, the short history of the BCS
has been anything but uncontroversial. In 2002, precisely two major teams
(Miami and Ohio State) went undefeated during the regular season, so it
was natural for them to play each other for the championship. In 2000, 2001,
and 2003, however, three or four teams each year were arguably worthy of
claiming one of the two invites to the championship game. Meanwhile, none
of the non-BCS schools have ever been invited to play in a BCS bowl. Tulane
went undefeated in 1998 but ﬁnished 10th in the BCS Standings. Similarly,
Marshall went undefeated in 1999 but ﬁnished 12th in the BCS. In 2003,
with no undefeated teams and six one-loss teams, the three BCS one-loss
teams (Oklahoma, LSU, and USC) ﬁnished 1st through 3rd (respectively)
in the BCS Standings, whereas the three non-BCS one-loss teams ﬁnished
11th (Miami of Ohio), 17th (Boise State), and 18th (TCU).

The fundamental diﬃculty in accurately ranking or even agreeing on a
system of ranking the Division I-A college football teams lies in two factors—
the paucity of games played by each team and the large disparities in the
strength of individual schedules. With 117 Division I-A football teams, the
10–13 regular season games (including conference tournaments) played by
each team severely limits the quantity of information relative to, for exam-
ple, college and professional basketball and baseball schedules. While the
32 teams in the professional National Football League (NFL) each play 16
regular season games against 13 distinct opponents, the NFL subsequently
uses regular season outcomes to seed a 12-team playoﬀ. Indeed, Division I-A
college football is one of the only levels of any sport that doesn’t currently
determine its champion via a multi-game playoﬀ format.1 Ranking teams is
further complicated by the Division I-A conference structure, as teams play
most of their games within their own conferences, which vary signiﬁcantly
in their level of play. To make matters worse, even the notion of “top 2”
teams is woefully nebulous: Should these be the two teams who had the
best aggregate season or those playing best at the end of the season?

1The absence of a Division I-A playoﬀ is itself quite controversial, but we do not intend
to address this issue here; rather, we are more immediately interested in possible solutions
under the constraint of the NCAA mandate against playoﬀs.

3

The BCS formula and its components

In the past, national champions were selected by polls, which have been
absorbed as one component of the BCS formula. However, they have been
accused of bias towards the traditional football powers and of making only
conservative changes among teams that repeatedly win.
In attempts to
provide unbiased rankings, many diﬀerent systems have been promoted by
mathematically and statistically inclined fans. A subset of these algorithms
comprise the second component of the oﬃcial BCS Standings. Many of
these schemes are suﬃciently complicated mathematically that it is virtu-
ally impossible for lay sports enthusiasts to understand them. Worse still,
the essential ingredients of some of the algorithms currently used by the BCS
are not publicly declared. This state of aﬀairs has inspired the creation of
software to develop one’s own rankings using a collection of polls and algo-
rithms [19] and comical commentary on “faking” one’s own mathematical
algorithm [10].

Let’s break down the cause of all this confusion. The BCS Standings are
created from a sum of four numbers: polls, computer rankings, a strength of
schedule multiplier, and the number of losses by each team. Bonus points for
“quality wins” are also awarded for victories against highly-ranked teams.
The smaller the resulting sum for a given team, the higher that team will
be ranked in the BCS Standings.

The ﬁrst number in the sum is the mean ranking earned by a team in

the AP Sportswriters Poll and the USA Today / ESPN Coaches Poll.

The second factor is an average of computer rankings. Seven sources
currently provide the algorithms selected by the BCS. The lowest computer
ranking of each team is removed, and the remaining six are averaged. The
sources of the participating ranking systems have changed over the short
history of the system, most recently when the BCS mandated that the oﬃcial
computer ranking algorithms were not allowed to use margin of victory
starting with the 2002 season.
In the two seasons since that change, the
seven oﬃcial systems have been provided by Anderson & Hester, Billingsley,
Colley, Massey, The New York Times, Sagarin, and Wolfe. None of these
sources receive any compensation for their time and eﬀort; indeed, many
of them appear to be motivated purely out of a combined love of football
and mathematics. Nevertheless, the creators of most of these systems guard
their intellectual property closely. An exception is Colley’s ranking, which is
completely deﬁned on his web site [4]. Billingsley [1], Massey [16], and Wolfe
[21] provide signiﬁcant information about the ingredients for their rankings,
but it is insuﬃcient to reproduce their analysis. Additional information

4

about the BCS computer ranking algorithms (and numerous other ranking
systems) can be found on David Wilson’s web site [20].

The third component of the BCS formula is a measurement of each
team’s schedule strength. Speciﬁcally, the BCS uses a variation of what is
commonly known in sports as the Ratings Percentage Index (RPI), which
is employed in college basketball and college hockey to help seed their end-
of-season playoﬀs.
In the BCS, the average winning percentage of each
team’s opponents is multiplied by 2/3 and added to 1/3 times the winning
percentage of its opponents’ opponents. This schedule strength is used to
assign a rank to each team, with 1 assigned to that deemed most diﬃcult.
That rank ordering is then divided by 25 to give the “Schedule Rank,” the
third additive component of the BCS formula.

The fourth additive factor of the BCS sum is the total number of losses

by each team.

Once these four numbers (polls, computers, schedule strength, and losses)
are summed, a ﬁnal quantity for “quality wins” is subtracted to account for
victories against top teams. The current reward is −1.0 points for beating
the #1 team, decreasing in magnitude in steps of 0.1, down to −0.1 points
for beating the #10 team.

It is not diﬃcult to imagine that small changes in any of the above weight-
ings have the potential to alter the BCS Standings dramatically. However,
because of the large number of parameters, including unknown ‘hidden pa-
rameters’ in the minds of poll voters and the algorithms of computers, any
attempt to exhaustively survey possible changes to the rankings is hopeless.
Instead, to demonstrate how weighting diﬀerent factors can inﬂuence the
rankings, we discuss a simple ranking algorithm in terms of random walkers
on a biased network.

Ranking football teams with random walkers

Before introducing yet another ranking algorithm, we emphasize that numer-
ous schemes are available for ranking teams in all sports. See, for example,
[9, 5, 15] for reviews of diﬀerent ranking methodologies and the listing and
bibliography maintained online by David Wilson [20].

Instead of attempting to incorporate every conceivable factor that might
determine a team’s quality, we took a minimalist approach, questioning
whether an exceptionally naive algorithm can provide reasonable rankings.
We consider a collection of random walkers who can each cast a single vote
for the team they believe is the best. Their behavior is deﬁned so simplis-

5

tically that it is reasonable to think of them as a large collection of trained
monkeys. Because the most natural arguments concerning the relative rank-
ing of two teams arise from the outcome of head-to-head competition, each
of these monkeys routinely examines the outcome of a single game played by
their favorite team—selected at random from that team’s schedule—and de-
termines its new vote based entirely on the outcome of that game, preferring
but not absolutely certain to go with the winner.

In the simplest deﬁnition of this process, the probability p of choosing the
winner is the same for all voters and games played, with p > 1/2 because on
average the winner should be the better team and p < 1 to allow a simulated
monkey to argue that the losing team is still the better team (due perhaps to
weather, oﬃciating, injuries, luck, or the phase of the moon). The behavior
of each virtual monkey is driven by a simpliﬁed version of the “but my team
beat your team” arguments one commonly hears. For example, much of
the 2001 BCS controversy centered on the fact that BCS #2 Nebraska lost
to BCS #3 Colorado, and the 2000 BCS controversy was driven by BCS
#4 Washington’s defeat of BCS #3 Miami and Miami’s win over BCS #2
Florida State.

The synthetic monkeys act as independent random walkers on a graph
deﬁned with biased edges between teams that played head-to-head games.
This algorithm is easy to deﬁne in terms of the microscopic behavior of
individual monkeys who randomly change their votes based on the win-loss
outcomes of individual games. The random behavior of these individual
voters is, of course, grossly simplistic. Indeed, under the speciﬁed range of
p, a given voter will never reach a certain conclusion about which team is the
best; rather, it will forever change its allegiance from one team to another,
ultimately traversing the entire graph. In practice, however, the macroscopic
total of votes cast for each team by an aggregate of random-walking voters
quickly reaches a statistically-steady ranking of the top teams according to
the quality of their seasons.

We propose this model on the strength of its simple interpretation of
random walkers as a reasonable way to rank the top teams (or at least as
reasonable as other available methods, given the scarcity of games played
relative to the number of teams). This simple scheme has the additional
advantage of having only one explicit, precisely-deﬁned parameter with a
meaningful interpretation easily understood at the level of single-voter be-
havior. We have investigated the historical performance and mathematical
properties of this ranking system elsewhere [2, 3]. At p close to 1/2, the
ranking is dominated by an RPI-like ranking in terms of a team’s record,
opponent’s records, etc., with little regard for individual game outcomes.

6

For p near 1, on the other hand, the ranking depends strongly on which
teams won and lost against which other teams.

Our initial questions can now be rephrased playfully as follows: Can a
bunch of monkeys rank football teams as well as the systems currently in
use? Now that we have crossed over into the Year of the Monkey in the
Chinese calender and the BCS has recently proposed changes to their non-
BCS rules, it seems reasonable to ask whether the monkeys can clarify the
eﬀects of these planned changes.

Impact of proposed changes on non-BCS schools

The complete details of the new agreement have not yet been released, but
indications are that the proposed rules would have given four at-large BCS
bids to non-BCS schools over the past six years [12]. Based on the BCS
Standings, the best guesses at those four teams are 1998 Tulane (11-0, BCS
#10, poll average 10), 1999 Marshall (12-0, BCS #12, poll average 11), 2000
TCU (10-1, BCS #14, poll average 14.5), and 2003 Miami of Ohio (12-1,
BCS #11, poll average 14.5). However, there are also indications that only
non-BCS teams ﬁnishing in the BCS top 12 would automatically get bids
[14], and each of these four schools would have had to be given one of the
at-large bids over at least one team ahead of them in the BCS Standings [7].
Given the perception that the polls unfairly favor BCS schools, it is
worth noting the contrary evidence from six seasons of BCS Standings. In
addition to the four schools listed above, other notable non-BCS campaigns
were conducted this past season by Boise State (12-1, BCS #17, poll average
17) and TCU (11-1, BCS #18, poll average 19). Five of these six schools
earned roughly the same ranking in the BCS standings and the polls. The
only signiﬁcant exception was 2003 Miami of Ohio, averaging 6th in the
oﬃcial BCS computer algorithms but only 14.5 in the polls.

While the new rules might indeed give BCS bowl bids to all non-BCS
schools who ﬁnish in the top 12, it is worth inquiring how close non-BCS
schools may have come to this or to a top 6 ranking that would have guar-
anteed them a bid during the past six years. In particular, 2003 was the
ﬁrst time in the BCS era that there were no undefeated teams remaining
prior to the bowl games. Given that there were six one-loss teams and no
undefeateds, what would have happened if one or more of the three non-BCS
teams had instead gone undefeated? While it is impossible to guess how the
polls would have behaved and we are unable to reproduce most of the oﬃcial
computer rankings, we can instead compute the resulting “random-walking

7

monkey” rankings for diﬀerent values of the bias parameter p. As a baseline,
Figure 1 plots the end-of-season, pre-bowl-game rankings of each of the six
one-loss teams, plus Michigan, from the true 2003 season (scaled logarith-
mically so that the top 2, top 6, and top 12 teams are clearly designated).

Oklahoma (12−1)
LSU (12−1)
Southern Cal (11−1)
Miami OH (12−1)
TCU (11−1)
Boise St (12−1)
Michigan (10−2)

2
10

1
10

k
n
a
R

0
10

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

p

Figure 1: Random-walking monkey rankings of selected teams for 2003.

Now consider what would have transpired had Miami of Ohio, TCU, and
Boise State all gone undefeated. Figure 2 shows the resulting rankings of
the same teams as Figure 1 under these alternative outcomes. In the limit
p → 1, going undefeated trumps any of the one-loss teams, so each of these
mythically undefeated schools ranks in the top 3 in this limit. For TCU and
Boise State, however, their range of p in the top 6 is quite narrow. If the
new rules require only a top 12 ﬁnish for a non-BCS team, then the situation
looks much brighter for an undefeated TCU, which earned monkey rankings
in the top 11 at all p values. However, according to the scenario plotted in
Figure 2, an undefeated Boise State’s claim on a BCS bid remains tenuous
even under the proposed changes. Indeed, even had Boise State been the
only undefeated team last season (not shown), the monkeys would have left
them out of the top 10 and behind Miami of Ohio for p . 0.86.

At the other extreme, one-loss Miami of Ohio already has a legitimate
claim to the top 12 according to both the monkeys and the real BCS Stand-
ings. Note, in particular, the exalted ranking the monkeys would have given
Miami of Ohio had they won their season opener against Iowa (their only
loss in the actual 2003 season). According to the monkeys, they may have
even had a reasonable argument to be placed in the championship game

8

Oklahoma (12−1)
LSU (12−1)
Southern Cal (11−1)
Miami OH (13−0)
TCU (12−0)
Boise St (13−0)
Michigan (10−2)

2
10

1
10

k
n
a
R

0
10

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

p

Figure 2: Random-walking monkey rankings of selected teams for an “al-
ternate universe” 2003 in which the three non-BCS, one-loss teams instead
went undefeated.

had they gone undefeated. It was bad enough not being able to ﬁt 3 teams
onto the ﬁeld for the BCS National Championship game, but we might have
been one Miami of Ohio victory over Iowa away from wanting to crowd four
squads into the mix!

As an example of how the eﬀects of games propagate into the rankings of
other teams, we also include Michigan’s ranking in both ﬁgures, even though
their outcomes were not changed in the calculations that produced the two
plots. Nevertheless, because Michigan is a next-nearest neighbor of Miami of
Ohio in the network (both teams lost to Iowa in 2003), changing the outcome
of the Iowa v. Miami of Ohio game unsurprisingly aﬀects Michigan’s ranking
detrimentally.

To conclude this section, we stress that the above discussion is purely
hypothetical, as the monkeys only provide a stand-in for our inability to
compute true BCS Standings under alternative outcomes.

The problem at the top, and a possible solution

While we focused above on non-BCS schools and the recent changes that
improve their chances of playing in a BCS bowl game, the larger BCS con-
troversy for many fans is the recurring inability of the BCS to generate a
championship game between conclusive “top 2” teams. Each of the past four

9

seasons, the two polls agreed on the top 2 teams prior to the bowl games.
In three of those seasons, however, the top 2 spots in the BCS Standings
included only one of the teams selected by the polls. In 2000 and 2001, the
#2 team in the polls ended up on the short end of the BCS stick, whereas
in 2003 it was USC (the #1 team in both polls) on the outside looking in.
Although it is easy to blame this situation on the computer rankings,
the true problem as we see it lies in the BCS formula of polls, computers,
schedule strength, losses, and quality wins. Simply, the polls and computers
already account for schedule strength and “quality wins” or else the three
non-BCS one-loss teams (Miami of Ohio, TCU, and Boise State) would have
placed in the top 6 in the 2003 BCS Standings. Adding these factors again
after the polls and computer rankings are determined disastrously double-
counts these eﬀects, adversely degrading conﬁdence in the BCS selections
for the National Championship and the other BCS bowls.

One of the presumed motivations for including separate factors for sched-
ule strengh and quality wins was to reduce the assumed bias of the polls
towards traditional football powers. However, as discussed above, the top
non-BCS teams over the past six years were ranked similarly in the polls
and computers. Therefore, one might rightly worry that the quality wins
and schedule strength factors are making it harder for non-BCS schools to
do well in the standings, as their schedules are typically ranked signiﬁcantly
lower and they have few opportunities for so-called “quality wins.”

USC was on the losing end of this double counting in 2003, having ﬁn-
ished the regular season #1 in both polls and averaged #2.67 on the com-
puters. LSU was #2 in both polls and averaged #1.93 on the computers,
and Oklahoma was #3 in both polls and averaged #1.17 on the comput-
ers. One of the oﬃcial computer systems even ranked non-BCS Miami of
Ohio ahead of USC. However, although the computers ranked Oklahoma
ahead of the other teams, it was Oklahoma’s 11th place schedule strength
and −0.5 “quality win” bonus for beating Texas that combined to give it
an additional 1.55 BCS points edge compared to USC’s 37th place schedule
(standings available from [17]). With six one-loss teams in Division I-A,
the ranking algorithms predominantly favored Oklahoma because of its rel-
atively diﬃcult schedule and its victory over Texas. Without those eﬀects
being included again in separate quality wins and schedule strength fac-
tors, a straight-up averaging of the polls and the computers would rank
USC ﬁrst (1+2.67=3.67), LSU second (2+1.93=3.93), and Oklahoma third
(3+1.17=4.17).

A reasonable knee-jerk reaction to this proposal would be to reassert
that schedule strength, number of losses, and so-called quality wins should

10

matter. Our point is that they are already incorporated in such a simple
averaging scheme, as the polls and the computers (necessarily) consider such
factors to produce reasonable rankings. To explicitly add further BCS points
for each of these considerations gives them more weight than the collective
wisdom of the polls and computer rankings believe they should have.

Whatever solution is ultimately adopted, we strongly advocate that mod-
iﬁcations to the BCS remove such double-counting and, ideally, provide a
system that is more open to the community. That the double-counting
problem isn’t widely appreciated further supports our opinion that the BCS
system needs to be more transparent. The recently announced changes do
not address this problem. College football fans shouldn’t have to accept
computer rankings without a minimal explanation of their determining in-
gredients, not only so that they have more conﬁdence in these algorithms but
also to open debate about what factors should be included and how much
they should be weighted. For example, there is certainly a need to discuss
how much losing a game late in the season or in a conference championship
game (as Oklahoma did in 2003) should matter compared to an earlier loss.
Even before the end-of-season controversy in 2003, a survey conducted
by New Media Strategies indicated that 75% of college football fans thought
that the BCS system should be scrapped entirely [8]. That number pre-
sumably increased after the new round of controversy. Changes that lead to
greater transparency and a simpliﬁed weighted averaging of the polls and
computers are the only way anything resembling the current BCS system
can maintain popular support.

References

[1] R. Billingsley, College football research center, http://cfrc.com/,

(as downloaded in January 2004).

[2] T. Callaghan, M. A. Porter, and P. J. Mucha, Random walker ranking
for NCAA Division I-A football, submitted to Amer. Math. Monthly, (2003).
Available from arxiv.org as physics/0310148.

[3]

, How well can monkeys rank football teams?,

http://www.math.gatech.edu/∼mucha/BCS,
2004).

(as downloaded in January

[4] W. N. Colley, ColleyMatrix: Colley’s bias free matrix rankings,

http://www.colleyrankings.com/, (as downloaded in January 2004).

[5] G. R. Connor and C. P. Grant, An extension of Zermelo’s model for
ranking by paired comparisons, Eur. J. App. Math., 11 (2000), pp. 225–247.

11

[6] M. Fish, Stuﬀ happens, SI.com, (December 9, 2003).

[7] P. Fiutak, Cavalcade of whimsy: Fifth BCS game is silly, CollegeFootball-

News.com, (March 4, 2004).

[8] T. Hyland, Survey: College football fans say BCS has to go, Baltimore Busi-

ness Journal, (December 3, 2003).

[9] J. P. Keener, The Perron-Frobenius theorem and the ranking of football

teams, SIAM Rev., 35 (1993), pp. 80–93.

[10] B. Kirlin, How to fake having your own math formula rating system to rank

college football teams,
http://www.cae.wisc.edu/∼dwilson/rsfc/history/kirlin/fake.html,
(as downloaded in 2003).

[11] T. Layden, Pleading the ﬁfth: BCS powers don’t go far enough in latest

reform, SI.com, (March 5, 2004).

[12] M. Long, BCS agrees to add ﬁfth bowl game, Associated Press, (March 1,

2004).

[13] M. Lupica, If this all adds up, subtract ’C’ from BCS to name bowl, New

York Daily News, (December 8, 2003).

[14] S. Mandel, Presidental seal: Diﬀerent decision-makers send BCS in unlikely

direction, SI.com, (March 4, 2004).

[15] J. Martinich, College football rankings: Do the computers know best?, Inter-

[16] K. Massey, Massey ratings, http://www.masseyratings.com/, (as down-

faces, 32 (2002), pp. 85–94.

loaded in January 2004).

[17] The National Football Foundation, The bowl championship series
overview, http://www.footballfoundation.com/bcs.php, (as downloaded in
January 2004).

[18] W. Suggs, Presidents see progress in opening up big-money bowls to more
colleges, Chronicle of Higher Education, 50 (November 28, 2003), p. A38.

[19] Whitaker Software Applications, Football rankulator,

http://www.footballrankulator.com/, (as downloaded in 2003).

[20] D. L. Wilson, American college football — rankings,

http://www.cae.wisc.edu/∼dwilson/rsfc/rate/, (as downloaded in January
2004).

[21] P. R. Wolfe, 2003 college football,

http://www.bol.ucla.edu/∼prwolfe/cfootball/ratings.htm,
(as downloaded in January 2004).

12

