CINEMA AS A TOOL FOR SCIENCE LITERACY

Costas Efthimiou1 and Ralph A. Llewellyn2
Department of Physics
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL 32816

1 INTRODUCTION

Surveys conducted by the National Science Foundation (NSF) have thoroughly documented
a severe decline in the understanding of and interest in science among people of all ages in
the United States (NSF, 2002). About 50 percent of the people do not know that Earth
takes one year to complete an orbit around the sun, that electrons are smaller than atoms,
and that early humans did not live at the same time as the dinosaurs. These examples of
faulty knowledge of physical sciences surely extend to life, social and literary sciences and
are mirrored in other nations.

This paper summarizes an ambitious project embarked upon by the authors at the Uni-
versity of Central Florida (UCF) to improve public understanding of the basic principles of
physical science, topics often included in the general education programs of many universi-
ties and colleges (Efthimiou & Llewellyn, 2003). This new approach, Physics in Films, uses
popular movies to illustrate the principles of physical science, analyzing individual scenes
against the background of the fundamental physical laws of mechanics, electricity, optics,
and so on.

While still not a mature project, Physics in Films has been successful and has become a
topic of wide discussion, both among UCF students and the physics education community
(APS News, 2003; Chow, 2003; Graham, 2002; Grayson, 2002; Priore, 2003). Only a few
similar projects have been tried earlier (Dennis 2002; Dubeck et al., 1994; Rogers, 2002).
None has approached the scope of the Physics in Films project.

2 DESCRIPTION OF THE PROJECT

2.1 Genesis of the Physics in Films Project

It is our experience that students in general think that physics is diﬃcult, hence boring,
and without much relevance in their daily lives. The authors, who regularly teach physical
science for non-science majors, searched for a way to instill in these students the enthusiasm
and excitement that all physicists experience. After much discussion and review of existing
resources (Dennis, 2002; Dubeck, 1994; Rogers, 2002), the proposal was made to accomplish

4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
7
0
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1costas@physics.ucf.edu
2ral@physics.ucf.edu

1

this goal by adopting as a teaching vehicle a medium that students had already accepted
as a reﬂection of today’s culture. The vehicle chosen was the use of popular movies to
illustrate both the basic principles and frontier discoveries of science and also to motivate
students in becoming more critical observers of their world. By using popular movies as
the actual mode of instruction, the intent was to provide a course in physical science that
was more relevant to their daily lives and to begin to correct the many misconceptions they
held about science.

2.2 Summer 2002: Action/Adventure Movies

During the summer 2002 Physics in Films was oﬀered for the ﬁrst time. Principles of
physics were discussed using scene clips from nine popular action/adventure movies. For
example, the law of gravitation as (mis)used in “Independence Day,” conservation of mo-
mentum in “Tango & Cash,” speed and acceleration in “Speed 2” and so on.

Figure 1 shows the nine movies used that ﬁrst summer. Students were required to watch
the ﬁlms at home and turn in a brief, written analysis of the physics principle illustrated
in each of three scenes of their own choosing (homework!). In class, ﬁve to ten percent of
the class (of 90 students) were called upon each day to orally present their analysis of one
scene to the class. Both the written and oral analyses became part of their grade in the
course.

Figure 1: Summer 2002: Action/Adventure/SciFi Movies.

An Example: Armageddon. As an example of how a movie clip is used in illustrat-
ing a physical principle, consider “Armageddon” (starring Bruce Willis). A huge, errant
asteroid the size of Texas is on a collision course with Earth. (There are no known asteroids

2

that large.) A team of oil well drillers is dispatched via a pair of space shuttles to inter-
cept the asteroid, drill a hole in it at the right place, lower a large nuclear bomb into the
hole, and subsequently blow the asteroid into two large pieces. The transverse velocities
imparted to the two pieces by the explosion, when added to their (undiminished) veloci-
ties toward Earth, are to cause the pieces to just miss Earth, thereby averting worldwide
disaster. After showing the clip, the analysis uses conservation of energy, conservation of
momentum, vector addition, and the law of gravity to assess how physically realistic the
solution in the ﬁlm (and in such a future event) might be. The overall situation is depicted
in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Asteroid Pieces Approach Earth

Using numbers provided in the ﬁlm, the students are introduced to the idea of making
reasonable approximations. For example, the asteroid is the size of Texas, so Texas is
assumed to be a square whose surface area equals that of the state. Then the asteroid is
approximated as a cube, each of whose sides equals the surface area of the state. Multiplying
the volume of the cube by the average density of Earth gives us a decent estimate of the
mass of the asteroid.

Assuming the nuclear bomb to be equal to 100,000 Hiroshima bombs provided an es-
timate of the energy available for the job (a modern nuclear warhead equals about 1,000
Hiroshima bombs). Assuming all of that energy became kinetic energy equally divided be-
tween the two pieces of the asteroid (i.e., ignoring the energy needed to break the asteroid
into two pieces), we can readily compute the distance the pieces have moved perpendicular
to their original direction of motion by the time they reach Earth. As noted in the diagram,
that distance is only a bit over 200 meters for each piece.

The students are astonished. Instead of being hit by one Texas-size asteroid, Earth will
be hit by two half-Texas-size asteroids about 400 meters apart! This discussion concludes

3

with an explanation of what is realistically possible and why the government has an ongoing
project to detect and track space objects approaching Earth or in Earth-crossing orbits
around the sun.

2.3 Personal Response System

From the beginning all sections of Physics in Films have used a personal response system
that enables each student to register their attendance and to record answers to questions
asked in class by the instructor. The system provides immediate conﬁrmation of answers,
permits the students to change their answers, displays the correct answers, and provides a
histogram of the class responses to questions so that students can compare themselves to
the class as a whole.

Attendance records and responses to quiz questions, both of which contribute to the
ﬁnal grade, are recorded automatically by an in-class computer. The system also provides
a means of recording student opinions regarding various aspects of the course, information
that is helpful in improving the presentations. For example, Figure 3 contains two tables
showing student responses to the use of the system itself. (SA=strongly agree, A=agree,
N=no opinion, D=disagree, SD=strongly disagree.) Shown, too, in the picture are a few
communication pads like the ones used by individual students.

Figure 3: Rating the Electronic Response System

2.4 Development of Flavors

After Physics in Films had been given for three terms to four sections with a combined
enrollment of about 800, the improved performance of the students relative to the tra-

4

ditional physical science course together with their enthusiasm regarding the Physics in
Films approach motivated the authors to explore new directions for developing the course
further. The original syllabus included movies selected to span the entire topical range
of the traditional physical science course. No special attention was given to the genre or
theme of the ﬁlms used. The ﬁlms eventually used, like those in Figure 1 for the ﬁrst
term, were action/adventure and science ﬁction ﬁlms. Encouraged by the students’ enthu-
siasm, the authors considered possible variations of the course that would accommodate
the curiosity of every student and satisfy the needs of every instructor.
It was decided
to create versions (packages)—nicknamed “ﬂavors”—whereby each ﬂavor used ﬁlms of a
particular genre or theme. Plans have been developed to create the following ﬂavors: Ac-
tion/Adventure, Science Fiction, Superhero, Modern Physics, Astronomy, Pseudoscience,
and Metaphysics. During the summer and fall 2003 terms the Superhero and Pseudoscience
ﬂavors were given for the ﬁrst time.

2.5 Physics in Films: Superheroes

Part of the motivation for oﬀering the Superheroes ﬂavor came from a course given by
Jim Kakalios at the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities (Feder, 2002). He has taught
a successful course in physical science based on superhero comic books. The Physics in
Films: Superheroes ﬂavor complements Kakalios’ approach, substituting motion and ‘real’
action for static images. It was ﬁrst taught in the summer 2003 term using the ﬁlms shown
in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Physics In Films: Superheroes Films

When the course was in progress, two of the ﬁlms (“The Hulk” and “X2”) were not yet
available on disk or tape, so the students had to go to the theaters, but no one complained.

5

In fact, the whole class approved!

The topical content of Physics in Films originally closely followed that of traditional
physical science courses. The textbook was “Fantastic Voyages” (Dubeck et al., 1994).
While somewhat ‘lighter’ than a typical physical science textbook, it uses some (rather
old) movies as illustrations and is the only such text available. In Physics in Films: Su-
perheroes classes however, the authors deviated somewhat from the traditional path and
added some decidedly non-traditional books. They were “The Science of Superheroes”
(Gresh & Weinberg, 2002), “The Science of Superman” (Woolverton, 2003), and “The Sci-
ence of XMen” (Yaco & Haber, 2000), all illustrated in Figure 5. Stocked in the trade
book sections of the bookstores, they are replete with applications of the concepts of phys-
ical science. The authors of these books frequently use physical laws in an eﬀort to make
the powers of the superheroes plausible to the lay reader. In so doing they provide fertile
ground for lively discussions.

Figure 5: Physics In Films: Superheroes books.

An Example: “Spiderman.” As an illustration of a superhero ﬁlm used in the
course consider “Spiderman” (starring Tobey McGuire) and a speciﬁc scene. The scene
is where the Green Goblin is standing on one of the towers of the Queensboro Bridge in
New York simultaneously holding Mary Jane (MJ) suspended over the river with his left
hand and the broken cable holding the Roosevelt Island cable car ﬁlled with children with
his right hand. This one scene provides for discussions in equilibrium of forces, torque,
friction, and free fall. Considering the latter, the Green Goblin presents Spiderman, who is
crouched on the bridge superstructure, with a dilemma by allowing both MJ and the cable
car to fall. Which will Spiderman save?

Timing events directly from the ﬁlm clip, students see that it takes Spiderman 14
seconds to decide and start after MJ ﬁrst, saving her, then saving the children in the cable

6

car. It looks great in the ﬁlm! But when the instructor leads the students through analysis
t2
of MJ’s fall they discover that in those 14 seconds she would fall a distance d = 1/2
where g = 9.8 m/s2 and t = 14 s. Thus, d = 960 meters and the Queensboro Bridge is only
106 meters above the water! Once again, the students are astonished! Even assuming that
the director implies ‘slow motion’ eﬀects as he presents the events, we can estimate that
Spiderman cannot react and catch MJ in less than 5 seconds. This would give a free-fall
length of 122.5 meters, still more than the height of the bridge.

g

2.6 Physics in Films: Pseudoscience

An idea or theory is called pseudoscience if it contradicts accepted scientiﬁc data, but is
presented as scientiﬁc. Note that a mistake or error in presenting scientiﬁc data does not
signal pseudoscience. It is the intentional misrepresentation of facts or unveriﬁed claims
that justify the label. For our purposes the authors categorize as pseudoscientiﬁc those
movies that are based on topics or phenomena that contradict scientiﬁc facts. There are
many such ﬁlms that might be used, but a group was chosen that most students had already
seen or knew about. (See Figure 6.) Physics in Films: Pseudoscience was ﬁrst taught in
the summer 2003 term.

Figure 6: Films used in Physics in Films: Pseudoscience

The topics covered and related to pseudoscience included, among others:

• Universality of physical laws – magic

• Time – time reversal, time stopping

7

• Strength of materials – unbreakability

• Chemical reactions – zombies

• Fundamental interactions – ghosts

• Intelligent life in the universe – alien visitors to Earth, alien abductions

Figure 7: Bookss used in Physics in Films: Pseudoscience.

An Example: The Sixth Sense. Among the topics discussed in physical science
are the related concepts of temperature and heat transfer via conduction, convection, and
radiation. “The Sixth Sense” (starring Bruce Willis) is concerned with ghosts. The movie
tells us that ghosts like low temperatures, although why that should be is not made clear.
In the scene where the young hero goes to the bathroom during the night, a sudden drop
in temperature is clearly shown. We have been told that this heralds the appearance of a
ghost, and indeed one appears.

As it happens, a scientiﬁc study of this presumed phenomenon has been done (Frood,
2003). The Haunted Gallery of Hampton Court Palace near London, UK, is reported
by many visitors to be haunted by the ghost of Catherine Howard (ﬁfth wife of Henry
VIII, executed in 1542). Air motion and thermal detectors were deployed in the Gallery
and some 400 visitors were asked about their experiences during the visit. More than
half felt sudden drops in temperature, some sensed ghostly presence, and several reported
seeing Elizabethan ﬁgures. The study (Frood, 2003) revealed many poorly sealed hidden

8

doorways that admitted columns of colder exterior air. In two locations the temperature
of the localized draft was only 36o F!

A Course Book Display. The UCF campus bookstore cooperated by installing a
prominent display ‘island’ featuring the Physics in Film: Superheroes and Physics in Film:
Pseudoscience courses (Figure 8). The display attracted student attention and (the authors
suspect) increased sales of the displayed books, as well.

Figure 8: UCF Bookstore display for Physics in Films.

3 ASSESSMENT AND FINDINGS

As of this writing, the Physics in Films alternative to the traditional Physical Science
course has been oﬀered at UCF since the summer 2002 term to a total of nine sections
enrolling, collectively, about 1600 students. During that time the authors have collected
data regarding student evaluations of the course and their performance on exams. In that
same time period there have been seven sections of Physical Science taught in the standard
way, enrolling about 2000 students. Some of the more interesting results and comparisons
are presented in this section.

3.1 Examination Results

Even though students may embrace a new idea enthusiastically, that does not mean their
performance will necessarily improve relative to the traditional course (where most of them
really struggle). In fact, student performance on individual exams and overall is improved
in the Physics in Films sections when compared with those in traditional Physical Science
sections. Table 1 shows the exam scores distribution for two classes of about the same size
(295 students each), covering the same topics, and taught by the same instructor. The
results are obviously dramatically diﬀerent!

9

Instructional Mode
Traditional
Class average percent
Physics in Films
Class average percent

Exam 1 Exam 2 Exam 3 Final Exam

49.3

4.9

65.3

67.7

58.2

75.7

59.4

72.8

Table 1: Comparison of Exam Results for large enrollment sections. The sections were
taught by the same instructor on the same material.

3.2 Student Evaluations and Opinions

Since Physics in Films was ﬁrst oﬀered, considerable data has been collected regarding
student opinions and evaluations of the course and the various ﬂavors taught to date. This
section summarizes some of the more interesting of those data.

Strongly Agree Agree No Opinion Disagree Strongly Disagree

Term
Summer 2002
92 students
Fall 2002
292 students

77.9%

10.4%

n/a

56.9%

26.6%

6.9%

9.1%

4.1%

2.6%

5.5%

Table 2: Responses to the Statement: Physics in ﬁlms should be developed further since it
is more interesting than the standard physical science course.

Strongly Agree Agree No Opinion Disagree Strongly Disagree

60%

32%

5%

1%

2%

Table 3: Response to the statement: I think I learned something from this class (Physics
in Films: Superheroes).

Strongly Agree Agree No Opinion Disagree Strongly Disagree

68%

25%

5%

2%

0%

Table 4: Responses to the statement: I would recommend to my friends that they take this
course (Physics in Films: Pseudoscience).

However, changing the public’s overall perception of science is not easy. More and longer
term eﬀorts reaching a much broader audience will be needed. As Table 6 suggests, fear

10

Strongly Agree Agree No Opinion Disagree Strongly Disagree

42%

42%

16%

0%

0%

Table 5: Responses to the statement: The topics selected from the movies for physics
analysis were interesting.

and unreasonable dislike of science are deeply rooted in the minds of students and others,
as the NSF surveys cited in the introduction to this paper makes clear.

Strongly Agree Agree No Opinion Disagree Strongly Disagree

25%

26%

8%

18%

23%

Table 6: Responses to the statement: I do not like science and I do not want to read
anything about science once I have ﬁnished this course.

4 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

It appears clear from the information and data presented herein that the Physics in Films
alternative to the more traditional Physical Science course captures student interest and
improves their performance. Approximately half of the students who enroll in Physical
Science at UCF now take the Physics in Films version, a further testament to the success
of the approach.

4.1 The Future

The authors will certainly continue their work at UCF in further developing the Physics
in Films concept. However, it may be argued that will not be enough. As Table 6 and the
NSF surveys have made clear, changing public perceptions of science will be neither easy
nor quickly accomplished.

It is the goal of the authors to increase the awareness of science and to show that an
understanding of basic physical science can be both enriching and rewarding. To this end
they are working toward the development of ‘packaged’ Physics in Films ﬂavors that can
be readily transferred to other institutions. They are also writing a new physical science
textbook designed to support the Physics in Films mode of teaching. In addition, they
have begun to explore the application of the concept to the creation or enhancement of
general education courses in many other disciplines. The following list presents several
possibilities together with a few examples of ﬁlms that include material for each discipline.

• Mathematics in Films: Pi, Good Will Hunting, Pay it Forward, Contact

11

• Astronomy/Astrophysics in Films: Armageddon, Deep Impact, Contact

• Biology in Films: Spiderman, The Hulk, Planet of the Apes, Jurassic Park

• Chemistry in Films: Flubber, Year of the Comet

• Engineering in Films: Armageddon, The Bridge on the River Kwai

• Archeology/Anthropology in Films: Indiana Jones trilogy, Jurassic Park

• Computers in Films: The Net, Independence Day, War Games

• Philosophy in Films: Blade Runner, Matrix, Terminator trilogy, Ghost

• History in Films: Braveheart, Patriot, The Man in the Iron Mask

• Law in Films: Erin Brockovich, The Firm, Legally Blond, Primal Fear

• Forensic Science in Films: Jennifer 8, Murder by the Numbers, Bone Collector

References

APS
http://www.aps.org/apsnews/0303/030306.html.

News(2003).

Physics

in

ﬁlms.

Retrieved

1/6/04

from

Chow, L. (2003). Cinema as physics lesson. Physics Today, 56, 15. Retrieved 1/6/04 from
http://www.physicstoday.org/vol-56/iss-5/p15a.html.

Dennis, C.M., Jr (2002). Start using “Hollywood Physics” in your classroom. Physics
Teacher, 40, 420.

Dubeck, L. W., Moshier, S. E., & Boss, J. E. (1994). Fantastic voyages: Learning science
through science ﬁctions ﬁlms. New York, NY: Springer.

Efthimiou, C. E. & Llewellyn, R. A. (2003). Physical science: A revitalization of the
traditional course by avatars of Hollywood in the physics classroom. Retrieved 1/6/04 from
http://www.arXiv.org/physics/0303005.

Feder, T. (2002). Teaching physics with superheroes. Physics Today, 55, 29.

Frood, A. (2003, May 21) Ghosts ’all in the mind’. London: BBC News. Retrieved 1/6/04
from http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/3044607.stm

Graham, A. (2002). A little bit of Hollywood, a lot of physics. Retrieved 1/6/03 from
http://www.ucﬀuture.com/main.cfm?include=detail&storyid=287529

Gresh, L. & Weinberg, R. (2002), The science of superheroes. New York, NY: Wiley.

12

Grayson, C. (2002). Students play games, watch movies, raise grades. Retrieved 1/6/04
from http://www.ucﬀuture.com/main.cfm?include=detail&storyid=328832

NSF (2002).
http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/seind02.

Science & engineering

indicators

2002. Retrieved

1/6/04

from

great
Priore, T.
the
ﬁlms
tion
http://www.ucﬀuture.com/main.cfm?include=detail&storyid=436180

(2003). With
teach

comes
of

power
laws

students

physical

physics. Retrieved

a

explanation:
1/6/04

Ac-
from

Rogers, T. (2002). Personal communication.

Woolverton, M. (2003). The science of Superman. New York, NY: BP Books.

Yaco, L., & Haber, K. (2000). The science of XMen. New York, NY: BP Books.

13

