The Neutrino Matrix

Prepared by the Members of the APS Multidivisional Neutrino Study*

November, 2004

matrix n:
1 : something within or from which something else originates, develops,

or takes form

2 : the natural material in which something is embedded
3 : womb
4 : a rectangular array of mathematical elements

4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
2
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

*Please see Appendices A and B.

Back Cover: Photomultipliers and Support Matrix
for the KamLAND Neutrino Detector.
Courtesy KamLAND Collaboration.

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Answers and Questions

2.1 Neutrinos and the New Paradigm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Neutrinos and the Unexpected . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

2.3 Neutrinos and the Cosmos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

3 Current Program and International Context

4 Recommendations

5 Timeline and Branch Points

6 Conclusions of the Study

1

6

6

18

24

28

28

6.1 Executive Summary of Solar and Atmospheric Experiments Working Group . . . . . 30

6.1.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

6.1.2 Recommendations

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

6.2 Executive Summary of the Reactor Working Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

6.2.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

6.2.2 Recommendations

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

6.3 Executive Summary of the Superbeams Working Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

6.3.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

6.3.2 Recommendations

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

6.4 Executive Summary of the Neutrino Factory and Beta Beam Experiments and Development Working Group

i

6.4.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

6.4.2 Recommendations

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39

6.5 Executive Summary of the Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay and Direct Searches for Neutrino Mass Working

6.5.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

6.5.2 Recommendations

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

6.6 Executive Summary of the Neutrino Astrophysics and Cosmology Working Group . 43

6.6.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

6.6.2 Recommendations

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

6.7 Executive Summary of the Theory Discussion Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46

6.7.1

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46

6.7.2 Recommendations

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49

B APS Study Origins, Committees, Glossary

50

B.1 The APS Multi-Divisional Neutrino Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50

B.2 Charge of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51

B.3 Sponsors for domestic neutrino science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51

B.4 Context: Related Studies and Reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53

B.5 Glossary of acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54

ii

Executive Summary

An ancient relic of the Big Bang, neutrinos by the millions ﬁll every cubic meter of space, a ghostly,
unseen matrix in which the universe has evolved. Now, new experiments on these elusive particles
are changing our understanding of the physical world.

The ﬁrst hint of the true nature of neutrinos was Nobel Prize winner Ray Davis’s surprising
discovery that fewer neutrinos come from the sun than were expected from our understanding
of how the sun produces its energy. We now know that this is due to “neutrino oscillations,”
a macroscopic consequence of the laws of quantum mechanics that govern the sub-atomic realm.
Oscillations, in turn, tell us that neutrinos have mass, ﬁnally conﬁrming a long-held suspicion.
Since Davis’s discovery, we have veriﬁed the existence of neutrino oscillations and neutrino mass
using neutrinos produced in our atmosphere, in nuclear reactors, and by accelerators.

We see the future of neutrino physics framed in three overarching themes:

• Neutrinos and the New Paradigm: Neutrinos have provided us with the ﬁrst tangible
evidence of phenomena beyond the reach of our theory of the laws of particle physics, the
remarkably predictive “Standard Model”. In the Standard Model, neutrinos do not have mass
and do not oscillate. Through this crack in the ediﬁce we are now peering, with no small
excitement, to see the physics that lies beyond. It appears to be a glimpse of what physics is
like at energies not seen since the Big Bang. Questions crowd upon us. The neutrino masses
are not zero, but their values are uncertain by a factor of 100—what, exactly, are the masses?
How much do neutrinos mix with each other, allowing one “ﬂavor” of neutrino to change
into another? Neutrinos, alone among matter particles, could be their own antiparticles. Are
they? Our understanding of nature has been enormously enriched by the study of symmetry.
Perhaps the most baﬄing symmetry is the ‘CP’ symmetry (change particle to antiparticle and
interchange left and right; everything should behave the same as before). Nature seems to
have a bias here. Do neutrinos respect CP perfectly, a little, or not at all? We recommend the
experimental program needed to build the foundations of the new paradigm.

• Neutrinos and the Unexpected: Neutrino physics has been marked by “anomalous,” un-
expected results that have proven to be absolutely correct and to have deep signiﬁcance.
Neutrinos may have even more extraordinary properties than those already seen. We have ev-
idence for exactly three ﬂavors of neutrinos with normal interactions. Are there other ﬂavors
that lack these interactions? We describe an experimental program designed to be open to
surprises.

• Neutrinos and the Cosmos: Neutrinos originating from the Big Bang and from the cores
of stars prompt us to ﬁnd the connections between these particles and the universe. Neutrinos
allow us to probe the origin and future of solar energy, upon which all life on earth depends.
Understanding neutrinos is necessary to comprehend supernova explosions, perhaps the origin
of the heaviest elements on earth. Neutrinos may have inﬂuenced the large-scale structure of
the universe. Nature’s bias with respect to CP is essential to explain why the universe contains
matter but almost no antimatter. However, the bias seen in laboratory experiments outside
the neutrino realm cannot solve this mystery. Perhaps neutrinos violate CP in a way that does

iii

help us solve it. We describe an experimental program to map out the connections between
the neutrino and the cosmos.

While the questions to be answered are clear, the best strategy demands thoughtful planning.
Developing the strategy is made more challenging by the fact that the ﬁeld spans the studies of
particle physics, nuclear physics, astrophysics, and particle beams. Drawing on the wide-ranging
expertise of members of the neutrino community in these areas, we report the results of our study
on the future of neutrino physics, organized by four Divisions of the American Physical Society. A
central purpose of this report is to communicate to U.S. decision-makers the consensus that has
emerged among our group on three recommendations:

We recommend, as a high priority, a phased program of sensitive searches for
neutrinoless nuclear double beta decay. In this rare process, one atomic nucleus turns
into another by emitting two electrons. Searching for it is very challenging, but the question
of whether the neutrino is its own antiparticle can only be addressed via this technique. The
answer to this question is of central importance, not only to our understanding of neutrinos,
but also to our understanding of the origin of mass.

We recommend, as a high priority, a comprehensive U.S. program to complete
our understanding of neutrino mixing, to determine the character of the neutrino
mass spectrum and to search for CP violation among neutrinos. This comprehensive
program would have several components: an experiment built a few kilometers from a nuclear
reactor, a beam of accelerator-generated neutrinos aimed towards a detector hundreds of kilo-
meters away, and, in the future, a neutrino ‘superbeam’ program utilizing a megawatt-class
proton accelerator. The interplay of the components makes possible a decisive separation of
neutrino physics features that would otherwise be commingled and ambiguous. This program
is also valuable for the tools it will provide to the larger community. For example, the proton
accelerator makes possible a wide range of research beyond neutrino physics.

The development of new technologies will be essential for further advances in neutrino physics.
On the horizon is the promise of a neutrino factory, which will produce extraordinarily pure,
well-deﬁned neutrino beams. Similarly challenging are the ideas for massive new detectors
that will yield the largest and most precise samples of neutrino data ever recorded. These
multipurpose detectors can also be used for fundamental and vitally important studies beyond
the ﬁeld of neutrino physics, such as the search for proton decay.

We recommend development of an experiment to make precise measurements of
the low-energy neutrinos from the sun. So far, only the solar neutrinos with relatively
high energy, a small fraction of the total, have been studied in detail. A precise measurement of
the low-energy neutrino spectrum would test our understanding of how solar neutrinos change
ﬂavor, probe the fundamental question of whether the sun shines only through nuclear fusion,
and allow us to predict how bright the sun will be tens of thousands of years from now.

These recommendations are made in the context of certain assumptions about the groundwork for

iv

the new experimental program. The assumptions include:

• Continuation and strong support of the existing program. The future program we
recommend depends on successful completion of the investigations now in progress. We have
identiﬁed four areas to address: continued increase in the proton intensity for neutrino experi-
ments at Fermilab, resolution of an experimental indication of neutrino ﬂavor change over short
distances, measurement of solar neutrinos of intermediate energy, and continued support of
R&D for detection of ultra-high energy astrophysical neutrinos. With these and other modest
improvements, the current phase of the neutrino program can be accomplished.

• Underground laboratory facilities. The extreme rarity of neutrino interactions requires
that experiments that are central to our proposed program, including double beta decay, studies
with the multipurpose very large detector, and solar neutrino research, be carried out deep
underground in appropriately designed laboratories.

• Determination of the neutrino reaction and production cross sections required for
a precise understanding of neutrino-oscillation physics and the neutrino astronomy
of astrophysical and cosmological sources. Our broad and exacting program of neutrino
physics is built upon precise knowledge of how neutrinos interact with matter.

• Research and development to assure the practical and timely realization of acceler-
ator and detector technologies critical to the recommended program. Of particular
importance are R&D eﬀorts aimed toward development of a high-intensity proton driver, a neu-
trino factory, a very large neutrino detector, and techniques for detection of ultra-high-energy
neutrinos.

• International cooperation. We advocate that the program to answer the outstanding neu-
trino questions be international. In this report, we recommend a U.S. program that will make
unique contributions to this international eﬀort, contributions that will not be duplicated else-
where. The U.S. program, involving experiments within the U.S. and American participation
in key experiments in other countries, has the potential to become the best in the world. But
it must cooperate with the programs of other nations and regions. The programs to be carried
out throughout the world must complement each other. We explain how they can do this.

The experimental program described in this study is intended to be a very fruitful investment in
fundamental physics. The selection is physics-rich, diverse, and cost-eﬀective. A timeline has been
developed to synchronize aspects of the program and to be integrated with the worldwide eﬀort to
reach an understanding of the neutrino. The program components are chosen to provide unique
information and thereby enhance companion studies in high energy physics, nuclear physics, and
astrophysics. There are rare moments in science when a clear road to discovery lies ahead and
there is broad consensus about the steps to take along that path. This is one such moment.

v

whose properties were such that it would not yet
have been seen: it carried no electric charge and
scarcely interacted with matter at all.

Enrico Fermi soon was able to show that while
the new particles would be hard to observe, see-
ing them would not be impossible. What was
needed was an enormous number of them, and a
very large detector. Fermi named Pauli’s par-
ticle the neutrino, which means ‘little neutral
one’. More than two decades after Pauli’s letter
proposing the neutrino, Clyde Cowan and Fred
Reines ﬁnally observed (anti)neutrinos emitted
by a nuclear reactor. Further studies over the
course of the next 35 years taught us that there
were three kinds, or ‘ﬂavors,’ of neutrinos (elec-
tron neutrinos, muon neutrinos, and tau neu-
trinos) and that, as far as we could tell, they
had no mass at all. The neutrino story (Fig. 2)
might have ended there, but developments in so-
lar physics changed everything.

1

Introduction

We live within a matrix of neutrinos. Their num-
ber far exceeds the count of all the atoms in the
entire universe. Although they hardly interact at
all, they helped forge the elements in the early
universe, they tell us how the sun shines, they
may even cause the titanic explosion of a dying
star. They may well be the reason we live in a
universe ﬁlled with matter – in other words, a
reason for our being here.

Much of what we know about neutrinos we
have learned in just the last six years. Neutrino
discoveries have come so fast we have barely had
time to rebuild the conceptual matrix by which
we hope to understand them.

The new discoveries have taught us two impor-
tant things: that neutrinos can change from one
type to another; and that, like other fundamental
particles of matter, they have mass. The impli-
cations of these new facts reach well beyond just
neutrinos, and aﬀect our understanding of the
sun, our theory of the evolution of the Universe,
and our hope of ﬁnding a more fundamental the-
ory of the subatomic world. We now have so
many new questions, our task in this Study has
been especially diﬃcult. We are most certain of
one thing: neutrinos will continue to surprise us.

The Story:

A crisis loomed at the end of the 1920’s – a
decade already ﬁlled with revolutions. One of
physics’ most sacred principles – the conserva-
tion of energy – appeared not to hold within the
subatomic world. For certain radioactive nuclei,
energy just seemed to disappear, leaving no trace
of its existence.

In 1930, Wolfgang Pauli suggested a “desper-
ate way out.” Pauli postulated that the missing
energy was being carried away by a new particle,

1

Figure 1: Ray Davis (left) and John Bahcall with
the ﬁrst solar neutrino detector in the Homestake
mine.

.

In 1919, Sir Arthur Eddington had suggested
that the sun’s multi-billion year age could be ex-
plained if its power source was the “well-nigh
inexhaustible” energy stored in atomic nuclei.
With Fermi’s neutrino theory, Hans Bethe and
Charles Critchﬁeld in 1938 created the ﬁrst de-
tailed theory of the nuclear furnace burning in
the sun’s core.

Figure 2: Important events that have led to the present excitement in neutrino physics.
.

Neutrinos are produced in great numbers by
those nuclear reactions, and can pass from the
solar center to us directly. While the light we
see from the sun represents energy created in
the core tens of thousands of years ago, a neu-
trino created in the sun right now will reach us
in just over eight minutes. But if neutrinos can
pass easily through the sun, how could we pos-
sibly detect them on Earth? In the mid-1960’s
experimentalist Raymond Davis, Jr. and theo-
rist John Bahcall thought about this problem.
Bahcall’s detailed calculations showed that there
might just be enough neutrinos produced in the
sun that they could be observed on earth, and
Davis set out to build a detector that could see

the neutrinos. His detector weighed hundreds of
tons, and he had to be able to detect the few
atoms each week that had been transformed by
neutrinos. What Davis saw was surprising.

While he did observe neutrinos, Davis found
only roughly 1/3 the number Bahcall had pre-
dicted. Davis’ experiment was exceedingly diﬃ-
cult, and Bahcall’s calculations equally so. Many
physicists believed that it was likely that either,
or perhaps both, were in error. But over the
next three decades, solar neutrino predictions
became more reﬁned, and new experiments in-
variably saw fewer than predicted. The mystery
would not go away.

2

Neutrinos in a Nutshell

Neutrinos are the most abundant matter particles, called “fermions,” in the universe. Unlike their
relatives, the electron and the quarks, they have no electrical charge.

There are three diﬀerent types (or ‘ﬂavors’) of electron-like particles, each with a diﬀerent mass:
the electron (e) itself, the muon (µ) weighing 200 times more than the electron, and the tau (τ )
which weighs 18 times more than the muon. For each of these charged particles there is also a
neutrino. Collectively, these six particles (e, µ, τ , ν1, ν2 and ν3) are known as the ‘leptons’, which
comes from the Greek word meaning ‘thin’, ‘subtle’, or ‘weak’.

The leptons. The colors indicate the ‘ﬂavors’
of the charged leptons, electron, mu, and tau.
The ﬂavors determine what happens when a
lepton collides with another particle.

Neutrino masses are exceedingly tiny, compared to the masses of their charged brethren. It is only
from discoveries made in the last six years that we know that these masses are not exactly zero,
and that the heaviest of them must have a mass at least one ten-millionth the electron’s mass.
Moreover, we know that the masses are all diﬀerent.

Like all the other particles of matter, neutrinos have antimatter partners, denoted with a bar on
top: e.g. ¯ν1, ¯ν2, ¯ν3. Unlike any other fermion, though, the ν and ¯ν may in fact be the same particle.

Drawn six years ago, the ﬁgure above would have the neutrinos each with a single, diﬀerent ﬂavor,
like the charged leptons. Neutrinos are created with other particles through a force appropriately
named the ‘weak interaction,’ and the weak interaction does not change ﬂavor. For example, in the
beta decay studied by Pauli in 1930 the weak interaction makes an antielectron and an ‘electron
neutrino,’ νe. A weak interaction that made an antimuon would also make a ‘mu neutrino,’ νµ,
and so forth. But what are those ‘particles’ ? The only way nature can construct a neutrino that
is totally electron ﬂavored is to form a quantum-mechanical mixture of exactly the right amounts
of the mixed-ﬂavor particles ν1, ν2 and ν3. What had always been thought of as a simple particle,
νe is actually a quantum-mechanical Neapolitan of the 3 neutrinos with deﬁnite masses.

As time passes, or the neutrino travels, the quantum waves that accompany the diﬀerent parts
get out of step because the masses are diﬀerent. Depending on the distance travelled, what was
originally produced as an electron ﬂavored ‘neutrino’ can become mu ﬂavored or tau ﬂavored as
the components shift. This is the phenomenon called neutrino oscillations, and it provides our best
evidence that neutrinos have distinct, nonzero masses.

There is a lot still to learn about the masses and ﬂavors. We are now trying to measure the ﬂavor
contents of each neutrino, and we represent them by 3 trigonometric angles called θ12, θ13, and θ23.
The masses themselves are only known within broad ranges, although oscillations tell us quite a
lot about the diﬀerences.

3

burning new questions about the physical and
mathematical neutrino matrix challenge us.

Facing Page: Inside the SNO Detector.
The technician is crouching on the ﬂoor
of a 12-m diameter acrylic sphere so
transparent it can hardly be seen.
Some 10,000 photomultipliers
surround the vessel.

Photo: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

The best explanation that encompassed both
the theoretical prediction and the experimental
results was that the neutrinos produced in the
sun were changing from one ﬂavor to another.
Experiments like Davis’ were sensitive only to
electron neutrinos, the only kind the sun can
If, on their way from the sun to the
produce.
earth, some of the electron neutrinos changed
into the other ﬂavors, they could sail through
the detectors completely unobserved. Neutrinos
of the sort envisaged by Pauli and enshrined in
our Standard Model of particles could not per-
form this feat.

While physicists puzzled over the solar neu-
trino experiments, a new neutrino mystery arose
in the mid 1980s. When cosmic rays hit the
earth’s atmosphere, they create showers of other
particles, including neutrinos. The Kamiokande
and IMB experiments, built to search for proton
decay, found that the number of muon neutrinos
created in the atmosphere appeared to be smaller
than expected. The experimenters pointed out
that, like the solar neutrinos, this could be true
if the muon neutrinos were actually changing
into undetected neutrinos, in this case tau neu-
trinos. But the experiments were very diﬃcult,
and many physicists again attributed the deﬁcit
to error.

Our consistent picture has been the result of
careful testing and repetition of important exper-
iments. A recent experimental indication that
neutrinos and antineutrinos are the same parti-
cle, as is anticipated on theoretical grounds, will
require conﬁrmation. One experimental obser-
vation does not ﬁt neatly into the picture of 3
active neutrinos that mix and have mass. In the
LSND experiment, muon antineutrinos appear
to convert to electron antineutrinos over a short
path. The observation is being checked in a new
experiment, MiniBOONE.

The discovery of neutrino ﬂavor transforma-
tion and mass answered questions that had en-
dured for decades. As those veils have lifted,

4

2 Answers and Questions

The story of neutrinos continues to be written.
As the narrative unfolds, three themes have crys-
tallized that broadly deﬁne the science. Within
each of these themes, we are confronted by basic
questions. Understanding the nature of neutri-
nos has become a critical issue at the frontiers
of physics, astrophysics, and cosmology. There
is universal agreement about the questions that
must be answered. It is only the diﬃculty of ob-
taining the answers that requires a well planned
strategy.

2.1 Neutrinos and the New Paradigm

The neutrino discoveries of the last decade force
revisions to the basic picture of the elemen-
tary particles and pose a set of well-deﬁned
but presently unanswered questions, questions of
fundamental importance.

• What are the masses of the neutrinos?

The Mass that Roared
The discovery that neutrinos have mass is
a breakthrough. For 30 years the trust-
worthy, “Standard” model has unfailingly
been able to describe anything in the par-
ticle world, in some cases to 10 decimal
places. That model asserts that neutrinos
are massless. Physicists expected that one
day the model would fail, even hoped for it,
because the model appears to be a simpli-
ﬁcation of a more complete description of
nature.

The combination of solar, atmospheric, accel-
erator, and reactor neutrino data reveals that the
ﬂavor change is due to a quantum phenomenon
called “oscillations” and shows that at least two
neutrinos have nonzero, distinct masses. This

6

simple fact has forced us to modify our descrip-
tion of particle physics, the “Standard Model,”
for the ﬁrst time since it was created over 25
If there are three neutrinos with
years ago.
masses m1, m2, and m3, oscillation experiments
give the diﬀerences between the squares of the
masses. We express these as ∆m2
12, which is
2, and ∆m2
3 − m2
2 − m2
m2
13
which is m2
1. One can see that any two dif-
ference pairs, sign and magnitude, are suﬃcient
to ﬁx the third.

23, which is m2

1, ∆m2

3 − m2

Oscillations tell us about mass diﬀerences, but
what about the masses themselves? In the labo-
ratory, precise measurements of the tritium beta-
decay spectrum constrain the average of the
three neutrino masses to be less than 2.2 eV.
For comparison (Fig. 3), the electron, the light-
est of the charged elementary particles, has a
mass of 510,999 eV. But the oscillation results
point to an average neutrino mass not smaller
than 0.02 eV. The mass is boxed in: it must lie
between 0.02 and 2.2 eV.

Interestingly, studies of the large-scale struc-
ture of the visible universe combined with the
precise determination of the cosmic microwave
background radiation from experiment put the
average neutrino mass at less than 0.5 eV. Now
we must pin it down. There are three kinds of
experiments focused on establishing the absolute
value of the neutrino masses:

1. precise experiments on the beta decay of tri-
tium, seeking to directly measure the aver-
age neutrino mass.

2. neutrinoless

double-beta-decay

experi-
ments, which have sensitivity to another
linear combination of neutrino masses,
provided that neutrinos are their own
antiparticles; and

3. precision studies of the distribution of the
cosmic microwave background combined
with observations of the large-scale struc-
ture of the universe revealed by clusters of

• What is the pattern of mixing among the
diﬀerent types of neutrinos?

Double Identity
Neutrinos exist with a dual identity. The
neutrinos with deﬁnite mass are not the
objects we thought we knew, νe, νµ, and
ντ . They are particles, ν1, ν2, and ν3,
each with a rainbow of the three ﬂavors.
The connection between the dual identities,
which is manifested in the phenomenon of
neutrino oscillations, is a key to the phys-
ics beyond the Standard Model.

Mathematically, we relate the neutrinos with
deﬁnite mass to the ﬂavors via a mixing ma-
trix. The same phenomenon is observed for the
quarks, and several decades of research have gone
into measuring and interpreting what is referred
to as the “CKM quark mixing matrix.”

Like the neutrinos, the quarks have mass
states that have mixtures of ﬂavor. One would
think that we could look to the quarks to under-
stand the neutrinos, but the theoretical analogy
proves unhelpful. Unlike the numbers that de-
scribe quark mixings, which are small, the mix-
ing of the neutrinos is large. The origin of this
striking diﬀerence is not presently understood.

We can describe the mixing in “matrix nota-

tion:”

Neutrinos

UM N SP ∼

0.8 0.5 ?
0.4 0.6 0.7
0.4 0.6 0.7















Figure 3: The masses of the fundamental
fermions, the particles of matter. The masses
are shown on a log scale. The individual neu-
trino masses are not well known, and the average
is only known to within two orders of magnitude.
There is a surprisingly large diﬀerence between
the neutrino masses and the masses of the quarks
and charged leptons.

galaxies.

The two possible orderings of the masses, or
hierarchies, are depicted in Fig. 4, and are of-
ten referred to as “normal” and “inverted.” We
currently do not know which is correct. Knowing
the ordering of the neutrino masses is important.
For example, in the case of an inverted hierarchy,
there are at least two neutrinos that have almost
the same mass to the one percent level. We have
yet to encounter two diﬀerent fundamental par-
ticles with nearly identical masses. If neutrinos
have this property, it surely points to a new and
fundamental aspect of Nature.

Future neutrino experiments may determine
the neutrino mass hierarchy. Two techniques
have the potential of determining the hierarchy:

1. accelerator-based long-baseline oscillation
experiments with baselines in the vicinity
of 1000 km or more; and

Quarks

2. very large atmospheric neutrino experi-
ments that can independently measure the
oscillation of neutrinos and antineutrinos.

VCKM ∼

0.005

1 0.2
0.2 1 0.04
0.04 1

0.005















7

Figure 4: The two possible arrangements (hierarchies) of the masses of the three known neutrinos,
based on oscillation data. The picture shows the situation for the mass of the lightest neutrino
being zero; but in fact, from experiment, the average mass of the neutrinos may be as large as 2.2
eV. On the left is a “normal” hierarchy, and on the right an “inverted” one.

The diﬀerence between the large numbers dom-
inating the neutrino matrix and the small num-
bers for the quark matrix is dramatic.

Determining all the elements of the neutrino
mixing matrix is important because it is likely
that,
in a way we do not yet understand,
they contain fundamental information about the
structure of matter. We see mixing in other con-
texts in physics, and it generally is a result of the
interaction of simpler, more primitive, systems.
The mu and tau ﬂavors, for example, may in fact
be mixed as much as is possible – is it so, and,
if so, why?

For three neutrino species, the neutrino mix-
ing matrix U has nine elements, but all of them
are determined by the same four or six under-
lying quantities – six if neutrinos are their own
antiparticles, four otherwise. These underlying
the “solar
quantities are three mixing angles:
angle” θ12, the “atmospheric angle” θ23, and θ13;
and one or three complex phases. Neutrino mix-

ing and mass together lead to neutrino oscilla-
tions — this is how we learned that neutrinos
have mass — and the detailed study of the os-
cillation phenomenon allows us to measure the
three mixing angles and one of the CP-violating
phases, referred to as δ.

We can describe the mass states and neutrino
mixings using the set of bars in Fig. 4. Each bar
represents a neutrino of a given mass, ν1, ν2, and
ν3. We use mixing angles to describe how much
of each ﬂavor (electron, muon, or tau) can be
found in each neutrino. In this diagram we de-
note the fractional ﬂavors by the color in the bar.
Yellow is electron ﬂavor, blue is muon ﬂavor, and
red is tau ﬂavor. For concreteness we have picked
certain ﬂavor fractions for each bar, although the
fractional amounts are presently known impre-
cisely or not at all.

We can now connect the diagram of Fig. 4 to

the mixing angles we measure:

8

Figure 5: Current experimental constraints on the three mixing angles, θ12, θ13, and θ23, and their
dependence on the two known mass-squared diﬀerences, ∆m2
23. The star indicates the
most likely solution. The contours correspond to certain conﬁdence levels that the parameter pairs
lie within.

12 and ∆m2

it can be: θ23 = 45 ± 8o. The third angle, θ13,
is known only to be relatively small, less than
10o. That is a major obstacle. Not only do we
not yet have a complete picture of the pattern of
mixing, but if this angle is zero, there is then no
possibility of testing whether the important “CP
symmetry” is preserved or violated by neutrinos
(see below). What new experiments can improve
our knowledge of the 3 angles, especially θ13?

1. Precision solar neutrino experiments;

2. Very precise measurements, at the 1% level
or better, of the ﬂux and spectrum of
electron-ﬂavor antineutrinos produced in
nuclear reactors and observed a few kilome-
ters away from the source;

3. Accelerator-based long-baseline oscillation
experiments with baselines of hundreds of
km or more.

• sin2 θ13 is equal to the amount of νe con-
tained in the ν3 state (the yellow in the ν3
bar).

• tan2 θ12 is equal to the amount of νe in ν2
divided by the amount of νe in ν1, i.e., the
ratio of the yellow fraction of the ν2 bar to
the yellow fraction of the ν1 bar in Fig. 4.
We currently know that tan2 θ12 < 1, which
means that there is more νe in ν1 than in
ν2.

• tan2 θ23 is the ratio of νµ to ντ content in
ν3, i.e., the fraction of the ν3 bar in Fig. 4
colored blue divided by the fraction colored
red. We currently do not know whether the
ν3 state contains more νµ or more ντ , or an
equal mixture.

Figure 5 summarizes our experimental knowl-
edge of the 3 mixing angles. The diﬀerences of
the squared masses provide enough information
now at least to link together the masses of the
3 known neutrinos for the ﬁrst time. Two of
the angles are large. The “solar angle” is now
fairly well determined from experiment: θ12 =
32.3 ± 1.6o. The “atmospheric angle” is not as
accurately known, but appears to be as large as

9

• Are neutrinos their own antiparticles?

Neutrino and Antineutrino
Particles and antiparticles have opposite
charges. What are we to make of neutri-
nos, which have no charge? Is there any-
thing that requires a distinction between
neutrinos and antineutrinos? If there is
not, perhaps neutrinos and antineutrinos
are really the same particle. This pos-
sibility can explain why neutrinos are so
light, yet not completely massless, and it
also points to the existence of neutrinos so
heavy we cannot possibly make them in the
laboratory. Intriguingly, their mass-energy
happens to be about the same as the en-
ergy where the known forces (except grav-
ity) may unite as one. We must ﬁnd out if
neutrinos are their own antiparticles.

The requirement that Albert Einstein’s the-
ory of special relativity also be applicable to the
weird world of quantum mechanics led to the re-
markable prediction, by Paul A. M. Dirac, that
for every particle there exists an antiparticle.
The particle and the antiparticle have identical
mass and spin. However, they have opposite
electric charges, and any other charge-like at-
tributes they may possess. Neutral particles are
special in that they can be their own antiparti-
cles. This is true of several neutral particles that
are not fermions, including the photon – the par-
ticle of light.

Neutrinos are the only elementary neutral
fermions known to exist. Being neutral, they
could also be their own antiparticles. Now that
we know neutrinos have mass, we can address
this most fundamental question. The answer to
this question is needed in order to build a New
Standard Model. There are two completely dif-
ferent ways of “adding” massive neutrinos to the
old Standard Model – one that allows neutrinos
to be their own antiparticles, and one that does

10

not – and we must know which one is correct in
order to proceed. As things stand, we no longer
can claim we know the equations that describe
all experimentally observed phenomena in parti-
cle physics.

In practice, we attack this problem by asking
what must be true if the neutrinos are not their
own antiparticles. If the neutrino and antineu-
trino are distinct particles, they must possess
some new fundamental “charge” which distin-
guishes the neutrino from the antineutrino. This
charge is called “lepton number.” We assign the
neutrinos and the negatively charged leptons lep-
ton number +1, and the antineutrinos and the
positively charged leptons lepton number −1. If
lepton number is violated by any physical pro-
cess, it would not be a conserved charge. This
necessarily would imply that the neutrinos are
their own antiparticles.
If, on the other hand,
lepton number is always conserved, it reveals a
new fundamental symmetry of Nature, one we
did not know existed before. 1

Currently, we have no conﬁrmed experimental
evidence that lepton number is violated. By far
the most sensitive probe of lepton number vio-
lation is neutrinoless double beta decay. In that
process, related to the beta decay process dis-
cussed earlier in which a single neutron decays
to a proton, an electron, and an antineutrino,
it may be energetically favorable for two neu-
trons to beta decay simultaneously. This pro-
cess, called double beta decay, occurs rarely; it
results in two antineutrinos, two electrons and
two protons. If neutrinos are their own antipar-
ticles, then, in principle, the antineutrino pair
could annihilate, resulting in neutrinoless dou-
ble beta decay: One nucleus decays into another

1Note to experts:

lepton number is known to be vi-
olated in the Standard Model by nonperturbative ef-
fects. One should replace everywhere ‘lepton number’ by
‘baryon number minus lepton number’ (B − L), which
is the non-anomalous global symmetry of the old Stan-
dard Model Lagrangian. If it turns out that neutrinos are
not their own antiparticles, we are required to “upgrade”
B −L from an accidental symmetry to a fundamental one.

nucleus plus two electrons, thereby violating lep-
ton number by two units.

The outcomes of future searches for neutrino-
less double beta decay, combined with results
from neutrino oscillation experiments and direct
searches for neutrino masses, may not only un-
ambiguously determine whether the neutrino is
its own antiparticle, but may also constrain the
neutrino masses themselves.

• Do neutrinos violate the symmetry CP?

Figure 6: A neutrino physicist seen in a CP Mir-
ror, which inverts spatially and maps matter to
antimatter. CP invariance implies the same be-
havior for both sides of the mirror.

The Mirror Cracked
When you look at yourself in a mirror, you
see a perfect spatial reﬂection that behaves
just as you do, only in reverse. Nature’s
particle mirror, which we call “CP,” is one
that reﬂects not only in space, but from
matter to antimatter. This particle mir-
ror is known to have a tiny ﬂaw: at a very
small
level quarks don’t behave like their
looking-glass partners. But what is small
for quarks could be large for neutrinos, and
through this crack in Nature’s mirror, we
may see physics far beyond the present en-
ergy scales.

sector, though, we expect CP-invariance to be vi-
olated in the neutrino sector at a small level. We
are also led to conclude that, as in the quark sec-
tor, several CP-invariance violating phenomena
in neutrino physics should be described in terms
of the same fundamental parameter — the CP-
violating phase δ contained in the mixing matrix.
We have learned, however, that the guidance
provided by the quark sector and other “theoret-
ical prejudices” can lead us astray. There is no
fundamental reason to believe that the mecha-
nism for neutrino CP-invariance violation is the
same as the one observed in the quark sector.
Only experiments can determine the size of CP-
invariance violation among neutrinos.

A prerequisite, as we have mentioned, for be-
ing able to observe CP-invariance violation in
the neutrino sector is that the third mixing an-
gle, θ13, not be vanishingly small. Experimen-
tally one must be simultaneously sensitive to
the eﬀects of all three mixing angles in order
to see CP-violating phenomena. Given that
fact, the best, and only practical, approach is
accelerator-based long-baseline oscillation exper-
iments. One test is to compare electron-ﬂavor
to muon-ﬂavor neutrino oscillations to electron-
ﬂavor to muon-ﬂavor antineutrino oscillations. A
diﬀerence would be a CP-invariance violation, al-
though in practice the presence of matter can
counterfeit the eﬀect. One can correct for that,
but only if the neutrino mass hierarchy is known.

As in the quark sector, the experimental veriﬁ-
cation and detailed study of CP-invariance viola-
tion will require signiﬁcant resources, ingenuity,
and patience. We recommend a program to re-
solve the question. In general terms, sorting out
the three unknowns of neutrino mixing, namely
θ13, δ, and the mass hierarchy, can be accom-
plished with a combination of:

CP invariance says that when matter is mir-
rored spatially and then converted to antimatter,
the result should behave identically to the orig-
inal particle (see Fig. 6). Guided by the quark

1. Long-baseline accelerator experiments in
which suﬃcient matter is present in the
beam path to provide sensitivity to the mass
hierarchy via the eﬀect of matter on neu-

11

trino oscillations.

2. Long-baseline accelerator experiments in
which ﬂavor conversion develops through
the action of all three mixing angles, a pre-
requisite for observing CP violation.

3. Medium-baseline (a few km) experiments
with reactors or accelerators to determine
the magnitude of θ13 independent of the in-
ﬂuence of CP violation and the mass hier-
archy.

2.2 Neutrinos and the Unexpected

Neutrinos may have properties beyond even our
new paradigm.
Such properties would again
force a profound revision in our thinking.

• Are there ‘sterile’ neutrinos?

Figure 7: A possible arrangement (hierarchy) of
the masses of the neutrinos, based on oscillation
data, with the additional input of evidence of a
fourth type of neutrino from LSND.

.

The Small, Silent Type
Neutrinos interact with other particles
through the quiet language of the weak
force. This makes them elegant probes
for new physics, because their voice is un-
cluttered by exchanges via the strong and
electromagnetic interaction, unlike the gre-
garious quarks and charged leptons. But
the neutrinos that speak to us through the
weak interactions may be accompanied by
companions who are even quieter. There
are indications from experiments that these
faint partners may exist.

Elegant experiments at the world’s largest
electron-positron collider indicate that there are
three and only three light neutrinos that interact
with matter. Other neutral fermions, lacking the
universal weak interaction that characterizes the
known neutrinos, would evade the inventory of
species made in collider experiments.

12

The speculated light neutral fermions capable
of mixing with neutrinos are known as ‘sterile
neutrinos,’ while the electron-ﬂavor, the muon-
ﬂavor and the tau-ﬂavor neutrinos are referred
to as ‘active neutrinos.’ The existence of sterile
neutrinos mixed with the active neutrinos would
aﬀect the evolution of the universe and have im-
portant astrophysical consequences, in addition
to its importance in the fundamental physics of
particles.

Experimental studies of muon-ﬂavor antineu-
trinos produced by antimuon decay at the Liq-
uid Scintillator Neutrino Detector (LSND) at the
Los Alamos National Laboratory, combined with
the rest of existing neutrino data, hint at the pos-
sibility that sterile neutrinos may exist. If this
is indeed the case, a more appropriate descrip-
tion of “neutrinos” may be best represented by
something like Fig. 7.

In light of the importance of the physics im-

plications, it is a priority to provide independent
experimental conﬁrmation. This is the purpose
of the MiniBooNE experiment, currently run-
ning at Fermilab.

• Do neutrinos have exotic properties?

A Still Closer Look
To our surprise, we have found that neu-
trinos have complex properties. This hard-
won discovery ended the 70-year old picture
of neutrinos as simple, massless objects.
Neutrinos have mass — do they have other
properties, too? How do we ﬁnd out more?
We must look carefully, as Ray Davis did
years ago, to see if what we observe is al-
ways what we expect.

A wide range of exotic properties are possi-
ble in the neutrino sector. These include mag-
netic and electric dipole moments, unexpected
neutrino decays, and even violation of our most
sacred fundamental symmetries. We would be
remiss not to search for these, since neutrinos
have a long history of surprising us with their
bizarre behavior.

Despite being electrically neutral, neutrinos
may have distributions of charge and magnetism
called electric and magnetic dipole moments.
This can only happen with massive particles. In
the New Standard Model, the neutrino magnetic
moment is expected to be tiny, at least eight
orders of magnitude away from current experi-
mental bounds. Reactor and accelerator experi-
ments in the next 10 to 15 years hope to improve
the sensitivity to neutrino magnetic moments by
two orders of magnitude. The observation of a
nonzero eﬀect would indicate the existence of
nonstandard physical eﬀects mediated by new
particles at or above the electroweak symmetry
breaking scale (about 100 GeV).

Massive particles may decay to lighter parti-

cles, so it is theoretically possible for neutrinos
to decay.
In the New Standard Model, neutri-
nos decay to even lighter neutrinos and/or pho-
tons, and the lifetime is expected to be absurdly
long: τν > 1038 years. Despite this, we should
still search for much shorter neutrino lifetimes,
because that would be evidence that our new
paradigm is wrong. Stringent bounds have been
set for neutrino decay into photons – longer than
billions of years. But bounds on neutrinos decay-
ing into new exotic matter are surprisingly weak.

There are many other deep physics princi-
ples that can be tested through neutrino studies.
The discovery of eﬀects such as the violation of
Lorentz invariance, of the equivalence principle,
or of CPT-invariance, to name only a few, would
force us to redeﬁne the basic tools – relativity,
quantum mechanics – we use in order to describe
Nature. Physics and astrophysics would be led
to the very challenging but rewarding path of
fundamental revision.

• What do neutrinos have to tell us about
the intriguing proposals for new models of
fundamental physics?

Journey to a Grand Uniﬁed Theory
Like paleontologists, who must infer the be-
havior of dinosaurs from a few remaining
bones and fossils, physicists must recon-
struct the behavior of particles at the high
energies of the Big Bang from the clues
provided by the low energy interactions we
produce in the laboratory today. Our re-
cent new discoveries of the properties of
neutrinos belong in the skeleton of a larger
“Grand Uniﬁed” theory.
It is a strange
looking beast, and further experimentation
will be required before we can understand
its full form.

The discoveries about neutrinos have forced us
to revise our robust and durable theory of phys-

13

ics, the Standard Model. Until the question of
whether neutrinos are their own antiparticles is
sorted out, a clear path to the New Standard
Model cannot be seen. There are other tantaliz-
ing hints for physics beyond the New Standard
Model. The “running coupling constants” seem
to unify at some very large energy scale, leading
to the strong belief that Nature can be described
in terms of a simpler grand uniﬁed theory (GUT)
that manifests itself as the Standard Model at
lower, more accessible energies.

Neutrinos may turn out to play a major
role in improving our understanding of GUTs.
Some GUTs provide all the elements required
to understand small neutrino masses — if they
are their own antiparticles — and the matter-
antimatter asymmetry of the universe via lep-
togenesis. GUTs also provide relations among
the quark mixing matrix, the lepton mixing ma-
trix, the quark masses, and the lepton masses, in
such a way that detailed, precise studies of the
leptonic mixing angles and the neutrino mass hi-
erarchy teach us about the nature of GUTs. In
particular, the large mixing angles of the leptonic
mixing matrix provide an interesting challenge
for GUTs. The study of neutrino masses and
mixing provides a privileged window into Nature
at a much more fundamental level.

2.3 Neutrinos and the Cosmos

In the last few years the evidence for cold dark
matter and dark energy in the cosmos have
brought us face to face with the uncomfortable
fact that we have no idea what 90% of the uni-
verse is made of. Neutrinos, oddly, are a compo-
nent of dark matter, but a minor ingredient by
mass. Exactly how much, we do not know yet.
On the other hand, despite being at a chilly 2K
today, they were “hot” until the cosmos was bil-
lions of years old. They may have played a role
in the formation of the vast skeins of galaxies in
superclusters throughout the universe.

14

• What is the role of neutrinos in shaping
the universe?

The First Neutrinos
Neutrinos were created in the cauldron of
the Big Bang. They orchestrated the com-
position of the ﬁrst nuclear matter in the
universe. Their total mass outweighs the
stars. They played a role in the framing
of the gossamer strands of galaxies. We
see in them the imprint of the cool matrix
of neutrinos that ﬁlls and shapes the uni-
verse.

The development of structure in the universe
is determined by its constituents and their abun-
dances. Neutrinos, due to their tiny masses, have
streamed freely away from developing aggrega-
tions of matter until quite recently (in cosmologi-
cal terms), when they ﬁnally cooled and their av-
erage speeds have decreased to signiﬁcantly less
than the speed of light. What is their role in
shaping the universe? The answer to this ques-
tion will not be known until the neutrino masses
are known.

A stringent but model-dependent upper bound
on the neutrino mass is provided by a combina-
tion of neutrino oscillation experiments, detailed
studies of the cosmic microwave background ra-
diation, and “full sky” galaxy surveys that mea-
sure the amount of structure in the observed uni-
verse at very large scales.
It is a testament to
the precision of current cosmological theory that
the fraction of the universe’s density contributed
by neutrinos is only 5% or less in this analy-
sis. Laboratory measurements currently bound
this number from above at 18%, and atmospheric
neutrino oscillations set a lower limit of 0.2%. A
unique test of our current understanding of the
history of the universe will come from new ex-
periments that directly determine the neutrino
mass.

Several experimental probes of astrophysics

and cosmology will help build a coherent picture
of the universe at the largest scales, including

1. Precision studies of the spectrum of the cos-

mic microwave background radiation;

2. Galaxy surveys;

3. Studies of gravitational weak lensing eﬀects

at extragalactic scales;

4. Precision determination of the primordial

abundance of light elements; and

5. Studies of the nature of dark energy, such
as surveys of distant type-Ia supernovae.

• Are neutrinos the key to the understand-
ing of the matter-antimatter asymmetry
of the universe?

Neutrinos Matter
The universe is ﬁlled with matter and not
antimatter. But why? In the initial ﬁreball
of the Big Bang, equal amounts of matter
and antimatter were surely created. What
gave the slight edge to matter in the race
for total annihilation? Surprisingly heavy
members of the neutrino family could ex-
plain this asymmetry. The light neutrinos
we see today, the descendants of the heavy
family, may hold the archaeological key.

It is intriguing that lepton number and CP-
invariance violation in the neutrino sector may
be the answer to one of the most basic ques-
tions – why does the universe we have observed
so far contain much more matter than antimat-
ter? In more detail, we would like to understand
the following issue: in the distant past, the uni-
verse is very well described by a gas of ultra-
relativistic matter and force carriers in thermal
equilibrium. This thermal bath contained a very
tiny asymmetry, around one extra proton or neu-
tron, or ‘baryons,’ for every 1010 baryons and
antibaryons.

15

As the universe cooled, almost all matter and
antimatter annihilated into light, and the tiny
left-over matter makes up all of the observable
universe. It is widely believed that the fact that
the primordial asymmetry was so small indicates
that in even earlier times the universe was de-
scribed by a symmetric gas of matter and an-
timatter, and that the asymmetry arose as the
universe evolved. This dynamical generation of
a matter-antimatter asymmetry is referred to as
‘baryogenesis,’ and the ingredients it must con-
tain were identiﬁed long ago: violation of C-
invariance – invariance of nature when particles
are replaced by antiparticles – and CP-invariance
– equivalent to time-reversal invariance; baryon-
number violation; and a time when the early uni-
verse was out of thermal equilibrium. More than
just a matter of taste, baryogenesis is required in
almost all models for the universe that contain
inﬂation, as the inﬂationary state of the universe
erases any ﬁnely-tuned matter-antimatter asym-
metry one could have postulated as present since
the beginning of time. Without baryogenesis, in-
ﬂationary models predict a very boring, matter-
antimatter symmetric universe.

In the Standard Model with massless neutri-
nos, it is not possible to generate the matter-
antimatter asymmetry of the universe dynami-
cally, for a few reasons, including: (i) the CP-
invariance violation present in the quark sector
is insuﬃcient to generate a large enough baryon
asymmetry; and (ii) there are no physical pro-
cesses that occur signiﬁcantly out of thermal
equilibrium in a Standard Model gas, at very
high temperatures. We only learned this re-
cently, when it became clear that the Higgs bo-
son is not light enough.

Neutrino masses may come to the rescue.
Not only do they provide new sources of CP-
invariance violation, they also provide new mech-
anisms for generating the matter-antimatter
asymmetry of the universe. The most popular
mechanism for generating the matter antimatter-
asymmetry of the universe with the help of neu-

trino masses is called ‘leptogenesis.’ What is
remarkable about several realizations of lepto-
genesis is that they relate the observed matter-
antimatter asymmetry of the universe to combi-
nations of neutrino masses, mixing angles and
other free parameters. Hence, we may learn,
by performing low-energy experiments, about
whether neutrino masses and mixing have some-
thing to do with the fact that the universe is
made of matter.

This is no simple matter, so to speak, and it
may turn out that one can never conclusively
learn whether the answer is ‘yes’ or ‘no.’ The
main reason is that it is likely that the baryon
asymmetry depends on parameters that describe
Nature at energies as high as 1015 GeV, an en-
ergy we simply cannot access by direct exper-
iment. Under these circumstances, low-energy
experiments can only probe particular combina-
tions of the leptogenesis parameters, and these
may end up severely underconstrained.

We have a plan for attacking this diﬃcult
problem. First, we must determine whether CP-
invariance is violated in the leptonic sector. Sec-
ond, we must learn whether neutrinos are their
own antiparticles, and determine as well as pos-
sible the overall scale of neutrino masses. It may
turn out, then, that several realizations of lepto-
genesis will be ruled out, or, perhaps, some very
simple model may ﬁt all data particularly well.
Further help may be provided by non-neutrino
experiments, including probes of the physics re-
sponsible for electroweak symmetry breaking (is
there low-energy supersymmetry?, etc.)
and
searches for charged-lepton ﬂavor violating pro-
cesses like µ → eγ. At that point, even if one
cannot prove whether leptogenesis is responsible
for the matter-antimatter asymmetry, we should
have enough circumstantial evidence to believe
it or to reject it.

• What can neutrinos disclose about the
deep interior of astrophysical objects, and
about the mysterious sources of very high
energy cosmic rays?

Neutrino Odyssey
While the main focus of this story is on the
it must
physics of neutrinos themselves,
not be forgotten that neutrinos can be used
to probe both inner structure and outer
limits. They are messengers that come
from deep in the heart of exploding stars
and cataclysmic centers of galactic nu-
clei. Through observation of these neutri-
nos, the ﬁelds of astrophysics and neutrino
physics have illuminated each other in the
past and will continue to in the future.

Neutrinos are the ultimate probe of astro-
physical objects and phenomena. Neutrinos
are deeply penetrating. Observing astrophysical
neutrinos is the only way to look at the interiors
of objects like the sun or the earth, and provides
the only means of obtaining detailed information
about the cataclysmic death of large stars in su-
pernova explosions.

Solar neutrino experiments over the past 30
years have, with our new understanding of the
properties of neutrinos, provided convincing re-
assurance of our understanding of the sun. How-
ever, we lack detailed conﬁrmation of many im-
portant aspects. The low-energy neutrino spec-
trum representing more than 99% of the ﬂux
has been quantiﬁed only in radiochemical exper-
iments that provide no detail of its structure.
The sun burns hydrogen to helium through two
major cycles, and we have essentially no infor-
mation about the one involving carbon, nitrogen
and oxygen, other than that it is relatively weak.

Neutrinos may provide a means for under-
standing how the highest energy cosmic rays
are produced and transported. Unlike protons,
which, along with heavier nuclei, are bent around

16

by galactic and extra-galactic magnetic ﬁelds,
and photons, which are scattered by cosmic ra-
diation backgrounds, neutrinos travel straight to
us, undeﬂected and unabsorbed. Several probes
of astrophysical neutrinos are being built, devel-
oped, and studied, including:

1. Under-ice and underwater kilometer-size de-
tectors of very high energy neutrinos, such
as IceCube, in Antarctica;

2. Multi-kilometer-scale cosmic ray detector
like the Auger experiment in Ar-

arrays,
gentina;

3. New experiments to study the spectrum of

neutrinos from the sun;

4. New detectors sensitive to coherent radio

and acoustic waves produced by neutrino–
matter
extremely high
energies, above 1015 eV, like the RICE and
ANITA experiments; and

interactions at

5. Eﬀorts to observe galactic supernova ex-
plosions and the supernova neutrino back-
ground, expected to permeate space as a
witness to all supernova explosions of the
past.

Below: A neutrino interaction in the
MiniBooNE detector. A muon moving faster
than the speed of light in oil has been produced,
and a ring of Cherenkov light like an optical
sonic boom is detected in photomultipliers
mounted on the geodesic. The size of each little
sphere indicates the amount of light.

17

3 Current Program and Inter-

national Context

The astonishing discoveries in neutrinos over the
last decade promise to revolutionize our under-
standing of nature at the most fundamental level.
These discoveries have resulted from a broad
range of experiments, many of which were orig-
inally justiﬁed for diﬀerent purposes. Some of
these experiments continue, along with other
new experiments that have been designed to pro-
vide yet more precise study of neutrino proper-
ties and perhaps oﬀer even more revolutionary
discoveries.

Neutrino physics enjoys a strong partnership
between theorists and experimentalists, a rela-
tionship that drives the ﬁeld forward. The cross-
cultural nature of the topic brings fresh ideas
from astrophysics, cosmology, particle physics,
and nuclear physics.
International collabora-
tion (see Table 1) and competition have led to
a healthy exchange of fresh ideas. The range
in size and years of running,
of experiments,
has allowed for both in-depth study and quick
turnaround in investigating anomalies. Neutrino
physics covers a broad range of experimental
techniques and needs, and the existing program
is already strong and rich in promise of new dis-
covery.
It is critical that, while future initia-
tives are undertaken, the current experimental
programs be exploited as fully as possible. Fur-
thermore, it is essential that the future program
take account of the existing domestic and in-
ternational eﬀorts which are either already un-
der way or planned for the next several years.
With full use of the existing program, the future
program outlined in this report has great poten-
tial for exciting new discoveries, even beyond the
presently deﬁned questions.

The existing U.S. experimental program (Fig.
8) is in the process of addressing a substantial
fraction of the important topics we have just de-
scribed. It is critical that we provide strong sup-

port to the current eﬀorts, and where possible
provide modest additional investment in order to
realize the best return from these eﬀorts. Some
of the important ongoing experiments either in
the U.S. or with substantial U.S. participation
are:

• The UHE Program: The U.S. has played
a major role in the development of meth-
ods for the detection of ultra high energy
cosmic rays. AMANDA has pioneered the
use of the Antarctic ice as a neutrino tele-
scope. It is currently taking data and will
be integrating with the km3-sized IceCube
over the next year or so. Radio and acous-
tic methods have been explored with GLUE,
FORTE, and SAUND, and the program
continues with RICE and ANITA in the
Antarctic. U.S. scientists also collaborate in
large lake and ocean cosmic-ray detectors,
Baikal, ANTARES, NEMO, and NESTOR.

• KamLAND: Recent results from the Kam-
LAND experiment, located in Japan, show
a clear energy dependent oscillation ef-
fect that not only clearly agrees and con-
ﬁrms solar neutrino oscillations but also
strongly constrains the possible range of
∆m2
12. Kamland continues to collect data
and we anticipate that the ﬁnal results will
provide a precision measurement of this pa-
rameter for which we do not expect any im-
provement for the foreseeable future.

• MiniBooNE: This U.S.-based experiment
is running in neutrino mode, and beneﬁt-
ing from continuous improvements in the
Fermilab Booster delivery of beam. Should
the LSND ¯νµ to ¯νe transition signal be con-
ﬁrmed, the collaboration plans additional
experiments, described in the superbeams
working group report. As discussed in Rec-
ommendations, a decisive resolution of this
question is essential, which may require ad-
ditional studies with beams of antineutri-
nos.

18

AMANDA

CUORICINO
KamLAND
MiniBooNE
SNO
Super-Kamiokande
K2K

ANITA
Auger

Borexino

IceCube

KATRIN
MINOS
RICE

Belgium, Germany, Japan, Netherlands,
Sweden, United Kingdom, United States, Venezuela
Italy, Netherlands, Spain, United States
China, Japan, United States
United States
Canada, United Kingdom, United States
Japan, Korea, Poland, United States
Canada, France, Italy, Japan, Korea, Poland,
Russia, Spain, Switzerland, United States
United States
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Bolivia, Brazil,
the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Italy, Mexico,
Poland, Slovenia, Spain, United Kingdom, United States, Vietnam
Belgium, Germany, Hungary, Italy,
Poland, Russia, United States
Belgium, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Sweden, United Kingdom, United States, Venezuela
Czech Republic, Germany, Russia, United Kingdom, United States
Brazil, France, Greece, Russia, United Kingdom, United States
United States

Table 1: Countries collaborating with the U.S. in our current and near-future experiments.

• SNO: The SNO experiment, in Canada, has
provided crucial experimental evidence con-
tributing to the proof that the solar neutrino
deﬁcit results from ﬂavor transitions from
νe to some combination of νµ and ντ . To
complete its physics program, SNO is now
preparing the detector for operations with
3He neutron counters in order to improve
sensitivity to the mixing angles θ12 and θ13.

• Super-Kamiokande and K2K: Decisive
evidence of oscillations in atmospheric neu-
trinos has come from Super-Kamiokande,
and the oscillation phenomenon is now also
seen in K2K with neutrinos from the KEK
accelerator. These experiments, located in
Japan, are impressive for the breadth and
quality of results on atmospheric, accelera-
tor, and solar neutrinos. Super-Kamiokande
is currently operating with about half its full
photomultiplier complement, and will un-
dergo refurbishment to the full coverage in

2005.

Recognizing the importance of neutrino stud-
ies, the U.S. is already committed to several new
experiments that are well into the construction
phase:

• ANITA: This balloon-borne radio tele-
scope, to be launched in the Antarctic, is de-
signed to detect very high energy neutrinos
resulting from the GZK eﬀect. A character-
istic pulse of radio energy is produced by the
intense shower of particles when such neutri-
nos interact in the ice. ANITA is expected
to provide the ﬁrst sensitivity to these pu-
tative neutrinos.

• Auger: Auger is a 3000-km2 air shower
array currently under construction in Ar-
gentina with substantial U.S. involvement.
Auger’s primary goal is the study of very

19

Figure 8: Neutrino experiments around the world. The ones shown have signiﬁcant US involvement.
.

high energy air showers, including those pro-
duced by neutrinos at and above the GZK
cutoﬀ.

ing from the NSF. It will very substantially
extend sensitivity to possible astrophysical
point sources of neutrinos.

• Borexino: This experiment, at the Gran
is aimed at a
Sasso Laboratory in Italy,
measurement of solar neutrinos with energy
spectrum sensitivity and ability to measure
the ﬂux from 7Be decays. Construction is
essentially complete, but operations have
been delayed.
It is hoped that operations
can begin in 2005. As we discuss in Recom-
mendations, a prerequisite in physics with
solar neutrinos is a determination of the 7Be
neutrino ﬂux to an accuracy of 5% or better.

• IceCube: This is a km3 high-energy neu-
trino observatory being built in the ice cap
at the South Pole.
It is an international
collaboration with primary support com-

• KamLAND Solar Neutrinos: Plans are
developing to upgrade the KamLAND de-
tector in Japan to permit a lower energy
threshold in order to detect solar neutrinos
from 7Be decay. Both Japan and the U.S.
are participating. Because the measurement
of 7Be neutrinos represents a substantial ex-
perimental challenge, it is likely that two in-
dependent experiments will be necessary to
reach the desired 5% accuracy.

• KATRIN: The KATRIN experiment is un-
der construction in Germany. It involves an
international collaboration focused on im-
proving the sensitivity to direct neutrino
mass measurement in tritium beta decay.

20

KATRIN represents an excellent example of
U.S. groups working together with interna-
tional collaborators to build a single facility
with unique capabilities.

• MINOS: The Fermilab NuMI beamline will
be complete late in 2004 and MINOS beam
operations will begin. This U.S.-based ex-
periment will oﬀer precision measurements
of oscillation parameters and extension in
sensitivity to νe appearance. The sensitivity
of MINOS depends on the number of pro-
tons that can be delivered. As we discuss in
Recommendations, continued improvements
in the proton intensity are necessary for the
present Fermilab experiments to meet their
physics goals.

• RICE: RICE, which seeks to observe neu-
trinos at the highest energies, has pioneered
the use of an array of radio antennas on the
surface of the Antarctic ice for the observa-
tion of energetic charged particles. It is cur-
rently taking data. Theoretical estimates
of neutrino ﬂuxes suggest that substantially
larger arrays may be required for positive
observation of ultra-high energy neutrinos.

In addition to the existing or soon-to-exist
experiments with signiﬁcant U.S. involvement,
there are important new experiments being
planned or built abroad that will
inform the
planning for a future U.S. program. In discussing
these future prospects, we do not include all pos-
sible future activities but take some account of
the relative advancement of the proposal or sta-
tus of construction. Some of the major exper-
iments being planned/built, of which our pro-
posed U.S. program has taken explicit account,
are:

• CNGS: Two experiments, ICARUS, and
OPERA, are under construction at the Gran
Sasso Laboratory in Italy for use with the
CERN-Gran Sasso neutrino beam, which
will start operation in 2006. These experi-

21

ments will search for evidence of ντ appear-
ance and, along with MINOS, will extend
the sensitivity to νe appearance. CERN, lo-
cated in Switzerland, is working to increase
SPS proton intensity in order to maximize
the physics output.

• Indian Neutrino Observatory (INO):
A large magnetized atmospheric neutrino
detector is being proposed for construction
in India. This detector may provide sensi-
tivity to the neutrino mass hierarchy.

• LVD: LVD is an 800-ton liquid scintillator
detector at Gran Sasso Laboratory in Italy,
with sensitivity to a galactic supernova.

• Mediterranean Neutrino Observatory:
There are three underwater neutrino tele-
scopes currently under development in the
Mediterranean, NESTOR, NEMO, and AN-
TARES. It is anticipated that these devel-
opment projects will result in a ﬁnal project
to build a single km3-size detector. This will
add a northern complement to the IceCube
Detector. No complementary U.S. project is
proposed for the northern hemisphere, and
modest U.S. collaboration may develop on
the eﬀort in the Mediterranean.

• Neutrinoless double beta decay: There
are many R&D programs worldwide in dou-
ble beta decay, some of which include op-
erating experiments. Among isotopes re-
ceiving the most attention are 76Ge, 100Mo,
130Te and 136Xe. The NEMO III experiment
in the Modane Laboratory in France is col-
lecting data with kilogram quantities of sev-
eral enriched isotopes, and features particle
tracking for event identiﬁcation. Cuoricino
is a calorimetric experiment operating with
kilogram quantities of natural tellurium.
Both experiments plan expansions. A con-
troversial analysis of data from the Heidel-
berg-Moscow experiment that used approx-
imately 10 kg of enriched 76Ge yields evi-
dence for an eﬀective neutrino mass greater
than 0.1 eV.

• Reactor experiments: The proposed
Double CHOOZ experiment in France will
use the existing underground space where
the ﬁrst CHOOZ experiment was per-
formed, along with a near detector to re-
duce the systematic uncertainty. A proposal
has been submitted and is in the approval
process. KASKA is an experiment being
planned for the Kashiwazaki reactor site in
Japan. Both of these experiments have a
sensitivity goal of sin2 2θ13 ≤ 0.03 at 90%
CL for ∆m2 = 0.002 eV2. In addition, there
are U.S. initiatives for experiments aiming
at the sin2 2θ13 ≤ 0.01 level that would be
carried out at reactor sites in Brazil, China,
or the U.S.

• SAGE: The SAGE gallium experiment in
Russia is unique in its sensitivity to neutri-
nos from the proton-proton (pp) interaction
and 7Be decays in the sun. With termina-
tion of the GNO gallium experiment at Gran
Sasso, discussions have commenced about
combining the SAGE and GNO collabora-
tions. Formal participation by U.S. groups
in SAGE has ended, but cooperation in this
important experiment continues.

• T2K: T2K will use the new 50 GeV accel-
erator, starting in 2009 at Tokai, along with
the Super-Kamiokande Detector to improve
sensitivity to νe appearance about a factor
of 5–10 beyond MINOS and CNGS. Due to
the 295-km baseline, T2K is almost insensi-
tive to matter eﬀects. This makes relatively
cleaner measurements for θ13 and δCP but
does not provide sensitivity to the mass hi-
erarchy. For that reason, that type of ex-
periment is a good complement to a longer-
baseline experiment with sensitivity to mat-
ter eﬀects, such that the combination of the
two provides clean separation of all of the
associated parameters. There is U.S. par-
ticipation in T2K with developing plans on
the scope of that participation. T2K is an
important part of a coherent international
eﬀort necessary to measure all of the impor-
tant oscillation parameters.

Several related experimental programs pro-
vide crucial data for better understanding results
from the neutrino experiments. Some of these
include:

• Nuclear Physics Cross

Sections:
section measure-
Nuclear-physics
cross
ments, such as for the fusion of 3He with
4He and for the reactions of protons with
certain radioactive nuclides, will continue
to be critical to understanding the sun and
supernovae.

• Cosmic-Ray and Astrophysics Mea-
surements: Cosmic-ray and astrophysical
measurements are important to an under-
standing and prediction of observed neu-
trino sources.

• Cosmology connections to neutrinos:
Measurements of
the cosmic microwave
background (CMB) and large scale struc-
ture continue to oﬀer very interesting
promise of placing limits on, or even obser-
vation of, an eﬀect resulting from neutrino
mass in the range of 0.1 eV.

A ﬁnal consideration is support for a strong
theory eﬀort on the broad set of issues in neu-
trino physics. Theoretical eﬀorts in neutrino
physics have played a fundamental role in inter-
preting the wide range of revolutionary experi-
mental results and building a coherent, yet still
incomplete, picture of the new physics uncovered
by the discovery of neutrino ﬂavor transitions.
Among the triumphs of such eﬀorts are compu-
tations of the solar neutrino ﬂux, development of
the neutrino oscillation formalism including the
eﬀects of neutrino propagation in matter, and
determination of the eﬀects of neutrinos in Big-
Bang nucleosynthesis, large scale structure for-
mation, and the distortions of the cosmic mi-
crowave background radiation.

It is also part of the theoretical eﬀorts to estab-
lish connections between the new discoveries in

22

Below: The MINOS detector in the Soudan
mine in Minnesota. A huge mural brightens the
work area.

neutrino physics and our most fundamental un-
derstanding of matter, energy, space, and time.
Signiﬁcant advances have been made in several
including establishing connections be-
arenas,
tween neutrino masses and leptonic mixing with
the concept of grand uniﬁcation, establishing a
relationship between neutrino masses and the
matter-antimatter asymmetry of the Universe
(through leptogenesis), and developing diﬀerent
predictive mechanisms for understanding the ori-
gin of neutrino masses in a more satisfying and
relevant way.

interdisci-
Finally, due to the particular
theory
plinary nature of neutrino physics,
has played the absolutely essential
role of
integrating results and developments in as-
tronomy, astrophysics, cosmology, high-energy
and low-energy particle physics, and nuclear
physics. As new discoveries arise in all of
these disciplines,
theoretical guidance and
integration will continue to be indispensable.

23

4 Recommendations

Our recommendations for a strong future U.S.
neutrino physics program are predicated on fully
capitalizing on our investments in the current
program. The present program includes the
longest baseline neutrino beam and a high-ﬂux
short baseline beam, both sited in the U.S. Else-
where, American scientists and support are con-
tributing in important ways to the burgeon-
ing world program in neutrino physics, includ-
ing a long-baseline reactor experiment in Japan,
solar and atmospheric neutrino experiments in
Canada, Italy, Japan, and Russia, a direct mass
measurement in Germany, ultra high energy as-
trophysics experiments in Antarctica and Ar-
gentina, and other experiments. We congratu-
late not only the scientists involved but also the
Agencies for their perceptive support of this de-
veloping program, which has been so spectacu-
larly fruitful.

Four issues deserve special mention:

1. Support for continued increases of proton
intensity for Fermilab neutrino experiments,
as is necessary for the present experiments
to meet their physics goals.

2. Support for decisive resolution of the high-
∆m2 puzzle. This issue is currently ad-
dressed by a single experiment now running
in a neutrino beam at Fermilab. Ultimately,
a decisive resolution of the puzzle may re-
quire additional studies with beams of an-
tineutrinos.

3. Support for determination of the 7Be solar
neutrino ﬂux. Such measurements are cur-
rently in the program of two underground
detectors, one in Italy and the other in
Japan.

4. Continued support for enhanced R&D fo-
cusing on new techniques for detecting neu-
trinos above 1015 eV from astrophysical

sources. This capability would open a new
window to astrophysics with signiﬁcant dis-
covery potential.

Turning to the recommendations for the fu-
ture, we preface our remarks by drawing atten-
tion to some basic elements in common:

1. In every instance the need for suitable un-
derground detector facilities emerges. A
successful neutrino program depends on the
availability of such underground space.

2. The precise determination of neutrino cross
sections is an essential ingredient in the in-
terpretation of neutrino experiments and is,
in addition, capable of revealing exotic and
unexpected phenomena, such as the exis-
tence of a neutrino magnetic dipole mo-
Interpretation of atmospheric and
ment.
long-baseline accelerator-based neutrino ex-
periments, understanding the role of neutri-
nos in supernova explosions, and predicting
the abundances of the elements produced
in those explosions all require knowledge of
neutrino cross sections. New facilities, such
as the Spallation Neutron Source, and ex-
isting neutrino beams can be used to meet
this essential need.

3. It is important that at least two detectors
worldwide should be operational which, in
addition to their other physics roles, are
continuously sensitive to a galactic super-
nova.

Our recommendations have their genesis in
central questions in neutrino physics: What are
the masses of the neutrinos? How and why do
they mix? Are neutrinos their own antiparticles?
Is CP symmetry broken by neutrinos? A com-
prehensive understanding of fundamental phys-
ics and of the universe rests upon the answers to
such questions.

24

• We recommend, as a high priority, that
a phased program of sensitive searches for
neutrinoless nuclear double beta decay be
initiated as soon as possible.

Neutrinoless double beta decay is the only
practical way to discover if neutrinos are their
own antiparticles and, thus, a new form of mat-
ter. Without this information, the construc-
tion of the New Standard Model cannot be com-
pleted. The lifetime for neutrinoless double beta
decay is inversely proportional to an eﬀective
neutrino mass. Hence, in order to observe a sig-
nal experimentally, not only must the neutrinos
be their own antiparticles, they must also be suf-
ﬁciently massive.

We recommend a phased approach with suc-
cessively larger detectors and lower backgrounds.
The ﬁrst experiments should address masses of
a few tenths of an eV. This is the ‘degenerate’
mass scale in which the three neutrino masses
are nearly equal, and it is the range in which the
large-scale structure of the universe would be af-
fected. From cosmological and existing double
beta decay data, controversial arguments have
been made that the neutrino mass is actually of
this size. For this mass range, neutrinoless dou-
ble beta decay can be discovered and precisely
measured with isotopic samples of approximately
200 kg in a period of 3 to 5 years.

If neutrinoless double beta decay is not ob-
served in the 200-kg experiments, then a sec-
ond phase of experimentation with 1-ton isotopic
samples should be initiated to search in the 20
to 55 meV mass range. That is the range given
by the observed atmospheric neutrino oscillation
signal if the mass hierarchy is non-degenerate
and inverted. A non-degenerate, normal mass
hierarchy with eﬀective masses below 20 meV re-
quires sample sizes of hundreds of tons. For that
scale of experiment substantially more R&D will
be necessary.

The issue is singularly important, the experi-

ments are diﬃcult, and there is, moreover, some
uncertainty in the theory that applies to each
candidate nucleus. Hence it is prudent to pur-
sue more than a single scalable technique with
diﬀerent isotopes and an expanded R&D eﬀort.
Worldwide, only four collaborations (two pre-
dominantly European and two predominantly
U.S.) are likely to propose viable 200-kg experi-
ments (with 76Ge, 130Te, and 136Xe) in the near
future. It is conceivable that two of the groups
will merge, leaving three eﬀorts among which the
U.S. will play a major role in two, and a sec-
ondary role in the third.

The U.S. is well positioned to make a signif-
icant contribution to this program. However,
these experiments all require that appropriate
underground facilities at moderate to substan-
tial depth be available.

• We recommend, as a high priority, a
comprehensive U.S. program to complete
our understanding of neutrino mixing, to
determine the character of the neutrino
mass spectrum, and to search for CP vi-
olation among neutrinos. This program
should have the following components:

• An expeditiously deployed multi-
detector reactor experiment with sen-
sitivity to νe disappearance down to
2θ13 = 0.01, an order of magni-
sin
tude below present limits.

2

• A timely accelerator experiment with
2θ13 sensitivity and

2
comparable sin
sensitivity to the mass-hierarchy
through matter eﬀects.

• A proton driver in the megawatt
class or above and neutrino super-
beam with an appropriate very large
detector capable of observing CP vi-
olation and measuring the neutrino
mass-squared diﬀerences and mixing
parameters with high precision.

25

The discovery of neutrino oscillations has pro-
vided completely new information about neu-
trino masses and mixing. To complete our un-
derstanding of mixing and the mass hierarchy, to
discover whether or not the CP symmetry is vi-
olated by neutrinos, and to be sensitive to unan-
ticipated new physics, a ﬂexible program with
several complementary experiments is necessary.

Knowledge of the presently unknown value of
the mixing angle θ13 is a key factor in all of these
objectives. Determination of this important pa-
rameter, or at least a stringent limit on it down
to sin2 2θ13 = 0.01, can be established with a
relatively modest scale reactor experiment. We
strongly urge the initiation of a reactor based
multi-detector experiment with this sensitivity
as soon as possible.

A new long-baseline experiment using the ex-
isting NuMI beamline at Fermilab and a beam
upgraded to 0.4 MW would be sensitive to com-
binations of the mixing angles θ13 and θ23, the
phase δ, and the mass-squared diﬀerence ∆m2
23.
Furthermore, if sin2 2θ13 is large enough, such
an experiment in concert with other experiments
can potentially determine the neutrino mass hi-
erarchy through matter eﬀects. Such an experi-
ment should be roughly 10 times more sensitive
to νe appearance than the long baseline exper-
iment currently under way at Fermilab and, if
done in a timely manner, would capitalize on the
considerable investment in NuMI.

Given that the value of θ13 is presently un-
known, should the accelerator and reactor ex-
periments be done in sequence or contemporane-
ously? We strongly recommend the contempora-
neous strategy. First, accurate determinations of
θ23, ∆m2
23 and either a stringent upper limit or a
value for θ13 are of central importance to an un-
derstanding of the origin of neutrino masses and
mixing. Second, in almost any conceivable sce-
nario, it will be essential to have the complemen-
tary and/or conﬁrmatory information from these
diﬀerent techniques. Third, we draw attention to

the unique and time-sensitive opportunity for the
U.S. to build a strong accelerator-based neutrino
physics program, with real discovery potential,
that will be a major contributor in the rapidly
advancing world program.

Even without knowing the outcome of the ini-
tial steps in the program, it is clear that very
large-scale,
long-baseline experiments will pro-
vide the best sensitivity to all the oscillation pa-
rameters as well as to possible unanticipated new
physics. They also provide the only possibility
for quantitatively exploring CP-invariance vio-
lation in the neutrino sector. A proton driver
in the megawatt class or above used to pro-
duce a neutrino superbeam, together with a de-
tector of more than 100 kilotons mass, should
be able to probe all aspects of three-generation
neutrino mixing, unambiguously determine the
mass hierarchy, and provide deﬁnitive informa-
tion on the amount of CP-invariance violation,
as long as sin2 2θ13 is larger than about 0.01. If
sin2 2θ13 is smaller still, a neutrino factory will be
required, because of its potential freedom from
backgrounds. Such a facility likewise requires an
intense proton driver. The intense proton driver
and detector would each provide beneﬁts across
a wide spectrum of fundamental physics in addi-
tion to neutrino physics.

Because of the long lead time in designing a
new intense proton driver, a decision whether
to embark on such a program should be made
as soon as practicable. With their existing ac-
celerator infrastructures and capabilities, either
Brookhaven or Fermilab would be natural sites,
and both laboratories have been working on de-
signs. A comprehensive study of the scientiﬁc,
technical, cost, and strategic issues will be nec-
essary.

Massive detectors have been key to the recent
revolution in neutrino physics. Their signiﬁcant
cost is more appropriately justiﬁed by the di-
verse physics program made possible by a mul-
tipurpose detector. Such a detector should be

26

The experiments that ﬁrst established neu-
trino ﬂavor transformation exploited neutrinos
from the Sun and neutrinos produced in the
earth’s atmosphere. These sources continue to
be used in the present program of neutrino ex-
periments. Natural neutrino sources are an im-
portant component of a program seeking to bet-
ter understand the neutrino and at the same time
aiming to use neutrinos to better understand as-
trophysical sources.

A measurement of the solar neutrino ﬂux
due to pp fusion, in comparison with the exist-
ing precision measurements of the higher-energy
8B neutrino ﬂux, will demonstrate the tran-
sition between vacuum and matter-dominated
oscillations, known as the Mikheyev-Smirnov-
Wolfenstein eﬀect. In combination with the es-
sential prerequisite experiments that will mea-
sure the 7Be solar neutrino ﬂux with an accuracy
of 5%, a measurement of the pp solar neutrino
ﬂux will allow a sensitive test of whether the Sun
shines exclusively through the fusion of light el-
ements. Moreover, the neutrino luminosity of
the Sun today is predictive of the Sun’s surface
temperature some 10,000 years in the future be-
cause neutrinos, unlike photons, travel directly
from the center of the Sun to the earth.

Low-energy solar neutrino experiments need
to be located in very deep underground sites in
order to achieve the required reduced levels of
background. If one is to be located in the U.S.,
adequate underground facilities are required.

A coordinated program such as we recommend
has enormous discovery potential, and builds
naturally upon the successes already achieved in
the U.S. program.
It is a rare and wonderful
circumstance that the questions of fundamental
science can be so clearly formulated and so di-
rectly addressed.

capable of addressing problems in nucleon de-
cay, solar neutrinos, supernova neutrinos, and at-
mospheric neutrinos in addition to long-baseline
neutrino physics. The broad range of capabili-
ties, however, can only be realized if it is built
deep enough underground. If such a detector is
to be sited in the U.S., appropriate new under-
ground facilities must be developed.

A high-intensity neutrino factory or a ‘beta-
beam’ facility is the ultimate tool in neutrino
physics for the long term, and may be the only
facility capable of deﬁnitively addressing some of
the physics issues. Neutrino factories and beta
beams require, respectively, development of a
muon storage ring or a radioactive-ion storage
ring, which provides intense, high energy muon
and/or electron neutrino beams with well under-
stood energy spectra and very low background
levels. Neutrino factories are presently the focus
of the U.S. development program, and there is a
signiﬁcant collaboration with Europe and Japan.
The neutrino factory R&D program needs in-
creased levels of support if the facility is to be
realized in the long term.

The overall program must be considered in an
international context. Reactor experiments less
sensitive than the one recommended here are be-
ing considered in France and Japan. An inter-
esting and extensive oﬀ-axis superbeam program
is under construction in Japan. Like the recom-
mended U.S. program, it is sensitive to a combi-
nation of parameters. The programs are comple-
mentary because only the U.S. program has suﬃ-
ciently long baselines to provide good sensitivity
to the mass hierarchy through matter enhance-
ment. With both the U.S. and international pro-
grams, we may conﬁdently anticipate a thorough
understanding of neutrino mixing.

• We recommend the development of
a spectroscopic solar neutrino experiment
capable of measuring the energy spectrum
of neutrinos from the primary pp fusion
process in the sun.

27

5 Timeline and Branch Points

How will the program we have recommended
here evolve with time, what are the branch
points at which new information will illuminate
the course ahead, and how do the U.S. and world
programs move forward in mutual cooperation?
In Fig. 9, a schematic timeline illustrates a feasi-
ble and appropriate schedule for the research. As
information is gained, a number of experimental
programs have branch points.
It is diﬃcult to
predict all of the possible future branches. Here
we note those that are clearly discernible.

The neutrinoless double beta decay program
will reach a decision point after the results of the
200 kg experiments are known. In the event that
no signal is seen, the likely branch is to larger de-
tectors sensitive to the ‘atmospheric mass’ range.
A positive signal at any stage will require ex-
periments with other isotopes to conﬁrm such
a fundamental scientiﬁc observation and to re-
duce the inﬂuence of theoretical uncertainties in
the quantitative result for the eﬀective neutrino
mass; because the experiments take many years,
it is necessary to initiate more than one at each
branch.

The direction that the comprehensive program
of oscillation parameter measurements takes in
the future depends on the value of the param-
eter sin2 2θ13.
If this parameter is larger than
0.01, the program we have outlined will accu-
rately determine some of the underlying phys-
ics, while the recommended proton driver and
very large detector will be necessary for a quan-
titative understanding of the extent of CP viola-
tion among the neutrinos. If, on the other hand,
this parameter is less than 0.01, information on
neutrino mixing will be provided by the proton
driver and appropriate very large detector, but
the search for CP violation must await the neu-
trino factory.

The resolution of the LSND question also rep-
resents an important branch point, although in

this case, observation of a signal would call for
augmentation of the program presented in this
document. The current program would continue
as presented, but with additional goals and ac-
companied by a suite of appropriate new exper-
iments to further explore this new phenomenon.

6 Conclusions of the Study

In this study, neutrino physicists, accelerator
physicists, and astrophysicists have worked to-
gether to identify the most exciting scientiﬁc op-
portunities for the future of neutrino physics. We
have prioritized these needs, dividing our ﬁnd-
ings into two high priority recommendations that
we concluded are crucial for the continued ad-
vancement of the ﬁeld, and one that would sub-
stantially enhance the U.S. program through its
added discovery potential. They represent but a
small subset of the interesting ideas that emerged
from the study, ideas reported in the appendix of
Working Group Reports. This collection, which
we believe represents the future in each study
area, underlines the intellectual richness of the
ﬁeld.

Out of this activity has emerged a program for
which the whole will be greater than the sum of
its parts. The program is coordinated to max-
imize results and minimize duplication, taking
into account the worldwide program. Our rec-
ommendations encourage international coopera-
tion, in order to leverage U.S. investment. Our
choices are interdisciplinary, exploiting the ex-
citement of connecting results from wide-ranging
disciplines. Just as the science represents the
convergence of many disciplines, so too will the
continued support of many Agency Divisions and
Oﬃces be needed to bring it to fruition.

With implementation of these recommenda-
tions, we believe the true character and form of
the neutrino matrix can be illuminated, and its
role in the universe disclosed.

28

Figure 9: An approximate indication of the development of our recommended neutrino program
with time. Some branchpoints are also indicated. Colors indicate U.S. contribution. Green: ≤ $10
M per year. Blue: $10 – 40 M per year. Orange: $40 – 100 M per year. Red: ≥ $100M per year.
Barred: R&D. Hatched: Design and construction. Solid: operations.

.

29

In this Appendix, only the Executive Summaries of the Working Groups are presented. The full

text can be found at any of the four APS Divisional web sites.

6.1 Executive Summary of Solar and Atmospheric Experiments Working Group

participants: H. Back, J.N. Bahcall, J. Bernabeu, M.G. Boulay, T. Bowles, F. Calaprice,
A. Champagne, M. Gai, C. Galbiati, H. Gallagher, C. Gonzalez-Garcia, R.L. Hahn, K.M. Heeger,
A. Hime, C.K. Jung, J.R. Klein, M. Koike, R. Lanou, J.G. Learned, K. T. Lesko, J. Losecco,
M. Maltoni, A. Mann, D. McKinsey, S. Palomares-Ruiz, C.Pe˜na-Garay, S.T. Petcov, A. Piepke,
M. Pitt, R. Raghavan, R.G.H. Robertson, K. Scholberg, H.W. Sobel, T. Takeuchi, R. Vogelaar,
L. Wolfenstein

6.1.1

Introduction

Both the ﬁrst evidence and the ﬁrst discoveries of neutrino ﬂavor transformation have come from
experiments which use neutrino beams provided by Nature. These discoveries were remarkable
not only because they were unexpected—they were discoveries in the purest sense—but that they
were made initially by experiments designed to do diﬀerent physics. Ray Davis’s solar neutrino
experiment was created to study solar astrophysics, not the particle physics of neutrinos. The IMB,
Kamiokande, and Super-Kamiokande experiments were hoping to observe proton decay, rather than
study the (ostensibly relatively uninteresting) atmospheric neutrino ﬂux. That these experiments
and their successors have had such a great impact upon our view of neutrinos and the Standard
Model underscores two of the most important motivations for continuing current and creating
future solar and atmospheric neutrino experiments: they are naturally sensitive to a broad range of
physics (beyond even neutrino physics), and they therefore have a great potential for the discovery
of what is truly new and unexpected. The fact that solar and atmospheric neutrino experiments
use naturally created neutrino beams raises the third important motivation—the beams themselves
are intrinsically interesting. Studying atmospheric neutrinos can tell us about the primary cosmic
ray ﬂux, and at high energies it may bring us information about astrophysical sources of neutrinos
(see Report of Astrophysics Working Group) or perhaps even something about particle interactions
in regimes still inaccessible to accelerators. For solar neutrinos, the interest of the beam is even
greater: as the only particles which can travel undisturbed from the solar core to us, neutrinos tell
us details about the inner workings of the Sun. The recent striking conﬁrmation of the predictions
of the Standard Solar Model (SSM) are virtually the tip of the iceberg: we have not yet examined
in an exclusive way more than 99% of the solar neutrino ﬂux. The discovery and understanding of
neutrino ﬂavor transformation now allows us to return to the original solar neutrino project—using
neutrinos to understand the Sun.

The fourth and perhaps strongest motivation for solar and atmospheric neutrino experiments is
that they have a vital role yet to play in exploring the new physics of neutrinos. The beams used in
these experiments give them unique sensitivity to some of the most interesting new phenomena. The
solar beam is energetically broadband, free of ﬂavor backgrounds, and passes through quantities of
matter obviously unavailable to terrestrial experiments. The atmospheric beam is also broadband,

30

but unlike the solar beam it has the additional advantage of a baseline which varies from tens of
kilometers to many thousands.

The Solar and Atmospheric Neutrino Experiments Working Group has chosen to focus on the

following primary physics questions:

• Is our model of neutrino mixing and oscillation complete, or are there other mechanisms at
work? To test the oscillation model, we must search for sub-dominant eﬀects such as non-
standard interactions, make precision comparisons to the measurements of other experiments
in diﬀerent regimes, and verify the predictions of both the matter eﬀect and vacuum oscillation.
The breadth of the energy spectrum, the extremely long baselines, and the matter densities
traversed by solar and atmospheric neutrinos make them very diﬀerent than terrestrial exper-
iments, and hence measurements in all three mixing sectors—including limits on θ13—can be
compared to terrestrial measurements and thus potentially uncover new physics.

• Is nuclear fusion the only source of the Sun’s energy? Comparison of the total energy output
of the Sun measured in neutrinos must agree with the total measured in photons, if nuclear
fusion is the only energy generation mechanism at work.

• What is the correct hierarchical ordering of the neutrino masses?

Atmospheric neutrinos which pass through the Earth’s core and mantle will have their transfor-
mation altered due to the matter eﬀect, dependent upon the sign of the ∆m2
32 mass diﬀerence.
Future large scale water Cerenkov experiments may be able to observe this diﬀerence in the
ratio of µ-like to e-like neutrino interactions, while magnetized atmospheric neutrino exper-
iments may be able to see the eﬀect simply by comparing the number of detected νµ to ¯νµ
events.

6.1.2 Recommendations

The highest priority of the Solar and Atmospheric Neutrino Experiment Working Group is the
development of a real-time, precision experiment that measures the pp solar neutrino ﬂux. A
measurement of the pp solar neutrino ﬂux, in comparison with the existing precision measurements
of the high energy 8B neutrino ﬂux, will demonstrate the transition between vacuum and matter-
dominated oscillations, thereby quantitatively testing a fundamental prediction of the standard
scenario of neutrino ﬂavor transformation. The initial solar neutrino beam is pure νe, which also
permits sensitive tests for sterile neutrinos. The pp experiment will also permit a signiﬁcantly
improved determination of θ12 and, together with other solar neutrino measurements, either a
measurement of θ13 or a constraint a factor of two lower than existing bounds.

In combination with the essential pre-requisite experiments that will measure the 7Be solar
neutrino ﬂux with a precision of 5%, a measurement of the pp solar neutrino ﬂux will constitute
a sensitive test for non-standard energy generation mechanisms within the Sun. The Standard
Solar Model predicts that the pp and 7Be neutrinos together constitute more than 98% of the solar
neutrino ﬂux. The comparison of the solar luminosity measured via neutrinos to that measured via
photons will test for any unknown energy generation mechanisms within the nearest star. A precise

31

measurement of the pp neutrino ﬂux (predicted to be 92% of the total ﬂux) will also test stringently
the theory of stellar evolution since the Standard Solar Model predicts the pp ﬂux with a theoretical
uncertainty of 1%. We also ﬁnd that an atmospheric neutrino experiment capable of resolving the
mass hierarchy is a high priority. Atmospheric neutrino experiments may be the only alternative to
very long baseline accelerator experiments as a way of resolving this fundamental question. Such
an experiment could be a very large scale water Cerenkov detector, or a magnetized detector with
ﬂavor and antiﬂavor sensitivity. Additional priorities are nuclear physics measurements which will
reduce the uncertainties in the predictions of the Standard Solar Model, and similar supporting
measurements for atmospheric neutrinos (cosmic ray ﬂuxes, magnetic ﬁelds, etc.). We note as well
that the detectors for both solar and atmospheric neutrino measurements can serve as multipurpose
detectors, with capabilities of discovering dark matter, relic supernova neutrinos, proton decay, or
as targets for long baseline accelerator neutrino experiments.

6.2 Executive Summary of the Reactor Working Group

participants: E. Abouzaid, K. Anderson, G. Barenboim, B. Berger, E. Blucher, T. Bolton,
S. Choubey, J. Conrad, J. Formaggio, D. Finley, P. Fisher, B. Fujikawa, M. Gai, M. Goodman,
A. de Gouvea, N. Hadley, R. Hahn, G. Horton-Smith, R. Kadel, K. Heeger, J. Klein, J. Learned,
M. Lindner, J. Link, K.-B. Luk, R. McKeown, I. Mocioiu, R. Mohapatra, D. Naples, J. Peng,
S. Petcov, J. Pilcher, P. Rapidis, D. Reyna, M. Shaevitz, R. Shrock, N. Stanton, R. Stefanski,
R. Yamamoto, M. Worcester

6.2.1

Introduction

The worldwide program to understand neutrino oscillations and determine the mixing parameters,
CP violating eﬀects, and mass hierarchy will require a broad combination of measurements. Our
group believes that a key element of this future neutrino program is a multi-detector neutrino
experiment (with baselines of ∼ 200 m and ∼ 1.5 km) with a sensitivity of sin2 2θ13 = 0.01. In
addition to oscillation physics, the reactor experiment may provide interesting measurements of
sin2 θW at Q2 = 0, neutrino couplings, magnetic moments, and mixing with sterile neutrino states.

θ13 is one of the twenty six parameters of the standard model, the best model of electroweak
interactions for energies below 100 GeV and, as such, is worthy of a precision measurement in-
dependent of other considerations. A reactor experiment of the proposed sensitivity will allow a
measurement of θ13 with no ambiguities and signiﬁcantly better precision than any other proposed
experiment, or will set limits indicating the scale of future experiments required to make progress.
Figure 10 shows a comparison of the sensitivity of reactor experiments of diﬀerent scales with ac-
celerator experiments for setting limits on sin2 2θ13 if the mixing angle is very small, or for making
a measurement of sin2 2θ13 if the angle is observable. A reactor experiment with a 1% precision
may also resolve the degeneracy in the θ23 parameter when combined with long-baseline accelerator
experiments (see Fig. 10).

In combination with long-baseline measurements, a reactor experiment may give early indications

32

Figure 10: Left 4 Panels: 90% C.L. regions and upper limits for various oscillation measurements
for (a,c) sin2 2θ13 = 0 and (b,d) sin2 2θ13 = 0.05. The top (bottom) plots are for the T2K (Nova)
long-baseline experiments. The three vertical dashed lines in (a) and (c) correspond to the 90%
C.L. upper limits of 0.005, 0.01, and 0.03 possible with diﬀerent scales of reactor experiments. The
green region (white curve) is the 90% C.L. allowed region for the two long-baseline experiments
for a ﬁve year neutrino-only run with nominal (×5) beam rate, and the blue region gives the
combination of the ﬁve year long-baseline measurement with a reactor experiment with sensitivity
of sin2 2θ13 = 0.01; in (b) and (d), the dashed curves show how the combined measurement would be
degraded with a reactor experiment with sensitivity of sin2 2θ13 = 0.03. Right 4 Panels: 90% C.L.
allowed regions for simulated data with oscillation parameters of sin2 2θ13 = 0.05, θ23 = 38o, ∆m2 =
2.5 × 10−3 eV2 and δCP = 270o. The analysis includes the restriction that sin2 2θ23 = 0.94 ± 0.06.
The green regions are for various combinations of the T2K and/or Nova experiments for ﬁve years
of running periods. The blue regions are the 90% C.L. allowed regions for the combination of a
reactor experiment with experiment. The dashed red lines show how the combined measurement
would be degraded with a reactor experiment with 3 times worse sensitivity.

33

of CP violation and the mass hierarchy. The combination of the T2K and Nova long-baseline
experiments will be able to make signiﬁcant measurements of these eﬀects if sin2 2θ13 > 0.05 and
with enhanced beam rates can improve their reach to the sin2 2θ13 > 0.02 level. If θ13 turns out
to be smaller than these values, one will need other strategies for getting to the physics. Thus, an
unambiguous reactor measurement of θ13 is an important ingredient in planning the strategy for
the future neutrino program.

6.2.2 Recommendations

Our group has one highest priority recommendation:

• We recommend the rapid construction of a multi-detector reactor experiment with a sensitivity

of 0.01 for sin2 2θ13.

Our other recommendations are the following:

• To help accomplish our highest priority recommendation, we recommend R&D support neces-

sary to prepare a full proposal.

• We recommend continued support for the KAMLAND experiment. KAMLAND has made the
best determination of ∆m2
12 to date, and will provide the best measurement for the foreseeable
future. As the deepest running reactor experiment, it also provides critical information about
cosmic-ray related backgrounds for future experiments.

• We recommend the exploration of potential sites for a next-generation experiment at a distance
of 70 km from an isolated reactor complex to make high precision measurements of θ12 and
∆m2

12.

• We recommend support for development of future large-scale reactor θ13 experiments that fully

exploit energy spectrum information.

6.3 Executive Summary of the Superbeams Working Group

participants: C. Albright, D. Ayres, A. Bazarko, F. Bertrand, G. Bock, D. Boehnlein, S. Brice, B.
Brown, L. Buckley-Geer, M. Campanelli, M. Chen, S. Childress, W. Chou, V. Cianciolo, D. Cline,
J. Conrad, J. Cooper, S. Dawson, D. Dean, F. DeJong, M. Diwan, A. Ereditato, R. Erbacher, G.
Feldman, D. Ferenc, B. Fleming, G.W. Foster, D. Galehouse, H. Gallagher, M. Goodman, A. de
Gouvea, D. Harris, M. Harrison, J. Hylen, H. Jostlein, C.K. Jung, T. Kajita, S. Kahn, E. Kearns,
R. Kephart, T. Kirk, G. Koizumi, S. Kopp, A. Kostelecky, K. Lande, K. Lang, P. Litchﬁeld, L.
Littenberg, W. Louis, J. Lys, A. Mann, A.K. Mann, W. Marciano, K. McDonald, K. McFarland,
G. McGregor, C. McGrew, O. Mena, S. Menary, M. Messier, D.G. Michael, L. Michelotti, S.
Mishra, H. Montgomery, C. Moore, J. Nelson, V. Palladino, A. Para, S. Parke, Z. Parsa, E.

34

Peterson, B. Pope, E. Prebys, D. Rahm, R. Rameika, R. Rau, H. Ray, P. Teimer, N. Samios,
N. Saoulidou, K. Scholberg, M. Shaevitz, M. Shiozawa, Y. Semertzidis, R. Shrock, C. Smith, R.
Smith, M. Sorel, J. Thron, J. Urheim, R. VanKooten, B. Viren, R. Webb, N. Weiner, W. Weng,
H. White, W. Wojcicki, Q. Wu, C. Yanagisawa, V. Yarba, E. Zimmerman, R. Zwaska

6.3.1

Introduction

As we seek the answers to the central questions in neutrino physics, accelerator-based experiments
will be crucial for providing the necessary precision and sensitivity. There are several physics
questions which accelerator superbeam experiments will address:

• What is the mixing pattern among the neutrinos? Do the mixings suggest some new funda-

mental mechanism which causes them to have unusual values?

• What is the mass hierarchy for the three known neutrinos?

• Do neutrinos violate the symmetry CP?

• Are there additional light neutrinos and do they participate in oscillations with the three known

neutrinos?

• Do we understand the basic mechanism of neutrino oscillations?

• Do neutrinos have measurable magnetic moments or other exotic properties?

Shorter-term experiments will depend on existing accelerator capabilities. However, in the longer
term it is now clear that we will require new or upgraded proton accelerators capable of providing
greater than a mega-Watt of proton power for a neutrino superbeam. With such a driver, a rich
new program of neutrino oscillation and other physics measurements will be possible.

6.3.2 Recommendations

I. Highest Priority Recommendation:

• Build a new MW+ class proton driver, neutrino superbeam and very massive

detector in the United States.

These are the necessary components for a complete set of precision measurements on the oscilla-
tion parameters of interest. The key feature of these experiments is that they will provide 1%
measurement of sin2 2θ23 and ∆m2
23 and sensitivity to sin2 2θ13 below 0.01 (depends on the other
parameters). Should sin2 2θ13 be greater than about 0.01 these experiments will also provide dis-
covery and measurement capability for CP violation and, because of the long baselines, unique

35

measurement capability of the mass hierarchy. A very large multi-purpose detector located at an
underground site will permit not just long-baseline oscillation measurements but also measurements
on solar and atmospheric neutrinos, a search for supernova neutrinos and a search for proton decay.
The new proton driver will enable both long and short baseline oscillation experiments as well as a
variety of other neutrino experiments. It will also permit new precise muon and hadron experiments
as well as act as the essential ﬁrst stage of a possible future neutrino factory.

II. Short-term Recommendations:

• Signiﬁcant design studies for a new proton driver facility have been completed over
the last few years. We urge a rapid decision on this facility. We expect that it will
take roughly 8 years from now before a new proton driver could be completed, if the decision
to proceed and selection of the site is done soon. Moving now to decide on this machine will
permit the U.S. to have the leading program of neutrino measurements in the following decade.

• Increase proton intensity at Fermilab, roughly by about a factor of 2 in both the
Booster and Main Injector neutrino beamlines over the next few years. Both the
MINOS and Mini-BooNE experiments oﬀer exciting discovery and measurement potential in
the next few years but their capabilities depend critically on proton intensity. Roughly, we
encourage investment with a goal of delivering about 4 × 1020 protons per year at both 8 GeV
and 120 GeV.

• We recommend the LSND result be tested with both neutrinos and anti-neutrinos.
Mini-BooNE is currently using neutrinos to test the LSND result (which is νe appearance in an
initial beam of νµ). It is essential that this test be conclusive. Should Mini-BooNE not conﬁrm
LSND with neutrinos, testing the result with anti-neutrinos will be important. Improvements
in proton intensity as discussed in the preceding recommendation would permit Mini-BooNE
to also test LSND with anti-neutrinos.

• We endorse the physics goals of a long-baseline νe appearance experiment using the
existing NuMI beamline. We recommend development of this experimental pro-
gram. A reactor neutrino experiment running in parallel will be complementary.
Such an experiment should be roughly 10 times more sensitive than MINOS to νe appearance
and being done in a timely manner would capitalize on the considerable investment in NuMI.
With a suitable detector, a properly optimized appearance experiment could have good sensi-
tivity to θ13 and provide a unique relatively short-term opportunity to determine the neutrino
mass hierarchy via matter eﬀects. That determination would have important implications for
fundamental neutrino properties as well as the requirements for future neutrinoless double beta
decay experiments.

III. Long Term Strategy and Priorities:

• Pursue a long-baseline neutrino program. The U.S. should focus on longer baseline
experiments than are being considered in Japan or Europe (at present at least).
The overall U.S. program (domestic and participation in experiments abroad)

36

should form a coherent part of an international eﬀort. Neutrino Superbeam experi-
ments being planned in Japan and Europe have baselines suﬃciently short so that it is diﬃcult
to measure the matter eﬀects which can identify the mass hierarchy. This is a unique measure-
ment capability which we believe the U.S. experiment(s) should oﬀer. In addition, the U.S.
experiments have the potential for providing the best sensitivity to the oscillation parameters,
including ﬁrst measurement of νe appearance and discovery and measurement of CP violation
in neutrino oscillations.

• A massive detector will be necessary for the future long-baseline experiments.
We recommend a study of the possible eventual connection between a neutrino
superbeam with a massive multi-purpose detector. One can probably build the very
large detector needed just for long baseline experiments alone on the surface. However, the
capabilities which such a detector must have can permit a broad range of physics measurement
capabilities if located underground. We think it is essential to study the technology and possible
connections between the superbeam and multi-purpose underground detector.

• If LSND is conﬁrmed, a whole new range of experiments should follow with possi-
ble programs at a variety of laboratories. If the LSND observation is correct, then there
are light sterile neutrinos which also participate in oscillations, or something even stranger yet.
This modiﬁes the model of neutrino mixings in a way that requires us to provide measure-
ments to both establish the very nature of the mixing as well as speciﬁc values of parameters.
Long baseline experiments with the capabilities we describe here will still be essential, but the
interpretation of their results may be diﬀerent. In addition, new short (or possibly medium)
baseline experiments will be essential to study the new physics phenomena in detail and build
a new picture of neutrino physics.

• Searches for exotic neutrino properties should be pursued with new superbeam
experiments. Due to their special properties, neutrinos can be particularly sensitive to
a range of possible new physics from extra dimensions to violation of equivalence principle
to new very weak interactions. Relatively small new short-baseline experiments are able to
extend sensitivity to possible exotic physics associated with neutrinos and such experiments
will become better as higher intensity neutrino beams are available. A good example of such
a measurement is to search for an anomalously large neutrino magnetic moment induced by
eﬀects of extra dimensions. Experiments extending such sensitivity by a factor of 10–100 are
foreseen.

• New high-precision cross-section experiments should be undertaken. Detailed under-
standing of neutrino interaction cross sections is important for future oscillation measurements.
Such measurements can also provide interesting insight to QCD eﬀects and eﬀects of nuclear
matter. Current understanding of cross-sections (total, diﬀerential and exclusive ﬁnal states)
in the GeV range, so important to oscillation experiments, is only at the tens of percent level.
Although near detectors can help to cancel some of the uncertainty in cross sections, the better
and more precise solution is to actually measure the cross sections better than currently known
once and for all! We encourage that the experiments necessary for this be carried out.

37

6.4 Executive Summary of the Neutrino Factory and Beta Beam Experiments

and Development Working Group

participants: C. Albright, V. Barger, J. Beacom, J.S. Berg, E. Black, A. Blondel, S. Brice,
S. Caspi, W. Chou, M. Cummings, R. Fernow, D. Finley, J. Gallardo, S. Geer, J.J. Gomez-
Cadenas, M. Goodman, D. Harris, P. Huber, A. Jansson, C. Johnstone, S. Kahn, D. Kaplan,
H. Kirk, T. Kobilarcik, M. Lindner, K. McDonald, O. Mena, D. Neuﬀer, V. Palladino, R. Palmer,
K. Paul, P. Rapidis, N. Solomey, P. Spampinato, Y. Torun, K. Whisnant, W. Winter, M. Zisman

and
The Neutrino Factory and Muon Collider Collaboration

6.4.1

Introduction

Two new types of facility have been proposed that could have a tremendous impact on future
neutrino experiments—the Neutrino Factory and the Beta Beam facility. In contrast to conven-
tional muon-neutrino beams, Neutrino Factory and Beta Beam facilities would provide a source of
electron-neutrinos (νe) and -antineutrinos (¯νe), with very low systematic uncertainties on the asso-
ciated beam ﬂuxes and spectra. The experimental signature for νe → νµ transitions is extremely
clean, with very low background rates. Hence, Neutrino Factories and Beta Beams would enable
very sensitive oscillation measurements to be made. This is particularly true at a Neutrino Fac-
tory, which not only provides very intense beams at high energy, but also provides muon-neutrinos
(νµ) and -antineutrinos (¯νµ) in addition to electron-neutrinos (νe) and -antineutrinos (¯νe). This
would facilitate a large variety of complementary oscillation measurements in a single detector, and
dramatically improve our ability to test the three-ﬂavor mixing framework, measure CP violation
in the lepton sector (and perhaps determine the neutrino mass hierarchy), and, if necessary, probe
extremely small values of the mixing angle θ13.

At this time, we do not know the value of θ13. If sin2 2θ13 < 0.01, much of the basic neutrino
oscillation physics program will be beyond the reach of conventional neutrino beams. In this case
Neutrino Factories and Beta Beams oﬀer the only known way to pursue the desired physics program.
The sensitivity that could be achieved at a Beta Beam facility presently looks very promising, but is
still being explored. In particular, the optimum Beta Beam energy is under discussion. Low energy
Beta Beam measurements would complement Superbeam measurements, but would achieve a θ13
sensitivity that does not appear to be competitive with that of a Neutrino Factory. Higher energy
Beta Beams may approach the sensitivity possible with a Neutrino Factory, although systematics
issues need further study. Thus, while a Beta Beam facility may have a signiﬁcant role to play in the
future global neutrino program, more work must be done on its design, development, cost estimate,
and physics sensitivity to validate its potential. We note that, due to very limited resources, there
has been no signiﬁcant activity in the U.S. on Beta Beams. Progress on Beta Beam development
being made in Europe should be followed, especially if the higher energy solution continues to look
favorable. An impressive Neutrino Factory R&D eﬀort has been ongoing in the U.S. and

38

elsewhere over the last few years, and signiﬁcant progress has been made toward optimizing
the design, developing and testing the required accelerator components, and signiﬁcantly reducing
the cost, even during the current Study. (Although a full engineering study is required, we have
preliminary indications that the unloaded cost of a Neutrino Factory facility based on an existing
Superbeam proton driver and target station can be reduced substantially compared with previous
estimates.) Neutrino Factory R&D has reached a critical stage in which support is required for two
key international experiments (MICE and Targetry) and a third-generation international design
study. If this support is forthcoming, a Neutrino Factory could be added to the Neutrino Physics
roadmap in about a decade. Given the present uncertainty about the size of θ13, it is critical to
support an ongoing and increased U.S. investment in Neutrino Factory accelerator R&D to maintain
this technical option. A Neutrino Factory cannot be built without continued and increased support
for its development. We note that the 2001 HEPAP Report advocated an annual U.S. investment
of $8M on Neutrino Factory R&D. The present support is much less than this. Since R&D on the
design of frontier accelerator facilities takes many years, support must be provided now to have an
impact in about a decade.

6.4.2 Recommendations

Accelerator R&D is an essential part of the ongoing global neutrino program. Limited beam
intensity is already constraining the neutrino physics program, and will continue to do so in the
future. More intense and new types of neutrino beams would have a big impact on the future
neutrino program. A Neutrino Factory would require a Superbeam-type MW-scale proton source.
We thus encourage the rapid development of a Superbeam-type proton source. The Neutrino
Factory and Beta Beam Working Group’s speciﬁc recommendations are:

• We recommend that the ongoing Neutrino Factory R&D in the U.S. be given
continued encouragement and ﬁnancial support. We note that the HEPAP Report of
2001 recommended an annual support level of $8M for Neutrino Factory R&D, and this level
was considered minimal to keep the R&D eﬀort viable.

In addition, and consistent with the above recommendation,

1. We recommend that the U.S. funding agencies ﬁnd a way to support the
international Muon Ionization Cooling Experiment (MICE), in collaboration
with European and Japanese partners. We note that MICE now has scientiﬁc
approval at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory in the UK, and will require signiﬁcant
U.S. participation. This has been identiﬁed as an important experiment for the global
Neutrino Factory R&D program. A timely indication of U.S. support for MICE is needed
to move the experiment forward.

2. We recommend that support be found to ensure that the international Targetry
R&D experiment proceeds as planned. We note that this R&D activity is crucial for
the short-, medium-, and long-term neutrino programs, and for other physics requiring
high-intensity beams.

3. We recommend that a World Design Study, aimed at solidly establishing the
cost of a cost-eﬀective Neutrino Factory, be supported at the same level as

39

Studies I and II. We note that the studies done here suggest that the cost of a Neutrino
Factory would be signiﬁcantly less than estimated for Studies I and II. This makes a
Neutrino Factory a very attractive ingredient in the global neutrino roadmap.

• We recommend that progress on Beta Beam development be monitored, and that
our U.S. colleagues cooperate fully with their EU counterparts in assessing how
U.S. facilities might play a role in such a program. We note that there is no signiﬁcant
U.S. R&D eﬀort on Beta Beams due to our limited R&D resources. Insofar as an intermediate
energy solution is desirable, however, the Beta Beam idea is potentially of interest to the U.S.
physics community.

6.5 Executive Summary of the Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay and Direct

Searches for Neutrino Mass Working Group

6.5.1

Introduction

participants: C. Aalseth, H. Back, L. Dauwe, D. Dean, G. Drexlin, Y. Efremenko, H. Ejiri,
S. Elliott, J. Engel, B. Fujikawa, R. Henning, G.W. Hoﬀmann, K. Lang, K. Lesko, T. Kishimoto,
H. Miley, R. Norman, S. Pascoli, S. Petcov, A. Piepke, W. Rodejohann, D. Saltzberg, S. Sutton,
P. Vogel, R. Warner, J. Wilkerson, and L. Wolfenstein.

The physics addressed by this research program seeks to answer many of the Study’s questions:

1. Are neutrinos their own anti-particles?

2. What are the masses of the neutrinos?

3. Do neutrinos violate the symmetry CP?

4. Are neutrinos the key to the understanding of the matter-antimatter asymmetry of the Uni-

verse?

5. What do neutrinos have to tell us about the intriguing proposals for new models of physics?

Only the research covered within this working group can answer the ﬁrst and second of these
fundamental questions. Among the ways to measure the neutrino mass, three are notable because
they are especially sensitive: double-beta decay, tritium beta decay, and cosmology. Consequently,
we have focused our report and recommendations on them. • Observation of the neutrinoless
double-beta decay (0νββ) would prove that the total lepton number is not conserved and would
establish a non-vanishing neutrino mass of Majorana nature. In other words, observation of the
0νββ decay, independent of its rate, would show that neutrinos, unlike all the other constituents of
matter, are their own antiparticles. There is no other realistic way to determine the nature — Dirac
or Majorana — of massive neutrinos. This would be a discovery of major importance, with impact
not only on this fundamental question, but also on the determination of the absolute neutrino mass

40

scale, on the pattern of neutrino masses, and possibly on the problem of CP violation in the lepton
sector. There is consensus on this basic point, which we translate into the recommendations on
how to proceed with experiments dedicated to the search for 0νββ decay, and on how to fund them.
To reach our conclusion, we have to consider past achievements, the size of previous experiments,
and the existing proposals. There is a considerable community of physicists worldwide as well
as in the US interested in pursuing the search for the 0νββ decay. Past experiments were of
relatively modest size. Clearly, the scope of future experiments should be considerably larger, and
will require advances in experimental techniques, larger collaborations and additional funding. In
terms of hmββi, the eﬀective neutrino Majorana mass that can be extracted from the observed 0νββ
decay rate, there are three ranges of increasing sensitivity, related to known neutrino-mass scales
of neutrino oscillations. • The ∼100-500 meV hmββi range corresponds to the quasi-degenerate
spectrum of neutrino masses. The motivation for reaching this scale has been strengthened by
the recent claim of an observation of 0νββ decay in 76Ge; a claim that obviously requires further
investigation. To reach this scale and perform reliable measurements, the size of the experiment
should be approximately 200 kg of the decaying isotope, with a corresponding reduction of the
background. This quasi-degenerate scale is achievable in the relatively near term, ∼ 3-5 years.
Several groups with considerable US participation have well established plans to build ∼ 200-kg
devices that could scale straight-forwardly to 1 ton (Majorana using 76Ge, Cuore using 130Te, and
EXO using 136Xe). There are also other proposed experiments worldwide which oﬀer to study a
number of other isotopes and could reach similar sensitivity after further R&D. Several among
them (e.g. Super-NEMO, MOON) have US participation.

By making measurements in several nuclei the uncertainty arising from the nuclear matrix el-
ements would be reduced. The development of diﬀerent detection techniques, and measurements
in several nuclei, is invaluable for establishing the existence (or lack thereof) of the 0νββ decay at
this eﬀective neutrino mass range. • The ∼20-55 meV range arises from the atmospheric neutrino
oscillation results. Observation of hmββi at this mass scale would imply the inverted neutrino mass
hierarchy or the normal-hierarchy ν mass spectrum very near the quasi-degenerate region. If either
this or the quasi-degenerate spectrum is established, it would be invaluable not only for the under-
standing of the origin of neutrino mass, but also as input to the overall neutrino physics program
(long baseline oscillations, search for CP violations, search for neutrino mass in tritium beta decay
and astrophysics/cosmology, etc.) To study the 20-50 meV mass range will require about 1 ton of
the isotope mass, a challenge of its own. Given the importance, and the points discussed above,
more than one experiment of that size is desirable. • The ∼2-5 meV range arises from the solar
neutrino oscillation results and will almost certainly lead to the 0νββ decay, provided neutrinos
are Majorana particles. To reach this goal will require ∼100 tons of the decaying isotope, and
no current technique provides such a leap in sensitivity. The qualitative physics results that arise
from an observation of 0νββ decay are profound. Hence, the program described above is vital and
fundamentally important even if the resulting hmββi would be rather uncertain in value. However,
by making measurements in several nuclei the uncertainty arising from the nuclear matrix elements
would be reduced.

Unlike double-beta decay, beta-decay endpoint measurements search for a kinematic eﬀect due to
neutrino mass and thus are “direct searches” for neutrino mass. This technique, which is essentially
free of theoretical assumptions about neutrino properties, is not just complementary. In fact, both
types of measurements will be required to fully untangle the nature of the neutrino mass. Excitingly,

41

a very large new beta spectrometer is being built in Germany. This KATRIN experiment has a
design sensitivity approaching 200 meV. If the neutrino masses are quasi-degenerate, as would be
the case if the recent double-beta decay claim proves true, KATRIN will see the eﬀect. In this case
the 0νββ-decay experiments can provide, in principle, unique information about CP-violation in
the lepton sector, associated with Majorana neutrinos.

Cosmology can also provide crucial information on the sum of the neutrino masses. This topic
is summarized in a diﬀerent section of the report, but it should be mentioned here that the next
generation of measurements hope to be able to observe a sum of neutrino masses as small as 40
meV. We would like to emphasize the complementarity of the three approaches, 0νββ , β decay,
and cosmology.

6.5.2 Recommendations

We conclude that such a double-beta-decay program can be summarized as having three components
and our recommendations can be summarized as follows:

1. A substantial number (preferably more than two) of 200-kg scale experiments (providing the
capability to make a precision measurement at the quasi-degenerate mass scale) with large
US participation should be supported as soon as possible.

2. Concurrently, the development toward ∼1-ton experiments (i.e. sensitive to

atm) should
be supported, primarily as expansions of the 200-kg experiments. The corresponding plans
for the procurement of the enriched isotopes, as well as for the development of a suitable
underground facility, should be carried out. The US funding agencies should set up in a timely
manner a mechanism to review and compare the various proposals for such experiments which
span research supported by the High Energy and Nuclear Physics oﬃces of DOE as well as by
NSF.

p

∆m2

3. A diverse R&D program developing additional techniques should be supported.

• In addition to double-beta decay, other techniques for exploring the neutrino mass need to be
pursued also. We summarize these recommendations as follows.

1. Although KATRIN is predominately a European eﬀort, there is signiﬁcant US participation.
The design and construction of this experiment is proceeding well and the program should
continue to be strongly supported.

2. Research and development of other techniques for observing the neutrino mass kinematically

should be encouraged.

42

6.6 Executive Summary of the Neutrino Astrophysics and Cosmology Working

Group

participants: B. Balantekin, S. Barwick, J. Beacom, N. Bell, G. Bertone, D. Boyd, L. Chatter-
jee, M.-C. Chen, V. Cianciolo, S. Dodelson, M. Dragowsky, J.L. Feng, G. Fuller, E. Henley, M.
Kaplinghat, A. Karle, T. Kattori, P. Langacker, J. Learned, J. LoSecco, C. Lunardini, D. McKay,
M. Medvedev, P. M´esz´aros, A. Mezzacappa, I. Mocioiu, H. Murayama, P. Nienaber, K. Olive, S.
Palomares-Ruiz, S. Pascoli, R. Plunkett, G. Raﬀelt, T. Stanev, T. Takeuchi, J. Thaler, M. Vagins,
T. Walker, N. Weiner, B.-L. Young

6.6.1

Introduction

In 2002, Ray Davis and Masatoshi Koshiba were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics “for pioneering
contributions to astrophysics, in particular for the detection of cosmic neutrinos.” However, while
astronomy has undergone a revolution in understanding by synthesizing data taken at many wave-
lengths, the universe has only barely been glimpsed in neutrinos, just the Sun and the nearby SN
1987A. An entire universe awaits, and since neutrinos can probe astrophysical objects at densities,
energies, and distances that are otherwise inaccessible, the results are expected to be particularly
exciting. Similarly, the revolution in quantitative cosmology has heightened the need for very pre-
cise tests that are possible only with neutrinos, and prominent among them is the search for the
eﬀects of neutrino mass, since neutrinos are a small but known component of the dark matter.
The Neutrino Astrophysics and Cosmology Working Group put special emphasis on the following
primary questions of the Neutrino Study; there are also strong connections to the other questions
as well.

• What is the role of neutrinos in shaping the universe?

• Are neutrinos the key to the understanding of the

matter-antimatter asymmetry of the universe?

• What can neutrinos disclose about

the deep interior of astrophysical objects, and about the mysterious sources of very high energy
cosmic

rays?

6.6.2 Recommendations

Our principal recommendations are:

• We strongly recommend the development of experimental

43

techniques that focus on the detection of astrophysical neutrinos,
especially in the energy range above 1015 eV. We estimate that the appropriate cost
is less than $10 million to enhance radio-based technologies or develop new technologies for
high energy neutrino detection. The technical goal of the next generation detector should be to
increase the sensitivity by factor of 10, which may be adequate to measure the energy spectrum
of the expected GZK (Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin) neutrinos, produced by the interactions of
ultra-high energy cosmic ray protons with the cosmic microwave background (Fig. 11). The
research and development phase for these experiments is likely to require 3-5 years.

• We recommend support for new precision measurements of neutrino-nucleus cross
sections in the energy range of a few tens of MeV. We estimate that measurements
of neutrino cross-section recommended by this working group can be accomplished for less
than $10 million, with R&D requiring $0.5 million for one year. Construction will require two
additional years.

• We recommend that adequate resources be provided to allow existing large-volume
solar, reactor, proton decay, and high energy neutrino telescopes to observe neutri-
nos from the next supernova explosion and participate in a worldwide monitoring
system. Furthermore, future large-volume detectors should consider the detec-
tion of supernova neutrinos an important science goal and plan accordingly. We
anticipate that the investment to insure that large volume detectors maintain sensitivity to
galactic supernovae, as well as the diﬀuse supernova neutrino background from all supernovae,
will be less than $10 million over the next 5 years. New large volume detectors expected for
long-baseline, reactor, proton-decay, solar, and high energy neutrino detectors should consider
new ideas to enhance the capabilities for the detection of supernova neutrinos. The cost is not
possible to determine at this time.

Our principal endorsements are:

• We enthusiastically support continued investment in a vigorous and multi-faceted
eﬀort to precisely (but indirectly) measure the cosmological neutrino background
through its eﬀects on big-bang nucleosynthesis, the cosmic microwave background,
and the large-scale structure of galaxies; in particular, weak gravitational lensing
techniques oﬀer a very realistic and exciting possibility of measuring neutrino
masses down to the scale indicated by neutrino oscillations.

• We enthusiastically support theoretical and computational eﬀorts that integrate
the latest results in astronomy, astrophysics, cosmology, particle physics, and nu-
clear physics to constrain the properties of neutrinos and elucidate their role in
the universe.

• We enthusiastically support the scientiﬁc goals of the current program in
galactic and extra-galactic neutrino astrophysics experiments, including Super-
Kamiokande, AMANDA, and NT-200 deployed in Lake Baikal. Furthermore, we
endorse the timely completion of projects under construction, such as IceCube,
undersea programs in the Mediterranean, ANITA, and AUGER.

44

Figure 11: Results are shown for the neutrino ﬂux (solid red line) predicted by a model of D.V.
Semikoz and G. Sigl (JCAP 0404:003 (2004) [hep-ph/0309328]), compared to existing limits (hori-
zontal lines labeled by the experiments). This model is chosen to produce the largest neutrino ﬂux
compatible with both the cosmic ray (red data points, blue dotted lines) and gamma ray data (red
data points, green dashed lines), yet it remains beyond the reach of current experiments. A new
generation of experiments is needed to test these very important predictions, as well as to begin to
survey the ultra-high energy universe for new sources.

• Though solar neutrinos were not in our purview, we endorse the conclusion of the
Solar/Atmospheric Working Group that it is important to precisely measure solar
neutrinos, and strongly support the development of techniques which could also
be used for direct dark matter detection.

45

6.7 Executive Summary of the Theory Discussion Group

participants: S. Antusch, K. S. Babu, G. Barenboim, Mu-Chun Chen, S. Davidson, A. de Gouvˆea,
P. de Holanda, B. Dutta, Y. Grossman, A. Joshipura, J. Kersten, Y. Y. Keum, S. F. King, P.
Langacker, M. Lindner, W. Loinaz, I. Masina, I. Mocioiu, S. Mohanty, R. N. Mohapatra, H.
Murayama, Silvia Pascoli, S. Petcov, A. Pilaftsis, P. Ramond, M. Ratz, W. Rodejohann, R. Shrock,
T. Takeuchi, T. Underwood, F. Vissani, L. Wolfenstein

6.7.1

Introduction

Various oscillation experiments, from solar and atmospheric to reactor and accelerator neutrinos
have conclusively established that neutrinos have mass and mix. Thanks to these experiments, we
now know: (i) the rough magnitude of the leptonic mixing angles (two of the three are large and
a third one relatively small) and (ii) that the masses of all three neutrino species are exceedingly
small compared to charged fermion masses. This very small amount of information has already
served as a source of great excitement as it provides the ﬁrst (and currently only) evidence of
physics beyond the standard model. The discovery of neutrino masses also raises hope that one
of the fundamental mysteries of the cosmos – why there is more matter than anti-matter? – may
be eventually resolved through a better understanding of neutrinos. There are, however, other
fundamental neutrino properties, related to their masses, about which we do not have information
yet. To elevate our knowledge of neutrinos to the same level as that of the quarks, the theory
discussion group has attempted to provide a prioritized list of the essential properties of neutrinos
needed for this purpose. This would surely shed essential light on the nature of the new physics
beyond the standard model as well as, perhaps, the origin of matter. The key questions whose
answers we do not know are:

1. Are neutrinos their own anti-particles?

2. What is the pattern of neutrino masses ?

3. Is there CP violation in the leptonic sector?

4. Are there additional neutrino species as may be hinted by the LSND experiment?

On the theoretical side, while there are several diﬀerent ways to understand small neutrino masses,
the seesaw mechanism, which introduces a set of heavy “right-handed neutrinos,” appears to be
the most appealing. Existing data do not provide any way to verify if this idea is correct. A key
question here is whether the seesaw scale is near the grand uniﬁcation scale where all forces are
expected to unify or much lower.

Before listing our recommendations, we very brieﬂy discuss some of what we should learn from
the results of various future neutrino experiments: (i) Searches for neutrinoless double beta
decay: A positive signal would teach us that lepton number (or more precisely the B − L quantum

46

number), which is an accidental symmetry of the standard model in the absence of neutrino masses,
is violated. This would provide fundamental information, and would serve as a crucial milestone
in searches for new physics. The popular seesaw mechanism predicts that neutrinos are their own
antiparticles, and the observation of neutrinoless double beta decay would solidify it as the leading
candidate explanation for the origin of neutrino masses. The observation of a positive signal in the
foreseeable future would also also imply the quasi-degenerate or inverted hierarchy for the neutrino
masses. The quasi-degenerate pattern would suggest some special mechanism

for mass generation, possibly type II (Higgs triplet) seesaw, such

as can emerge in SO(10) grand uniﬁed theories (GUTs). On the other hand, the absence of

evidence for neutrinoless double beta

decay would rule out the inverted and quasi-degenerate mass-hierarchies, if the experiments
reach an ultimate sensitivity of < mee >≃ 15 − 50 meV and if neutrinos are Majorana particles.
Furthermore,

if at the same time KATRIN observes a positive signal, we would learn that neutrinos are
Dirac fermions. This fact would have far reaching implications for theory. It would, for example,
contradict the predictions of the seesaw theory.

(ii) Determination of the mass hierarchy: This can obtained, for example, from long
baseline oscillation experiments An inverted mass hierarchy (m2
2), may be interpreted to
mean that leptons obey a new (only slightly broken) symmetry: Le − Lµ − Lτ , which would raise
doubts about quark-lepton symmetry, which is a fundamental ingredient of GUTs, such as SO(10).
A normal mass hierarchy (m2
2), on the other hand, is expected in generic seesaw models,
including most SO(10) GUT that address fermion masses and mixing. (iii) Measurement of θ13:
The next most important search item is the magnitude of θ13, which can be obtained, for example,
from reactor neutrino experiments as well as long baseline accelerator neutrino experiments.

3 ≪ m2

3 ≫ m2

1, m2

1, m2

θ13 turns out to be one of the most clear discriminators among various models of neutrino
masses. Simple symmetry arguments suggest that there are two possible ranges for θ13: θ13 ≃
q∆m2
atm ≃ 0.04. Of course, the magnitude of θ13 also
determines whether other fundamental questions (including “is there leptonic CP violation?” and
“what is the neutrino mass hierarchy?”) can be experimentally addressed via neutrino oscillations.

atm ≥ 0.1 or θ13 ≃ ∆m2

⊙/∆m2

⊙/∆m2

(iv) CP violation and origin of matter:

One may argue that CP violation in the leptonic sector is expected, as strongly suggested by the
presence of a large CP phase in the quark sector. We believe, however, that detailed experimental
studies are required in order to determine the mechanism for leptonic CP-violation (assuming it
exists!). The observation of leptonic CP-violation would enhance the possibility that the matter
asymmetry of the Universe was generated in the lepton sector by demonstrating that CP violation
exists among leptons. However, there is no unambiguous connection: the absence of CP-invariance
violation in the light neutrino sector, for example, would not imply that enough baryon asym-
metry cannot be generated via the leptogenesis mechanism. It turns out, however, that models

47

for leptogenesis generically imply observable CP-invariance violation in the leptonic sector. (v)
Extra neutrinos: If the LSND anomaly is conﬁrmed by MiniBooNE, a substantial change in our
understanding of high energy physics will be required. One potential interpretation of the LSND
anomaly is to postulate the existence of (at least one) extra, “sterile” neutrino. This would be a very
concrete hint for new physics, beyond the traditional seesaw, GUTs, etc. If MiniBoone conﬁrms
the LSND anomaly, the most important task will be to explore the nature of this phenomenon. It
may turn out that LSND (and MiniBooNE) have uncovered some even more exotic phenomenon.
(vi) Other issues: Precision measurements of the solar neutrino spectrum can also provide useful
information about the detailed nature of matter eﬀects on neutrino propagation in the Sun as well
as sources of energy generation there. Similarly reactor searches for magnetic moment of neutrinos
can also provide signals of physics beyond the standard model such as possible extra dimensions or
new physics at TeV scale.

In this Working Group, approaches that focus on the following primary physics questions are

addressed:

work?

• Is our model of neutrino mixing and oscillation complete, or are there other mechanisms at

To test the oscillation model, we must search for sub-dominant eﬀects such as non-standard
interactions, make precision comparisons to the measurements of other experiments in dif-
ferent regimes, and verify the predictions of both the matter eﬀect and vacuum oscillation.
The breadth of the energy spectrum, the extremely long baselines, and the matter densities
traversed by solar and atmospheric neutrinos make them very diﬀerent than terrestrial exper-
iments, and hence measurements in all three mixing sectors—including limits on θ13—can be
compared to terrestrial measurements and thus potentially uncover new physics.

• Is nuclear fusion the only source of the Sun’s energy, and is it a steady state system?

Comparison of the total energy output of the Sun measured in neutrinos must agree with the
total measured in photons, if nuclear fusion is the only energy generation mechanism at work.
In addition, the comparison of neutrino to photon luminosities will tell us whether the Sun is
in an approximately steady state by telling us whether the rate of energy generation in the
core is equal to that radiated through the solar surface—the heat and light we see today at
the solar surface was created in the interior ∼ 40,000 years ago, while the neutrinos are just
over eight minutes old.

• What is the correct hierarchical ordering of the neutrino masses?

Atmospheric neutrinos which pass through the Earth’s core and mantle will have their transfor-
mation altered due to the matter eﬀect, dependent upon the sign of the ∆m2
32 mass diﬀerence.
Future large scale water Cerenkov experiments may be able to observe this diﬀerence in the
ratio of µ-like to e-like neutrino interactions, while magnetized atmospheric neutrino exper-
iments may be able to see the eﬀect simply by comparing the number of detected νµ to ¯νµ
events.

48

6.7.2 Recommendations

We very strongly recommend the following experiments, that will shed light on the issues discussed
above. We make the conservative assumption that MiniBooNE will not conﬁrm the LSND anomaly:

1. Double beta decay searches, which will shed light on whether neutrinos are their own anti-

particles;

2. Oscillation experiments capable of precisely measuring all oscillation parameters, including the

neutrino mass hierarchy, θ13 and, ultimately, CP-violation;

3. Finally, we recommend that all resources be provided to Mini-Boone until a satisfactory reso-

lution of the LSND puzzle is obtained.

49

B APS Study Origins, Committees, Glossary

B.1 The APS Multi-Divisional Neutrino Study

To answer the very interesting questions raised by the discovery of neutrino mass, an eﬀective,
coherent strategy is needed. To foster the development of such a strategy, the American Physical
Society’s Divisions of Nuclear Physics and of Particles and Fields, together with the Divisions of
Astrophysics and the Physics of Beams, have sponsored this yearlong Study on the Physics of
Neutrinos. The study has endeavored to identify the most important open questions, to evaluate
the physics reach of various proposed ways of answering them, and to determine an eﬀective, fruitful
U.S. role within a global experimental program. An important – if challenging – goal of the study
has been to achieve consensus regarding the future of neutrino physics.

A central element of the study has been its Working Groups, each deﬁned by an experimental
approach to answering the outstanding questions (see Table 2). After the study’s organizational
meeting, held in December, 2003 at Argonne National Laboratory, the working groups carried
out their activities autonomously, interacting with one another when appropriate to compare the
diﬀerent approaches to answering a given physics question, and to coordinate the attacks on related
questions. The working groups presented their ﬁndings at the ﬁnal joint meeting of the study,
held in June, 2004 in Snowmass, Colorado. Those ﬁndings are now embodied in the Working
Group Reports, the executive summaries of which appear in Appendix A of the present document.
The full texts may be found at http://www.interactions.org/neutrinostudy. The meeting in
Snowmass featured extensive discussion of the working group recommendations and of the study
participants’ opinions.

With the working group ﬁndings and the discussion in Snowmass as input, a Writing Committee
(see Table 2) has created the present ﬁnal report of the study. This report, The Neutrino Matrix,
is meant to integrate the working group ﬁndings into a coherent plan for the future that reﬂects
the consensus that was evident in Snowmass.

Overall guidance of the study has been provided by its Organizing Committee (see Table 2).
This committee planned the course of the study, and watched the progress of the Working Groups.
Together with the Working Group Leaders, it oversaw the ﬁnal stages of the study. The Writing
Committee submitted its draft ﬁnal report to the Organizing Committee members and Working
Group leaders, who could then ensure that this report appropriately reﬂects the views of the study
participants, and who bear ﬁnal responsibility for the report’s contents.

Further information on the study and links to the Working Group web pages may be found at

http://www.interactions.org/neutrinostudy.

50

B.2 Charge of the Study

The APS Divisions of Particles and Fields and of Nuclear Physics, together with the APS Divi-
sions of Astrophysics and the Physics of Beams, is organizing a year-long Study on the Physics of
Neutrinos, beginning in the fall of 2003. The Study is in response to the remarkable recent series
of discoveries in neutrino physics and to the wealth of experimental opportunities on the horizon.
It will build on the extensive work done in this area in preparation for the 2002 long range plans
developed by NSAC and HEPAP, as well as more recent activities, by identifying the key scientiﬁc
questions driving the ﬁeld and analyzing the most promising experimental approaches to answer-
ing them. The results of the Study will inform eﬀorts to create a scientiﬁc roadmap for neutrino
physics.

The Study is being carried out by four APS Divisions because neutrino physics is inherently
interdisciplinary in nature. The Study will consider the ﬁeld in all its richness and diversity. It
will examine physics issues, such as neutrino mass and mixing, the number and types of neutrinos,
their unique assets as probes of hadron structure, and their roles in astrophysics and cosmology. It
will also study a series of experimental approaches, including long and short baseline accelerator
experiments, reactor experiments, nuclear beta-decay and double beta-decay experiments, as well as
cosmic rays and cosmological and astrophysical observations. In addition, the study will explore
theoretical connections between the neutrino sector and physics in extra dimensions or at much
higher scales.

The Study will be led by an Organizing Committee and carried out by Working Groups. The
Organizing Committee will function as an interdisciplinary team, reporting to the four Divisions,
with signiﬁcant international participation. The Study will be inclusive, with all interested parties
and collaborations welcome to participate. The ﬁnal product of the Study will be a book (or e-book)
containing reports from each Working Group, as well as contributed papers by the Working Group
participants. The Organizing Committee and Working Group leaders will integrate the ﬁndings of
the Working Groups into a coherent summary statement about the future. The Working Groups
will meet as necessary, with a goal of producing the ﬁnal report by August 2004.

The overarching purpose of the Study is for a diverse community of scientists to examine the
broad sweep of neutrino physics, and if possible, to move toward agreement on the next steps toward
answering the questions that drive the ﬁeld. The Study will lay scientiﬁc groundwork for the choices
that must be made during the next few years.

B.3 Sponsors for domestic neutrino science

⊙ Department of Energy Oﬃce of High Energy Physics The mission of the High Energy Physics
(HEP) program is to explore the fundamental nature of matter, energy, space, and time.

⊙ Department of Energy Oﬃce of Nuclear Physics The DOE Nuclear Physics (NP) program
aims to understand the composition, structure, and properties of atomic nuclei, the processes
of nuclear astrophysics and the nature of the cosmos.

⊙ Department of Energy, National Nuclear Security Administration

51

Organizing Committee:

Stuart J. Freedman University of California, Berkeley Co-chair
Boris Kayser
Co-chair
Janet Conrad
Guido Drexlin
Belen Gavela
Takaaki Kajita
Paul Langacker
Keith Olive
Bob Palmer
Georg Raﬀelt
Hamish Robertson
Stan Wojcicki
Lincoln Wolfenstein Carnegie-Mellon University

Fermilab
Columbia University
University of Karlsruhe
University Autonoma de Madrid
University of Tokyo
University of Pennsylvania
University of Minnesota
Brookhaven National Lab
Max Planck Institute for Physics
University of Washington
Stanford University

Working Groups and Group Leaders:

Brookhaven National Laboratory
California Institute of Technology

Solar and atmospheric neutrino experiments:
Institute for Advanced Study
John N. Bahcall
Joshua R. Klein
University of Texas, Austin
Reactor neutrino experiments:
Gabriela Barenboim University of Valencia
Ed Blucher
University of Chicago
Superbeam experiments and development:
William Marciano
Douglas Michael
Neutrino factory and beta beam experiments and development:
Stephen Geer
Michael Zisman
Neutrinoless double beta decay and direct searches for neutrino mass:
Steven R. Elliott
Petr Vogel
Neutrino Astrophysics and Cosmology:
Steven Barwick
John Beacom
Theory:
Rabi Mohapatra

Fermilab
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

Los Alamos National Laboratory
California Institute of Technology

University of California, Irvine
Ohio State University

University of Maryland

Writing Committee

Columbia University
Janet Conrad
Steve Elliott
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Stuart J. Freedman University of California, Berkeley
Maury Goodman
Andr´e de Gouvˆea
Boris Kayser
Joshua R. Klein
Douglas Michael
Hamish Robertson University of Washington

Argonne National Laboratory
Northwestern University
Fermilab
University of Texas, Austin
California Institute of Technology

Chair

Table 2: Committees

52

⊙ National Science Foundation

⊙ National Aeronautics and Space Administration

B.4 Context: Related Studies and Reports

<> The Nuclear Science Advisory Committee’s long-range plan, “Opportunities in Nuclear Science:

A Long-Range Plan for the Next Decade.”
www.sc.doe.gov/henp/np/nsac/nsac.html

<> The High-Energy Physics Advisory Panel subpanel report on long-range planning, “The Sci-
ence Ahead: The Way to Discovery,” lays out a roadmap for the U.S. particle physics program
over the next 20 years, also known as the “Bagger-Barish” report.
doe-hep.hep.net/lrp panel/index.html

<> The DOE “Oﬃce of Science Strategic Plan” and the 20-year facilities roadmap, “Facilities for

the Future of Science: A Twenty-Year Outlook.”
www.sc.doe.gov/Sub/Mission/Mission Strategic.htm

<> The National Research Council (NRC) laid out 11 key scientiﬁc questions at the intersection
of physics and astronomy in a report entitled “Connecting Quarks with the Cosmos: Eleven
Science Questions for the New Century.”
www.nationalacademies.org/bpa/projects/cpu/report.

<> The OSTP report entitled “The Physics of the Universe: A Strategic Plan for Federal Research
at the Intersection of Physics and Astronomy” is the response of the White House to the NRC
Report “Connecting Quarks with the Cosmos.” One of its recommendations is that NSF and
DOE should collaborate to “identify a core suite of physics experiments” for research into
Dark Matter, neutrinos, and proton decay; and that NSF should take the lead on conceptual
development and formulation of a scientiﬁc roadmap for an underground laboratory facility.
www.ostp.gov/html/physicsoftheuniverse2

<> A National Research Council Report, “Neutrinos and Beyond: New Windows on Nature,”
addresses the scientiﬁc motivation for the Ice Cube project at the South Pole and for a multi-
purpose national underground laboratory.
books.nap.edu/catalog/10583.html

<> A HEPAP Subpanel Report, “Quantum Universe: The Revolution in 21st Century Particle

Physics” identiﬁes nine questions for particle physics.
interactions.org/cms/?pid=1012346.

<> A White Paper Report on Using Reactors to search for a value of θ13.

www.hep.anl.gov/minos/reactor13/reactor13

<> A Fermilab Report, “The Coming Revolution in Particle Physics ” Report of the Fermilab

Long Range Planning Committee.
www.fnal.gov/pub/today/directors corner/lrpreportﬁnal

53

B.5 Glossary of acronyms

• GALLEX - GALLium EXperiment

• AGS - Alternating Gradient Synchrotron,

accelerator at Brookhaven

derground Study

• GENIUS - GErmanium liquid NItrogen Un-

• AMANDA - Antarctic Muon And Neutrino

Detector Array

• ANITA - ANtarctic Impulse Transient An-

tenna

• ANTARES - Astronomy with a Neutrino
Telescope and Abyss environmental RE-
Search

• APS - American Physical Society

• BBN - Big Bang Nucleosynthesis

• BOONE - BOOster Neutrino Experiment

• CC - Charged Current neutrino event

• CDF - Collider Detector Facility

• GNO - Germanium Neutrino Observatory

• GUT - Grand Uniﬁed Theory

• GZK - Greisen Zatsepin Kuzmin cutoﬀ in

cosmic ray energy spectrum

• HELLAZ - HElium at Liquid AZzote tem-

perature

Panel

posal)

• HEPAP - High Energy Physics Advisory

• ICARUS - Imaging Cosmic and Rare Un-

derground Signals

• INO - Indian Neutrino Observatory (pro-

• JPARC - Japanese PArticle Research Cen-

• CERN - European Laboratory for Particle

ter

Physics

mixing matrix

• CKM - Cabbibo-Kobayashi-Maskawa 3x3

• CMB - Cosmic Microwave Background

• K2K - KEK to Super-Kamiokande

• KamLAND - Kamioka Liquid scintillator

Anti-Neutrino Detector

• KASKA - Kashiwazaki-Kariwa Reactor

• CHORUS - C(ERN) Hybrid Oscillation Re-

Neutrino (proposal)

search apparatUS

• CNGS - C(ERN) Neutrinos to Gran Sasso

Experiment

• KATRIN - KArlsruhe TRItium Neutrino

• CPT - Charge conjugation - Parity - Time

• LENS - Low Energy Neutrino Spectroscopy

reversal invariance

• CUORE - Cryogenic Underground Observa-

tory for Rare Events

• D0 - (D-zero) collider experiment at Fermi-

lab intersection region D0

• DOE - Department of Energy

• LEP - Large Electron Proton collider

• LMA - Large Mixing Angle Solution of the

Solar neutrino problem

• LSND - Liquid Scintillator Neutrino Detec-

tor

• MINERvA - Main INjector ExpeRiment

• EXO - Enriched Xenon beta-beta decay Ob-

(neutrino)-A

servatory

• FNAL - Fermi National Accelerator Lab

Search

• MINOS - Main Injector Neutrino Oscillation

54

• MOON - MOlybdenum Observatory for

• SLC - Stanford Linear Collider

Neutrinos

• SM - Standard Model of particles and ﬁelds

• MNSP - Maki Nakagawa Sakata Pontecorvo

3x3 mixing matrix

• SN(e) - Supernova(e)

• MSW - Mikheyev-Smirnov-Wolfenstein
for neutrino

eﬀect

matter-enhancement
oscillations

• MWE -Meters of Water Equivalent

• SNO - Sudbury Neutrino Observatory

• SPS - CERN Super Proton Synchrotron

• SSM - Standard Solar Model

• Super-Kamiokande - Super-Kamioka Nu-

• NC - Neutral Current neutrino event

cleon Decay Experiment

• NEMO - Neutrino Ettore Majorana Obser-

• SUSY - SUper SYmmetry

• NOvA - NuMI Oﬀ-axis (neutrino) Appear-

periment at JPARC

• T2K - Tokai to Kamioka long-baseline ex-

vatory

ance

• WMAP - Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy

• NOMAD - Neutrino Oscillation MAgnetic

Probe

Detector (CERN)

• NSF - National Science Foundation

• NuMI - Neutrinos at the Main Injector

• NuTeV - Neutrinos at the TeVatron

• OMB - Oﬃce of Management and Budget

• OPERA - Oscillation Project with

Emulsion-tRacking Apparatus

• OSTP - Oﬃce of Science and Technology

Policy

Panel

• QCD - Quantum ChromoDynamics

• P5 - Particle Physics Project Prioritization

• QE - Quasi-Elastic neutrino event

• R&D - Research and Development

• RICE - Radio Ice Cerenkov Experiment

• SAGE - (Soviet) russian American Gallium

Experiment

• SAGENAP - Scientiﬁc Assessment Group
for Experimental Non-Accelerator Physics

55

