5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
8
0
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Aesthetics and scarcity
A physics perspective on ornament∗

Karl Svozil†
Institut für Theoretische Physik, University of Technology Vienna,
Wiedner Hauptstraße 8-10/136, A-1040 Vienna, Austria

Human aesthetics is developed as a function of decryption. Decryption is analyzed in terms of computation,
thus providing some principles by which artists may design appealing virtual reality environments. While too
condensed coding makes a decryption of a work of art impossible and is perceived as chaotic by the untrained
mind, too regular structures are perceived as monotonous, too orderly and not very stimulating. It is also argued
that, due to human predisposition, aesthetics is inevitably based on natural forms.

PACS numbers: 89.20.-a,89.75.-k,01.70.+w
Keywords: Interdisciplinary applications of physics, complex systems, philosophy of science

dedicated to Hans Frank d. Jüngeren
painter, teacher and friend

I. SIMPLE QUESTIONS

Suppose you are in New York City, in midtown Manhattan, and you have ten minutes to spare. Where would you rather be:

on Park Avenue? or in Central Park? Don’t think about it - what is your ﬁrst reaction?

Park Avenue offers modernity; it is dominated by artistic structures created by valiant human imagination. Central Park offers
an artiﬁcial “natural” habitat, created by valiant human landscape gardening. Shouldn’t all the trees and plants of Central Park
appear boring compared to the magniﬁcence of Park Avenue’s skyscrapers?

Nonetheless, I suspect that many or perhaps even most people would prefer Central Park over Park Avenue for just idling
around. (I am not considering here the curiosity of suburbanites studying man-made canyons.) Why have so many people left
the city centres in favour of rural surroundings? Why is hiking and vacationing in beautiful natural habitats a means to refresh
our minds?

One could also ask where one would choose to live if one were in a galaxy far, far away, shaken by Star Wars: on the planet
Naboo? or on Coruscant? Again, I suppose most people would choose the natural beauty of Naboo (at least after the siege of
the Trade Federation is lifted).

Virtual realities - digitally created landscapes and habitats - may someday offer a chance to spend a holiday inside a totally
artiﬁcial environment created by the digital artist. At the present time, I suspect that most of us would dislike spending an
entire holiday in one of the current generation of virtual reality installations, and would in fact rather undergo the rigors of
travel in order to visit uncontrolled, natural spots far away. Would it not be much more risk-free, convenient, personalised,
funny, satisfactory and also cheaper to go virtual? The artist, then, will want to provide surroundings that people will ﬁnd most
pleasing, or else fail to attract customers and audience.

There may be a simple explanation for the human preference for the natural. This explanation runs against many modern
artistic philosophies, such as International Style architecture, “modern art” paintings and modern “classical” music, which upon
constant exposure may be either monotonous and dull, or irritatingly irregular and erratic, to the majority of people. For the
artist, the advantage of these styles is that they are systematic and may be implemented with relative ease. The aesthetics I
suggest, by contrast, may impose a high burden on those who create virtual human habitats.

II. AN AESTHETICS OF NATURE-BEAUTY

We propose that to a large degree aesthetics are derived from natural forms, both ontogenetically and phylogenically. The
human experience of art, at least where beauty and appreciative psychological responses are concerned, is informed by the
variations of natural forms such as clouds, rocks, leaves, waves, or the songs of birds. (Two such structures are depicted in

∗ Presented

at
http://www.timesup.org/laboratory/DataEcologies/index2005.html

the Data Ecology Workshop Part

at

II

†Electronic address: svozil@tuwien.ac.at; URL: http://tph.tuwien.ac.at/~svozil

the Time’s Up

laboratories

- Linz/Austria

12th

-

14th May.

URL

2

FIG. 1: Autumn foliage near Baden, Lower Austria, Oct. 15, 2000 (©Karl Svozil)

Figs. 1&2.) All human creations, in particular hermetic virtual realities, must cope with this human predisposition, which limits
the plasticity and adaptability of human perception. Regardless of the artistic motive, neglect of this condition may result in a
sense of provocation and ugliness for the person experiencing the creation.

One issue in the creation of virtual realities—and also in contemporary architecture and the arts in general—is the avoidance
of monotony and uniformity, despite the scarcity of available algorithmic, imaginative or monetary resources [42]. In this paper,
we will propose an aesthetics built upon what will be called “nature-beautyt’t’ (in German “das Naturschönet’t’ [43]). We will
speak of “natural entities,” by which we mean speciﬁcally traditional forms occurring in the natural human habitats of the past
or in the rural settings of the present [44].

One assumption of nature beauty is the heuristic law of decryption: every pattern and law will eventually be decrypted, and
the decryption process is central to the human aesthetic experience. The more complex a pattern in terms of description and

3

FIG. 2: Mount Everest as seen by MERIS at orbit # 09148 on Nov. 30th, 2003 (©ESA/MERIS)

production, the more difﬁcult is its decryption. For the person embedded in an aesthetic environment, if the decryption comes too
fast and easy the result will be boredom; conversely, if the decryption is too difﬁcult, the result will be perplexity and irritation.
Descriptional complexity can be characterised by the algorithmic information content [1, 2, 3]; i.e., by the length of the
shortest program able to generate that pattern or form. Computational complexity [4, 5, 6] is a measure for the amount of time
and memory (space) required to generate the pattern or form from the algorithm. For example, a very short subroutine of only a
few lines can generate a very large pattern or form, but it may take a very large amount of time and memory to accomplish this.
The resulting pattern, then, is descriptionally simple, but computationally complex.

4

A related principle is the heuristic law of aesthetic complexity. At one extreme, plain structures appear monotonous; at the
other extreme, totally stochastic structures appear irritating. That is to say, where patterns are simple and easily recognised, the
person experiencing them quickly loses interest; and equally true, where there is no recognisable pattern at all, the person will
also lose interest in the apparent randomness.

Art takes place in the region between monotony and irritation, between order and chaos. Of course, the mere absence of
monotony and randomness is no sufﬁcient criterion for art, but it can be safely stated that it is a necessary one. Any attempt to
push the artistic boundaries either towards monotony or towards stochasticity must consider the human mind, which might not
be sufﬁciently plastic to cope with the results.

Consider, for instance, the extremes of white noise and brown noise. White noise is a type of noise that is produced by
combining with equal weight all different frequencies together. White noise is thus characterised by a constant frequency
spectrum 1/ f 0 and is too stochastic and random to be perceived as music; it is extremely irritating to most human ears. Some
compositions by György Ligeti or John Cage may serve as examples, where a great deal of randomness is intentionally introduced
as a matter of style—a style that many people ﬁnd irritating and incomprehensible. At the other extreme, we have brown noise—
which takes its name from Brownian motion, the apparently random bouncing of molecules—exhibiting step-wise “random
walk” behaviour with a frequency spectrum 1/ f 2. Brown noise appears monotonous and boring.

At the mid-point between these extremes of noise, we ﬁnd what we might term “pure music,” which can be characterised by

a frequency spectrum of about 1/ f . This type of “noise” may be termed “fractal” or self-similar “noise” [7, 8, 9].

The term “noise,” of course, was coined to describe sound, but the statistical analysis is easily applied to any mode of
perception involving pattern recognition. For examples of “noise” in graphic or visual art, we may look to modernist paintings.
“White noise” in paintings would, of course, consist of a canvas painted over with an even, uniform coat of grey paint (and there
are some examples in modern art which very nearly approach this ideal). “Brown noise” would be random shapes or splotches in
random colours at random locations on the canvas (and, again, there are some modernist paintings which very nearly answer to
this description). “Fractal noise” in painting would consist of the regular and rigid application of self-similar patterns, along the
lines of the well-known images produced by the Mandelbrot set. Such images are common in some computer graphics. What
is the effect on the viewer of these types of “noise” when exhibited in paintings? Many viewers ﬁnd all of these varieties of
drawings to be incomprehensibly dull, which is to say lacking in any aesthetic quality at all [45].

“Noise” is descriptionally simple, even if computationally complex. Very few lines of code are required to produce an even
and uniform whiteness; or a random scattering of shapes; or an endless fractal pattern. For the artist, descriptional simplicity
(“very few lines of code”) means that he or she has relatively little thinking to do to produce the “art.” By contrast, nature-beauty
imposes heavy algorithmic costs on the creators of virtual realities and arts in general, requiring a structural richness that exceeds
the power of contemporary computers by orders of magnitude.

To illustrate, let us consider how Nature herself creates nature-beauty. In terms of algorithmic information content, it takes
about 4 million nucleotides (the basic molecules forming the nucleic acids DNA and RNA), and about 4 thousand genes, to
describe the simple bacterium Escherichia coli (E. coli). This is the genome of E. coli, which for present purposes we may
equate with lines of code and functional segments of code. Humans have about 1,000 times more nucleotides than E. coli
(around 3 billion), and an estimated 40,000 to 60,000 genes. Every cellular entity on earth can be assumed to lie within those
bounds. The phenotype—that is the bodily creature –generated from these codes is quite beyond the capability of contemporary
computers. Even “mere” protein folding remains one of the most difﬁcult computational challenges of our time. This compares
indirectly to the exorbitant computational resources needed to simulate an entire city in detail within a virtual reality.

Ultimately, the above theses will have to be corroborated or falsiﬁed by experience and neurophysiological modelling. They
relate, in some respects, to Chomsky’s system of transformational grammar. One of the possible tests would be to differentiate
between the ontogenetic and the phylogenetic parts of the thesis. Children who grow up in rural surroundings might, for instance,
show very similar aesthetic preferences when compared to urban children, although their environmental experiences vary widely.
The same should be true for people from very different environmental, cultural, social and ethnic backgrounds.

III. GARDEN GNOME VIRTUAL ARCHITECTURE?

Several arguments can be brought forward against an aesthetics build upon nature-beauty; some will be discussed below.

A. Kitsch: ridiculing nature-beauty

A clever demonstration directed against the aesthetics of nature-beauty has been devised by Udo Wid, a Viennese artist and
physicist. He planted a garden gnome into a ﬂower pot, such that only a very tiny upper part of its red cap was visible. The
gnome was surrounded by plants. Many people were actually taken in by this arrangement. This instalment seemed to prove
the absurdity of any claims of the existence of nature-beauty—after all, an aesthetics being blinded by a planted garden gnome
cannot possibly have any value.

5

However, I take Udo Wid’s example not as evidence against the theory of nature-beauty, but as just another indication of how
easily people can be seduced to perceive beauty while really being confronted with kitsch or even trash. One might even ask: so
what?

B. Ugliness as a by-product of progress

One artistic task is to expand upon existing forms, and sometimes such expansion results in provocation and even ugliness.

We might ask whether provocation and ugliness are the inevitable companions of aesthetic expansion.

I think not. Occasionally, provocation may accompany creativity, but it is not a necessary element of artistic quality. Some
groups of “artists” have made it to their primary business to provoke, so that the provocation itself is seen as sufﬁcient justiﬁcation
for the art [46].

Creativity that results in ugliness cannot properly be called progress, no matter how intellectually and spiritually challenging.
While the initial provocation may prove stimulating and produce some expansion in the artistic palette, the perpetuation of
ugliness on ever larger scales is not a promising programme [47].

C. Artistic dominance

Academically established schools of artistic taste have been able to dominate contemporary arts and architecture to a large
degree. However, the most successful and popular artistic creations of our time do not follow such conformist trends. For
instance, when the writer and director George Lucas and his team created dwellings for the Star Wars Episodes I and II, they
deliberately chose Renaissance-style palaces for the residence of the Queen of Naboo. Even for Coruscant, seat of government
for the Galactic Republic and the Empire that supplanted it, they invented an architecture not resembling any Bauhaus or other
academic style. Indeed, perhaps the most striking and effective cinematic use of the Bauhaus and International styles was in
connection with the terrors of Fritz Lang’s Metropolis. I would suggest that these styles are effective for a tale of horror precisely
because they make people uncomfortable [48].

Most of this critique is not entirely new [10, 11, 12], and neither is the attempt to recover beauty through natural forms. What
may be new is the idea that the limits of aesthetics may be due to the human condition, a heritage of how we perceive the world,
and the bounds imposed by algorithmic information and complexity.

D. Scarcity of resources

One of the most inﬂuential critiques of nature-beauty was formulated in 1908 by Alfred Loos in his pamphlet “Ornament
und Verbrechen” (English translation “Ornament and Crime”) [13]: ornamentation is expensive; and resources diverted to
decoration are wasted with regard to the functional value of the decorated objects. Those resources could for instance be much
better invested for leisure or for an increase in productivity. Loos’ principle can be pointedly stated by the following question:
why build one pretty house with ornamentation when you can have two ugly ones for the same price?

Such thoughts blended in well with Frederick Winslow Taylor’s “The Principles of Scientiﬁc Management” [14] written in
1911 in the USA, as well as the social fantasies of the Bolsheviks in the USSR. While such principles improved productivity
and had a substantial impact on the growth of the economic output, they also increased the monotony of work and the human
environment in general. Certain qualiﬁcations and beneﬁts of craftsmen such as variety, identity, signiﬁcance and autonomy were
abandoned. Charlie Chaplin’s “Modern Times” is a persiﬂage of these circumstances. The products became cheap, affordable
and disposable but at the same time monotonous, insigniﬁcant, dull and without charm. We should ask ourselves to what extent
this tradeoff between charm and abundance has been justiﬁed.

To give an example: for the functionalist, a street lamp is just a street lamp emitting light; nothing else. No matter how ugly
the lamp looks, as long as it serves its purpose by emitting light. If the total cost of ownership is low, all is well in functional
terms. What Loos and other modernists did not recognise was that any street lamp has an indispensable added value: by daylight,
it is perceived by everybody not according to its function as a street lamp, but as a kind of street furniture or decoration. At day,
the functional value of light emission is insigniﬁcant; what matters instead is the design itself.

The same applies to the decoration of facades. Ornamentation of buildings increases the cost of production and the efforts
that go into it without immediate functional value to the tenants; however, it serves another, equally valuable purpose to a much
greater audience: it appears pretty and beautiful. An avenue or a court framed by buildings which are ornamented looks less
monotonous and austere than the same avenue or court with plain facades. Without ornamentation, objects of everyday life
appear cheap and ugly.

One immediate reaction of customers is not to buy such things, to throw them away immediately, or at least to get rid of
them as soon as possible. This may be one of the reasons why American products often sold better than the same products from

6

the former Soviet block. In Eastern Europe, nobody attempted to imprint added values, because almost by Soviet deﬁnition,
the product needed to serve only its intended functional value. Prettiness became equated with bourgeois decadence [49]. And
as scarcity dominated, any incentive to buy and enjoy consumption was discouraged. Let me mention an anecdote: during an
extended visit to Moscow in 1986, I attended a performance of the Bolshoi theatre in the Kremlin. The audience virtually cried
out at a ball scene—they were so desperate for beauty and ornament! This is different from surplus societies and supply-sided
markets—at least for those who can afford—where added value is an important marketing factor.

A mere programmatic commitment to ornamentation does not solve the problem of its cost, though. After all, Loos did not
criticise ornamentation per se, but the extra cost associated with it, which is not met by any immediately recognisable functional
value. Loos even suggested using naturally ornamented panels and templates such as wood or stone as a substitute for expensive
human-crafted ornamentation.

Alas, natural ornamentation materials such as stones and wood are also expensive and not affordable by everyone (compare
recent laminate ﬂoorings carrying photo reproductions of wood). And as can be seen from the beautiful parquet ﬂooring recov-
ered recently in the Palais Liechtenstein, Vienna, depicted in Fig. 3, even laying natural panels requires high craftsmanship and
geometric sophistication.

The costs associated with aesthetics explain why the rich and the aristocracy have chosen to live in abundantly decorated en-
vironments, with beautifully crafted ornaments and art throughout history. Take the Roman villas, the palaces of the renaissance
and baroque periods as examples for an aesthetics affordable only to very few.

For the commoner, ornament and art has been hardly affordable throughout history. One of the most efﬁcient attempts to
improve this situation was the production of bentwood furniture on a large scale by Thonet and Kohn industries around 1900.
Although the general living conditions have improved dramatically, in this aesthetic respect, nothing has changed much: the
average citizen cannot afford beauty even today and lives in almost ridiculously styled environments mimicking ornamentation
[15].

Nevertheless, at least “ofﬂine,” not in real time, we seem to be nearing an ability to produce simple and affordable ornamenta-
tion, because we are able to geometrically generate and produce patterns, tiles, ornaments and structures which show sufﬁcient
sophistication and charm not to be immediately recognisable as either unacceptably monotonic or irritatingly irregular. Even so,
those tasks are extremely complex, and so we are better able to comprehend the magnitude of the problem. With many of the
existing Computer Aided Design programs it is, for instance, not even possible to compute the unwindings of simple smooth
non-ﬂat surfaces. And the computational resources consumed still exceed any realisation in real time. So, from the point of view
of present virtual reality modelling, true nature-beauty appears only in science ﬁction. But given the pace of advancement of
computer technology, this time will come; and we must get prepared for it.

E. What is abstract art?

Uranium 235 and the transuranium elements such as Plutonium 239 or Ununbium 277 are all natural. Nobody would call
such elements “abstract” just because they have not been available before their creations in reactors. Likewise, materials such
as concrete, carbon ﬁbres or glass panels are evidently natural, because they occur in nature after they have been produced by
human intervention. By the same token, the plastic explosive C4 (MilSpec: MIL-C-45010A), dioxin, or anthrax are all natural.
Moreover, a person familiar with arid grassland and tundra may ﬁnd a coral reef and water waves “abstract.” Nevertheless,
coral reefs and water waves are quite common on our planet. A painting depicting an object which has still to be designed and
invented appears to be only temporarily “abstract.”

So, one could argue that, as every conceivable form is natural in one way or the other, nature-beauty is arbitrary and ill-deﬁned.
Likewise, abstract art is not qualitatively different from other art forms. In this latter respect I would agree, although I do not
go along with the arbitrariness which is seemingly implied by the kind of omni-naturalness which results from too wide an
interpretation of natural forms. Natural habitats do exhibit extreme forms very seldom; they are rare exceptions rather than the
rule.

IV. STRATEGIES TO INTRODUCE RICHNESS

Several strategies have been applied to increase the aesthetic complexity and richness of virtual universes. Many can also be
found in nature. Some of them are mentioned below. By automation, all these superﬁcial strategies may contribute towards the
better acceptance of virtual realities and ornamented forms in general without requiring too much human effort.

7

FIG. 3: Parquet ﬂooring in the galery rooms of the Garden Palais Liechtenstein, late 18th century, Vienna, Austria (©Sammlungen des Fürsten
von und zu Liechtenstein, Vaduz. URL http://www.liechtensteinmuseum.at)

A. Randomness and mutation

8

True randomness is a hypothetical postulated resource nobody knows to exist. All “algorithmic random number generators”
by deﬁnition produce non-random output. Some random number modules have been proposed [16] and realised [17] on the
basis of physical processes such as quantum effects. Yet, it can be safely asserted that for all practical purposes of aesthetics,
pseudo-random number generators sufﬁce.

Alas, pure randomness is perceived as incomprehensible and irritating. For a demonstration, the reader should contemplate
the panel of random colour tiles in Fig. 4(a). Nevertheless, a certain randomisation may improve the perception of geometrical
forms, making them appear “less perfect” and “ideal” by “mutating” them.

B. Morphing and crossing of existing forms

This variation has been borrowed from Genetic Algorithms [22, 23, 24]. It is the deliberate use of natural forms such as leaves,
trees, waves and so on, morphing, crossing and blending them into existing functional and structural entities. The shape of Ionic
and Corinthian Capitals, as depicted in Fig. 5(c), are such examples. Imagine a Greek or Roman temple such as the Erechtheum
in Athens build in plain Bauhaus or International Style!

Permutations are a means to repeat one and the same formal message over and over again without repeating it syntactically.
Strictly speaking, it should be considered in the symmetry section below. One of the decisive features of permutations are
the reversibility, the “one-to-one-ness” of the associated transformations. Fig. 4(b) depicts a permutation pattern previously
generated in the context of quantum state discrimination [18, 19, 20, 27].

Self-similar “fractal” [28, 29, 30, 31] structures have been discussed intensively in the context of the creation authentically
looking landscapes [32] and architectural form [33, 34], as well as music [9]. As demonstrated by the image compression
techniques from iterated functions systems [35], fractals are generated by the successive iteration of certain non-linear mappings.
It should be realised however, that although fractal forms abound in nature, their virtually generated doubles often tend
to appear boring and artiﬁcial. A combination of fractal symmetry and random mutation may be a good recipe for creating
interesting patterns.

Repetition of patterns and reproduction of natural forms such as the ones in Fig. 4(c,e,g) may be a great design resource. It
should be noted that without any modiﬁcations such as mutation, the repetition of small structures can be decoded very easily
and thus may appear monotonous. One should, however, not underestimate the joy people experience by listening to something
they already know [36]!

Ornamentation by symmetric patterns is an ancient method. Contemporary mathematics offers a pandemonium of different
symmetric patterns [37], the formally most advanced being aperiodic tilings [21, 38]. Figs. 4(d,f,h,i) depict such aperiodic ﬂoor
tilings. These tilings would not have been possible a few years ago and therefore are not realized in any historic building.

V. HUMAN ART VERSUS COMPUTER GENERATED DESIGN VERSUS NATURE-BEAUTY

So far nothing has been said about human originality and artistic talent. Indeed, the more one attempts to argue for the
necessity and feasibility of automated creation of ornamentation in accord with nature-beauty, the more it becomes clear how
brilliant, gratifying and truly enjoyable human artistic expressions can be.

C. Permutation

D. Self-similarity

E. Repetition

F. Symmetry

9

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

FIG. 4: Raster graphics (a) from white noise; (b) from permutations in a quantum [18] and automaton [19, 20] state discrimination problem; (c)
from regular tessellation through repetition; (d) Tiling obtained from the projection of a dimensional hypercube with an algorithm by Grimm
and Schreiber [21]; (e-g) Tilings from an algorithm by Sremcevic and Sazdanovic (MathSource 4540); (h) Tiling from an algorithm by Lyman
P. Hurd (MathSource 595); (i) Ammann aperiodic tiling from an algorithm by Sasho Kalajdzievski (MathSource 4273);

10

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 5: (a) Greek ornament from the Chorage Monument of Lysicrates, Athens; by Lewis Vulliamy and reprinted by Owen Jones [25]; (b)
Greek ornament from left to right: upper part of a stele, termination of the marble tiles of the Pantheon; the upper part of a stele; by Lewis
Vulliamy and reprinted by Owen Jones [25]; (c) Roman Corinthian and Composite Capitals reduced from Taylor and Cresy’s Rome [26] and
reprinted by Owen Jones [25];

11

FIG. 6: Santino Bussi (1664-1736) Stucco detail in the Sala Terrena of the Garden Palais Liechtenstein, after 1700, Vienna, Austria
(©Sammlungen des Fürsten von und zu Liechtenstein, Vaduz. URL http://www.liechtensteinmuseum.at)

Consider, for example, the traditional ornaments collected by Owen Jones [25] and depicted in Fig. 5, the stucco created by
Santino Bussi and depicted in Fig. 6, and Jan Van Huysum’s bouquet of ﬂowers in Fig. 7. From these experiences it may appear
even questionable whether the automation of pattern formation will ever be capable to fully substitute or outperform human art.
One is reminded of similar debates in artiﬁcial intelligence research and the controversy between semantics and the associated
syntax, which has so vividly been expressed in Searle’s “Chinese room” metaphor [39, 40] against strong artiﬁcial intelligence;
or Weizenbaums artiﬁcial communicator “Eliza.”

In view of the preliminary nature of these issues, let me just ask a few questions: Is “algorithmic art” not a contradictio
in adjecto, an inconsistency in the adjective modifying a noun, as in “round square?” Why do modern biology books still use
drawings made by humans rather than photography? Is nature-beauty just the expression of deeper forms which are only revealed
by human artistic talent? Is the human mind capable of condensing the “essence” of natural form? That is, are natural forms
mere shadows of hidden objects as in Plato’s cave metaphor—and are artists capable of recognising the “real” objects behind
those shadows?—Maya covering an illusory world of the senses? What is it that makes Reality feel “so real? ” The song of a
nightingale is beautiful, but is Korngold’s “Violanta,” Bach’s “Matthäuspassion,” or Mahler’s “Sixth Symphony”, his “Song of
the Earth,” Schönberg’s “Gurrelieder,” Schreker’s “Irrelohe,” or Wagner’s “Tristan und Isolde” even more so? How is it possible
for those masters to distil and create beauty from their experiences? May this be indication for transcendence and dualism?

12

FIG. 7: Jan Van Huysum, Flowers (©Sammlungen des Fürsten von und zu Liechtenstein, Vaduz. URL http://www.liechtensteinmuseum.at)

VI. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK

13

We have argued for the necessity of ornamentation, decoration and the presence of nature-beauty as a precondition for aes-
thetic acceptance. We have discussed bounds from above and from below on artistic expression: art can neither exist in a
scheme dominated by chaos, randomness, arbitrariness and white noise, nor can it exist in a regime dominated by too much
order, monotony and dullness. Thereby, we have in mind statistical and algorithmic measures and methods to evaluate and
automatically generate ornamental forms.

For those desperate for beauty and surrounded by ugliness, let me add a quite simple advise: look upward to the sky and watch
the clouds pass by; go to the woods; take a pilgrimage, go walkabout! No despot so far in human history was able to eliminate
clouds, plants, the sunrise and sunset.

Another practical suggestion is the construction of a network of “green corridors” through city centers. These corridors should
be covered with lush vegetation and should allow pedestrians and probably also cyclists to traverse passages of ugly facades and
constructions, which would be effectively coated by natural ornamentation. Another possibility would be to systematically cover
great parts of city facades by plants.

Creating enjoyable habitats for the human mind by algorithmic methods presents a great challenge. Therefore, it is promising
and gratifying to look into the future of virtual reality modelling by also looking back at the traditions of form, decoration and
ornament. So much beauty is awaiting us in those universes when we have shaken off the armour of hatred for the forms which
we always loved and sought. By wisely maintaining our cultural as well as our human heritage in evenly suspended attention (to
borrow the wording “gleichschwebende Aufmerksamkeit” from Freudian psychoanalysis), it will be a liberation from a certain
kind of totalitarian modernity which, whenever dominant, has created deserts of monotony and ugliness, and a step forward to
enjoy ourselves within the universes which await us in the years to come.

Acknowledments

I would like to express my special thanks to Ross Rhodes for critically reading and revising the manuscript. Thanks go
also to (in lexicographic order) Tim Bo, Georg Franck-Oberaspach, Günter Krenn, Christian Schreibmüller, and Udo Wid for
discussions and references. Many ideas grew from a research cooperation with Klaus Ehrenberger of the Medical University of
Vienna on the coding and processing of stimuli by cochlear implants, a direct artiﬁcial interface to the cortex. Almost needless
to say, I take full responsibility for controversial statements. Reproductions of Figs. 3, 6, and 7 with kind permission of the
Sammlungen des Fürsten von und zu Liechtenstein.

[1] G. J. Chaitin, Information, Randomness and Incompleteness, 2nd ed. (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1990). This is a collection of G.

Chaitin’s early publications.

[2] G. J. Chaitin, Algorithmic Information Theory (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987).
[3] C. Calude, Information and Randomness—An Algorithmic Perspective, 2nd ed. (Springer, Berlin, 2002).
[4] C. H. Bennett, “Dissipation, Information, Computational Complexity and the Deﬁnition of Organization,” in Emerging Synthesis in

Science, D. Pines, ed. (Academic Press, New York, 1985).

[5] C. Calude, Theories of Computational Complexity (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1988).
[6] C. H. Bennett, “Logical Depth and Physical Complexity,” in The Universal Turing Machine. A Half-Century Survey, R. Herken, ed.

(Kammerer und Unverzagt, Hamburg, 1988).

[7] R. F. Voss and J. Clarke, “1/f noise in music and speech,” Nature 258, 317–318 (1975).
[8] R. F. Voss and J. Clarke, “1/f noise in music: music from 1/f noise,” Journal of Acoustical Society of America 63, 258–263 (1978).
[9] M. Gardner, “White and brown music, fractal curves and one-over- f ﬂuctuations,” Scientiﬁc American 238, 16–32 (1978). See also URL

http://www.seriouscomposer.com/TDML/tdml.htm.

[10] T. Wolfe, From Bauhaus to Our House (Farrar Straus Giroux, New York, 1981).
[11] Charles, Prince of Wales, A Vision of Britain: A Personal View of Architecture (Doubleday, London, New York, 1989).
[12] L. Krier, Architecture : choice or fate (Andreas Papadakis, Windsor, Berks, England, 1998).
[13] A. Loos, Ornament und Verbrechen (Academic Press, New York, 1908). URL http://www.neumarkt-dresden.de/PDF-Dateien/Loos.pd
[14] F. W.

Scientiﬁc Management

(Harper Bros.,

1911). URL

New York,

Principles

Taylor,

NY,

The

of

http://melbecon.unimelb.edu.au/het/taylor/sciman.htm.

[15] H. Koelbl and M. Sack, Das deutsche Wohnzimmer (Bucher, Luzern, 1980).
[16] K. Svozil, “The quantum coin toss—Testing microphysical undecidability,” Physics Letters A 143, 433–437 (1990). URL

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0375-9601(90)90408-G.

[17] T. Jennewein, U. Achleitner, G. Weihs, H. Weinfurter, and A. Zeilinger, “A Fast and Compact Quantum Random Number Generator,”

Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 71, 1675–1680 (2000). quant-ph/9912118.

14

[18] N. Donath and K. Svozil, “Finding a state among a complete set of orthogonal ones,” Physical Review A 65, 044,302 (2002). quant-

ph/0105046, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.65.044302.

[19] K. Svozil, “Quantum information via state partitions and the context translation principle,” Journal of Modern Optics 51, 811–819 (2004).

quant-ph/0308110.

[20] K. Svozil, “Finite automata models of quantized systems: conceptual status and outlook,” in Developments in Language Theory. Proceed-
ings of the 6th International Conference, DLT 2002, Koto, Japan, September 2002, M. Ito and M. Toyama, eds., pp. 93–102 (Springer,
Berlin, 2003). quant-ph/0209089.

[21] U. Grimm and M. Schreiber, “Aperiodic Tilings on the Computer,” in Quasicrystals - An Introduction to Structure, Physical Proper-
ties and Applications, J.-B. Suck, M. Schreiber, and P. Häussler, eds., pp. 49–66 (Springer, Berlin, 2002). cond-mat/9903010, URL
http://wftp.tu-chemnitz.de/pub/Local/physik/AperiodicTilings/.

[22] D. E. Goldberg, Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization & Machine Learning (Addison Wesley, Reading, MA, 1989).
[23] J. H. Holland, “Genetic Algorithms,” Scientiﬁc American 267(7), 44–50 (1992).
[24] M. Mitchell, An Introduction to Genetic Algorithms (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1996).
[25] O. Jones, The Grammar of Ornament (Day and Son, London, 1856).
[26] G. L. Taylor and E. Cresy, The Architectural Antiquities of Rome (London, 1821).
[27] K. Svozil, “Quantum information in base n deﬁned by state partitions,” Physical Review A 66, 044,306 (2002). quant-ph/0205031, URL

http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.66.044306.

[28] B. B. Mandelbrot, Fractals: Form, Chance and Dimension (Freeman, San Francisco, 1977).
[29] B. B. Mandelbrot, The Fractal geometry of nature (Freemann, San Francisco, 1983).
[30] K. J. Falconer, The Geometry of Fractal Sets (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1985).
[31] K. J. Falconer, Fractal Geometry (John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 1990).
[32] R. F. Voss, “Random Fractal Forgeries,” in Fundamental Algorithms fo Computer Graphics. NATO ASI Series. Volume 17, R. A. Earnshaw,

ed., p. 805 (Springer, Berlin, 1985).

[33] C. Bovill, Fractal Geometry in Architecture & Design (Birkhäuser, Boston, 1995).
[34] C. Jencks, The Architecture of the Jumping Universe (Acedemy Editions, London, 1995).
[35] M. Barnsley, Fractals Everywhere (Academic Press, San Diego, 1988).
[36] R. P. Feynman, The Character of Physical Law (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1965).
[37] B. Grünbaum and G. C. Shephard, Tilings and patterns (Freeman, New York, NY, 1987).
[38] M. Baake, “A guide to mathematical quasicrystals,” in Quasicrystals - An Introduction to Structure, Physical Properties and
Applications, J.-B. Suck, M. Schreiber, and P. Häussler, eds., pp. 17–48 (Springer, Berlin, 2002). math-ph/9901014, URL
http://www.arxiv.org/abs/math-ph/9901014.

[39] J. Searle, “Minds, Brains, and Programs,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3, 417–424 (1980).
[40] J. Searle, Minds, Brains, and Science (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1984).
[41] M. Bense, Programmierung des Schönen (Agis-Verlag, Baden-Baden, 1960).
[42] In particular, architecture suffers from austerities of form and lack of sophistication, which are sometimes externally imposed upon
the architects by ﬁnanciers and engineers, and which are sometimes self-inﬂicted in the name of style. Conversely, music and some
graphical arts have taken an entirely opposite turn towards an aggregation of complexity and the increase of information density per time
or space—in its extreme form promoting incomprehensible, irritating noise.

[43] Compare Hegel’s concept of “das Naturschöne” (“beauty of nature”) [41] which is contrasted to “das Kunstschöne” (“beauty of art”),
although Hegel used a top-down system based on the human mind and its superior artistic expression instead of the bottom-up approach
proposed here.

[44] We do not have in mind every form occurring in nature. For example, a concrete wall is also a natural form by an extended deﬁnition; but

we do not include it in our considerations, since we do not want to surrender to unbounded arbitrariness.

[45] To be fair, these forms have their adherents, and I take the relative popularity of these creations to be an indication of the utter ignorance
and obtuseness of audiences, who suspend their own standards and judgements, deferring to fashionable opinions. The poet Handke has
exempliﬁed such tendencies to the extreme in his play “Publikumsbeschimpfung” (Engl. translation “audience bashing”), which confronts
the benevolent and over-tolerant audience with absurd slander and insults. The author had the questionable privilege to see these principles
at work after he and his friend (presently a renown Viennese academic himself) re-enacted the “Publikumsbeschimpfung” in front of a
university audience of learned scholars and students plus company, which truly seemed to enjoyed the piece which obviously intended to
insult them; and even sat through the reading of three full pages of the Viennese phone book.—They did not give up; we gave up!
[46] In my opinion, this has less to do with art than the need to attract attention. With sufﬁcient publicity, artists may create a market for
their work; with sufﬁcient success, they may achieve an intellectual hegemony that effectively excludes dissidents from monetary and
academic resources.

[47] Here again, some would plead for an aesthetics of unbounded relativism, asserting that ugliness is a subjective experience. My answer
to them is rather simple: I do not think so! Having stated this, I acknowledge that the perfection of ugliness might be a stimulating
challenge, although not from an aesthetic point of view. Perhaps some Foundation for Relativism in Art might endow a challenge prize
for the designer who is able to create the ugliest and most offensive virtual universe possible.

[48] Let me state a harsh and personal reply to those artists and engineers who disguise an aesthetics which is based on natural forms: be
advised that most of your customers prefer natural habitats over simpliﬁed synthetic ones. You may like it or not, but those customers
will vote with their feet and their wallets against your shallow perception of modernity. You may be fairly successful in print; you may
win prizes and be selected in tenders by committees of peers; you may even be allowed or encouraged to build some similar creations
for which the 20th century has become so (in)famous: the structureless skyscrapers, the buildings made with pre-cast concrete slabs, and
the bunkers. But you will not achieve the thing that matters most, which is a virtual habitat in which people silently hang around and
pretentionless enjoy their living.

[49] On the contrary, consider the “repressance”-type architecture of the Stalin time, such as the main building of Lebedev University.

15

