Multifractal Fingerprints in the Visual Arts

J. R. Mureika
Email: jmureika@jsd.claremont.edu
W. M. Keck Science Center, The Claremont Colleges
925 N. Mills Avenue, Claremont, California 91711-5916

G. C. Cupchik
Email: cupchik@scar.utoronto.ca
Division of Life Sciences, University of Toronto at Scarborough
1265 Military Trail, Scarborough, ON Canada M2C 1A4

C. C. Dyer
Email: dyer@astro.utoronto.ca
Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Toronto
60 St. George Street, Toronto, ON Canada M5S 3H8

Abstract
The similarity in fractal dimensions of paint “blobs” in samples of gestural expressionist
art implies that these pigment structures are statistically indistinguishable from one an-
other. This result suggests that such dimensions cannot be used as a “ﬁngerprint” for
identifying the work of a single artist. To overcome this limitation, the multifractal spec-
trum is adopted as an alternative tool for artwork analysis. For the pigment blobs, it is
demonstrated that this spectrum can be used to isolate a construction paradigm or art
style. Additionally, the fractal dimensions of edge structures created by luminance gradi-
ents on the canvas are analyzed, yielding a potential method for visual discrimination of
fractally-similar paintings.

5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
1
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

The notion that Nature can be described by fractal geometry was ﬁrst
suggested by Benoit Mandelbrot [1]. A fractal is a recursive, self-similar
structure whose constituent parts in some way resemble the whole. Mathe-
matically, these are deﬁned as

N(d) ∝ dDF ,

(1)

Here, N(d) is a measure of the number of “objects” which comprise the
set at a viewing scale d, and DF is the fractal dimension, which can be
interpreted as a measure of the irregularity of the structure. Simple, smooth
shapes such as dots, circles, or spheres have fractal dimensions which coincide
with their Euclidean dimension. Conversely, a fractal is deﬁned by a non-
integer dimension which acts as a measure of the object’s roughness. For
example, a line has dimension 1, but if it becomes very jagged at many scale
levels, its dimension rises fractionally above this value - it has become a
fractal. If the line becomes so jagged and rough that it eﬀectively ﬁlls an
area, then it has a fractal dimension approaching 2.

A recent surge of interest in fractal geometric “ﬁngerprinting” of natural
phenomena has included the study of artistic style. The style in question
is gestural expressionism, a mid-twentieth century technique in which the
artist’s hand movements are guided by a philosophy of psychic automatism
and the resulting images are seemingly disordered and chaotic. Researchers
have proposed that a characteristic fractal dimension may be associated with
the work of Jackson Pollock, identifying the physical distribution of pigment
patterns as the associated fractal [2, 3, 4, 5]. If a distinctive fractal dimen-
sion could be uncovered for every artist, this would pave the way for a novel
form of artwork authentication. But is this technique suﬃcient to distin-
guish artists within the same gestural expressionist group, in this case be-
tween Jackson Pollock and the Quebec Automatistes, including artists such
as Marcel Barbeau and Jean-Paul Riopelle?

A comparison was made between two groups of 8 paintings by Pollock
and Les Automatistes. The images were digitized as 24-bit color ﬁles of sides
ranging between 1000-2500 pixels, and pigment patterns were ﬁltered out
according to a speciﬁed target color in RGB space (see Figures 1 and 2). A
variance in the values of the R, G, and B channels (each between 0-255 for
24-bit color) up to a speciﬁed distance from the target was allowed to account
for any small ﬂuctuations in the pigment shade. The fractal dimensions of
the resulting patterns were calculated by the standard box counting method

2

covering roughly 3 orders of magnitude of scale (1000 pixels to 4 pixels per
side), roughly several meters to a few millimeters in terms of the actual
canvas dimensions. As the patterns are a result of random monochromatic
pigment deposits we hereafter refer to them as “blobs”, an etymology based
on the “elongated blobs” of Julesz as distinguishable perceptual objects [6].
A one-way analysis of variance comparing the 8 Pollock (mean DF = 1.79)
with the 8 Automatistes (DF = 1.73) paintings indicated that the DF indices
were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent, F (1, 14) = 1.18 p < .30. This suggests that
the fractal dimension of drip paintings is not unique to any one artist and
cannot be used for any such type of authentication scheme.
It should be
noted that a more recent study [4] has found that a fractal box counting
analysis can diﬀerentiate between ﬁve Pollock and ﬁve non-Pollock images.
These results can be considered to be consistent with those reported in the
paper, since the non-Pollock images could be painted in such a way as to be
“non-gestural”. Future analysis can shed more light on this ﬁnding.

Since a single fractal dimension rarely represents the true structure of
natural objects, the multifractal spectrum of an image may provide a more
rigorous way to classify the style or construction paradigm of paintings associ-
ated with a particular group such as gestural expressionists. A multifractal is
a set whose form is a weave of overlapping self-similar conﬁgurations. These
geometric formulations have been shown to describe the physical organiza-
tion of a myriad of natural phenomena, ranging from tree root growth to
large-scale galaxy clustering [7, 8]. Unlike simple fractals, multifractals are
characterized by an inﬁnite set of dimensions {Dq} = {D0, D1, D2, . . .}, cal-
culated in a similar manner to DF , which determine the scaling structure as a
function of the local pattern density. The subscript q is generally an integer,
where q = 0 represents the classic fractal dimension (DF = D0). The regions
of densest clustering, represented by extremely large values of q (or q → ∞)
scale according to the dimension D∞ ≤ D0. These two statistics, and all
those in between, give a much deeper insight into the physical organization
of the object in question, and in fact can be used as a method of identifying
the associated formation mechanism (as was discussed in [9]). In the case of
a regular fractal, all multifractal dimensions {Dq} are equal to DF .

The multifractal spectra Dq were determined for the 8 Pollock (mean
D0 = 1.60) and 8 Automatistes (mean D0 = 1.58) paintings, and a one-
way analysis of variance reveals that these do not present a clearer means
of diﬀerentiation than the base dimension, F (1, 14) = 0.06, p < .80. The
gestural expressionist paintings by Pollock and the Automatistes were then

3

compared with 6 paintings chosen from a diﬀerent style, Artonomy or Sys-
tematic Art, created by Tsion Avital [10]. This alternate technique involves
creating paintings which are grouped in series according to strict rules of
transformation and are “meaningless” when individually taken out of con-
text. However, the individual paintings simply serve as a control in this
study. A sample of Avital’s Artonomy is shown in Figure 3.

For 6 of these systematic art images, the analysis derived a mean DF =
1.60 and D∞ = 1.58, suggesting instead a monofractal structure (DF =
D∞). This should be compared with the multifractal “depth” of the Pollock
and Automatistes works which show mean diﬀerences DF − D∞ = 0.19 and
0.15, respectively. This indicates that the set of dimensions {Dq} of paint
blobs can be used only to diﬀerentiate between “classes” of painting but not
conclusively between diﬀerent artists within the same class. The multifractal
spectrum is interpreted here as the signature of an artistic style [9].

How then can one distinguish between artists within particular stylistic
groups? It was noted that humans have a preference for fractals dimensions
of about 1.8 [2], suggesting that the gestural expressionists catered their craft
to this special dimension. However, according to Berlyne [11] test subjects
were found to have a visual propensity for images which are less complex,
or contain more symmetric and heterogeneous information. This fact was
more recently conﬁrmed independently by Taylor [5], who report that human
visual preference is tuned to DF ∼ 1.3. The images deemed “pleasing” in
reference [11] consist of regularly overlapping Euclidean shapes, which would
suggest a fractal dimension closer to (but greater than) 1. This poses the
very interesting question of why these artists gear their paintings to such
high values if they are not deemed “perceptually favorable”?

Moreover, if there is no appreciable diﬀerence between the base fractal
statistics for the pigment distributions, as in the case of the images in Figures
1 and 2, what is it about the paintings that can impart diﬀerent visual
sensations? In their seminal work, Hubel and Weisel (see e.g.
[12]) have
established the principle that the brain is naturally disposed to analyze visual
structures in terms of edges. A study of these edges on the canvases should
thus reveal new information about the perceptual nature of the artworks.

The standard RGB primary color decomposition can be seen as a re-
ﬂection of the eye’s sensitivity to speciﬁc wavelengths of light via the L,
M, and S cone cells. Following the notion of edge detectors in the brain, it
makes sense to approach the problem in a diﬀerent color space representation,
namely YIQ. This oﬀers an alternative method to decompose chromaticity

4

information in terms of luminance (Y), hue (I), and saturation (Q) instead
of red, green and blue primaries (see e.g.
[13] for further details on color
spaces).

The paintings by Jackson Pollock, Les Automatistes, and Tsion Avital
were compared in terms of luminosity gradients, which were obtained by
applying a Sobel ﬁlter to the luminance channel (Y) whose values again
range between 0 (black, no gradient) to 255 (white, high gradient). The
edge structure is deﬁned as the regions of strongest color contrast and the
associated fractal dimensions DF for each painting were obtained. In this
case, the DF of these patterns showed decided grouping, unlike those of the
physical paint blobs. A highly signiﬁcant diﬀerence was found for Pollock’s
edges (DF = 1.84) as compared to those of Les Automatistes (DF = 1.48),
F (1, 14) = 14.52, p < .002. The works of Jackson Pollock thus show highly
irregular edge structures (characterized by DF close to 2), compared with
those of Les Automatistes, while Artonomy’s edges possess very simple Eu-
clidean organization (DF roughly 1). It is therefore the irregularity of edges
that makes Jackson Pollock’s style unique and is representative of the degree
of “expressionism” in the painting.

The suggestion that patterns of similar fractal dimension are perceptually
indistinguishable can be related to the work of Julesz [6] who argues that tex-
ture discrimination in “eﬀortless” or “immediate” perception can only occur
for conﬁgurations whose autocorrelation power spectra are diﬀerent. Such
correlation statistics can be implicitly linked to the multifractal spectrum
(e.g. D2 is equivalent to the two-point correlation exponent, a structural
measure of “pair-clustering” between points on the image) and thus these
conclusions provide a natural extension of earlier ﬁndings.

The juxtaposition of blobs versus edges on the canvas provides two dis-
tinct structures in one painting. One facet of the image results from the
deposits of raw pigment on the canvas, while another facet has as its origins
the boundary between two adjacent colors. The similarity between these
deﬁnitions and one of Julesz’s fundamental classes of topological perception
units (coined textons in [6, 14], analogous to what we term blobs) lends fur-
ther support to the idea that these are visually discriminable patterns. In
fact, as the density of edges on the canvas increases, the edge structures
themselves become blobs. Mathematically, this is evident in the sense that
DF (or D0) are very close to 2.

A two-way mixed model ANOVA was conducted treating Artist (Pol-
lock/Les Automatistes) as a between-subjects variable and Structure (blob/edge)

5

as a within-subjects variable. A signiﬁcant two-way interaction of Artist and
Structure, F (1, 14) = 5.51, p < .03, shows that the blobs and the edges that
they create are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for Pollock (see Figure 4). This
equivalence of mean fractal dimensions implies a “symmetry” between in-
distinguishable components which form a cohesive whole. However, for the
Automatistes, the density of edges is signiﬁcantly less than the density for
blobs. There is thus a breakdown in the structural symmetry in this case,
yielding a perceptual “conﬂict” of two nested but distinguishable character-
istics of the painting. Thus, for the Pollock paintings, the viewer transitions
eﬀortlessly between blobs and edges, but not so for Les Automatistes.

The contrast between edges and blobs has ﬁgured prominently in art
historical analysis as the “linear versus painterly dimension” discussed in
[15]. While the linear is characteristic of classical art styles which favor clear
edges and structured space, the sketchy baroque and impressionist styles are
more painterly, encouraging viewers to complete an image. The linear versus
painterly dimension has also consistently emerged as the primary one under-
lying perceptual discriminations between pairs of paintings. This applies to
paintings selected across a broad spectrum of traditions [16, 17] as well as
those produced by Avital’s Systematic Art approach [18].

In sum, this new study has shown that Jackson Pollock is unique within
gestural expressionism because of the irregularity or degree of roughness of
edges underlying the structure of his paintings. It is precisely the disposition
of the brain to discriminate edges [8] that makes it so sensitive to this fractal
property in Jackson Pollock. The fact that fractality is a property of the
whole implies that order is discerned in seeming chaos and this may provide a
foundation for the pleasure experienced by some when viewing his paintings.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by grants from the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada. The image Reﬂections of the Big Dipper (1947)
by Jackson Pollock (Figure 1(a)) was provided by Art Resource, NY, and
has been reproduced with the permission of the Artists Rights Society. We
graciously thank Tsion Avital for the permission to reproduce his works in
Figure 3.

6

References

Co., 1983)

[1] B. B. Mandelbrot, The Fractal Geometry of Nature (W. H. Freeman and

[2] R. P. Taylor, A. P. Micolich, D. Jonas, “Fractal Analysis of Pollock’s

Drip Paintings”, Nature 399, 422 (3 June 1999)

[3] R. P. Taylor, A. P. Micolich, D. Jonas, “The Construction of Fractal

Drip Paintings”, Leonardo 35 (2), 203-207 (2002)

[4] R. P. Taylor, “Order in Pollock’s Chaos”, Scientiﬁc American, 116-121

(December 2002)

[5] R. P. Taylor, “Architect Reaches for the Clouds”, Nature 410, 18 (2001)

[6] B. Julesz, “Figure and Ground Perception in Brieﬂy Presented Isodipole
Textures”, Perceptual Organization, M. Kubovy and J. R. Pomerantz
(Eds.), (Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1981), pp.27-54

[7] T. Vicsek, Fractal Growth Phenomena, World Scientiﬁc Press, Singapore

(1989)

[8] F. Sylos Labini, M. Montuori, L. Pietronero, “Scale Invariance of Galaxy

Clustering”, Phys. Rep. 293, 61-226 (1998)

[9] J. R. Mureika, Topics in Multifractal Analysis of Two- and Three-
Dimensional Structures in Spaces of Constant Curvature, Doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Toronto (2001)

[10] T. Avital, Artonomy: Systematic Art, doctoral dissertation, Hebrew

University, Jerusalem (1974)

[11] D. E. Berlyne, Aesthetics and Psychobiology, Appleton-Century-Crofts,

Meredith Corporation (1971)

[12] D. H. Hubel, T. N. Weisel, “Receptive ﬁelds, binocular interaction and
functional architecture in the cat’s visual cortex”, J. Physio. 160 (1),
106-154 (1962)

[13] J. Foley, A. van Dam, S. Feiner, J. Hughes, Computer Graphics: Prin-
ciples and Practice (second edition in C) (Addison-Wesley, 1996)

7

[14] B. Julesz and P. Burt, presented at the 20th annual meeting of the

Psychonomic Society, Phoenix, AZ, November 8-10, 1979

[15] H. Wolﬄin, Principles of Art History: The Problem of the Development

of Style in Later Art (Dover, New York, 1950)

[16] D. E. Berlyne and J. Ogilvie, “Dimensions of Perception of Paintings”, in
Studies in the New Experimental Aesthetics: steps toward an objective
psychology of aesthetic appreciation, D.E. Berlyne (Ed.) (Hemisphere,
Washington, DC, 1974), 181-226

[17] G. C. Cupchik, “An Experimental Investigation of Perceptual and Stylis-
tic Dimensions of Paintings Suggested by Art History”, in Studies in the
New Experimental Aesthetics: steps toward an objective psychology of
aesthetic appreciation, D. E. Berlyne (Ed.) (Hemisphere, Washington,
DC, 1974), 235-257

[18] T. Avital and G. C. Cupchik, “Perceiving Hierarchical Structures in
Nonrepresentational Paintings”, Emp. Stud. Arts 16 (1), 59-70 (1998)

8

Copyright credits:
Reﬂections of the Big Dipper (1947), Pollock, Jackson (1912-1956)
c(cid:13) 2003 The Pollock-Krasner Foundation/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New
York; Stedelijk Meuseum, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

9

Figure 1: Reﬂections of the Big Dipper (1947), by Jackson Pollock. Image
progression shows (A) original painting, (B) blob structure (black pigment)
and (C) luminance edge structure (white regions).

10

Figure 2: Tumulte (1973), Les Automatistes. (A) blob and (B) edge struc-
ture.

11

Figure 3: Example of Systematic Art, by Tsion Avital (A) Raw image (B)
Edge structure.

12

Figure 4:
DF of blob and edge structure.

Interaction of artist and structure for average fractal dimension

13

