5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
8
0
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ground Control to Niels Bohr: Exploring Outer

Space with Atomic Physics

Mason A. Porter and Predrag Cvitanovi´c∗

July 25, 2013

To the Sun and Back

8 August 2001 was an exciting day for scientists studying nonlinear dy-

namics. With a trajectory designed using techniques from the theory of

dynamical systems, NASA launched the spacecraft Genesis towards the Sun

to collect pieces of it (called solar wind). When Genesis completes its mission

(see Fig. 1), scientists may determine not only the composition of the Sun

but also whether Earth and the other planets have the same constituents.

The samples collected by the Genesis mission of NASA’s Discovery program
∗Mason Porter is a Visiting Assistant Professor in the School of Mathematics and a

Research Associate Member of the Center for Nonlinear Science at Georgia Institute of

Technology. Predrag Cvitanovi´c is the Glen Robinson Chair in Nonlinear Science in the

School of Physics at Georgia Institute of Technology. The authors acknowledge Shane

Ross and Turgay Uzer for useful discussions and critical readings of this paper. They also

thank Jerry Marsden and Thomas Bartsch for providing them with their preprints. MAP

also acknowledges support provided by an NSF VIGRE grant awarded to the School of

Mathematics at Georgia Tech.

1

will be studied extensively for many years now that the spacecraft has re-

turned some of its souvenirs to Earth. A sample return capsule, containing

the ﬁrst extraterrestrial matter returned by a U.S. spacecraft since 1972,

was released by Genesis on 8 September 2004 and arrived at the Johnson

Space Center in Houston, TX on 4 October. It was subsequently announced

in March 2005 that ions of Solar origin were indeed present in one of the

wafer fragments [9, 13].

M. Lo of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, who led the development of the

Genesis mission design, worked with Caltech mathematician J. Marsden,

Georgia Tech physicist T. Uzer, and West Virginia University chemist C.

Jaﬀ´e on the statistical analysis of transport phenomena. Why? The Genesis

trajectory constitutes a highly unstable orbit (controlled by the Lagrange

equilibrium points) of the infamous celestial three body problem studied by

H. Poincar´e and others. Some of the most dangerous near-earth asteroids

and comets follow similar chaotic paths, which have the notorious property

that they can be resolved with numerical simulations only up to some ﬁnite

time.

In a turn of events that would have astonished anyone but N. Bohr,

we now know that chaotic trajectories identical to those that govern the

motions of comets, asteroids, and spacecraft are traversed on the atomic

scale by highly excited Rydberg electrons [6, 7, 8, 22, 18]. This almost perfect

parallel between the governing equations of atomic physics and celestial

mechanics implies that the transport mechanism for these two situations is

virtually identical: On the celestial scale, transport takes a spacecraft from

one Lagrange point to another until it reaches its desired destination. On

the atomic scale, the same type of trajectory transports an electron initially

trapped near the atom across an escape threshold (in chemical parlance,

2

Figure 1: Planned trajectory for the Genesis spacecraft, whose several-year

mission is to collect charged particles from the solar wind and return them

to Earth. The trajectory was chosen to take Genesis suﬃciently far away

from Earth’s geomagnetic ﬁeld so that solar wind samples could be collected

before interacting with that ﬁeld. It reached the ﬁrst Lagrange point (L1) on

16 November 2001, setting up ﬁve halo loops about L1 (lasting 30 months)

3
that began the scientiﬁc portion of the mission. Sample collection lasted

from 3 December 2001 until 1 April 2004. Genesis released its sample return

capsule on 8 September 2004 (which arrived on 4 October) and then headed

back to L1, which it was scheduled to leave in February 2005, after which it

was slated to begin orbiting around the Sun just inside Earth’s orbit. (Figure

courtesy Roby Wilson, Jet Propulsion Laboratory/California Institute of

across a “transition state”), never to return. The orbits used to design space

missions thus also determine the ionization rates of atoms and chemical-

reaction rates of molecules!

Recent work [18, 19, 20] also oﬀers hope that researchers may eventually

overcome one of the current outstanding challenges of nonlinear science: how

does one describe chaotic dynamics in systems with many degrees-of-freedom

but still too few to be amenable to the methods of statistical physics? The

concept of “chaos” is well-understood only for low-dimensional systems, as

few methods deal successfully with higher-dimensional dynamics. Transition

state theory is one such tool.

The large-scale chaos present in the Solar System is weak enough that the

motion of most planets appears regular on human time scales. Nevertheless,

small celestial bodies such as asteroids, comets, and spacecraft can behave

in a strongly chaotic manner, and it is important to be able to predict

the behavior of populations of these smaller celestial bodies not only to

design gravitationally-assisted transport of spacecraft but also to develop a

statistical description of populations of comets, near-Earth asteroids, and

zodiacal and circumplanetary dust [8].

This is precisely the challenge faced by atomic physicists and chemists

in computing ionization rates of atoms and molecules. In brute force ap-

proaches, this is accomplished via large numerical simulations that track

the orbits of myriad test particles with as many interactions as desired. In

practice, however, such techniques are computationally intensive and con-

vey little insight into a system’s key dynamical mechanisms. A theoretically

grounded approach relies on transition state theory [8]. “Transition states”

are surfaces (manifolds) in the many-dimensional phase space (the set of

all possible positions and momenta that particles can attain) that regulate

4

mass transport through bottlenecks in that phase space; the transition rates

are then computed using a statistical approach developed in chemical dy-

namics [18]. In such analyses, one assumes that the rate of intramolecular

energy redistribution is fast relative to the reaction rate, which can then be

expressed as the ratio of the ﬂux across the transition state divided by the

total volume of phase space associated with the reactants.

In the next few sections, we’ll delve a bit deeper into this story. We

start with an introduction to transition state theory and then show how

this theory from atomic and molecular physics can be used on the much

grander celestial scale. We then close with some recent extensions and a

brief summary.

Back in the Saddle Again

Before heading oﬀ into outer space, we need to examine things on a much

smaller scale—namely, simple chemical reactions between ions and small

molecules.

Transition state theory has its origins in early 20th century studies of the

dynamics of chemical reactions. Consider, for example, the collinear reaction

between the hydrogen atom H and the hydrogen molecule H2 in which one

hydrogen atom switches partners.

In the 1930s, Eyring and Polanyi [3]

studied this chemical reaction, providing the ﬁrst calculation of the potential

energy surface of a reaction. This surface contains a minimum associated to

the reactants and another minimum for the products; they are separated by

a barrier that needs to be crossed for the chemical reaction to occur. Eyring

and Polanyi deﬁned the surface’s “transition state” as the path of steepest

ascent from the barrier’s saddle point. Once crossed, this “transition state”

5

q
1

p
1

(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

p
2

(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

q
2

p
n

(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:1)(cid:1)

q
n

Figure 2: The linearized dynamics of a transition state. One degree-of-

freedom yields a pair of real eigenvalues of opposite sign (shown by the saddle

projection on the left), and the others give pure imaginary conjugate pairs

of eigenvalues (indicated by the center projections) The blue trajectories in

the left panel are reactive, whereas the green ones are not.

could never be recrossed.

The notion of a transition state as a “surface of no return” deﬁned in

coordinate space was immediately recognized as fundamentally ﬂawed, as

recrossing can arise from dynamical eﬀects due to coupling terms in the

kinetic energy. (See Ref. [6] for further historical details.) Pechukas demon-

strated that the surface of minimum ﬂux, corresponding to the transition

state, must be an unstable periodic orbit whose projection onto coordinate

space connects the two branches of the relevant equipotentials [14]. As a

result, these surfaces of minimum ﬂux are called “periodic orbit dividing

surfaces” or PODS.

Despite the speciﬁcity of the H2+H ⇋ H+H2 reaction, a transition state

is a very general property of Hamiltonian dynamical systems describing how

a set of “reactants” evolves into a set of “products” [24]. Transition state

theory can be used to study “reaction rates” in a diverse array of physical

situations, including atom ionization, cluster rearrangement, conductance

through microjunctions, diﬀusion jumps in solids, and (as we shall discuss)

6

celestial phenomena such as asteroid escape rates [6, 7, 8, 22].

E. Wigner recognized very early that in order to develop a rigorous

theory of transition states, one must extend the notions above from con-

ﬁguration space to the phase space of positions and momenta [22, 23].

(Each position-momentum pair constitutes one of the system’s “degrees-

of-freedom” [DOF].) The partitioning of phase space into separate regions

corresponding to reactants and products thereby becomes the theory’s goal,

progress towards which has required advances in both dynamical systems

theory and computational hardware.

For two DOF Hamiltonian systems, the stable and unstable manifolds of

the orbit discussed provide an invariant partition of the system’s energy shell

into reactive and nonreactive dynamics. The deﬁning periodic orbit also

bounds a surface in the energy shell (at which the Hamiltonian is constant),

partitioning it into reactant and product regions. This, then, deﬁnes a

surface of no return and yields an unambiguous measure of the ﬂux between

reactants and products.

In systems with three or more DOF, however,

periodic orbits and their associated stable and unstable manifolds do not

partition energy shells (their dimensionality is insuﬃcient) [11], so one needs

to search instead for higher-dimensional analogs of PODS [22].

Consider an n DOF Hamiltonian system with an equilibrium point, the

linearization about which has eigenvalues

, where
±
R. That is, we are considering situations in which the stable and

2 , . . . , n

iωj, j

∈ {

λ,

±

λ , ωj

}

∈

unstable manifolds are each one-dimensional. (There exist chemical reac-

tions with higher-dimensional stable and unstable manifolds, but theoretical

chemists do not really know how to deal with them yet.) Also assume that

the submatrix corresponding to the imaginary eigenvalues is symmetric, so

that its complexiﬁcation is diagonal. One can then show that in the vicinity

7

of the saddle point, the normal form of this Hamiltonian is [5]

H = λq1p1 +

(p2

i + q2

i ) + f1(q2, . . . , qn, p2, . . . , pn, I)

n

Xi=2

ωi
2

+ f2(q2, . . . , qn, p2, . . . , pn) ,

(1)

where (q1, . . . , qn, p1, . . . , pn) are the canonical coordinates, I := q1p1, and

the functions f1 and f2 are at least third order and account for all the nonlin-

ear terms in Hamilton’s equations. Additionally, f1(q2, . . . , qn, p2, . . . , pn, I) =

0 when I = 0. Although (1) is constructed locally, it continues to hold as

parameters are adjusted until a bifurcation occurs.

The simplest example is the linear dynamical system with Hamiltonian

H =

1
2

p2
ξ −

κ2
2

ξ2

+

1
2

n

Xi=2

(p2

i + ω2

i q2
i )

(2)

consisting of n

1 decoupled linear (“harmonic”) oscillators and a decoupled

−

saddle point, which can be obtained from the linearization of (1) by a rota-

tion in phase space (see Fig. 2). The ﬁrst DOF (ξ, pξ) gives the “reaction

coordinates” and the other n

1 DOF are “bath coordinates.” A trajectory

−

is called “reacting” if ξ changes sign as one traverses it.

Such considerations can be generalized from this linear situation to the

fully nonlinear Hamiltonian (1) needed to describe chemical reactions by

considering higher-dimensional analogs of saddle points called normally hy-

perbolic invariant manifolds (NHIMs) [22, 21]. The descriptor ‘normally hy-

perbolic’ means that in the linearization of (1), the growth and decay rates

of the dynamics normal to the NHIM (constituting the “reaction”) dominate

the growth and decay rates of the dynamics tangent to the NHIM, which

is obtained as follows: The dynamics of (1) are described by the (2n

1)-

−

dimensional energy surface H = constant > 0. If p1 = q1 = 0, it follows

8

that ˙q1 = ˙p1 = 0, which yields a (2n

2)-dimensional invariant manifold,

−

whose intersection with the energy surface gives the NHIM. The (q1, p1) co-

ordinates describe the directions normal to the NHIM. Additionally, NHIMs

persist under perturbations, so one can transform back from (1) to the origi-

nal Hamiltonian system derived by physical or chemical considerations. The

stable and unstable manifolds of the NHIM are known explicitly and act as

impenetrable (invariant) boundaries between reactive and nonreactive tra-

jectories [22].

Before proceeding, let’s consider the example of hydrogen ionization in

crossed electric and magnetic ﬁelds, as described by the Hamiltonian

H(x1, x2, x3, P1, P2, P3) =

(P 2

1 + P 2

2 + P 2
3 )

1
2

+

1
2

(cid:20)

−

1
R
1
8

(x1P2

x2P1) +

(x2

1 + x2
2)

−

ǫx1

√ǫ

,

(cid:21)

−

−

(3)

where R =

(x1 + √ǫ)2 + x2

2 + x3

3. The equilibrium at the origin has two

imaginary pairs of eigenvalues and one real pair, so it’s a center-saddle-

p

center. The Hamiltonian (3) can be transformed to its normal form, whose

lowest order term is

H2 = µx1P1 +

(x2

2 + P 2

2 ) +

(x2

3 + P 2

3 ) .

(4)

ω1
2

ω2
2

As required, the saddle variables (x1, P1) appear only in the combination

x1P1, so a NHIM can be constructed as discussed above and one can easily

study which trajectories react and which do not.

9

Hitchhiking the Solar System with Bohr and Poincar´e

Volume 7 (1885-86) of Acta Mathematica included the announcement that

King Oscar II of Sweden and Norway would award a medal and 2500 kroner

prize to the ﬁrst person to obtain a global general solution to the n-body

celestial problem [2]. Henri Poincar´e, then thirty-one years old, had long

been fascinated with celestial mechanics. His ﬁrst paper, published in 1883,

treated some special solutions of the 3-body problem. The following year,

Poincar´e published a second paper on the topic, but he had not touched

celestial mechanics since then. Nevertheless, he had developed new qualita-

tive techniques for studying diﬀerential equations that he felt would provide

a good intuitive basis for his attempt to solve the n-body problem.

In the treatise that resulted from his attempt to win King Oscar II’s

prize [15, 16, 17], Poincar´e laid the foundations for dynamical systems the-

ory, developing integral invariants to prove his recurrence theorem, a new

approach to periodic solutions and stability, and much more. Some of his

results clashed with his prior intuition, and there were others that he felt

were true but that he was unable to establish rigorously (the world would

have to wait for the likes of G. Birkhoﬀ, S. Smale, and others). After more

than two years of working on the n-body problem, the solution began to take

shape. One of the problem’s secrets was revealed by the 3-body problem:

Poincar´e proved that there did not exist uniform ﬁrst integrals other than

H = constant, so that even the 3-body problem could not be “integrated.”

Chaos was here to stay!

Now that we have discussed the mathematics of transition states, let’s

see how they can help us not only on atomic problems but also on celestial

ones. To do this, we will use the old adage that the same equations have

10

the same solutions: Namely, a suitable coordinate change transforms the

Hamiltonian describing the celestial restricted three body problem (RTBP)

into the Hamiltonian (3) describing hydrogen ionization in crossed electric

and magnetic ﬁelds [8]. The term “restricted” is used when the mass of one

body is assumed to be so small that it does not inﬂuence the motion of the

other two bodies, which follow circular orbits around their center of mass.

It is also assumed that all three orbits lie in a common plane [2, 10].

In conventional coordinates, the RTBP is described by the Hamiltonian

H =

(p2

x + p2
y)

1
2

(xpy

ypx)

−

−

1

µ
−
r1 −

µ
r2 −

1
2

−

−

µ(1

µ) = E ,

(5)

where E is the energy, r1 =

the masses of the bodies are ms = 1

−
is chosen so that one thinks of ms as the Sun’s mass and mp as a planet’s

(x + µ)2 + y2, r2 =

(x

1 + µ)2 + y2, and

−
µ and mp = µ < ms. (The notation

p

p

mass.) The coordinate system rotates with the period of Jupiter about the

Sun-Jupiter center of mass. The Sun and Jupiter are located respectively, at

µ, 0) and (1

(
−
relative to the Sun and the planet is (x, y).

−

µ, 0). The position of the the third body (say, an asteroid)

An example is provided by Jupiter’s comets such as Oterma which shut-

tle back and forth between complex heliocentric orbits lying, respectively,

interior and exterior to Jupiter’s orbit [8] (see Fig. 3). (Oterma lies in the

same energy regime as Shumaker-Levy 9, so it is destined to one day crash

into Jupiter.) Jupiter often temporarily ‘captures’ such comets while they

make these transitions. The interior orbits are generally near a 3:2 reso-

nance, with Oterma making three revolutions about the Sun for every two

solar revolutions of Jupiter (in the inertial frame), whereas the exterior ones

are near a 2:3 resonance. In a frame rotating with Jupiter, the transition

between resonances occurs in a “bottleneck” region in conﬁguration space.

11

Figure 3: Resonance transition of the Jovian comet Oterma. (a) The dy-

namics in heliocentric coordinates. (b) The dynamics in a reference frame

rotating with Jupiter. (c) Magniﬁed view of the bottleneck region from (b).

(Figure courtesy Shane D. Ross, University of Southern California.)

12

The celebrated “Jacobi integral” (a constant of motion) provides a dy-

namical invariant that divides phase space into reactant (interior) and prod-

uct (exterior) regions, which are separated by the narrow bottleneck con-

taining Jupiter and two of the Lagrange points, L1 and L2. The passage

of celestial bodies like comets through the bottleneck is then regulated by

phase space structures near L1 and L2, which are both saddle points. The

transition states in this problem, controlling transport through the bottle-

neck and hence the conversion of “reactants” to “products,” are the periodic

orbits around L1 and L2. With these structures identiﬁed, C. Jaﬀ´e et al.

have accurately computed average transport rates (corresponding to aster-

oid escape rates) using Rice-Ramsperger-Kassel-Marcus theory and checked

the predicted rates against large-scale numerical simulations [8].

Meanwhile, Back on Earth...

The story doesn’t end with the work discussed in this note. On the practical

side, discussions at NASA are currently underway about the possibility of an

extended Genesis mission that would keep the spacecraft in the Earth-Moon

system for the next several years [9].

On the theoretical side, the mathematics, physics, and chemistry com-

munities remain hard at work. Recent discoveries include a computational

procedure based on NHIMs to detect high-dimensional chaotic saddles in

three DOF Hamiltonian systems (and the application of this technology to,

for example, the three-dimensional Hill’s problem) [19], mathematical re-

ﬁnements of earlier constructions of transition states [20], and the eﬀect of

noise on transition states [1]. Current work on space mission design in-

cludes the use of set-oriented methods and ideas from graph theory to go

13

beyond transition state theory [12] and the merging of tube dynamics with

a Monte Carlo approach to examine the invariant manifolds emanating from

transition states [4].

It is a time-honored scientiﬁc tradition that the same equations have

the same solutions. When it comes to 3-body problems, this implies that

the same chaotic trajectories that govern the motions of comets, asteroids,

and spacecraft are traversed on the atomic scale by highly excited Rydberg

electrons. Such unanticipated connections between microscopic and celes-

tial phenomena are not only intellectually gratifying but also have practical

engineering applications in the aerospace and chemical industries. More-

over, the progress made would hardly be conceivable without this particular

mix of specialists recruited by M. Lo. Clearly, chemists, astronomers, and

mathematicians have much to discuss!

Additionally, while it is paramount in many problems to slay the dragon

of chaos so that order can reign, just the opposite is true here—the goal is to

create a big enough (chaotic) saddle and ride this dragon on the (Normally

Hyperbolic) Invariant Manifold Superhighway! The Genesis mission shows

that chaos can, in fact, be good.

References

[1] T. Bartsch, R. Hernandez, and T. Uzer, The transition state in

a noisy environment. Submitted, February 2005.

[2] F. Diacu and P. Holmes, Celestial Encounters: The Origins of

Chaos and Stability, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1996.

14

[3] H. Eyring and M. Polanyi, On simple gas reaction, Zeitschrift f¨ur

physikalische Chemie B, 12 (1931), pp. 279–311.

[4] F. Grabern, W. S. Koon, J. E. Marsden, and S. D. Ross, The-

ory and computation of non-RRKM lifetime distributions and rates in

chemical systems with three or more degrees of freedom. Submitted,

February 2005.

[5] J. Guckenheimer and P. Holmes, Nonlinear Oscillations, Dynami-

cal Systems, and Bifurcations of Vector Fields, No. 42 in Applied Math-

ematical Sciences, Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, 1983.

[6] C. Jaff´e, D. Farrelly, and T. Uzer, Transition state in atomic

physics, Physical Review A, 60 (1999), pp. 3833–3850.

[7] C. Jaff´e, D. Farrelly, and T. Uzer, Transition state theory with-

out time-reversal symmetry: Chaotic ionization of the hydrogen atom,

Physical Review Letters, 84 (2000), pp. 610–613.

[8] C. Jaff´e, S. D. Ross, M. W. Lo, J. Marsden, D. Farrelly, and

T. Uzer, Statistical theory of asteroid escape rates, Physical Review

Letters, 89 (2002), No. 011101.

[9] Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Genesis: Search for origins. genesis-

mission.jpl.nasa.gov, April 15, 2005.

[10] W. S. Koon, M. W. Lo, J. E. Marsden, and S. D. Ross, Hetero-

clinic connections between periodic orbits and resonance transitions in

celestial mechanics, Chaos, 10 (2000), pp. 427–469.

15

[11] A. J. Lichtenberg and M. A. Lieberman, Regular and Chaotic

Dynamics, No. 38 in Applied Mathematical Sciences, Springer-Verlag,

New York, NY, 2nd ed., 1992.

[12] J. E. Marsden and S. D. Ross, New methods in celestial mechanics

and mission design. In preparation, May 2005.

[13] National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Genesis and

the search for origins.

www.nasa.gov/mission pages/genesis/main,

[14] P. Pechukas, Dynamics of Molecular Collisions, Plenum, New York,

April 15, 2005.

NY, 1976, ch. 6, Part B.

[15] H. Poincar´e, New Methods of Celestial Mechanics, Volume I: Peri-

odic Solutions, The Non-existence of Integral Invariants, Asymptotic

Solutions, Dover Publications, New York, NY, 1957.

[16]

, New Methods of Celestial Mechanics, Volume II: Methods of New-

comb, Gylden, Lindstedt, and Bohlin, Dover Publications, New York,

NY, 1957.

992.

[17]

, New Methods of Celestial Mechanics, Volume III: Integral In-

variants, Periodic Solutions of the Second Type, Doubly Asymptotic

Solutions, Dover Publications, New York, NY, 1957.

[18] T. Uzer, C. Jaff´e, J. Palaci´an, P. Yanguas, and S. Wiggins,

The geometry of reaction dynamics, Nonlinearity, 15 (2002), pp. 957–

[19] H. Waalkens, A. Burbanks, and S. Wiggins, A computational

procedure to detect a new type of high-dimensional chaotic saddle and

16

its application to the 3D Hill’s problem, Journal of Physics A: Mathe-

matical and General, 37 (2004), pp. L257–L265.

[20] H. Waalkens and S. Wiggins, Direct construction of a dividing sur-

face of minimal ﬂux for multi-degree-of-freedom systems that cannot be

recrossed, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General, 37 (2004),

pp. L435–L445.

[21] S. Wiggins, Normally Hyperbolic Invariant Manifolds in Dynamical

Systems, Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, 1994.

[22] S. Wiggins, L. Wiesenfeld, C. Jaff´e, and T. Uzer, Impenetrable

barriers in phase space, Physical Review Letters, 86 (2001), pp. 5478–

5481.

[23] E. Wigner, Calculation of the rate of elementary association reactions,

Journal of Chemical Physics, 5 (1937), pp. 720–725.

[24]

, The transition state method, Transactions of the Faraday Society,

34 (1938), pp. 29–41.

17

