5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
0
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fundamental particles and their interactions

by

B. Ananthanarayan
Centre for High Energy Physics,
Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560 012, India

Abstract

In this article the current understanding of fundamental particles and
their interactions is presented for the interested non-specialist, by adopt-
ing a semi-historical path. A discussion on the unresolved problems is
also presented.

2

3

6

7

7

8

10

10

Contents

1 Introduction

2 The electron and the nucleus

3 Radioactivity and the weak force

4 Particle zoology

5 The strong force

6 Synthesis

7 Acknowledgements

8 Further Reading

1

1 Introduction

The subject of this article is to present a sketch of the understanding we have
today of what we consider to be fundamental particles and the interactions
between them. By adopting a semi-historical path, we shall meander through a
century or so of discoveries which have led to the establishing of the currently
accepted picture and outline some of the outstanding unsolved problems of this
picture.

At a semantic level, one is accustomed to a unique principle or object as
being fundamental. However, in the title of this talk, one has already invoked
the plural for both particles as well as interactions. This latter has been imposed
on us by all that has been established through decades of observations and
experiments, and runs somewhat contrary to the notions of philosophers who
sought to ﬁnd a unique building block, e. g. Democritos of Greece who called
this the ‘atom’, or ancient Indian philosophers who spoke of anu in a similar
spirit. Although the name atom has been appropriated by chemistry, and today
we know of 92 atoms associated with all the naturally occuring elements, the
idea of such an elementary or fundamental atom is an intriguing one. It must
be mentioned that the picture that will be presented in this discussion is one
that stands in this year 2005, and yet has to be replaced by another picture, if
current day and future experiments reveal more elementarity. The picture we
present today will then stand as an approximation to what is now an unknown
fundamental theory.

It is easy to list the interactions, which are the electromagnetic, weak, strong
and gravitational interactions1. Of the fundamental particles the only one that is
familiar in day to day life is the electron, whose presence is known from a myriad
daily experiences, as most devices that one uses implicitly uses the properties
of this fundamental particle. In daily experience, this particle interacts through
the electromagnetic interactions.

This year 2005, is the ‘Year of Physics 2005’ and commemorates three re-
markable discoveries of A. Einstein in the year 1905, namely those of the dis-
covery of the theory of Brownian motion, the special theory of relativity, and
the photo-electric eﬀect. The latter proved unequivocally that associated with
the electromagnetic interactions was a ‘quantum’ that was to be later called the
photon. The heuristic picture of the electromagnetic interactions that was to
emerge is one where electrically charged particles would exchange such photons
between themselves which would give rise to the eﬀective force between them.
Note that the idea of a ‘particle’ associated with light dates back to I. Newton,
who spoke of a ‘corpuscular theory’, which was replaced by the ‘wave picture’ in
light of discoveries of diﬀraction phenomena of C. Huygens. In modern quantum
theory, the ‘particle-wave’ duality is an inevitable feature.

In the 1905 work of Einstein is also one of the most famous equations of
all time, the energy-mass equivalence E = mc2. It is on this equation that the
principle of nuclear energy is based, i.e., that in certain nuclear reactions, part
1The theoretical framework that describes the ﬁrst three is referred to as the ‘standard

model’.

2

of the mass of the nuclei that participate in the reactions is released as energy.
[This is in contrast to chemical reactions, where binding energies of molecules is
liberated in a chemical reaction.] On the other hand, if particles are accelerated
to very high energies in a controlled manner, and are brought to a collision,
in such reactions, the energy could be converted into mass of the daughters
of the reaction process. Einstein’s theory also predicts that for every particle,
there are so-called ‘anti-particles’, e.g., for the electron there is a ‘positron’
which is like an electron in every respect, except that its electric charge is of the
opposite sign. That this should be the case was discovered by P. A. M. Dirac
who was studying a relativistic generalization of Schr¨odinger’s equation in order
to describe the motion of an electron. His studies led him to an equation which
seemed to admit solutions that did not permit a conventional interpretation.
Although he was himself hesitant to suggest his equation required that the
electron have a partner, the situation was clariﬁed by the experimental discovery
by C. Anderson of a particle that was identical to an electron, except that it
had a positive electric charge, in cosmic ray experiments. A photon, on the
other hand, is its own anti-particle. Therefore new kinds of particles could
be produced in this manner, subject to certain conservation laws2, and their
interactions studied. This is the basis of many experiments today. In the past,
very energetic particles from other parts of the cosmos, so-called cosmic rays
would enter the earth’s atmosphere and interact with the nuclei of the atoms
therein and produce showers of well known and new kinds of particles which
could then be detected in terrestrial or balloon borne detectors.

2 The electron and the nucleus

When one spells out the word electromagnetic interaction, it is manifestly a
union of two other forces known through antiquity, viz., the electric and mag-
netic forces. It is worth spending a little time on the etymology of word ‘electric’
which comes from the latin word electrum for amber, a substance formed from
wood resin, and from which electric forces could be generated by rubbing. An-
cient humans were accustomed to electric forces generated by the formation of
clouds and the subsequent lightning bolts. Magnetic forces were also known by
the time of the Greeks due to the property of magnetized ore that could be used
as ‘lodestones’ and were mined in the Magnesia prefecture of Thessaly, one of
the thirteen peripheries of Greece. It was through the work in recent history,
in the 18th and 19th centuries, of C. A. Coulomb, C. F. Gauss, H. C. Øersted,
M. Faraday, A. M. Amp`ere, culminating in the work of J. C. Maxwell, that it
was shown that electricity and magnetism are manifestations of a uniﬁed elec-
tromagnetic force, which is experienced by electrically charged and magnetized
objects. With the advent of the quantum theory of M. Planck which was further
developed by N. Bohr, E. Schr¨odinger and W. Heisenberg a new theory would
2For instance, protons and neutrons belong to a family of particles known as ‘baryons’.
If an electron and positron are collided, then the reaction products must contain for every
baryon produced, an anti-baryon.

3

have to be found to generalize ‘classical’ electromagnetism of Maxwell.

The discovery of the electron itself as a fundamental charged particle is
attributed to the renowed English physicist J. J. Thomson who discovered it
in the year 1897, and came to be known as the father of the electron. He had
established the charge to mass ratio of the electron. Subsequently, the famous
‘oil-drop’ experiment of R. A. Millikan allowed one to determine the electronic
charge and it was established the mass of the electron3 is 0.511 MeV/c2.

It may also be noted here that the electron carries ‘spin’ 4 which is an
intrinsic property of elementary particles and has a value that is denoted by
¯h/2. A photon on the other hand carries a spin of ¯h. Electrons are examples of
fermions, named for the Italian physicist E. Fermi since they obey ‘Fermi-Dirac’
statistics, while photons are examples of bosons, named for the famous Indian
physicist S. N. Bose, as they obey ‘Bose-Einstein’ statistics.

Having measured some of the basic properties of the electron, Thomson
needed to understand why atoms are electrically neutral under most circum-
stances, and how they may be ionized. He advanced a picture of a watermelon
like atom where a positively charged medium would have embeddeed in it, the
negatively charged electrons, much as the watermelon seeds, and the net charges
would cancel out. This plausible picture was subjected to experimental tests by
the eminent scientist E. Rutherford. By taking a thin gold foil and bombarding
it with so-called α−particles arising from the radioactive decay of certain natu-
rally occuring elements, and by counting the scattered particles, he was able to
establish that there was an uncommonly large number of backward scattering
events of the projectiles. The only way of understanding this was to replace
the watermelon picture of Thomson with one where the entire positive charges
were concentrated in a very small region, later to be called a nucleus which
would be constituted of both the ‘protons’ as well as ‘neutrons’, so that an α−
particle projectile would essentially pass unhindered if it did not pass near the
vicinity of the nucleus, or would suﬀer a head-on collision and turn around and
be scattered in a backward direction.

Thus Rutherford came to be regarded as the father of the nucleus, and also
the father of the proton, the particle associated with the Greek word, protos,
meaning ﬁrst.
In other words, Rutherford advanced the picture of the atom
being consituted of these fundamental particles, a picture which was soon revised
with the discovery by J. Chadwick of what was named as the ‘neutron’ which
was another consitutent of nuclei. Nevertheless, the picture that stayed with us,
3The unit chosen here is common in elementary particle physics: the M stands for Mega
which is equal to a million and eV stands for electron-volt, the energy gained by an electron
when it falls through a potential of 1 Volt. We have divided MeV by c2, to express the
mass in terms of its energy equivalent via the Einstein relation. For future reference, another
convenient unit is GeV, where G stands for Giga which equals a billion. We shall not use the
conventional units here, which are cumbersome for our purposes; e.g, the mass of the electron
in these units is 9.11 × 10−31 kg.

4The constant ¯h ≡ h/(2π) is a fundamental quantity of nature, where h is called Planck’s
constant. In particular, a photon γ of frequency ν carries energy Eγ = hν. Note that angular
momentum has the same units as energy×time, which is why the spin is associated with the
same unit.

4

until the 1950’s was that only protons, neutrons (collectively known as nucleons)
and electrons were fundamental particles. In particular, it was established that
the masses of the proton and neutron are 938.2 MeV/c2 and 939.6 MeV/c2
respectively. These also each carry spin of ¯h/2.

A word now about the quantum electrodynamics, the full relativistic quan-
tum ﬁeld theory describing the interactions of electrons and the photon. This
is the theory which explains the quantum motion of an electron in the ﬁeld set
up by another charged particle, which is heuristically imagined as the exchange
of photons between the electron and say another electron which would be the
source of the ﬁeld (so-called Møller scattering). One would understand the scat-
tering of an electron in such a ﬁeld; furthermore, it would also be possible to
understand how an electron and a positron could annihilate each other by pro-
ducing energy brieﬂy as a photon which could then produce another electron
and positron pair, in addition to the electron scattering oﬀ the ﬁeld set up by the
proton. This process was ﬁrst discussed by the Indian physicist H. J. Bhabha
and is named Bhabha scattering.

In addition to the above, it is also possible that an electron and positron
could annihilate and the energy of the collision could be converted into, say a
muon and anti-muon pair, which can be detected in laboratory detectors. Such
process have distinct probabilities that can be computed in accordance with the
principles of quantum mechanics and special theory of relativity (quantum ﬁeld
theory), and there is remarkable agreement between theory and obesrvation.
Note here that in this manner, particles that did not ‘exist’ earlier can actually
be ‘created’. This is a profound manifestation of energy and mass equivalence.
In the context of quantum electrodynamics, the theory was worked out ﬁrst by
Dirac, P. Jordan and others, and put on a sound footing through the work of
R. P. Feynman, J. Schwinger and S-I. Tomonaga, and that of F. J. Dyson.

One unanswered question was of course that which pertained to the forces
between protons and neutrons necessary to keep them inside the nucleus. In
other words, where did the inter-nucleon forces come from? H. Yukawa proposed
that there ought to be particles, later called pions, that would mediate the forces
between the nucleons. These particles were subsequently discovered in cosmic
ray experiments in 1947 by C. Powell. These particles carry no spin.

The question then was whether or not these are carriers of fundamental forces
just as the photon was the carrier of the electromagnetic force, after recognizing
that this particle must have a non-vanishing mass, unlike the photon, in order
for it to have a limited range, viz. at the inter-nucleon level5. The answer is no,
and in the modern picture of interactions, the internucleon force is a residue of
the so-called ‘strong force’ that not only gives rise to the proton and neutron in
terms of constituents called quarks, while the pions are bound states of quark-
anti-quark pairs, and mediate the eﬀective internucleon force, as we will see in
some of the following sections.

5There are, in fact, 3 pions in nature, the charged pions π± which weigh 139.6 MeV/c2

and the neutral pion π0 which weighs 135.0 Mev/c2.

5

3 Radioactivity and the weak force

We had already mentioned that Rutherford carried out his experiments with α-
particles that came from radioactive decays of some natural radioisotopes. This
decay was eﬀectively due to the mother nucleus spitting out a helium nucleus,
which is what the α-particle is, and turning into a daughter nucleus.

Another kind of radioactivity was so-called β-decay, where the particle emit-
ted was either an electron or a positron. A free neutron itself decays into a
proton and an electron. However, by the early 1930’s it was clear that another
particle was also produced which evaded direct detection at that time, and was
introduced by the Austrian physicist W. Pauli. This was named the ‘neutrino’,
the little one of the neutron by Fermi. It had been realized at that time an un-
familiar force of nature must be responsible for this and was named the ‘weak’
force which seemed to play a role only at sub-nuclear distance scales and was
so weak that its impact on day to day life on terrestrial scales was negligible.
Indeed, in light of our prior experience, this force would also require a mediator,
and one that was massive to ensure the short-range nature of the force, which we
today know to be the W ± particles. These particles are very massive6, weigh-
ing roughly 80.4 GeV/c2; despite this decays can take place in accordance with
the principles of quantum mechanics and special relativity, where a ‘virtual’
W particle can be produced, turning a neutron into a proton and this virtual
particle decaying into an electron and anti-neutrino pair. Here the additional
energy locked up in the larger mass of the neutron, compared to that of the
proton, is converted into the electron and anti-neutrino pair, when the neutron
gets converted into a proton.

Today, we have a complete picture of this weak interaction and why it is
short ranged, and we also know that we cannot really speak in isolation of an
electromagnetic force and a weak force, but instead we speak of an ‘electro-
weak’ theory, where the two forces above are diﬀerent manifestations of the
same. The price to pay was the introduction of another massive cousin of the
photon, designated as the Z 0, which weighs 91.2 GeV/c2. This theory was
sucessfully constructed by S. Glashow, A. Salam and Weinberg (GSW) and was
put on a sound mathematical footing through the work of G. ’t Hooft and M.
J. G. Veltman.

The weak forces themselves are very peculiar indeed and are unlike any
other; it is the only one that changes the particle type, e.g. changes a neutron
into a proton, then it had been discovered by T. D. Lee and C. N. Yang that
they violate mirror-symmetry (also known as parity (P)) maximally, e.g. left-
handed neutrinos alone participate in the weak reactions. Before the rise of the
GSW theory siginiﬁcant work on this was due to R. E. Marshak and E. C. G.
Sudarshan and R. F. Feynman and M. Gell-Mann, who had given the V − A
theory for the weak interactions. The weak forces alone also violate so-called
CP violation, where C stands for charge conjugation, which related particles to
anti-particles in a mathematical sense. The weak forces are the only ones that
6These are about 90 times as heavy as a proton, which in turn is about 2000 times as heavy

as an electron!

6

require the mediators of the force through massive particles. The manner in
which these particles acquire their mass is a complicated phenomenon and goes
under the name of the ‘Higgs mechanism.’ Many future experiments have as
their goal, the discovery of this particle and a detailed study of its properties.

4 Particle zoology

In the 1950’s a whole set of new particles were identiﬁed from cosmic ray exper-
iments and from so-called ﬁxed target experiments. It led to what was referred
to as the ‘particle zoo’, where particles would live for a short time and decay into
stable daughters. In particular, in cosmic ray experiments one found showers of
energetic and massive particles. In one discovery predating that of the pion, a
particle that we now call the muon was discovered independently by J. C. Street
and E. C. Stevenson and by C. Anderson and S. Nedermeyer. Today we know
that it is just like an electron except that it is about 210 times heavier, and due
to the weak interaction it decays into an electron and into a neutrino and an
anti-neutrino, the anti-neutrino of the electron type and a neutrino of the muon
type, in about a micro-second7. Much later in laboratory experiments, a third
type of ‘heavy electron’ (τ -lepton) was discovered by M. Perl, which is 3600
times as heavy as an electron. Correspondingly, its lifetime compared to that of
the muon is orders of magnitude lower. The detection of these neutrinos them-
selves has itself been a rich ﬁeld; the electron type neutrinos were discovered in
reactor experiments by F. Reines and C. L. Cowan, Jr., while the muon type
neutrinos by L. M. Lederman, M. Schwartz and J. Steinberger. The existence of
a τ -type neutrino has only recently been established in Fermilab experiments.
In meantime, cosmic ray experiments also showed all kinds of ‘strange’
events, where particles produced in pairs lived for a relatively long time, com-
pared to what one expected. This was explained by Gell-Mann and A. Pais by
introducing particles which had ‘strange’ constituents, such that a strange and
anti-strange particle pair was produced. Laboratory experiments also contin-
ued to see plethora of heavier and excited particles that lived ﬂeetingly. This
caused a serious crisis for physics which sought to see fundamental constituents.
This was eventually resolved through the discovery of a theory for the strong
interactions, the subject of our next section.

5 The strong force

All this was put in place by assuming that these particles, and also the nucleons
were all made of underlying constituents which we today call quarks, and the
plethora was nothing but energized bound states of these quarks. The quarks
7Muons produced high up in the atmosphere when a cosmic ray strikes a nucleus of a
nitrogen or oxygen atom (the earth’s atmosphere is mainly consituted of these elements),
would not be able to reach a terrestrial detector in their short lifetime, but for the fact of
dilatation of their life due to their very large velocity, an eﬀect predicted by Einstein’s theory
of relativity.

7

themselves came in ‘ﬂavours’ of the up, down and strange type, and carried some
unknown strong charges, and the forces were mediated by unknown carriers
of the strong forces, strong cousins of the electromagnetism’s photon. These
would be called the gluons, and the strong charges would be called ‘color’.
Today, we think that all observed strongly interacting matter is the result of
the dynamics of this theory called quantum choromodynamics. This theory
was the result of the work of a generation of scientists primarily led by Gell-
Mann. Note however, that the strong interaction binds quarks and gluons into
states such as the nucleons, and till date the dynamics that leads to this is not
known; this is referred to as the ‘conﬁnement’ hypothesis. Furthermore, it is
due to the peculiarities of quantum ﬁeld theories that this theory behaves in
such a way that when protons and neutrons are struck by projectiles with very
large energy transfer between the projectile and the target, that the constituent
quarks behave as though they are quasi-free. This remarkable property known
as ‘asymptotic freedom’, was established ﬁrmly by the work of D. J. Gross, H.
D. Politzer and F. Wilczek. Indeed, these physicists are the most recent winners
of the coveted Nobel prize for physics for the year 2004.

As time went along, it became clear that the picture needed some more
enlargement.
Indeed as there were the electron and its neutrino, muon and
its neutrino, and the τ -lepton and its neutrino, it would be necessary to group
the quarks as well. Apart from a technical detail that we leave out here, it
would be necessary to group the up and down quarks together. This would
require that the strange quark would require a partner; S. Glashow, J. Iliopoulos
and L. Maini would propose one called the charm quark, which was discovered
in experiments led by S. C. C. Ting and B. Richter, and ﬁnally there would
be the top and bottom quarks, discovered at Fermilab by the CDF and D0
collaborations, and by L. Lederman respectively. This essentially completes the
list of fundamental particles.

As mentioned earlier, the strong interactions present a very diﬃcult challenge
in ﬁnding the solution of the microscopic theory. Consider for instance, the
proton which is said to be made up of 2 u quarks and 1 d quark. It is now
established that each of these quarks weights roughly 5 MeV/c2. However, the
mass of the proton is about 938 MeV/c2. It is only through the (as yet unsolved)
dynamics of the strong interactions that these quarks which together weigh only
about 15 MeV/c2 become so much more massive. The strange quark is believed
to weigh about 150 MeV/c2, while the charm quark weighs about 1.5 GeV/c2,
while the top and b quarks weigh respectively 175 GeV/c2 and 4.2 GeV/c2. This
incredible spread of masses of these particles over orders of magnitude remains
one of the great unsolved problems of elementary particle physics.

6 Synthesis

Let us now spend a little time going over what we have learnt so far. Elemen-
tary particles come in two varieties, those that do not participate in the strong
interactions and those that do not. The former are known as leptons, which

8

participate in the weak interactions, and of these the‘charged’ leptons are those
that also carry electric charge also participate in the electromagnetic interac-
tions in a signiﬁcant manner. On the other hand,‘colored’ quarks participate
in the strong and weak interactions. All of them carry electric charge. All the
above are spin ¯h/2 particles and are fermions.

As regards the forces, the electromagnetic force is carried by the photon. The
full electro-weak sector contains the W ± and the Z 0 in addition. These mediate
forces between leptons and quarks. They were experimentally discovered at
CERN in 1984 for which the Nobel prize was awarded to C. Rubbia and S. van
der Meer. The gluons are responsible for transmitting the strong force. All the
above are spin ¯h particles and are bosons. They were experimentally discovered
by by the PETRA collaboration at the German laboratory DESY.

There is one as yet undiscovered particle in the ‘standard model’ which is

known as the Higgs. It must weight at least 120 GeV/c2.

While we have discussed in the earlier sections masses of all the particles, we
have made no mention of the masses of neutrinos. It is notoriously diﬃcult to
carry out measurements of the masses of these particles and for a long time one
only had upper bounds on their masses. In the recent past, however, there is
much evidence that they do indeed possess non-vanishing masses, which comes
from deep underground experiments. Such masses are required to resolve the
‘solar neutrino problem’. The latter, simply stated, is that fewer than expected
neutrinos reach the earth from the solar interior where they are produced in
copious numbers in reactions that power the sun. These masses are the ﬁrst
concrete indication that the standard model is incomplete.

There are still a huge number of unresolved problems. We do not have un-
derstanding of why there are these diﬀerent types of forces. We do not know
why their strengths are what they are. Are they all seemingly diﬀerent mani-
festations of an unknown unique force? Even in the framework of these forces,
there are unresolved questions: for instance, why does electric charge come in
multiples of a fundamental unit? Dirac had pointed out that if there were
magnetic monopoles, then this conclusion would have been inevitable. How-
ever, decades of experiments have searched for magnetic monopoles that may
be ﬂoating around in the Universe, and may have had a chance encounter with
a terrestrial detector, but have remained fruitless. Why are there so many
particles, so like each other, except for their diﬀerent masses? Why do these
elementary particles replicate themselves? Why are their masses what they are?
What is the role of gravitation in this picture? How is it to be included in a
relativistic formulation? There are many heroic attempts, but each has its own
set of technical problems and is beyond the scope of the present discussion.

The upcoming generation of high energy physics experiments, space probes
and the current generation of scientists are hard at work hoping to unravel these
mysteries.

9

7 Acknowledgements

This is an expanded version of talk presented at the workshop ‘Vijnana Jignase
(Science Discourse)’ organized by the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced
Scientiﬁc Research and Ninasam in Heggodu, Shimoga district, Karnataka, In-
dia, February 12-14, 2005.
It is my pleasure to thanks the organizes K. V.
Akshara, Sharath Ananthamurthy, Roddam Narasimha and especially Srikanth
Sastry for their kind invitation to present the talk. I thank P. N. Pandita, D.
Sen and S. Vaidya for a careful reading of, and comments on the manuscript.

8 Further Reading

1. G. D. Coughlan and J. E. Dodd, The Ideas of Particle Physics : An
Introduction for Scientists, 2nd edn., Cambridge University Press, 1991

2. Robert P. Crease and Charles C. Mann, The Second Creation: Makers
of the Revolution in Twentieth-Century Physics, Rutgers University Press
(reprint edition), 1996

3. Steven Weinberg, The Discovery of Subatomic Particles, Cambridge Uni-

versity Press (revised edition), 2003

4. B. Ananthanarayan et al., Resonance — Journal of Science Education,

Vol. 7, No. 3, 10 (2002); Vol. 7, No. 6, 45 (2002).

10

