5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
8
1
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

CREATIVITY LEADING TO
DISCOVERIES IN PARTICLE PHYSICS
AND RELATIVITY

Miroslav Pardy

Department of physical electronics
and
Laboratory of plasma physics
Faculty of Science, Masaryk University
Kotl´aˇrsk´a 2, 611 37 Brno, Czech Republic

October 29, 2013

Abstract

Independently on Popper’s, Holten’s and Kuhn’s philosophy of science, we present
– in “annus mirabiliss 2005” – the basic ingredients of discovery creativity in physics.
We discuss understanding, problem solving, heuristics, computer thinking, technological
thinking and so on. We present some discoveries from the viewpoint of creativity.
The Dirac equation, the Riccati equation for massive photons in laser physics, the
nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation and its classical limit for heavy particles, the quantum
Navier-Stokes equation, the equation of the quantum magneto-hydrodynamics and so
on. We discuss general relativity, the nonlinear Lorentz transformation involving the
maximal acceleration constant which we relate to the Hagedorn temperature, and possible
dependence of mass on acceleration. We discuss the reciprocity of technology and
theoretical physics and the technological limit.

1 Introduction

Michael Faraday – man of simplicity – used special experimental methods to discovery
many laws of nature including famous magnetic induction. Thomas Alva Edison used
speciﬁc experimental techniques and method ”trial and error” to generate inventions
useful for daily life. Nicola Tesla invented electrical motor for alternate current. Euler,
Poincar´e, and others realized mathematical discoveries every day. All these thinkers used
undoubtedly some heuristical rules, or “road map” to achieve success.

1

What are the dominating factors which determine the discoveries and the key discov-
eries? What are the speciﬁc steps? What are the tenacious ideas, or, purposes which are
leading to the key discoveries?

The principles of discoveries are not always accepted by physicists. Why? Because we
are in a jungle of facts and the only way forwards we built is the way by trial and error.
On the other hand, if we want to avoid disappearing of the total or partial content of
the classical physics in the new theory it is desirable only small change of the classical
theory and to built the new theory as a paradigm of the old theory. Such a
principle was used by Bohr in his planetary model of atom. However, de Broglie and
Schr¨odinger deﬂected from the Bohr instructions. Similarly, in particle physics, quark
theory – nuclear aristocracy – is not small change of the bootstrap theory – nuclear
democracy –, but revolution.

The integral part of the process of discoveries is, no doubt, also an eﬀort of the nameless
and godforsaken investigators who prepared the way to a discovery. In the scope of this
process a discoverer appears as a single man among a large team of scholars who has
completed the initiated work.

We know from history (Hadamard, 1946) that the predecessor of the inﬁnitesimal
calculus was Nicole Oresme (1323-1382), Johann Kepler (1571-1630) and Pierre Fermat
(1601-1665), the author of well-known famous theorem. Fermat received the mathematical
expression for the condition of maximum and minimum of a function. He constructed
expression

f (a + ε)
ε

−

f (a)

,

ε

→

0.

(1)

However, this expression is nothing else than the derivative of f (x) at point x = a,
and Fermat also applied it to ﬁnding tangents to several curves. However, nor Fermat
was able to overcome an unknown barrier standing at the way to the inﬁnitesimal calculus
(Hadamard, 1946). Oresme, Kepler and Fermat realized only the ﬁrst step of the creation
of the inﬁnitesimal calculus.

It is necessary to distinguish two steps (Hadamard, 1946).

“To discover a fact on the one hand, and to understand the signiﬁ-
cance of this fact on the other hand”.

When Newton and Leibniz appeared in the sky of mathematics, the inﬁnitesimal
calculus was realized. While Fermat applied his method for special examples, Newton
and Leibniz gave a precise form to that idea, in driving it far enough to be able to make
it a starting point for further researches.

The decisive factors of the birth of the inﬁnitesimal calculus were the deﬁnition of
the notion of derivative, which is of course not suﬃcient, and the application of this
mathematical object to the large amount of problems. Thus, the discovery of inﬁnitesimal
calculus was based, as we can deduce, on the two general principles. Introducing the
new notion and its large application.

The misunderstanding of the signiﬁcance of the fact is well know in particle physics
where the so called Ω−-meson was predicted in 1962 as the crucial test of the SU(3)
symmetry and discovered in Brookhaven in 1964. However, already in 1954 Eisenberg
had observed Ω−-meson and in 1955 it was conﬁrmed by Fry. The laboratory events
was interpreted as the Ω− events and not as the Ω−-meson. The experimenters were
not prepared to understand the signiﬁcance of the discovery of the new particle (Alvarez,

2

1973). Similar events in the particle physics related to the Popper philosophy of discoveries
was presented in the Pietschmann (1978) article.

At present time the excited states of proton is the brilliant conﬁrmation of the quark
composition of proton. But the society consciousness hesitates in understanding of this
fact. The excited states of an electron is the manifestation of its substructure but the
society consciousness hesitates in understanding of the signiﬁcance of this fact.

In physics, Bohr created a model of atom bearing later his name. Bohr created two
postulates which deﬁne the model of atom: 1. every atom can exist in the discrete series
of states in which electrons do not radiate even if they are moving at acceleration (the
postulate of the stationary states), 2. transiting electron from the one stationary state to
other emits energy according to the law

En,

¯hω = Em −
where Em is the energy of an electron in the initial state, and En is the energy of the
ﬁnal state of an electron to which the transition is made and Em > En. This postulate
involves also the assumption that the photons are created by transitions and they exists
only outside of atom. Photons are real particles, real quanta as was conﬁrmed by the
Compton eﬀect. There is no photon inside the atom. The multiphoton Compton
eﬀect is also possible as follows from the Feynman diagrams, or from the Volkov solution
of the Dirac equation (Berestetzkii, 1989; Pardy, 2003a, 2003d, 2004b). This eﬀect was
veriﬁed by high energy laser experiments.

(2)

The photon situation is reciprocal to the quark situation in particle physics. Quarks
exist only inside the mesons and baryons. New mesons, or baryons are created
and cloned inside mesons and baryons by the tension of the physical strings
connecting quarks. The existence of quarks inside mesons and hadrons was veriﬁed by
many deep inelastic scattering experiments.

The Planck distribution law of photons inside the so called black body was derived
by Einstein from the Bohr model. Einstein introduced coeﬃcients of spontaneous and
stimulated emission Amn, Bmn, Bnm. From the condition of equilibrium

and the Maxwell statistics

NmAmn + Nmn̺ωBmn = Nn̺ωBnm

Nm = De− Em

kT , Nn = De− En
kT ,

he derived the Planck law in the form:

̺ω =

¯hω3
π2c3

1

¯hω
kT

e

.

1

−

The decisive point of the derivation of the black body by Einstein was not the mathemat-
ical beauty of the equations but speciﬁc model suggested by intuition.

However, the Einstein derivation was not complete, because he did not consider
the situation that the black body can be inﬂuenced by some external ﬁeld. Then, it
is necessary to introduce coeﬃcients of the external inﬂuence Cmn, Cnm, and from the
equilibrium condition to derive the generalized Planck law (Pardy, 2005c).

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

̺ω =

¯hω3
π2c3

1

¯hω
kT

e

1

−

+

¯hω3
π2c3

P (ω)

Q(ω)e

¯hω
kT

−
¯hω
kT

e

1

−

3

where P, Q are some function which must be calculated using the advanced solid state
physics and advanced quantum mechanics.

In the special theory of relativity, Einstein was not inﬂuenced by the partial results
of his predecessors. Namely by, W. Voight (1850-1919) who proposed in the year 1887
an idea of the transformation of coordinates and time, J. Larmor who in 1900 derived
independently so called Lorentz transformation and H. Poincar´e (1854-1912) who derived
in 1905 the similar consequences as Einstein.

Einstein worked independently. The dominating factors leading Einstein to his theory
were admiration of the axiomatic system of Euclidean geometry, with the goal to unify the
electromagnetism and moving bodies by the axiomatic way, and a courage to postulate
a principle of constant light velocity as the integral part of his axiomatic system. This
principle is from the viewpoint of common sense, very strange and nobody was of a courage
to postulate such strange principle. Einstein decided to hit the nail on the head.

The reasonable generalization of the special theory of relativity for noninertial systems
and gravity, respectively, was a theory working with the non-Euclidean mathematical
objects. Einstein decided to apply the Riemann geometry which was yet developed by B.
Riemann (1826-1866) and T. Levi-Civita (1873-1941).

Dominating heuristic factors in the birth of the general relativity theory were the
Einstein goal to unify STR and gravity. Later, Hilbert proved that Einstein gravity
equations could be easily derived from variation principle with the adequate Lagrangian.
Why was not so easy to create general relativity? Leibniz, Kant, Schopenhauer and
others created the statements that space and time is only the subjective feelings, or,
´a priori auxiliary notions, and not objective reality. Lobaˇcevskii and Gauss introduced
space and time as physical reality. This was the starting point of the modern science of
space and time and of the Einstein general relativity.

Now, let us look more to creativity in theoretical physics leading to discoveries.

2 On creativity in general

The theoretical physics was realized by the creative work and not by copying the older
physical texts and existing products. The creative work is a novel work.
It can be
meaningful or meaningless.
It is meaningful in the human sense, if it is accepted by
the society, or by the speciﬁc group of people as useful and valuable work. The ”novel
work” means that the creative product did not exist previously in the same form.
It
arises from the already existing material by the process of reorganization, reintegration,
modiﬁcation, new axiomatization, redeﬁnition of basic parts and so on, in such a way that
when it is completed it contains elements that are new. The novelty of the creative work is
given by the novelty of methods and ideas used and by the deviation from the traditional
knowledge or the status quo. The novelty of the creative work depends usually on the
novelty of the problem and especially on the creative individual. The creative individual
has the speciﬁc motivation to create. The creativity motivation does not diﬀer from any
motivation problem. In other words, the individual experiences a state of disequilibrium,
or a lack of satisfaction with the existing state of aﬀairs. In such a way the homeostasis of
the creative individual is disturbed. This is possible only when there exists the sensitivity
to the given state. The creative person has a lower threshold, or the greater sensitivity
for the gaps or the lack of closure that exist in the environment (Bodnarczuk, 1990). The
sensitivity is obviously given by the intellectual factors, involving fantasy, inborn in the
creative person and by the educational drill which cultivate the mental life of a person.

4

It also means that computer creativity can be only mechanical one and never will involve
fantasy, because fantasy cannot be realized by non-stochastic computer algorithm.

Mathematics – art for art – is the science of the pure forms which gives no propositions
is, as can be seen later, the applied pure
It means that theoretical physics is pure mathematics restricted by the

about outer world. Theoretical physics,
mathematics.
physical experiment and involving physical interpretation.

While mathematician starts from pure deﬁnitions and then proceeds to show how the
product of thought may originate either by single act of creation or by the double act of
positing and combining, the theoretical physicist interprets mathematical deﬁnitions (for
instance operators in quantum mechanics, Green’s functions in the quantum ﬁeld theory,
and so on) and expresses the outer world in the mathematical form.

However, because the theoretical physicist works practically with the mathematical
objects, his thinking is the mathematical one, but limited by the outer world laws. Never-
theless he uses the same heuristics as mathematician. Then, the principles of creativity in
mathematics and theoretical physics are practically congruent. The eﬀectiveness of work
in physics and mathematics consists in clariﬁcation and using these principles.

The interesting is the opinion of Julian Schwinger on the creativity.

” What the physicist actually does? He does not begin with the
ﬁnal theory and draw mathematical consequences, he elaborates
the theory, he describes a certain class of phenomena and then
extrapolates and sees how far it works”.

Every rigorous scientiﬁc work is based on the operative rules which are rigorously
deﬁned or are only intuitive ones, for which man failed to obtain a precise algorithm. If
we use the intuitive rules in science we say that we use the heuristic procedures. The
aim of the heuristic procedures, or the heuristics is to solve new problems for which the
algorithmic solutions are not known, or diﬃcult to ﬁnd, and to make discoveries.

3 On theoretical methods in physics

One can distinguish between two main procedures in theoretical physics. The ﬁrst one
is to work with experimental facts which means the close contact with the experimental
physicists. This method involves the systematical collection of the experimental data and
trial to ﬁt them into a comprehensive and satisfying scheme.

The other procedure is to work from the mathematical basis. This second method
was in the modern physics used in the maximally eﬀective way by P. A. M. Dirac. In this
method one examines and criticises the existing theory. One tries to pin-point the faults
in it and then tries to remove them by replacing it by the new scheme. The obstacles
in the second way consist in removing the faults without destroying the great successes
of the existing theory. In other words, the second procedure is the replacing of the one
theory by the better one in such a way that the better theory involves some details of the
ﬁrst theory, other details distracts and implants into the new schema some new ideas.

While the ﬁrst method called phenomenology requires the common sense and not very
much mathematics, the second method is only for the mathematical experts who use the
mathematics with the goal to understand nature.

The procedure which works from the mathematical basis was sometime also unsuc-
cessful. For instance, the gravitational and the electromagnetic ﬁelds should be closely

5

connected, but Einstein spent many years trying to unify them, without success. Never-
theless it is necessary to say that the Einstein endeavor formed the basis for the uniﬁcation
of electromagnetic and weak interactions and for the struggle to unify the all forces in
nature into the grand uniﬁcation scheme.

Whether one follows the phenomenological or the mathematical procedures depends
on the subject of study and on the intellectual mentality of the investigator. Let us
illustrated it by the discovery of quantum mechanics (Salam).

While Heisenberg was working from the experimental basis, using the results of
spectroscopy which by 1925 had accumulated an enormous amount of experimental data,
Schr¨odinger worked from the mathematical basis. Among these data were some very
important, namely the relative intensities of the lines of the multiplets. Only Heisenberg
was able to pick up the substantial thing from the great wealth of data and arrange them
in a matrix scheme, which led to the matrix quantum mechanics.

On the other hand Schr¨odinger had the idea at the back of his mind that spectral
frequencies should be ﬁxed by eigenvalue equation, something like those that ﬁx the
frequencies of system of vibrating strings.

Of course, the Schr¨odinger spectral idea was an integral part of his intellectual attitude
to modern physics especially to the relativity. Schr¨odinger was inﬂuenced by the new
physical ideas and so he tried to set up a quantum mechanics within the framework
of relativity. While de Broglie applied the wave idea to the free particles, Schr¨odinger
tried to generalize it to an electron bound in atom within the relativistic framework.
However, when he applied his theory to the hydrogen atom, he found it did not agree
with experiment. The discrepancy was caused by the ignoring the spin of the electron.
Then Schr¨odinger noticed that his theory was correct in the nonrelativistic approximation
which forms the well known Schr¨odinger equation.

4 The Dirac heuristics

.

Nobel Laureate Abdus Salam says on Dirac (Kamran, 1989):

”Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac was undoubtedly one of the greatest
In three decisive years, 1925,
physicists of this or any century.
1926 and 1927, with three papers, he laid the foundations ﬁrst of
quantum physics, second of the quantum theory of ﬁelds, and third
of the theory of elementary particles with his famous equation of
the electron. No man except Einstein has such a decisive inﬂuence
in so short a time on the course of physics in this century”.

So, if Dirac is compared with Einstein, then is is worth while to know his heuristic
methods in theoretical physics used by him to perform such big discoveries. Many Dirac
authentic statements concerning the methods of discoveries in theoretical physics are very
useful for understanding his methods of discoveries. Surprising is that Dirac excluded
the philosophical thinking in his theoretical works (Kamran, 1989)).

”I then felt that all the things that philosophers said were rather
indeﬁnite, and I came to the conclusion eventually that I did
not think philosophy could contribute anything to the advance of
physics”.

6

The basic philosophical question is what does a word mean or what does every phrase in
the verbal expression of thought mean? Just such attitude but in the more mathematical
form is involved in the Dirac modes of thought.

The very instructive are the Dirac opinions on the Einstein general theory of relativity

and on the magnetic monopole (Kamran, 1989).

”One has a great conﬁdence in the theory arising from its great
beauty, quite independent of its detailed success”.

”.. monopoles should exist, because of pretty mathematics”.

The pretty mathematics is also the integral part of Dirac’s derivation of his famous
equation. The heuristic procedure which Dirac used was so called playing with
equation. The discovery of the Dirac equation was realized after the Pauli equation
which Pauli proposed in May 1927 (Pais, 1986).

The Pauli equation describes the electron spin by the two-component spinors in such a
way that spin is explicitly coupled to the electron angular momentum. The strength of the
coupling called the ”Thomas factor” cannot be determined inside the Pauli theory and it
must be inserted by hand without further justiﬁcation. Pauli noted that such unpleasant
feature is caused by its nonrelativistic behavior. In other words Pauli was award that this
equation was approximate and provisional.

The spin was described in the Pauli theory by the 2 x 2 matrices, since known as the
the Pauli matrices. However, now it is known that Dirac discovered these independently.
Dirac writes (Dirac, 1977b):

”I believe I got these matrices independently of Pauli, and possibly
Pauli also got them independently from me”.

However Dirac used matrices of four rows and columns. At this procedure Dirac

discovered that his 4 x 4 matrices were composed from the Pauli 2 x 2 matrices.

Thus the Dirac equation was born in 1928 (Dirac, 1928a, 1928b) by respecting the
special theory of relativity and using the heuristics linearization of the nonlinear
operator. While the rigorous relativistic generalization of the Schr¨odinger equation is

Dirac use the matrix transcription where it is possible to write

i¯h

∂ψ
∂t

q

=

c2p2 + m2c4 ψ.

c2p2 + m2c4 = c

αµpµ,

q

4

Xµ=1

(7)

(8)

where αµ are composed from Pauli matrices. Dirac did not introduce numbers p, q, r, s
in such a way that (a2 + b2 + c2 + d2) = (pa + qb + rc + sd)2 and did not deﬁne special
relations between numbers p, q, r, s. He used matrices, because Pauli equation involved
matrices and successfully described the quantum nonrelativistic motion an electron. In
case of introduction of numbers p, q, r, s, we get the relativistic Schr¨odinger equation of
the ﬁrst order while Klein-Gordon equation is equation of the second order.

The great Dirac discovery he has made was, that his equation gave the particle a spin
of half a quantum. Also gave it a magnetic moment. It gave just the properties of an
electron (Dirac, 1977b).

7

The obvious consequences of the Dirac equation were the Sommerfeld ﬁne structure
formula and the Thomas factor. For energies small compared to mc2 all the results of the
nonrelativistic Schr¨odinger theory were recovered.

While at this time the Dirac equation is famous, the serious objections were to this
equation at time of its birth. The fundamental objection was the existence of the negative
energies of the electrons which followed inevitably from it. Now, they are interpreted as the
positron energies, where positron is the antiparticle to electron. Dirac himself supposed
that his equation describes proton instead of positron, at this time nondiscovered particle.
However, the magnetic moment of proton diﬀers from the Dirac prediction.

Dirac was never satisﬁed quite with his equation and in year 1972 postulated the new
equation with the positive energy solution only (Dirac, 1972a, 1972b, 1977a). Although
the new equation is also studied at the present time, it is not so famous as the original
equation from year 1928.

So we have seen that the speciﬁc principles guiding Dirac to his discovery were the
pretty mathematics, playing with equation and the principles of the special theory of
relativity. During the discussion with Abraham Pais on the research methods, Dirac said
(Pais, 1986):

”First play with pretty mathematics for its own sake, then see
whether this leads to new physics”.

The method of ”playing with mathematics” was the ”leitmotiv” of the all Dirac life

around. At age 28 he writes (Dirac, 1931):

” The most powerful method of advance that can be suggested
at present is to employ all the resources of pure mathematics in
attempts to perfect and generalize the mathematical formalism that
forms the existing basis of theoretical physics, and after each success
in this direction, to try to interpret the new mathematical features
in terms of physical entities”.

At age 36 Dirac writes (Dirac, 1939):

”As time goes on it becomes increasingly evident that the rules
which the mathematician ﬁnds interesting are the same as those
which Nature has chosen”.

At age 60 he writes (Kuhn, 1963):

”I think it’s a peculiarity of myself that I like to play with equations,
just looking for beautiful mathematical relations which may be don’t
have any physical meaning at all. Sometimes they do”.

At age 78 he writes (Dirac, 1982):

”A good deal of my research work in physics has consisted in not
setting out to solve some particular problems, but simply examining
mathematical quantities of a kind that physicists use and trying to
ﬁt them together in an interesting way regardless of application that
the work may have. It is simply a research for pretty mathematics.
It may turn out later that the work does have an application. Then
one has good luck”.

8

So we have seen that Dirac was deeply convinced that the best method how to ﬁnd
truth in Nature is the pretty mathematics. So, mathematics is for the physicists not only
the instrument of the description of the phenomena, however, it is the main source of
ideas and principles of the new theory. With the help of the pure mathematical
construction we can ﬁnd the notions and the relations between them which
give us the key in order to understand the phenomena in nature. The experiment
remains the only single criterion of the adequacy, or non-adequacy of the mathematical
constructions. However, the present creative basis belongs to mathematics.

The foregoing statements do not mean that if one is expert in mathematics, he is at
the same time theoretical physicist because there is the substantial diﬀerence between
mathematics and theoretical physics. While the mathematical statements are according
to Bertrand Russell - the greatist philosopher of england - non-existential, the physical
statements inform us on the existing relations and things in nature.

The mathematical program can be eﬀective in the theoretical physics if it involves the
deep physical principles and ideas. From this point of view it is possible to analyze the
eﬀectiveness of such theories as the Regge theory of elementary particles, the bootstrap
theory, the supersymmetry, supergravity, source theory, the present time string theory
and so on. Only if they are based on the deep physical ideas, then, there is some chance
to be physically true.

Let us summarize the discourse on the Dirac heuristics by his own statement (Dirac,

”I learn to distract all physical concepts as the basis for theory.
Instead one should put one’s trust in a mathematical scheme,
even if the scheme does not appear at ﬁrst sight to be connected
with physics. The physical meaning had to follow behind the
mathematics”.

Now, we can show that the Dirac method enables also the playing with his equation

itself (Pardy, 1973a). Let us write his equation in the form:

We can multiply the last equation from the left by gamma-matrices Γ an by the
3, ψ∗

conjugated function ¯ψ = ψ+γ4 = (ψ∗

4, ) in order to get:

1, ψ∗

2, ψ∗

ϕ1 + ϕ2 + mcψ = 0,

ϕ1 = ¯hγµ

; ϕ2 =

Aµγµψ.

∂ψ
∂xµ

e
c

i
−

¯ψΓα(ϕ1 + ϕ2 + mcψ) = 0,

γα = I, γµ, σµν, iγ5γµ, γ5

σµν =

(γµγν −

γνγµ).

1
2i

9

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

1978).

where

where

with

It is possible to show that the equation (11) is equivalent to the Dirac equation (Pardy,

1973a). Its mathematical beauty corresponds to the beauty of the Dirac equation.

The meaning of the above procedure is, that electron can be evidently described by the
components ¯ψΓαψ. It is possible to derive the Lorentz equation for the classical motion
of a point particle in the electromagnetic ﬁeld for the component ¯ψγµψ. The so called
Bargmann-Michel-Telegdi spin equation follows for the component ¯ψγµγ5ψ (Rafanelli et
al. 1964; Pardy, 1973a). The procedure performed with Dirac equation can be applied in
the analogical form to the Duﬃn-Kemmer equation (Pardy, 1973b).

There is a case when Dirac equation generates new equation. We think the case of the
Volkov solution of the Dirac equation for an electron moving in the electromagnetic ﬁeld
of massive photons. While in case for the massless photons the solution is known, the
massive photon situation leads to the so called Riccati equation (Pardy, 2003d, 2004d)

y′ + y2 + P (x) = 0,

(14)

where the function y is the integral part of the spinor ψ. So, the Dirac equation generates
the new diﬀerential equation which, as it is known, has no solution in the closed form
in general. The Riccati equation was mathematically meaningful from the time of its
discovery. Now, it is meaningful also from the view point of physics (Pardy, 2004d).

It can be easily to see that the playing with equation and with mathematics of the
nonrelativistic quantum mechanics leads to the new generalized quantum mechanical
equation of the nonrelativistic quantum mechanics. Let us demonstrate it here.

If we add to the original equations of hydrodynamical model of quantum mechanics
(Pardy, 2001d) the classical terms from the hydrodynamics involving the viscosity
properties of a ﬂuid, then we get the following evidently the beautiful quantum Navier-
Stokes equations:

m

∂v
∂t

 

+ (v

)v

=

· ∇

!

m

Vq −

∇

−

1
n

η
n

1
n (cid:18)

η
3 (cid:19)

∆p +

∆v +

ξ +

grad div v,

(15)

where Vq is the known quantum mechanical potential:

Vq =

¯h2
2m

∆√n
√n

.

−

(16)

and potential V is replaced by the macroscopic pressure p.

This equation (15) can be considered as the quantum mechanical model of the quantum
process involving dissipation. We hope that this equation will be conﬁrmed by experiment
and then it will be of the same value as the original Schr¨odinger equation of the quantum
mechanics.

The second possibility of the method of playing with equation is the equation of
the so called quantum magneto-hydrodynamics which can be eassily obtained from the
modiﬁcation of the quantum hydrodynamical equation(Madelung, 1926) inserting in it
the magneto-hydrodynamical term. The result is the following equation:

∂v
∂t

m

+ (v

Vq −
where and H is the vector of the magnetic ﬁeld. The last equation involves quantum
corrections to the classical magneto-hydrodynamical equation. The Alfv´en waves follows

(rotH

(17)

H),

p +

· ∇

)v

m

∇

×

−

=

!

 

1
n∇

1
4πn

10

for instance form the magneto-hydrodynamical equation.
involves the quantum corrections to the Alfv´en waves.

It means that equation (17)

The dissipative terms can be evidently inserted in the equation (17) in order to get

quantum Navier-Stokes magneto-hydrodynamical equation.

m

∂v
∂t

 

+ (v

)v

=

· ∇

!

m

−

∇

1
n ∇

p +

Vq −
1
4πn

×

η
n

1
n (cid:18)

η
3 (cid:19)

∆v +

ξ +

grad div v +

(rotH

H).

(18)

Now, let us consider the so called nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation and its solution.
It was shown that it was also derived by the method of playing with equation (Pardy,
2001d).

The motivation for introduction of the nonlinear quantum theory was in expecting
of the better understanding of the synergism of waves and particles. Bia lynicky-Birula
and Mycielski (1976) considered the generalized Schr¨odinger equation with the additional
2)Ψ, where F was some arbitrary function which they later speciﬁed to be
term F (
Ψ
|
2) as a consequence of the factorization of the wave function for the composed
b(ln
Ψ
−
|
systems. The same equation was also obtained by Lemos (1983) within the context of the
stochastic quantum mechanics. Using the method of playing with equation, we derived
the generalized Schr¨odinger equation as follows (Pardy, 2001d).

|

|

i¯h

∂Ψ
∂t

=

¯h2
2m

−

∆Ψ + V Ψ

b(ln

Ψ

2)Ψ,

−

|

|

where b is positive and the nonlinear term contents the unit constant with the dimension-
ality of (length)3.

It is easy to show that eq. (19) follows from the hydrodynamical model of quantum
mechanics (Bohm et al., 1954; Madelung, 1926; Rosen, 1974) after adding into the
2 and by the inverse procedure to the
Euler hydrodynamical equation the pressure
derivation of the hydrodynamical model (Pardy, 2001d).

b
|
−

Ψ

|

The solution of eq.

(19) can be assumed in the soliton-wave form (in the one-

dimensional case with V = 0) (Pardy, 1994a; Pardy, 2001d):

where c, v, k and ω are real numbers. After insertion of function (20) into eq. (19), we
get

Ψ(x, t) = cG(x

vt)ei(kx−ωt),

−

Ψ(x, t) = cea/B exp

B(x

vt + d)2

ei(kx−ωt),

1
4

(cid:26)− (cid:20)

−

(cid:21)(cid:27)

where

and

v =

, B =

¯hk
m

4mb
¯h2 ,

a =

B
2 −

2m
¯h

ω + k2

2m
¯h2 b ln c2,

−

11

with d being some constant. The constant c can be determined from the normalization
condition

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

∞

−∞

Z

Ψ∗Ψ dx = 1.

The probability density is δm(ξ) = Ψ∗Ψ, and from eq. (21) we get (for d = 0)

δm(ξ) =

mα
π

r

e−αmξ2

,

ξ = x

vt, α =

−

2b
¯h2 .

It is obvious that δm(ξ) is the delta-generation function, which tends for m

just
to the Dirac delta function. The advantage of the δm function is in its behavior for the
suﬃciently the large mass m, because in this case it describes the strongly localized motion
of a particle. In other words, function δm describes the classical motion of a particle with
large mass m in contrast to the standard quantum mechanics. Such behavior obviously
gives the logical support for the competence of the logarithmic quantum mechanics.

→ ∞

Other interesting feature of the nonlinear QM consists in fact that it solves the
Schr¨odinger cat as a consequence of the broken principle of superposition (Pardy, 2001d).
If the nonlinearity in the Schr¨o dinger equation is of the quadratic form (Pardy, 1989b),

we get so called Gross-Pitaevskii equation

i¯h

∂Ψ
∂t

=

¯h2
2m

−

∆Ψ + V Ψ

α

Ψ

2Ψ,

−

|

|

which describes the quantum motion of superﬂuid described in many articles including
author’s one (Pardy, 1989b).

(24)

(25)

(26)

5 The problem of understanding of mathematics and

physics

The high creativity in mathematics, physics, or in other sciences is based on the deep
understanding of the content and techniques used. The creativity without understanding
is a free play with the mathematical or theoretical objects, but giving nothing interesting.
Only understanding of the scientiﬁc disciplines gives the interesting and valuable results.
However, what is the understanding as such? Especially what is the understanding of
mathematics or theoretical physics? Let us try to answer this question.

Understanding in science, especially in physics, involves the knowledge of explana-
tion of a fact, prediction of new consequences of it and knowledge of possible
applications.

Paul Ehrenfest (Weisskopf, 1971):

“refused to admit that something is understud if one understands
only the mathematical derivation”

Or, another statement of Ehrenfest (Weisskopf, 1971):

”Physics is simple but subtle”

In case we consider some physical eﬀect, the understanding of this eﬀect means how
does the eﬀect arise, what are the general causes of it and how it is related to the other
part of nature.

12

Let us imagine a long series of syllogisms with components A, B, C, ..., in which the
conclusions of those that precede form the premises of those that follow. Or, It is obvious
that everybody intelligent person is able to grasp the syllogism in the isolated form, or,
D;
in the form A =

B; B =

C; C =

END.

... =

⇒

⇒

⇒

⇒

However, between the moment when a man meets the ﬁrst proposition and the END
much time will sometime have elapsed and it may well happen that a man has been
inﬂuenced by some unexpectable events which change the meaning of the individual steps
and also the meaning of the whole chain. In such a way the chain of syllogisms forms no
harmonic system for a man and the subjective reﬂection of such situation is the feeling
of some misunderstanding. In other words understanding supposes not only knowledge
and understanding of the individual steps but the simultaneous retaining them in the
memory in the original chain. From these words it follows that people who have weak
mathematical memory are not able to grasp the total chain of the mathematical steps
and therefore are not able to understand mathematics. On the other hand the computer
calculations inform us that the true results can be obtained without understanding in the
human sense because computer works algorithmically without understanding.

After analysis of the notion understanding we have found miscellaneous view on the

notion of understanding. For instance:

a) understanding means to see the premises from which the theory
arises, what are the fundamental results of the theory and the
method used
b) understanding means the knowledge of logical systematization
c) understanding is the knowledge of the model of the system or
situation
d) understanding means the knowledge of the operational system of
the theory and its physical meaning
e) understanding is process which is tested by the ability of solving
physical problems of given theory
f) understanding means ability of formulation of the new problems
g) understanding means the knowledge of all questions formulated
in the boundaries of the given theory

and so on. It is obvious that it is possible to create other deﬁnitions of understanding
which stress speciﬁc aspects of process of understanding.

Understanding can be tested by explanation. What is explanation? It is the verbal
process which can be no more then a description which simplify. It describes situation
in terms of fundamental factors, being so fundamental that no description of them is
possible. The fundamental factors called ”absolute” may be given names and the number
of them should be a minimum. The explanation involves understanding and should employ
only such conceptions which are in common use. It is essential that the explanation must
be logically correct and actually true. It is well known from the pedagogical practice that
the explanation of the unknown object can be realized easily by exempliﬁcation.

According to Poincar´e (1913), understanding in mathematics appears as sudden
illumination. However, it is not absolutely spontaneous, but appears as a result of the
long course of the previous work.

The integral part of understanding is the feeling of harmony which form a internal
signal informing us on understanding of the mathematical or the physical system of ideas.

13

If a man feels during the cognitive process certain disharmony, then this is the signal
informing him on the necessity to analyze the problem once again.

At present time, the time of the artiﬁcial intelligence, the question arises how to
realize explanation with so called computer understanding of the problem situation, and
how to make predictions by computer by pure deductive algorithm. For prediction, it
is the logical process which is equivalent to mathematical deduction. Inductive
predictions are not valid because the results of induction are hypotheses which must be
proved. We belief that it is possible to solve the general problems by computer and also
to produce problems by computer.

5.1 Understanding of relativity

The special theory of relativity has familiarized us with the notion of thinking of space-
time in terms of geometry. In other words we describe space-time as a diﬀerential manifold
endowed with the Minkowski metric

Putting

ds2 = c2dt2

(dx2 + dy2 + dz2).

−

(27)

t = t(x1, x2, x3, x4); x = x(x1, x2, x3, x4); y = y(x1, x2, x3, x4); z = z(x1, x2, x3, x4),

(28)

we get after insertion of the transformations (28) into the space-time element (27):

ds2 = gµνdxµdxν,
which is equivalent to the original element (27). The coeﬃcients gµν form the so called
metric tensor. It is determined unambiguously by the transformations (28). It is possible
to show that if we choose the metric tensor arbitrarily, then there is no transformations of
the form (28), from which the coeﬃcients gµν follow. The form (29) in this case deﬁnes so
called Riemann geometry. The Einstein idea consists in the assumption that the space-
time in the presence of the gravitational ﬁeld is not Euclidean but Riemannian and that
the motion of a body in the gravitational ﬁeld is equivalent to the motion of the same body
in the Riemann space-time along the geodesic path which is described by the equation

(29)

dxα
ds
where Γµ
αβ are so called the Christoﬀel symbols and they are dependent on gµν. The
geodesic path can be deﬁned also mechanically in the 2D-geometry as a trajectory of
the inﬁnitesimal roller skate moving on the 2D-surface. The deﬁnition of the mechanical
inﬁnitesimal roller skate in the 4D-surface was not given till present time.

d2xµ
ds2 = Γµ

dxβ
ds

(30)

αβ

,

Why did Einstein used the Riemann geometry and not the diﬀerent approach? From
the history of mathematics it is known that Gauss (1777-1855), and also Lobaˇcevskii
(1792-1850)considered space and time as the objective reality and created the philosoph-
ical idea that the geometry of space is determined by the physical properties of it. Or,
it may not be necessary Euclidean. Later Riemann (1826-1866) created geometry of his
name. So the idea that space, or, space-time can be curved was not new and Einstein was
free to accept the physical idea that the curvature of space-time is caused by gravity.

14

In case that the transformations (28) do not involve time, we get eq. (30) in the three-
dimensional form with ds = dt and then they are equivalent to the Lagrange equations.
They are involved in the every textbooks on the tensor calculus.

The metric tensor gµν in the general theory of relativity and gravitation can be

determined by solution of the Einstein equation

Rµν

gµνR = (8πG/c4)T µν.

1
2

−

(31)

where G is the Newton gravitational constant, c is the velocity of light and T µν is the
tensor of the energy and momentum of the physical system and Rµν is the Ricci tensor.
Let us remark only, that while Einstein derived equations by the very sophistic operations
involving also the so called ﬁctitious experiments with elevator, David Hilbert derived
these equations easily and elegantly from the variational principle postulating only the
appropriate Lagrangian and proved that general theory of relativity is only one of the
problems of the Lagrangian mechanics. So, knowledge of mathematics is one of the
most practical thing in constructing physical equations.

The fundamental objections to the Einstein approach is that the three-dimensional
space cannot be curved in the three dimensional space and we have no evidence on the
more than three-dimensional space. The objection is serious because the internal geometry
on the sphere is possible only as the existence of the four-dimensional space in which the
sphere is immersed. The resolution of this paradox is possible using the optical analogy.
In optics there exist so called the optical length which is in no case equivalent to the
geometrical length. In the nonhomogenous optical medium the distance of two bodies
A and B is given by the optical length, or by the geometrical length which is always
Euclidean. On the other hand in case of the space time with the gravitational ﬁeld there
exist, according to Einstein, only the physical length which can be measured only by light
rays and clocks. Because the experimentalist is immersed in the Riemann space time, he
has no possibility in this space-time to deﬁne the Euclidean length in contradiction to the
optical situation.

Let us remark also that there many missing problems and missing solutions in
general relativity. For instance, the solution of the mathematical pendulum, the Foucalt
pendulum, physical pendulum, free fall, the special relativistic limit of general relativity
and so on. Some of these problems are discussed by Santilli (2005).

Now, the question arises, if the Einstein approach is the sole method how to describe
gravity. Poincar´e claims that the real objects are not described only by geometry G ,
but by the geometry together with the physical law P , or by G + P . As the geometry is
created by the a’ priori way, the physical law must be added to such a’ priory geometry
in order to get the appropriate description of reality.

This alternative way was realized for instance by Gupta (1952), Feynman (1963) and
Schwinger (1976) who has replaced the Einstein theory by the quantum ﬁeld theory of
gravitation where gravity is described by the tensor of massless ﬁeld of the second rank
which corresponds to the bosons with zero mass, having the spin 2 and helicity
2.
Attractive forces between bodies and all other eﬀects are in this theory caused just by
these bosons.

±

The basic formula in the source theory is the vacuum-to-vacuum amplitude (Schwinger,

1976):

0+|

0−i

h

= e

i

¯h W (S),

15

(32)

where the minus and plus tags on the vacuum symbol are causal labels, referring to any
time before and after space-time region where sources are manipulated. The exponential
form is introduced with regard to the existence of the physically independent experimental
arrangements which has a simple consequence that the associated probability amplitudes
multiply and corresponding W expressions add. (Schwinger, 1976).

In the ﬂat space-time the ﬁeld of gravitons is described by the amplitude (32) with

the action (c = 1):

W (T ) = 4πG

(dx)(dx′)

x′)Tµν(x′)

T (x)D+(x

x′)T (x′)

(33)

Z

T µν(x)D+(x
h

−

−

,
i

where the dimensionality of W (T ) is the same as the dimensionality of the Planck constant
¯h. Tµν is the tensor of momentum and energy, and for particle moving along the trajectory
x = x(t) it is deﬁned by the equation

1
2

−

T µν(x) =

pµpν
E

δ(x

x(t)),

−

(34)

where pµ is the relativistic four-momentum of a particle with a rest mass m.

The last formulas was used to determine the production of gravitons by the binary
system (Pardy, 1983b, 1994d). The method of calculation of the emission of gravitons is
an analogue of the method of calculation of the photon emission by the binary system
(Pardy, 2000a, 2000b, 2001c, 2002b, 2004d).

The special synthesis of the curvature approach and the spin 2 approach enabled
to determine the so called gravitational ˇCerenkov radiation which is analogous to the
ˇCerenkov radiation in a dielectric medium (Pardy, 1983a, 1983c, 1989a). Calculation
was applied with radiative corrections (Pardy, 1984; 1994c, 1994e) to zero temperature
and ﬁnite temperature situation (Pardy, 1994b, 1995). This eﬀect was still not observed
similarly as the Hawking eﬀect. While the electrodynamical ˇCerenkov eﬀect with massive
photons was calculated (Pardy, 2002a) together with radiative corrections,
it is not
excluded that the gravitational ˇCerenkov eﬀect with massive gravitons is of the physical
meaning. The solution of this problem was still not published. The gravitons can be
evidently produced by plasma ﬂuctuations. This problem was not solved by author. The
ﬁrst step was performed in the case of photons generated by the plasma ﬂuctuations
(Pardy, 1994f).

Gravity as every physical theory is dependent on crucial experiments. For instance,
on the deﬂection of light. It was conﬁrmed by experiment. However if photon is massive,
or if it is considered as a quantum particle, then it is necessary to make new analysis
(Pardy, 2001a, 2005a).

We can say that in case of the general relativity the understanding of it is elementary
if we accept the Hilbert variational approach and the curved space-time as physically
meaningful. The existence of the massive gravity is possible from the postulation of the
massive gravitons. The existence of the massive classical gravity is open question and it
is open problem in the deﬁnition of the massive classical gravitational ﬁeld.

While the Pythagoras theorem c2 = a2 + b2 is valid for the right angle triangle in the
Euclidean geometry, it si nor valid on the spherical surface and on the general Riemann
surface. Similarly the plane geometry Heron formula

P =

s(s

a)(s

b)(s

c);

s =

(a + b + c)

(35)

−

−

−

1
2

1
2

q

16

It means that spherical geometry, or Riemann
is not valid on the spherical surface.
geometry is substantially diﬀerent with regard to ﬂat geometry.
It also means that
Einstein theory of Riemann space-time substantially diﬀers from the ﬂat space-time
geometry. The experiment must decide if the Einstein theory is more fundamental than
the Schwinger source theory of gravity.

It is surprising that in the Newton period Pierre Gassendi developed the so called
string model of gravity which states that between body A and B there is a string which
transmits the attractive force. It seems that Faraday used the Gassendi ideas in his theory
of electromagnetism. The string model of gravity is now considered as the problem of
mathematical physics and it is not excluded that theory of this model will give fresh ideas
in the string theory of matter (Pardy, 1996a; 2005b).

Deﬁnition of the space-time element and the Einstein equation with the cosmological
constant makes it possible to deﬁne also the cosmological dislocations (Pardy, 2005a) and
antidislocations. The deﬁnition of these dislocation in the ﬂat space-time quantum gravity
is open problem. There is no experimental conﬁrmation of such dislocations till present
time. Dislocations and antidislocations can annihilate to form light bursts in universe
(Pardy, 2005a).

While Einstein used the ﬁctitious experiment with accelerated elevator, there is a
diﬀerent approach to description of accelerated systems. The nonrelativistic approach by
Pardy (2004a), and the relativistic discussion by Friedman and Gofman (2005).

O′ (Pardy, 2004a).

In the nonrelativistic approach, the two systems S(0, x, y, z) and S′(0, x′, y′, z′) are
considered, where system S′ moves in such a way that x-axes converge, while y and z-
axes run parallel and at time t = t′ = 0 for the beginning of the systems O and O′ it is
O

≡
Let us suppose that system S′ moves relative to some basic system B with acceleration
a/2 and system S′ moves relative to system B with acceleration
a/2. It means that
both systems moves in the opposite direction one another with acceleration a and they
are equivalent because in every system it is possibly to observe the unit force caused by
the acceleration a/2. In other words no system is inertial.

−

Now, let us consider the formal transformation equations between two systems. At this
moment we give to this transform only formal meaning because at this time, the physical
meaning of such transformation is not known. On the other hand, the consequences of
the transformation will be shown very interesting.

We write the transformation equations in the form (Pardy, 2004a):

x′ = a1x + a2t2,

y′ = y,

z′ = z,

t′ =

b1x + b2t2,

(36)

where constants involved in the equations will be determined from the viewpoint of
kinematics. Since from the viewpoint of kinematics, both systems are equivalent, for
the inverse transformation to the transformation (36) it must hold:

x = a1x′

a2t′2,

y′ = y,

z′ = z,

t =

b1x′ + b2t′2.

(37)

−

The minus sign with coeﬃcients a2 and b1 appearing for the reason that constant a2

has the rate of acceleration while constant b1 the rate of inverse value of acceleration.

Similarly, as in inertial systems, the hypothetical requirement can be now expressed
that the transformation equations for system moving relative to themselves with accel-
eration include a suitable invariant function. Let us now deﬁne such transformations as
follows:

q

q−

17

x =

αt2;

x′ =

αt′2,

1
2

1
2

(38)

(39)

⇐⇒
1

a2
α2

1
q

−

where α is the constant having the rate of acceleration.

If we now substitute (37) into (36), we obtain from [x′ = (1/2)αt′2]

[x = (1/2)αt2]

x′ = Γ(a)(x

at2),

t′2 = Γ(a)

t2

; Γ(a) =

1
2

−

2a
α2 x

(cid:19)

−

(cid:18)

and

y′ = y,

z′ = z,.

→

→

1
2 a,

→

1
2α.

→

Let us remark that the more simple derivation of the last transformation can be
obtained if we perform in the Lorentz transformation the elementary change of variables
as follows: t

t′2,

t2,

t′

v

c

The physical interpretation of this nonlinear transformations is the same as in the case
of the Lorentz transformation only the physical interpretation of the invariant function
x = (1/2)αt2 is open. The time transformation requires the correct interpretation of time.
We use the time delay here as in the Fok book, where Fok writes that time delay is the
form of the measurement procedure (Fok, 1961). It was proved that Fok interpretation
of time is correct (Pardy, 1969). Some relativists suggest diﬀerent interpretation of time
dilatation.

Similarly, we can consider the length contraction in special theory of relativity (STR).
The magnitude of the moving length depends on the measurement procedure. Let us
prove it. The rod velocity v does not depend on the light velocity. Then, if the end points
of rod are A and B, and, if we deﬁne the point of observation O in S , and, if the points
A and B are identical with point O at time tA, tB, then the length of the moving rod is
evidently L = v(
tB|
). This deﬁnition of length as dual to the contracted length in
STR and it is missing deﬁnition in STR. The measurement of the length by the ˇCerenkov
eﬀect was published recently (Pardy, 1997a).

tA −

|

If we want to measure the laser pulse, then it is necessary to use the more sophistic
approach. The duration of the laser pulse ∆t of the rest laser in the system S follows
from the relation c∆t = nλ where λ is the wave length of the laser light and n is the
number of waves. Observer in the system S′ which moves at the velocity v with regard
to the laser system S writes c(∆t)′ = nλ′ where λ′ is transformed wave length according
to special relativity theory. Or,

λ′ = λ

v/c
1
−
1 + v/c

(40)

v
u
u
t
for the observer moving toward the laser pulse. This relation, known as the relativistic
Doppler formula can be used as a test of special theory of relativity to show that the
one-way velocity of light is c. The nonrelativistic relation is λ′ = λ(1
v/c) and the
nonrelativistic (∆t)′ diﬀers from the relativistic (∆t).

−

We know from the history of physics, that Lorentz transformation was taken ﬁrst
as physically meaningless by Lorentz himself and later only Einstein decided to put the
physical meaning to this transformation and to the invariant function x = ct.

The transformation (39) forms one-parametric group with parameter a. To prove it we
must prove by the direct calculations the four requirements involving in the deﬁnition of
1
a group. However, we know, that using relations t
2α,
the nonlinear transformation is expressed as the Lorentz transformation forming the one-
parametric group. And this is a proof. Such proof is equivalent to the proof by direct

1
2a,

t′2,

t2,

→

→

→

→

t′

v

c

18

calculation. The integral part of the group properties is the so called addition theorem
for acceleration.

w3 =

w1 + w2
1 + w1w2
α2

(41)

where w1 is the acceleration of the S′ with regard to the system S, w2 is the acceleration
of the system S′′ with regard to the system S′ and w3 is the acceleration of the system
S′′ with regard to the system S.

The relation (41), expresses the law of acceleration addition theorem on the under-
standing that the events are marked according to the relation (39). In this formula as
well as in the transformation equation (39) appears constant α which cannot be calcu-
lated from the theoretical considerations, or, from the theory. What is its magnitude and
whether there exists such a physical ﬁeld that is consistent with the designation of the
events given by the relations (39) can be established only by experiments. On the other
hand the constant α has physical meaning of the maximal acceleration and its meaning
is similar to the maximal velocity c in special relativity.

It is not excluded that the maximal acceleration constant determines the upper limit
of the Higgs boson and links the mass of W boson with the mass of the Higgs boson. The
LHC and HERA experiments will give the answer to this problem. At the same time it is
not excluded that the maximal acceleration constant is related to the so called Hagedorn
temperature which is the phase boundary temperature between the hadron gas phase and
the deconﬁnement state of mobile quarks and gluons.
In other words, acceleration of
quarks and gluons in the hadron gas is restricted by the maximal acceleration.

We can also suppose in analogy with the special relativity that mass depends on the
acceleration for small velocities, in the similar way as it depends on velocity in case of
uniform motion. Of course such assumption must be experimentally veriﬁed and in no
case it follows from special theory of relativity, or, general theory of relativity. So, we
postulate ad hoc, in analogy with special theory of relativity:

Let us derive as an example the law of motion when the constant force F acts on the

body with the rest mass m. Then, the Newton law reads [15]:

m(a) =

m

a2
α2

1
q

−

;

v

c,

a =

≪

dv
dt

.

F =

= m

dp
dt

d
dt

v

1
q

−

.

a2
α2

(42)

(43)

The solution of this equation was found (Pardy, 2003b, 2004a). For F

, we get
v = α2t. This relation can play substantial role at the beginning of the Big Bang, where
the accelerating forces can be considered as inﬁnite, however the law of acceleration has
ﬁnite nonsingular form.

→ ∞

We know that the dependence of the mass on acceleration follows from quantum
electrodynamics (Ritus, 1979). Our case is based on the diﬀerent approach. In case that
the constant “maximal acceleration” will be conﬁrmed for instance by LHC, then, the
high energy physical theories, gravitation and cosmology must be modiﬁed, including the
Hawking eﬀect. Evidently, this constant will generate revolution in cosmology.

19

5.2 Understanding of quantum mechanics

Although the mathematical structure of quantum mechanics is elementary, or, in other
words, this theory is only Schr¨odinger equation applied to many physical situation, the
most diﬃcult problem is the derivation of the Schr¨odinger equation and the origin of
probability behavior of an electron. Till present time, the problem was not solved.

To solve this problem, Feynman invented so called path integral approach to quantum
mechanics with the goal to remove the mystery of quantum mechanics. The substance of
the Feynman path integral is, that the wave function of an electron , is the sum amplitudes
taken over all classical trajectories of a particle (Blokhintzev, 1971; Pardy, 1973c). The
interpretation of the Feynman sum is a such, that electron moves from point A to B along
all classical trajectories connecting A and B (Pardy, 1973c).

According to Feynman, the total probability amplitude U(A, B) from a particle

transition from point A to point B is as follows

where S is the classical Hamilton-Jacobi action function

U(A, B) =

1
C

i

e

¯h S[x(t)],

Xover all trajectories
f rom A to B

S =

L[ ˙x(t); x(t)]dt,

tB

tA

Z

(44)

(45)

where L is Lagrange function.

{

}

We can see that all amplitudes exp

are multiplied only by a constant 1/C.
(i/¯h)S
In case that the electron is in some stochastic medium, for instance inside the black-body
where the thermal stochastic photons are present the sum must be modiﬁed by some
weight function. We take the Wiener measure of the Brownian motion for the weight
function of a particle in a stochastic medium (Pardy, 1973c). In other words, the original
trajectories are modiﬁed. If the result gives the physical meaningful consequences, then
also the modiﬁcation of trajectories is physically meaningful. It was shown that the result
of such generalization is the change of mass of electron according to the formula (Pardy,
1973c):

m

→

m + iδ,

(46)

where δ is related to the so called diﬀusion constant of the Brownian motion. The complex
mass of electron means that no energetic level is stationary, which is very natural when
electron is moving in the stochastic medium. However, if the space as such is not euclidean
but stochastic, or, inﬁnitesimally deformed, for instance in the vicinity of the thermal Big
Bang, then it seems that the modiﬁcation of the trajectories is mathematically necessary.
Hawking (1989) accepted the Feynman theory over the path with the interpretation
that electron moves from A to B by every possible path. The possible modiﬁcation
of the Feynman integral by some additional properties of space time is not involved in
the Hawking monograph. Similarly, such approach to the Feynman integrals was not
elaborated in the literature.

On the other hand the complex mass of electron naturally appears in the quantum
electrodynamical description of the synchrotron radiation and it is possible from it to
calculate the spectrum of the synchrotron radiation. The nonstability by the complex
mass, of the orbit of electron in synchrotron was discussed (Pardy, 1985).

20

(47)

(48)

There is one speciﬁc case where Feynman sum is restricted to one trajectorie. This is
so called Volkov solution of the Dirac equation. The solution is of the form (Berestezkii,
1989; Pardy, 2003a, 2004b, 2004c):

ψp = R

u
√2p0

eiS =

1 +
"

e
2kp

(γk)(γA)

u
√2p0

#

eiS,

where u is an electron bispinor of the corresponding Dirac equation

−
with the normalization condition ¯uu = 2m

(γp

m)u = 0,

The mathematical object S is the classical Hamilton-Jacobi function, which was

determined in the form:

e
(kp) (cid:20)
and A(ϕ) is a periodic potential with ϕ = kx. For the electron motion in the two potentials
A(ϕ) and B(χ), and for the speciﬁc conﬁguration of ﬁelds A, B (Pardy, 2004c), we get

− Z
0

(A)2

(pA)

(49)

S =

e
2

dϕ

px

−

−

kx

(cid:21)

ψ = R(ϕ)R(χ)

u
√2p0
The Volkov wave function is quantum mechanical one and it involves classical action,
however no integral over trajectories is present and at the same time this is not the WKB
approximation. It means that all trajectories are mutually canceled excepting the classical
one. Why? This is an open and the missing problem in the monographs on Feynman
integral.

eiS(ϕ)eiS(χ).

(50)

6 The selection of facts

It is well known that the explosive development of industry was iniciated in
the beginning by the absolutely nonpractical ideas (The maxwell equations,
the Hertz experiments with the electromagnetic waves, the special theory of
relativity, the Boole algebra and the mathematical logic and so on). Some of
the initiators of such unpractical ideas were unpractical people who died poor and who
never thought of the practical employment of their ideas. Nevertheless, they had a guide
that was not their own caprice. It was the happiness for society that such ideas were not
refused. Of course, some ideas are always rejected and the question arises what are
the mathematical and physical ideas which inﬂuence the life of the industrial
society by the maximal way.

According to Poincar´e (1913), the most important facts are those which can
be used several times, or which have a chance to recurring. However, what are
the facts of such properties? According to Poincar´e (1913), the simple facts. Because it
is evident that a complex fact is composed from many simple facts by chance and that
only a still more probable chance could ever so unite them again, on the contrary to the
case of a simple fact.

The question is what is the simple fact. The astronomer has found the simple fact
a point which replaces the universe bodies, because the distance between the stars are

21

immense, that each of the universe body appears only as a point and qualitative diﬀerences
disappear and because a point is a simpler object than a body with shape and qualities.
Particle physicists has found that the simple facts in the microworld are quarks
which are point-like, massive and charged together with electrons, positrons, µ-mesons
, τ -mesons and neutrinos which are also (approximately) point-like with regard to the
present experimental knowledge. All matter is composed from these particles and from
intermediate bosons which cause the electromagnetic, weak, strong and gravitational
interactions between particles and bodies.

The similar situation is in biology, chemistry and so on, where it is possible to establish

the simple facts.

The fundamental rule to perform a good selection of facts is not ascertain resemblances
and diﬀerences of the mathematical objects, however, to discover similarities hidden
under apparent discrepancies. This is what gives value to certain facts that come
to complete a whole and shows that it is the faithful image of other known wholes.
Mathematicians and physicists do not select facts randomly. They try to condensate a
great deal of experience and great deal of thought into a small volume and that is why a
little book on mathematics and theoretical physics contains so many pieces of knowledge.
According to Poincar´e (1913), the selection of basic facts and searching for these
facts is accompanied by the speciﬁc mathematical emotions which can be called as the
emotion of the mathematical beauty. These emotions for the motivation for study
of mathematics and theoretical physics. Poincar´e (Poincar´e, 1913; Wolpert, 1993) writes:

”The scientist does not study nature because it is useful; he studies
it because he delights in it, and because it is beautiful. Of course, I
do not speak here of that beauty which strike the senses, the beauty
of qualities and appearance; not that I undervalue such beauty, far
from it but it has nothing to do with science. I mean the profound
beauty which comes from the harmonious order of the parts and
which a pure intelligence can grasp.”

Or,

”If nature were not beautiful, it would not be worth knowing and
life would not be worth living”.

The mathematical beauty is not the beauty which strikes senses, the beauty of qualities

and appearance. This is (Poincar´e, 1913)

“intimate beauty which comes from the harmonious order of its
parts, and which a pure intelligence can grasp” (Poincar´e, 1913).

Or, (Poincar´e, 1913)

“ ...
the care for the beautiful leads us to the some selection as
care for the useful. Similarly, economy of thought, that economy of
eﬀort, which according to Mach, is the constant tendency of science,
is a source of beauty as well as a practical advantage”.

22

The question arises, whether the mathematical beauty is the suﬃcient condition for
the theory to be physically true. It is necessary to say that it is possible to invent many
mathematical theories, equations, relations and so on which have mathematical beauty
but which do not correspond to nature.

We known that the basic fact of Newton physics is the notion of force. Every force
is invisible, including Lorentz force and forces in particle physics. They transform
according to the transformation laws of the special theory of relativity. The basic
V ,
theoretical object in the Lagrange mechanics is the Lagrange function L = T
where T is the kinetic energy of a particle and V is the potential energy. Potential
energy was introduced by Rankine – the missing information in textbooks. Force in
Lagrange mechanics is deﬁned from potential. Schr¨odinger equation involve potential and
not force. Similarly the general relativity by Einstein does not work with force. Force
in quantum ﬁeld theory is derived from the interactions. Potential energy is derived
from the Green function of a particle. While force and potential are basic ingredients
in classical mechanics, in quantum ﬁeld theory not. We use here the propagator, or the
Green function.

−

The propagator, or the Green function, for the massive photon in dielectric medium

with index of refraction n was derived as (Pardy, 2002a)

D+(x

x′, m2) =

−

i
c

1
4π2

sin[ n2ω2
c2

∞

dω

m2c2
¯h

2 ]1/2
x′

−
x
|

x′

x

|

−

e−iω|t−t′|.

|

0
Z
The potential is according to Schwinger deﬁned by the formula:

−

|

V (x

x′) =

−

dτ D+(x

x′, τ ).

−

∞

−∞

Z

The τ -integral can be evaluated, in case of the massless photon, using the mathematical

formula

2
iω
and the ω-integral can be evaluated using the formula

dτ e−iω|τ | =

−∞

∞

Z

After using eqs. (53) and (54), we get

∞

sin ax
x

0
Z

π
2

,

dx =

for a > 0.

V (x

x′) =

−

1
c

1
4π

1

.

x

|

−

x′

|

In case of the massive photon, the mathematical determination of potential is the
analogical to the massless situation only with the diﬀerence we use the propagator (51)
and the table integral:

Using this integral we get that the potential generated by the massive photons is

∞

dx
x

0
Z

sin

p√x2

u2

=

e−pu.

(cid:16)

−

(cid:17)

π
2

V (x

x′, m2) =

−

exp

1
c

1
4π

x
x′

mcn
¯h |
−

|

−
x

n

|

−

x′

|

.

o

23

(51)

(52)

(53)

(54)

(55)

(56)

(57)

So we have seen that the basic fact in quantum ﬁeld theory was the Green function,
then potential and then force derived from the potential. The question arises what is the
potential between two charges immersed into the sea of photons of the black body. This
problem was solved (Pardy, 1994g).

7 The scientiﬁc activity

The fundamental mechanism of the scientiﬁc research was deﬁned by Gilman (1985):

”Research work is inherently sequential. It involves overcoming a
series of obstacles that must be approached one after one. This
cannot be avoided because a subsequent obstacle does not become
well-deﬁned until the preceding one has been overcome. Thus,
unlike manufacturing, research work does not lend itself to being
accelerated by doing several operations in parallel. And the rate at
which it achieves progress depends on the instantaneous eﬀort that
is put into it”.

Similarly to the Gilman philosophy expresses the physical credo David Stern (Stern,
1993). According to him, scientiﬁc work requires continuously to keep notes of scientiﬁc
ideas, collect them, transcribe them, illustrate them, to use word processors in order to
edit and produce them.

In order to realize the progress in science it is necessary to select the right text for
study. A poor text is frustrating, only a good one makes soar. It is necessary to
select text which provides intuitive insights. And the best way how to obtain insight is to
solve problems which follows directly from the text or are invented independently on it.
The problems must be physically meaningful. Only such problems are interesting.
It is necessary to solve big problems because no one care about publishable petty results.
There is no need to have fear from the big problems because every problem can be divided
or splitted into a sum of small problems easily solvable. However, what is big and good
problem? It obviously depends on the scientiﬁc educations which enables to formulate
the big problems from the big theoretical experience. It depend also on the mentality of a
person who estimates the problem and also on the situation in the scientiﬁc world. The
best way is to have not only one problem but to formulate many problems.
Then, to establish the hierarchy of them in order to decide what problem is
solvable immediately and what problem is more diﬃcult for solution.

There is no need to have a fear from drudgery because no pain, no gain. On the other

hand a minute thinking is more eﬀective than hours of memorising.

The eﬀective way is discussion on the similar problems with experts. At the same time
the eﬀective way is to write a review of what was yet done in the certain ﬁeld and it forces
us to think not only analytically but also synthetically. It is obvious that it is possible
to unify all heuristical activities in the maximalistic form of the scientiﬁc
publication. Namely, to write article with the goal to give clear new mathematical
formulation of the new or old interesting problem, to ﬁnd solution and to show that the
result is principially experimentally possible to verify. Only in this situation one has the
very strong motivation for dealing with science. Such approach leads to discoveries in case
we use the correct heuristics. However, the integral part of every heuristics is knowledge
of the process of problem solving. Let us look on this problem.

24

8 Problem solving

We know from the history of mathematics that Newton approach to the problem solving
was expressed by the words:

”I continuosly keep in the mind the subject of my investigation and
with patience I wait, unless the ﬁrst ﬂash little by little turns out
into the dazzling light”.

The deeply true rule for the very eﬀective problem solving and making the mathemat-

ical discoveries was expressed by Poincar´e (1913) in the following form:

”The mathematical discovery, the great or the little one, never arises
spontaneously. They ever suppose a ground into which are peaces
of knowledge sewn and very well cultivated by work, conscious or
unconscious”.

The substance of the problem solving is also the right question because if we answer
the incorrect question, we move in the blind street. Solution is the long part of human
activity. Solution of problems is a sequence of orderly steps. However, the human cognitive
actions that arrive at the solutions do not form at the ﬁrst moments of such sequence. The
sequence is the ﬁnal result of the human cognitive process of the problem solving. The
most of the elementary actions in the problem solving which do not form the
ﬁnal chain may consists of false starts, daydreams, idiosyncratic associations
or images. Only person well trained in the solving of the particular problems has the
experience for the construction of the ﬁnal chain from which the start is going to the
correct result.

The solution of the problem comes after proper analysis of the situation and after
application of the method ”trial and error”. This method is in inevitable integral part of
the problem solving. Nevertheless, solutions are generally sudden integration. Usually
the signiﬁcants of the problem situation come together and are integrated in a unique way
in one pulse of rapid attentional integration. This characteristic suddenness is usually
called as insight. But for this to happen (Blumenthal, 1977),

“attention must be free enough to go well beyond the raw data from
view due to overloading of the cognitive capacities”.

If we speak about the free attention we mean practically automatical formation of
of sequences during the problem solving. Automatization of the mental processes is the
fundamental basis for the growth of the development of the human knowledge. With
the automatisation of the cognitive processes, which means operations without detailed
attentional focusing, attention is free to concentrate on the goals rather than on the means
of performance. The original system of attentional activity then become automatic tools
in the construction of the more complex mental formation. Or, (Blumenthal, 1977),

”Our ability to learn may be thus limited to the degree that our
attention is free and to the degree that it can be directed to the
events to be learned”.

25

While on the other hand the well-developed automaticity may at times block creativity
or blind the person to solving the problem, on the other hand without automaticity there
is no progress. The creative person must be able to de-automatize and also to apply old
automatism in the new context. According to Whitehead (1928)

”Civilization advances to the degree that we can perform important
processes without thinking about them”.

The last statement is the idea of the computer creativity. We work with programs of
the the computer abstraction, conversation, proofs of theorems, compilation of
texts and so on. At present time there are computer chess players and computer players
of the diﬀerent kinds of plays. We have intelligent programs such as MATHEMATICA,
MAPLE, MATLAB and other superprograms which are able to solve partial problems
of mathematics. Every computer program is only well organized system of operations
in the microprocessor machine. Of course, we believe that in future the organization
of operations will be so brilliant that computer will be able solve not only all problems
from QED, QCD, gravity, cosmology, topology and so on, but also, with some additional
communication with scientists, to create all physical theories and write the scientiﬁc
articles and monographs of high quality.

There is no problem for computer to deﬁne the imaginary number i as the solution o
the elementary equation x2 + 1 = 0, and there is no problem for computer to prove the
famous Euler formula

ii = e− π

2

(58)

and other famous Euler formulas. There is no problem for computer to prove √2
= p/q
where p and q are the integers. On the other hand, to prove that √2 = P/Q for the
inﬁnite integers P and Q is for computer impossible. The problem is inﬁnity. Inﬁnity and
the inﬁnitesimality is the deadline of every computer.

9 General conditions for creativity

Now, let us investigate the necessary general factors from which the creative process
involving problem solving is built up. The complete act of the creative production consists
of the four stages: Preparation, Incubation, Illumination, Veriﬁcation.

Other schemes of the creative work was elaborated by Rossman (Guilford, 1963) who,
after study of the 700 productive inventors concluded that the substantial stages consist
in the seven steps. Observation and need of solution of diﬃculty, analysis of the
need, survey of all available information, formulation of objective solutions,
critical analysis of the solutions, the birth of the new innovation - the idea
proper, experimentation to test the idea.

John Dewey gives the following rules for the problem solving (Guilford, 1963).
Recognition of a problem, analysis of a problem, suggestion of possible
solutions, testing of the consequences, judgment of the selected solution. So,
the similarity between the schemes of diﬀerent authors are obvious.

26

6
10 Theoretical physics and technology

What is the relation between technology and theoretical physics? Let us remember
quotation of Francis Bacon from his Novum Organon (Rescher, 1978):

”Neither the naked hand nor the intellect left to itself can eﬀect
much. It is by instruments and helps that work is accomplished,
which are as much needed by the intellect as by hand. And as
the instruments of the hand either impel or guide its motion, so the
instruments of the mind either encourage or admonish the intellect.”

So, technology forms the inspiration necessary for the theoretical thinking. Pure
technology leads to empirism and alchemy and pure theory leads to useless symbolic
meditation.

Technology is very much older than science. Unaided by science, technology gave
rise to the crafts of primitive man, such as agriculture and metalworking, the Chinese
triumphs of engineering, renaissance cathedrals, and even the steam engine. Not until
the nineteenth century did science have an impact on technology. In human evolution
the ability to make tools, and so control the environment, was a great advantage, but the
ability to do science was almost entirely irrelevant.

The history of science teaches us that there exist an escalation of price of the
innovation of science. But why? Why should the resource-cost of signiﬁcant scientiﬁc
discoveries increase so substantially with the progress of science? Is this trend only the
short-term phenomena or the structural facts deep-rooted in the nature of science? What
is the explanation of the cost-escalation and the logarithmic retardation of the
production of scientiﬁc results in the modern science? What is the explanation
of the cost-escalation of LHC? Planck’s principle is hypothesis that the resource-input
costs are proportional to the scientiﬁc innovation. The reasons for the deceleration of
science are speculative, nevertheless there are facts for such development.

A certain amount of mathematical detail is unavoidable in testing the model which
explains the relationship between science and technology. It is necessary to have some
explicit deployment of certain basic assumptions about the nature of scientiﬁc work.
Unless they are set out with reasonable precision, there is no way of testing the
compatibility and consonance of these assumptions.

Technology is obviously the applied science, and the technology is crucially dependent
upon previous technology (Recher, 1978). For instance the experimental physics heavily
depends on some very advanced technology. Currently, in ﬁelds such as plasma physics
and thermonuclear research, there are many theoretical physicists, with a broad range of
interest and expertise, some with a background in elementary particle physics, intimately
concerned with engineering questions.

It is non exaggeration to say that the laboratory science is the result of the industrial

revolution, or the fruit of its technological harvest.

Just as scientiﬁc knowledge and methods are entering technology, scientiﬁc research
is in turn determined by technology. Technology provides instruments and apparatus
for scientiﬁc investigation and technological development throws up new fundamental
problems that stimulate the course of scientiﬁc research. For instance the transuranic
elements, many isotopes and elementary particles, and most organic compounds are only
created at all through the use of technical aids.

Natural science is fundamentally empirical and its advance is critically dependent not
on human ingenuity alone, but on the phenomena to which we can only acces through

27

interactions with nature. The dependence of the theoretical advance on the goading of
the experimental results was brilliantly expressed by Max Planck (Rescher, 1978):

“ ...it was the facts learned from experiments that shook and ﬁnally
overthrew the classical theory. Each new idea and each new step
were suggested to investigators – where it was not actually thrust
upon them – as the result of measurement”.

The fundamental research in physics is crucially dependent on the progress of tech-
nology. Historical examples are overhelmingly numerous. Superconducting magnets for
a giant bubble chamber are available only because of the extremal industrial eﬀort that
followed the discovery of hard superconductors.
In experimental physics, high-energy
physics and astronomy – wherever photons are counted, which includes much of funda-
mental physics – photomultiplier technology has often paced experimental progress. The
multidirectional impact of semiconductor technology on experimental physics is obvious.
In several branches of fundamental physics it extends from the particle detector through
nanosecond circuitry to the computer output of analyzed data.

The creative scientist must be sensitive for speciﬁc situations and he must be able to
put the crucial questions. However, on the other hand he must have a well-developed
sense of the possible as to the issues which, in the existing state of research technology,
one can hope to tackle eﬀectively with the instruments in hand.

Let us discuss the dependence of the development of the particle physics on the
speciﬁc technology which enables such development. The knowledge of the structure of
atomic nuclei and of elementary particles has been derived mainly from the study of
reactions between colliding particles. The method used is to bombard a ”target” with a
stream of particles and study the particles resulting from this interaction. The simplest
type of the reaction is the elastic scattering in which colliding particles simply deﬂect
each other without undergoing any other change.
In this case the most close distance
of approach which can be explored depends on the initial energy. In inelastic reactions,
on the other hand, one or both of the colliding particles may undergo changes and in
addition new particles and quanta of the electromagnetic radiation may be created. The
creation of new particles and quanta can occur only if the necessary energy is available
in the kinetic energy of the colliding particles. Consequently, the kinetic energy is the
determining factor for the phenomena to be observed. The high energy particles occur in
nature or as a result of interaction of particles accelerated in accelerator. Such accelerators
1010 eV. Particles in a
have already made available particles with energy exceeding 2.5
higher range of energies are accessible only through experiments with LHC and cosmic
rays.

×

This dependence of high-energy physics on technology and engineering frequently
stretches the capabilities of existing technology to the utmost, requiring innovations and
extrapolations that go well beyond any present state of the art. Because the resulting
technological developments have implications much broader than their use in the particle
physics, all technology beneﬁts from the opportunity to respond to this pressure. New
technological developments occur sooner than they would in the absence of such pressure,
and they often present new engineering opportunities, that can be exploited immediately.
Let us recall some examples: very high vacuum systems, sources of enormous radio
frequency power, cryogenic systems, large-scale static superconducting magnets, pattern
recognition devices, very fast electronic circuits, computers and so on.
In this sense,
elementary particle physics has had a major impact on technology, but the eﬀect was not
the result of the direct research.

28

The development of special relativity was evidently conditioned by the technological
success of Michelson and Morley who by their famous interferometer proved the nonex-
istence of the aether wind. Without such technological success, the development of the
special relativity was improbable.

All other experiments which conﬁrmed the relevance of the special relativity theory,
such as the dilation of time, the famous Einstein relation between mass and energy, the
mass dependence on velocity and so on, was evidently enabled by the high technology
and its using in the experimental physics.

Similarly in the general relativity and gravitation the conﬁrmation of the gravitational
waves was conditioned by the gigantic radiotelescope which is also the success of high
technology. The experimental proof was given by Taylor and Hulse at the Arecibo
radiotelescope. They performed the systematic measurement of the motion of the binary
with the pulsar PSR 1913+16 (Damour et al. 1992; Taylor et al. 1992; Taylor, 1993).
They found that the generalized energy-loss formula, which follows from the Einstein
general theory of relativity, is in accordance with their measurement. This success was
conditioned by the fact that the binary emits suﬃcient gravitational radiation to inﬂuence
the orbital motion of it at the observable scale. PSR 1913+16 is now considered as the
best general relativistic laboratory .

It is evident that without symbiosis of extremal high technological equipment which
participated in measurement it was not possible to ﬁnd that all data obtained by
measurement are compatible with the Einstein quadrupole formula.

11 New phenomena and technology

The really major advances in natural science involve the opening up of a new point of
view or in other words the new way of posing old problems.

One of the keygoverning conceptions of the contemporary work in science is the idea
of ”new phenomena” which falls upon the scientiﬁc community of the day like a bolt from
the blue. This idea is handily developed in a passage by the eminent Russian physicist
Piotr Kapitza (Kapitza, 1964).

“I would like to deﬁne a ”new phenomenon” as a natural phe-
nomenon that can neither be foreseen nor explained on the basis
of existing theoretical concepts. To clarify the deﬁnition, I will
name those new phenomena which, in my opinion, were discovered
in the past 150 years. The ﬁrst discovery I would like mention is
the discovery of the Galvani electric current in 1789. This discovery
in no way ﬂowed from the theoretical conceptions of that period.
(Volta only half ﬁnished this discovery, if you like). Another discov-
ery worthy of note, in my opinion, was Oersted discovery in 1820 of
the inﬂuence of electric current on a magnetic needle. I do not con-
sider the Faraday discovery of electromagnetic induction as a new
one, since it is nothing more, than the converse discovery to that
made by Oersted, which it was already possible to foresee. The Oer-
sted discovery led to Maxwell’s equations, and all others were but
an elaboration of this discovery. To foresee the Oersted discovery
theoretically was impossible.

29

A further example of a new phenomenon is the Hertz discovery
of external photo-eﬀect (not electromagnetic waves which we all
know) which thirty or forty years later led to Einstein’s equations,
which were impossible to foresee theoretically. The principles
of indeterminacy and the quantum theory were contained in the
discovery of the photo-eﬀect; all the others were just a further
elaboration.

Then, I would include the Becquerel discovery of radioactivity. This
also was an unforeseable phenomenon. On the other hand, the dis-
covery of the electron cannot be counted as an independent discov-
ery. Next, I would note the Michelson and Morley experiment, the
result of which was impossible to foresee. Then Hertau’s discovery
of cosmic rays, which was also unforeseeable.
It also appears to
me that the discovery of uranium ﬁssion by Lise Maitner and Otto
Hahn should be noted”.

The new data can be derived only by the new technology and once this technology
becomes available there results a land-oﬃce scramble for its exploitation. Nothing more
clearly manifests the dependency of scientiﬁc progress upon advances in the technology
of data-aquisition and coordination which create the conditions requisite for scientiﬁc
innovations than the common phenomenon of a clustering of redundant ﬁndings. Science
grows rapidly around laboratories, around discoveries which make the testing
the hypotheses easier, which provide the sharp and consistent selective
systems. Thus the barometer, microscope, telescope, galvanometer, cloud chamber
chromatograph all have stimulated rapid scientiﬁc growth.

Nothing could more emphatically demonstrate the nonability of the mere intellect
unaided by the technological means for the acquisition of empirical data than the fact that
nowadays in many areas of natural science it is virtually impossible that major discoveries
or any original work or real value and interest should come from some quarter outside
the handful of major research groups or institutes that are ”on top of the problem” at
hand and are privy to the new data generated by the frontier technology of research that
represents a special ”in-house” information source such as particle accelerator, research
reactors, radiotelescope and so on. The case of Einstein who was able to do discoveries
without laboratories is necessary to discuss apart.

On the other hand the progress without the new data is, of course, possible in various
ﬁelds of scholarship and research. The example of pure mathematics shows that the
discoveries can be made in the area of inquiry that has no empirical datum content at all.
But this is not the case which concerns directly the natural science. Only natural science
depends directly on the empirical data and it diﬀers from the so called pure sciences
as mathematics, logic, or hermeneutics, where in case of hermeneutics the substance
of the intellectual activity consists in the imaginative reinterpretation of the old data
from the new conceptual perspectives. Without the inﬂux of new empirical data all one
could do is to proceed to an increasingly sophisticated conceptual resystematization and
reinterpretation of the same data base. While this might indeed constitute a progress of
sorts, it just is not the sort of progress at issue in natural science, and blocks the way to
the empirical process of testing the hypothesis and elimination the indirect ideas on which
the progress of science as it is well known standardly depends. The sort of reinterpretative
innovation can only have major signiﬁcance in the human sciences where the theleogical
concept of meaning is operative. The reinterpretation might count as ”progress” but

30

this sort of progress will not represent a major advance in the area of natural science
where the strictly hermeneutic issues of meaning and theleology at best play a minor and
peripheral part. Nevertheless the hermeneutics has the pedagogical values and can be a
good gymnastics for the human brain.

12 Reciprocity

The scientiﬁc progress in technology depends undoubtedly on the progress of science and
it may be easy to see that the progress in science depends on progress in technology. The
relation between science and technology is in such a way reciprocal (Toulmin, 1972).

“ A natural science and an associated technology are partners in
a kind of historical gavotte, developing most eﬀectively when their
changes are harmoniously synchronized” .

The expressive explanation of the relationship between sience and technology is

presented by Hermann Bondi (1967). He writes:

“I have spoken earlier of disproof as the essential agent of progress,
but why can we disprove today what we couldn’t disprove yesterday?
The answer is that today we can carry out more accurate experi-
ments relating to matters that were inaccessible yesterday. We can
do so because of the progress of technology. And so a progressing
technology is an absolutely essential condition for a progressing sci-
ence. It is a peculiar disease of this country, I think to feel that
science sort of marches in front and that poor, dirty technology
follows a long way behind. But the relation of science and technol-
ogy is the relation of the chicken and the egg; you cannot have the
one without the other. It is true that modern technology derives
from modern science, but we would not have any of modern science
without modern technology”. .

The historical development of science thus moves in a dialectic feedback of interchange
from the one side to the other of the theoretical-technological divide, doing so at increasing
levels of sophistication.
It can be illustrated by construction of ITER where the
compression of matter with laser beams will be probably used in order to get nuclear
fusion (Nakai and Mima, 2004).

ITER means “the way” in Latin and it can be transaled as International Ther-
monuclear Experimental Reactor. While the problem of interaction of an electron
with two laser beams was solved only theoretically with Dirac equation in the restricted
form (Pardy, 2005c), it leads to the practical use if we will consider more realistic situa-
tion with the laser pulses (Pardy, 2003a). The practical meaning is, that two laser beams
(pulses) impinging on a target which is constituted from material in the form of a foam,
can replace 100-200 laser beams impinging on a normal target and it means that the
nuclear fusion with two laser beams is realistic in combination with the thermonuclear
reactor to generate the physical process of implosion (Rozanov, 2004).

Nuclear fusion involves the bringing together of atomic nuclei. The sum of the
individual masses of the nucleons is greater than the mass of the whole nucleus. This
is because the strong nuclear force holds the nucleons together. Then, the combined

31

nucleus is a lower energy state than the nucleons separately. The energy diﬀerence is
released in the fusion process.

There are two major fusion processes. The magnetic conﬁnement and inertial
conﬁnement. The inertial fusion occurs inside targed fuel pellets by imploding them with
It produces extremely high densities
laser or particle beam irradiation in brief pulses.
in the targed where the laser pulse creates a schock wave in the pellet that it intensiﬁed
by its internal geometry. On the other hand, magnetic fusion devices, like the tokamak,
operate at lower densities, but use magnetic ﬁelds to conﬁne the plasma for longer time.
To achieve a burning plasma, a suﬃciently high density of fuel must be heated to
temperatures about 100 million degrees of Celsius that the nuclei collide often enough
despite their natural repulsive forces and energy losses.

The fuels to be used are two isotopes of hydrogen. Namely, deuterium and tritium.
While deuterium occurs naturally in sea water and it means it is inexhaustible, tritium
can be bred in a fusion system when the light element, lithium, absorbs neutrons produced
in the fusion reaction. World resources of lithium are inexhaustible and it means that
also the energy obtained by fusion process is practically inﬁnite. There are only a few
fusion reaction channels in the D-T mixtures in ITER:

D2 + T 3

He4(3.5MeV ) + n(14.1MeV )

D2 + D2

He3(0.8MeV ) + n(2.5MeV )

D2 + D3

T 3(1.0MeV ) + p(3.0MeV )

D2 + He3

He4(3.7MeV ) + p(14.7MeV ).

→

→

→

→

(59)

(60)

(61)

(62)

Fusion reaction only occur at a suﬃcient rate for useful power production when the

nucleai have energies in the range 10 - 100 keV and can collide almost continuosly.

The high temperature fusion is not the ﬁnal word of the nuclear physics. The so called
cold fusion is also considered as a source of the cheep energy and the development of this
strategy is very perspective using the so called sonoluminescence. Sonoluminescence
is generated by ultrasound which produces microscopical bubbles in a liquid. The
temperature inside each bubble is tens thousands of Kelvin and it makes possible for
some ingredients to generate the fusion.

The very modern approach to future energetics is to get the pure energy from the
reaction of matter and antimatter. Antimatter can be created during some experiments
in particle accelerators and then included in the special traps. Matter and antimatter
forms the interaction called annihilation with the maximal product of energy. The so
called annihilation reactor is the reactor without jeopardy.

All new approach to energetics laser fusion in ITER, cold fusion, annihilation reactor
represent the reciprocity between theory and technology. It is evident that the byprod-
ucts of such reciprocity are many fundamental physical discoveries generated
only by this way.

The reciprocity can be realized also by so called theoretical inventions, which are
not still realized but they are described and suggested theoretically. Such invention is for
instance the so called magnetronic laser MAL for the therapy of cancer. It is proposed
in order to show the alternative way of the therapy of cancer (Pardy, 2003c).

32

The other possibility of the reciprocity between technology and theory is the so called
laser acceleration of elementary particles. This is very old problem and QED approach
was suggested (Pardy, 1997b, 2001b).

13 The technological limit

Progress in science is limited at any given stage of scientiﬁc history by the implicit
barriers set by the available technology of data acquisition and processing. Technological
dependency sets technological limits.

The crucial example is the situation in the ancient Greek. From the given information
technology of the day it is not just improbable but actually inconceivable that the Greek
astronomers should have come up with an explanation for the red shift or the Greek
physicians with an account of the bacteriological transmission of some communicable
disease. The reason for this is simple because the relevant types of data needed to
put such phenomena within the cognitive grasp of man simply lay beyond their reach.
Progress in theorizing in these directions was barred by a technological barrier on the
side of data that was as absolute as the then-extant technological barriers in the way of
developing the internal combustion engine or the wireless telegraph. So we endorsed
the idea that the technology is crucially conditioned by the deliminative role of the
technological possibilities of the time.

On the other hand modern technology crucially depends on the theoretical
basis of science. The obvious example is the knowledge of the inﬁnitesimal calculus.
In time of Galileo and Descartes it was a custom to study the acceleration of a body
and its dependence on the distance or time. Nevertheless, it was absolutely impossible to
develop dynamics of the more complicated motions of bodies because the mathematical
instruments of Galileo or Huygens was not suﬃciently elaborated for the description of
the complexity of such motion. So after invention of the inﬁnitesimal calculus it was
possible to consider new problems in mechanics but also in optics in hydrodynamics and
so on and to generate the technological instruments for veriﬁcation of the behavior of the
mechanical, optical, hydrodynamical and so on systems. Without such subtle instrument
as the inﬁnitesimal calculus was, it was practically no motivation and no inspiration to
invent new equipments.

In such a way, the eﬀective development of science consists in the symbiosis of the
mathematical instruments with the technology. The symbiosis is so strong that
practically there is no possibility for development one of them alone without development
of other (Pardy, 1996b).

References

Alvarez, L. W. (1973). Certiﬁcation of three old cosmic-ray emulsion events as Ω− decays
and interactions, Phys. Rev. D 8, 702.

Bia lynicky-Birula, I. and Mycielski, J. (1976). Nonlinear wave mechanics Ann. Phys.
(N.Y.) 100, 62.

Berestetzkii, V. B., Lifshitz, E. M. and Pitaevskii, L. P. Quantum electrodynamics,
Moscow, Nauka, (in Russian), 1989.

Blokhintzev, D. I. The fundamental questions of quantum mechanics, Academia, Prague,

33

(in Czech), 1971.

Blumenthal, A. L., The process of cognition, Prentice Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliﬀs, New
Jersey, 1977.

Bodnarczuk, M. (1990). Assuring both quality and creativity in basic research, presented
at the 17th Annual Conference of the American Society for Quality Control-Energy Di-
vision, Tuscon, Arizona, September 9-12.

Bohm, D. and Vigier, J. (1954). Model of the causal interpretation of quantum theory in
terms of a ﬂuid with irregular ﬂuctuations, Phys. Rev. 96, 208.

Bondi, H. Assumption and myth in physical theory, Cambridge, 1967.

Damour, T. and Taylor J. H. (1992). Strong-ﬁeld test of relativistic gravity and binary
pulsars, Phys. Rev. D 45, 1868.

Dirac, P. A. M. (1928a). The quantum theory of electron I, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 117, 610.

Dirac, P. A. M. (1928b). The quantum theory of electron II, Proc. Roy. Soc. A 118,
351.

Dirac, P. A. M. (1931). Quantized singularities in the electromagnetic ﬁeld , Proc. Roy.
Soc. A 133, 60.

Dirac, P. A. M. (1939). The relation between mathematics and physics, Proc. Roy. Soc.,
Edinburgh 59, 122.

Dirac, P. A. M. (1972a). A positive - energy relativistic wave equation I, Proc. Roy. Soc.
A 322, 435.

Dirac, P. A. M. (1972b). A positive - energy relativistic wave equation II, Proc. Roy.
Soc. A 328, 1.

Dirac, P. A. M. (1977a). The relativistic electron wave equation, Report KFKI - 1977-62,
Hung. Ac. Sci.

Dirac, P. A. M. in: History of twentieth century physics, 109, Academic Press, New York,
1977b.

Dirac, P. A. M. (1982). Pretty mathematics, Int. Journal of Theor. Phys. 21, 603.

Feynman, R. P. (1963). Quantum theory of gravitation, Acta Phys. Polonica 24, 697.

Fok, V. Theory of space, time and gravity, GIFML, Moscow, 1961.

Friedman, Y. and Gofman, Y. (2005). Kinematic relations between relativistically accel-
erated systems in ﬂat space-time based on symmetry, e-print gr-qc/0509004.

Gilman, J. J. (1985). Important of stable eﬀort for research productivity, preprint LBL-
20353, September.

Gupta, S. (1952). Quantization of Einstein gravitational ﬁelds: general treatment, Proc.
Phys. Soc. A 65, 608.

Guilford, J. P. Intellectual factors in productive thinking, The second conference on pro-
ductive thinking,May 2-4, Washington, D.C., 1963.

Hadamard, J. Newton end the inﬁnitesimal calculus, in: The Royal Society Newton Ter-
centenary Celebrations. (1946).

34

Hawking, S. A brief history of time, Bantam press, London, 1989.

Kamran, M. in: Dirac - the taciturn genius, preprint IC/89/265, Miramare-Trieste, 1989.

Madelung, E. (1926). Quantentheorie in hydrodynamischer Form, Z. Physik 40, 322.

Kapitza, P. The future problems of science, in: The science of science, ed. by Goldsmith,
M. and Mackay, A. (eds.), London, 1964.

Kuhn, T. (1963). Interview with Dirac, May 7, Niels Bohr Library, Am. Inst. of Phys.,
New York.

Lemos, N. A. (1983). Stochastic description of the Birula-Mycielski nonlinear equation,
Phys. Lett. 94A, (1), 20.

Nakai, S. and Mima, K. (2004). Laser driven inertial fusion energy: present and perspec-
tive, Rep. Prog. Phys. 67, 321.

Pais, A. Playing with equation, the Dirac way, Report Number DOE/ER/40033B–106,
RU/86/150, Rockefeller University, New York, 1986.

Pardy, M. (1969). A remark on the clock paradox, Phys. Lett. 28 A , No. 11, 766.

Pardy, M. (1973a). Classical motions of spin 1/2 particles with zero anomalous magnetic
moment, Acta Phys. Slovaca 23, No. 1, 5.

Pardy, M. (1973b). WKB approximation for the Duﬃn-Kemmer equation for spin zero
particles, Acta Phys. Slovaca 23, No. 1, 13.

Pardy, M. (1973c). The generalized Feynman integral, Int. Journal of Theor. Phys., Vol.
8, No. 1 , 31.
Pardy, M. (1983a). Particle production by the ˇCerenkov mechanism, Phys. Lett. 94A,
No. 1, 30.

Pardy M. (1983b). The synchrotron production of gravitons by the binary system, Gen-
eral Relativity and Gravitation 15, No. 11, 1027.

Pardy, M. (1983c). Particle production by accelerated charges moving in condensed mat-
ter, J. Phys. G, Nucl. Phys. 9, 853.

Pardy, M. (1984). Particle production by charges in condensed matter, Int. Journal of
Theor. Phys. 23, No. 5, 469.

Pardy, M. (1985). Radiative corrections to classical particle motion in a magnetic ﬁeld,
Phys. Rev. D 31, No. 2, 325.
Pardy, M. (1989a). Finite-temperature ˇCerenkov radiation, Phys. Lett. A 134, No. 6,
357.

Pardy, M. (1989b). The quantum states of the superﬂuid ring from the Gross-Pitaevskii
equation, Phys. Lett. A 140, Nos. 1, 2, 51.

Pardy, M. Possible tests of the nonlinear quantum mechanics, in: Waves and Particles in
Light and Matter, Ed. A. Garuccio and A. van der Merwe, Plenum Publishing Corpora-
tion, 419-422, 1994a.
Pardy, M. (1994b). The ˇCerenkov eﬀect with radiative corrections, Phys. Lett. B 325,
517

Pardy, M. (1994c). The synchrotron production of photons with radiative corrections,

35

Phys. Lett. A 189, 227.

Pardy, M. (1994d). The high-energy gravitons from the binary, e-print: CERN-
TH.7239/94
Pardy, M. (1994e). The gravitational ˇCerenkov radiation with radiative corrections, Phys.
Lett. B 336, 362; ibid: e-print CERN-TH.7270/94.

Pardy, M. (1994f). The emission of photons by plasma ﬂuctuations, e-print CERN-
TH.7348/94.

Pardy, M. (1994g). The two-body potential at ﬁnite temperature, e-print CERN-
TH.7397/94.
Pardy, M. (1995). The ﬁnite-temperature gravitational ˇCerenkov radiation, Int. Journal
of Theor. Phys. 34, No. 6, 951.

Pardy, M. (1996a). The string model of gravity, gr-qc/9602007.

Pardy, M. (1996b). Technological support of theoretical sciences, Scripta Fac. Sci. Nat.
Univ. Purk. Brun. 24 – 26, No.7, 67.
Pardy, M. (1997a). ˇCerenkov eﬀect and the Lorentz contraction, Phys. Rev. A 55, No.
3. 1647.

Pardy, M. (1997b). The quantum ﬁeld theory of laser acceleration, Phys. Lett. A 243,
223. ibid. hep-ph/0005319.

Pardy, M. (2000a). The two-body electromagnetic pulsar, hep-ph/0001277.

Pardy, M. (2000b). Synchrotron production of photons by a two-body system, Int. Jour-
nal of Theor. Phys. 39, No. 4, 1109; hep-ph/0008257.

Pardy, M. (2001a). Deﬂection of light by the screw dislocations in space-time, gr-
qc/0106019.

Pardy, M. (2001b). The quantum electrodynamics of laser acceleration, Radiation Physics
and Chemistry 61, 391.

Pardy, M. (2001c). The circle electromagnetic pulsar, hep-ph/0111036.

Pardy, M. (2001d). To the nonlinear quantum mechanics, quant-ph/0111105.
Pardy, M. (2002a). ˇCerenkov eﬀect with massive photons, Int. Journal of Theor. Phys.
41, No. 5, 887.

Pardy, M. (2002b). Largest terrestrial electromagnetic pulsar, Int. Journal of Theor.
Phys. 41, No. 6, 1155.

Pardy, M. (2003a). Electron in the ultrashort laser pulse, Int. Journal of Theor. Phys.
42, No. 1, 99. ibid: hep-ph/0207274.

Pardy, M. (2003b). The space-time transformations between accelerated systems, gr-
qc/0302007.

Pardy, M. (2003c). Theory of the magnetronic laser, physics/0306024.

Pardy, M. (2003d). Massive photons in particle and laser physics, hep-ph/0308190.

Pardy, M. (2004a). The space-time transformations and maximal acceleration, Spacetime
& Substance Journal 1(21), 17.

36

Pardy, M. (2004b). Massive photons and the Volkov solution, Int. Journal of Theoretical
Physics 43, No. 1, 127.

Pardy, M. (2004c). Volkov solution for an electron in the two wave ﬁelds, hep-ph/0408288.

Pardy, M. (2004d). Radiation of the gravitational and electromagnetic pulsars, hep-
ph/0412330.

Pardy, M. Light in metric space-time and its deﬂection by the screw dislocation, Spacetime
Physics Research Trends. Horizons in World Physics, Volume 248, ISBN 1-59454-322-4,
2005a. ibid. e-print hep-ph/0402249.

Pardy, M. (2005b). The propagation of a pulse in the real strings and rods, math-
ph/0503003.

Pardy, M. (2005c). Radiation of the black body in the external ﬁeld, quant-ph/0509081

Pietschmann, H. (1978). The rules of scientiﬁc discovery demonstrated from examples of
the physics of elementary particles, Foundation of physics 8, Nos. 11/12, 905.

Poincar´e, A. (1913). Science and Method, Thomas Nelson and Sons, London, (1902).

Rafanelli, K, and Schiller, R. (1964). Classical motion of spin-1/2 particles, Phys. Rev.
135, No. 1 B, B279.

Rescher, N. Scientiﬁc progress, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1978.

Ritus, V. I. (1979). The quantum eﬀects of the interaction of elementary particles with
the intense electromagnetic ﬁeld, Trudy FIAN 111, 5.

Rosen, N. A. (1974). Classical picture of quantum mechanics, Nuovo Cimento 19B,(1)
90.

Rozanov, V. B. (2004). On the possible realization of spherical compression for fusion
targets irradiated by two laser beams, Uspekhi Fiz. Nauk, 174(4), 371. (in Russian).

Salam, A. From a life of physics, International atomic agency.

Santilli, R. M. (2005). Inconsistencies of general relativity and their apparent resolution
via the Poincar´e invariant isogravitation, IBR-TPH-03-05.

Schwinger, J. (1976). Gravitons and photons, the methodological uniﬁcation of source
theory, General Relativity and Gravitation. 7, No, 3, 251.

Stern, D. (1993). All I really need to know, Physics Today, 63.

Taylor, J. H. Jr. (1993). Binary pulsars and relativistic gravity (Nobel Lecture).

Taylor, J. H. Wolszczan, A. Damour T. and Weisberg J. M. (1992). Experimental con-
straints on strong-ﬁeld relativistic gravity, Nature 355, 132 .

Toulmin, S. Human Understanding, Vol 1., (Princeton), p. 373, (1972).

Whitehead, A. N. Process and Reality, New York, Macmillan.

Weisskopf, W. (1971). My life as a physicist, Lecture given at the Erice Summer School
in High-Energy Physics, Sicily, Italy in 1971.

Wolpert, L. The unnatural nature of science, Faber and Faber, London, Boston, 1993.

37

