5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
5
0
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Staging quantum cryptography with chocolate balls∗

Karl Svozil†
Institut für Theoretische Physik, University of Technology Vienna,
Wiedner Hauptstraße 8-10/136, A-1040 Vienna, Austria

Moderated by a director, laymen and students are encouraged to assume the role of quanta and enact a quan-
tum cryptographic protocol. The performance is based on a generalized urn model capable of reproducing
complementarity even for classical chocolate balls.

PACS numbers: 03.67.Dd,01.20.+x,01.75.+m,01.40.-d
Keywords: quantum cryptography, role-playing game, RPG, quanta

Dedicated to Antonin Artaud,
author of Le théâtre et son double [1].

I. BACKGROUND

Quantum cryptography is a relatively recent and extremely
active ﬁeld of research within quantum physics. Its main char-
acteristic is the use of (at least ideally) individual particles for
encrypted information transmission. Its objective is to encrypt
messages, or to create and enlarge a set of secret equal random
numbers, between two spatially separated agents by means of
elementary particles, such as single photons, which are trans-
mitted through a quantum channel.

The history of quantum cryptography dates back to around
1970, to the manuscript by Wiesner [2] and a protocol by
Bennett & Brassard in 1998 [3–7] henceforth called “BB84”.
Since then, experimental prototyping has advanced rapidly.
Without going into too much detail and just to name a few ex-
amples, the work ranges from the very ﬁrst experiments car-
ried out in the IBM Yorktown Heights Laboratory by Bennett
and co-workers in 1989 [6], to signal transmissions across
Lake Geneva in 1993 [7], and the network in the Boston
Metropolitan Area which has been sponsored by DARPA
since 2003 [8]. In a much publicized, spectacular demonstra-
tion, a quantum cryptographic aided bank transfer took place
via optical ﬁbers installed in the sewers of Vienna in the pres-
ence of some local politicians and bank representatives [9].

Quantum cryptography forms an important link between
quantum theory and experimental technology, and possibly
even industrial applications. The public is highly interested
in quantum physics and quantum cryptography, but the proto-
cols used are rarely made available to the layman or student in
any detail. For an outsider these subjects seem to be shrouded
in some kind of "mystic veil" and are very difﬁcult to under-
stand, although great interest in the subject prevails.

∗The author reserves the copyright for all public performances. Performance
lincenses are granted for educational institutions and other not-for-proﬁt per-
formances for free; these institutions are kindly asked to send a small note
about the performance to the author.
†Electronic address: svozil@tuwien.ac.at; URL: http://tph.
tuwien.ac.at/~svozil

In what follows, we shall use a simple but effective gen-
eralized urn model introduced by Wright [10–12] to mimic
complementarity. A generalized urn model is characterized
by an ensemble of balls with black background color. Printed
on these balls are some color symbols from a symbolic al-
phabet. The colors are elements of a set of colors. A par-
ticular ball type is associated with a unique combination of
mono-spectrally (no mixture of wavelength) colored symbols
printed on the black ball background. Every ball contains just
one single symbol per color.

Assume further some mono-spectral ﬁlters or eyeglasses
which are “perfect” by totally absorbing light of all other col-
ors but a particular single one. In that way, every color can be
associated with a particular eyeglass and vice versa.

When a spectator looks at a particular ball through such an
eyeglass, the only operationally recognizable symbol will be
the one in the particular color which is transmitted through
the eyeglass. All other colors are absorbed, and the symbols
printed in them will appear black and therefore cannot be dif-
ferentiated from the black background. Hence the ball ap-
pears to carry a different “message” or symbol, depending on
the color at which it is viewed. We will present an explicit
example featuring complementarity, in very similar ways as
quantum complementarity.

The difference between the chocolate balls and the quanta is
the possibility to view all the different symbols on the choco-
late balls in all different colors by taking off the eyeglasses.
Quantum mechanics does not provide us with such a possibil-
ity. On the contrary, there are strong formal arguments sug-
gesting that the assumption of a simultaneous physical exis-
tence [13] of such complementary observables yields a com-
plete contradiction [14].

II. PRINCIPLES OF CONDUCT

In order to make it a real-life experience, we have aimed
at dramatizing quantum cryptography. The quantum world is
turned into a kind of drama, in which actors and a moderator
present a quantum cryptographic protocol on stage. The audi-
ence is actively involved and invited to participate in the dra-
matic presentation. If at all possible, the event should be mod-
erated by a well-known comedian, or by a physics teacher.

The entire process is principally analogous to an exper-
just like humans, single

iment in a slightly surreal sense:

FIG. 1: Utensils required for staging the BB84 protocoll.

(4) Small red and green ﬂags, two of each

2

Balltyp red green

Typ 1
Typ 2
Typ 3
Typ 4

0
0
1
1

0
1
0
1

TABLE I: Schema of imprinting of the chocolate balls.

(3) A large number of foil-wrapped chocolate balls (in
Austria called “Mozartkugeln”) or similar – each with
a black background, imprinted with one red and one
green symbol (either 0 or 1) – to be placed inside the
urn. According to all possible combinations, there are
four types altogether, which can be found in Table I.
There needs to be an equal number of each type in the
urn.

(5) Two blackboards and chalk (or two secret notebooks)

(6) Two coins

The following acting persons are involved:

(1) A moderator who makes comments and ensures that the
participants more or less adhere to the protocol as de-
scribed below. The moderator has many liberties and
may even choose to stage cryptographic attacks.

(2) Alice and Bob, two spatially separated parties

(3) Ideally, but not necessary are some actors who know
the protocol and introduce new visitors to the roles of
Alice, Bob and the quanta.

(4) A large number of people assuming the roles of the
quanta. They are in charge of transmitting the choco-
lates and may eat them in the course of events or after-
wards.

In our model, chocolates marked with the symbols 0 and
1 in red, correspond to what in quantum optics correspond to
horizontally (↔) and vertically (l) polarized photons, respec-
tively. Accordingly, chocolates marked with the symbols 0
and 1 in green, correspond to left ((cid:9)) and right ((cid:8)) circularly
polarized photons, or alternatively to linearly polarized pho-
tons with polarization directions (ւր) and (ցտ) rotated by 45
(p /4) from the horizontal and the vertical, respectively.

The protocol is to be carried out as follows:

(1) Alice ﬂips a coin in order to chose one of two pairs of
glasses: heads is for the green glasses, tails for the red
ones. She puts them on and randomly draws one choco-
late from the urn. She can only read the symbol in the
color of her glasses (due to subtractive color the other
symbol in the complementary color appears black and
cannot be differentiated from the black background).
This situation is illustrated in Figure 2. She writes the

quanta are never completely predictable. Among other things,
they are in fact determined by random events, and marked by a
certain “noise” similar to the chaos that will certainly accom-
pany the public presentation of the quantum cryptographic
protocols. Therefore, the interference of individual partici-
pants is even encouraged and not a deﬁciency of the model.

Throughout the performance, everybody should have fun,
relax, and try to feel and act like an elementary particle –
rather in the spirit of the meditative Zen koan “Mu.” The par-
ticipants might manage to feel like Schrödinger’s cat [15], or
like a particle simultaneously passing through two spatially
separated slits. In idle times, one may even contemplate how
conscious minds could experience a coherent quantum super-
position between two states of consciousness. However, this
kind of sophistication is neither necessary, nor particularly im-
portant for dramatizing quantum cryptographic protocols.

Our entire empirical knowledge of the world is based on
the occurrence of elementary (binary) events, such as the re-
actions caused by quanta in particle detectors yielding either
a “click” or none. Therefore, the following simple syntactic
rules should not be dismissed as mere cooking recipes, for
quantum mechanics itself can actually be applied merely as
a sophisticated set of laws with a possibly superﬂuous [16]
semantic superstructure.

III.

INSTRUCTIONS FOR STAGING THE PROTOCOL

Our objective is to generate a secret sequence of random
numbers only known by two agents called Alice and Bob. In
order to do so, the following utensils depicted in Figure 1 will
be required:

(1) Two sets each of fully saturated glasses in red and green

(complementary colors)

(2) An urn or bucket

x x(cid:3) (cid:0)

~?

x x(cid:3) (cid:0)

~?

~0 1 ~0 0 ~1 0
~0 1 ~1 1 ~1 0
~1 0 ~1 1 ~~0 1 0 0
(cid:10)
(cid:9)

urn

red eyeclass

green eyeglass

FIG. 2: Wright’s generalized urn model put to practical crypto-
graphic use.

symbol she could read, as well as the color used, either
on the blackboard or into her notebook. Should she at-
tempt to take off her glasses or look at the symbols with
the other pair, the player in the role of the quantum is
required to eat the chocolate at once.

(2) After writing down the symbol, Alice hands the choco-
late to the quantum, who in turn carries it to the recipi-
ent Bob. During this process, it could, however, get lost
and for some reason never reach its destination (those
with a sweet tooth might for example not be able to wait
and eat their chocolate immediately).

(3) Before Bob may take the chocolate and look at it, he,
too, needs to ﬂip a coin in order to choose one pair of
glasses. Again, heads is for the green, and tails for the
red ones. He puts them on and takes a look at the choco-
late ball he has just received. He, too, will only be able
to read one of the symbols, as the other one is imprinted
in the complementary color and appears black to him.
Then he makes a note of the symbol he has read, as
well as of the color used. As before, should he attempt
to take off his glasses or look at the symbols with the
other pair, the quantum is required to eat the chocolate
at once.

After the legal transmission has taken place, the “quan-
tum” may eat the chocolate ball just transfered from Al-
ice to Bob, or give it away, anyway.

(4) Now Bob uses one of the two ﬂags (red or green) to tell
Alice whether he has received anything at all, and what
color his glasses are. He does not, however, communi-
cate the symbol itself.

At the same time, Alice uses one of her ﬂags to inform
Bob of the color of her glasses. Again, she does not tell
Bob the symbol she identiﬁed.

(5) Alice and Bob only keep the symbol if they both re-
ceived the corresponding chocolate, and if the color of
their glasses (i.e. their ﬂags) matched. Otherwise, they
dismiss the entry.

The whole process (1-5) is then repeated several times.
As a result, Alice and Bob obtain an identical random se-
quence of the symbols 0 and 1. They compare some of the

3

Balltyp red green

Typ 1 — 0
Typ 2 — 1
0 —
Typ 3
1 —
Typ 4

TABLE II: Coloring and geometry of the four chocolate ﬁgures.

symbols directly to make sure that there has been no attack
by an eavesdropper. The random key can be used in many
cryptographic applications, for instance as one-time pad (like
TANs in online banking). A more amusing application is to
let Alice communicate to Bob secretly whether (1) or not (0)
she would consider giving him her mobile phone number. For
this task merely a single bit of the sequence they have cre-
ated is required. Alice forms the sum i ⊕ j = i + j mod 2 of
her decision and the secret bit and cries it out loudly over to
Bob. Bob can decode Alice’s message to plain text by simply
forming the sum s ⊕ t of Alice’s encrypted message s and the
secret bit t = j shared with Alice, for j ⊕ t = 0. Indeed, this
seems to be a very romantic and easily communicable way
of employing one-time pads generated by quantum cryptogra-
phy. (And seems not too far away from the phantasies of its
original inventors ;-)

IV. ALTERNATIVE PROTOCOL VERSIONS

There exist numerous possible variants of the dramatization
of the BB84 protocol. A great simpliﬁcation can be the total
abandonment of the black background of the chocolate balls,
as well as the colored eyeglasses. In this case, both Alice and
Bob simply decide by themselves which color to take, and
record the symbols in the color cosen.

In the following, we will present yet another BB84-type
protocol with the context translation principle [17]. First of
all, we deﬁne one of two possible contexts (either red or
green). Then we randomly measure another context, which is
independent of this choice. If the two contexts do not match
(red-green or green-red), a context translation [17] is carried
out by ﬂipping a coin. In this case, there is no correlation be-
tween the two symbols. If, however, the two contexts match
(red-red or green-green), the results, i.e.
the symbols, are
identical.

In this protocol, we use sets of two chocolate ﬁgures shaped
like 0 and 1, and uniformly colored in red and green, as shown
in Table II. An equal amount of each type of ﬁgures is placed
inside an urn. No colored glasses are necessary to carry out
this protocol.

The protocol is to be carried out as follows:

(1) First of all, Alice randomly draws one ﬁgure from the
urn and makes a note of its value (0 or 1) and of its
color. Then she gives the ﬁgure to one of the quanta.

(2) The quantum carries the ﬁgure to Bob.

(3) Bob ﬂips a coin and thus chooses one of two colors.
Heads is for green, tails for red. If the color corresponds
to that of the ﬁgure drawn by Alice and presented by
the quantum (red-red or green-green), the symbol of the
ﬁgure counts. If it does not correspond (red-green or
green-red), Bob takes the result of the coin he has just
ﬂipped and assigns heads to 0 and tails to 1. If he wants
to, he may ﬂip it again and use the new result instead.
In any case Bob writes down the resulting symbol.

(4-5) The rest corresponds to the protocol presented previ-

ously.

V. FURTHER DRAMATURGICAL ASPECTS, ATTACKS
AND REALIZATION

It is possible to scramble the protocol in its simplest form
and thus the encryption by drawing two or more chocolate
balls, with or without identical symbols on them, from the urn
at once; or by breaking the time order of events.

It is allowed to carry out peaceful attacks in order to to
eavesdrop on the encrypted messages.
In the case of the
ﬁrst protocol, every potential attacker needs to wear colored
glasses herself. Note that no one (not even the quanta) may
take additional chocolates or chocolate ﬁgures from the urn,
which are identical to the one originally drawn by Alice. In
a sense, this rule implements the no-cloning theorem stating
that it is not possible to copy an arbitrary quantum if it is in a
coherent superposition of the two classical states.

The most promising eavesdropping strategy is the so-called
man-in-the-middle attack, which is often used in GSM net-
works. The attacker manages to impersonate Bob when com-
municating with Alice and vice versa. What basically happens
is that two different quantum cryptographic protocols are con-
nected in series, or carried out independently from each other.
Quantum cryptography is not immune to this kind of attack.

The ﬁrst performance of the quantum drama sketched above
took place in Vienna at the University of Technology as a par-

4

allel part of an event called “Lange Nacht der Forschung”
(“long night of science”). Figure 3a) depicts the “quantum
channel,” a “catwalk” constructed from yellow painted form
liners lifted on the sides with planed wood planks, through
which the individual “quanta” had to pass from Alice to Bob.
In the middle of the catwalk, the path forked into two passes,
which joined again – some allusion to quantum interference.
The photographs in Figure 3b)-f) depict some stages of the
performance.

Experience showed that a considerable fraction of the audi-
ence obtained some understanding of the protocol; in particu-
lar the players acting as Alice and Bob. Most people from the
audience got the feeling that quantum cryptography is not so
cryptic after all, if they are capable of performing the protocol
and even have fun experiencing it.

For the student of physics probably the most important
questions are those related to the differences and similari-
ties between chocolate balls and quanta. This quasi-classical
analogy may serve as a good motivation and starting point to
consider the type of complementarity encountered in quan-
tum physics, and the type of experience presented by single-
quantum experiments.

Acknowledments

a

by

The

born

coffee

idea was

“Lange Nacht

over
conversation
The ﬁrst public performance
Forschung”
der

with Günther Krenn.
was
sponsored
http://www.langenachtderforschung.at.
The chocoate balls “Mozartkugeln” were donated by
Manner http://www.manner.com.
The black foils
covering the balls were donated by Constantia Packaging
http://www.constantia-packaging.com. Thanks
go to Karin Peter and the public relation ofﬁce of the TU Vi-
enna for providing the infrastructure, to the Impro Theater for
the stage performance, and to Martin Puntigam moderating
part of the performances.

[1] A. Artaud, Le théâtre et son double (Gallimard, Paris, 1938).
[2] S. Wiesner, “Conjugate coding,” Sigact News 15, 78–88 (1983).

Manuscript written circa 1970 [6, Ref. 27].

[3] C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard, S. Breidbart, and S. Wiesner,
“Quantum cryptography, or unforgable subway tokens,” in Ad-
vances in Cryptography: Proceedings of Crypto ’82, pp. 78–82
(Plenum Press, New York, 1982).

[4] C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard, “Quantum Cryptography: Pub-
lic key distribution and coin tossing,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Computers, Systems, and
Signal Processing, Bangalore, India, pp. 175–179 (IEEE Com-
puter Society Press, 1984).

[5] A. Ekert, “Quantum cryptography based on Bell’s theorem,”

Physical Review Letters 67, 661–663 (1991).

[6] C. H. Bennett, F. Bessette, G. Brassard, L. Salvail, and
J. Smolin, “Experimental Quantum Cryptography,” Journal of
Cryptology 5, 3–28 (1992).

[7] N. Gisin, G. Ribordy, W. Tittel, and H. Zbinden, “Quantum
cryptography,” Review of Modern Physics 74, 145–195 (2002).
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.
74.145.

[8] C. Elliott, A. Colvin, D. Pearson, O. Pikalo, J. Schlafer, and
H. Yeh, “Current status of the DARPA Quantum Network,”
(2005). quant-ph/0503058.

[9] A. Poppe, A. Fedrizzi, T. Loruenser, O. Maurhardt, R. Ursin,
H. R. Boehm, M. Peev, M. Suda, C. Kurtsiefer, H. Weinfurter,
T. Jennewein, and A. Zeilinger, “Practical Quantum Key
Distribution with Polarization-Entangled Photons,” Optics
Express 12, 3865–3871 (2004). quant-ph/0404115, URL
http://www.opticsinfobase.org/ViewMedia.
cfm?id=80796&seq=0.

[10] R. Wright, “Generalized urn models,” Foundations of Physics

20, 881–903 (1990).

[11] R. Wright, “The state of the pentagon. A nonclassical exam-

5

ple,” in Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Theory, A. R.
Marlow, ed., pp. 255–274 (Academic Press, New York, 1978).
[12] K. Svozil, “Logical equivalence between generalized urn mod-
els and ﬁnite automata,” International Journal of Theoretical
Physics p. in print (2005). quant-ph/0209136.

[13] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, “Can quantum-
mechanical description of physical reality be considered com-
plete?” Physical Review 47, 777–780 (1935). URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.47.777.

[14] S. Kochen and E. P. Specker, “The Problem of Hidden Variables
in Quantum Mechanics,” Journal of Mathematics and Mechan-
ics 17(1), 59–87 (1967). Reprinted in [18, pp. 235–263].
[15] E. Schrödinger, “Die gegenwärtige Situation in der Quanten-
mechanik,” Naturwissenschaften 23, 807–812, 823–828, 844–
849 (1935). English translation in [19] and [20, pp. 152-
167]; http://www.emr.hibu.no/lars/eng/cat/, URL http://
www.emr.hibu.no/lars/eng/cat/.

[16] C. A. Fuchs and A. Peres, “Quantum theory needs no ‘In-
terpretationt’,” Physics Today 53(4), 70–71 (2000). Further
discussions of and reactions to the article can be found in
the September issue of Physics Today, 53, 11-14 (2000),
http://www.aip.org/web2/aiphome/pt/
URL
vol-53/iss-9/p11.htmlandhttp://www.aip.
org/web2/aiphome/pt/vol-53/iss-9/p14.html.
[17] K. Svozil, “Quantum information via state partitions and the
context translation principle,” Journal of Modern Optics 51,
811–819 (2004). quant-ph/0308110.

[18] E. Specker, Selecta (Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 1990).
[19] J. D. Trimmer, “The present situation in quantum mechanics:
a translation of Schrödinger’s “cat paradox”,” Proc. Am. Phil.
Soc. 124, 323–338 (1980). Reprinted in [20, pp. 152-167].
[20] J. A. Wheeler and W. H. Zurek, Quantum Theory and Measure-

ment (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1983).

(a)

(b)

6

(c)

(d)

7

(e)

(f)

FIG. 3: Pictures of (a) the catwalk; (b) the author with two eyeglasses, one green and one red; (c) a “quant” crossing the catwalk; (d) agent
obstacles in the “quantum” catwalk; (e) another “quant” crossing the catwalk; (f) hissing the ﬂag.

