MIT/CTP-3701

The Universe is a Strange Place∗

Frank Wilczek1

1Center for Theoretical Physics, Department of Physics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA

Our understanding of ordinary matter is remarkably accurate and complete, but
it is based on principles that are very strange and unfamiliar. As I’ll explain, we’ve
come to understand matter to be a Music of the Void, in a remarkably literal sense.
Just as we physicists ﬁnalized that wonderful understanding, towards the end of
the twentieth century, astronomers gave us back our humility, by informing us that
ordinary matter – what we, and chemists and biologists, and astronomers themselves,
have been studying all these centuries constitutes only about 5% of the mass of the
I’ll describe some of our promising attempts to rise to this
universe as a whole.
challenge by improving, rather than merely complicating, our description of the
world.

5
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
6
0
1
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ Public lecture given at Lepton-Photon 2005, Uppsala, Sweden July 2005. Earlier I used the same title for

a quite diﬀerent talk, astro-ph/0401347.

2

In a lecture of one hour I will not be able to do justice to all the ways in which the

Universe is a strange place. But I’ll share a few highlights with you.

I.

INTERIOR STRANGENESS

First I’d like to talk about how strange I am. Oh, and you too, of course. That is, I’d like
to describe how strange and far removed from everyday experience is the accurate picture
of ordinary matter, the stuﬀ that we’re made of, that comes from modern physics.

I think that 10,000 years from now, our descendants will look back on the twentieth
century as a very special time. It was the time when humankind ﬁrst came to understood
how matter works, indeed what it is.

By 1900, physicists had a great deal of Newtonian-level knowledge. The paradigm for
this level of understanding is Newton’s account of the motion of planets, moons, and comets
in the solar system. Newtonian-level knowledge takes the form: if bodies are arranged with
given positions and velocities at time t0, then the laws of physics tell you what their positions
and velocities will be at any other time. Newton’s theory is extremely accurate and fruitful.
It led, for example, to the discovery of a new planet – Neptune – whose gravity was necessary
to account for anomalies in motion of the known planets. (We’re facing similar problems
today, as I’ll describe later. Neptune was the “dark matter” of its day.)

But nothing in Newton’s theory prescribes how many planets there are. Nothing predicts
their masses, or their distances from the Sun. For planetary systems all that freedom is
a good thing, we know now, because astronomers are discovering other systems of planets
around other stars, and these solar systems are quite diﬀerent from ours, but they still obey
Newton’s laws.

But no such freedom is observed for the building blocks of ordinary matter. Those
building blocks come in only a few kinds, that can only ﬁt together in very restricted ways.
Otherwise there could not be such a subject as chemistry, because each sample of matter
would be diﬀerent from every other sample. Pre-modern physics could not account for that
fact, and therefore it could not even begin to account for the speciﬁc chemical, electrical,
and mechanical properties of matter.

The turning point came in 1913, with Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom. Bohr’s model
brought quantum ideas into the description of matter. It pictured the hydrogen atom as
analogous to a simpliﬁed solar system (just one planet!) held together by electric rather than
gravitational forces, with the proton playing the role of the sun and the electron the role of
the planet. The crucial new idea in Bohr’s model is that only certain orbits are allowed to
the electron: namely, oribts for which the angular momentum is a whole-number multiple
of Planck’s constant. When the atom exchanges energy with the outside world, by emitting
or absorbing light, the electron jumps from one orbit to another, decreasing its energy by
emitting a photon or increasing its energy by absorbing one. The frequency of the photon,
which tells us what color of light it conveys, is proportional to its energy according to the
Planck-Einstein relation E = hν, where E is the energy, ν is the frequency, and h is Planck’s
constant. Because the allowed orbits form a discrete set, rather than a continuum, we ﬁnd
discrete spectral lines corresponding to the allowed energy changes.

Bohr’s model predicts the colors of the spectral lines remarkably accurately, though not
perfectly. When Einstein learned of Bohr’s model, he called it “the highest form of musicality
in the sphere of thought”. I suppose Einstein was alluding here to the ancient idea of “Music
of the Spheres”, which has enchanted mathematically inclined mystics from Pythagoras to

3

Kepler. According to that idea the planets produce a kind of music through their stately
periodic motions, as the strings of a violin do through their periodic vibrations. Whether
the “Music of the Spheres” was intended to be actual sounds or something less tangible, a
harmonious state induced in the appreciative mind, I’m not sure. But in Bohr’s model the
connection is close to being tangible: the electron really does signal its motion to us in a
sensory form, as light, and the frequencies in the line spectrum are the tonal palette of the
atomic instrument.

So that’s one way in which Bohr’s model is musical. Another is in its power to suggest
meanings far beyond its actual content. Einstein sensed immediately that Bohr’s introduc-
tion of discreteness into the description of matter, with its constraint on the possible motions,
intimated that the profound limitations of pre-modern physics which I just described would
be overcome – even though, in itself, Bohr’s model only supplied an approximate description
of the simplest sort of atom.

In one respect, however, Einstein was wrong. Bohr’s model is deﬁnitely not the highest
form of musicality in the sphere of thought. The theory that replaced Bohr’s model, modern
quantum mechanics, outdoes it by far.

In modern quantum mechanics, an electron is no longer described as a particle in orbit.
Rather, it is described by a vibrating wave pattern in all space. The equation that describes
the electron’s wave function, Schr¨odinger’s equation, is very similar to the equations that
describe the vibrations of musical instruments. In Schr¨odinger’s account light is emitted or
absorbed when the electron’s vibrations set the electromagnetic ﬁeld – aether, if you like –
in motion, by the same sort of sympathetic vibration that leads to the emission of sound
by musical instruments, when their vibrations set air in motion. These regular, continuous
processes replace the mysterious “quantum jumps” from one orbit to another that were
assumed, but not explained, in Bohr’s model.

A major reason that physicists were able to make rapid progress in atomic physics, once
Schr¨odinger found his equation, is that they were able to borrow techniques that had already
been used to analyze problems in sound production and music. Ironically, despite his well-
known love of music, Einstein himself never accepted modern quantum mechanics.

After the consolidation of atomic physics in the early 1930s, the inner boundary of physics
shrank by a factor of a hundred thousand. The challenge was to understand the tiny atomic
nuclei, wherein are concentrated almost all the mass of matter. The nuclei could only held
together by some new force, which came to be called the strong force, since gravity is much
too feeble and electrical forces are both too feeble and of the wrong sign to do the job (being
repulsive, not attractive). Experimenters found that it was useful to think of nuclei as being
built up from protons and neutrons, and so the program initially was to study the forces
between protons and neutrons. You would do this by shooting protons and neutrons at
each other, and studying how they swerved. But when the experiments were done, what
emerged was not just existing particles swerving around in informative directions, but a
whole new world containing many many new particles, a Greek and Roman alphabet soup
containing among others π, ρ, K, ω, φ mesons and ∆, Λ, Σ, Ω baryons and their antiparticles,
that are unstable, but otherwise bear a strong family resemblance to protons and neutrons.
So the notion of using protons and neutrons as elementary building blocks, bound together
by forces you would just go ahead and measure, became untenable.

I’ll skip over the complicated story of how physicists struggled to recover from this confus-
ing shock, and just proceed to the answer, as it began to emerge in the 1970s, and was ﬁrmly
established during the 1990s. The building blocks of nuclei are quarks and gluons. Add elec-

4

trons and photons, and you have all the building blocks you need for atoms, molecules, ions,
and indeed all ordinary matter.

Quarks once had a bad reputation, because for many years attempts to produce them in
the laboratory, or to ﬁnd them anywhere, failed. People went so far as to search with great
care through cosmic ray tracks, and even in moon rocks. And gluons had no reputation at
all. But now we know that quarks and gluons are very real. You can see them, quite literally
— once you know what to look for! Here (Fig. 1) is a picture of a quark, an antiquark, and

FIG. 1: A three-jet event at LEP. Courtesy L3 collaboration.

a gluon. What is shown here is the result of colliding electrons and positrons at very high
energy. It was taken at the Large Electron Positron collider (LEP) at CERN, near Geneva,
which operated through the 1990s. You see that the particles are emerging in three groups,
which we call jets. I want to convince you that one of these jets represents a quark, one an
antiquark, and one a gluon.

The key idea for justifying this interpretation is asymptotic freedom, for which the Nobel
Prize was awarded in 2004. Asymptotic freedom says that an energetic quark (or antiquark or
gluon) will frequently emit soft radiation, which does not signiﬁcantly change the overall ﬂow
of energy and momentum; but only rarely emit hard radiation, which does produce changes
in the ﬂow. Here’s what asymptotic freedom means, concretely, in the LEP situation. Right
after the electron and positron annihilate, their energy is deposited into a quark-antiquark
pair moving rapidly in opposite directions. Usually the quark and antiquark will only emit
soft radiation. In that case, which occurs about 90% of the time, we will have two jets of
particles, moving in opposite directions, whose total energy and momentum reﬂect those of
the original quark and antiquark. More rarely, about 10% of the time, there will be a hard
radiation, where a gluon is emitted. That gluon will then initiate a third jet. And 10% of
the 10%, that is 1%, of the time a second hard radiation will occur, and we’ll have four jets,
and so forth. Having invested hundreds of millions of Euros to construct the LEP machine,
physicists exploited it intensely, producing many millions of collisions, working up to about
one bang per buck. So it was possible to study the properties of these multi-jet events, to
see how likely it was for them to emerge at diﬀerent angles and to share the available energy
in various ways, and thereby to test precisely whether they behave in the way that our basic
theory of quarks and gluons, namely quantum chromodynamics (QCD), predicts. It works.

5

That’s why I can tell you, with complete conﬁdence, that what you’re seeing in the picture
is a quark, an antiquark, and a gluon. We see them not as particles in the conventional
sense, but through the ﬂows they imprint on the visible particles.

There’s another aspect of this business that I think is extremely profound, though it is
so deeply ingrained among physicists that they tend to take it for granted. It is this: These
observations provide a wonderfully direct illustration of the probabilistic nature of quantum
theory. At LEP experimentalists just did one thing over and over again, that is collide
electrons and positrons. We know from many experiments that electrons and positrons have
no signiﬁcant internal structure, so there’s no question that when we make these collisions
we really are doing the same thing over and over again.
If the world were governed by
deterministic equations, then the ﬁnal result of every collision would be the same, and the
hundreds of millions of Euros would have had a very meagre payoﬀ. But according to the
principles of quantum theory many outcomes are possible, and our task is to compute the
probabilities. That task, computing the probabilities, is exactly what QCD accomplishes so
successfully.

By the way, one consequence of the probabilistic nature of our predictions is that while I
can tell you that you’re seeing a quark, an antiquark and a gluon, I can’t say for sure which
is which!

So we know by very direct observations that quarks and gluons are fundamental con-
stituents of matter. QCD proposes that gluons and quarks are all we need to make protons,
neutrons, and all the other strongly interacting particles. That’s an amazing claim, because
there’s a big disconnect between the properties of quarks and gluons and the properties of
the things they are supposed to make.

Most notably, gluons have strictly zero mass, and the relevant quarks have practically zero
mass, but together, it’s claimed, they make protons and neutrons, which provide overwhelm-
ingly most of the mass of ordinary matter. That claim ﬂies in the face of the “conservation
of mass” principle that Newton used as the basis of classical mechanics and Lavoisier used
as the foundation of quantitative chemistry. Indeed, before 1905, this idea of getting mass
from no mass would have been inconceivable. But then Einstein discovered his second law.
My friend and mentor Sam Treiman liked to relate his experience of how, during World
War II, the U.S. Army responded to the challenge of training a large number of radio
engineers starting with very diﬀerent levels of preparation, ranging down to near zero. They
designed a crash course for it, which Sam took, and a training manual, which Sam loved,
and showed me . In that training manual, the ﬁrst chapter was devoted to Ohm’s three
laws. The Army designed Ohm’s ﬁrst law is V = IR. Ohm’s second law is I = V /R. I’ll
leave it to you to reconstruct Ohm’s third law.

Similarly, as a companion to Einstein’s famous equation E = mc2 we have his second

law, m = E/c2.

All this isn’t quite as silly as it may seem, because diﬀerent forms of the same equation
can suggest very diﬀerent things. The great theoretical physicist Paul Dirac described his
method for making discoveries as “playing with equations”.

The usual way of writing the equation, E = mc2, suggests the possibility of obtaining large
amounts of energy by converting small amounts of mass. It brings to mind the possibilities
of nuclear reactors, or bombs. In the alternative form m = E/c2, Einstein’s law suggests
the possibility of explaining mass in terms of energy. That is a good thing to do, because
in modern physics energy is a more basic concept than mass. It is energy that is strictly
conserved, energy that appears in the laws of thermodynamics, energy that appears in

6

Schr¨odinger’s equation. Mass, by contrast, is a rather special, technical concept – it labels
irreducible representations of the Poincar´e group (I won’t elaborate on that.)

Actually, Einstein’s original paper does not contain the equation E = mc2, but rather
m = E/c2. So maybe I should have called m = E/c2 the zeroth law, but I thought that
might be confusing. The title of the original paper is a question: “Does the Inertia of
a Body Depend Upon its Energy Content?” From the beginning, Einstein was thinking
about the foundations of physics, not about making bombs. I think he would have been
delighted to learn that our answer to his question is a resounding “Yes!” Not only does
the inertia of bodies depend on its energy content; for ordinary matter most of inertia
is the energy associated with moving quarks and gluons, themselves essentially massless,
following m = E/c2. Who knows, it might even have inspired him to accept modern quantum
mechanics.

To solve the equations of QCD, and identify the diﬀerent ways in which quarks and
gluons can organize themselves into the particles we observe, physicists have pushed the
envelope of modern computing. They sculpt upwards of 1030 protons and neutrons into a
massively parallel computer, which runs at teraﬂop speeds – that is, a thousand billion,
or 1012 multiplications of big numbers per second for months, that is 107 seconds. All to
calculate what every single proton does in 10−24 seconds, that is ﬁgure out how to arrange
its quarks and gluons eﬃciently, to get the minimum energy.

Evidently there’s room for improvement in our methods of calculation. But already the
results are most remarkable. They are displayed in Fig. 2. I think what you see in that

FIG. 2: Hadron masses as computed numerically in QCD. Courtesy D. Toussaint.

modest-looking plot is one of the greatest scientiﬁc achievements of all time. We start with
a very speciﬁc and mathematically tight theory, QCD. An objective sign of how tight the
theory is, is that just a very few parameters have to be taken from experiment. Then
everything else is ﬁxed, and must be computed by algorithms the theory supplies, with no

7

room for maneuver or fudge factors. Here three parameters were ﬁxed, indicated by the
diamonds, by matching the masses of the π and K mesons and a splitting among heavy
quark mesons (I won’t enter the technicalities) and then all the other calculated masses are
displayed as circles, with line intervals indicating the remaining uncertainty in calculation
(due to computer limitations). As you see, they agree quite well with the measured values,
indicated as squares.

What makes this tour de force not only impressive, but also historic, is that one of the
entries, N, means “nucleon”, that is, proton or neutron. So QCD really does account for
the mass of protons and neutrons, and therefore of ordinary matter, starting from ideally
simple elementary objects, the quarks and gluons, which themselves have essentially zero
mass. In this way, QCD fulﬁlls the promise of Einstein’s second law.

Another important aspect of Figure 2 is what you don’t see. The computations do not pro-
duce particles that have the properties of individual quarks or gluons. Those objects, while
they are the building block, are calculated never to occur as distinct individual particles.
They are always conﬁned within more complex particles – or, as we’ve seen, reconstructed
from jets. This conﬁnement property, which historically made quarks and gluons diﬃcult to
conceive and even more diﬃcult to accept, is now a calculated consequence of our equations
for their behavior.

Thus our theory corresponds to reality, in considerable detail, wherever we can check
it. Therefore we can use it with some conﬁdence to explore domains of reality that are
extremely interesting, but diﬃcult to access directly by experiment.

I think that for the future of physics, and certainly for the future of this lecture, the most
profound and surprising result to emerge from late twentieth-century physics may be the
realization that what we perceive as empty space is in reality a highly structured and vibrant
dynamical medium. Our eyes were not evolved to see that structure, but we can use our
theories to calculate what empty space might look like if we had eyes that could resolve down
to distances of order 10−14 centimeters, and times of order 10−24 seconds. Derek Leinweber
in particular has put a lot of eﬀort into producing visualizations of the behavior of quark
and gluon ﬁelds, and I highly recommend his website www.physics.adelaide.edu.au/theory/
staﬀ/leinweber/VisualQCD/QCDvacuum/
welcome.html as a source of enlightenment. Figure 3 shows gluon ﬁelds as they ﬂuctuate in
“empty” space. I want to emphasize that this is not a free fantasy, but part of the calculation
that leads to Fig. 2 (for experts: what is shown is a smoothed distribution of topological
charge).

FIG. 3: Gluon ﬁelds ﬂuctuating in Void. Courtesy D. Leinweber.

8

The diﬀerent particles we observe are the vibration patterns that are set up in the medium
of “empty” space, let’s call it Void, when it is disturbed in diﬀerent ways. Stable particles
such as protons correspond to stable vibration patterns; unstable particles correspond to
vibration patterns that hold together for a while, then break apart. This is not a metaphor,
it is our most profound understanding. Rather it is more familiar and conventional ideas
about matter that are metaphors, for this deeper reality.

Indeed, the way Figure 2 was produced, and more generally the way we compute the
properties of matter from ﬁrst principles, is to introduce some disturbance in Void, let it
settle down for a while, and observe what kind of stable or long-lived patterns emerge. An
example is shown in Fig. 4. Here a quark and an antiquark are inserted on the left, the

FIG. 4: Disturbance in Void from injecting quark-antiquark pair. Courtesy G. Kilcup.]

medium responds, and a stable vibration pattern emerges (the plane shows a slice of time).
This picture is obtained by averaging over the ﬂuctuations that would occur in the absence
of the quark and antiquark, so the stuﬀ in Figure 3 has been subtracted; we’re interested in
the net disturbance. This is how we produce a π meson for numerical study. The picture for
a proton would look similar; you’d get it by studying the disturbance when you introduce
three quarks, instead of a quark and antiquark.

We go from these vibration patterns to masses by combining Einstein’s second law m =
E/c2 with the Einstein-Planck relation E = hν between the energy of a state and the
frequency at which its wave function vibrates. Thus

or alternatively

m = E/c2 = hν/c2

ν = mc2/h.

Thus masses of particles correspond in a very direct and literal way to the frequencies at
which the Void vibrates, when it is disturbed. That is how we calculate them. The ancient
“Music of the Spheres” was an inspiring concept, but it never corresponded to ideas that
are very precise or impressive. Now we have a Music of the Void, which I trust you’ll agree
is all three of these things.

9

II. OUR STRANGE SURROUNDINGS

Just as we physicists were ﬁnally consolidating this powerful understanding of ordinary
matter, astronomers made some amazing new discoveries, to help us maintain our humility.
They discovered that the sort of matter we’ve been familiar with, made from electrons,
photons, quarks, and gluons — the stuﬀ we’re made of, the stuﬀ of chemistry and biology,
the stuﬀ of stars and nebulae — makes up only 5% of the Universe by mass. The remainder
consists of at least new substances. There’s 25% in something we call dark matter, and 70%
in what we call dark energy.

Very little is known about dark matter, and even less about dark energy. One thing we
do know is that neither of them is really dark. They’re transparent. They neither emit
nor absorb light to any signiﬁcant extent — if they did, we’d have discovered them a long
time ago. In fact, dark matter and dark energy seem to interact very feebly not only with
photons, but with ordinary matter altogether. They’ve only been detected through their
gravitational inﬂuence on the (ordinary) kind of matter we do observe.

Other things we know: Dark matter forms clumps, but not such dense clumps as ordinary
matter. Around every visible galaxy that’s been carefully studied we ﬁnd an extended halo
of dark matter, whose density falls oﬀ much more slowly than that of ordinary matter as
you recede from the center. It’s because it is more diﬀusely distributed that averaged over
the Universe as a whole the dark matter has more total mass than ordinary matter, even
though ordinary matter tends to dominate in the regions where it is found.

Dark energy doesn’t seem to clump at all. It is equally dense everywhere, as far as we
can tell, as if it is an intrinsic property of space-time itself. Most strange of all, dark energy
exerts negative pressure, causing the expansion of the Universe to accelerate.

With that, I’ve basically told you everything we know about dark matter and dark energy.
It’s not very satisfying. We’d like to know, for example, if the dark matter is made of
particles. If so, what do those particles weigh? Do they really not interact with matter at
all, except by gravitation, or just a little more feebly than we’ve been sensitive to so far? Do
dark matter particles interact strongly with each other? Can they collide with one another
and annihilate?

How do you ﬁnd answers to questions like those? One way, of course, is to do experiments.
But the experiments have not borne fruit so far, as I mentioned, and as a general rule it’s
diﬃcult to ﬁnd something if you don’t know what you’re looking for. There’s another way
to proceed, which has a great history in physics. That is, you can improve the equations
of fundamental physics. You can try to make them more consistent, or to improve their
mathematical beauty.

For example, in the middle of the nineteenth century James Clerk Maxwell studied the
equations of electricity and magnetism as they were then known, and discovered that they
contained a mathematical inconsistency. At the same time Michael Faraday, a self-taught
genius of experimental physics who did not have great skill in mathematics, had developed
a picture of electric and magnetic phenomena that suggested to Maxwell how he might
ﬁx the inconsistency, by adding another term to the equations. When Maxwell added
this term, he found that the new equations had solutions where changing electric ﬁelds
induce magnetic ﬁelds, and vice versa, so that you could have self-supporting waves of
electromagnetic disturbance traveling through space at the speed of light. Maxwell proposed
that his electromagnetic disturbances in fact are light, and in this way produced one of the
great uniﬁcations in the history of physics. As a bonus, he predicted that there could be

10

electromagnetic waves of diﬀerent wavelength and frequency, which would in eﬀect be new
forms of “light”, not visible to human eyes. Waves of this sort were ﬁnally produced and
detected by Heinrich Hertz in 1888; today of course we call them radio waves, and also
microwaves, gamma rays, and so on. Another example came around 1930, when Paul Dirac
worked to improve Erwin Schr¨odinger’s equation for the quantum mechanical wave function
of electrons. Schr¨odinger’s equation, as I mentioned before, made a big logical improvement
on Bohr’s model and is quite successful in giving a ﬁrst account of atomic spectra. We still
use it today. But Schr¨odinger’s equation has a severe theoretical ﬂaw: it is not consistent
with special relativity.
In 1928 Dirac invented an improved equation for electrons, that
implements quantum dynamics and is also consistent with special relativity. Some of the
solutions of Dirac’s equation correspond closely to solutions of solutions of Schr¨odinger’s
equation, with small corrections. But Dirac’s equation has additional solutions, that are
completely new. At ﬁrst it was quite unclear what these solutions meant physically, but
after some struggles and false starts in 1932 Dirac put forward a convincing interpretation.
The new solutions describe a new kind of matter, previously unsuspected. Dirac predicted
the existence of antielectrons, or positrons. Within a few months, the experimentalist Carl
Anderson found positrons, by studying cosmic rays. It was the ﬁrst example of antimatter.
Nowadays positrons are used for medical purposes (Positron Emission Tomography, or PET),
and many other kinds of antimatter have been discovered.

Today we have several good new ideas for how to improve the equations of physics. I’ll
mention a few momentarily. But ﬁrst let me make a preliminary observation: Because we
understand so much about how matter behaves in extreme conditions, and because that
behavior is remarkably simple, we can work out the cosmological consequences of changes
in our fundamental equations. If our suggestion for improving the equations predicts new
kinds of particles, we can predict the abundance with which those particles would be pro-
duced during the big bang. If any of the particles are stable, we will predict their present
cosmological density. If we’re lucky, we might ﬁnd that one of our new particles is produced
in the right amount, and has the right properties, to supply the astronomers’ dark matter.
Recently experimenters have been testing our theoretical understanding of the early uni-
verse in a most remarkable way. By colliding gold nuclei at extremely high energies they
create, for very brief times and in a very small volume (around 10−20 seconds, and 10−12
centimeters), conditions of temperature and density in terrestrial laboratories similar to
those that last occurred throughout the universe a hundredth of a second or so after the
Big Bang. The ashes of these tiny ﬁreballs are thousands of particles, as shown in Fig. 5.
It looks very complicated, and in many ways it is, but our theories makes many predictions
about the overall ﬂow of energy and the properties of the most energetic particles that can
be compared with observations, and those predictions work pretty well, so we’re encouraged,
and emboldened.

So, how do we go about improving our equations? Over the course of the twentieth
century, symmetry has been immensely fruitful as a source of insight into Nature’s basic
operating principles. QCD, in particular, is constructed as the unique embodiment of a
huge symmetry group, local SU(3) color gauge symmetry (working together with special
relativity, in the context of quantum ﬁeld theory). As we try to discover new laws that
improve on what we know, it seems good strategy to continue to use symmetry as our
guide. This strategy has led physicists to several compelling suggestions. Let me very
brieﬂy mention four of them:

1. We can combine our theories of the strong, weak, and electromagnetic interactions

11

FIG. 5: Particles emerging from a violent collision of gold nuclei, which reproduces physical con-
ditions close to the big bang. Courtesy STAR collaboration.

into a single uniﬁed theory, by extending the symmetries that form the basis of these
theories into a larger symmetry, that contains all of them (and more). This is known
as grand uniﬁcation. Grand uniﬁcation predicts the existence of new particles and new
phenomena, including mass for neutrinos (which has been observed) and instability of
protons (not yet observed).

2. We can extend the space-time symmetry of special relativity to include mixing of
space and time with additional quantum dimensions. This is known as supersymmetry.
Supersymmetry predicts the existence of a whole new world of particles. Each currently
known particle will have a heavier superpartner, with diﬀerent spin.

3. We can enhance the equations of QCD by adding a symmetry that explains why the
strong interactions exhibit no preferred arrow of time. This leads us to predict, by
quite subtle and advanced arguments, the existence of a new kind of extremely light,
extremely feebly interacting particle, the axion.

4. We can enhance the symmetry of our equations for the weak and electromagnetic in-
teractions, and achieve a partial uniﬁcation, by postulating the existence of a universal
background ﬁeld, the so-called Higgs condensate, that ﬁlls all space and time. There
is already a lot of indirect evidence for that idea, but we’d like to produce the new
particles, the Higgs particles, that this ﬁeld is supposed to be made of.

Each of these items leads into a beautiful story and an active area of research, and it’s
somewhat of a torture for me to restrain myself from saying a lot more about them, but
time forbids. I’ll just describe one particular line of ideas, that ties together the ﬁrst two of
these items with the dark matter problem, and that will soon be tested decisively.

Both QCD and the modern theory of electromagnetic and weak interactions are founded
on similar mathematical ideas. The combination of theories gives a wonderfully economical
and powerful account of an astonishing range of phenomena. It constitutes what we call the
Standard Model. Just because it is so concrete and so successful, the Standard Model can
and should be closely scrutinized for its aesthetic ﬂaws and possibilities. In fact, the structure

12

of the Standard Model gives powerful suggestions for its further fruitful development. They
are a bit technical to describe, but I’ll say a few words, which you can take as poetry if not
as information.

The product structure SU(3) × SU(2) × U(1) or the gauge symmetry of the Standard
Model, the reducibility of the fermion representation (that is, the fact that the symme-
try does not make connections linking all the fermions), and the peculiar values of the
hypercharge quantum numbers assigned to the known particles all suggest the desirability
of a larger symmetry. The devil is in the details, and it is not at all automatic that the
superﬁcially complex and messy observed pattern of matter will ﬁt neatly into a simple
mathematical structure. But, to a remarkable extent, it does.

To try out that idea, we have to extend our theory to distances far smaller than, or
equivalently energies far larger than, we have so far accessed experimentally. Fig. 6 gives
a sense of what’s involved. The left-most part of the graph, with the discs, represents our

FIG. 6: Uniﬁcation of couplings using the currently known particles (upper panel) and with low-
energy supersymmetry (lower panel).

actual measurements. It’s a logarithmic scale, so each tick on the horizontal axis means a
factor of ten in energy. Building an accelerator capable of supplying one more factor of ten
in energy will cost a few billion Euros. After that it gets really diﬃcult. So the prospects for
getting this information directly are not bright. Nevertheless, it’s interesting to calculate,
and if we do that we ﬁnd some very intriguing results.

In correcting for the medium, we must include ﬂuctuations due to all kinds of ﬁelds,
including those that create and destroy particles we haven’t yet discovered. So we have
to make some hypothesis, about what kind of additional particles there might be. The
simplest hypothesis is just that there are none, beyond those we know already. Assuming
this hypothesis, we arrive at the calculation displayed in the top panel of Fig. 6. You see

13

that the approach of coupling strengths to a uniﬁed value is suggested, but it is not quite
accurately realized.

Physicists react to this near-success in diﬀerent ways. One school says that near-success
is still failure, and you should just give up this dream of uniﬁcation, that the world is bound
to be a lot more complicated. Another school says that there is some truth in the basic
idea, but the straightforward extrapolation of physics as we know it (based on quantum
ﬁeld theory) to such extreme energies and distances is wrong. You might have to include
the eﬀect of extra dimensions, or of strings, for example. So you should be grateful that this
calculation works as well as it does, and wait for revolutionary developments in physics to
teach you how to improve it.

Either or both of these reactions might turn out to be right. But I’ve long advocated a
more deﬁnite and (relatively) conservative proposal that still seems promising, and I’d like
to mention it now, having warned you that not all my colleagues have signed on to it, by
any means. It is based on yet another way to improve the equations of physics, known as
low-energy supersymmetry.

As the name suggests, supersymmetry involves expanding the symmetry of the basic
equations of physics. This proposed expansion of symmetry goes in a diﬀerent direction
from the enlargement of gauge symmetry, which we’ve just been considering. Supersymmetry
connects particles having the same color charges and diﬀerent spins, whereas expanded gauge
symmetry changes the color charges while leaving spin untouched. Supersymmetry expands
the space-time symmetry of special relativity.

In order to implement low-energy supersymmetry, we must postulate the existence of a
whole new world of heavy particles, none of which has yet been observed directly. There
is, however, a most intriguing indirect hint that this idea may be on the right track. If we
include the particles needed for low-energy supersymmetry, in their virtual form, into the
calculation of how couplings evolve with energy, then accurate uniﬁcation is achieved! This
is shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 6.

Among the many new particles, one is particularly interesting. It is electrically neutral
and has no color charge, so it interacts very weakly with ordinary matter. It lives a very
long time – longer than the current lifetime of the Universe. Finally, if we calculate how
much of it would be produced during the big bang, we ﬁnd that it supplies roughly the right
density to supply the dark matter. All this adds up to suggest that maybe this new particle
is supplying the dark matter astronomers have discovered.

By ascending a tower of speculation, involving now both extended gauge symmetry and
extended space-time symmetry, we seem to break though the clouds, into clarity and breath-
taking vision. Is it an illusion, or reality? That question creates a most exciting situation for
the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), due to begin operating at CERN in 2007. For that great
accelerator will achieve the energies necessary to access the new world of heavy particles, if
it exists. How the story will play out, only time will tell. In any case, I think it is fair to
say that the pursuit of uniﬁed ﬁeld theories, which in past (and many present) incarnations
has been vague and barren of testable consequences, has in the circle of ideas I’ve been
describing here attained entirely new levels of concreteness and fertility.

III. THREE GREAT LESSONS

Now I’m done with what I planned to tell you today about the strangeness of the Universe.
I think it’s appropriate to conclude by connecting these grand considerations about the

14

nature of reality to human life. So I’ll conclude by drawing what I feel are three great
lessons — I’m not sure whether I should call them moral, philosophical, or spiritual lessons
— from the scientiﬁc results I’ve described.

1. The part of the world we understand is strange and beautiful. We, and all the

things we deal with in everyday life, are Music of the Void.

2. If we work to understand, we can understand. Using hands and minds evolved
for quite other purposes, by diligent labor and honest thought, we have come to com-
prehend vastly alien realms of the inﬁnite and the inﬁnitesimal.

3. We still have a lot to learn.

Acknowledgment

The work of FW is supported in part by funds provided by the U.S. Department of

Energy under cooperative research agreement DE-FC02-94ER40818.

