5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
5
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

GAMOW’S BICYCLE:
THE APPEARANCE OF BODIES AT RELATIVISTIC SPEEDS
AND APPARENT SUPERLUMINAL VELOCITIES

ANDRZEJ NOWOJEWSKI

Abstract. A human creates an image basing on the information delivered by
photons that arrived at his retina simultaneously. Due to ﬁnite and constant
velocity of light these photons left the moving body at diﬀerent times, since
not all points of the body are equidistant. In other words its image represents
it is distorted and does not
the body as it was in several diﬀerent times i.e.
correspond to its real appearance. The useful experimental arrangement is set
and then used to derive the general expression that transforms two-dimensional
stationary shapes to their apparent forms, which could be photographed once
they are set in motion.
It is then used to simulate the so-called Gamow’s
bicycle combined out of circles and straight lines. The simulation outlines
two important aspects of bike’s motion: apparent distance of two points and
apparent velocity which are then discussed thoroughly. It is found that the
approaching body is elongated and its apparent speed is greater than its real
one (under certain conditions can exceed the speed of light), whereas the re-
ceding one is contracted (but not in a matter of Lorentz contraction) with the
speed smaller than the real one. Both the apparent length and speed tends to
a certain limit when time tends to ±∞. The change of both parameters takes
place in the vicinity of the nearest approach to the observer and is more rapid
when the velocity greater and the distance is smaller. When the moving ver-
tical rod is seen at right angle, its total apparent length is Lorentz contracted,
however its interior is still distorted. At the same conditions apparent velocity
of a point equals its real one. Finally it is proven that not only the apparent
geometrical shape changes as the body moves but also its color according to
Doppler shift.

1. Introduction

Once the revolutionary Einstein’s Theory of Relativity was understood, science
educators began publishing books and articles that gave an average person the
chance to comprehend these new ideas. One of such books, George Gamow’s ”Mr.
Thompkins in the Wonderland”[1], became a bestseller. The main character visits
a city where the speed of light just slightly exceeds the velocity of a bicycle. As
he sees an approaching cyclist, two most controversial (to a non-physicist) eﬀects
of Special Relativity - length contraction and time dilatation - are displayed to the
shocked traveller. But is it really the picture Mr. Thompkins would see? Gamow
in his considerations has not taken into account the fact that Mr. Thompkins
perceives the bicycle thanks to individual photons, which travel with ﬁnite velocity.
In this paper we develop a method of simulating the appearance of moving, two-
dimensional objects, present the results in the example of Gamow’s bicycle and
provide their detailed discussion. Some outcomes of this paper have already been
published[2].

1

2

ANDRZEJ NOWOJEWSKI

Mr. Thompkins’s brain creates an image of a moving bicycle basing on informa-
tion that was delivered by photons, which arrived on his retina at the same time.
This, however does not mean that these photons were emitted by the bicycle at one
instant too. We have to remember that light travels at a ﬁnite velocity of c, which
according to special theory of relativity is constant for all observers. Accordingly,
photons emitted from rear light of approaching bicycle will reach Mr. Thompkins
later than photons from front light. If photons from both lights reach the observer
simultaneously, the light from the rear lamp must have been emitted earlier. That
is why the image will appear distorted and elongated, since the bike was further
away at earlier times (we will call the phenomenon by the name of retardation ef-
fects). An analogous situation occurs in astronomy. We can observe celestial bodies
as they were 3 · 106 years ago (e.g. M32 Galaxy of Andromeda) and 5000 years ago
(e.g. M1 Crab Nebula) at the same time. The closer the object is, the more recent
image we receive: M32 is 3 · 106 light years whilst M1 is only 5000 light years away.
It is a result of ﬁnite velocity of propagation of light and information. We do not
experience such phenomena in our every day life because it only becomes apparent
in extreme situations: either when we deal with great distances (e.g. astronomy)
or great velocities (e.g. Gamow’s bicycle).

Gamow’s book presents either unintentionally or deliberately (in order to sim-
plify complex matters of Einstein’s theory of relativity) incorrect statements con-
cerning the visual appearance of bodies in motion. In fact, it only represents the
popular conviction of physicists that Lorentz contraction could be visually observed.
Even Lorentz and Einstein themselves suggested this statement to be true[3]. The
ﬁrst attempt to contradict the general belief was made by Lampa in 1924[4]. Un-
fortunately it was overlooked by the international community and it was not until
Terrell in 1959[3] when heated discussion arouse on the topic, both in professional
journals as well as popular-science magazines[5][6]. Terrell showed that Lorentz
contraction cannot be observed visually and rapidly moving, distant or small (i.e.
subtending small solid angles) bodies will instead appear rotated. It was not long
before many more independent investigations of the phenomenon were launched.
Analysis of a moving sphere showed that it appears to be rotated and its circumfer-
ence will always (regardless of the distance or its radius) be circular[7][8]. Analogous
results were obtained for the case of a moving cube[9]. It was later on discovered
that the interpretation of the results and some conclusions in early publications were
inaccurate. The most comprehensive revision of the eﬀect was done by Mathews
and Lakshmanan[10]. It was shown that understanding the retardation eﬀects as an
apparent rotation could lead to a common belief that moving bodies are in fact ro-
tated, which results in a number of absurdities in the so-called ”train paradox”[11].
Apparent rotation is grossly misleading: change in apparent volumes and distor-
tion of cross sections of moving bodies could not be explained by a simple rotation
but by a combination of shears, extensions or contractions parallel to the direction
of motion (under certain conditions a sphere may even appear to be concave[12]).
Finally Scott and Viner[13] pointed out correctly that under particular conditions
Lorentz contraction could be observed directly. Unfortunately by the time these
errors where corrected, several textbooks on special relativity[14][15] as well as in-
structional articles[16] were published with these mistakes. Fortunately more recent
papers[17] seem to recognize the source of the problems. In the meantime, consid-
erations of the apparent, geometrical shape of moving bodies were supplemented

GAMOW’S BICYCLE

3

by calculations of light intensity and spectra changes[18][19][20] that resulted in more
complete description of the retardation eﬀects.

In this paper we will derive an expression that transforms two-dimensional, sta-
tionary objects into shapes that could be observed while these bodies are at motion.
We present how the operation works in the example of Gamow’s bicycle, which is
then thoroughly analyzed under two main aspects (its apparent speed and the ap-
parent distance of two arbitrarily chosen points). We will use conventional notation:
1 − (v/c)2 and β = v/c. For the sake of simplicity, we
Lorentz factor: γ = 1/
assume in all simulations that c = 1. All ﬁgures and simulations were created with
the programme Mathematica 4.1.

p

2. Finite velocity of photons
Let us consider two cartesian frames of reference S′ and S, moving relative to
each other at the speed of v, parallel to x and x′ axes in the positive direction of
x-axis . The origins of both systems and all axes (x, y, z) coincide at t = t′ = 0. For
the purpose of this paper we shall only consider two-dimensional ﬁgures stationary
in S′ and satisfying the equations F (x, y) = 0, z = d in S′. According to special
theory of relativity F will be contracted in S:

(2.1)

F (γ(x − βct), y) = 0

The picture below illustrates how the Gamow’s bicycle really looks like in S and
S′.

Figure 1. A picture showing Gamow’s bicycle at rest (left) and
a contracted bicycle, moving with the velocity β = 0.8 (right).

Before we proceed in deriving the transformation let us think about choosing
an appropriate type of observation. The choice of an observer was generally not
discussed by the researchers with few exceptions[9]. At ﬁrst thought it may not be
obvious that Mr. Thompkins or, in general, a human with a naked eye are not ideal
observers for such considerations. An image created in a brain is a projection on a
plane that is inclined at some angle to the x-axis in system S, because one usually
turns one’s head towards the moving object during the process of observation.
The choice of the angle of inclination is not as easy as it may appear in case of
rapidly moving objects, since they become distorted and there is no easy way to tell
where the geometrical center is located. Apart from that, humans posses a depth
vision thanks to a pair of eyes. Three dimensional vision is created by combining
two images from both eyes that do not match each other exactly (because of the
distance separating human eyes). Again, in our case it causes more harm than

4

ANDRZEJ NOWOJEWSKI

Figure 2. A sequence of 10 photographs of a Gamow’s bicycle
moving with velocity β = 0.8 to the right. Pictures are separated
with the same time intervals: ﬁrst was taken at t0 = −4, the last
t0 = 14 (the actual center of the front wheel is at the least distance
from an observer at time t0 = 0). The observer (indicated here by
a black dot) is located at a distance equal to half the diameter of
wheels from the plane of motion.

GAMOW’S BICYCLE

5

good. Because of the separation, at any instant of time, one eye will always be
closer to the object. Because of that it will receive an earlier image of the object.
In that case images from both eyes will not only be shifted but indeed will not
match each other at all (for that matter it is questionable whether the approach
used by Kraus [18] to describe the appearance of a rapidly moving sphere seen by a
human observer was useful)! Even if we developed a method to simulate such images
it would be useless since no qualitative observations could be done. Therefore we
have to devise a system that allows us to make some measurements. Let us imagine
that the x-axis is a non-transparent barrier with a small aperture with a shutter
located exactly at the origin of S (the point with coordinates (0, 0, 0)). We also
assume that the entire plane at distance −l (l > 0), parallel to the XY plane
is a very sensitive ﬁlm (i.e. with inﬁnite ISO number). This arrangement will
alow us to visualize the actual appearance of a moving object without committing
our attention to an implementation of complicated projections that would further
distort the image. Now, we assume that a group of photons from the self-luminous
body F (see Eq. (2.1)) arrives at an aperture at time t0. The shutter is opened
at that moment to allow the photons to arrive later on the ﬁlm. The distance
l is in fact irrelevant because it only enlarges the picture isotropically. We may
then choose convenient, special case l = d and not discuss it further. This way, we
ﬁnally obtain a photograph of F at the instant of observation t0. Owing to equation
(2.1) we know the location of every point of F as a function of time. An arbitrary
chosen photon emitted from point with coordinates (x, y, d) at time t will travel
x2 + y2 + d2 before it arrives at the origin at time of observation t0.
the distance
We can write down a simple equation of motion for that photon:

p

(2.2)

c(t0 − t) =

x2 + y2 + d2

p
We now have two equations: (2.1) which relates the location of emission points in
space to the time t and (2.2) which links the location and emission time t with
the time of observation t0. The observer cannot be sure whether the photons were
emitted at one instant or not. He only knows that photons arrived simultaneously
at t0. We will therefore calculate t from (2.2) and substitute this expression to
(2.1):

(2.3)

F (γ(x − β(ct0 −

x2 + y2 + d2)), y) = 0

p

This is the expression that could be used to ﬁnd out how the ﬁgure F would
appear at time t0 when moving with velocity v. It is clear that only x coordinate
is aﬀected, i.e. retardation eﬀects work only in the direction of motion. That is
why interpreting it as an apparent rotation of an object in motion (the so-called
Terrell-Penrose rotation) is unreasonable - any rotation changes coordinates in at
least two dimensions. In order to ﬁnd out how this expression works in practice let
us consider Gamow’s bicycle from Fig. 1. It comprises out of simple, geometrical
ﬁgures (4 circles and 10 lines) so applying (2.3) should not be a problem.

What does the Fig. 2 actually transpire? The ﬁrst striking observation is that
the apparent shape of a bicycle is nowhere near the shape of a contracted one (Fig.
1). An approaching vehicle is elongated, whereas a receding one is contracted (but
not in a matter of Lorentz contraction). The change takes place when a bicycle
goes past the observer. At that time every part of the bicycle is deformed and its
view is generally distorted. At one point each wheel may even resemble a banana
If we look closer at the movement of both axles we notice that
or a croissant.

6

ANDRZEJ NOWOJEWSKI

their speed is diﬀerent and it is changing, despite that the velocity of the bicycle is
constant. The velocity of an approaching axle is greater than that of the receding
one. In following sections we will explain these phenomena.

3. Apparent length

In Fig. 2 we can clearly see that the apparent distance between two points (e.g.
front and rear axles) changes in time. This section is an extension of Weinstein’s
paper[21] that ﬁrst dealt extensively with this topic. We can investigate this phe-
nomenon by considering two points (e.g. both ends of a rod). In S′ their coordinates
are: x′
1 = L. In S, however,
we arrive with following equations of motion thanks to Lorentz transformation:

2 = L and are separated by the distance x′

1 = 0, x′

2 − x′

x′
1 = γ(x1 − βct) ⇔ x1 = vt,

x′
2 = γ(x2 − βct) ⇔ x2 = L/γ + vt,

hence, the distance separating these two moving points is contracted:

(3.3)

L′ = x2 − x1 = L/γ.
Now we can calculate the distance between these points that will actually be seen.
Let us assume that they are moving along the line parallel to the x-axis at a distance
d from it. Light impulses emitted at times t1 from rear and t2 from front point
reach observer at t0. Their equations of motion are:

Now we calculate t1 and t2 from (3.1) and (3.2):

c(t0 − t1) = qx2

1 + d2,

c(t0 − t2) = qx2

2 + d2.

t1 = x1/v,

t2 =

x2 − L/γ
v

and implement them in (3.4) and (3.5):

c(t0 − x1/v) = qx2

1 + d2,

c(t0 −

x2 − L/γ
v

) = qx2

2 + d2.

On solving these two equations we obtain:
x1 = t0vγ2 − βγ

(3.10)

d2 + (t0vγ)2,

(3.11)

x2 = Lγ + t0vγ2 − βγ

d2 + (L + t0vγ)2.

Finally the observed length equals:

(3.12)

L0 = x2 − x1 = Lγ − βγ(

d2 + (L + t0vγ)2 −

d2 + (t0vγ)2).

p

p

p

p

(3.1)

(3.2)

(3.4)

(3.5)

(3.6)

(3.7)

(3.8)

(3.9)

GAMOW’S BICYCLE

7

It obviously diﬀers very much from an ordinary Lorentz contracted length (3.3), it

-200

-100

0

Time t0

100

0.8

0.6

0.4
Velocity v/c

0.2

0

200

4

2

0

Apparent length L /Lo

Figure 3. The graph presents the dynamics of apparent length
as a function of velocity and observer’s time.

depends not only on velocity v and stationary separation L but also on the distance
d and the time of observation. We will now analyze dependance of L0 on velocity
and distance as a function of time.

From an analysis of Fig. 2 we already know that an approaching object is
elongated whereas a receding one is contracted. We also suspect that L0 ≈ L when
v ≪ c since we do not encounter any such phenomena in every day life. In fact if we
look closely at (3.12) we will see that the expression tends to L when v → 0. To see
how L0 behaves when v changes we turn to Fig. 3. When v is small L0 tends indeed
to L, on the other hand when v ≈ c, L0 could be several times greater or smaller
than L. We can also see that the graph is consistent with Fig. 2. An approaching
rod seems elongated several times and a receding one contracted by roughly the
same magnitude. The change takes place near the observer. This contraction is
more rapid when velocity is closer to c. We also observe another interesting fact.
The apparent length approaches a certain limit when time tends to inﬁnity. We
calculate it by putting t0 → ±∞ in (3.12):
(3.13)

L0±∞ = Lγ(1 ∓ β).
This equation resembles a relativistic Doppler shift (it was ﬁrst noticed by Mathews
and Lakshmann[10])! This fact should not come to us as a surprise considering,
that the contraction or elongation of light waves is caused by exactly the same
fact (i.e. ﬁnite and constant velocity of light). It is, however necessary to draw
the following distinction: Doppler shift is real and retardation eﬀects discussed
in this paper are only apparent. In addition it is worthy to point out that under
special circumstances Lorentz contraction could be observed visually (contradictory
to some early statements[3] ). It is so, when both ends of the apparent rod are at the
same distance[13] - photons from each end travel the same time to the observer (there
L2/4γ2 + d2/c − L/2vγ.
is no retardation). In our case it happens at time t0 =
However this statement is not true in general. We have to remember that merely
rod’s ends, and not the interior, are equidistant from the origin. In other words,

p

8

ANDRZEJ NOWOJEWSKI

p

Figure 4. Two sets of 21 points, each representing equally dis-
tributed features on the moving vertical rod. Lower set shows the
real appearance of the moving rod at time t = −L/2vγ (emis-
sion time) and the upper one, the observable appearance at time
L2/4γ2 + d2/c − L/2vγ (observer’s time), i.e. when both
t0 =
ends of the rod were equidistant from the origin (both rods move
along a line, parallel to x-axis at the distance d = L/5γ with
v = 0.9c, here they have been separated for the sake of clarity).
We can clearly see that the total lengths of both rods are Lorentz-
contracted, however the interior of the observable rod (upper) is
distorted.

photon emitted from the point that is located within the rod will travel shorter
distance before reaching the observer. Therefore retardation eﬀects will still apply
and the interior of the rod would be distorted. We can fully observe this eﬀect in
Fig. 4. Unfortunately Scott and Viner failed to recognize this fact in their criticism
of Terrell. The interior distortion is only negligible when the rod’s length is far
smaller than the distance from the origin, i.e. d ≫ L/γ (the rod subtends small
angle) or when v ≪ c (retardation eﬀects are generally negligible).

Equation (3.12) also indicates that apparent length depends on d.

In fact if
we look closely we will discover that the smaller d is, the more rapid contraction
occurs near the observer. That is why the wheels of Gamow’s bicycle (see Fig. 2)
contract non-uniformly and assume croissant-shape at one point . This observation
also suggests that a sphere under special conditions could appear convex as ﬁrst
pointed out by Scott and Driel[11] and thoroughly discussed by Suﬀerin[12].

4. Apparent superluminal velocities

a)

A

v(t -t )
b a

B

C(t-t)

b

c

c(t-t )b a

A

v(t -t )
b a

B

)

a

- t

b

( t

c

)

b

-

c

t

c (

t

b)

O

O

Figure 5. Geometrical explanation of superluminal velocities phenomenon.

As we previously noted the velocity of Gamow’s bicycle in Fig. 2 exhibits fairly
interesting behavior. The vehicle clearly approaches the observer faster than recedes
later, despite the fact that its factual velocity is constant. The deceleration takes

GAMOW’S BICYCLE

9

place in the vicinity of the closest approach to the observer. In order to understand
this, let us ﬁrst consider a front light of an approaching bicycle in the stationary
system S. The lamp emits a light pulse at tA from the point A. The pulse reaches
the observer in tB after travelling c(tB − tA). At exactly the same time the front
lamp emits another pulse from point B, after travelling the distance v(tB − tA).
The second pulse reaches the observer at tC after travelling the distance c(tC − tB).
According to the observer, the front light was in position A at time tB and in B at
time tC . The observed velocity u of the bike is, by deﬁnition, a ratio between the
travelled distance to the time interval:

u =

v(tB − tA)
tC − tB

(4.1)

(4.2)

From Schwartz inequalities (see Fig. 5a) we obtain c(tB − tA) > c(tC − tB), thus
u > v. We can conduct analogous considerations for the receding point (see Fig.
5b): c(tC − tB) > c(tB − tA), thus u < v. This is the reason why the apparent
velocity of Gamow’s bicycle is diﬀerent from the real one and changes with time.
In fact we can calculate the velocity more precisely by simply diﬀerentiating (3.10),
which is the equation of apparent motion with respect to observer’s time t0:

u =

= vγ2(1 −

dx
dt0

t0v2γ

)

d2 + (t0vγ)2

c

p

A similar equation was ﬁrst derived by Mathews and Lakshmann[10] who were also
the ﬁrst to discuss the question of apparent velocities greater than the velocity of
light in a physical journal. The expression for apparent velocity (4.2) gives u > v
for approaching and u < v for receding objects according to our expectations. In
order to closely analyze the dependance of u on d and t0 we sketched the graph of
u(d, t) presented in Fig. 6. Similarly to apparent length dynamics, the greater v

-200

-100

Time t0
0

100

200

150

100

50

Distance d

0

200

8

4

0

Apparent velocity u/c

Figure 6. Apparent velocity as a function of observer’s time and
collision parameter.

and smaller d the more rapidly the apparent velocity decreases, which resembles the
acoustic Doppler eﬀect. That is why diﬀerent parts of Gamow’s bicycle in Fig. 2
move relative to each other when approaching an observer. Eventually they assume

10

ANDRZEJ NOWOJEWSKI

the same velocity (when t tends to inﬁnity). We can calculate limit velocities by
putting t0 → ±∞ in (4.2):

u±∞ =

v
1 ± β

.

(4.3)

(4.4)

The plus sign in (4.3) refers to receding and minus to approaching bodies. The
velocity v > c/2 ensures that the apparent speed will exceed the speed of light! In
turn, the maximal apparent velocity of a receding object is half the speed of light.
We will now try to write down (4.2) in terms of apparent position of the body,
which is far more useful in practice. First let’s deﬁne ϕ as the angle between the
velocity vector of the body and a line which links the object and an observer. Let the
distance to the body be z. In these terms we can write that: d = z sin ϕ (collision
parameter), x = z cos ϕ (apparent x coordinate of the body) and vt0 = z(cos ϕ + β)
(calculated directly from (3.8)). If we substitute appropriate terms into (4.2) we
will obtain:

u/c =

β
1 − β cos ϕ

.

This expression could be derived directly. Let’s consider a self-luminous object
It emits light pulses at times t1
moving along a straight line with velocity v.
and t2. These impulses reach an observer at times t′
1 = t1 + z/c and
t′
2 = t2 + (z − v(t2 − t1)) cos ϕ)/c, where v(t2 − t1) is the distance travelled by the
body and v(t2 − t1) cos ϕ tells us how much closer the body is at the moment of the
second emission (we assume both rays to be parallel since the interval ∆t = (t2 −t1)
is very small compared to z/c). Of course the apparent velocity is u = v∆t/∆t′.
We can easily calculate: ∆t′ = ∆t − ∆tβ cos ϕ ﬁnally arriving with the expression
(4.4). Now we can see that when the body is seen at a right angle (ϕ = π/2 or
t0 = d/c) the apparent velocity equals the real one.

1 and t2’: t′

It is worthy to point out that apparent superluminal velocities have already
been encountered in astrophysics. First cases of so-called ”superluminal extensions”
were reported in early 70-s during observations of jets of two quasars 3C273 and
3C279. There have been many reports in Science [25] and Nature[26] magazines
since, concerning superluminal motions ranging from two up to thirty times the
speed of light.

5. Concluding Remarks

It has been shown that Gamow’s bicycle in Wonderland would in fact look dif-
ferently than the description provided by Gamow himself. It would appear grossly
distorted and elongated (when approaching) or contracted (when receding). Of
course the picture seen by Mr. Thompkins would not fully correspond to Fig. 1
because of the diﬀerences between human eyes and apparatus used to derive the
mathematical description of the phenomenon. In general Gamow’s bicycle would
be further distorted in the eyes of Mr. Thompkins and would be seen at a cer-
tain angle. This would make the elongation (contraction) of the bicycle diﬃcult to
account for at greater times ±t0. The velocity of the bicycle would also appear dif-
ferent from the factual one: it would approach Mr. Thompkins with greater speed
(under certain conditions even greater than c) and recede from him at smaller
one (with maximal being: c/2). However these are not the only diﬀerences be-
tween the reality and Gamow’s Wonderland. The spectrum and light intensity of

GAMOW’S BICYCLE

11

both lamps (or in case of self-luminous bicycle - the entire vehicle) will also be
eﬀected. When a self-luminous body moves with a certain velocity its spectrum
changes due to Doppler eﬀect. The relation between the emitted λ0 and observed
λ wavelengths is given by: λ = λ0γ(1 − β cos ϕ). From section 4 we already know
x2 + y2 + d2, so the Doppler shift of the emission point of the
that cos ϕ = x/
body depends on its position. We can therefore expect that self-luminous bicycle
would change its color when passing by the observer. This aspect has already been
thoroughly analyzed on the example of sphere[18] as well as the question of light
intensity change due to motion[5][18][19][20].

p

Knowing how a rapid motion aﬀects the appearance and observable position of
the body a question arises: are we able to ﬁnd out how the moving body really
looks like, or is there any method to prove that Lorentz contraction really occurs?
The answer to both questions is yes. The simplest way to do that is to combine
measurement of the same moving body by two diﬀerent researchers, observing the
object at diﬀerent angles. By incorporating retardation eﬀects into data analysis
the contracted length and shape could be obtained. There is also another way
to experimentally determine the actual position and velocity of the body. It was
developed by Einstein and was given name of radar method. In brief, the method
boils down to sending two electromagnetic impulses towards the moving body and
detecting their return after being reﬂected by the body. The desired parameters
could be obtained thanks to exact times of emission and observation of the reﬂected
light. Unfortunately all these methods are impractical when we deal with objects
at astronomical distances. And it appears this is the only place where retardation
eﬀects play a major role in observation process.

I would like to thank Dr Andrzej Dragan for having me interested in the subject

and for the invaluable discussions and support.

6. Acknowledgments

References

[1] G. Gamow, ”Mr. Thompkins in Wonderland” (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1958)
[2] A. Nowojewski, J.Kallas, A. Dragan, ”On the Appearance of Moving Bodies”, Am. Math.
Month. 111 (11), 817 (2004)
[3] J. Terrell, ”Invisibility of Lorentz Contraction”, Phys. Rev. 116 (4), 1041 (1959)
[4] A. Lampa, ”Wie erscheint nach der Relativit¨atstheorie ein bewegter Stab einem ruhenden
Beobachter?” Z. Phys. 72, 138(1924)(in German)
[5] V. F. Weisskopf, ”The visual appearance of rapidly moving objects”, Phys. Today 13 (9), 24
(1960)
[6] Sci. American 203 (1), 74 (1960)
[7] R. Penrose, ”The apparent shape of relativistically moving sphere”, Proc. Cambridge Phil.
Soc. 55, 137 (1959)
[8] M. Boas, ”Apparent Shape of Large Objects at Relativistic Speeds”, Am. J. Phys. 29 (5), 283
(1961)
[9] F.R. Hickey, ”Two-dimensional appearance of a relativistic cube”, Am. J.Phys. 47 (8), 711
(1979)

[10] P.M. Mathews, M. Lakshmann, ”On the Apparent Visual Forms of Relativistically Moving
Objects”, Nuovo Cimento 12B (1), 168 (1972)
[11] G. D. Scott, H. J. van Driel, ”Geometrical Appearances at Relativistic Speeds”, Am. J. Phys.
38, 971 (1970)
[12] K. G. Suﬀern, ”The apparent shape of a rapidly moving sphere”, Am. J. Phys. 56 (8), 729
(1988)

12

ANDRZEJ NOWOJEWSKI

[13] G. D. Scott, R. R. Viner, ”The geomentrical appearence of large objects moving at relativistic
speeds”, Am. J.Phys. 33 (7), 534 (1965)
[14] A.P. French, ”Special Relativity”, Norton, New York 1968, p.149
[15] R. Resnick, ”Introduction to Special Relativity”, Wiley, New York 1968, p.77
[16] D. Hollenbach, ”Appearance of a rapidly moving sphere: A problem for undergraduates”,
Am. J. Phys. 44 (1), 91 (1975)
[17] J. R. Burke, F. J. Strode, ”Classroom exercises with the Terrell eﬀect”, Am. J. Phys. 59 (10),
912 (1991)

[18] U. Kraus, ”Brightness and color of rapidly moving objects: The visual appearance of a large
sphere revisited”, Am. J. Phys. 68 (1), 56 (2000)
[19] J. M. McKinley, ”Relativistic transformations of light power”, Am. J. Phys. 47, 602 (1979)
[20] J. M. McKinley, ”Relativistic transformation of solid angle”, Am. J. Phys. 48, 612 (1980)
[21] R. Weinstein, ”Observations of Length by a Single Observer”, Am. J. Phys. 28 (7), 607 (1960)
[22] R. Bhandari, ”Visual appearance of a Moving Vertical Line”, Am. J.Phys. 38 (10), 1200
(1970)
[23] R. Bhandari, ”Visual appearance of a moving vertical line revisited”, Am. J.Phys. 46 (7),
760 (1978)
[24] D.W. Lang, ”The Meter Stick in the Matchbox”, Am. J.Phys. 38 (10), 1181 (1970)
[25] C.A. Knight et al, ”Quasars Revisited: Rapid Time Variations Observed Via Very-Long
Baseline Interferometry”, Science 173, 225 (1971)
[26] R.T. Schilizzi, A.G. de Bruyn, ”Large-scale radio structures of superluminal sources”, Nature
303, 26 (1983)

Mansfield College,University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3TF, UK
E-mail address: vanshar@hot.pl

