The Uniqueness of the World

Luis J. Boya∗
Departamento de F´ısica Te´orica, Universidad de Zaragoza
E-50009 Zaragoza, Spain

luisjo@unizar.es

Abstract

We follow some (wild) speculations on trying to understand the uniqueness of our

physical world, from the ﬁeld concept to F-Theory.

KEY WORDS: Uniﬁcation of forces, Uniqueness, High-Road approach, M and F

Theories.

5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
2
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Dedicated to Emilio Santos in his 70th birthday. I have enjoyed discussions with Emilio on physics

for the last 40 years.

1

1

Special Relativity

Is the Universe we experience derivable “a priori”? That is, are there enough reasonable
assumptions from which one can understand the major features we observe by looking at
the world around us? Some physicists (e.g. S. L. Glashow) call this the “top-bottom”
approach, or the High Road to do physics. Einstein since around 1920 thought so, but this
view has been fairly unpopular. In this essay we are going to explore some old and recent
avenues with this idea in mind.

We notice we live in three spatial dimension, with another dimension, time, ﬂowing for-
ward irrespective of us; we change places at will, but, alas, time is not under our command.
In a ﬁrst view we approach space as a continuum, and associate somewhat arbitrarily three
real number to specify a position. It is perfectly possible that in the future we dispense
with the reals and substitute for some other class of numbers (integers?). In fact, we can
argue that the reals can never really be observable, so in a strictly positivistic approach
they should not be used. Besides positions, we observe motions; time becomes entangled
with space, and the simplest thing is to attribute some real number as time to mark events.
(Static) geometry gives way to kinematics.

Experience determines soon a ﬁrst limitation: velocities are not to be arbitrarily large;
special relativity comes in. The lesson is, I believe, nature abhors inﬁnities, so no observ-
able can attain inﬁnite values (the same argument goes also against the real numbers, of
course; it also hints towards atomicity, see below). Velocity c plays the role of inﬁnite
velocity in the following sense: for an “observer” moving at c, it passes no time: it is like
going with inﬁnity speed in prerelativistic physics. By continuity, time slows down when
we run. Special relativity makes a greater strain in our intuition than the general theory
(Dirac is one of few who understood and explicitely said that: the conceptual jump from
space to spacetime is bigger than from ﬂat space to curved), because absolute (maximal)
velocity, instead of absolute time, is more counterintuitive and paradoxical that, say, the
geometry of space being determined by its matter content. Maximal velocity leads to rel-
ative time, and one of the big tenets of classical intuition (and classical philosophy), the
steady ﬂowing of an universal time, falls into pieces: time goes along characteristically
with the moving observer.

So everything physical is propagated at ﬁnite speed. Including forces, of course. Which
forces? Well, at least macroscopically we observe two forces, due to weight and charges.
The main feature of both, we have learned painfully in the last hundred years, is that they
are gauge forces. That is, there is a geometric construction, the gauge arbitrariness being
close to the patch freedom or coordinate choice in the geometry of manifolds: consistency
in overlapping patches leads to the gauge group, and the concordance of the equations
with gauge invariance leads to conservation laws, the most conspicuous feature of both
gravitation and electricity. In return, this implies the ﬁeld laws, as it gives freedom to the
propagating ﬁelds and, in retrospect, favours, if not selects, the macroscopic dimension of

2

space (-time): it is better to be in a (1, 3) manifold as regards only these two forces.

2

Electromagnetism

Let us be more speciﬁc. Force with ﬁnite propagation speed singles out a ﬁeld description,
as Faraday and Maxwell claimed already in the XIX century: no newtonian action-at-
distance, but ﬁelds as propagating agents. The electric ﬁeld acts in a point of space, and
charged matter responds by moving under the inﬂuence of the local ﬁeld; by reaction,
the charged matter distribution controls the existence and propagation of the ﬁelds. The
primitive idea (Newton) that particles act among themselves with no further reality, is
superseded in the ﬁeld approach, which acquires degrees of freedom of its own: Maxwell
predicted electromagnetic waves, one of the most sensational discoveries in the history of
science.

Let us call F the (electromagnetic, em) ﬁeld, and j the charged matter distribution;
we emphasize “charged”, because we learn soon that matter, indeed most of the matter,
is neutral (= globally uncharged). The relation between F and j must be of contact type
(today expressed as local (diﬀerential) equations in the numerical continuum; how will it be
in the future?). The liberties of the ﬁeld manifest themselves in the diﬀerential character
of the equation: so, through the integration constant (or function), the ﬁeld exhibits its
own degrees of freedom. Thus one of the simplest formulation could be, with δ some ﬁrst
order diﬀerential operator

There are interesting solutions even when j = 0.This formula is only half of the truth: it
must be appended by stating how does charged matter move in given ﬁelds (Lorentz force,
see below). If F and j are vector/tensor magnitudes, the operator δ could be nilpotent,
δ2 = 0: technically, if they are p-forms, the only natural diﬀerential operators are of square
zero. Hence

(1)

(2)

which is an invariance law: only conserved electric matter can be coupled to the em ﬁeld.
As j is a p-form, integration gives charge stability: Q(t0) = Q(t1). This is the distinguished
feature of gauge theories, an automatic conservation law.

Three important consequences can be drawn from this: ﬁrst, assuming j has the rel-
ativistic character of a 4-vector, (1) should be read as 3 = 3 conditions, and not 4 = 4,
that is, only conserved currents are to be coupled: conservation of electric charge follows.
Secondly, gauge invariance: the Lorentz force, i.e. the relation by which F determines the
motion of charges, written in hamiltonian or lagrangian form, as it should in any sensible

δF = j

δj = 0

3

formalism, must be in terms of a ﬁrst integral of F, and then the 1-form A, such F = dA,
either postulated, or coming from dF = 0, should enjoy some indeterminacy: A → A + dΛ,
where Λ is the gauge function. This is the patch arbitrariness we talked about above; in
fact, in some spacetime topologies F is always global, as curvature of the connection, but
A is not: F should be closed but not necessarily exact. Properly, this gauge invariance e.g.
in the lagrangian formulation (which we omit) is the true reason of charge conservation
through the important Noether second theorem: invariance under functional transforma-
tions imply relations among the equations of motion, the fact that here we have 3 = 3, not
4 = 4 equations. Third consequence, there is conservation of ﬂux: a single point charge q
should generate a ﬁeld decreasing with the 1/r2 law, as ﬂux conservation follows from (1):
a sphere no matter how large surrounding the charge should encompass the same ﬂux.

Therefore, no wonder about the 1/r2 law, the same as Newton discovered in gravita-
tion, and for the same reason. Does this tell us something about the geometry/dimensions
of space? Well, it makes the case for a preference for three extended space dimensions:
in one space dimension only, the Coulomb law will determine conﬁnement, there are not
degrees for the ﬁeld; also in two dimensions (logarithmic potential), whereas in four space
dimensions the 1/r2 law for the potential is scale invariant, making the orbits unstable
(besides complications at the quantum level, like “falling into the cente”, etc.). Worse for
spacetime dim > 4; we conclude the d = 3 character of open space as being the most
satisfactory setting for an exact geometric force law.

The inﬂuence of the ﬁeld on the motion of matter hinges on how we describe matter;
for a single structureless particle with mass m, and charge q, the simplest equation would
be (with F the force and u the 4-velocity)

dpµ/ds = F = qFµνuν

(3)

which is the Lorentz force.

3 Gravitation

What about the geometry of this 3d space or 4d spacetime? As Minkowski saw already in
1909, ﬁnite propagation speed hints strongly to a 4d metric spacetime with signature (1,
3): the light cone constitutes the set of light rays. Now we go back to Riemann (whose
physical insights are sometimes obscured by his gigantic mathematical prowesses); in his
geometric studies he already hinted at a selfconsistent determination of the geometry of
space (not of spacetime) on physical grounds, and therefore to connect matter with cur-
vature. It took more than ﬁfty years for this ideas to fructify, the main stumbling block
being the necessity, unthinkable in the pre-Maxwell times Riemann was living, of uniting

4

space and time. There should be another geometric force which will shape the form of the
universe for us. Today it is only too clear how Einstein´s General Relativity program ac-
complishes this. We have the equivalence principle: a test particle moves upon gravitation
universally, depending not on itself but on the surrounding matter: geodesic motion. This
is even simpler that the Lorentz force motion, because there is more universality.

The next question is, how much deformation of space (curvature) is produced by (a
kilogram of) matter? It is hard to beat Wheeler´s dictum: space tells matter how to move,
matter tells space how to curve (bend). There is a 4d manifold V with a metric g, and
then with a geometric object, G, coming from the spacetime structure, necessarily some
derivative(s) of the metric g, which should be determined by the matter distribution, T.
So Einstein wrote

G = κT

(4)

(to be compared with eq.(1)) where the constant κ converts matter to geometry. But
this equation refers to all matter, because there are no “unponderable” matter. The
ﬁrst sensible choice for T is to be a symmetric 2-tensor with positivity requirements and
conserved, δT = 0 (as opposed to the 1-tensor j, as there is electrically neutral matter,
but not weightless matter). Question arises, exactly as Einstein thought: how to extract,
from an arbitrary continuum 4-manifold V, a 2-tensor with gauge invariance (that is, with
an automatic conservation law). The struggle of Einstein along November 1915 to ﬁx the
right thing is hectic; at the lagrangian level, Hilbert beated him for a week. But there is
nearly only a solution (good mathematics comes in help of good physicists): if (V, g) is the
4d manifold, and Riem the (1, 3) Riemann curvature tensor, the only conserved tensor is
G, ( δG = 0 ), where

G := Ric − (1/2)g where Ric = Tr1(Riem)

(5)

(We write the trace Tr1 because by Tr2 we mean Tr Ric = scalar curvature Rsc: the object
Hilbert wrote inside a lagrangian).And we repeat the scheme of above: ﬁrst, there is con-
servation law, δT = 0: only conserved matter can be coupled to spacetime curvature (this
point, automatic conservation laws has been forcefully argued often by Wheeler). Second,
equation (4) should read as 6 = 6 numbers, not 10 = 10 (the tensors are symmetric); the
rest is the gauge invariance (choice of patches to describe the 4d world). Indeed, the la-
grangian, as Emmy Noether taught both Hilbert and Weyl, has a four-function invariance
(under change of coordinates), hence there are four constraints among the equations of
motion.

Third, the same 1/r2 law arises as before, at the level of the geodesic motion γ, where
δ Rγ ds = 0, closing into a beautiful circle, because the 1/r2 law was the primordial discov-
ered feature, already hidden in Kepler´s ﬁrst law. Notice the paradox, seldom stated: for a
single big mass M, the metric far enough away falls as r−1, so a closed orbit is elliptical as

5

in the r−2 force law, but the curvature, which plays the role of ﬁeld intensity, should (and
does!) fall oﬀ faster, with r−3 ; whereas the electric ﬁeld of a point charge falls oﬀ itself
like r−2: This is because geodesic motion is inertial (no force); geodesics are ﬁxed by the
connection (Christoﬀel symbols), falling like r−2, not by the curvature: electric forces are
forces, but inertial “forces” are not. Is there then any role for the curvature? Of course:
this is the reason why the moon is more eﬀective than the sun in tidal motion on earth.

It is irresistible to add some comments to the magnitude of Einstein creation (although,
I repeat, less innovative that special relativity). Deﬁnitive blow to the philosophical stand-
point that there is a empty space in which we add things to ﬁll it up: space (and time) is
not an “a priori” category: it is created along with the matter in it. Rather, operatively
speaking, there is no space if there is no matter, and the latter ﬁxes the former; another
blow to a naive realism. In the search for an “a priori” understanding of the world, many
prejudices of naive realism fall in the path of the scientiﬁc discoveries.

4 Uniﬁcation

Are they really so diﬀerent, electricity and gravitation? Both are gauge theories, both
universal or nearly so, both ruled by the inverse square law but in the face of it, very
diﬀerent also: two signs for the charge, irrelevance of gravitation at the microscopic realm.
It had to be an outsider, an unknown young physicist in the german city of K¨onigsberg
(at the moment occupied by the russians) who dared to unite them. The most spectacular
feature of Kaluza´s construction (1919) is to account for the essential diﬀerence: nega-
tive/positive (and hence neutral) electric matter versus just masses, and this by means of
let us add a circle at each 4d spacetime point, and describe electric
a geometric device:
force as prompting motion along the circle (two senses = two signs of the charge), whereas
neutral matter moves only in the other 3 large space directions. Even today the boldness
of Kaluza idea ranks, to us, close to Riemann´s ﬁrst inception of geometry as determined
by physical eﬀects.

To make a long story short, one would set the ”gravitation” equations in a circle times
curved 4d space; the electric force comes automatically, conserved, and with the two signs
for the charge. Besides, the disproportionate ratio of electric to gravitant forces at the
atomic scale sets the circle radius very very small (O. Klein, 1926); compared even with
the dimensions of atomic nuclei, smaller for a factor of 1020. But there is a price: a metric
g in (D + 1) dimension gives rise, viewed from D-dim space, to

gD+1 → gD + AD + φD

(6)

that is, a 1-tensor (em ﬁeld potential) and an enigmatic 0-tensor (dilaton φ), besides the
metric g.

6

Both Einstein and Kaluza-Klein were far ahead of their times. General relativity layed
dormant for physicists until the astrophysical discoveries in the mid-sixties, whereas the
idea of extra dimensions did not enter the mainstream of physics until the ´80s, with many
unbelievers still today.

Already in 1919 H.Weyl, thus before Kaluza, sought another electrogravitation uniﬁ-
cation by allowing the scale of the metric g to vary pointwise, but this “gauge” invariance
became much more useful as a point-dependent phase in the charged ﬁelds.

5 Other Forces

Let us not stop at this. Nature is more versatile. Masses, charges and light do not exhaust
the physical world (inspite that Einstein never cared about the rest, un pecado de orgullo
we should try to avoid). Could there be other forces, not ostensibly expressible with the
1/r2 law, and still of geometric (gauge) origin? I confess I have no hint here but to retort to
experiments; it is only very diﬃcult to understand atomicity, a conspicuous feature of the
natural world, unless there is some quantum description (how, otherwise, does atomicity
and discreteness come from?), and some other forces. Or, more forcefully, arbitrarily large
division of matter chunks is unoperational: another Irrlehre to skip; from Democritus we
have learned this option. Indeed, granted the feebleness of gravity forces at the atomic
scale, evidence for nonelectric forces in the microworld became incontrovertible in the late
20´s and 30´s: beta radioactivity and particles other than electrons and protons in the
nuclei, hence nuclear forces of nonelectromagnetic origin.

The program then was clear: ﬁrst, one should empirically state the laws of these new
forces, try to discover the intimate nature (type of gauge, for example). There is a heroic
struggle to uncover the laws of both the strong and weak interactions, which we force-
fully omit, which lasted for about forty years, only to state, at the end, the result: both
are gauge forces, of course, but both hide this character (none obeys eﬀectively the 1/r2
law) with mechanisms we do not fully understand even now: conﬁnement in one case (
the strong force), symmetry breaking in the other (weak force). I cite here only two gi-
ants: Murray Gell-Mann (working mainly in the weak forces found the gauge group for the
strong) and Steven Weinberg (working in the strong forces discovered the broken gauge
theory of the weak). Are then four forces too many? On the contrary: to reduce all
the observable phenomena to only four types of interactions is a fantastic achievement.
Yet not full uniﬁcation, as even the “electroweak” theory just juxtaposes two gauge the-
ories with an arbitrary mixing angle. The dynamics of the microworld seems to be well
described by the gauge forces associated to the group SU(3)QCD ×(SU(2)×U(1))electroweak.

But by now Pandora´s box is open, and we would like to apply Kaluza´s program
to these new forces. We learned the lesson of the ﬁfth dimension in the same sense as

7

Riemannn conception: the space (-time) is physically determined, not only with respect to
shape, but we should strech the program towards understanding also the dimension and
the signature! Geometry should be as a whole selfconsistently determined by matter. I
do not see how people totally happy with general relativity are so reluctant to accept dy-
namically generated extra dimensions for our world; we feel only four, yes, but we also feel
matter as continuous and packed, whereas it is discrete and space is practically empty (
indeed, nuclear to atomic volume ratio close to 10−15). And following this line, one should
learn the lesson and go beyond: geometry is primary to phenomena, so one must try to
understand the extra forces through geometry. In other words, there should be constraints
in the extra dimensions, and ﬁxed these, the extant forces will follow. This should be the
Top of the top-bottom approach!

This program has not been fulﬁlled as yet; (it will be el ﬁn de la aventura, the end
of science. Inspite J. Horgan, we are still light years away). So we pause for a moment
and ask, instead, what consequence will have to allow the dimensions to vary in order to
understand the forces, new and old, more geometrico.

6 Extended Objects

This is our understanding why extended objects are needed, or at least very welcome, in a
theory with more than ﬁve dimensions; it is somehow antiintuitive, so we elaborate a bit.
Since the times of Democritus, a constant feature in physics has been to attribute atomicity
to matter; atoms should be the building blocks of the Universe. But now, a more versatile
point of view emerges: there might be elementary extended objects which sould not be
operatively understood as made of little point particles. Now, why the extended objects in
the ﬁrst place? I see a very neat geometric/dynamical reason: in a universe with more than
ﬁve dimensions, and you need them if forces other that electrogravitatory enter, the natural
objects are strings or membranes, or higher p-branes. Why? The key concept is duality
with gauge forces. Namely, electric forces, which we use for abbreviation, come together
with magnetic forces, as we know since Amp`ere and Oersted. Duality for particles (i.e.
point particles) occurs in 4 dimension, but duality for strings occur in six, for membranes
in 8, and for p-Branes in 2(p + 2). The dual of a string is a (magnetic) string only in six
dimensions: a charged particle in 4d describes a worldline, hence couples by the Lorentz
force to a 1-form A with a 2-form F as ﬁeld strength; F dualizes to ∗F , another two-form.
A string spans a worldsheet, couples to a potential two-form B, with a 3-form ﬁeld strength
G = dB, dualizing to a Hodge partner only in six dimensions. Similarly for higher p-Branes.

Turning the argument around:

if there are extra dimensions, to ﬁnd and deal with
extended objects is just too natural. And, passim, we overtake Democritus and Leucipus
after 24 centuries: elementary objects are not necessarily pointlike.

8

Here we hit a technical barrier, which makes one suspect a theoretical scheme going
beyond lagrangian quantum ﬁeld theory is called for: we do not know how to extract full
exact consequences of a string theory, not to speak of membranes or higher p-branes. For
0- and 1-Branes the Nambu ( =extremal volume) and Polyakov ( = general-relativistic)
formulations are equivalent (although even the nonperturbative regime in string theory
escapes us). But for p > 1 the minimal and relativity forms are inequivalent... This is why,
in our view, M-theory (see later) is stagnant. And we did not adress yet another problem:
granted there are extra dimensions, and that we do not see them, why and how do they
bend (compactify)? Or rather, if all dimensions are ﬁnite (compact), why ones are more
compact than others?

7 SuperSymmetry

But we still face other bigger problem, in the search for a unique world. Already risen by
Einstein, it is the “marble versus wood” problem.

The universe is structured like a building, with bricks held together by a glue. The force
ﬁelds are the glue, the fermions are the bricks. Is this dichotomy fundamental? Quantum
Mechanics comes to stress the diﬀerence, making it more poignant: the exclusion princi-
ple, which determines the existence of structures in the Universe, does not apply to the
coherent states of the particles carrying the gauge forces, namely the classical ﬁelds. Is
there a description in which glue and bricks come together, united but diﬀerent? We tried
uniﬁcation, since Kaluza, for interactions (glue). Now we ask for forces and matter itself.
I do not dare to say that supersymmetry (Susy) is compelling, but certaintly looks as a
provisional phenomenological step forward: if there is a symmetry between bricks and glue,
we “understand” why the two are necessary. So Susy comes to the fore, but from a lateral
entrance, however: the Susy partners of the extant particles are new particles: in general,
quarks and leptons go with the fundamental representations of the gauge groups, whereas
the glues (gluons, photons) go with the adjoint. This were only natural, for example, if
the “bricks” have some solitonic character.

Supersymmetry extends to everything; simple quantum mechanics, quantum ﬁeld the-
ory, electromagnetism (qed), gravitation, etc., have more or less natural enlargements,
becoming supersymmetric. There is the so-called minimal extension of the standard model
(MSSM), with some phenomenological support (coincidence of the running coupling con-
stants at a very high scale, aprox 1016 GeV). The most natural supersymmetry occurs
because of the octonions: it is the triality isomorphism between the three 8-dim irreps of
the Spin(8) group; in fact, this supersymmetry lies at the base of both superstring theory,
11-dim supergravity, and M-Theory. The three irreps 8v, 8L and 8R realize Spin(8)/Z2.

With troubles: we have not seen, so far, a single Susy partner of extant particles/

9

force carriers. With advantages, in the sense of that supersymmetry limits the dimensions
and even the nature of the extended objects. For example, superstrings live happy in ten
dimensions, but gravitons are even happier in eleven, with a membrane ﬂoating around.
So Susy seems a step forward in the uniqueness program we address here.

It is worth recalling how, since 1974, the candidate for big uniﬁcation has changed.
Once the electroweak theory passed the ﬁrst tests (neutral currents do exist; W ± and Z
found later), Georgi and Glashow proposed the ﬁrst Grand Uniﬁcation model, based in
Insuﬃcient, with neutrinos massive. Then superstrings came along,
the group SU(5).
with the veiled promise to unify even gravitation in a convergent (renormalizable) scheme
(1976). Too early. In 1980 gravitation reached the climax together with Susy, producing a
momentaneous distraction (M. Duﬀ) from superstrings: eleven dimension supergravity is
seen at our mundane 4d world as a rich theory with 8 gravitinos (for example). Embarras
de richesse? On the contrary, the gauge group is not big enough to encompass the group
of the standard model, which is a geometric group: O(1) × U(1) × Sp(1) × Aut0(Oct), or
Z2 × SO(2) × SU(2) × SU(3). Here O(1) is P CT and the last group is SU(3) ⊂ G2, the
little group of octonion automorphisms.

Then in 1984/5 the superstring revolution came, with the promise of another T.O.E.
The main new ingredient was uniqueness: there are only ﬁve consistent superstring the-
ories, all living in 10 = (1, 9) dimensions, all incorporating gravity, all supersymmetric,
some including two unique gauge groups...

8 M-Theory

By now we have uncovered the three ingredients I want to stress in the program for a better
understanding of the world around us: extra dimensions, extended object and supersym-
metry. Supergravity and the diﬀerent string theories fuse in the new, beautiful M-theory
(Townsend, Witten and Polchinski) who arose in 1995. Beautiful but distant: after ten
years, we are sill in the begining of understanding it, no knowing its inner fabric. It is
fairly unique and rigid ( no coupling constants to adjust), but on the face of it, not yet
thoroughly satisfactory.

Ten years have barely passed, yes, and where do we stand? The initial hopes of this
M-theory did not materialize, and even the most optimistic persons (Ed Witten) seem
to have lost steam. At this point we want to pinpoint some shortcomings of the present
M-theory and signal one potentially interesting new avenue.

First of all the gauge group of the standard model is not reproduced; in fact the nat-
ural gauge group is too narrow, and some string groups like E8 × E8 come “out of the
blue”. Secondly, gravitation appears inextricably mixed with the other forces, and one

10

would like to separate it from gauge forces, granted the insigniﬁcance of gravitation at the
atomic scale. In the third place, although M-theory is set with a maximum 11 = (1, 10)
dimensions, strings live in ten and ourselves in four uncompactiﬁed. We shall ﬁnish by
enunciating F -theory, an invention of C. Vafa (1996) which deserves serious considerations.

9 F-Theory

According P. Ramond and B. Kostant (1999), the 11-dim Supergravity multiplet is related
to the octonionic projective (Moufang) plane OP 2, which is the exceptional symmetric
space OP 2 = F4/Spin(9); for example, the triplet: graviton (+44) - gravitino (−128) +
3-form (+84) comes from the Euler number (3) of OP 2, generated, as irreps of Spin(9), by
the identity representation of the group F4. As remarked above, the particle pattern does
not naturally correspond to what we see (or expect to see). Is there a natural extension,
conserving the aesthetic appeal, and enlarging the situation?

C. Vafa advanced already in 1996 a possible extension (called F -theory) in order to
incorporate the IIB string theory in the same footing as the other string theories. But
with the projective insight of Ramond, there is a better formulation of this F -theory: it
is a theory living in 12 = (2, 10) dimensions, allowing for a queer extended object (a
(2, 2) supermembrane) and with a temptative particle content expressable in the complex
extension (Atiyah) of the Moufang plane. Namely

Y = OP 2

C = E6/O(10) × O(2)

(7)
(More precisely Y := (E6/Z3)/[(Spin(10) × U(1))/Z2]. The particle supermultiplet has
now 27 members (Euler number of OP 2
C), it is still supersymmetric, and oﬀering more
than enough room (in fact, too much!)
to encompass the experimental (and some fu-
ture!) multiplets. The two big groups above are distinguished: E6 is the best candidate
for Grand Uniﬁcation (all nongravitatory forces) and Spinc(10) is the compact part of
SO(10, 2) = Sp(2, Oct), the maximal extension of the Cartan identity B2 = C2. The asso-
ciated Ramond-Kostant multiplet has now 2 × 32768 states (!), and neither graviton nor
gravitino(s) appear. It is too early to see how this gigantic supermultiplet shrinks to the
128 − 128 states of the m = 0 multiplet of the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model.
The new scheme keeps most of the nice features as before, but mathematically is simpler;
for example, the supersymmertric algebra in twelve dimensions contains just the “de Sit-
ter” group generators, presumably signaling the kinematic part, and then just a selfdual
sixform, which points to a special matter content. Finally, the 27 = 33 number for the
multiplets makes one to think both in the number of generations as well as the number of
colors. Only the future will tell us if Nature has chosen this wonderful and highly unique
structure to describe our world.

11

