6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
5
0
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Tempt To Measure Reality

Bhag C. Chauhan∗
Centro de F´isica Te´orica das Part´iculas (CFTP)
Departmento de Fisica, Instituto Superior T´ecnico
Av. Rovisco Pais, 1049-001, Lisboa-PORTUGAL

February 20, 2014

Abstract

Despite the extraordinary successes the two great bastions of 20th cen-
tury science (Quantum Theory and General Relativity) are troubled with
serious conceptual and mathematical difﬁculties. As a result, further growth
of fundamental science is at stake. Is this the end of science? Optimistic
answer is “NOT”! In this work, it is argued that science must continue its
cruise, but with anew strategy – a thorough recourse into the grass-root level
working of science is inevitable. In fact, our conventional scientiﬁc methods
are based upon ordinary sense perception, which keeps the outer physical
universe as a separate entity, that is something quite independent of the ob-
server. Basically, it is the observer – the knower (human mind) – which
makes perception possible. It makes a person or scientist to recognize or re-
fute the existence of an object or a phenomenon. It is also tempted to evince
that working of human mind is epistemically scientiﬁc and can, in princi-
ple, be completely deciphered. It’s inclusion in scientiﬁc theories, although
tedious, can certainly spark a revolution in our understanding of nature and
reality.

∗e-mail: < chauhan@cf tp.ist.utl.pt > Homepage: http : //cf tp/ chauhan/

1

1 Introduction and Motivation

Human having a curious mind has been continuously understanding the phenom-
enal world out there, and his perception of reality is gradually improving over the
centuries. Science is a versatile tool which makes human to see reality at a close-
up. The great new truth revelations by the unbroken diligence of scientists for
the centuries have dramatically transformed human’s view about himself and his
place in the universe. The spectacular success of science particularly in the last
century has ascertained human to consider it to be a self-contained world-view
independent or inclusive of its entire philosophical foundation.

Unfortunately, there are several difﬁculties in our theories which obstruct us
to see the true picture of nature and reality. Along with the scientiﬁc knowledge,
we have also gathered speculations, debates, and confusions. It seems as we are
extending the radius of our scientiﬁc knowledge, so have been increasing the cir-
cumference of our ignorance and the truth is becoming more and more dispelled.
After struggling for several years a desponded scientist, Albert Einstein, who have
a number of pioneering contributions to the development of modern science, ut-
tered: “I used to think when I was young that sooner, or later all the mysteries of
existence would be solved and I worked hard. But now I can say that the more we
know, the more our existence turns out to be mysterious. The more we know, the
less we know and the more we become aware of the vastness... Science has failed
in de-mystifying existence, on the contrary it has mystiﬁed things even more.”

On the other hand, the protagonists have overlooked the fact, as for them the
important thing is how science could be utilized to increase the physical ease of
life. They are least concerned about the problems in the fundamental science as
they have their own missions. They even don’t hesitate to apply the available
scientiﬁc knowledge for the purpose of destruction. They think that they can
live more happily in this way. They have led the whole human society into the
same mentality. As a matter of fact, a soaring level of human happiness has been
resulting to the endless lusty desires, which have given birth to a restless world
with several problems. The green-earth-environment has been polluted, a massive
development of nuclear weapons is taking place. The countries having not enough
food-stuffs to eat but do sustain far-ﬂying dreams to create missiles and atom-
bombs.

All the crisis that modern science and humanity are facing today, clearly show
that there is something wrong in our conventional way of thinking, the way we
understand nature and our relation with it. Adding that the thinking of protago-

2

nists, who are the directors of the minds of the whole social setup, is the product
of the existing world-view. There is a need to understand fully the working of
the conventional method of scientiﬁc studies. In this work, difﬁculties of modern
science in understanding nature and reality are exposed and a candidate solution
has been proposed.

The sections are divided as follows: In section 2, advancements and difﬁcul-
ties of quantum theory and modern cosmology are discussed. A secret dream of
scientists for centuries – Theory of Everything (TOE) – seems not to be fulﬁlled is
shown in section 3. A recourse into the foundation of science is attempted in sec-
tion 4 supplemented with a short discussion in section 5. Finally, the conclusions
are presented in section 6.

2 Human Quest For Reality

The studies of archaeological survey show that human mind has been always
agitating and susceptible to the external stimuli. The numerous developments,
as found in the excavations and investigations, dating back to the time roughly
35,000 years ago, show the beginnings of the emergence of a reﬂective conscious-
ness. Records of stone tools, burial sites, cave art, and of migration patterns evince
that a ﬁrst awakened human culture was born in these glimmerings of personal and
shared awareness. There happened a dramatic change in the view of reality and
human identity at about roughly 10,000 years ago when our ancestors shifted from
a nomadic life to a more settled livings in villages and farms; and then followed
by a rise of city-states and the beginnings of civilization at roughly about 5,000
years ago.

A more recent revolution in the human awakening is clearly visible through
the vast existing literature, museums and the developments in all the pathways
of our life. The birth of science happened roughly 300 years ago with a radical
dynamism and materialism of the industrial era. Science is based most assuredly
on analysis, that is, scrutinizing every phenomenon and examining every part of it
and ﬁnding out how it came about. The scientiﬁc revolution gave a totally different
awareness to the human understanding of reality – all aspects of life have vividly
changed with it, including the work that people do, the ways they live together,
how they relate to one another, and how they see their role in society and place in
the universe.

The humanity’s prevailing paradigm is changed again by another radical world-

3

view, which was kicked off in the beginning of 20th century with the emergence of
a new vision of matter and universe. The modern concept of matter in subatomic
physics from quantum theory and the new concept of space-time from the theory
of relativity are totally different from the one, of which we were traditionally used
to. These new explorations have changed our conception of the universe as whole
with life in it.

The evolution in the life style of human is an implication of his desire and ne-
cessity of physical comfort and to know more and more about nature and physical
reality.

2.1 Looking Deep Into The Matter

Quantum theory grew out of a series of anomalies in the picture of matter and light
offered by classical physics – in particular associated with black-body radiation,
the photo-electric effect, and the need to devise a model of the atom consistent
with the newly discovered sub-atomic particles. Without quantum physics, we
are unable to explain the behavior of solids, the structure and function of DNA,
super-conductivity, properties of super-ﬂuids, and burning of stars etc... There is
no doubt that quantum theory has been one of the most profound discoveries of the
20th century development of science. In fact, this theory has become dramatically
successful in order to explain the experimental results, which were, otherwise,
impossible to understand in the classical formalism. It is generally agreed that
quantum theory is, if not a complete explanation, at least a great step forward in
the measurement of reality.

Despite the extraordinary successes this theory has been plagued by concep-
tual difﬁculties. The debate about the relation of quantum mechanics to the fa-
miliar physical world continues. It is not at all clear, what this theory is about
and what does it, in fact, describe? [1]. From its inception the theory had has
a “measurement problem” with the troubling intrusion of the observer [2] in ex-
periments. An Irish physicist J.S. Bell1 has quoted in his book, ”Speakable and
Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics” [3]: “... conventional formulations of quan-
tum theory, and of quantum ﬁeld theory in particular, are unprofessionally vague
and ambiguous. Professional theoretical physicists ought to be able to do better.”
Albert Einstein was not at all comfortable with the foundation and working
1Who became well known as the originator of Bell’s Theorem, regarded by some in the quan-

tum physics community as one of the most important theorems of the 20th century.

4

of quantum theory, despite the important role he had played in the development
of this theory (he was awarded the Nobel Prize for discovering the photo-electric
effect). Nevertheless, it is a general conviction among the scientists that Niels
Bohr2 (founder of Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics) vanquished
Einstein in their famous, decades-long, debate [4]. On the other hand, till the end
of his life, Einstein continued to pretend that perhaps the quantum mechanical
description is not the whole story. Erwin Schrodinger, one of the founders of
the quantum theory and who is also known as the father of wave function3, was
one of the most acerbic critics of the theory. He ultimately found this theory as
impossible to believe.

There are several mysteries, puzzles and paradoxes in Quantum Mechanics:

However, the Schrodinger equation is perfectly linear, propagates continuously in time,
but collapses discontinuously when a particle interacts with a classical system at the event
of measurement. In fact, there is no dynamical description for the collapse of the wave
function.

A quantum system is described with a complex wave function (ψ) which is an abstract
entity, but whose squared value (|ψ|2) represents its physical properties. This gives a
probability distribution for where discrete particles may be found once the wave function
is collapsed by an act of observation.

Quantum particles can have spooky connections: According to theory, they can commu-
nicate over vast distances in an instant, which gave rise to the famous EPR paradox [5]
and Bell’s theorem [6]. This ghost action violates the principle of the limitation of the
velocity of light in relativity theory and the principle of causality.

There is a profound relationship between measurement and reality, where reality depends
heavily on the measurement techniques. Observation would create a different kind of
reality than what existed independently. In other words, reality existed in a different way
while under observation than it did in itself.

According to the “Principle of Superposition” the Schroedinger’s Cat inside a box [7] is
neither dead nor alive, but a superposition of these two states. The wave function thus

2A Danish physicist who received Nobel Prize in 1922 for his services in the investigation of

the structure of atoms and of the radiation emanating from them.

3A continuous function that contains all the measurable informations about the quantum

particle.

5

contains the superposition of all possible states of a system until it is observed.

A quantum particle can behave as a wave as well as a particle; e.g., in photo-electric effect
it shows its particle nature whereas in a double slit experiment it behaves like a wave.

It is fundamentally impossible to measure the key physical quantities, in certain pairs, e.g.,
position and momentum, simultaneously to any desired degree of accuracy. Attempts to
increase the precision of one measurement, result in less precise measures of the other
member of the pair: “Principle of Uncertainty.”

There were several attempts to falsify this theory on conceptual and exper-
imental grounds, e.g., Albert Einstein with the collaboration of Boris Podolsky
and Nathan Rosen proposed a gedanken experiment [EPR Experiment][5] as an
attempt to show that quantum mechanics was somehow not complete and that
the wave function does not provide a complete description of physical reality.
However, they left open the question of whether or not such a description exists.
J.S. Bell proved mathematically through an inequality, famously known as “Bell’s
Inequality”[3], that quantum mechanics does violate special relativity by allow-
ing instantaneous interactions across even the cosmological distances. In another
attempt, Erwin Schroedinger fabricated a thought experiments [7]: Cat-in-a Box,
where the future of a cat paradoxically depends on the random decay of a radioac-
tive atom. Astonishingly, according to quantum theory, the hapless cat is neither
dead nor alive but in a state of superposition of the two possibilities, before to be
seen actually – which is ridiculous and hard to swallow. In this way, the theory
which helps us to look deep into the matter is resting on the serious conceptual
difﬁculties.

2.2 Looking Deep Into The Cosmos

Einstein’s theory of general relativity gave a new vision toward the understanding
of the dynamics of heavenly bodies and the origin and evolution of universe. In
modern cosmology the most popular theory today we have is the big-bang theory
[8]. According to this theory there was nothing before the big-bang and all the
space-time must have originated there and then (“t=0”). No matter/ energy could
exist before this bang, as there was no space and time for it to be in. The theory
further describes that this universe evolved from a dense, nearly featureless hot
gas and that is expanding and cooling continuously.

6

Scientiﬁc evidences strongly support that the universe had a deﬁnite beginning
a ﬁnite amount of time ago and also prove that the early universe was very hot and
that as it expands, the gas within it cools. There are three important observations
strongly supporting the big-bang model: 1) The expansion of the universe ob-
served in 1929 by Edwin Hubble. 2) The abundance of the light elements H, He,
Li (according to the theory these light elements should have been fused from pro-
tons and neutrons in the ﬁrst few minutes after the big-bang). 3) The discovery of
the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) radiation. The theory claims that the
CMB radiation is the remnant heat leftover from the big-bang and the frequency
spectrum of the CMB should have a blackbody radiation form. This was indeed
measured with tremendous accuracy by an experiment on NASA’s COBE satel-
lite. The recent Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) mission reveals
conditions as they existed in the early universe by measuring the properties of the
CMB radiation over the full sky [9].

Although, this theory has passed some scientiﬁc tests, there are still many
more trials, which it must undergo successfully. In the context of a recent test of
this theory, John Bahcall – a leading solar-neutrino physicist and astrophysicist –
writes [10]: “I am happy that the big-bang theory passed this test, but it would
have been more exciting if the theory had failed and we had to start looking for
a new model of the evolution of universe”. In fact, there are many domains of
modern cosmology which are far from being settled. The theory is silent about
what banged, why it banged, or what happened before it banged. Despite its
name, the big-bang theory does not describe the bang at all. The biggest problem
of the big-bang theory of the origin of the universe is philosophical – perhaps even
theological – what banged and why it banged!

The philosophical base of the theory stands as embarrassing situation for the
scientists. Robert Jastrow – the ﬁrst chairman of NASA’s Lunar Exploration Com-
mittee – himself admitted [11]: “Astronomers try not to be inﬂuenced by philo-
sophical considerations. However, the idea of a universe that has both a beginning
and an end is distasteful to the scientiﬁc mind”. To avoid this initial difﬁculty the
idea of singularity was introduced in which the universe expands from a singular
point and collapses back to the singular point and repeats the cycle indeﬁnitely
[12]. The idea was appreciated to avoid the philosophical, rather theological, base
of the theory, but the available experimental evidences indicate that this type of
oscillating universe is a physical impossibility. The facts and recent results sug-
gest the geometry of the universe is ﬂat and will expand forever [13, 9]. So, the
attempts behind this idea to avoid philosophical or theistic beginning of the uni-

7

verse all fail [14].

The philosophical origin of the big-bang is hard to quit even in the current
attempts that are being made through a highly speculative theory of uniﬁcation of
quantum mechanics with gravity: “Quantum Cosmology”. It must be noted that
the meaning of “t=0” is highly contextualized by the assumptions and limitations
of big-bang theory. In the alternative theories like quantum cosmology, they may
well address the problems like “t=0” but the underlying philosophical ideas about
space, time, matter and causality, far from being eradicated, might re-emerge in
new and distinctive patterns and which will lead to further questions.

3 TOE Project

Science works under the principle of economy of understanding nature [15]: when
multiple explanations are available for a phenomenon, the simplest version must
be preferred. The logical description of a vast range of physical phenomena from
a few basic principles, rather than the memorization of a large number of isolated
facts or formulae. Such economy is the strength of modern analytical science.

Scientists have a secret dream to expound nature in the simplest version. They
want to explain all phenomena in the universe with the minimum number of par-
ticles interacting with a single interaction. Search for such a TOE is like the quest
for the Holy Grail in the Middles Ages.

TOE is a beautiful contemplation of theoretical physics and mathematics that
fully explains all the known and unknown – everything in entire universe including
life – with a single uniﬁed equation. Search for such a theory has started from the
idea proposed by Isaac Newton. According to him, one great theory might exist
that would link all the other known theories and this Grand Uniﬁed Theory (GUT)
would be able to describe everything including life in the entire universe.

Science has traversed a long way since the time of Newton, and other physi-
cists, including Albert Einstein, began to realize this beautiful idea of uniﬁca-
tion. This idea became more popular after the revolutionary work of James Clerk
Maxwell (1831-1879): The ﬁrst theoretical uniﬁcation of the two physical phe-
nomena – electricity and magnetism – into one all-encompassing framework. The
next great step was the success of Quantum Electrodynamics (QED) theory (the
integration of electromagnetism and quantum mechanics)4. On the same lines, the
4This landmark work in the direction of GUT earned Richard Feynman, Julian Schwinger, and

8

uniﬁcation of electromagnetic and weak nuclear forces known as Electro-Weak
theory (EW)5 took place.

In order to ﬁnd the most promising road to a GUT there are continuous endeav-
ors to unify all the forces of nature. Mathematically elegant Kaluza-Klein theory
does indeed succeed unifying gravity and electromagnetism in a 5 - dimensional
formalism. Many ideas of this theory is the basis for the several modern uniﬁed
theories that can by themselves form a GUT, namely string theory, supergravity
and loop quantum gravity. Scientists want to see this theory (GUT) as an uniﬁ-
cation of general relativity theory, that describes the large scale structure in the
universe and quantum theory, that studies the microscopic structures.

Although, the idea of uniﬁcation seemed quite rewarding, yet the several difﬁ-
culties at theoretical, experimental and phenomenological level have faded away
the hope of realization of this elegant dream: What once seemed very near on
the horizon may be further off than imagined. Much of the difﬁculty in merging
these theories comes from the radically different assumptions that these theories
make on how the universe works. On the one hand, in conventional GUTs like
SU(5) physical particles exist in the ﬂat space-time of special relativity, whereas
on the other hand in general relativity space-time is curved and that changes by
the motion of mass.

Noticing that a class of GUT quantum theories proposed in 1980’s and later
[16] couldn’t pass even the ﬁrst test in the laboratory: In 1999, Superkamiokande
experiments reported that they had not detected proton decay as predicted by the
GUTs [17]. Also none of the generic predictions of these theories – the existence
of topological defects such as monopoles, cosmic strings, domain walls etc... –
has been observed yet. As a result, not a single such quantum theory is currently
universally accepted.

On the other hand, the very complexity of Einstein’s general relativity was
ﬁrst noted by himself as leading to a very serious impediment on its further devel-
opment. In fact, after publishing his famous paper in 1916, he conceded that this
arose from the mathematical difﬁculties involved in the complexity of its nonlin-
ear coupled equations and their huge number of terms. In 1952 he expounded it as
an acute frustration: “The generalization of the theory of gravitation has occupied
me unceasingly since 1916.” Obviously, at this stage of debates and confusions,

Sin-itiro Tomonaga the Nobel Prize for physics in 1965.

5In 1979, Sheldon Glashow, Abdus Salam, and Stephen Weinberg were given the Nobel Prize

for this work.

9

uniﬁcation of all the four interactions is extremely difﬁcult.

4 A Recourse and A Proposal

With the help of science we observe, describe and establish the truth on ocular
demonstration and verify it with experiments which anyone may undertake with-
out the least faith in ultimate results. If we believe that science must cruise in a
consistent way towards reality and not get lost in the so called conﬂuence of chaos
and confusions, then all the above discussed facts and difﬁculties faced by modern
science and humanity put a big question-mark (?) on the grass-root level working
of science.

A serious ﬂaw is resting in the foundation of physics [18]. And there is a
serious need to understand completely the working of the conventional method
of scientiﬁc studies. Recalling that all scientiﬁc researches are based on Carte-
sian Partition approach: Relying upon ordinary sense perception, which keeps
the outer physical universe as a separate entity, to be an independent existence,
that is something quite independent of the observer. Notice that here we are sep-
arating the real observer from the observation and only relying upon the sense
perception of human body.

In order to make a perception possible there must be a subject –the knower–
who can observe a phenomenon or an event with the help of a connecting princi-
ple. In fact, it is not the physical part of human brain which acts as the observer
(the knower) and makes the perception possible, but there exists a subtle playback
entity; a consciousness being – “Mind”. The human mind is the doer, the observer
which interprets the messages collected from outside by the brain with the help
of sense organs and instruments. Human mind is a part of nature and an essen-
tial component of our observations, and there is no point in eliminating it from
the measurement process. The relationship of mind and matter, which eliminate
Cartesian partition, has already been widely explored in literature [23].

4.1 Some Supporting Conjectures

Let’s ponder upon some facts which might be supporting the scientiﬁc importance
of human mind:

1. Recalling that the classical physics, the study of macroscopic world, is
based on the principle of ’Cartesian Partition’; and in the last century’s develop-

10

ment of science, there came up a well corroborated fact that the classical physics is
an incomplete understanding of nature. This suggests that our scientiﬁc research
based upon ’Cartesian Partition’ approach must be incomplete or erroneous.

Nevertheless, to a ﬁrst approximation this approach is ﬁne, simple, and work-
able, as evidenced by the success of science since its birth. However, as we enter
deep into the matter – with quantum theory, still clinging to this approach – then
we have to have always face the weird responses of mother nature to our questions.
Some people called this as the intrusion of observer in the act of measurement [2].
On the same lines, it is straightforward to argue that this acute ascendancy of
observer in the measurement process experimentally conﬁrms the prevailing im-
portance of the functioning of human mind – the real observer – in the deﬁnition
of reality. In this way it’s scientiﬁc contemplation is inevitable.

2. It has been witnessed by the gradual growth of science, the several inter-
faces among its different branches have been emerging out, e.g., Bio-Chemistry,
Bio-physics, Astro-particle Physics etc... It appears that ﬁnally all the branches of
science, including social and behavioral sciences, are going to meet at some point
of time. There can no longer be “pure” science – every branch of science reacts
with others [19].

As all the ﬁelds of science are developing, so they are converging, and the
mysteries of human mind in almost each of them are coming up into light [20].
This clearly implies a global necessity for understanding the functioning of human
mind. It seems obvious that a scientiﬁc contemplation of human mind could bring
all the ﬁelds of knowledge on a common platform, and certainly impel human
awareness a leap forward.

3. As has been already mentioned above, modern scientiﬁc advancement has
inﬂuenced all the sectors of our day-to-day life including our thoughts and culture.
There is no doubt that along with the enormous physical comforts, mental restless
and all the problems at personal, social, and global levels that we face today are
also related to our scientiﬁc understanding of nature. So, there exists essentially a
crisis of understanding of our own minds and nature – a crisis of true perception
of reality. In order to maintain both peace and prosperity together we have to
understand the functioning of our minds and learn to eliminate the causes which
promote human toward destruction.

According to Melvin Calvin [19], a Nobel laureate in chemistry, that it is ap-
parent that for the welfare of mankind, scientists must understand the basic knowl-
edge of other ﬁelds than their own, and, in addition, must understand world about
them in terms of the humanist as well. And, conversely, the student of humani-

11

ties must understand the interrelationships of his own specialty (for example, of
urban planning, with the humanitarian, or aesthetic, provisions for peace of mind
and of environment) as well as the relationship of his specialty to new knowledge
advanced in the area of science.

4. However, we know that our thoughts and emotions do inﬂuence our brain
chemistry and other biological activities, yet for no signiﬁcant reasons we don’t
treat them in the deﬁnition of reality. The mind composed of thoughts and emo-
tions do inﬂuence our observations and measurements. In this way mind-independent
measurement of reality is erroneous and incomplete. So the functioning of mind
must be incorporated in our scientiﬁc methods in order to understand the true
picture of reality.

5. Notice that the most creative physicists have always emphasized that human
consciousness (mind) is at the foundation of the scientiﬁc method behind physics.
According to American physicist Eugene Wigner: “The next revolution in physics
will occur when the properties of mind will be included in the equations of quan-
tum theory”. Luis De Broglie – who proposed the idea of the wave-nature of
particle – said: “The structure of the material universe has something in common
with the laws that govern the working of the human mind”. Erwin Schroedinger
felt deeply that human mind is a sole constructor of all the observations and quoted
as: “Our picture of the world is, and always will be, a construct of the mind”. In
order to construct reality mind has been thought responsible for the collapse of
wave function [21]. The idea give rise in some cases to a defense of freedom of
will.

6. A radical change in the human understanding of nature and objective reality
is expected by un-veiling the mysteries of human mind. This revolution of human
consciousness is quite possible as evinced by the several leaps already happened
in the history of evolution [18].

In summary, there are some facts which are interpreted as the compelling evi-
dence for the scientiﬁc contemplation of human mind. There is a need to expand
our world-view in order to include human mind in the deﬁnition of reality.

5 Discussion

Science is an objective study of matter and its interactions: based on a tacit as-
sumption that information about a physical system can be acquired without inﬂu-
encing the the system’s state. However, the “information” is regarded as unphys-

12

ical, a mere record of the tangible, material universe essentially decoupled from
the domain governed by the physical laws. So, in order to contemplate human
mind scientiﬁcally, ﬁrst of all we need to check if it is objective in nature.

The Cartesian approach of science ﬁnds it extremely difﬁcult to include an en-
tity, in the theory, which is just a subjective experience. If human mind is purely
subjective in nature, as per general prejudice, then it would certainly be impos-
sible to contemplate it scientiﬁcally. However, on the other hand, the objectivity
property of mind can dramatically simplify the understanding of it and thereby
facilitate its inclusion in scientiﬁc theories.

Metaphorically, human mind can be understood as a lake of water. The surface
of lake is the dividing line between sleeping and waking state of consciousness.
Below the surface is the subconscious and unconscious mind, and on the surface
is the conscious state of mind. It is argued here that human mind is subjective
only in its superﬁcial layers which retain and defend the individuality of a per-
son. However, the objectivity is in the whole remaining part of it, as because all
humans are alike in the deep down, having the similar qualities and traits: quest
for truth and happiness, an urge to be alive, and seek justice, sense of guilt, love
and compassion, kindness etc... and all those abilities necessary to carry life. For
example, if you ask a terrorist: why he was shedding blood of innocent lives. His
answer is simple and straightforward: “I don’t like to do but am forced by the
circumstances.” This clearly shows the objectivity of mind below the superﬁcial
“terrorist-mask”.

Traditionally, using statistical analysis, the three factors genetic, environmen-
tal, and the product of both components have been recognized as responsible for
all the behavioral variations. It has been accepted since a long time by the biolo-
gists that the genes, the environment, and the interaction between them orchestrate
the human behavior [22]. Which shows that only these three factors contribute to
shape the personality of a child and offer a shallow individuality to him. So, in
this way, the subjectivity of human mind at the superﬁcial levels (although not
well-understood yet) can be scientiﬁcally contemplated. It is up to the further ad-
vancements of neuro-studies, genetics, and in behavioral sciences to realize this
dream.

For further elaboration of this concept, let’s perform a thought experiment:

13

Mind: A Compact Disc

Metaphorically, the mind of every new-born baby is a formatted and blank com-
pact disc (“Mind-Disc”) produced by the same company (nature) through a certain
franchised ﬁrm (parents). To call it formatted, means that there already exist some
genetic and biological instructions like, a certain mental level and some speciﬁc
traits, e.g., cry for food, sucking of nipple, excretion, breathing, pumping of heart
and all of those are necessary to carry life. The “Mind-Disc” is called blank be-
cause it is like a clean slate, what-so-ever you want to print on it, you can.

So, let’s take the mind of a new-born baby as a fresh sample to test. As child
grows up social factors start shaping his life. It is a noted fact that the parents,
teachers and society are the dominant factors responsible for an innocent child to
become a criminal or a gentleman in his later life. Evidently, this example, to
a far extent, supports the objectivity of human mind and thereby establishes that
determinism is working on the most part of it. The other factors inﬂuencing the
human behavior are genetic and biological (as a format of the mind-disc set off by
nature). If we could contemplate them scientiﬁcally, a total objectivity of human
mind can be established.

6 Conclusions

Although, classical physics has failed to explain the dynamics of the microscopic
particles, yet modern scientiﬁc researches are based upon the prejudice posed by
classical physics – Cartesian Partition – keeping the outer physical universe as a
separate entity. Indeed, the quantum physics experiments have knocked the door
of a new paradigm through the troublesome intrusion of observer – human mind
– in the act of observation. The prevailing role of observer, as suggested by the
quantum physics experiments, is a one of the physical proofs substantiating the
idea proposed in this work as a solution of the problem in hand.

Several facts have been analyzed and conjectures have been presented, which
favor the scientiﬁc contemplation of human mind in order to facilitate the further
growth of science and humanity. The objectivity property of human mind has
been brought into light. As a result of which, it would be dramatically simpler to
comprehend it in the scientiﬁc theories. Although, the scientiﬁc contemplation of
human mind is a great challenge for the scientists yet, it there are strong possi-
bilities that a fruitful collaboration of the experts from all disciplines of life could

14

spark and may facilitate the accomplishment of the holistic cause.

In the light of the indicative conjectures, once some concrete steps are made
in this direction, the solutions to the various problems related to the difﬁculties
and growth of modern science, and peace and prosperity of humanity would start
showing up. Finally a paradigm-shift is evinced, which has the potential to dra-
matically transform our view of reality, identity, social relationships, and human
purpose.

The work was supported by Fundac¸ ˜ao para a Ciˆencia e a Tecnologia through the
grant SFRH/BPD/5719/2001.

Acknowledgments

References

[1] S. Goldstein, “Quantum Theory without Observers – Part 1-2”, Physics To-

day, p.42, March 1998 and p.38, April 1998.

[2] J. A. Wheeler and W. H. Zurek, “Quantum Theory and Measurement”, (eds.,

Princeton U. P., Princeton, 1983).

[3] J. S. Bell, “Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics”, (Cam-

bridge University Press, 1987).

[4] Bohr v Einstein: The debate between Bohr and Einstein over the interpre-
tation of quantum theory began in 1927 at the ﬁfth Solvay Conference of
physicists and ended at Einstein’s death in 1955.

[5] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky and N. Rosen, “Can quantum-mechanical descrip-
tion of physical reality be considered complete?”, Physical Review 47, 770
(1935).

[6] J. S. Bell, “On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox” Physics 1, n3, 195

(1964).

[7] E. Schroedinger, “Quantum Theory and Measurement” Naturwiss. 23, 807
(1935), translated to English ed. J.A. Wheeler and W.H. Zurek, (Princeton
Univ Press, 1983).

15

[8] E. Kolb and M. Turner, “The Early Universe” (Westview Press, 1990).

[9] C. L. Bennett et al., “First year Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe
(WMAP) observations: Preliminary maps and basic results” Astrophys. J.
Suppl. 148 1 (2003).

[10] J. Bahcall, “The Big Bang is Bang On” Nature 408 (2000).

[11] R. Jastrow, “Until the Sun Dies” (New York: W.W. Norton, p.31, 1977).

[12] J. Gribbin, “Oscillating Universe Bounces Back” Nature 259 (1976).

[13] J. Silk, “The Big Bang”, (San Francisco, CA: W.H. Freeman, p.309, 1980); J.
Gribbin, “Genesis: The Origins of Man and the Universe”, (New York: Dela-
corte, p.316, 1981); R. Jastrow, “God and the Astronomers”, (New York: W.
Norton, p.123, 1978); E. Chaisson, “Early Results from the Hubble Space
Telescope”, Scientiﬁc American 266, 6 (1992).

[14] H. Ross, “The Fingerprint of God”, (Orange, CA: Promise Publishing,

p.105, 1991).

[15] Occam’s Razor: A principle attributed to the 14th century English logician
and Franciscan friar, William of Occam that forms the basis of methodolog-
ical reductionism, also called the principle of parsimony. This has become a
basic perspective for those who follow the scientiﬁc method.

[16] H. Georgi and S. Glashow, “Unity of All Elementary-Particle Forces”,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 32, 438 (1974); Graham Ross, “Grand Uniﬁed Theories”,
(Benjamin-Cummings Publishing Company, 1985).

[17] Superkamiokande Collaboration (Y. Hayato et al.) Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1529

(1999).

11 (2005).

[18] Bhag C. Chauhan, “Science In Trauma”, archive: physics/0210088.

[19] Melvin Calvin’s “The Impurity of Science” referenced in CERN Courier 45,

[20] F. Capra, “The Turning Point” (Simon & Schuster, New York, 1982); “Un-

common Wisdom” (London: FLAMINGO, 1989).

16

[21] A. H. Compton, “The Freedom of Man”, (Yale University Press, New Haven
1935); “Reinventing the Philosophy of Nature”, (Review of Metaphysics,
p. 3, 1981); J. von Neumann, “Mathematical Foundation of Quantum Me-
chanics”, (Princeton University Press, 1955); E. P. Wigner, “The Scientist
Speculates”, (I. J. Good, ed., Heineman, London, p.284, 1961); L. Bass, “A
Quantum Mechanical Mind-Body Interaction”, Foundation of Physics 5(1),
159 (1975); H. P. Stapp, “Quantum Properties and Brain-Mind Connection”,
Foundation of Physics 21(12), 1451 (1991); Mind, Matter and Quantum Me-
chanics, (Springer-Verlag, New-York, 1993); R. Penrose, “Shadows of the
Mind”, (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1994).

[22] Gene E. Robinson, “Genomics: Beyond Nature and Nurture”, Science 304,

issue 5669, 397 (2004).

[23] D. Bohm, “A New Theory of Relationship of Mind and Matter,” Philosoph-
ical Psychology, 3, No.2, 271 (1990); D. Bohm and B. J. Hiley, “The Un-
divided Universe”, ch. 15, (Routledge, London, 1993); B. J. Hiley, “Non-
commutative geometry, the Bohm interpretation and the mind-matter re-
lationship”, Computing Anticipatory Systems - CASYS 2000, ed. by D.
Dubois, Springer, Berlin, p. 77, 2003); C. G. Jung and W. Pauli, “The In-
terpretation of Nature and the Psyche”, Pantheon, New York, 1955); C. A.
Meier, “Atom and Archetype: The Pauli/Jung Letters 1932-1958”, Prince-
ton University Press, Princeton, ed. 2001); H. Atmanspacher and H. Primas,
“The hidden side of Wolfgang Pauli” Journal of Consciousness Studies 3,
112 (1996).

17

