6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
2
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Intelligent Design in the Physics Classroom?

Travis Norsen
Marlboro College
Marlboro, VT 05344
norsen@marlboro.edu
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

This fun polemical piece was written several months ago on a tip that the Chronicle of Higher
Education might be interested in publishing something like it. Sadly (both for me and, I think, for
the Chronicle’s readership) the editors didn’t think it was of suﬃcient interest to the wider academic
community. I am posting it here at the arxiv so that it can, nevertheless, be publicly available. If
anyone out there wants to (suggest a place to) publish the piece, I’m all ears.

A dangerous enemy has inﬁltrated our science class-
rooms and is infecting our students’ minds. The enemy
is a profoundly unscientiﬁc theory masquerading as legit-
imate science. Its presence in the science classroom blurs
the distinction between real science and arbitrary dogma
and “makes students stupid” by leaving them less able
to distinguish reasonable ideas from unreasonable ones –
a skill that is surely one of the main goals of teaching
science in the ﬁrst place.

You probably suspect the enemy I’m talking about is
Intelligent Design (ID). Yes, ID has inﬁltrated some sci-
ence classrooms. Yes, ID is speciﬁcally designed to blur
the distinction between real science and religious dogma.
And yes, the phrase “makes students stupid” is straight
out of Pennsylvania Judge John Jones’ recent ﬁnding that
“ID is not science” and shouldn’t be taught in the biol-
ogy classroom. But, in part because of Jones’ excellent
analysis, I don’t think ID is a terribly signiﬁcant danger.
It is too transparently unscientiﬁc, too widely recognized
for what it really is: a thinly-veiled attempt to inject
religious creationism into the science classroom.

The enemy I’m worried about is something else – some-
thing just as unscientiﬁc as ID, but more dangerous be-
cause it is not widely recognized as such: the Copenhagen
interpretation of quantum mechanics.

The Copenhagen interpretation, so named because of
the Danish roots of its main author Niels Bohr, grew out
of the paradoxical nature of sub-atomic particles revealed
by experiments in the 1920’s: electrons sometimes acted
like particles but sometimes like waves. This is a paradox
because particles are, by deﬁnition, localized entities that
follow deﬁnite trajectories while waves are not conﬁned
to any particular path or region of space. How could the
same thing be both conﬁned and not conﬁned, both a
particle and a wave? Paradox indeed!

Luckily, the two conﬂicting aspects never appear si-
multaneously. The experimental situations in which the
particle and wave properties manifest themselves are, in
a sense, mutually exclusive. The famous Heisenberg Un-
certainty Principle codiﬁes this separation: any experi-
ment which reveals the precise particle character of an
electron will necessarily obscure the wave character com-
pletely, and vice versa.

not very satisfying. Bohr’s approach was not so much
to resolve the paradox as to embrace it. Naming his
philosophy “complementarity,” he posited that the elec-
tron’s wave and particle natures were mutually incompat-
ible – yet still jointly exhaustive – perspectives. A com-
plete theoretical description of the electron would have
to include both wave and particle aspects; yet, like the
experimental situations in which they are revealed, the
very concepts of “wave” and “particle” could not be ap-
plied simultaneously. According to the Copenhagen view,
physicists can never really understand the surprising ex-
perimental results or the real nature of the electron. We
must simply embrace the paradox and quit hoping for a
coherent physical picture.

This all probably sounds rather weird and philosoph-
ical, at least compared to what scientists normally con-
sider scientiﬁc. One might think, therefore, that Bohr’s
ideas could have had little or no impact on the actual sci-
entiﬁc theory of quantum mechanics. This, however, is
deﬁnitely not the case. Bohr’s ideas were tremendously
inﬂuential in the development of the theory, and continue
to be taught – in all the textbooks and in the overwhelm-
ing majority of classrooms – as an essential, ineliminable
part of the formal textbook theory.

Indeed, Bohr’s paradox-embracing philosophy has an
exact counterpart in the theory’s mathematics.
It de-
scribes electrons as waves that obey Schr¨odinger’s wave
equation. So far so good. But this part of the dynam-
ics only applies when nobody is looking. When some-
body looks (i.e., when a “measurement” of the elec-
tron is made) it suddenly (one is tempted to say, mag-
ically) becomes a particle – a process governed, not by
Schr¨odinger’s equation, but by a diﬀerent, incompatible
bit of mathematics. According to the Copenhagen the-
ory, the fundamental laws of nature governing electrons
are deeply dependent on the human-centered concept of
“measurement.”

Bohr’s colleague Pascual Jordan expressed the implica-
tions of the Copenhagen theory this way: “we ourselves
produce the results of measurement... We compel [the
electron] to assume a deﬁnite position; previously it was,
in general, neither here nor there; it had not yet made
its decision for a deﬁnite position.”

If one wants to achieve a coherent, physical under-
standing of the nature of the electron, however, this is

Heisenberg explains that “we can no longer speak of
the behavior of the particle independently of the process

of observation. As a ﬁnal consequence, the natural laws
formulated mathematically in quantum theory no longer
deal with the elementary particles themselves but with
our knowledge of them. Nor is it any longer possible
to ask whether or not these particles exist in space and
time objectively.” He concludes that “science no longer
confronts nature as an objective observer, but sees itself
as an actor in this interplay between man and nature.”
Bohr advocates complete surrender: “There is no
quantum world... It is wrong to think that the task of
physics is to ﬁnd out how Nature is. Physics concerns
what we can say about Nature.”

I think that on some level, most physicists recognize
the irrational and unscientiﬁc character of these sorts of
statements – but also that they are reasonable extrap-
olations from the Copenhagen theory. This is probably
why physicists have developed a kind of pragmatic, anti-
philosophical attitude, and why they deliberately sup-
press discussion of the more philosophical aspects of the
Copenhagen quantum theory. This attitude is best ex-
pressed in the popular slogan “Shut up and calculate,”
often wielded against students wishing to steer discussion
toward these interesting (if disturbing) implications.

But if the textbook theory really has these crazy im-
plications, it is rather pathetic to just ignore and sup-
press them. Unscientiﬁc views should be openly iden-
tiﬁed, challenged, and rejected. Why haven’t physicists
been willing to do this?

Because they think there is no better alternative. As
physicist Murray Gell-Mann said, “Niels Bohr brain-
washed a whole generation of physicists into believing
that the problem [of interpreting quantum theory] was
solved ﬁfty years ago.” Basically, the orthodox dogma is
that the Copenhagen approach is the only way to deal
with the paradoxes. Physicists were allegedly forced –
by incontrovertible experimental data – to accept Bohr’s
interpretation. This is the premise behind physicists’ pa-
thetic and evasive strategies for dealing with the Copen-
hagen theory and its implications.

But, in fact, this premise is a complete fabrication.
The Copenhagen philosophy is not the only possible con-
ceptual framework for quantum theory. There exists a
completely normal, scientiﬁc, common-sensical alterna-
tive – a theory that agrees with all of the experiments
but avoids completely the unscientiﬁc philosophical bag-
gage and subjectivist implications of the Copenhagen ap-
proach. This alternative theory gives no special dynam-
ical role to “measurement,” in no way implies that the
world doesn’t exist until somebody looks at it, and com-
pletely undermines the case for mind-over-matter anti-
realism, channeling, the magical healing power of crys-
tals, and all the other nonsense (as expressed, for exam-
ple, in the bizarre recent movie What the Bleep do We
Know? ) that draws its lifeblood from the Copenhagen

2

philosophy.

This alternative theory was ﬁrst proposed in the 1920’s
by Louis de Broglie, who (tragically) abandoned his ideas
in the face of tremendous peer pressure from the likes
of Bohr and Heisenberg. De Broglie’s theory was then
independently rediscovered in 1952 by David Bohm, and
clariﬁed and elaborated in the 60’s and 70’s by John Bell.
How does this alternative theory resolve the basic
wave-particle paradox which spawned such bizarre con-
tortions in the Copenhagen approach? The solution is
almost embarrassingly simple. Bell explains: “While the
founding fathers agonized over the question

‘particle’ or ‘wave’

de Broglie in 1925 proposed the obvious answer

‘particle’ and ‘wave.’ ”

And that’s that. The paradox is resolved: there are
two entities, a wave and a particle. The motion of the
particle is aﬀected by the wave according to a simple dy-
namical equation, and the resulting particle trajectories
are completely consistent with what is observed in ex-
periments. It is hard not to agree with Bell’s judgment
that “this idea seems to me so natural and simple, to
resolve the wave-particle dilemma in such a clear and or-
dinary way, that it is a great mystery to me that it was
so completely ignored.”

And it continues to be ignored. The theory is rarely
mentioned in textbooks – or , when mentioned, usually
dismissed as ﬂawed, impossible, or inconsistent, all as
part of a bogus proof that the Copenhagen view must
be accepted. But the theory exists. It is possible; it is
consistent; it is real. And there is no defensible reason
that it should not be more widely known – i.e., more
widely included in the quantum physics curriculum.

This may seem like a rather technical

issue that
physicists should straighten out for themselves, an issue
that non-physicist academics shouldn’t or needn’t worry
about. But the academic community at large has a le-
gitimate interest and stake in this issue, just as it has a
legitimate interest and stake in the debate over Intelli-
gent Design. Like ID, Copenhagen quantum mechanics
“makes students stupid.” Like ID, it probably has no
place in college science classrooms. If it is nevertheless
to be given such a place, shouldn’t the obviously more
rational alternative theory of de Broglie and Bohm also
be taught?

This is a question physicists should have asked long
ago. Given their stubborn refusal to do so, perhaps it is
time for their colleagues and administrators – and any
willing Pennsylvania judges – to provide the necessary
wake-up call. Because, if you ask me, our physics stu-
dents deserve a more intelligently designed curriculum.

