Europhysics Letters

PREPRINT

Induced order and reentrant melting in classical two-dimensional
binary clusters

K. Nelissen 1, B. Partoens 1, I. Schweigert 1,2 and F. M. Peeters 1
1 Departement Fysica,Universiteit Antwerpen, Groenenborgerlaan 171, B-2020 Antwer-
pen,Belgium
2 Institute of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, Institutskaya 4/1, Novosibirsk
630090, Russia

PACS. 64.60.Cn – Order-disorder transformations; statistical mechanics of model systems .
PACS. 83.10.Mj – Molecular dynamics, Brownian dynamics.
PACS. 83.10.Rs – Computer simulation of molecular and particle dynamics.

Abstract. – A binary system of classical charged particles interacting through a dipole
repulsive potential and conﬁned in a two-dimensional hardwall trap is studied by Brownian
dynamics simulations. We found that the presence of small particles stabilizes the angular
order of the system as a consequence of radial ﬂuctuations of the small particles. There is an
optimum in the increased rigidity of the cluster as function of the number of small particles.
The small (i.e. defect) particles melt at a lower temperature compared to the big particles and
exhibit a reentrant behavior in its radial order that is induced by the intershell rotation of the
big particles.

Introduction. – Melting and crystallization are fundamental processes in nature and have
been widely studied. Charged particles systems like e.g. colloids [1] and dusty plasma’s [2]
display similar phase behavior as atoms and molecules with the added advantage that the
micrometer size of the particles and their slower dynamics make them accessible for real space
imaging [3]. Most of the previous research was directed towards one-component systems.
Recently, in a theoretical study in Ref. [4] the complexity of the system was increased by
investigating systems with two types of particles of diﬀerent radii and diﬀerent eﬀective charge
conﬁned in a parabolic trap. A recent experimental study [5] concentrated on oppositely
charged colloidal particles conﬁned in a cavity and found a remarkable diversity of new binary
structures. In this letter we consider a ﬁnite size binary system of repulsive particles which
are conﬁned to move in two dimensions (2D). The circular hard wall conﬁnement potential
competes with the 2D Wigner crystal structure [6] and leads to ring like arrangements for the
particles [7, 8]. Previously it was shown experimentally [9] and theoretically [10] that single
component systems exhibit a remarkable re-entrant melting behavior. In the present binary
system we assume a large diﬀerence in the size and ‘charge’ of the particles and therefore the
smaller particles can be considered as ‘defects’ which disturb the order of the big particles [11].
We found that these defect particles have a pronounced eﬀect on the melting behavior of the
system and results in an unexpected stabilization of the ordered phase and a new reentrant
c(cid:13) EDP Sciences

6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
5
1
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

melting behavior. The possibility of stabilization was also addressed in the theoretical study
of Ref. [4] in the case of few binary Coulomb clusters conﬁned in a parabolic trap.

The present study is motivated by the experiment of Ref. [12] where the melting behavior
of a binary system of paramagnetic colloidal spheres (with diﬀerent radii) conﬁned in 2D
circular cavities was studied. The coupling parameter could be tuned by changing the applied
magnetic ﬁeld strength. They found that: 1) the shell-like structure of the system depends
strongly on the relative number of big (NB) and small particles (NS), and 2) the melting
process takes place in several stages where ﬁrst the small particles and afterwards the big
particles become delocalized.

Model system. – In our model, like the experiment of Ref. [12], the particles are conﬁned
by a circular hard wall potential (VP = 0 for r ≤ R and Vp = ∞ at r > R). Like in the
experiment, the particles interact through a repulsive dipole potential V (~ri, ~rj ) = qi.qj/|~ri −
m0/4π is the ‘charge’ and ~ri the coordinate of the ith particle. For
~rj|3, where qi = Mip
a given type of interparticle interaction and external conﬁnement, only three parameters
characterize the order of the system: the number of big particles NB, the number of small
particles NS (also called defect particles) and the coupling parameter Γ. In the experiment
the diameter of the big particles is twice the diameter of the small particles [12], therefore we
have chosen the charge of the small particles to be 1/8th of the charge of the big particles.
As a representative example we will discuss in the following the results for clusters with 16
and 17 big particles. We deﬁne the characteristic energy of the inter-particle interaction for
dipole clusters as E0 = q2/a3
is the average distance between the
big particles. In the present calculation we deﬁne the coupling parameters as Γ = q2/a3
0kBT ,
where kB is the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature of the medium.

0, where a0 = 2R/NB

1/2

The ratio of the particle velocity relaxation time versus the particle position relaxation
time is very small due to the viscosity of water and consequently the motion of the particles
is diﬀusive and overdamped. In our simulations we will neglect hydrodynamic interactions.
Following [13] we rewrite the stochastic Langevin equations of motion for the position of the
particles as those for Brownian particles:

d~ri
dt

=

Di
kBT

dV (~ri, ~rj)
d~r

+

dVP (~ri)
d~r

+

N

X
j=1






~F i
L
mi




,



where Di is the self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient and mi is the particle mass of the ith particle, and ~F i
L
is the randomly ﬂuctuating force acting on the particles due to the surrounding media. In the
numerical solution of Eq. (1) we took a time step ∆t ≤ 10−4/(nDB), where n = NB/(πR2)
is the density of the big particles. The radius of the circular vessel is R = 36 µm and the self-
diﬀusion coeﬃcient of the big particles DB = 0.35 µm2/s is taken from the experiment [12]. As
the self-diﬀusion constant is inversely proportional to the particle diameter (from the Stokes-
Einstein relation D = kBT /8πνa, with ν the viscosity of the ﬂuid and a the particle diameter)
we took DS = 0.7µm2/s for the small particles.

Before starting the Brownian dynamics we ﬁnd ﬁrst the groundstate conﬁguration using

the Monte Carlo technique as in Ref. [14].

In order to characterize the angular order of the system, we calculate the angular diﬀusion
of the particles over a 30 min x 1000 time interval. The relative angular diﬀusion coeﬃcient
can be written as

where hi refers to a time averaging, and the mean relative angular displacement rotation of
the ﬁrst shell [θ1(t)] relative to the second [θ2(t)] one is deﬁned as ∆θ(t) = [θ2(t)] − [θ1(t)].

Dθ =

(cid:8)

2
h∆θ(t)

2
i − h∆θ(t)i

/t,

(cid:9)

(1)

(2)

K. Nelissen, B. Partoens, I. Schweigert and F. M. Peeters : Induced order and reentrant melting in classical two-dimensional

The mean squared radial diﬀusion (MSRD) coeﬃcient is

∆R2 =

[hri(t)2i − hri(t)i2]/a0,

(3)

1
N

N

X
i=1

which is a measure of the radial order in the system. The MSRD is calculated separately for
the big and the small particles.

Results. – We found that all the interesting melting properties for small binary clusters
are present in the NB = 16 and NB = 17 systems. In the insets of Fig. 1 the ground state
conﬁgurations for these systems are shown with zero ((a) and (e)), one ((b) and (f)), three
((c) and (g)) and six ((d) and (h)) small particles. In a 16-particle system with less than 9
small particles (left column in Fig. 1), one can see that the big particles form a shell structure
with 4 particles in the inner shell and 12 particles localized at the edge of the hard wall. The
small particles ﬁll up the vacancies between the big particles. The diﬀerence of charge between
the big particles and the small particles is so large, that the small particles are expelled from
the outer ring. The (4,12)-conﬁguration is a magic number conﬁguration and is exactly the
same conﬁguration as one ﬁnds without small particles [15]. (For 9 or more small particles
the magic conﬁguration is lost and the big particles form a non-magic conﬁguration.) In a
17-particle system (right column in Fig. 1) with no small particles, the big particles form the
(5,12)-conﬁguration. However, by adding 2 small particles to the system, the ground state
conﬁguration of the big particles changes into the (4,13)-conﬁguration. The reason for this
change in the ground state is that the (5,12)-conﬁguration is a non-magic number conﬁguration
and by adding small particles the system tries to adjust to a more triangular lattice.

In order to study the melting of the binary clusters we performed Brownian dynamics
simulations for several values of the coupling constant Γ. First we show how the angular
melting properties change by adding small particles. Afterwards we deal with the radial
melting properties.

Angular melting. The relative angular diﬀusion coeﬃcients as function of Γ for a system
with 16 and 17 big particles for diﬀerent number of small particles are shown in Fig. 1. We
notice from Fig. 1(a), for the magic number cluster (4, 12) without small particles, that the
relative angular diﬀusion curve starts to diﬀer from zero around Γ ≈ 1000. For larger values
of Γ, both shells do not rotate relative to each other (i.e. they are locked), which is a typical
behavior for a magic number conﬁguration. One can see that adding small particles inﬂuences
drastically the relative angular melting temperature: the value of the coupling constant Γ at
which the angular order between both rings is lost moves to smaller values. This is shown
more clearly in Fig. 2: the black squares show the Γ value at which the relative angular
diﬀusion coeﬃcient exceeds the value 100 as a function of the number of small particles in a
cluster consisting of 16 big particles. One can see that adding even a few small particles can
reduce the critical Γ value with a factor of ten. This leads to a ﬁrst conclusion that adding
small particles stabilizes angular order (i.e.
it increases the rigidity of the cluster). This
unexpected increase in angular order is induced by the vibrations of the small particles. The
vibrating small particles, which are mostly situated between the inner and outer shell, lock
both shells with respect to each other and stabilize the angular order. Notice the occurrence
of a relatively large critical value of Γ for 6 small particles. This can be explained in terms
of vacancies. Between the big particles there are only 5 vacancies. When 6 small particles
are added to the system, two small particles have to occupy the same vacancy (see inset of
Fig. 1(g)). This distorts the triangular structure and reduces the angular order, leading to a
smaller angular melting temperature. If one increases the number of small particles further,

4

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

.

.

.

.
.

.

.

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Fig. 1 – (color online) Left column: system containing 16 particles. From top to bottom the number
of small particles increases from 0, 1, 3, 6. Right column: system containing 17 particles. Right
scale: the relative angular diﬀusion coeﬃcient (given with error bars) as function of Γ. Left scale: the
∆R2 for the small particles (red bullets) and the big particles (black squares) in the binary cluster as
function of Γ. The insets show the corresponding groundstate conﬁguration at T = 0

the angular stabilization is restored. One can conclude that on average small particles stabilize
the angular order, but the increase in angular melting temperature with respect to a cluster
without small particles depends on the positioning of the small particles in the vacancies.

Adding small particles does not only inﬂuence the angular melting temperature, but also
the height of the plateau in the angular diﬀusion coeﬃcient (shown by the red triangles in
Fig. 2 at Γ=20). The height of the plateau indicates how fast the shells are rotating with
respect to each other. There exists an optimum number of small particles for this angular
stabilization (corresponding to a minimum in this curve), which in this case is obtained for
NS = 8 at which the relative angular diﬀusion coeﬃcient is reduced with a factor of two
with respect to a system without small particles. Note also that the small dip in the relative
angular diﬀusion coeﬃcient for the system without small particles around Γ ≈ 8 is a sign of
the reentrant behavior as studied before in Ref. [10] and observed in the experiment of R.
Bubeck et al. [16].

Next, we examine how these angular melting properties are modiﬁed for the non-magic
cluster with 17 big particles (see right column in Figs. 1 and 3). Without small particles,
the relative angular order is lost at much smaller temperatures than for a magic number
conﬁguration. Adding one small particle does not aﬀect this melting temperature substantially
for this particular system, as it will sit in the center of the cluster. However, adding more

K. Nelissen, B. Partoens, I. Schweigert and F. M. Peeters : Induced order and reentrant melting in classical two-dimensional

.

.

.

.

.

Fig. 2 – (color online) System containing 16 particles. Black squares: critical Γ where the angular
diﬀusion of the big particles is exceeding the value 100. Red triangles: height of the plateau of the
angular diﬀusion curve measured at Γ = 20. Green dots: height of the ∆R2
of the big particles
measured at Γ = 20. Pink pentagons: Melt temperature of the small particles.

than three small particles has an even stronger inﬂuence on the melting temperature for
angular melting (shown by the black squares in Fig. 3) in comparison with the magic-number
conﬁguration. Again we found an optimum number of small particles for angular stabilization,
which in this case also occurs for 8 small particles (see the minimum in the curve with red
triangles in Fig. 3).

Radial melting.

In order to describe the melting in the radial direction we calculated
∆R2 as a function of Γ. The ∆R2 of the big particles in the binary cluster is shown by the
black squares in Fig. 1. Notice that the radial melting of the big particles sets in around
Γ = 10 which is independent of the number of small particles.
In the limit of Γ to zero,
∆R2 approaches NB/72, which is exactly the theoretical limit for the ∆R2 of a system of
completely uncorrelated particles in a cavity with hard walls. Notice that the ∆R2 curve of
the big particles in Fig. 1, exibits an increase of the inclination around Γ = 10 − 20 as a
function of the number of small particles. To analyze this further, we show in Figs. 2 and 3
the ∆R2 of the big particles at Γ = 20 as a function of the number of small particles (green
dots) for 16 and 17 big particles, respectively. This ∆R2 curve shows a linear increase which
can be understood as follows: as the angular motion of the big particles is tempered by the
small particles, most of the kinetic energy of the particles is directed into the radial direction.
Summarizing we can conclude that the radial melting temperature of the big particles is
independent of the number of small particles, but that the thermal ﬂuctuations of the angular
motion of the big particles is compensated by an increase of ∆R2.

Comparing the ∆R2 of the big particles with the ∆R2 of the small particles (the red dotted
curves in Fig. 1) it is seen that the radial melting of the small particles sets in at a smaller
temperature than the radial melting of the big particles. This conﬁrms the experimental
observation [12] that the small particles become delocalized at a larger value of the coupling
constant than the big particles. From the ∆R2 of the small particles we notice that the radial
melting of the small particles depends on the number of small particles. Figs. 2 and 3 (pink
pentagons) show the critical Γ value where ∆R2 becomes larger than 0.01 as a function of the
number of small particles for a 16 and 17 particle system, respectively. The ∆R2 curves show
that the radial melting temperature increases as function of the number of small particles.

6

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

.

.

.

.

Fig. 3 – (color online) The same as Fig. 2 but now for a cluster consisting of 17 big particles.

This is a consequence of the induced distortion of the triangular lattice by the small particles
which is proportional to the number of small particles. The inﬂuence of this distortion is
clearly visible in the ∆R2 curve (pink pentagons in Fig. 2), just like for the angular melting
temperature (black squares). For 6 small particles, at least 2 particles have to occupy a single
vacancy which distorts signiﬁcantly the triangular lattice of the big particles in comparison to
the occupancy of only 1 small particle per vacancy. This leads also to a weaker pinning of the
small particles and consequently a smaller melting temperature (i.e. a larger critical coupling
constant). Since the interaction energy of the small particles (with charge = q0/8) is less than
the interaction energy of the big particles, we can expect that the critical coupling constant
at which the small particles melt is between 8 times (for 1 small particle in the cluster) and
64 times (in the limit that the interaction is completely dominated by small particles) the
critical coupling constant for the big particles. One can verify in Fig. 1 that this is indeed the
case.

An unusual behavior is found for the radial melting behavior of the small particles which
is found not to occur in a single step. The ∆R2 (red dotted curves in Fig. 1 for 16 and
17 big particles) increases suddenly at a speciﬁc Γ value. However, it does not reach its
maximum value immediately. This means that the small particles at this temperature do not
move freely throughout the system, but hop between the vacancies. By further decreasing Γ
we even observe a decrease in the ∆R2 before it reaches the theoretical limit of NB/72, in
which case the small particles move uncorrelated through the system. In contrast to the mono
dispersive cluster where only an angular reentrant behavior was observed [10], we ﬁnd here a
new reentrant behavior but now in the radial melting of the small particles. This reentrant
melting occurs exactly at the Γ value where the relative angular diﬀusion coeﬃcient increases
strongly. When at large Γ the small particles temper the relative angular motion of the shells,
we notice now that for smaller Γ values it is the complete angular melting which restricts on
its turn the radial motion of the small particles.

Conclusion. –

In conclusion, we investigated the melting behavior of a classical two-
dimensional binary cluster. We showed that defect particles in such a binary cluster stabilize
the angular order of the cluster. An optimum value for the number of small particles was
found for this increased angular stabilization. This tempering of the angular motion of the
big particles is compensated by an increase of the radial motion of the big particles. The
melting process in a binary cluster takes place in several steps where ﬁrst the small particles

K. Nelissen, B. Partoens, I. Schweigert and F. M. Peeters : Induced order and reentrant melting in classical two-dimensional

and then the big particles become delocalized with increasing temperature. Due to the radial
diﬀusion of the small particles, the relative intershell rotation of the big particles is reduced
with respect to a system without small particles. Further, with an increase of temperature,
the diﬀusion of the big particles switches on that leads to the stabilization of the radial motion
of the small particles and a reentrant behavior of the small particles occurs.

Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Flemish Science Foundation (FWO-

VI). One of us (I.S.) was supported by a NATO-fellowship.

REFERENCES

(2003).

[1] P.N. Pusey and W. von Megen, Nature (London) 320, 340 (1986).
[2] C.H. Chu and Lin I, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 4009 (1994).
[3] C. A. Murray and R. A. Wenk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 1643 (1989).
[4] J.A. Drocco, C.J. Olson Reichhardt, C. Reichhardt, and B. Janko, Phys. Rev. E 68, 060401(R)

[5] M.E. Leunissen, C.G. Christova, A. Hynninen, C.P. Royall, A.I. Campbell, A. Imhof, M. Dijkstra,

R. van Roij, and A. van Blaaderen, Nature (London) 437, 235 (2005).

I.V. Schweigert, V. A. Schweigert, and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4381 (2000).

[6] E. Wigner, Phys. Rev. 46, 1002 (1934).
[7] C.C. Grimes and G. Adams, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42, 795 (1979).
[8] V.M. Bedanov and F.M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B 49, 2667 (1994).
[9] R. Bubeck, C. Bechinger, S. Neser, and P. Leiderer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3364 (1999).
[10]
[11] K. Nelissen, B. Partoens and F.M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. E 69, 046605 (2004).
[12] K. Mangold, J. Birk, P. Leiderer, and C. Bechinger, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 6, 1623 (2004).
[13] D. L. Ermak and J. A. McCammon, J. Chem. Phys. 69, 1352 (1978).
[14] V. A. Schweigert and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B 51, 7700 (1995).
[15] M. Kong, B. Partoens, A. Matulis, and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. E 69, 036412 (2004).
[16] R. Bubeck, C. Bechinger, S. Neser, and P. Leiderer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3364 (1999).

