6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
9
0
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

IMAFF-FM-04/20

The Fermi Paradox in the light of the Inﬂationary and Brane
World Cosmologies

Beatriz Gato-Rivera

Instituto de Matem´aticas y F´ısica Fundamental, CSIC
Serrano 123, Madrid 28006, Spain

ABSTRACT

The Fermi Paradox is discussed in the light of the inﬂationary and brane
world cosmologies. We conclude that some brane world cosmologies may
be of relevance for the problem of civilizations spreading across our galaxy,
strengthening the Fermi Paradox, but not the inﬂationary cosmologies, as has
been proposed.

December 2004

Published in the volume ‘Trends in General Relativity and Quantum Cosmology’, Nova
Science Eds., New York, 2006.

1 The Fermi Paradox

Los Alamos, summer 1950. At lunch Enrico Fermi, Edward Teller and other col-
leagues bring up the subject of unidentiﬁed ﬂying objects, which was very popular at
that time. After a while, when they had changed subjects Fermi suddenly asked: Where
is everybody? Performing fast mental computations, Fermi had reached the conclusion
that alien civilizations should have been around visiting Earth for many thousands or
millions of years. Therefore, why we do not see them? This is the Fermi Paradox.

Although Fermi never explained how he made his computations, nor gave an esti-
mate of the number of civilizations which should have visited Earth, he had to rely on
arguments like these: In our galaxy there are thousands of millions of stars much older
than the Sun, many of them thousands of millions of years older (in the ‘habitable zone’
of the galaxy they are on average one thousand million years older [1]). Therefore many
civilizations must have arisen in our galaxy before ours and a fraction of them must have
expanded through large regions of the galaxy or even through the entire galaxy.

Some other arguments that probably were not available at that time involve estimates
about the lifetime of the second generation stars, inside of which the chemical elements
of organic matter are made, and also involve estimates of the total time necessary for a
technological civilization to colonize, or visit, the whole galaxy. Regarding the second
generation stars, they are formed only two million years after the supermassive ﬁrst
generation stars. The reason is that supermassive stars burn out completely exploding
as supernovae in one million years only and it takes another million years for the debris
to form new stars. Therefore the appearance of organic matter in our galaxy could have
happened several thousands of millions of years before the Sun came into existence. As
to the total time necessary to colonize, or visit, the whole galaxy by a technological
civilization, conservative computations of diﬀusion modeling give estimates from 5 to 50
million years [2], which is a cosmologically short timescale. Besides these considerations,
the fact that life on Earth started very early supports the views, held by many scientists,
that life should be abundant in the Universe.

2 Solutions to the Fermi Paradox

Many solutions have been proposed to the Fermi paradox. We classify them as ex-
pansionist and non-expansionist, depending on whether they rely on the idea that tech-
nological civilizations expand or do not expand through large regions of the galaxy. The
most popular non-expansionist solutions, based on the assumption that technological

1

civilizations do not expand beyond a small neighborhood, are the following ones:

• Interstellar travel is not possible no matter the scientiﬁc and technological level
reached by a civilization. Advocates of this idea are, for example, most experts of
the SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) project, who for about 30 years
are trying to detect electromagnetic signals from distant civilizations.

• Generically, advanced civilizations have little or no interest in expanding through

large regions of the galaxy.

• Technological civilizations annihilate themselves, or disappear by natural catastro-
phes, before having the chance to spread through large regions of the galaxy.

On the other hand, the most popular expansionist solutions to the Fermi Paradox,
based on the assumption that generically technological civilizations (or a non-negligible
fraction of them) do expand through large regions of the galaxy, are the following ones:

• Alien civilizations do visit Earth at present times, for diﬀerent purposes, and/or
have visited Earth in the past. In this respect it is remarkable the fact that Francis
Crick, one of the discoverers of the DNA structure, proposed in the mid-seventies
that life on Earth could have been inseminated on purpose by alien intelligences
intelligences∗. Besides, some scientists as well as many authors of popular books,
have speculated that some unidentiﬁed ﬂying objects could be true alien spacecrafts
whereas some ‘gods’ descending from the sky, abundant in many ancient traditions,
could have been just alien astronauts (see for example [3]).

• Advanced alien civilizations have not encountered the Solar System yet, but they

are on their way.

primitive life-forms [4].

• Advanced alien civilizations might have strong ethical codes against interfering with

• Advanced aliens ignore us because of lack of interest due to our low primitive level.
For example Robert Jastrow, ex-director of Mt. Wilson Observatory, claims [5]
that, in average, advanced civilizations should consider us as larvae due to the fact
that they should be thousands of millions of years ahead of us.... and who would
be interested in communicating with larvae?

∗It is less known that several years before Crick, in 1960, the astronomer Thomas Gold suggested,
during a congress in Los Angeles, that space travellers could have brought life to Earth some thousands
of millions of years ago.

2

• Alien civilizations have not reached us yet because intelligent life is extremely diﬃ-
cult to emerge. Otherwise alien civilizations would necessarily be here. As a result
we could ﬁnd ourselves among the most evolved technological civilizations in our
galaxy or we could even be the only one.

Besides these simple solutions there are many more exotic proposals†. For example,
a rather drastic expansionist solution is given by the string theoretist Cumrun Vafa who
thinks that the fact that we do not see aliens around could be the ﬁrst proof of the
existence of brane worlds: all advanced aliens would have emigrated to better parallel
universes (our Universe would have zero measure) [7].

Recently we made our own proposal for solving the Fermi Paradox [8]. It states that,
at present, all the typical galaxies of the Universe are already colonized (or large regions
of them) by advanced civilizations, a small proportion of their individuals belonging to
primitive subcivilizations, like ours. That is, we put forward the possibility that our
small terrestrial civilization is embedded in a large civilization unknowingly and this sit-
uation should be common in all typical galaxies. Whether the primitive subcivilizations
would know or ignore their low status would depend, most likely, on the ethical stan-
If the standards were
dards of the advanced civilization in which they are immersed.
low, the individuals of the primitive subcivilizations would be surely abused in many
ways. Consequently, in this case the primitive individuals would be painfully aware of
their low status. If the ethical standards of the advanced individuals were high instead,
then very probably they would respect the natural evolution (social, cultural) of the
primitive subcivilizations, treating them ‘ecologically’ as some kind of protected species.
In this case, which could well describe the situation of the terrestrial civilization, the
primitive individuals would be completely unaware of the existence of the large advanced
civilization. Observe that the ‘alien visitors’, from the viewpoint of the primitive indi-
viduals, would not be so from the viewpoint of the advanced individuals because they
rather would be visiting, or working in, their own territory. Observe also that we do
not postulate that advanced alien civilizations might have strong ethical codes against
interfering with primitive civilizations. We simply distinguish between aggressive and
non-aggresive advanced civilizations, which in our opinion is a much more realistic idea.
In this respect, the fact that our civilization has never been attacked by aggressive aliens,
as far as history knows, could well be a clue that we belong to a non-aggressive advanced
civilization which protects planet Earth, as part of its territory.

If this scenario were true for our civilization, then the Subanthropic Principle [8]
would also hold. It states that we are not typical among the intelligent observers from
the Universe. Typical civilizations of typical galaxies would be hundreds of thousands, or

†As many as ﬁfty solutions to the Fermi Paradox have been collected in the book [6], although there

are several left out which we mention in this article.

3

millions, of years more evolved than ours and, consequently, typical intelligent observers
would be orders of magnitude more intelligent than us. Finally, in order for our proposal
to be a solution of the Fermi Paradox, we complement it with an additional hypothesis,
called the Undetectability Conjecture [8], which explains why we do not detect any signals
of civilization from the outer space. This conjecture states that, generically, all advanced
enough civilizations camouﬂage their planets for security reasons, because of the existence
of aggressive advanced civilizations, so that no sign of civilization can be detected by
external observers, who would only obtain distorted data for disuasion purposes.

3 The Fermi Paradox in the light of the inﬂationary

and brane world cosmologies

3.1

Inﬂationary cosmologies

Almost two years ago Ken D. Olum argued [9] that in the inﬁnite Universe predicted by
eternal inﬂation there must be some large civilizations which have spread widely through
the Universe and contain a huge number of individuals. Although the Fermi Paradox was
not mentioned, the underlying idea was again that in the observable Universe, because
of the existence of thousands of billions of stars much older than the Sun, there must be
large civilizations much older than ours. Then the author presented some computations
regarding the probabilities that typical intelligent observers belong to a large (galactic
size) civilization at the present time. In particular, using the assumption of an inﬁnite
Universe, like in the models of eternal inﬂation, and doing some conservative computa-
tions he predicted that ‘all but one individual in 108 belongs to a large civilization’.

Dropping the inﬁnite Universe assumption, but keeping still inﬂation, the author
claimed that the predictions are not very diﬀerent than for the previous case because
inﬂationary models, even if not eternal, usually produce a Universe much larger that
the Universe we observe. Then, invoking the anthropic premise that we are typical
individuals, he predicted that there is a probability of 108 versus 1 that we belong to a
large civilization, in conﬂict with observation. The author concluded: ‘A straightforward
application of anthropic reasoning and reasonable assumptions about the capabilities of
other civilizations predict that we should be part of a large civilization spanning our
galaxy. Although the precise conﬁdence to put in such a prediction depends on one’s
assumptions, it is clearly very high. Nevertheless, we do not belong to such a civilization.
Thus something should be amiss....... but then what other mistakes are we making.....?’
According to our proposal we could be part of a large civilization spanning our galaxy,

4

or a large region of it, without being aware, because of our primitive low status together
with the high ethics of our hosts, as discussed in the previous section. The two major
mistakes of the author, therefore, would have been to assume: ﬁrst, that we are typical
intelligent observers, and, second, that to belong to a civilization implies to be a citizen
of it.

Olum’s article seems to make the Fermi Paradox even stronger. However we do not
agree with these views because, in our opinion, only our own galaxy matters for the
problem at hand, regarding the observable Universe. Any other galaxies are much too
far to be even considered as candidates for visitation or colonization in either direction
(our closest neighbour Andromeda is more than two million light years away). As a result,
it should not matter whether or not there is inﬂation or whether or not the Universe is
inﬁnite or ﬁnite, as long as inﬂation and the age of the Universe have little inﬂuence
on the age of our own galaxy, in particular on the age of the Sun and the thousands
of millions of stars older than the Sun.
In other words, cosmological inﬂation aﬀects
the large scale structure of the Universe, but not the small galaxy-size scale, which is
the only relevant scale for the spreading of civilizations. Otherwise one would have to
postulate the existence of exotic phenomena, like wormholes [10], Alcubierre warp drive
[11], Krasnikov tubes [12], etc., with the hope that they would allow intergalactic travel
by advanced civilizations endowed with the appropriate technology. Our honest opinion,
however, is that if this type of phenomena really existed, they could perhaps oﬀer some
practical help regarding interstellar travel in our observable Universe, but only inside our
own galaxy.

3.2 Brane world cosmologies

In the last years brane world models have been of increasing interest for both Particle
Physics and Cosmology. They put forward the possibility that our Universe is located
in a subspace (brane) of a higher dimensional spacetime, with the standard model ﬁelds
conﬁned on the brane and gravity propagating in the bulk. This allows large, and even
inﬁnite, extra dimensions. Recent work on brane worlds started following the proposals
of N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos and G.R. Dvali [13], and L. Randall and R. Sundrum
[14]. The interest in these models comes from the fact that they oﬀer the possibility to
solve, or view from a newly diﬀerent perspective, many longstanding problems in Particle
Physics and Cosmology. First of all brane worlds may solve the hierarchy problem be-
tween the electroweak scale MW and the Planck scale MP l without the need to introduce
supersymmetry: MW would be the only fundamental scale in nature, and the weakness
of the 4-dimensional gravity would be just a consequence of the 4-dimensional graviton
wave function being diluted in the bulk. But brane worlds can also shed some light on
the baryogenesis and leptogenesis, on the proton stability, on the small masses and large
mixing of the neutrinos, on the gravitational lensing (by brane world black holes), on the

5

nature of the dark matter and dark energy, etc. (see [15] for brane world reviews).

In contrast with the inﬂationary cosmologies, brane world cosmologies have the po-
tential to truly strengthen the Fermi Paradox. The reason is that in the brane world
scenarios our observable Universe is embedded in a much larger cosmos with, at least,
one more large spatial dimension. Along the large extra spatial dimensions there may be
other universes which could be parallel to our own, or intersecting it somewhere. If any
of these scenarios turns out to describe the real world, then it would be natural to expect
that some of these universes would have the same laws of Physics as ours and many of the
corresponding advanced civilizations could master techniques to travel or ‘jump’ through
the extra dimensions for visitation or colonization purposes. Moreover, one has to take
into account that many of these universes could be very close to ours, even at less than
one millimeter distance along an extra dimension. This opens up enormous possibilities
regarding the expansion of advanced civilizations simultaneously through several parallel
universes with the same laws of Physics, resulting in multidimensional empires. It could
even happen that the expansion to other ‘parallel’ galaxies through extra dimensions
could be easier, with lower cost, than the expansion inside one’s own galaxy.

In many other universes, however, the laws of Physics would be diﬀerent, correspond-
ing perhaps to diﬀerent vacua of the ‘would be’ ultimate Theory of Everything, resulting
probably in ‘shadow matter’ universes with respect to ours. This means that shadow mat-
ter would only interact with our matter gravitationally, in the case it would be brought
to our Universe using appropriate technology. This does not mean, however, that the
shadow universes would be necessarily empty of intelligent beings. If some of them had
advanced civilizations, some of their individuals could even ‘jump’ to our Universe, but
not for colonization purposes since they would not even see our planets and stars, which
they would pass through almost unaware (they would only notice the gravitational pull
towards their centers). And the other way around, we could neither see, nor talk to, the
shadow visitors, although they could perhaps try to communicate with the ‘would be’
intelligent beings of our Universe through gravitational waves, for example.

At present we are still in a very premature phase in the study of brane worlds and
we do not know whether these ideas are in fact realistic. Nevertheless, the idea of large
extra dimensions and parallel universes is acquiring greater and greater importance in
the scientiﬁc community, among both theoreticians and experimentalists. As a matter of
fact, the experimental signatures expected from large extra dimensions, at present and
future colliders, are well understood by now [16] and an intense experimental search is
currently under way. For example, experiments starting in 2007 at the LHC (CERN)
will be looking, among other events, for signatures of large extra dimensions.

6

4 Conclusions and Final Remarks

We have discussed whether the inﬂationary and brane world cosmologies have the poten-
tial to inﬂuence the problem known as the Fermi Paradox. We conclude that cosmological
inﬂation does not inﬂuence the spreading of civilizations through our galaxy, contrary
to recent claims, since it does not aﬀect the age of the stars in it. Even if inﬂation
produces a much older, or inﬁnite Universe, like in eternal inﬂation models, it will be
only relevant at very large scales far beyond visitation or colonization by technological
civilizations, unless one invokes very exotic phenomena able to connect distant galaxies
eﬃciently enough with regards to space travel (possibility in which we, honestly, do not
believe). Only in this case an older, or inﬁnite Universe would increase the probabilities
of visitation by civilizations of other galaxies in our observable Universe.

In the case of brane world cosmologies we conclude that some of these scenarios could
have the potential to strengthen the Fermi Paradox, provided they involved parallel
universes with the same laws of Physics as ours. Then it would be natural to expect
the existence of advanced civilizations capable of traveling through extra dimensions for
visitation or colonization purposes, in either direction. It could even happen that the
expansion to other parallel galaxies through extra dimensions could be easier, with lower
energetic cost, than the expansion inside one’s own galaxy, since many of these universes
could be very close to ours, even at less than one millimeter distance along an extra
dimension.

Acknowledgements

I am indebted to Pedro Gonz´alez-D´ıaz for several interesting discussions.

References

[1] C.H. Lineweaver, Y. Fenner, and B.K. Gibson, ‘The galactic habitable zone and the

age distribution of complex life in the Milky Way’, Science 303, 59, 2004.

[2] I. Crawford, ‘Where are they?’, Scientiﬁc American, July 2000

[3] J.W. Deardorﬀ, ‘Possible extraterrestrial strategy for Earth’, Q. J. R. Astron. Soc.,

27, 94, 1986.

[4] W.I. Newman and C. Sagan, ‘Galactic civilizations: Population dynamics and inter-

stellar diﬀusion’, Icarus 46, 293, 1981.

7

[5] R. Jastrow in videos of the series ‘The Universe of Stephen Hawking’, 1996.

[6] S. Webb, ‘If the Universe is Teeming with Aliens.... Where is Everybody? Fifty So-
lutions to the Fermi Paradox and the Problem of Extraterrestrial Life’, Copernicus
Books, New York, 2002.

[7] C. Vafa, private communication.

[8] B. Gato-Rivera, ‘Brane Worlds, the Subanthropic Principle and the Undetectability

Conjecture’, physics/0308078, 2003.

[9] K. Olum, ‘Conﬂict between anthropic reasoning and observation’, gr-qc/0303070 ver-

sion V1 (2003).

[10] M.S. Morris and K.S. Thorne, Am. J. Phys. 56, 395, 1988.

M. Visser, Lorentzian Wormholes: From Einstein to Hawking, AIP Press, Woodbury,
New York, 1996.
M. Visser, S. Kar and N. Dadhich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 201102-1, 2003

[11] M. Alcubierre, Class. Quant. Grav. 11, L73, 1994.

H.E. Puthoﬀ, Phys. Essays 9, 156, 1996.

[12] S.V. Krasnikov, Phys. Rev. D 57, 4760, 1998.

[13] N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos and G.R. Dvali, Phys. Lett. B429, 263, 1998;

Phys. Rev. D 59, 86004, 1999; Phys. Today 55N2, 35, 2002.

[14] L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4690, 1999.

[15] R. Maartens, Living Rev. Rel. 7, 1, 2004.

I. Antoniadis, Eur. Phys. J. C 33, S914, 2004.
C. Csaki, ‘TASI lectures on extra dimensions and branes’, hep-ph/0404096.
V. Rubakov, Phys. Ups. 44, 871, 2001.
D. Langlois, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 148, 181, 2003.

[16] G.F. Giudice, R. Rattazzi and J.D. Wells, Nucl. Phys. B 544, 3, 1999.

E. A. Mirabelli, M. Perelstein and M.E. Peskin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 2236, 1999.
K. M. Cheung and W.Y. Keung, Phys. Rev. D 60, 112003, 1999.

8

