6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
6
0
9
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

String Theory and Einstein’s Dream

Ashoke Sen

Harish-Chandra Research Institute
Chhatnag Road, Jhusi, Allahabad 211019, INDIA

E-mail: ashoke.sen@cern.ch, sen@mri.ernet.in

1

Introduction

Uniﬁcation of the theory of gravitation, as given by Einstein’s general theory of relativity,
and the theory of electromagnetism, as formulated by Maxwell, had been Einstein’s dream
during the later part of his life. String theory, which is the subject of this article, is an
attempt to realize this dream. However in many ways string theory attempts to go
beyond Einstein’s dream. String theory attempts to bring all known forces of nature, –
not just gravity and electromagnetism, – under one umbrella. It also tries to do so in a
manner that is consistent with the principles of quantum mechanics, – the theory that
is necessary for describing the laws of nature at very small distance. Thus string theory
is an attempt to provide an all encompassing description of nature that works at large
distances where gravity becomes important as well as small distances where quantum
mechanics is important.

In this article I shall try to give a very general introduction to string theory.1 However
in order to do so, I must begin by reviewing our current understanding of the basic
constituents of matter. This is the subject to which we shall now turn.

2 The World of Elementary Particles

According to our current understanding, everything that we see around us is made of a few
elementary building blocks. Figure 1 gives us a bird’s eye view of our current knowledge
of the structure of matter. At the crudest level the building blocks of matter are the
individual molecules of various compounds. However there are a very large number of
compounds, each with its own characteristic molecule. A simpler picture emerged when
it was realized that each molecule is made of some smaller building blocks known as

1Refs.[1, 2, 3, 4] provide some good introductory textbooks on string theory.

1

MOLECULES

ATOMS

ELECTRONS

NUCLEUS

u
u
d

PROTONS

NEUTRONS

u
d
d

QUARKS
u 1 u   u
2 3
d     d   d
2 3
1

Figure 1: Our current understanding of the building blocks of matter.

atoms. There are about 100 diﬀerent types of atoms and diﬀerent molecules diﬀer in
their properties because they contain diﬀerent number of atoms of diﬀerent types in
diﬀerent arrangements. During the early years of the twentieth century it was realized
that atoms are also not the smallest constituents of matter, – each atom is made of a
central nucleus and a set of electrons revolving around it. Diﬀerent atoms have diﬀerent
number of electrons, but all the electrons found in all atoms have identical properties.
In contrast the nuclei of diﬀerent types of atoms have very diﬀerent properties. This
picture simpliﬁed once it was realized that each nucleus can be regarded as being made
of even smaller constituents, – the proton and the neutron. Diﬀerent nuclei have diﬀerent
properties because they contain diﬀerent numbers of protons and neutrons. Finally, even
the protons and neutrons are now known to be made of even smaller constituents called
quarks – the proton being made of two up (u) quarks and one down (d) quarks, and the
neutron of one u and two d quarks. According to our current knowledge, the electrons
and the quarks cannot be divided any further. We call them elementary particles.

This gives us a very simple picture of the structure of matter, namely everything is
made of three diﬀerent types of ‘elementary particles’ – the electron, the u quark and
the d quark. However as we shall see, this is far from a complete picture. As is already
evident from Fig. 1, the up and down quarks each come in three varieties. Here we have
denoted them by u1, u2, u3 and d1, d2, d3, but often they are refered to as red, blue and
green type of quarks. We shall refer to this as the colour quantum number although this

2

has nothing to do with the colour that we see in everyday life. The quarks inside the
proton and neutron continuously change their colour due to a process known as strong
interaction that will be discussed soon. There are various other reasons why this picture
is not complete. I shall review some of them here.

In order to understand the structure of matter, we need to understand not only the
basic constituents of matter, but also the nature of the forces that operate between them.
Without this knowledge we shall not have any understanding of what keeps the quarks
bound inside a proton and neutron, or at a larger scale, of what keeps the atoms bound
inside a molecule. According to our current knowledge there are four basic types of
forces operating between elementary particles, – 1) gravitational, 2) electromagnetic, 3)
strong and 4) weak. Of these the gravitational and the electromagnetic forces are familiar
to us from everyday experience. For example the gravitational force is responsible for
earth’s gravity and the motion of the planets around the sun. The electromagnetic force
is the cause of lightening in the sky, the force of a magnet, working of various electrical
appliances etc. It is also responsible for binding the electrons and the nuclei inside the
atom and the atoms inside a molecule. The strong force operates between quarks and
is responsible for binding them inside a proton and a neutron and also for binding the
proton and the neutron inside a nucleus. The weak force, being weak, is not responsible
for binding any particles; however it is responsible for certain radioactive decays known
as β-decay.

It turns out that in studying the physics of elementary particles, we can ignore the
eﬀect of gravitational force. To see this one can compare the electrostatic force between
two protons with the gravitational force between two protons at rest. The result is

Grav. Force
Elec. Force

=

p/r2

GN m2
p/r2
e2

∼ 10−36

where GN is the Newton’s constant (6.67 × 10−8 cm3/gm sec2) that controls the strength
of the gravitational force between two bodies, mp is the proton mass (1.67×10−24 gm) and
ep is the proton charge (4.8 × 10−10 e.s.u.). Clearly this ratio is extremely small. Similarly
all other forces can also be shown to be much larger than the gravitational force.

So far we have discussed the elementary particles and the forces operating between
them as separate entities, but with the help of quantum theory one can give a uniﬁed
description of elementary particles, and the forces among the elementary particles. Con-
sider for example the electromagnetic force between two electrons when they pass each
other. Due to this force, each particle gets deﬂected from its original trajectory. This has
been depicted in Fig. 2. In quantum theory, one provides a diﬀerent explanation of the
same phenomenon. Here the deﬂection takes place because the two electrons exchange
a new particle, called photon, while passing near each other (see Fig. 3). The photon
is capable of carrying some amount of energy and momentum from the ﬁrst electron to
the second electron, thereby causing this deﬂection.2 We call the photon the mediator of
2The quantum picture shown in Fig. 3 suggests that the change in the direction of the electrons

3

-

e

e -

Figure 2: Classical picture of the deﬂection of a pair of electrons via electromagnetic force.

electromagnetic force. Even though it mediates electromagnetic force, the photon itself is
electrically neutral.

Thus in the language of quantum theory we can describe a force by specifying the
particle(s) which mediate the force.
It turns out that the strong force is mediated by
eight diﬀerent particles known as gluons. These particles are all electrically neutral.
The quarks inside a proton (and neutron) continuously exchange gluons, and in this
process keep changing their colour quantum number. On the other hand the weak force
is mediated by three particles, denoted by W +, W − and Z. W + and W − carry +1 and
-1 unit of electric charge respectively while Z is neutral. (The unit of electric charge is
taken to be the charge carried by a single proton. Thus W + has charge equal to that of
a proton, while W − has charge that is equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to that of
a proton.)

Clearly, we must add the gluons, W +, W − and Z, as well as the photon, to our list
of elementary particles. We shall refer to these as the mediator particles. Theoretical
analysis shows that for every elementary particle there must also be another elementary
particle, known as the antiparticle, that carries exactly the same amount of charge but
with opposite sign. Thus for every quark and the electron we have the corresponding
anti-quark and the anti-electron (known as the positron). Fortunately the gluons, the
photon and the Z particles are their own anti-particles, whereas W − is the anti-particle
of W + and vice-versa. Thus we do not need to expand our list by including anti-particles
of the mediator particles. However this still does not exhaust the list of all elementary
particles. Besides the u and d quarks, electrons and mediators and their anti-particles,
there are also other elementary particles which are produced by cosmic rays, radioactive

happens suddenly instead of continuously. In practice each exchange of photon causes a tiny amount of
sudden jump, and the classical picture emerges due to the quantum process repeating many times via
many exchanges of photons.

4

e

e

e

γ

e

Figure 3: Quantum picture of the deﬂection of a pair of electrons via electromagnetic
force.

decays, collision of high energy particles, etc. They must also be added to the list.

Our current list contains about 100 types of elementary particles. Thus the situation
would not seem any better than the days when atoms were thought to be the basic
constituents of matter. The properties of matter known at that time could be explained
in terms of the properties of about 100 types of atoms. There is however a diﬀerence, –
unlike the case of atoms, there is a simple mathematical theory that explains the properties
of all the elementary particles. In fact this theory has been so successful that it has come
to be known as the ‘standard model’ of elementary particles. This model, in principle,
can be used to calculate the result of any experiment that we wish to perform involving
the elementary particles. So far the standard model has been extremely successful in
explaining almost all experimental results.

3 The Standard Model: Its Successes and Limita-

tions

In this section I shall explain some of the basic properties of the standard model. The
basic inputs in this theory are

• quantum mechanics,

• special theory of relativity, and

• laws of electromagnetism and their generalization to strong and weak forces.

There is a mathematical framework, known as gauge theory, that includes all these three
features. I shall not describe the details of this framework here. It turns out that there are

5

many diﬀerent consistent gauge theories, one of which describes the theory of elementary
particles. This particular theory is known as the standard model.

Once the theory is written down, it predicts the outcome of every possible experiment
involving elementary particles. (Of course some experimental inputs go in to decide on
what is the right theory.) For example the standard model tells us precisely what kind
of elementary particles we have in our world. According to this model, the elementary
particles in our world fall into four categories:

• Quarks

u1, u2, u3,

d1, d2, d3,

c1, c2, c3,

s1, s2, s3,

t1, t2, t3,

b1, b2, b3

In this list we recognize the familiar up and down quarks, each coming in three
colours. It turns out that nature contains four more types of quarks, – charm (c),
strange (s), top (t) and bottom (b), each coming in three colours. These four types of
quarks are not usually found inside matter but can be produced in highly energetic
collision among normal matter. Of the six quarks, the up, charm and top quarks
carry 2/3 unit of electric charge, whereas the down, strange and bottom quarks
carry −1/3 unit of electric charge. For each quark we also have its anti-quark; we
have not listed them separately here.
e−, νe,

µ−, νµ,

τ −, ντ

• Leptons

In this list we recognize the electron (e−); the − sign on top is to remind ourselves
that the electron carries −1 unit of charge, ı.e. charge equal in magnitude but
opposite in sign to that carried by the proton. νe, – known as the electron neutrino,
– is a weakly interacting chargeless particle. These are so weakly interacting that
a neutrino passing through the earth does so experiencing almost no force. The
pair of particles(µ−, νµ) have properties similar to that of the pair (e−, νe) although
the muon (µ−) is a lot heavier that the electron. Similarly the pair (τ −, ντ ) have
properties similar to that of (e−, νe), with the tau particle (τ −) being even heavier
than a muon. For each lepton we also have an anti-lepton which we have not listed
here. For example, the anti-particle of the electron is called the positron and denoted
by the symbol e+.

• Gauge Bosons

gluons: g1, . . . g8, Photon: γ, W +, W −, Z

These are the by now familiar mediator particles which have been discussed before.
As already mentioned the list is complete without having to add the anti-particles
separately.

• Higgs Particle

φ

This is the most mysterious particle in the standard model. Unlike every other par-
ticle in the list which has been experimentally observed, the Higgs particle has never
been seen in any experiment despite several attempts. Nevertheless its existence is
predicted by the standard model, and new experiments are being designed to look
for this particle.

6

b

1

W+

e +

t

1

eν

Figure 4: An allowed process in the standard model.

The standard model not only gives us a list of elementary particles but also the list
of processes that can occur involving these particles. For example in order to explain
the electromagnetic force between electrons using the process described in Fig. 3, it is
necessary to know that an electron can emit a photon. This follows from the mathematical
framework that lies behind the standard model. The same mathematical framework also
tells us that if in this diagram we replace the electron by an electron neutrino then this
is not an allowed process in the standard model; hence a neutrino cannot exchange a
photon with another particle. Fig. 4 shows another example of a process that can occur
in the standard model. This describes the decay of a top quark (t1) into an electron
neutrino (νe), a positron (e+) and a bottom quark (b1). In fact the standard model not
only tells us which processes can occur, but it also gives us precise mathematical formula
for calculating the probablility of occurance of any such process. These predictions are
then compared with experimental data to test the model.

Given the success of the standard model, one might like to conclude that we now have
a complete understanding of the elementary constituents of matter. This however is not
true. There are several reasons why standard model cannot be the complete theory of
elementary particles. I shall review a few of these here.

First and foremost, the standard model does not explain the origin of one of the
important forces that we observe in nature, namely the gravitational force. In particular
the list of particles predicted by the standard model does not contain any particle that
mediates gravitational force. The eﬀect of this omission of course is not seen in any of
the experiments involving elementary particles since, as observed earlier in this article,
the gravitational force between two elementary particles is extremely small compared to
the other forces. Nevertheless a complete theory must account for every possible tiny
eﬀect that exists in nature. Thus a theory that does not provide an explanation of the
gravitational force cannot be a complete theory of nature.

7

e

e

graviton

graviton

e

e

Figure 5: An inﬁnite contribution to the gravitational scattering of two electrons.

In order to appreciate the gravity of this problem, let us ﬁrst take stock of what is
known about gravity. Our current theoretical understanding of the gravitational force is
based on the ‘general theory of relativity’, – a theory written down by Einstein almost
a hundred years ago. This theory has been enormously successful in explaining all ef-
fects related to gravity. Unfortunately this theory is based on the principles of classical
mechanics and not of quantum mechanics. Since other forces in nature follow the rules
of quantum mechanics, any theory that attempts to explain gravity as well as the other
forces of nature must treat gravity according to the rules of quantum mechanics. Hence
the general theory of relativity, despite being so successful, cannot be the ﬁnal story about
gravity. In fact the reason that this theory has been so successful so far is that for gravity
the diﬀerence between the predictions of a classical and the quantum theory is extremely
tiny and cannot be observed in any of the current experiments. (We say that quantum
eﬀects involving gravity are extremely small.)

Thus the problem at this stage seems to be to ﬁrst ﬁnd a quantum theory of gravity
and then combine this with the standard model to arrive at a complete theory of all
elementary particles and forces operating between them. At the ﬁrst sight the problem
does not seem unsurmountable. After all, we normally obtain a quantum theory by ﬁrst
writing down a classical theory and then applying a deﬁnite set of rules to turn it into a
quantum theory. Why can’t the same thing be done with the general theory of relativity?
If one proceeds to do this one does get some encouraging results at ﬁrst. In particular one
ﬁnds that like other forces, gravity is also mediated by a new kind of elementary particle.
This particle has been given the name graviton. Like the diagram in Fig. 3 one will have
a diagram where two electrons exchange a graviton, representing the (tiny amount of)
deﬂection of one of the electrons due to gravitational force of the other electron.

So far everthing seems to be proceeding as desired. However one soon runs into a
problem with this approach. To understand the origin of this diﬃculty consider the process

8

shown in Fig. 5 involving multiple graviton exchanges. As in the case of the standard
model, there are precise mathematical rules for computing the probability amplitude of
this process in the quantum general theory of relativity. When one applies those rules to
calculate this probability amplitude, one ﬁnds that the result is inﬁnity!

This is clearly a nonsensical answer! In actual practice we know that this probability
must be extremely tiny since no experiment has yet seen the eﬀect of gravitational force
between elementary particles. Thus there must be something wrong with this theory.

In order to appreciate how string theory eventually resolves this problem, it will be
useful to investigate in a little more detail the origin of this problem. You would notice
that in a diagram like the one shown in Fig. 5 there are ‘interaction vertices’ where three
(or more) lines meet. For example in Fig. 5 there are four such interaction vertices. These
are the points where something happens. We can regard these points as the basic events
which make up the complete process. Each such event takes place at a given point in space
at a given time, and in order to calculate the total probability amplitude of the process
we must integrate over the location of each event in space as well as in time. It turns
out that the integrand, calculated using the rules of quantum theory, diverges (becomes
inﬁnite) when more than two or more such elementary events take place at the same point
in space at the same time. This in turn causes the integral to diverge occasionally.3

In any case the ﬁnal outcome of this complicated analysis is that the standard pro-
cedure that has been successful in formulating a quantum theory of strong, weak and
electromagnetic forces do not work for gravity, and for this reason it is not easy to incor-
porate gravity into the standard model.

Besides the problem of incorporating gravity, the standard model suﬀers from other
conceptual and technical problems. While it is true that the standard model, once for-
mulated, can predict the results of most experiments involving elementary particles, the
formulation of the theory itself requires a lot of input from experiments. For example
there are many consistent gauge theories, often labelled by several continuous parame-
ters, and standard model corresponds to one of these theories with a speciﬁc choice of
the values of these parameters. There is no explanation within the theory as to why
this particular gauge theory with this particular choice of parameters should describe our
universe. Furthermore the choice of parameters which describes the standard model are
not generic, but requires very ﬁne tuning. This is evident from the fact that the theory
has some extremely small dimensionless numbers like the ratio of gravitational and elec-
tromagnetic force between two elementary particles. For a generic choice of parameters
this ratio would be of order one. Finally recent experiments show that not all predictions
of the standard model are completely correct. In particular, according to the standard
model the neutrinos are zero mass particles, but recent experiments show that neutrinos
actually have a tiny but ﬁnite mass. This requires a small modiﬁcation of the gauge
3Similar divergences also occur in the standard model, but can be removed by a procedure known as
renormalization. This procedure does not work for general theory of relativity since the divergences are
more severe.

9

Figure 6: Vibrating closed and open strings.

theory that describes the standard model.

These are some of the reasons why we believe that the standard model is not the ﬁnal
story. In the rest of this article we shall try to see how string theory attempts to address
some of these issues.

4 String Theory

The basic idea in string theory is quite simple. It says that the elementary constituents
of matter are not point like objects (particles) but one dimensional objects. These one
dimensional objects, also known as the fundamental (or elementary) strings, have very
speciﬁc properties which determine the various modes in which the string can vibrate.
However to the present day experimentalists these strings appear as particles since their
size is small compared to the distance scale that can be probed by the most powerful
microscopes available today.4 In particular, diﬀerent vibrational states of a fundamental
string appear to us as diﬀerent elementary ‘particles’ just as the diﬀerent modes of vibra-
tion of a single musical string can produce diﬀerent harmonics of a note. Thus in string
theory instead of having diﬀerent types of elementary particles we have one single type of
elementary string as the basic constituent of matter. Fig. 6 shows some of the vibrational
states of strings. As is evident from this ﬁgure, strings can come in two varieties, – closed
strings which have no boundary and open strings which have two end points forming its
two boundaries.

4The most powerful microscopes available today are in fact the particle accelerators. In these machines
we accelerate particles to a velocity close to that of light so that they carry very high energy and then
collide them with other particles. This process has the capability of (indirectly) probing the structure of
matter to a very small scale. The minimum distance that can be resolved by the current accelerators is
about 10−16cm.

10

Figure 7: A process describing a pair of strings scattering from each other.

Since quantum mechanics and special theory of relativity are two of the basic inputs
in the standard model, and since string theory must include the standard model if it
is to describe our universe, it is natural to require that string theory also respects the
principles of quantum mechanics and special theory of relativity. However one ﬁnds that
for various technical reasons it is not easy to respect these principles. In fact the only
way we can respect these principles is by formulating string theory not in the usual three
dimensional space but in a hypothetical nine dimensional space.5 Furthermore in this
nine dimensional space one can formulate altogether ﬁve diﬀerent types of string theory,
– known as the Type I, Type IIA, Type IIB, E8×E8 heterotic and SO(32) heterotic string
theories. These ﬁve string theories diﬀer from each other in the type of vibrations which
the string performs. As a result they have diﬀerent vibrational states, which is reﬂected
in the spectrum of elementary ‘particles’ that each of these theories produce.

Having nine space dimensions instead of three seems to be a serious problem. We
shall return to this issue shortly and show that this in fact is not a very serious problem.
However, let us leave aside this problem for a moment and discuss some of the good
things which string theory provides. First of all one ﬁnds that one of the vibrational
states of string theory have properties identical to that of a graviton, – the mediator of
gravitational force. Furthermore one ﬁnds that string theory calculations do not suﬀer
from any inﬁnities of the type we encounter while trying to directly quantize general theory
of relativity. Thus string theory provides us with a ﬁnite quantum theory of gravity!

It is instructive to try to understand why the probability amplitudes calculated in
string theory are ﬁnite. For this we need to look at the ﬁgure 7 describing the process
of scattering of two strings. Like in the case of point particle theories, there are deﬁnite
mathematical rules for calculating the probability amplitude of this process. The point
5We often count time as an additional dimension and describe this as a ten dimensional space-time.

But in this article we shall only count the number of space dimensions.

11

R

12

Figure 8: A two dimensional space with a compact coordinate.

to note is that in this diagram there are no points where speciﬁc events (like splitiing
of a single string into a pair of strings) take place; the diagram is completely smooth
everywhere. As a result the divergences in the point particle theories, – which arise when
two or more such events take place at the same point at the same time, – are absent in
string theory. This is the intuitive reason why string amplitudes are ﬁnite.

At this point we must mention that the graviton is only one of the many vibrational
states of an elementary string. In fact the laws of quantum mechanics tells us that a single
elementary string has inﬁnite number of vibrational states. Since each such vibrational
state behaves as a particular type of elementary particle, string theory seems to contain
inﬁnite types of elementary particles. This would be in contradiction with what we observe
in nature were it not for the fact that most of these elementary particles in string theory
turn out to be very heavy, and not observable in present experiments. Thus there is no
immediate conﬂict between what string theory predicts and what we observe in actual
experiments. On the other hand these additional heavy elementary particles are absolutely
essential for getting ﬁnite answers in string theory.

Let us now return to the issue about the dimension of space-time. Consistency of
string theory demands that we can formulate the theory only in 9 space dimensions.
How can string theory be relevant for describing nature, which seems to have only 3
space dimension? The answer to this question is provided by an old idea known as
compactiﬁcation. This idea was pioneered by Kaluza and Klein during the ﬁrst half of
the twentieth century and Einstein himself had been attracted by this idea. We shall
illustrate the basic idea by a simple example in which we begin with a world with two
space dimensions instead of nine space dimensions. We take the two space coordinates
to describe the surface of a cylinder of radius R instead of an inﬁnite plane as shown in
Fig. 8. All objects (including light) in this world can move only along the surface of the
cylinder. Thus if we move along the vertical direction in the ﬁgure, then after travelling

Figure 9: A two dimensional space with a small compact coordinate.

a certain distance (2πR where R is the radius of the cylinder) we shall traverse the whole
circumference of the circle and come back to the original point where we started. We call
this a compact drection. In contrast an object can travel along the horizontal direction
without ever returning to its original position and we call this the non-compact direction.
Clearly if R is very large (larger than the range of the most powerful telescope) then
the two dimensional space will appear to be inﬁnite in both directions and we would not
know that one of the directions is compact. If R is within the visible range, then the two
dimensional creatures will start seeing inﬁnite number of images of each object separated
by an interval of 2πR since light from any object can reach an observer in many (inﬁnite
number of) ways, – directly, travelling once around the circumference, travelling twice
around the circumference etc. This may seem strange from our point of view but will not
at all seem strange from the point of view of the two dimensional people living in this
world since they would always see their world this way. But now consider the case when
R is very small, as shown in Fig. 9. Clearly this world looks one dimensional as R →0. In
fact as long as R is smaller than the resolution of the most powerful microscope, the two
dimensional people will never know that they have a hidden dimension in their world. To
them the world will appear to be one dimensional.

This illustrates the way a universe with a certain number of space dimensions can
‘appear to be’ a universe with less number of dimensions. This idea can be generalized
to make the nine dimensional world of string theory look like three dimensional world
in which we live. All we need to do is to take six of the nine space directions to be
small, describing a compact space K. When the size of K is suﬃciently small, the space
will appear to be 3 dimensional. The main diﬀerence with the two dimensional example
that we discussed is that while there is only one one dimensional space (namely the
circle) that can be used for making one direction compact, there are more possibilities
in higher dimensions. An important class of six dimensional spaces which are useful
for compactiﬁcation of string theory are the so called Calabi-Yau spaces. There are
many diﬀerent six dimensional Calabi-Yau spaces, and the theory that describes the three
dimensional world after compactiﬁcation depends on the choice of the compact space K,
as well as which of the ﬁve string theories we start from in nine dimensions.

Often the three dimensional theory found this way comes very close to describing
In particular when we examine the vibrational states of
the world we see around us.
the string in such a space, not only do we ﬁnd the graviton, but we often ﬁnd ‘gauge
bosons’, – the kind of particles which mediate strong, weak and electromagnetic forces.
Some other vibrational states have properties similar to those of various quarks, leptons,

13

Higgs particle etc. Thus string theory has the potential of describing a uniﬁed theory of
elementary particles and all the forces operating between them.

We would like to emphasize here that in string theory we use quantum mechanics and
special theory of relativity as basic inputs; but the general theory of relativity and gauge
theories come out of string theory. Thus string theory in a sense provides an explanation
of why the forces operating in our universe are described by general theory of relativity
and gauge theories.

Of course all is not well at this stage. First of all, we have the problem that even
though we know of many string compactiﬁcations which come very close to describing the
world that we see, there is no known compactiﬁcation that describes exactly the world
that we see around us. Trying to look for a string compactiﬁcation that describes exactly
the theory that governs our universe is an active area of research in which many theorists
are participating. Second, one might wonder what is the basic principle that one uses to
decide which of the ﬁve string theories is the right theory for describing our universe. If
we are looking for a theory that describes everything in our universe, wouldn’t it be nicer
to have a single mathematically consistent theory rather than ﬁve consistent theories?
Finally, even if there is some principle that tells us which of the ﬁve string theories we
should use, there are still many diﬀerent choices of the compact space that brings us down
to three dimension; and one might wonder what principle decides on the choice of the
compact space. In fact it is possible to have string compactiﬁcation where the number
of non-compact direction is diﬀerent from three; all it requires to have d non-compact
directions is to choose an appropriate compact space of dimension (9 − d). Thus the
question arises as to why our world is three dimensional? We shall try to address some
of these issues in the next section.

5 Duality, M-theory and the Early Universe

So far we have discussed the role played by the vibrational states of a single fundamental
string. However these are not the only possible objects in string theory. String theory
contains many other types of objects which can be made of more than one (some time
inﬁnite number of) fundamental strings. We shall call these objects composite objects.

In conventional approach to the study of elementary constituents of matter, we make a
clear distinction between elementary and composite objects. For example in the standard
model the quarks are elementary particles while the proton and the neutron are composite
particles made of quarks. The standard model tells us various properties of quarks and
other elementary particles in the theory; the properties of protons, neutrons and other
composite objects can be derived from the properties of these constituent particles. Thus
elementary particles enjoy a previlaged position in the description of the theory.

The initial formulation of string theory was based on the same principle, with the role
of elementary particles being taken over by the elementary strings. The vibrational states

14

of the elementary string were the analogs of the elementary particles; all other objects
made of more than one elementary strings were composite objects whose properties could
in principle be derived from the properties of the elementary string. However this picture,
that gives a special role to the elementary particles, got modiﬁed dramatically after the
discovery of duality symmetries in string theory. This is the story to which we now turn.
During the mid 90’s it was realised that some time a pair of theories which ‘look’
diﬀerent may actually describe the same physical theory. In other words, the same physical
theory may have diﬀerent descriptions as diﬀerent compactiﬁcations of diﬀerent string
theories. This symmetry, relating the two apparently diﬀerent theories, is known as the
duality symmetry. This name is actually a misnomer, since often one ﬁnds more than
two descriptions of the same physical theory. One of the surprising features of duality
symmetries is that a particle which looks elementary in one description may appear as
composite in a dual description. Thus whether a given particle is elementary or composite
is not an intrinsic property of the particle, but depends on which particular description
we use for the string theory under study.

Another aspect of duality is that typically the coupling constant of the theory, – the
parameter that determines the strength of various forces operating between the elementary
particles – is related to the coupling constant of the dual theory in a complicated way.
Due to this one ﬁnds that often a weakly coupled theory, ı.e. a theory with small value
of the coupling constant is related by duality to a theory with large value of the coupling
constant. Since it is easier to do calculations in a theory for small value of the coupling
constant, often duality relates the results of a complicated calculation in one theory to
the results of a simple calculation in the dual theory.6

It is best to illustrate this with some examples. We begin with an example of duality
involving theories with all nine dimensions non-compact. We had earlier introduced ﬁve
diﬀerent consistent string theories in nine dimensions. It turns out that the type I string
theory and the SO(32) heterotic string theory are dual to each other in the sense described
above. They ‘look’ diﬀerent because the set of elementary particles, obtained from the
states of the elementary string, are quite diﬀerent in the two theories. However when one
considers the full set of particles – elementary and composite – in the two theories, one
ﬁnds that the two sets are identical. The coupling constant of the heterotic string theory
turns out to be equal to the inverse of the coupling constant of the type I theory. Thus
when the heterotic string is weakly coupled the type I string is strongly coupled and vice
versa.

Another example of duality involves string theories with ﬁve non-compact space di-
rections. We take any one of the two heterotic string theories and take four of the space
directions to be compact, each describing a circle of certain radius. Such a four dimen-
sional space is known as a four torus, denoted be the symbol T 4. On the other side we
take type IIA string theory and make four of the space directions compact, this time
6Due to the diﬃculty in doing calculations in a strongly coupled theory, most of the dualities have

not been proven, but have been tested in many diﬀerent ways.

15

IIA

M−theory

I

E8 X E8 heterotic

SO(32) heterotic

Figure 10: Phases of M-theory.

describing a more complicated four dimensional space known as K3. It turns out that
these two ﬁve dimensional string theories are dual to each other.

In special cases a particular compactiﬁcation of string theory may be related to itself
by a duality symmetry.
In this case the duality symmetry will relate the elementary
and composite particles in the same theory. Such theories are known called self-dual.
For example type IIB string theory with all directions non-compact is a self-dual theory.
Another example is any of the two heterotic string theories with six compact directions,
each described by a circle. In both these theories duality typically relates an elementary
particle to a composite particle.

Using various known dualities between diﬀerent compactiﬁcation of diﬀerent string
theories one can now argue that all ﬁve string theories are diﬀerent ways of describing a
single theory. This theory has been given the name M-theory. Diﬀerent compactiﬁcations
of diﬀerent string theories which are not related by duality are to be regarded as diﬀerent
phases of M-theory, much in the same way that water, ice and steam are to be regarded
as diﬀerent phases of a single theory, – the theory of water molecules.7 A schematic (and
much simpliﬁed) picture of the phases of M-theory has been shown in Fig 10. A point in
this diagram represents a phase of M-theory, and the ﬁve holes represent the ﬁve weakly
coupled string theories through which we may try to get a view of the diﬀerent phases of
the theory. In principle any point can be viewed as an appropriate ‘compactiﬁcation’ of
7One diﬀerence between these two cases is that while for water the three phases are stable for diﬀerent
values of temperature, pressure etc., diﬀerent compactiﬁcations of string theory are all stable phases at
zero temperature.

IIB

16

any of the ﬁve string theories, but clearly if we consider a point near one of the windows,
– representing the corresponding string theory with small value of the coupling constant,
– we have a better view of the point from that window. Understanding what lies in the
interior of the phase diagram, representing phases of M-theory which cannot be viewed
as weakly coupled theories from the viewpoint of any of the ﬁve string theories, is one of
the most challenging problem for the present day string theorists.

Thus the problem of connecting M- theory to nature reduces to:

1. Demonstrating that there is a phase of M-theory that describes exactly the nature

that we observe.

2. Explaining why nature exists in this particular phase and not in any other phase.

Both issues are currently under active investigation by many researchers. I shall end this
talk by describing some speculative ideas on the second issue.

It has recently been found that M-theory has certain metastable phases. These
metastable phases are analogous to the supercooled or superheated phases of matter.
Consider for example the case of a supercooled water, – water below the normal freezing
point. As long as there is no disturbance the water remains as water, but a small distur-
bance in any part of the system will make a small region around that part condense into
the more stable ice phase. This small region of ice will then expand inside the water and
eventually convert the whole water into ice. Similarly the metastable phases of M-theory
have the property that occasionally some regions of the universe in this phase may make
transition into a more stable phase, and this region then grows with time, converting the
surrounding region into the more stable phase.

There is however a crucial diﬀerence between the way a metastable phase of M-theory
behaves and a metastable phase of a normal ﬂuid behaves. The metastable phases of M-
theory which are relevant for our discussion have an additional property that if any region
of the universe is in that phase, it expands rapidly as a consequence of the laws of general
theory of relativity. In technical terms we say that these phases have positive values of
the cosmological constant, – a constant that Einstein had introduced into the equations
for general relativity and later abandoned due to lack of experimental evidence.8 Often
the rate of expansion of the universe due to this cosmological constant term turns out
to be much faster than the rate of expansion of the bubbles of more stable phases which
might form inside these metastable phases.

Let us now combine these two facts about the metastable phases of M-theory, and
study how the universe will evolve if any region of the universe happens to be in such a
metastable phase of M-theory. First of all, due to the cosmological constant term such a
region of the universe will expand very rapidly. At the same time in diﬀerent parts of the
8Recent experiments have found that our universe has a small but non-zero value of the cosmological
constant. Thus Einstein was right after all! The phases of M-theory which we are discussing here have
much larger values of the cosmological constant.

17

phase 2

phase 1

Rapidly expanding 
supercooled phase

phase 3

Figure 11: State of the universe

universe small regions of more stable phases will form9 which will then grow, converting
the surrounding region of the universe into the more stable phase. In fact inside diﬀerent
bubbles we may have diﬀerent stable phases of M-theory. In a normal ﬂuid this process
will stop when the walls of the expanding bubble eventually collide; and eventually the
entire ﬂuid will be converted to the most stable of all the phases. However in the current
situation this never happens since the universe as a whole is expanding rapidly due to
the cosmological constant. Thus the process continues ad inﬁnitum; the original universe
keeps on expanding, and more and more bubbles of stable phases form in diﬀerent regions
of the universe. Eventually every possible phase of M-theory is realized inside one or more
bubbles. This situation has been depicted in Fig. 11.

In this picture, no single phase of M-theory is prefered by nature. The world that we
see around us exists in a particular phase simply because we happen to live in this part
of the world. If we had lived in another part of the world we would see a diﬀerent phase.
Of course, in most of the phases of M-theory life as we know would be impossible, and so
nobody would be there to observe these phases. But that is another matter!

9Even if there is no external disturbance, the laws of quantum mechanics predict that there will be
some intrinsic disturbance in the universe which causes some randomly chosen regions to form small
bubbles of more stable phases.

18

6 Summary

There are various aspects of string theory which I have left out of our discussion. These
include string theory analysis of black hole entropy, duality between string theory and
gauge theory etc. My main focus in this article has been to explain how string theory
brings us closer to Einstein’s dream. However we are still quite far from realizing our ﬁnal
goal of ﬁnding a complete theory of elementary constituents of matter. It is up to the
present and the future generation of string theorists to carry the theory forward towards
this goal. It will be an uphill task but worth the eﬀort.

References

[1] B. Zwiebach, A ﬁrst course in string theory, Cambridge Univ. Pr. (2004).

[2] C. V. Johnson, D-branes, Cambridge Univ. Pr. (2003).

[3] J. Polchinski, String theory. Vol. 1 and 2, Cambridge Univ. Pr. (1998).

[4] M. B. Green, J. H. Schwarz and E. Witten, Superstring Theory. Vol. 1 and 2, Cam-

bridge Univ. Pr. ( 1987).

19

