6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
7
1
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Three questions on Lorentz violation1

Alfredo Iorioa,b

a Institute of Particle and Nuclear Physics, Charles University
V Holesovickach 2, 180 00 Prague 8 - Czech Republic
b Department of Physics, University of Salerno
Via Allende, 84081 Baronissi (SA) - Italy

Abstract

We review the basics of the two most widely used approaches to
Lorentz violation - the Standard Model Extension and Noncommu-
tative Field Theory - and discuss in some detail the example of the
modiﬁed spectrum of the synchrotron radiation. Motivated by touch-
ing upon such a fundamental issue as Lorentz symmetry, we ask three
questions: What is behind the search for Lorentz violation? Is String
Theory a physical theory? Is there an alternative to Supersymmetry?

1Invited lecture at DICE2006 Piombino - Italy, September 11-15, 2006

1 Introduction

The Special Theory of Relativity (STR) is again the subject of an intense
investigation. The ﬁrst time such a scrutiny took place was about one hun-
dred years ago, when the theory was ﬁrst proposed by Einstein. At that time
STR represented a brilliant theoretical solution to many crucial experimental
questions: the experiments - for instance those on the “luminiferous aether”
- were calling for a theoretical revolution, that more or less punctually came.
It is interesting to read how eminent scientists of the time reacted to
STR. For instance, it is quite noticeable the heroic eﬀort of Bridgman -
an experimentalist and Nobel laureate - to avoid to future physicists (us)
another cultural shock of the kind that struck scientists with STR - and
Quantum Mechanics (QM) - in the early 1900’s [1]. Such an eﬀort, although
not really successful regarding the main goal of Bridgman, gave origin to
a method of philosophical investigation on the meaningfulness of scientiﬁc
theories that today goes under the name of operationism. It is surprising to
learn that even Mach, who with his critics to mechanicism paved the way on
the philosophical side to STR, was skeptic with Einstein’s theory [2]. But
skeptics had to surrender to the enormous amount of experimental evidences
from a great variety of diﬀerent kind of phenomena. Thus STR is probably
the most solidly tested and deeply rooted theory in contemporary particle
physics.

Despite STR’s experimental robustness, nowadays is happening somehow
the reverse of what happened at the beginning of the last century: theoret-
ically posited questions eagerly call for experimental ﬁndings that violate
STR. That a theory calls for experiments to prove (or disprove) its asser-
tions it is certainly not new in physics. To a great extent already STR, and
more evidently the General Theory of Relativity (GTR), are examples of
this. We may even say that it is the goal of any good theoretical physicist to
produce a theory that predicts unknown phenomena while keeping explaining
the known ones.

Nonetheless, the search going on these days for experimental signatures
of violation of Lorentz symmetry motivates, in our view, some general reﬂec-
tions on contemporary “theoretical particle physics”, i.e. of a large - perhaps
the dominant - part of what on the Los Alamos archives goes under the
name of HEP-TH. Thus, since many available reviews on Lorentz violation

1

are masterly written2 we shall try here to do the reviewer’s job in a diﬀerent
perspective by trying to spell out some basic issues behind the search for
Lorentz violation.

2 A bird’s-eye-view on the search for Lorentz

violation

It is true that way after the experimental establishing of STR there have been
various attempts to modify aspects of STR in various ways. Already Heisen-
berg questioned the causality structure of Quantum Field Theory (QFT)
while facing the problem of the very deﬁnition of elementary particle [4]. On
the other hand - although the paper that probably pioneered the ﬁeld now
known as “Lorentz violation” is that of 1990 by Carroll, Field and Jackiw3 [5]
- the contemporary systematic assault to Lorentz symmetry can be ascribed
to results of String Theory (ST).

The ﬁrst result is Kostelecky and Samuel’s discovery that in (an open
bosonic, and possibly other) ST(s) Lorentz symmetry can be spontaneously
broken due to the presence in the string (ﬁeld) lagrangian of cubic terms that
include one scalar (the tachion) and two tensor ﬁelds (of any rank) [6]. The
resulting low-energy limit theory is what Colladay and Kostelecky later called
the Standard Model Extension (SME) [7]. The SME is certainly the most
widely used theoretical frame within which Lorentz violating phenomenolog-
ical scenarios are investigated today (for a review see, e.g., [8]).

The second result is of Seiberg and Witten who discovered that a par-
ticular low-energy limit of ST leads to certain noncommutative (in the sense
[xµ, xν] = iθµν ) ﬁeld theories (NCFTs)
of spatiotemporal coordinates, e.g.
[9]. They proved that these theories, although Lorentz symmetry violating,
still keep standard gauge invariance. This was done by providing a map that
gives the noncommutative nonlocal gauge ﬁeld (transforming under the non-
commutative gauge transformations) in terms of the standard commutative
local gauge ﬁeld (transforming under the usual gauge transformations) and

2Among the many excellent reviews on the ongoing search for Lorentz violation see, for
instance, the one by Mattingly [3] where an eﬀort is made towards including all theoretical
approaches as well as the phenomenological analysis.

3There the authors introduced a Lorentz violating term of Chern-Simons origin into

Maxwell electrodynamics and extensively studied the possibility of visible signatures.

2

of the noncommutative parameters θµν. This map is known as the Seiberg-
Witten (SW) map4. This is probably the second most used theoretical frame
to study Lorentz violation5 (for a very recent overview see for instance the
Introduction of [13]).

The SME and the NCFTs, both “string-inspired” models, are not the only
two known approaches to Lorentz violation available today. We single out
these two because they are the most widely used and because their explicit
goal is to propose that Lorentz violation could be a fact of nature. Another
available approach where Lorentz violation is posited as a fact of nature, is
that of Double Special Relativity (DSR) proposed by Amelino-Camelia in
[14] (see also [15]), based on two invariants: the speed of light and an energy
scale. An important independent work is that of Coleman and Glashow that
do not take that view [16]. Their idea is to test STR by studying what sort
of new bounds can be obtained at high energies using the hypothesis that
Lorentz symmetry is not exactly satisﬁed as a working technical tool. Others
approaches also exist [3].

Let us now enter a bit more into the details of the SME and NCFTs. As
said, the SME is based on a mechanism of spontaneous breaking of Lorentz
symmetry within a higher dimensional string ﬁeld theory. “Over there” la-
grangians contain interactions that include tensor ﬁelds of any rank, hence an
inﬁnite number of them is possible. Lorentz symmetry exactly holds - where
by “exact” here we mean that the lagrangian and the vacuum conﬁguration
are both symmetric - and similarly for gauge symmetry and renormalizabil-
ity. This is one of the magic things of ST: such interactions would spoil gauge
symmetry and renormalizability in a four dimensional ﬁeld theory, but for
higher dimensional strings this is not a problem. One such stringy interac-
tions is a cubic term with a scalar and a squared tensor ﬁeld. For stability
the vacuum expectation value (vev) of this scalar ﬁeld cannot be zero, thus

4It is surely possible to construct gauge theories on noncommutative spaces such that
the SW map holds without direct reference to ST, as shown in [10] where the authors
] as a derivative and make this derivative gauge covariant. What we want
consider [x,
to stress here, though, is the profound impact on the HEP-TH community and beyond of
ideas originated in ST: would the Seiberg-Witten map be discovered without Seiberg and
Witten?

·

5The quantum phase of NCFTs is still an open issue: it was shown that novel infrared
divergencies appear in such theories [11], but whether these are unavoidable or not is
still to be clariﬁed. Lately it was argued that such divergencies should not be present if
noncommutativity is implemented via a deformed (twisted) coproduct [12].

3

giving rise to a nonzero mass for the tensor ﬁelds that this way have nonzero
vevs. As the tensors transform non trivially under the Lorentz group this
mechanism gives rise to a spontaneous breaking of such symmetry. As for
any spontaneous breaking, it is the vacuum conﬁguration that becomes not
symmetric, while the lagrangian remains so. By the usual mechanism of the
shifting/redeﬁnition of the ﬁelds (the rescaling of the vacuum to the “true”
vacuum) the vevs of these ﬁelds, say C (k)

µ...ν, appear in the lagrangian.

In the SME the breaking is chosen so that such coeﬃcients combine with
the ﬁelds of the SM (and gravity) and their derivatives. The Lorentz (and
possibly CPT) violating terms added to the SM terms have then the form

C (k)

µ...ν(SM ﬁelds and derivatives)µ...ν ,

(2.1)

1/mk

Planck.

∼
m−1

where C (k)
Planck, so that the higher we go with the power k, the
smaller the eﬀect. Notice here the appearance of the fundamental length
ℓPlanck ∼
The idea here is to ﬁnd phenomenological setups such that the “Planck
size” eﬀects can be “magniﬁed” to the point of giving rise to signatures
measurable by the instruments at our disposal. Those eﬀects should have
visible signatures “over here”, i.e. at reachable energy scales too. This is
quite an interesting point of view. It is somehow opposed to the idea that
it is impossible to test phenomena that take place at the Planck scale. Of
course, it is not claimed that this way one reaches the “Planck world”, but
the core of the approach, so to speak, is that the “Planck world” and “our
world” cannot be fully decoupled.

It is crucial to notice that the Lorentz indices match: the Lorentz vi-
olating terms do not violate the symmetry explicitly (as, for instance, a
non-matching index would brutally do) but they are still scalars when all
the terms, the C (k)s and the SM ﬁelds and derivatives, are transformed. On
the contrary, when the C (k)s are not transformed (as one would expect, for
instance, if these terms would represent a ﬁxed background) then Lorentz
violation comes about. This occurrence is usually referred to as: The SME
is “observer-Lorentz” invariant, while it is “particle-Lorentz” violating, the
“observer” transformations being those of the ﬁrst kind - i.e. those involving
the coeﬃcients and the ﬁelds - the “particle” transformations being those of
the second kind.

This model brings with it many nice features of the original ST model:
it is powercounting renormalizable, gauge invariant, Pµ is conserved and

4

P0 > 0. These properties made SME’s success and the various C (k)s for
the diﬀerent sectors of the SME (especially those in the electromagnetic
sector) have been cleverly searched for in a great variety of experiments and
experimental proposals (see e.g. [8]).

We want to discuss now the example of the spectrum of the synchrotron
radiation to give a ﬂavor of the kind of modiﬁcations one encounters by
dealing with Lorentz violation and to make explicit one of the mechanisms
by which “ampliﬁcation” of Planck-size eﬀects can take place. We shall
not present the SME treatment but instead we shall treat the case within
a noncommutative electrodynamics (NCED) approach6. This will also give
us the chance to introduce some details on the basic formalism of NCFTs
approach.

Suppose that, due to a fundamental length ℓstring ∼

ℓPlanck, spa-
tiotemporal coordinates do not commute. One way of making this explicit
is7

∼

√θ

xµ

xν

xν

xµ = iθµν ,

∗

−

∗

e

∗

χ)(x)

-)product of any two ﬁelds φ(x) and χ(x) is deﬁned
where the (Moyal-Weyl
∗
µ∂y
i
2 θµν ∂x
ν φ(x)χ(y)
as (φ
|y→x, and it is a suitable generalization of
the multiplication law in the presence of a nonzero θ. Finally, θµν is c-number
valued, constant, and the Greek indices run from 0 to 3. The NCED action
is

≡

(2.2)

(2.3)

ˆI =

1
4 Z

−

d4x ˆF µν ˆFµν ,

where ˆFµν = ∂µ ˆAν −
i[ ˆAµ, ˆAν]∗. As said, the nonlocal ﬁeld ˆAµ can be
∂ν ˆAµ −
expressed in terms of a standard U(1) gauge ﬁeld Aµ and of θµν by means of
the SW map8 [9] ˆAµ(A, θ), that at O(θ) reads

ˆAµ(A, θ) = Aµ −

1
2

θαβAα(∂βAµ + Fβµ) .

(2.4)

6To a certain extent NCFTs can be seen as a SME with a particular choice of the

coeﬃcients C(k)

µ...ν [3], [8],[17].

7Of course, this is not the most general way noncommutativity of the coordinates could
take place. For instance, two equally valid, if not more general, approaches are the Lie-
algebraic and the coordinate-dependent (q-deformed) formulations [10], and many other
approaches exist. Nonetheless, the canonical form is surely the most simple and the basic
features of noncommutativity are captured in this model.
0, hence, in that limit, ˆFµν

8 ˆAµ(A, θ)

Fµν = ∂µAν

Aµ as θµν

∂ν Aµ.

→

→

→

−

5

The Noether currents for space-time transformations of the theory (2.3)
are J µ
f = Πµνδf Aν −
/δ∂µAν, and for translations
(the only symmetric case) f µ
const. Hence the (conserved) energy-
≡
≡
ηµν ˆ
momentum tensor T µν = ΠµρF ν
is in general not symmetric, a clear
ρ −
L
sign of the breaking of Lorentz symmetry [18]. Conservation of T µν means
conservation of the Poynting vector

f µ, where Πµν = δ ˆ
ˆ
L
L

aµ

~S =

c
4π

~D

×

~B =

c
4π

~E

×

~H ,

(2.5)

where Di
all the relevant information about the Lorentz violating vacuum.

2ǫijkΠjk are the constitutive relations containing

Πi0 and H i

≡

≡

1

The eﬀects of a nonzero θ, if any, are very small, thus the O(θ) model

would do the job

ˆI =

1
4 Z

−

d4x [F µνFµν −

1
2

θαβFαβF µνFµν + 2θαβFαµFβνF µν] + Jµ ˆAµ , (2.6)

∗

where the vector ﬁeld is coupled to an external current, and the O(θ) SW map
-product are used. In the presence of a background magnetic ﬁeld ~b,
and
and for Jµ = 0, the plane-wave solutions exist [19]. The waves propagating
transversely to ~b travel at the modiﬁed speed c′ = c(1
~bT ) (where
~θT ·
~θ
(θ1, θ2, θ3), with θij = ǫijkθk, and θ0i = 0) while the ones propagating
along the direction of ~b still travel at the usual speed of light c.

≡

−

Plane-waves do not represent a case where “ampliﬁcation” of the nonzero
θ eﬀects can take place. Synchrotron radiation, instead, is a case where ul-
trarelativistic “magniﬁcation” of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in the direction
of motion could help. With these ideas in mind the authors of [20] studied
the synchrotron radiation in NCED, and indeed found the ampliﬁcation they
were looking for. It is matter of solving the modiﬁed Maxwell equations de-
scending from (2.6) with the settings: a) charged particle moving (circularly)
in the plane (1, 2): Jµ = ecβµδ(x3)δ(2)(~x
~r(t)), where ~r(t) is the position
of the particle, and βµ = (1, ~v/c); b) ~b = (0, 0, b); c) ~θ = (0, 0, θ). Keeping
only contributions of order O(e/R), where R is the distance from the source,
one can compute the electric and magnetic ﬁelds that have quite involved

−

6

expressions9.

·

| ∼

|
~L(t)

R >>
~n]

To compute the spectrum in the ultra-relativistic regime (β = v/c

1)
~x
~r(t)
) one needs the power radiated in
and far from the source (
|
|
2, where all the quantities (~n, ~β,
the direction ~n: dP (t)/dΩ = R2[~S
≡ |
˙~β, R) are in the plane (1, 2), and the Poynting vector ~S given in (2.5) contains
all the relevant information. In the ultra-relativistic approximations two are
the characteristic frequencies for the synchrotron: the cyclotron frequency
, and the critical frequency ωc = 3ω0γ3. For radiation in the plane
ω0 ∼
the relevant range of frequencies is ω >> ω0 (such that the latitude ϑ
π/2),
∼
2 (where ~L(ω) is
hence the leading terms for the energy dI(ω)/dΩ
the Fourier transformed of ~L(t)) are

~L(ω)

~r
|

→

c/

≡

2

|

|

|

|

d
dΩ

I(ω)

∼

2

e2
3π2c (cid:18)

ω
ω0 (cid:19)

−4

γ

K 2
"

2/3(ξ)[1 + λ(1 + 6γ2)] + λ

K1/3(ξ)K2/3(ξ)

,

24γ5ω0
ω

#

(2.7)

where ξ = (ω/3ω0)γ−3, and K2/3(ξ) and K1/3(ξ) are modiﬁed Bessel functions10.
For ω0 << ω << ωc, i.e. 1 << ω/ω0 << γ3,

X

dI(ω)/dΩ

≡

dI(ω)/dΩ

|λ=0 ∼

1 + 10(ω0/ω)2/3λγ4 .

(2.8)

This shows how the smallness of the factor λ = 2θb is compensated by the
fourth power of γ, hence the ampliﬁcation one was looking for. For instance,
by using the bound in [22], θ < 10−2(TeV)−2, one has that λ = 2bθ <
10−21(TeV)2. Thus
2n10−23, where n is the value of b in Tesla, and 1 Tesla

9The part proportional to λ

∼
2θb contains a term of the form

≡

d
dt′

1

1

c(1

"

~n

·

−

~β)

 

c(1

~n

·

−

~β)

d
dt′

~nc(t

~n

−

·

(1

−

t′)
~β)R !#ret

,

where ~n = ~R/R, and [
]ret are the usual retarded quantities. We see here contributions
proportional to the derivative of the acceleration. The ¨β contribution arises as an eﬀect of
the conversion of the two speeds of lights c and c′ in the poles of the Green functions into
a single speed c with a derivative of the delta function δ′(τ
R/c). These terms recall
the familiar scenario of the Abraham-Lorentz pre-acceleration eﬀects for the classical self-
energy of a point charge [21].
10When ω << ωc, for ξ

ξ−ν, ν = 2/3, 1/3.

0, Kν(ξ)

−

→

∼

7

for an electron synchrotron the correction is

X < 1 + (

ω0
ω

)2/3n

10−21

×

×  

E

(MeV)
MeV !

4

,

(2.9)

where
E
energetic synchrotron (SPring-8, Japan)
ω/ω0 ∼

is the energy of the electron, γmax ∼
γ2 we have11

E

2

E
= 8 GeV, b

(MeV)/MeV. For the most
1 Tesla, and when

∼

X < 1 + 10−10 .
We see a “1013-ampliﬁcation” of the eﬀects induced by a nonzero θ, indepen-
dent from the actual input value for θ: from 10−23 to 10−10 in this case.

Other investigators have also looked into the synchrotron radiation within
the SME [24] and other approaches [25]. They ﬁnd similarly important depar-
tures from the Lorentz preserving formula in agreement with the above pre-
sented modiﬁcation of the energy spectrum and with a previously proposed
formula for the maximum frequency based on kinematical general arguments
[26].

Synchrotron radiation is just one among the many phenomenological se-
tups (a large part of which in the electromagnetic sector) that have been
lately investigated, and we make here no claim that it is the most important.
We picked up this example because it clariﬁes the ampliﬁcation mechanism
quite cleanly and because of our own familiarity with it. Despite the growing
number of phenomenological/experimental investigations, no signals of vio-
lation are found. In the most fortunate cases, the best we are able to do is to
use existing data to ameliorate the bounds on the violating parameters. The
last work of Bailey and Kostelecky [27] is dedicated to the pure gravity sector
of the SME and many experimental setups to look for Lorentz violation are
proposed. In a way, that paper can be seen as a turning point. The message
there seems to be “As the electromagnetic sector is giving no positive results,
let us now turn our attention to the gravity sector”.

To our knowledge, this is the state of the art. The reviewer’s job could
safely stop here but, while doing it, we had the chance to take a step back

11These numbers should be taken with some care, as the scope here is to illustrate
the mechanism of ampliﬁcation of Lorentz violating eﬀects at work rather than to give
the most severe bounds. We are also justiﬁed in doing so here by the fact that within
NCED, at present, no better constraints are obtained by including synchrotron radiation
of astrophysical origin (and vacuum ˇCerenkov radiation) [23].

8

from the everyday work-schedule and we could take a look at the grand
scenario - it is of Lorentz symmetry that we are talking here - thus some
general considerations naturally came to the mind. The rest of this lecture
is dedicated to that.

3 Three Questions

Here are three questions:

3.1 Why questioning a solid paradigm?

Why are we so systematically “shaking” the STR? There are only two kinds of
reasons to embark oneself to turn inside out a solidly tested view of nature:
theoretical or experimental. The ﬁrst case (theory) reduces to the second
because, although the motivations to change can be fully theoretical, in the
end the new theory has to face the experiments.

When we learned the STR we also learned how compelling were the exper-
imental evidences that forced theorists to re-think the Galilean/Newtonian
paradigm. Today this is not the case12. On the other hand, looking closely,
the argument of having compelling theoretical motivations presents a pecu-
liarity that deserves consideration. The logic is as follows: If a theory claims
to describe nature than it must come under the judgment of the experiments.
It must provide predictions for precise signatures so that the theory itself can
be proved or disproved. The SME, the NCFTs and the other approaches to
Lorentz violation are surely taking the road of experiments, there is no doubt
about that and it is a most welcome fact. But, in our view, the underlying
motivations behind the search for Lorentz violation are in ST. This is more
evident for the SME or for the NCFTs `a la Seiberg-Witten, but more loosely
speaking it can be said of the other approaches too. This leads straight
to our answer to the question “why questioning STR”: we are questioning
it because the dominant theory at our disposal (ST) is somehow telling us

12Another way of looking at the historical development of STR is to say that a wrong
theoretical approach (the Galilean/Newtonian) pushed for experimental ﬁndings, such as
that of a luminiferous aether, that never came. These non-ﬁndings where the experimental
basis on which STR was founded. When put it this way the sentence in the text above
should end with a question mark.

9

to do that. The reason why the (deep) theoretical motivations behind the
if no signs of
search for Lorentz violation have a logical loophole is that:
violations are found this would not aﬀect ST. In the negative case the SME
would probably be left apart, but nothing at all would happen to ST.

It is true that, strictly speaking, ST is not necessary to write down the
SME, as explicitly shown by its inventors Colladay and Kostelecky [7], and
by many authors [8]. But, while this has a pleasant outcome as for the model
independence and generality of certain results, on the other hand it is clear
that the motivations to build up the model in the ﬁrst place lay with ST.
Similarly, the whole path from noncommuting coordinates till noncommuta-
tive gauge theories can be taken without mentioning the word “string” (see,
e.g., [10]). Nonetheless, it was the link to ST provided by Seiberg and Witten
[9] that made NCFTs’ fortune as viable candidates for Lorentz violation. In
a more loose sense it can be said that also the other approaches are per-
meated by concepts and ideas originated in or promoted by ST (such as a
fundamental length/energy scale and nonlocality).

Thus, our answer to the question immediately turns on a lightspot on the
very special status of ST: it leads the research in particle physics by inspiring,
one way or the other, the new directions of investigation that, sometimes,
reach the arena of experimentally testable scenarios, but ST itself never gets
so involved with its “by-products” to the extent of being proved false13. This
is very singular, and we do not know of any other case like that in science.
To use a simplifying image: it is as if ST gets close to the border between
theory and phenomenology, leaves there the results of its speculations and
leaves to others to write down things in a form suitable for testing, but then
these models are no longer part of ST. Another question then comes out of
the ﬁrst question: is ST a physical theory? This is a very delicate (or rough?)
question to ask. We should soon try some speculations. Before doing so let
us close this subsection by further clarifying our own view on the search for
Lorentz violation.

Despite the lack of experiments and despite the absence of compelling
theoretical reasons, for us this search still represents an important chance
for a fresh rethinking of fundamental issues in particle physics - the most

13It is expected that, for consistency, positive outcomes of experiments, for instance in
Lorentz violation, will not be taken as a proof (direct or indirect) for the experimental
soundness of ST.

10

important of all being the symmetry principles. This way, if we are lucky, we
might discover by unsuspected means where and if the “mistake” is hiding.
By “mistake” here we mean that prejudice we are enforcing on our view that
lead us too “far away”. It is a particularly welcome circumstance that is the
community of theorists and experimentalists together that is facing these
issues.

3.2

Is ST a physical theory?

This is a diﬃcult question. We could measure how diﬃcult it is by showing
how spread between “Yes” and “No” is the plot of the answers physicists
would give. There would be straight “Of course it is not”, and straight “Of
course it is”. Most interestingly, there would be a blur phase of answers
where the word “physics” would start changing its meaning from the original
one - i.e. of an experimental science as we learned it at school - towards some-
thing less and less deﬁnite. This last class of answers (containing the “Yes”)
could be the starting point for a serious discussion involving scientists and
philosophers that, in our opinion, is much needed today. One way of attack-
ing the problem (because this is a problem) would be to invoke Bridgman’s
operationism [1] and see in which of its class ST would ﬁt. Needless to say,
according to Bridgman’s criteria, ST is not a physical theory. Nonetheless,
more care would be needed because Bridgman’s criteria are surely not infal-
lible and they were invented in a diﬀerent era of particle physics. On top of
that, we are only amateur philosophers hence unable to discern among the
subtleties of logical coherence sometimes invoked by ST to justify its exis-
tence. Thus, we are getting too far away without a deﬁnite answer. Let us
try something else.

Let us try attacking the problem by talking about a string theorist’s14
trajectory: Alan Kostelecky’s. To many Kostelecky is the man of Lorentz
violation. He started oﬀ his career as a string theorist but of a special kind.
Reading the papers he co-wrote on Lorentz violation in ST and the semi-
nal ones on the SME one clearly notices that even before moving fully into
the realm of experimentally veriﬁable (or falsiable) ideas he had the (sane)
attitude of a theorist with an eye (or even two) to the experimental arena.

14I was inspired in doing so by David Tong (at that time a fellow postdoc at MIT) who
used to say something like “My goal is to eventually obtain an experimental prediction
from string theory or, at the very latest, from a string theorist.”

11

There is a - probably unnoticed - sentence in the seminal paper on the
SME that brings us a step forward towards the answer we are looking for: In
the Introduction of the second entry of Reference [7] it is described in words
the mechanism of spontaneous breaking of Lorentz symmetry within the
higher dimensional ST. There Kostelecky and Colladay call the four space-
time dimensions physical. This implies that the other (twentytwo or seven or
whatever) dimensions are considered there un-physical. So here we have at
least part of the answer to our question (“Is ST a physical theory”): according
to a string theorist that part of string theory that studies “phenomena”
outside the four dimensions is not physics15.

To make full justice to Bridgman we should ask the same question we
asked for ST for other theories/concepts available today in theoretical particle
physics. These include Suypersymmetry (SUSY) and its descendants, Extra
Dimensions, Noncommutativity `a la Connes, Loop Quantum Gravity, not to
talk about models nowadays out of fashion such as the Grand Uniﬁcation
models, etc. Surely, the discussion among scientists and philosophers we
evoked earlier should scrutinize those ideas as well. Nonetheless, we make
three points here: First, ST is the dominant theory (as we think we proved in
the case in point of the search for Lorentz violation) and as any good regent
has to fully take the burden that goes with the honors. Second, most of
(or all) the concepts and ideas above enumerated are somehow included into
the “all encompassing” ST. Third, we were motivated by our investigations
of the philosophical/epistemological reasons behind the search for Lorentz
violation and we simply found ST behind it.

3.3 How about SUSY?

SUSY surely has its place among the ideas/theories waiting for an answer
about its physical relevance. Nonetheless, physicists have to move fast and
before the problem is fully solved (it might take forever...) one might try to
take shortcuts. As said before, in our view, the search for Lorentz violation
is very welcome exactly because it might serve the scope of changing in an
unsuspected fashion ideas that were on the table. One of these ideas could
be SUSY.

15As a byproduct, we also solved Tong’s problem of obtaining experimental predictions

from a string theorist: ask Alan Kostelecky.

12

Already Berger and Kostelecky [28] have investigated, within the SME,
the eﬀects of Lorentz violation on SUSY and found that a (modiﬁed) SUSY
algebra can be written. Similarly, the eﬀects of noncommuting coordinates
on SUSY has been considered [29]. What if we take a step back and look
into the no-go theorems [30] with the assumption that the spatiotemporal
group is no longer ISO(3,1)?

Acknowledgments

It is my pleasure to thank the organizers of DICE2006, especially Thomas
Elze, for inviting me. I also thank Ugo Senatore of the National Monument
Library of Badia di Cava de’ Tirreni in Italy, for providing an inspiring
environment for the preparation of this lecture.

References

lan)

[1] Bridgman P W 1927 The Logic of Modern Physics (New York: Macmil-

[2] Mach E 1977 La Meccanica nel suo Sviluppo Storico-Critico (Torino:
Boringhieri) Italian translation from the original ninth German edition
of 1933 (ﬁrst edition 1883). The critical view of STR is made explicit in
the Foreward to the ninth edition.

[3] Mattingly D 2005 Living Rev. Relativity 8 5

[4] Heisenberg W 1957 Rev. Mod. Phys. 29 269

[5] Carroll S M, Field G B and Jackiw R 1990 Phys. Rev. D 41 1231

[6] Kostelecky V A and Samuel S 1989 Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 224

[7] Colladay D and Kostelecky V A 1997 Phys. Rev. D 55 6760; 1998 Phys.

Rev. D 58 116002

[8] Bluhm R 2005 Overview of the SME: Implications and Phenomenology

of Lorentz Violation Preprint hep-ph/0506054

[9] Seiberg N and Witten E 1999 J. High Energy Phys. 09 032

13

[10] Madore J, Schraml S, Schupp P and Wess J 2000 Eur. Phys. J. C 16

[11] Minwalla S, van Raamsdonk M and Seiberg N 2000 J. High Energy Phys.

[12] Balachandran A P, Pinzul A and Qureshi B A 2006 Phys. Lett. B 634

[13] Mariz T, Nascimento J R and Rivelles V O 2006 Dispersion Relations

in Noncommutative Theories Preprint hep-th/0609132

[14] Amelino-Camelia G 2002 Int. J. Mod. Phys. 11 1643; Int. J. Mod. Phys.

[15] Magueijo J 2003 Rept. Prog. Phys. 66 2025; Magueijo J and Smolin L

2003 Phys. Rev. D 67 044017

[16] Coleman S and Glashow S L 1999 Phys. Rev. D 59 116008

[17] Carroll S M, Harvey J A, Kostelecky V A, Lane C D and Okamoto T

2001 Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 141601

[18] Iorio A and Sykora T 2002 Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 17 2369

[19] Guralnik Z, Jackiw R, Pi S-Y and Polychronakos A P 2001 Phys. Lett.

[20] Castorina P, Iorio A and Zappal`a D 2004 Phys. Rev. D 69 065008

[21] Jackson J D 1975 Classical Electrodynamics (New York: John Wiley

[22] Chaichian M, Sheikh-Jabbari M and Tureanu A 2001 Phys. Rev. Lett.

0002 020

161

434

D 11 35

B 517 450

and Sons)

86 2716

[23] Castorina P, Iorio A and Zappal`a D 2005 Europhys. Lett. 71 912

[24] Altschul B 2006 Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 201101

[25] Montemayor R and Urrutia L F 2005 Phys. Lett. B 606 86

14

[26] Jacobson T, Liberati S and Mattingly D 2003 Nature 424 1019

[27] Bailey Q G and Kostelecky V A 2006 Phys. Rev. D 74 045001

[28] Berger M S and Kostelecky V A 2002 Phys. Rev. D 65 091701

[29] Rivelles V O 2004 Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 127 63

[30] Coleman S and Mandula J 1967 Phys. Rev. 159 1251

15

