TIFR/TH/06-19
July 2006

Albert Einstein: His Annus Mirabilis 1905∗

Virendra Singh
INSA C.V. Raman Research Professor

Department of Theoretical Physics
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research
1, Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai 400 005, India

Abstract

Einstein in 1905, his year of miracles, wrote ﬁve papers which mark a watershed
between classical physics and modern physics. They dealt with problem of reality
of atoms, theory of special relativity which overthrew Newtonian conceptions of
space and time, and his revolutionary light quantum hypothesis which together
with Planck’s work on black body radiation started the quantum revolution. We
put these discoveries in the context of that period and also indicate their later
inﬂuence.

7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
2
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Inaugural Lecture of “Einstein Lecture Series” (9 lectures) delivered at Nehru
Similar lectures were also given at other
Center, Mumbai on July 9, 2005.
institutions.

1

1 Year of Physics (2005)

We are having a worldwide celebration of physics throughout this year (2005). The
year 2005 has been declared the “Year of Physics” by UNESCO. It is the centenary
year of the “Annus Mirabilis”, ie the Miracle year, 1905, of Albert Einstein. During
this year he published a set of ﬁve papers dealing with the existence of atoms, special
relativity including the now famous equation E = M C 2 expressing the equivalence
of energy content E and inertial mass M of a body, as well as on the quantum
theory together with its application to the photoelectron eﬀect. These papers mark
the watershed between classical physics of Isaac Newton, Michael Faraday and John
Clerk Maxwell and the modern physics. It is therefore entirely appropriate that this
centenary year of the annus mirabilis be celebrated as the year of physics.

We may also mention that the decade of 1895 to 1905 was extremely rich in
discoveries which established the existence of a number of phenomenon which were
not explicable within classical physics. This crisis would require for its resolution
a change of classical framework to that of modern physics involving relativity and
quantum theory. In 1895, Roentgen discovered X-rays. In 1896 the radioactivity
was discovered by Henri Becquerel and magnetic ﬁeld eﬀect on spectral lines by
Pietr Zeeman. In 1897, J.J. Thompson established the existence of electrons. In
1900, Max Planck introduced quantum ideas in physics. As has been noted in this
connection, the twentieth century in physics began not in the year 1900, but a full
ﬁve years earlier in 1895. It is also ﬁtting that this fruitful decade (1895–1905) was
capped by the Annus Mirabilis of Einstein.

Before we proceed to discuss in detail why the year 1905 is referred to as the
annus mirabilis, let us brieﬂy recall an earlier year, 1666 which is also referred to
by the same designation. It was the annus mirabilis of Isaac Newton, who came to
symbolise the emergence of not only classical physics and astronomy but classical
mathematics.

2 Annus Mirabilis of Isaac Newton

2.1 John Dryden

The noted restoration English poet, John Dryden, published a long poem, some
116 pages in print, in 1688 usually referred to brieﬂy as “Annus Mirabilis”. It is
worth quoting the title in full which was “Annus Mirabilis, The Year of Wonders,
MDCLXVI, An Historical Poem. Also A Poem on the Happy Restoration and
Return of His Late Sacred Majesty, Charles the Second. Likewise A Panegyric on
His Coronation Together With a Poem to My Lord Chancellor, Presented on New-
Year Day 1662. And a Elegy on the Death of Kind Charles the Second By John
Dryden, Esq”.
It celebrated the annus mirabilis, 1666, the year of wonders and
some of the wonders so celebrated were survival of London from the Great Fire and
the Victory of English ﬂeet over the Dutch.

This the how the term “Annus Mirabilis” entered the English language. The
term was soon appropriated by scientists to refer to the achievements of Isaac
Newton during that year, 1666, which truly could be called “wonders” unlike
“wonders” celebrated by John Dryden in his poem.

2

2.2

Isaac Newton

Since some of Newton’s discoveries took place in the previous year, ie 1665, we should
more properly speak of his Anni Mirabilis, ie years of wonders, 1665-1666. Newton
was born at the village of Woolsthorpe on christmas day 1642. Coincidentally it
was the year in which Galileo died. Newton was admitted to Trinity College at
the Cambridge University at the age of eighteen. Soon after he had completed
his Bachelor’s degree, the University was closed down due to a serious epidemic of
the “Great Plagues” at Cambridge in June 1665. All the professors and students
went home and Newton returned to his ancestral village of Woolsthorpe to live
with his grandmother and mother. During this period of enforced idleness Newton
started thinking about mathematics and scientiﬁc problem and had one of those
rare concentrated burst of creativity which resulted in his laying the foundation of
classical mathematics, physics and astronomy.

Some ﬁfty year later Newton himself wrote an account of period for des
Maizeaux. This account is almost invariably quoted in this connection and is as
follows: “In the beginning of the year 1665 I found the Method of approximating
series and the Rule for Reducing any dignity of any Binomial into such a series. The
same year in May I found the method of Tangents of Gregory and Slusius, and in
November had the direct method of ﬂuxions and the next year in January had the
Theory of Colours and in May following I had entrance into ye inverse method of
ﬂuxions. And the same year I began to think of gravity extending to ye orb of the
Moon and · · · I deduced that the forces wch keep the Planets in their Orbs must
be reciprocally as the squares of their distances from the centers about which they
revolve · · · All this was in the two plague years of 1665-1666. For in those days I
was in the prime of my age for invention and minded Mathematics and Philosophy
more than at any other time since”.

Note that Newton was a fresh undergraduate and only twentyfour years of age at
the time when he discovered analysis, both diﬀerential and integral calculus, theory
of colours and the law of universal gravitation.

3 Annus Mirabilis: Albert Einstein

3.1 Early life

Albert Einstein was born on 14 March 1879 at Ulm in Germany. In his childhood, in
1889, his father had presented him a pocket magnetic compass and young Einstein
found the behavior of magnetic needle, which always point in a ﬁxed north south
direction, as a profound, almost mystical, experience. This gave him the idea that
the physical world is subject to laws.

On July 28, 1900 he was granted Diploma by ETH (Eidgen¨ossische Technische
Hochschule) at Zurich. His grades in diﬀerent courses were: Theoretical Physics
- 5/6, Experimental Physics - 5/6, Astronomy - 5/6, Theory of Functions - 5.5/6
and the Diploma Paper – 4.5/6. An overall grade of 5 our of a total of 6 is quite
good and might come as a surprise to those who have been exposed to the idea
that Einstein was a poor student. He was indeed a poor student in his elementary
school, which was more due to bad teaching, but had clearly remedied the situation
by the time he was at ETH, Zurich. Not only that towards the end of that year,

3

on December 13, 1700, he sent his ﬁrst research paper for publication to the well
known journal “Annalen der Physik”.

He started work as a clerk at the Patents oﬃce, Bern on probation at a salary of
3500 swiss francs per year. It seems that his father had to use his personal inﬂuence
with one of his friends for Albert to get this job. Soon afterwords his father died on
October 10, 1902 and thus one of sources of ﬁnancial security for him was cut oﬀ.
On top of that his expenses increased when he married his fellow student Mileva
Maric and with the birth of their ﬁrst son Hans Albert on March 14, 1904, Luckily
he was conﬁrmed in his job at the Patent oﬃce on September 16, 1904.

During this period (1901-1904) when he had no proper academic appointment
and subject as well to ﬁnancial insecurities, it is surprising that he published ﬁve
papers in Annalen der Physik. We need not comment on ﬁrst two of these which
deal with capillary phenomenon. But the remaining three, on his discovery of the
ensemble method is statistical mechanics were rather important. Here, however, he
had been scooped by Josiah W. Gibbs, who had obtained these results some what
earlier.

3.2 Einstein in 1905

During this year, Einstein published ﬁve papers on statistical physics, special theory
of relativity and the quantum theory apart from completing his Ph.D. dissertation.

In chronological order these were as follows:

(1) Light quantum paper: The paper “On a heuristic point of view concerning the
production and transformation of light” was received by Annalen der Physik
on March 18, 1905. This was published in Annalen der Physik 17, 132-148
(1905).

(2) Thesis on Molecular Sizes: The Ph.D. dissertation “On a new determination
of the Molecular Dimensions” was completed on April 30, 1905. It was printed
at Bern and submitted to University of Z¨urich on July 20, 1905. He also sent
a paper based on the thesis to Annalen der Physik soon after the thesis was
accepted on August 19, 1905 by the University which appeared in Annalen der
Physik 19, 289-305 (1906) next year.

(3) Brownian Motion paper: The paper “On the motion of small particles
suspended in liquids at rest required the Molecular Kinetic theory of heat”
was received on May 11, 1905 for publication and appeared in Annalen der
Physik, 17, 549-560 (1905).

(4) Special theory of relativity paper: The paper “On the electrodynamics of
moving bodies” was received for publication on June 30, 1905 and appeared
in Annalen der Physik 17, 891-921 (1905).

(5) E = mc2 paper: The paper “Does the inertia of a body depend on its energy
context” was received for publication on September 27, 1905 and appeared as
Annalen der Physics 18, 639-641 (1905).

Einstein, besides the above, sent another paper on Brownian motion on

December 19, 1905 to Annalen der Physik which was published next year.

We had mentioned earlier Newton’s own account of his Anni Mirabilis some half
a century after the event. We have an account by Einstein of his work in his annus

4

mirabilis which was written during that very year. It occurs in letters he wrote to
his friend Conrad Habicht. He, together with Einstein and Maurice Solovine, was
a member of the triumvirate ‘Olympia Academy’, who used to meet regularly in
evenings to have wide ranging intellectual discussions extending from philosophy to
physics.

Einstein wrote to Habicht on May 18 or 25, 1905: “· · · But why have you still
not sent me your dissertation? · · · I promise you four papers in return, the ﬁrst
of which I might send you soon, since I will soon get complimentary reprints.
The paper deals with radiation and the energy properties of light and is very
revolutionary as you will see if you send me your work ﬁrst. The second paper
is a determination of the true sizes of atoms from the diﬀusion and the viscosity of
dilute solutions of neutral substances. The third proves that, on the assumption of
molecular theory of heat, bodies on the order of megnitude 1/1000 m.m., suspended
in the liquids, must already perform an observable random motion that is produced
by the thermal motion; in fact physiologists have observed (unexplained) motions
of suspended small, inanimate, bodies, whose motion they designate as “Brownian
Molecular motion”. The fourth paper is only a rough draft at this point, and is an
electrodynamics of moving bodies which employes a modiﬁcation of the theory of
space and time; the purely kinematical part of this paper will surely interest you.
· · ·”.

Einstein again wrote to him on some Friday during the period June 30, 1905
– September 22, 1905 to bring him uptodate with his later work as follows: “· · ·
A consequence of the study on electrodynamics did cross my mind. Namely, the
relativity principle, in association with Maxwell’s fundamental equations, requires
that the mass be a direct measure of the energy contained in a body; light carriers
mass with it. A noticeable reduction of mass would have to take place in the case
of radium. The consideration is amusing and seductive; but for all I know, God
Almighty might be laughing at the whole matter and might have been leading me
around by the nose”.

We have excised the purely personal remarks and banter from these letters.
In the rest of the writeup we shall now discuss these contribution in somewhat
more detail and provide their background and context so as to appreciate them more
properly. We shall not follow the chronological order in which they were written but
rather the order in which they make a transition from classical physics to modern
physics. Chronologically his light quantum paper is ﬁrst during 1905 but as Einstein
himself remarked it is the most revolutionary. The order followed would therefore
be as follows:

1. Thesis on molecular motion

2. Brownian motion paper
3. Special theory of relativity and E = mc2 papers

4. Light Quantum paper.

5

4 Thesis on Molecular Sizes

4.1 The ﬁrst attempt

The Ph.D. thesis which Einstein wrote in 1905 was not his ﬁrst attempt at
submitting a thesis for this degree. He ﬁrst submitted a Ph.D. dissertation in
November 1901. It is not known as to what the topic was. It is also not clear as to
why Einstein withdrew it soon in February 1902. As he wrote to his friend Michele
Besso from Bern on a Thursday (January 22(?) 1903): “I have recently decided to
join the ranks of Privatdozenten, assuming, of course that I can carry through with
it. On the other hand I will not go for a doctorate, because it would of little help
to me, and the whole comedy has bcome boring”. He however changed his mind
about a doctorate degree soon afterwards.

4.2 Thesis on molecular sizes

Till 1909 ETH was not recognized as an institution allowed to grant doctoral degrees.
However under a special arrangement the ETH students were permitted to submit
their doctoral dissertations to University of Z¨urich. Einstein’s thesis advisor was
Alfred Kleiner who was an experimental physicist, specialised in instrumentation.
He however also had a broader interest in basic physics. The thesis was dedicated
to his fried Marcel Grossman, who would eventually help him with tensor calculus
in his formulation of general theory of relativity in 1915.

Einstein motivated the thesis topic by pointing out that though there have been
many determinations of molecular sizes till that date they all have used kinetic
theory of gases. His proposed method would be the ﬁrst to use phenomenon in
liquids. Even though not exactly the ﬁrst to do so, it was indeed the ﬁrst one to
give results comparable in accuracy from those obtained by much more developed
kinetic theory of gases. This is qite remarkable in the absence of any available
kinetic thoery of liquids. Einstein had chosen his thesis problem totally on his own
as was acknowledged by his thesis advisor Kleiner.

4.3 Main results in the thesis

The thesis has two main results:

(i) Viscosity of dilute solutions

Let η and ηs be respectively the viscosity of the solvent and solution made of a
solute in this liquid. Einstein’s hydrodynamical investigation led to the result

where the ϕ is the fraction of volume occupied by the solute molecules in the
solution. The solute volume fraction ϕ is given by

where NA is the Avodgadro number, a the radius of the solute molecules, ρs
(and ms) refer to the massdensity (and the molecular weight) of the solute.

ηs = η

1 +

(cid:20)

∗

5
2 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

ϕ
(cid:21)

ϕ =

3
(NAa

)(ρs/ms)

4π
3

6

We have put a star on the numerical factor 5/2 above as this factor was missed
out in Einstein dissertation.
Einstein assumed that the solution is a dilute one and further that the solute
molecules do not dissociate in the solution. He proceeds to calculate the change
in ﬂow of the solvent around solute particles, taken to be spheres, and shows
that it results in an eﬀective visiosity coeﬃcient ηs for the solution as given
above.

(ii) Diﬀusion coeﬃcient of solute molecules

Einstein also established a formula for diﬀusion coeﬃcient D of the solute
particle in the solvent liquid. He showed that

D = RT /(6πηNAa)

where R is the universal gas constant and T is the absolute temperature of
the liquid.
We thus see that a measurement of the relative change in viscosity of a solution
due to a solute allows us to determine the product NAa3 while a measurement
of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient allows us to know the product NAa. Together these
two measurements allow us a determination of both the Avogadro Number,
NA, and the size of the solute molecules, a. Einstein applied his analysis to
available data on dilute solutions of sugar molecules in water and obtained

a = 9.9 × 10

cm,

NA = 2.1 × 10

−8

23

.

On using improved data, which became available soon he obtained a better
value of NA given by

NA = 4.15 × 10

23

during 1906. This was ﬁrst of the three methods proposed by Einstein during
1905 for determining NA. This clearly points to the importance Einstein
attached to the problem of determining the Avogadro number.

4.4 Comments on the dissertation

As Alfred Kleiner noted in his report, dated 22-23 July, 1905, on the thesis: “The
arguments and calculations to be carried out are among the most diﬃcult ones
in hydrodynamics, and only a person processing perspicacity and training in the
handling of mathematical and physical problems could dere to tackle them, and it
seems to me that Mr. Eination has proved that he is capable of working successfully
on scientiﬁc problems; I would therefore recommend that the dissertation be
accepted”. He however added “since the main achievement of Einstein’s thesis
consists in the handling of diﬀerential equatons, and hence is mathematical in
character and belongs in the domain of analytical mechanics, I would like to ask the
dean also to approach my colleague Professor Burkhardt (Heinrich Burkhardt was
Professor of Mathematics at University of Zurich) for an expert opinion”.

His expert opinion was as follows: “At the request of my colleague, Professor
Kleiner, I reviewed the dissertation of Mr. Einstein and checked the most important

7

part of his calculations, that is, all of the places indicated by Professor Kleiner.
What I checked, I found to be correct without exception, and the manner of
treatment demonstrate a thorough command of the mathematical methods, involved
· · ·”. Incidently the correct factor of 5/2, in the expression for ηs was again missed
out in this checking. In view of the discrepency between the experimental results
on the solution viscosity of Jacques Bancelin, working in the laboratory of Jean
Perrin, Einstein requested his student and collaborator, Ludwig Hopf, to check his
calculations again. Hopf was successful in ﬁnally ﬁnding the missing factor of 5/2
in Einstein’s expression. Hopf’s correction was communicated to Perrin by Einstein
on Jan 12, 1911. If this correction is used then we get the much more satisfactory
value

NA = 6.56 × 10

23

.

Initially this dissertation was foreshadowed by other papers of Einstein during
this year. However, eventually, this is the paper of Einstein which has received the
highest citation in view of it’s use by molecular physicists and chemists. May be
citation index is not such an infallible guide to the signiﬁcance of a paper!

5 Brownian Motion

5.1 Atomic theory around the end of nineteenth
century

Modern chemistry dates back to John Dalton’s book “New System of Chemical
Philosophy” in 1808 in which he proposed his system of a ﬁnite number of chemical
elements. All the molecules were taken as composed of atoms of these chemical
elements. Amedeo Avogadro in 1811 proposed that, under conditions of equal
temperature and pressure, equal volumes of gases contain the same number of
molecules for all gases. This number for a mole of gas was named by Jean
Perrin as the Avogadro Number NA. Avogadro’s law presupposes the reality of
molecules. Most chemists, however, used atomic theory in the nineteenth century
as a theoretical heuristic device to bring order into the description of chemical
phenomenon. They did not necessarily subscribe to their reality.

In the second half of the nineteenth century, the Kinetic theory of gases,
which posited the gases to consist of moving molecules, made rapid progress.
Clausius, in 1857, suggested that heat is a form of moleculer motion. John Clerk
Maxwell proposed his famous distribution law for the molecular velocities in a gas.
Ludwig Boltzmann gave his equation which set out to reduce all thermodynamic
phenomenon to mechanical description using molecules. These developments in the
kinetic theory of gases gave a big boost to the atoms being real entities.

At the end of nineteenth century most physicists and chemists thus either
believed in the reality of molecules or at least were willing to use them as heuristics.
In view of the fact that all the evidence for the atoms was indirect, as atoms were
not directly seen, there was still a small but powerful opposition to the idea of
their reality. The great physical chemist Ostwald, as well as George Helm, regarded
atoms to be mathematical constructs. The situation in regard to atoms was similar
to that of “quarks” as constituents of matter in twentieth century. Ostwald had

8

his own program, ‘Energetics’, in which the prime ontological entity was energy.
Max Planck also was of that persuasion at that time since he regarded laws of
thermodynamics to be absolute laws. While in Boltzmann’s atomic view the second
law of thermodynamics, regarding entropy, was only statistical in nature and not
absolute. Even the great physicist and philosopher Ernst Mach was opposed to the
reality of the atoms in view of “positivist” slant of his philosophy. In 1905 Einstein
made a decisive impact on this debate through his paper on Brownian Motion.

5.2 Einstein’s contribution

In his paper on Brownian motion, Einstein investigated the random motions
executed by visible, but very small, particles in a liquid. The visible random motion
of these particles was taken to arise from their being buﬀeted by the incessent motion
of the invisible liquid molecules. His hope was that such a study would be convincing
enough about the reality of the underlying molecules of the liquid. As he noted “It
will be shown in this paper that according to molecular – kinetic theory of heat,
bodies of a microscopically visible size suspended in liquids must, as a result of
thermal molecular motion, perform motions of such magnitude that they can easily
be detected by a microscope”. He continues “It is possible that the motions to
be discussed here are identical with the so-called “Brownian molecular motion”;
however, the data available to me on the latter are so imprecise that I could not
form a deﬁnite opinion on this matter”.

Robert Brown, the english botanist, had observed random motion of pollen
grains in a liquid in 1828. The motion was analogous to a drunkard’s walk around
a lamp post. Brown as a result of his experiments ruled out the possibility that the
observed motion was due to pollen grains being moved by some vital force ie due to
their living nature. Many diﬀerent suggestions such as eﬀect of capillarity, role of
convection currents, evaporation, interaction with light, and electrical forces were
put forward to explain these random motion. Even kinetic theory was proposed
as a possible explanation but Von Nageli, in 1879, ruled it out for reasons which
appeared cogent. He took straight segments on the path of a Brownian particle to
be their free motion between two collisions with molecules. We now know that even
these straight segments arises due to the eﬀect of multiple collisions with atoms.
In fact one of achievements of Einstein in this paper was to clarify the physically
signiﬁcant observations to make on these particles.

Einstein calculated the diﬀusion constant D for the suspended microscopic
particles, of the size ‘a’ of the order of one-thousandath of a millimeter, in the
liquid and showed that it is given by

D = RT /(6πηaNA)

where T is the temperature, η the viscosity of the liquid. As before NA is the
Avogadro Number and a determination of D would provide us another method to
measure it. One would recall that same formal expression for D had appeared in his
thesis on molecular sizes. There it was however for solute molecules while here it
is for suspended particles in the liquids. One would think that these two situations
being analogous, except for the size of the diﬀusing particle, the same formula
should be valid. However in those days it was not believed that Vant-Hoft’s law of

9

osmotic pressure is applicable for both the solute molecules as well as for suspended
particles. Einstein showed using molecular kinetic theory that it is indeed valid for
both.

Einstein then showed that a measurement of mean square ﬂuctuation in the x-
component of position of a Brownian particle, < x2 > in time t provides us with a
way to measure D as

2
hx

i = 2Dt,

assuming that this prediction of < x2 > /t being constant is correct. That can
however be always checked by the experiment. This is the ﬁrst example of a
ﬂuctuation – dissipation theorem in physics.

5.3 Jean Perrin

J. Perrin, and his group, beginning 1908, carried out a series of beautiful experiment
on the Brownian of colloid particles in suspension. They were able to produce the
colloidal particles of a uniform size. Their work resulted in a complete conﬁrmation
of Einstein’s results and a precise determination of the Avogadro’s number. As a
result of Perrin’s work the atomism triumphed. Even the arch-disbeliever in atoms,
F.W. Ostwald, was convinced of their existence. As he wrote in a new edition of
his “Outline of Chemistry”, published by the end of ﬁrst world war, “I am now
convinced that we have recently become possessed of experimental evidence of the
discrete or grained nature of matter for which the atomic hypothesis sought in vain
for hundreds and thousands of years”. As Perrin, himself, wrote in his book Les
Atomes (1913), “The atomic theory has triumphed. Until recently still numerous,
its adversaries, at last overcome, now renounce their misgivings, which were for so
long, both legitimate and undeniably useful”. J. Perin was awarded the Nobel Prize
for this work in 1926.

5.4 Further work

Einstein also gave another derivation of the diﬀusion equation in this paper based on
treating the motion of a Brownian particle as, to use modern terminology, a random
Markov process. This derivation is to be contrasted to the classical derivations which
were based on continuum mechanics. He thus connected diﬀusion process of many
particles, approximated as a continuum, to the random-walk problem of individual
particles. Further developments in the theory of Brownian motion have resulted in
great progress in the study of stochastic processes, ﬂuctuation phenomenon thus
giving birth to most of statistical physics. All these have their origins in the
Brownian motion paper of Einstein.

6 Classical Physics and It’s Discontents

The thesis and the Brownian motion paper of Einstein were of great importance to
physics in view of their bearings on the “reality of molecules”, as well as for other
reasons mentioned earlier. They were however perfectly in the mold of classical
physics. With his papers on special theory of relativity and on quanta, which we
discuss later, he was launching revolutions in classical physics. To discuss these

10

conceptual revolutions it is ﬁrst necessary to give some idea of the conceptual
structure of classical physics.

6.1 Classical physics

The foundations of classical Newtonian dynamics were laid by Isaac Newton in
his annus mirabilis and published in his magnum opus “Principia”, or to give it
its’ full title “Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica”, in 1687. Newtonian
world consists of point particles which inﬂuence each other by mutual forces “acting
at a distance from each other”. He also discovered the universal inverse square
law of gravitation between masspoints, thus unifying physics and astronomy. The
masspoints move with time in an arena of three dimensional space. Space and time
are absolute in the sense that the motion of the particles does not aﬀect them. Thus
the drama of particle motion is played on an unchanging ﬁxed stage of the space
and time.

Newton also viewed light as a stream of discrete particles. Christian Huygen,
was ﬁrst to propose in 1678 that light is better described as a wave motion. Later
discoveries of interference of light by Thomas Young in 1801, and of diﬀraction of
light by Augustin Fresnel gave a strong support to the wave theory of light and it was
ﬁrmly established. Since it was inconcievable in those days to think of wavemotion
without a medium, which would oscillate and support it’s propagation, a universal
medium “luminiferous aether” was postuated to exist.

The concept of continuous ﬁeld, which pervades over space, like a magnetic
ﬁeld, unlike point particles of Newton was introduced by Michael Faraday around
in 1864, the
the middle of the nineteenth century. Clerk Maxwell achieved,
synthesis of two disparate ﬁelds, electric and magnetic ﬁelds, into a coherent uniﬁed
ﬁeld “electromagnetic ﬁeld” in which the two aﬀected each other. A completely
unexpected prediction of Maxwell’s equations was that of transverse electromagnetic
waves. The velocity of these waves, now denoted by c, involved electrical and
magnetic quantities. On calculation this velocity c was found to be the same as the
known velocity of light. Maxwell therefore made the brilliant suggestion that light
is the same entity as these electromagnetic waves. This ends over lightening review
of classical physics as it was at the end of the nineteenth century.

6.2 Two clouds on the horizon

Lord Kelvin, in a very perceptive and insightful lecture before the Royal Institution
in April 1900 talked about two “Nineteenth century clouds over the dynamical
theory of heat and light”. One of these involved the continued unsuccessful attempts
to experimentally measure the motion of the earth through luminiferrous aether.
The other one of these referred to the failure of equipartition of energy in classical
statistical mechanics.

Rest of the Einstein’s work during the miracule year 1905 is devoted to a
dispelling of these two ominous clouds on the horizon over the classical physics.
His papers on special theory of relativity deal with a resolution of “earth’s velocity
through aether” puzzle. This involves a complete overhaul of classical concepts
of space and time. His paper on the “light quantum” deals with other cloud and
ushered in the quantum revolution. We now turn to these papers now.

11

7 Special Theory of Relativity

7.1 Galilean relativity

Newton’s laws of motion are valid in a set of special frames of reference. These
are called “inertial frames of reference”. For example Newton’s ﬁrst law says that
a mass point, not acted upon by any external force, keeps moving in a straight
line with a uniform speed. Now a particle which is moving in such a fashion in an
earth-laboratory will not appear to moving in a straight line when viewed from the
Sun due to earth’s daily rotation and it’s annual revolution around the Sun. Clearly
the two frames of reference, i.e. one in which the earth is at rest and other one in
which the Sun is at rest, can not both be inertial frames of reference.

How do we know if some particular frame of reference is inertial? We ﬁrst note
that if a frame of reference S is inertial then any other frame of reference S′ which
is moving in a straight line with uniform velocity, is also inertial. This speciﬁes
the class of frames of reference which are inertial and in which Newton’s three laws
of motion hold.
In order to characterise the class of the inertial frame we have
In practice for solar system applications, it was
to specify at least one of them.
taken to be the frame in which the center of mass of the solar system is at rest or
in uniform rectilinear motion. Within the accuracy required in these calculation,
it was same as the one in which the center of mass of the universe was at rest of
uniform linear motion or the one in which the system of ﬁxed stars was at rest or
uniform linear motion.

The rules for comparing the space and time coordinate measurement in diﬀerent
inertial frames are known as Galilean transformation. Newton’s laws obey the
principles of Galilean relativity. Their form is invariant,
ie unchanged, under
Galilean transformation between two inertial reference systems.

7.2 Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory and Galilean
relativity

Note that as long as Newton’s laws of motion are the only fundamental laws of
physics there is no way in which one can determine the absolute velocity of any
inertial frame with respect to some absolutely ﬁxed point at rest. This situation
radically changes with the advent of Maxwell’s equations for electromagnetism.

We note that Maxwell’s equation do not have the same form in diﬀerent inertial
frames connected by Galilean transformations. That is they are not invariant under
them. For example the velocity of electromagnetic waves (i.e. light) is a constant.
One can ask, in which inertial frame is it so? Because it can not be so in all inertial
frames, which are connected by Galilean relation. If it is given by ~c in its’ direction
of propagation S, it would be ~c + ~v in the frame S′ which is moving with a velocity
~v rectilinearly with respect to S. The velocity of light was thus a ﬁxed constant c
only in the frame in which the luminiferous aether is at rest.

Taking advantage of this clash, between invariance of Newton’s laws and non-
invariance of Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory of light, thus opens a way by which
the motion of earth, for example, can be experimentally measured with respect to
universal aether. A large number of methods were thought for this purpose. All of
them gave a null result. Experiments were unable to detect the motion of the earth

12

through aether. Most celebrated and accurate experiment devised for this purpose
was by Michelson and Morely in 1887, which also reported a null result. As Maxwell
summarised in an article in Encyclopedia Britannica, “The whole question of the
state of the luminiferous medium near the earth, and of it’s connection with gross
matter, is very far as yet from being settled by experiment”.

7.3 Einstein’s Resolution: Special theory of Relativity

Einstein’s resolution of “earth-aether velocity” problem was obtained by a thorough
revision of Newtonian concepts of absolute space and absolute time. In this revision
he was guided by his analysis of the concept of simultaneity. If the two events take
place in a single frame of reference, e.g. a railway platform or a uniformly moving
railway train on linear tracks, there is no diﬃculty in saying whether the two events
are simultaneous in the same single frame of reference. If you start thinking about
the problem one ﬁnds that the two events which look simultaneous in one frame,
say railway platform, are not so in another relatively moving frame, e.g. that of
a moving train. This is because the light signals used to observe the two events,
whose simultaneity we are discussing, will take diﬀerent times in the frames of two
relatively moving observers. This is due to speed of light signal being ﬁnite. Since
simultaneity is not an invariant concept it follows that time can not be absolute.

Einstein wished to hold on to what is now known as the two postulates of his

“special relativity theory”. These are

(i) All physical laws have the same form in all inertial frames i.e.

frames of
references which move rectilinearly with a constant velocity with respect to
each other;

(ii) The velocity of light is same in all inertial frames.

These two postulates look irreconcilable within Newtonian notions of absolute space
and absolute time and Galilean transformation. However if Newtonian space and
time concepts are modiﬁed so as to be in accord with what one has learnt from
Einstein’s analysis of ‘simultaneity’, then it was Einstein’s insight that the two
postulates considered above can indeed be reconciled. They can then support a
new structure of space and time, now called space-time. As Minkowski said in 1908
in a lecture given at Cologne in 1908 “Hereafter space and time are bound to fade
away and only a union of the two will preserve an independent reality”.

It is clear since time is not invariant in diﬀerent inertial frames we can not
maintain the Galilean transformations as the proper ones to connect them. Einstein
goes on to show that they have to replaced by Lorentz transformations. This results
in providing purely kinematic derivation of Fitzgerald-Lorentz length contraction
which had been postulated earlier to explain null aether-earth velocity results. It
also leads to Einstein time dilation i.e. moving objects live longer.

Under Lorentz transformations Maxwell’s theory,

is
invariant. Newtonian dynamics, being invariant under Galilean transformation,
is however not so and it has therefore to be modiﬁed. These result in mass variation
with velocity. All these phenomenon are observed in high energy accelerators on a
routine basis.

it is satisfying to note,

Einstein was asked to donate his original manuscript of “special relativity paper”
for Kansas War-bond rally for auction. Since he did not have it any more he copied

13

out the published version in long-hand. He did not however make any corrections
despite feeling that he could have phrased it better in many place.
It went for
six and a half million dollars at the auction and was deposited in the Library of
Congress at Washington.

7.4 E = mc2
In his special relativity paper Einstein missed out on a profound result which led
to energy-mass equivalence. This was published separately in a 3 page. Befor this
paper one had two seperate conservation laws, one for the mass and another for
energy, in physical transformations. With this insight they merged into only one
conservation law.

He noted that “The mass of a body is a measure of its energy contrast; If
the energy changes by E, the mass changes in the same sense by E/c2, · · ·”. We
have modiﬁed the notation in this translation to accord with modern usage. The
published paper has L in place of E and “L/9.1020, if the energy is measured in
ergs and mass in grams” in place of modern E/c2.

He also noted “Perhaps it will prove possible to test this theory using bodies
whose energy content is variable to high degree (e.g. salts of radium)”. This was
quite prophetic in view of its’ eventual sad use in nuclear explosions. Coming back
to his letter to Habicht, the Lord was indeed chuckling and leading him by the nose.
Incidently the equation E = mc2 is the only equation which occurs in Bartlett’s
familier quotation. It has acquired in our culture an iconic status and is seen on
bill boards, T-shirts and so on.

7.5 Einstein’s later related work

We just give a chronological listing of important land marks.
1907: Discovery of Principle of Equivalence
1912-13: Gave metric tensor description of gravitation
1915, Nov. 25: Completes his formulation of General theory of Relativity. Space-
time which was so far regarded as ﬂat and Euclidean is now modiﬁed to a curved
Riemannian space time. The curvature of space-time is identiﬁed with gravitation.
1917: First paper on Cosmology
1919, May 29: The total solar eclipse expedition led by British astronomer
Eddington conﬁrms General theory of Relativity of German Einstein. This
provides a shining example of international peaceful scientiﬁc collaboration between
scientists, even though belonging to enemy nations in just concluded First World
War. Einstein becomes a World-icon.
After 1922: Einstein works unsuccessfully on unifying electromagnetsm with
gravitation.

We also wish to note down about the ﬁrst ever English translation of Einstein
and Minkowski’s papers from German was published by Calcutta University in 1920.
The translators were M.N. Saha and S.N. Bose and a historical introduction was
provided by P.C. Mahalarobis.

14

8 Quantum Revolution

We now discuss his light quantum paper which was his most revolutionary one in
1905.

8.1 The Black Body Radiation: Kirchhoﬀ to Planck

The origins of the quantum revolution are in the problem of Black-Body Radiation.
All heated bodies emit radiation energy as well as absorb it. A consideration of
thermodynamic equilibrium led Gustov Kirchhoﬀ of Berlin, in 1859 to conclude
that the ratio of emissivity to absorptivity of the radiation does not depend on
the nature of the heated body. This ratio, a universal function is the same as the
emissivity of a perfect black body i.e. a body which completely absorbs all the
radiation falling on it. It was also shown that the radiation inside a heated cavity is
same as black body radiation. Max Planck occupied Kirchhoﬀ’s chair at Berlin in
1889. He argued that as the ratio is independent of the nature of the cavity material
he should be able to calculate it by using a simple model for the material of the
cavity. The model he used was that it is made of Hertzian oscillators each with a
single frequency ν. Using this model he could show that the universal function is
related to average energy of each oscillator of frequency ν at the temperature T of
the Black Body radiation. He had this result on 18 May 1899.

If Planck had known the equipartition theorem of classical statistical mechanics,
for average energy, at this point, he would have obtained the law of Black body
radiation now known as Rayleigh-Jeans radiation law as it was given by Rayleigh in
June 1900 and corrected for a missing factor of 8 by Jeans in June 1905. Indeed this
was ﬁrst done by Einstein in his light quantum paper. Amusingly he did it before
Jeans. Rayleigh-Jeans radiation law was found applicable only at small values of
ν/T and not for large values of ν/T . One thus became aware of the second cloud
on the horizon of classical physics referred to by Lord Kelvin viz the failure of
equipartition of energy.

Guided by the precision experimental results on black body radiation Planck
announced an empirical radiation law on Oct.19, 1900 which ﬁtted the data
perfectly. The Planck’s radiation law is now known to be the correct law of black
body radiation. It had the same form as Rayleigh’s law for small ν/T and the form
of empirically proposed Wien’s law, given in 1894, for large ν/T . Planck however
had no theoretical basis for his radiation law.

Planck next presented a derivation of his radiation law. He was so desperate that
he even used Boltzmann’s probability interpretation for entropy. The derivation was
announced to German Physical Society on Dec. 14, 1900. The really new element
in his derivation was his assumption that a Hertzian oscillator, of frequency ν, can
emit or absorb radiation only in integral multiples of a basic quantum of energy
ǫ, where ǫ = hν. The constant h is now known as Planck’s constant. In classical
physics there was no such discreteness. The oscillator could emit or absorb radiation
of any energy. This was the ﬁrst parting of ways with classical physics. Planck
however took this assumption as a purely a formal one and did not quite realise
that something radical has been introduced. As he said “This was a purely formal
assumption and I really did not give it much thought except that no matter what
the cost, I must bring out a positive result”.

15

8.2 Einstein’s light quantum hypothesis

Einstein was the ﬁrst person to realise that Planck’s introduction of energy quanta
was a revolutionary step. As we noted a while ago Einstein, in his light quantum
paper, ﬁrst showed that the so called ‘Rayleigh-Jean’s Law’ is the unambiguous
prediction of classical physics for the radiation law. This law not only does not
it also theoretically suﬀers from ‘ultraviolet
work for high frequency radiation,
catastrophy’ (i.e. inﬁnite energy). This convinced Einstein that to get the correct
radiation law, a break with classical physics is involved.

In his quest for the cause of the failure of classical physics Einstein was guided
by his unhappiness with asymmetrical treatment of matter and radiation in classical
physics. Matter is discrete and particulate while radiation is continnuous and wave
like. He thus proposes that radiation is also particle-like just as matter is, i.e. his
“light quantum” hypothesis, and is not wave like. He was of course fully aware
of the successes of wave theory in dealing with the phenomenon of interference
and diﬀraction of light. All these phenomenon, however, need only time averages
and for such phenomenon wave theory probably is indispensible.
It is however
concievable that a basic particle picture on time averaging could produce wave like
behavior. He sumarised that the particle nature of radiation may show up in the
processes involving the generation and transformation of light where we deal with
instantaneous processes.

Can one adduce any evidence in favour of particle nature of light? Einstein
proceeds to show that a consideration of Wien’s radiation law, valid in the
nonclassical regime of large frequencies, does that. He calculates the probability
p that the monochramatic radiation of frequency ν, occupying a volume V0, could
be conﬁned to smaller volume V using Wien’s law. The result is

n
p = (V /V0)

with n = E/hν

where E is the total energy of the radiation. This is of the same form as for a gas
of n particles. From this remarkable similarity, Einstein concludes “Monochromatic
radiation of low density (within the range of validity of Wien’s radiation formula)
behaves thermodynamically as if it consisted on mutually independent energy
quanta of magnitude Rβν/N ”. (In modern notation Rβν/N reads as hν). This
In this picutre “the energy of light
is the Einstein’s light quantum hypothesis.
is discontinuously distributed in space.
· · · when a light ray is spreading from a
point is not distributed continuously over ever increasing spaces, but consists of a
ﬁnite number of energy quanta that are localised in points in space, move without
dividing, and can be absorbed or generated only as a whole”.

Einstein applied successfully his light quantum hypothesis to other phenomenon
involving generation and transformation of light. The most important of these
was his treatment of photoelectric eﬀect. He also discussed Stokes’ rule in
photoluminescence and ionisation of gases by ultraviolet light.

8.3 The photoelectric eﬀect

In 1887 Heinrich Hertz observed that the ultraviolet light incident on metals can
cause electric sparks. In 1989 J.J. Thomson established that the sparks are due to
emission of the electrons. Phillip Lenard showed in 1902 that this phenomenon,

16

now called the Photoelectric eﬀect, showed ‘not the slightest dependence on
the light intensity’ even when it was varied a thousandfold. He also made a
qualitative observation that photoelectron energies increased with the increasing
light frequency. The observations of Lenard were hard to explain on the basis of
electromagnetic wave theory of light. The wave theory would predict an increase
in photoelectron energy with increasing incident light intensity and no eﬀect due to
increase of frequency of incident light.

On the Einstein’s light quantum picture, a light quantum, with energy hν, on
colliding with an electron in the metal, gives its entire energy to it. An electron
from the interior of a metal has to do some work, W , to escape from the interior to
the surface. We therefore get the Einstein photoelectric equation, for the energy of
the electron E,

E = hν − W.

Of course electron may lose some energy to other atoms before escaping to the
surface, so this expression gives only the maximum of photo-electron energy which
would be observed. One can see that Einstein’s light quantum picture explains
quite naturally the intensity independence of photoelectron energies and gives a
precise quantitative prediction for its dependence on incident light frequency.
It
also predicts that no photoelectrons would be observed if ν < ν0 where hν0 = W .
The eﬀect of increasing light intensity should be an increase in the number of emitted
electrons and not on their energy. Abram Pais has called this equation as the second
coming of the Planck’s constant.

Robert A. Millikan spent some ten years testing Einstein equation and he did
the most exacting experiments. He summarized his conclusions as well as his
personal dislike of light quantum concept, as follows:
‘Einstein’s photoelectric
equation · · · appears in every case to predict exactly the observed results · · · yet
the semi-corpuscular theory by which Einstein arrived at his equations seems at
present wholly untenable’ (1915) and ‘the bold, not to say reckless hypothesis of
electromagnetic light corpuscle’ (1916).

8.4 Envoi

Einstein was awarded Nobel Prize in Physics for 1921 for this paper on light quanta
and especially it’s application to the photoelectric eﬀect. Even though his status as
public icon is associated with his relativity theory, he was not awarded Nobel Prize,
for that. He however delivered his Nobel Lecture on Relativity.

Einstein’s light quantum was renamed as “photon” by G.N. Lewis as late as
1926. Though Einstein talked about photon energy, E = hν, in 1905, it is curious
hν
c , only in 1917. As
that he introduced the concept of photon momentum, p =
we have seen even Millikan did not believe in photons around 1915-16 despite his
detailed experimental work on photoelectric eﬀect. In 1923, the kinematics of the
Compton eﬀect was worked out on the basis of it’s being an elastic electron-photon
scattering by A.H. Compton sucessfully. After that it was widely accepted that
light does sometimes behaves as photon.

Einstein made the ﬁrst application of quantum ideas to matter in his work on
speciﬁc heat of solids in 1907. A consideration of energy ﬂuctuations, using Planck’s
radiation law, led him to the dual particle-wave nature of radiation in 1909. In 1916-

17

17, in the course of a new derivation of the Planck’s radiation law, using chemical
kinetics methods, Einstein discovered the phenomenon of stimulated emission of
light and introduced his famous A and B coeﬃcients. These are of fundamental
importance in the theory of lasers.

S.N. Bose in 1924 at Dacca sent Einstein a new derivation of Planck’s law in
which only the photon concept was used. Albeit the photons did not obey the
classical statistics of Maxwell and Boltzmann, but rather a new statistics. Einstein
saw the importance of this contribution, translated the paper into German, and got
it published. He also applied it to the matter. The new statistics is now known as
either Bose-Statistics or as Bose-Einstein statistics. The particles which obey this
statistics are known as bosons. As a consequence of these statistical considerations
Einstein discovered that a free gas of Boson undergoes a phase transition, Bose-
Einstein condensation, below a critical temperature. The phenomenon was seen
only in 1995 and a Nobel Prize awarded for it in 2001.

The modern mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics was obtained by
W. Heisenberg and E. Schrodinger in 1925-26 in two diﬀerent, but equivalent,
forms. Einstein’s role in achieving this transition from old quantum theory to the
modern quantum mechanics was quite signiﬁcant. He has been called godfather
of Schrodinger’s wave mechanics and his relativity theory with it’s emphasis
on operational procedure provided the inspiration to Heisenberg in his matrix
mechanics.

After 1926 Einstein’s focus shifted to foundational questions of quantum
mechanics. He gave his ensemble interpretation of quantum mechanics. His
discovery of nonlocal correlations in quantum mechanics with Podolsky and Rosen
in 1935 was of far reaching signiﬁcance and continues to spawn new ﬁelds, such
as quantum computing, quantum information theory and quantum cryplography,
down to the present time.

9 Epilogue

Einstein purchased in 1935 a white simple frame house at 112, Mercer Street within
walking distance of his oﬃce at Institute for Advanced Princeton and he lived here
till the end. There were a few pictures and etchings. These included a drawing of
Gandhi, whom he admired greatly. There were photographs of his mother and his
sister Maja who lived with him after she moved to Princeton from Italy in 1939. He
had also brought with him, from Europe, three etchings of the physicist he admired
more than any other. These were of Newton, Maxwell and Faraday. It is now given
his contributions to physics abandantly clear that he himself belong to this select
company.

When Einstein died the famous cartoonist Herblock published in Washington
Post, a cartoon, in which the planet earth is identiﬁed by the words “Albert Einstein
lived here”. He became a world icon in 1919 and since then he has continued to
hold a place of high esteem in public mind for his science, his humanity, his ﬁght
for a peaceful world and his freedom from cant. At the end of millenium He was
voted by Time magazine, and many others as the “Man of the Millenium”.

18

10 Bibiliographical Notes:

1. The literature on science and life of Einstein is enormous. The best
biography for physicists is Pais, A., Subtle is the Lord · · ·: The Science and
Life of Albert Einstein, Clarendon Press, Oxford and Oxford University Press,
New York, 1982.
A volume for a more general reader is Bernstein, J., Einstein, The Viking
Press, New York, 1973.

2. For the writings of Einstein, we have the multivolume ongoing series,

The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1987 – · · ·, and the companion
volumes
The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein: English Translation,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1987 – · · ·. The brief quotations
from Einstein’s papers and letters and thesis reports used in this lecture are
from Vol.2: The Swiss Years: Writings, 1900-1909; Vol.5: The Swiss Years:
correspondence, 1902-1914 of this series of translation volumes. Einstein’s
papers from the miracle year 1905 are also available in English translation
in Einstein’s Miraculous Year: Five Papers that changed the Face of Physics,
(ed. J. Stachel), Princeton, 1998. (Indian reprint by Srishti Publishers, New
Delhi, 2001).
There are also a number of other english translations of individual papers.

3. The quote from Isaac Newton is from R.S. Westfall,

Never at Rest, A Biography of Isaac Newton, Cambridge, 1981.

4. On Einstein’s doctoral thesis, see also N. Straumann: arXiv: physics/0504201

(April 2005).

5. For an appreciation of Einstein’s contribution to the theory of random
processes, see L. Cohen, The History of Noise, IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine, p.20-45, Nov. 2005.

6. Ostwald’s quote on the reality of atoms is from Bernstein’s book (p.186)

referred earlier.

7. For a more detailed writeup on Einstein’s contributions to quantum theory, see
V. Singh: Einstein and the Quantum, Current Science B9, 2101-2112 (2005).
[There is some overlap of the present writeup with this paper]

8. For the impact of Einstein’s work on the Physics of the twentieth century,
see Physics World, Special Einstein issue, Jan. 2005; Current Science, Special
Einstein Issue, (25 Dec. 2005).
D. Giulini and N. Straumann, Stud. Hist. Phil. Mod. Phys., 37, 115-173
(2006).

19

