6
8
9
1
 
r
p
A
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
0
3
0
4
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Desperately Seeking Superstrings?

by Paul Ginsparg and Sheldon Glashow

Physics Today, May 1986

Why is the smart money all tied up in strings? Why is so much theoretical capital
expended upon the properties of supersymmetric systems of quantum strings propagating
in ten-dimensional space-time? The good news is that superstring theory may have the
right stuﬀ to explain the “low-energy phenomena” of high-energy physics and gravity as
In the context of possible quantum theories of gravity, each of the few currently
well.
known superstring theories may even be unique, ﬁnite and self-consistent. In principle a
superstring theory ordains what particles exist and what properties they have, using no
arbitrary or adjustable parameters. The bad news is that years of intense eﬀort by dozens
of the best and the brightest have yielded not one veriﬁable prediction, nor should any
soon be expected. Called “the new physics” by its promoters, it is not even known to
encompass the old and established standard model.

In lieu of the traditional confrontation between theory and experiment, superstring
theorists pursue an inner harmony where elegance, uniqueness and beauty deﬁne truth.
The theory depends for its existence upon magical coincidences, miraculous cancellations
and relations among seemingly unrelated (and possibly undiscovered) ﬁelds of mathemat-
ics. Are these properties reasons to accept the reality of superstrings? Do mathematics
and aesthetics supplant and transcend mere experiment? Will the mundane phenomeno-
logical problems that we know as physics simply come out in the wash in some distant
tomorrow? Is further experimental endeavor not only diﬃcult and expensive but unneces-
sary and irrelevant? Contemplation of superstrings may evolve into an activity as remote
from conventional particle physics as particle physics is from chemistry, to be conducted
at schools of divinity by future equivalents of medieval theologians. For the ﬁrst time since
the Dark Ages, we can see how our noble search may end, with faith replacing science once
again. Superstring sentiments eerily recall “arguments from design” for the existence of a
supreme being. Was it only in jest that a leading string theorist suggested that “super-
strings may prove as successful as God, Who has after all lasted for millennia and is still
invoked in some quarters as a Theory of Nature”?

The trouble began with quantum chromodynamics, an integral part of the standard
model that underlies the quark structure of nucleons and the nuclear force itself. QCD
is not merely a theory but, within a certain context, the theory of the strong force: It
oﬀers a complete description of nuclear and particle physics at accessible energies. While
most questions are computationally too diﬃcult for QCD to answer fully, it has had many
qualitative (and a few quantitative) conﬁrmations. That QCD is almost certainly “correct”
suggests and aﬃrms the belief that elegance and uniqueness — in this case, reinforced by

1

experiment – are criteria for truth.

No observed phenomenon disagrees with or demands structure beyond the standard
model. No internal contradictions and few loose ends remain, but there are some vexing
puzzles: Why is the gauge group what it is, and what provides the mechanism for its
breakdown? Why are there three families of fundamental fermions when one would seem
to suﬃce? Aren’t 17 basic particles and 17 tunable parameters too many? What about a
quantum theory of gravity? Quantum ﬁeld theory doesn’t address these questions, and one
can understand its greatest past triumphs without necessarily regarding it as fundamental.
Field theory is clearly not the end of the story, so something smaller and better is needed:
Enter the superstring.

The trouble is that most of superstring physics lies up at the Planck mass — about
1019 GeV – and it is a long and treacherous road down to where we can see the light of
day. A naive comparison of length scales suggests that to calculate the electron mass from
superstrings would be a trillion times more diﬃcult than to explain human behavior in
terms of atomic physics. Superstring theory, unless it allows an approximation scheme for
yielding useful and testable physical information, might be the sort of thing that Wolfgang
Pauli would have said is “not even wrong.” It would continue to attract newcomers to the
ﬁeld simply because it is the only obvious alternative to explaining why certain detectors
light up like video games near the end of every funding cycle.

In the old days we moved up in energy step by step, seeing smaller and smaller struc-
tures. Observations led to theories or models that suggested further experiments. The
going is getting rougher; Colliders are inordinately expensive, detectors have grown im-
mense, and interesting collisions are rare. Not even a politically popular “Superstring
Detection Initiative” with a catchy name like “String Wars” could get us to energies where
superstrings are relevant. We are stuck with a gap of 16 orders of magnitude between
theoretical strings and observable particles, unbridgeable by any currently envisioned ex-
periment. Conventional grand uniﬁed theories, which also depend on a remote fundamental
energy scale (albeit one extrapolated upward from known phenomena rather than down-
ward from abstract principle), retain the grand virtue that, at least in their simplest form,
they were predictive enough to be excluded — by our failure to observe proton decay.

How tempting is the top-down approach! How satisfying and economical to explain
everything in one bold stroke of our aesthetic, mathematical or intuitive sensibilities, thus
displaying the power of positive thinking without requiring tedious experimentation! But
a priori arguments have deluded us from ancient Greece on. Without beneﬁt of the
experimental provocation that led to Maxwell’s equations and, inevitably, to the special
theory of relativity, great philosophers pondering for millennia failed even to suspect the
basic kinematical structure of space-time. Pure thought could not anticipate the quantum.
And even had Albert Einstein succeeded in the quest that consumed the latter half of his

2

life, somehow ﬁnding a framework for unifying electromagnetism and gravity, we would by
now have discarded his theory in the light of experimental data to which he had no access.
He had to fail, simply because he didn’t know enough physics. Today we can’t exclude the
possibility that micro-unicorns might be thriving at a length scale of 10−18 cm. Einstein’s
path, the search for uniﬁcation now, is likely to remain fruitless.

Having a potentially plausible candidate “theory of everything” does dramatically
alter the situation. But we who are haunted by the lingering suspicion that superstrings,
despite all the hoopla, may be correct are likely to remain haunted for the foreseeable
future. Only a continued inﬂux of experimental ideas and data can allow the paths from
top and bottom to meet. The theory of everything may come in its time, but not until we
are certain that Nature has exhausted her bag of performable tricks.

3

