6
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
0
0
1
6
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Spec. in Sci. and Tech. 17, 232-36 (1994) r

Life and Water
H.C. Rosu 1

Instituto de F´ısica, Universidad de Guanajuato,
Apdo Postal E-143, 37150 Le´on, Gto, M´exico

Abstract
Many living organisms on Earth are strongly dependent on water, the natural
liquid of the planet. A possible reason for that could be the conjecture of
Ryoji Takahashi [Phys. Lett. A 141, 15 (1989)] that water microdrops release
negentropy through a phase transition to a phase with zero surface tension.
Biological cells could make use of such a phase transition in their duty cycle.
We comment on the relative merit of this conjecture, and present it in wider
theoretical context.

IC-246/1992 r [HCR]

LAA physics/9610013

PACS numbers: 01.70.+w Philosophy of science; 01.55.+b General Physics

1

Introduction

From time to time physicists are venturing in realms not very familiar to them,
like biology (see two famous examples in the following). According to Dyson,
the noblesse oblige principle of not writing on topics in which the author is not a
master prevented many from such activities in the past. But topics of extremely
broad character, like the origins of life, are literally open to everybody as soon
as one knows how to ask the right questions.

In February 1943, Erwin Schr¨odinger gave a famous course of lectures to
an audience of about four hundred at Trinity College, Dublin. One year later
this course was published as the little book What is Life ?. It is an inﬂuential
book to this day and a masterpiece, read by all the creators of molecular biology
in the ﬁfties as well as by many more unknown people. Schr¨odinger’s book is
essentially describing the phenomenon of biological replication, and only in one
chapter the other important life phenomenon of metabolism. Also the concept
of negentropy is introduced.

In February 1985, Freeman Dyson delivered the Turner Lectures at Trinity
College, Cambridge, published as a little book with the title Origins of Life.
One will ﬁnd in this book a discussion of the so-called double-origin hypothesis
of life. The ﬁrst beginning of life is with replication (protein) creatures and the
second beginning is with creatures capable of metabolism.

We recall here the astroplankton hypothesis of Haldane[1], i.e., vital units
wandering through the universe, ready to start the cycle of evolution whenever
conditions are favorable. The same author[2] gave an estimate for the sponta-
neous occurence of a bacterial virus in the primitive ocean. Such a creature has,

1e-mail: rosu@ifug.ugto.mx
Additional address: IGSS, Magurele-Bucharest, Romania

1

according to Haldane, about 100 bits of negative entropy of information that
could arise spontaneously in the primitive water in 109 years.

The most remarkable chemical characteristic of living matter is its optical
activity. For recent progress the reader is referred to the Ciba symposium[3].
What we call living organisms synthesize themselves from molecular subunits of
one enantiomorph alone. This surprising fact was already known to Pasteur. In
his lectures, as early as 1860, he popularized the idea that biosyntheses involve a
chiral force. After the discovery of parity violation in weak interactions (1956),
and especially after people became aware of the electroweak uniﬁcation scheme
(1970), there were speculations tracing the origin of biochiral forces to the elec-
troweak parity violation[4]. However, it has to be clearly stated that electroweak
energy diﬀerence between the enantiomers of an amino acid corresponds to an
excess of 106 molecules of the stable form in a total of 1023, i.e., one part in 1017.
This is only an extremely weak “signal” onto the background of many random
ﬂuctuations in more important factors, like circularly polarized light, that could
determine which enantiomer is formed. However, some time ago, Prof. Salam[5]
proposed an enhancement mechanism of the chiral electroweak signal by means
of a phase transition into a condensed Bose-like mode. See also the comments
of Chela-Flores[6], and the recent work of Salam[7].

In the widely interdisciplinary problem of the origins of life it is very diﬃcult
to step out from the domain of speculations into the domain of ﬁrmly established
experiments.

In the following we shall discuss a new point of view on the strong cor-
relations among the life forms on Earth and the water liquid. It is based on
the works of Ryoji Takahashi[8] on the negentropy of micron size drops of wa-
ter. This negentropy is related to the surface tension coeﬃcient of water drops.
Laplace’s equation and Maxwell’s third thermodynamic relation are the key fea-
tures in stating the negentropy property of water microdrops when their volume
is increased. To explain thermodynamically the liquid phenomena in the mi-
cron region, which have been observed by reﬂected scanning electron microscopy
(SEM), Takahashi introduced the hypothesis of a new phase of water, the super
water. The scope of this short paper is to comment on the results of Takahashi.

2 Normal water

At the molecular level, water is an extremely unusual substance.
It has two
types of intermolecular forces - the hydrogen bond and the hydrophobic eﬀect.
Although of low molecular weight, water has unexpectedly high melting and
boiling points and latent heat of vaporization. Besides, liquid water exhibits
the famous density maximum at 4oC, and it is hevier than its solid phase (ice).
Usually one assumes that the strong intermolecular bonds formed in ice persist
into the liquid state and that they must be strongly orientation-dependent since
water adopts a tetrahedral coordination; more exactly the average number of
nearest neighbors is 4.5. For more details on the cluster structure of water the
interested reader may consult the recent paper of Benson and Siebert[9].

Other unusual properties are the very low compressibility and curious solu-
bility features, both as a solute and as a solvent. Liquid water possesses high
molecular dipole moment and high dielectric constant, which, unlike any typ-
ical polar liquid, is actually increasing when water freezes into ice, and is still
increasing at −70oC.

2

3 Super water

The surface tension of microdrops of water was investigated by means of re-
ﬂected scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and very interesting phenomena
were reported ten years ago by Takahashi[10]. He investigated the creation of
microdrops by the dehydration of hydrated metaphosphoric acid used as speci-
men when the surface of the specimen underwent bombardment of the electron
beam. The imaging current was as low as 10−10A with a beam diameter less
than 100˚A and the voltage was lowered in steps down to 5 kV. The irradiation
of the surface was done for 3 to 15 s. At high voltages the surface developes
craters, but at low voltages the change of the surface is a local rise in the form
of a microdrop without any crater. This means that the beam ionizes locally
the included water and the pressure is increased in a narrow region under the
surface, giving birth to a microdrop according to Laplace’s formula. In other
words, the SEM experimental conditions are just at the threshold of molecular
surface tension phenomena. Since the surface tension is due to attractive forces
between molecules acting over tens of ˚A, the surface tension concept is still in its
range of validity for drops of micron sizes. At low values of the voltage the ion-
ization is diminished and consequently the droplets should increase continuously
in size. Surprisingly, the experimental result is diﬀerent. At low accelerating
voltages (from 5 kV to 8 kV) the size of the droplet is almost independent of
the voltage and of the size of the specimen. The interpretation of Takahashi is
to postulate the existence of a minimum drop in any liquid, a fact he claims to
be universal. Moreover, by employing Gibbs-Helmholtz equation he claims that
in the one micron region there exists a phase transition to a super- lubriﬁant
phase of water for which the surface tension is naught. The Gibbs-Helmholtz
equation gives the surface energy of a plane liquid per unit area u as follows:

u
T

=

γ
T

− dγ
dT

(1)

=

+ s

u
T

or since the second term is just the surface entropy per unit area changed in
sign:

γ
T
A zero γ implies both u and s zero. Such a limiting case describes a liquid
which is able to freely deform itself without any change in volume, i.e., the
best lubricant. Takahashi estimated the minimum diameter of water droplets
at which the normal-super water transition takes place to be 1µm. As the short
range attractive forces drop to naught in the super phase the binding is provided
by the electromagnetic attractive forces, being less than that of normal water.
In the surface of the super water the electromagnetic forces exerted on charged
particles are balanced at each point in the tangent plane.

(2)

It is this normal-super water transformation that was thought responsible by
Takahashi of the negentropy cycle of living cells. These living devices accumu-
late entropy by metabolic processes. The excess entropy is however compensated
by the negentropy of a pressure induced transformation to super water. A con-
clusion to be drawn from this explanation is that the size of a one-cell organism
should be larger than the minimum diameter of normal-super water transition.

4 Negentropy of water microdrops

In 1989 Takahashi[8] calculated the Laplace pressure in water droplets of various
sizes in the micron range in saturated moisture based on the Landolt-B¨ornstein

3

data of γ of 1956. According to Takahashi, the P-T curves represent the equilib-
rium between the normal and the super phases. Within equilibrium conditions
Maxwell’s third thermodynamic relation is fulﬁlled:

(

∂S
∂V

)T = (

∂PL
∂T

)V

(3)

PL is the Laplace pressure. At small diameters and for room temperatures,
(∂PL/∂T )V is negative. Thus, from Maxwell’s relation, it follows that when
normal water turns into super water a negative entropy is produced in the tran-
sition. This negative entropy of the normal-super water transition could be
used by biological cells in their attempt to avoid the second law of thermody-
namics. Another requirement is to create a negative increment of pressure in
the cell in order to drive the phase transition to super water. The cell might
do that by controlling electrically the osmotic pressure. In the p-V plane this
results in a pressure induced transformation in which a work is given out. This
clearly requires entropy. The argument of Takahashi is that the biological cell
produces, by metabolism, just the amount of entropy required to compensate
the negentropy of super water transformation.

5 Conclusions

We presented some comments on the Takahashi model of the so-called normal-
super phase transition in water microdrops and its application to the engine
biological cell - microdrop. As soon as one assumes the existence of a normal
to super water phase transformations with a negative latent heat, one may
consider the problem of the related negative entropy (negentropy). This is
what Takahashi has done. Even though the model looks very ambiguous, it
is apparently supported by some experimental evidence, and in spite of the
fact that other explanations of the SEM data are possible, it gives a rather
challenging interpretation of the Schr¨odinger negentropy.

We would like to emphasize the fact that from the chemical point of view
cells are soup bubbles made of a great number of substances. Water is the most
abundant substance in biosystems, at the level of 70%, but actually one will
ﬁnd it almost entirely in the form of intercellular water. A model for water in
biosystems, based on the assumption that water is adsorbed on macromolecules
has been presented by Cerofolini[11].

Concerning Takahashi’s hypothesis, we draw attention to the recent work of
Landsberg and Woodward[12]. When discussing the incremental heat input into
a thermodynamical system, they introduce a “latent heat” lX corresponding to
some function of pressure and volume X(p,V) for which lX dX is not generally
the work done on the system. We are currently investigating the application of
such an idea to water microdrops in biological environments.

6 Note added on August 5/1996

I maintained a sporadic interest in Takahashi’s experiment on minimum drop,
both on the negative and positive side. On the prevailing negative one, I have to
mention that Takahashi asseverated that “measurement of the minimum drop
with any material other than metaphosphoric acid is nearly impossible” and
therefore the existence of a universal minimum drop in any liquid is only a
speculation.

About a year ago, I have devoted three days to this old ﬁle and I came up
with the idea that most probably Takahashi got into a miscibility (and meniscus

4

formation) problem, but I was not able to ﬁnd around any data on hydrated
HP O3 and I let it pass away, since at that time I got involved in many other
projects. Even in this case the problem is really interesting and I oﬀer some
references to those wishing to pursue such a study [13].

Acknowledgements

We thank Professor Abdus Salam, the International Atomic Energy Agency and
the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organizations for their
hospitality at the International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste.

References

[1] Haldane,J.B.S. 1954. The origin of life. New Biol., 16, 12.

[2] Haldane, J.B.S. 1952. The mechanical chess-player. Brit. Journ. Phil. Sci.,

3, 189.

105.

[3] Bock, G.R. and Marsh, J. (eds.) 1991. Biological Asymmetry and Handed-

ness. (Ciba Foundation Symposium 162). Wiley, Chichester.

[4] Mason, S.F. 1985. Biomolecular handedness. Chem. Br., 21, 538.

Kondepudi, D.K. and Nelson, G.W. 1985. Weak neutral currents and the
origin of biomolecular chirality. Nature, 314, 438.

[5] Salam, A. 1991. The role of chirality in the origin of life. J. Mol.Evol., 33,

[6] Chela-Flores, J. 1991. Comments on a novel approach to the role of chirality

in the origin of life. Chirality, 3, 389.

[7] Salam, A. 1992. Chirality, phase transitions and their induction in amino

acids. Phys. Lett., B 288, 153.

[8] Takahashi, R. 1989. Negentropy in Microdrops of Water. Phys. Lett., A

141, 15.

[9] S.W. Benson, S.W. and Siebert, E.D. 1992. A simple two-structure model

for liquid water. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 114, 4269.
See also:

Teixeira J. 1990. Liquid Water: Theory and Experiment. NATO ASI E
188, 167

[10] Takahashi, R. 1982. Normal-super transformation of liquids: the minimum

drop studied by SEM. Jap. Journ. Appl. Phys., 21, 974.

[11] Cerofolini G.F. 1983. A Paradigm for the Biomedium. Nuovo Cimento, D

2, 763

[12] P.T. Landsberg, Woodward R.P. 1992. Classical Fluids of Negative Heat

Capacity. J. Stat. Phys. 73, 361 (1993)

[13] R.G. Johnson et al., “Critical behavior near a vanishing miscibility gap”,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 49 (1985); M.-E. Boudh-Hir and G.A. Mansoori, “The-
ory for interfacial tension of partially miscible liquids”, Physica A 179, 219
(1991) and references therein; J.E. Mungall, “Interfacial tension in miscible

5

two-ﬂuid systems with linear viscoelastic rheology”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73,
288 (1994)

R. Lovett and M. Baus, “Fluid interfaces as treated by density functional
theory”, Physica A 194, 93-104 (1993)
(BL)
“The magnitude and location of the surface tension of curved interfaces”,
J. Chem. Phys. 103, 377 (1995)
(LB)
“A family of equivalent expressions for the pressure of a ﬂuid adjacent to
a wall”, J. Chem. Phys. 95, 1991 (1995)
G.L. Vasconcelos, “Exact solutions for Hele-Shaw ﬂows with surface ten-
sion: The Schwarz-function approach”, Phys. Rev. E 48, R658-60 (1993)
D.J.E. Callaway,

“Surface tension, hydrophobicity, and black holes: The entropic connec-
tion”, Phys. Rev. E 53, 3738 (1996)

6

