7
9
9
1
 
b
e
F
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
2
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantum Field Theory by Lewis H. Ryder, Cambridge University Press, 487
pages, Second Edition (1996).

D. V. Ahluwalia (Los Alamos National Laboratory).

The ﬁrst edition of this book appeared in 1985. To my knowledge this was the
the ﬁrst book that presented a completely modern and logical development of
quantum theory of matter and gauge ﬁelds. Since this book had very signiﬁcant
eﬀect on my research, the review that follows carries the ﬂavor of a personal
note of thanks.

So in late eighties, when the ﬁrst edition of this book reached my desk, I was
a graduate student who had just ﬁnished taking some elementary courses in
quantum mechanics and quantum ﬁeld theory. I had not yet chosen a research
topic. Professor Lewis H. Ryder’s relatively slim book arrived my desk, and
I, who was suﬀering from intense frustration created by the lack of a modern
classic in quantum ﬁeld theory, was immediately enamored by this work of
scholarship.

The initial chapters of Professor Ryder’s slim monograph guided me to the
original works of Eugene Wigner, Steven Weinberg, C. N. Yang and R. L.
Mills. Within a matter of a year or so I had expanded some of Professor
Ryder’s work and ﬁnished a over–two–hundred page Ph.D dissertation under
my friend and mentor Professor Dave Ernst, a nuclear physicist who was at
that time interested in high–spin hadronic resonances.

In the ﬁrst chapter the reader is be introduced to the a “synopsis of particle
physics,” with the request, “I ask readers’ indulgence to make the best they
can of these sections until they meet explanations later in the book.”

Chapter 2 is where the real fun begins. It is devoted to “single–particle rel-
ativistic wave equation.” Here one need not depend on Dirac’s genius to ob-
tain the celebrated spin-1/2 wave equation for charged particles. Elegant and
simple arguments based on classic works of Wigner, Weinberg, and his own
teacher Feza G¨ursey, are exploited to derive the celebrated Dirac equation.
In the second edition the author had the opportunity to correct an important
element that enters the derivation of Dirac equation. On. p. 41 (p.44 of the
ﬁrst edition) one is taught, “Now, when a particle is at rest, one cannot deﬁne
its spin as either left–or right–handed, so φR(0) = φL(0).” This important
observations should have been corrected, as I learned with C. Burgard, to
read:

Now, when a particle is at rest, one cannot deﬁne its spin as either left–or
right–handed, so φR(0) = ± φL(0).

The ± sign is important for a consistent and correct derivation of the Dirac

1

equation and is responsible for the opposite relative intrinsic parities of spin–
1/2 fermions. Its deeper signiﬁcance arises when one considers spin one. For
spin one, the same arguments (when corrected, as above) as that of Professor
Ryder lead to a fundamentally new construct. Similarly, I wonder why after
having so beautifully derived the Dirac equation, Professor Ryder chose not to
present the derivation of the Maxwell equations as well. Within the framework
of chapter 2, one could have easily obtained the Dirac spinors without any
reference to Dirac equation. Again, this is not done and an opportunity is lost
in showing the strength and beauty of Ryder’s approach.

But these criticisms would not have even arisen had Professor Ryder not shown
me the path on which these questions and my subsequent researches lay!

The free wave equations have no ﬁre. The ﬁre is breathed by demanding their
covariance under appropriate gauge group. This is elegantly and logically done
in Chapter 3.

The Chapter 2 and Chapter 3 provide the basic building blocks for a quantum
theory of interacting matter and gauge ﬁelds. Chapter 4, as the logic demands,
presents “canonical quantisation and particle interpretation.” Chapter 5 is de-
voted to Richard Feynman’s path integral approach. The Chapters 6 to 9 deal
with the standard perturbative approach of quantum ﬁeld theory, including
an introduction to the standard model of electroweak interactions and renor-
malisation.

Chapter 10 and 11 are essentially self–contained essays on non-perturbative
topological aspects and supersymmetry. On a recent weekend, looking at the
fallen foot and half of snow in these mountains through a large glass window
framed by pine trees in Los Alamos, I entertained myself with parts of these
essays.

A rare combination of a thorough understanding and appreciation of the es-
sential logical structure of quantum ﬁeld theory and deep pedagogic skills
have intermingled to create a masterpiece on the elementary introduction to
quantum ﬁeld theory in less than ﬁve hundred pages. My deepest thanks to
Professor Ryder on behalf of all his readers. Without reservations, I give my
strongest recommendation to every beginning student of physics to acquire
and read Quantum Field Theory by L. H. Ryder.

2

