7
9
9
1
 
r
p
A
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
0
4
0
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Quantum Theory of Fields, Vol. I (Foundations) and Vol. II
(Modern Applications). By Steven Weinberg. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, U. K. xxvi + 609 pp. for Vol. I (1995); xxi + 489 pp. for Vol. II
(1996).

“Men and Women are not content to comfort themselves with tales of gods
and giants, or to conﬁne their thoughts to the daily aﬀairs of life; they also
build telescopes and satellites and accelerators, and sit at their desks for
endless hours working out the meaning of the data they gather. The eﬀort
to understand the universe is one of the very few things that lifts human life
a little above the level of farce, and gives it some of the grace of a tragedy.”

S. Weinberg, in The First Three Minutes (1977).

I have been invited to write a review of these two volumes on the quantum
theory of ﬁelds. I consider it to be an honor to be so invited. My views are
necessarily personal. Nevertheless, I hope the reader shall ﬁnd them of some
use in gaining the perspective of what is ahead of her if she is courageous
enough to commit herself to this Dirac–like monograph of over a thousand
pages. Perhaps a little preparatory reading shall be of immense help in this
journey for her. Therefore, I shall describe to you my own journey to these
two volumes in the hope that you, if you are a beginning student, shall ﬁnd
these two volumes accessible when you ﬁrst encounter them.

This long–awaited two–volume set by Professor Steven Weinberg is a deeply
personal and logical perspective on the quantum theory of ﬁelds. I found many
of these ideas, ﬁrst, in a handwritten notes that Dr. Wayne Itano kindly sent
to me when I was a graduate student at Texas A&M University. These were
the lecture notes that Dr. Itano had taken in Professor Weinberg’s lectures
at Harvard. In addition, as I have noted in my review of Professor Lewis H.
Ryder’s Quantum Field Theory, my ﬁrst introduction to Professor Weinberg’s
ideas came via Professor Ryder’s book. I still think that Professor Ryder’s
book is an essential preparatory reading for a beginning student before she
embarks on her journey to these two volumes of Professor Weinberg.

Next, I read three early papers of Weinberg entitled “Feynman Rules for Any
Spin” and many related papers. The ﬁrst two papers in the “Feynman Rules
for Any Spin” series were published in Physical Review in 1964, and the third,
ﬁve years later, in 1969, in the same journal. My own copies of these three
papers are now worn out from use, with “p” in “Spin” slashed through by
Professor Roger Smith — a pun that, I am sure, Dick Feynman would have
enjoyed. To me these still make a good honest reading and I take pleasure
that now and then I have been able to ﬁnd a small error in, or an appropriate
extension of, these works.

1

Professor Weinberg’s ideas, as is always the case with the original and ever–
young minds, are not static. So it was not too long ago that Professor Weinberg
wrote:

“A distinguished nuclear physicist asked me not too long ago what I thought
of a proposal to do an experiment on the scattering of a nucleus (I for-
get which nucleus) with spin–2, which aimed at ﬁnding out experimentally
which relativistic wave equation that nucleus satisﬁed. This is all wrong. If
you go into the streets of College Park and a passer–by asks you what is
the Lorentz transformation of a particle of spin–2, you do not have to ask
him if he is referring to a symmetric traceless tensor wave function, or a
wave equation belonging to some other representation of the homogeneous
Lorentz group that contains spin–2. All you have to do is . . . tell him that
the states transform according to j = 2 matrix representation of the of the
rotation group (I promise you that if you do that the pedestrian will not ask
you any more questions). The kinematic classiﬁcation of particles according
to their Lorentz transformation properties is entirely (for ﬁnite mass) deter-
mined by their familiar representation of the rotation group. It has nothing
whatever to do with the choice of one relativistic wave equation rather than
another.”

S. Weinberg, Nucl. Phys. B (Proc. Suppl.) 6, 67 (1989).

The background for this argument is contained in the beginning chapters of
the “Foundations.” It is not clear to me if Professor Weinberg still holds this
view without any qualiﬁcations. For one thing, recently it has become possible
to construct a ﬁeld theory in which a (1, 0) ⊕ (0, 1) boson and its associated
anti–boson carry opposite relative intrinsic parity. In the standard description,
in terms of a (1/2, 1/2) representation, spin-1 bosons and anti–bosons have
the same relative intrinsic parity. Of course, whether the boson–antiboson
pair carries the same, or opposite, relative intrinsic parities has experimental
consequences. Generalizations of this argument exist for spin–2 and higher.
Moreover, interactions that are “simplest” in one representation may look
complicated in another, as Professor Weinberg himself notes in Sec. 5.7.

In 1962 Professor Wigner, in a collaborative work with Professors V. Bargmann
and A. S. Wightman, suggested the possibility that unusual P, and CP, prop-
erties of particles and antiparticles may exist within the kinematic consid-
erations that began with his 1939 work. However, no explicit constructs for
these unusual Wigner– (or “BWW–”) type ﬁeld theories existed prior to 1993.
In this context Professor Weinberg (see p. 104) notes that “No examples are
known of particles that furnish unconventional representations of inversions,
so these possibilities will not be pursued further here.” In my opinion, it is
not yet clear what the general phenomenological and theoretical implications
of these newly discovered constructs are. The experimentalists, and entering

2

graduate students, should be made aware of these unusual possibilities — or,
so atleast is my opinion.

The structure of quantum ﬁeld theory is exceedingly rich. This becomes abun-
dantly clear as one reﬂects on the presentation of Professor Weinberg. For
instance, at least a generation of physicists simply wrote down the spin–1/2
rest spinors a la Bjorken and Drell. In Professor Weinberg’s monograph the
same result is obtained after reﬂections and calculations spanning about ﬁve
pages (see Sec. 5.5). I refer the reader to hep-th/9702027, written by Professor
Weinberg under the title “What is Quantum Field Theory, and What Did We
Think It Is?” for a very readable essay on the logical structure of the theory
of quantum ﬁeld theory. In the cited essay Professor Weinberg writes, “This
has been an outline of the way I’ve been teaching quantum ﬁeld theory these
many years. Recently I’ve put this all together into a book, now being sold for
a negligible price. The bottom line is that quantum mechanics plus Lorentz
invariance plus cluster decomposition implies quantum ﬁeld theory. But there
are caveats that have to be attached to this . . .. ” It is not appropriate for me
to comment on other chapters of these monographs — even though almost
all of them carry many original arguments and derivations — for the simple
reason that many others (much more knowledgeable than I on these chapters)
have already done so elsewhere in various reviews already published. Some
may ﬁnd it a little strange that a monograph of this nature contains no men-
tion of theorists such as R. Arnowitt, J. J. Sakurai, or E. C. G. Sudarshan,
to mention just a few. The origin of such omissions, in my opinion, may lie in
the fact that this two–volume monograph is a deeply personal perspective of
its author.

In Professor Weinberg’s Gravitation and Cosmology some of us learned how
the empirically observed equivalence of the inertial and gravitational masses
yields Einstein’s general theory of relativity. In that book the starring role
was taken away from the geometric elements and was rightfully transferred
to the experimental facts. Now we learn how quantum mechanics, space–time
symmetries, and the requirement that spatially separated experiments yield
uncorrelated results, intermingle in such a manner as to result in a quantum
theory of ﬁelds. We may be approaching something close to the Landau and
Lifshitz classics inasfar as two of the most important aspects of modern physics
are now covered by one single author of relentless eﬀort and uncompromising
honesty.

In the preface to the second volume Professor Weinberg notes “Perhaps su-
persymmetry and supergravity will be the subjects of a Volume III.” Before
the Weinberg trilogy is completed, I hope we all have had the opportunity
to study, examine, and enjoy Professor Weinberg’s The Quantum Theory of
Fields in great detail. This work compares in its depth with P. A. M. Dirac’s
The Principles of Quantum Mechanics and without doubt goes far beyond the

3

ambition of providing a quick calculational recipe book. It is my opinion that
The Quantum Theory of Fields is a serious scholarly attempt to lift “life a
little above the level of farce.” It would be a tragedy, if the expediency of ﬁn-
ishing Ph.D.s and making calculations made The Quantum Theory of Fields
a bookshelf decoration.

D. V. Ahluwalia
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA.

4

