7
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
0
0
1
7
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Faster Than Light ?

J. E. Maiorino(a) and W. A. Rodrigues Jr.(b)
(a)Instituto de F´ısica Gleb Wataghin
Universidade Estadual de Campinas - UNICAMP∗
(b)Instituto de Matem´atica, Estat´ıstica e Computa¸c˜ao Cient´ıﬁca
Universidade Estadual de Campinas - UNICAMP†

September 1997

Maxwell’s equations are a set of ﬁrst order partial diﬀerential equations
describing the behavior of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds generated by dis-
tributions of charges and currents. Such equations also possess solutions for
the case where there are no charges nor currents. The simplest solutions
of this kind, discovered by Maxwell himself, describe electromagnetic ﬁeld
conﬁgurations which we will call light-solutions (LS ). Light-solutions prop-
agate in empty space with a particular velocity c (c ≈ 300, 000 km/s in MKS
units). The simplest, easiest to ﬁnd LS s are the plane wave solutions (PW ),
which have the following important characteristics:

(i) PW s are transverse waves: the electric ( ~E) and magnetic
( ~B) ﬁelds oscillate in time with a certain frequency and are per-
pendicular to the direction of propagation and to each other.

(ii) The ﬁeld invariants of PW s are null.
In adequate units,
where c = 1, these ﬁeld invariants are given by I1 = ~E. ~B and
I2 = ~E2 − ~B2.

Figure 1 is a pictorial representation of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds of a
plane wave.

One cannot elude a very natural question about LS s: What is the ref-
erence frame with respect to which LS s propagate with velocity c ? For
Maxwell and his contemporaries the answer was that LS s have velocity c
in a frame “materialized” by a special medium called aether, which is their

∗maiorino@ime.unicamp.br
†walrod@ime.unicamp.br

1

~E

~B

direction of
propagation

Figure 1: Representation of the oscillating electric ( ~E) and magnetic ( ~B)
ﬁelds of a plane wave.

“carrier”, i.e. LS s are vibrations of this aether. The aether concept was, at
their time, an important part of electromagnetic theory, as indissociable of
it as the concepts of charge and current. The advent of special relativity,
and above all of Einstein’s interpretation for it, has taken the aether concept
out of mainstream physics and into the books on history of science.1

The Earth, our cosmic home, is endowed with several forms of motion
more or less easily detectable. One such motion is its translation around
the Sun. It thus cannot be permanently at rest with respect to the aether
and many experiments (of which the most famous is that of Michelson and
Morley) have been carried in order to detect the eﬀect of the Earth’s motion
on the measured velocity of light, without success. These negative results
ultimately led to the formulation of special relativity by Lorentz, Poincar´e
and Einstein.

Before we continue it is important to examine carefully the concept of
velocity itself. Note that in order to determine experimentally the mean
velocity of a particle that traverses a distance L in such a way that our
experiment is a realization of the mathematical deﬁnition of this concept,
we must measure the distance L with standard rules and we shall also need
at least two standard clocks. One of them will be at the beginning of the
path L and the other at the end. The clocks must be synchronized, that is,
we must be sure that when the ﬁrst clock displays a time, say, t = 0, the
other will register the same time.

Probably the most noticeable contribution of Einstein to special rela-
tivity was the realization that such a synchronization process depended on
a deﬁnition. Einstein then adopted a deﬁnition (called synchronization ‘`a
1Contrary to what is written in most textbooks, Einstein never really abandoned the
aether concept, and has even written several articles in which he claims that this concept
is an essential one. See in this respect the article by L. Kostro [1].

2

l’Einstein’) that took into account the empirical fact that the time for a light
signal to go from a point A to a point B in space, with both points ﬁxed in
a given inertial reference frame,2 is independent of the velocity of the source
that emits the signal. He proposed that the clocks at A and B (in any
inertial reference frame) should be synchronized in the following way: The
observer in A sends a light signal to B, where the signal is instantaneously
reﬂected back to A. The observer in A determines the total traversal time
τ for the path A → B → A, and asks the observer in B to adjust his clock
in such a way that it would show a time τ /2, i.e. one-half the total time for
the path A → B → A, at the moment when the light signal arrived there.
It can be shown that this deﬁnition implies that the measured velocity of
light will be always c, in any reference frame, once the standard rules and
clocks have a behavior diﬀerent from that presupposed by classical theory.
And in fact such a distinct behavior is exactly that found in nature, with
a very good approximation. In particular, it has been found empirically by
the American physicists J. C. Hafelle and T. E. Keating, in 1968 [3], that
when two atomic clocks are synchronized at a given point of space in an
inertial refence frame, if one of them makes a trip and comes back to the
initial point after some time, then it will register a time interval smaller
than the time measured by the clock that remained at rest, and the diﬀer-
ence will be exactly what is needed in order that the measurement of the
velocity of any light-solution will be c in every inertial reference frame.3 If
in two inertial reference frames the spacetime coordinates of events are de-
termined by standard rules and standard clocks synchronized ‘`a l’Einstein’,
then the coordinates of an event as determined in both reference frames will
be related by the famous Lorentz transformations (ﬁg. 24).

All these ideas were incorporated by Poincar´e, in 1904, and Einstein, in
1905, in what is now known as the theory of special relativity. Poincar´e (and
also Einstein) assumed the validity of a universal principle, called principle
of relativity, which establishes that the development of all natural phenom-
ena does not depend on the state of uniform motion of the inertial reference
frame where they take place.5 It can be shown that, from the mathematical
point of view, this implies that all natural phenomena shall be described by
equations which posses the Lorentz group as their symmetry group. More-

2For a rigorous deﬁnition of inertial frame, see [2].
3In fact, Hafelle and Keating did the experiment on Earth, which is a non inertial

frame. A full account of their results requires general relativity to be well understood.

4Adapted from [4].
5The precedence of Poincar´e over Einstein is well documented. The interested reader

may look at [5] for details.

3

y

Y

⇒ V

s

S

collision of
two particles

x

4

X

−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

−¯3

−¯2

−¯1

¯0

¯1

¯2

¯3

¯4

z//Z

Figure 2:
How is it possible that the velocity of light is always c in every inertial reference frame?

Suppose that S and s are two inertial laboratories that move with velocity V with

respect to each other. Both laboratories are equipped with standard clocks synchro-

nized `a l’Einstein, and the origins of their coordinate systems coincide for T = t = 0.

In S, the equation of motion for a light signal emitted at T = t = 0 is written
c2T 2 − X 2 − Y 2 − Z2 = 0. In s, the equation for the same signal is c2t2 − x2 − y2 − z2 = 0.
These equations (together with a few other reasonable hypotheses) imply that the re-

lation between t and T , on one hand, and between x and X, on the other, cannot be

those used in the Newtonian theory of spacetime.

Indeed, it can be shown that the

transformations relating the coordinates of any event e (e.g. the collision of two parti-
cles) in systems S and s, and such that both equations for the light signals are true, are

x =

y = Y,

z = Z;

t =

T =

,

T − V X/c2
p1 − V 2/c2
t + V x/c2
p1 − V 2/c2

,

X − V T
p1 − V 2/c2
x + V t
p1 − V 2/c2

, X =

, Y = y, Z = z.

Notice that the coordinates of event e are e = (T, X, Y, Z) in S and e = (t, x, y, z) in
s. These are the famous Lorentz transformations, which allow us to calculate, from the

measurements made by a certain observer, the results that would be obtained by another

observer whose state of motion relative to the ﬁrst one is known, if he observed the same
phenomenon. For c → ∞ (or for V /c ≪ 1) these transformations reduce to the Galilean
transformations (x = X − V T , t = T , y = Y , z = Z) used in Newtonian theory of space-
time and in our quotidian calculations, which involve systems endowed with velocities

much smaller than the velocity of light.

4

over, one can show that the validity of the principle of relativity implies that
no internal process of synchronization of clocks in a given inertial frame (i.e.
synchronization without “looking outside the laboratory”) will diﬀer from
the synchronization `a l’Einstein [6].

About his attempt to formulate the principle of relativity, Einstein says
in his Autobiographical Notes: “After ten years of reﬂection such a principle
resulted from a paradox upon which I had already hit at the age of sixteen: If
I pursue a beam of light with the velocity c (velocity of light in a vacuum), I
should observe such a beam of light as a spatially oscillatory electromagnetic
ﬁeld at rest. However, there seems to be no such thing, whether on the basis
of experience or according to Maxwell’s equations.”

Well, the fact is that Einstein was mistaken. Maxwell’s equations are
a source of big surprises.
Indeed, just ten years after the publication of
Einstein’s fundamental article, the American mathematician H. Bateman,
showed in his book Electrical and Optical Motion [7] that the scalar wave
equation has solutions that describe a non spreading packet that travels
with speed less than that of any LS ! Also, the late professor A. O. Barut,
of Boulder University, published in 1992 an extraordinary article [8] where he
showed that Maxwell’s equations without sources also possess wave packet
solutions that travel with velocities less than that of LS s. These solutions
present a little dispersion, but it can be shown that in many cases the time
for the spreading of the packet is comparable to the presumed age of the
universe. Such packets might eventually be used to represent elementary
particles, which would turn out to be nothing but special electromagnetic
conﬁgurations. This idea was developed in [9].

But do Maxwell equations predict the existence of any electromagnetic
ﬁeld conﬁguration that propagates with a velocity greater than c? The sur-
prising answer to this question is yes. It has been recently proved [10, 9, 11]
that all relativistic wave equations—the scalar wave equation, Maxwell’s
equations, and the Klein-Gordon, Dirac and Weyl equations—have solu-
tions that propagate with arbitrary velocities 0 ≤ v < ∞.
It has been
veriﬁed that Maxwell’s equations have, besides LS s, solutions correspond-
ing to electromagnetic ﬁeld conﬁgurations that propagate with superluminal
velocities in vacuum.6 One particular superluminal solution is the so called
electromagnetic X wave, which does not distort as it propagates. Figure
3 shows the real part of the X wave solution for the homogeneous wave
equation on the plane y = 0, propagating in the z direction. A complete
solution of Maxwell equations may be obtained from it by the Hertz po-

6See also [12].

5

1
1

0
0

X

-1
-1

1

0.75

Y

0.25

-0.001
-0.001

-0.0005
-0.0005

0.0005
0.0005

0.001
0.001

Figure 3: Exact X wave solution of homogeneous wave equation. The solu-
tion is cylindrically symmetric around the z axis; what we show here is the
value of its real part on the plane y = 0.

tential method [9].
In general, electromagnetic conﬁgurations that move
(in vacuum) with velocities v 6= c have a longitudinal component (electric
and/or magnetic) and possess at least one non null ﬁeld invariant. The exact
electromagnetic X wave has inﬁnite energy (as is the case for plane wave
solutions) and thus cannot be produced in practice. Nevertheless, computer
simulations of ﬁnite aperture approximations for the X wave, which have
ﬁnite energies, have shown that these approximations also propagate with
velocity greater than that of LS s. These approximate solutions distort a
little as they propagate. Fig. 4 shows the results of such simulations for two
diﬀerent approximations for an X wave.

Nobody has so far produced an approximate electromagnetic X wave.
However, there are serious reasons to believe that this is possible. One of

0
0

Z

6

Figure 4: Aspect of anX wave propagating in the z direction. The pictures
in (1) and (2) show an approximate solution obtained from the Rayleigh-
Sommerfeld diﬀraction formula for a broad band X wave; in (3) and (4) we
have the same kind of approximation for a band limited X wave. The latter
(Reprinted
might in principle be produced with present day technology.
from [9].)

7

Figure 5: Comparison of the velocities of a single element acoustic wave and
an acoustic X wave. (Reprinted from [9].)

them is the production of (approximate) acoustic X waves, described in
the article by Rodrigues and Lu [9]. Acoustic waves satisfy a scalar wave
equation where the parameter c is replaced by cs, the velocity of sound.
It has indeed been veriﬁed that acoustic X waves can travel with speeds
greater than cs. Also, another kind of non spreading acoustic waves called
Bessel pulses were produced, which traveled with velocity less than cs, as
predicted by the theory (ﬁgs. 5 and 6) .

One may also ﬁnd theoretical predictions of superluminal propagation
of electromagnetic conﬁgurations in several situations which are mathemat-
ically modelled through boundary value problems. As examples we cite:

(i) Maxwell’s equations, when we take into account the quantum theory of
ﬁelds. If one solves these equations for the electromagnetic ﬁeld inside
the region limited by two perfectly reﬂecting mirrors with conducting
surfaces, one veriﬁes that the velocity of the electromagnetic ﬁeld is
greater than that of LS s (in vacuum) in the direction perpendicular to
the surface of the mirrors. This solution has been found by G. Barton
and K. Scharnhorst [13].

(ii) One can show that under appropriate boundary conditions it is possible
to generate wave packets that propagate with superluminal velocities

8

Figure 6: Comparison of the velocities of a single element acoustic wave and
an acoustic Bessel pulse. (Reprinted from [9].)

outside a conducting cylinder. This result has been discovered by
W. Band [14]. In 1988, P. T. Papas and A. G. Obolensky claimed to
have sent signals through coaxial cables with velocities up to 100 times
greater than that of LS s [15]. Few people believe in these results, but a
generalization of Band’s theory predicts the possibility of propagation
of superluminal modes in coaxial cables under appropriate boundary
conditions.

(iii) Besides these facts, there exist evidences that microwaves have been
launched through horn antennas in the air with velocities around 1.47 c
for distances of about 1 m. For details see [16, 17, 18].

Another important theoretical consideration is the following. For more
than half a century the problem of tunneling of wave packets through po-
tential barriers has been investigated in countless articles. This problem is
an important one since the tunneling of elementary particles of matter is a
nontrivial prediction of quantum mechanics, responsible by the functioning
of several semiconductor devices which are fundamental for modern tech-
nology.7 One conclusion of these works is that in the case of the tunneling

7For a revision see [19].

9

of electromagnetic wave packets (which is formally equal to the quantum
mechanical problem) the potential barrier can be physically realized by a
special wave guide where there naturally occur certain modes of propagation
called “evanescent”.

Several recent experiments have conﬁrmed the superluminal propagation
through barriers. These results have been published in prestigious periodi-
cals such as Physical Review Letters. Physics Letters A, Journal of Applied
Physics and others.
In particular, R. Chiao and his collaborators, from
Berkeley University, could observe a single photon going through a barrier
with a velocity 1.47 times the velocity of LS s [20]. G. Nimtz [21] transmitted
Mozart’s symphony #40 between two points 11.7 cm apart with a velocity
4.7 times that of LS s.

We must remark here that the always quoted results from Sommerfeld
and Brillouin [22] showing that electromagnetic waves cannot travel through
a dispersive medium with velocity greater than c is valid only for ideal (or
mathematical) signals which have discontinuities in their ﬁrst (or second)
derivatives and are transverse waves. In such cases, as is well known ([23],
vol. 2, p. 178), the signal must propagate along the light-cone characteristics
of Maxwell equations.8 As correctly pointed out by Nimtz [21], ideal signals
cannot be produced in practice, and for real signals the Brillouin-Sommerfeld
results do not apply.

These spectacular achievements have given rise to much discussion. Are
such results incompatible with the theory of relativity ? Have we found its
limit of validity ?

Well, we may read in every textbook on special relativity, and also on
research articles, that the theory or relativity implies that no signal may
propagate with velocity greater than the velocity of LS s in vacuum. This
claim is known as causality principle and its acceptance is due mainly to an
argument of Einstein. We shall consider here a more opportune version of
the argument.

Consider two inertial frames S and S′ moving with velocity V with re-
spect to each other (see ﬁg. 7) and suppose that the observers in S and S′
can produce electromagnetic X waves with velocity v > c, as measured in
their respective reference frames, where all clocks have been synchronized ‘`a
l’Einstein’. Suppose also that the observer in S has agreed with his friend in
S′ to make the following experiment: “If you receive a signal coming from
my laboratory until hour zero of your clock (time t0′ in ﬁg. 7), you should
8Maxwell equations have more general characteristics other than the light-cone. See

[23].

10

v′

t

te
td

x′

t′

t′
0

x

v

Figure 7: Illustration of Einstein’s reasoning. The superluminal signal from
S′ would arrive at S before the signal from S was sent.

destroy my laboratory with an X wave of velocity v > c, as we have agreed.”
It can be shown that if S′ receives the signal from S (which was sent at time
te in ﬁg. 7) and uses his launcher of X waves, he will be able to destroy the
laboratory in S at an instant td earlier than te. This constitutes a logical
paradox, and based on such a reasoning Einstein concluded that there is no
propagation of superluminal signals.

Einstein’s conclusion does not resist a more careful analysis. Indeed, in
order for this conclusion to be correct it is necessary that relativity theory it-
self be valid. But the existence of superluminal signals implies that there are
processes for the synchronization of clocks inside an inertial reference frame
which do not agree with the synchronization `a l’Einstein. In particular, the
existence of a transcendent superluminal signal (as is the case for some of
the tunneling experiments) may eventually be used to eﬀect a Newtonian
synchronization, i.e. the type of synchronization supposed true by classical
physics, what would imply a falsiﬁcation of the principle of relativity [24].

There are many delicate and subtle points about these questions which
cannot be discussed here. We would like to call the readers’ attention to the
fact that the claim that there is no contradiction between the principle of
relativity and the existence of superluminal signals, as maintained by some
authors (e.g. [25]), is false. For a more thorough discussion of this problem
the reader may look at [9].

Before we ﬁnish we would like to remark that even 150 years after their
discovery, Maxwell’s equations are still a source of great surprises. Indeed,
in a series of recent articles ([10, 26, 27, 28]) it has been veriﬁed that there
exists an unexpected relation between Maxwell’s equations and the Dirac
equation, a relation which also unveils the geometric origin of the so called

11

supersymmetry between bosons and fermions.

We believe that the experiments mentioned above, and a series of other
experiments involving the foundations of quantum mechanics (discussed in
the book [29]), are the ﬁrst clouds appearing in the horizon of physics at
this end of century. And we believe that they will surely have unpredictably
deeper consequences than those thought of by Lord Kelvin at the end of last
century, when he referred to the experiments on the black-body radiation
and the Michelson-Morley experiments.

References

[1] L. Kostro, in M. C. Duﬀy (ed.), Physical Interpretations of Relativity

Theory, British Soc. Phil. Sci. (1989).

[2] W. A. Rodrigues Jr. and M. A. F. Rosa, Found. Phys. 19, 705 (1989).

[3] J. C. Hafelle and T. E. Keating, Science 177, 166 (1968); ibid., 168

(1968).

Hoje 5(26), 48 (1986).

[4] E. Recami, M. Fracastoro-Decker and W. A. Rodrigues Jr., Ciˆencia

[5] R. De La Taille, Science et Vie 951, 114 (1995).

[6] W. A. Rodrigues Jr. and J. Tiomno, Found. Phys. 15, 945 (1985).

[7] H. Bateman, Electrical and Optical Motion, Cambridge, Cambridge

Univ. Press (1915).

[8] A. O. Barut, Found. Phys. 22, 1267 (1992).

[9] W. A. Rodrigues Jr. and J.-Y. Lu, Found. Phys. 27, 435 (1997).

[10] W. A. Rodrigues Jr. and J. Vaz Jr., Adv. Appl. Cliﬀord Algebras 7 (S),

[11] W. A. Rodrigues Jr. and J. E. Maiorino, Random Oper. Stoch. Equ. 4,

[12] R. Donnelly and R. Ziolkowsky, Proc. Royal Soc. London A 460, 541

453 (1997).

355 (1996).

(1993).

[13] G. Barton and K. Scharnhorst, J. Physics A 26, 2037 (1993).

12

[14] W. Band, Found. Phys. 18, 549 (1989).

[15] P. T. Papas and A. G. Obolensky, Electronics and Wireless World 12,

1162 (1988).

1, 1051 (1991).

1453 (1993).

[16] G. C. Giakos and T. K. Ishii, IEEE Microwave and Guided Wave Lett.

[17] T. K. Ishii, Microwaves & RF, August 1991, p. 114.

[18] A. Ranfagni, P. Fabeni, G. P. Pazzi and D. Mugnai, Phys. Rev. E 48,

[19] V. S. Olkhovsky and E. Recami, Phys. Reports 214, 339 (1992).

[20] R. Chiao et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 708 (1993).

[21] G. Nimtz, Phys. Lett. A 196, 154 (1994).

[22] L. Brillouin, Wave Propagation and Group Velocity, Academic Press,

[23] R. Courant and D. Hilbert, Methods of Mathematical Physics, vol. 2,

[24] T. Matolcsi and W. A. Rodrigues Jr., Algebras, Groups and Geometries

[25] E. Recami, N. Cimento 9, 1 (1986).

[26] J. Vaz Jr. and W. A. Rodrigues Jr., Int. J. Theor. Phys. 32, 945 (1993).

[27] W. A. Rodrigues Jr., J. Vaz Jr. and M. Pavsic, Banach Center Publ.,

Polish Acad. Sciences 37, 295 (1996).

[28] W. A. Rodrigues Jr. and J. Vaz Jr., in K. Habetha (ed.), Cliﬀord Al-
gebras and their Applications in Mathematical Physics, Kluwer Acad.
Publ. (1997).

[29] A. A. Grib and W. A. Rodrigues Jr., Nonlocality in Quantum Physics,

to be published.

N. Y. (1960).

Wiley, N. Y. (1966).

15, 1 (1997).

13

