8
9
9
1
 
v
o
N
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
0
1
1
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Integers and Fractions

The 1998 Nobel Prize in Physics has been awarded jointly to Professor Robert B.
Laughlin, Stanford University, USA, Professor Horst L. St¨ormer, Columbia University
and Bell Labs, USA, and Professor Daniel C. Tsui, Princeton University, USA, for ”their
discovery of a new form of quantum ﬂuid with fractionally charged excitations” appearing
in the fractional quantum Hall eﬀect. The quantum Hall eﬀect has two versions, the
integer (which won an earlier Nobel Prize) and the fractional. These two versions share the
remarkable feature that an experimentally measured quantity, characterising one aspect
of a complicated many-particle system, stays perfectly ﬁxed at some simple and universal
values even though many diﬀerent parameters of the system vary from sample to sample
(in fact, some parameters like disorder vary quite randomly). In addition, the fractional
quantum Hall eﬀect has the astounding property that the low-energy excitations of the
system carry a charge which is a simple fraction of the charge of an electron, even though
the system is composed entirely of particles like atoms, ions and electrons, all of whose
charges are integer multiples of the electronic charge. This article will brieﬂy review the
quantum Hall eﬀect and the contributions of this year’s Noble Laureates. A few references
are given at the end for the reader who wants to learn more about the subject.

In 1879, Edwin Hall discovered that when a two-dimensional layer of electrons (such as
in a thin gold plate) is placed in a magnetic ﬁeld perpendicular to the layer (pointing, say,
in the ˆz-direction), an electric ﬁeld along one direction in the layer (say, the ˆy-direction)
causes a current ﬂow along the ˆx-direction which is at right angles to both the electric
and the magnetic ﬁeld. The ratio of the current density Jx to the electric ﬁeld Ey is now
called the Hall conductivity σxy. This quantity depends on the strength of the magnetic
ﬁeld, and the density and sign (negative for electrons and positive for holes) of the charge
carriers. Classically, the Hall eﬀect can be understood as being caused by the Lorentz
force which acts on a charged particle moving in a magnetic ﬁeld; this force acts in a
direction perpendicular to both the velocity and the magnetic ﬁeld and is proportional
to the product of the two. The Hall conductivity is to be distinguished from the usual
conductivity σxx which denotes the ratio of the current density to the electric ﬁeld along
the same direction.

Hall performed his experiments at room temperatures and at magnetic ﬁelds of less
than a Tesla (104 Gauss). By the end of the 1970’s, semiconductor technology had pro-
gressed to the extent that experimenters could perform similar measurements at the inter-
face of a semiconductor and an insulator (such as a Si − SiO2 device called a MOSFET)
at very low temperatures of around 1oK in magnetic ﬁelds of around 10 Tesla. The two-
dimensional interface acts as a quantum well which is very narrow (typically, 5 × 10−7 cm
wide) in the direction perpendicular to the interface. This freezes out the motion of the
electrons (or holes) in that direction thereby constraining them to move only along the

1

two dimensions parallel to the interface. The density of carriers in these systems is about
1011 cm−2, while the mobility of the carriers is typically 104 cm2/Volt-sec. We recall here
that the mobility denotes the drift velocity achieved by a carrier when an electric ﬁeld of
unit strength is applied. The ﬁnite value of the mobility in the above systems is due to
the various imperfections and impurities which cause the carriers to get scattered every
10−12 sec or so.

In 1980, the German physicist Klaus von Klitzing and his collaborators observed in
such systems that the Hall conductivity σxy does not vary linearly with the strength of
the magnetic ﬁeld (as the classical argument would suggest) but rather shows plateaus,
i.e., σxy does not vary at all for certain ranges of the applied magnetic ﬁeld. Further, its
value at the plateaus is quantised at the remarkably simple values

σxy = r

e2
h

,

(1)

where r is a small integer like 1, 2, 3, ... (whose value depends on the density of the carriers
and the magnetic ﬁeld), e is the charge of an electron, and h is 2π times the Planck’s
constant ¯h. (The value of σxx is extremely close to zero wherever σxy has a plateau).
Amazingly, the quantised values of σxy do not depend at all on any other parameters of
the system such as its shape and size, the eﬀective masses of the carriers, the strengths
of their interactions with each other and with impurities, and the density of impurities.
Finally, the plateau values of σxy have an experimental uncertainty of only about one
part in ten million which makes it one of the most accurately measured quantities in all
of science. For this reason, the integer quantum Hall eﬀect (IQHE), so called because r
is an integer, is now used to deﬁne the value of e2/h which is a fundamental constant of
nature. The 1985 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to von Klitzing for his discovery of
the IQHE.

The IQHE can be explained by invoking some facts from one-particle quantum me-
chanics. A magnetic ﬁeld leads to the formation of energy bands called Landau levels
which are separated from each other by gaps. The number of states in each Landau level
is directly proportional to both the area of the system and the strength of the magnetic
ﬁeld. Due to the Pauli exclusion principle for fermions, each state can accommodate only
one electron; at very low temperatures, all states up to a maximum energy called the
Fermi energy are occupied. If the density of electrons is such that exactly an integer num-
ber of Landau level is ﬁlled, then the Hall conductivity is given by that integer times e2/h.
Further, the existence of a ﬁnite energy gap to the next (unoccupied) Landau level would
lead to the vanishing of the usual conductivity σxx at a plateau at zero temperature; if
the temperature is ﬁnite but much smaller than the gap, then σxx is exponentially small.
The above simpliﬁed discussion has to be modiﬁed in a major way to take into account
the imperfections and impurities which are randomly located in the system; we will refer
to all these point objects as disorder. In an ideal system with no disorder, each Landau

2

level would be inﬁnitely narrow and all the states would be spatially extended. In a real
system, the disorder broadens each Landau level, and also converts a number of states
from extended states (which can carry current) to localised states (which cannot carry
current). We thus get alternating and non-overlapping bands of extended and localised
states, with the extended bands staying close to the energies of the ideal Landau levels.
The existence of localised bands intially led people to worry that the Hall conductivity may
depend sensitively and unpredictably on the amount of disorder. However, using some
clever arguments based on gauge invariance and topology, theorists were able to prove the
amazing result that the extended band in any given Landau level contributes exactly the
same amount to the Hall conductivity as that entire Landau level would have contributed
if there had been no disorder and all the states had been extended. This means that if
the Fermi energy lies within a band of localised states, and there is an integer number
of ﬁlled bands of extended states below that energy, then the Hall conductivity is simply
equal to that integer times e2/h. Thus, although the localised states do not contribute to
the Hall conductivity, they are crucial for the ﬁnite widths of the conductivity plateaus;
this is because the Hall conductivity does not change at all if the Fermi energy moves by
small amounts (due to changes in the carrier density or magnetic ﬁeld), as long as it stays
within a given localised band.

In 1982, St¨ormer, Tsui and collaborators working on some other systems discovered
additional plateaus in σxy of the same form as in Eq.
(1), but with the parameter r
now equal to some simple odd-denominator fractions like 1/3, 2/3, 1/5, 2/5, 3/7, ...; simul-
taneously, σxx vanishes. Note that r denotes the number of Landau levels occupied by
electrons, hence a value of r less than 1 means that the lowest Landau level is only par-
tially ﬁlled. Although this fractional quantum Hall eﬀect (FQHE) sounds similar to the
IQHE, both its discovery and its theoretical understanding involved much greater levels
of diﬃculty and subtlety than the IQHE. Experimentally, the carrier mobility required
to observe the FQHE is many times times larger, i.e., about 105 − 106 cm2/ Volt-sec.
This required the use of a new class of systems such as GaAs − AlGaAs heterostructures.
A technique called modulation doping molecular beam epitaxy was used to produce in-
terfaces which are extremely sharp, almost free of defects and well-separated from the
impurities (namely, the dopant atoms which act as donors or acceptors). This vastly
reduces the rate of scattering of the carriers which reside at the interface and therefore
leads to much higher mobilities. The FQHE also requires much lower temperatures going
down to about 0.1oK and higher magnetic ﬁelds up to about 30 Tesla (since the ﬁlling r
is inversely proportional to the magnetic ﬁeld).

The discovery of the FQHE raised the theoretical question of why there should be
a gap above the ground state (as is suggested by the vanishing of σxx) when the lowest
Landau level is only partially occupied by electrons. Clearly, this requires an explanation
which is very diﬀerent from the one for the IQHE. Within an year, Laughlin came up with
a many-body explanation for the existence of a gap. In doing so, he also discovered a very

3

accurate variational quantum mechanical wave function for the system which explained all
the observed phenomena and predicted some new ones. Laughlin’s key idea was that the
Coulomb repulsion between the carriers (assumed to be electrons from here on) must play
a crucial role in the FQHE unlike the case of the IQHE. This must lead to the electrons
”avoiding” each other as best as they can, subject to the constraint that they are all in
the lowest Landau level. Using some general properties of states in the lowest Landau
level, Laughlin introduced a variational many-electron wave function of the form

Ψ(zj, z⋆

j ) = Y
j<k

(zj − zk)m exp [− X

zjz⋆

j ] ,

j

(2)

j = xi − iyj are complex variables denoting the position of
where zj = xj + iyj and z⋆
electron j in the x − y plane; to simplify the notation, we have scaled the coordinates in
some way so as to make them dimensionless. For m equal to an odd integer, this wave
function is antisymmetric (as the wave function of several identical fermions should be;
the spin degree of freedom plays no role here since the electrons are completely polarised
in the lowest Landau level), vanishes very rapidly as any two particles approach each
other (thereby ensuring that they stay away from each other and minimise their Coulomb
repulsion), and, very importantly, describes a state with an uniform density corresponding
to the special value of Landau level ﬁlling given by r = 1/m. (For other ﬁlling fractions
which are not of the form 1/m, Laughlin and others suggested related variational wave
functions using similar arguments). The state deﬁned by Eq. (2) describes a peculiar
kind of quantum liquid which has no long-range positional order (unlike the atoms in a
crystalline solid), but does have a long-range phase correlation; this is related to the fact
that the wave function picks up a phase of 2πm when any particle j is taken in a loop
around particle k, no matter how large the loop is.

After showing that the wave function in (2) perfectly explains the properties of the
ground state such as the conductivity quantisation, Laughlin went on to study the nature
of the low-energy excitations called quasiparticles. He showed that these are separated
from the ground state by an energy gap of about 1oK, and that the quasiparticle size
is typically about 5 × 10−7 cm which is substantially smaller than the average distance
between two electrons (about 3 × 10−6 cm). There are two types of quasiparticles, called
quasielectrons and quasiholes; in the neighbourhood of these objects, the local electron
density is slightly larger or smaller, respectively, than the special value of density (or
ﬁlling) given by the Laughlin wave function. Since each quasiparticle costs a ﬁnite energy,
the system tends to oppose any attempts to change its electron density away from one
of the special ﬁllings of 1/m; this property is called incompressibility and it is one of
the striking features of the fractional quantum Hall system, sometimes called a Laughlin
liquid. If a small change in ﬁlling is forced upon the system by varying either the number
of electrons or the magnetic ﬁeld, the system reacts by producing a small number of
quasielectrons or quasiholes which then go and bind to one of the points of disorder; this
allows the rest of the system to remain at the special ﬁlling, the Hall conductivity thereby

4

remaining exactly at the quantised value. Thus the ﬁnite widths of the Hall plateaus
again depend on the presence of a small amount of disorder.

Laughlin also made the extraordinary prediction that the quasiparticles should carry
a charge which is a fraction of the electron charge, e.g., the quasielectron and quasihole
charges should be equal to ±e/m, respectively, if r = 1/m. This prediction has been
directly veriﬁed in recent experiments which study tiny ﬂuctuations (called shot noise)
in the current ﬂowing across a narrow region of a fractional quantum Hall system. The
amount of shot noise is directly proportional to the charge of the carriers, and the exper-
iments conclusively proved that these are fractional. (Although the quasiparticles cannot
move through the bulk of a quantum Hall system because they get pinned by impurities,
they do move freely along the edges of such a system, and they can jump from one edge
to a nearby edge as shown by the shot noise experiments).

For those who are uneasy with the idea of fractional charge, we should emphasise that
the quasiparticles in a fractional quantum Hall system are not elementary particles (like
electrons or photons), but are collective excitations involving a large number of electrons.
It was already known in another many-body system (polyacetylene chains) that composite
objects may carry fractional charge. The FQHE has provided us with a new and wonderful
example of objects with a fractional quantum number. Incidentally, it has been suggested
by some theorists that these quasiparticles are neither fermions (obeying Fermi-Dirac
statistics) nor bosons (obeying Bose-Einstein statistics), but that they obey a novel kind
of quantum statistics (called fractional or anyonic statistics) which lies in between the
two possibilities; however this has not yet been proved experimentally.

Laughlin’s wave function has led to new ways of thinking about strongly interacting
many-body systems. For instance, if r = 1/m where m is odd, it is natural to think of
a quantum Hall system as being made up of ”composite bosons” which are combinations
of electrons and m elementary quanta of magnetic ﬂux. These ”bosons” eﬀectively see
a zero magnetic ﬁeld, since the entire magnetic ﬁeld has been ”absorbed” in the way
these strange particles are deﬁned. Now one can view the FQHE as resulting from a
Bose-Einstein condensation of these bosons at low temperatures, in the same way that
Cooper pairs of electrons condense in superconductors or the atoms of He4 condense to
form a superﬂuid at low temperatures. This idea of composites of electric charge and
magnetic ﬂux has turned out to be remarkably useful in explaining many other aspects of
quantum Hall systems, such as the behaviour of the system at the ﬁlling r = 1/2 (which
does not show a conductivity plateau, but has some other interesting properties which are
well-explained by the notion of ”composite fermions”).

Before ending, one should appreciate that the theoretical and experimental work on
the quantum Hall eﬀect is a reﬂection of the high level of both industrial and university
research and the close collaboration between the two in the West, particularly in the USA.

5

References

1559-1562.

40-48.

[1] Tsui, D. C., Stormer, H. L. and Gossard, A. C., Physical Review Letters, 1982, 48,

[2] Laughlin, R. B., Physical Review Letters, 1983, 50, 1395-1398.

[3] Halperin, B. I., The quantized Hall eﬀect, Scientiﬁc American, April 1986, 254,

[4] Eisenstein, J. P. and Stormer, H. L., The fractional quantum Hall eﬀect, Science, 22

June 1990, 248, 1510-1516.

March 1996, 274, 64-69.

42-47.

[5] Kivelson, S., Lee, D.-H. and Zhang, S.-C., Electrons in ﬂatland, Scientiﬁc American,

[6] Anderson, P. W., When the electron falls apart, Physics Today, October 1997, 50,

[7] Collins, G. P., Fractionally charged quasiparticles signal their presence with noise,

Physics Today, November 1997, 50, 17-19.

[8] Daviss, B., Splitting the electron, New Scientist, 31 January 1998, 157, 36-40.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS. I thank B. Sriram Shastry for some stimulating discussions.

Diptiman Sen
Centre for Theoretical Studies,
Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560012, India

6

