9
9
9
1
 
b
e
F
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
0
2
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Physics in a Mirror:
The TRIUMF 221 MeV pp Parity
Violation Experiment

W.D. Ramsay, J. Birchall, J. Bland, A.A. Hamian, L. Lee, S.A. Page,
W.T.H. van Oers, R.J. Woo
Department of Physics, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg MB, Canada R3T 2N2

P.W. Green, G.M. Roy, G.M. Stinson
Department of Physics, University of Alberta, Edmonton AB, Canada T5G 2N5

Y. Kuznetsov, N.A. Titov, A.N. Zelenski
Institute for Nuclear Research, Russian Academy of Sciences, 117312 Moscow, Russia

J.D. Bowman, R.E. Mischke
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos NM, USA 87545

C.A. Davis, R. Helmer, C.D.P. Levy
TRIUMF, 4004 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver BC, Canada V6T 2A3

We measure the diﬀerence in the scattering probability when an
experiment scattering longitudinally polarized 221 MeV protons from
liquid hydrogen is replaced by its mirror image. The result depends
on the interplay between the weak and strong interactions in the inter-
esting region near the surface of the proton. The experiment is techni-
cally very challenging and requires elaborate precautions to measure
and correct for various sources of systematic error.

TRI-PP-99-02

Abstract

1

1 INTRODUCTION

Fig. 1. The parity operation ﬂips all three axes, which is equivalent to a mir-
ror reﬂection plus a 1800 rotation.
In this example, it would be a reﬂection in
the yz-plane and a rotation about the x-axis. Because we can assume rotational
invariance, parity inversion is often thought of as a mirror reﬂection.

Measuring the eﬀects of the Weak Interaction between two protons in the
presence of the Strong Interaction, some ten million times stronger, presents
a unique set of diﬃculties. The measurement is only made possible by the
fact that the strong force treats right-handed (spin aligned along the direc-
tion of motion like a right-handed screw) and left-handed particles equally,
while the weak force favours left-handed particles. In fact, of the W and Z
bosons which carry the weak force, the W s act only on left-handed particles,
and the Z acts much more strongly on left-handed particles. In the jargon
of the ﬁeld, the strong interaction is said to “conserve parity” or to be “in-
variant under the parity transformation”, a transformation that reﬂects each
coordinate through the origin (~r → ~−r, see ﬁgure 1). The weak interaction,
on the other hand, is not invariant under such a transformation, and is said
to “violate parity”. In an experiment now underway at TRIUMF, a beam
of protons with their spins aligned along the direction of motion is passed
through a proton target (liquid hydrogen), and the fraction scattered when

2

the protons in the beam have their spins aligned along the beam direction
is compared with the fraction scattered when the spin is opposite to the
beam direction. Because these two cases diﬀer only in that they are mirror
images of each other, any diﬀerence will be an indication of the “parity vio-
lating” weak interaction. The diﬀerence is expressed as the parity violating
longitudinal analyzing power Az = (σ+ − σ−)/(σ+ + σ−) where σ+ and σ−
are the scattering probabilities for positive (right-handed) and negative (left-
handed) helicity respectively. The TRIUMF experiment expects to measure
Az with a statistical uncertainty of ±0.2 × 10−7 and a systematic error of
±0.2 × 10−7. The major technical diﬃculty to be overcome in such an exper-
iment is to be sure that when the proton spin is “ﬂipped” from right handed
to left handed, that the change in all other beam properties is either zero, or
small and measured accurately enough that its eﬀects can be corrected. The
TRIUMF experiment measures, and corrects for the eﬀects of, beam current,
position, direction, size, and transverse polarization. Most of the time in
such an experiment is spent understanding and controlling all the sources
of systematic error. The current measurement is being made at 221 MeV,
where the theoretical interpretation of the result is simpliﬁed as explained in
the next section.

1.1 Choice Of Energy

In describing the scattering of an incident parallel beam of particles, it is com-
mon in nuclear physics to express the incident quantum mechanical “plane
wave” in terms of a sum of “partial waves”, each with a speciﬁc angular
momentum which is conserved in the scattering. The eﬀect of a scattering
interaction can then be described in terms of the phase shift it gives to each
partial wave. Figure 2 shows the analyzing power, Az, which we are mea-
suring, broken down into contributions from the lowest three partial wave
mixings. At low energies, Az arises almost completely from the 1S0 −3 P0
parity-mixed partial wave1, while at the energy of the TRIUMF measure-
ment, this contribution vanishes and Az arises essentially exclusively from
the 3P2 −1 D2 parity-mixed partial wave.

1For historical reasons, the archaic notation 2S+1ℓJ is normally used, where ℓ is the
orbital angular momentum, with ℓ = S, P, D, F ... denoting ℓ = 0, 1, 2, 3... respectively, J
is the total angular momentum, and S is the total spin. Since parity is given by (−1)ℓ, S
and P have opposite parity as do P and D.

3

Fig. 2. Contributions to the parity violating longitudinal analyzing power, Az,
as calculated by Driscoll and Miller [1] for the ﬁrst three parity mixed partial
waves. The energy of the TRIUMF experiment is chosen so that only the PD
wave contributes. Data taken at Bonn [2], PSI [3], and LANL [4] are also shown.
The TRIUMF point is preliminary, from Hamian’s [8] analysis of one data set.
The experiment is designed to obtain a ﬁnal uncertainty similar to Bonn and PSI.

Because it is impossible to tell whether a given proton was scattered by the
strong or the weak interaction, the rules of quantum mechanics dictate that
we add the complex “scattering amplitudes” rather than the cross-sections
(scattering probabilities). In the expression for Az, all that remains are the
“interference terms” involving the product of strong and weak interactions.
The nature of the two interactions is such that the shape of the Az curve
is set by the strong interaction while the sign and absolute scale is set by
the weak interaction. Since the strong proton-proton interaction is already
very well measured, it is possible, without knowing the weak interaction, to
accurately determine the energy at which the SP contribution crosses zero.
Just as the electromagnetic force between two electrons is interpreted as
due to the exchange of photons between them, the strong force between two
protons can be described by the exchange of mesons between them. The
analyzing powers in ﬁgure 2 were calculated by Driscoll and Miller[1] using
such a meson exchange model. In this calculation, the SP contribution arises
roughly equally from ρ and ω meson exchange, whereas the P D contribution

4

arises almost exclusively from ρ-meson exchange. By measuring at an energy
where the SP contribution integrates to zero over the acceptance of our
apparatus, the TRIUMF experiment will be able to determine the value of
the weak ρ meson-nucleon-nucleon coupling constant hρ, a number that is
now known only very poorly. Figure 3 shows the P D contribution for a range
of hρ considered “reasonable” by Desplanques, Donoghue, and Holstein [5].
The TRIUMF measurement will constrain this range signiﬁcantly.

Also signiﬁcant is the fact that at 221 MeV, the 3P2 −1 D2 wave corre-
sponds to an interaction near the surface of the proton. This probes an inter-
mediate region between the long range interaction which can be considered
strictly meson exchange and the very short range part where the interaction
takes place between the quarks of the proton. The extent to which quark de-
grees of freedom are important here is an interesting question. For example,
taking explicit account of quark degrees of freedom, Grach and Shmatikov
[6] calculate Az = 2.4 × 10−7 at 230 MeV compared to the Az = 0.6 × 10−7
from the meson exchange calculation of Driscoll and Miller [1] referred to
earlier. Adding an intermediate ∆ to the meson exchange calculation, Iqbal
and Niskanen [7] calculate Az = 1.1 × 10−7 at the same energy. Clearly a
good measurement is needed.

Fig. 3. Contribution to Az from the parity mixed partial wave (PD) to which
the TRIUMF experiment is sensitive. The solid curve shows the result of Driscoll
and Miller’s [1] calculation using the DDH [5] “best guess” value for hρ, and the
dotted curves show what would be expected if hρ varied over the DDH “reasonable
range”. The ﬁctitious data point shows the error bar expected from the TRIUMF
measurement and illustrates how such a measurement will signiﬁcantly constrain
the range of hρ.

5

2 THE EXPERIMENT

Fig. 4. Heart of the experiment, showing the target and main detectors. TRIC1
and TRIC2 are ion chambers containing hydrogen gas at approximately 1/5 at-
mosphere pressure. The target is 40 cm of liquid hydrogen.

Figure 4 shows the principle of the experiment. A 200 nA beam of pro-
tons with energy 221 MeV passes through the ﬁrst detector (Transverse Ion
Chamber 1, or TRIC1), then 40 cm of liquid hydrogen, and ﬁnally through
the second detector (TRIC2). The ﬁrst detector measures the beam current
before the target, the second detector measures the beam current after the
target, and a precision subtractor takes the diﬀerence between the two sig-
nals. The detector and electronic gains are adjusted to make the output of
the subtractor zero with unpolarized beam2. If there is a parity violating
analyzing power for pp scattering at this energy, then the scattered fraction
(∼4%) will be slightly more or slightly less than the unpolarized case de-
2For those interested in technical details, I point out that we are interested in the AC
part of the signals, and that the ﬁne gain adjustment is made for best common-mode
rejection at the spin ﬂip frequency. This reduces both shot noise and the sensitivity to
helicity correlated changes in beam current.

6

pending on the helicity of the beam. A signal synchronized with the helicity
and whose magnitude is proportional to Az, will appear at the output of the
subtractor. This signal is very small. For example, if Az = 0.6×10−7 and the
longitudinal polarization is 80%, we must measure a diﬀerence signal only
2 × 10−9 of the TRIC signal, a feat comparable to measuring the thickness
of a piece of paper in a 40 km measurement.

Upstream of TRIC1 are Intensity Proﬁle Monitors and Polarization Pro-
ﬁle Monitors (IPMs and PPMs in ﬁgure 7) which measure the distribution
of intensity and transverse polarization across the beam.

2.1 Data Acquisition

To recover such a small signal, we use synchronous detection, the same prin-
ciple used by lock-in ampliﬁers. The data are binned according to spin state
and diﬀerences which are uncorrelated with spin state average out with time,
whereas helicity correlated diﬀerences do not.

The data are taken in 1

5 second (200 ms) cycles, each cycle consisting of
40 second (25 ms) spin states arranged in the pattern (+−−+ −+ +−)
eight 1
or its complement. The cycles are further arranged in a “super-cycle” with
the starting spin state of each cycle following the same eight state pattern.
The starting spin state of each supercycle is chosen at random. This data
taking pattern cancels both linear and quadratic drifts.

Each 25 ms spin state is divided into polarization measuring and asym-
metry measuring intervals as shown in ﬁgure 5. The main integration period
is set for exactly 1
60 second to reject 60 Hz line frequency noise and all its
harmonics.

Fig. 5. Intervals during each spin state. First the PPM (Polarization Proﬁle Mon-
itor) scans a CH2 blade through the beam to measure the polarization distribution
across the beam, then the beam currents and proﬁles are measured by the TRICs
(Transverse Ion Chambers) and IPMs (Intensity Proﬁle Monitors).

7

2.2 Sources Of Error

Sources of error can be divided into those which are related to the beam helic-
ity and those which are not. Beam property changes which are synchronized
with spin ﬂip (“coherent” or “helicity correlated” changes) can, and usually
do, produce a false signal of parity violation. Things which are not helicity
correlated, such as detector noise and random variation in beam properties,
do not bias the result, but only increase the run time required to reach a
given precision.

2.2.1 RANDOM CHANGES

The ultimate limit to the statistical precision of the experiment is that de-
termined by the counting statistics of the scattered protons, a limit which
could be reached if we were able to count individual scattered protons. Then
Az could be measured to ±0.2 × 10−7 in 20 hours. In practice, the count rate
of the scattered protons is too high (∼50 GHz) for direct counting and the
experiment measures currents instead. With our existing detector conﬁgu-
ration, the running time for a ±0.2 × 10−7 precision rises to approximately
300 hours, largely because of detector noise3.

In addition to detector noise, random variations in beam properties such
as intensity or position contribute to noise in the signal and increase the
required run time.

2.2.2 HELICITY CORRELATED CHANGES

Helicity correlated changes in beam properties can produce a false Az signal.
This false signal is dealt with in diﬀerent ways:

• Careful design and operation of the TRIUMF polarized ion source and
cyclotron makes it possible to change the spin direction with the abso-
lute minimum of eﬀect on other beam properties.

• The parity equipment and operating conditions are carefully chosen to

minimize the sensitivity to helicity correlated changes.

3We could match this with a counting experiment by reducing the beam current to
count at ∼1.5 GHz. This rate is still impractically high and it is easier to use the higher
beam current and put up with detector noise.

8

• The beam properties are accurately measured during data taking so
the actual helicity correlated changes are known for each data set.

• Calibration runs determine the sensitivity to helicity correlated modu-

lations so that corrections can be made.

Transverse polarization, beam intensity, position, and size are all measured
and the resultant false eﬀects are corrected for.

Fig. 6. The eﬀect of transverse components of polarization. The two diagrams
use a pencil beam with vertical polarization to illustrate the mechanism. In both
cases, because the strong interaction analyzing power is positive in this example,
the scatterer causes more beam to be scattered to the left in the positive spin state
and more to the right in the negative spin state. In the left-hand diagram, since
the beam passes through the center of the detector, there is no diﬀerence in the
detector response for the two spin states. In the right-hand diagram, however, the
beam is left of center at the detector, so the signal is larger in the negative spin
state, causing a false signal of parity violation. The false signal is proportional
to the size of the transverse component multiplied by the distance oﬀ center – a
quantity called the ﬁrst moment of transverse polarization. A real beam of ﬁnite
extent is made of a bundle of such pencil beams, and can have a ﬁrst moment
of transverse polarization even if its average transverse polarization is zero. For
example, spin could be up on one side of the beam and down on the other.

Transverse Polarization If the proton spin is not perfectly longitudinal, the
small transverse component will reverse with helicity. As explained in the
caption to ﬁgure 6, the false signal is proportional to the product of the

9

transverse component and the distance that the beam is oﬀ center. This
product is referred to as the ﬁrst moment of transverse polarization. First
moments of transverse polarization are the most diﬃcult property for us to
measure and are the main source of systematic error.

To determine ﬁrst moment sensitivities, test runs are made with pure
vertical and pure horizontal polarization. By scanning the vertically polar-
ized beam horizontally and the horizontally polarized beam vertically, we are
able to determine our sensitivities to the ﬁrst moments xPy and yPx, and to
ﬁnd the beam position at which there is no sensitivity to average transverse
polarization. This axis, where transverse polarization components cause no
false eﬀect, is called the polarization neutral axis.

In analyzing the eﬀect of ﬁrst moments, we separate extrinsic ﬁrst mo-
ments caused by a beam whose centroid is displaced from the neutral axis and
which has some average transverse polarization, and intrinsic ﬁrst moments
which do not depend on the position of the beam centroid but rather arise
from the distribution of transverse components within the beam. By using
fast ferrite-cored steering magnets servoed to the intensity proﬁle monitors
(IPMs in ﬁgure 7), we are able to hold the beam on the polarization neutral
axis and virtually eliminate corrections for extrinsic ﬁrst moments. Intrinsic
ﬁrst moments, on the other hand are independent of beam centroid position,
arise in the cyclotron and beamline, and are very hard to control. Correc-
tions for intrinsic ﬁrst moments are typically the only corrections which are
not consistent with zero when averaged over a one month running period.

By measuring the distribution of transverse components of polarization
at the two Polarization Proﬁle Monitors (PPMs in ﬁgure 7) we are able
to use our measured ﬁrst moment sensitivities to correct the data for the
eﬀects of ﬁrst moments. The PPMs are able to determine ﬁrst moments to
±5µm in a one hour run. For a one month data taking period, the ﬁnal
correction to the raw Az is substantial, of the order 10−7, and uncertainty
in the correction increases the uncertainty in the ﬁnal Az. For example,
in the Hamian’s[8] analysis of the February, 1997 data set, the statistical
uncertainty of ±0.58 × 10−7 was increased to ±0.65 × 10−7, primarily by
uncertainty in the ﬁrst moment corrections.

10

Fig. 7. Schematic of the whole Parity Experiment. Every item, from the ion source
(OPPIS) to the end of the beamline, must be optimized to reduce systematic errors.

Beam Intensity If the gains are properly set, the beam currents before and
after the target subtract perfectly and we are blind to beam current changes.
In practice this “common mode rejection” is good4, but is not perfect, and
it drifts slightly with time.

During normal operation, the coherent intensity modulation which ac-
companies spin ﬂip ranges from approximately 2 × 10−5 to 8 × 10−5 of the
200 nA beam current. To determine what eﬀect this has on the measured
Az, 1.6 seconds out of every 16 are devoted to running with the ion source
unpolarized and the beam intensity artiﬁcially modulated by a laser (“pho-
todetachment laser” in ﬁgure 7) which co-propagates with about 30 m of
the H − beam prior to injection into the cyclotron. When this laser is on,
electrons are removed from some of the H − ions and these are then not
accelerated. This gives us data with large (∼ 0.2%) pure intensity mod-
ulation interleaved with the primary data. The false Az produced by the
photodetachment laser is then scaled using the measured value of intensity
modulation recorded during the real data, and a correction can be made.

4Of the order 80 to 90 db.

11

Beam Position Modulation The beam proﬁles are measured during each
spin state using two x − y Intensity Proﬁle Monitors (IPM1 and IPM2 on
ﬁgure 7). From this the beam centroid, size, and skewness are calculated and
the mean and helicity correlated values are extracted. The false Az arising
from helicity correlated motion is proportional to the size of the motion and
the distance the beam is oﬀ the “neutral axis” of the experiment. To cali-
brate the sensitivity to coherent position modulation, a series of test runs are
made in which fast ferrite-cored steering magnets are used to intentionally
introduce a series of large coherent position changes. Enough diﬀerent beam
positions and modulations are recorded to describe our sensitivity to posi-
tion motion. During real data taking we ﬁnd that the actual beam position
modulation with spin ﬂip is at the limit of our detection ability (0.1µm in
a one-hour run) and overall corrections for position modulation are insignif-
icant.

Beam Size Modulation The same Intensity Proﬁle Monitors which deter-
mine the beam position for each spin state also determine the beam size. If
the beam size changes on spin ﬂip, more or less of the beam tails will be
clipped by the ﬁnite detector aperture and a false signal will appear. To cal-
ibrate our sensitivity to size modulation, large, intentional size modulation
is introduced using two fast ferrite-cored quadrupole magnets. We ﬁnd that
our apparatus is very sensitive to size modulation. Fortunately the actual
coherent size modulation with spin ﬂip is very small (< 0.1µm on a 5mm
beam) and its eﬀect on our ﬁnal Az averages to near zero.

Energy Modulation The gain of the hydrogen-ﬁlled ion chambers used as
our main detectors is given by the number of electron-ion pairs produced by
a proton going through the active region. As the beam energy is lowered,
the energy loss per unit length ( dE
dx ) goes up and the gain increases. Because
the proton beam loses approximately 27 MeV in the liquid hydrogen target,
the gas gain in the downstream chamber rises more rapidly with a drop
in beam energy than does the gain in the upstream chamber. The result
is that a coherent beam energy modulation produces a false Az signal. In
fact, the experiment is very sensitive to coherent energy modulation with
∂Az/∂E = 2.8 × 10−8 per eV.

It is normally possible to keep energy modulation at the ion source at the
few milli-eV level, and it is known that the injection system and cyclotron

12

will multiply this by a factor of about 100, so we believe that coherent energy
modulation does not bias our Az signiﬁcantly. Nevertheless, the ampliﬁcation
factor can vary quite a bit and we are not able to measure the coherent energy
modulation directly to the required precision during running, so another
approach is adopted to minimize such eﬀects.

It is possible to tune our beamline so that spin-up from the cyclotron
becomes either positive or negative helicity at the parity apparatus. If the
spin-up state always has, say, a slightly higher energy than the negative
state, then when we switch the beamline helicity, asymmetry arising from
true Az will reverse, but that from energy modulation will not. By averaging
the apparent Az from the two diﬀerent beamline helicities, eﬀects of energy
modulation should cancel out.

2.3 State Of The Data

In experiments such as this, most of the time is spent doing development and
control measurements to understand and minimize sources of systematic er-
ror. Following some years of developing detectors and diagnostic equipment,
the experiment was ﬁnally mounted on a new beamline 4A2 at TRIUMF in
late 1994. 1995 and much of 1996 were spent improving the performance
of the TRIUMF cyclotron and ion source, and reﬁning our systematic error
controls. A major data taking run was made in February and March of 1997.
This data has been analyzed and a preliminary result reported by Hamian[8].
She obtained an overall uncertainty of ±0.65×10−7. Another major run from
July and August of 1998 is now being analyzed. With the addition of a run
planned for the summer of 1999, we should have enough data to determine
Az with an uncertainty of ±0.3 × 10−7, adequate to signiﬁcantly improve our
knowledge of the weak meson-nucleon-nucleon coupling constant, hρ.

3 CONCLUSION

Proton-proton parity violation experiments are technically demanding, but
provide a unique window on the interplay of strong and weak interactions.
The TRIUMF 221 MeV measurement probes a very interesting region near
the surface of the proton, between the quarks inside the proton and the pion
exchange of more distant interactions.
In terms of meson exchange, it is
sensitive only to the ρ-meson exchange. The experiment is expected to ﬁnish

13

data taking in 1999 and a ﬁnal result should be available in 2000.

References

[*] Work supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Re-

search Council of Canada

[1] D.E. Driscoll and G.A. Miller, Phys. Rev. C39, 1951 (1989).

[2] P.D. Eversheim, et al., Phys. Lett. B256, 11 (1991); P.D. Eversheim,

private communication (1994).

[3] S. Kistryn, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1616 (1987).

[4] V. Yuan, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 1680 (1986).

[5] B. Desplanques, J.F. Donoghue, and B.R. Holstein, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.)

124, 449 (1980).

[6] I. Grach and M. Shmatikov, Phys. Lett. B316, 467 (1993).

[7] M.J. Iqbal and J.A. Niskanen, Phys. Rev. C49, 355 (1994).

[8] A.A. Hamian, PhD thesis, University of Manitoba, (1998).

14

