9
9
9
1
 
n
u
J
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
0
6
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Night Thoughts of a Quantum Physicist

Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics,

University of Cambridge,

Silver Street, Cambridge CB3 9EW, U.K.

Adrian Kent

Abstract

The most dramatic developments in theoretical physics in the next millennium are

likely to come when we make progress on so far unresolved foundational questions. In this

essay I consider two of the deepest problems confronting us, the measurement problem in

quantum theory and the problem of relating consciousness to the rest of physics. I survey

some recent promising ideas on possible solutions to the measurement problem and explain

what a proper physical understanding of consciousness would involve and why it would

need new physics.

1. Introduction

As the twentieth century draws to a close, theoretical physics is in a situation that,

at least in recent history, is most unusual: there is no generally accepted authority. Each

research program has very widely respected leaders, but every program is controversial.

After a period of extraordinary successes, broadly stretching from the 1900’s through to the

early 1980’s, there have been few dramatic new experimental results in the last ﬁfteen years,

with the important exception of cosmology. All the most interesting theoretical ideas have

run into serious diﬃculties, and it is not completely obvious that any of them is heading in

the right direction. So to speak, some impressively large and well organised expeditionary

parties have been formed and are faithfully heading towards imagined destinations; other

smaller and less cohesive bands of physicists are heading in quite diﬀerent directions. But

we really are all in the dark. Possibly none of us will get anywhere much until the next

fortuitous break in the clouds.

I will try to sketch brieﬂy how it is that we have reached this state, and then suggest

some new directions in which progress may eventually be possible. But my ﬁrst duty is to

stress that what follow are simply my personal views. These lie somewhere between the

heretical and the mainstream at the moment. Some of the best physicists of the twentieth
century, would, I think, have been at least in partial sympathy.1 But most leading present
day physicsts would emphasize diﬀerent problems; some would query whether physicists

can sensibly say anything at all on the topics I will discuss.

I think we can, of course. It seems to me the problems are as sharply deﬁned as those

we have overcome in the past:

it just happens that we have not properly tackled them

yet. They would be quite untouched — would remain deep unsolved problems — even

if what is usually meant by a “theory of everything” were discovered. Solving them may

need further radical changes in our world view, but I suspect that in the end we will ﬁnd

there is no way around them.

2. Physics in 1999

The great discoveries of twentieth century physics have sunk so deeply into the general

consciousness that it now takes an eﬀort of will to stand back and try to see them afresh.

But we should try, just as we should try to look at the night sky and at life on earth with

childlike eyes from time to time. In appreciating just how completely and how amazingly

our understanding of the world has been transformed, we recapture a sense of awe and
wonder in the universe and its beauty.2

So recall:

in 1900, the existence of atoms was a controversial hypothesis. Matter

and light were, as far as we knew, qualitatively diﬀerent. The known laws of nature were

deterministic and relied on absolute notions of space and time which seemed not only

natural and common sense but also so ﬁrmly embedded in our understanding of nature as

to be beyond serious question. The propagation of life, and the functioning of the mind,

remained so mysterious that it was easy to imagine their understanding might require quite

new physical principles. Nothing much resembling modern cosmology existed.

Einstein, of course, taught us to see space and time as diﬀerent facets of a single ge-

ometry. And then, still more astonishingly and beautifully, that the geometry of spacetime

1 In any case, I am greatly indebted to Schr¨odinger and Bell’s lucid scepticism and to Feynman’s
compelling explanations of the scientiﬁc need to keep alternative ideas in mind if they are even

partially successful, as expressed in, for example, Schr¨odinger 1954, Bell 1987, Feynman 1965.

2 We owe this, of course, not to nature — which gives a very good impression of not caring

either way — but to ourselves. Though we forget it too easily, that sense is precious to us.

is nonlinear, that matter is guided by the geometry and at the same time shapes it, so that

gravity is understood as the mutual action of matter on matter through the curvature of

spacetime.

The ﬁrst experiments conﬁrming an important prediction of general relativity — that

light is indeed deﬂected by the solar gravitational ﬁeld — took place in 1917: still within

living memory. Subsequent experimental tests have conﬁrmed general relativity with in-

creasingly impressive accuracy. It is consistent with our understanding of cosmology, as

far as it can be — that is, as far as quantum eﬀects are negligible. At the moment it has

no remotely serious competitor: we have no other picture of the macroscopic world that

makes sense and ﬁts the data.

Had theorists been more timid, particle physics experiments and astronomical obser-

vations would almost certainly eventually given us enough clues to make the development

of special and general relativity inevitable. As it happens, though, Einstein was only par-

tially guided by experiment. The development of the theories of relativity relied on his

extraordinary genius for seeing through to new conceptual frameworks underlying known

physics. To Einstein and many of his contemporaries, the gain in elegance and simplicity

was so great that it seemed the new theories almost had to be correct.

While the development of quantum theory too relied on brilliant intuitions and synthe-

ses, it was much more driven by experiment. Data — the black-body radiation spectrum,

the photo-electric eﬀect, crystalline diﬀraction, atomic spectra — more or less forced the

new theory on us, ﬁrst in ad hoc forms, and then, by 1926, synthesised. It seems unlikely

that anyone would ever have found their way through to quantum theory unaided by the

data. Certainly, no one has ever found a convincing conceptual framework which explains

to us why something like quantum theory should be true. It just is. Nor has anyone, even

after the event, come up with a truly satisfactory explanation of what precisely quantum

theory tells us about nature. We know that all our pre-1900 intuitions, based as they are

on the physics of the world we see around us every day, are quite inadequate. We know

that microscopic systems behave in a qualitatively diﬀerent way, that there is apparently

an intrinsic randomness in the way they interact with the devices we use to probe them.

Much more impressively, for any given experiment we carry out on microscopic systems,

we know how to list the possible outcomes and calculate the probabilities of each, at least

to a very good approximation. What we do not fully understand is why those calculations

work: we have, for example, no ﬁrmly established picture of what (if anything) is going on

when we are not looking.

Quantum theory as originally formulated was inconsistent with special relativity.

Partly for this reason, it did not properly describe the interactions between light and

matter either. Solving these problems took several further steps, and in time led to a

relatively systematic — though still today incomplete — understanding of how to build

relativistic quantum theories of ﬁelds, and eventually to the conclusion that the electro-

magnetic force and the two nuclear forces could be combined into a single ﬁeld theory. As

yet, though, we do not know how to do that very elegantly, and almost everyone suspects

that a grander and more elegant uniﬁed theory of those three forces awaits us. Nor can we

truly say that we fully understand quantum ﬁeld theory, or even that the theories we use

are entirely internally consistent. They resemble recipes for calculation, together with only

partial, though tantalisingly suggestive, explanations as to why they work. Most theorists

believe a deeper explanation requires a better theory, perhaps yet to be discovered.

Superstring theory, which many physicists hope might provide a complete theory of

gravity as well as the other forces— a “theory of everything” — is currently the most

popular candidate. Though no one doubts its mathematical beauty, it is generally agreed

that so far superstring theory has two rather serious problems. Conceptually, we do not

know how to properly make sense of superstrings as a theory of matter plus spacetime. Nor

can we extract any very interesting correct predictions from the theory — for example,

the properties of the known forces, the masses of the known particles, or the apparent

four-dimensionality of space-time — in any convincing way.

Opinions diﬀer sharply on whether those problems are likely to be resolved, and so

whether superstring theory is likelier to be a theory of everything or of nothing: time will

tell. Almost everyone agrees, though, that reconciling gravity and quantum theory is one of

the deepest problems facing modern physics. Quantum theory and general relativity, each

brilliantly successful in its own domain, rest on very diﬀerent principles and give highly

divergent pictures of nature. According to general relativity, the world is deterministic,

the fundamental equations of nature are non-linear, and the correct picture of nature is,

at bottom, geometric. According to quantum theory, there is an intrinsic randomness

in nature, its fundamental equations are linear, and the correct language in which to

describe nature seems to be closer to abstract algebra than geometry. Something has to

give somewhere, but at the moment we do not know for sure where to begin in trying to

combine these pictures: we do not know how to alter either in the direction of the other

without breaking it totally.

However, I would like here to try to look a bit beyond the current conventional wisdom.

There is always a danger that attention clusters around some admittedly deep problems

while neglecting others, simply through convention, or habit or sheer comfort in numbers.

Like any other subject, theoretical physics is quite capable of forming intellectual taboos:

topics that almost all sensible people avoid. They often have good reason, of course, but

I suspect that the most strongly held taboos sometimes resemble a sort of unconscious

tribute. Mental blocks can form because a question carries the potential for revolution,

and addressing it thoughtfully would raise the possibility that our present understanding

may, in important ways, be quite inadequate:

in other words, they can be unconscious

defences against too great a sense of insecurity. Just possibly, our best hope of saying

something about future revolutions in physics may lie in looking into interesting questions

which current theory evades. I will look at two here: the measurement problem in quantum

theory and the mind-body problem.

3. Quantum Theory and the Measurement Problem

As we have already seen, quantum theory was not originally inspired by some parsi-

monious set of principles applied to sparse data. Physicists were led to it, often without

seeing a clear way ahead, in stages and by a variety of accumulating data. The founders

of quantum theory were thus immediately faced with the problem of explaining precisely

what the theory actually tells us about nature. On this they were never able to agree.

However, an eﬀective enough consensus, led by Bohr, was forged. Precisely what Bohr

actually believed, and why, remain obscure to many commentators, but for most practi-

cal purposes it has hardly mattered. Physicists found that they could condense Bohr’s

“Copenhagen interpretation” into a few working rules which explain what can usefully be

calculated. Alongside these, a sort of working metaphysical picture — if that is not a

contradiction in terms — also emerged. C.P. Snow captures this conventional wisdom well

in his semi-autobiographical novel, “The Search” (Snow 1934):

Suddenly, I heard one of the greatest mathematical physicists say, with complete

simplicity: “Of course, the fundamental laws of physics and chemistry are laid

down for ever. The details have got to be ﬁlled up: we don’t know anything of the

nucleus; but the fundamental laws are there. In a sense, physics and chemistry

are ﬁnished sciences.”

The nucleus and life: those were the harder problems: in everything else, in

the whole of chemistry and physics, we were in sight of the end. The framework

was laid down; they had put the boundaries round the pebbles which we could

pick up.

It struck me how impossible it would have been to say this a few years before.

Before 1926 no one could have said it, unless he were a megalomaniac or knew no

science. And now two years later the most detached scientiﬁc ﬁgure of our time

announced it casually in the course of conversation.

It is rather diﬃcult to put the importance of this revolution into words. [. . .]
However, it is something like this. Science starts with facts chosen from the exter-

nal world. The relation between the choice, the chooser, the external world and
the fact produced is a complicated one [. . .] but one gets through in the end [. . .]
to an agreement upon “scientiﬁc facts”. You can call them “pointer-readings” as

Eddington does, if you like. They are lines on a photographic plate, marks on

a screen, all the “pointer-readings” which are the end of the skill, precautions,

inventions, of the laboratory. They are the end of the manual process, the begin-

ning of the scientiﬁc. For from these “pointer-readings”, these scientiﬁc facts, the

process of scientiﬁc reasoning begins: and it comes back to them to prove itself

right or wrong. For the scientiﬁc process is nothing more nor less than a hiatus

between “pointer-readings”: one takes some pointer readings, makes a mental

construction from them in order to predict some more.

The pointer readings which have been predicted are then measured: and if

the prediction turns out to be right, the mental construction is, for the moment,

a good one. If it is wrong, another mental construction has to be tried. That is

all. And you take your choice where you put the word “reality”: you can ﬁnd

your total reality either in the pointer readings or in the mental construction or,

if you have a taste for compromise, in a mixture of both.

In other words, on this conventional view, quantum theory teaches us something deep

and revolutionary about the nature of reality. It teaches us that it is a mistake to try to

build a picture of the world which includes every aspect of an experiment — the prepara-

tion of the apparatus and the system being experimented on, their behaviour during the

experiment, and the observation of the results — in one smooth and coherent description.

All we need to do science, and all we can apparently manage, is to ﬁnd a way of extrapo-

lating predictions — which as it happens turn out generally to be probabilistic rather than

deterministic — about the ﬁnal results from a description of the initial preparation. To

ask what went on in between is, by deﬁnition, to ask about something we did not observe:

it is to ask in the abstract a question which we have not asked nature in the concrete. On

the Copenhagen view, it is a profound feature of our situation to the world that we cannot

separate the abstract and the concrete in this way. If we did not actually carry out the

relevant observation, we did not ask the question in the only way that causes nature to

supply an answer, and there need not be any meaningful answer at all.

We are in sight of the end. Quantum theory teaches us the necessary limits of science.

But are we? Does it? Need quantum theory be understood only as a mere device for ex-

trapolating pointer-readings from pointer-readings? Can quantum theory be satisfactorily

understood this way? After all, as we understand it, a pointer is no more than a collection

of atoms following quantum laws. If the atoms and the quantum laws are ultimately just

mental constructions, is not the pointer too? Is not everything?

Landau and Lifshitz, giving a precise and apparently not intentionally critical descrip-

tion of the orthodox view in their classic textbook (Landau & Lifshitz, 1974) on quantum

theory, still seem to hint at some disquiet here:

Quantum mechanics occupies a very unusual place among physical theories:

it

contains classical mechanics as a limiting case, yet at the same time requires this

limiting case for its own formulation.

This is the diﬃculty. The classical world — the world of the laboratory — must be

external to the theory for us to make sense of it; yet it is also supposed to be contained

within the theory. And, since the same objects play this dual role, we have no clear division

between the microscopic quantum and the macroscopic classical. It follows that we cannot

legitimately derive from quantum theory the predictions we believe the theory actually

makes. If a pointer is only a mental construction, we cannot meaningfully ask what state

is in or where it points, and so we cannot make meaningful predictions about its behaviour

at the end of an experiment. If it is a real object independent of the quantum realm, then

we cannot explain it — or, presumably, the rest of the macroscopic world around us — in

terms of quantum theory. Either way, if the Copenhagen interpretation is right, a crucial

component in our understanding of the world cannot be theoretically justiﬁed.

However, we now know that Bohr, the Copenhagen school, and most of the pioneers of

quantum theory were unnecessarily dogmatic. We are not forced to adopt the Copenhagen

interpretation either by the mathematics of quantum theory or by empirical evidence. Nor

is it the only serious possibility available. As we now understand, it is just one of several

possible views of quantum theory, each of which has advantages and diﬃculties. It has not

yet been superseded: there is no clear consensus now as to which view is correct. But it

seems unlikely it will ever again be generally accepted as the one true orthodoxy.

What are the alternatives? The most interesting, I think, is a simple yet potentially

revolutionary idea originally set out by Ghirardi, Rimini, and Weber (Ghirardi et al.

1986), and later developed further by GRW, Pearle, Gisin and several others. According

to their model, quantum mechanics has a piece missing. We can ﬁx all its problems by

adding rules to say exactly how and when the quantum dice are rolled. This is done

by taking wave function collapse to be an objective, observer-independent phenomenon,

with small localisations or “mini-collapses” constantly taking place. This entails altering

the dynamics by adding a correction to the Schr¨odinger equation. If this is done in the

way GRW propose, the predictions for experiments carried out on microscopic systems

are almost precisely the same, so that none of the successes of quantum theory in this

realm are lost. However, large systems deviate more signiﬁcantly from the predictions

of quantum theory. Those deviations are still quite subtle, and very hard to detect or

exclude experimentally at present, but they are unambiguously there in the equations.

Experimentalists will one day be able to tell us for sure whether or not they are there in

nature.

By making this modiﬁcation, we turn quantum theory into a theory which describes

objective events continually taking place in a real external world, whether or not any

experiment is taking place, whether or not anyone is watching. If this picture is right, it

solves the measurement problem: we have a single set of equations which give a uniﬁed

description of microscopic and macroscopic physics, and we can sensibly talk about the

behaviour of unobserved systems, whether they are microscopic electrons or macroscopic

pointers. The pointer of an apparatus probing a quantum system takes up a deﬁnite

position, and does so very quickly, not through any ad hoc postulate, but in a way that

follows directly from the fundamental equations of the theory.

The GRW theory is probably completely wrong in detail. There are certainly serious

diﬃculties in making it compatible with relativity — though there also some grounds for

optimism that this can be done (Pearle 1998, Kent 1999). But GRW’s essential idea has,

I think, a fair chance of being right. Before 1986, few people believed that any tinkering

with quantum theory was possible:

it seemed that any change must so completely alter

the structure of the theory as to violate some already tested prediction. But we now know

that it is possible to make relatively tiny changes which cause no conﬂict with experiment,

and that by doing so we can solve the deep conceptual and interpretational problems of

quantum theory. We know too that the modiﬁed theory makes new experimental predic-

tions in an entirely unexpected physical regime. The crucial tests, if and when we can

carry them out, will be made not by probing deeper into the nucleus or by building higher

energy accelerators, but by keeping relatively large systems under careful enough control

for quantum eﬀects to be observable. New physics could come directly from the large scale

and the complex: frontiers we thought long ago closed.

4. Physics and Consciousness

Kieslowski’s remarkable ﬁlm series, Dekalog, begins with the story of a computer

scientist and his son who share a joy in calculating and predicting, in using the computer

to give some small measure of additional control over their lives. Before going skating, the

son obtains weather reports for the last three days from the meteorological bureau, and

together they run a program to infer the thickness of the ice and deduce that it can easily

bear his weight. But, tragically, they neglect the ﬁre a homeless man keeps burning at the

lakeside. Literally, of course, they make a simple mistake: the right calculation would have

taken account of the ﬁre, corrected the local temperature, and shown the actual thickness

of the ice. Metaphorically, the story seems to say that the error is neglecting the spiritual,

not only in life, but perhaps even in physical predictions.

I do not myself share Kieslowski’s religious worldview, and I certainly do not mean

to start a religious discussion here. But there is an underlying scientiﬁc question, which

can be motivated without referring to pre-scientiﬁc systems of belief and is crucial to our

understanding of the world and our place in it, and which I think is still surprisingly

neglected. So, to use more scientiﬁcally respectable language, I would like to take a fresh

look at the problem of consciousness in physics, where by “consciousness” I mean the

perceptions, sensations, thoughts and emotions that constitute our experience.

There has been a signiﬁcant revival of interest in consciousness lately, but it still

receives relatively little attention from physicists. Most physicists believe that, if con-
sciousness poses any problems at all, they are problems outside their province.3 After all,

3 Penrose is the best-known exception: space does not permit discussion of his rather diﬀerent

arguments here, but see Penrose 1989, 1994.

the argument runs, biology is pretty much reducible to chemistry, which is reducible to

known physical laws. Nothing in our current understanding suggests that there is anything

physically distinctive about living beings, or brains. On the contrary, neurophysiology, ex-

perimental psychology, evolutionary and molecular biology have all advanced with great

success, based ﬁrmly on the hypothesis that there is not. Of course, no one can exclude

the possibility that our current understanding could turn out to be wrong — but in the

absence of any reason to think so, there seems nothing useful for physicists to say.

I largely agree with this view. It is very hard to see how any novel physics associated

with consciousness could ﬁt with what we already know. Speculating about such ideas does

seem fruitless in the absence of data. But I think we can say something. There is a basic

point about the connection between consciousness and physics which ought to be made,

yet seems never to have been clearly stated, and which suggests our present understanding

almost cannot be complete.

The argument for this goes in three steps. First, let us assume, as physicists quite com-

monly do, that any natural phenomenon can be described mathematically. Consciousness

is a natural phenomenon, and at least some aspects of consciousness — for example, the

number of symbols we can simultaneously keep in mind — are quantiﬁable. On the other

hand we have no mathematical theory even of these aspects of consciousness. This would

not matter if we could at least sketch a path by which statements about consciousness

could be reduced to well understood phenomena. After all, no one worries that we have

no mathematical theory of digestion, because we believe that we understand in principle

how to rewrite any physical statement concerning the digestive process as a statement

about the local densities of various chemicals in the digestive tract, and how to derive

these statements from the known laws of physics. But we cannot sketch a similar path for

consciousness: no one knows how to transcribe a statement of the form “I see a red giraﬀe”

into a statement about the physical state of the speaker. To make such a transcription, we

would need to attach a theory of consciousness to the laws of physics we know: it clearly

cannot be derived from those laws alone.

Second, we note that, despite the lack of a theory of consciousness, we cannot com-

pletely keep consciousness out of physics. All the data on which our theories are based

ultimately derive from conscious impressions or conscious memories of impressions. If our

ideas about physics included no hypothesis about consciousness, we would have no way of

deriving any conclusion about the data, and so no logical reason for preferring any theory

over any other. This diﬃculty has long been recognised. It is dealt with, as best we can,

by invoking what is usually called the principle of psycho-physical parallelism. We demand

that we should at least be able to give a plausible sketch of how an accurate representation

of the contents of our conscious minds could be included in the description of the mate-

rial world provided by our physical theories, assuming a detailed understanding of how

consciousness is represented.

Since we do not actually know how to represent consciousness, that may seem an

empty requirement, but it is not. Psycho-physical parallelism requires, for example, that a

theory explain how anything that we may observe can come to be correlated with something

happening in our brains, and that enough is happening in our brains at any given moment

to represent the full richness of our conscious experience. These are hard criteria to make

precise, but asking whether they could plausibly be satisﬁed within a given theory is still

a useful constraint.

Now the principle of psycho-physical parallelism, as currently applied, commits us to

seeing consciousness as an epiphenomenon supervening on the material world. As William

James magniﬁcently put it (James 1879):

Feeling is a mere collateral product of our nervous processes, unable to react

upon them any more than a shadow reacts on the steps of the traveller whom it

accompanies. Inert, uninﬂuential, a simple passenger in the voyage of life, it is

allowed to remain on board, but not to touch the helm or handle the rigging.

Third, the problem with all of this is, that as James went on to point out, if our

consciousness is the result of Darwinian evolution, as it surely must be, it is diﬃcult to

understand how it can be an epiphenomenon. To sharpen James’ point: if there is a sim-

ple mathematical theory of consciousness, or of any quantiﬁable aspect of consciousness,

describing a precise version of the principle of psycho-physical parallelism and so char-

acterising how it is epiphenomenally attached to the material world, then its apparent

evolutionary value is ﬁctitious. For all the diﬀerence it would make to our actions, we

might as well be conscious only of the number of neutrons in our kneecaps or the charm

count of our cerebella; we might as well ﬁnd pleasures painful and vice versa. In fact, of

course, our consciousness tends to supply us with a sort of executive summary of informa-

tion with a direct bearing on our own chances of survival and those of our genes; we tend

to ﬁnd actions pleasurable or painful depending whether they are beneﬁcial or harmful

to those chances. Though we are not always aware of vital information, and are always

aware of much else, and though our preferences certainly don’t perfectly correlate with our

genetic prospects, the general predisposition of consciousness towards survival is far too

strong to be simply a matter of chance.

Now, of course, almost no one seriously suggests that the main features of conscious-

ness can be the way they are purely by chance. The natural hypothesis is that, since they

seem to be evolutionarily advantageous, they should, like our other evolutionarily advanta-

geous traits, have arisen through a process of natural selection. But if consciousness really

is an epiphenomenon, this explanation cannot work. An executive summary of informa-

tion which is presented to us, but has no subsequent inﬂuence on our behaviour, carries no

evolutionary advantage. It may well be advantageous for us that our brains run some sort

of higher-level processes which use the sort of data that consciousness presents to us and

which are used to make high-level decisions about behaviour. But, on the epiphenomenal

hypothesis, we gain nothing by being conscious of these particular processes: if they are

going to run, they could equally well be run unconsciously, leaving our attention focussed

on quite diﬀerent brain activities or on none at all.

Something, then, is wrong with our current understanding, There are really only two

serious possibilities. One is that psycho-physical parallelism cannot be made precise and

that consciousness is simply scientiﬁcally inexplicable. The other is that consciousness

is something which interacts, if perhaps very subtly, with the rest of the material world

rather than simply passively co-existing alongside that world. If that were the case, then we

can think of our consciousnesses and our brains — more precisely, the components of our

brains described by presently understood physics — as two coupled systems, each of which

inﬂuences the other. That is a radically diﬀerent picture from the one we presently have, of

course. But it does have explanatory power. If it were true, it would be easy to understand

why it might be evolutionarily advantageous for our consciousness to take a particular form.

If say, being conscious of a particular feature of the environment helps to speed up the

brain’s analysis of that feature, or to focus more of the brain’s processing power on it, or

to execute relevant decisions more quickly, or to cause a more sophisticated and detailed

description to enter into memory, then evolution would certainly cause consciousness to

pay attention to the relevant and neglect the irrelevant.

We have to be clear about this, though: to propose this explanation is to propose that

the actions of conscious beings are not properly described by the present laws of physics.

This does not imply that conscious actions cannot be described by any laws. Far from it: if

that were the case, we would still have an insoluble mystery, and once we are committed to

accepting an insoluble mystery associated with consciousness then we have no good reason

to prefer a mystery which requires amending the laws of physics over one which leaves the

existing laws unchallenged. The scientiﬁcally interesting possibility — the possibility with

maximal explanatory power — is that our actions and those of other conscious beings are

not perfectly described by the laws we presently know, but could be by future laws which

include a proper theory of consciousness.

This need not be true, of course. Perhaps consciousness will forever be a mystery.

But it seems hard to conﬁdently justify any a priori division of the unsolved problems

in physics into the soluble and the forever insoluble. We ought at least to consider the

implications of maximal ambition. We generally assume that everything in nature except

consciousness has a complete mathematical description: that is why, for example, we carry

on looking for a way of unifying quantum theory and gravity, despite the apparent diﬃculty

of the problem. We should accept that, if this assumption is right, it is at least plausible

that consciousness also has such a description. And this forces us to accept the corollary

— that there is a respectable case for believing that we will eventually ﬁnd we need new

dynamical laws — even though nothing else we know supports it.

One ﬁnal comment: nothing in this argument relies on the peculiar properties of

quantum theory, or the problems it poses. The argument runs through equally well in

Newtonian physics. Maybe the deep problems of quantum theory and consciousness are

linked, but it seems to me we have no reason to think so. It follows that anyone committed

to the view I have just outlined must argue that a deep problem in physics has generally

been neglected for the last century and a half. So let me try to make that case.

There is no stronger or more venerable scientiﬁc taboo than that against enquiry,

however tentative, into consciousness. James, in 1879, quoted “a most intelligent biologist”

as saying:

It is high time for scientiﬁc men to protest against the recognition of any such

thing as consciousness in scientiﬁc investigation.

Scientiﬁc men and women certainly have protested this, loudly and often, over the last

hundred and twenty years. But have those protests ever carried much intellectual force?

The folk wisdom, such as it is, against the possibility of a scientiﬁc investigation of con-

sciousness seems now to rest on a confusion hanging over from the largely deleterious eﬀect

of logical positivism on scientists earlier this century. Hypotheses about consciousness are

widely taken to be ipso facto unscientiﬁc because consciousness is presently unmeasurable

and its inﬂuences, if any, are presently undetectable. Delete the word “presently”, and the

case could be properly made: as it is, it falls ﬂat. If logical positivism is to blame, is only

the most recent recruit to the cause. The problem seems to run much deeper in scientiﬁc

culture. Schr¨odinger described (Schr¨odinger 1954) the phenomenon of:

[. . .] the wall, separating the ‘two paths’, that of the heart and that of pure reason.
We look back along the wall: could we not pull it down, has it always been there?

As we scan its windings over hills and vales back in history we behold a land far,

far, away at a space of over two thousand years back, where the wall ﬂattens and

disappears and the path was not yet split, but was only one. Some of us deem it

worth while to walk back and see what can be learnt from the alluring primeval

unity.

Dropping the metaphor, it is my opinion that the philosophy of the ancient

Greeks attracts us at this moment, because never before or since, anywhere in

the world, has anything like their highly advanced and articulated system of

knowledge and speculation been established without the fateful division which

has hampered us for centuries and has become unendurable in our days.

Clearly, the revival of interest in Greek philosophy that Schr¨odinger saw did not

immediately produce the revolution he hoped for. But our continued fascination with

consciousness is evident on the popular science and philosophy bookshelves. It looks as

though breaking down the wall and building a complete worldview are going to be left

as tasks for the third millennium. There could hardly be greater or more fascinating

challenges.

Nor can there be many more necessary for our long term well being. Science has done

us far more good than harm, psychologically and materially. But the great advances we

have made in understanding nature have also been used to support a worldview in which

only what we can now measure matters, in which the material and the external dominate,

in which we objectify and reduce ourselves and each other, in which we are in danger of

coming to see our psyches and our cultures, in all their richness, as no more than the

evolutionarily honed expression of an agglomeration of crude competitive urges.

To put it more succinctly, there is a danger, as Vaclav Havel put it in a recent essay

(Havel 1996), of man as an observer becoming completely alienated from himself as a

being. Havel goes on to suggest that hopeful signs of a more humane and less schizophrenic

worldview can be found in what he suggests might be called postmodern science, in the

form of the Gaia hypothesis and the anthropic principle.

I disagree: it is hard to pin down precise scientiﬁc content in these ideas, and insofar

as we can it seems to me they are no help. But I think we have the answer already. The

alienation is an artefact, created by the erroneous belief that all that physics currently

describes is all there is. But, on everything we value in our humanity, physics is silent.

As far as our understanding of human consciousness is concerned, though we have learned

far more about ourselves, we have learned nothing for sure that negates or delegitimizes a

humane perspective. In that sense, nothing of crucial importance has changed.

5. Postscript

All this said, of course, predicting the future of science is a mug’s game.

If, as I

have argued, physics is very far from over, the one thing we should be surest of is that

greater surprises than anything we can imagine are in store. One prediction that seems

likelier than most, though, is that the Editor will not be restricted to considering human

contributors for the corresponding volume in 2999. Perhaps our future extraterrestrial or

mechanical colleagues will ﬁnd some amusement in our attempts. I do hope so.

References

Schr¨odinger, E. 1954 Nature and the Greeks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bell, J.S. 1987. Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics: Collected papers

on Quantum Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press

Feynman, R. 1965 The Character of Physical Law. London: British Broadcasting

Corporation. Reading: Addison Wesley.

Snow, C.P. 1934 The Search. London: Victor Gollancz.

Ghirardi, G. et al. 1986 Uniﬁed Dynamics for Microscopic and Macroscopic Systems.

Physical Review D 34 470-491.

Landau, L. and Lifshitz, E. 1974 Quantum Mechanics. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Pearle, P. 1999 Relativistic Collapse Model with Tachyonic Features. Physical Review

A 59 80-101.

Kent, A. 1998 Quantum Histories. Physica Scripta T76 78-84.

Penrose, R. 1989 The Emperor’s New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds, and the

Laws of Physics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Penrose, R. 1994 Shadows of the Mind: A Search for the Missing Science of Con-

sciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

James, W. 1879 Are We Automata? Mind 13 1-22.

Havel,V. 1996. In The Fontana Postmodernism Reader, (ed. W. Truett Anderson).

London: Fontana.

