9
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
p
o
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
1
0
0
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Physics World vol. 12 (October 1999) 21-22
Los Alamos electronic archives: physics/99100nn
fc 1999 H.C. Rosu

BLIND SPOT MAY REVEAL VACUUM RADIATION

from HARET ROSU
in the Instituto de F´ısica at the Universidad de Guanajuato, Apdo Postal E-143, 37150 Le´on, Gto, Mexico

Back in the 1970s Stephen Hawking of Cambridge University in the UK made the
theoretical discovery that small black holes are not “completely black”. Instead,
a black hole emits radiation with a well-deﬁned temperature that is proportional
to the gravitational force at its surface. The ﬁnding uncovered a deep connection
between gravity, quantum mechanics and thermodynamics. And later, Bill Unruh
of the University of British Columbia in Canada proposed that quantum particles
should emit thermal radiation in a similar way when they are accelerated. Accord-
ing to Unruh, a particle undergoing a constant acceleration would be embedded in
a “heat bath” at temperature T = ¯h
· a , where ¯h is the Planck constant divided
2πck
by 2π, a is the acceleration, c is the speed of light and k is the Boltzmann con-
stant. But is it really possible to detect such radiation? Recently, Pisin Chen of the
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center and Toshi Tajima of the University of Texas at
Austin in the US have suggested that it should be possible to detect the Unruh radi-
ation emitted by electrons that are accelerated by high intensity lasers (1999 Phys.
Rev. Lett. 83 256). The diﬃculty with detecting Unruh radiation is that enormous
accelerations are required to produce a measurable eﬀect. For instance, we would
have to accelerate a particle to over 1020 m/s2 to generate a temperature of 1 K.
Recent advances in laser research mean that lasers can now deliver subpicosecond
pulses with petawatts of power. These could produce accelerations that are 1025
times greater than the acceleration due to gravity at the Earth’s surface, and two
orders of magnitude larger than previous experimental proposals. At the quantum
level, the vacuum is full of particles and antiparticles that constantly appear and
disappear. The Heisenberg uncertainty principle allows these “virtual” particles to
exist for a very brief moment of time before they recombine and disappear into
the vacuum again. According to Hawking if a particle and antiparticle are created
close to the surface of a black hole, the strong gravitational force will pull one of
the particles into the hole while the other escapes. Thus the black hole can pro-
duce “radiation from nothing”. Similarly, Unruh radiation comes from the quantum
vacuum. The curious feature about Hawking radiation is that the temperature is
inversely proportional to the mass of the emitting source. The only black holes that
may be detectable are “miniholes” that may have been formed shortly after the Big
Bang. Such black holes would have a mass of 1015 grammes and would be smaller
than a single atom. The Unruh eﬀect is considered slightly less esoteric, and in the

1980s several groups proposed experiments to detect the radiation. Unruh himself
suggested that sound waves would propagate in a supersonic ﬂuid ﬂow in the same
way that quantum ﬁelds propagate in the vicinity of a black hole. And shortly
afterwards the late John Bell and Jon Leinaas of the University of Oslo in Norway
suggested that the Unruh eﬀect would alter the motion of particles at high-energy
accelerators. A more realistic experiment was suggested by Joseph Rogers, now at
Cornell University in the US, in which an electron conﬁned by electric and magnetic
ﬁelds in a so-called Penning trap would give a signal. Meanwhile Eli Yablonovitch,
now at the University of California at Los Angeles proposed that Unruh radiation
would be produced when a gas is suddenly ionized and turns into a plasma. And
Simon Darbinyan of the Yerevan Physics Institute in Armenia and co-workers sug-
gested that Unruh radiation could be produced by a beam of particles propagating
through channels in a crystal lattice. In all of these experiments, however, the Un-
ruh signal would be buried beneath a much larger background signal, a problem
that Chen and Tajima have managed to circumvent. Moreover, in their scheme
an electron can be instantly accelerated and decelerated in every laser cycle. Chen
and Tajima present simple calculations for the acceleration produced by a standing
wave produced by two counter-propagating, ultra-intense laser pulses. They pro-
pose to detect the Unruh radiation from a minute change to the classical Larmor
radiation emitted when an electron is accelerated. Despite the high acceleration
produced in a petawatt laser, the power of the emitted Unruh radiation is several
orders of magnitude smaller than the power of the Larmor radiation. However,
Chen and Tajima calculated the angular distribution of both types of radiation and
found a “blind spot” where the Unruh signal would dominate over the Larmor ra-
diation (see ﬁgure). Although appealing, the proposal of Chen and Tajima is based
on several assumptions that may not actually be true. For example, they assume
that the electron has a well-deﬁned acceleration, velocity and trajectory. Moreover,
in 1988 Alexander Nikishov and Vladimir Ritus of the Lebedev Physical Institute
in Moscow suggested that the Unruh heat-bath concept could not be tested using
charged particles in an electric ﬁeld. They argued that the particle and antiparticle
pairs created from the vacuum would encounter a varying acceleration ﬁeld over a
short timescale, whereas Unruh radiation is related to constant accelerations only.
And at a recent workshop on the quantum aspects of beam physics, John Jackson
from the University of California at Berkeley warned against trying to interpret
conventional phenomena in terms of Unruh radiation. Nevertheless it is challenging
to look for new ways to test quantum ﬁeld theory that may give an insight into the
physical origin of Hawking radiation.

2

Figure: The angular distributions of the Larmor (top) and Unruh radiation
(bottom) emitted by an accelerated electron. In general the power of the background
Larmor radiation is much greater than the Unruh signal, but there is a small “blind
spot” where the Unruh radiation dominates.

3

