0
0
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

7
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
5
3
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

What Dimensions Do the Time and Space Have: Integer or Fractional?

L.Ya.Kobelev

Department of Physics, Urals State University
Lenina Ave., 51, Ekaterinburg 620083, Russia

Electronic address: leonid.kobelev@usu.ru

d(t)
t

A theory of time and space with fractional dimensions (FD) of time and space (dα, α = t, r)
deﬁned on multifractal sets is proposed. The FD is determined (using principle of minimum the
functionals of FD) by the energy densities of Lagrangians of known physical ﬁelds. To describe
behaviour of functions deﬁned on multifractal sets the generalizations of the fractional Riemann-
are introduced with the order of diﬀerentiation (depending on time and
Liouville derivatives D
coordinate) being equal the value of fractional dimension. For dt = const the generalized fractional
derivatives (GFD) reduce to ordinary Riemann-Liouville integral functionals, and when dt is close
to integer, GFD can be represented by means of derivatives of integer order. For time and space
with fractional dimensions a method to investigate the generalized equations of theoretical physics
by means of GFD is proposed. The Euler equations deﬁned on multifractal sets of time and space
are obtained using the principle of the minimum of FD functionals. As an example, a generalized
Newton equation is considered and it is shown that this equation coincide with the equation of
classical limit of general theory of relativity for dt → 1. Several remarks concerning existence of
repulsive gravitation are discussed. The possibility of geometrization all the known physical ﬁelds
and forces in the frames of the fractal theory of time and space is demonstrated.

01.30.Tt, 05.45, 64.60.A; 00.89.98.02.90.+p.

I. INTRODUCTION

The problem concerning the nature of space and time
is one of the most interesting problems of the modern
physics. Are the space and time continuous? Why is time
irreversible? What dimensions do space and time have?
How is the nature of time in the equations of modern
physics is reﬂected? Diﬀerent approaches (quantum grav-
ity, irreversible thermodynamics, synergetics and others)
provide us with diﬀerent answers to these questions. In
this paper the hypothesis about a nature of time and
space based on an ideas of the fractal geometry [1] is
oﬀered. The corresponding mathematical methods this
hypothesis makes use of are based on using the idea about
fractional dimensions (FD) as the main characteristics of
time and space and in connection with this the gener-
alization of the Riemann-Liouville fractional derivatives
are introduced. The method and theory are developed
to describe dynamics of functions deﬁned on multifractal
sets of time and space with FD.

Following [2], we will consider both time and space as
an only material ﬁelds existing in the Universe and gener-
ating all other physical ﬁelds. Assume that each of them
consists of a continuous, but not diﬀerentiable bounded
set of small elements. Let us suppose a continuity, but
not a diﬀerentiability, of sets of small time intervals (from
which time consist) and small space intervals (from which
space consist). First, let us consider set of small time in-
tervals St (for the set of small space intervals the way of
reasoning is similar). Let time be deﬁned on multifrac-
tal set of such intervals (determined on the carrier of a
measure Rn
t ). Each of intervals of this set (further we

use the approximation in which the description of each
multifractal interval of these sets will be characterized by
middle time moment t and refer to each of these intervals
as ”points”) is characterized by global fractal dimension
(FD) dt(r(t), t), and for diﬀerent intervals FD are diﬀer-
ent( because of the time dependence and spatial coordi-
nates dependence of dt ). For multifractal sets St (or Sr)
each set is characterized by global FD of this set and by
local FD of this set( the characteristics of local FD of
time and space sets in this paper we do not research).
In this case the classical mathematical calculus or frac-
tional (say, Riemann - Liouville) calculus [3] can not be
applied to describe a small changes of a continuous func-
tion of physical values f (t), deﬁned on time subsets St,
because the fractional exponent depends on the coordi-
nates and time. Therefore, we have to introduce integral
functionals (both left-sided and right-sided) which are
suitable to describe the dynamics of functions deﬁned on
multifractal sets (see [1]). Actually, this functionals are
simple and natural generalization the Riemann-Liouville
fractional derivatives and integrals:

Dd

dt(cid:19)nZ t
a+,tf (t) =(cid:18) d
b−,tf (t) = (−1)n(cid:18) d

a

Dd

f (t′)dt′

Γ(n − d(t′))(t − t′)d(t′)−n+1 (1)
dt(cid:19)nZ b

Γ(n − d(t′))(t′ − t)d(t′)−n+1

f (t′)dt′

t

where Γ(x) is Euler’s gamma function, and a and b are
some constants from [0, ∞). In these deﬁnitions, as usu-
ally, n = {d} + 1 , where {d} is the integer part of d

(2)

1

if d ≥ 0 (i.e. n − 1 ≤ d < n) and n = 0 for d < 0.
Functions under the integral sign we will consider to be
generalized functions deﬁned on the space of ﬁnite func-
tions [4]. Similar expressions can be written down for
GFD of functions f (r, t) with respect to spatial variables
r, with f (r, t) being deﬁned on the elements of set Sr
whose dimension is dr.

For an arbitrary f (t) it is useful to expand the gen-
eralized function 1/(t − t′)ε(t′) under the integral sign in
(1)-(2) into a power series in ε(t′) when d = n+ε, ε → +0
and write

Dd

a+,tf (t) =(cid:18) d

dt(cid:19)nZ t

Γ(n − d(t′))(t − t′)
× (1 + ε(t′) ln(t − t′) + ...) dt′

a

f (t′)

Dd

b−,tf (t) = (−1)n(cid:18) d

dt(cid:19)nZ b

Γ(n − d(t′))(t′ − t)
× (1 + ε(t′) ln(t′ − t) + ...) dt′

t

f (t′)

(3)

(4)

Taking into account that all functions here are real func-
tions and 1/t = P (1/t) ± πiδ(t), singular integrals here
can be deﬁned through the rule

Z t

0

f (t′)
t − t′ dt′ = af (t)

(5)

where a is a real regularization factor. A good agreement
of (3)-(4) with the exact values given by expressions (1)-
(2) can be obtained at large time by ﬁtting the value of
a.

Instead of usual integrals and usual partial deriva-
in the frames of multifractional time hypothe-
tives,
sis it is necessary to use GFD operators to describe
small alteration of physical variables. These function-
als reduce to ordinary integrals and derivatives if space
and time dimensions are taken to be integer, and coin-
cide with the Riemann-Liouville fractional operators if
di = const. If fractional dimension can be represented as
di = n + εi(r(t), t), |ε| ≪ 1, it is also possible to reduce
GFD to ordinary derivatives of integer order. Here we
show this only for the case when d = 1 − ε < 1

D1+ε

0+ f (t) =

≈

0

∂

∂tZ t
∂tZ t

∂

0

ε(τ )f (τ )dτ

Γ(1 + ε(τ ))(t − τ )1−ε(τ )
ε(τ )f (τ )dτ
(t − τ )1−ε(τ )

(6)

Though for ε 6= 0 the last integral is well deﬁned and
is real-valued, expanding it in power series in ε leads to
singular integrals like (5)

A =Z t

0

ε(t′)f (t′)
t − t′ dt′

To regularize this integral we will consider it to be deﬁned
on the space of ﬁnite main functions ϕ(t′)/2πi and take
the real part of the common regularization procedure

A = aε(t)f (t)

(7)

Thus we obtain

D1+ε

0+ f (t) =

∂
∂t

f (t) +

∂
∂t

[aε(r(t), t)f (t)]

(8)

where a is a regularization parameter. For the sake of
independence of GFD from this constant it is useful in
the following to choose βi (on which ε depends linearily)
proportional to a−1. It can be shown that for large t the
exact expressions for the terms in (1)-(2) proportional to
ε are very close to the approximate expression given by
(8) provided a special choice for the parameter α is is
made (t = t0 + (t − t0), t − t0 ≪ t0, α ∼ ln t ∼ ln t0)

II. EQUATIONS OF PHYSICAL THEORIES IN

MULTIFRACTAL TIME AND SPACE

Equations describing dynamics of physical ﬁelds, par-
ticles and so on can be obtained from the principle of
minimum of fractional dimensions functionals. To do
this,
introduce functionals of fractional dimensions of
space and time Fα(...|dα(r)), α = t, r. These function-
als are quite similar to the free energy functionals,but
now it is fractional dimension (FD) that plays the role
of an order parameter (see also [2]). Assume further
that FD dα is determined by the Lagrangian densities
Lα,i, (i = 1, 2, ..., α = t, r) of all the ﬁelds ψα,i, describ-
ing the particles and Φα,i describing the interactions in
the point (r)

dα = dα[Lα,i(r, t)]

(9)

Equations that govern dα behavior can be found by min-
imizing this functional and lead to the Euler’s equations
written down in terms of GFD deﬁned in (1)-(2)

Ddα

+,Lα,i(x)dα − Ddα

−,xDdα

+,L′

α,i(x)dα = 0

(10)

Substitution in this equation GFD for usual derivatives
and specifying the choice for F dependence on dα and
relations between dα and Lα (the latter can correspond to
the well known quantum ﬁeld theory Lagrangians) makes
possible to write down the functional dependence F [L] in
the form (a, b, c are unknown functions of L or constants,
L0 is inﬁnitely large density of the measure carrier Rn
energy)

F (...|dα) =Z dLα(cid:26) 1

2

[a(Lα)

∂dα
∂Lα

]2

+

or

b(Lα)

2

(Lα − Lα,0)d2

α + c(Lα)dα(cid:27)

(11)

F (...|dα) =Z d4Lα(cid:26) 1

2

[a(Lα)

∂dα
∂Lα

]2

b(Lα)

2

(Lα − Lα,0)d2

α +

1
4

c(Lα)d4

α(cid:27)

(12)

+

2

The equations that determine the value of fractional di-
mension follow from taking the variation of (11)-(12) and
read

∂

∂L(cid:18)a(L)

or

∂dt,α

∂L (cid:19) + b(L)(L − L0)dα + c(L)d2

α = 0 (13)

∂

∂Lα (cid:18)a(Lα)

∂dt,α

∂Lα (cid:19) + b(Lα)(Lα − L0,α)d2

α + c(Lα)d4

α = 0

(14)

For nonstationary processes one have to substitute the
time derivative of dα into the right-hand side of Eqs.(13)-
(14). Neglecting the diﬀusion of dα processes in the space
with energy densities given by the Lagrangians L we can
deﬁne Lα − Lα,0 = ˜Lα ≪ Lα,0 with ˜Lα having sense
of over vacuum energy density and for the simplest case
(13) gives (α = t, Lt,i ≡ Li)

dt = ˜Lt = 1 +Xi

βiLi(t, r, Φi, ψi)

(15)

More complicated dependencies of dα on Lα,i are consid-
ered in [2]. Note that relation (15) (and similar expres-
sion for dr does not contain any limitations on the value
of βiLi(t, r, Φi, ψi) unless such limitations are imposed
on the corresponding Lagrangians, and therefore dt can
reach any whatever high or small value.

The principle of fractal dimension minimum, consist-
ing in the requirement for Fα variations to vanish under
variation with respect to any ﬁeld, in this theory produce
the principle of energy minimum (for any type of frac-
tional dimension dependency on the Lagrangian densi-
ties). It allows to receive Euler’s-like equations with gen-
eralized fractional derivatives for functions f (y(x), y ′(x)),
that describe behaviour of physical value f depending
on physical variables y and their generalized fractional
derivatives y ′ = Ddα

+,xf

any principal diﬃculties. As Lagrangians Lα,i one can
choose any of the known in the theoretical physics La-
grangians of ﬁelds and their sums, taking into account
interactions between diﬀerent ﬁelds.

i.e.

From Eq.(17) it is possible to obtain generalizations
of all known equations of physics (Newton, Shroedinger,
Dirac, Einstein equations and etc.), and the similar equa-
tions for fractional space dimensions (α = r). Such
generalized equations extend the application of the cor-
responding theories for the cases when time and space
are deﬁned on multifractal sets,
these equations
would describe dynamics of physical values in the time
and the space with fractional dimensions.The Minkowski-
like space-time with fractional (fractal) dimensions for
the case dt ∼ 1 can be deﬁned on the ﬂat continuous
Minkowski space-time (that is, the measure carrier is the
Minkowski space-time R4). These equations can be re-
duced to the well known equations of the physical theo-
ries for small energy densities, or, which is the same, for
small forces (dt → 1) if we neglect the corrections arising
due to fractality of space and time dimensions (a number
of examples from classical and quantum mechanics and
general theory of relativity were considered in [2]).For
statistical systems of many classical particles the GFD
help to describe an inﬂuence of fractal structures arising
in systems on behavior of distribution functions.

III. GENERALIZED NEWTON EQUATIONS

Below we write down the modiﬁed Newton equations
generated by the multifractal time ﬁeld in the presence
of gravitational forces only

Ddt(r,t)

−,t Ddt(r,t)

+,t

r(t) = Ddr

+,rΦg(r(t))

(20)

Ddr

−,rDdr

+,rΦg(r(t)) +

b2
g
2

Φg(r(t)) = κ

(21)

g

In (21) the constant b−1
is of order of the size of the Uni-
verse and is introduced to extend the class of functions
on which generalized fractional derivatives concept is ap-
plicable. These equations do not hold in closed systems
because of the fractality of spatial dimensions, and there-
fore we approximate fractional derivatives as Ddr
0+ ≈ ∇.
The equations complementary to (20)-(21) will be given
in the next paragraph. Now we can determine dt for the
distances much larger than gravitational radius r0 (for
the problem of a body’s motion in the ﬁeld of spherical-
symmetric gravitating center) as (see (11) and [5] for
more details)

dt ≈ 1 + βgΦg

(22)

Neglecting the fractality of spatial dimensions and the
contribution from the term with b−1
g , and taking βg =
2c−2), from the energy conservation law (approximate

3

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

δFt,yi ∼ δdt,yi = 0

δyidα(f ) = δyiLα,i(f ) = 0,

α = r, t

Ddα

+,yi(x)f − Ddα

−,xDdα
+,y ′

i(x)f = 0

The boundary conditions will have the form

x1

x0

= 0

Ddα
+,y ′

i(x)f(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

In these equations the variables x stand for either t or
r (the latter takes into account fractality of spatial di-
mensions), yi = {Φi, ψi} , (i = 1, 2, ...), Lα,i are the La-
grangian densities of the ﬁelds and particles. Here f can
be of any mathematical nature (scalar, vector, tensor,
spinor, etc.), and modiﬁcation of these equations for func-
tions f of more complicated structure does not encounter

since our theory and mathematical apparatus apply only
to open systems) we obtain

Ddt

−,tDdt

+,tΦe(t(r)) +

b2
et
2

Φe(t(r)) = er

(26)

2γM

(cid:20)1 −
+(cid:20)1 −

∂t (cid:19)2
c2r (cid:21)(cid:18) ∂r(t)
∂t (cid:19)2
c2r (cid:21) r2(cid:18) ∂ϕ(t)

2γM

−

2mc2

r

= 2E

(23)

Here we used the approximate relation between gener-
alized fractional derivative an usual integer-order deriva-
tive (10) with a = 0.5 and notations corresponding to the
conventional description of motion of mass m near grav-
itating center M . The value a = 0.5 follows from the
regularization method used and alters if we change the
latter. Eq.(23) diﬀers from the corresponding equation
in general theory of relativity by presence of additional
term in the ﬁrst square brackets. This term describes ve-
locity alteration during gyration and is negligible while
perihelium gyration calculations. If we are to neglect it,
Eq.(23) reduces to the corresponding classical limit of
equations of general relativity equation. For large energy
densities (e.g., gravitational ﬁeld at r < r0) Eqs.(7) con-
tain no divergences [2], since integrodiﬀerential operators
of generalized fractional diferentiation reduce to general-
ized fractional integrals (see (1)).

Note, that choosing for fractional dimension dr in GFD
Ddr
0+ Lagrangian dependence in the form Lr,i ≈ Lt,i gives
for (17) additional factor of 0.5 in square brackets in (23)
and it can be compensating by ﬁtting factor βg.

IV. FIELDS ARISING DUE TO THE

FRACTALITY OF SPATIAL DIMENSIONS

(”TEMPORAL” FIELDS)

If we are to take into account the fractality of spatial
dimensions (dx 6= 1, dy 6= 1, dz 6= 1), Eqs.(17)-(19), we
arrive to a new class of equations describing certain phys-
ical ﬁelds (we shall call them ”temporal” ﬁelds) generated
by the space with fractional dimensions. These equations
are quite similar to the corresponding equations that ap-
pear due to fractality of time dimension and were given
earlier. In Eqs.(10)-(12) we must take x = r, /; α = r
and fractal dimensions dr(t(r), r) will obey (14) with t
being replaced by r. For example, for time t(r(t), t)) and
potentials Φg(t(r), r) and Φe(t(r), r) (analogues of the
gravitational and electric ﬁelds) the equations analogous
to Newton’s will read (here spatial coordinates play the
role of time)

Ddr(r,t)

−,r Ddr(r,t)

+,r

t(r) = Ddt

+,t(cid:0)Φg(t(r)) + erm−1

r Φe(t(r))(cid:1)(24)

Ddt

−,tDdt

+,tΦg(t(r)) +

b2
gt
2

Φg(t(r)) = κr

(25)

4

These equations should be solved together with the gen-
eralized Newton equations (20)-(21) for r(t(r), r).

With the general algorithm proposed above, it is easy
to obtain generalized equations for any physical theory
in terms of GFD. From these considerations it also fol-
lows that for every physical ﬁeld originating from the
time with fractional dimensions there is the correspond-
ing ﬁeld arising due to the fractional dimension of space.
These new ﬁelds were referred to as ”temporal ﬁelds” and
obey Eqs.(14)-(16) with x = r, α = r. Then the question
arises, do these equations have any physical sense or can
these new ﬁelds be discovered in certain experiments? I
wont to pay attention on the next fact: if Lt,i ≈ Lr,i no
new ﬁelds are generated. This is the case when fractal
dimension of time and space dt,/br can not be divided on
, the time and space fractal sets can not be divided
dt +dr
¯
too.The FD time and space are common and deﬁned by
value given by Li (the latter can be chosen in the form
of usual Lagrangians in the known theories).

V. CAN REPULSIVE GRAVITATIONAL FORCES

EXIST?

In general theory of relativity no repulsive gravita-
tional forces are possible without a change of the Rie-
mann space curvature (metric tensor changes). But in
the frames of multifractal time and space model, even
when we can neglect the fractality of spatial coordinates,
from (24) it follows (for spherically-symmetric mass and
electric charge distributions)

mr

∂2t(r)
∂r2 =

∂

∂tXi

Φi(t) ≈ −

mrkr
c2t2 ±

e2
ct2

(27)

with accuracy of the order of b2. Here mr is the ana-
logue of mass in the time space and corresponds to spa-
tial inertia of object alteration with time changing (it
is possible that mr coincides with ordinary mass up to
a dimensional factor). Eq.(27) describes the change of
the time ﬂow velocity from space point to space point
depending on the ”temporal” forces and indicates that
in the presence of physical ﬁelds time does not ﬂow uni-
formly in diﬀerent regions of space, i.e the time ﬂow is
irregular and heterogeneous (see also Chapter 5 in [2]).
Note, that introducing equations like (27) in the time
space is connected with the following from our model
consequences (see (17)-(19)) about equivalence of time
and space and the possibility to describe properties of
time (a real ﬁeld generating all the other ﬁelds except
”temporal”) by the methods used to describe the char-
acteristics of space. Below we will show that taking into
consideration usual gravitational ﬁeld in the presence of
its ”temporal” analogues gives way to the existence of
gravitational repulsion proportional to the third power

of velocity. Indeed, the ﬁrst term in the right-hand side
of (27) is the analogue of gravity in the space of time
(”temporal” ﬁeld). Neglecting fractional corrections to
the dimensions and taking into account both usual and
”temporal” gravitation, Newton equations have the form

m

d2r
dt2 = Fr + Ft = −

γmM

r2 +

mrkr

dt(cid:19)3
ct2 (cid:18) dr

(28)

The criteria for the velocity, dividing the regions of at-
traction and repulsion reads

dt(cid:19)3
(cid:18) dr

=(cid:18) γmM

2 (cid:19)−1 mrkr

ct2

r
¯

(29)

Here r(t) must also satisfy Eq.(20). Introducing gravita-
tional radii r0 and t0 (the latter is the ”temporal” gravi-
tational radius, similar to the conventional radius r0), we
can rewrite (23) as follows

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

dr

dt(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

= c 3sc

t2
r2

t0
r0

(30)

In the last two expressions r is the distance from a body
with mass m to the gravitating center, t is the time diﬀer-
ence between the points where the body and the gravitat-
ing center are situated, mr = m/c, κr = κt/c. If we ad-
mit that r0 and t0 are related to each other as r0 = t0/c,
the necessary condition for the dominance of gravitation
repulsion will be c < rt−1. It is not clear whether this
criteria is only a formal consequence of the theory or it
has something to do with reality and gravitational re-
pulsion does exist in nature. What is doubtless, that in
the frames of multifractal theory of time and space it
is possible to introduce (though, may be, only formally)
dynamic gravitational forces of repulsion (as well as re-
pulsive forces of any other nature, including nuclear).

VI. THE GEOMETRIZATION OF ALL

PHYSICAL FIELDS AND FORCES

The multifractal model of time and space allows to con-
sider the fractional dimensions of time dt and space dr (or
undivided FD dtr as the source of all physical ﬁelds (see
(11)) (including, in particular, the case when ﬂat (not
fractal) Minkowski space-time R4 is chosen as the mea-
sure carrier). From this point of view, all physical ﬁelds
are consequences of fractionality (fractality) of time and
space dimensions. So all the physical ﬁelds and forces
are exist in considered model of multifractal geometry of
time and space as far as the multifractal ﬁelds of time
and space are exists. Within this point of view, all phys-
ical ﬁelds are real as far as our model of real multifractal
ﬁelds of time and space correctly predicts and describes
the physical reality. But since in this model all the ﬁelds
are determined by the value of fractal dimension of time
and space, they appear as geometrical characteristics of

5

time and space (12-14). Therefore there exists a com-
plete geometrization of all physical ﬁelds, based on the
idea of time and space with (multi)fractional dimensions,
the hypothesis about minimum of functional of fractal
dimensions and GFD calculus used in this model. The
origin of all physical ﬁelds is the result and consequence
of the appearing of the fractional dimensions of time and
space. One can say that a complete geometrization of all
the ﬁelds that takes place in our model of fractal time and
space is the consequence of the inducing (and describing
by GFD) composed structure of multifractal time and
space as the multifractal sets of multifractal subsets St
with global and local FD. The fractionality of spa-
and Sr
¯
tial dimensions dr also leads to a new class of ﬁelds and
forces (see (17)-(19) with α = r). For the special case
of integer-valued dimensions (dt = 1, dr = 3) the mul-
tifractal sets of time and space St and Sr coincide with
the measure carrier R4. From (14) it follows then that
neither particles nor ﬁelds exist in such a world. Thus
the four-dimensional Minkowski space becomes an ideal
physical vacuum (for FD dα > 1 the exponent of Rn has
value n > 4). On this vacuum, the multifractal sets of
) are deﬁned with their frac-
time and space ( St and Sr
¯
tional dimensions, and it generates our world with the
physical forces and particles.

Now the following question can be asked: what is the
reason for the dependence in the considered model of
fractal theory of time and space of fractionality of di-
mensions on Lagrangian densities? One of the simplest
hypothesis seems to assume that the appearing of frac-
tional parts in the time and space dimensions with de-
pendence on Lagrangian densities originates from certain
deformations or strains in the spatial and time sets of
the measure carrier caused by the inﬂuence of the real
time ﬁeld on the real space ﬁeld and vise versa (generat-
ing of physical ﬁelds caused by deformations of complex
manifolds deﬁned in twistor space is well known [6]). As-
suming then that multifractal sets St and Sr are complex
manifolds (complex-valued dimensions of time and spa-
tial points can be compacted), deformation, for example,
of complex-valued set St under the inﬂuence of the spatial
points set Sr would result in appearing of spatial energy
densities in time dimension, that is generating of physical
ﬁelds (see [6]). Fractional dimensions of space appearing
(under the inﬂuence of set St deformations) yields new
class of ﬁelds and forces (or can also not yield). It can
be shown also that for small forces (e.g., for gravity - at
distances much larger then gravitational radius) gener-
alized fractional derivatives (1)-(2) can be approximated
through covariant derivatives in the eﬀective Riemann
space [2] and covariant derivatives of the space of the
standard model in elementary particles theory [7] (with
the corrections taking into account ﬁelds generating and
characterizing the openness of the world in whole [8,9]).
All this allows to speak about natural insertion of the
oﬀered mathematical tools of GFD, at least for ε ≪ 1, in
the structure of all modern physical theories (note here,
that the theory of gravitation as the theory of real ﬁelds

with a spin 2 is invented in [10]). Note also, that number
of problems within the framework of the theory of multi-
fractal time and space (classical mechanics, nonrelativis-
tic and relativistic quantum mechanics) were considered
in [2,9,11].

VII. CONCLUIONS

In our model we postulate the existence of multifractal
space and time and treat vacuum as Rn space which is
the measure carrier for the sets of multifractal time and
space. Fractionality of time dimension leads then to ap-
pearing of space-time energy densities L(r(t), t), that is
generating of the known ﬁelds and forces, and fraction-
ality of space dimensions gives new time-space energy
densities L(t(r), r) and a new class of ”temporal” ﬁelds.
Note, that the roles of dt and dr in distorting accord-
ingly space and time dimensions is relative and can be
interchanged. Apparently, one can consider the ”united”
dimension dt,r - the dimension of undivided onto time
and space multifractal continuum in which time and co-
ordinates are related to each other by relations like those
for Minkowski space, not using the approximate relation
utilized in this paper dtt, r = dt + dr. Moreover in some
cases it seems to be even impossible to separate space
and time variables, and then dt and dr can be chosen to
be equal to each other, i.e., there would be only one frac-

tional dimension dt = drx,y,z = 1 +P βiLi(r(t), t; t(r), r)

describing the whole space-time. In this case one would
have to calculate generalized fractional derivatives from
the same Lagrangians, and new ”temporal” ﬁelds will not
be generated.

The considered model of multifractal time and space
oﬀers a new look (both in mathematical and philosophi-
cal senses) onto the properties of space and time and their
description and onto the nature of all the ﬁelds they gen-
erate. This gives way to many interesting results and
conclusions, and detailed discussion of several problems
can be found in [2]. Here we restrict ourselves with only
brief enumerating of the most important ones.

a) The model does not contradict to the existing phys-
ical theories. Moreover, it reduces to them when the
potentials and ﬁelds are small enough, and gives new
predictions (free of divergencies in most cases) for not
small ﬁelds. Though, the question about applicability
of the proposed relation between fractal dimension and
Lagrangian densities still remains open.

b) We consider time and space to be material ﬁelds
which are the basis of our material Universe.
In such
a Universe there exist absolute frames of reference, and
all the conservation laws are only good approximations
valid for ﬁelds and forces of low energy density since
the Universe is an open system, deﬁned on certain mea-
sure carrier (the latter probably being the 4-dimensional
Minkowski space). Smallness of fractional corrections to
the value of time dimension in many cases (e.g., on the

Earth’s surface it is about dt − 1 ∼ 10−12) makes possible
to neglect it and use conventional models of the physics
of closed systems.

c) The model allows to consider all ﬁelds and forces of
the real world as a result of the geometrization of time
and space (may be more convenient the term ”fractaliza-
tion” of time and space) in the terms of fractal geometry.
It is fractional dimensions of time and space that generate
all ﬁelds and forces that exist in the world. The model in-
troduces a new class of physical ﬁelds (”temporal” ﬁelds),
which originates from the fractionality of dimensions of
space. These ﬁelds are analogous to the known physi-
cal ﬁelds and forces and can arise or not arise depending
on certain conditions. Thus the presented model of time
and space is the ﬁrst theory that includes all forces in
single theory in the frames of fractal geometry. Repeat
once more: the model allows to consider all the ﬁelds
and forces of the world as the result of geometrization in-
cluding them in FD of time and space. It is non-integer
dimensions of time and space that produce the all ob-
servable ﬁelds. The new class of ﬁelds naturally comes
into consideration, originating solely from the fractional-
ity of space dimensions and with the equations similar to
those of the usual ﬁelds. The presented model of space
and time is the ﬁrst theory that allows to consider all
physical ﬁelds and forces in terms of a unique approach.
d) Basing on the multifractal model of time and space,
one can develop a theory of ”almost inertial” systems
[11,13,14] which reduces to the special theory of relativity
when we neglect the fractional corrections to the time
dimension. In such ”almost inertial” frames of reference
motion of particles with any velocity becomes possible.

e) On the grounds of the considered fractal theory of
time and space very natural but very strong conclusion
can be drawn: all the theory of modern physics is valid
only for weak ﬁelds and forces, i.e. in the domain where
fractional dimension is almost integer with fractional cor-
rections being negligibly small.

f) The problem of choosing the proper forms of defor-
mation that would deﬁne appearing of fractional dimen-
sions also remains to be solved. So far there is no clear
understanding now which type of fractal dimensions we
must use, dt and dr or dt,r. Obviously, solving numerous
diﬀerent problems will depend on this choice as the result
of diﬀerent points of view on the nature of multifractal
structures of time and space.

The author hopes that new ideas and mathematical
tools presented in this paper will be a good ﬁrst step on
the way of investigations of fractal characteristics of time
and space in our Universe.

[1] Mandelbrot B. The fractal geometry of nature (W.H.

Freeman, New York, 1982)

6

[2] Kobelev L.Ya. Fractal theory of time and space, (Konross,

Ekaterinburg, 1999) (in Russian)

[3] S.G.Samko , A.A.Kilbas , O.I.Marichev, Fractional Inte-
grals and Derivatives - Theory and Applications (Gordon
and Breach, New York, 1993)

[4] I.M.Gelfand, G.E.Shilov, Generalized Functions (Aca-

demic Press, New York, 1964)

[5] Kobelev L.Ya. Generalized Riemann-Liouville fractional
derivatives for multifractal sets, Urals State University,
Dep. v VINITI, 25.11.99, No.3492-B99

[6] Penrose R.J., J.Math. Phys., 8, 345 (1967)
[7] Kobelev L.Ya., Multifractal time and space, covariant
derivatives and gauge invariance, Urals State University,
Dep. v VINITY, 09.08.99, No.2584-B99 (in Russian);

[8] Yu.L.Klimontovich Statistical Theory of Open Systems

(Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1995)

[9] Kobelev L.Ya, Multifractal time and irreversibility in dy-
namic systems, Urals State University, Dep. v VINITY,
09.08.99, No.2584-99 (in Russian)

[10] A.A.Logunov, M.A.Mestvirishvili, Theoretical
Mathematical Physics, 110, 1 (1997) (in Russian)

and

[11] Kobelev L.Ya., Multifractality of Time and Special The-
ory of Relativity, Urals State University, Dep. v VINITY
19.08.99, No.2677-99 (in Russian)

[12] Kobelev L.Ya., Fractal Theory of Time and Space, Ural
State Univ., Dep.v VINITY 22.01.99, No.189-99 (in Rus-
sian)

[13] Kobelev L.Ya., Can a Particle Velocity Exceed the Speed

of Light in Empty Space? gr-qc/0001042, 15 Jan 2000

[14] Kobelev L.Ya., Physical Consequences of Moving Faster
than Light in Empty Space. gr-qc/0001043, 15 Jan 2000

7

