1
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
2
v
3
4
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

3-D extent of the main ionospheric trough
—a case study

Mikael Hedin1, Ingemar H¨aggstr¨om1, Asta Pellinen-Wannberg1, Laila Andersson1,
Urban Br¨andstr¨om1, Bj¨orn Gustavsson1, ˚Ake Steen1, Assar Westman2, Gudmund
Wannberg2, Tony van Eyken3, Takehiko Aso4, Cynthia Cattell5, Dave Klumpar6
and Charles W. Carlson7

1Swedish Institute of Space Physics, Box 812, S-981 28 Kiruna, Sweden.
2EISCAT Scientiﬁc Association, Box 812, S-981 28 Kiruna, Sweden.
3EISCAT Scientiﬁc Association, Postboks 432, N-9170 Longyearbyen, Norway.
4National Institute of Polar Research, 1-9-10 Kaga, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173, Japan.
5School of Phys. and Astr., Univ. of Minnesota, MN 55455, USA.
6Space Sciences Laboratory, Univ. of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
7Lockheed-Martin Palo Alto Research Labs, CA 94304, USA.

Abstract

The EISCAT radar system has been used for the ﬁrst time in a four-beam meridional mode. The
FAST satellite and ALIS imaging system is used in conjunction to support the radar data, which
was used to identify a main ionospheric trough. With this large latitude coverage the trough was
passed in 2 1
2 hours period. Its 3-dimensional structure is investigated and discussed. It is found
that the shape is curved along the auroral oval, and that the trough is wider closer to the midnight
sector. The position of the trough coincide rather well with various statistical models and this
trough is found to be a typical one.

1 Introduction

The main ionospheric trough is a typical feature of the sub-auroral ionospheric F-region,
where it is manifest as a substantial depletion in electron concentration. It is frequently
observed in the nighttime sector, just equatorward of the auroral zone. This trough is
often referred to as the “main ionospheric trough” or “mid-latitude trough” to distinguish
from troughs in other locations. The polar edge of the trough is co-located with the auro-
ral zone. The equatorward boundary is less distinct, consisting of a gradually increasing
amount of electrons, towards the plamasphere, which could be called the normal iono-
sphere. Inside the trough, there are electric ﬁelds present, giving rise to westward ion
convection. Extensive reviews of modelling and observations of the main ionospheric
trough are given by Moffett and Quegan (1983) and Rodger et al. (1992).

The present study was performed as a part of International Auroral Study (IAS). The
goal for IAS was to provide simultaneous observations from ground and space of auroral
processes. An important part of IAS was the FAST (Carlson et al., 1998) satellite. FAST
was planned with signiﬁcant ground-base support, i.e., control station and supporting
scientiﬁc instrument, in Alaska, but as all polar orbiting satellites also passes over northern
Scandinavia, it is well suited for coordination with ground-based instrument there as well.
The most important instrument, besides the EISCAT radars, is ALIS (Br¨andstr¨om and
Steen, 1994), the camera network in northern Sweden for auroral imaging.

2 The 4-beam EISCAT radar conﬁguration

Previous radar experiments have used different scanning patterns to determine the to-
pography of the trough; Collis and H¨aggstr¨om (1988) used a wide latitude scan (EISCAT
common program experiment CP-3), Collis and H¨aggstr¨om (1989) used a small 4-position
scan (CP-2), and Jones et al. (1997) used a combination of a wide scan to ﬁnd the trough,
and a narrow scan to observe the structure. Also a single position tri-static radar mode
(CP-1) has been used by H¨aggstr¨om and Collis (1990). These methods all give a trade-off

2

between time and space resolution—the more scan points the longer the time before sub-
sequent observations of the same position, and for small and fast scans the range in space
is often insufﬁcient

Here we use for the ﬁrst time all the EISCAT radars in a four-beam conﬁguration close
to the meridian plane to get a wide area of observation without losing time resolution. The
EISCAT Svalbard Radar (ESR) (Wannberg et al., 1997) is ﬁeld aligned (elevation 81.5◦)
at invariant latitude (ILAT) 75.2◦N. The mainland tri-static UHF system (Folkestad et al.,
1983) is also ﬁeld aligned (elevation 77.4◦) at ILAT 66.3◦N. Between these, the Tromsø
VHF radar is used in a “split-beam mode”, with the eastern antenna panels pointing north
(70◦ elevation) and the western panels pointing vertical. The data is split into two sets,
VHF-N (north) and VHF-V (vertical).

The combined “meta-radar” has a huge fan-like observation area around 70◦N–80◦N

in geographic latitude.

3 Characteristics of the observed trough

The radar observations of the trough in question are shown in ﬁgure 1. The trough is
seen as the clear decrease in electron density, and we determine the time in UT for the
radars passing under the trough to be 1710–1720, 1820–1900, 1845–1925 and 1900–1940
respectively. The more prominent density increase for the Tromsø sites after 2000 UT is
not the edge of the trough, rather typical F-region blobs, poleward of the trough.

In ﬁgure 1 we see that the trough extends through all of the F-region, but not in the
E-region. Note that white color is both highest density and no usable data, but generally
no data is due to low density and this is seen to be the case here in the trough. In the
northern part of the trough (later time in the data), we can actually see some typical weak
ionization in the E-region, interpreted as diffuse aurora.

We compare the actual location of the trough minimum with predicted positions from
models by Collis and H¨aggstr¨om (1988); K¨ohnlein and Raitt (1977); Rycroft and Burnell
(1970) respectively1—all linear in SLT (solar local time) and Kp. For the present day,
Kp values are 1− before and 1o after 1800 UT. In ﬁgure 2, these model values are shown
together with the actual position of the whole trough as determined from ESR, FAST,
VHF-N, VHF-V and UHF respectively (from high to low latitude). We see that the devi-
ations from the model predictions are substantial, and conclude that the linear models are
not adequate for use over a wide range in latitude and time. This is not surprising because
the ﬁts used to construct the equations all had a big spread, even though the correlations
were quite good.

A more recent study based on satellite data is made by Karpachev et al. (1996), where
they use both latitude and longitude to make a statistical model not restricted to linear
relations. In this model, the time used is magnetic local time (MLT), which is reason-
able because the trough structure is governed by the earth magnetic ﬁeld. They use both
linear and non-linear time dependency, and ﬁnd that for midnight hours, the difference
is rather small, compared to the large spread in the data, but favours the non-linear time
dependency.

From the start time of when each radar beam enters the trough, as seen in ﬁgure 1,
we can estimate the trough apparent southward speed to be around 12 km/min from
Longyearbyen to Tromsø, and around 4 km/min between the Tromsø beams. Assum-
ing that the trough appears to pass over ESR and between the mainland radars with the
respective speed, we can make a crude estimate of the vertical shape of the trough and the
width: From the plot in ﬁgure 1, we estimate that the southward (early) wall, taken as the
border of blue and green color, has an inclination of 35◦ for the VHF-N beam and 21◦
for VHF-V. This should be compared with the direction of the magnetic ﬁeld at Tromsø,
zenith angle 13◦ southwards. If we assume the trough wall to be ﬁeld aligned, the antici-
pated inclination is 33◦ (20+13) for VHF-N and 13◦ for VHF-V, in good agreement with
the rough estimate. In the plot of the ﬁeld aligned beams, ESR and UHF, the trough wall
appears vertical, which means it is ﬁeld-aligned. The passing time for Longyearbyen is

1with Rycroft and Burnell (1970) changed to invariant latitude as suggested by K¨ohnlein and Raitt (1977)

3

Fig. 1. EISCAT electron density (ESR and UHF) and raw electron density (VHF-N and VHF-V) plots for
970314. The electron concentration (in m−3) is colour coded, with UT on horizontal and height (km) on
vertical axis.

4

76

74

72

70

68

66

64

62

)

N
°

(
 
e
d
u
t
i
t
a
l
 
t
n
a
i
r
a
v
n
I

CH

KR

RB

60

18

19

20

21

22

23

Solar local time

Fig. 2. The thick lines show the coordinates in ILAT and SLT (solar local time) of the actual pass of the
trough as determined from (high to low latitude) ESR, FAST, VHF-N, VHF-V and UHF. The dash-dotted line
is an estimate of the trough boundaries, extrapolated to later time from these direct measurements. The diffuse
aurora observed with ALIS is indicated by the small spot in the latest part of the plot, just above the border of
the estimated trough boundary. The solid lines show predictions for location of trough minima from models
discussed in the text.

10 minutes, which, using the above speeds, gives a width of 120 km, and for the Tromsø
beams the time is 40 minutes, which gives a width of 160 km, both in north-south direc-
tion. This assumes the trough to consist of two straight parts, one extending from over
Longyearbyen and Tromsø, the other over the Tromsø beams, instead of the actual arc-like
shape as seen in ﬁgure 2, but it will anyway give an indication of the size. The east-west
size can be estimated by using the earth rotation, this gives a velocity of 6.1 km/min, and
a size of 61 km for Longyearbyen and around 10 km/min with size 400 km over Tromsø.
The actual width, measured perpendicular over the trough extent is then 54 km for the
part passing over Longyearbyen and 149 km for the part passing over Tromsø. That is,
the trough radial width is actually broader equatorwards, closer to magnetic midnight.
This is shown in ﬁgure 2.

The FAST satellite does not carry sounding instruments, so trough signatures are not
as obvious to detect. The signature used is the precipitation north of the trough and the
electric ﬁeld associated with the ion (E ×B) drift (absent south of the trough). It is known
from earlier studies (Collis and H¨aggstr¨om, 1988) that there is a westward ion convection
in the trough, which is absent outside. The satellite passes over the trough 1742–1743 UT
as shown in ﬁgure 2.

During the night, the auroral imaging system ALIS was not operating continuously
because there was no signiﬁcant aurora and it was partly cloudy. However, some pictures
were taken at relevant times, and they show faint diffuse aurora around the time when
ALIS passes under the trough poleward boundary. If we plot the position of diffuse aurora
from ALIS, it located just in the northern part of the trough region as extrapolated from
the other more direct measurements in ﬁgure 2.

If we compare the observed trough with the relevant typical features of the mid-latitude
trough as described in Moffett and Quegan (1983), we can say that the present trough is
quite typical.

5

4 Conclusions

The EISCAT facility has been used in a new four-beam meridional mode. The ESR and
UHF system are ﬁeld-aligned, and the VHF system is split in two beams in between. This
gives a very wide latitude range for observation, well suited to study ionospheric struc-
tures moving over large range in short time. With this conﬁguration, no time resolution is
lost.

In this case, the main ionospheric trough has been observed as high as 75◦N ILAT down
to 66◦N ILAT. The observed trough is a quite typical one–it has all the common features
known from earlier studies. The present observation is made when the Kp index was low
and stable, and so the trough was also quite non-dramatic, but this means that the trough is
rather stationary over the big area of observation. This rules out signiﬁcant time variations
of the trough position, as would have been the case in a more active environment, enabling
investigation over a relatively long period as the earth moves under it.

If we calculate the apparent southward motion of the trough, the speed is over 10 km/min
between Longyearbyen and Tromsø, but about 4 km/min between the Tromsø sites. This
is consistent if the trough is really an oval shape, so that Longyearbyen passes under it
close to perpendicular, but for Tromsø latitudes the direction of passage is much more
oblique, thereby the apparent southward motion is much slower. The trough is also seen
to be wider towards magnetic midnight. The earlier proposed linear equations for trough
motions are shown not to be valid over the latitude range in question.

Coordinated studies poses substantial difﬁculties, most of which are not scientiﬁc but
rather administrative or probabilistic by nature. Nevertheless, if one measurement (EIS-
CAT in this case) is good, the others can often be used to extract some extra information
in support.

Acknowledgement. We gratefully acknowledge assistance of the EISCAT staff. The EISCAT Scientiﬁc Asso-
ciation is supported by France (CNRS), Germany (MPG), United Kingdom (PPARC), Norway (NFR),Sweden
(NFR), Finland (SA) and Japan(NIPR).

References

Br¨andstr¨om, U. and Steen, ˚A., ALIS - a new ground-based facility for auroral imaging
in northern scandinavia, in Proceedings of ESA Symposium on European Rocke and
Balloon Programmes, ESA SP-355, ESA, 1994.

Carlson, C. W., Pfaff, R. F., and Watzin, J. G., The fast auroral snapshot mission, Geophys.

Res. Lett., 25, 2013–2016, 1998.

Collis, P. N. and H¨aggstr¨om, I., Plasma convection and auroral precipitation processes
associated with the main ionospheric trough at high latitudes, J. Atmos. Terr. Phys., 50,
389–404, 1988.

Collis, P. N. and H¨aggstr¨om, I., High resolution measurements of the main ionospheric

trough using EISCAT, Adv. Space Res., 9, 545–548, 1989.

Folkestad, K., Hagfors, T., and Westerlund, S., EISCAT: An updated description of tech-

nical characteristics and operational capabilities, Radio Sci., 18, 867–879, 1983.

H¨aggstr¨om, I. and Collis, P., Ion composition changes during F-region density depletions
in the presence of electric ﬁelds at auroral latitudes, J. Atmos. Terr. Phys., 52, 519–529,
1990.

Jones, D. G., Walker, I. K., and Kersley, L., Structure of the polward wall of the trough
and the inclination of the geomagnetic ﬁeld above the EISCAT radar, Ann. Geophys.,
15, 740–746, 1997.

Karpachev, A. T., Deminov, M. G., and Afonin, V. V., Model of the mid-latitude iono-
spheric trough on the base of cosmos-900 and intercosmos-19 satellites data, Adv.
Space Res., 18, 6221–6230, 1996.

6

K¨ohnlein, W. and Raitt, W. J., Position of the mid-latitude trough in the topside ionosphere

as deduced from ESRO 4 observations, Planet. Space Sci., 25, 600–602, 1977.

Moffett, R. J. and Quegan, S., The mid-latitude trough in the electron concentration of the
ionospheric F-layer: a review of observations and modeling, J. Atmos. Terr. Phys., 45,
315–343, 1983.

Rodger, A. S., Moffett, R. J., and Quegan, S., The role of ion drift in the formation of
ionisation troughs in the mid- and high-latitude ionosphere—a review, J. Atmos. Terr.
Phys., 54, 1–30, 1992.

Rycroft, M. J. and Burnell, S. J., Statistical analysis of movement of the ionospheric

trough and the plasmapause, J. Geophys. Res., 75, 5600–5604, 1970.

Wannberg, G., Wolf, I., Vanhainen, L.-G., Koskenniemi, K., R¨ottger, J., Postila, M.,
Markkanen, J., Jacobsen, R., Stenberg, A., Larsen, R., Eliassen, S., Heck, S., and Hu-
uskonen, A., The EISCAT Svalbard radar: A case study in modern incoherent scatter
radar system design, Radio Sci., 32, 2283–2307, 1997.

