1

0
0
0
2

 

n
u
J
 

7
2

 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
8
6
0
6
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ENHANCED PITCH ANGLE DIFFUSION DUE TO ELECTRON-WHISTLER

INTERACTIONS DURING DISTURBED TIMES

W. Wykes, S. C. Chapman, and G. Rowlands

Space and Astrophysics Group, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK

ABSTRACT

During periods of increased magnetospheric activ-
ity, whistler wave emissions have been observed with
increased wave amplitudes. We consider a pitch an-
gle diﬀusion mechanism that is shown to scale with
whistler wave amplitude and hence is ’switched on’
during these periods of intense activity.

We consider the interaction between relativistic elec-
trons and two oppositely directed, parallel propa-
gating whistler mode waves. We show that for in-
tense whistlers this process is stochastic and results
in strong electron pitch angle diﬀusion.

We show that the interaction is rapid, occur on
timescales of the order of tens of electron gyrope-
riods and that the interaction is sensitive to wave
amplitude, wave frequency and electron energy.

Key words: Electron, Whistler, Substorms, Diﬀu-
sion.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Electron whistler interactions have long been consid-
ered as a mechanism for pitch angle scattering. Gy-
roresonance processes with near-parallel propagating
waves (e.g. Kennel and Petschek (1966), Lyons and
Williams (1984)) have been shown to produce pitch
angle diﬀusion for electrons that are at resonance
with a series of whistler waves (see Gendrin (1981)).
We generalize resonant diﬀusion to include all phase
space dynamics, i.e. as well as considering the reso-
nant diﬀusion of trapped electrons we consider diﬀu-
sion of untrapped electrons (we refer to this process
as ‘oﬀ-resonance’ diﬀusion). Therefore we maximize
the area in phase space contributing to pitch angle
diﬀusion.

The underlying dynamics of the interaction between
electrons and a single whistler are inherently sim-
ple, as demonstrated by Laird (1972) who derived
the Hamiltonian for relativistic electrons interacting
with a whistler with a single wave number. However,

for a single monochromatic whistler the process is not
stochastic. We introduce stochasticity by including
an identical, oppositely directed whistler mode wave.

We initially consider a simpliﬁed system consisting
of monochromatic whistlers in order to understand
the underlying behaviour. This treatment is then
extended to consider whistler wave packets, i.e. a
group of waves with a range of frequencies.

We derive approximate equations in the limit of low
whistler wave amplitudes and consider the degree of
pitch angle diﬀusion for waves of diﬀerent frequencies
and bandwidths and for electrons of diﬀerent ener-
gies.

2. EQUATIONS OF MOTION

We derive full relativistic equations of motion and
approximate them in the limit of low wave ampli-
tudes, for the case of monochromatic whistlers and
wave packets. We normalize time to the electron
gyrofrequency Ωe = eB0/me, (where B0 is the back-
ground magnetic ﬁeld), the wave amplitude is nor-
malized to the background magnetic ﬁeld, wave fre-
quency is normalized to the gyrofrequency and we
normalize the electron velocity to the phase velocity
of the waves, given by the electron dispersion relation
(ignoring ion eﬀects):

k2c2
ω2 = 1 −

ω2
pe

ω(ω − Ωe)

(1)

where ωpe is the plasma oscillation frequency. Elec-
trons can become trapped by either of the two
whistlers if they are traveling close to the resonance
velocity, given by:

ω − k · vr = nΩe/γ

(2)

where n is an integer and γ = (1 − v2/c2)−1/2 is the
relativistic factor.

2

Figure 1. Stroboscopic surface of section plots for the monochromatic whistler interaction. For quiet time wave
amplitudes, panel a), all trajectories are regular, with resonances given by the resonance condition Equation (2).
For high wave amplitudes observed during disturbed times, panels b), phase space is dominated by stochastic
trajectories with regular trajectories conﬁned to close to the resonances. The stochastic region is bounded above
and below by the ﬁrst regular, untrapped, trajectories away from resonance, therefore there is a limit on the
diﬀusion of electrons in phase space.

2.1. Monochromatic Whistlers

In the limit of low wave amplitudes the full equations
of motion can be reduced to:

d2x
dt2 =

2bv⊥ 0

γ0

sin [(1/γ0 − ω)t] cos [kx]

(3)

where x is the distance along the background mag-
netic ﬁeld, b is the normalized wave amplitude,
v⊥ 0 is the initial perpendicular velocity and γ0 =

1/p(1 − v⊥

2

0/c2).

2.2. Wave Packet Approximation

Instead of a pair of waves it is more realistic to con-
sider the interaction of a wave packet, ie a small
group of waves with a range of wave frequencies and
wave numbers. We assume the wave amplitude is
non-zero over wave frequency range ∆ω:

b(ω) =( 0

b
0

: ω < ω0 − ∆ω/2
: ω0 − ∆ω/2 < ω < ω0 + ∆ω/2
: ω > ω0 + ∆ω

(4)

where ω0 is the central wave frequency of the
wave packet. Integrating the monochromatic ehistler
equation (3) over the frequency range ∆ω gives the
following wave packet equation:

d2x
dt2 = Ωe

2bv⊥0

1
γ0
1
γ0

sin(cid:20)(
sin(cid:20)(

−ω)t+k0x(cid:21)sin[(t−βx)∆ω/2]
−ω)t−k0x(cid:21)sin[(t+βx)∆ω/2]

(t − βx)

(t + βx)

(5)

2bv⊥0

+ Ωe

γ0

γ0

where 1/β = dω/dk is the group velocity of the
waves. The wave packet equation (5) yields the
monochromatic whistler equation (3) in the limit
∆ω → 0, with amplitude b′ = bΩe∆ω.

3. NUMERICAL RESULTS

The monochromatic and wave packet equations were
solved numerically using a variable order, variable
stepsize diﬀerential equation integrator. We con-
sider physical parameters for the terrestrial magne-
tosphere at L = 6: gyrofrequency, Ωe = 25.3 kHz,
plasma frequency, ωpe = 184 kHz, background mag-
netic ﬁeld, B0 = 144 nT and wave amplitude Bω =
0.5 pT , giving a normalized wave amplitude, con-
sistent with quiet times in the terrestrial magneto-
sphere, b = 10−5 (see for example Nagano et al.
(1996), Parrot (1994) and Summers and Ma (2000)).

The phase plots in Figure 1 are comprised of stro-
boscopic surfaces of section (Benettin et al., 1976)
to sample the full electron phase space. The initial
parallel velocity was varied over the range [−vr, vr],
where vr is the resonance velocity, given by the res-
onance condition, (2), for n = 1. All electrons were

given a constant initial perpendicular velocity, with
v⊥ ≈ 20vr as it was found that a high velocity
anisotropy was required for stochasticity.

In Figure 1 we plot parallel velocity vk = dx/dt
against phase angle ψ, where ψ is the angle between
whistler propagating in a positive direction along
the background ﬁeld and the perpendicular veloc-
ity, v⊥.
In panel a) we consider a whistler wave
amplitude consistent with quiet times (b = 10−5)
all trajectoriesin phase space are regular. There is
little change in vk and hence only weak pitch an-
gle diﬀusion. As the wave amplitude is increased,
stochastic trajectories are introduced, as the regular
trajectories between the two resonances are progres-
sively broken down. In panel b) we consider the case
of intense whistler wave activity during substorms
(b = 10−3, see for example Parrot (1994) and Nagano
et al. (1996)). The stochastic region grows to en-
compass the resonances as the wave amplitude is in-
creased. Regular trajectories are conﬁned to KAM
surfaces (near-integrable trajectories with an approx-
imate constant of the motion (Tabor, 1989)). The
stochastic region is bounded by the ﬁrst untrapped
(regular) trajectories away from the resonances, thus
there is a limit on diﬀusion in phase space.

As well as resonant diﬀusion of trapped electrons,
there is diﬀusion of untrapped electrons throughout
the stochastic region of phase space. Since, for suﬃ-
cient wave amplitudes, the stochastic region can en-
compass the resonances, the diﬀusion of untrapped
electrons, which we refer to as ‘oﬀ-resonance’ diﬀu-
sion, may be enhanced over resonant diﬀusion. In ad-
dition we achieve pitch angle diﬀusion from a larger
area of phase space.

Due to the time dependent nature of the wave packet
equation (5) it is not possible to construct phase dia-
grams as in Figure 1 for the monochromatic whistler
case. Instead we can consider the dynamics of single
electrons. In Figure 2 we show a single trajectory so-
lution of the wave packet equation (5), for quiet time
wave amplitudes and wide (∆ω = Ωe/50 = 500 Hz)
and narrow (∆ω = Ωe/500 = 50 Hz) whistler
wave packets (see for example Carpenter and Sulic
(1988)). We consider the change in pitch angle from
an initial pitch angle of 90◦. For narrow wave packets
there is little change in pitch angle and the trajec-
tory is regular. For wide wave packets the trajec-
tory is stochastic with a large change in pitch angle
(∆α ∼ 25◦) occuring within a few tens of electron
gyroperiods (∼ 10 ms). We can now achieve strong
pitch angle diﬀusion for wave amplitudes consistent
with the quiet time magnetosphere.

4. PITCH ANGLE SCATTERING

Using the wave packet equation (5) with quiet time
whistlers (b = 10−5) and a relatively wide band
whistler (∆ω = Ωe/50 = 500 Hz, (Carpenter and
Sulic, 1988)), we can estimate the degree of pitch
angle scattering. In Figures 3 and 4 we estimate the

3

Figure 2.
Change in pitch angle from an initial
pitch angle of 90◦, for quiet time wave amplitudes
(b = 10−5) and narrow and wide whistler wave pack-
ets. For narrow wave packets there is little change in
pitch angle. For wide wave packets there is a large
change in pitch angle (∆α ∼ 25◦) occuring within a
few tens of electron gyroperiods (∼ 10 ms), hence the
interaction is rapid. Changes in pitch angle attenu-
ate with time and the pitch angle reaches a constant
value.

Figure 3. Log change in pitch angle, (log10 |1+∆α|),
as a function of wave frequency, ω, and initial pitch
angle, α0, for 10 keV electrons (v = 0.2c) and quiet
time (low amplitude),wide band whistler wave packets
(∆ω = Ωe/50). For high to moderate initial pitch
angles (α0 = 50◦ − 90◦) there is a change in pitch
angle of up to 40◦. For low pitch angles (α0 = 5◦ −
10◦) the change in pitch angle is of the order of a
few degrees.

4

while electrons at higher energies (100 keV ) are scat-
tered by lower frequency wave (ω ∼ Ωe/10). M eV
electrons would require extremely low frequency
waves for eﬃcient scattering, hence our mechanism
is most eﬃcient for electrons in the 10 − 100 keV
range.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors would like to acknowledge PPARC for
the funding of this work.

REFERENCES

Benettin G., L. Galgani, J. M. Strelcyn. Kolmogorov
entropy and numerical experiments. Physica A,
14, 2338, 1976.

Carpenter D. L., and D. M. Sulic. Ducted whistler
propagation outside the plasmapause. J. Geophys.
Res., 93, 9731, 1988.

Gendrin R. General Relations between wave ampliﬁ-
cation and particle diﬀusion in a magnetoplasma.
Rev. Geophys., 19, 171, 1981.

Kennel C. F. and H. E. Petschek. Limit on stably
trapped particle ﬂuxes. J. Geophys. Res., 71, 1,
1966.

Laird M. J. Cyclotron resonance in an inhomoge-

neous plamsa. J. Plasma Physics, 8, 255, 1972.

Lyon L. R. and Williams, D. J. Quantitative Aspects
of Magnetospheric Physics. D. Reidel, Hingham,
Mass., 1984.

Nagano I., S. Yagitani, H. Kojima, H. Matsumoto.
Analysis of Wave Normal and Poynting Vectors of
the Chorus Emissions Observed by GEOTAIL. J.
Geomag. Geoelectr., 48, 299, 1996

Parrot M. and C. A. Gaye. A statistical survey of
ELF waves in geostationary orbit. GRL 21, 2463,
1994.

Summers D. and C. Ma. A model for generating rel-
ativistic electrons in the Earth’s inner magneto-
sphere based on gyroresonant wave-particle inter-
actions. J. Geophys. Res., 105, 2625, 2000.

Tabor M. Chaos and integrability in nonlinear dy-
namics - an introduction. New York, Chichester:
Wiley, 1989.

log change in pitch angle, (log10 |1 + ∆α|), as a func-
tion of wave frequency, ω, and initial pitch angle, α0.
We consider the interaction between 10keV electrons
in Figure 3 (100keV electrons in Figure 4) and wide
band whistlers (∆ω = ωe/50). For high to moder-
ate initial pitch angles (α0 = 50◦ − 90◦) there is a
change in pitch angle of up to 40◦. For low pitch
angles (α0 = 5◦ − 10◦) the change in pitch angle is of
the order of a few degrees. In Figure 4 we see a sim-
ilar degree of diﬀusion except that lower frequency
whistler wave packets are required.

Figure 4. As for Figure 3 except for 100 keV elec-
trons (v = 0.5c). Pitch angle scattering from a few
degrees up to 40◦ occurs although lower frequency
whistler wave packets are required.

5. DISCUSSION

We have considered electron-whistler wave particle
interactions to investigate diﬀusion over all phase
space, to include both resonant and ‘oﬀ-resonance’
diﬀusion. We have considered a simpliﬁed interac-
tion with monochromatic whistler wave to under-
stand the underlying behaviour and have shown that
the presence of the second whistler wave introduces
stochastic eﬀects into the system. For wave ampli-
tudes consistent with disturbed times we have shown
that ‘oﬀ-resonance’ diﬀusion occurs and that reso-
nant diﬀusion is unchanged.

We have considered a more realistic case of whistler
wave packets and have shown that for relatively wide
band whistler wave packets strong pitch angle dif-
fusion occurs for wave amplitudes consistent with
quiet, undisturbed, times. For high initial pitch an-
gles we estimate a change in pitch angle of up to 40◦,
while for low pitch angles a change of a few degrees
is estimated.

The eﬀectiveness in scattering electrons of diﬀerent
energies is dependent on the wave frequency. Elec-
trons with low energies (10 keV ) are readily scattered
by waves of around half the electron gyrofrequency,

