0
0
0
2

 

p
e
S
3
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
4
0
9
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Average observed properties of the Earth’s quasi-perpendicular and

quasi-parallel bow shock

A. Czaykowska, T. M. Bauer, R. A. Treumann, and W. Baumjohann

Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur extraterrestrische Physik, Garching, Germany

acz@mpe.mpg.de, thb@mpe.mpg.de, tre@mpe.mpg.de, bj@mpe.mpg.de

ABSTRACT

We present a statistical analysis of 132 dayside (LT 0700-1700) bow shock crossings
of the AMPTE/IRM spacecraft. We perform a superposed epoch analysis of plasma and
magnetic ﬁeld parameters as well as of low frequency magnetic power spectra some min-
utes upstream and downstream of the bow shock by dividing the events into categories
depending on the angle θBn between bow shock normal and interplanetary magnetic
ﬁeld and on the plasma-β, i.e., the ratio of plasma to magnetic pressure. On average,
the proton temperature is nearly isotropic downstream of the quasi-parallel bow shock
(θBn < 45◦) and it is clearly anisotropic with Tp⊥/Tpk ≈ 1.5 downstream of the quasi-
perpendicular bow shock (θBn > 45◦). In the foreshock upstream of the quasi-parallel
bow shock, the power of magnetic ﬂuctuations is roughly 1 order of magnitude larger
(δB ∼ 4 nT for frequencies 0.01–0.04 Hz) than upstream of the quasi-perpendicular
bow shock. There is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the magnetic power spectra upstream
and downstream of the quasi-parallel bow shock, only at the bow shock itself magnetic
power is enhanced by a factor of 4. This enhancement may be due to an ampliﬁcation
of convecting upstream waves or due to wave generation at the shock interface. On the
contrary, downstream of the quasi-perpendicular bow shock the magnetic wave activity
is considerably higher than upstream. Downstream of the quasi-perpendicular low-β
bow shock we ﬁnd a dominance of the left-hand polarized component at frequencies
just below the ion cyclotron frequency with amplitudes of about 3 nT. These waves
are identiﬁed as ion cyclotron waves which grow in a low-β regime due to the proton
temperature anisotropy. We ﬁnd a strong correlation of this anisotropy with the inten-
sity of the left-hand polarized component. Downstream of some nearly perpendicular
(θBn ≈ 90◦) high-β crossings mirror waves are identiﬁed. However, there are also cases
where the conditions for mirror modes are met downstream of the nearly perpendicular
shock, but no mirror waves are observed.

Subject headings: Earth: bow shock – Earth: magnetosheath

– 2 –

1.

Introduction

Since the beginning of the space age, the Earth’s bow shock is of particular interest because
it serves as a unique laboratory for the study of shock waves in collisionless plasmas. Most of our
understanding of structure, dynamics, and dissipation processes of such shocks has come from in
situ spacecraft measurements crossing the bow shock. Early observations of waves and particles
upstream of the bow shock can be found in the special issue of the Journal of Geophysical Research,
86, pp. 4317–4536 [1981]. A collection of observational and theoretical work on the bow shock is
contained in Stone & Tsurutani [1985] and Tsurutani & Stone [1985]. Reviews focusing on the
dissipation processes taking place at the Earth’s bow shock have been given by, e.g., Kennel et al.
[1985] and, more recently, by Omidi [1995]. Plasma wave observations across the bow shock in the
high frequency range have been reviewed by Gurnett [1985]. Schwartz et al. [1996] have reviewed
results concerning low frequency waves in the magnetosheath region behind the bow shock.

Many of the previous measurements have demonstrated that a large variety of nonthermal
particles is generated at the bow shock. While nonthermal electrons can act as a source for high
frequency waves, nonthermal ions can be responsible for low frequency waves. Electrons and ions
reﬂected at the shock stream sunward along the interplanetary magnetic ﬁeld, thus forming the
electron and ion foreshock, respectively.

Structure, dynamics, and dissipation processes of the bow shock vary considerably depending
on the angle θBn between the upstream magnetic ﬁeld and the shock normal, on the plasma β, i.e.,
the ratio of plasma to magnetic pressure in the upstream region, and on the Mach numbers MA
or Mms, i.e., the ratios of the solar wind velocity along the shock normal to the upstream Alfv´en
or magnetosonic speed. For quasi-perpendicular shocks with θBn > 45◦, the main transition from
the solar wind to the magnetosheath is accomplished at a sharp ramp. In contrast, quasi-parallel
shocks with θBn < 45◦ consist of large-amplitude pulsations extending into the foreshock region. For
larger Mach numbers this pulsating structure continuously re-forms by virtue of collisions between
convecting upstream waves and the shock [Burgess, 1989] or due to an instability at the interface
between solar wind and heated downstream plasma [Winske et al., 1990].

Two-ﬂuid theories of shocks have indicated the presence of a critical magnetosonic Mach num-
ber, M ∗, above which ion reﬂection is required to provide the necessary dissipation. However, it
has been demonstrated by observations [Greenstadt & Mellott, 1987; Sckopke et al., 1990] that ion
reﬂection occurs also below M ∗ and that the distinction between subcritical (Mms < M ∗) and
supercritical (Mms > M ∗) shocks is not sharp. Whereas the ramp of quasi-perpendicular shocks
at high Mach numbers is preceded by a foot and followed by an overshoot, these features are less
prominent at low Mach numbers [Mellott & Livesey, 1987]. While quasi-parallel shocks are steady
at low Alfv´en Mach numbers, MA ≤ 2.3, they become unsteady for higher Mach numbers, where
they continuously re-form [Krauss-Varban & Omidi, 1991].

An important role in the dissipation process is played by ions reﬂected at the bow shock. At
quasi-parallel shocks they can escape from the shock into the foreshock region and drive ion beam

– 3 –

instabilities. These instabilities may excite large-amplitude waves observed in the foreshock region,
e.g., by Le & Russell [1992] and Blanco-Cano & Schwartz [1995]. At quasi-perpendicular shocks the
reﬂected ions gyrate back to the shock and enter the downstream region, where their presence leads
to a strong perpendicular temperature anisotropy [Sckopke et al., 1983]. This anisotropy leads to
the generation of ion cyclotron and mirror waves [e.g., Price et al., 1986; Gary et al., 1993]. These
waves have been observed in the Earth’s magnetosheath, e.g., by Sckopke et al. [1990] and Anderson
[1993,1994]. Closer to the magnetopause the mechanism of ﬁeld line draping leads to the
et al.
formation of anisotropic ion distributions and the formation of a plasma depletion layer. Waves in
this environment have also been described by Anderson et al. [1993,1994]. Large-amplitude mirror
waves have been observed in planetary magnetospheres, e.g., by Bavassano-Cattaneo et al. [1998]
in Saturn’s magnetosphere, where the ion temperature anisotropies are due to both shock heating
and ﬁeld line draping.

In the present study we investigate the average behavior of plasma and magnetic ﬁeld param-
eters including the low frequency magnetic wave power as measured by AMPTE/IRM during a
fairly large number of bow shock crossings. We show that, as expected, quasi-perpendicular and
quasi-parallel bow shocks behave diﬀerently even in their average properties. This diﬀerence has
been quantiﬁed in our investigation. Section 2 provides a short description of the available data.
It is followed by Section 3 which compares the properties of quasi-perpendicular and quasi-parallel
shocks. In Section 4 low and high-β bow shock crossings are compared for the quasi-perpendicular
shock, and it is outlined why a classiﬁcation by β is preferred to a classiﬁcation by Mach number.
Finally, Section 5 presents concluding remarks.

2. Data description

The present analysis uses data from the AMPTE/IRM satellite. From the periods when the
apogee of AMPTE/IRM was on the Earth’s dayside (August – December 1984 and August 1985 –
January 1986), we have selected all crossings of the satellite through the Earth’s bow shock in the
local time interval 0700 – 1700, whenever there was a reasonable amount of data measured on both
sides of the bow shock, i.e., at least 2 min upstream and 4 min downstream. Altogether this gives
132 events, with some events belonging to multiple crossings due to the fast movement of the bow
shock relative to the slowly moving satellite. Due to the satellite’s orbital parameters, all crossings
occurred at low latitudes, i.e., in the interval ±30◦ from the ecliptic plane. We analyze the data from
the triaxial ﬂuxgate magnetometer described by L¨uhr et al. [1985] which gives the magnetic ﬁeld
vector at a rate of 32 samples per second. In addition, we use the plasma moments calculated from
the three-dimensional particle distribution functions measured once every spacecraft revolution
(∼ 4.3 s) by the plasma instrument [Paschmann et al., 1985].

In Fig. 1 we show the locations of the individual bow shock crossings rotated into the ecliptic
along meridians. Cases where the angle θBn is less than 45◦, i.e., quasi-parallel events, and cases
where the angle θBn is greater than 45◦, i.e., quasi-perpendicular events, are shown in addition

– 4 –

Fig. 1.— GSM-Positions of the 132 AMPTE/IRM bow shock crossings rotated to the ecliptic
plane along meridians. Coordinates are given in Earth radii (RE). Quasi-perpendicular crossings
are marked with a square, quasi-parallel crossings with a triangle. The solid curve represents the
best ﬁt hyperbola of Fairﬁeld [1971].

to the best ﬁt hyperbola of Fairﬁeld [1971] using data from the Imp 1 to 4 and Explorer 33 and
35 spacecraft. It is found that most of the AMPTE/IRM bow shock crossings occurred closer to
the Earth than Fairﬁeld’s average bow shock. Since we analyze only bow shock crossings on the
dayside, the best ﬁt hyperbola derived from our data is not reliable at the ﬂanks. However, the
distance of the subsolar point is well deﬁned. We ﬁnd a value of 12.3 RE, which is more than 2 RE

– 5 –

closer to the Earth than the value of 14.6 RE found by Fairﬁeld. In his study, Formisano [1979]
analyzed 1500 bow shock crossings. He normalized the observed distance Robs of these crossings to
an average value of the solar wind dynamical pressure using

Rnorm = Robs(cid:18) nobsv2

n0v2

obs

0 (cid:19)

1/6

(1)

with a typical value of the solar wind speed v0 = 450 km/s and particle density n0 = 9.4 cm−3.
He derived a distance of the subsolar point of 11.9 RE. Applying the same normalization to the
AMPTE/IRM data, we ﬁnd a value of 11.7 RE, which is in good agreement with the result of
Formisano [1979]. This indicates that the diﬀerence of the distance of the subsolar point between
Fairﬁeld’s and our study is due to diﬀerent average solar wind dynamical pressure. We interpret
this ﬁnding as a solar cycle eﬀect since the AMPTE/IRM data are obtained close to solar activity
minimum, whereas Fairﬁeld’s data set is from the years 1964-1968, when solar activity increased
from minimum to maximum. In solar minimum the Earth is hit more frequently by high speed
solar wind streams than in solar maximum. The high speed solar wind has, although less dense,
a higher dynamical pressure than the slow solar wind. Hence, the solar wind dynamical pressure
is usually higher on average during solar minimum than during solar maximum [Fairﬁeld, 1979].
In addition, during solar minimum, the heliospheric plasma sheet described by Winterhalter et al.
[1994] is fairly ﬂat, i.e., near the ecliptic plane. With its very high densities it can enhance the
solar wind pressure although the solar wind velocity is only around 350 km/s.

In a more recent study, Peredo et al.

[1995] investigated 1392 bow shock crossings from 17
spacecraft during the years 1963–1979, i.e., one and a half solar cycles. They found a dependence
on the Alfv´en Mach number MA. With the average Alfv´en Mach number MA = 5.6 ± 2.9 of the
AMPTE/IRM data set the distance of the subsolar point should be in the range of 14.0-14.9 RE.
Performing a normalization with the average values of n0 = 7.8 cm−3 and v0 = 454 km/s used by
Peredo et al. [1995], the distance of the subsolar point of the AMPTE/IRM data set is 12.1 RE.
The results of Peredo et al. [1995] are thus not in agreement with our results and those of Formisano
[1979]. Peredo et al. [1995] explain this disagreement with the fact that the study of Formisano
[1979] is biased by the dominance of the high latitude HEOS 2 bow shock crossing. However, our
data are low-latitude and agree well with the results of Formisano [1979]. In principle, the bow
shock position depends on the magnetopause position and on the standoﬀ distance between the
magnetopause and the bow shock. Whereas the magnetopause position depends only on the solar
wind dynamical pressure, the standoﬀ distance at a given Mach number depends on the polytropic
index γ (Spreiter et al., 1966). Since our data were sampled at typical solar minimum conditions,
the polytropic index might be diﬀerent than in other phases of the solar cycle. This might contribute
to the discrepancy.

– 6 –

3. Comparison of quasi-perpendicular and quasi-parallel bow shock crossings

We divided the 132 events into 92 quasi-perpendicular (θBn > 45◦) and 40 quasi-parallel
(θBn < 45◦) cases and compared the average behavior of plasma and magnetic ﬁeld parameters
and low frequency magnetic ﬂuctuations of the two groups.

Actually, for the quasi-parallel bow shock crossings θBn varies substantially with time in the
dynamic foreshock region. For these events the angle θBn had to be averaged over a time interval
of about 20 s further upstream to identify them with quasi-parallel shock crossings. The high level
of ﬂuctuations in the region upstream of the quasi-parallel bow shock is well known [e.g., Hoppe et
al., 1981, Greenstadt et al., 1995].

In order to obtain the average behavior of plasma and magnetic ﬁeld parameter at the bow
shock, one would ideally need average spatial proﬁles of these parameters. However, with just one
satellite and in a region with strong plasma ﬂows and strong motions of the region itself, it is not
unambiguously possible to translate the time proﬁles into spatial proﬁles. Therefore we perform
a superposed epoch analysis by averaging time proﬁles centered on the bow shock crossing time
and consider the result as an approximation for the average spatial behavior. The time series are
aligned on the keytime with the upstream always preceding, i.e., for outbound crossings the time
sequence had to be reversed.

The keytime, i.e., the bow shock crossing time, is identiﬁed with the steepest drop in the proton
velocity. This drop is well deﬁned for the quasi-perpendicular cases and corresponds, of course, to
the shock ramp. Due to the large-amplitude pulsations in the foreshock, the keytime cannot as easily
be found in the quasi-parallel cases. We therefore applied, as an additional criterion for the quasi-
parallel events, that no solar wind-like plasma is allowed to be visible in the downstream region.
As noted in Section 1, quasi-parallel shocks consist of large-amplitude pulsations associated with a
sequence of partial transitions from solar wind-like to magnetosheath-like plasma and vice versa.
Thus our deﬁnition of the keytime implies that the keytime of quasi-parallel shocks corresponds to
the downstream end of this pulsating transition region.

We use data from 2 min upstream to 4 min downstream for the analysis of the plasma and
magnetic ﬁeld parameters and data from 3 min upstream to 9 min downstream for the low frequency
ﬂuctuations, although not for all events such long time proﬁles are available.

One has to be aware that superposed epoch analysis can mask small scale structures, in par-
ticular if they are not visible in all events, like magnetic foot and overshoot structures. These
and other features can be smeared out due to diﬀerent bow shock velocities with respect to the
satellite for diﬀerent crossings. This eﬀect becomes worse the farther away from the keytime the
data are averaged. Nevertheless, superposed epoch analysis is useful to reveal the average plasma
and magnetic ﬁeld parameters and the typical features in the vicinity of the key-structure as has
been shown by, e.g., Paschmann et al. [1993], Phan et al. [1994], and Bauer et al. [1997] in there
studies at the magnetopause.

– 7 –

Fig. 2.— Superposed-epoch analysis of plasma and magnetic ﬁeld parameters from 2 min upstream
to 4 min downstream of the bow shock (BS) of 92 quasi-perpendicular (left) and 40 quasi-parallel
(right) bow shock crossings. Shown are from top to bottom the magnitude B of the magnetic ﬁeld,
the magnitude vp of the proton velocity, the proton velocity vn parallel to the bow shock normal
vector, and the root mean square amplitude δB2 of magnetic ﬂuctuations.

3.1. Plasma and magnetic ﬁeld parameters

The time series adjusted in the way described above are superimposed by averaging 10-s bins.
The averages are performed geometrically in order to reduce the dominance of cases with large
dynamical ranges. The result of the superposition is shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. The averages of
the downstream and upstream values, excluding the 4 bins closest to the bow shock on both sides,
are given in Table 1, together with the ratios of the downstream to the upstream values.

The top panel of Fig. 2 shows the magnitude B of the magnetic ﬁeld. It increases steeply by
a factor of 3 at the quasi-perpendicular bow shock and gradually by a factor of 1.8 at the quasi-
parallel bow shock. The proton bulk velocity vp, shown in the next panel, decreases to somewhat
less than half of its solar wind value for the quasi-perpendicular bow shock and to slightly more
than half for the quasi-parallel bow shock. The third panel shows the proton velocity parallel to
the shock normal vector. The latter is calculated from the Fairﬁeld bow shock model [Fairﬁeld,

– 8 –

Table 1: Averages of plasma and magnetic ﬁeld parameters

Upstream Downstream

Ratio

q-⊥

9.4 ± 0.1

28.5 ± 0.8

3.0 ± 0.1

q-k

10.9 ± 0.8

19.6 ± 1.1

1.8 ± 0.2

q-⊥

436 ± 6

198 ± 7

0.45 ± 0.03

q-k

332 ± 16

171 ± 17

0.52 ± 0.08

q-⊥ −401 ± 9

−122 ± 7

0.30 ± 0.02

q-k −283 ± 18

−96 ± 16

0.34 ± 0.08

q-⊥

0.6 ± 0.1

2.3 ± 0.5

4.0 ± 1.4

q-k

1.9 ± 0.3

3.2 ± 0.5

1.7 ± 0.5

q-⊥

7.4 ± 0.1

20.1 ± 0.4

2.7 ± 0.1

q-k

7.8 ± 0.3

14.4 ± 1.1

1.8 ± 0.2

B [nT]

vp [km/s]

vn [km/s]

δB2 [nT]

N ∗

e [cm−3]

N2p [10−2 cm−3]

q-⊥ 0.15 ± 0.01

0.38 ± 0.03

2.6 ± 0.3

q-k

4.0 ± 0.5

2.6±0.5

0.7 ± 0.2

Te [104 K]

Tp⊥/Tpk

q-⊥ 27.5 ± 0.4

71.3 ± 0.7

2.6 ± 0.1

q-k

q-⊥

q-k

43 ± 1

73 ± 3

1.7 ± 0.1

—

1.51 ± 0.06

1.05 ± 0.03

—

Table 1: Averages of 92 quasi-perpendicular (q-⊥) and 40 quasi-parallel (q-k) bow shock crossings
from 120 to 20 seconds upstream and 20 to 240 seconds downstream: the magnitude B of the
magnetic ﬁeld, the magnitude vp of the proton velocity, the proton velocity vn parallel to the bow
shock normal vector, the magnetic ﬂuctuations δB2, the corrected electron density N ∗
e , the density
of energetic protons N2p, the electron temperature Te, and the proton temperature anisotropy
Tp⊥/Tpk. Ratios of the downstream to the upstream values are given in the last column.

– 9 –

Fig. 3.— Superposed-epoch analysis of plasma parameters from 2 min upstream to 4 min down-
stream of the bow shock (BS) of 92 quasi-perpendicular (left) and 40 quasi-parallel (right) bow
shock crossings. Shown are from top to bottom the corrected electron density N ∗
e , the density
of energetic protons N2p, the electron temperature Te, and the proton temperature anisotropy
Tp⊥/Tpk.

1971]. For both categories vn decreases by more than the magnitude of the proton velocity vp,
indicating that the plasma is deﬂected away from the bow shock normal direction in order to ﬂow
around the magnetopause. In the last panel we show the root mean square amplitude δB2 of the
high resolution magnetic ﬁeld measurements during one spin period:

δB2 =" 3
Xk=1

1
n

n

(Bk,i − ¯Bk)2#
Xi=1

1/2

(2)

where i = 1, ..., n counts the measurements during one spin period, and Bk, k = 1, 2, 3 denote
the magnetic ﬁeld vector components. ¯Bk is the average of Bk taken during one spin period. At
the keytime, δB2 is approximately half the jump of the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld. Further
upstream and downstream it is a measure of wave activity with Doppler-shifted periods shorter than
the spin period of about 4.3 s. Although the magnetic ﬁeld increases only gradually at the quasi-
parallel bow shock, δB2 is strongly enhanced at the bow shock crossing time and has a maximum

– 10 –

immediately downstream of the shock. This jump in δB2, as a parameter measured independently
of the velocity, is a conﬁrmation that the selection of the crossing times with the help of the velocity
jump (Section 2) is reasonable. In the foreshock region upstream of the quasi-parallel bow shock,
δB2 is considerably higher than in the solar wind regime upstream of the quasi-perpendicular bow
shock.

The ﬁrst panel of Fig. 3 shows the electron density N ∗

e , approximately corrected for the low-
energy cut-oﬀ of the plasma instrument [Sckopke et al., 1990]. Like the magnetic ﬁeld, the density
rises sharply at the quasi-perpendicular bow shock, whereas it increases gradually at the quasi-
parallel bow shock. The second panel shows N2p, the proton density in the energy interval 8-40
keV. N2p increases by a factor of 2.6 at the quasi-perpendicular bow shock. In the foreshock region
upstream of the quasi-parallel bow shock N2p is an order of magnitude higher than upstream of the
quasi-perpendicular bow shock and decreases by a factor of about 0.7 in the downstream region.

In the next panel the electron temperature Te is shown. Downstream of the quasi-parallel bow
shock crossing it has about the same value as downstream of the quasi-perpendicular bow shock.
However, upstream of the quasi-parallel bow shock Te is about a factor of 1.6 higher than upstream
of the quasi-perpendicular bow shock. The reason for this is again the foreshock region where
the solar wind kinetic energy is already partly transformed into thermal energy. The last panel
shows the proton temperature anisotropy Tp⊥/Tpk. The plasma instrument did not resolve the cold,
supersonic distributions of the solar wind ions. The calculated proton densities and temperatures
are therefore not reliable in the solar wind regime. Hence, the proton temperature anisotropy cannot
be determined in the upstream region and is therefore set to 1. Whereas the proton temperature
anisotropy downstream of the quasi-parallel bow shock is insigniﬁcant, there is a strong proton
temperature anisotropy, Tp⊥/Tpk > 1.4, downstream of the quasi-perpendicular bow shock, with
a maximum value of more than 2 immediately behind the shock. Comparing the downstream
values of the electron and proton temperatures (not shown), we ﬁnd Tp ≈ 4.3 × 106 K ≈ 6 Te for
the quasi-parallel bow shock and Tp ≈ 2.9 × 106 K ≈ 4 Te for the quasi-perpendicular bow shock.
Whereas the electron temperature is slightly anisotropic, Te⊥/Tek ≈ 0.9, upstream and downstream
of quasi-perpendicular shocks, no signiﬁcant anisotropy is observed at quasi-parallel shocks.

3.2. Low frequency magnetic ﬂuctuations

In order to analyze the low frequency magnetic ﬂuctuations we perform a spectral analysis of
the magnetic ﬁeld using a cosine-bell ﬁlter [see, e.g., Bauer et al., 1995]. The Fourier transform
is taken over a time interval of 4 min. Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 show the resulting power spectra of
the compressive and the right- and left-hand polarized modes, respectively.
In each graph the
center time (-3,-1,1,3,5,7) of the transformed time interval is given in minutes relative to crossing
time. A cross marks the proton cyclotron frequency fcp = eB/2πmp with mp the proton mass.
The solar wind (SW) spectrum of Fig. 4, 3 min upstream of the quasi-perpendicular bow shock,
shows a structureless decrease to higher frequencies following the power law S ∼ f −1.3. The

– 11 –

Fig. 4.— Superposed-epoch analysis of magnetic spectra of 92 quasi-perpendicular (left) and 40
quasi-parallel bow shock crossings (right) from 3 min upstream to 1 min downstream. Solid line:
compressive component, dashed line: left hand polarized component, dotted line: right hand po-
larized component. The cross with the horizontal error bar marks the proton cyclotron frequency.
The acronyms SW, BS, SH mean solar wind, bow shock, and magnetosheath, respectively.

compressive mode lies below the transverse modes that represent Alfv´en waves frequently observed
in the interplanetary medium. They are thought to have their origin in the vicinity of the Sun

– 12 –

Fig. 5.— Superposed-epoch analysis of magnetic spectra of 92 quasi-perpendicular (left) and 40
quasi-parallel bow shock crossings (right) from 3 min to 7 min downstream. Same format as Fig. 4.

[Belcher & Davis, 1971]. The spectrum upstream of the quasi-parallel bow shock has much more
power than that upstream of the quasi-perpendicular bow shock. It also has a diﬀerent structure:
For lower frequencies it shows a ﬂatter decrease (S ∼ f −0.5), while for higher frequencies it decreases
more steeply (S ∼ f −2.0). The kink in the spectrum lies below the proton cyclotron frequency.

– 13 –

The next power spectra (-1, SW/BS) contain magnetic ﬁeld data from the upstream region
and the bow shock itself. At the quasi-perpendicular bow shock the compressive mode at low
frequencies is one order of magnitude higher compared to the transverse modes and follows a power
law of S ∼ f −2.1. This represents simply the spectrum of the jump of the magnetic ﬁeld across the
shock ﬁltered with a cosine bell function. The spectra of the transverse modes are a little higher
than 2 min earlier and the decrease with frequency is not constant any more. At the quasi-parallel
bow shock the increase of the magnetic ﬁeld is not visible, which is not surprising since the magnetic
ﬁeld increases only gradually. Level and structure of the spectrum are similar to those calculated
2 min earlier.

The spectra (1, SW/BS) contain magnetic ﬁeld data from again the bow shock itself and from
the magnetosheath just downstream of the bow shock. At the quasi-perpendicular bow shock the
compressive mode behaves similar to the spectrum 2 min earlier, whereas the spectral power of
the transverse modes is higher than 2 min earlier. Just below the proton cyclotron frequency ﬁrst
indications of a plateau are visible. At the quasi-parallel bow shock wave activity is signiﬁcantly
enhanced by a factor of 4 compared to the upstream spectra. Again all three modes behave similar.
The proton cyclotron frequencies increase according to the magnetic ﬁeld increase by a factor of 3
at the quasi-perpendicular bow shock and by a factor of 2 at the quasi-parallel bow shock.

Figure 5 shows that for both categories of shock crossings the spectra do not change much in
the interval 2 to 8 min downstream of the bow shock. Below fcp the compressive and the right-hand
polarized modes downstream of the quasi-perpendicular bow shock follow a power law S ∼ f −1.1,
whereas the spectral energy of the left-hand polarized mode is clearly enhanced in the frequency
interval from about 0.1 Hz to about the proton cyclotron frequency. This fact is investigated more
carefully in Section 4. Downstream of the quasi-parallel bow shock the spectral energy is again
higher than downstream of the quasi-perpendicular bow shock. For f < fcp it follows the power
law S ∼ f −0.8. 3 min after the crossing the spectral energy is higher than in the 2 later spectra but
already lower than directly at the bow shock. For both categories the spectral energy decreases
steeply (S ∼ f −2.6) for f > fcp.

3.3. Discussion

The processes in the bow shock transition region itself cannot be described in terms of mag-
netohydrodynamics (MHD). However, if one considers the bow shock as an inﬁnitesimally thin
discontinuity one can derive from the MHD equations the Rankine-Hugoniot jump conditions (see,
e.g., Siscoe, 1983), which are relations for the conditions in the plasma upstream and downstream
of the discontinuity under the assumption of time independence.

For mass continuity the jump condition is

n2vn2 − n1vn1 = 0

(3)

– 14 –

where the subscripts 1 and 2 denote the upstream and downstream values of the corresponding
parameters, respectively. According to Eq. (3) the product of the downstream-to-upstream ratio
of the electron density Ne and the normal proton velocity vn, which is equivalent to the plasma
bulk speed normal to the discontinuity, must be unity. For the quasi-parallel events this product is
observed to be about 0.6. This fact is not surprising, since the considered upstream time proﬁles
are not taken from the quiet solar wind regime but from the dynamic foreshock region, which is
highly time dependent. For the quasi-perpendicular events this product is observed to be about
0.8, which means that the jump condition Eq. (3) is not fully satisﬁed. This could be explained
by the fact that we have not measured the exact electron density, but only the density of electrons
with energies between 15 eV and 30 keV. Electrons with higher energies are negligible since already
in the energy range of 1.8 - 30 keV the upstream density is of the order of 10−5 cm−3. However,
particularly in the cold solar wind, electrons with energies below the instrument cut-oﬀ contribute
an essential part to the total electron density. Therefore we use the corrected electron density N ∗
e .
The correction is calculated with the assumption of a Maxwellian distribution of the measured
temperature. However, as has been measured, e.g., recently by the Wind spacecraft [Fig. 4 of Lin,
1997], the quiet solar wind ﬂow cannot be described by a single Maxwellian distribution over its
whole energy range. Therefore the electron density could easily be overestimated by the correction,
especially in the cold solar wind regime where the low energy electrons are more important than in
the warmer magnetosheath regime. In order to satisfy the jump condition Eq. (3) we can estimate,
that the value of the corrected electron density upstream of the quasi-perpendicular bow shock is
about 20% too high if we assume that the error in the downstream value is not of importance.
Other factors for the apparent deviation from mass continuity could be the unknown bow shock
motion, which changes the downstream plasma velocity by a higher percentage than the upstream
plasma velocity, and the uncertainty of the shock normal vector.

For an exactly parallel shock wave one derives from the Rankine-Hugoniot jump condition that
the magnetic ﬁeld remains constant in magnitude and direction and one is left with the equations
for a purely hydrodynamic shock wave. In the case of an exactly perpendicular shock wave the
jump conditions give the relation

(4)

n2
n1

B2
B1

=

=

v1
v2

For the limit of high Mach numbers, i.e., the Alfv´en Mach number MA → ∞ and the sonic
Mach number Ms → ∞, Eq. (4) has a value of 4 for γ = 5/3. Since we do not observe the extreme
cases of exactly perpendicular and exactly parallel geometry but quasi-perpendicular and quasi-
parallel shock wave crossings with ﬁnite Mach numbers the numbers given above are not reached.
For the quasi-perpendicular bow shock the ratio Eq. (4) is about 3 for the average magnetic ﬁeld B
and proton normal velocity vn, and somewhat less for the corrected electron density N ∗
e according
to the above mentioned probable overestimation of this parameter in the solar wind regime. For
the quasi-parallel bow shock the change in the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld is signiﬁcantly lower
than for the quasi-perpendicular bow shock, which is consistent with theory.

– 15 –

In their study of subcritical quasi-perpendicular shocks, Thomsen et al., [1985] found that the
downstream electron temperature is nearly isotropic, Te⊥2/Tek2 ≈ 0.9 , and that the downstream-
to-upstream ratio Te⊥2/Te⊥1 of the perpendicular temperature is approximately equal to the ratio
B2/B1 of the magnetic ﬁeld strength. From the latter result they concluded that the net heating is
adiabatic, although Te⊥/B is not constant. Obtaining averages, Te⊥2/Tek2 ≈ 0.9, Te⊥2/Te⊥1 ≈ 2.6,
and B2/B1 ≈ 3.0, we can conﬁrm these results for our data set of (subcritical and supercritical)
quasi-perpendicular shocks. Moreover, isotropy of the downstream electron temperature and adia-
batic net heating is also found for our data set of quasi-parallel shocks, for which we obtain averages
Te⊥2/Tek2 ≈ 1.0, Te⊥2/Te⊥1 ≈ 1.7, and B2/B1 ≈ 1.8.

An interesting question of shock physics is how the dissipated bulk ﬂow energy of the solar wind
is partitioned amongst ion and electron heating. For the average proton-to-electron temperature
ratio we found Tp/Te ≈ 6 downstream of the quasi-parallel bow shock and Tp/Te ≈ 4 downstream of
the quasi-perpendicular bow shock. Hence, for quasi-parallel shocks proton heating is more favored
with respect to electron heating than for quasi-perpendicular shocks.

Let us turn to the low frequency waves of Fig. 4 and Fig. 5. At quasi-parallel bow shocks
the wave power observed 3 min upstream of the keytime is much higher than the power of the
interplanetary Alfv´en waves observed upstream of quasi-perpendicular shocks. This enhanced power
reﬂects upstream waves generated in the foreshock. Observations of upstream waves have recently
been reviewed by Greenstadt et al. [1995] and Russell & Farris [1995]. The nonlinear steepening of
the shock leads to whistler precursors phase standing in the shock frame. The interaction between
ions reﬂected at the shock and the incoming solar wind can drive ion beam instabilities. These are
probably the source of large-amplitude waves observed at periods around 30 s. Finally, there are
upstream propagating whistlers with frequencies around 1 Hz, which seem to be generated directly
at the shock. The most striking feature in the average spectrum of upstream waves observed
3 min before the keytime is the kink at 0.04 Hz ≈ fcp/3. The average power measured in the
ﬂat portion 0.01–0.04 Hz of the spectrum corresponds to a mean square amplitude δB1 ≈ 4 nT or
δB1/B ≈ 0.4. Large-amplitude waves observed in this frequency range [Le & Russell, 1992; Blanco-
Cano & Schwartz, 1995] have been interpreted as upstream propagating magnetosonic waves excited
by the right-hand resonant ion beam instability, upstream propagating Alfv´en/ion cyclotron waves
excited by the left-hand resonant ion beam instability, or downstream propagating magnetosonic
waves excited by the non-resonant instability. Whereas the upstream propagating magnetosonic
waves should be left-hand polarized in the shock frame (and also in the spacecraft frame), the
other two wave types should be right-hand polarized. This might explain why none of the two
circular polarizations dominates in our average spectra. Moreover, the compressional component
is comparable to the two transverse components. This shows that the waves propagate at oblique
angles to the magnetic ﬁeld. For oblique propagation, low frequency waves have only a small helicity
[Gary, 1986]. Thus they are rather linearly than circularly polarized.

The power spectra presented by Le & Russell [1992] exhibit clear peaks at f ≈ fcp/3. Looking
into the spectra of individual time intervals, we ﬁnd that sometimes the IRM data exhibit similar

– 16 –

spectral peaks. However, most of the individual spectra do not have clear peaks, but are rather ﬂat
in the range 0.01–0.04 Hz like the average spectrum of Fig. 4. The steep decrease of the power above
about f ≈ fcp/3 is common to our spectra and those reported previously. In fact, the maximum
growth rate of the ion beam generated waves is expected for frequencies below the proton cyclotron
frequency [e.g., Scholer et al., 1997].

In Fig. 2 we saw that magnetic ﬂuctuations above 0.23 Hz in the foreshock have root mean
square amplitudes δB2 ≈ 1.5 nT. This is comparable to typical amplitudes of the upstream propa-
gating whistlers. In individual time intervals these narrow-band waves lead to clear spectral peaks
at frequencies around 1 Hz. However, since the frequency varies from event to event, no such peak
appears in the average spectra.

At the keytime of quasi-parallel bow shocks we observed a clear enhancement of the wave
power. This enhancement can either be due to an ampliﬁcation of the upstream waves or due
to wave generation at the shock interface. Wave generation at the shock due to the interface
instability has been found in hybrid simulations of Winske et al. [1990] and Scholer et al. [1997].
This instability is driven by the interaction between the incoming solar wind ions and the heated
downstream plasma at the shock interface. Ampliﬁcation of upstream waves has been predicted
by McKenzie & Westphal [1969] who analyzed the transmission of MHD waves across a fast shock.
They found that the amplitude of Alfv´en waves increases by a factor of 3. For compressional waves
the ampliﬁcation can even be stronger. However, the hybrid simulations of Krauss-Varban [1995]
show that the transmission of waves across the shock is complicated by mode conversion.

The proton temperature anisotropy downstream of the quasi-perpendicular bow shock serves
as a source of free energy. According to both observations and simulations this kind of free energy
drives two modes of low frequency waves under the plasma conditions in the magnetosheath: the
ion cyclotron wave and the mirror mode (see e.g., Sckopke et al., 1990, Hubert et al., 1989 and
Anderson et al., 1994 for observations, Price et al., 1986, and Gary et al., 1993 for simulations, and
Schwartz et al. 1996 for a review).

Which of these waves grow under which conditions is investigated in Section 4, where we divide
the crossings of quasi-perpendicular shocks into cases with low and high upstream β, respectively.
It turned out that for this classiﬁcation by β the diﬀerences become somewhat clearer than for a
classiﬁcation by upstream Mach number. The critical Mach number M ∗ above which ion reﬂection
is required to provide the necessary dissipation is strongly dependent on the plasma-β [Edmiston
& Kennel, 1984]. We have calculated the ratio Mms/M ∗ for our shock crossings and have found
that all subcritical shocks are low-β, i.e., that the classiﬁcation low-β versus high-β is more or less
identical to the classiﬁcation subcritical versus supercritical. The reason for this is that M ∗ → 1 for
β ≫ 1. As the excitation of mirror and ion cyclotron waves depends on β, the results of Section 4
should be interpreted as the eﬀect of the plasma-β and not as an eﬀect of subcritical or supercritical
Mach numbers.

For the quasi-parallel bow shocks, we could not investigate the diﬀerence between subcritical

– 17 –

and supercritical shocks, because no subcritical quasi-parallel shock was identiﬁed in the data set.
Trying higher thresholds for the division into low and high Mach numbers, we did not ﬁnd any
qualitative diﬀerences. In this context it should be noted that only one of the cases in our data
set has an Alfv´en Mach number in the range MA ≤ 2.3, for which quasi-parallel shocks are steady
according to the hybrid simulations of Krauss-Varban & Omidi [1991].

4. Comparison of quasi-perpendicular low-β and high-β bow shock crossings

In order to reveal the origin of the left-hand polarized component in the power spectra down-
stream of the quasi-perpendicular bow shock (Fig. 5) we divide the crossings into classes with low
(< 0.5) and high (> 1.0) upstream β and compare these two classes. There are 20 low-β and
47 high-β cases. The crossings with 0.5 ≤ β ≤ 1.0 are not included in this analysis in order to
emphasize the diﬀerences between the low-β and high-β regimes.

Fig. 6.— Superposed-epoch analysis of the plasma parameter β, the proton temperature anisotropy
Tp⊥/Tpk, and the mirror instability criterion from 2 min upstream to 4 min downstream of the quasi-
perpendicular bow shock (BS) on the left for 20 low-β, on the right of 47 high-β crossings.

4.1. Plasma and magnetic ﬁeld parameters

In Fig. 6 we show some interesting diﬀerences between the low-β and high-β categories. Of
course the plasma parameter β diﬀers essentially. In the upstream region β is derived by setting the
proton density to the corrected electron density and the proton temperature to 10−5 K, the long

– 18 –

term average of the proton temperature, since proton distribution functions are not well measured
in the cold solar wind (Section 3.1). The classiﬁcation for the low-β and high-β categories is
derived from the estimated plasma β in the upstream region. The ﬁrst panel of Fig. 6 shows that
the same classiﬁcation could be obtained using the plasma-β of the downstream region with the
limits shifted to larger values. The most striking diﬀerences between the low-β and high-β bow
shock are shown in the next two panels, i.e., the proton temperature anisotropy Tp⊥/Tpk and the
mirror wave instability criterion. Both parameters are again determined only in the downstream
region. The instability criterion for almost perpendicular propagation of the mirror mode in its
general form [Hasegawa, 1969] is given by

−1 +Xj

βj⊥(cid:18) βj⊥

βjk

− 1(cid:19) > 0.

(5)

The subscript j denotes the particle species (j = e, p for electrons and protons, respectively).

Downstream of the quasi-perpendicular low-β bow shock the proton temperature anisotropy is
very high, Tp⊥/Tpk ≈ 2.5, immediately behind the shock and remains high, Tp⊥/Tpk > 2, throughout
the whole magnetosheath interval investigated. Downstream of the quasi-perpendicular high-β bow
shock the proton temperature anisotropy is also signiﬁcant, but lower compared to the low-β bow
shock, i.e., Tp⊥/Tpk ≈ 1.8 just behind the bow shock and Tp⊥/Tpk ≈ 1.3 further downstream.
The mirror instability criterion is only marginally satisﬁed immediately downstream of the quasi-
perpendicular low-β bow shock and is not satisﬁed at later times, since the instability criterion
does not only depend on the particle temperature anisotropy but also on the absolute value of
β. Downstream of the quasi-perpendicular high-β bow shock the mirror instability criterion is
satisﬁed in the entire interval of 4 min behind the shock. Extremely high values of the left-hand
side of Eq. (5) are occasionally observed immediately behind the shock.

4.2. Low frequency magnetic ﬂuctuations

Fig. 7 shows the magnetic power spectra downstream of the quasi-perpendicular low-β (left)
and high-β (right) bow shock, 3, 5, and 7 min after the crossing time. Now it becomes obvious
that the left-hand polarized mode dominates only behind the quasi-perpendicular bow shock with
low-β in a frequency interval below the proton cyclotron frequency. 5 and 7 min downstream,
the left-hand polarized mode has up to one order of magnitude more power spectral density than
the compressive and the right-hand polarized components. Below the frequency range where the
left-hand polarized component dominates in the low-β cases, the spectrum downstream of the quasi-
perpendicular high-β bow shock shows a weaker gradient than downstream of the low-β bow shock.
In addition, the compressive mode lies on the same level as the transverse modes and occasionally
at somewhat higher levels, whereas 5 and 7 min downstream of the low-β bow shock the compressive
mode lies clearly below the transverse modes.Due to the higher magnetic ﬁeld the proton cyclotron
frequency is a factor of about 2.3 higher downstream of the low-β bow shock (B ≈ 45 nT) than

– 19 –

Fig.
7.— Superposed-epoch analysis of magnetic power spectra downstream of 20 quasi-
perpendicular low-β and 47 quasi-perpendicular high-β bow shock crossings. Same format as Fig. 5.

downstream of the high-β bow shock (B ≈ 23 nT).

At this point, let us collect some numbers for typical wave amplitudes. For that purpose we use
the root mean square amplitude δB2 given in Eq. (2), which has already been shown in Fig. 2 and
can be obtained by integrating the power spectra for frequencies above 0.23 Hz, and we use the root
mean square amplitude δB1 of ﬂuctuations in the frequency range 0.01–0.04 Hz. The range 0.01–

– 20 –

0.04 Hz has been chosen, because it corresponds to the ﬂat portion of the spectrum observed 3 min
upstream of the keytime of quasi-parallel bow shocks. These upstream waves have δB1 ≈ 4 nT or
δB1/B ≈ 0.4. In contrast, the Alfv´en waves seen in the solar wind upstream of quasi-perpendicular
bow shocks have δB1 ≈ 0.8 nT or δB1/B ≈ 0.09. At the keytime of quasi-parallel bow shocks we
observed a clear enhancement of the wave power, which leads to δB ≈ 8 nT or δB/B ≈ 0.5.

In this section we saw that the characteristics of the wave activity downstream of quasi-
perpendicular shocks depend on β. For low β, the magnetic ﬂuctuations above 0.23 Hz are domi-
nated by left-hand polarized ﬂuctuations with δB2 ≈ 3 nT or δB2/B ≈ 0.08, which will be inter-
preted as ion cyclotron waves. For high β, typical amplitudes are δB2 ≈ 1.5 nT or δB2/B ≈ 0.08.

4.3. Discussion

Sckopke et al.

[1990] have performed a case study of low-β subcritical bow shock crossings,
using the AMPTE/IRM data of September 5, and November 2, 1984. These events are also
included in our quasi-perpendicular low-β data set: There are 8 events from September 5 and 3
events from November 2, 1984. Sckopke et al. [1990] identiﬁed the dominating left-hand polarized
component with the ion cyclotron wave which can be generated by a proton temperature anisotropy
(e.g., Hasegawa, 1975). The growth rate of the ion cyclotron wave is positive when the instability
criterion is satisﬁed. This holds for the resonance with protons when

Tp⊥
Tpk

>

fcp

fcp − f

.

(6)

The AMPTE/IRM plasma instrument did not resolve ion masses, therefore all ions are assumed to
be protons.

Figure 8 shows the ratio of the left-hand polarized to the right-hand polarized component in
the frequency band 0.3–0.8fcp for 32 2-min intervals from 4 to 8 min downstream of the quasi-
perpendicular low-β bow shock as a function of the proton temperature anisotropy. There is a
clear correlation found between these two ratios with a correlation coeﬃcient of 0.8. This shows
that the wave intensity more than 4 min downstream of the quasi-perpendicular bow shock depends
strongly on the local temperature anisotropy.

The temporal evolution of the correlation coeﬃcients, calculated for 2-min intervals down-
stream of the quasi-perpendicular low-β bow shock, is shown in Fig. 9. The value of the correlation
coeﬃcient 11 minutes downstream is not reliable since only a limited data set extends so far down-
stream. Although the temperature anisotropy is highest immediately downstream of the bow shock,
the best correlation is found around 5 min downstream. This shows that the ion cyclotron waves
need a certain time to develop in the moving plasma.

Since downstream of the quasi-perpendicular high-β bow shock the mirror instability criterion
is satisﬁed on average, we have looked more carefully for this highly compressive non-propagating

25

20

15

10

5

)
r
(
 
I
 
/
 
)
l
(
 
I

0

0

– 21 –

1

2

3

4

5

Tp   / TpII

⊥

Fig. 8.— Ratio of the left-hand polarized to the right hand polarized component I(l)/I(r) against
the proton temperature anisotropy Tp⊥/Tpk ot 32 2-min intervals from 4 to 8 min downstream of
the quasi-perpendicular low-β bow shock.

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

t

i

n
e
c
i
f
f

e
o
c
 
n
o

i
t

l

a
e
r
r
o
C

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Minutes after crossing

Fig. 9.— Temporal evolution of the correlation coeﬃcient of the ratios I(l)/I(r) and Tp⊥/Tpk
downstream of the quasi-perpendicular low-β bow shock.

mode. The fact that the compressive mode has a higher power spectral density downstream of
the high-β than downstream of the low-β shock might indicate the existence of mirror modes. We
therefore perform a superposed epoch analysis for 9 cases for which the mirror instability criterion

– 22 –

)
z
H

/

2

T
n
(

 

m
u
r
t
c
e
p
S

 
r
e
w
o
P
 
c
i
t

e
n
g
a
M

Frequency (Hz)

Fig.
10.— Superposed-epoch analysis of magnetic spectra 7 min downstream of 9 quasi-
perpendicular high-β bow shock crossings of which the mirror instability criterion is well satisﬁed.

is particularly well satisﬁed, 7 min downstream of the high-β bow shock. The resulting spectrum
is shown in Fig. 10.
In this spectrum we ﬁnd a compressive mode slightly dominating at some
frequencies well below the proton cyclotron frequency.

Contrary to the correlation of the intensity of the left-hand polarized ion cyclotron waves to
the proton temperature anisotropy for quasi-perpendicular low-β cases, our investigation does not
reveal a clear correlation of the intensity of the compressive mode to any parameter for the quasi-
perpendicular high-β cases. One reason for this could be that the highly compressive mirror mode,
which is expected to exist under the observed high-β conditions is a purely growing mode with
frequencies being pure Doppler-shifted frequencies. Consequently, the waves do not appear in a
ﬁxed frequency interval and can be smeared out in the superposition. Therefore we have looked into
the individual spectra of intervals 5, 7, and 9 min downstream of the quasi-perpendicular high-β
bow shock when the mirror criterion is fulﬁlled. This is the case in 34 of the quasi-perpendicular
high-β events (72 %). Only in 4 cases (12 % of the quasi-perpendicular high-β events where the
mirror criterion is fulﬁlled) mirror waves can clearly be identiﬁed in the magnetosheath and are
visible in several consecutive spectra. These events and the means of identiﬁcation of the mirror
modes are described in Czaykowska et al.
[1998]. The 4 events have in common that the angle
θBn is larger than 80◦. But there are also almost perpendicular high-β events with large values of
the left-hand side of Eq. (5) where no indication for mirror waves is visible. Thus a more complex

– 23 –

dependence on diﬀerent parameters seems to determine the growth of the mirror wave. For 14 of the
high-β events (41 %) where the mirror instability criterion is fulﬁlled, the compressive component is
at least slightly dominating at several frequencies. Several of these events have an angle θBn < 80◦.
In addition, 2 high-β events show ion cyclotron waves in the consecutive spectra taken 5, 7, and
9 min downstream. It is well known [Price et al., 1986; Gary et al., 1993] that the growths of the
ion cyclotron and mirror waves are competing processes. In the magnetosheath plasma the crucial
parameters for this competition are the α-particle concentration and the plasma-β. However, in
our data set we have found many events in the high-β regime where none of the two wave modes
can be identiﬁed although the proton temperature anisotropy is high. This seems to indicate that
the dominance of the growing mode does not persist long enough to be visible in one spectrum.
The energy of the growing mode might be transferred to other modes by nonlinear eﬀects.

Statistical studies of measurements in the magnetosheath suggest that a relation of the form

Tp⊥
Tpk

− 1 =

S

(βpk)α

(7)

exists between the proton temperature anisotropy and the ratio βpk of ﬁeld-aligned proton pressure
and magnetic pressure. Analyzing AMPTE/CCE data, Anderson et al. [1994] determined S = 0.85
and α = 0.48 and Fuselier et al. [1994] determined S = 0.83 and α = 0.58. Using AMPTE/IRM
data, Phan et al. [1994] obtained S = 0.58 and α = 0.53. We performed a similar analysis on our
data set of quasi-perpendicular bow shock crossings. For this analysis we computed 2-min averages
of all measurements of Tp⊥/Tpk and βpk taken between the keytime and 8 min downstream of the
keytime. We ﬁnd a reasonable ﬁt to Eq. (7) with S = 0.43 ± 0.03 and α = 0.58 ± 0.05, which is not
too diﬀerent from the result of Phan et al. [1994].

A relation of the form of Eq. (7) is regarded as the consequence of the combined action of
ion cyclotron and mirror waves, which grow due to the temperature anisotropy and reduce this
anisotropy by means of pitch angle scattering. The growth of the waves depends on Tp⊥/Tpk and
βpk and it is expected that the anisotropy is reduced until the growth rate, γm, of the most unstable
wave falls below some threshold. In fact, Anderson et al.
[1994] showed that Eq. (7) with their
values of S and α corresponds approximately to the threshold γm/2πfcp = 0.01. Hence, the validity
of Eq. (7) indicates that the magnetosheath plasma reaches a state near marginal stability of the
waves driven by the temperature anisotropy. As noted above, we found that data obtained less
than 8 min downstream of quasi-perpendicular bow shocks satisfy a relation of the form Eq. (7)
with values of S and α that are not too diﬀerent from those determined by Phan et al. [1994] for
the entire magnetosheath. This indicates that the state near marginal stability is already reached
close to the shock.

Figure 7 shows that the largest amplitudes of the ion cyclotron waves at quasi-perpendicular
low β shocks are observed on average about 5 min downstream of the keytime (see also Fig. 9).
The bow shock moves relative to the spacecraft at speeds of 10–100 km/s. Taking a typical speed
of 30 km/s, we can translate 5 min to a downstream distance of 9000 km. According to Fig. 2, the
plasma velocity, vpn, normal to quasi-perpendicular shock is 120 km/s on average. Thus the plasma

– 24 –

needs about 75 s to ﬂow 9000 km downstream. Since the ion cyclotron waves are convected with
the plasma while they are growing, these 75 s can serve as a rough estimate for the time τ that the
waves need to reach their maximum amplitudes and saturate. In terms of gyro-periods, we have
τ ∼ 75 s ≈ 50/fcp. Moreover, we ﬁnd that on the same time scale τ the temperature anisotropy is
reduced from about 2.5 immediately downstream of the low β shock to about 2.1 (Fig. 6) and that
the ion cyclotron waves typically reach amplitudes of δB/B ∼ 0.07.

These results can be compared with two-dimensional hybrid simulations of McKean et al.
[1994]. These authors examined a plasma with βpk = 1 and Tp⊥/Tpk = 3. Under these conditions
the ion cyclotron mode is found to be the dominant mode and the waves saturate after τ ≈ 5/fcp
and reach amplitudes of δB/B ∼ 0.15. The proton temperature anisotropy is reduced on the same
time scale τ from 3 to about 1.8. For our data set of low β bow shocks Tp⊥/Tpk is on average 2.5
and βpk is on average 0.5 immediately downstream of the shock. Since these values are considerably
lower than the initial values used by McKean et al. [1994], the plasma simulated by McKean et al.
[1994] is initially much farther away from the state of marginal stability. Thus it is not surprising
that the waves grow faster, reach larger amplitudes and therefore lead to a stronger reduction of
the anisotropy by means of pitch angle scattering.

McKean et al.

[1994] also examined a plasma with βpk = 4 and Tp⊥/Tpk = 3. Under these
conditions the ion cyclotron mode dominates for low α-particle concentration, whereas the mirror
mode dominates for high α-particle concentration. The waves saturate after τ ≈ 10/fcp and reach
amplitudes of δB/B ∼ 0.2. The proton temperature anisotropy is reduced on the same time scale
τ from 3 to about 1.5. This can be compared with data obtained at the quasi-perpendicular high
β shock. For our data set of high-β bow shocks Tp⊥/Tpk is on average 1.8 and βpk is on average
5 immediately downstream of the shock. Again, the plasma simulated by McKean et al. [1994] is
initially much farther away from the state of marginal stability. Fig. 6 shows that a reduction of
the anisotropy to 1.3 is observed 30 s downstream of the keytime. This can again be translated to
a downstream distance and used to estimate the time span that passes while the plasma travels
this distance. This estimate gives 8 s ≈ 2.5/fcp. Finally, it should be noted that the mirror waves
analyzed by Czaykowska et al. [1998] have amplitudes of δB/B ∼ 0.2, which is comparable to those
found in the simulations of McKean et al. [1994].

5. Conclusions

We have analyzed the plasma and magnetic ﬁeld parameters as well as low frequency magnetic
ﬂuctuations at 132 dayside AMPTE/IRM bow shock crossings. The average distance of the subsolar
point, which results from the coordinates of the investigated bow shock crossings, is considerably
smaller than in other studies, even when normalized to the average solar wind dynamical pressure.
A reason for this discrepancy might be a variation of the polytropic index with the solar cycle
since our observations are performed during typical solar minimum conditions. The position of the
Earth’s bow shock still seems to be a matter of discussion.

– 25 –

A superposed epoch analysis has been carried out by averaging particle and magnetic ﬁeld data
as well as low frequency magnetic spectra upstream and downstream of the bow shock. We have
performed this analysis by dividing the events into diﬀerent categories, i.e., quasi-perpendicular
and quasi-parallel events as well as quasi-perpendicular low-β and high-β events.

The particle and magnetic ﬁeld data show that upstream of the quasi-parallel bow shock,
in the foreshock region, the plasma is already heated compared to the undisturbed solar wind.
Moreover, there are more energetic protons in the foreshock region, and the magnetic ﬁeld is highly
variable. Downstream of the quasi-perpendicular bow shock, a proton temperature anisotropy is
found, which is higher on average downstream of the quasi-perpendicular low-β than downstream
of the quasi-perpendicular high-β bow shock.

Concerning the low frequency magnetic ﬂuctuations we ﬁnd that upstream of the quasi-
perpendicular bow shock the solar wind spectrum is undisturbed with transverse Alfv´en waves
surpassing the compressive spectral component. Upstream of the quasi-parallel bow shock largely
enhanced wave activity is detected in the turbulent foreshock region. These upstream waves are
convected downstream, experiencing an enhancement at the bow shock itself. Downstream of the
quasi-perpendicular bow shock the observed proton temperature anisotropy leads to the generation
of left-hand polarized ion cyclotron waves under low-β conditions and in some cases to the gen-
eration of mirror waves under high-β conditions. A clear correlation has been observed between
the intensity of the left-hand polarized component of the magnetic power spectrum relative to the
right-hand polarized component and the proton temperature anisotropy. On the other hand, we
could not ﬁnd a simple correlation between the intensity of the compressive component and any
single plasma or magnetic ﬁeld parameter. In cases where mirror waves are obviously observable
mostly three conditions are fulﬁlled: the plasma-β is high, the mirror instability criterion is satisﬁed
and the angle θBn is large, i.e., θBn & 80◦. But there are also cases where all these conditions are
well satisﬁed but no mirror waves are visible in the frequency interval under consideration.

G. Paschmann and H. L¨uhr were the principal investigators of the AMPTE/IRM plasma and

magnetic ﬁeld experiments, respectively. We appreciate valuable discussions with N. Sckopke.

REFERENCES

Anderson, B. J., & S. A. Fuselier, Magnetic pulsations from 0.1 to 4.0 Hz and associated plasma
properties in the Earth’s subsolar magnetosheath and plasma depletion layer, J. Geophys.
Res. 98, 1461–1479, 1993.

Anderson, B. J., S. A. Fuselier, S. P. Gary, & R. E. Denton, Magnetic spectral signatures in the
Earth’s magnetosheath and plasma depletion layer, J. Geophys. Res. 99, 5877–5891, 1994.

Bauer, T. M., W. Baumjohann, R. A. Treumann, N. Sckopke, & H. L¨uhr, Low-frequency waves in

the near-Earth plasma sheet, J. Geophys. Res. 100, 9605-9617, 1995.

– 26 –

Bauer, T. M., Particles and ﬁelds at the dayside low-latitude magnetopause, MPE Report 267,

Garching, 1997.

Bavassano-Cattaneo, M. B., C. Basile, G. Moreno, & J. D. Richardson, Evolution of mirror struc-
tures in the magnetosheath of Saturn from the bow shock to the magnetopause, J. Geophys.
Res. 103, 11,961-11,972, 1998.

Belcher, J. W. & L. Davis, Large-amplitude Alfv´en waves in the interplanetary medium, 2, J.

Geophys. Res. 76, 3534-3563, 1971.

Blanco-Cano, X. & S. J. Schwartz, AMPTE-UKS observations of low frequency waves in the ion

foreshock, Adv. Space Res., 15(8/9), 97–101, 1995.

Burgess, D., Cyclical behavior of quasi-parallel collisionless shocks, Geophys. Res. Lett. 16, 345-

349, 1989.

Czaykowska, A., T. M. Bauer, R. A. Treumann, & W. Baumjohann, Mirror waves downstream of

the quasi-perpendicular bow shock, J. Geophys. Res. 103, 4747-4753, 1998.

Edmiston, J. P., & C. F. Kennel, A parametric survey of the ﬁrst critical Mach number for a fast

MHD shock, J. Plasma Phys., 32, 429-441, 1984.

Fairﬁeld, D. H., Average and unusual locations of the Earth’s magnetopause and bow shock, J.

Geophys. Res. 76, 6700–6716, 1971.

Fairﬁeld, D. H., Global aspects of the Earth’s magnetopause, in Magnetospheric Boundary Layers,

ed. by B. Battrick, pp. 5-13, ESA, Noordwijk, 1979.

Formisano, V., Orientation and shape of the Earth’s bow shock in three dimensions, Planet. Space

Sci., 27, 1151-1161, 1979.

Fuselier, S. A., B. J. Anderson, S. P. Gary, & R. E. Denton, Ion anisotropy/beta correlations in

the Earth’s quasi-parallel magnetosheath, J. Geophys. Res. 99, 14,931–14,936, 1994.

Gary, S. P., Low-frequency waves in a high-beta collisionless plasma: Polarization, compressibility

and helicity, J. Plasma Phys., 35, 431–447, 1986.

Gary, S. P., S. A. Fuselier, & B. J. Anderson, Ion anisotropy instabilities in the magnetosheath, J.

Geophys. Res. 98, 1481–1488, 1993.

Greenstadt, E. W. & M. M. Mellott, Plasma wave evidence for reﬂected ions in front of subcritical

shocks: ISEE 1 and 2 observations, J. Geophys. Res. 92, 4730–4734, 1987.

Greenstadt, E. W., G. Le, & R. J. Strangeway, ULF waves in the foreshock, Adv. Space Res.,

15(8/9), 71–84, 1995.

Gurnett, D. A., Plasma waves and instabilities, in Collisionless Shocks in the Heliosphere: Reviews
of Current Research, Geophys. Monogr. Ser., 35, ed. by B. T. Tsurutani & R. G. Stone,
pp. 207–224, AGU, Washington, DC, 1985.

Hasegawa, A., Drift mirror instability in the magnetosphere, Phys. Fluids, 12, 2642–2650, 1969.

Hasegawa, A., Plasma Instabilities and Nonlinear Eﬀects, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1975.

– 27 –

Hoppe, M. M., C. T. Russell, L. A. Frank, T. E. Eastman, & E. W. Greenstadt, Upstream hy-
dromagnetic waves and their association with backstreaming ion populations: ISEE 1 and
2 observations, J. Geophys. Res. 86, 4471-4492, 1981.

Hubert, D., C. Perche, C. C. Harvey, C. Lacombe, & C. T. Russell, Observation of mirror waves

downstream of a quasi-perpendicular shock, Geophys. Res. Lett. 16, 159–162, 1989.

Kennel, C. F., J. P. Edmiston, & T. Hada, A quarter century of collisionless shock research, in
Collisionless Shocks in the Heliosphere: A Tutorial Review, Geophys. Monogr. Ser., 34, ed.
by R. G. Stone & B. T. Tsurutani, pp. 1-36, AGU. Washington, D.C., 1985.

Krauss-Varban, D., Waves associated with quasi-parallel shocks: Generation, mode conversion and

implications, Adv. Space Res., 15(8/9), 271-284, 1995.

Krauss-Varban, D., & N. Omidi, Structure of medium Mach number quasi-parallel shocks: Up-

stream and downstream waves, J. Geophys. Res. 96, 17,715–17,731, 1991.

Le, G., & C. T. Russell, A study of ULF wave foreshock morphology – II: Spatial variation of ULF

waves, Planet. Space Sci., 40, 1215–1225, 1992.

Lee, L. C., C. P. Price, C. S. Wu, & M. E. Mandt, A study of mirror waves generated downstream

of a quasi-perpendicular shock, J. Geophys. Res. 93, 247–250, 1988.

Lin, R. P, Observations of the 3D distributions of thermal to near-relativistic electrons in the
interplanetary medium by the Wind spacecraft, in Coronal physics from radio and space
observations, LNP 483, ed. by Trottet, G., Springer-Verlag, New York, 1997.

L¨uhr, H., N. Kl¨ocker, W. Oelschl¨agel, B. H¨ausler, & M. Acu˜na, The IRM ﬂuxgate magnetometer,

IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., GE-23, 259–261, 1985.

McKean, M. E., D. Winske, & S. P. Gary, Two-dimensional simulations of ion anisotropy instabil-

ities in the magnetosheath, J. Geophys. Res. 99, 11,141–11,153, 1994.

McKenzie, J. F., & K. O. Westphal, Transmission of Alfv´en waves through the Earth’s bow shock,

Planet. Space Sci., 17, 1029–1037, 1969.

Mellott, M. M., & W. A. Livesey, Shock overshoots revisited, J. Geophys. Res. 92, 13,661–13,665,

1987.

Omidi, N., How the bow shock does it, Rev. Geophys., Supplement, 629-637, 1995.

Paschmann, G., H. Loidl, P. Obermayer, M. Ertl, R. Laborenz, N. Sckopke, W. Baumjohann, C. W.
Carlson, & D. W. Curtis, The plasma instrument for AMPTE/IRM, IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., GE-23, 262–266, 1985.

Paschmann, G., W. Baumjohann, N. Sckopke, & H. L¨uhr, Structure of the dayside magnetopause

for low magnetic shear, J. Geophys. Res. 98, 13,409–13,422, 1993.

Peredo, M., J. A. Slavin, E. Mazur, & S. A. Curtis, Three-dimensional position and shape of the
bow shock and their variation with Alfv´enic, sonic and magnetosonic Mach numbers and
interplanetary magnetic ﬁeld orientation, J. Geophys. Res. 100, 7907–7916, 1995.

– 28 –

Phan, T.-D., G. Paschmann, W. Baumjohann, N. Sckopke, & H. L¨uhr, The magnetosheath region
adjacent to the dayside magnetopause: AMPTE/IRM observations, J. Geophys. Res. 99,
121–141, 1994.

Price, C. P., D. W. Swift, & L.-C. Lee, Numerical simulations of nonoscillatory mirror waves at the

Earth’s magnetosheath, J. Geophys. Res. 91, 101–112, 1986.

Russell, C. T., & M. H. Farris, Ultra low frequency waves at the Earth’s bow shock, Adv. Space

Res., 15(8/9), 285–296, 1995.

Scholer, M., H. Kucharek, & V. Jayanti, Waves and turbulence in high Mach number nearly parallel

collisionless shocks, J. Geophys. Res. 102, 9821–9833, 1997.

Schwartz, S. J., D. Burgess, & J. J. Moses, Low-frequency waves in the Earth’s magnetosheath:

Present status, Ann. Geophys., 14, 1134–1150, 1996.

Sckopke, N., G. Paschmann, S. J. Bame, J. T. Gosling, & C. T. Russell, Evolution of ion distri-
butions across the nearly perpendicular bow shock: Specularly and nonspecularly reﬂected
ions, J. Geophys. Res. 88, 6121–6136, 1983.

Sckopke, N., G. Paschmann, A. L. Brinca, C.W. Carlson, & H. L¨uhr, Ion thermalization in quasi-

perpendicular shocks involving reﬂected ions, J. Geophys. Res. 95, 6337–6352, 1990.

Siscoe, T. H., Solar system magnetohydrodynamics, in Solar-Terrestrial Physics, ed. by R. L.

Carovillano & J. M. Forbes, pp 11-100, Reidel Publishing, Dordrecht, 1983.

Spreiter, J. R., A. L. Summers, & A. Y. Alksne, Hydrodynamic ﬂow and the magnetosphere, Planet.

Space Sci., 14, 223-253, 1966.

Stone, R. G., & B. T. Tsurutani (eds.), Collisionless shocks in the Heliosphere: A tutorial review,

Geophys. Monogr. 34, AGU, Washington D.C., 1985.

Tsurutani, B. T., & R. G. Stone (eds.), Collisionless shocks in the Heliosphere: Review of current

research, Geophys. Monogr. 35, AGU, Washington D.C., 1985.

Thomsen, M. F., J. T. Gosling, & S. J. Bame, Ion and electron heating at collisionless shocks near

the critical Mach number, J. Geophys. Res. 90, 137-148, 1985.

Winske, D., N. Omidi, K. B. Quest, & V. A. Thomas, Re-forming supercritical quasi-parallel
shocks, 2, Mechanism for wave generation and front re-formation, J. Geophys. Res. 95,
18,821–18,832, 1990.

Winterhalter, D., E. J. Smith, M. E. Burton, N. Murphy, & D. J. McComas, The heliospheric

plasma sheet, J. Geophys. Res. 99, 6667-6680, 1994.

This preprint was prepared with the AAS LATEX macros v5.0.

