1
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
1
1
1
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

LABORATORY MODELLING OF THE EARTH
RADIATION BELT

Dr. Alexander LUCHINSKIYa

Prof. Dr. Yakov S. SHIFRINb

(a) Johannes Gutenberg - University Mainz,

Institut f¨ur Physik, Germany
Gymnasialstr 11, D-55543 Bad Kreuznach, Germany
E-mail: Aluchinsk@aol.com

Tel./Fax +49 671 / 35594

(b) Kharkov State Technical University of Radio Electronics
Lenin Avenue 14, Kharkov, 310726 Ukraine

E-mail: shifrin@kture.kharkov.ua
Tel. +380 572 409430

Fax +380 572 409113

Abstract

Method of the laboratory modelling of the Earth radiation belt is presented.
Method can be used for the estimation of consequences of global energetic and
communication projects realizations.

The radiation belt of the Earth is the inner part of the magnetosphere, in which
the geomagnetic ﬁeld hold charged particles with kinetic energy from 10 KeV to 100
MeV. This belt play the essential role for the sun radiation regime for the Earth and
for the electromagnetic waves propagation.

As it is well known, even small alteration of solar activity inﬂuent essential upon
the biological and ecological balance at the Earth for all levels - from viruses and
micro-organisms to biological societies and ecological systems at all. The most bright
indicator of the solar activity alteration are changes of the pathogenic organisms activ-
ity as a result of a displacement of biological equilibrium. But the other phenomena,
which are not connected with pathogenic biological objects are very important for the

life on the Earth and ecological balance too, although they can not be so obviously
observed.

In this century the realisation of some global projects will be very actual for
the supply of the Earth with the electrical energy to be converted from the solar
energy and for the creation of global communication systems. The realisation of
these projects cannot be neutral for the ionosphere and for the radiation belt state.
For example, for the Glazer Project it will be necessary to create a system of
powerful solar energy converters, which should send powerful SHF beams through
the radiation belt. But even small alterations in the radiation belt will change the
solar irradiation regime of the Earth the same way, as for alteration of solar activity
by constant magnetosphere.

Thus it is very dangerous to realise global energetic and communication projects

without the all-round investigation of consequences of these realisations.

That is why it is necessary in particular to have a possibility of the radiation belt
laboratory modelling and its experimental investigation as a complete system under
the inﬂuence of diﬀerent factors.

Besides that this task is actual also immediate for the solving of problems of

radiation propagation and communication too.

This problem was solved in [4] and [5] for a general case, i.e. for all kinds of planets,
which have magnetical ﬁelds. The laboratory Modelling of the Earth radiation belt is
in fact a particular case of this solution. Therefore no additional patent descriptions
for any details will be required.

In the Earth radiation belt the charged particles realised a motion, which can be
considered as a sum of three components: 1 - quick cycle motion due to Lorenz force
in the geomagnetic ﬁeld; 2 - the ”longitude-drift” of these cycles along the Equator
in the crossed magnetic and gravitational ﬁelds; and 3 - the oscillation of particles in
directions, normal to the cycles planes and to the direction of drift.

Change of movement directions in these oscillations occurs due to geometrical

phenomenon of so-called specular reﬂection.

The main problem for the realisation of radiation belt laboratory modelling is that
it is on principle impossible to create the 3-dimensional radial gravitation ﬁeld in a
laboratory device.

This problem can be solved through the replacing of gravitation ﬁeld with the elec-
trostatical ﬁeld, because the mathematical description of these two ﬁelds are similar.
For the realisation of the drift-phenomenon it is principally necessary the existence
of two crossed ﬁelds. It is not important for this process, what kind of ﬁeld will be
used together with the magnetic ﬁeld, gravitational ﬁeld or the electrostatical one.

Finally it is proposed to use for this modelling the Penning Trap [1] or our phys-
ically similar traps with other construction of electrodes [2]-[5], which can make this
modelling more eﬀective.

By doing this way, the cycle motion in Earth magnetic ﬁeld corresponds to the
”cyclotron motion” in the Penning Trap, the drift along the Equator corresponds
to the ”magnetron motion”, and the interpolar oscillation corresponds to the ”axial
motion”.

For the realisation of laboratory experiments with this model it is necessary to

provide the possibility of the ceaseless change of ﬁeld conﬁguration during the exper-
iment. It is achieved through the special construction of the trap ring electrode. This
electrode in the form of rotation-hyperboloid of one sheet is collected from straight
plates, which lies in hyperbolic surface. This technical solution can be used not only
for the aims of the problem under consideration, but in constructions of some antenna
systems with smooth rearrangeable geometry too.

References

[1] Geonium theory: physics of a single electron or ion in a Penning trap; L. S.

Brown, G. Gabrielse; Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 58, No 1, 1986.

[2] DE 198 26 241 A1 Int. Cl.6 H 01 J 49/42 Eine Einrichtung zur dynamischen
Speicherung von Teilchen; Dr. A. Luchinskiy, Prof. Dr. G. Werth, A. Drakoudis;
1998

[3] DE 198 25 604 A1 Int. Cl.6 H 01 J 49/42; G 01 N 27/00 Eine Einrichtung zur
Realisierung speziell geformter Laserfelder in einer Quadrupol Teilchenfalle; Dr.
A. Luchinskiy, Prof. Dr. G. Werth, N. Hermanspahn; 1998

[4] DE 100 09 238 A 1 Int. Cl.7 G 09 B 23/06 Verfahren der Labormodellierung des

Strahlungsg¨urtels der Planeten; Dr. A. Luchinskiy; 2000.

[5] Deutsche Patentanmeldung Nr. 101 53 235.0 Verfahren der Labormodellierung

des Strahlungsg¨urtels der Planeten; Dr. A. Luchinskiy; 2001.

