2
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
1
1
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

From Wormholes to the Warp Drive:
Using theoretical physics to place ultimate
bounds on technology

William A. Hiscock
Department of Physics
Montana State University
Bozeman, Montana 59717
[e-mail: hiscock@physics.montana.edu]

Abstract

The serious study of such science ﬁction staples as wormholes,
time travel, and the warp drive, as a means of understanding and
constraining possible realistic solutions within General Relativity is
reviewed.

1

”You cannot change the laws of physics, Captain.”
– Lt. Commander Montgomery Scott, Chief Engineer
U.S.S. Enterprise NCC-1701

Wormholes. Time travel. The “warp drive”. These staples of science ﬁc-
tion have today become subjects of serious study by theoretical physicists.
Each of these concepts can be identiﬁed with mathematical solutions to the
equations of Einstein’s theory of general relativity - the modern theory of
gravity, in which the phenomena of gravity are explained in terms of the
geometry of curved spacetime. By studying these solutions in detail, the-
oretical physicists seek to better learn what bounds exist on the behavior
of matter and geometry in our present physical theories. Such studies can
yield new insights into the developing quantum theory of gravity, and can
also help establish ultimate limits on technology - not based on the degree
of scope or diﬃculty of an engineering challenge, but by compatibility with
our core understanding of the fundamental laws of physics.

Three decades ago, adequate theories were ﬁrst developed for three of the
four fundamental forces of nature: the so-called “strong” and “weak” nu-
clear forces which operate on subatomic scales, and the electromagnetic force
which is responsible for most of what we experience in everyday life: chem-
istry, biology, and technology (non-nuclear). The theoretical model of these
three forces has been so successful in matching experiment that it has been
termed the “Standard Model” of particle physics. Professor Howard Georgi
of Harvard has testiﬁed to the robustness of the model in saying “Everything
anyone has ever seen can be explained in terms of the Standard Model.”
While there are some highly interesting aspects of the Standard Model where
new developments in particle physics are still taking place (e.g., the study
of neutrino properties), the development of the Standard Model of particle
physics must rank as one of the premier scientiﬁc accomplishments of the
twentieth century.

The fourth fundamental force in nature, the gravitational force, remains in
many ways an enigma. Gravity was the ﬁrst force for which a detailed math-
ematical theory was developed, by Isaac Newton, over three hundred years

2

ago. That theory is still adequate to successfully navigate our planetary
spacecraft, such as Voyagers 1 and 2, around the solar system. Einstein
developed our modern theory of gravity not because Newton’s theory had
been found to disagree with experiment, but because Newton’s theory was
mathematically incompatible with the dictates of Einstein’s special theory of
relativity, which requires that all observers measure the same value for the
speed of light, c, regardless of their state of motion (this feature of nature
has been overwhelmingly conﬁrmed by experiment and observation). Ein-
stein’s new theory, ﬁnalized in 1916, is usually called “general relativity”, a
name that unfortunately obscures the fact that it is actually a theory of the
gravitational interaction.

Einstein’s theory is widely regarded as one of the most beautiful theories in
all of science.
It describes gravity in terms of the curved geometry of the
four dimensional (three space, one time) world we inhabit. Physicist John
Wheeler has beautifully summarized the content of general relativity in a
sentence: “Matter tells space how to curve; space tells matter how to move”.
The ﬁrst part of the sentence tells us the origin of spacetime curvature.
Matter (in any form, including energy, as per Einstein’s famous E = mc2)
is the source of gravity, causing the curvature of space (or “spacetime”, a
shorthand for our four-dimensional world). The second part of the sentence
describes how matter behaves in this curved four dimensional world, namely
that it follows paths which are the curved space generalization of “straight
lines” - geodesics. The “great circle” route of an airplane ﬂying from New
York to Tokyo is an example of a geodesic; it is not a straight line (which
would pass through the solid Earth), but is the shortest path connecting the
two cities along the curved surface of the Earth.

Despite these great strides that have been made in the understanding of
the behavior of matter and energy at the fundamental level, there are still
many unresolved questions to attract the attention of physicists. Perhaps
the greatest of these is the search for an understanding of how gravity ﬁts
together with the other three fundamental forces. It is clear that a truly fun-
damental theory of gravity must be quantum in nature, and general relativity
is not. The contrast between the Standard Model, built on the foundation
of quantum ﬁeld theory, and general relativity, highly accurately tested but
still inadequate because of its classical nature, has caused many to term the
theory of quantum gravity to be the “holy grail” of theoretical physics. How-

3

ever, despite decades of eﬀort, little is year truly clear about the nature of
quantum gravity. Should gravity be able to stand alone in a quantum theory,
independent of the other ﬁelds that constitute nature, or can gravity only be
understood in terms of a uniﬁed theory that attempts to handle all aspects of
matter and its interactions at once? M-theory (sometimes called “the theory
formerly known as superstrings”) is a bold attempt at a theory of everything,
solving the problem of the quantum theory of gravity by merging all mat-
ter and interactions into a single theory in which the fundamental objects
are not point particles, but are higher dimensional objects such as loops of
“superstring”.

In ordinary matter, quantum eﬀects become quite evident when one reaches
the atomic scale, at roughly 10−10 meters. Today’s high energy particle ac-
celerators allow us to study the behavior of matter and energy at scales as
small as 10−17 meters, where the existence of particles such as quarks, gluons,
and W and Z bosons are evident that are completely invisible back up at the
atomic scale. Quantum gravitational eﬀects are expected to become impor-
tant when one reaches the Planck scale, about 10−35 meters. If superstring
theory describes nature, this is the size of a typical loop of superstring ma-
terial. The large diﬀerence in scale between the Planck scale of superstrings
and today’s experiments - some 18 orders of magnitude, a billion billion - is
one reason why it is so diﬃcult for physicists working on superstring models
to make experimental predictions from their theory that can be tested with
our present level of technology.

The even larger span between the scales at which quantum eﬀects become
evident in matter, and the Planck scale of quantum gravity, twenty-ﬁve orders
of magnitude, is a realm where the semiclassical theory of gravity may be
a good tool to help us understand how gravity and quantum physics are to
be married.
In semiclassical gravity, the gravitational ﬁeld is still treated
classically, being described by the curved spacetime of general relativity.
The matter which creates the spacetime curvature, however, is treated using
quantum ﬁeld theory. The resulting theory cannot be ultimately acceptable,
since it mixes classical and quantum physics, but it should be a valuable
tool and approximate description of the behavior of nature over length scales
(and energy scales) that reach down towards the realm where string theory
may provide an ultimate exegesis.

Theoretical physicists expand their understanding of the strengths, limits,

4

and behavior of a particular theory by “pushing” the theory to its limiting
cases. For example, we understand general relativity much better by studying
the properties of black hole solutions to the Einstein equations than we would
if we restricted attention to the tiny diﬀerences between the predictions of
Newtonian gravity and general relativity for, say planetary orbits. These
tiny diﬀerences provide valuable experimental tests of GR, since we don’t
have any black holes in our near neighborhood that we can study in detail;
but understanding the full range of behavior allowed by the theory is best
enhanced by examining the nature of its predictions for situations that are far
from “normal” - e.g., for black holes, and much more speculative solutions to
the equations such as those called “wormholes”, the “warp drive”, and those
which lead to the possibility of time travel.

Each of these concepts can be identiﬁed with particular spacetime geometries,
and hence with mathematical solutions to Einstein’s theory of general rela-
tivity. In fact, any four-dimensional geometry for a spacetime can be termed
a solution of Einstein’s theory - the question physics must answer is whether
the matter necessary to curve spacetime into a particular “shape” is of a form
compatible with nature as we understand it. If one postulates a spacetime
geometry with some exotic property (e.g., a wormhole), then it is likely that
“exotic” matter is necessary to generate that geometry. By “exotic matter”
we mean matter that has properties not usually seen in ordinary situations
- such as negative mass or energy densities. Such properties are so far from
those exhibited by normal matter that we must seriously ask whether such
behavior is compatible with the quantum ﬁeld theory description of matter
in the Standard Model. This then provides a link between extreme quantum
behavior of matter and exotic geometries, and hence insight into the possi-
bilities of quantum gravity. Next, one may ask whether the exotic geometry
is stable - would small changes destroy the exotic structure, for example by
closing oﬀ a wormhole. In some cases, the small change necessary to drive
the instability is provided by quantum mechanics, again providing a link be-
tween these exotic spacetime structures and quantum aspects of gravity. A
pencil balanced on its point is an example of a mathematical solution of the
laws of mechanics which is unstable; the smallest motion will cause it to fall
in one direction or another. The goal is to continue to make the model of the
geometry more realistic, adding more aspects of physics to its description,
and determining whether the original exotic geometry is compatible with this
more realistic treatment. If physics rules the feature out, then no amount of

5

clever engineering can hope to turn science ﬁction to fact; on the other hand,
if no incompatibility with known physics is found, then it might be possible
for future engineers to create such geometric structures in spacetime. It is
important to note that the work of physicists does not aim to place limits on
the potential scope of engineering, except where violations of well-tested and
accepted laws of physics is involved. Simply because an engineering solution
might involve energies and scales many orders of magnitude beyond what
Earthly technology can achieve today does not daunt the inquiring physicist
at all.

An example of how such a study proceeds is provided by the story of how the
present interest in these concepts largely began - surprisingly enough, with
science ﬁction, namely the writing of the novel “Contact” by Carl Sagan.
Sagan asked Kip Thorne, the Feynman Professor of Physics at Caltech, for
advice to help ensure that the method chosen to transport the novel’s heroine
across the Galaxy would not be scientiﬁcally ludicrous. Thorne suggested
replacing the notion of diving through a black hole as a portal to distant
realms with the idea of using a wormhole.

A black hole is a spherical region of spacetime surrounded by an “event hori-
zon”, which functions as a one-way “gate”. Anything that crosses the event
horizon into the black hole - rocks, spaceships, light itself - cannot escape
the black hole. In the simplest model of a black hole, where the black hole
has no spin or electric charge, any matter falling into the hole is inevitably
crushed into a spacetime singularity, where the gravitational tidal forces are
inﬁnitely strong. There is no escape. The notion that black holes might pro-
vide “tunnels to elsewhere” ﬁrst arose in the 1960’s, when physicists found
that if a black hole had an electric charge, or if it was spinning, matter (e.g.,
a spaceship) falling into the hole could avoid being crushed into a singularity
and would eventually emerge from the conﬁnes of the hole into “another uni-
verse”. This “other universe” might be identiﬁed with a distant region of our
own universe, which led quickly to science ﬁction authors using black holes as
interstellar shortcuts through spacetime. However, the physics did not stop
there: through the 1970’s, work by a large number of physicists (including
Nobel Laureate Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar) showed that the “tunnel”
structure inside such models of black holes is unstable, both classically and
quantum mechanically. By including more physics in the model, we ﬁnd that
the tunnel is closed oﬀ, replaced by a singularity as in the simpler black hole

6

case. Thus, by studying these exotic models of black hole interiors in greater
detail, the “science ﬁction” aspects were actually ruled out when nature was
examined more closely.

For this reason, Thorne suggested that Sagan use a wormhole in his novel,
rather than a black hole. A “wormhole” is, as the name suggests, a topo-
logically distinct route between two locations which are the “mouths” of the
wormhole (think of an actual wormhole which has two ends on the surface
of an apple). A priori, the distance through the wormhole, from mouth
to mouth, could be either longer or shorter than the conventional distance
traveled through ordinary space (or over the surface of the apple). For the
purposes of science ﬁction, wormholes that provide shortcuts through space-
time are of course preferred. Unlike a black hole, wormholes do not generally
possess event horizons, there are no “one-way gates” in spacetime involved.

The serious study of wormhole geometries in general relativity began in the
late 1980’s when Thorne and his students, and subsequently many other the-
oretical physicists, showed that wormholes inevitably must involve “exotic
matter”. In order to hold the “throat” of the wormhole (between the two
mouths) open, there must be some form of matter or energy present which
has negative mass or energy. Every form of classical matter known to physics
has positive mass, hence the term ”exotic” for this alternate possibility. This
is where the truly interesting research questions begin, for when one com-
bines a quantum description of matter and energy with curved spacetime, it is
known that situations involving negative mass can arise. This has even been
demonstrated in the laboratory, in the Casimir eﬀect, a very weak attractive
force that exists between two uncharged parallel plates made of electrically
conducting material. This force exists due to the negative energy in the
volume between the two plates, which is caused by the conducting plates
eliminating some of the usual vacuum modes between them. While this is an
example of how quantum eﬀects can create an eﬀective negative mass, it is
a very weak eﬀect - the negative mass is small in magnitude (much smaller
than the mass of the plates) and occupies a very small volume of space. For
wormholes, the key question still being investigated today is whether any
plausible conﬁguration of quantum ﬁelds in curved spacetime could create
suﬃcient negative mass to hold open a macroscopic wormhole - one large
enough for a starship, a person, or even a single atom to pass through. So
far, the evidence suggests that it is highly unlikely such structures could ex-

7

ist: strongly negative mass such as that required to hold a wormhole open
has never been observed and is considered unlikely to exist (even antimatter
has positive mass). The ﬁnal word here is certainly not yet written; our un-
derstanding continues to improve as new models incorporating more particle
physics are examined.

Physicists are also interested in microscopic wormholes, much smaller than
a proton, down at the scale of the Planck length. These might play an
important role in quantum gravity, where spacetime is often viewed as a
foaming sea of tiny wormholes, forming and disappearing every instant. An-
other signiﬁcant problem for anyone enthusiastic about wormholes is the
”worm” problem: how do you create a wormhole? Perhaps a small, quan-
tum wormhole (if they exist) could be caught and expanded to useful size.
This important question has not really been addressed yet in any satisfactory
manner.

The ”warp drive” is another example of an interesting geometry that is yield-
ing new insights to general relativity. In 1994, Miquel Alcubierre, at the time
a graduate student at the University of Wales in Cardiﬀ, published a math-
ematical description of a spacetime geometry that embodies the properties
usually associated in science ﬁction with a ”warp drive”. In this geometry,
a ”starship” can apparently travel faster than the speed of light, traversing
interstellar distances of many lightyears in an arbitrarily short time - both
as measured by those on the starship, and those at the destination. I say
”apparently”, because the starship never exceeds the speed of light as mea-
sured by a local observer - the basic tenet of Einstein’s special relativity is
not violated. The motion of the ship occurs because the spacetime in front of
the starship contracts while that behind the starship expands, transporting
the starship forward. Further study has shown that such solutions are prob-
ably all unphysical, for several reasons. The foremost diﬃculty was noted
by Alcubierre in his original paper: such solutions inevitably involve a large
concentration of negative mass, which appears to be just as implausible in
this context as in the case of wormholes. Still, research continues in this
area, as there are enough signiﬁcant variations on Alcubierre’s original idea
to keep theoreticians busy for some time to come.

Is time travel possible? Ignoring the pedestrian everyday progression of time,
the question can be divided into two parts: Is it possible, within a short time

8

(less than a human life span), to travel into the distant future? And is it
possible to travel into the past? Our current understanding of fundamental
physics tells us that the answer to the ﬁrst question is a deﬁnite yes, and to
the second, maybe.

The mechanism for traveling into the distant future is to use the time-dilation
eﬀect of special relativity. Special relativity teaches us that time is not ab-
solute and universal for all possible observers: a moving clock will appear
to tick more slowly the closer it approaches the speed of light. This eﬀect,
which has been overwhelmingly supported by experimental tests, applies to
all types of clocks, including biological aging. Departing from Earth in a
spaceship that could accelerate continuously at a comfortable one g (an ac-
celeration that would produce a force equal to the gravity we feel everyday at
the earth’s surface), one would begin to approach the speed of light relative
to the Earth within about a year. As the ship continued to accelerate, it
would come ever closer to the speed of light, and its clocks would appear to
run at an ever slower rate relative to the Earth. Under such circumstances,
a round trip to the center of our Galaxy and back to the Earth– a distance
of some 60,000 light-years–could be completed in only a little more than 40
years of ship time. Upon arriving back at the Earth, the astronaut would
be only 40 years older, while 60,000 years would have passed on the Earth.
(Note that there is no “twin paradox,” because it is unambiguous that the
space traveler has felt the constant acceleration for 40 years, while a hy-
pothetical twin left behind on an identical spaceship circling the Earth has
not.) Such a trip would pose formidable engineering problems: the amount
of fuel required, even assuming a perfect 100% eﬃcient conversion of mass
into energy, greatly exceeds the mass of a planet. But nothing in the known
laws of physics would prevent such a trip from occurring.

Time travel into the past is a much more uncertain proposition. There are
many solutions to Einstein’s equations of general relativity, including some
involving wormholes in motion, that allow a person to follow a timeline that
would result in her encountering herself–or her grandmother–at an earlier
time. The problem, as we’ve seen before, is deciding whether these solutions
represent situations that could occur in the real universe, or whether they are
mere mathematical oddities incompatible with known physics. Much work
has been done by theoretical physicists in the past decade to try to determine
whether, in a universe that is initially without time travel, one can build a

9

time machine–in other words, if it is possible to manipulate matter and the
geometry of space-time in such a way as to create new paths that circle
back in time. The main possible roadblock to creating a time machine seems
to be a quantum instability of the spacetime - any attempt to ”turn on” a
time machine would result in spacetime changing its geometry to prevent
the machine’s operation. This instability was ﬁrst discovered by Deborah
Konkowski of the U.S. Naval Academy and myself in 1982. Once again, the
question of the possibility of time travel remains open and an active area of
research; there are serious questions as to whether this quantum instability is
truly strong enough to prevent time travel, and whether there are not special
quantum states that avoid the instability altogether.

These concepts associated with science ﬁction continue to be useful areas of
research for real, serious, theoretical physics. By studying these solutions to
Einstein’s equations, we can gain new insights about the ultimate limits of
gravity and its relation to quantum ﬁeld theory descriptions of matter.

Suggestions for additional reading:

Black Holes & Time Warps Einstein’s Outrageous Legacy, K. S. Thorne (Nor-
ton, N.Y., 1994).

Dreams of a ﬁnal theory, S.Weinberg (Pantheon, N.Y., 1993).

Time Travel in Einstein’s Universe: The Physical Possibilities of Travel
Through Time, J. Richard Gott (Houghton Miﬄin, N.Y., 2001).

Lorentzian Wormholes: From Einstein to Hawking, M. Visser (Springer-
Verlag 1996).

10

