2
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
0
2
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A posteriori reading of Virtual
Impactors impact probability

Germano D’Abramo
Istituto di Astroﬁsica Spaziale e Fisica Cosmica,

Area di Ricerca CNR Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy

E–mail: dabramo@rm.iasf.cnr.it

Abstract

In this paper we deﬁne the a posteriori probability W . This quan-
tity is introduced with the aim of suggesting a reliable interpretation
of the actual threat posed by a newly discovered Near Earth Asteroid
(NEA), for which impacting orbital solutions (now commonly known
as Virtual Impactors or VIs) can not be excluded on the basis of
the available astrometric observations. The probability W is strictly
related to the so-called background impact probability (that extrapo-
lated through a statistical analysis from close encounters of the known
NEA population) and to the annual frequency with which the impact
monitoring systems (currently NEODyS-CLOMON at University of
Pisa and SENTRY at NASA–JPL) ﬁnd VIs among newly discovered
asteroids. Of W we also provide a conservative estimate, which turns
out to be of nearly the same order of the background impact prob-
ability. This eventually says to us what we already know: the fact
that nowadays monitoring systems frequently ﬁnd VIs among newly
discovered asteroids does not make NEAs more threatening than they
have ever been.

1 Introduction

Soon after a new Near Earth Asteroid (NEA) is discovered, a preliminary or-
bit is computed using its positions in the sky over a suitable interval of time

1

(astrometric observations). Like every physical measurements, astrometric
ones are aﬀected by errors which make the orbit uncertain to some vari-
able degree. Sophisticated mathematical and numerical tools are currently
available to orbit computers which allow to propagate such measurement er-
rors to the six orbital elements which identify the orbit of the asteroid. For
this reason, the new NEA, soon after its discovery, is not represented by
a single point in the 6-dimensional dynamical elements space; rather, it is
represented by an uncertainty region, a 6-dimensional volume with diﬀused
contours. Obviously, the volume of this uncertainty region changes (usually
shrinks) when new more observations become available and the orbit reﬁnes.
Moreover, when the nominal orbit of the new NEA is geometrically close
to the orbit of the Earth, and it shares some other peculiar orbital characteris-
tics, it can happen that some orbital solutions which lead to a future collision
of the asteroid with the Earth can not be excluded only on the basis of the
available astrometric observations. Namely, orbital solutions which lead to a
collision are inside the uncertainty region and they are fully compatible with
the available astrometric observations and their errors.

What is substantially done in these cases by the researchers, with vari-
ous sophisticated techniques whose description is well beyond the scope of
this paper (see Milani et al., 2000; 2003), is to sample the uncertainty re-
gion according to a suitable frequency distribution (closely related to what is
currently known about error statistics) and then evaluate the relative prob-
ability that the “true” orbit of the asteroid is one among the collision ones.
From now on we will refer to this probability with the symbol Vi. The colli-
sion orbits are nowadays commonly called Virtual Impactors (or VIs; for an
exhaustive review see Milani et al., 2003).

Every time new more astrometric observations become available, the qual-
ity of the asteroid orbit improves and the estimated impact probability Vi
Its value is almost always such that Vi ≪ 1 and during
is re-computed.
the phases of the orbital reﬁnement it ﬂuctuates, usually with a somewhat
increasing trend1 until it falls to zero, its most probable ﬁnal value.

Starting from 1999, some press announcements were made regarding as
many newly discovered NEAs which were found to have non zero collision
chances in the near future (given the highly chaotic dynamics involved in
1The reason of such increasing behavior is rather technical and it is essentially connected

to the fact that uncertainty region shrinks with new more observations.

2

the multiple planetary close encounters, which are at the basis of the impact
calculations, impact analysis procedures can safely cover only time spans
of the order of a century). The computations were carried out mainly by
two research groups, that at the University of Pisa and that at NASA–JPL.
One of the ﬁrst and, maybe, most famous of such cases was that of asteroid
1999 AN10 (for more informations, see for example Milani et al., 1999; 2003
and http://impact.arc.nasa.gov/news/1999/apr/21.html; for a detailed
historical account of these cases, see Chapman, 1999), being that of the
asteroid 2002 NT7 the most recent one (up to this date). These objects
obviously rose the somewhat alarmed attention of the public opinion and of
the whole astronomical community for a while. Then, after the asteroids
orbits were reﬁned thanks to new more astrometric observations and the
impact possibilities ruled out, they have became again of purely academic
interest.

Currently, the only two existing automatized VIs monitoring systems,
CLOMON2 at University of Pisa and SENTRY3 at NASA–JPL, ﬁnd tens of
newly discovered NEAs with VIs orbital solutions every years, and some with
not so small impact probability (for a preliminary statistics of VIs detections
see Tab. 1, more later).

Given such past experience of public (and professional) reactions and
given the current rate of VIs orbital solutions discovery, some questions rise
to the author’s mind: how are VIs impact probabilities actually related to
the real impact threat? How much threat should we reliably read in a VIs de-
tection announcement? Equivalently, soon after the discovery of VIs orbital
solutions of a new asteroid, what is the probability that Vi approaches and
eventually reaches the unity (within this paper we will use the compact nota-
tion “Vi → 1”), after the right amount of new more astrometric observations
has became available?

In this paper we would give a statistical, a posteriori reading of VIs
impact probabilities (which actually are in their very nature “deterministic”,
or, more properly, a priori) in order to provide an answer to such questions.

2http://newton.dm.unipi.it/neodys
3http://neo.jpl.nasa.gov/risk/

3

2 Statistical reading of Vi

Soon after the discovery of VIs orbital solutions of a new asteroid, what is
the probability of Vi → 1, after the right amount of new more astrometric
observations has became available? It would seem quite obvious that this
probability is simply Vi, according to its deﬁnition. But we believe that this
is not the case. This is essentially because Vi, as we said before, ﬂuctu-
ates every time new more astrometric observations become available and the
computations are redone: which particular value should we consider for our
needs? The value obtained with the second batch of astrometric observa-
tions following the discovery observations? Or the third? Or just the value
of Vi calculated with the discovery observations? And, in latter case, if the
discovery was made in another period of the year, the calculated value of Vi
would have been the same? Actually, what we are asking is: only knowing
that a newly discovered NEAs exhibits some VIs orbital solutions, what is
the probability that Vi will be equal to 1 at the end of the whole orbital
reﬁnement process? We believe that only a statistical, a posteriori analysis
can give an acceptable and veriﬁable answer.

Now, let us make the following thought experiment, only functional to
the presentation of our point. Suppose that we are able to discover all as-
teroids with absolute magnitude less than or equal to H which pass close to
the Earth. Moreover, we reasonably suppose that every discovered impact-
ing asteroid will show some VIs, with low Vi soon after the discovery and
ﬂuctuating with an increasing trend as soon as subsequent astrometric ob-
servations become available. In other words, we are putting ourselves in the
somewhat idealized situation where every impacting asteroid brighter than
H will surely be discovered and for it VIs monitoring systems will surely spot
some VIs soon after its discovery.

Thus, we deﬁne the a posteriori probability of Vi → 1, which could be also
interpreted as a kind of “weight” of the VIs impact probability calculation
(more on this later), as:

W (≤ H) =

n(≤ H)
v(≤ H)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)T

=

ρi(≤ H)
fVi(≤ H)

,

(1)

where n(≤ H) is the number of impacts of asteroids with absolute magnitude
less than or equal to H and v(≤ H) is the number of asteroids with same size
found among all the newly discovered NEAs to exhibit VIs orbital solutions,

4

both counted in the period of T years. Note that, according to what we said
at the beginning of this section, the number n(≤ H) is counted in the number
v(≤ H), since we have assumed that every impacting asteroid is identiﬁed
soon after its discovery as having some VI orbital solutions.

Let us explain better the meaning of eq. (1). Within the hypotheses
introduced above on the almost perfect NEAs discovery eﬃciency and VIs
monitoring capabilities, we imagine to be able to wait for a very long period of
years (T ) and count the number n(≤ H) of asteroid impacts and the number
v(≤ H) of VIs orbital solutions detected among all the discovered NEAs
below the characteristic absolute magnitude H, within that period of time.
Hence the fraction of these two numbers gives the a posteriori probability
that a newly discovered asteroid, for which the VIs monitoring systems have
spotted some VIs orbital solutions, is just that which will fall on the Earth.
In the third member of eq. (1) we rewrite W in terms of the background
annual impact frequency ρi, namely that extrapolated through a statistical
analysis from close encounters of the known NEA population (Morrison et
al., 2003), and the annual frequency fVi of ﬁnding VIs among the newly
discovered NEAs. A sketch of the average time between impacts (1/ρi) is
given in Fig. 1 as a function of the impactor’s diameter.

Above we said that W can be interpreted as a kind of “weight” of the
VIs impact probability calculation. This is because the greater is fVi, the
lesser is the a posteriori probability of Vi → 1, no matter how is the initial
numerical value of Vi. Namely, the higher is the frequency with which we
ﬁnd VIs among newly discovered asteroids (with respect to the background
frequency of impact, ρi), the lesser is their a posteriori weight in expressing
the threat of those particular newly discovered asteroids. This mechanism
shares inevitable analogies with the well-known “crying wolf” experience,
bad faith apart.

Moreover, we can see that W is not directly related to the speciﬁc numer-
ical value of Vi. Rather, it depends upon fVi, namely the annual rate of VIs
discovery, which, in turn, depends upon some observational characteristics.
These are the annual number of NEA discoveries, the number of astrometric
observations available at discovery, the magnitude of astrometric errors and
the conventions in their statistical treatment and the observational geometry
and orbital characteristics of the newly discovered asteroid. But, we guess,
it is not easy to give an exact estimate of its value at the moment. A greater
sample of VIs detections is necessary in order to better estimate fVi and thus

5

Figure 1: An approximation of the average time between asteroidal impacts
with the Earth (the reciprocal of the background annual impact frequency
ρi) as a function of the impactor’s diameter. We choose to use diameters
(D) rather than absolute magnitudes (H) since diameters are a more direct
physical quantity. The mathematical relation between D and H is: log10 D ≃
log10 1329 − H
2 log10 pV , where pV is the albedo of the asteroid and it is
usually assumed to be equal to 0.15 (Chesley et al., 2002).

5 − 1

the probability W .

Anyway, having an idea of the total number of VIs detections found at
every size between calendar years 2000 and 2001 (for this, a suﬃcient but not
complete archive of VIs detections could be found in the web pages of the Ob-
serving Campaigns of the Spaceguard Central Node at http://spaceguard.
rm.iasf.cnr.it), a conservative estimate of W cannot be too much diﬀer-
ent from that we get with fVi of the order of the unity. From Tab. 1 we see
that the numerical value of fVi varies between ∼ 1 and ∼ 10, in the reported
range of absolute magnitudes H. For the sake of simplicity, in this paper we
choose to adopt fVi ∼ 1 for all H, being conﬁdent of committing a justiﬁable

6

approximation, surely comparable with the uncertainty with which ρi is cur-
rently known (at least within some ranges of absolute magnitude). In that
way, we simply have W ∼ ρi.

Note that relaxing the optimistic assumptions on the almost perfect NEAs
discovery eﬃciency and VIs monitoring capabilities makes fVi, as approxi-
mated with the aid of Tab. 1, even an underestimate, and consequently it
makes W ∼ ρi an overestimate.

Therefore, the probability of Vi → 1 is nearly of the order of the back-
ground impact probability, no matter how is Vi’s speciﬁc, initial (ﬂuctuating)
numerical value.

This result should not be a surprise since it simply re-states what we
already know: the actual impact threat of the unknown NEA population on
the Earth is always the same estimated through the close encounters statistics
of known population. The fact that in the last few years many VIs orbital
solutions have been detected among newly discovered NEAs obviously does
not make NEAs more threatening than they have ever been.

As a matter of fact, the annual rate of VIs detections, if compared with the
background impact probability, suggests an order of magnitude of the weight
VIs detections have in expressing the real threat of a newly discovered NEA
with Vi 6= 0.

3 Conclusions

From the introduction and the discussion of the a posteriori probability W
done in this paper it follows that, rigorously speaking, the VIs impact prob-
ability Vi does not give the real expression of the actual impact threat posed
by a newly discovered NEA exhibiting VIs orbital solutions. This is properly
done by W , which is strictly related to the so-called background impact prob-
ability ρi (that extrapolated through a statistical analysis from close encoun-
ters of the known NEA population) and to the annual frequency with which
the impact monitoring systems (currently NEODyS-CLOMON at University
of Pisa and SENTRY at NASA–JPL) ﬁnd VIs among newly discovered as-
teroids. Of W we also provide a conservative estimate, which turns out to
be of nearly the same order of ρi.

All this might seem a bit paradoxical, given the deﬁnition of Vi. Yet, a
closer look to the deﬁnition of W shows that our conclusions are straightfor-

7

Table 1: Annual frequency of VIs detections below absolute magnitude H,
estimated using the Spaceguard Central Node archive of VIs observing cam-
paigns organized in the calendar years 2000 and 2001. During that period of
time there were no VIs detections below H = 16. In the reported range of
H, the numerical value of fVi varies between ∼ 1 and ∼ 10.

H fVi(≤ H)

yr−1
14.5
14.0
14.0
13.5
13.0
9.5
9.5
8.5
7.5
7.0
5.5
3.5
1.5
∼ 1

29
28
27
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
16

ward and even obvious.

References

Chapman, C.R., 1999. The asteroid/comet impact hazard. Case Study for
Workshop on Prediction in the Earth Sciences: Use and Misuse in Policy
Making, July 10-12 1997 - Natl. Center for Atmospheric Research, Boul-
der, CO and September 10-12 1998, Estes Park, CO. Available on-line at:
http://www.boulder.swri.edu/clark/ncar799.html

8

Chesley, R.S., Chodas, P.W., Milani, A., Valsecchi, G.B., Yeomans, D.K.,
Icarus, in
2002. Quantifying the risk posed by potential Earth impacts.
press.

Milani, A., Chesley, S.R., Valsecchi, G.B. 1999. Close approaches of asteroid
1999 AN10: resonant and non-resonant returns. Astronomy & Astrophysics
346:L65-L68.

Milani, A., Chesley, S.R., Valsecchi, G.B. 2000. Asteroid close encounters
with Earth: Risk assessment. Planetary & Space Science 48: 945-954.

Milani, A., Chesley, S.R., Chodas, P.W., Valsecchi, G.B. Asteroid close ap-
proaches and impact opportunities. Chapter for Asteroids III book edited
by William Bottke, Alberto Cellino, Paolo Paolicchi, and Richard P. Binzel.
University of Arizona Press, Tucson (2003).

Morrison, D., Harris, A.W., Sommer, G., Chapman, C.R., Carusi, A. Dealing
with the Impact Hazard. Chapter for Asteroids III book edited by William
Bottke, Alberto Cellino, Paolo Paolicchi, and Richard P. Binzel. University
of Arizona Press, Tucson (2003).

9

