3
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
2
0
5
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH, VOL. , NO. , PAGES 1–10,

Diamagnetic Suppression of Component Magnetic
Reconnection at the Magnetopause

M. Swisdak,1 B. N. Rogers,2 J. F. Drake,1 and M. A. Shay1

Abstract. We present particle-in-cell simulations of collisionless magnetic reconnection
in a system (like the magnetopause) with a large density asymmetry across the current
layer. In the presence of an ambient component of the magnetic ﬁeld perpendicular to
the reconnection plane the gradient creates a diamagnetic drift that advects the X-line
with the electron diamagnetic velocity. When the relative drift between the ions and elec-
trons is of the order the Alfv´en speed the large scale outﬂows from the X-line necessary
for fast reconnection cannot develop and the reconnection is suppressed. We discuss how
these eﬀects vary with both the plasma β and the shear angle of the reconnecting ﬁeld
and discuss observational evidence for diamagnetic stabilization at the magnetopause.

1. Introduction

Magnetic reconnection, the breaking and reforming of
magnetic ﬁeld lines with a concomitant transfer of energy
from the ﬁeld to the surrounding plasma, is thought to drive
such phenomena as solar ﬂares, magnetospheric substorms,
and tokamak sawtooth crashes. Despite the suspected link-
age, the resistive magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) model of
reconnection due to Sweet [1958] and Parker [1957] (the fa-
vored theoretical model for many years), predicts reconnec-
tion rates in each of these systems that are typically orders
of magnitude too low to be physically relevant. The dis-
crepancy arises because the Sweet-Parker reconnection rate
varies with the Spitzer resistivity which in turn depends on
particle interactions that are rare in these collisionless plas-
mas.

Recent work suggests that terms important at small
length scales but usually ordered away in resistive MHD,
notably the Hall term in Ohm’s law, lead to reconnection
rates that are consistent with the observations [Shay et al.,
1999]. With the addition of this new physics the speed of
the electron ﬂows away from the reconnection site (the X-
line) is no longer bounded by the ion Alfv´en speed, instead
scaling inversely with the width of the current layer formed
by the reconnecting magnetic ﬁelds. As a result, the out-
ward electron ﬂux remains large even as the width, con-
trolled by non-ideal eﬀects, becomes small. Downstream
from the reconnection site the super-Alfv´enic electrons slow
to rejoin the ions and expand outwards in a wide layer remi-
niscent of the Petschek [1964] model. This behavior has been
conﬁrmed by a variety of numerical simulations: two-ﬂuid,
hybrid (ﬂuid electrons and particle ions), and full particle.
In the GEM (Geospace Environment Modeling) reconnec-
tion challenge each of several independent codes modeling

1IREAP, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.
2Department of Physics, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH,

USA.

Copyright by the American Geophysical Union.

Paper number .
0148-0227/08/$9.00

an identical (two-dimensional) system found features simi-
lar to those described above [Birn et al., 2001 and references
therein]. Laboratory experiments in the relevant regimes are
challenging, but recent results [Brown, 1999; Ji et al., 1999]
support some aspects of this picture.

Although the GEM challenge established a possible mech-
anism for fast collisionless reconnection, it did so for a rela-
tively simple geometry. Experimental evidence suggests that
in nature reconnection is likely to be more complex. For
instance, at the Earth’s dayside magnetopause the magne-
tosphere, a region of low density but strong magnetic ﬁeld,
abuts the magnetosheath and its high density but weaker
magnetic ﬁeld. Still, early single-point spacecraft measure-
ments of the magnetopause [Paschmann et al., 1979; Son-
nerup et al., 1981] detected ﬁeld signatures and particle dis-
tribution functions suggesting the occurrence of reconnec-
tion. A more recent study using data from multiple space-
craft [Phan et al., 2000] found, at least in one case, the
bidirectional jets that are a reconnection hallmark. Simi-
lar cross-ﬁeld pressure gradients occur in laboratory fusion
experiments where their associated diamagnetic drifts are
thought to control the onset of reconnection during the saw-
tooth crash [Levinton et al., 1994].

The ﬁrst theoretical explorations of asymmetric recon-
nection [Levy et al., 1964; Petschek and Thorne, 1967] were
based on incompressible MHD and predict an outﬂow re-
gion comprising a combination of slow MHD shocks and slow
and intermediate MHD waves. Two-dimensional computer
simulations using compressible MHD [Hoshino and Nishida,
1983; Scholer, 1989], hybrid [Lin and Xie, 1997; Omidi et
al., 1998; Krauss-Varban et al., 1999; Nakamura and Sc-
holer, 2000] and particle [Okuda, 1993] codes have addressed
these predictions. Common features include the preferential
growth of the magnetic island (O-line) towards the magne-
tosheath and a pronounced density drop on the magneto-
spheric side of the boundary layer. Also, consistent with
the picture of Levy et al. [1964], the current layer abutting
the magnetosheath is generally stronger than that bordering
the magnetosphere and takes the form of a series of discon-
tinuities. There is disagreement, however, concerning the
precise form of these discontinuities, possibly because the
nonlocality associated with the motion of collisionless par-
ticles parallel to the shock front makes the two-dimensional

1

2

SWISDAK ET AL.: DIAMAGNETIC SUPPRESSION OF RECONNECTION

(2-D) simulations more complicated than the 1-D models.
Simulations have also been performed with an initial out-of-
plane component of the magnetic ﬁeld (nonzero By in GSM
coordinates) [Hoshino and Nishida, 1983; Krauss-Varban et
al., 1999; Nakamura and Scholer, 2000]. This guide ﬁeld
tends to slow, but not completely suppress, reconnection
and alter the structure of the shock transitions.

In our investigations we begin with a simple magne-
topause equilibrium model with an ambient pressure dif-
ference and perform two-dimensional fully kinetic numerical
simulations. We reproduce the qualitative features seen in
previous work but also ﬁnd that diamagnetic drifts produced
by the pressure gradient advect the X-line. When the dia-
magnetic velocity, v∗ = −(c/qnB2)∇p × B (c is the speed
of light; q, n, and p are the species charge, density, and pres-
sure; B is the magnetic ﬁeld), is comparable to the Alfv´en
speed, reconnection is completely suppressed. These dia-
magnetic eﬀects have not been previously reported in the
context of magnetopause reconnection. They are ordered
out of the MHD model [Hoshino and Nishida, 1983] and
were not seen in the hybrid simulations, perhaps because the
spatially localized resistivity used to trigger fast reconnec-
tion eﬀectively prohibits X-line advection. In spite of this,
diamagnetic eﬀects can be signiﬁcant at the magnetopause.
Taking n ∼ 10 cm−3, B ∼ 10−4 G, kBT ∼ 100 eV, and
gradients of order an inverse ion inertial length, one ﬁnds
v∗/vA ∼ 1.
In the fusion context, previous analytic work
has suggested that diamagnetic drifts can stabilize the tear-
ing mode and lower the rate of reconnection [Biskamp, 1981;
Rogers and Zakharov, 1995]. But since this work considered
a reduced MHD model (equivalent to the limit of a large
guide ﬁeld) its applicability to magnetospheric applications
has not been established.

Unlike the conﬁguration in the magnetotail, the magnetic
ﬁeld on opposite sides of the magnetopause is usually not
equal in magnitude and anti-parallel. Reconnection in such
a system does not occur at a unique spatial location, even
in a model with a 1-D equilibrium, since components of the
magnetic ﬁeld reverse direction at any location across the
current layer. Because of the possibility that reconnection
can occur at multiple spatial locations, it has been suggested
that the magnetopause magnetic ﬁeld is stochastic [Galeev
et al., 1986; Lee et al., 1993]. The exploration of reconnec-
tion in a 2-D model must then be carried out with care since
stability at a particular surface does not necessarily imply
stability at all surfaces. In exploring the impact of diamag-
netic drifts on reconnection we therefore must address both
stability at a single plane and explore which plane is ex-
pected to dominate the dynamics of a full 3-D system. We
suggest on the basis of analytic arguments and simulations
that the strongest reconnection occurs at the surface where
the reversed ﬁeld components have equal magnitudes.

In section 2 of the paper we present our computational
scheme and initial conditions. Section 3 is an overview of
reconnection at the magnetopause, both without and with
a diamagnetic drift. Section 4 discusses how varying the
strength of the out-of-plane ﬁeld changes the diamagnetic
eﬀects while section 5 addresses the question of determin-
ing the dominant reconnection plane. Finally, in section 6
we summarize our results and discuss their implications for
understanding magnetic reconnection at the magnetopause.

2. Computational Methods

Although diamagnetic drifts are present in two-ﬂuid and
hybrid models, a complete calculation in the collisionless
limit requires a careful, and assumption-ﬁlled, treatment of

the full pressure tensor. To avoid this diﬃculty, we sacriﬁce
the beneﬁts of a ﬂuid simulation for a more computationally
demanding, but mathematically straightforward, full parti-
cle description.

2.1. The Code

The simulations are done with p3d, a massively parallel
kinetic code that can evolve up to ∼ 109 particles on current
Cray T3E and IBM SP systems [Zeiler et al., 2002]. The
Lorentz equation of motion for each particle is evolved by a
Boris algorithm (E accelerates for half a timestep, followed
by a rotation of v by B, and then the other half-step acceler-
ation by E). The electromagnetic ﬁelds are advanced in time
with an explicit trapezoidal-leapfrog method using second-
order spatial derivatives. Poisson’s equation constrains the
system; if ∇ · E 6= 4πρ, a multigrid algorithm recursively
corrects the electric ﬁeld. Although the code permits other
choices, we work with fully periodic boundary conditions.

The code is written in normalized units: lengths to the ion
inertial length c/ωpi = di, times to the inverse ion cyclotron
−1
frequency Ω
ci , velocities to the Alfv´en speed vA, masses to
the ion mass mi, and temperatures to miv2
A. Unless other-
wise noted, the asymptotic reconnecting ﬁeld is assumed to
have a magnitude of 1 on both sides of the magnetopause
(the reason for this choice will be made clear in section 5)
and the asymptotic density in the magnetosheath is taken
to be 1.

To conserve computational resources, yet assure a suﬃ-
cient separation of spatial and temporal scales, we take the
electron mass to be 0.005 = 1/200 and the speed of light to
be 20. Our simulations are performed in a box of 1024×1024
gridpoints that is 25.6 on a side, corresponding to a grid scale
of 0.025 and so ≈ 3 gridpoints per electron inertial length.
−3.
A typical timestep is 1.5 × 10

2.2.

Initial Conditions

Reconnection occurs in the x − y plane in our coordi-
nate system. For reference, this is equivalent to the z − x
plane in GSM coordinates. The initial equilibrium is con-
structed from two (modiﬁed) Harris current sheets centered
at Ly/4 and 3Ly/4, where Ly is the box size in the y direc-
tion; to allow periodicity the current is parallel to ˆz in one
sheet and anti-parallel in the other. The current sheets pro-
duce a magnetic ﬁeld Bx = tanh[(y − Ly/4)/w0] − tanh[(y −
3Ly/4)/w0] − 1, where w0 = 0.5. The density proﬁle is sim-
ilar, n = n0(tanh[(y − Ly/4)/w0] − tanh[(y − 3Ly/4)/w0]) +
nmin, where, unless otherwise speciﬁed, n0 = 0.45 and
nmin = 0.1. This proﬁle gives an asymptotic density of n = 1
in the magnetosheath and 0.1 in the magnetosphere. The
initial ion and electron temperatures are Ti = 2 and Te = 1,
implying thermal speeds of ≈ 1.4 and 14, respectively. The
guide (out-of-plane) ﬁeld Bz is assigned a speciﬁc asymp-
totic value Bz0 on the magnetosheath side and is calculated
elsewhere by assuming pressure balance. Note that at the
reversal surface, where Bx = 0, pressure balance implies
that ∂yn(Ti + Te) ∝ Bz∂yBz, and hence a density gradient
must be accompanied by a gradient in Bz. At t = 0 a 5%
perturbation in the magnetic ﬂux function places the X- and
O-line in each sheet.

Unlike a conventional Harris sheet, this initial state is not
a kinetic (Vlasov) equilibrium. Although it has been shown

SWISDAK ET AL.: DIAMAGNETIC SUPPRESSION OF RECONNECTION

3

[Quest and Coroniti, 1981] that the presence of a guide ﬁeld
reduces the growth rate of the tearing mode instability in the
linear regime, our initial perturbation is large enough that
the system begins to reconnect nonlinearly before any other
perturbations become important. We must also emphasize
that our system characterizes the magnetopause only in a
rough approximation. In particular, magnetospheric plasma
is typically not isothermal, but instead has temperature gra-
dients comparable in magnitude, but anti-parallel, to those
of the plasma density.
If this eﬀect is included the over-
all pressure gradient, as well as the diamagnetic eﬀects we
discuss here, will be smaller.

3. Simulation Overview

In the simplest description of fast collisionless reconnec-
tion three length scales are relevant: the system size and
the ion and electron inertial lengths.
(Depending on the
strength of the initial out-of-plane ﬁeld, the ion Larmor ra-
dius can also enter as a parameter [Kleva and Drake, 1995].)
The dynamic couplings between these scales, which must ex-
ist for fast reconnection to occur, are discussed in detail by
Biskamp et al. [1997] and Shay et al. [1998]. At large scales
both species are frozen into the magnetic ﬁeld and ﬂow to-
wards the X-line with a velocity vin that is some fraction of
the upstream Alfv´en speed. Roughly c/ωpi away from the
current sheet the inertia term in the ion equation of mo-
tion becomes important and the ions, but not the electrons,
decouple from the ﬁeld. Deﬂected outwards, the ions ﬂow
Alfv´enically away from the X-line while the electrons travel
further inward until they too decouple and travel outward
at velocities near the electron Alfv´en speed. Downstream,
the electrons slow to join the ionic outﬂow and reform an

MHD ﬂuid. In what follows we show that diamagnetic drifts
can disrupt this structure by strongly altering the MHD out-
ﬂows, thereby inhibiting the coupling of the ions to the X-
line and halting the formation of a large-scale reconnection
geometry.

3.1. Anti-parallel Reconnection

To document certain features and establish contact with
previous work, Figure 1 shows the X-line structure from
a magnetopause simulation similar to those described by
[1999] and Nakamura and Scholer
Krauss-Varban et al.
[2000]. The upper section of each panel (y/di > 3.2) con-
tains low density plasma and a large magnetic ﬁeld like the
magnetosphere, while the lower section has a high density
plasma and a weak ﬁeld like the magnetosheath. There are
a few diﬀerences between the initial conditions for this sim-
ulation and the case with a guide ﬁeld discussed in section
2.2 (and used in the rest of this paper). The reversed ﬁeld
is given by a shifted hyperbolic tangent such that the mag-
nitudes of the asymptotic ﬁelds are unequal, Bsp
x = 1.5 and
Bsh
x = 0.5, where magnetosphere and magnetosheath quan-
tities are denoted with the superscripts “sp” and “sh”, re-
spectively. The guide ﬁeld Bz is zero. Pressure balance then
ﬁxes the density proﬁle as a gradient from 1 to 2/3 across
the current layer with a relative maxima where Bx = 0.

The general features of Figure 1 are consistent with ear-
lier calculations. One consequence of the asymmetry in ﬁeld
strengths across the magnetopause is the evident tendency
for the magnetic island to grow preferentially in the direction

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

a

b

c

x

B

0.5

0.1

z

B

1.5

1.0

0.0

-0.5

0.2

0.0

-0.1

1.00

0.90

0.80

0.70

y
t
i
s
n
e
D

Figure 1. Reconnection in a magnetopause-like conﬁgura-
−1
ci . (a)
tion with no guide ﬁeld.
The out-of-plane current density Jz, (b) the in-plane ﬁeld
lines, and (c) the ion velocity vectors, averaged over a scale
of ∼ di. Note the ﬂows associated with the X-line. The
longest vector corresponds to a velocity of ∼ 0.15vA.

In each panel t = 13.5Ω

Figure 2. Cuts at x = 20di of the outﬂow region of Figure
1. Each plot has been averaged over 0.25di in the horizontal
direction to reduce the noise. (a)-(c) The reconnecting ﬁeld,
the out-of-plane ﬁeld, and the density, respectively.

0

1

2

4

5

6

3
y/di

4

SWISDAK ET AL.: DIAMAGNETIC SUPPRESSION OF RECONNECTION

in = (Bsp/Bsh)vsp

of the magnetosheath. Since equal amounts of ﬂux must re-
connect from either side in a given time, Bspvsp
in = Bshvsh
in ,
in ≫ vsp
and so vsh
in . The larger inﬂow on the
magnetosheath side of the reversal surface is evident in the
ion velocity vectors shown in Figure 1c. With the stronger
inﬂow, the (frozen-in) magnetosheath ﬁeld is more strongly
advected toward the X-line than its magnetospheric coun-
terpart, leading to the wider opening angle (i.e., the bulge)
on the magnetosheath side of the current layer. In earlier
MHD simulations it was shown that the asymmetry of the
island did not appear when the amplitudes of the reversed
ﬁeld on either side of the magnetopause are equal [Scholer,
1989].

Because of the simulation’s relatively small size clearly
separated MHD and kinetic discontinuities do not exist,
making comparisons with previous work diﬃcult. Neverthe-
less, in cuts of the reconnection outﬂow (see Figure 2), the
self-generated, out-of-plane magnetic ﬁeld is evident and the
positive (negative) value of Bz on the magnetosheath (mag-
netosphere) side of the current layer is consistent with earlier
predictions. The perturbation, however, is much stronger
on the magnetosheath side; the anti-symmetry of Bz seen
in systems with a symmetric pressure does not extend to
reconnection at the magnetopause.

The sharp density drop at the magnetosphere edge of the
current layer (y ≈ 3.4di) is a consequence of the diﬀerent
inﬂow speeds on the two sides of the layer and the plasma
mixing across the island. Since the magnetospheric ﬁeld is
much stronger, and therefore the inﬂow velocity from this
side of the current layer is weak, only a small amount of
magnetospheric plasma crosses the separatrices. The result
is an outﬂow region almost completely comprising magne-
tosheath plasma. This eﬀect was evident in earlier hybrid
simulations [Krauss-Varban et al. 1999; Nakamura and Sc-
holer, 2000] and has also been seen in satellite crossings of
the magnetopause [Eastman et al., 1996].

3.2. Component Reconnection and Diamagnetic
Propagation

In the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld any nonparallel pres-

sure gradient produces a diamagnetic drift,

v∗j = −c

∇pj × B
qj nB2

,

(1)

where pj = nTj is the thermal pressure and qj is the charge
of species j. Due to the charge dependence, ions and elec-
trons drift in opposite directions. To have diamagnetic ﬂows
parallel to the current layer in our geometry the guide ﬁeld
Bz and the gradient of the pressure must be nonzero where
Bx = 0.

Even though diamagnetic drifts do not correspond to
actual particle motions they nevertheless advect the mag-
netic ﬁeld [Coppi, 1965; Scott and Hassam, 1987].
In
two dimensions the magnetic ﬁeld can be written as B =
ˆz × ∇ψ(x, y) + Bz(x, y)ˆz where ψ is the magnetic ﬂux func-
tion. Taking the cross product of Faraday’s law with ˆz yields
∂t∇ψ − c∇Ez = 0, or Ez = ∂tψ/c. Next, dotting the elec-
tron ﬂuid equation with ˆz gives

Ez = −

ˆz · (ve × B) −

1
c

me
e

dvez
dt

.

(2)

The last term represents the inertial eﬀects of electrons and
breaks the frozen-in condition. Since it is usually small we
ignore it and substitute for B to get Ez = −ve · ∇ψ/c and

a convection equation for the ﬂux [Coppi, 1965],

∂tψ + ve · ∇ψ = 0.

(3)

Hence, the electron ﬂuid velocity, which includes a diamag-
netic component given by (1), advects magnetic structures.
Strictly speaking, equations (1) and (3) are ﬂuid results
and need not describe the dynamics at the X-line of our
simulations where small-scale structures leave the ﬂuid ap-
proximation on unsure ground. However, as can be seen
in Figure 3, they are still good descriptions of the system.
The out-of-plane current density essentially maps the mag-
netic ﬁeld lines (see Figure 1b) so the island (centered at
x/di ∼ 5) grows robustly during the time shown. Simulta-
neously, the X-line propagates to the left, the direction of
the electron diamagnetic drift. The locations of the X-line
in the three panels of Figure 3 are x/di = 19.2, 14.8 and
10, respectively, corresponding to a drift speed of 0.61vA
and consistent with the value calculated from the initial pa-
rameters of v∗e = 0.56. As ﬂux reconnects the magnetic
island widens, decreasing the pressure gradient across its
center, slowing its drift, and allowing the X-line to overtake
it. This stabilizes the island’s growth because the plasma
outﬂow from the X-line towards the near end of the island
must slow due to the increase in magnetic pressure. The
actual collision of the X-line with the island, which occurs
later in time, may be unphysical since in any real system the
initial separation of the X- and O-lines will be much greater
than the 12.8di of the present model. Thus, the eﬀects of
the collision will not be discussed further.

A surprise is that the diamagnetic propagation evident in
Figure 3 has not been seen in previous hybrid simulations

Figure 3. The out-of-plane current density at three times
for a magnetopause geometry similar to Figure 1, but in-
cluding an out-of-plane guide ﬁeld and therefore an in-plane
diamagnetic drift. The initial conditions are those described
in section 2.2 with an asymptotic guide ﬁeld of 3.0 in the
magnetosheath and 3.8 in the magnetosphere. The density
drops from 1 to 0.1 across the current layer.

SWISDAK ET AL.: DIAMAGNETIC SUPPRESSION OF RECONNECTION

5

of the magnetopause [Krauss-Varban et al., 1999; Nakamura
and Scholer, 2000] even though these models should include
the relevant electron diamagnetic drifts. In some cases the
simulation parameters may be such as to minimize diamag-
netic eﬀects (e.g.
a lower magnetospheric temperature).
Diamagnetic drifts may also be absent if the simulations
were performed with an initially uniform out-of-plane ﬁeld.
According to the force balance condition, the local pressure
gradient (and hence the drift) must then be zero at the re-
versal surface, although whether it would remain zero as
the system evolves is unclear. In section 5 we discuss fur-
ther why a uniform guide ﬁeld may not be representative
of reconnection at the magnetopause. A ﬁnal possibility
occurs for simulations using a ﬁxed, spatially-localized re-
sistivity to break the frozen-in condition at the X-line. How
such a resistivity model would aﬀect an X-line that is trying
to propagate is unclear, but it is nevertheless evident from
our results that such models may be inappropriate for sim-
ulating guide ﬁeld reconnection at the magnetopause when
diamagnetic drifts are large.

Figure 4a shows the current density for the simulation of
Figure 3. Unlike the example shown in Figure 1, the mag-
netic island does not bulge into the magnetosphere side of
the current layer. This is because the reconnecting magnetic
ﬁeld Bx is anti-symmetric across the current layer and thus,
as discussed earlier, both sides contribute equal amounts of
magnetic ﬂux to the reconnection. Clearly evident in Figure
4a, as well as the last two panels of Figure 3, is the left-right
asymmetry of the opening angle of the magnetic ﬁeld lines
near the X-line. This is caused by the interplay of the X-
line’s diamagnetic drift, controlled by just the electrons, and
the reconnection outﬂow, which must also involve the ions.
Consider the relative motion of the X-line and the ions.
Downstream from the reconnection site the J × B force ac-
celerates frozen-in ions up to the Alfv´en speed, ±vAx. To
this must be added the relative velocity between the diamag-
netic drift of the ions and the X-line, v∗ = |v∗i| + |v∗e|, with

the result being a right-left asymmetry in the outﬂow veloc-
ities, ±vAx + v∗. Since, from continuity, the opening angle
of the magnetic ﬁeld downstream from the X-line is roughly
vin/vout — and vin is roughly constant due to the symmet-
ric reconnecting ﬁeld — we expect the rightward opening
angle to be much smaller than its counterpart, consistent
with Figure 4b.

By a similar argument, normal ion outﬂow from an X-
line only develops when vAx > v∗. For the simulations pre-
sented in Figures 3 and 4 the electron and ion diamagnetic
drifts at the reversal surface are −0.56 and 1.12, respec-
tively, compared with vAx = 1.35 (based on a density of
0.55, corresponding to a mixture of the magnetopause and
magnetosheath plasma). Thus, for the parameters of this
simulation, the reconnection should be marginally unable to
reverse the ion ﬂow to the left of the X-line. The ion ﬂow
vectors are shown in Figure 4b at the same time as the cur-
rent density shown in Figure 4a. The strong ion ﬂow on
the right side of the X-line results from the combination of
the ion diamagnetic velocity with the direct acceleration by
the reconnected magnetic ﬁeld. The reconnection generated
forces almost reverse the diamagnetic ﬂow just to the left of
the X-line.

We again emphasize that it is the relative drift of the
ions and electrons, i.e. v∗ = |v∗i| + |v∗e|, that must be
smaller than the in-plane Alfv´en speed for normal reconnec-
tion to proceed. Reconnection was suppressed in a nearly
indistinguishable fashion in a series of simulations with the
same total temperature Te + Ti (and therefore identical v∗)

a

b

c

4

6

8

10

4

6

8

10

x

B

0.0

1.0

0.5

-0.5

-1.0

3.8

3.6

3.2

3.0

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

z

B

3.4

y
t
i
s
n
e
D

Figure 4. Structure of (a) the out-of-plane current density
for the simulation
Jz and (b) ion ﬂow vectors at t = 16.0Ω
shown in Figure 3. The large ﬂows at the current layer are
the ion diamagnetic drifts. The longest vector corresponds
to a velocity of ∼ 1.2vA

−1
ci

Figure 5. Cuts at x = 13.8di of the outﬂow region of Figure
4. Each plot has been averaged over 0.1di in the horizontal
direction to reduce the noise. (a)-(c) The reconnecting ﬁeld,
out-of-plane ﬁeld and density, respectively.

4

8

10

6

y/di

6

SWISDAK ET AL.: DIAMAGNETIC SUPPRESSION OF RECONNECTION

but diﬀering values of Te and Ti (Ti = 1/2, Te = 5/2 and
Ti = 5/2, Te = 1/2). Since Ti ≫ Te at the magnetopause,
stabilization can still occur even if the drift of the X-line,
which is due only to v∗e, is negligible.

The cuts in Figure 5 show that for this simulation the re-
connection ﬁeld Bx is symmetric across the layer while the
pressure drop across the magnetopause is supported by the
jump in the guide ﬁeld Bz. In contrast to the density pro-
ﬁle in the case with no guide ﬁeld, the density drop across
the layer is nearly centered on the magnetic island. Large
drops occur on either edge of the current layer with a weak
plateau in the middle of the island. The inﬂow velocity into
the island from either side of the current layer is now roughly
equal because of the near anti-symmetry of Bx. The plasma
in the core of the island is therefore a nearly equal mix of
magnetosphere and magnetosheath plasma and is not dom-
inated by the magnetosheath, in contrast to the case shown
in section 3.1.

4. Suppression of Component Reconnection

We have shown for a single case that, consistent with
equation (3), X-lines convect with the diamagnetic velocity

of the electrons in the reversal region and suggested a cri-
terion for the suppression of reconnection from diamagnetic
drifts, v∗ > vAx. We now more fully explore this stabiliza-
tion criterion by varying the strength of the out-of-plane
ﬁeld to vary the ratio of v∗ to vAx. For our magnetopause
model the diamagnetic velocity at the surface where Bx = 0
can be written as

v∗j =

cTj
qj Lpj Bz

,

(4)

where the pressure scale length is given by L−1
p = |∂yp|/p.
Varying the amplitude of the out-of-plane ﬁeld Bz while
keeping all the other parameter ﬁxed alters v∗j but keeps

No v*

Larger
v*

5

10

t Ω
ci

15

Figure 7. Reconnected ﬂux versus time for four simula-
tions. The reconnection rate is the slope of each curve. The
solid line is a reference run with no diamagnetic drift. The
dotted, dashed, and dash-dotted lines are from simulations
with diﬀering values of Bz0 (1.5, 1.0 and 0, respectively) and
therefore v∗.

5

15

20

10
t Ω
ci

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

 

x
u
l
F
d
e
t
c
e
n
n
o
c
e
R

0.0

0

a

b

i

d
/
x

25

20

15

10

5

0

0

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

e

*

v
 
d
e
r
u
s
a
e
M

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6
Calculated v

*e

0.8

1.0

1.2

Figure 6. The top panel shows the position of the X-line
versus time for several runs diﬀering only in the strength of
the guide ﬁeld Bz. The solid line is for the run of section
3.1 and experiences no diamagnetic motion. The dotted,
dashed, and dash-dotted lines correspond to Bz0 = 3, 1.5,
and 0.5, respectively. The bottom panel is a comparison of
the measured X-line velocities and the electron diamagnetic
velocity at the reversal surface. The straight line has a slope
of one and is plotted to guide the eye. In both panels the
X-point location corresponds to a saddle point in ψ.

.

Figure 8. (a) The out-of-plane current density Jz and (b)
−1
from a simulation with an
ion ﬂow vectors at t = 13.0Ω
ci
asymptotic Bz = 0.5 and a strong diamagnetic drift. The
large ﬂows to the right at the current layer are the result of
the ion diamagnetic drift. The longest vector corresponds
to a velocity of ∼ 0.95vA

SWISDAK ET AL.: DIAMAGNETIC SUPPRESSION OF RECONNECTION

7

vAx constant. As can be seen in Figure 6a, a large guide
ﬁeld implies a small v∗. Despite the occasional glitches (dis-
continuities in the motion arise when a new X-line triggered
by random perturbations begins to dominate), the drift ve-
locity is remarkably constant.

The bottom panel of Figure 6 shows the initial elec-
tron diamagnetic velocity at the reversal surface versus the
drift speed of the X-line measured in the simulation. Al-
though the agreement for sub-Alfv´enic velocities is quite
good, as v∗e approaches vAx another eﬀect becomes impor-
tant. Rather than move the ions at super-Alfv´enic velocities
the system develops an electric ﬁeld Ey transverse to the cur-
rent layer that, combined with the guide ﬁeld Bz, generates
an E × B drift opposing the ion motion and adding to the
electron velocity. There is no change in the net current but
the electrons, and hence the X-line, move faster than just
the diamagnetic velocity would suggest.

Since diamagnetic ﬂows of suﬃcient strength disrupt the
large-scale ﬂows characteristic of reconnection, increases in
v∗ should correlate with decreases in the amount of recon-
nected ﬂux. Figure 7 depicts the extent to which a diamag-
netic drift can alter the reconnection rate of a system. The
reconnected ﬂux is plotted versus time for four diﬀerent sim-
ulations: one with no diamagnetic drift, as in Figure 1, and
three with varying asymptotic guide ﬁelds, Bz0 = 1.5, 1.0,
and 0. For the latter cases the associated drift speeds (dia-
magnetic plus E×B) at the reversal surface are v∗ = 0.8, 1.1
and 1.5, respectively. Reconnection is almost completely
suppressed for the largest drifts. The plateau in reconnected
ﬂux seen in each of the bottom three curves is an artifact
(discussed earlier) of our system’s periodic boundary condi-
tions that allow the X-line to impinge on the more slowly
propagating magnetic islands.

For large guide ﬁelds the diamagnetic drift speed ap-
proaches zero and the stabilization is minimized. The con-
verse limit is more subtle since pressure balance imposes

x

x´

Bsp

z

α

z´

θ

Bsh

Figure 9. Schematic of the asymptotic magnetic ﬁelds
in the magnetosphere, Bsp, and magnetosheath, Bsh. The
reconnecting and out-of-plane components of the magnetic
ﬁeld depend on the orientation of the reconnection plane:
x − z versus x

− z

.

′

′

restrictions on the system’s conﬁguration.
If the proﬁles
of the density and the reconnecting ﬁeld are speciﬁed then
there is a minimal possible value of the guide ﬁeld in the
current layer; Bz cannot be taken to be zero and the drift
cannot grow without bound. Hence although (for example)
the GEM challenge simulations had zero guide ﬁeld they
did not have a large diamagnetic drift. Rather, Bz → 0 and
Lp → ∞, keeping v∗ = 0.

To conﬁrm the hypothesis that the reconnection process
cannot reverse the ion diamagnetic drift and drive outward
ﬂows from the X-line for large values of the diamagnetic ve-
locity, we show Jz and the ion velocities from a simulation
with an asymptotic out-of-plane ﬁeld Bz = 0.5 in Figure
8. In this case the island of reconnected ﬂux remains small
even at late time because of the weak growth shown in Fig-
ure 7. The ﬂows are actually smaller than the peak of the
expected diamagnetic velocity because of the development
of the electric ﬁeld Ey across the layer. A slight reduction
of the ion ﬂow speed to the left of the X-line indicates that
the reconnected ﬁeld lines exert a small leftward directed
force on the ions in this region, but the result is only a small
perturbation of the ion ﬂow pattern. Thus, the X-line is
unable to couple eﬀectively to the ions, strong reconnection
does not develop, and the island amplitude saturates.

5. Dependence on the Reconnection Plane

Although two-dimensional simulations are computation-
ally cheaper than their three-dimensional counterparts, this
simplicity comes with drawbacks. Perhaps the most impor-
tant when considering diamagnetic drifts is that the orien-
tation of the X-line with respect to the magnetic ﬁeld con-
ﬁguration is externally imposed, rather than being free to
develop. Diﬀerent simulation planes have diﬀerent recon-
necting and out-of-plane ﬁelds and hence varying amounts
of diamagnetic stabilization. In this section we explore this
eﬀect, albeit only by considering rotations around the ˆy-axis
to avoid introducing stabilizing By components into the sys-
tem. We will assume that the favored plane (i.e., the one
the system would choose if allowed to evolve in three dimen-
sions) is the one where the reconnection rate is maximal, but
note that the results are not a replacement for more ambi-
tious 3-D simulations. We further assume that the diamag-
netic eﬀects are playing the dominant role in determining
the plane where reconnection is most robust. Thus, we are
considering systems in which v∗ ∼ vAx.

Three-dimensional particle simulations have already ad-
dressed this issue for the basic case of a system with no
guide ﬁeld and no pressure drop across the current layer
[Hesse et al., 2001; Pritchett, 2001]. Random perturbations
were used as seeds to avoid imposing a plane a priori. Al-
though X-lines were free to develop with any orientation,
they preferentially formed parallel to the current layer, con-
sistent with our assumption of treating only rotations about
ˆy. Moreover they remained quasi-two-dimensional even at
late times. However, the simplicity of B makes this case de-
generate since the reversal surface (the place where Bx = 0)
must be at the center of the current layer for any rotation
about ˆy. This restriction does not exist in more complicated
conﬁgurations.

The basic geometry of magnetic ﬁelds at the magne-
topause is shown in Figure 9. In order to agree with our sim-
ulation coordinates, the magnetospheric ﬁeld Bsp is taken to

8

SWISDAK ET AL.: DIAMAGNETIC SUPPRESSION OF RECONNECTION

be in the positive x direction while the magnetosheath ﬁeld
Bsh is inclined at an angle θ with respect to the negative
x axis. Thus, the rotation angle across the magnetopause
is π − θ. The ˆy direction is perpendicular to the surface of
the magnetopause. For a two-dimensional simulation in the
x − y plane the reconnecting components of the magnetic
ﬁeld will be parallel to ˆx,

and the guide ﬁeld to ˆz,

Bsp

x = Bsp
x = −Bsh cos θ,

Bsh

Bsp

z = 0
z = Bsh sin θ.

Bsh

The primed axes in Figure 9 are rotated clockwise by an
angle α with respect to the unprimed system and represent
another possible reconnection plane. In a simulation carried
plane the reconnecting components of the
out in the x
magnetic ﬁeld will be

− y

′

′

while the guide ﬁeld components are

Bsp

x′ = Bsp cos α
x′ = −Bsh cos(θ + α),

Bsh

Bsp
z′ = −Bsp sin α
z′ = Bsh sin(θ + α).

Bsh

As shown in section 4, stabilization via a diamagnetic
drift is inversely proportional to the value of the guide ﬁeld
Bz in the center of the current layer. Thus, the expectation
is that the plane with the maximum value of the guide ﬁeld
at the surface where reconnection takes place will dominate.
Unfortunately, the asymptotic ﬁelds determine neither the
location of the reversal surface nor the value of the guide
ﬁeld there. Furthermore, the actual guide ﬁeld at the rever-
sal surface may vary as reconnection proceeds. To simplify
matters, we adopt the crude hypothesis that the guide ﬁeld
at the reversal surface Bg is the mean of the asymptotic
guide ﬁelds, which is [Bsh sin(θ + α) − Bsp sin α]/2 in the

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

x
u
l

F
 
d
e
t
c
e
n
n
o
c
e
R

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

0

5

15

20

10
t Ω
ci

Figure 10. Reconnected ﬂux versus time for three simula-
tions. The solid line is a simulation with an asymptotic guide
ﬁeld of 1.5 (the dotted line in Figure 7). The dashed and
◦
about ˆy.
dotted lines are simulations in planes rotated ±15

rotated system. With this ansatz the optimal plane for re-
connection is that where Bg is maximized with respect to
the angle α, from which we derive the condition

Bsp cos α = Bsh cos(θ + α).

(13)

Interestingly, this corresponds to the plane where the recon-
necting ﬁeld components are equal in magnitude but oppo-
sitely directed (see equations (9)-(10)). Figure 10 shows the
eﬀect of rotating our simulation plane on the reconnection
rate and suggests that when diamagnetic drifts are strong,
reconnection in the anti-symmetric plane is favored.

6. Summary and Discussion

Diamagnetic drifts can be an important part of mag-
netopause reconnection in certain parameter regimes.
In
our simulations the plasma β (approximately 1) and the
magnetosheath-magnetosphere density contrast (a factor of
10) are roughly consistent with observational constraints.
However our initial conditions also neglect both tempera-
ture gradients and scale lengths larger than an ion inertial
length. For other magnetopause models that include these
features the diamagnetic drifts and associated stabilization
may be smaller.

When diamagnetic drifts are signiﬁcant an X-line will ad-
vect with the electron ﬂuid velocity, causing the separatri-
ces to have an asymmetry in their opening angles with the
wider facing the direction of motion. For large enough ﬂows,
v∗ = |v∗e| + |v∗i| ∼ vA, reconnection can be completely sup-
pressed since the large-scale outﬂows from the X-line needed
for fast reconnection cannot develop. The reconnected ﬁeld
lines are not strong enough to reverse the ion diamagnetic
ﬂows toward the X-line.

The diamagnetic eﬀects presented here introduce a β de-
pendence that was absent in the symmetric systems studied
earlier. The diamagnetic stabilization condition v∗ > vA
can be rewritten as a condition on β:

βx >

Bz
Bx

2Lp
c/ωpi

,

(14)

where Bx is the amplitude of the reconnecting ﬁeld, βx =
8πnT /B2
x, and Bz and Lp are evaluated at the current layer.
For Bz ∼ Bx and for pressure scale lengths of the order of
the ion inertial length c/ωpi, the threshold for the suppres-
sion of reconnection is β ∼ 1.

A statistical study of accelerated ﬂow events was done by
Scurry et al.
[1994] to investigate the dependence of day-
side reconnection on magnetosheath β and the shear angle
of the magnetic ﬁeld across the magnetopause. They found
that for low values of β the accelerated ﬂow events spread
over a broad range of clock angles while at high values of β
they were strongly correlated with large clock angles. The
implication is that magnetic reconnection in the presence of
a signiﬁcant guide ﬁeld is suppressed at high β. Thus, these
observations are consistent with the criterion given by equa-
tion (14) for the diamagnetic suppression of reconnection.

When Bz ≫ Bx equation (14) indicates that it is diﬃcult
to stabilize reconnection with diamagnetic eﬀects, just as is
demonstrated in section 4. We do not address what happens
when the guide ﬁeld becomes very large, but Rogers et al.
[2001] examined the eﬀect of β on reconnection in a sym-
metric system (no pressure drop across the current layer) us-
ing theoretical arguments as well as numerical simulations.

SWISDAK ET AL.: DIAMAGNETIC SUPPRESSION OF RECONNECTION

9

They argued that fast reconnection as described in section
3 can take place whenever dispersive waves (e.g., whistlers
or kinetic Alfv´en waves) exist in a system at small spatial
scales. Only under extreme conditions (Bz ∼ Bxpmi/me,
βx = 8πnT /B2
x ≪ 1) is reconnection inhibited by a guide
ﬁeld Bz.

A ﬁnal curious feature of equation (14) occurs in the limit
where Bz is small, as the expression would seem to imply
that reconnection is inhibited even for low values of βx. This
is not the case because there is a linkage between the pres-
sure scale length Lp and the value of Bz at the reversal
surface. Since the reconnection ﬁeld Bx = 0 at this lo-
cation, pressure balance requires that p/Lp = BzB′
z with
′
′
B
z,
z = |∂yBz|. This condition implies that BzLp = p/B
and so that if the right-hand side is to remain ﬁnite then
In the absence of a guide ﬁeld the
Lp → ∞ as Bz → 0.
pressure gradient must be zero at the reversal surface. For
nonconstant Bz, the minimal initial value of the reversal
guide ﬁeld is determined by the details of the initial condi-
tions.

Unlike systems with simple reversed ﬁelds, reconnection
at the magnetopause is not limited to a single plane, a fact
that has led to the prediction that the magnetopause ﬁeld
might become stochastic [Galeev et al., 1986; Lee et al.,
1993]. Diamagnetic drifts oﬀer a way to trigger reconnec-
tion at multiple surfaces since they can directly aﬀect which
planes dominate reconnection. A rough argument suggests
that the maximal guide ﬁeld (and hence the minimal drift
and minimal stabilization) occurs at the surface where the
components of the ﬁeld that reconnect are equal and oppo-
site. Hence we expect this to be the dominant location of
“component reconnection” at the magnetopause.

The direction of the X-line advection can in principle be
predicted from the local pressure gradients and magnetic
ﬁelds. Under appropriate conditions this eﬀect should be de-
tectable by spacecraft at the magnetopause, although deﬁni-
tive results are certainly more likely with multiple spacecraft
missions like Cluster or the future Magnetospheric Multi-
scale Mission.

Acknowledgments. This work was supported in part by the
NASA Sun Earth Connection Theory and Supporting Research
and Technology programs and by the NSF.

10

SWISDAK ET AL.: DIAMAGNETIC SUPPRESSION OF RECONNECTION

References

Birn, J., et al., Geospace environmental modeling (GEM) mag-
netic reconnection challenge, J. Geophys. Res., 106 , 3715–
3719, 2001.

Biskamp, D., Nonlinear theory of the m = 1 mode in hot tokamak

plasmas, Phys. Rev. Lett., 46 , 1522–1525, 1981.

Biskamp, D., E. Schwarz, and J. F. Drake, Two-ﬂuid theory of
collisionless magnetic reconnection, Phys. Plasmas, 4 , 1002–
1009, 1997.

Brown, M. R., Experimental studies of magnetic reconnection,

Phys. Plasmas, 6 , 1717–1724, 1999.

Coppi, B., Current-driven instabilities in conﬁgurations with

sheared magnetic ﬁelds, Phys. Fluids, 8 , 2273, 1965.

Eastman, T. E., S. A. Fuselier, and J. T. Gosling, Magnetopause
crossings without a boundary layer, J. Geophys. Res., 101 ,
49–58, 1996.

Galeev, A. A., M. M. Kuznetsova, and L. M. Zeleny, Magne-
topause stability threshold for patchy reconnection, Space Sci.
Rev., 44 , 1–41, 1986.

Hoshino, M., and A. Nishida, Numerical simulation of the dayside

reconnection, J. Geophys. Res., 88 , 6926–6936, 1983.

Ji, H., M. Yamada, S. Hsu, R. Kulsrud, T. Carter, and S. Za-
haria, Magnetic reconnection with Sweet-Parker characteris-
tics in two-dimensional laboratory plasmas, Phys. Plasmas,
6 , 1743–1750, 1999.

Kleva, R. G., J. F. Drake, and F. L. Waelbroeck, Fast reconnec-
tion in high temperature plasmas, Phys. Plasmas, 2 , 23–34,
1995.

Krauss-Varban, D., H. Karimabadi, and N. Omidi, Two-
dimensional structure of the co-planar and non-coplanar mag-
netopause during reconnection, Geophys. Res. Lett., 26 , 1235–
1238, 1999.

Lee, L. C., Z. W. Ma, Z. F. Fu, and A. Otto, Topology of mag-
netic ﬂux ropes and formation of fossil ﬂux transfer events
and boundary layer plasmas, J. Geophys. Res., 98 , 3943–3951,
1993.

Levinton, F. M., L. Zakharov, S. H. Batha, J. Manickam, and
M. C. Zarnstorﬀ, Stabilization and onset of sawteeth in TFTR,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 72 , 2895–2898, 1994.

Levy, R. H., H. E. Petschek, and G. L. Siscoe, Aerodynamic
aspects of the magnetospheric ﬂow, AIAA J., 2 , 2065–2076,
1964.

Lin, Y., and H. Xie, Formation of reconnection layer at the day-
side magnetopause, Geophys. Res. Lett., 24 , 3145–3148, 1997.
Nakamura, M., and M. Scholer, Structure of the magnetopause
reconnection layer and of ﬂux transfer events: Ion kinetic ef-
fects, J. Geophys. Res., 105 , 23,179–23,191, 2000.

Okuda, H., Numerical simulation of the subsolar magnetopause
current layer in the Sun-Earth meridian plane, J. Geophys.
Res., 98 , 3953–3962, 1993.

Omidi, N., H. Karimabadi, and D. Krauss-Varban, Hybrid simu-
lation of the curved dayside magnetopause during southward
IMF, Geophys. Res. Lett., 25 , 3273–3276, 1998.

Parker, E. N., Sweet’s mechanism for merging magnetic ﬁelds in

conducting ﬂuids, J. Geophys. Res., 62 , 509–520, 1957.

Paschmann, G., et al., Plasma acceleration at the Earth’s mag-
netopause: Evidence for reconnection, Nature, 282 , 243–246,
1979.

Petschek, H. E., Magnetic ﬁeld annihilation, in Proc. AAS-NASA
Symp. Phys. Solar Flares, vol. 50 of NASA-SP , pp. 425–439,
1964.

Petschek, H. E., and R. M. Thorne, The existence of intermediate

waves in neutral sheets, ApJ , 147 , 1157–1163, 1967.

Phan, T. D., et al., Extended magnetic reconnection at the
Earth’s magnetopause from detection of bi-directional jets,
Nature, 404 , 848–850, 2000.

Quest, K. B., and F. V. Coroniti, Linear theory of tearing in a

high-β plasma, J. Geophys. Res., 86 , 3299–3305, 1981.

Rogers, B., and L. Zakharov, Nonlinear ω∗ stabilization of the
m = 1 mode in tokamaks, Phys. of Plasmas, 2 , 3420–3428,
1995.

Rogers, B. N., R. E. Denton, J. F. Drake, and M. A. Shay, The
role of dispersive waves in collisionless magnetic reconnection,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 87 , 195,004, 2001.

Scholer, M., Asymmetric time-dependent and stationary mag-
netic reconnection at the dayside magnetopause, J. Geophys.
Res., 94 , 15,099–15,111, 1989.

Scott, B. D., and A. B. Hassam, Analytical theory of nonlinear
drift-tearing mode stability, Phys. Fluids, 30 , 90–101, 1987.
Scurry, L., C. T. Russell, and J. T. Gosling, Geomagnetic activity
and the beta dependence of the dayside reconnection rate, J.
Geophys. Res., 99 , 14,811–14,814, 1994.

Shay, M. A., J. F. Drake, R. E. Denton, and D. Biskamp, Struc-
ture of the dissipation region during collisionless magnetic re-
connection, J. Geophys. Res., 103 , 9165–9176, 1998.

Shay, M. A., J. F. Drake, B. N. Rogers, and R. E. Denton, The
scaling of collisionless, magnetic reconnection for large sys-
tems, Geophys. Res. Lett., 26 , 2163–2166, 1999.

Sonnerup, B. U. ¨O., G. Paschmann, I. Papamastorakis, N. Sck-
opke, G. Haerendel, S. J. Bame, J. R. Asbridge, J. T. Gosling,
and C. T. Russell, Evidence for magnetic ﬁeld reconnection
at the Earth’s magnetopause, J. Geophys. Res., 86 , 10,049–
10,067, 1981.

Sweet, P. A., Electromagnetic Phenomena in Cosmical Physics,

p. 123, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1958.

Zeiler, A., D. Biskamp, J. F. Drake, B. N. Rogers, M. A. Shay,
and M. Scholer, Three-dimensional particle simulations of col-
lisionless magnetic reconnection, J. Geophys. Res., 107 , 1230,
2002, doi:10.1029/2001JA000287.

M. Swisdak, IREAP, University of Maryland, College Park,

MD 20742-3511, USA, (swisdak@glue.umd.edu)

(Received

.)

