On the probability distribution function of small scale

interplanetary magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations

R. Bruno, B. Bavassano

Istituto Fisica Spazio Interplanetario del CNR, 00133 - Roma, Italy

V. Carbone, L. Primavera, F. Malara, L. Sorriso-Valvo, P. Veltri

Dipartimento di Fisica Universit`a della Calabria, 87036 Rende (Cs), Italy

(Dated: Manuscript version from 5 May 2004)

Abstract

In spite of a large number of papers dedicated to study MHD turbulence in the solar wind there

are still some simple questions which have never been suﬃciently addressed like:

a)do we really know how the magnetic ﬁeld vector orientation ﬂuctuates in space? b) what is

the statistics followed by the orientation of the vector itself? c) does the statistics change as the

wind expands into the interplanetary space?

A better understanding of these points can help us to better characterize the nature of interplan-

etary ﬂuctuations and can provide useful hints to investigators who try to numerically simulate

MHD turbulence.

This work follows a recent paper presented by some of the authors which shows that these ﬂuc-

tuations might resemble a sort of random walk governed by a Truncated L´evy Flight statistics.

However, the limited statistics used in that paper did not allow ﬁnal conclusions but only specula-

tive hypotheses. In this work we aim to address the same problem using a more robust statistics

which on one hand forces us not to consider velocity ﬂuctuations but, on the other hand allows us

to establish the nature of the governing statistics of magnetic ﬂuctuations with more conﬁdence. In

addition, we show how features similar to those found in the present statistical analysis for the fast

speed streams of solar wind, are qualitatively recovered in numerical simulations of the parametric

instability. This might oﬀer an alternative viewpoint for interpreting the questions raised above.

4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
5
0
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

The ﬁrst turbulent model proposed by [23] didn’t take into account that the rate of energy

transfer along the turbulent cascade might not be scale–independent (Landau’s objection).

This situation, in the framework of a classical Richardson’s cascade, can be described by

the fact that smaller and smaller eddies are less and less space–ﬁlling.

In other words,

turbulence would be unevenly or intermittently distributed in space. As a matter of fact, we

address this phenomenon as Intermittency. Evidence of the presence of this phenomenon,

when performing a statistical study on a generic ﬂuctuating ﬁeld V (x), is that the probability

distribution functions (PDF hereafter) of the diﬀerences δvl(x) =

V (x+l)

V (x)

normalized

|

−

|

to the σ of the distribution at scale l do not rescale for diﬀerent scales [52]. In particular,

the tails of these PDFs become more and more stretched at smaller and smaller scales. This

means that the wings of the distributions become fatter and fatter. Such a behaviour implies

that, at smaller scales, extreme events become statistically more probable than if they were

normally distributed.

Intermittency has been found also in the solar wind ﬂuctuations as demonstrated in the

ﬁrst studies performed by [13] in the outer heliosphere. In particular, this author showed an

unexpected similarity between interplanetary observations on scales of 1AU and observations

on scales of meters obtained for laboratory turbulence by [1]. These results suggested the

universality of this phenomenon, which was independent on scale. On the other hand,

[29] and [14] were the ﬁrst authors to study Intermittency in the inner heliosphere.

In

particular, the former authors showed the diﬀerent intermittent character of fast and slow

wind while the latter ones showed a possible ﬁrst evidence for the Kraichnan scaling ([25])

in a magnetoﬂuid like the solar wind. Since then, several papers ([9, 11, 21, 35, 40, 43, 51])

among others followed these ﬁrst approaches to the problem of understanding Intermittency

in the solar wind. However, novel techniques based on the properties of wavelets introduced

by [18] and ﬁrstly used within ordinary ﬂuid dynamics by [34] and within the solar wind

context by [55], [9] and [10], represented a powerful tool to ﬁnally disclose the nature of

intermittent events.

In this last paper, the authors showed that the intermittent event

they were able to single out was a so called current–sheet–associated TD, as deﬁned by

[20]. This type of structure is associated with wind velocity gradients, a rapid magnetic

ﬁeld intensity change and a reversal of the maximum variance magnetic ﬁeld component

2

across the discontinuity. This discontinuity was interpreted as the interface between two

adjacent ﬂux tubes, i.e. two regions characterized by diﬀerent plasma and magnetic ﬁeld

conditions although within the same large scale plasma region. During these studies, it was

also noticed that the jumps performed by the tips of magnetic and velocity vectors were such

to resemble a typical L´evy process ([12]). This process is similar to a random walk but the

statistics governing the spatial jumps is characterized by extreme behaviour. Consequently,

the presence of long–range correlations makes the Gaussian statistics, which governs the

Brownian motion, no longer representative of the physical process.

In fact, the spatial

distribution of the directions assumed by these vectors during the selected time interval

was not uniform but rather patchy. This particular behavior was indicating the presence of

particular directions along which the ﬂuctuating ﬁeld vector would roughly remain aligned

for a longer time. Then, a rapid and large jump would characterize the transfer from

one patch to another. These large jumps were recognized to make the ﬂuctuating ﬁeld

more intermittent. Moreover, the highly Alfv´enic character of the selected time interval

clearly showed that propagating modes and coherent structures were both contributing to

the observed turbulence and strengthened the already proposed view of a turbulence made

of a mixture of waves and structures ([8, 22, 29, 30, 48, 49], among others).

In reality,

it took a long time to reach this view of interplanetary MHD turbulence. As a matter of

fact, the ﬁrst spectra of solar wind ﬂuctuations obtained from the observations of Mariner

2 in 1962, were interpreted by [17] as evidence for the presence of turbulent processes,

possibly MHD turbulence as described by [25]. The velocity shear mechanism proposed by

[17] would be sustained by strong velocity gradients present in the solar wind and would

produce large scale Alfv´en waves that would transfer their energy to smaller and smaller

scales through a turbulent process. On the other hand, [4], looking at the correlation between

velocity and magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations observed by Mariner 5, concluded that interplanetary

ﬂuctuations were exclusively made of outward propagating Alfv´en modes, mostly, of solar

origin. Obviously, these two point of view were in contradiction because the absence of

inward propagating modes would preclude the development of turbulent cascade of energy

to form a spectrum similar to the one observed by [17]. In reality, interplanetary ﬂuctuations

are not just Alfv´en waves. Only several years later, a careful data analysis performed

on the observations provided by the Helios spacecraft contributed to make the idea of a

possible coexistence of propagating waves and convected structures accepted (see review by

3

[50]). Moreover, only recently, theoretical eﬀorts ([53, 54, 56] have shown the possibility

that propagating modes and coherent structures might share a common origin within the

general view described by the physics of complexity. Propagating modes would experience

resonances which generate coherent structures which, in turn, will migrate, interact and

eventually generate new modes. Moreover, [37] using a 1–D MHD numerical simulations

based on a pseudo–spectral code, were able to qualitatively reproduce the radial behavior

of magnetic ﬁeld and velocity Intermittency observed by [11] in the inner heliosphere. In

particular, they numerically simulated the propagation of a turbulent Alfv´enic spectrum

in a uniform background magnetic ﬁeld. As a matter of fact, coherent structures were

created during the spectral evolution due to the parametric instability resembling a sort of

shocklets or current sheets. Obviously, the model has strong limitations since while the 1–D

code allows dependence on only 1 spatial coordinate, the vectors can have all 3 cartesian

components. As a consequence, these results remain at a qualitative level.

Using the idea of [32] as a starting point, [10] proposed the spaghetti–like model in which

Alfv´enic ﬂuctuations propagate within a convected structure made of tangled ﬂux–tubes,

each of them being characterized by its local magnetic ﬁeld and plasma. These structures

represent the correlated part of the signal, unlike from the Alfv´enic component which does

not conserve spatio–temporal coherence. Moreover, it was found that the statistics asso-

ciated to these ﬂuctuations experienced a strong radial evolution. As a matter of fact,

directional jumps, within fast solar wind, evolved from a more Gaussian–like statistics at

0.3AU towards a sort of Truncated L´evy Flight ([28] statistics at 0.9 AU. This phenomenon

suggested that the possible cause of the radial evolution was the radial progressive deple-

tion of the Alfv´enic component of the turbulent ﬂuctuations with respect to the convected

structure. However, the limited statistics due to the low resolution of plasma data did not

allow a more reﬁned analysis. In this paper we used higher resolution data, about one or-

der of magnitude higher in frequency, to study in more detail the structure of the PDFs of

directional ﬂuctuations but we had to limit this study to the only magnetic component of

the ﬂuctuations.

4

FIG. 1: Top panel: solar wind speed proﬁle versus time as recorded during the ﬁrst solar mission

of Helios 2. The solid smooth line represents the heliocentric distance of the s/c which varied

between 0.97 and 0.29AU. Bottom panel: magnetic ﬁeld intensity proﬁle versus time. The whole

interval was characterized by the presence of only one shock around day 90. Vertical hatched

regions identify time intervals chosen for this analysis. There are two high speed intervals located

in the trailing edge of two corotating streams and two low speed intervals ahead of them.

II. DATA ANALYSIS

Data used in this work are 6 sec averages of magnetic ﬁeld measurements performed by

Helios 2 s/c during its primary mission to the sun almost three decades ago, in 1976. This

is the only data set available covering the heliocentric distance range between 0.3, closest

approach to the sun, and 1AU. So far, this data set has been extremely valuable to study the

main physical mechanisms governing the solar wind turbulence. In particular, it has been

very useful to study the radial evolution of interplanetary turbulence. As a matter of fact,

this data set contains in–situ observations at diﬀerent heliocentric distances of magnetic

ﬁeld and plasma belonging to the same corotating solar source region of high velocity wind.

Thus, the stationary character of this region allowed studies which could focus on the radial

evolution of solar wind turbulence, providing extremely important results which have been

reviewed in an excellent paper by [50]. In the present analysis we will refer to this particular

high velocity stream and to the low velocity wind ahead of it observed at two diﬀerent

heliocentric distances, namely 0.3 and 0.9 AU. These time intervals are highlighted in Fig. 1

by vertical hatched stripes which, from the top to the bottom of the ﬁgure, go across velocity

and heliocentric distance in the top panel and magnetic ﬁeld intensity in the bottom panel.

Each of the four time intervals lasts 2 days and it has approximately 28800 6sec averages,

taking into account data gaps. Temporal extremes, average heliocentric distance, average

wind speed and ﬁeld intensity are reported in Table I for each interval.

Just for sake of completeness we like to add that the same corotating stream was also

observed at 0.7 AU starting around day 74 but we will omit that time interval since it would

be redundant for the analysis we present here. As already said in section I, the main goal of

this work is the study and characterization of directional ﬂuctuations. To do so, we start with

plotting the position of the tip of the magnetic ﬁeld vector within the reference system of

5

TABLE I: Time extremes and average values characterizing the intervals

time interval distance [AU] < V > [km/s] < B > [nT ]

46:00–48:00

49:12–51:12

99:12–101:12

105:12–107:12

0.90

0.88

0.34

0.29

433

643

405

729

6.8

6.8

28.9

42.1

FIG. 2: The top panel refers to fast wind recorded at 0.3AU while the bottom panel refers to fast

wind at 0.9 AU. Each point of both plots represents the location of the tip of the magnetic ﬁeld

vector for each 6 sec average. These locations have then been connected by a black straight line to

form a trajectory. Moreover, the shadow of this trajectory is also shown on the three coordinate

planes to better understand the spatial 3D conﬁguration. In these panels we show only intervals of

2000 points representing larger intervals of 28800 6–sec averages. Values of each component have

been normalized to the average magnetic ﬁeld intensity measured within the 2000 points interval.

The top panel shows a more uniform coverage with respect to the bottom panel which shows a

sort of patchy conﬁguration.

In other words, there is some kind of evolution during the radial

expansion which is dramatically reﬂected in this kind of spatial behaviour.

the three coordinate axes during sub–intervals of only 2000 points within the selected time

periods. These sub–intervals can be considered representative of each particular interval

they refer to. A longer sequence of points would make impossible, in the graphical format

we used, to recognize diﬀerences between diﬀerent intervals. In Fig. 2 we show data relative

to fast wind observed at 0.3 and 0.9 AU in the top and bottom panels, respectively. In this

graphical representation, the origin of the coordinated axes is right in the center of the 3D

plot. This means that, in case of a vector of constant magnitude which changes direction in

a random way, after suﬃcient time, we would see a dark sphere centered in the middle of

the graph with radius equal to the vector magnitude. In case directional ﬂuctuations were

concentrated around some particular direction we would expect the surface of the sphere

to be unevenly covered. In the top panel, the tip of the vector wanders in a random way

on the surface of almost half a sphere without showing any preferential direction. The

6

FIG. 3: The top panel refers to slow wind recorded at 0.3 AU while the bottom panel refers to

slow wind at 0.9 AU. The format is the same used for Fig. 2 and, also in this case, we show only

2000 points out of 28800 points of each selected time interval. Both conﬁgurations relative to 0.3

and 0.9 AU greatly diﬀer from what we observed within fast wind. In both cases a patchy conﬁgu-

ration is clearly visible, meaning that the tip of the vector dawdles longer around some particular

orientations. At ﬁrst sight, the two panels show similar conﬁgurations although ﬂuctuations at 0.3

AU appear to be slightly larger. Deﬁnitely, we do not observe the same radial evolution noticed

for fast wind

enhanced regularity of this surface, if compared to slow wind in the following, depends on

the fact that, during this high velocity stream, ﬁeld intensity is quite constant, as generally

expected for a high velocity stream. One of the main features of this stream is that it is

highly Alfv´enic as already stressed several times in the available literature (see for example

paper by [7]). This fact, obviously, induces large directional ﬂuctuations on the direction

of the ambient magnetic ﬁeld. As a consequence, the dark spot in the ﬁgure completely

covers half sphere. Obviously, only half of the sphere is covered since magnetic ﬁeld polarity

remains generally constant within high velocity streams while it can ﬂip from positive to

negative and vice versa more easily within slow wind. However, when we reach 0.9 AU the

situation dramatically evolves. Although the tip of the vector still wanders on the surface

of only half a sphere, it does not cover this surface completely but leaves out wide areas.

The distribution of the dark spots suggests that the presence of preferred spatial directions,

connected by large and quick jumps which take only a few data points, begins to emerge as

the heliocentric distance increases.

On the contrary, the evolution we just noticed in fast wind is much less dramatic within

slow wind as shown in the two panels of Fig. 3. The top panel, which refers to observations

recorded at 0.3 AU, clearly shows the presence of two main directions around which the

magnetic ﬁeld vector ﬂuctuations mainly cluster. Moreover, as in the previous case, large

jumps connecting one spot to the other are clearly visible. When we move to 0.9 AU in the

lower panel, we do not notice much of a diﬀerence with respect to the situation encountered in

the upper panel. Fluctuations appear to be generally smaller but the spotty conﬁguration

clearly emerges again. However, this kind of graphical representation is not suﬃcient to

7

give an idea of how the tip of the vector really moves in time unless complemented by

the information we provide in the top panel of Fig. 4. In this panel we show the vector

displacement

δB(t)

, normalized to <

>, between each B(t) and an arbitrary ﬁxed

|

|

B

|

|

direction which we chose to be the direction of the ﬁrst vector B(t0) of the time series.

Thus, following this deﬁnition, each individual

δB(t)

is given by:

|

|

−

(Bi(t)

Bi(t0))2

δB(t)

=

|

|

s Xi=x,y,z

(1)

This time sequence, the same used for the top panel of Fig. 3 which refers to slow wind

at 0.3 AU, clearly shows small amplitude and high frequency ﬂuctuations superimposed on

a sort of larger amplitude low frequency background structure. This background structure

is characterized by few large and quick directional jumps. The eﬀect of these jumps is to

move the ﬂuctuating vector from one particular average direction to another, i.e. from one

dark spot to another (Fig. 3). This type of information, together with the 3D graphical

representation, gives an idea of how the vector direction really ﬂuctuates in space and time.

Moreover, most of the time the largest directional jumps are associated to the largest changes

of the ﬁeld intensity (bottom panel). So, these two panels suggest that during short time

intervals the ﬁeld can be characterized by a most probable orientation and a most probable

intensity. In other words, these regions appear to be distinguishable from each other and the

transition from one to another is through a large rotational jump and a change in the ﬁeld

intensity. Similar ﬁndings have already been reported in a previous paper ([10]) although

it was focused on a single case study and on larger scales. In that same study it was found

that this kind of transition, or border, was a tangential discontinuity not in pressure balance.

The features we notice in the present study might be TDs as well although we cannot prove

it since we don’t have plasma data with the same time resolution of magnetic ﬁeld data. If

this is the case, the structure we have seen at larger scales replicates at smaller scales in a

kind of self-similar manner.

Results relative to slow wind at 0.9 AU are shown in Fig. 5 in the same format as of

the previous Figure. Although, both panels show ﬂuctuations generally smaller than the

corresponding ones observed at 0.3 AU, corresponding features in both proﬁles are still

clearly recognizable. Thus, radial evolution within slow wind doesn’t play much of an

inﬂuence on this kind of relationship.

In the next Fig. 6 we show vector displacement for

the time interval recorded at 0.3 AU, within fast wind in the same format of the previous two

8

FIG. 4: Data refer to slow wind at 0.3 AU. Top panel: vector displacement

, normalized to
δB(t)
|
|

>, between each B(t) and an arbitrary ﬁxed direction versus time. The arbitrary direction

was chosen as the direction of the ﬁrst vector of the time series. This kind of graph shows a series

of time intervals during which the vector displacement tends to remain approximately close the

average level. These time intervals are interleaved by large and quick directional jumps. Moreover,

largest jumps often coincide with remarkable changes in ﬁeld intensity as shown in the bottom

<

B
|

|

panel.

FIG. 5: Vector displacement versus time in the same format as of Fig. 4 relative to slow wind at

0.9 AU. Largest vector displacements (top panel) often coincide with large compressive events as

shown in the bottom panel. As shown in the paper, the statistics of these vector displacements is

remarkably similar to that shown in the previous Fig. 4

Figures. Directional ﬂuctuations appear to be very chaotic and not as much structured as

we found in slow wind. Thus, it is certainly more diﬃcult to recognize structures similar to

the ones observed in the previous Figures and correlate them to the proﬁle of the magnetic

ﬁeld intensity in the bottom panel. As a matter of fact, we expect to ﬁnd large amplitude

directional ﬂuctuations within fast wind, especially close to the sun, because we are aware of

the relevant presence of Alfv´enic modes in this type of wind. As a consequence, we believe

that these ﬂuctuations mask the correspondence we were able to highlight within slow wind

which, a priori, might be similar to that. Consequently, if the Alfv´enic modes had a smaller

amplitude we would be able to recognize and relate similar features in both panels.

As a matter of fact, results shown in Fig. 7 relative to fast wind data recorded at 0.9 AU,

strongly support our intuition. The top panel of this Figure shows a well structured proﬁle,

not much diﬀerent from those observed in slow wind. This time, several structures noticed in

the top panel can easily be related to companion structures in the bottom panel. The reason

lies in the fact that the amplitude of Alfv´enic ﬂuctuations is largely reduced at the Earth’s

orbit compared to short heliocentric distances (see the wide related literature in [50]). This

qualitative study has to be substantiate with some quantitative evaluation of the relative

importance of these two components contributing to the observed interplanetary turbulence.

To do so, in the following, we will discuss and compare the probability distribution functions

9

FIG. 6: Fast wind at 0.3 AU. Normalized vector displacements versus time in the same format as

of Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 are shown in the top panel while, normalized vector intensities are shown in

the bottom panel. The top panel shows large ﬂuctuations which are diﬃcult to relate to the proﬁle

of the magnetic ﬁeld intensity in the bottom panel although, some corresponding events can still

be recognized. In this sense, fast wind at 0.3 AU diﬀers from the slow wind samples we already

discussed.

FIG. 7: Normalized vector displacements and normalized vector intensity versus time are shown

in the same format as of Fig. 4 to Fig. 6 for fast wind at 0.9 AU. Vector displacements shown in the

top panel appear to be less chaotic than those observed at 0.3 AU. A sort of underlying structure

can be recognized and related to ﬁeld intensity ﬂuctuations shown in the bottom panel. In other

words, this situation tends to resemble the one encountered within slow wind.

(PDF) of the directional ﬂuctuations observed within each time interval. In order to look for

a possible scaling between diﬀerent PDFs, we have normalized each

δB(t)

to the standard

|

|

deviation σof the relative distribution. Moreover, the maximum amplitude of each PDF was

normalized to 1. In Fig. 8 we show PDFs for the fast wind samples recorded at 0.3 and 0.9

AU in the top and bottom panels, respectively. We found that both distributions can be

reasonably well ﬁtted by a double lognormal distribution in the form reported by eq. 2.

P (ξ) =

A1
σ1ξ√2π

exp

ξ/δ1
ln
|
√2σ1 !

|

+

A2
σ2ξ√2π

exp



−  

ξ/δ2
ln
|
√2σ2 !

|

2



(2)



−  



2






/σ, one for each bin of the



δBi|

|

where ξ, δ, σ > 0. The variable ξ stands for the diﬀerent

distribution, Ai is a measure of the area under each curve, δi is called scale parameter and

represents the median, σi is the shape parameter. Larger values of σi push the x–location

of the peak of the distribution towards lower values. Obviously, using a larger number of

lognormals would provide a better ﬁt but, the real conspicuous improvement is obtained

only when we use two lognormals instead of just one.

The two lognormal components have a distinguishable role in the total PDF. One com-

ponent accounts for the lognormal tail at large values of

δB

/σ while the second component

|

|

takes care of the smallest values of

δB

/σ. Moreover, taking into account the values of the

parameters reported in Tab. II and relative to the best ﬁt obtained reaching the minimum

|

|

10

TABLE II: Fast Wind: Values of the Parameters Obtained from the Fit of the PDF relative to

vector displacements

Distance AU r2

TABLE III: Fast Wind: Values of the Parameters Obtained from the Fit of the PDF relative to

0.998 0.85

0.13 0.71

0.03 0.95

0.02 0.44

0.14 1.08

0.04 0.60

0.13

0.998 0.89

0.24 0.74

0.03 0.80

0.02 0.20

0.25 0.98

0.09 0.52

0.32

A1

±

±

A1

±

±

σ1

±

±

σ1

±

±

δ1

±

±

α1

±

±

A2

±

±

A2

±

±

σ2

±

±

σ2

±

±

δ2

±

±

α2

±

±

0.998 8.47

0.76 0.72

0.02 9.24

0.14 4.77

0.84 1.16

0.03 6.28

0.81

0.999 4.62

0.78 0.75

0.03 4.67

0.09 1.87

0.82 1.07

0.05 3.00

0.82

0.3

0.9

0.3

0.9

angular ﬂuctuations

Distance AU r2

χ2 value for the two distributions at 0.3 and 0.9 AU, one of the two lognormals experiences

a stronger radial evolution. In particular, the lognormal that represents ﬂuctuations peaked

on smaller

δB

/σ strongly decreases its contribution with increasing radial distance from

|

|

the sun. An estimate of this evolution can be inferred from the ratio of the areas A1 and A2

below each curve. While at 0.3 AU the probability ratio A2/A1

0.52, at 0.9 AU it drops

≃

to

0.22. Consequently, the contribution of the smaller PDF to the whole PDF varies from

≃

34% at 0.3 AU to 18% at 0.9 AU. All the other parameters do not experience a similar radial

variation and this behavior reﬂects in a depletion of the left–hand tail of the total PDF.

However, it is worth noticing that values of both δ’s are located at somewhat larger values

for the sample referring at 0.3 AU, suggesting that ﬂuctuations are generally larger when

closer to the sun.

Similar conclusions apply to the PDFs relative to the angular ﬂuctuations δα experienced

by the vector orientation shown in Fig. 9. Obviously, this measure provides information only

about directional ﬂuctuations and is not inﬂuenced by compressive eﬀects that may act on

the vector intensity. As such, information contained in Fig. 9 are less meaningful than

those discussed earlier but, we like to show this kind of Figure, and the analogous one for

slow wind in Fig. 11, just for sake of completeness. Moreover, these distributions have not

11

FIG. 8: PDFs of vector displacements

normalized to σ at 0.3 and 0.9 AU, for fast wind,

δB
|

|

are shown in the top and bottom panels, respectively. The two thin solid curves refer to as many

lognormals contributing to form the thick solid curve which best ﬁts the distribution. Parameters

relative to the ﬁt are reported in Tab. II.

FIG. 9: PDFs of angular displacements δα at 0.3 and 0.9 AU, for fast wind, are shown in the top

and bottom panels, respectively. The two thin solid curves refer to as many lognormals contributing

to form the thick solid curve which best ﬁts the distribution. Parameters relative to the ﬁt are

reported in Tab. III.

been normalized to their respective σs since we like to show the eﬀective angular range of

these ﬂuctuations. Also for this ﬁt we report the relative parameters which are shown in

Tab. III. For these ﬂuctuations the ratio A2/A1 varies from 56% at 0.3 AU to 40% at 0.9
AU. The PDF is clearly peaked at larger angles (5.75◦ compared to 2.25◦) at 0.3 AU and
its right tail reaches values close to 100◦.

In Fig. 10 we show the vector displacement

δB

normalized to σ for slow wind at 0.3 and 0.9 AU in the same format as of Fig. 8.

|
The situation within slow wind shows that radial evolution is almost absent. This can be

|

inferred from the values of the best ﬁts parameters reported in Tab. IV which show that

the contribution of the smaller lognormal can be neglected at both distances. As a matter

of fact, the relative contribution of the smaller lognormal is between 0.26% at 0.3 AU and

0.13% at 0.9 AU, respectively. Moreover, the values of the parameters relative to the larger

lognormal only slightly change between 0.3 and 0.9 AU suggesting that these ﬂuctuations do

not evolve much with radial distance, as expected for slow wind. In summary, remarkable is

the constancy of all parameters inferred from the ﬁt of the main lognormal, which highlights

the absence of radial evolution. In this case, values of δ’s are considerably smaller than those

obtained for fast wind, conﬁrming that these ﬂuctuations are generally smaller.

As already reported for fast wind, we like to show the PDFs relative to the angular

ﬂuctuations as shown in Fig. 11 and parameters relative to the best ﬁt which are shown

in Tab. V. Also in this case, the contribution of the smaller lognormal is much smaller

than within fast wind. As a matter of fact, the ratio A2/A1 varies from 7.5% at 0.3 AU
to 4.4% at 0.9 AU. Moreover, these PDFs are roughly peaked at the same angle (0.75◦)

12

TABLE IV: Slow Wind: Values of the Parameters Obtained from the Fit of the PDF relative to

0.998 0.776

0.003 0.959

0.009 0.523

0.004 0.002

0.001 0.437

0.095 0.039

0.010

0.998 0.727

0.004 0.934

0.005 0.503

0.004 0.001

0.001 0.532

0.722 0.049

0.009

A2

±

±

σ2

±

±

δ2

±

±

TABLE V: Slow Wind: Values of the Parameters Obtained from the Fit of the PDF relative to

vector displacements

Distance AU r2

0.3

0.9

angular ﬂuctuations

Distance AU r2

0.3

0.9

radial dependence.

A1

±

±

A1

±

±

σ1

±

±

σ1

±

±

δ1

±

±

α1

±

±

0.999 4.14

0.68 1.08

0.02 2.74

0.33 0.31

0.66 0.76

0.32 5.12

0.76

0.999 2.68

0.02 0.98

0.01 1.89

0.01 0.12

0.02 0.42

0.03 1.27

0.02

A2

±

±

σ2

±

±

α2

±

±

although the right tail at 0.3 AU reaches larger values and, do not show any noteworthy

A. Building artiﬁcial interplanetary time series

At this point, we tried to reproduce, from a statistical point of view, our interplanetary

acting on the direction of a unit vector. In other words, the interval of variability of

data samples employing a random walk process governed by a double log–normal statistics
δBi|
as inferred from real data, was divided in a suﬃcient number of bins. For each of them we

|

,

generated a certain number of values, all equal to the value represented by the mid point

of the bin. The amount of values generated depended on the corresponding probability

indicated by the double log–normal, which was shaped using the same parameters we had

previously obtained from our best ﬁts and reported in Tables II and IV. These

δBi|

|

were

then randomly extracted and used to make the tip of a unit vector, with one end ﬁxed at

the center of a sphere of unit radius, wander on the surface of the sphere. The direction of
the path followed by the tip of the vector at each step was randomly extracted between 0◦
and 360◦. In particular, to avoid the eﬀect of the two singular points at the poles of the

13

FIG. 10: PDFs of vector displacements

normalized to σ at 0.3 and 0.9 AU, for slow wind,

δB
|

|

are shown in the top and bottom panels, respectively. The two thin solid curves refer to as many

lognormals contributing to form the thick solid curve which best ﬁts the distribution. Parameters

relative to the ﬁt are reported in Tab. IV. The smaller lognormal is almost superﬂuous since its

contribution to the ﬁnal ﬁt is negligible.

FIG. 11: PDFs of angular displacements δα at 0.3 and 0.9 AU, for slow wind, are shown in

the top and bottom panels, respectively. The two thin solid curves refer to as many lognormals

contributing to form the thick solid curve which best ﬁts the distribution. Parameters relative to

the ﬁt are reported in Tab. V. Also in this case, the contribution of the smaller lognormal to the

ﬁnal ﬁt is negligible.

sphere, the Cartesian coordinates of our reference system were rotated after each extraction

in order to have the x axis always coinciding with the newly extracted direction.

Four

artiﬁcial temporal series of 28800 data points each, representing interplanetary observations

performed at 0.3 and 0.9 AU, for fast and slow wind were built in such a way. Samples of

2000 data points each are plotted in Fig. 12 and Fig. 13, for fast and slow wind, respectively.

The only arbitrary imposition we applied on the fast wind sample was that to keep always

the same vector polarity to resemble, as much as possible, the real situation within fast

wind. As a consequence, we forced these ﬂuctuations to remain within a solid angle of 2π

aperture. These plots reproduce at some level the main features that can be observed in

Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. Fluctuations appear more intermittent in slow wind but show the largest

evolution, between 0.3 and 0.9 AU, within fast wind. Obviously, all the artiﬁcial time series

we built have, by deﬁnition, the same statistics of real interplanetary data and we omit to

show the PDFs of the relative

/σ or δα.

δBi|

|

On the other hand, we like to show temporal sequences of these

δB(t)

relative to a

|

|

ﬁxed, arbitrary direction as we did for real data shown in the top panels of Fig. 4 to 7.

Only the top panels have to be considered since, artiﬁcial data have been built keeping

the vector intensity constant. Results are quite satisfactory since we are able to reproduce

the typical behavior observed within both fast and slow wind. In particular, the transition

from the chaotic behavior on the left panel of Fig. 14, representing ﬂuctuations at 0.3 AU,

14

FIG. 12:

3D representation of vector displacements relative to artiﬁcial data generated by a

random–walk whose jumps are obey to a double–lognormal whose parameters have been obtained

by the best ﬁt of real ﬂuctuations. The top and bottom panels refer to fast wind at 0.9 and 0.3

AU, respectively and, have to be compared to analogous plots for real data shown in Fig. 2.

FIG. 13:

3D representation of vector displacements relative to artiﬁcial data generated by a

random–walk whose jumps are obey to a double–lognormal whose parameters have been obtained

by the best ﬁt of real ﬂuctuations. The top and bottom panels refer to slow wind at 0.9 and 0.3

AU, respectively and, have to be compared to analogous plots for real data shown in Fig. 3.

towards more structured ﬂuctuations on the right panel of the same Figure, representing

ﬂuctuations at 0.9 AU, is well reproduced by the artiﬁcial time series. Moreover, artiﬁcial

data reproduce equally well ﬂuctuations encountered at both heliocentric distances in slow

wind. They show similar structured ﬂuctuations and not relevant diﬀerences between 0.3

and 0.9 AU.

The last comparison between real and artiﬁcial time series that we like to show refers to

the power spectra associated to ﬂuctuations experienced by the vector components. In order

to do so, we computed the trace of the power spectrum for real and artiﬁcial ﬂuctuations

relative to both heliocentric distances within fast wind. Results are shown in Fig. 16 where,

power spectra relative to real ﬂuctuations are reported in the left–hand–side panel while,

corresponding spectra of artiﬁcial time series are in the right–hand–side panel. The power

spectra of the components have been computed via a Fast Fourier Transform from time

series of 2048 data points. The power spectral densities of the three components have been

successively added up to obtain the trace of the variance matrix which has been smoothed

by averaging adjacent data points within a sliding window of 5 points. In the same panels

we also show as a reference the slope of the classical Kolmogorov’s spectrum. Spectra shown

in the left–hand–side panel are typical spectra encountered within high velocity streams,

as several times reported in literature (see review by [50]). On the other hand, artiﬁcial

spectra have been graphically separated by multiplying the spectrum identiﬁed by the label
0.3 AU by a factor of 102 to avoid overlapping. As a matter of fact, our artiﬁcial ﬂuctuations

have statistically similar amplitudes, no matter whether we refer to 0.3 or 0.9 AU since our

15

FIG. 14: Vector displacement versus time as measured from artiﬁcial data referring to fast wind

at 0.3 AU on the left panel and at 0.9 AU on the right panel. These plots should be compared to

the top panels of Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, respectively.

FIG. 15: Vector displacement versus time as measured from artiﬁcial data referring to slow wind

at 0.3 AU on the left panel and at 0.9 AU on the right panel. These plots should be compared to

the top panels of Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, respectively..

ﬂuctuations are conﬁned onto the surface of a sphere of unitary radius. Unexpectedly, the

resemblance is so good that the artiﬁcial spectrum at 0.3 AU shows a bending similar to

the one that characterizes real ﬂuctuations. The main diﬀerences seem to be in the high

frequency tail of artiﬁcial data where eﬀects due to aliasing, absent in the left–hand–side

panel, can be noticed.

STABILITY

III. RESULTS OF THE NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS OF PARAMETRIC IN-

Recently, [26, 27, 36, 37] investigated in detail how the parametric instability could be

responsible for typical features observed in the radial evolution of the Alfv´enic turbulence

in the solar wind high speed streams. This instability develops in a compressible plasma

and, in its simplest form, involves the decay of a large amplitude Alfv´en wave (generally

called “pump wave”, or “mother wave”) in a magnetosonic ﬂuctuation and a backscattered

Alfv´en wave. The wavevectors and frequencies of the ﬂuctuations generated in this process

are mutually related through well precise “resonance conditions” [41]. This mechanism can

be viewed as a way for decorrelating an initially coherent state (the large amplitude mother

Alfv´en wave). In fact, a circularly polarized Alfv´en wave is an exact solution of the ideal

magnetohydrodynamics equations even in the compressible case. Hence, it should propagate

unperturbed in a uniform plasma. However, in presence of even very small perturbations

in density, this wave is subject to the parametric instability and it decays producing ﬂuc-

tuations of diﬀerent kinds.In fact, in slow streams, the inhomogeneities of the background

magnetic structure supply a source of decorrelation for the Alfv´en waves coming from the

sun ([7]). On the converse, in fast streams, where the magnetic ﬁeld is more homogeneous,

16

FIG. 16: The left panel shows power spectra obtained from the trace of the spectral matrix relative

to magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations recorded at 0.3 and 0.9 AU by Helios 2 in 1976. Each time interval

had 2048 averages of 6–sec each and are the same sub–intervals used for Fig. 2, 6, 7. The right

panel shows power spectra obtained from the trace of the spectral matrix relative to the artiﬁcial

ﬁeld ﬂuctuations relative to 0.3 and 0.9 AU, built from a random walk whose jumps obey to a

double–lognormal distribution. Data relative to 0.3 AU have been multiplied by a factor of 102

to facilitate visual comparison with real data shown in the left panel. It is worth to notice that

artiﬁcial data, besides a general agreement with real data, are able to reproduce the bending of
the power spectrum observed at 0.3 AU. Straight solid lines indicate the k−5/3 Kolmogorov slope

waves should travel almost undisturbed and the observed (although slower than in slow

wind) radial evolution of the Alfv´enic turbulence need some mechanism to be ascribed to.

Although, it has been shown ([19, 39]) that plasma instabilities generated by velocity shears

play a relevant role in the radial evolution of turbulence, another possibility is represented

by parametric instability as shown by [26] and [37]. These last studies related to para-

metric instability focus the attention on the eﬀects of this instability on the evolution of a

large amplitude, circularly polarized, non-monochromatic Alfv´en wave in a one dimensional

case. The spectrum of this initial perturbation had a break at a certain wavelenght, like the

spectrum of the Alfv´enic ﬂuctuations coming from the sun. They found that the Alfv´enic

correlation of the initial perturbation is lost during the time evolution, because of the para-

metric instability, leading to a production of both backscattered Alfv´enic perturbations and

magnetosonic waves. Finally, these perturbations evolve non linearly, producing approxi-

mately power law spectra and a reduction of the normalized cross helicity. The results found

are qualitatively in good agreement with solar wind observations carried out by several au-

thors (see review by [50]). In addition, [26] observed that the turbulent development of the

instability leads to the formation of shock waves and to an intermittent behaviour of the

dissipation. In particular, looking at the evolution of the ﬂatness of velocity and magnetic

ﬁeld ﬂuctuations, [37] found a good qualitative agreement of the results of the simulations

with the analysis of the same quantities performed by [11]. It is then natural, in order to

oﬀer a possible diﬀerent interpretation of the results shown in the previous sections, at least

those concerning fast solar wind streams, to see whether turbulence induced by parametric

17

instability has characteristics similar to those described in the solar wind in the previous

sections. To accomplish this aim, we furtherly analysed the results of the numerical simula-

tions described in [37]. The details of the numerical code can be found in [36], [26] and [27],

whilst further details concerning the simulations are given in [37].

We simulate the evolution of a broad–band Alfv´enic ﬂuctuations in a compressible plasma,

during their outwards propagation in the heliosphere. Similarly to the in–situ observations,

the initial spectrum has a break–point. During the run of the simulation, inward propagating
ﬂuctuations start to appear and form a power–law spectrum at small k′s. As already pointed

out by [47], this feature might suggest that parametric decay mechanism is at work in the

solar wind.

The simulation domain is one-dimensional, periodic and we use cartesian geometry. The

reference frame is chosen in such a way that the initial Alfv´en wave is circularly polarized

in the x

z plane and it propagates along the y direction. A background constant magnetic

−

ﬁeld intensity B0 is imposed in the propagation direction of the wave: the resulting total

ﬁeld has, therefore, uniform intensity everywhere. The homogeneous boundary conditions

limit the application of this study to the fast wind, where the background magnetic ﬁeld is

rather homogeneous. In our framework, the time evolution of the quantities represents the

radial evolution of the ﬂuctuations in the solar wind, while the spatial variations are the

numerical counterpart of samples of the observed data at a given distance from the sun. We

study the evolution of the parametric instability for 180 τA (τA is the Alfv´en time based on

the initial background radial magnetic ﬁeld and density, i.e. the time needed for the wave,

whose wavelength is the largest in our spectral domain, to go across the simulation box).

In the rest of the paper, we plot quantities at time t1 = 45τA and t2 = 180τA, the former

corresponding to a time much before the saturation of the instability, the latter to a time
longer than the saturation time, which is reached at tsat ∼
a situation in which the instability has only weakly taken place and another in which it has

100τA. Practically, we consider

already completely developed, that should be representative of the state of the solar wind

closer to the sun and further away from it, respectively.

We estimated the time needed by the instability to saturate and to reproduce the spectral

features observed at 0.9 AU. We found that a period of time between 6 and 7 days is

necessary. This estimation, although longer, is still within the same order of magnitude of

the expansion time required by the solar wind to travel between 0.3 and 1 AU. The above

18

FIG. 17: The top panel of the ﬁgure refers to the results of the numerical simulations of parametric

instability at time t = t1 = 45τA, while the bottom panel refers to the the results at time t = t2 =

180τA. Each point of both plots represents the location of the tip of the magnetic ﬁeld vector in

a point of the simulation domain, in the same format of Fig. 2, which the present ﬁgure should

be compared with. The diﬀerence in the shape of the plots, cylindrical for this ﬁgure, spherical

for Fig. 2 is explained in the text. Also in this case, the simulated data at t = t1, corresponding

to the real data at 0.3AU , have a more uniform distribution on the cylindrical surface, whilst the

data at t = t2 (to compare with real data at 0.9AU ) show long jumps, followed by small amplitude

oscillations around the new values.

evaluation is based on the fact that between t1 and tsat there are about 55τA. In order to

estimate τA we compared the frequencies corresponding to the observed spectral break at

0.3 AU in Helios data with the corresponding one shown in our simulation at t = t1.

In Fig. 17, we show the three-dimensional plots of the magnetic ﬁeld components, nor-

malized to the average magnetic ﬁeld intensity, at the time t1 (upper panel) and t2 (lower

panel), respectively. These plots are to be compared to Fig. 2. One can see that at t = 45τA

the tip of the magnetic ﬁeld vector (represented by the line) moves in space in a rather uni-

form way and covers approximately the surface of a cylinder. This behaviour is qualitatively

very similar to that shown in the upper panel of Fig. 2, only, at diﬀerence with that case,

here the tip of the vector covers almost uniformly a cylinder instead of a sphere. This diﬀer-

ence is due to the fact that the numerical simulation is one-dimensional: this implies (due

to the divergenceless condition for the magnetic ﬁeld) that the variations of the magnetic

ﬁeld components are only orthogonal to the propagation direction of the waves, whilst the

parallel component remains constant during the time evolution. Moreover, since the initial

perturbation is circularly polarized, the trajectory of the tip of the vector would describe a

circular line. In order to improve the visualization of the curve, to make it three-dimensional

instead of two-dimensional, we replaced the constant component of the magnetic ﬁeld with

a linearly growing function between zero and one, that makes the tip of the vector stay on

a cylindrical surface. The real data are three-dimensional, instead, and the approximately

constant ﬁeld intensity produces the spherical pattern plotted in Fig. 2, as already explained

in section II.

19

FIG. 18: Results of the numerical simulations of the parametric instability at time t = t1 = 45τA.

Normalized vector displacements versus the spatial coordinate y are shown in the top panel while,

normalized vector intensities are shown in the bottom panel. This ﬁgure should be compared with

Fig. 6. The top panel shows large ﬂuctuations which are basically uncorrelated with the proﬁle of

the magnetic ﬁeld intensity in the bottom panel. This behaviour is qualitatively similar to that

observed in the fast wind at 0.3AU (see Fig. 6)

FIG. 19: Normalized vector displacements and normalized vector intensity versus position in the

simulation box are shown in the same format as of Fig. 18 for the results of the numerical simulations

at time t = t2 = 180τA. At diﬀerence with the previous ﬁgure, vector displacements (top panel)

appear to be more structured in space and some sort of correlation with the ﬁeld intensity (bottom

panel) can be recognized. This behaviour is qualitatively similar to that observed in fast solar wind

at 0.9AU (Fig. 7).

At the later time t2 = 180τA the situation changes dramatically. The tip of the magnetic

ﬁeld vector describes a more patchy pattern, characterized by large jumps, followed by

smaller ﬂuctuations around a single direction, and so on. This pattern is qualitatively

similar to that observed in Fig. 2. In conclusion, results of parametric instability simulation

seem to account for the observed transition to a sort of L´evy walk observed in the real solar

wind data (see also [12]).

As a second point of agreement with the observations, we plot the vector displacements

δB

, with respect to a ﬁxed direction, normalized to the mean magnetic ﬁeld intensity as

|
a function of the independent variable y. We compute this quantity by considering the

|

magnetic ﬁeld at a given time t and evaluating the vector diﬀerences of its components

with the ﬁxed direction (0; 1; 0) in each simulation grid point. Since in our simulation the

background magnetic ﬁeld has components B0 = (0; 1; 0), we are practically plotting the

vector displacements of the magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations. Finally, we compute the intensity

of this vector in each point. The results of this computation are shown in the upper panel

of Fig. 18 at the time t1 = 45τA and Fig. 19 at the time t = 180τA. Along with this curves,

the magnetic ﬁeld intensities

B(y)

, normalized to its mean value, at the same times, are

|

|

shown in the lower panels of the ﬁgures. This graphics should be compared with the ones in

20

FIG. 20: PDFs of vector displacements

, at the scale λ = λmax/628, normalized to σ for

δBλ|
|

the results of the numerical simulations of the parametric instability at time t = t1 = 45τA and

t = t2 = 180τA are shown in the top and bottom panels, respectively. The two thin solid curves refer

to as many lognormals contributing to form the thick solid curve which best ﬁts the distribution.

Parameters relative to the ﬁt are reported in Tab. VI.

Fig. 6 and 7, where the analogous quantities are plotted for the fast solar wind at 0.3 and

0.9AU, respectively.

Also in this case the qualitative similarity between the results of the simulations and the

observed solar wind data is remarkable. At the time t = t1, corresponding to 0.3AU, the

vector displacements have a quite random behaviour, although not as “noisy” as in Fig. 6,

and no evident correlation between the vector displacements and the magnetic ﬁeld intensity

is observed. Note that the ﬂuctuations of the magnetic ﬁeld intensity are rather small at

this time, due to the fact that the initial wave is circularly polarized.

On the converse, in Fig. 19, the vector displacements of the magnetic ﬁeld appear to be

more structured, characterized by fast rotations of the vector, followed by smaller oscillations

around the new position. Moreover, there exists a clear correlation between the strongest

gradients of the vector displacements and the ones of the magnetic ﬁeld intensity, as already

observed in the real solar wind fast streams.

Finally, we plotted in Fig. 20 the PDFs of vector displacements

, deﬁned as

δBλ|

|
Bi(x, t))2

(3)

δBλ(x, t)

=

|

|

(Bi(x + λ, t)

−

s Xi=x,y,z

normalized to their standard deviations, at times t1 and t2. In eq.3, t represents a speciﬁc

phase of the evolution, x a generic position within the simulation box and λ is the scale

length analogous to the sampling time of real data used to compute the PDFs in section II.

However, at diﬀerence with real data, where the resolution of 6 sec still lies in the inertial

range, in the simulations we have to keep into account the fact that the smaller scales are

aﬀected by viscosity and diﬀusivity. Thus, we evaluated the vector diﬀerences at a length

scale λ = λmax/628, where λmax is the maximum wavelength excited at the beginning of

the simulation, and equals the length of the simulation domain. This length scale is rather

small, compared to the integral scale of the domain, but still in the inertial range of the

spectrum.

21

TABLE VI: Numerical simulation: Values of the Parameters Obtained from the Fit of the PDF

relative to vector displacements

Simulated time

r2

0.954 1.13

0.14 1.43

0.09 1.08

0.20 0.47

0.06 0.35

0.03 0.94

0.03

A1

±

±

σ1

±

±

δ1

±

±

A2

±

±

σ2

±

±

δ2

±

±

0.996 0.52

0.56 0.72

0.21 0.45

0.27 0.09

0.55 0.69

0.95 0.15

0.45

45τA

180τA

The similarity with Fig. 8, where the PDFs of the vector displacements

δB

are shown

|

|

for the fast wind at 0.3 and 0.9AU, is evident. Also in this case, it is possible to ﬁt eﬀectively

the curves with two lognormal distributions and the trend is similar to that observed in the

solar wind data. In fact, the two lognormal distributions have comparable heights at t = t1,

while the population relative to the long vector displacements increases its importance at

subsequent times (t = t2). The parameters of the ﬁts are shown in table VI.

Another point of similarity with the analysis of real data regards the power spectrum.

As a matter of fact, as already shown by [26] and [27], the power spectrum obtained from

the trace of the spectral matrix of the Alfv´enic ﬂuctuations, after the saturation of the

parametric instability has been reached, shows a clear evidence of a power law inertial range

similar to the one observed in Helios data at 0.9 AU.

We like to stress that a direct quantitative comparison between the real data and the

simulated data is meaningless. In fact, a direct comparison would require to ﬁx appropriate

length and time scales in the simulation. Moreover, as described in [37], the model used

is very simple, due to the one-dimensionality constraint, to the cartesian geometry and

especially to the fact that the solar wind is actually an expanding medium. However, the

results of the simulations show a qualitative behaviour very similar to that observed in real

data of the fast solar wind. We conclude that the parametric instability oﬀers a possible

alternative explanation of the observed data.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we focused on the statistics followed by interplanetary magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuc-

tuations on a 6-sec time scale, well inside the MHD regime ([2], as observed in solar wind

22

turbulence between 0.3 and 0.9 AU. In particular, we aimed to understand the spatio–

temporal evolution of the magnetic ﬁeld vector through the study of changes experienced by

both vector orientation and intensity. Several previous works, which dealt with a statistical

approach to this same problem, considered diﬀerent aspects connected to directional ﬂuc-

tuations as, for example, power associated to the ﬂuctuations, their radial evolution, their

anisotropy, the nature of the ﬂuctuations, their generation mechanisms, and so on but, none

of them, to our knowledge, has ever studied how and why the orientation of these ﬂuctuations

changes with time. There have been only few attempts to study similar problems but always

limited to single case studies ([10, 33, 38, 44, 48]. The most recent statistical approach to

the same problem is represented by a paper by [12] in which these authors concluded that

the temporal evolution of magnetic ﬁeld and wind velocity vectors directions might follow a

sort of L´evy walk. That paper, although based on larger time scales and on a weak statis-

tics, represents the ﬁrst attempt to understand the inﬂuence due to propagating modes and

convected structures on the orientation of velocity and magnetic ﬁeld vectors within MHD

turbulence. Following this analysis and, using a more robust statistics, we found that PDFs

of interplanetary magnetic ﬁeld vector diﬀerences within high velocity streams can be rea-

sonably ﬁtted by a double log-normal distribution. In other words, vector diﬀerences, which

are due to the two distinct contributions of directional uncompressive ﬂuctuations and purely

compressive ﬂuctuations, can be separated in two distinct PDFs. Moreover, the lognormal

nature of the PDFs might suggest a multiplicative process at the origin of these ﬂuctua-

tions, that is typical of a turbulent cascade. Furthermore, it only applies to deﬁnite positive

quantities, like the vector or angular displacements we analyze in this paper. Incidentally,

the multiplicative cascade notion was introduced by Kolmogorov into his statistical theory

([23, 24] of turbulence as a phenomenological framework to accomodate extreme behaviour

observed in real turbulent ﬂuids.

Another interesting feature of these distributions is that the two PDFs have a diﬀerent

weight since one of them, the one that represents the smallest

is always considerably

δBi|

|

smaller than the other one. Moreover, while the smaller PDF does evolve with heliocentric

distance, decreasing its own relevance, the largest PDF seems to remain almost unaﬀected.

Now, if we consider, as already suggested ([11]), MHD turbulence mainly due to propagating,

uncompressive ﬂuctuations of Alfv´enic origin and to convected compressive structures, it

comes natural to identify these diﬀerent contributions to turbulence with the two PDFs

23

we found. In addition, we would expect a diﬀerent radial evolution since only propagating

Alfv´enic modes, interacting non–linearly, undergo a considerable turbulent evolution as we

already know from literature ([50]. We found that the relative contribution to the total

PDF of what we identify with uncompressive ﬂuctuations varies from 34% at 0.3 AU to

18% to 0.9 AU, in terms of relative probability.

In other words what we identify with

the Alfv´enic contribution results to be somewhat smaller than the contribution due to the

convected structures. Similar conclusions were reached by [5] who gave an estimate for the

Alfv´enic component around 15% of the total power associated to turbulence. Thus, we

might associate our convected structures to the 2–D turbulence identiﬁed in the solar wind

by [5] and [30] who model interplanetary magnetic turbulence as made of slab and quasi–2D

turbulence only. However, the dominant 2–D magnetic turbulence is characterized by the

fact that its wave vector results to be normal to the ambient magnetic ﬁeld direction. As

a consequence, we would expect to see a radial evolution even stronger than the one we

observed for the slab component which has its wave vectors parallel to the ambient ﬁeld. As

a matter of fact, the turbulent cascade acts preferably on wave numbers perpendicular to

the ambient magnetic ﬁeld direction, as suggested by the three–wave resonant interaction

([6, 42]. On the contrary, the dominant component of the turbulence observed by Helios

is the least aﬀected by the radial evolution and, probably, should not be identiﬁed with

the 2–D turbulence. Another possibility is that the 2–D turbulence is mixed together with

the slab turbulence and represented by the smaller PDF which experiences the stronger

radial evolution. If this is the case, our analysis suggests that interplanetary ﬂuctuations

are made of three rather than two components: slab, 2–D and convected structures which

would support the three component model by [31]. This view is corroborated by the fact

that the PDF of

within slow wind can be ﬁtted by a single lognormal whose parameters

δBi|

|

only slightly change with heliocentric distance. As a matter of fact, this behavior has to be

expected if we consider that slow wind is poor in Alfv´en modes and its turbulence is already

fully developed by the time we observe it at 0.3 AU ([46]. Consequently, between.3 and .9

AU, ﬂuctuations do not undergo the same turbulent evolution observed in the fast wind and

the constancy of the PDF of

should be expected. We like to stress that interplanetary

δBi|

|

observations revealed that slow wind MHD ﬂuctuations are intrinsically diﬀerent from those
observed in fast wind. In fact, [3] showed that the Els¨asser ratio e−/e+, which is always

around 1 within slow wind, saturates to

0.5 within fast wind at a distance of

2.5 AU.

∼

∼

24

One more interesting observation regards the topology showed by these ﬂuctuations

within fast and slow wind. We showed that the trajectory followed by the tip of the mag-

netic vector during its turbulent ﬂuctuations follows a structured path. This path appears

more clearly when the PDF of

can be ﬁtted by a single lognormal, as in the case

δBi|

|

of slow wind regardless of heliocentric distance. However, within fast wind this structured

path can be more easily observed with increasing the heliocentric distance, in concurrence

with the depletion of the Alfv´enic ﬂuctuations. In other words, Alfv´enic modes mask the

underlying magnetic, quasi–static structure convected by the wind. The superposition of

these two types of ﬂuctuations is such that the ﬁnal motion is characterized by extreme

behaviour. Referring to the 3D representation used in this paper, the tip of the vector ap-

pears to be trapped within a certain solid angle for sometime but, occasionally, it escapes

this limited angular region and quickly travels, in a few time steps, to ﬁnally end up in

another angular region characterized by a diﬀerent average orientation. These large jumps

should be accounted for by the larger PDF and should be related to similar large jumps

studied by [10] and interpreted as tangential discontinuities marking the border between

adjacent ﬂux tubes. On the contrary, local ﬂuctuations, clustering around certain average

directions, should have Alfv´enic nature and should be identiﬁed by the smaller PDF. These

results support and further corroborate the recently re–proposed spaghetti–like structure

model ([10] ﬁrstly introduced, although in the context of cosmic ray modulation, by [32] to

describe interplanetary magnetic ﬁeld topology.

Finally, adopting a sort of feedback procedure, we cross–checked the soundness of our

ﬁtting scheme showing that artiﬁcial data obtained from the tip of a vector that randomly

walk on the surface of a sphere of constant radius, performing directional jumps which

obey to a double lognormal, provides results similar, in some aspects, to those observed in

interplanetary space.

However, the interplanetary observations we have do not allow to understand whether

these structures come directly from the Sun or are locally generated by some mechanism.

Recent theoretical results by [37] showed that coherent structures responsible for the radial

dependence of Intermittency as observed in the solar wind ([11], might be locally created

by parametric decay of Alfv´en waves. These authors, showed that during the turbulent

evolution, coherent structures like shocklets and/or current sheets were continuously created

when the instability was active. In order to see whether a similar mechanism may account for

25

the observed behaviour of the vector displacements and their statistics, we further analyzed

in this paper the results of the simulations performed in [37]. The results of this investigation

show a fairly good agreement, at least under the qualitative point of view, between the

simulations and the solar wind data: either the evolution of the tip of the magnetic ﬁeld

vector, or the correlation between the vector displacement at a given scale with the magnetic

ﬁeld intensity ﬂuctuations, or the evolution of the PDFs of the vector displacement in time,

all show trends similar to those observed in the real fast solar wind data. Unfortunately, a

direct quantitative comparison between the simulations and the data is diﬃcult due to the

limitations of the model. However, this mechanism, which might be active within fast wind,

should be less eﬀective within slow wind given the remarkable decoupling between magnetic

ﬁeld and velocity ﬁeld within this type of wind ([22]. Nevertheless, the enticing nature of

the parametric instability in explaining the results comes from some well deﬁned fact: a)

it is a well deﬁned mechanism of physical origin that induces a turbulent evolution in the

plasma and not an undeﬁned turbulence model; b) it is likely applicable to explain many

general observed features of fast solar wind, like the evolution of the spectra, the decrease

of the Alfv´enic correlation during the propagation in the heliosphere, and so on ([37]; c) the

observed evolution of the vector displacements and of their relative PDFs can be seen as a

natural consequence of the formation of shocklets and discontinuities in the wind, organized

in a sort of coherent structures, that explain the long jumps observed in the magnetic

ﬁeld and the structures in the vector displacements at larger distances from the sun.

In

particular, the decrease with distance of the lognormal component of the PDFs correlated

to the Alfv´enic part of the turbulence, can be seen as the continuous transfer of energy

between the Alfv´enic and magnetosonic components of the waves during the evolution of

the instability. However, a deﬁnitive conclusion about this point needs further investigations.

Another recent theoretical eﬀort by [16] models MHD turbulence in a way that tends to

the view and interpretation of the interplanetary observations we presented in this paper,

that is the existence of two diﬀerent components both contributing to turbulence. The

theoretical model presented by these authors tells us that propagating modes and coherent,

convected structures are both necessary, inseparable ingredients of MHD turbulence since

they share a common origin within the general view described by the physics of complexity

([15, 53, 54]. Propagating modes experience resonances which generate coherent structures

which, in turn, will migrate, interact and eventually generate new modes.

26

These theoretical models, which favour the local generation of coherent structures, fully

complement the possible solar origin of the convected component of interplanetary MHD

turbulence.

Acknowledgments

Magnetic ﬁeld 6sec averages derive from the Rome–GSFC magnetic experiment onboard

Helios 2 s/c. (PIs of the experiment were F. Mariani and N.F. Ness)

[1] Anselmet, F., Y. Gagne, E.J. Hopﬁnger, and R.A. Antonia, High order velocity structure

functions in turbulent shear ﬂows, J. Fluid Mech., 140, 63–89, 1984.

[2] Bavassano, B., M. Dobrowolny, F. Mariani, and N.F. Ness, Radial evolution of power spectra

of interplanetary Alfvenic turbulence, J. Geophys. Res. 86, 3617–3622, 1982.

[3] Bavassano, B., E. Pietropaolo, R. Bruno, On the evolution of outward and inward Alfvnic

ﬂuctuations in the polar wind, J. Geophys. Res., 105, 15959–15964, 2000.

[4] Belcher, J. W., & L. Davis, Jr., Large–amplitude Alfv´en waves in the interplanetary medium,

J. Geophys. Res. 76, 3534–3563, 1971.

[5] Bieber, J.W., Wanner, W. and W. H. Matthaeus, Dominant two-dimensional solar wind tur-

bulence with implications for cosmic ray transport, J. Geophys. Res., 101, 2511–2522, 1996.

[6] Bondeson, A., Cascade properties of shear Alfv´en turbulence, Phys. Fluids, 28, 2406–2411,

1985.

[7] Bruno, R., Bavassano, B. and Villante, U., Evidence for long period Alfv´en waves in the inner

solar system, J. Geophys. Res. 90, 4373–4377, 1985.

[8] Bruno, R. and Bavassano, B., Origin of low cross-helicity regions in the inner solar wind, J.

Geophys. Res. 96, 7841–7851, 1991.

[9] Bruno, R., Bavassano, B., Pietropaolo, E., Carbone, V., Veltri, P., Eﬀects of intermittency

on interplanetary velocity and magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations anisotropy, Geophys. Res. Lett. 26,

3185–3188, 1999.

[10] Bruno, R., V. Carbone, P. Veltri, E. Pietropaolo and B. Bavassano, Identifying intermittency

events in the solar wind, Planetary Space Sci., 49, 1201–1210, 2001.

27

[11] Bruno, R., Carbone, V., Sorriso-Valvo, L., and Bavassano, B., Radial evolution of so-

lar wind intermittency in the inner heliosphere, J. Geophys. Res., 108 (A3), 1130,

doi:10.1029/2002JA009615, 2003.

[12] Bruno,R., L. Sorriso-Valvo, V. Carbone and B. Bavassano, Europhys. Lett., A possible

truncated-Lvy-ﬂight statistics recovered from interplanetary solar-wind velocity and magnetic-

ﬁeld ﬂuctuations, 66, 146–152, 2004.

[13] Burlaga, L., Intermittent turbulence in the solar wind, J. Geophys. Res. 96, 5847–5851, 1991.

[14] Carbone,V., Veltri, P., Bruno, R., Experimental evidence for diﬀerences in the extended self–

silimarity scaling laws between ﬂuid and magnetohydrodynamic turbulent ﬂows, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 75, 3110–3120, 1995.

[15] Chang, T.,Self-organized criticality, multi-fractal spectra, and intermittent merging of coher-

ent structures in the magnetotail, Astrophys. Space Sci. 264, 303–316, 1999.

[16] Chang, T., Tam, S.W.Y. and Wu, C., Phys. Plasmas, 11, 1287–1299, 2004.

[17] Coleman, P. J.,Turbulence, Viscosity, and Dissipation in the Solar-Wind Plasma, Astrophys.

J., 153, 371–383, 1968.

[18] Farge, M., Holschneider, M., Colonna, J. F., Wavelet analysis of coherent structures in two–

dimensional turbulent ﬂows, in Topological Fluid Mechanics, ed. H.K. Moﬀat, Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press, 765–776, 1990.

[19] Goldstein, M.L., D.A. Roberts and W.H. Matthaeus,Magnetohydrodynamic Turbulence In

The Solar Wind, Annual Rep. on Astron. and Astrophys., 33, 283–326, 1995.

[20] Ho, C.M., Tsurutani, B.T., Goldstein, B.E., Phillips, J.L. & Balogh, A., Tangential Disconti-

nuities at high heliographic latitudes (

80◦), Geophys. Res. Lett., 22, 3409–3412, 1995.

∼ −

[21] Horbury, T. S., Balogh, A., Forsyth, R. J., & Smith, E. J., ULYSSES observations of inter-

mittent heliospheric turbulence, Advances in Space Research, 19, 847–850, 1997.

[22] L. Klein, R. Bruno, B. Bavassano and H. Rosenbauer, Anisotropy and minimum variance

of magnetohydrodynamic ﬂuctuations in the inner heliosphere, J. Geophys. Res., 98, 17461–

17466, 1993.

[23] Kolmogorov, A. N.,The local structure of turbulence in incompressible viscous ﬂuid for very

large Reynolds numbers, C. R. Akad. Sci. SSSR 30, 301–341, 1941.

[24] Kolmogorov, A. N., A reﬁnement of previous hypotheses concerning the local structure of

turbulence in viscous incompressible ﬂuid at high Reynolds number, J. Fluid mech. 177, 133–

28

[25] Kraichnan, R. H., Inertial–range spectrum of hydromagnetic turbulence, Phys. Fluids 8, 1385–

[26] Malara F., Primavera L., Veltri P., Nonlinear evolution of parametric instability of a large-

amplitude nonmonochromatic Alfvn wave, Phys. Plasmas, 7, 2866–2877, 2000.

[27] Malara, F., Primavera, L., Veltri, P., Nonlinear evolution of the parametric instability: nu-

merical predictions versus observations in the heliosphere, Nonlinear Proc. in Geophys., 8,

166., 1962.

1387, 1965.

159–166, 2001.

[28] Mantegna, R. & Stanley, E. H., Stochastic process with ultraslow convergence to a Gaussian:

The truncated Lvy ﬂight, Phys. Rev. Lett., 73, 2946–2949, 1994.

[29] Marsch, E., & Liu, S., Structure functions and intermittency of velocity ﬂuctuations in the

inner solar wind, Ann. Geophysicae 11, 227–238, 1993.

[30] Matthaeus, W. H., Goldstein, M. L., Roberts, D. A., Evidence for the presence of quasi–

two–dimensional nearly incompressible ﬂuctuations in the solar wind, J. Geophys. Res. 95,

20673–20683, 1990.

[31] Matthaeus, W. H., and S. Ghosh, Spectral decomposition of solar wind turbulence: Three-

component model, In S. Habbal, R. Esser, J. V. Hollweg, and P. A. Isenberg, editors, Solar

Wind Nine, AIP Conf. Publ., 471, 519–526, 1999.

[32] McCracken, K.G., & N.F. Ness, The collimation of cosmic rays by the interplanetary magnetic

[33] Nakagawa, T., A. Nishida and T. Saito, Planar magnetic structures in the solar wind, J.

ﬁeld, J. Geophys. Res., 71, 3315–3325, 1966.

Geophys. Res. 94, 11761–11775, 1989.

[34] Onorato, M., Camussi, R., Iuso, G., Anomalous scaling and bursting process in an experimen-

tal turbulent channel ﬂow, Phys. Rev. E 61, 1447–1460, 2000.

[35] Pagel C., & Balogh A., Radial dependence of intermittency in the fast polar solar wind

magnetic ﬁeld using Ulysses, J. Geophys. Res., A108a.SSH2P, 2003.

[36] Primavera L., Malara F., Veltri P., Numerical Simulations of the Parametric Instability in

Solar Wind, ESA SP-448, 1199–1204, 1999.

[37] Primavera, L., F. Malara, & Veltri P., Parametric instability in the solar wind: numerical

study of the nonlinear evolution, paper presented at Solar Wind 10 Conference, 17–21 June

2002, Pisa, Italy, Eds. Velli, Bruno and Malara, AIP, 679, 505–508, 2003.

29

[38] Riley, P., Sonett, C. P., Tsurutani, B. T., Balogh, A., Forsyth, R. J., Hoogeveen, G. W.,

Properties of arc-polarized Alfvn waves in the ecliptic plane: Ulysses observations, J. Geophys.

Res., 101, 19987–19993, 1996.

[39] Roberts, D.A., M.L. Goldstein, & Matthaeus W.H., Velocity shear generation of solar wind

turbulence, J. Geophys. Res. 97, 17115–17130, 1992.

[40] Ruzmaikin, A., Feynman, J., Goldstein, B., & Balogh, A., Intermittent turbulence in solar

wind from the south polar hole, J. Geophys. Res. 100, 3395–3404, 1995.

[41] Sagdeev, R. Z., and Galeev, A. A., Nonlinear Plasma Theory, Ed. by O. Neil and D. Book, p.

7, W. A. Benjamin, New York, 1969.

[42] Shebalin, J.V., Matthaeus, W.H., & Montgomery, Anisotropy in MHD turbulence due to a

mean magnetic ﬁeld, D.,J. Plasma Phys. 29, 525–547, 1983.

[43] Sorriso–Valvo, L. , Carbone, V., Veltri, P., Consolini, G., & Bruno, R., Intermittency in the

solar wind turbulence through probability distribution functions of ﬂuctuations, Geophys. Res.

Lett. 26, 1801–1804, 1999.

[44] Tsurutani, B. T., Ho, C. M., Smith, E. J., Neugebauer, M., Goldstein, B. E., Mok, J. S.,

Arballo, J. K., Balogh, A., Southwood, D. J., Feldman, W. C., The relationship between

interplanetary discontinuities and Alfven waves: ULYSSES observations, Geophys. Res. Lett.,

[45] Tu, C. -Y., The damping of interplanetary Alfv´enic ﬂuctuations and the heating of the solar

21, 2267–2270, 1994.

wind, J. Geophys. Res. 93, 7–20, 1988.

[46] Tu, C.-Y & Marsch, E., Evidence for a “background” spectrum of the solar wind turbulence

in the inner heliosphere, J. Geophys. Res. 95, 4337–4341, 1990.

[47] Tu, C.-Y and Marsch, E., and Thime, K. M. Basic properties of solar wind MHD turbulence

analysed by means of Els¨esser variables, J. Geophys. Res. 95, 11739–11759, 1989.

[48] Tu, C.-Y & Marsch, E., A case study of very low cross–helicity ﬂuctuations in the solar wind,

Ann. Geophys. 9, 319–332, 1991.

[49] Tu, C.-Y & Marsch, E., A model of solar wind ﬂuctuations with two components: Alfv´en

waves and convective structures, J. Geophys. Res. 98, 1257–1276, 1993.

[50] Tu, C.-Y & Marsch, E., MHD structures, waves and turbulence in the solar wind: observations

and theories, Space Sci. Rev., 73,1–210, 1995.

[51] Tu, C.-Y, Marsch, E., Rosenbauer, H., An extended structure function model and its aplication

30

to the analysis of solar wind intermittency properties, Ann. Geophys. 14, 270–285, 1996.

[52] Van Atta, C.W. and Park, J., Statistical self–similarity and inertial subrange turbulence, Lect.

Notes in Phys., 73, 402–426, 1975.

[53] Vasquez, B. J., and Hollweg, J. V., Nonlinear Alfv´en waves. 1. Interactions between outgo-

ing and ingoing waves according to an amplitude expansion, J. Geophys. Res., 109:A05103,

doi:10.1029/2003JA010105, 2004.

[54] Vasquez, B. J., S. A. Markovskii, and J. V. Hollweg, Nonlinear Alfv´en waves. 2. The in-

ﬂuence of wave advection and ﬁnite wavelength eﬀects., J. Geophys. Res., 109:A05104,

doi:10.1029/2003JA010106, 2004.

[55] Veltri, P., & Mangeney, A., Scaling Laws and Intermittent Structures in Solar Wind MHD

Turbulence, In S. Habbal, R. Esser, J. V. Hollweg, and P. A. Isenberg, editors, Solar Wind

Nine, AIP Conf. Publ.,471, 543–546, 1999.

[56] Wu, C.C, & Chang, T., 2D MHD Simulation of the Emergence and Merging of Coherent

Structures, Geophys. Res. Lett., 27, 863–866, 2000.

31

This figure "figure001.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure002.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure003.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure004.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure005.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure006.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure007.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure008.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure009.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure010.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure011.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure012.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure013.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure014.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure015.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure016.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure017.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure018.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure019.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

This figure "figure020.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0409056v1

