4
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
0
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Exact periodic solutions of the Liouville equation
and the “snake” of density in JET
F. Spineanu and M.Vlad
Association Euratom-MEC Romania
NILPRP, P.O.Box MG-36, Magurele, Bucharest, Romania

The snake phenomenon has been observed in JET during the experiments
of pellet injection and consists in formation of persistent density perturbations
at rational-q surfaces. These structures persist over several sawtooth collapses
and are diﬃcult to explain as magnetic perturbations. Possibly related to this,
there are indications that the tokamak plasma density has an anomalous radial
pinch, much larger than that of the neoclassical origin. In this class of phe-
nomena one should also include the persistent impurity accumulation in laser
blow-oﬀ injected impurity, observed in experiments in TCV. There are several
studies of the statistical properties of the correlations between the peaking
factors for density, current density or pressure, with plasma parameters and
these studies seem to support the idea of turbulent equipartition of the thero-
modynamic invariants (Minardi). However we should note that these studies
involve quantities expressed as global variables (like averages) and they can
hide other dependences not immediately obvious.

We consider the possibility that the particle density behavior (and partic-
ularly the snake phenomenon) can be connected with the existence of attract-
ing solutions of certain nonlinear integrable equations. The statistical studies
carried out on a large set of discharges with the purpose of testing the pre-
diction of the Turbulent Equipartition theory have suggested that the current
density is given by the equation ∆j + (λ2/4) j = 0 where λ is a constant.
However this may be valid on ﬁnite spatial patches and on every patch the
equation can be considered an approximation of some more general equation,
for which the derivation from ﬁrst principles may be possible. One is the sinh-
Poisson equation, ∆φ + (λ2/4) sinh φ = 0 for which the previous equation is
the linearised form. The reason to consider the sinh-Poisson equation comes
from the existing proofs that this equation governs the asymptotic states of
ideal ﬂuids, or, more generally, of 2D systems that can be reduced to the dy-
namics of point-like elements interacting by the potential which is the inverse
of the Laplacean operator (Jackiw and Pi, Spineanu and Vlad). This equa-
tion is however obtained when there are two kinds of elements (like positive
and negative vorticity) and they are of equal number, n+ = n−. Then the
sinh-Poisson equation is obtained as governing the states with maximum en-
tropy of the discrete statistical system at negative temperature (Montgomery
et al.). Since the equation for the current density mentioned above is de-
rived under the assumption of turbulent equipartition, the two descriptions
may be related. However, the solutions for the unbalanced system of ele-
ments, α
φ)] have been
obtained numerically (Pointin and Lundgren) and have been shown to have
higher entropy and higher stability than those of the sinh-Poisson, precisely
the characteristics we are seeking for. The limiting form of the unbalanced
equation is the Liouville equation, ∆φ = (λ2/8) exp (

= 1, ∆φ = (λ2/8) [exp (φ) /√α

√α exp (

n+/n−

φ).

≡

−

−

−

6
There are ﬁeld theoretical models that are able to describe statistical en-
sembles of a discrete sets of elements and these models lead to the Liouville
equation when a particular condition (called : self-duality) is fulﬁlled. We
note that the Liouville equation can lead to the above current density equa-
tion (Helmholtz-type) in an approximation where the function diﬀers weakly
from a background value.

In the following we will discuss solutions of the soliton type of the Liouville
equation ∆φ = (λ2/8) exp (
φ). It is commonly considered that the Liouville
equation is solved by the formula given in terms of two arbitrary complex
functions F and G

−

φ (x, y) =

ln

−

(

F ′ (z) G′ (z∗)
16 F (z) G (z∗)

1 + λ2

2

)

where z = x + iy and ∗ is the complex conjugate. However this form of the
solution is too general to be useful. More popular is the particular form derived
from this one,

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

φ = ln [cosh (kx) + ε cos (ky)]
ε2) k2 exp (

2φ). This describes the cat’s eye vortex
solution of ∆φ = (1
chains of the Kelvin-Stuart stream function, and the magnetic ﬂux function in
the chains of magnetic islands (Finn and Kaw).

−

−

Our main objective is to identify a type of solution of the Liouville equation
which is more localised on a magnetic surface compared with the proﬁle of a
magnetic island of the same helical symmetry. For this the factor k must be
independent of the local q: the spatial extension of the density perturbation
at a magnetic surface and the helical symmetry of that magnetic surface must
be independent. This is clear in the case of the Liouville (and sinh-Poisson)
equation, since it is conformally invariant. We cannot be sure that the solution
we are looking for can be of the form shown above. The correct approach is
to ﬁnd any solution of the Liouville equation.

We now describe the systematic way of obtaining solutions of the Liouville
equation on periodic domains, taking y as the poloidal and x as the radial
coordinate. The method (Tracy et al.) consists of taking the Liouville equation
as the limit of the sinh-Poisson equation:

λ2 =

λ2 exp (

β) , ψ

φ

β

e

e

λ

−

−

→

→ ∞

≡
. Then the sinh-Poisson equation becomes the Liouville equa-
and let β
λ. The sinh-Poisson equation is exactly integrable on
tion after taking
periodic domains since it possesses a pair of Lax operators (Ting, Chen and
Lee). The eigenvalue problem for the Lax operators identiﬁes a spectrum of
complex values where the two Bloch functions are not independent (for one
eigenvalue we have only one eigenfunction). These nondegenerate eigenvalues
are called main spectrum and represent branching points in the two-sheeted
Riemann surface associated to the Wronskian of the two periodic solutions. It
is shown that the problem of ﬁnding the unknown function φ is mapped on
the problem of motion of a set of functions (auxiliary spectrum) on this Rie-
mann surface. The equations of motion are nonlinear but they can be solved

exactly, using the Abel transform. In this transformation the two-sheeted Rie-
mann surface is mapped onto a compact hyperelliptic Riemann surface and the
equations of motion are linearised as rotations along the cycles on this complex
curve. The topology of the hyperelliptic Riemann surface is that of a sphere
with a number of handles (the genus of the surface) which is given by the ge-
ometry of the cuts in the complex plane needed to uniformize the ﬁrst Riemann
surface. Therefore the genus is actually determined by the main spectrum of
the Lax linear operator, or, in concrete terms, by the boundary condition we
require for the solution. The linear equations of motion are integrated leading
to phases, which are linear combinations of the original variables, x and y.
The number of phases is the number of type A cycles on the surface (like the
short turn on a torus), or, the genus ; so, the number of phases is again de-
termined by the main spectrum. We have to return to the original framework,
and this represents the Jacobi inversion problem. It is solved exactly in terms
of Riemann theta functions. The exact solution of the sinh-Poisson equation
in terms of Riemann theta function, Θ, is

where l = kxx + kyy + l0 , l0 is a vector of constants, initial phases, and

φ (x, y) = 2 ln

Θ

l + 1
21
Θ (l) !
(cid:0)

(cid:1)

 

kx,j

ky,j

+ 2Cj1

(

1)N CjN
8√Q
−
1)N CjN
−

i (

8√Q −

2iCj1

≡

≡

The physical content of the problem is in the square matrix C whose dimen-
sion is half the number of eigenvalues in the main spectrum. The matrix C
is obtained from integrals of a basis of diﬀerential one-forms deﬁned on the
hyperelliptic Riemann surface along the basis of closed paths (cycles). These
integrals can be converted into integrals along closed paths on the plane of the
spectral variable, around cuts or crossing these cuts. The geometrical aspect
of this conversion is numerically complicated due to the jumps of the phases
of the complex integrand at crossing the cuts. However, the symmetries of the
main spectrum allows us to use general forms of the matrix

Cij = 16N −2j+1C ∗
Cij = C

∗
N −i+1,j

i,N −j+1, j

N/2

≤

A particular choice of the entries of C (which obeys the symmetries) corre-
sponds, physically, to a particular form of the boundary condition assumed for
φ, on a linear section of the periodic domain.

The solution of the Liouville equation can be obtained from that for the
sinh-Poisson equation in a certain limit. This limit has been translated into a
particular distribution of the functions of the auxiliary spectrum (Tracy et al.).
For any (x, y) there are three classes according to the positions relative to the
2 = λ4/256, E being the spectral variable.
inversion circle, which is given by
|

E

|

Figure 1: The streamfunction φ solution of the Liouville equation.

256E∗
j

First, one notes that the discrete points of the main spectrum are situated in
certain positions around this circle: (1) there are N inversion pairs, (Ej, EN +j),
in the set E1, E2, ..., E2N with: EN +j = λ4/
for j = 1, N. (2) there
are M pairs E2N +1, ..., E2N +2M such that E2N +k = λ2αk/16, E2N +M +k =
(λ2/16) /α∗
k, with αk independent of λ. From each pair of the eigenvalues of
the set (2) (situated near the inversion circle) there are M auxiliary functions,
which scale as λ2. The rest of the points of the auxiliary spectrum are devided
into two classes. The ﬁrst contains the auxiliary functions which are outside
the inversion circle and are independent of λ. The second are deﬁned inside the
inversion circle and are scaled as λ4. In this way, λ2 exp (
φ) is independent
of λ. This classiﬁcations cannot be directly employed, but they suggest a
particular choice for the points of the main spectrum. These studies, mainly
numerical, are still in progress.

−

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

A conclusion can be drawn at this stage: the solution exhibits a localised
perturbation on the poloidal direction, while the helical symmetry is still that
given of the q of the surface. This solution is solitonic and therefore is sta-
ble (we still have to clarify the eﬀect of the limiting procedure on the set of
invariants when passing from sinh-Poisson to Liouville). The fact that this
kind of solution is an attractor comes from the general property of the plasma
state: the self-duality (leading to the Liouville equation) corresponds to the
extremum of the action of the system of discrete elements.

References

[1] H. Weisen and E. Minardi, Europhys. Lett. 56 (2001) 542.

[2] J. M. Finn and P.K. Kaw, Phys. Fluids 20 (1977) 72.

[3] E. R. Tracy, C. H. Chin and H. H. Chen, Physica 23D (1986) 91.

[4] A.C. Ting, H. H. Chen and Y.C. Lee, Physica 26D (1987) 37.

[5] G. Joyce and D. Montgomery, J. Plasma Phys. 10 (1973) 107.

[6] F. Spineanu and M. Vlad, Phys. Rev. E67 (2003) 046309.

[7] R. Jackiw and So-Young Pi, Phys. Rev. D42 (1990) 3500.

