4
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
2
1
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Magnetic turbulence in the plasma sheet

Z. V¨or¨os (1), W. Baumjohann (1), R. Nakamura (1), M. Volwerk (1),
A. Runov (1), T. L. Zhang (1), H. U. Eichelberger (1),
R. Treumann (2), E. Georgescu (2), A. Balogh (3),
B. Klecker (2) and H. R`eme (4)
(1) Institut f¨ur Weltraumforschung der ¨OAW, Graz, Austria,
(2) Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur extraterrestrische Physik, Garching, Germany,
(3) Imperial College, London, UK,
(4) CESR/CNRS, Toulouse, France.

Abstract

Small-scale magnetic turbulence observed by the Cluster spacecraft in
the plasma sheet is investigated by means of a wavelet estimator suitable for
detecting distinct scaling characteristics even in noisy measurements. The
spectral estimators used for this purpose are affected by a frequency depen-
dent bias. The variances of the wavelet coefﬁcients, however, match the
power-law shaped spectra, which makes the wavelet estimator essentially un-
biased. These scaling characteristics of the magnetic ﬁeld data appear to be
essentially non-steady and intermittent. The scaling properties of bursty bulk
ﬂow (BBF) and non-BBF associated magnetic ﬂuctuations are analysed with
the aim of understanding processes of energy transfer between scales. Small-
scale (∼ 0.08 − 0.3 s) magnetic ﬂuctuations having the same scaling index
α ∼ 2.6 as the large-scale (∼ 0.7 − 5 s) magnetic ﬂuctuations occur dur-
ing BBF-associated periods. During non-BBF associated periods the energy
transfer to small scales is absent, and the large-scale scaling index α ∼ 1.7 is
closer to Kraichnan or Iroshnikov-Kraichnan scalings. The anisotropy char-
acteristics of magnetic ﬂuctuations show both scale-dependent and scale-
independent behavior. The former can be partly explained in terms of the
Goldreich-Sridhar model of MHD turbulence, which leads to the picture
of Alfv´enic turbulence parallel and of eddy turbulence perpendicular to the
mean magnetic ﬁeld direction. Nonetheless, other physical mechanisms,
such as transverse magnetic structures, velocity shears, or boundary effects
can contribute to the anisotropy characteristics of plasma sheet turbulence.
The scale-independent features are related to anisotropy characteristics which
occur during a period of magnetic reconnection and fast tailward ﬂow.

1

1

Introduction

Magnetic ﬁeld measurements on board the Geotail and AMPTE/IRM spacecraft
revealed that the power-law behaviour of the energy density spectra in frequency
space, P (f ) ∼ f −α depends on the considered frequency range, both in the distant
tail [Hoshino et al., 1994], and in the near-Earth plasma sheet [Bauer et al., 1995].
This ﬁnding was conﬁrmed by Ohtani et al. [1995] using fractal analysis of the
ﬂuctuations in the AMPTE/CCE and SCATHA magnetic ﬁeld measurements. The
spectral index changes around fc1 ∼ 0.01 − 0.08 Hz. The observed scaling indices
are α1 ∼ 0.5 − 1.5 for f < fc1 and α2 ∼ 1.7 − 2.9 when f > fc1 [Milovanov
et al., 2001; Volwerk et al., 2003, 2004]. The uncertainty of the estimated values
of α1 and α2 can be explained by slightly different frequency ranges studied by
various authors and by the occurrence of spatially inhomogeneous, intermittent
and transitory mechanisms involved in the generation of the observed scalings.

Since the characteristic timescale ∼ 1/fc1 was found to be a few times the pro-
ton gyroperiod, ions can play an important role in the excitation of the correspond-
ing magnetic ﬂuctuations. The high-frequency part of the spectrum can be pro-
duced by an MHD cascading process. Instability mechanisms or self-organisation
processes, such as coalescence of magnetic islands or inverse cascades were pro-
posed for the explanation of low-frequency scaling [Hoshino et al., 1994].

For frequencies higher than 0.1 Hz a second break in spectral power density
was predicted theoretically at a turnover frequency fc2 [Milovanov et al., 2001].
The estimation of the scaling index α3 for frequencies f > fc2, however, is en-
cumbered by noise produced by the magnetometer itself.
In this paper we ex-
amine those high frequency ﬂuctuations for which the spectral indices α2 and α3
are expected. To this end we use a wavelet method which allows to estimate the
scaling propeties of magnetic ﬂuctuations over the mentioned frequency ranges.
Reliable spectral information could not be extracted, hitherto, from the noisy high-
frequency magnetometer data. Nonetheless, in Section 2 we argue that an essen-
tially unbiased wavelet method combined with an embedding technique of syn-
thetic scaling signals allows us to estimate the scaling parameters reliably.

Very little is known about the origin of the multi-scale turbulence in the plasma
sheet. Its appearance is obviously dependent on the driving and dissipation mech-
anisms which characterize an observed ﬂuctuating process [Borovsky and Funsten,
2003]. Magnetic ﬁeld and plasma ﬂow ﬂuctuations were observed by a number
of authors [e.g., Coroniti et al., 1980; Borovsky et al., 1997; Neagu et al., 2002].
Plasma shear ﬂows might appear as possible drivers of those ﬂuctuations. The sta-
tistical analyses of AMPTE/IRM data in the near-Earth magnetotail have already
shown that there exist rapid plasma ﬂows in the central plasma sheet which are
preferentially perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld and strongly sunward oriented

2

[Baumjohann et al., 1989, 1990]. Subsequent research indicated that such ﬂows
are preferentially organized into sporadically occurring groups of bursty bulk ﬂows
(BBF), typically lasting for 10 min. Despite their short duration, BBFs are the car-
riers of decisive amounts of mass, momentum and magnetic ﬂux [Angelopoulos et
al., 1992; Angelopoulos et al., 1993; Sch¨odel et al., 2001]. Therefore BBFs can
stir the plasma sheet plasma very efﬁciently. In this paper we place emphasis on
comparison of multi-scale power and scaling properties of the magnetic ﬂuctua-
tions during BBF and non-ﬂow or post-ﬂow periods. We will also try to identify
the turnover frequency fc2, comparing the estimated values of α2 and α3 during
BBF and non-BBF periods.

The observed scaling features, together with those expected from MHD consid-
erations, will help us to classify the magnetic ﬂuctuations observed by the Cluster
spacecraft in the plasma sheet. Recent approaches to MHD turbulence highlight the
inﬂuence of a mean magnetic ﬁeld on scale-dependent appearance of anisotropic
ﬂuctuations [Goldreich and Shridhar, 1995]. The anisotropy increases towards
small scales. Therefore, the high-resolution Cluster magnetometry provides a way
for studying the scale-dependent anisotropy of magnetic ﬂuctuations. We discuss
the observed magnetic anisotropies in terms of recent MHD theories and simula-
tions.

2 The wavelet estimator

We analyse the scaling properties of 67 Hz resolution magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations
from the Cluster ﬂuxgate magnetometer [Balogh et al., 2001] using a wavelet
method proposed by Abry et al., [2000]. Wavelets offer an effective way for get-
ting an unbiased estimate of α [Veitch and Abry, 1999], whereas power spectral
estimations are affected by frequency-dependent multiplicative bias [Abry et al.,
1995]. The spectral estimation is biased mainly because it is performed over a
constant bandwidth which does not match the f −α structure of the spectrum prop-
erly. The variance of discrete wavelet coefﬁcients (see later), however, matches
well the power-law shaped spectrum. Unlike Fourier methods, wavelet methods
work better for processes exhibiting spectral scaling because wavelets have inbuilt
rescaling properties. The wavelet estimator allows to identify different kinds of
scaling processes which are invisible to biased spectral estimators, especially in
noisy and short data.

3

2.1 Outline of the method

Abry et al., [2000] proposed a semi-parametric wavelet technique based on a fast
pyramidal ﬁlter bank algorithm for the estimation of scaling parameters cf and
α in the relation P (f ) ∼ cf f −α, where cf is a nonzero constant. The algorithm
consists of several steps. First, a discrete wavelet transform of the data is performed
over a dyadic grid (scale, time) = (2j, 2j t) and j, t ∈ N. Then, at each octave
j = log22j, the variance µj of the discrete wavelet coefﬁcients dx(j, t) is computed
through

µj =

1
nj

nj

X
t=1

2
x(j, t) = 2jα cf C(α, ψ0)
d

(1)

f −α |
where nj is the number of coefﬁcients at octave j, and C(α, ψ0) =
ψ0(f ) |2 df , ψ0(f ) stands for the power spectrum of the mother wavelet Ψ0. Fi-
nally, from Equation (1) α and cf are estimated by constructing a plot of yj ≡
log2µj versus j (logscale diagram, LD) and by using a weighted linear regres-
sion over the region (jmin, jmax) where yj is a straight line. In this paper we use
the Daubechies wavelets for which ﬁnite data size effects are minimized and the
number of vanishing moments M can be changed. The latter allows to cancel or
decrease the effects of linear or polynomial trends and ensures that the wavelet
details are well deﬁned.

R

We note that the wavelet estimator, Equation (1), is also affected by a multi-
plicative bias (multiplication by C(α, ψ0), see later), but C is not frequency depen-
dent. A similar multiplicative term for spectral estimators is frequency dependent,
which makes the log-log plot of the power versus frequency not precisely linear.
Therefore the estimation of α via linear regression in the log-log plot is strongly
affected by bias [Abry et al., 1995]. Within the wavelet approach Veitch and Abry
[1999] have found explicit solutions for the variances of log2(µj) which are then
used in the weighted regression in the LD. These improvements make the wavelet
estimator unbiased even for data of small length.

Different kinds of scaling can be analysed by this technique. The value of α
and the scaling range (jm, jn) are characteristic for the speciﬁc scalings present
[Abry et al., 2000]. For example α ∈ (0, 1) at the largest scales present in the
data is characteristic for long range dependent processes, while α ∼ 0 at large
scales together with α ∈ (0, 1) at small scales is a signature of noise. Furthermore,
α ∈ (1, 3) aligned at almost all scales available corresponds to a nonstationary,
self-similar (fractal) process having a fractal dimension D = (5 − α)/2 [Abry et
al., 2000].

4

2.2 An embedding technique

When the scaling index is estimated over a high frequency range, magnetometer
noise can strongly inﬂuence the outcome. Since different estimation techniques
used over slightly different frequency ranges, there is a large scatter in the previ-
ously observed values of α, which makes it difﬁcult to compare the scaling prop-
erties in turbulence. Furthermore, the estimated values are presumably affected by
the occurrence of transitory processes in the plasma sheet. We therefore perform
the estimation of cf and α within sliding overlapping windows of width W with
a time shift S << W to analyse the data over different frequency ranges with the
same method and simultaneously take into account their temporal evolution.

In order to examine how the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR, the relative power of
the signal and the noise in LD) inﬂuences the estimation of α within the window
W in small-scale ﬂuctuations, we generate a self-similar fractal signal with known
second order scaling properties using wavelets and embed it in a time series of quiet
time magnetic ﬁeld measurements from the Cluster spacecraft. As a synthetic frac-
tal signal we use fractional Brownian motion (fBm) generated by a fast ﬁlter bank
based pyramidal algorithm [Abry and Sellan, 1996]. Fractional Brownian motion
has a Gaussian distribution of increments by deﬁnition. At the same time, mag-
netic ﬂuctuations exhibit two-point Gaussian statistics only for large separations.
Therefore, we consider the fBm process as an approximation which can roughly
model the second order properties of the magnetic ﬂuctuations.

We suppose that the magnetic ﬂuctuations observed in the plasma sheet during
quiet times are close to the magnetometer noise level. Figure 1a shows the mag-
netic ﬁeld BX component (67 Hz resolution) observed by Cluster 3 on Septem-
ber 7, 2001. If not speciﬁed the GSM coordinate system will be used through-
out the paper. Two short fractal signals A and B, with the same scaling index
αA ≡ αB = 1.6 but different amplitude are added to BX. In Figure 1a BX is
depicted from 1840 to 1917 UT. First, signal A is added into BX from ∼1857 to
∼1901 UT. The average amplitude of ﬂuctuations of A is much larger than of BX.
In Figure 1b a dashed horizontal line show the theoretical value of αA ≡ αB = 1.6.
The estimated αA reaches this theoretical value in a wider interval in Figure 1b as
was the length of signal A in Figure 1a. Despite the non-precise timing, the es-
timated value of αA is correct. Next, signal B is embedded into BX. Signal B
and BX have comparable average amplitude. The estimated αB in Figure 1b does
not achieve the theoretical horizontal line, therefore αB is underestimated. We can
conclude that, whenever the amplitude of the signal is signiﬁcantly larger than the
amplitude of the noise (case A), the correct value of α is recovered, otherwise α is
underestimated (case B).

Let us explain now the reason of non-precise timing. In Figure 1b αs are esti-

5

mated within a sliding window W ∼ 480 s over time scales (octaves) j1 = 2 and
j2 = 4 (∼ 0.08 − 0.33 s and ∼ 3 − 12 Hz; these are approximate Fourier peri-
ods and frequencies that correspond to the main oscillations within the Daubechies
wavelets). The embedded fractal signals A and B produce a rapid departure of the
estimated values α from the noise level α ∼ 0.3, as soon as the analysing window
includes some part of a fractal signal (A or B in Figure 1a). This effect is visi-
ble at ∼1853 UT and before 1906 UT, when two analysing windows depicted by
horizontal lines in Figure 1b are centered in those time positions. The dashed, ver-
tically extended right and left ends of the windows match perfectly the beginnings
and the ends of the fractal signals A and B. When the timing is important, the effect
of window length has to be accounted.

Another effect which inﬂuences the estimation of the scaling index α. If the
duration of a scaling process T is less than half the window length, W/2, α is also
underestimated. In Figure 1a the length of the fractal signals A and B equals W/2.
The proper sliding window length for unbiased estimation of α can be found by
trial. For decreasing W the estimated α increases, then saturates. Obviously, as
W decreases, the ﬂuctuations of the estimations increase. In general, W has to
be chosen such that the opposing requirements for robustness of scaling parameter
estimations (wide window needed) and for time localization of short events (narrow
window needed) were matched. For the events analysed in this paper W = 61 s
was found to be an optimal choice.

Finally, let us consider possible kinds of non-physical mechanisms which can
lead to spurious scalings. Time series analysis methods may lead to spurious results
when applied to short data series containing irregularities, e.g. jumps, spikes [Kat-
sev and L’Heureux, 2003] or random pulse trains [Watkins et al., 2001]. Spikes,
i.e., single values with large deviation are removed during quality check of the data.
Possible effects of other irregularities will be discussed jointly with the estimation
of the scaling parameters in subsequent sections.

2.3 Noise correction

The above explained embedding technique allows us to introduce corrections, when-
ever the amplitude of a fractal signal approaches the noise level. It can happen
when high frequency (small-scale) scalings are examined. A few more steps are
needed to explain the method in detail. To this end we show the typical scaling
properties of a fractal signal (s), noise (n) and of a compound additive process
(signal+noise, sn) in LD. For what follows the subscripts s, n, sn will correspond
to the speciﬁed processes. We also demonstrate that a single correction curve (see
later) belongs to every embedded model fractal signal with a given αs.

Equation 1 describes the scaling properties of a signal through the scaling of

6

the corresponding wavelet coefﬁcients. Taking a base 2 logarithm of both sides of
Equation 1, we obtain an equation of line in LD. Therefore any scaling signal (a
straight line in LD) can be characterized by a pair of values (cf (j), α(jmin, jmax)),
where cf (j) is the power of intercept at octave j. Here we suppose that, for a ﬁxed
mother wavelet, the last term, C(α, ψ0), on the right hand side of Equation 1, is
dynamically unimportant. The change of ψ0, however, can inﬂuence the estimation
of scaling parameters. We use the Daubechies family of wavelets with changing
number of vanishing moments M . It does slightly inﬂuence our estimations and
the corresponding uncertainities represent a source of error.

Figure 2 shows an exemple of LD. The magnetometer noise is depicted by a
single curve, since we suppose, it is time-independent (see later). It exhibits signa-
tures typical for noise: αn ∼ 0 at large scales (j > 7) together with αn ∼ 0.3 ∈
(0, 1) at small scales (j < 6) [Abry et al. 2000]. For the sake of clarity the straight
lines corresponding to the scalings of both signal and compound process are de-
picted only at the left hand side of Figure 2 (j ≤ 5). The amplitude of the model
fractal signal was changed from values larger to values smaller than the amplitude
of the noise. The resulting parallel, shifted straight lines are representations of self-
similar signals in LD. The compound process exhibits similar characteristics as the
signal itself, while SNR is large. If SNR becomes ≤ 1, the compound process
approaches the straight line of noise at the scales j1 and j2.

′

′

′

′

′

f sn(t) represents a time dependent SNR.

Time-independent noise has averages (hcf n(j)i, hαn(j1, j2)i) ∼ const. Our
goal is to estimate the time evolution of the scaling exponent of the signal αs(j1, j2, t)
for known (cf n, αn) and (c
f sn(j, t) ≡
cf sn(j, t)/hcf n(j)i ensures that for weak signals, cf sn ∼ cf n (noise dominates),
′
and c

f sn(j, t), αsn(j1, j2, t)). The normalization c

f sn ∼ 1. Actually, c
Now we can use the introduced notation and the embedding technique to study
the dependence of αsn on c
f sn within a window W . Figure 3 shows the relation-
ship αsn(c
f sn) (correction curves), which was obtained experimentally by embed-
ding two model fractal signals with αmod = 1.5 and 2, gradually decreasing their
amplitudes (decreasing SNR), into quiet time BX measured by s/c 4 on Septem-
ber 7, 2001. For both model fractals the correction curves were computed at the
octaves j = 0 and j = 4, separately. Independent of j, αsn approaches asymptot-
ically αs ≡ αmod for large enough c
f sn means that SNR is large and
the compound signal exhibits the same scaling as the fractal model signal (left-top
′
straight lines in Figure 2). If c
f sn ∼ 1, the noise dominates, and αsn ∼ αn (scaling
of the compound process between yj = −5 and −10 in Figure 2). Between the
′
two limits (c
f sn ∼ 1), however, the course of the curves for j = 0
and j = 4 in Figure 3 is rather different. Because of the complex behaviour of the
compound process at j = 0 near the noise level (Figure 2), αsn cannot be deter-

f sn → ∞ and c

f sn. Large c

′

′

′

7

′

mined from the αsn(c
is unambiguous at the scale j = 4, we will consider the αsn(c
octave throughout the paper.

f sn) relationship unequivocally (Figure 3). Since the relation
f sn) curves at that

′

The accuracy of the wavelet method estimation of α can be controlled by
′
the power of intercept of the compound process c
f sn. Figure 3 shows that for
′
f sn << 100 we ﬁnd αsn < αmod, therefore αs is underestimated. The αsn(c
c
f sn)
relationship allows us to introduce corrections and estimate the effective asymp-
totic value of αs.

′

′

We note that cf sn(t) and αsn(j1, j2, t) are computed directly from magnetic
ﬁeld time series by using a sliding window W. The key assumption of the method
is time-independence of the scaling parameters for noise. Obviously, this condition
is not strictly fulﬁlled. Therefore, it is important to examine the time-independence
of hcf ni and hαni. The parameters c
f sn(t) and αsn(j1, j2, t) computed from mag-
netic ﬁeld BX component (67 Hz resolution) observed by the Cluster spacecraft
s/c 1 and 3 during the quiet interval 1700-2100 UT on September 7, 2001, are de-
picted in Figure 4. Here W = 68 s and S = 4 s. During the chosen interval the
spacecraft are traversing the neutral sheet from the northern (BX ∼ 18 nT) to the
southern hemisphere (BX ∼ −15 nT) (Figure 4a) and the plasma ﬂow velocity
does not exceed 50 km/s (not shown). Independent of the location of the Cluster
spacecraft and despite the occurence of low frequency wave motion after 1830 UT,
f sn(t) exhibit stationary behaviour, ﬂuctuating around the
both αsn(j1, j2, t) and c
mean values (Figure 4 b,c). The estimated αsn can be related to the magnetome-
ter noise αn because αsn ∼ αn ∈ (0, 1) and c
f sn ∼ cf n ∼ 1 (see also Figure
3). Noteworthy is that αn and cf n are slightly different for each s/c (Figure 4b,c)
and also vary with the magnetic ﬁeld components. The examination of several
quiet time magnetic ﬁeld time series and time series obtained from ground-based
calibration measurements shows that in average (including the four s/c and each
magnetic component) hαni = 0.5 ± 0.25 and hcf ni = 0.004 ± 0.003. Similar
values were obtained using 128 Hz quiet time magnetic ﬁeld measurements from
the Equator-S spacecraft (not shown). For discrimination between αs (which is
expected to be > 1) and αn, this accuracy seems to be sufﬁcient. It is expedient
in concrete case studies, however, to compute the correction curves (Figure 3) for
each spacecraft and component separately.

′

′

Examining αsn and c

f sn estimated for BX from s/c 2 on September 7, 2001,
we found short, but signiﬁcant deviations from hαni and hcf ni, respectively (not
shown). The deviations occurred due to a 5 min long data gap on s/c 2, which
led to spurious scalings because of the step function-like irregularity in BX, in ac-
cordance with the ﬁndings of Katsev and L’Heureux [2003]. This type of spurious
estimations can easily be avoided by interpolation. Another type of jump-related

′

8

spurious estimation might occur near the plasma sheet boundary layer (PSBL) or
owing to its motion. The PSBL cannot be identiﬁed from the magnetic ﬁeld mea-
surements alone[Eastman et al., 1984]. Therefore, non-physical scalings due to
magnetic jumps near PSBL are not expected.

In summary, using the wavelet approach, we can estimate directly from a time
′
series the time evolution of the parameters of a compound process (c
f sn(t), αsn(t)).
The time independent parameters of noise (hcf ni, hαni) can be obtained from quiet
′
time measurements. When c
f sn(t) is small, the effective asymptotic value of αs(t)
for a self-similar signal can be obtained from a correction curve taking a limit
′
f sn(t) → ∞. Spurious estimations during quiescent periods can be avoided by
c
careful quality checks of the magnetic data.

3 Magnetic ﬂuctuations in the plasma sheet

In order to introduce the wavelet method and the small-scale corrections to the esti-
mated α, quiet time magnetic measurements together with artiﬁcial fractal signals
were used in the previous section. Since our goal is to investigate BBF and non-
BBF related magnetic turbulence, here we choose a ∼ 4h interval during which the
Cluster spacecraft observed BBF and non-BBF intervals successively.

3.1 Event overview and small-scale corrections

In what follows, we analyse burst mode (67 Hz) magnetic data from the Cluster
ﬂuxgate magnetometer (FGM) [Balogh et al., 2001] during the interval 0110-0500
UT on August 27, 2001, when the Cluster spacecraft were near the ZGSM = 0
plane, in the postmidnight magnetotail (XGSM ∼ −19RE ). The magnetic data are
compared with the spin-resolution ( 4 s) velocity data from the Cluster ion spec-
trometry (CIS/CODIF) experiment [R´eme et al., 2001]. Figure 5a shows the BX
component from s/c 1,3. The variation of the scaling index for two different ranges
of scales is depicted in Figure 5b. In addition to (j1, j2) = (2, 4), corresponding
time scale ∼ 0.08 − 0.33 s), we also consider the octaves: (j3, j4) = (5, 8), corre-
sponding time scale ∼ 0.7 − 5 s . Hereinafter we will refer to those scales as small
scales (j1, j2) and large scales (j3, j4), respectively. Obviously, j1 is limited by
the resolution and j4 by the chosen window W . The average noise levels hαni for
s/c 1,3 and BX magnetic components are also indicated by black and gray dashed
lines in Figure 5b. The large-scale scaling exponents are anticorrelated with the
magnitude of BX simply because of the preferential occurrence of perpendicular
ﬂows closer to the neutral sheet (BX → 0 nT). Figure 5c shows the variation of
′
the normalized power of the intercepts c
f sn computed for the small scales (j1, j2).

9

′
Its time evolution exhibits periods of c
f sn ∼ 1 intermittently interrupted by bursts
′
of activity when c
f sn > 1. The former corresponds to the noise level, indicating
that there is no signiﬁcant energy ﬂow from large scales into small scales. The
′
increased values of c
f sn are associated with high frequency (small-scale) ﬂuctua-
tions of BX (Figure 5a), increased αsn (relative to hαni, Figure 5b) and are well
correlated with the appearance of bursty perpendicular ﬂows (Figure 5d). The large
scales (j3, j4) are not corrupted signiﬁcantly by magnetometer noise.

The effect of spurious estimations due to spikes, random pulses, or other types
of nonstationary signals can be addressed for BBF-associated periods, too. The
use of Daubechies analysing wavelets with vanishing moments ensures that part of
the nonstationarities represented by polynomial trends are cancelled. Spurious es-
timates of the scaling index might appear because of discontinuities which separate
earthward moving plasma structures from the background plasma ahead of them
[Sergeev et al., 1996]. In fact, before the appearance of the rapid perpendicular
ﬂow, e.g., at 0131 UT (Figure 5d), there is a large jump in the large scale scaling
index from αsn(j3, j4) ∼ 1 to 2.5. This jump and all similar jumps in our data can
partly be explained by the presence of a discontinuity in front of the plasma ﬂow
[Nakamura et al., 2002]. On the other side, this short effect cannot be separated
from the non-physical effect of the sliding window, explained above (Figure 1).

After 0130 UT, αsn(j3, j4) ﬂuctuates around ∼ 2.5 for more than 30 min (Fig-
ure 5b). We believe, that all estimations exhibiting small ﬂuctuations around a
mean value for equal or longer time than the sliding window length (∼ 1 min),
belong to a BBF-associated scaling process in our case. Therefore these estima-
tions are not spurious. The same is true for non-BBF associated processes. Also,
αsn is largely coherent between s/c1 and 3. Short living pulses are supposed to
be random, however. Moreover, some results of multifractal approach [V¨or¨os et
al., 2003] and of wavelet based structure function approach [V¨or¨os et al., 2004]
also support the idea that BBF-associated magnetic ﬂuctuations correspond to a
physical scaling process.

′
During the BBF-associated periods one ﬁnds that 1 < c

f sn < 100, therefore
αs is underestimated (see Figure 3). Since self-similarity is deﬁned for 1 < α < 3,
we used 4 model fractal time series with αmod = 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3 and quiet time
BX magnetic data from s/c 1,3 to compute the αsn(c
f sn) correction curves at the
octave j=4 (Figure 6). These curves can be used to introduce corrections and to
estimate the effective value of αs. Like in Figure 3 there are two limiting cases.
′
The condition c
f sn → ∞ leads to αsn = αs = αmod, with slower approach to
a model value for αsn > 2. The limit c
f sn → 1 leads to αsn = hαni. The
error bars depicted at the left-top corner of Figure 6 arise from the uncertainty
of the estimation of αsn in a logscale diagram using Daubechies wavelets with

′

′

10

varying number of vanishing moments (M = 3−7) and from the uncertainty of the
magnetometer noise level estimation within the chosen window W. The depicted
error bars represent only the uncertainity of the determination of the correction
curves, and not the uncertainity of the estimations of αs(j1, j2). The estimation
′
error of the small scale α changes from ±0.2 to ±0.5 as c
f sn → 1. The errors can
be estimated by adding more correction curves to Figure 6 (not shown). It is more
′
difﬁcult to distinguish an α as c
f sn decreases. We present two examples how to
read the measured αsn(j1, j2) using both Figures 5 and 6. The two dashed lines
′
A and B in Figure 6 correspond to two pairs of values (c
f sn, αsn) in Figure 5b,c
before 0330 UT. The gray lines and the letter A belong to s/c 3, while the black lines
and the letter B belong to s/c 1. In both examples the corrected effective value of
small-scale αs(j1, j2) is close to the correction curves which asymptotically reach
the horizonthal line αmod = 3 in Figure 6. After correction, all BBF associated
peaks of αs(j1, j2) > hαni and c
f sn > 1 show a similar feature (not shown), that is
in average, αs(j1, j2) = 2.5± 0.5 ∼ αs(j3, j4) ∼ 2.5. Therefore, after introducing
corrections, the BBF-associated small-scale and large-scale scaling indices cannot
be discriminated. We note that the peaks at ∼ 0240 UT from s/c 1 (Figure 5b,c)
appear due to the data gaps.

′

3.2 Statistical evaluation of BBF and non-BBF associated multi-scale

magnetic ﬂuctuations

During non-BBF periods αs(j3, j4) drops to the noise level when s/c 1,3 are in the
lobe (BX ∼ 25nT) or ﬂuctuates between 1 and 2.5 when s/c 1,3 are in the plasma
sheet (Figure 5a,b). Among others, the time evolution of the scaling indices can be
inﬂuenced by the location of the Cluster spacecraft, the duration and the magnitude
of perpendicular ﬂows and by the motion of the plasma sheet (e.g., thickening or
thinning). Despite the complexity, we can separate BBF and non-BBF associated
magnetic ﬂuctuations, based on two different conditions.

′

′

Condition 1 is based only on small-scale scaling parameters having for BBF-
associated ﬂuctuations on both s/c 1,3, αsn(j1, j2) > hαni + 0.3 and c
f sn > 2 and
non-BBF-associated ﬂuctuations αsn(j1, j2) < hαni + 0.1 and c
f sn < 1.1. It sim-
ply means that we relate the observed small-scale magnetic ﬂuctuation-dissipation
activity to the large-scale magnetic ﬂuctuations. We suppose that on the basis of
scaling characteristics and power of small-scale magnetic ﬂuctuations we can iden-
tify BBF and non-BBF associated intervals without actual examination of velocity
data. For testing this supposition we use only the parameters computed from the
magnetic ﬁeld BX component measured by s/c 1,3 (Figure 5a-c). So we select
only those values of αs(j3, j4) from the whole period (Figure 5b) which meet the
above conditions for αsn(j1, j2) and c
f sn. The conditional statistics performed on

′

11

the large-scale scaling index gives for both s/c 1,3 αs,BBF (j3, j4) = 2.57 ± 0.05
for BBF-associated and αs,non−BBF (j3, j4) = 1.6 ± 0.4 for non-BBF associated
case.

Now we consider also the velocity data. Condition 2 is based on threshold-
ing of perpendicular ﬂows, taking V⊥,xy ≡ qV 2
⊥,y > 300 km/s for rapid
ﬂows and V⊥,xy < 100 km/s for non-BBF associated remnant ﬂows. Since the
velocity data is available with a time resolution of ∼ 4s and the time step between
neighbouring sliding windows is S = 4s, after adjusting times, αs(j3, j4) can be
compared to V⊥,xy. It gives αs,BBF (j3, j4) = 2.6± 0.1 and αs,non−BBF (j3, j4) =
1.7 ± 0.4. All the estimates represent mean values with standard deviations.

⊥,x + V 2

Both conditions give the same statistical results on large-scale scaling index.
From the conditions and the corresponding values of large-scale indices follows
that, relative to non-BBF associated intervals, BBF-associated intervals exhibit
both large-scale and small-scale spectral steepening and an unambiguous increase
of small-scale power of magnetic ﬂuctuations. Therefore we propose that small-
scale magnetic ﬂuctuations are energized by BBF’s. Then the spectral transfer of
energy to small scales is transient, which makes the position of the spectral break at
the expected turnover frequency fc2 uncertain. Our results suggest that whenever
BBF-associated magnetic ﬂuctuations occur, the break at ∼ fc2 disappears when
the small-scale corrections are introduced. Otherwise the energy ﬂow to small
scales ends at fc2, and in this case, at frequencies f > fc2, the measured scaling
parameters belong to the noise. The examination of the LD’s at various ranges of
scales shows that fc2 may correspond to the approximate Fourier frequencies of
1 − 3 Hz (between octaves j2 and j3).

The same analysis of the BY and BZ magnetic ﬁeld components shows that
the observed scaling features remain similar to the BX case. The small-scale
BY and BZ ﬂuctuations are also associated mainly with V⊥,xy. After introduc-
ing corrections as above, αs(j1, j2) ∼ αs(j3, j4) ∼ 2.6 for BBF and ∼ 1.7 for
remnant ﬂows, the errors in the same range as above, in conditional statistics of
BX . A dissimilarity appears in BZ small-scale ﬂuctuations (Figure 7). The small-
′
scale power c
f sn of BZ ﬂuctuations (Figure 7c) during BBF-associated intervals
is several times larger than that of BX (Figure 5c) or BY (not shown). Usually
′
f sn(BX) over time scales less than 1 s. This is a
c
f sn(BZ ) >> c
signature of anisotropy and we will examine it deeper.

f sn(BY ) > c

′

′

3.3 Anisotropy of magnetic ﬂuctuations

The small-scale powers of the magnetic ﬁeld components from s/c 1,3, computed
at j = 4 (∼ 0.33 s), are compared in log-log scatterplots in Figure 8. The
comparison of BX and BY components shows a balanced scatter around the line

12

′

′
f sn(BY ) (Figure 8a), though the increased population of points un-
c
f sn(BX ) = c
′
der that line between 2 < c
f sn(BY ) < 10, indicates a weak anisotropy. The scat-
′
′
terplot of c
f sn(BX ) and c
f sn(BZ ) shows strong anisotropy (Figure 8b) for values
′
f sn > 1.5. We also calculated the scatterplots at scale j = 6 (∼ 1.3 s) (Figures 9
c
a, b), which, after comparison with Figure 8b, indicate scale dependent anisotropy.
′
The anisotropy increases towards small scales. Since c
f sn(BX ) and
′
f sn(BX) in Figure 8, the small-scale magnetic ﬂuctuations are gen-
c
f sn(BY ) ≥ c
erated due to multi-scale transfer of energy preferentially in the GSM Z or Z − Y
direction. The powers at the scale j = 6 show more isotropy, even if the scatterplot
′
of c
f sn(BY ) (Figure 9a) indicates that, with increasing scales the
ﬁeld-aligned power of ﬂuctuations can also increase.

f sn(BX) versus c

f sn(BZ ) ≫ c

′

′

′

The points depicted by ’+’ signs in Figures 8b and 9b belong to the time period
between 0400 and 0410 UT. During this interval a magnetic reconnection event
in the central plasma sheet at 0401 UT was identiﬁed by Baker et al.
[2002].
The corresponding ’+’ points in Figures 8b and 9b, therefore, are associated with
the magnetic reconnection or/and the tailward ﬂow, leading to a strong anisotropy
which does not exhibit the same increase towards the small scales as it is observed
for the other points. Therefore the underlying mechanism which drives these ﬂuc-
tuations should be different from the previous scale dependent one. Since only this
reconnection-related short interval shows different anisotropy characteristics, we
cannot say more about the nature of the underlying physical processes. Answering
the question about reconnection or tailward ﬂow associated anisotropy character-
istics certainly requires a thorough statistical analysis. We can speculate, however,
that the observed scale-independent anisotropy features might be related to the spe-
ciﬁc current systems or magnetic ﬁeld topology near the reconnection site [Nagai
et al., 2003; Runov et al., 2003].

The small-scale αsn(j1, j2) for individual components are compared in scatter-
plots in Figure 10 a,b. Again, αsn(j1, j2, BZ ) seems to be different from αsn(j1, j2, BX)
and αsn(j1, j2, BY ). This anisotropy can weaken, however, because non-corrected
values are depicted and the corrections are larger for BX, BY than for BZ (Figures
5c and 7c).

The anisotropy can also be considered in the coordinate system of the local
mean ﬁeld. We computed the mean total magnetic ﬁeld vector through low-pass
ﬁltering the GSM magnetic ﬁeld components and using standard vector operations
transformed the burst mode magnetic data into mean-ﬁeld perpendicular (B⊥) and
mean-ﬁeld aligned (Bk) components. Figures 11a, b show B⊥ and Bk, respec-
tively, computed for averaged hBi at the time-scale 1.3 s. Figures 11 c, d show the
′
perpendicular c
f sn(Bk) powers, computed at the scales
j = 3 (∼ 0.33 s) and j = 6 (∼ 1.3 s). As above for the GSM X, Y, Z components

f sn(B⊥) and the parallel c

′

13

(Figures 8-10), the anisotropy is scale dependent and the small-scale power pref-
erentially develops in directions perpendicular to the mean magnetic ﬁeld. Again,
the short interval after 0400 UT shows a different kind of reconnection or tailward
ﬂow related behavior. The large-scale (j = 6) perpendicular power remains larger
than the parallel power only during this interval. The similarity of the statistical
results obtained in GSM and mean ﬁeld coordinate systems can be explained as
follows: for open, stretched magnetic ﬁeld lines Bk resembles BX and B⊥ is sim-
ilar to qB2
Y (where BY and BZ are the GSM components of the magnetic
ﬁeld). Dissimilarities can appear close to the neutral sheet when BX → 0.

Z + B2

3.4 Two-point conditional statistics

Let us investigate now the effect of the transitory character of the ﬂuctuations or
their drivers. We compare magnetic ﬂuctuations observed at the same time on two
spatially separated Cluster spacecraft. Figure 12 compares the parallel αsk(j3, j4)
and the perpendicular αs⊥(j3, j4) scaling indices from s/c 1 and 3. The scatterplot
in (Figure 12a) involves all the magnetic data from s/c 1,3 and forms an irregu-
lar cloud of points. We applied two-point conditional statistics to ﬁnd BBF- and
non-BBF-associated points in that cloud. We used the same small-scale condi-
tion 1 combined with the velocity condition 2 as above (both should give the same
results), and required the fulﬁlment jointly at s/c 1,3 at the same time. In conse-
quence of the joint conditional requirement the amount of data points in (Figures
12 b,c) is signiﬁcantly reduced. It can be explained partially by a relatively high
level of ﬂuctuations of the considered parameters. For example, the perpendicular
velocity wildly ﬂuctuates during the rapid ﬂows (e.g. Figure 5d) which makes the
comparison with the small-scale parameters more difﬁcult. The omission of the
velocity condition, however, does not add many more points to the Figures 12 b,c.
Therefore, we suppose that fewer joint data points are found by two-point condi-
tional statistics because the two spacecraft are often in physically different regions,
exhibiting different scaling features. It indicates that the magnetic ﬂuctuations and
their sources are transient and limited in space.

The statistical evaluation of the BBF-associated data points in Figure 12b gives
averages αs⊥(j3, j4) = 2.4 ± 0.3 and αsk(j3, j4) = 2.7 ± 0.3 which is consistent
with the previous estimations using the components BX,Y,Z (dashed lines). The
’+’ signs in Figure 12b represent measurements during the reconnection event,
discussed above.

Figure 12c shows the non-BBF-associated data points. Here the ’+’ signs rep-
resent measurements near the plasma sheet boundary layer or in the lobe (BX ≥ 20
nT) while the remaining points are inside of the plasma sheet (BX ≤ 15 nT). The
statistical evaluation of the latter gives αs⊥(j3, j4) = 1.7 ± 0.3 and αsk(j3, j4) =

14

1.7 ± 0.4, which is again consistent with the previous estimations using the com-
ponents BX,Y,Z (dashed lines).

Let us summarize the main results at the end of this section. We used a wavelet
method to study the small-scale properties of magnetic ﬂuctuations. We found that
the energy transfer to the smallest available time scales is associated with BBFs.
The scaling properties of those ﬂuctuations are recoverable from burst mode mag-
netic ﬂuctuations by using an embedding technique. Small-scale ﬂuctuations show
an increased anisotropy relative to the mean magnetic ﬁeld. The anisotropy is ob-
served mainly in the normalized power of the magnetic ﬂuctuations, while it is less
evident in the spectral scaling index. The transient character of the physical pro-
cesses or driving mechanisms makes a robust estimation of the basic characteristics
of magnetic turbulence difﬁcult in the plasma sheet.

4 Discussion

A complete characterization of MHD turbulence requires not only a statistical de-
scription of the velocity ﬁeld, but also a statistical study of other measurable quan-
tities, e.g. magnetic ﬁeld, density or temperature ﬂuctuations. In this paper we
analysed a 4 hour long period of high quality burst mode (67 Hz) magnetic ﬁeld
data, which allowed an immersion to the scale or frequency ranges which are not
available in velocity measurements. We considered time scales from ∼ 0.08 to 5
s, which, assuming 500 km/s velocities during rapid ﬂows, correspond roughly to
spatial scales of 40 − 2500 km in the ﬂow direction. The average velocities are
smaller than 500 km/s, so the largest scale can be signiﬁcantly smaller than 2500
km. Also, both the velocities and the estimated spatial scales are smaller in other
than the maximum velocity direction or during non-BBF intervals. Since the av-
erage separation of the Cluster spacecraft was ∼ 1500 km during 2001, we used
principally a single-point technique to analyse scaling characteristics of magnetic
ﬂuctuations from s/c 1,3. The usual multi-point statistical approach, commonly
available in laboratory measurements, is not available in the plasma sheet at those
scales and the conversion of the scaling characteristics of magnetic ﬂuctuations in
time into scaling laws in wavenumber space is possible only through additional hy-
potheses. The Taylor hypothesis assumes that the conversion is possible if the spa-
tial ﬂuctuations on a given scale pass over the spacecraft faster than they typically
evolve in time. In the plasma sheet this can be the case during fast BBF’s [Hor-
bury, 2000] or during strong global bulk ﬂows which may occur after a dynamical
reconﬁguration of the magnetotail [Borovsky and Funsten, 2003]. Otherwise, the
random velocities of the ﬂuctuations advect spatial structures over the spacecraft.
A more realistic approach is the so-called random sweeping model (RSM), which

15

takes the basically random velocities of the ﬂow into account and allows to obtain
statistical information on spatial structures.

Borovsky et al. [1997] have used RSM and found that the spectral index, de-
scribing the scaling properties of magnetic ﬂuctuations in the plasma sheet at the
frequency range of 1/4 − 1/150 s−1, is the same in both frequency or wavenumber
representations, that is, k−α ∼ f −α. The ’large-scale’ (∼ 1/0.3−1/5 s−1) used in
this paper partially overlaps with the scales of Borovsky et al. [1997] paper. Note
that, RSM is supposed to work when the large scale velocity ﬁeld drives the small-
scale ﬂuctuations. This seems to be valid in our case due to the high correlation
between BBFs and small-scale magnetic ﬂuctuations. Therefore we suppose, that
at least at the scales (j3, j4) the equality k−α ∼ f −α holds also in our case and the
estimated values of α can be compared with the power-law dependence of power
spectra in MHD turbulence. We have to underline, however, that RSM is only a
model and its validity should be proven comparing real spatial and time structures.
In absence of such comparisons the interpretation of scaling indices in terms of
MHD turbulence remains disputable. At the same time, we consider the observed
anisotropy effects to be more reliable. Let us start the comparison of observations
and theory, therefore, with the evaluation of the inﬂuence of a local mean magnetic
ﬁeld on anisotropy of ﬂuctuations.

The clear signs of the interaction of rapid ﬂows with the magnetic ﬁeld in
the plasma sheet are the BBF-associated dipolarization of ﬁeld lines (increase of
BZ ) and the breaking and diversion of the ﬂows around the dipolar inner magne-
tosphere. The presence of a mean magnetic ﬁeld in the plasma sheet cannot be
eliminated by coordinate transformations. This is in contrast with hydrodynamic
turbulence, where the anisotropy usually ceases in the coordinate system of the av-
erage ﬂow [Biskamp, 2003]. The classical Kolmogorov theory for hydrodynamic
and the Iroshnikov-Kraichnan theory for MHD turbulence assume isotropy of the
inertial-range energy cascade in Fourier space, exhibiting scalings E(k) ∼ k−5/3
and ∼ k−3/2, respectively (E(k) is the amount of energy between wavenumbers k
and k + dk divided by dk).

Shebalin et al.

[1983] studied incompressible MHD anisotropies arising in
wave vector space in the presence of a mean magnetic ﬁeld. They studied the in-
teraction of opposite-travelling wave packets and found that, in wave vector space,
those interactions produce modes with wavevectors preferentially perpendicular to
the mean magnetic ﬁeld. Goldreich and Sridhar [1995] proposed a balance condi-
tion between parallel and perpendicular modes (parallel propagating Alfv´en waves
and perpendicular eddy motions). On this basis it was shown that a scale dependent
2/3
⊥ , where l ∼ 1/k is the char-
anisotropy appears, namely kk ∼ k
acteristic scale of eddies in parallel and perpendicular directions), which means

2/3
⊥ (or lk ∼ l

16

that the anisotropy is increasing with decreasing scale. Moreover, it was shown
that the perpendicular ﬂuctuations exhibit Kolmogorov scaling E(k) ∼ k−5/3. In
other words, the mean magnetic ﬁeld does not inﬂuence the perpendicular hydrody-
namic cascade formed by eddies. The coupled parallel ﬂuctuations are essentially
produced by waves. In the case of compressible MHD the Alfv´en modes follow
the anisotropic Goldreich-Sridhar scaling while fast modes exhibit isotropy [Cho
et al., 2003].

The scale dependent anisotropy proposed by Goldreich and Sridhar [1995]
would represent a way the relative importance of Alfv´en waves and eddy motions
might be recognized. Matthaeus et al. [1998] tested this assumption using Fourier
spectral methods for MHD equations in a periodic cube. They have found, that
for incompressible, weakly compressible and driven MHD turbulence, anisotropy
scales linearly with the ratio of ﬂuctuating to total magnetic ﬁeld strength. Their re-
sults therefore seem to be inconsistent with the Goldreich-Sridhar model. Cho and
Vishniac [2000] argued, however, that the Fourier technique used by Matthaeus
et el. [1998] smooths out the true scaling relation for anisotropy. It happens be-
cause the anisotropic eddies or wave packets are elongated along magnetic ﬁeld
lines. When they follow the large-scale variation of the magnetic ﬁeld, they point
in different directions. Consequently, the information about the eddy shapes is lost
when a global transformation such as the Fourier transformation is applied. Cho
and Vishniac [2000] showed that, when the eddy shapes relative to the local mag-
netic ﬁeld are analysed in real space, the Goldreich-Sridhar scaling is recovered.

For what follows, it is important that not only the velocity statistics exhibits the
Goldreich-Sridhar anisotropy, but also the magnetic ﬁeld statistics [Cho and Lazar-
ian, 2004]. If we suppose similarity between frequency and wavenumber scalings,
then our results suggest that the observed magnetic turbulence in the plasma sheet
also resembles the anisotropy of Goldreich-Sridhar model. The small-scale mag-
netic turbulence is stronger in perpendicular directions. It is mainly visible when
the relative powers of ﬂuctuations are compared (Figures 8 and 11). Then, ex-
cept for the short interval when magnetic reconnection and tailward ﬂow occurs,
the anisotropy is scale dependent (Figures 8,9). The applied wavelet technique
ensures that the scale-dependent anisotropy is not smoothed out. Namely, over
each considered scale range the local trend (local mean ﬁeld) is cancelled by the
analysing wavelet having a proper number of vanishing moments. The observed
anisotropy seems to indicate that the small-scale eddy turbulence is stronger than
the Alfv´enic turbulence. This is in agreement with the results of Borovsky and
Funsten [2003], who claimed that turbulence of eddies rather than the turbulence
of Alfv´en waves prevails in the plasma sheet. Their observation is based on three
different arguments: (a.) Alfv´en wave turbulence produces scale sizes that are
larger than the vertical size of the plasma sheet, whereas eddy turbulence does not;

17

(b.) the autocorrelation length of the turbulence is typical for eddy turbulence; (c.)
the low Alfv´en ratio (ratio of the kinetic energy of the ﬂow to the energy den-
sity of magnetic ﬂuctuations) indicates 2D eddy structures. All these results might
yield a picture of the Goldreich-Sridhar model and quasi-2D MHD turbulence. The
quasi-2D MHD picture is supported by numerical studies of high Reynolds number
turbulence which predict that the spatial distribution of the turbulent ﬁelds is more
intermittent in 2D than in 3D MHD ([Biskamp, 2003], and references therein).
Since BBF-associated magnetic ﬂuctuations are stretched down to the small scales
(j1, j2) (Figures 5,7), where the anisotropy becomes stronger and turbulence might
be essentially 2D, an increase of the small scale intermittence can be expected,
too. Indeed, V¨or¨os et al. [2003] have shown that small scale magnetic ﬁeld in-
termittence increases during BBF-associated intervals. Here, some more words of
caution have to be added. First of all, the importance of multi-scale dynamics in
turbulence has to be underlined. Since the Goldreich-Sridhar anisotropy is scale
dependent, at sufﬁciently large scales this kind of anisotropy can disappear, and
even Alfv´enic turbulence can become stronger. Figures 9a and 11 d show that the
large scale power of parallel (BX or Bk ) ﬂuctuations can be equal with or slightly
overpower the perpendicular components (BY , BZ or B⊥). The development of
anisotropy and 2D structures can also be dependent on the actual Reynolds num-
bers, helicity, Alfv´en ratio [Oughton et al., 1994] or be inﬂuenced by the presence
of transverse pressure-balanced magnetic structures or transverse velocity shears
[Ghosh et al., 1998]. In this respect it is important to note that in our case the
mean ﬁeld direction is constantly changing due to the time-varying contribution of
magnetic ﬁeld components to the total magnetic ﬁeld (compare Figures 5,7). Nev-
ertheless, the small scale power of the BZ (vertical) ﬂuctuations is the strongest
all the time. The vertical GSM direction, however, is not always the perpendicular
direction to the mean magnetic ﬁeld. Therefore the effect of the mean ﬁeld, even if
it represents a robust way for the development of scale-dependent anisotropy has
to be complemented by other mechanisms, which can produce strong ﬂuctuations
in perpendicular directions. For example the above mentioned transverse mag-
netic structures or velocity shears can also redirect the initially parallel-propagating
Alfv´en waves to highly oblique waves [Ghosh et al., 1998]. In the plasma sheet,
BBF-associated dipolarization, increase of BZ (or BY when the current sheet is
tilted), can represent such a transverse magnetic structure. Also, the relative thin-
ness of the plasma sheet in the z direction and the associated boundary effects can
produce anisotropy statistics in plasma sheet turbulence [V¨or¨os et al., 2004]. To
evaluate the possible contributions of these mechanisms a wider statistical study is
required, however.

Let us consider now the estimated scaling indices α in comparison with the pre-
dictions of Goldreich-Sridhar model. When the anisotropy effects are neglected,

18

the conditional statistics explained above gives for BBF-associated ﬂows the large
scale index αs(j3, j4) = 2.6 ± 0.1, independent on magnetic ﬁeld component. It is
deﬁnitely different from the Goldreich-Sridhar model which predicts Kolmogorov
scaling with α ∼ 5/3 in perpendicular direction. We could advance an argu-
ment that the Goldreich-Sridhar anisotropy is weaker at the scales (j3, j4), but the
′
small-scale αs(j1, j2) reaches the same range of values when the estimated c
f sn
is large enough and allows to introduce corrections. αs(j3, j4) decreases and ap-
proaches the Kolmogorov scaling during non-ﬂow or post-BBF intervals, when
the ratio of the large-scale mean ﬁeld to the magnetic ﬂuctuations becomes larger
and the conditions for the development of Goldreich-Sridhar anisotropy are more
In this case the estimated αs(j3, j4) = 1.7 ± 0.4. The large error
favourable.
appears because the post-ﬂow intervals usually correspond to transient, probably
decaying turbulence. This also causes that one cannot distinguish between the
Kolmogorov and Iroshnikov-Kraichnan models. The high value of αs(j3, j4) dur-
ing BBF-associated intervals does not necessarily mean that the Goldreich-Sridhar
phenomenology fails. Magnetic ﬂuctuations are subject to an additional constraint
which acts during rapid ﬂows only. The limited vertical dimension of the ﬂow
channel or the plasma sheet thickness can modify the actual value of α increas-
ing it to α ∼ 3, which is a limiting value for fully developed 2D hydrodynamic
turbulence [Volwerk et al., 2003, 2004, V¨or¨os et al., 2004].

5 Conclusions

The work described here demonstrates the ability of the windowed wavelet estima-
tor for obtaining reliable estimates of the effective second-order scaling parameters
(cf , α) even in situations when the noise level is relatively high. Magnetic turbu-
lence seems to be steady only during relatively short time intervals (a few minutes),
otherwise α exhibits nonstationary behaviour at all scales, which can partially ex-
plain the large scatter of previously estimated values of scaling indices. As we
observed magnetic turbulence associated with bursty ﬂows and post-ﬂow intervals,
our ﬁndings agree well with previous knowledge that the ﬂow of plasma in the
Earth’s magnetotail is intrinsically unsteady [e.g. Baumjohann, 2002]. Joint con-
ditional statistics from two Cluster spacecraft s/c 1,3 shows a high level of spatial
intermittence which is related to the differing scaling features in physically differ-
ent regions in the plasma sheet.

The examination of BBF-associated high frequency magnetic ﬂuctuations within
a sliding window showed that the small-scale (j1, j2) and large-scale (j3, j4) scal-
ing indices are equal within error estimations. Volwerk et al. [2003, 2004] have
obtained similar scaling exponents for the time scales 1-13 s. It means that the

19

spectral break predicted by Milovanov et al. [2001] for the scales < 1/fc2 ∼ 10 s
is absent and, using the notation from the Introduction, α2 ∼ α3. During non-BBF
periods the small-scale α3 ∼ α(j1, j2) aproaches the noise level of the magnetome-
ter, which introduces an artiﬁcial break at the scale ∼ 1 s. Obviously, it cannot be
interpreted in terms of a new scaling regime describing a scale dependent physics.
We found that, for the scales analysed, the conversion of the observed scalings
from frequency to wavenumber representation is model dependent and cannot be
veriﬁed by direct comparison of spatial and temporal variations. It makes the in-
terpretation of the results in terms of MHD phenomenology more difﬁcult. The
anisotropy features of magnetic ﬂuctuations provided additional tools to facilitate
the interpretation of the results. The anisotropy is better visible in the normalized
power of ﬂuctuations cf than in the scaling index α. It was shown that large-scale
magnetic ﬂuctuations are more isotropic while small-scale magnetic turbulence
evolves in direction perpendicular to the mean magnetic ﬁeld, usually in the GSM
Z or Z − Y direction, and the observed anisotropy is scale dependent. It partly
agrees with the predictions of Goldreich-Sridhar model of MHD turbulence, but
the additional effect of transverse magnetic structures or velocity shears cannot be
excluded. On this basis we think the turbulence in the plasma sheet is a mixture of
Alfv´enic wavy turbulence and of eddy 2D turbulence. The latter becomes stronger
and more intermittent with decreasing scales.

The occurrence of reconnection and/or rapid tailward ﬂow can increase the
level of anisotropy. The build-up of a ﬂow channel seems to modify the actual
value of the scaling indices, indicating the presence of additional constraints on
Alfv´enic and/or eddy turbulence. These are observations which should be veriﬁed
on larger data sets.

Acknowledgement

The authors acknowledge the use of the code for the estimation of scaling expo-
nents developed by P. Abry and his colleagues.

References

[1] Abry, P., P. Gonc¸alv´es, and P. Flandrin, Wavelets, spectrum estimation and 1/f
processes, Wavelets and Statistics, edited by A. Antoniadis, and G. Oppenheim,
Lect. Notes Stat., 103, 15, 1995.

[2] Abry, P., and F. Sellan, Some remarks on and fast implementation for the
wavelet-based synthesis of fractional Brownian motion proposed by F. Sellan
and Y. Meyer, Appl. Comput. Harmon. An., 3, 377, 1996.

20

[3] Abry, P., P. Flandrin, M.S. Taqqu, and D. Veitch, Wavelets for the analysis,
estimation and synthesis of scaling data, Self-Similar Network Trafﬁc and Per-
formance Evaluation, edited by K. Park, and W. Willinger, Wiley Interscience,
New York, 39, 2000.

[4] Angelopoulos, V.,W. Baumjohann, C. F. Kennel, F. V. Coroniti, M. G. Kivel-
son, R. Pellat, R. J. Walker, H. L¨uhr, and G. Paschmann, Bursty bulk ﬂows in
the inner plasma sheet, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 4027, 1992.

[5] Angelopoulos, V., et al., Characteristics of ion ﬂow in the quiet state of the

inner plasma sheet, Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 1711, 1993.

[6] Baker, D.N., et al., Timing of magnetic reconnection during a global
2190,

substorm onset, Geophys. Res. Lett.,

29(24),

magnetospheric
doi:10.1029/2002GL015539, 2002.

[7] Balogh, A. et al., The Cluster magnetic ﬁeld investigation: overview of in-

ﬂight performance and initial results, Ann. Geophys., 19, 1207, 2001.

[8] Bauer, T. M., W. Baumjohann, R. A. Treumann, N. Sckopke, and H. L¨uhr,
Low-frequency waves in the near-Earth plasma sheet, J. Geophys. Res., 100,
9605, 1995.

[9] Baumjohann, W., G. Paschmann, and C. A. Cattell, Average plasma properties

in the central plasma sheet, J. Geophys. Res., 94, 6597, 1989.

[10] Baumjohann, W., G. Paschmann, and H. L¨uhr, Characteristics of high-speed

ion ﬂow in the plasma sheet J. Geophys. Res., 95, 3801, 1990.

[11] Baumjohann, W., Modes of convection in the magnetotail, Phys. Plasmas, 9,

3665, 2002.

2003.

[12] Biskamp, D., Magnetohydrodynamic turbulence, Cambridge Univ. Press,

[13] Borovsky, J. E., R. C. Elphic, H. O. Funsten, and M. F. Thomsen, The Earth’s
plasma sheet as a laboratory for ﬂow turbulence in high-β MHD, J. Plasma
Phys., 57, 1, 1997.

[14] Borovsky, J. E., and H. O. Funsten, MHD turbulence in the Earth’s plasma
sheet: Dynamics, dissipation and driving, J. Geophys. Res., 108, 1284,
doi:1.1029/2002JA009625, 2003.

[15] Cho, J., and E. T. Vishniac, The anisotropy of magnetohydrodynamic

Alfv´enic turbulence, Astrophys. J., 539, 273, 2000.

21

[16] Cho, J., and A., Lazarian, Compressible magnetohydrodynamic turbulence:
mode coupling, scaling relations, anisotropy, viscosity-damped regime, and as-
trophysical implications, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc, in press, 2004.

[17] Cho, J., A. Lazarian, and E. T. Vishniac, MHD turbulence: scaling laws and

astrophysical implications, Lect. Notes Phys., 614, 56, 2003.

[18] Coroniti, F. V., L. A. Frank, D. J. Williams, R. P. Lepping, F. L. Scarf, S. M.
Krimigis, and G. Gloeckler, Variability of plasma sheet dynamics, it J. Geophys.
Res., 85, 2957, 1980.

[19] Eastman, T. E., L. A. Frank, W. K. Peterson, and W. Lennartsson, The plasma

sheet boundary layer, J. Geophys. Res., 89, 1553, 1984.

[20] Goldreich, P., and S. Sridhar, Toward a theory of interstellar turbulence. II.

Strong Alfv´enic turbulence, Astrophys. J., 438, 763, 1995.

[21] Ghosh, S., W. H. Matthaeus, D. A. Roberts and M. L. Goldstein, The evolu-
tion of slab ﬂuctuations in the presence of pressure-balanced magnetic structures
and velocity shears, J. Geophys. Res., 103, 23691, 1998.

[22] Hoshino, M., A. Nishida, T. Yamamoto, and S. Kokubun, Turbulent mag-
netic ﬁeld in the distant magnetotail: Bottom-up process of plasmoid formation?
Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 2935, 1994.

[23] Horbury, T. S., Cluster II analysis of turbulence using correlation functions,

ESA SP-449,, 89, 2000.

[24] Katsev, S., and I. L’Heureux, Are Hurst exponents estimated from short or

irregular time series meaningful?, Comput. Geosci., 29, 1085, 2003.

[25] Matthaeus, W. H., S. Oughton, S. Ghosh, and M. Hossain, Scaling of

anisotropy in hydromagnetic turbulence, Phys. Rev. Lett., 81, 2056, 1998.

[26] Milovanov, A. V., L. M. Zelenyi, G. Zimbardo, and P. Veltri, Self-organized
branching of magnetotail current systems near the percolation threshold, J. Geo-
phys. Res., 106, 6291, 2001.

[27] Nakamura, R., et al., Motion of

the dipolarization front during a
ﬂow burst event observed by Cluster, Geophys. Res. Lett., 29(20), 1942,
doi:10.1029/2002GL015763, 2002.

[28] Nagai, T., I. Shinohara, M. Fujimoto, S. Machida, R. Nakamura, Y. Saito, and
T. Mukai, Structure of the Hall current system in the vicinity of the magnetic re-
connection site, J. Geophys. Res., 108(A10), doi:10.1029/2003JA009900, 2003.

22

[29] Neagu, E., J. E. Borovsky, M. F. Thomsen, S. P. Gary, W. Baumjohann, and
R. A. Treumann, Statistical survey of magnetic ﬁeld and ion velocity ﬂuctua-
tions in the near-Earth plasma sheet: Active Magnetospheric Particle Trace Ex-
plorers/Ion Release Module (AMPTE/IRM) measurements, J. Geophys. Res.,
107(A7), doi:10.1029/2001JA000318, 2002.

[30] Ohtani, S., T. Higuchi, A. T. Y. Lui, and K. Takahashi, Magnetic ﬂuctuations
associated with tail current disruption: Fractal analysis, J. Geophys. Res., 100,
19135, 1995.

[31] Oughton, S., E. R. Priest and W. H. Matthaeus, The inﬂuence of a mean
magnetic ﬁeld on three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic turbulence, J. Fluid
Mech., 280, 95, 1994.

[32] R´eme, H., et al., First multispacecraft ion measurements in and near the
Earth’s magnetosphere with the identical Cluster ion spectrometry (CIS) ex-
periment, Ann. Geophys., 19, 1303, 2001.

[33] Runov, A., et al., Current sheet structure near magnetic X-line observed by
Cluster, Geophys. Res. Lett., 30(11), 1579, doi:10.1029/2002GL016730, 2003.

[34] Sch¨odel, R., W. Baumjohann, R. Nakamura, V. A. Seregeev, and T. Mukai,
Rapid ﬂux transport in the central plasma sheet, J. Geophys. Res., 106, 301,
2001.

[35] Sergeev, V. A., V. Angelopoulos, J. T. Gosling, C. A. Cattell, and C. T. Rus-
sel, Detection of localized, plasma-depleted ﬂux tubes or bubbles in the midtail
plasma sheet, J. Geophys. Res., 101, 10817, 1996.

[36] Shebalin, J. V., W. H. Matthaeus, and D. C. Montgomery, Anisotropy in MHD

turbulence due to a mean magnetic ﬁeld, J.Plasma Phys., 29, 525, 1983.

[37] Veitch, D., and P. Abry, A wavelet based joint estimator of the parameters of

long-range dependence, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theor., 45, 878, 1999.

[38] Volwerk, M., et al., A statistical study of compressional waves in the tail
current sheet, Geophys. Res. Lett., 108(A12), 1429, doi:10.1029/2003JA010155,
2003.

[39] Volwerk, M., et al., Compressional waves in the neutral sheet, Ann. Geophys.,

22, 303, 2004.

[40] V¨or¨os, Z., et al., Multi-scale magnetic ﬁeld intermittence in the plasma sheet,

Ann. Geophys., 21, 1955, 2003.

23

[41] V¨or¨os, Z., et al., Wavelet analysis of magnetic turbulence in the Earth’s

plasma sheet, Phys. Plasmas, 11, 1333, doi: 10.1063/1.1667499, 2004.

[42] Watkins, N. W., M. P. Freeman, C. S. Rhodes, and G. Rowlands, Ambiguities
in determination of self-afﬁnity in the AE-index time series, Fractals, 9, 471,
2001.

24

40

a. 

]

T
n
[
 

B

20

X

b. 
α

=1.6 

mod

 

α

0
   

2

1

0

B

 
X

A  

B 

+ 

α

 
A

α

 
B

18:42

18:48

18:54 19:00   19:06

19:12            
UT [h]

Figure 1: Estimation of the scaling index α; (a) Fractal signals A and B to be
embedded and quiet time BX measured by Cluster 3 on September 7, 2001; the
generated fractal signals A and B have the same αmod = 1.6, but different am-
plitudes, (b) αA and αB from mixed signal; (the dashed line corresponds to the
theoretical value αmod = 1.6)

NOISE + SIGNAL 

α ~ 0 

j

 
y

15

10

5

0

−5

−10

−15

−20

SIGNAL 

NOISE 

2

4

6
Octave j

8

10

Figure 2: The logscale diagram; The scaling properties of signal, noise and sig-
nal+noise cases are shown when the signal to noise ratio is changed; yj ≡ log2µj
(Eq.1)

25

Figure 3: The αsn(c
with αmod = 1.5 and 2, computed at the octaves j = 0 and j = 4

f sn) relationship (correction curves) for model fractal signals

α

=2 

mod

j=0 

α

mod

=1.5 

j=4 

α

noise

~0.7 

0
10

1
10

c’
 
fsn

2
10

s/c1 

s/c3 

[nT] 

α

2.5
 
sn

2

1.5

0.5

1

0

′

2001−09−07 

 
B
X

α

sn

20 

10

0  

−10

−20
        

1.5

1

0.5

0
     

1.5

0.5

c’
 
fsn

1

0

1700  

a. 

b. 

c. 

1730

1800  

1830

1900  

1930

2000  

2030

2100  

UT 

Figure 4: Estimation of the quiet time noise level of the scaling parameters; a.) BX
f sn; all for s/c
component of the magnetic ﬁeld on September 7, 2001 b.) αsn c.) c
1 and 3

′

26

2001−08−27 

B

 
X

α

 
sn

c’
 
fsn

V⊥x

 

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

−5
    

3  

2.5

2  

1.5

1  

0.5

0  
    

12

9 

6 

3 

0 

a. 

b. 

c. 

600 

400 

200 

0   

−200

−400

−600

d. 

[nT] 

[km/s] 

UT 

s/c  1 

s/c  3 

,j
(j
3

) 
4

,j
(j
1

) 
2

A  B 

27

0130

0200

0230

0300  

0330

0400  

0430

0500  

Figure 5: Two-point (s/c 1,3) estimation of the scaling parameters in comparison
with the magnetic ﬁeld and velocity measurements; a.) the BX components of the
magnetic ﬁeld; b.) αsn estimated at small scales (j1, j2) ∼ (0.08, 0.33)s and at
′
large scales (j3, j4) = (0.7, 5)s; c.) (c
f sn) estimated at the scale j = 4 ∼ 0.33 s;
the capital letters A and B show two cases when corrections to small-scale α are
introduced in Figure 6; d.) x-component of perpendicular velocity

B

 
X

α

=3 

mod

s/c 1 

s/c 3 

α

mod

=2.5 

2.5

α

sn

α

=2 

mod

α

mod

=1.5 

1.5

3

2

1

0.5

0
0
10

A 

B

1
10

noise level s/c 1 (Bx)

noise level s/c 3 (Bx) 

2
10

c’
 
fsn

′

Figure 6: Correction curves computed for model fractals with αmod =
the correction curves reach asymptotically the theoretical values
1.5, 2, 2.5, 3;
′
αmod for c
f sn → 1; the letter A corresponds
to s/c 3 while B to s/c 1; the error bars at the left-top corner arise from the uncer-
tainty of parameter estimation in logscale diagram and from the uncertainty of the
magnetometer noise level estimation

f sn → ∞ and the noise level for c

28

2001−08−27 

a. 

s/c  1 

s/c  3 

[nT] 

 
B
Z

α

 
sn

c’
 
fsn

20

15

10

5

0

−5

−10

3  

2.5

2  

1.5

1  

0.5

0  

40

30

20

10

0 

400 
200 
0   
 
V⊥x
−200
−400

b. 

c. 

d. 

,j
(j
3

) 
4

,j
(j
1

) 
2

29

0130

0200  

0230

0300  

0330

0400  

0430

0500  

Figure 7: Same as in Figure 5, but for the BZ component of magnetic ﬁeld

[km/s] 

UT 

c’
fsn

(B

)          j=4 (∼ 0.3 s)        
X

2
10

a. 

b. 

)  
Y

(B
fsn

’

) =c

X

(B
fsn

’
c

)  
Z

(B
fsn

’

) =c

X

(B
fsn

’
c

0
10

1
10

2
10

0
10

2
10

c’
fsn

(B

) 

Y

1
10

c’
fsn

) 
(B
Z

′
Figure 8: Log-log scatterplots of powers at the scale j = 4 ∼ 0.33 s; a.)c
′
f sn(BY ); b.) c
versus c
interval of magnetic reconnection

f sn(BX )
f sn(BZ ) - the crosses correspond to an

f sn(BX) versus c

′

′

1
10

0
10

2
10

1
10

0
10

0
10

c’
fsn

(B

)           j=6 (∼ 1.3 s) 
X

a. 

b. 

     

     

     

0
10

30

1
10

2
10

1
10

2
10

c’
fsn

(B

)  

Y

c’
fsn

(B

)  
Z

′
Figure 9: Log-log scatterplots of powers at the scale j = 6 ∼ 1.3 s; a.)c
′
versus c
f sn(BY ); b.) c
interval of magnetic reconnection

f sn(BX )
f sn(BZ ) - the crosses correspond to an

f sn(BX) versus c

′

′

Figure 10: Small-scale (j1, j2) scatterplots of the scaling indices; a.) αsn(BX )
versus αsn(BY ); b.)αsn(BX) versus αsn(BZ )

α(j
,j
1

, B
2

X

) 

a. 

3.5

4

3

2

1

2.5

1.5

0.5

0

0

a. 

b. 

c. 

B⊥ 

 
B
||

c

’
 
fsn

8
6
4
2
0
    

20

10

0 
   
15
10
5 
0 
    

’
 c
fsn

100

50 

0  

) =α (j 1

X

, B
,j 2
α (j 1

b. 

                 

                 

)  
Y

                 
, B
,j 2

                 

                 

                 

                 

                 

)  
Z

, B
,j 2

) =α (j 1

X

, B
,j 2
α (j 1

1

2

                 
4

  

3

1

2

3

4

α(j
,j
1

, B
2

Y

)  

α(j
,j
1

)  
, B
Z
2

2001−08−27   s/c 3

nT 

nT 

j= 3

c

’
fsn

(B⊥)  

c

’
fsn

(B

)  
||

c

’
fsn

(B⊥)   

c

’
fsn

(B

 )
||

d. 

j=6

0130

0200  

0230

0300  

0330

0400  

0430

0500  

UT 

Figure 11: Magnetic ﬂuctuations in the mean magnetic ﬁeld coordinate system;
a.) the perpendicular component (B⊥); b.) the parallel component (Bk); c.) the
normalized powers of B⊥ and Bk at the time scale 0.33s; d.) the normalized powers
of B⊥ and Bk at the time scale 1.3s;

31

α
,j
⊥ (j
3

)            s/c 1,3
4

BBF−associated 

non−BBF−associated 

a. 

4

3

2

1

0

0

           

b. 

           

           

           

 (j 3
⊥

α

)  
,j 4

 (j 3
) =α ||
,j 4

            

c. 

            

            

            

α
,j
 (j
3
||

)  
4

1

2

           
4

 

3

1

2

            
4
   

3

1

2

3

4

Figure 12: Joint conditional statistics in a coordinate system parallel and perpen-
dicular to the local mean magnetic ﬁeld at scales (j3, j4); a.) scatterplot of all avail-
able points from s/c 1,3; b.) scatterplot of BBF-associated data points - the crosses
correspond to an interval of magnetic reconnection; c.) scatterplot of non-BBF-
associated data points - the crosses correspond to the intervals when |BX | > 20
nT, while the points represents intervals with |BX| ≤ 15 nT

32

