5
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
0
3
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH, VOL. , XXXX, DOI:10.1029/,

The Transition from Anti-Parallel to Component Magnetic
Reconnection
M. Swisdak,1 J. F. Drake,2 M. A. Shay2 and J. G. McIlhargey,3

Abstract. We study the transition between anti-parallel and component collisionless
magnetic reconnection with 2D particle-in-cell simulations. The primary ﬁnding is that
a guide ﬁeld ≈ 0.1 times as strong as the asymptotic reconnecting ﬁeld — roughly the
ﬁeld strength at which the electron Larmor radius is comparable to the width of the elec-
tron current layer — is suﬃcient to magnetize the electrons in the vicinity of the x-line,
thus causing signiﬁcant changes to the structure of the electron dissipation region. This
implies that great care should be exercised before concluding that magnetospheric re-
connection is antiparallel. We also ﬁnd that even for such weak guide ﬁelds strong inward-
ﬂowing electron beams form in the vicinity of the magnetic separatrices and Buneman-
unstable distribution functions arise at the x-line itself. As in the calculations of Hesse
et al. [2002] and Yin and Winske [2003], the non-gyrotropic elements of the electron pres-
sure tensor play the dominant role in decoupling the electrons from the magnetic ﬁeld
at the x-line, regardless of the magnitude of the guide ﬁeld and the associated strong
variations in the pressure tensor’s spatial structure. Despite these changes, and consis-
tent with previous work, the reconnection rate does not vary appreciably with the strength
of the guide ﬁeld as it changes between 0 and a value equal to the asymptotic reversed
ﬁeld.

1. Introduction

The fast dissipation of magnetic energy in collisionless
plasmas is a common occurrence in nature, with examples
ranging from tokamak sawtooth crashes to magnetospheric
substorms to solar ﬂares. The process common to these phe-
nomena is thought to be magnetic reconnection, in which
oppositely directed components of the magnetic ﬁeld cross-
link, forming an x-line conﬁguration. The expansion of the
newly connected ﬁeld lines away from the x-line converts
magnetic energy into kinetic energy and heat while pulling
in new ﬂux to sustain the process.

∼

Observations suggest that in many systems the ratio of
the characteristic reconnection time to the Alfv´en crossing
time is
0.1. The simplest magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
description of reconnection [Sweet, 1958; Parker, 1957] is in-
consistent with this value, being too slow by several orders of
magnitude [Biskamp, 1986]. However, the numerical simula-
tions comprising the GEM Reconnection Challenge [Birn et
al., 2001] showed that the inclusion of the Hall eﬀects, which
are important at small spatial scales and are neglected in
MHD, can produce fast reconnection. The magnetic topol-
ogy in these simulations was understandably quite simple:
equal and anti-parallel ﬁelds separated by a thin current
layer. Yet even in the magnetotail, where this approxima-
tion is often close to reality, a small ﬁeld directed parallel to
the current (a guide ﬁeld) is often observed [Israelovich et
al., 2001].

The eﬀects of a guide ﬁeld, Bg, on magnetic reconnection
have been examined before. Sharp diﬀerences have been
seen in the large-scale ﬂows around the x-line [Hoshino and

1Icarus Research, Inc., Bethesda, MD, USA.
2IREAP, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.
3Department of Physics, University of

Maryland-Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Copyright by the American Geophysical Union.
0148-0227/13/$9.00

1

Nishida 1983; Tanaka 1995; Pritchett 2001] as well as the
pressure and magnetic ﬁeld signatures [Kleva et al., 1995;
Rogers et al. 2003]. Three-dimensional particle simulations
of similar systems without [Zeiler et al. 2002] and with
[Drake et al., 2003] a guide ﬁeld showed that the former
was basically laminar in the direction parallel to the guide
ﬁeld while the latter developed strong turbulence. Pritch-
ett and Coroniti [2004] noted that moderate guide ﬁelds
(Bg/B0 . 1, where B0 is the reconnecting ﬁeld) have only
a slight eﬀect on the reconnection rate, although Ricci et
al.
[2004] found somewhat slower rates for larger ﬁelds
(Bg/B0 = 3, 5). Hesse et al.
[1999,2002] and Yin and
Winske [2003] showed that non-gyrotropic electron motions
balance the reconnection electric ﬁeld at the x-line in both
the anti-parallel and guide ﬁeld cases.

In light of these results, determining the minimum guide
ﬁeld Bg that changes the structure of the x-line becomes of
interest. If it satisﬁes Bg > B0 then the eﬀects of a guide
ﬁeld can usually be ignored in the magnetosphere. On the
other hand, if the transition occurs when Bg << B0 guide-
ﬁeld reconnection is typical, and anti-parallel is a special
case perhaps only relevant in simulations. We argue, based
on both simulations and theoretical grounds, that the tran-
sition occurs when the electron Larmor radius in the guide
ﬁeld at the x-line becomes smaller than the width of the
electron current layer, i.e. for Bg/B0
0.1. The implica-
tion is that most magnetospheric reconnection is probably
component reconnection.

≈

In section 2 of this paper we present our computational
scheme and initial conditions. Section 3 presents results for
the case Bg = 0, section 4 for Bg = 1.0 and section 5 for
Bg = 0.2. We summarize our results and discuss their im-
plications for understanding magnetospheric reconnection in
section 6.

2. Computational Details

Our simulations are done with p3d, a massively parallel
particle-in-cell code [Zeiler et al., 2002] . The electromag-
netic ﬁelds are deﬁned on gridpoints and advanced in time

X - 2

SWISDAK ET AL.: TRANSITION GUIDE FIELD

with an explicit trapezoidal-leapfrog method using second-
order spatial derivatives. The Lorentz equation of motion
for each particle is evolved by a Boris algorithm where the
velocity v is accelerated by E for half a timestep, rotated by
B, and accelerated by E for the ﬁnal half timestep. To en-
sure that ∇ · E = 4πρ a correction electric ﬁeld is calculated
by inverting Poisson’s equation with a multigrid algorithm.
The equations solved by the code are written in normal-
ized units. Masses are normalized to the ion mass mi, the
magnetic ﬁeld to the asymptotic value of the reversed ﬁeld,
and the density to the approximate value at the center of the
current sheet (see below). Other normalizations derive from
these: velocities to the Alfv´en speed vA, lengths to the ion
inertial length c/ωpi = di, times to the inverse ion cyclotron
frequency Ω−1

ci , and temperatures to miv2
A.

Our coordinate system is chosen so that the inﬂow and
outﬂow for an x-line are parallel to ˆy and ˆx, respectively.
The guide magnetic ﬁeld and reconnection electric ﬁeld are
parallel to ˆz. For comparison, our ˆx, ˆy, and ˆz unit vec-
ˆx, ˆz, and ˆy in GSM coordinates. The
tors correspond to
simulations presented here are two-dimensional in the sense
that out-of-plane derivatives are assumed to vanish, i.e.,
∂/∂z = 0.

−

−

−

−

−

tanh[(y

Ly/4)/w0]

3Ly/4)/w0]

The initial equilibrium comprises two Harris current
sheets [Harris 1962] superimposed on a ambient popula-
tion of uniform density. The reconnection magnetic ﬁeld is
1, where
Bx = tanh[(y
w0 = 0.25 and Ly = 6.4 are the half-width of the initial cur-
rent sheets and the box size in the ˆy direction respectively.
This conﬁguration has two current sheets and allows us to
use fully periodic boundary conditions. The electron and
ion temperatures, Te = 0.05 and Ti = 0.5, are initially uni-
form as is the guide ﬁeld Bg. Except for the background
(lobe) population, which can have arbitrary density (here
nℓ = 0.2), pressure balance uniquely determines the ini-
In this equilibrium the density at the
tial density proﬁle.
1.1 at t = 0. At t = 0 we per-
center of each sheet is
turb the magnetic ﬁeld ( ˜Bx/B0
0.1) to seed x-lines at
(x, y) = (Lx/4, 3Ly/4) and (3Lx/4, Ly/4).

≈

≈

To conserve computational resources, yet assure a suf-
ﬁcient separation of spatial and temporal scales, we take
the electron mass to be 0.01 and the speed of light to be
20. The domain measures 6.4 on a side and the grid has
1024
16 grid-
points per electron inertial length and 2 per electron Debye
length. To check for convergence we doubled the box size
for one run (for Bg = 0.2) and saw no signiﬁcant variation
in our results.

1024 points, which implies that there are

≈

×

The particle timestep is 6

10−4, or 0.12ωpe. Our simu-
109 particles and conserve energy to better

×

lations follow
than 1 part in 1000.

∼

3. Overview, Bg = 0

Investigating the critical value of Bg with multiple 3-D
simulations would entail a prohibitive computational ex-
pense, so we instead performed a series of 2-D simula-
tions that varied only in the strength of the guide ﬁeld.
The restricted dimensionality means that many turbulent
modes, including the Buneman instability seen by Drake et
al.
[2003], are not present. However, other investigators
have found that the gross morphological features of recon-
nection x-lines are roughly invariant in the direction parallel
to the current density [Pritchett and Coroniti, 2004].

A snapshot of the out-of-plane current density near the
x-line for a simulation with Bg = 0 is shown in Figure 1.
The initial current sheet has completely reconnected; the
plasma at the x-line at the time shown was in the low den-
sity (nℓ = 0.2) lobe at the simulation’s beginning. Since

|

≈

≡

p

B
= 0 at the x-line for Bg = 0 inward-ﬂowing electrons
|
must at some point ﬁnd themselves in a region where the
magnetic ﬁeld is too weak to dominate their motion. This
happens at a distance from the x-line given roughly by the
electron inertial length, c/ωpe
de, which for this simu-
0.2 (in normalized units). Once the
me/nℓ
lation is
electrons demagnetize they stream towards the x-line paral-
lel to the ˆy axis, through the region of low magnetic ﬁeld,
until they turn due to the increasing ﬁeld on the opposite
side of the current layer and reverse direction. They then
execute “ﬁgure-8” trajectories [Speiser 1965], oscillating in
the ˆy direction until escaping from the ends of the layer. At
0), the
the turning points of their trajectories (where vy
local electron density increases, forming a bifurcated cur-
rent sheet. Zeiler et al.
[2002] have previously reported
this bifurcation, although it is particularly noticeable in our
simulations because of the high spatial resolution (16 grid-
points per de) and large ion to electron temperature ratio
(Ti/Te = 10). The bifurcation would be obscured in simula-
tions where these parameters had smaller values. Note that
this bifurcation is at a much smaller scale than the ion-scale
splits reported in Cluster observations [Runov et al. 2003].
The bifurcation is also evident in Figure 2, which shows
In
the diagonal components of the electron temperature.
analogy with the deﬁnition of the ﬂuid pressure tensor we
deﬁne the electron temperature tensor in a grid cell as a sum
over the N local particles:

→

Tαβ =

(vα,i

<vα >)(vβ,i

<vβ >),

(1)

−

−

me
N

N

Xi=1

N
where < . . . > denotes an average, e.g., < x >= 1
i=1 xi .
N
Like the pressure tensor, which is related to the temperature
tensor by Pαβ = nTαβ where n is the density, the temper-
ature is symmetric, Tαβ = Tβα. For an isotropic plasma
the oﬀ-diagonal elements of the temperature tensor vanish
while the diagonal elements are equal to each other and to
the scalar temperature, Tαα = Te. This is the case at t = 0
in our simulations.

P

≈

Bx decreases, while µ

The decrease in Tyy and Tzz during inﬂow are consistent
with the adiabatic invariance of the magnetic moment µ:
v2
⊥/B remains constant. Txx,
B
approximately the parallel temperature, simultaneously in-
creases due to energy conservation. Any energy change due
to the interaction of the reconnection electric ﬁeld Ez and
the curvature and grad-B drifts is small everywhere except
near the x-line.

∝

Once inside the layer the electrons demagnetize and, as
previously seen by Zeiler et al.
[2002], the electron distri-
bution in vy space separates into two counter-propagating
beams due to the cross-current layer bounce motion (see
Figure 2d). As a consequence Tyy sharply increases, as has
previously been noted by Horiuchi and Sato [1997].

Despite the beams we see no evidence of a two-stream in-
stability, probably because of the small current layer width.
Unstable wavenumbers for the electron-two-stream instabil-
ity satisfy kyv0 < 2ωpe where v0 is the separation of the
beam velocities [Krall and Trivelpiece 1986]. The maximum
growth rate, γ = ωpe/√8, occurs for kyv0 =
3/2 ωpe, and
0 the growth rate vanishes. In the simulation the
as v0
beam separation is largest at the x-line, v0
8, and drops
≈
to 0 at the edges of the layer
0.22(= de) upstream. With
≈
a local ωpe
90 the instability criterion implies that only
wavelengths λ & 0.28 are unstable at the x-line, and thus
that the two-stream instability is not excited in the narrow
current layer.

→

p

≈

In a 2-D collisionless plasma the reconnection electric ﬁeld
at the x-line is ultimately balanced by the divergence of the
electron pressure tensor [Vasyliunas 1975]. In our units the
collisionless electron ﬂuid momentum equation is

E =

ve

B

×

−

−

1
ne ∇·

¯¯Pe

−

me(ve

)ve

me

·∇

−

∂ve
∂t

(2)

SWISDAK ET AL.: TRANSITION GUIDE FIELD

X - 3

which is exact insofar as the pressure tensor ¯¯Pe incorpo-
rates all kinetic eﬀects not included in the other terms. The
reconnection electric ﬁeld is thus

Ez =

(vxBy

−
1
n (cid:18)

∂Pxz
∂x

−

−

vyBx)
∂Pyz

+

m

vx

(cid:18)

−

∂vz
∂x

∂y (cid:19)
∂vz
∂y

+ vy

+

∂vz
∂t (cid:19)

(3)

where we have dropped the electron subscript and used the
fact that ∂/∂z = 0. In a steady state only the pressure terms
can balance Ez at the x-line, as can be seen in Figure 3. Far
from the current layer the EMHD relation E =
B
holds, while nearer the x-line both the oﬀ-diagonal elements
of the pressure tensor and the inertial terms are important.
At the x-line the pressure tensor terms dominate. Both
∂Pyz/∂y and ∂Pxz/∂x contribute, although the former is
larger in our simulation by a factor of
2. The term pro-
portional to ∂/∂t is not shown separately but, as expected
during quasi-steady reconnection, is negligible.

ve

×

−

≈

Conservation of magnetic moment again explains the de-
crease in T⊥ along the inﬂow direction. Since Bg is constant
the decrease in B is smaller than was the case in section 3,
and the relative decrease of T⊥ in Figure 6c is smaller than in
Figure 2d. Because the electrons remain magnetized at the
x-line, T⊥ remains small, in sharp contrast to the results
shown in Figure 2. The increase in T|| inside the current
sheet is due to the intermixing of colder inﬂowing electrons
and electrons accelerated by the parallel electric ﬁeld along
the separatrices. The unimodal distribution function of Fig-
ure 6d conﬁrms that the electrons do not execute Speiser-like
orbits.

The terms balancing the reconnection ﬁeld in equation
(3) are shown for this case in Figure 7. At the x-line the
oﬀ-diagonal elements of the pressure tensor again make the
primary contribution although, as a comparison of Figures
7 and 3 makes clear, the scale length over which they are
important is much smaller than when Bg = 0. This is con-
sistent with the results of Hesse et al.
[2002]. Unlike the
anti-parallel case the ∂Pxz/∂x term makes the dominant
contribution while the ∂Pyz/∂y term is negligible.

4. Guide Field, Bg = 1.0

5. Transition

A large guide ﬁeld changes the structure of the x-line by
both lowering the total plasma β and magnetizing the elec-
trons throughout the current sheet. When Bg is small the
dominant wave mode at small lengthscales, and hence the
governor of the particle dynamics, is the whistler. This is
seen when electrons in the outﬂow region are accelerated
by Ez and drag the magnetic ﬁeld out of the reconnection
plane [Mandt et al., 1994; Shay et al., 1998], causing the
well-known quadrupolar symmetry in Bz along the separa-
trices [Sonnerup, 1979; Terasawa, 1983] . As Bg increases
the importance of the kinetic Alfv´en mode grows [Rogers
et al., 2001]. For that mode the coupling occurs when E||
accelerates electrons along newly reconnected ﬁeld lines, in-
creasing the electron density on one side of the current layer,
decreasing it on the other, and forming a quadrupolar pat-
tern [Kleva et al., 1995]. The perturbations in Bz acquire
a component determined by pressure balance,
leading to
a symmetric component that can, for very large Bg, over-
whelm the quadrupolar pattern [Rogers et al., 2003]. Figure
4 shows the electron density and Bz from the simulation
discussed in the previous section (Bg = 0) and one that is
otherwise identical except that Bg = 1.0.

The parallel velocity of the electrons, mostly directed out
of the reconnection plane, develops a quadrupolar symmetry
opposite to that of the density (high density paired with low
velocity and vice versa). The density asymmetry is a larger
eﬀect, however, and the result is an out-of-plane current den-
sity that is canted with respect to the initial current sheet,
as can be seen in Fig. 5. Because inﬂowing electrons remain
magnetized in the guide ﬁeld they do not have ﬁgure-8 tra-
jectories at the x-line and the bifurcations in the electron
density and current density disappear.

In the Bg = 0 simulation discussed in Section 3 the mag-
netic ﬁeld on the inﬂow axis (x = 4.8) was dominantly par-
allel to ˆx (except at the x-line where
= 0). For Bg = 1.0,
45◦ between the lobe plasma
in contrast, the ﬁeld rotates
≈
and the x-line. The rotation complicates the interpretation
of the temperature tensor of equation (1), so to simplify we
transform to a coordinate system where the axes are parallel
and perpendicular to the local magnetic ﬁeld. In this frame

B
|

|

¯¯T = [T||

ˆbˆb + T⊥(¯¯I

ˆbˆb)] + ¯¯Tng

(4)

−

where ˆb is a unit vector in the direction of the magnetic ﬁeld,
¯¯I is the unit tensor, and ¯¯Tng contains the non-gyrotropic
Images of the parallel and perpendicular temper-
terms.
atures along with cuts through the x-line are shown for
Bg = 1.0 in Figure 6a-c.

For what Bg does the transition between the reconnec-
tion of Section 3 and that of Section 4 occur? Far from the
x-line, where both species are completely magnetized, the
guide ﬁeld cannot play an important dynamical role unless
Bg & B0. As a particle approaches the current layer, how-
ever, the reconnecting component decreases and the inﬂu-
ence of the guide ﬁeld rises. Qualitatively, Bg is important
when the associated electron Larmor radius is equal to the
spatial scale associated with the x-line.

Consider a system with Bg = 0 and examine the z compo-
nent of the electron equation of motion under quasi-steady
conditions,

mevey

∂vez
∂y

=

eEz

−

−

e
c

(vexBy

veyBx)

−

1
n

∂Pyz
∂y

,

−

(5)

where we have assumed that derivatives with respect to x
can be neglected when compared to those with respect to
y. In a 2D steady-state system Faraday’s Law implies that
Ez is relatively uniform (see Figures 3 and 7). Far from
the x-line electrons are frozen to the magnetic ﬁeld and the
Ez and v
B terms are roughly equal. Within the current
layer the convective part of the inertial term and the pres-
sure tensor become important, with the transition occurring
at some lengthscale ∆y where the terms balance. If, for sim-
plicity, we restrict our attention to the vertical axis through
the x-line, symmetry implies that By is zero and

×

vez = ∆yΩx,up

(6)

where Ωx,up = eBx,up/mec is the cyclotron frequency based
on the reconnecting ﬁeld at y =
∆y. In general Bx,up will
be less than the asymptotic reconnecting ﬁeld. Within this
inner scale the electrons carry most of the current, so we
also have

±

4π
c

Jz =

nvez

4π
c

B

≈ ∇ ×

≈

∂Bx
∂y

where we have ignored both the displacement current and
the contribution from the current due to ∂By/∂x. Con-
verting derivatives with respect to y to division by ∆y and
combining equations (6) and (7) we ﬁnd that

(7)

(8)

∆y =

= de

c
ωpe

X - 4

SWISDAK ET AL.: TRANSITION GUIDE FIELD

The electron velocity producing the current is vez

deΩx,up.
Now consider the addition of a small ambient guide ﬁeld.
The magnetic ﬁeld no longer vanishes at the x-line and the
electron Larmor radius there is

∼

ρg =

vey
Ωe,g

(9)

≈

where we have taken vex
0 based on symmetry consider-
ations, Ωe,g = eBg/mec is the electron cyclotron frequency
based on Bg, and vey is the electron inﬂow velocity into the
unmagnetized region around the x-line. The guide ﬁeld will
be important when this Larmor radius is smaller than the
width of the current layer, ρg < ∆y.

×

The major contributors to the electron inﬂow velocity vey
B drift. A Sweet-Parker-
are the thermal speed and the E
like scaling suggests that the ratio of the E
B inﬂow speed
to the outﬂow speed is equal to the normalized reconnec-
tion electric ﬁeld Ez. For a wide range of conditions it has
been shown [Shay et al., 1999; Shay et al., 2001] that the
outﬂow is roughly equal to the electron Alfv´en speed vAe
0.1. In the low-temperature limit (vth << vE×B)
and Ez
0.1vAe and the bound for
this argument implies that vey
a dynamically important Bg is given by

≈

×

≈

ρg =

vey
Ωe,g

=

0.1vAe
Ωe,g

< ∆y = de

(10)

or

Bg > Ez

0.1.

∼

(11)

≈

≈

In our simulations Ez, and hence the transitional value of
Bg, is

0.2.

Equation (11) is not valid when the electron thermal
speed vthe dominates the contribution from the E
B drift.
In the high-temperature limit one must substitute vth rather
than vE×B for vey in equation (9), and the relevant crite-
rion becomes βg < 1 where β is evaluated with the lobe
density and temperature. In the simulations presented here
vthe
vE×B and so the critical value of the guide ﬁeld re-
≈
mains Bg

0.2.

×

≈

We note that the estimate for the electron inﬂow velocity
vye
0.1cAe is smaller than the counter-streaming velocity
of the electrons shown in Fig. 2(d). This is because a local
electrostatic ﬁeld Ey develops inside the electron current
layer that accelerates the electrons towards the magnetic
null. However, this ﬁeld decelerates the electrons once they
cross the null so this electric ﬁeld does not change the ef-
fective electron Larmor radius of the electrons in the guide
ﬁeld.

We have explored the transition from anti-parallel to ﬁ-
nite guide ﬁeld reconnection through a series of simulations
with Bg = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.4, and 0.75 and found, in agreement
with our above arguments, that simulations with Bg = 0.2
most clearly display characteristics intermediate between
Bg = 0 and Bg = 1.

Figure 8 shows the out-of-plane current density for a run
identical to those previously discussed except that Bg = 0.2.
There is no bifurcation in the current density and the canting
of the current layer, while present, is not as strong as the case
with Bg = 1.0 (Figure 5). Figure 9 shows the electron den-
sity and Bz for this simulation. The electron density is not
bifurcated and bears some resemblance to the quadrupolar
cavities so prominent in Figure 4c, while Bz, although still
basically quadrupolar, no longer has the strong symmetry
obvious of Figure 4b. Evidence for a transition can also be
seen in the parallel and perpendicular temperatures shown
in Figure 10. The results are clearly intermediate between
Figures 2 and 6. The cut in Figure 10c shows that the in-
crease in the parallel temperature as electrons approach the
x-line is similar in both magnitude and proﬁle to the Bg = 0

case. Within the current layer, however, T|| increases to a
sharp peak similar to that for Bg = 1. The perpendicular
temperature decreases towards the x-line and then, within
the layer, rises to a peak. This peak is midway in magnitude
between the Bg = 0 and Bg = 1 cases.

In order to examine the variation with guide ﬁeld of the
oﬀ-diagonal pressure tensor terms of Equation 3 it is neces-
sary to separate the gyrotropic and non-gyrotropic contri-
butions. The gyrotropic part is strongly inﬂuenced by the
presence of a guide ﬁeld and, in any case, does not contribute
to balancing Ez at the x-line. Figure 11 shows the change in
the non-gyrotropic portion of Pyz as the guide ﬁeld varies.
The cuts in Figure 11d demonstrate that as Bg increases the
role of ∂Pyz/∂y in balancing the reconnection electric ﬁeld
at the x-line decreases dramatically.

The presence of a small guide ﬁeld also has signatures far
from the x-line. Figure 12 shows the vx-vy distribution func-
tions for three simulations with diﬀerent guide ﬁelds taken
at the same point, just upstream of the upper-left separatrix
and, for the runs with a ﬁnite guide ﬁeld, inside the density
cavity. Because of the low plasma density within the cav-
ity the parallel electric ﬁeld remains ﬁnite over an extended
region along the separatrix [Pritchett and Coroniti, 2004])
in the Bg = 1.0 system. This electric ﬁeld locally acceler-
ates the electrons, producing a strong beam ﬂowing towards
the x-line. However even for Bg = 0.2 the beam is already
clearly present. (The features in the upper left quadrant of
each panel are electrons that have already been accelerated
at the x-line). There is a net current but no distinct beam
for Bg = 0. The origin, detailed structure, and eﬀect of this
extended region of E|| is discussed in a future publication.

6. Discussion

≪

≈

This study suggests that only a minimal guide ﬁeld,
Bg
0.1B0 is required to alter the dynamics of electrons
both in the vicinity of the x-line and at remote locations
along the separatrices. The implication is that in most real
systems, including the magnetotail, the guide ﬁeld might
not be negligible. In any case this study suggests that one
can not simply ignore the guide ﬁeld if Bg

B0.

A counter-argument could be made that reconnection
with Bg
= 0 is signiﬁcantly slower compared to the case
with Bg = 0 and therefore the magnetosphere will self-select
locations where the guide ﬁeld is nearly zero (less than 0.1
of the anti-parallel ﬁeld). We ﬁnd that this is not the case.
The guide ﬁeld alters the dynamics both locally and at large
scales signiﬁcantly before the rate of reconnection is signiﬁ-
cantly aﬀected. Speciﬁcally, Figure 13 shows that magnetic
ﬂux reconnects only slightly (
10%) slower for Bg = 1.0
than for Bg = 0, a result consistent with other simulations
[Rogers et al., 2003; Pritchett and Coroniti, 2004]. It should
be noted, however, the the onset of reconnection in real sys-
tems could be biased either for or against guide ﬁelds. Our
simulations do not address this question since they start
with a ﬁnite perturbation that eﬀectively places the system
in the nonlinear regime at t = 0.

≈

Another factor potentially aﬀecting guide ﬁeld reconnec-
tion is the eﬀect of an ambient pressure gradient and the
associated diamagnetic drifts. At the magnetopause, where
density gradients perpendicular to the current layer produce
diamagnetic drifts, the reconnection rate can be strongly re-
duced [Swisdak et al., 2003]. However, it was shown that dia-
magnetic suppression occurs for small guide ﬁelds with the
transition occurring when βx > Bg/B0 (for density length
scales of order an ion inertial length). Combined with the re-
sults of this work the conclusion is again that magnetopause
reconnection always includes a dynamically important guide
ﬁeld.

Guide ﬁelds also play an important role in the develop-
ment of turbulence in three-dimensional reconnection simu-
lations. Simulations by Drake et al.
[2003] with Bg = 5.0

6
SWISDAK ET AL.: TRANSITION GUIDE FIELD

X - 5

showed that turbulence can self-consistently develop at a
reconnection x-line. The acceleration of electrons by the re-
connection electric ﬁeld led to a separation of the ion and
electron drift speeds, which then triggered the Buneman in-
stability. At late time the nonlinear evolution led to the for-
mation of electron holes, localized bipolar regions of electric
ﬁeld. These structures produced an eﬀective drag between
the ions and electrons that was large enough to compete
with the oﬀ-diagonal pressure tensor in balancing the recon-
nection electric ﬁeld. Earlier 3D simulations with Bg = 0 by
Zeiler at al. [2002] produced no signiﬁcant turbulence at the
x-line once reconnection was established. The strong elec-
tron heating for Bg = 0 (as shown in Figure 2) suppressed
all streaming instabilities near the x-line since for Ti
Te
such instabilities require a beam velocity vb greater than
the electron thermal speed vte. Yet since Bg = 5.0 is sig-
niﬁcantly larger than typical magnetospheric values it was
unclear from these studies whether turbulence and enhanced
ion-electron drag were common features of reconnection in
the magnetosphere.

≫

Our 2D simulations cannot produce the Buneman insta-
bility at the x-line seen in these earlier simulations. How-
ever, we can examine the distribution functions produced
by our simulations and determine whether they would be
unstable in a full 3D system. In the low temperature limit
with k parallel to both B and the relative drift velocity vb
a plasma is Buneman unstable to wavenumbers satisfying
the relation kvb < ωpe [Krall and Trivelpiece, 1986]. For ﬁ-
nite temperature plasmas with Maxwellian distributions the
condition for instability is more complicated and, in fact, for
small drifts in warm plasmas no instability exists. The in-
stability threshold for arbitrary distributions can be found
numerically, but a rough rule of thumb is that a plasma is
Buneman unstable if the electron and ion velocity distribu-
tion functions do not substantially overlap (vb & vte).

Figure 14 shows the distribution of vz at the x-line for
runs with three values of the guide ﬁeld, Bg = 0, 0.2, 1.
The dotted line shows the ion distribution and the double
peak is a remnant of the two initial populations, the non-
drifting background and the drifting population comprising
the initial current sheet. The three electron distribution
functions demonstrate that as the guide ﬁeld increases the
x-line electrons acquire a larger drift with respect to the
ions. The electron energy gain is limited by the amount of
time they spend within the current layer before advecting
into the outﬂow region. Larger simulations suggest that our
small system size may prevent the electrons from reaching
their maximum speeds. A ﬁnite Bg acts like a guide wire,
restraining this ﬂow and leaving more time for a particle
to be accelerated by the reconnection electric ﬁeld. If our
simulation were three-dimensional the Bg = 1 case would
almost certainly be Buneman unstable, while the Bg = 0
case would not. Again, the Bg = 0.2 case is transitional.

The small size of the transition guide ﬁeld has important
implications for magnetospheric reconnection. The x-line
current sheet should usually be canted with respect to the
ambient current layer. Density and ﬂow velocities measured
on the separatrices should have a quadrupolar symmetry.
Distribution functions taken just upstream of the separatri-
ces should exhibit an inward-ﬂowing beam. Turbulence, and
electron holes in particular, should be common. Magneto-
spheric reconnection with negligible guide ﬁelds should be
rare.

Acknowledgments. This work was supported in part by the
NASA Sun Earth Connection Theory and Supporting Research
and Technology programs and by the NSF.

References

Birn, J., et al., Geospace environmental modeling (GEM) mag-
netic reconnection challenge, J. Geophys. Res., 106 , 3715–
3719, 2001.

Biskamp, D., Magnetic reconnection via current sheets, Phys.

Fluids, 29 , 1520–1531, 1986.

Drake, J. F., M. Swisdak, C. Cattell, M. A. Shay, B. N. Rogers,
and A. Zeiler, Formation of electron holes and particle ener-
gization during magnetic reconnection, Science, 299 , 873–877,
2003.

Harris, E. G., On a plasma sheet separating regions of oppositely

directed magnetic ﬁeld, Nuovo Cim., 23 , 115, 1962.

Hesse, M., K. Schindler, J. Birn, and M. Kuznetsova, The diﬀu-
sion region in collisionless magnetic reconnection, Phys. Plas-
mas, 6 , 1781, 1999.

Hesse, M., M. Kuznetsova, and M. Hoshino, The struc-
reconnec-
the dissipation region for component
ture of
tion: Particle simulations, Geophys. Res. Lett., 29 , 2002,
doi:10.1029/2001FL014714.

Horiuchi, R., and T. Sato, Particle simulation study of collision-
less driven reconnection in a sheared magnetic ﬁeld, Phys.
Plasmas, 4 , 277, 1997.

Hoshino, M., and A. Nishida, Numerical simulation of the dayside

reconnection, J. Geophys. Res., 88 , 6926–6936, 1983.

Israelovich, P. L., A. I. Ershkovich, and N. A. Tsyganenko, Mag-
netic ﬁeld and electric current density distribution in the geo-
magnetic tail, based on Geotail data, J. Geophys. Res., 106 ,
25,919–25,927, 2001.

Kleva, R. G., J. F. Drake, and F. L. Waelbroeck, Fast reconnec-
tion in high temperature plasmas, Phys. Plasmas, 2 , 23–34,
1995.

Krall, N. A., and A. W. Trivelpiece, Principles of Plasma
Physics, chap. 9, pp. 449–458, San Francisco Press, Inc., 1986.
Mandt, M. E., R. E. Denton, and J. F. Drake, Transition to
whistler mediated reconnection, Geophys. Res. Lett., 21 , 73–
76, 1994.

Parker, E. N., Sweet’s mechanism for merging magnetic ﬁelds in

conducting ﬂuids, J. Geophys. Res., 62 , 509–520, 1957.

Pritchett, P. L., Geospace environment modeling (GEM) mag-
netic reconnection challenge: Simulations with a full particle
electromagnetic code, J. Geophys. Res., 106 , 3783, 2001.
Pritchett, P. L., and F. V. Coroniti, Three-dimensional collision-
less magnetic reconnection in the presence of a guide ﬁeld, J.
Geophys. Res., 109 , 2004, 10.1029/2003JA009999.

Ricci, P., J. U. Brackbill, W. Daughton, and G. Lapenta, Colli-
sionless magnetic reconnection in the presence of a guide ﬁeld,
Phys. Plasmas, 11 , 4102–4114, 2004.

Rogers, B. N., R. E. Denton, J. F. Drake, and M. A. Shay, The
role of dispersive waves in collisionless magnetic reconnection,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 87 , 195,004, 2001.

Rogers, B. N., R. E. Denton, and J. F. Drake, Signatures of
collisionless magnetic reconnection, J. Geophys. Res., 108 ,
doi:10.1029/2002JA009,699, 2003.

Runov, A., et al., Properties of a bifurcated current sheet ob-
served on August 29, 2001, Geophys. Res. Lett., 30 , 1036,
2003, doi:10.1029/2002GL016136.

Shay, M. A., J. F. Drake, R. E. Denton, and D. Biskamp, Struc-
ture of the dissipation region during collisionless magnetic re-
connection, J. Geophys. Res., 103 , 9165–9176, 1998.

Shay, M. A., J. F. Drake, B. N. Rogers, and R. E. Denton, The
scaling of collisionless, magnetic reconnection for large sys-
tems, Geophys. Res. Lett., 26 , 2163–2166, 1999.

Shay, M. A., J. F. Drake, B. N. Rogers, and R. E. Denton,
Alfv´enic collisionless magnetic reconnection and the Hall term,
J. Geophys. Res., 106 , 3759–3772, 2001.

Sonnerup, B. U. ¨O., Magnetic ﬁeld reconnection, in Solar System
Plasma Physics, edited by L. J. Lanzerotti, C. F. Kennel, and
E. N. Parker, vol. 3, p. 46, North Holland Publishing, Amster-
dam, 1979.

Speiser, T. W., Particle trajectories in model current sheets, 1,

Analytical solutions, J. Geophys. Res., 70 , 4219, 1965.

Sweet, P. A., Electromagnetic Phenomena in Cosmical Physics,

p. 123, Cambridge University Press, New York, 1958.

Swisdak, M., B. N. Rogers, J. F. Drake, and M. A. Shay, Dia-
magnetic suppression of component magnetic reconnection
at the magnetopause, J. Geophys. Res., 108 , 1218, 2003,
doi:10.1029/2002JA009726.

Tanaka, M., Macro-particle simulations of collisionless magnetic

reconnection, Phys. Plasmas, 2 , 2920, 1995.

X - 6

SWISDAK ET AL.: TRANSITION GUIDE FIELD

Terasawa, T., Hall current eﬀect on tearing mode instability, Geo-

phys. Res. Lett., 10 , 475, 1983.

Vasyliunas, V. M., Theoretical models of magnetic ﬁeld line merg-

ing, 1, Rev. Geophys., 13 , 303, 1975.

Yin, L., and D. Winske, Plasma pressure tensor eﬀects on recon-
nection: Hybrid and hall-magnetohydrodynamics simulations,
Phys. Plasmas, 10 , 1595–1604, 2003.

Zeiler, A., D. Biskamp, J. F. Drake, B. N. Rogers, M. A. Shay,
and M. Scholer, Three-dimensional particle simulations of col-
lisionless magnetic reconnection, J. Geophys. Res., 107 , 1230,
2002, doi:10.1029/2001JA000287.

M. Swisdak, Icarus Research, Inc., PO Box 30780 Bethesda

MD 20824-0780, USA , (swisdak@ppd.nrl.navy.mil)

SWISDAK ET AL.: TRANSITION GUIDE FIELD

X - 7

Figure 2. Data for Bg = 0. Panels (a) and (b) show
the electron temperatures Txx and Tyy (see the text for
deﬁnitions) near the x-line of Figure 1. Panel (c) shows
cuts of the temperatures at x = 4.8. The solid line is Tyy,
the dashed Txx, and the dotted Tzz. Panel (d) shows the
distribution of vey in a region measuring 1.0 de long and
0.5 de high and centered on the x-line.

Figure 1. Reconnection in a system with Bg = 0 at
t = 4.5.
(a) The out-of-plane current density overlaid
with magnetic ﬁeld lines in a region surrounding the x-
line. The blackest regions are not color-coded correctly,
having been over-exposed to show details near the x-line
(b) A vertical cut through the x-line at x = 4.8.

Figure 3. For Bg = 0 a cut through the x-line at x =
4.8 showing the various terms balancing Ez in equation
(3). Ez is shown by the stars and the dashed, solid, and
dotted lines denote the v
B, divergence of the pressure
tensor, and inertial terms, respectively. To reduce the
noise the plotted quantities were averaged over 20 grid-
points in x and 4 in y.

×

Figure 4. The electron density and out-of-plane mag-
netic ﬁeld Bz in simulations with Bg = 0 and 1.0. (a)
ne, Bg = 0; (b) Bz, Bg = 0; (c) ne, Bg = 1.0; (d) Bz,
Bg = 1.0. In all panels t = 4.5. In panels (a) and (c)
black areas have been over-exposed to show detail at the
x-line.

X - 8

SWISDAK ET AL.: TRANSITION GUIDE FIELD

Figure 5. Reconnection in a system with Bg = 1.0 at
t = 4.5.
(a) The out-of-plane current density overlaid
with magnetic ﬁeld lines in a region surrounding the x-
line. Black areas have been over-exposed to show detail
(b) A vertical cut through the x-line at
at the x-line.
x = 4.8.

Figure 8. Reconnection in a system with Bg = 0.2 at
t = 4.5.
(a) The out-of-plane current density overlaid
with magnetic ﬁeld lines in a region surrounding the x-
line. Black areas have been over-exposed to show detail
(b) A vertical cut through the x-line at
at the x-line.
x = 4.8.

Figure 6. Data for Bg = 1.0. Panels (a) and (b) show
T|| and T⊥, respectively. Panel (c) shows vertical cuts at
x = 4.8. The solid line is T|| and the dashed T⊥. Panel
(d) shows the distribution of vey in a region measuring
1.0 de long and 0.5 de high and centered on the x-line.

Figure 9. The electron density (a) and out-of-plane
magnetic ﬁeld Bz (b) in a simulation with Bg = 0.2.
In panel (a) black areas have been over-exposed to show
detail at the x-line.

Figure 7. The terms balancing the reconnection elec-
tric ﬁeld for Bg = 1.0. Ez is shown by the stars and the
dashed, solid, and dotted lines denote the v
B, diver-
gence of the pressure tensor, and inertial terms, respec-
tively. Note the diﬀerence in horizontal scale between
this ﬁgure and Figure 3. To reduce noise the plotted
quantities were averaged over 16 gridpoints in x and 4 in

×

SWISDAK ET AL.: TRANSITION GUIDE FIELD

X - 9

Figure 10. Data from Bg = 0.2. Panels (a) and (b)
show T|| and T⊥, respectively. Panel (c) shows vertical
cuts at x = 4.8. The solid line is T|| and the dashed T⊥.
Panel (d) shows the distribution of vey in a region mea-
suring 1.0 de long and 0.5 de high and centered on the
x-line.

Figure 12. Panels (a)–(c) show the vx-vy distribution
functions taken just upstream of the separatrix for runs
with Bg = 0, 0.2, 1.0, respectively. The slanted line in
each panel shows the direction of the local magnetic ﬁeld.
The colors are measured in units of phase space den-
sity. The counter-propagating features at the upper left
of each ﬁgure are due to electrons accelerated at the x-line

Figure 11. Panels (a)–(c) show the non-gyrotropic com-
ponent of Pyz for Bg = 0, 0.2, and 1.0. Panel (d) shows
a cut at x = 4.8 in each ﬁgure. The solid, dashed, and
dotted lines are for, respectively, Bg = 0, 0.2, and 1.0.

Figure 13. The reconnected ﬂux versus time for the
three runs discussed in this work. The solid, dashed, and
dotted lines correspond to Bg = 0, 0.2, and 1.0, respec-
tively. The reconnection rate is the slope of the curves.

Figure 14. The vz distribution functions for three runs.
The solid line shows the case Bg = 0, the dash-dotted
Bg = 0.2 and the dashed Bg = 1.0. The dotted line
shows the ions.

