5
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
1
3
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Measurement of the electric ﬂuctuation
spectrum of magnetohydrodynamic turbulence

S. D. Bale,∗ P. J. Kellogg,† F. S. Mozer,∗ T. S. Horbury,‡ and H. Reme§
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence in the solar wind is observed to show the spectral
behavior of classical Kolmogorov ﬂuid turbulence over an inertial subrange and departures from this
at short wavelengths, where energy should be dissipated. Here we present the ﬁrst measurements
of the electric ﬁeld ﬂuctuation spectrum over the inertial and dissipative wavenumber ranges in a
β & 1 plasma. The k−5/3 inertial subrange is observed and agrees strikingly with the magnetic
ﬂuctuation spectrum; the wave phase speed in this regime is shown to be consistent with the Alfv´en
speed. At smaller wavelengths kρi ≥ 1 the electric spectrum is softer and is consistent with the
expected dispersion relation of short-wavelength kinetic Alfv´en waves. Kinetic Alfv´en waves damp
on the solar wind ions and electrons and may act to isotropize them. This eﬀect may explain the
ﬂuid-like nature of the solar wind.

PACS numbers: 52.35.Ra Plasma turbulence; 52.35.Bj Magnetohydrodynamic waves

Turbulence is ubiquitous in astrophysical plasmas; tur-
bulent processes are thought to play a role in cosmic
ray and energetic particle acceleration and scattering
[1], advection dominated accretion ﬂows, and perhaps
solar/stellar wind acceleration. Yet key aspects of the
physics of turbulence in magnetized plasmas are poorly
understood, in particular the physics of dissipation at
small scales. The classical scenario of magnetohydrody-
namic turbulence is thus: ﬂuctuations in the plasma are
driven at some large ’outer’ scale and decay by interact-
ing locally in k−space. Eddies at some scale k exchange
energy with eddies at nearby spatial scales, possibly as a
three-wave or higher order interaction [10, 11, 12], with
the resulting net ﬂow of energy to smaller spatial scales
(larger k); this cascade of energy occurs over an ’iner-
tial subrange’ of k−space and can be shown to predict a
power spectrum that scales as k−5/3. At the smaller scale
of the ion thermal gyroradius, kρi ≥ 1, the ions become
demagnetized and the plasma can no longer behave as a
simple ﬂuid; the turbulent energy is then thought to be
damped on the thermal plasma by Landau or transit-time
damping. However, the details of this damping process
are not known and there a few reported measurements
in this regime of k−space.

Observations of the magnetic spectrum show break-
points at near kρi ≈ 1, above which the spectrum typ-
ically becomes harder [13, 14, 15]. This has been inter-
preted variously as evidence of kinetic Alfv´en waves [13],
whistler wave dispersion[17], and ion cyclotron damping
of Alfv´en waves [16].

Here we report the ﬁrst measured power spectrum of
electric ﬂuctuations in solar wind turbulence. The iner-

∗Department of Physics and Space Sciences Laboratory, University
of California, Berkeley
†School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Minnesota, Min-
neapolis
‡The Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College, London, UK
§CESR, Toulouse, France

tial subrange is clearly evident and follows the magnetic
ﬂuctuation spectrum. At large wavenumbers kρi ≥ 1,
the electric spectrum is enhanced.

Data are used from experiments on the Cluster space-
craft. Cluster ﬂies four spacecraft, as a controlled tetra-
hedron, in an inclined orbit with apogee at 19 Earth radii
(RE). From December to May each year, the spacecraft
exit the terrestrial magnetosphere on the dayside and
make measurements in the solar wind. We use approxi-
mately 195 minutes of data during the interval 00:07:00
- 03:21:51 on February 19, 2002, when Cluster was at
apogee and spent several hours in the ambient solar wind;
all of our data is from Cluster spacecraft 4.

The electric ﬁeld is measured by the Electric Field
and Waves experiment (EFW) experiment [6]; EFW is
a double-probe experiment which measures the ﬂoating
voltage of 8 cm diameter current-biased spheres extended
on 44m wires in quadrature. These spheres, as well as
the spacecraft, are illuminated by the Sun and emit pho-
toelectrons which cause the surfaces to charge positive
with respect to the plasma. The surfaces attract a return
current of thermal electrons which provide the electrical
coupling to the plasma. Systematic variations in this
coupling, due to changing illumination or variations in
surface properties and work function, are a large source
of background noise in EFW at the spacecraft spin-period
(4 seconds) and harmonics. This is discussed more below.
EFW measures the electric ﬁeld on two orthogonal sen-
sor pairs in the spacecraft spin-plane at 25 samples/sec.
These two components are rotated into X and Y com-
ponents in the GSE (geocentric solar ecliptic) coordinate
system. Since the GSE Y direction represents the ori-
entation with best symmetry for solar illumination, this
component of the electric ﬁeld is generally less noisy; we
use the GSE Y electric ﬁeld Ey for all of our analysis.
However, at any given instance, Ey is composed of data
from all four electric ﬁeld probes, each with slightly dif-
ferent photocoupling to the plasma. We therefore apply
a ﬁnite impulse response (FIR) ﬁlter to the data to notch
out the primary perturbations at the spin-tone and some

harmonics.

The magnetic ﬁeld is measured by the FGM instrument
[2]; three-component magnetic ﬁeld vectors are sampled
at 22 samples/sec (SPS). In our analysis, we use the
GSE Z component of the magnetic ﬁeld Bz for reasons
that are explained below. Moments of the solar wind
ion distribution (velocity, density, and temperature) are
computed from the ion spectrum measured by the CIS
experiment[4].

Figure 1 shows an overview of the data used in the
following analysis; panels a) and b) are wavelet spectro-
grams and will be discussed below. Panel c) shows the
two components of measured electric ﬁeld Ex and Ey
in GSE coordinates. Panel (d) show the magnetic ﬁeld
data. Panels e), f), and g) show the plasma ion density,
plasma ion βi (ratio of plasma to magnetic pressure), and
Alfv´en Mach number. The average ion beta is ¯βi ≈ 5,
average Alfv´en speed ¯vA ≈ 40 km/s, and the average
solar wind velocity is ¯vsw ≈ (-347, 4.9, -32.6) km/s (in
GSE coordinates), over the entire interval. During the
interval between 00:30 and 00:50, the magnetic ﬁeld is
nearly tangent to the Earth’s bow shock (as per a calcu-
lation assuming straight ﬁeld lines [3]); however, Cluster
summary plots of electron and plasma wave data show
no evidence of connection to the shock. All of our data
is ambient solar wind.

To compute power spectra, the electric ﬁeld data Ey
(25 samples/sec) were subsampled onto the time tags of
the magnetic ﬁeld data Bz (22 samples/sec) by linear in-
terpolation; a total of exactly 218 points are used. The
power spectral density (PSD) was computed using both
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) and Morelet wavelet [9]
schemes. The FFT was computed as follows: the data in-
terval was divided into 64 contiguous ensembles of length
4096 (182 seconds); this gives an inherent bandwidth of
∆f ≈ 1/186 Hz. To minimize spectral leakage, each
ensemble was ’whitened’ by applying a ﬁrst-order diﬀer-
ence algorithm, the PSD was computed by FFT, then the
spectrum was postdarkened [1] and divided by the band-
width of the FFT. Since the data is prewhitened, no win-
dow function was applied before the FFT. The electric
ﬁeld spectra were then ’cleaned’ by interpolating over the
narrowband spikes resulting from the spin-associated sig-
nals described above. A ﬁnal spectrum was computed as
the average of the 64 ensembles. Figure 2 shows the FFT
power spectra of Ey and Bz (in black). Wavelet spectra
were computed by ﬁrst producing the (complex) FFT of
Ey and applying the spectral cleaning (interpolation) to
the real and imaginary parts, at positive and negative
frequencies. An inverse FFT restores the ’cleaned’ signal
and a Morelet wavelet spectrogram was computed from
this cleaned Ey, as well as the original Bz. The wavelet
has 136 log-spaced frequencies; the ﬁnal wavelet PSD is
computed as the square of the spectrum averaged over
time. The wavelet PSD is also shown in Figure 2 (in
red). The wavelet spectrum extends to lower frequencies
than the FFT, which is composed of ensembles of smaller
data intervals; however, these very low frequencies lie be-

2

low the ’cone of inﬂuence’ and are unreliable[9]. Here we
restrict our interpretation to the region where the FFT
and wavelet spectra agree. The FFT electric spectrum in
Figure 2 shows clearly the eﬀect of the notch ﬁlters and
residual spin-harmonic spikes. The wavelet PSD, with its
much larger bandwidth, mostly averages over these resid-
ual features although a depression near the notched por-
tion of the spectrum can be seen. The FFT and wavelet
PSD spectra agree remarkably well for both electric and
magnetic ﬁelds.

Of course, our (human) scheme of measuring time
means little to the solar wind plasma, so there is little
reason to expect the data to be inherently organized by a
power spectrum in Hertz. Since the solar wind is super-
Alfv´enic (Figure 1), the phase speed vA of the Alfv´enic
ﬂuctuations is much less than the wind speed itself; hence
the measured frequency spectrum is actually a Doppler-
shifted wavenumber spectrum ω ≈ kvsw. This is often
called Taylor’s hypothesis and might not be considered
to hold at large wavenumbers, especially if waves are
present with phase speeds greater than the solar wind
speed (such as whistler waves).

As discussed above, it is considered that the ﬂuid-like
behavior of the wind breaks down at near kρi ≈ 1, there-
fore kρi is a natural parameter for organization of the
power spectrum. The top panel of Figure 3 shows the
FFT and wavelet power spectra organized by kρi, instead
of frequency. For the FFT spectrum, the local values of
|vsw|, Ti, and |B| are used to compute k = ω/vsw and
the thermal ion gyroradius ρi = vi/Ωci averaged over
each (186 sec) ensemble; the Ey and Bz power spectra
are then interpolated onto a linearly-spaced set of val-
ues kρi ∈ (0.006, 10). Since solar wind parameters vary
slightly in each ensemble, this also has the eﬀect of smear-
ing (averaging) over the narrowband interference in the
FFT PSD of Ey. The wavelet spectrograms are time-
averaged on to 4 second intervals and then interpolated
onto a set of log-spaced values of kρi; panels a) and b)
of Figure 1 show these scaled spectrograms as a function
of time.
In Figure 1 a) and b), the ﬂuctuation power
has been divided by k−5/3 to highlight ﬂuctuations above
the average spectrum of the inertial range. The electric
and magnetic wavelet spectrograms are then averaged to
compute the composite spectra in panel a) of Figure 3.
Between kρi ≈ 0.015 and 0.45, the wavelet and FFT
spectra of electric and magnetic ﬂuctuations show power
law behavior with indices of k−1.7, which is consistent
with the Kolmogorov value of 5/3. Both δEy and δBz
show breakpoints at near kρi ≈ 0.45; the magnetic spec-
trum becomes harder with a index k−2.12, while the elec-
tric spectrum becomes softer. As discussed above, hard
magnetic spectra have been observed previously [14, 15].
Above kρi ≈ 0.45, the electric spectrum is power law like
k−1.26 to kρi ≈ 2.5. Above this second breakpoint, a ex-
ponential exp (−kρi/12.5) better ﬁts the spectrum. At
these higher wavenumbers, the electric ﬁeld data is noisy
and shows harmonics of the spin tone (as shown above).
To test the validity of this data, we perform two analyses.

3

shown as a horizontal bar. Over, and even below, the
inertial range kρi ∈ (0.015, 0.4) the phase speed is con-
sistent with the local Alfv´en speed; this is strong evidence
of the Alfv´enic nature of the cascade. The red curve in
panel b) is a ﬁt of the function v0 (1 + k2ρ2
i ) to the FFT
curve, where v0 is a free parameter which ﬁnds a best ﬁt
at v0 ≈ 55 km/s. This function approximates the disper-
sion relation of kinetic Alfv´en waves. The cold-plasma
whistler wave phase speed goes as vφ ≈ (kρi) β−1/2 vA
above ω > Ωci, i.e.
linear with kρi, and would form
a much shallower dispersion above kρi ≈ 1 than is ob-
served in panel b) of Figure 3. This leads us to believe
that the Alfv´en waves in the inertial subrange eventu-
ally disperse as ’kinetic’ Alfv´en waves above kρi ≈ 1,
becoming more electrostatic and eventually damping on
the thermal plasma. Plasma heating by linear dissipa-
tion of kinetic Alfv´en waves at β ≈ 1 has been studied in
the context of accretion ﬂows[5]. There it was found that
Landau and transit-time damping contribute to both pro-
ton and electron heating at short wavelengths, which is
enhanced for higher β. Kellogg [7] computed the level of
electric ﬁeld ﬂuctuations required to stochastically ther-
malize protons to 1 AU in the solar wind; he found that
a spectral density of E2 ≈ 10−11(V /m)2Hz−1 was suf-
ﬁcient. This is one order of magnitude less than our
observed levels (Figure 2). It is, therefore, plausible to
conclude that the observed electric spectrum is respon-
sible for isotropizing the solar wind protons and may be
the mechanism by which the solar wind maintains its
ﬂuid-like characteristics.

Acknowledgments

Cluster data analysis at UC Berkeley is supported by

NASA grants NAG5-11944 and NNG04GG08G.

[15] H. J. Beinroth and F. M. Neubauer, J. Geophys. Res, 86,

[16] S. P. Gary, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 6759, 1999.
[17] O. Stawicki, S. P. Gary, and H. Li, J. Geophys. Res., 106,

7755, 1981.

8273, 2001.

The black dots of panel c) in Figure 3 show the correla-
tion between the electric and magnetic wavelet power as
a function of kρi. It can be seen that the ﬂuctuations
are strongly correlated through the inertial range (with
coeﬃcient ≈ 1), remain well-correlated between the two
breakpoints kρi ∈ (0.45, 2) and begin to loose corre-
lation quickly above the second breakpoint. A wavelet
cross-spectral analysis (between δEy and δBz was also
computed; the blue bars show the cross-spectral coher-
ence, with 1 sigma error bars, also as a function of kρi.
Again, δEy and δBz are strongly coherent through the
inertial range and past the ﬁrst breakpoint. We conclude
that the electric and magnetic spectra physical and well-
correlated up to the second spectral breakpoint. Above
kρi ≈ 2.5 it is diﬃcult to assess the quality of the data. If
electrostatic waves are present, there is no expectation of
correlation with δB; however in this initial study, we can-
not eliminate the possibility of systematic noise at these
frequencies. Additionally, the eﬀects of low pass ﬁlters
on both the EFW and FGM experiments may modify
the spectra at these highest (kρi > 3) frequencies.

To estimate the phase speed of the ﬂuctuations, we use
Faraday’s law and compute the ratio of the electric and
magnetic spectra. Since the electric ﬁeld measurements
are made in the spacecraft (unprimed) frame, we need
to Lorentz transform to the plasma (primed) frame by
~E = ~E′ + ~vsw × ~B. Panel b) of Figure 3 shows the phase
speed

vφ(kρi) =

δE′
y(kρi)
δBz(kρi)

=

δEy(kρi)
δBz(kρi)

+ vx − vz

(1)

Bx
Bz

where ¯vx, ¯vz, ¯Bx, and ¯Bz are the average x and z compo-
nents of the solar wind velocity and magnetic ﬁeld. The
black dots in panel b) are computed from the wavelet
spectrum, while the blue line is computed from the FFT
spectrum. The average Alfv´en speed ¯vA ≈ 40 km/s is

[1] Bieber et al., J. Geophys. Res., 98, 3585, 1993.
[2] A. Balogh et al., Space Science Rev., 79, 65, 1997.
[3] Filbert, P. C. and P. J. Kellogg, J. Geophys. Res., 84,

1369, 1979.

[4] H. Reme et al., Space Science Rev., 79, 303, 1997.
[5] G. Gustafsson et al., Space Sci. Rev., 79, 137 (1997).
[6] G. Gustafsson et al., Space Sci. Rev., 79, 137 (1997).
[7] P. J. Kellogg, Astrophys. J., 528, 480, 2000.
[8] E. Quataert, Astrophys. J., 500, 978, 2000.
[9] C. Torrence and G. P. Compo, Bull. American Meteoro-

logical Society, 79, 61, 1998.

[10] F. Waleﬀe, Phys. Fluids, 4, 350, 1992.
[11] P. Goldreich and S. Sridhar, Astrophys. J., 485, 680,

1997.

1996.

[12] C. S. Ng and A. Bhattacharjee, Astrophys. J., 465, 845,

[13] R. J. Leamon et al., J. Geophys. Res., 104, 22331, 1999.
[14] R. J. Leamon et al., J. Geophys. Res., 103, 4475, 1998.

4

FIG. 1: Wavelet and time series data of solar wind turbu-
lence. From the top-down, the ﬁve panels show a) the wavelet
spectrogram of Ey, as a function of kρi, b) a similar wavelet
spectrogram of Bz, c) the X and Y components of the mea-
sured electric ﬁeld, d) the vector magnetic ﬁeld, e) plasma
ion density, f) plasma ion β, and g) the Alfv´en Mach number.
This entire interval was used for the spectral analysis of Ey
and Bz. The spectral breakpoints called out.

FIG. 2: Power spectral density of electric δEy and magnetic
ﬂuctuations δBz as a function of frequency, computed from
FFT (black) and Morlet wavelet (red) algorithms. The FFT
spectrum of electric ﬁeld (upper panel) shows the eﬀect of
notch ﬁlters and residual spin-tone data.

FIG. 3: The wavelet (upper) and FFT (lower) power spec-
tra of Ey (green) and Bz (black) binned as a function of
wavenumber kρi (and oﬀset for clarity) in panel a). The elec-
tric are multiplied by factor to lie atop the magnetic spec-
tra. The spectrum is Kolmogorov k−5/3 over the interval
kρi ∈ (0.015, 0.45); a spectral breakpoint occurs for both Ey
and Bz at kρi ≈ 0.45. A second breakpoint occurs for elec-
tric spectrum at kρi ≈ 2.5 above which the electric spectrum
is more exponential. Panel b) shows the ratio of the electric
to magnetic spectra in the plasma frame; the average Alfv´en
speed (¯vA ≈ 40 km/s) is shown as a horizontal line. The red
line is a ﬁtted dispersion curve, discussed in the text. Panel
c) shows both the cross-coherence of δEy with δBz (as blue
dots with error bars) and the correlation between the electric
and magnetic power (as black dots).

This figure "figure1.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0503103v1

This figure "figure2.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0503103v1

This figure "figure3.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0503103v1

