6
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
1
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH, VOL. ???, XXXX, DOI:10.1029/,

Plasma Depletion and Mirror Waves Ahead of Interplanetary
Mass Ejections
Y. Liu,1 J. D. Richardson,1 J. W. Belcher,1 J. C. Kasper,1 and R. M. Skoug2

Abstract. We ﬁnd that the sheath regions between fast interplanetary mass ejections
(ICMEs) and their preceding shocks are often characterized by plasma depletion and mir-
ror wave structures, analogous to planetary magnetosheaths. A case study of these sig-
natures in the sheath of a magnetic cloud (MC) shows that a plasma depletion layer (PDL)
coincides with magnetic ﬁeld draping around the MC. In the same event, we observe an
enhanced thermal anisotropy and plasma beta as well as anti-correlated density and mag-
netic ﬂuctuations which are signatures of mirror mode waves. We perform a superposed
epoch analysis of ACE and Wind plasma and magnetic ﬁeld data from diﬀerent classes
of ICMEs to illuminate the general properties of these regions. For MCs preceded by shocks,
the sheaths have a PDL with an average duration of 6 hours (corresponding to a spa-
≃ 1.2 - 1.3 and are
tial span of about 0.07 AU), a proton temperature anisotropy
marginally unstable to the mirror instability. Plasma depletion and mirror waves may
also appear in the case of ICMEs with preceding shocks which are not MCs but at a
reduced level. ICMEs without shocks are not associated with these features. These dif-
ferences between the three ICME categories imply that these features depend on the ICME
geometry and the extent of upstream solar wind compression by the ICMEs. We discuss
the implications of these features for a variety of crucial physical processes including mag-
netic reconnection, formation of magnetic holes and energetic particle modulation in the
solar wind.

T⊥p
T
kp

Field Lines

Shock

Turbulent Sheath

Plasma Flow

ICME

Sun

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the turbulent sheath
between an ICME and the preceding shock in the solar
equatorial plane, illustrating the ﬁeld line draping and
consequent plasma ﬂow.

1. Introduction

Plasma depletion layers (PDLs) and mirror mode waves
are common features of planetary dayside magnetosheaths
[e.g., Kaufmann et al., 1970; Crooker et al., 1979; Hammond
et al., 1993; Violante et al., 1995; Hill et al., 1995]. The phys-

1

ical explanation for the plasma depletion is that the plasma
is squeezed out of the local noon region as the magnetic ﬁeld
drapes around the magnetosphere [Zwan and Wolf, 1976].
Combining this model with the double-adiabatic equations
derived by Chew et al. [1956], Crooker and Siscoe [1977] pre-
dicted that a temperature anisotropy of T⊥ > Tk would be
a direct consequence of the magnetic ﬁeld line draping and
plasma depletion, where ⊥ and k denote the directions per-
pendicular and parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld. When the tem-
perature anisotropy exceeds the instability threshold, mirror
mode waves are generated.

Magnetic ﬁeld draping may occur in front of an obstacle
in the solar wind if the magnetized plasma cannot pene-
trate the obstacle. Coronal mass ejections (CMEs), large-
scale magnetic structures expelled from the Sun, form large
obstacles called interplanetary mass ejections (ICMEs) as
they propagate into the solar wind. The ambient magnetic
ﬁeld may be draped around fast ICMEs, similar to the case
of planetary magnetosheaths [Gosling and McComas, 1987;
McComas et al., 1988]. Figure 1 shows an idealized sketch
of this ﬁeld line draping. An ICME with its axis lying in the
solar equatorial plane creates a preceding shock if its speed
relative to the ambient solar wind exceeds the fast-mode
speed. Note that the ICME may still remain magnetically
connected to the Sun. In front of the shock, the ambient
magnetic ﬁeld has the form of a Parker spiral. Between the
shock and ICME is the sheath region where the magnetic
ﬁeld becomes stretched and turbulent. The shocked solar
wind plasma, frozen-in to the magnetic ﬁeld, is compressed
in the direction perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld, which
may cause the plasma to ﬂow along the draped ﬁeld lines
and result in formation of a PDL. The plasma temperature
is enhanced in the perpendicular direction by the compres-
sion and depressed along the magnetic ﬁeld by the parallel
ﬂow. As a result, anisotropic ion distributions are produced.
When the threshold condition

T⊥
Tk

− 1 >

1
β⊥

(1)

X - 2

LIU ET AL.: PLASMA DEPLETION AND MIRROR WAVES AHEAD OF ICMES

close by summarizing and discussing the results in section 5
and test the SEA in the Appendix. This paper provides the
ﬁrst consistent view of plasma depletion and mirror waves
in the environment of ICMEs.

2. Observations and Data Reduction

We use solar wind plasma and magnetic ﬁeld observa-
tions at 1 AU from ACE and Wind. Particularly important
are the temperature anisotropy data which are needed to
identify mirror mode waves. The ACE and Wind plasma
teams use two diﬀerent algorithms to calculate T⊥ and Tk.
The Wind team ﬁts the measured ion velocity distributions
with a convecting bi-Maxwellian function, using the mag-
netic ﬁeld data to determine the parallel and perpendicular
directions [Kasper et al., 2002]. The accuracy of their ther-
mal anisotropies may be aﬀected by angular ﬂuctuations of
the magnetic ﬁeld; spectra with angular ﬂuctuations over
15◦ are rejected. The ACE team calculates the second mo-
ment integrals of the measured distributions to obtain the
temperature anisotropy. The resulting temperature matrix
is then rotated into a ﬁeld-aligned frame, which gives two
perpendicular and one parallel temperatures [e.g., Gary et
al., 2001]. If the plasma is gyrotropic (i.e., there is no pre-
ferred direction for particle gyration in a plane perpendicular

is satisﬁed, the plasma is subject to the mirror mode in-
stability [Chandrasekhar et al., 1958]. The perpendicular
plasma beta is deﬁned as β⊥ = nkB T⊥
B2/2µ0 with n, kB, B and µ0
representing the plasma density, Boltzmann constant, mag-
netic ﬁeld strength and permeability of free space, respec-
tively. This picture should apply to ICMEs with any axis
orientation. Therefore, PDLs and mirror mode waves are
expected to form ahead of fast ICMEs. The presence and
properties of these features may depend on the geometry of
the ejecta and how much the magnetic ﬁeld is draped and
compressed. Unlike the case of planetary magnetosheaths,
ICMEs are expanding in the solar wind and the spatial span
of their sheath regions is increasing since the preceding shock
usually moves faster than the ejecta.

A possible PDL lasting about 3 hours in front of an ICME
was identiﬁed and investigated by Farrugia et al.
[1997],
based on an ideal magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) theory de-
veloped by Erkaev et al.
[1995]. Mirror mode structures
which appear to be ahead of an ICME were also found in
the solar wind [Tsurutani et al., 1992]. In this paper, we use
a case study and statistical analysis to investigate plasma de-
pletion and mirror waves associated with ICMEs. Section 2
describes the observational data and data analysis. Section
3 shows an example of a PDL and mirror waves in the sheath
region of an ICME. A superposed epoch analysis (SEA) of
ICMEs is conducted in section 4, which will give evidence
for the presence of the features on a statistical base. We

1Kavli Institute for Astrophysics and Space Research,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
USA.

2Space Science and Applications, Los Alamos National

Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, USA.

Copyright 2013 by the American Geophysical Union.
0148-0227/13/$9.00

Figure 2. ACE measurements of the normalized proton
temperature Tp/Tex over the thermal anisotropy and par-
allel plasma beta of protons. The color shading indicates
the average values of Tp/Tex for the data binning. Black
contours display the 2D histogram overlaid on the data
at levels of [0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9]. Also shown are the
thresholds for the ﬁrehose (dashed line), cyclotron (solid
line) and mirror (dotted line) instabilities.

Figure 3. Solar wind plasma and magnetic ﬁeld param-
eters measured by ACE for a 2.5-day interval in 1999.
From top to bottom, the panels show the alpha-to-proton
density ratio, proton density, bulk speed, proton temper-
ature, magnetic ﬁeld strength, and thermal anisotropy.
The shaded region shows a MC while the dashed line in-
dicates the arrival time of the MC-driven shock. Dotted
lines denote the 8% level of the alpha/proton density ra-
tio (top panel), the expected proton temperature (fourth
panel), and the scaled Wind data (bottom panel). Mirror
and cyclotron thresholds are shown by the colored lines.

LIU ET AL.: PLASMA DEPLETION AND MIRROR WAVES AHEAD OF ICMES

X - 3

We use mainly ICMEs from the list of Liu et al.

to the magnetic ﬁeld), the two perpendicular temperatures
should be the same; we only include the data for which the
ratio of the two perpendicular temperatures is less than 1.3.
[2005]
which are observed at both ACE and Wind. Events with
Tp/Tex ≤ 0.5 and nα/np ≥ 8% were qualiﬁed as ICMEs,
where Tp, Tex and nα are the proton temperature, expected
proton temperature and alpha density separately. The ex-
pected temperatures are calculated from the temperature-
speed relationship at 1 AU [Lopez, 1987]. The boundaries
of ICMEs are adjusted by incorporating other signatures
of ICMEs [Neugebauer and Goldstein, 1997, and references
therein]. A subset of ICMEs with smooth rotations of
the magnetic ﬁeld are deﬁned as magnetic clouds (MCs)
[Burlaga et al., 1981]. The ICMEs are further sorted into
three categories: MCs and ICMEs (non-MCs) with preced-
ing shocks and ICMEs without preceding shocks. Events
with large data gaps in the sheath regions are rejected, which
gives a total 18 MCs preceded by shocks, 21 ICMEs (non-
MCs) with forward shocks and 56 ICMEs without shocks be-
tween 1998 and 2005. All the shocks upstream of the ICMEs
are fast shocks across which the magnetic ﬁeld strength in-
creases.

We compare the thermal anisotropies determined from
the Wind non-linear ﬁttings to those obtained from the
ACE moment integrals for diﬀerent plasma regimes. Fig-
ure 2 shows ACE observations of the normalized temper-
ature Tp/Tex as a function of the temperature anisotropy
and parallel plasma beta of protons. The parallel plasma
npkBTkp
beta of protons is deﬁned as βkp =
B2/2µ0 . A similar plot
for Wind data can be found in Liu et al.
[2006, Figure 9].
The 1.7 × 106 ACE 64 s temperature averages from 1998
- 2005 are divided into two-dimensional bins of tempera-
ture anisotropy and plasma beta; bins with dense spectra
are further subdivided, with the requirement that each cell
contains at least 2000 data points. The curves indicate the
threshold conditions

T⊥p
Tkp

− 1 =

S
βα
kp

(2)

for the cyclotron, mirror and ﬁrehose instabilities, respec-
tively. The free parameters, S and α, are determined from
solutions to the single-ﬂuid MHD equations or to the Vlasov
dispersion relation [Parker, 1958; Gary et al., 1997]. The
ﬁrehose instability has S = −2 and α = 1, while S = 0.64,
α = 0.41 for the cyclotron instability over 0.1 ≤ βkp ≤ 10
and S = 0.87, α = 0.56 for the mirror mode in the domain
5 ≤ βkp ≤ 50 at the maximum growth rate γm = 0.01Ωp.
Here Ωp denotes the proton cyclotron frequency. Most of the
data is constrained by these thresholds; when the thermal
anisotropy is close to the thresholds, the plasma is heated by
the induced instabilities. As indicated by the contour lines,
the most probable temperature anisotropy for the solar wind
at 1 AU is T⊥p/Tkp = 0.6 - 0.7. This ratio can be increased
in the sheath regions of fast ICMEs to 1.1 - 1.3. The ICME
plasma, characterized by Tp/Tex ≤ 0.5, lies far away from
the instability thresholds. These results are consistent with
the picture described by Wind data [Liu et al., 2006]. We
conclude that the two methods used to derive the thermal
anisotropies give similar results.

3. Case Study

We ﬁrst present a study of the association of a PDL and
mirror mode waves with a MC observed by ACE and Wind
on day 106 - 107 of 1999. Figure 3 shows the ACE data,
with the MC interval indicated by the shaded area. The
MC was identiﬁed by the enhanced helium density, declin-
ing speed, depressed proton temperature, smooth and strong
magnetic ﬁeld, and large rotation of the By component (see

Figure 5). A forward shock driven by the event passed the
spacecraft on day 106.44, with simultaneous sharp increases
in the proton density, bulk speed, temperature and magnetic
ﬁeld strength. Within the sheath region, between the shock
and the leading edge of the MC, the proton density ﬁrst
increases due to the compression at the shock and then de-
creases closer to the MC. This density decrease is the plasma
depletion mentioned above. Fluctuations in the density and
magnetic ﬁeld strength are out of phase during the density
increase. This signature is typical for mirror waves. The
bottom panel shows the temperature anisotropy and insta-
bility threshold conditions calculated from equation 2 for
mirror and cyclotron instabilities. The dotted line in this
panel shows Wind data scaled in time to match the sheath
and MC intervals seen at ACE. Again, anisotropies from
Wind ﬁt and ACE moment integrals are in agreement. The
− 1, is near zero inside the MC but
thermal anisotropy,
drops to ∼ −0.4 in the ambient solar wind. In the sheath
region, the anisotropy is as high as 0.5 (exceeding the insta-
bility thresholds) and has an average value of 0.2 - 0.3 (very
close to the thresholds). The plasma beta (not shown here)
is very high in the sheath after day 106.52, with values some-
times exceeding 50. As is evident from Figure 2, the mirror
threshold is lower than the cyclotron limit when βkp > 6,
which is also indicated in the ﬁnal panel of Figure 3. There-
fore, mirror instabilities are excited in the sheath and give
rise to the anti-correlated density and magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuc-
tuations. More evidence is provided below for the plasma
depletion and mirror mode structures.

T⊥p
Tkp

3.1. Flux-rope and Shock Orientation

The mechanism described in section 1 for generation of
PDLs and mirror mode waves may ﬁt these observations.
To test this ﬁt requires knowledge of the MC and shock ori-
entation. Minimum variance analysis (MVA) [Sonnerup and
Cahill, 1967] provides estimates of the MC axis orientation
using the measured magnetic ﬁeld vectors [e.g., Lepping et

0.5

z HAUL

0

Shock Normal

-0.5

0.5
0.5
0.5

-0.5

Axis

0

y HAUL

-0.5

0
0

x HAUL
x HAUL

Figure 4. 3D rendering of the MC in the GSE coor-
dinates. Arrows indicate the axis orientation and shock
normal, respectively. The belt around the ﬂux tube ap-
proximates the shock surface.

X - 4

LIU ET AL.: PLASMA DEPLETION AND MIRROR WAVES AHEAD OF ICMES

al., 1990; Bothmer and Schwenn, 1998]. Eigenvectors of
the magnetic variance matrix, ˆy∗, ˆz∗, ˆx∗, corresponding to
the eigenvalues in descending order, form a right-handed or-
thogonal coordinate system. MCs are oriented along the
intermediate variance direction (ˆz∗). Application of the
MVA method to the normalized magnetic ﬁeld measure-
ments within the MC gives an axis, in terms of the azimuthal
(θ) and longitudinal (φ) angles, of θ = −69◦ and φ = 91◦
in the geocentric solar ecliptic (GSE) coordinates. The axis
orientation is also determined with a ﬂux-rope reconstruc-
tion technique, based on the Grad-Shafranov equation [Hau
and Sonnerup, 1999; Hu and Sonnerup, 2002]; the resulting
axis orientation is very close to the MVA estimate.

Figure 4 is a 3D view of the MC modeled as a cylindrical
ﬂux rope with a diameter of 0.23 AU (obtained from the
average speed multiplied by the MC duration in Figure 3)
in the GSE system. Note that the x axis points from Earth
to the Sun, so the Sun lies at (1, 0, 0) AU in the system.
The ﬂux rope is viewed from (-2, 1.5, 0) AU relative to the
origin (Earth) of the system. It is almost perpendicular to
the ecliptic plane. The dark belt around the MC represents
part of the shock surface which is approximated as a sphere
centered at the Sun. The distance between the shock and
the MC is about 0.08 AU along the ACE trajectory. The
upper arrow points in the direction of the shock normal with
θ = 7◦ and φ = 178◦ determined from magnetic coplanarity

ˆn =

(B1 × B2) × (B2 − B1)
|(B1 × B2) × (B2 − B1)|

,

where B1 and B2 are the average magnetic ﬁeld vectors up-
stream and downstream of the shock, respectively. The an-
gle between the shock normal and upstream magnetic ﬁeld
is about 61◦, so the shock is oblique, similar to Earth’s bow
shock which is generally a fast oblique shock. The shock
normal makes an angle of about 96◦ with the ﬂux-rope axis.
Therefore, the whole situation can be pictured as a ﬂux rope
nearly perpendicular to the ecliptic plane moving away from
the Sun (along -x direction) and driving an oblique shock
ahead of it. In the MC frame, the ambient ﬁeld lines may
be draped around the MC, analogous to planetary magne-
tosheaths.

The shock speed can be calculated from vs = n2v2−n1v1
given by the conservation of mass across the shock. Substi-
tuting the upstream density and velocity n1 = 4 cm−3 and
v1 = 375 km s−1, and downstream n2 = 9 cm−3 and v2 =
430 km s−1, we obtain vs ≃ 474 km s−1, slightly larger than
the MC leading-edge speed of 450 km s−1. The size of the
sheath, between the MC and shock, is thus expected to in-
crease with distance. The MC is also expanding in the solar
wind, as shown by the speed diﬀerence between the leading
and trailing edges (see Figure 3). These two factors may af-
fect the formation of PDLs and anisotropic ion distributions
within the sheath.

n2−n1

3.2. Plasma Depletion and Magnetic Field Draping

Figure 5 provides an expanded view of the PDL and shows
that it is associated with ﬁeld line draping. The dashed lines
bracket the PDL, in which the proton density decreases by
a factor of 2 within 2.6 hours. Within the MC the By com-
ponent, not Bz as usually seen in MCs, exhibits a large
rotation, which conﬁrms our MC axis determination. Inter-
estingly, the magnetic ﬁeld is nearly radial inside this PDL
as indicated by the comparison of the Bx component with
the ﬁeld strength. These data are direct evidence for ﬁeld
line draping. The bottom panel shows the dot product of
the ﬁeld direction with the axis orientation, which is typ-
ically near zero in the PDL, so the ﬁeld lines in the PDL
are perpendicular to the MC axis. This product reaches
its maximum close to the MC center. In contrast, the dot
product between the ﬁeld direction and minimum variance
direction (ˆx∗) is almost -1 in the PDL but roughly constant
throughout the MC interval, further evidence of the mag-
netic ﬁeld draping. The good time coincidence between the
density decrease and ﬁeld line draping provides conﬁdence
that this feature is a PDL.

3.3. Wave Structures

Mirror mode instabilities produce anti-correlated density

and magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations, namely,

δn
n

= −(

− 1)

T⊥
Tk

δB
B

(3)

for a bi-Maxwellian distribution [e.g., Hasegawa, 1969],
where δn and δB are perturbations in the background
plasma density n and magnetic ﬁeld strength B. However, in
the same low frequency regime the slow mode, alone among
the three basic MHD modes, also has a plasma density vari-
ation out of phase with the magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuation. Start-
ing with the CGL theory [Chew et al., 1956], we obtain the
relationship between density and magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations
expressed as

δn
n

= (

kBT⊥ sin2 θ
mp
kBT⊥
mp

−

)−1[

ω2
k2 −
kBTk cos2 θ
mp

B2
µ0nmp
δB
B

]

,

+

(4)

Figure 5. Proton density (upper panel), magnetic ﬁeld
magnitude with its components denoted by the colored
lines (middle panel), and the dot product of the ﬁeld
direction with the MC axis orientation (lower panel) en-
compassing the PDL between the vertical dashed lines.
The dotted line in the bottom panel shows the dot prod-
uct between the ﬁeld direction and the minimum variance
direction of the MC magnetic ﬁeld.

LIU ET AL.: PLASMA DEPLETION AND MIRROR WAVES AHEAD OF ICMES

X - 5

2

where mp is the proton mass and θ is the angle between the
wave vector k and the magnetic ﬁeld. The dispersion rela-
tion, ω
k2 , is given by Parks [2004, equation (9.247), but see
the errata]. Equation (4) is a general relationship between
the density and magnetic ﬂuctuations for the slow and fast
modes. It can be readily shown from equation (4) that the
fast mode always gives positively correlated δn and δB. The
ﬁrehose instability arising from this mode will also induce
in-phase density and magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations, at least at
its linear stage. The intermediate mode with a dispersion
P⊥−Pk
B2/µ0 + 1) cos2 θ is not involved with the
relation ω
perturbations so that δρ = δB = 0 across this mode as
in the ordinary MHD theory. Here vA denotes the Alfv´en
speed and P⊥, Pk are the perpendicular and parallel thermal
pressures.

k2 = v2
A(

2

The direction of the wave vector can be estimated using
MVA on the measured magnetic ﬁeld. For plane waves, the
propagation vector lies along the minimum variance direc-
tion. The best estimate of the direction is roughly normal
to the magnetic ﬁeld with an average value of 93◦ for the
interval with active ﬂuctuations in the sheath region, so the
waves may be highly oblique. Therefore, equation (4) can
be reduced to

δn
n

= −(1 +

2
β⊥

)

δB
B

(5)

for the slow mode. Equations (3) and (5) can be used to
compare data with theoretical predictions.

Figure 6 displays the density variations within a 4-hour
interval in the sheath region. Note that the ﬂuctuations
seem to be periodic at later times. A frequency of 1.04×10−3
Hz stands out in the power spectrum of the ﬂuctuations,
which corresponds to a period of about 960 s. The smooth
density proﬁle is obtained by applying a Butterworth low-

pass ﬁlter to the frequency space of the data and then con-
verting it back to the time domain. We set the cutoﬀ fre-
quency of the ﬁlter to 5 × 10−4 Hz, smaller than the present
wave frequency. The same ﬁlter is also applied to the mag-
netic ﬁeld data to get the background ﬁeld strength. The
ﬁlter removes ﬂuctuations with frequencies higher than the
cutoﬀ frequency, so the smoothed quantities represent the
unperturbed proﬁles. Using these background quantities
and the ﬁeld variations, we obtain the density perturbations
predicted by the mirror and slow modes from equations (3)
and (5), respectively. Figure 6 compares the observed and
predicted density ﬂuctuations. The density variations pre-
dicted by the mirror mode agree fairly well with observations
after 12 UT on day 106; only one spike is missed at 14.3 UT.
The slow mode also predicts the phase of the variation cor-
rectly, but gives much larger ﬂuctuation amplitudes than
observed. As implied by equation (3), the mirror mode den-
sity perturbation relative to the background is smaller in
amplitude than the corresponding magnetic ﬁeld variation
for a moderate anisotropy, while the opposite is true across
slow mode waves as described by equation (5). Therefore,
we conclude that the wave activity is driven by the mirror
mode. The mirror mode is also present in the PDL where
the onset condition is met (see Figure 3), but its amplitude
is signiﬁcantly reduced, probably due to the decrease in the
plasma beta.

It should be noted that the mirror mode is non-oscillatory
and its proper treatment requires kinetic theory [e.g.,
Hasegawa, 1969; Southwood and Kivelson, 1993]. It arises
as the result of the mirror instability which is a purely grow-
ing mode in a uniform plasma. The mirror mode may be
coupled to propagating waves, for instance, the drift wave
produced by magnetic ﬁeld and density gradients [Hasegawa,
1969], and then be convected away. The apparent oscilla-
tory structure in Figure 6 is likely to result from this wave
coupling. To illustrate this point, we write the dispersion
relation as [Hasegawa, 1969]

ω = ω∗ + iξµ1/2[η − (1 +

µ
ν

)

eν
I0(ν) − I1(ν)

],

(6)

Figure 6. Extended view of the density ﬂuctuations
ahead of the PDL. Colored lines indicate density varia-
tions predicted by the slow and mirror modes, respec-
tively. The background proﬁle obtained from a low-pass
ﬁlter is represented by the dashed line.

Figure 7. Theoretical growth rate of the mirror instabil-
ity as a function of the parallel plasma beta and temper-
ature anisotropy. The color bar indicates the logarithmic
scale of the growth rate in units of the proton cyclotron
frequency. Contour lines show the growth rate levels of
[10−2, 10−1, 100, 101] × Ωp.

X - 6

where

LIU ET AL.: PLASMA DEPLETION AND MIRROR WAVES AHEAD OF ICMES

ξ = (

)1/2(

2
π

Tk
T⊥

)3/2 Ωp
β⊥

,

η = β⊥(

− 1),

T⊥
Tk
k2
k
Ω2
p
k2
⊥
Ω2
p

kBT⊥
mp
kBT⊥
mp

,

.

µ =

ν =

Here ω∗ is the frequency of the wave that the mirror mode
is coupled to, and I0, I1 are the modiﬁed Bessel functions of
the ﬁrst kind with order 0 and 1. Without the wave coupling,
the wave frequency ω is purely imaginary and as a result the
mirror wave is non-propagating. This point contradicts the
perspective of ﬂuid theory. The onset condition expressed
by equation (1) is derived from the above equation at the
limit of a long perpendicular wavelength, i.e., when the per-
pendicular wave number k⊥ is much larger than the parallel
wave number kk. Here we use equation (6) to estimate the
maximum growth rate of the mirror instability. Shown by
this equation, the growth rate is proportional to kk. While
k⊥ ≫ kk, the maximum growth rate will be restricted by
the eﬀect of ﬁnite Larmor radius since the perpendicular
wavelength cannot be smaller than the ion Larmor radius.
Taking derivatives of that equation with respect to µ and ν
and equating them to zero, we obtain the maximum growth
rate expressed as

γm = (

3
π

)1/2 1
6β⊥

(

T⊥
Tk

)−3/2(η − 1)2Ωp

(7)

for kk ≪ k⊥ at the long wavelength limit. Note that η is
a measure of the overshoot of the mirror instability which
must be larger than 1 as required by equation (1). The the-
oretical growth rate is displayed in Figure 7 over the two
dimensional plane of the parallel plasma beta and thermal
anisotropy under the constraint of η > 1. As is evident from
the ﬁgure, a signiﬁcant growth rate occurs only in high beta
regions when the thermal anisotropy is moderate. The best
power law ﬁt to the 0.01Ωp level of the growth rate over
5 ≤ βkp ≤ 50 in the form of equation (2) gives S = 1.05
and α = 0.85, close to but lower than the the numerical
evaluation of Gary et al.
In
the current case, the average observed values β⊥p ≃ 12 and
T⊥p
≃ 1.2 result in γm = 0.02Ωp, which seems reasonable
Tkp
for the overshoot of the instability of η ≃ 2.4.

[1997] in the same domain.

4. Superposed Epoch Analysis

In the previous section, we presented an example showing
the presence of a PDL and mirror mode waves in front of a
MC. ICME data in the literature often show these features
[e.g., Neugebauer and Goldstein, 1997, Figure 3; Bothmer
and Schwenn, 1998, Figures 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8; Mulligan and
Russell, 2001, Figures 1 and 2; Richardson et al., 2002, Fig-
ure 2; Richardson et al., 2004, Figure 1; Zurbuchen and
Richardson, 2004, Figure 2; Gosling et al., 2005, Figure 1];
all the ICMEs are preceded by shocks. In this section we
show the results of a superposed epoch analysis (SEA) to
give a more broad-based view of these features. We de-
ﬁne the ICME arrival time as the zero epoch and superpose
the ICME-related data for the three ICME classes (MCs
with shocks, non-MC ICMEs with shocks, ICMEs without
shocks) separately. ICMEs with preceding shocks are scaled
into a 30 hour long interval (the average duration of an
ICME at 1 AU) and the sheath regions are scaled into 14
hour intervals (the average duration of the sheath at 1 AU);

ICMEs without shocks are scaled into the same interval, but
since there is no sheath region we use the 14 hours of data
ahead of the ICMEs. Thus we line up the data in a ﬁxed
time relation to the ICME arrival times as if we had many
observations of a single event. By averaging the superposed
data for each time, real signals will be preserved but noise
will tend to average out [e.g., Haurwitz and Brier, 1981;
Prager and Hoenig, 1989].

Figure 8 displays the superposed 4 m averages of ACE
plasma and magnetic data for the three categories of ICMEs.
As required by our ICME identiﬁcation criteria, the ICME
intervals (the data after the zero epoch) have a depressed
proton temperature and the MCs (left panels) possess a
strong magnetic ﬁeld. The ﬁrst two classes of ICMEs have
an expansion speed (the speed diﬀerence between the lead-
ing and trailing edges) of about 90 km s−1; the third class
of ICMEs, those without preceding shocks, have expansion
speeds of about 20 km s−1. As a result of this expansion, the
ﬁrst two ICME classes have a lower average plasma density
than the third class. Using the ambient solar wind density
n = 6.5 cm−3, temperature T = 105 K and magnetic ﬁeld
strength B = 7 nT derived from the data ahead of ICMEs
in the right panels, we estimate the fast mode speed from
)1/2 to be around 70 km s−1. The expan-
vf = (v2
sion speed can be regarded as the ICME speed relative to
the ambient solar wind, which is larger the fast mode speed
for the ﬁrst two classes. Consequently, shock waves should
be driven ahead of the fast ICMEs, consistent with the data
in Figure 8. For all ICMEs, the expansion speed is of the
order of the Alfv´en speed, i.e., 50 - 60 km s−1 at 1 AU. This
result is in agreement with previous ﬁndings [e.g., Burlaga
et al., 1981; Liu et al., 2005].

A + 5kBT
3mp

In the left and middle panels, the superposed shock oc-
curs 14 hours before the arrival time of the ICMEs; between
the shock and the ICME is the sheath region where PDLs
and mirror mode waves may occur. For MCs with preced-
ing shocks (left panels), a PDL is present beginning about
six hours ahead of the ICME in which the proton density
decreases by a factor of about 1.7 and the ﬁeld magnitude
gradually increases. The anti-correlated density and mag-
netic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations show that wave structures are also
present. Presumably these structures are induced by the
mirror instability; the superposed thermal anisotropy sup-
ports this interpretation (see Figure 9). Plasma depletion
may also occur in the sheath region of ICMEs with shocks
(middle panels). The plasma is rareﬁed in the layer adjacent
to these ICMEs, but the magnetic ﬁeld magnitude remains
roughly constant. The density and magnetic ﬁeld have high-
frequency ﬂuctuations, but no coherent structure is appar-
ent. The sheath regions of the ﬁrst two ICME classes thus
show a diﬀerent association with the PDL and mirror waves,
which may reveal the dependence of these features on the
ICME geometry. MCs are better organized than common
ICMEs in terms of magnetic structure and may lead to favor-
able conditions for such features to develop. The ICMEs not
associated with shocks (right panels) do not have PDLs and
the density and magnetic ﬂuctuations are even further re-
duced. The compression of the ambient solar wind by these
ICMEs is apparently not large enough to produce these fea-
tures. Farrugia et al. [1997] suggested that a PDL may form
irrespective of whether ICMEs drive shocks or not. Figure 8
indicates that shocks seem necessary to produce these fea-
tures since their formation is closely related to the extent of
the compression. Observations of PDLs in planetary mag-
netosheaths show a gradual increase in the magnetic ﬁeld
simultaneously with the density decrease [e.g., Crooker et
al., 1979; Hammond et al., 1993; Violante et al., 1995]. This
increase in the ﬁeld strength may not be required in ICME
sheaths. The upstream ﬁeld compression by ICMEs may be

LIU ET AL.: PLASMA DEPLETION AND MIRROR WAVES AHEAD OF ICMES

X - 7

Figure 8. Superposed epoch plots of the proton density, magnetic ﬁeld strength, bulk speed and proton
temperature for the three classes of ICMEs. The zero time (dashed lines) is the forward boundary of the
ICME.

alleviated by the sheath expansion as the preceding shocks
move away from the ejecta.

The speed and ﬁeld strength proﬁles within ICMEs are
smooth compared with the turbulent proﬁles of the density
and temperature. As is well known, Alfv´en waves give rise
to correlated velocity and magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations [e.g.,
Belcher and Davis, 1971]. The low-frequency Alfv´en waves
may be responsible for solar wind heating and acceleration
through a non-linear cascade process of energy [e.g., Isen-
berg and Hollweg, 1983; Goldstein et al., 1995; Leamon et
al., 1999; Hu and Habbal, 1999]. Radial evolution of ICMEs
was investigated by Liu et al.
[2006], and they found that
the ICME expansion between 0.3 and 20 AU seems to obey a
polytrope with an index γ ∼ 1.3. This plasma heating may
not be powered by Alfv´en waves since they are not prevalent
within ICMEs as implied by the smooth speed and magnetic
ﬁeld proﬁles.

Mirror waves can also be evidenced by the tempera-
ture anisotropy. Figure 9 shows the superposed thermal
anisotropy data from Wind for the three classes of ICMEs.
The threshold instability conditions, calculated from the su-
perposed parallel plasma beta βkp using equation (2), are
plotted to allow comparison with the anisotropy. An abrupt
increase in the mirror and cyclotron thresholds can be seen
at the leading edge of the ﬁrst two groups of ICMEs (left
and middle panels); it is stronger in the ﬁrst case, indicating
that the plasma beta is low within these MCs. For the third
ICME class (right panel), there is essentially no diﬀerence
in the onset conditions inside and outside the ICME. The
ICME plasma has an anisotropy typically around zero, so
it is stable with respect to temperature anisotropy instabil-
ities. This point is consistent with the picture described by
Figure 2. The thermal anisotropy increases to 0.1 - 0.4 in the
sheath regions of the ﬁrst ICME category (left panel) and is
very close to the instability thresholds at some epochs. The
sheath plasma may be marginally unstable to the mirror and
cyclotron instabilities. As a result, mirror waves may be in-
duced under certain conditions and then be carried away by
coupling to other propagating modes. This interpretation is

in accord with the anti-correlated density and magnetic ﬁeld
ﬂuctuations seen in Figure 8 (left panels). The temperature
anisotropy may also be enhanced in the sheaths of the sec-
ond ICME class (middle panel), but not as strongly, so the
ﬂuctuations are reduced as shown in Figure 8 (middle pan-
els). For the third ICME group (right panel), the thermal
anisotropy does not deviate from zero across the sheath and
ICME intervals, so mirror waves do not appear.

The superposed parallel proton plasma beta βkp ranges
from 0.5 to 5.5 in the sheath regions of the MCs with preced-
ing shocks. In this regime, the instabilities are dominated
by the cyclotron mode since it has a lower threshold than
the mirror mode (refer to Figure 2). Gary [1992] showed
through numerical evaluation of the Vlasov dispersion rela-
tion that the cyclotron instability has a higher linear growth
rate. The temperature anisotropy can be rapidly reduced by
the cyclotron instability and thus the mirror mode may not
develop to a signiﬁcant level. However, Price et al.
[1986]
found that the introduction of a small fraction of minor ions
would substantially lower the growth rate of the cyclotron
instability while leaving the mirror mode unaﬀected. Since
helium ions are always present in the solar wind, the mirror
mode would be able to grow given the observed plasma beta
and thermal anisotropy.

5. Conclusions and Discussion

In analogy with planetary magnetosheaths, we propose
that PDLs and mirror mode structures form in the sheath
regions of fast ICMEs. The upstream ﬁeld compression by
fast ICMEs and their leading shocks results in ﬁeld line drap-
ing and anisotropic plasma heating in the sheath. An exten-
sive case study and statistical analysis of ICMEs observed
by ACE and Wind show that these two features occur in the
sheaths ahead of fast events.

The association of plasma depletion and mirror waves
with ICMEs is demonstrated by an MC example observed

X - 8

LIU ET AL.: PLASMA DEPLETION AND MIRROR WAVES AHEAD OF ICMES

Figure 9. Superposed epoch plots of proton thermal anisotropy for the same three classes of ICMEs
as in Figure 8. Dashed lines mark the ICME arrival times while dotted lines show the zero level of the
anisotropy. Threshold conditions for the instabilities are represented by the colored lines.

at ACE and Wind on day 106 of 1999. This event drives
a forward oblique shock with its axis perpendicular to the
shock normal. Downstream of the shock, the proton density
decreases by a factor of 2 within 2.6 hours (corresponding to
0.03 AU in length) ahead of the MC. At the same time the
magnetic ﬁeld is stretched to be nearly radial and normal to
the MC axis. Anti-correlated density and ﬁeld strength ﬂuc-
tuations are seen inside the sheath region between the MC
and the shock and are consistent with mirror mode waves;
the thermal anisotropy exceeds the mirror mode onset con-
dition and the plasma beta is high. Analytical growth rates
of the mirror instability limited by the eﬀect of ﬁnite Lar-
mor radius are obtained as a function of plasma beta and
temperature anisotropy. From the observed overshoot of the
mirror instability the maximum growth rate is estimated to
be around 0.02Ωp.

We perform SEA on three classes of ICMEs to investi-
gate the general properties of PDLs and mirror mode waves
associated with these diﬀerent kinds of events. On aver-
age, the sheath region is about 14 hours long (roughly 0.17
AU) at 1 AU in comparison with the 0.2 - 0.3 AU span
of ICME intervals. For MCs preceded by shocks, a PDL
forms with a density decrease by a factor of 1.7 which lasts
about 6 hours accompanied by a gradual increase in the
ﬁeld magnitude. The average thermal anisotropy T⊥p
≃
Tkp
1.2 - 1.3 in the vicinity of the mirror instability onset and
leads to anti-correlated ﬂuctuations in the density and mag-
netic ﬁeld strength. Compared with the ﬁrst class, ICMEs
with forward shocks which are not MCs have a thinner layer
of plasma depletion close to their leading edges; associated
with a slightly enhanced thermal anisotropy, ﬂuctuations in
the density and magnetic ﬁeld are smaller and do not have
a deﬁnite structure. This diﬀerence between the two classes
may indicate the eﬀect of the ICME geometry in creating
the features. The third category, ICMEs without shocks,
is not associated with plasma depletion and mirror waves.
The occurrence of these signatures may be determined by
the extent of the upstream ﬁeld compression by ICMEs. As
a measure of the compression, an ICME speed of about 90
km s−1 relative to the ambient solar wind seems necessary
to drive shocks and produce the features. As revealed by
the SEA, all the ICME plasma is stable to the temperature
anisotropy instabilities, consistent with the ﬁnding of Liu et
al. [2006].

These results reveal important physical processes which
alter the ICME circumstance and provide another environ-
ment in which to study PDLs and mirror mode waves. As
noted by Zwan and Wolf [1976], PDLs can only develop in

the absence of signiﬁcant magnetic reconnection; otherwise,
ﬂux tubes that are compressed against the magnetosphere
would merge with geomagnetic ﬁeld lines before they are
diverted around the obstacle. The same condition should
hold in ICME sheaths for the squeezing process to be op-
erative. An ideal MHD simulation of plasma ﬂow behind
MC-driven shocks also seems to conﬁrm that the PDL be-
comes thinner with a small increase in the reconnection rate
[Erkaev et al., 1995]. McComas et al. [1988; 1994] suggested
that magnetic reconnection should commonly take place be-
tween fast ICMEs and the upstream ambient solar wind in
the same manner as occurs at the dayside of the magne-
topause. Direct evidence for the local reconnection in the
solar wind was not provided until recently, but none of the
reconnection sites were identiﬁed at the interface between
ICMEs and the upstream solar wind [Gosling et al., 2005].
Given the frequency of PDLs in ICME sheaths, magnetic
reconnection may not be prevalent or locally important in
the sheath regions of fast ICMEs.

Observations indicate that mirror waves can make large
depressions, i.e., holes in the background magnetic ﬁeld [e.g.,
Kaufmann, et al., 1970; Tsurutani et al., 1992; Violante et
al., 1995]. This point is emphasized by Winterhalter et al.
[1994] who made a survey of magnetic holes observed at
Ulysses and examined their relationship with mirror insta-
bilities. Consistent with the results of Klein and Burlaga
[1980], they found that the holes tend to occur in the in-
teraction regions where fast streams overtake the ambient
solar wind and the mirror mode is marginally stable. Non-
linear saturation mechanisms of the mirror instability were
qualitatively discussed by Kivelson and Southwood [1996].
In the non-linear saturation process, the marginal stability
can be achieved by large reductions in the magnetic ﬁeld,
so the fully evolved state would be characterized by holes
in the background magnetic ﬁeld rather than alternate ﬁeld
enhancements and depressions. However, Bavassano Cat-
taneo et al.
[1998] suggested that mirror waves make ﬁeld
enhancements as well as dips based on Voyager observations
of Saturn’s magnetosheath. According to Figure 7, the mir-
ror instability will grow quickly and consequently make a
series of holes when the plasma beta is overall high; adja-
cent holes are so close that the magnetic ﬁeld appears to
be alternately enhanced and depressed. When the plasma
beta is occasionally high, the hole will be isolated. Their
observed plasma beta proﬁle seems to support this explana-
tion. If the interpretation that magnetic holes are remnants
of mirror mode structures is correct, the mechanism sug-
gested here would be able to explain the creation of some

LIU ET AL.: PLASMA DEPLETION AND MIRROR WAVES AHEAD OF ICMES

X - 9

magnetic holes localized in the solar wind in a self-consistent
manner.

Mirror waves may contribute to energetic particle modu-
lation and acceleration in the sheath regions of ICMEs. Var-
ious studies of the cosmic ray modulation in the solar wind
showed that enhanced magnetic turbulence in the sheath is
particularly eﬀective in producing Forbush decreases [e.g.,
Badruddin et al., 1991; Ifedili, 2004], probably due to parti-
cle scattering by waves or their non-linear evolved states.
According to Kivelson and Southwood [1996], the ﬁnal
evolved state of mirror waves would be such that the to-
tal perpendicular pressure (plasma plus ﬁeld) is constant
along the ﬁeld line. Particles with small pitch angles will
be constrained by the mirror force F = −µ∇kB, where µ
is the magnetic moment; if the magnetic moment and to-
tal energy are invariant, motion of these particles into weak
ﬁeld regions along the ﬁeld line will convert perpendicular
energy to parallel and kinetic energy, which can serve to sup-
press growth of the mirror instability. Particles with large
pitch angles may be excluded from strong ﬁeld regions, also
leading to the pressure balance.

Appendix A: Test of Superposed Epoch
Analysis

Superposed epoch analysis (SEA) is useful to identify the
association of individual features with key events (here de-
ﬁned as the ICME arrival times) in time series data. The
statistical signiﬁcance of the association can be determined
by a randomization technique which avoids the assump-
tions of normality, random sampling and sample indepen-
dence made by parametric testing [e.g., Haurwitz and Brier,
1981; Prager and Hoenig, 1989]. The null hypothesis is that
plasma depletion and mirror waves are not associated with
ICMEs. Under this null hypothesis, any time in the data
can be considered as a key event, i.e., an ICME arrival time.

We use the 4 m averages of ACE proton density data
from 1998 - 2005 as a proxy for the signiﬁcance test. We
repeatedly draw random sets of locations for the key event
and their corresponding background times from the data.
Key events closer than a minimum spacing of 27 days are
discarded to avoid the eﬀect of solar sector crossings. Each
randomization yields 39 positions of simulated ICME arrival
times and 660 background spectra corresponding to each key
event (210 before and 450 after). For each set, we compute
the t-statistic deﬁned as

t =

¯E − ¯B
(m+n)(mσ2

,

E +nσ2
B )

mn(m+n−2)

q

where σE and σB are the standard deviations of the m = 39
key events and n = 660 × 39 background times respec-
tively, and ¯E, ¯B are their corresponding means. This statis-
tic obeys Student’s t-distribution with degrees of freedom
m + n − 2 for normally distributed and independent data.
The observed t-statistic is calculated from the true arrival
times of the 39 ICMEs with preceding shocks used in our
analysis. The frequency distribution of the simulated t-
statistic resulting from 10,000 runs of the randomization is
displayed in Figure 10 as a histogram with a bin size of
0.1. Compared with the Gaussian ﬁt, the distribution skews
toward the high-value tail. The signiﬁcance level can be esti-
mated from the relative frequency with which the simulated
t-statistic is smaller than or equal to the observed one. The
observed statistic is about 0.91, corresponding to a signiﬁ-
cance level of 91%. In contrast, the standard t-distribution
gives 82% for the observed statistic.

Acknowledgments. We acknowledge the use of the mag-
netic ﬁeld data of ACE and Wind from the NSSDC. The work
at MIT was supported under NASA contract 959203 from JPL
to MIT, NASA grants NAG5-11623 and NNG05GB44G, and by
NSF grants ATM-0203723 and ATM-0207775.

References

Badruddin, Mr., D. Venkatesan, B. Y. Zhu (1991), Study and ef-
fect of magnetic clouds on the transient modulation of cosmic-
ray intensity, Solar Phys., 134, 203.

Bavassano Cattaneo, M. B., C. Basile, G. Moreno, and J. D.
Richardson (1998), Evolution of mirror structures in the mag-
netosheath of Saturn from the bow shock to the magnetopause,
J. Geophys. Res., 103, 11,961.

Belcher, J. W., and L. Davis Jr. (1971), Large-amplitude Alfv´en
waves in the interplanetary medium, 2, J. Geophys. Res., 76,
3533.

Bothmer, V., and R. Schwenn (1998), The structure and origin
of magnetic clouds in the solar wind, Ann. Geophys., 16, 1.
Burlaga, L., E. Sittler, F. Mariani, and R. Schwenn (1981), Mag-
netic loop behind an interplanetary shock: Voyager, Helios,
and IMP 8 observations, J. Geophys. Res., 86, 6673.

Chandrasekhar, S. A., A. N. Kaufman, and K. M. Watson (1958),
The stability of the pinch, Proc. Roy. Soc. London, Ser. A,
245, 435.

Chew, G. F., M. L. Goldberger, and F. E. Low (1956), The Boltz-
mann equation and the one-ﬂuid hydromagnetic equations in
the absence of particle collisions, Proc. Roy. Soc. London, Ser.
A, 236, 112.

Crooker, N. U., and G. L. Siscoe (1977), A mechanism for pres-
sure anisotropy and mirror instability in the dayside magne-
tosheath, J. Geophys. Res., 82, 185.

Crooker, N. U., T. E. Eastman, and G. S. Stiles (1979), Observa-
tions of plasma depletion in the magnetosheath at the dayside
magnetopause, J. Geophys. Res., 84, 869.

Erkaev, N. V., C. J. Farrugia, H. K. Biernat, L. F. Burlaga, and
G. A. Bachmaier (1995), Ideal MHD ﬂow behind interplane-
tary shocks driven by magnetic clouds, J. Geophys. Res., 100,
19,919.

Figure 10. Histogram distribution of the t-statistic from
the Monte Carlo simulations with its Gaussian ﬁt denoted
by the dashed line. The arrow indicates the value of the
real statistic while the upper text shows the signiﬁcance
level.

X - 10

LIU ET AL.: PLASMA DEPLETION AND MIRROR WAVES AHEAD OF ICMES

Farrugia, C. J., N. V. Erkaev, H. K. Biernat, L. F. Burlaga, R. P.
Lepping, and V. A. Osherovich (1997), Possible plasma deple-
tion layer ahead of an interplanetary ejecta, J. Geophys. Res.,
102, 7087.

Gary, S. P. (1992), The mirror and the ion cyclotron anisotropy

instabilities, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 8519.

Gary, S. P., J. Wang, D. Winske, and S. A. Fuselier (1997), Pro-
ton temperature anisotropy upper bound, J. Geophys. Res.,
102, 27159.

Gary, S. P., R. M. Skoug, J. T. Steinberg, and C. W. Smith
(2001), Proton temperature anisotropy constraint in the solar
wind: ACE observations, Geophys. Res. Lett., 28, 2759.

Goldstein, M. L., D. A. Roberts, and W. H. Matthaeus (1995),
Magnetohydrodynamic turbulence in the solar wind, Annu.
Rev. Astron. Astrophys., 33, 283.

Gosling, J. T., and D. J. McComas (1987), Field line draping
about fast coronal mass ejecta: A source of strong out-of-
ecliptic interplanetary magnetic ﬁelds, Geophys. Res. Lett., 14,
355.

Gosling, J. T., R. M. Skoug, D. J. McComas, and C. W.
Smith (2005), Direct evidence for magnetic reconnection in
the solar wind near 1 AU, J. Geophys. Res., 110, A01107,
doi:10.1029/2004JA010809.

Hammond, C. M., J. L. Phillips, S. J. Bame, E. J. Smith, and
C. G. Maclennan (1993), Ulysses observations of the planetary
depletion layer at Jupiter, Plan. Space Sci., 41, 857.

Hasegawa, A. (1969), Drift mirror instability in the magneto-

sphere, Phys. Fluids, 12, 2642.

Hau, L.-N., B. U. ¨O. Sonnerup (1999), Two-dimensional coherent
structures in the magnetopause: Recovery of static equilibria
from single-spacecraft data, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 6899.
Haurwitz, M. W., and G. W. Brier (1981), A critique of the super-
posed epoch analysis method: Its application to solar-weather
relations, Mon. Wea. Rev., 109, 2074.

Hill, P., G. Paschmann, R. A. Treumann, W. Baumjohann, N.
Sckopke, and H. L¨uhr (1995), Plasma and magnetic ﬁeld be-
havior across the magnetosheath near local noon, J. Geophys.
Res., 100, 9575.

Hu, Q., and B. U. ¨O., Sonnerup (2002), Reconstruction of mag-
netic clouds in the solar wind: Orientations and conﬁgurations,
J. Geophys. Res., 107, 1142, doi:10.1029/2001JA000293.

Hu, Y.-Q., and S. R. Habbal (1999), Resonant acceleration and
heating of solar wind ions by dispersive ion cyclotron waves,
J. Geophys. Res., 104, 17045.
(2004), The

two-step Forbush decrease:
An empirical model, J. Geophys. Res., 109, A02117,
doi:10.1029/2002JA009814.

S. O.

Ifedili,

Isenberg, P. A., and J. V. Hollweg (1983), On the preferential
acceleration and heating of solar wind heavy ions, J. Geophys.
Res., 88, 3923.

Kasper, J. C., A. J. Lazarus, and S. P. Gary (2002), Wind/SWE
observations of ﬁrehose constraint on solar wind proton
temperature anisotropy, Geophys. Res. Lett., 29, 1839,
doi:10.1029/2002GL015128, 2002.

Kaufmann, R. L., J.-T. Horng, and A. Wolfe (1970), Large-
amplitude hydrodynamic waves in the inner magnetosheath,
J. Geophys. Res., 75, 4666.

Kivelson, M. G., D. J. Southwood (1996), Mirror instability II:
The mechanism of nonlinear saturation, J. Geophys. Res., 101,
17,365.

Klein, L., and L. F. Burlaga (1980), Interplanetary sector bound-

aries 1971 - 1973, J. Geophys. Res., 85, 2269.

Leamon, R. J., C. W. Smith, N. F. Ness, and H. K. Wong (1999),
Dissipation range dynamics: Kinetic Alfv´en waves and the im-
portance of βe, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 22331.

Lepping, R. P., J. A. Jones, and L. F. Burlaga (1990), Magnetic
ﬁeld structure of interplanetary magnetic clouds at 1 AU, J.
Geophys. Res., 95, 11,957.

Liu, Y., J. D. Richardson, and J. W. Belcher (2005), A sta-
interplanetary coronal
tistical study of the properties of
mass ejections from 0.3 to 5.4 AU, Plan. Space Sci., 53, 3,
doi:10.1016/j.pss.2004.09.023.

Liu, Y., J. D. Richardson, J. W. Belcher, J. C. Kasper, and
H. A. Elliott (2006), Thermodynamic structure of collision-
interplanetary
dominated expanding plasma: Heating of
coronal mass ejections, J. Geophys. Res., 111, A01102,
doi:10.1029/2005JA011329.

Lopez, R. E. (1987), Solar cycle invariance in solar wind proton

temperature relationships, J. Geophys. Res., 92, 11189.

McComas, D. J., J. T. Gosling, D. Winterhalter, and E. J. Smith
(1988), Interplanetary magnetic ﬁeld draping about fast coro-
nal mass ejecta in the outer heliosphere, J. Geophys. Res., 93,
2519.

McComas, D. J., J. T. Gosling, C. M. Hammond, M. B. Moldwin,
J. L. Phillips, and R. J. Forsyth (1994), Magnetic reconnec-
tion ahead of a coronal mass ejection, Geophys. Res. Lett., 21,
1751.

Mulligan, T., and C. T. Russell (2001), Multispacecraft modeling
of the ﬂux rope structure of interplanetary coronal mass ejec-
tions: Cylindrically symmetric versus nonsymmetric topolo-
gies, J. Geophys. Res., 106, 10,581.

Neugebauer, M., and R. Goldstein (1997), Particle and ﬁeld sig-
natures of coronal mass ejections in the solar wind, in Coronal
Mass Ejections, Geophys. Monogr. Ser., vol. 99, edited by N.
Crooker, J. A. Joselyn and J. Feynman, pp. 245, AGU, Wash-
ington, D.C.

Parker, E. N. (1958), Dynamical instability in an anisotropic ion-

ized gas of low density, Phys. Rev., 109, 1874.

Parks, G. K. (Ed.) (2004), Physics of Space Plasmas - An Intro-

duction, 2nd ed., Westview Press, Boulder.

Prager, M. H., and J. M. Hoenig (1989), Superposed epoch anal-
ysis: A randomization test of environmental eﬀects on recruit-
ment with application to chub Mackerel, Trans. Amer. Fish.
Soc., 118, 608.

Price, C. P., D. W. Swift, and L. C. Lee (1986), Numerical sim-
ulation of nonoscillatory mirror waves at the Earth’s magne-
tosheath, J. Geophys. Res., 91, 101.

Richardson, J. D., K. I. Paularena, C. Wang, and L. F. Burlaga
(2002), The life of a CME and the development of a MIR:
From the Sun to 58 AU, J. Geophys. Res., 107, 1041,
doi:10.1029/2001JA000175.

Richardson, J. D., Y. Liu, and J. W. Belcher (2004), Propaga-
tion and evolution of ICMEs in the solar wind, in NATO Sci-
ence Series II: Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry, vol. 178,
edited by J.-A. Sauvaud and Z. Nemecek, pp. 1, Prague, Czech
Republic.

Sonnerup, B. U. ¨O, L. J. Cahill, Jr. (1967), Magnetopause struc-
ture and attitude from Explorer 12 observations, J. Geophys.
Res., 72, 171.

Southwood, D. J., and Kivelson M. G. (1993), Mirror instability:
1. Physical mechanism of linear instability, J. Geophys. Res.,
98, 9181.

Tsurutani, B. T., D. J. Southwood, E. J. Smith, and A. Balogh
(1992), Nonlinear magnetosonic waves and mirror mode struc-
tures in the March 1991 Ulysses interplanetary event, Geophys.
Res. Lett., 19, 1267.

Violante, L., M. B. Bavassano Cattaneo, G. Moreno, and J. D.
Richardson (1995), Observations of mirror waves and plasma
depletion layer upstream of Saturn’s magnetopause, J. Geo-
phys. Res., 100, 12047.

Winterhalter, D., M. Neugebauer, B. E. Goldstein, E. J. Smith,
S. J. Bame, and A. Balogh (1994), Ulysses ﬁeld and plasma
observations of magnetic holes in the solar wind and their rela-
tion to mirror-mode structures, J. Geophys. Res., 99, 23,371.
Zurbuchen, T. H., and I. Richardson (2004), In-situ solar wind
and ﬁeld signatures of interplanetary coronal mass ejections,
solar Phys., submitted.

Zwan, B. J., and R. A. Wolf (1976), Depletion of solar wind
plasma near a planetary boundary, J. Geophys. Res., 81, 1636.

Y. Liu, Kavli Institute for Astrophysics and Space Research,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Room 37-676a, Cam-
bridge, MA 02139, USA. (liuxying@space.mit.edu)

