6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
0
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Space Science Review manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Mats Holmstr¨om

Asymmetries in Mars’ Exosphere
Implications for X-ray and ENA Imaging

Received: April 5, 2006

Abstract Observations and simulations show that Mars’ atmosphere has large seasonal variations.
Total atmospheric density can have an order of magnitude latitudinal variation at exobase heights. By
numerical simulations we show that these latitude variations in exobase parameters induce asymmetries
in the hydrogen exosphere that propagate to large distances from the planet. We show that these
asymmetries in the exosphere produce asymmetries in the ﬂuxes of energetic neutral atoms (ENAs)
and soft X-rays produced by charge exchange between the solar wind and exospheric hydrogen. This
could be an explanation for asymmetries that have been observed in ENA and X-ray ﬂuxes at Mars.
Keywords Mars · Energetic Neutral Atoms · X-rays · Exospheres

1 Introduction

Traditionally, exospheric densities and velocity distributions are modelled by spherical symmetric an-
alytical Chamberlain functions (Chamberlain and Hunten 1987). Chamberlain theory assumes that
gravity is the only force acting on the neutrals, that the exobase parameters (density and tempera-
ture) are uniform over a spherical exobase, and that no collisions occur above the exobase. Planetary
exospheres are however not spherical symmetric due to non-uniform exobase parameters and due to
eﬀects such as photoionization, radiation pressure, charge exchange, recombination and planetary ro-
tation. To account for these eﬀects numerical simulations are needed. Using Monte Carlo test particle
simulations it is possible to account for the above eﬀects (if ion distributions are assumed).

Even though neutrals in the exospheres by deﬁnition do not collide often, collisions occur. Espe-
cially near the exobase the transition is gradual from collision dominated regions at lower heights (with
Maxwellian velocity distributions) to essentially collisionless regions at greater heights. Using test par-
ticles one can model collisions with an assumed background atmospheric proﬁle (Hodges Jr. 1994),
but to account for collisions properly the test particle approach is not suﬃcient, and self consistent
simulations are needed. One approach to model collisions is the direct simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC)
method (Bird 1976) for rareﬁed ﬂows, that has been applied to exospheres by Krestyanikova and Shematovich
(2005).

In this work we use the test particle approach to model the eﬀects on the Martian exosphere from
non-uniform exobase conditions, from photoionization, from radiation pressure, and from solar wind
charge exchange. We launch test particles from the exobase and follow their trajectories. The forces
on the particles are from gravity and radiation pressure. Along their trajectories the particles can be

Mats Holmstr¨om
Swedish Institute of Space Physics
PO Box 812, SE-981 28 Kiruna, Sweden
Tel.: +46-980-79186
Fax: +46-980-79050
E-mail: matsh@irf.se

2

Mats Holmstr¨om

photoionized, and they can charge exchange with solar wind protons outside the bow shock. Exospheric
column densities give us a qualitative estimate of how exospheric asymmetries eﬀect solar wind charge
exchange (SWCX) X-ray images. The energetic neutral atoms (ENAs) produced by charge exchange
then gives us estimates of the ENA ﬂuxes near Mars.

In this work we do not include the eﬀects of collisions since it greatly increases the computational
cost. However, this work should be seen as a ﬁrst qualitative study of how asymmetries in exobase
conditions at Mars eﬀect the exosphere, and in turn the ENA and X-ray ﬂuxes near Mars. To do a more
accurate quantitative study is much more diﬃcult. One then would need to specify the exact time,
season and Mars–Sun distance; and have access to exobase conditions (at that time) from observations,
global circulation models, and solar wind conditions, along with full knowledge of the ion ﬂuxes near
Mars.

1.1 ENA and X-ray imaging

When the solar wind encounters a non-magnetized planet with an atmosphere, e.g., Mars or Venus,
there will be a region of interaction, where solar wind ions collide with neutrals in the planet’s exosphere.
Two of the processes taking place are

– The production of ENAs by charge-exchange between a solar wind proton and an exospheric neu-

– The production of soft X-rays by SWCX between heavy, highly charged, ions in the solar wind and

tral (Holmstr¨om et al 2002), and

exospheric neutrals (Holmstr¨om et al 2001).

Images of ENAs and SWCX X-rays can provide global, instantaneous, information on ion-ﬂuxes and
neutral densities in the interaction region. It is however not easy to extract this information from the
measured line of sight integrals that are convolutions of the ion-ﬂuxes and the neutral densities. We
need to introduce models that reduce the complexity of the problem. At Mars, the hydrogen exosphere
is enlarged due to the planet’s low gravity, and thus provide a large interaction region, extending
outward several planet radii. Traditionally, most of the modeling of the outer parts of Mars’ exosphere
has been using analytical, spherical symmetric, Chamberlain proﬁles. Planetary exospheres are however
not spherical symmetric to any good approximation, and asymmetries at Mars observed in ENAs by
Mars Express (Brinkfeldt et al 2006) and in X-rays by XMM (Dennerl et al 2006) could be due to
asymmetries in the exosphere. Here we investigate the asymmetries in exospheric densities at Mars
due to various factors, and their impact on ENA and SWCX X-ray images.

We may note that although asymmetric exospheres have not been used often in modeling of
solar wind-Mars interactions, they are well known in the engineering community since aerobraking
and satellite drag is directly dependent on exospheric densities, and provides total density measure-
ments (Justus et al 2002).

In Section 2 we describe in more detail the methods and parameters used in our simulations. In
Section 3 we then present the results of our numerical experiments, and ﬁnally we present conclusions
in Section 4.

Here we ﬁrst describe the algorithms used to simulate Mars’ hydrogen exosphere, and we then describe
the detailed setup used in the numerical experiments.

2 Methods

2.1 The simulation algorithm

In what follows, the coordinate system used is Mars solar ecliptic coordinates, centered at the planet
with the x-axis toward the Sun, the z-axis perpendicular to the planet’s velocity, in the northern
ecliptic hemisphere, and a y-axis that completes the right handed system. Based on this solar ecliptic
coordinate system we deﬁne (longitude, latitude) coordinates, with the z-axis toward 90 degree latitude,
the x-axis (sub solar point) at (0,0), and the y-axis at (90,0).

Asymmetries in Mars’ Exosphere

3

The simulation domain is bounded by two spherical shells centered at Mars. An inner boundary (the
exobase) with a radius of 3580 km corresponding to a height of 200 km above the planet – assuming
from now on a planet radius RM of 3380 km – and an outer boundary with a radius of 10 RM .
At the start of the simulation the domain is empty of particles. Then meta-particles are launched
from the inner boundary at a rate of 1000 meta-particles per simulation second. Each meta-particles
corresponds to Nm hydrogen atoms. The location on the inner boundary of each launched particle is
randomly drawn with probability proportional to the local hydrogen exobase density. The velocity of
each launched particle is randomly drawn from a probability distribution proportional to

(n · v) e−a|v|

2

,

where n is the local unit surface normal, v is the velocity of the particle, and a = m/(2kT ), m is the
mass of a neutral, k is Boltzmann’s constant, and T is the temperature (at the exobase position). Note
that the distribution used is not a Maxwellian, but the distribution of the ﬂux through a surface (the
exobase) given a Maxwellian distribution at the location (Garcia 2000).

After an hydrogen atom is launched from the inner boundary, we numerically integrate its trajectory
with a time step of 5 seconds. To avoid energy dissipation, the time advance of the particles is done
using a fourth order accurate symplectic integrator derived by Candy and Rozmus (1991).

Between time steps, the following events can occur for an exospheric atom

– Collision with an UV photon. Following Hodges Jr. (1994) this occurs as an absorption of the photon
(∆v opposite the sun direction) followed by isotropic reradiation (∆v in a random direction). From
Hodges Jr. (1994) we use a velocity change ∆v = 3.27 m/s. The collision rate used is 10−3 s−1,
and the rate is zero if the particle is in the shadow behind the planet.

– Charge exchange with a solar wind proton. If the hydrogen atom is outside Mars’ bow shock it can
charge exchange with a solar wind proton, producing an ENA, at a rate of 8.4 · 10−8 s−1. The ENA
is randomly drawn from a Maxwellian velocity distribution with a bulk velocity of 450 km/s in the
anti-sunward direction, and a temperature of 1.2 · 105 K. Thus, the original exospheric hydrogen
atom is replaced by the ENA in the simulation. Following Slavin et al (1991), we deﬁne the bow
shock by the surface (x, ρ) RM such that

x =

−x0 + Le + x0e2 − pρ2e2 − ρ2L2
e2 − 1

,

where L = 2.04 RM , e = 1.02, and x0 = 0.55 Rm. Here ρ = py2 + z2 is the distance to the x-axis
(the Mars–Sun line). We can note that the charge exchange rate gives an average life time for an
hydrogen atom of more than 100 days in the solar wind. The implication for our simulations is
that few ENA meta-particles are produced. To handle this we increase the charge exchange rate
by a factor of f = 1000 and when a charge exchange event occurs, the exospheric meta-particle
with weight Nm is replaced by a meta-particle with weight (1 − 1/f )Nm and an ENA with weight
Nm/f .

– Photoionization by a solar photon occurs at a rate of 10−7 s when an exospheric hydrogen atom
is outside the optical shadow behind the planet, and then the meta-particle is removed from the
simulation.

All rates above are from Hodges Jr. (1994) for Earth, and average solar conditions, scaled by 0.43 to
account for the smaller ﬂuxes at Mars. For a given event rate, τ , after each time step, for each meta-
particle, we draw a random time from an exponential distribution with mean τ , and the event occur if
this time is smaller than the time step. An additional event that probably is of importance is electron
impact ionization, which we do not consider in this work since it would require knowledge of electron
ﬂuxes and velocity distributions. Note that we only consider ENAs produced outside the bow shock,
so the ﬂuxes presented here is a lower bound. Additional ENAs are produced inside the bow shock,
but including those would require a complete ion ﬂow model. Anyhow, simulations (Holmstr¨om et al
2002) suggest that the ENA ﬂux from the solar wind population is dominant in intensity. Also, we do
not consider collisions between neutrals, as discussed in the introduction. We can note that omitting
collisions means that the population of particles on satellite orbits will be small. The only generation
mechanism for satellite particles will be radiation pressure.

4

Mats Holmstr¨om

Fig. 1 The non-uniform exobase density and temperature for Mars’ hydrogen exosphere used in this study. The
coordinate system is Mars solar ecliptic longitude and latitude, with (0,0) corresponding to the sub solar point.
The exobase temperature is shown in gray, with a value of 200 K, except for a region of increased temperature
on the dayside, and a region of decreased temperature on the nightside. The exobase density is constant in
three longitude bands, and shown in black is the density relative to a reference density of 4.2 · 105 cm

−3.

2.2 The simulation setup

As stated in the introduction, the aim of this study is to make a qualitative study of the eﬀects of non-
uniform exobase conditions on the hydrogen exosphere, and the implications for ENA and SWCX X-ray
ﬂuxes. Thus, we choose to study a simpliﬁed model problem where we have artiﬁcially chosen a spatial
distribution of exobase density and temperature, shown in Figure 1. We have constant density in three
longitude bands, and three diﬀerent temperature regions. This is an approximation of the conditions
at southern summer solstice, and was chosen as follows. We use the density and temperature for solar
minimum conditions from (Krasnopolsky 2002, Fig. 1) at a height of 200 km; 200 K and 4.2 · 105 cm−3
as a reference value. This is a day side average for a solar zenith angle of 60 degrees. The corresponding
density at 130 km (mostly CO2) is 2.9 kg/km3. Using the spatial variations from (Bougher et al 2000,
Fig. 5 and 10) we scale the reference values, and construct the exobase conditions shown in Figure 1.
We will later denote this the non-uniform case, and the case when we use the reference values for all of
the exobase will be the uniform case. The spatial variations in (Bougher et al 2000) are from a global
circulation model of Mars’ exosphere and is based on the observations available at that time. Later
the model has been partially veriﬁed by observations (Lillis et al 2005).

First we investigate the eﬀects of non-uniform exobase conditions on the hydrogen exosphere. Then
we study the implications for ENA and SWCX X-ray ﬂuxes.

3 Numerical experiments

3.1 The exosphere

Here we use the non-uniform exobase conditions shown in Figure 1. First of all we want to examine how
far out from the planet the exosphere is non-uniform. Since the simulation particles are launched on
ballistic trajectories, at any point there will be a mix of particles from diﬀerent regions of the exobase.
This will introduce a smoothing of the exobase boundary conditions, and it is not obvious how large
this smoothing will be, i.e. how far from the planet the non-uniformity will persist. To investigate this
we divide the exosphere into three regions corresponding to the three latitude bands in Figure 1, and
plot proﬁles of the average hydrogen density for each of the regions. These proﬁles at a simulation

Asymmetries in Mars’ Exosphere

5

30N−90N
30S−30N
30S−90S

]

3
−
m

[
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
D

12

10

11

10

10

10

9
10

8
10

7
10

1

2

3

4

7

8

9

10

5
6
Mars Radii

Fig. 2 Average hydrogen density as a function of planetocentric distance in RM for non-uniform exobase
conditions. The exosphere has been divided into three regions corresponding to the three latitude bands in
Figure 1, and each of the proﬁles shown is an average over the corresponding region. Latitude 30 to 90 degrees
(dots), -30 to 30 (squares), and -90 to -30 (circles).

time of 10 hours are shown in Figure 2. We see that the density variation at the exobase by a factor
of 10 is reduced to approximately a factor of 3 at a planetocentric distance of 2 RM , and a factor
of 2 at 10 RM . Thus, the exospheric densities get more uniform with distance to the planet, but large
diﬀerences in density persist all through the simulation domain.

3.2 SWCX X-rays

To estimate the eﬀects of the non-uniform exosphere on SWCX X-ray images, we note that the X-
ray ﬂux is a line-of-sight convolution of ion ﬂux and hydrogen density. So in the unperturbed solar
wind, outside the bow shock, the X-ray ﬂux should be proportional to the hydrogen column density.
In Figure 3 we show the hydrogen column density for the cases of uniform and non-uniform exobase
conditions. These are then estimates of what SWCX X-ray images would look like, from Earth at
Mars’ opposition, at least away from the planet (near the planet X-ray ﬂuorescence dominate anyway).
Note that the column density can vary by almost an order of magnitude, for constant planetocentric
distances, even far away from the planet, in the non-uniform case. This would directly eﬀect SWCX
X-ray images and lead to asymmetries of the same magnitude.

3.3 ENA ﬂuxes

Here we investigate the ﬂuxes of hydrogen ENAs that are created outside the bow shock by charge ex-
change between exospheric hydrogen and solar wind protons, with respect to any asymmetries induced
by the asymmetric exosphere. One motivation for this investigation is that the neutral particle imager,
part of ASPERA-4 on-board Mars Express, has seen asymmetries in the ENA ﬂuxes in the tail behind
the planet (Brinkfeldt et al 2006). In Figure 4 we compare the ENA ﬂuxes through a plane at x = −1.0
for uniform and non-uniform exobase conditions. We can note the spherical symmetry for the case of

6

Mats Holmstr¨om

−2] along the x-axis for uniform (left) and non-uniform
Fig. 3 Logarithm of the hydrogen column density [m
(right) exobase conditions. The white circles shows the size of the exobase. The simulation time is 10 hours,
and the total number of meta-particles are 848320 and 893240. The maximum column density is 0.781 and
1.86 ·1014m

−2.

−1] through the yz-plane at x = −1.0 for uniform exobase conditions
Fig. 4 Logarithm of the ENA ﬂuxes [m
−1. The ﬂuxes are
(left), and for non-uniform conditions (right). The maximum ﬂux is 0.912 and 1.79 ·109m
computed by averages over all ENAs with −1.05 < x < −0.95, from simulation time 0 to 10 hours, and the
total number of ENA meta-particles is 18796 and 22924. The white circle shows the size of the exobase.

−2s

−2s

uniform exobase conditions, apart from the statistical ﬂuctuations associated with test particle Monte
Carlo simulations. On the other hand, in the case of non-uniform exobase parameters the asymmetry
of the ENA ﬂux is clearly visible as enhanced, and extended, ﬂux in the south corresponding to the
higher densities in the southern hemisphere. There is also a suggestion of enhanced densities in the +y
hemisphere corresponding to the enhanced exobase temperature in that hemisphere. For a constant
planetocentric distance in this plane we see that the ENA ﬂux can vary by more than a factor of 2.

How does the ENA ﬂuxes vary at diﬀerent positions relative to the planet? In Figure 5 we plot
the ﬂuxes through the yz-planes at x = 1.0, 0.0, -1.0, and -3.0. The north-south asymmetry is visible
in all plots, with the highest, most concentrated ﬂuxes at x = 1. The area of large ﬂux then spreads
out slightly and has a bit lower intensity toward the tail. Note however that the ﬂux at x = −3 is as
large as the ﬂux at x = 0. For all plots the maximum ﬂux seems to be obtained at an approximate
distance from the x-axis of 5000 km (about 1600 km outside the optical shadow). This is perhaps a
bit surprising — that the maximum ﬂux is not closer to the umbra, but is a consequence of the shape
of the bow shock in combination with the exospheric proﬁles, as seen in the ﬂux through x = 1 that is
a crescent well outside the planet outline.

In all numerical experiments above, radiation pressure and photoionization was not included. It
was found that including those events, as described in the previous section, did not change the results
presented in any signiﬁcant way.

Asymmetries in Mars’ Exosphere

7

−1] through the yz-planes at x = 1 (upper left), x = 0 (upper
Fig. 5 Logarithm of the ENA ﬂuxes [m
right), x = −1 (lower left), and x = −3 (lower right) for non-uniform exobase conditions. All are averages over
−1. The white circle shows
an x-width of 0.1 RM . The maximum ﬂuxes are 2.50, 1.63, 1.79, and 1.60 ·109m
the size of the exobase.

−2s

−2s

4 Conclusions

Traditionally, modeling of the solar wind interaction with Mars’ exosphere, and the production of
SWCX X-rays and ENAs, has assumed a spherical symmetric exosphere. From observations and sim-
ulations we know however that the exosphere is not symmetric. From the results of our simple test
particle model of Mars’ exosphere we ﬁnd that asymmetries in exobase density and temperature prop-
agate to large heights (many Martian radii). Column densities can deviate by almost an order of
magnitude from symmetry, implying similar asymmetries in SWCX X-ray images. We also ﬁnd that
the ﬂuxes of ENAs that are produced in the solar wind can deviate by more than a factor of two
from symmetry. These asymmetries could explain the asymmetries seen in X-ray images and in ENA
observations, but further studies are needed to ﬁnd out if that is the case. We also ﬁnd that radia-
tion pressure and photoionization are unimportant processes in comparison to asymmetries in exobase
parameters. Finally, we can note that asymmetries in the exosphere could also possibly explain the
low exospheric densities seen by the neutral particle detector on-board Mars Express, as reported in
this issue by Galli et al (2006), since that measurement was over the northern hemisphere during early
northern spring (April 25, 2004), when exospheric densities should have been low due to the seasonal
variations.

Acknowledgements Parts of this work was accomplished while the author visited NASA’s Goddard Space
Flight Center during 2005, funded by the National Research Council (NRC).

8

References

Mats Holmstr¨om

Bird GA (1976) Molecular Gas Dynamics. Clarendon Press
Bougher S, Engel S, Roble R, Foster B (2000) Comparative terrestrial planet thermospheres 3. Solar cycle
variation of global structure and winds at solstices. Journal of Geophysical Research 105(E7):17,669–17,692
Brinkfeldt K, Gunell H, Brandt P, Barabash S, Frahm R, Winningham J, Kallio E, Holmstr¨om M, Futaana Y,
Ekenb¨ack A, Lundin R, Andersson H, Yamauchi M, Grigoriev A, Sharber J, Scherrer J, Coates A, Linder
D, Kataria D, Koskinen H, S¨ales T, Riihela P, Schmidt W, Kozyra J, Luhmann J, Roelof E, Williams
D, Livi S, Curtis C, Hsieh K, Sandel B, Grande M, Carter M, Sauvaud JA, Fedorov A, Thocaven JJ,
McKenna-Lawlor S, Orsini S, Cerulli-Irelli R, Maggi M, Wurz P, Bochsler P, Krupp N, Woch J, Fraenz M,
Asamura K, Dierker C (2006) Observations of energetic neutral atoms on the nightside of Mars, Icarus, in
press.

Candy J, Rozmus W (1991) A symplectic integration algorithm for separable Hamiltonian functions. Journal

of Computational Physics 92:230–256

Chamberlain JW, Hunten DM (1987) Theory of Planetary Atmospheres. Academic, San Diego, Calif.
Dennerl K, Lisse C, Bhardwaj A, Englhauser VBJ, Gunell H, Holmstr¨om M, Jansen F, Kharchenko V,
Rodriguez-Pascual P (2006) Mars observed with XMM-Newton: High resolution spectroscopy with RGS,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, in print.

Galli A, Wurz P, Lammer H, Lichtenegger H, Lundin R, Barabash S, Grigoriev A, Holmstr¨om M, Gunell H
(2006) The hydrogen exospheric density proﬁle measured with ASPERA-3/NPD, submitted to this issue
of Space Science Review.

Garcia AL (2000) Numerical Methods for Physics, 2nd edn, Prentice Hall, chap 11.3
Hodges Jr RR (1994) Monte Carlo simulation of the terrestrial hydrogen exosphere. Journal of Geophysical

Holmstr¨om M, Barabash S, Kallio E (2001) X-ray imaging of the solar wind–Mars interaction. Geophysical

Holmstr¨om M, Barabash S, Kallio E (2002) Energetic neutral atoms at Mars: I. Imaging of solar wind protons.

Research 99(A12):23,229–23,247

Research Letters 28(7):1287–1290

Journal of Geophysical Research 107(10)

Justus C, James B, Bougher S, Bridger A, Haberle R, Murphy J, Engel S (2002) Mars-GRAM 2000: A Mars

atmospheric model for engineering applications. Advances in Space Research 29(2):193–202

Krasnopolsky VA (2002) Mars’ upper atmosphere and ionosphere at

low, medium, and high so-
lar activities: Implications for evolution of water. Journal of Geophysical Research 107(E12):5128–,
doi:10.1029/2001JE001809

Krestyanikova MA, Shematovich VI (2005) Stochastic models of hot planetary and satellite coronas: a photo-
chemical source of hot Oxygen in the upper atmosphere of Mars. Solar System Research 39:22–32, DOI
10.1007/s11208-005-0012-7

Lillis RJ, Engel JH, Mitchell DL, Brain DA, Lin RP, Bougher S, Acuna MH (2005) Probing upper ther-
mospheric neutral densities at Mars using electron reﬂectometry. Geophysical Research Letters 32,
doi:10.1029/2005GL024337

Slavin JA, Schwingenschuh K, Riedler W, Eroshenko E (1991) The solar wind interaction with Mars - Mariner
4, Mars 2, Mars 3, Mars 5, and PHOBOS 2 observations of bow shock position and shape. Journal of
Geophysical Research 96:11,235–

