9
9
9
1
 
t
c
O
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
e
c
a
p
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
0
0
1
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

UN/ESA Workshops on Basic Space Science: An Up-
date on Their Achievements

Hans J. Haubold
Programme on Space Applications
Oﬃce for Outer Space Aﬀairs
United Nations
Vienna International Centre
P.O. Box 500
A-1400 Vienna, Austria
Email: haubold@kph.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
During the second half of the twentieth century, expensive observatories are
being erected at La Silla (Chile), Mauna Kea (Hawai), Las Palmas (Canary
Island), and Calar Alto (Spain), to name a view. In 1990, at the beginning of
The Decade of Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics (Bahcall [2]), the
UN/ESA Workshops on Basic Space Science initiated the establishment of
small astronomical telescope facilities, among them many particularly sup-
ported by Japan, in developing countries in Asia and the Paciﬁc (Sri Lanka,
Philippines), Latin America and the Caribbean (Colombia, Costa Rica, Hon-
duras, Paraguay), and Western Asia (Egypt, Jordan, Morocco). The annual
UN/ESA Workshops continue to pursue an agenda to network these small ob-
servatory facilities through similar research and education programmes and
at the same time encourage the incorporation of cultural elements predomi-
nant in the respective cultures. Cross-cultural integration and multi-lingual
scientiﬁc cooperation may well be a dominant theme in the new millennium
(Pyenson [20]). This trend is supported by the notion that astronomy has
deep roots in virtually every human culture, that it helps to understand hu-
manity’s place in the vast scale of the Universe, and that it increases the
knowledge of humanity about its origins and evolution. Two of these Work-
shops have been organized in Europe (Germany 1996 and France 2000) to
strengthen cooperation between developing and industrialized countries.

1. Introduction

Answering questions about the Universe challenges astronomers, fascinates
a broad national audience and inspires young people to pursue careers in

engineering, mathematics, and science. Basic space science research assists
nations, directly and indirectly, in achieving societal goals. For example,
studies of the Sun, the planets, and the stars have led to experimental tech-
niques for the investigation of the Earth’s environment and to a broader
perspective from which to consider terrestrial environmental concerns such
as ozone depletion and the greenhouse eﬀect [1].
Basic space science makes humanistic, educational and technical contribu-
tions to society. The most fundamental contribution of basic space science is
that it provides modern answers to questions about humanity’s place in the
Universe. Quantitative answers can now be found to questions about which
ancient philosophers could only speculate. In addition to satisfying curiosity
about the Universe, basic space science nourishes a scientiﬁc outlook in soci-
ety at large. Society invests in basic space science research and receives an im-
portant dividend in the form of education, both formally through instruction
in schools, colleges and universities, and more informally through television
programmes, popular books and magazines, and planetarium presentations.
Basic space science introduces young people to quantitative reasoning and
also contributes to areas of more immediate practicality, including industry,
medicine and the understanding of the Earth’s environment [2].
The international basic space science community has long shown leadership
in initiating international collaboration and cooperation. Forums have been
established on a regular basis in which the basic space science community
has publicized its scientiﬁc achievements and the international character of
astronomical and space science studies. The most recent such initiatives
were the International Space Year (1992), with its elements Mission to Planet
Earth and Mission to the Universe, and the Third United Nations Conference
on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III), held
from 19-30 July 1999 at the United Nations Oﬃce Vienna, Austria [21].
Despite the considerable progress made in the development of astronomy and
basic space science, the observation has been made that of the 188 countries
that are Member States of the United Nations, nearly 100 have professional
or amateur astronomical organizations. Only about 60 of these countries,
however, are suﬃciently involved in astronomy to belong to the Interna-
tional Astronomical Union. Only about 20 countries, representing 15% of
the world’s population, have access to the full range of astronomical facili-
ties and information. This does not include most of the Eastern European,

Baltic, and former countries of the Soviet Union, whose fragile economies
keep them from achieving their full potential, despite the excellence of their
astronomical heritage and education [3].

2. First Cycle of Workshops: Regional Observations and Recom-
mendations
In 1991, the United Nations, through its Programme on Space Applications
of the UN Oﬃce for Outer Space Aﬀairs, in cooperation with the European
Space Agency, held its ﬁrst Workshop on Basic Space Science in India for Asia
and the Paciﬁc region [4]. Since then, such workshops have been held annu-
ally in the diﬀerent regions around the world to make a unique contribution
to the worldwide development of astronomy and space science, particularly in
developing countries. Workshops were held in 1992 in Costa Rica and Colom-
bia for Latin America and the Caribbean, in 1993 in Nigeria for Africa, and
in 1994 in Egypt for Western Asia. Additionally to the direct beneﬁts of a
common research workshop, a vital part of each of the workshops were daily
working group sessions, which provided participants a forum in which obser-
vations and recommendations for developing basic space science in all its as-
pects, through regional and international cooperation, have been made. The
deliberations of these sessions and the observations and recommendations
that emanated from them, region by region, are published as UN General
Assembly documents that can be used to lobby governments and funding
agencies to implement prospective follow-up projects of the workshops [5].

3. Second Cycle of Workshops: Implementing Follow-up Projects
Among the most important results emanating from the workshop series,
starting with the ﬁrst workshop in India in 1991, is that for each of the
regions a number of follow-up projects were identiﬁed, mainly the establish-
ment and operation of small astronomical telescope facilities, which have
been gradually implemented over the course of the workshops. Examples of
them are brieﬂy listed below.
The Galactic Emission Mapping (GEM) project of researchers from Brazil,
Colombia, Italy, Spain, and the United States, devised to obtain a full sky,
multi-frequency, and high sensitivity survey of the galactic radio emission,
lead to the operation of the GEM radio telescope at an equatorial site in
Colombia in 1995. Subsequently, in order to cover the northern and southern
latitudes not visible from this equatorial site, the radio telescope was moved

to Spain (IAC at Tenerife) and to Brazil (INPE at Sao Jose dos Campos) to
continue radio frequency observations. Since 1995, the results obtained with
GEM are
(i) a galactic radio emission database in the frequencies 408, 2300, and 5000
MHz;
(ii) an estimate of the sky temperature and spectral indices within that fre-
quency range; and
(iii) an estimate of the galactic emission proﬁle and quadrupole component
[6].
In 1995, the workshop was held in Sri Lanka to inaugurate an astronomical
telescope facility, based on a donation of an astronomical telescope (45-cm
GOTO) from Japan to Sri Lanka, at the Arthur C. Clarke Institute for Mod-
ern Technologies. The telescope is equipped with a photoelectric photometer,
spectrograph, and an ordinary camera for imaging (recently, a CCD camera
was installed), and necessary computer equipment. Young astronomers are
being trained and educated for the operation of the telescope facility through
comprehensive programmes at Bisei Observatory, Japan. Since 1995, the
ACCIMT serves as the national centre for research, education, and popular-
ization of astronomy in Sri Lanka [7].
In 1997, the workshop inaugurated the Central American Astronomical Ob-
servatory (utilizing a 40-cm Maede telescope) at the National Autonomous
University of Honduras, Tegucigalpa, Honduras, with the dedication of the
Telescopio Rene Sagastume Castillo at the Suyapa Observatory for Cen-
tral American countries (Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Nicaragua, Panama) [8].
Following the recommendation of the workshop in Egypt in 1994, the long
awaited refurbishment and modernization of the 74” Kottamia telescope at
Helwan, Egypt, will be ﬁnalized in 1999. This telescope, equipped with
Cassegrain and Coude spectrographs, saw ﬁrst light in 1964 and is still the
largest telescope in the region of Western Asia and will be made available
for regional and international cooperation in the near future. The agree-
ment between the National Research Institute of Astronomy and Geophysics
(NRIAG) and the Government of Egypt lead to the replacement of the pri-
mary and secondary mirrors of the telescope by new mirrors of Zerodur glass
ceramics. To improve the optical performance of the telescope system, a
more eﬃcient supporting system was also developed for the primary mirror

[9].
The most recent UN/ESA Workshop on Basic Space Science: Scientiﬁc Ex-
ploration from Space, was hosted by the Institute of Astronomy and Space
Sciences at Al al-Bayt University from 13 to 17 March 1999 in Mafraq, Jor-
dan. The major result of the working group sessions was the urgent recom-
mendation to make the small astronomical telescope facility (40-cm Maede
telescope) on campus of Al al-Bayt University operational and to encourage
the project of the construction of the 32-m Baquaa radio telescope at the
University of Jordan, Amman [10].

4. Third Cycle of Workshops: Networking Telescopes and Beyond
Based on the request from the United Nations, the Foreign Oﬃce of the
Government of Germany, through the German Space Agency (DLR), made
it possible to hold a UN/ESA Workshop on Basic Space Science at the Max-
Planck-Institute for Radioastronomy (MPIfR), Bonn, Germany, in 1996, for
the beneﬁt of Europe. This workshop analyzed the results of all previous
Workshops on Basic Space Science, particularly the follow-up projects that
emanated from the second workshop cycle and charted the course to be fol-
lowed in the future [6-10]. Additional to this objective, the workshop ad-
dressed scientiﬁc topics at the forefront of research in such diverse ﬁelds as
photon, neutrino, gravitational waves, and cosmic rays astronomy, respec-
tively. Taking into account that the past workshops did not lead yet to
the establishment of an astronomical facility in African countries under con-
sideration for such an eﬀort, this workshop prepared the publication, on a
regular basis, of an urgently needed bilingual newsletter (African Skies/Cieux
Africains) for the space science community in Africa, a collaborative eﬀort
of astronomers from France and South Africa [11].
The forthcoming Ninth UN/ESA Workshop on Basic Space Science: Satel-
lites and Networks of Telescopes as Tools for Global Participation in the
Studies of the Universe, will be held at Toulouse, France, in June 2000. The
organizers of the series of workshops have agreed, based on observations and
recommendations of the past workshops, that the agenda of this workshop
will focus on the following topics:
(i) Feasibility of the establishment of a World Space Observatory (WSO)
[12].
(ii) Network of Oriental Robotic Telescopes (NORT) [13].

(iii) Networking of small astronomical telescopes to be preferentially utilized
for observation of variable stars. The establishment of small astronomical
telescope facilities with the sponsorship of Japan in Paraguay and the Philip-
pines. Cooperation between small astronomical telescope facilities in terms
of education and research programmes [14, 19] .
(iv) Research with astronomical data bases [15] and the utilization of astro-
physics data systems [16].

5. Results That Supplemented the Workshop Series
1992 had been designated as International Space Year (ISY) by a wide va-
riety of national and international space organizations, including the United
Nations. To help generate interest and support for planetariums as centres of
culture and education, the United Nations in cooperation with the Interna-
tional Planetarium Society, as part of its International Space Year activities,
published a guidebook on the Planetarium: A Challenge for Educators [17].
Subsequently, this booklet was translated by national planetarium associa-
tions from English into Japanese, Slovakian, and Spanish, and is still available
from the United Nations.
In 1993, the European Space Agency, through the United Nations, donated
30 personal computer systems for use at universities and research institutions
in Cuba, Ghana, Honduras, Nigeria, Peru, and Sri Lanka.
In 1995, scientists from around the world gathered at the United Nations
Headquarters in New York to discuss a broad range of scientiﬁc issues associ-
ated with near-Earth objects (NEOs). This gathering became known as the
ﬁrst United Nations International Conference on Near-Earth Objects [18].
Subsequently, the European Space Agency sponsored a study of a global
network for research on near-Earth objects with the purpose to design and
implement a worldwide information and data exchange centre called Space-
guard Central Node (SCN) in order to support follow-up activities after the
detection of NEOs [19].

Acknowledgement
The author is deeply indebted to Dr. W. Wamsteker (European Space
Agency) for his continual support and commitment in organizing the Work-
shops. The author would like to thank Prof. M. Kitamura (National As-
tronomical Observatory Tokyo), Dr. K.-U. Schrogl (German Space Agency
Cologne), Dr. J. Andersen (International Astronomical Union Paris), and

Prof. A.M. Mathai (McGill University Montreal) for their support of the
Workshops.

References

Note: The author is writing in his personal capacity and the views expressed
in this paper are those of the author and not necessarily those of the United
Nations.

[1] For a comprehensive review of social and economic dimensions of science
as a collaborative eﬀort see C.H. Lai (editor), Ideals and Realities: Selected
Essays of Abdus Salam, 2nd edition (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, 1987) and,
focusing on the historic dimension of such endeavors, see [19].
[2] See J.N. Bahcall, The Decade of Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics
(Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1991). For the interplay on
how technology of astronomical instruments, astrophysics, and mathematics
produce the remarkable picture of the Universe, in the course of history
of humankind, see R. Osserman, Poetry of the Universe: A Mathematical
Exploration of the Cosmos (New York: Doubleday, 1995).
[3] See J.R. Percy and A.H. Batten, ”Chasing the dream”, Mercury, 1995,
24(2):15-18. For an elaboration on the United Nations contributions see H.J.
Haubold and W. Wamsteker, ”Worldwide Development of Astronomy: The
Story of a Decade of UN/ESA Workshops on Basic Space Science”, Space
Technology, 1998, 18(4-6):149-156, and H.J. Haubold, ”UN/ESA Workshops
on Basic Space Science: an initiative in the world-wide development of as-
tronomy”, Journal of Astronomical History and Heritage, 1998, 1(2):105-121.
[4] Subsequently, these workshops were co-organized by the Austrian Space
Agency (ASA), French Space Agency (CNES), German Space Agency (DLR),
European Space Agency (ESA), International Astronomical Union (IAU), In-
ternational Centre for Theoretical Physics Trieste (ICTP), Institute of Space
and Astronautical Science of Japan (ISAS), National Aeronautics and Space
Administration of the United States (NASA), The Planetary Society (TPS),
and the United Nations (UN).
[5] A month-to-month update on results and new developments related to the
UN/ESA Workshops on Basic Space Science is made available at the Work-
shop’s World-Wide-Web site at http://www.seas.columbia.edu/∼ah297/un-
esa/. The Proceedings of the workshops were published in: (I) Conference

Proceedings of the American Institute of Physics Vol. 245, American Insti-
tute of Physics, New York, 1992, pp. 350; (II) Earth, Moon, and Planets
63, No. 2 (1993)93-170; (III) Astrophysics and Space Science 214, Nos. 1-
2 (1994)1-260; (IV) Conference Proceedings of the American Institute of
Physics Vol. 320, American Institute of Physics, New York, 1994, 320pp.;
(V) Earth, Moon, and Planets 70, Nos. 1-3 (1995)1-233; (VI) Astrophysics
and Space Science 228, Nos. 1-2 (1995)1-405; and (VII) Astrophysics and
Space Science 258, Nos. 1-2 (1998)1-394.
[6] For a detailed report on the development of the GEM project, its scientiﬁc
results, impacts on university education and research in Colombia, and refer-
ences to the literature see S. Torres, “The UN/ESA Workshop on Basic Space
Science in Colombia, 1992: What has been achieved since then?”, COSPAR
Information Bulletin, 1999, No. 144, pp. 13-15. The World-Wide-Web site
of GEM can be accessed at http://aether.lbl.gov/www/projects/GEM.
[7] S. Gunasekara and P. de Alwis, ”The astronomy promotional programme
at ACCIMT”, in Conference on Space Sciences and Technology Application
for National Development: Proceedings, held at Colombo, Sri Lanka, 21-22
January 1999, Ministry of Science and Technology of Sri Lanka, pp. 143-146.
The World-Wide-Web site of ACCIMT at http://www.slt.lk/accimt/page5.html
is gradually incorporating results obtained with the telescope facility. See
also the papers of Kitamura and Kogure, respectively, in [14].
[8] The Observatory and its educational and scientiﬁc activities is part of
the World-Wide-Web site at http://www.unah.hondunet.net/unah.html. A
recent photograph of the Observatory building is available at
http://www.laprensahn.com/natarc/9812/n23001.htm.
[9] S.M. Hasan, “Upgrading the 1.9-m Kottamia telescope”, African Skies,
1998, No. 2, pp. 16-17.
[10] For all workshops, United Nations Reports on the organization of the
respective Workshop have been published as UN General Assembly docu-
ments, see Report on the Eighth United Nations/European Space Agency
Workshop on Basic Space Science: Scientiﬁc Exploration from Space, hosted
by the Institute of Astronomy and Space Sciences at Al al-Bayt Univer-
sity on behalf of the Government of Jordan, A/AC.105/723, 18 May 1999,
8pp. A special World-Wide-Web site was developed for this workshop at
http://www.planetary.org/news/Events/unispace.html.
[11] The World-Wide-Web site of the Working Group for Space Science

in Africa is http://da.saao.ac.za:80/∼wgssa/.
In this connection, see, for
a detailed review of the workshop in Nigeria, held in 1994, L.I. Onuora,
“The UN/ESA Workshop on Basic Space Science in Nigeria: Looking back”,
COSPAR Information Bulletin, 1999, No. 144, pp. 15-16.
[12] W. Wamsteker and R. Gonzales Riestra (editors), Ultraviolet astro-
physics beyond the IUE ﬁnal archive: Proceedings of the conference, held
at Sevilla, Spain, 11-14 November 1997, European Space Agency SP-413,
pp. 849-855. H. Gavaghan, “U.N. plans its future in space”, Science, 1999,
285, p. 819. See also Report on the Eighth United Nations/European Space
Agency Workshop on Basic Space Science: Scientiﬁc Exploration from Space,
hosted by the Institute of Astronomy and Space Sciences at Al al-Bayt Uni-
versity on behalf of the Government of Jordan, A/AC.105/723, 18 May 1999,
8pp.
[13] F.R. Querci and M. Querci, “The network of oriental robotic telescopes”,
African Skies, 1998, No. 2, pp. 18-21.
[14] H. Gavaghan, “U.N. plans its future in space”, Science, 1999, 285, p. 819.
M. Kitamura, “Provision of astronomical instruments to developing countries
by Japanese ODA with emphasis on research observations by the donated
45-cm reﬂectors in Asia”, in Conference on Space Sciences and Technol-
ogy Application for National Development: Proceedings, held at Colombo,
Sri Lanka, 21-22 January 1999, Ministry of Science and Technology of Sri
Lanka, pp. 147-152. T. Kogure, ”Stellar activity and needs for multi-site
observations”, in Conference on Space Sciences and Technology Application
for National Development: Proceedings, held at Colombo, Sri Lanka, 21-22
January 1999, Ministry of Science and Technology of Sri Lanka, pp. 124-131.
[15] E.g., IUE Newly Extracted Spectra (INES), World-Wide-Web site at
http://ines.vilspa.esa.es, which is a complete astronomical archive and data
distribution system, representing the ﬁnal activity of ESA in the context of
the International Ultraviolet Explorer project.
[16] E.g., the NASA Astrophysics Data System (ADS), World-Wide-Web site
at http://adswww.harvard.edu, whose main resource is an abstract service
which includes four sets of abstracts: (i) astronomy and astrophysics, (ii)
instrumentation, (iii) physics and geophysics, and (iv) Los Alamos preprint
server.
[17] See World-Wide-Web site at http://www.seas.columbia.edu/∼ah297/un-
esa/planetarium.html.

[18] See World-Wide-Web site at http://www.seas.columbia.edu/∼ah297/un-
esa/neo.html.
[19] See World-Wide-Web site at http://spaceguard.ias.rm.cnr.it
[20] L. Pyenson and S. Sheets-Pyenson, Servants of Nature: A History of Sci-
entiﬁc Institutions, Enterprises, and Sensibilities, W.W. Norton & Company,
New York, 1999, pp. XV+496.
[21] The report on this UNISPACE III Conference is available electronically
at http://www.un.or.at/OOSA; as part of the Technical Forum of UNIS-
PACE III, comprising 38 scientiﬁc activities, an IAU/COSPAR/UN Special
Workshop on Education in Astronomy and Basic Space Science was held
leading to conclusions and proposals contained in UN Document
A/CONF.184/C.1/L.8.

