0
0
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

6
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
3
0
1
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dream of a Christmas lecture

Alejandro Rivero∗

February 2, 2008

Abstract

We recall the origins of diﬀerential calculus from a modern perspective.
This lecture should be a victory song, but the pain makes it to sound more
as a oath for vendetta, coming from Syracuse two milenia before.

A visitor in England, if he is bored enough, could notice that our old 20
pound notes are decorated with a portrait of Faraday imparting the ﬁrst series
of ”Christmas lectures for young people”, which began time ago, back in the
XIXth century, at his suggestion. Today they have become traditional activity
in the Royal Institution.

This year the generic theme of the lectures was quantum theory and the
limits implied by it. The BBC uses to broadcast the full sessions during the
holidays, and I decided to enjoy an evening seeing the recording. This day, the
third of the series, is dedicated to the time scale of quantum phenomena. The
main hall is to be occupied, of course, by the children who have come to enjoy
the experimental session, and the BBC director, a senior well trained to control
this audience, keeps the attention explaining how the volunteers are expected to
enter and exit the scene. While he proceeds to the customary notice, that ”all
the demonstrations here are done under controlled conditions and you should
not try to repeat them at home”, I dream of a zoom over a ﬁrst bowl with some
of the bank notes, and the teacher starting the lecture.

He wears the white coat and in a rapid gesture drops a match in the bowl,
and the pieces of money take ﬁre. The camera goes from the ﬂames to the
speaker, who starts:

Money. Man made, artiﬁcial, unnatural. Real and Untrue.
And then a slide of a stock market chart:
But take a look to this graph: Why does it move with the same equations that
a grain of pollen? Why does it oscillate as randomly as a quantum mechanic
system?.

Indeed. It is already a popular topic that the equations used for the deriva-
tive market are related to the heat equation, and there is some research run-
ning in this address. But the point resonating in my head was a protest,
formulated[20] a couple of months before by Mr. W.T. Shaw, a researcher
of ﬁnancial agency, Nomura:

”Money analysts get volatility and other parameters from the measured mar-
ket data, and this is done by using the inverse function theorem. If a function
has a derivative non zero in a point, then it is invertible at this point. But, if

∗Email: rivero@wigner.unizar.es

1

we are working out discrete calculus, if we are getting discrete data from the
market, how can we claim that the derivative is non zero? Should we say that
our derivative is almost non zero? What control do we have over the inversion
process?”.

Most meditations in this sense drive oneself to understand the hidings under

the concept of stability of a numerical integration process.

But consider just this: discrete, almost zero, almost nonzero calculus!. It is a
romantic concept by itself. Inﬁnitesimals were at the core of the greatest priority
dispute in Mathematics. On one side, at Cambridge, the second Lucasian chair,
Newton. On the other side, at the political service of the elector of Mainz, the
mathematical philosophy of Leibniz. And coming from the dark antiquity, old
problems: How do you get a straight line from a circle? How do you understand
the area of any ﬁgure? What is speed? Is the mathematical continuum composed
of indivisible ”individua”, mathematical ”atoms without extension”?

Really all the thinking of calculus is pushed by two paradoxes. That one of

the volume and that one of the speed.

The ﬁrst one comes, it is said, from Democritus. Cut a cone with a plane
parallel and indeﬁnitely near to the basis. Is the circle on the plane smaller or
equal than the basis?

Other version makes the inﬁnite more explicit. Simply cut the cone parallel
to the basis. The circle in the smaller cone should be equal to the one in the top
of the trunk. But this happens for every cut, lets say you make inﬁnite cuts,
always the circles will be equal. How is that diﬀerent of a cylinder? You can say,
well, that the shape, the area, decreases between the cuts, no in the cuts. Ok,
good point. But take a slice bounded by two cuts. As we keep cutting we make
the slice smaller, indeﬁnitely thinner, until the distinction between to remove a
slice and to make a cut is impossible. How can this distinction be kept? And
we need to kept it in a mathematically rigorous way, if possible.

The second paradox is a more popular one, coming from the meditations of
Zeno. In more than one sense, it is dual to the previous one. Take time instead
of height and position instead of circular area. How can an arrow to have a
speed? How can an arrow to change position if it is resting at every instant?
In other version, it is say that it can not move where it is ﬁxed, and it can
not move where it is not yet. Or, as Garcia-Calvo, a linguist and translator of
Greek, formulated once: ”One does not kiss while he lives, one does not live
when he kisses”.

Seriously taken, the paradox throws strong doubts about the concept of
instantaneous speed. Or perhaps about the whole conception of what ”instan-
taneous” is. While Democritus asked how indeﬁnite parts of space could add up
to a volume, Zeno wonders how a movement can be decomposed to run across
indeﬁnite parts of time. A Wicked interplay.

It is interesting to notice that physicists modernly do not like to speak of
classical mechanics as a limit ¯h → 0, but as a cancellation of the trajectories
that diﬀer from the classical one. Perhaps this is more acceptable. Anyway, the
paradoxes were closed in false by Aristotle with some deep thoughts about the
inﬁnity. Old mathematics was recasted for practical uses and, at the end, lost.
But in the late mid ages, some manuscripts were translated again. A man
no far from my homeland, in the Ebro river in Spain, took over a Arabic book
to be versed into Latin. It was the Elements, that book all you still ”suﬀer”
in the ﬁrst courses of math in the primary school, do you remember? Circles,

2

angles, triangles, and all that. And, if your teacher is good enough, the art of
mathematical skepticism and proof comes with it.

Of course the main interesting thing in the mid ages is a new art, Algebra.
But that is a even longer history. To us, our interest is that with the comeback of
geometry, old questions were again to be formulated. If continuous becomes, in
the limit, without extension, then is such limit divisible? And if it is indivisible,
atomic, how can it be?

That automatically brings up other deterred theory to compare with. That
one which postulates Nature as composed with indivisible atoms but, having
somehow extension, or at least some vacuum between them.

Such speculation had begun to be resuscitated in the start of the XVII, with
Galileo Galilei himself using atomic theory to justify heat, colours, smell. His
disciple Vincenzo Viviani will write, time-after, that then, with the polemic
of the book titled ”Saggiatore”, the eternal prosecution of Galileo actions and
discourses began.

Mathematics was needing also such atomic objects, and in fact the ﬁrst
inﬁnitesimal elements were named just that, atoms, before the modern name
was accepted.

(By the way, Copernico in “De revolutionibus” explains how the atomic
model, with its diﬀerent scales of magnitude, inspires the astronomical world:
the distance of the earth to the center of the stars sphere is said to be negligible
by inspiration from the negligibility of atomic scale. It is very funny that some
centuries later someone proposed the ”planetary” model of atoms.)

Back to the lecture. Or to the dream. Now the laboratory has activated a

sort of TV projector bringing images from the past. Italy.

Viviani. He made a good eﬀort to recover Archimedes and other classical
geometers. So it is not strange that the would-to-be ﬁrst lucasian, Isaac Bar-
row, become involved when coming to Florence. And Barrow understood how
diﬀerentiation and integration are dual operations.

Noises...
Perhaps Barrow learn of it during his Mediterranean voyage
Noises of swords and pirates sound here in the TV scene, and Barrow himself

enters in the lecture room.

He is still blooding from the encounter with the pirates. Greets the speaker,

cleans himself, and smiles to the children in the ﬁrst row:

”We become involved in a stupid war. Europe went to war about sacraments,
you know, the mystery of eucharistic miracle and all that niceties. And there we
were, with individia, indivisilia, atoms... things that rule out diﬀerence between
substance and accidents. You can not make a bread into a divine body if it is
only atoms, they say.”

Indeed, someone ﬁled a denounce against Galileo claiming that is theory was
against the dogma of transustantiation[17]. Touchy matter, good for protestant
faith but not for the dogmas from Trent concilium.

For a moment he raises the head, staring to us, in the upper circle. Then
he goes back to the young public: ”Yes, there was war. Protestants, Catholics,
Anglicans. Dogmas and soldiers across Europe. Bad time to reject Aristotle,
worse even to bring again Democritus. With Democritus comes Lucretius, with
Lucretius comes Epicurus. Politically inconvenient, you know. Do the answers
pay the risk?”

3

He goes away. He went away to Constantinople, perhaps to read the only
extant copy of the Archimedean law. Perhaps he found the lost Method. Perhaps
he lost other books when his ship was burned in Venice.

Yes, Bourbaki says (according [1]) that Barrow was the ﬁrst one prooﬁng
the duality between derivatives and integration. At least, with his discrete
”almost zero” diﬀerential triangle, doubting about the risks of jumping to the
limit, was closer to our modern [3] view. Three or four years ago Majid, then
still in Cambridge, claimed its resurrection in the non commutative calculus
f (x)dx = dxf (x − λ). Even the formulation of fermions in the lattice, according
Luscher, depends on this relationship to proof the cancellation of anomalies.

Also we would note that his calculus was ”renormalized” to a ﬁnite scale,
as instead of considering directly ∆f /∆x, he ﬁrst scaled this relationship to a
ﬁnite triangle with side f (x). The freedom to choose either the triangle on f (x)
or the one in f (x + λ) was lost when people start to neglect this ﬁnite scale.

Really, this is mathematical orthodoxy. Consider a series sin(1/n) and an-
other one 1/n, both going to zero. The quotient, then, seems to go to an
indeﬁnite 0/0, but if you scale all the series to a common denominator, call
it Sa(n)/a, you will ﬁnd that Sa(n) goes to a as n increases. Wilson in the
seventies made the same trick for statistical ﬁeld theory (or for quantum ﬁeld
theory), which was at that moment crowded of problematic inﬁnities.

There is also a inﬁnite there in the Barrow idea, but it is a very trivial one.
Just the relation between the vertical of the ﬁnite triangle and the horizontal
of the small one, f (x)
∆x . It goes to inﬁnity, but this divergence can be cured by
subtracting another inﬁnite quantity, f (x+λ)

∆x , so that the limit is ﬁnite1.

Barrow died in sanctity. But in his library [13] there was no less that three
copies of Lucretius ”De Rerum Natura”, a romam poem about atomistic Nature,
already critiquized in the antiquity because in supports the Epicurean doctrine:
that gods, if they exist, are not worried about the human aﬀairs, so we must
build our moral values from ourselves and our relationships with our friends and
society.

In the lecture room, the slides ﬂy one ager other. Back in the XVII, with
heat, smell, colour, and other accidents, black storms blow in the air. It has been
proposed that the sacred eucaristic mystery was in agreement with Aristotle, as
it could be said that the substance of wine and bread was substituted by the
substance of the Christ, while the accidents remained. Go tell to the Luterans.
First August 1632. The Compa˜nia de Jesus forbids the teaching of the atomic
doctrine. 22nd June 1633, Galileo recants. “Of all the days that was the one /
An age of reason could have begun” [2]

In the ”Saggiatore”, Galileo had begun to think of physical movement of
atoms as the origin of the heat. It would take three centuries for Einstein to get
the Brownian key. But even that was already disentangled of pure mathematics,
so it took some other half century for to discover the same equations again, now
for the stock market products. The history has not ﬁnished.

It sounds not to surprise that Dimakis has related discrete calculus to the
Ito calculus, the basic stochastic in the heat equation, the play of money, that
Black and Scholes rediscovered.
In some sense it is as if the physical world
described by mathematics were dependent on mathematics only, as it it were

1This example was provided by Alain in Vietri at the request of the public, but it was not

to be related to the hoft algebra of trees, as far as I can see

4

the unique answer to organise things in a localized position.

Dark clouds will block our view. Barrow survived to his ship and crossed Ger-
many and come home to teach Newton. But Newton himself missed something
greater when, for sake of simplicity, the limit to zero was taken. In this limit,
he can claim the validity of series expansion to solve any diﬀerential equation,
so it is a very reasonable assumption. Yes, but it had been more interesting to
control the series expansion even without such limit.

Leibniz come to the same methods and the jump to the limit is to be the
standard. Mathematical atoms, scales and discrete calculus will hide its inter-
play with the inﬁnitesimal ones for some centuries. Only two years ago Mainz,
in voice of Dirk Kreimer, got again the clue to generalized Taylor series. The
wood was found to be composed of trees.

Vietri is a small village in the Tyrrenian sea, near Salerno, looking at the
bay of Amalﬁ. Good ﬁshing and intense limoncello liquor. About the 20th of
Mars, 1998, there Alain come, to explain the way Kreimer had found a Hopf
algebra structure governing perturbative renormalization. The algebra of trees
was not only related to Connes Moscovici algebra, but also with the old one
proposed by Cayley to control the Taylor series of the vector ﬁeld diﬀerential
equation.

And to close the circle, Runge-Kutta numerical integration algorithms can
be classiﬁed with a hoft algebra of trees. Today it can be said[5] that the generic
solution to a diﬀerential equation is not just the function, but also some in-
formation codiﬁed in the Butcher group. Which can be related to the physics
monster of this century, the renormalization group we have mentioned before.
Can we control the inversion of the Taylor series using trees? Then these
doubts about the inverse function theorem in stock markets could be sorted out.
Will us be able to expand in more than one variable? Still ignorabimus.

Worse, it is progressively clear that this kind of pre-Newtonian calculus are a
natural receptacle for quantum mechanics. Even the stock market Ito equations
are sometimes honoured as ”Feynman-Kac-Ito” formula, so marking its link
with the quantum world. The diﬀerence comes from the format of the time
variable in both worlds. One should think that time is more subtle than the
intuitive ”dot” that Newton put in the ﬂuxion equations.

Perhaps we are now, then, simply correcting a ﬂaw made three hundred
years ago. A ﬂaw that Nature pointed to us, when it was clear the failure of
classical mechanics in the short scale.

But how did come to exist the conditions to such failure? Why did geometry
need to be reborn in the XVIIth century? Why did the mathematicians so little
information, so that the mistake has a high probability2 to happen?

If calculus, or ”indivisilia”, were linked to atomism already in the old age,
it could be a sort of explanation. Archimedes explain that Democritus was the
ﬁrst ﬁnding ”without mathematical proof” the volume of the cone. And with
Democritean science there was political problems already in Roman times:

A leftist scholar, Farrington[12], claims that political stability was thought
to reside in some platonic tricks, lies, proposed in ”Republic”: a solid set of
unskeptic faith going up the pyramid until the divine celestial gods. Epicurus is
seen as a ﬁghter for freedom, putting at risk social stability. Against Plato ideals,

2And, by the way, Why there was not the slightest notion of probability in the old math-

ematics texts, so they were unable even to consider it?

5

Epicurus casts in his help the Ionian learning, including Democritean mathe-
matics and physics. According Farrington, if government aspires to platonic
republic, it must control or suppress such kind of mathematics and physics.

No surprise, if this is true, that the man who understood the ﬂoating bodies
and the centers of gravity, who stated the foundations and integration, the pro-
cess of mechanical discovery and mathematical rigor, who was fervently trans-
lated by Viviani and Barrow, was killed and dismissed. To be buried without
a name, it could have been Archimedes’ own wish. But to get his books left
out of the copy process for centuries until there were extinct, that is a diﬀerent
thing.

”Only a Greek copy of the Floating Bodies extant, found at Constantinople.
See here the palimpsest, the math almost cleared, a orthodox liturgy, perhaps St
John Chrisostom, wrote above instead.”

”Let me to pass the pages, and here you have, the only known version of
Archimedes letter about the Mechanical Method. Read only by three persons,
perhaps four, since it was deleted in the Xth century. Was this reading the goal
of Barrow in orient?”

And even then, is it the same? It has been altered, the last occasion in this

century, when someone painted four evangelists over the Method.

Hmm. Last Connes report [7] quotes the Floating Bodies principle, doesn’t

it?. More and more associations. Stop!

And recall.
Had our research been diﬀerent if we had been fully aware of the indivisilia
problems, if we had tried hard for rigour? Perhaps. Only in the XVI, res-
cued Apollonius and Archimedes, the new mathematics re-taken the old issue.
And, as we have seen, in a dark atmosphere. Enough to confuse them and go
into classical mechanics instead of deformed mechanics.
Instead of quantum
mechanics.

The matter of copernicanism has been usually presented as a political issue.
Brecht made a brilliant sketch of it while staying in Copenhagen with some
friends, physicists which become themselves caught in the dark side of our own
century. We suspect that the matter of atomism also has suﬀered because of
this, and now it appears that Diﬀerential Geometry itself has run across a world
of troubles since the assesination of his founder in Sicily two milenia ago. The
truth has been blocked again and again by the status quo, by the ”real world”
preferring tales of stable knowledge to inquisitive minds learning to crawl across,
and with, the doubt.

If the goal of the Christmas lectures is to move young people to start a career
in science, here is our statement: it is for the honour of human spirit. It is
because understanding, reading the book of nature, we calm our mind. Call it
ataraxia, athambia, or simply tranquility.

But we have been mistaken, wronged, delayed. The world has tricked, out-
raged, raped us. When we have been wronged, should we not to revenge? Then
our main motivation is here: when reality is a lie, the song of science must be
a song of vengeance. A man in Syracuse has been killed, all our milenia-old
family has been dishonoured. Every mother, every child, every man in Sicily
knows then the word. Vendetta.

Go to your blackboards, my children, and sing the song. Just to clear any

trace of pain in the soul.

6

References

[1] V.I. Arnol’d, Huygens and Barrow, Newton and Hooke, Birkhauser (1990)

[2] B. Brecht, The Life Of Galileo, tr. by D.L.Vesey

[3] A. Connes, Gravity coupled with matter and foundation of non commutative

geometry, Comm. Math. Phys., 182 (1996)

[4] A. Connes and D. Kreimer, Hopf Algebras, renormalization and quantum ﬁeld

theory, hep-th/9808042

[5] A. Connes and D.Kreimer, Lessons from Quantum Field Theory

[6] A. Connes and D. Kreimer, ”Renormalization in quantum ﬁeld theory and the

Riemann Hilbert Problem”, hep-th/9909126

[7] A. Connes and D. Kreimer, ”Renormalization in quantum ﬁeld theory and the
Riemann Hilbert Problem I: the Hopf algebra structure of graphs and the main
theorem”, hep-th/9912092

[8] Dirac P.A.M.,Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc, 30, 150 (1934)

[9] A. Dimakis, C. Tzanakis, Dinamical Evolution in NC discrete phase space and

the derivation of Classical Kinetic Equations, math-ph/9912016

[10] J.S. Dowker, Path Integrals and Ordering Rules, J. Math. Phys. 17 (1976)

[11] K. Elsner, Elektroschwaches Modell und Standardmodell in der nichtkommuta-

tiven Geometry, Diplomarbeit, Marbug (1999)

[12] B. Farrington, Science and Politics in the Ancient World

[13] M. Feingold et al, Before Newton. The life and times of Isaac Barrow, Cambridge

University Press (1990)

[14] Roy R. Gould, Am. J. Phys., 63, n. 2 (1995)

[15] J.M. Gracia-Bondia, J. Varilly and H. Figueroa, Elements of Noncommutative

Geometry, Birkhauser, Boston, (2000)

[16] B. Iochum, T. Krakewski, P. Martinetti, Distances in ﬁnite spaces from NC ge-

ometry hep-th/9912217

[17] Pietro Redondi, Galileo heretico, Alianza Universidad, 1990

[18] A. Rivero, Some conjectures looking for a NCG theory, hep-th/9804169

[19] W. Siegel, Fields, hep-th/9912205

[20] W.T. Shaw, Principles of Derivatives Modelling in a Symbolic Algebra Environ-

ment, Mathematica notebook

[21] J. Varilly, NonCommutative Geometry and Quantization hep-th/9912171

[22] R. Wulkenhaar, Introduction to Hoft Algebras in renormalization and noncom-

mutative geometry, hep-th/9912221

[23] R. Wulkenhaar, On Feynman graphs as elements of a Hopf algebra, hep-

th/9912220

7

