0
0
0
2

 

b
e
F
2
2

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
2
4
0
2
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Heat and Kinetic Theory in 19th-Century Physics
Textbooks: The Case of Spain

JOS´E M. VAQUERO and ANDR´ES SANTOS
Departamento de F´ısica, Universidad de Extremadura, E-06071 Badajoz, Spain

1. INTRODUCTION

The period of Enlightenment was a time when Spanish physics, which
had been lagging behind the level of the rest of Europe, was able to
recover. However, the political events of the end of the 18th-century,
the War of Independence, and then the reign of Fernando VII ruined
the panorama of Spanish science. History was sadly to repeat itself
with the Spanish Civil War of 1936, which brought to nothing the
eﬀorts of physicists and mathematicians of the end of the 19th and the
beginning of the 20th centuries to regain the time lost during the reign
of Fernando VII until the “generation of ’98”.

Part of the disastrous situation during the 19th-century can be
traced back to the legislation and curricular plans of Spain’s univer-
sities. The Faculty of Exact, Physical, and Natural Sciences was not
created until 1857, with the Ley (Law) Moyano. Physics had been
relegated to a minor faculty, that of Arts, as preparation for the major
faculties, and formed part of the “Philosophical Institutions” which
were studied in the following order: I. History of philosophy and ele-
ments of mathematics; II. Logic and metaphysics; III. General physics;
IV. Special physics. All was in a Latin which had become progressively
less suited to teaching, so that enlightened reformers always attempted
to publish textbooks in Spanish. Physics texts in Latin were still being
imposed on students even up to the time of the absolutist period of
Fernando VII (Moreno Gonz´alez, 1988).

After the death of Fernando VII, an ordinance regulating printing
was promulgated in 1834 which allowed a certain freedom in publi-
cation, in particular in scientiﬁc publishing. One of the consequences
of the centralization of curricular plans, such as the Plan Pidal, was
the impulse given to the production of textbooks associated with the
new programs of study. They were original productions as well as
translations of foreign authors, and formed the beginning of a national
scientiﬁc output which was to be of greater or lesser quality according
to each particular case. The study plans usually counselled the use
of certain textbooks which most closely approached the spirit of the

SCED524.tex; 2/02/2008; 1:08; p.1

2

J. M. VAQUERO AND A. SANTOS

courses. The procedure consisted in appointing committees to decide
on the most suitable texts which then put forward a number of them
to be chosen from.

In the meantime, Europe was seeing a major change in vision to-
wards atomism thanks to such personalities as Herapath, Waterston,
Clausius, van der Waals, Maxwell, and Boltzmann (Brush, 1986). Im-
ponderable ﬂuids had been abandoned as the explanation of physical
phenomena, and Mechanics, Heat, Electromagnetism, and Optics had
been uniﬁed by the concept of energy. Teaching was based on a program
of mechanical explanations (Harman, 1982).

The goal of the present communication is to analyze the impact
of modern ideas concerning energy and the constitution of matter on
the textbooks of 19th-century Spain. We have examined 45 works on
general physics at secondary and university education levels, with pub-
lication dates from the mid 19th-century to the early 20th-century. One
of the ﬁrst things that struck us was the great similarity between the
books of diﬀerent authors. With centralism, teachers were encouraged
to write their own textbooks and, indeed, were rewarded for doing so.
At the same time, the administration’s goal was for teaching to be uni-
form nationwide. The result was that textbooks were written essentially
with the Ministerio de Fomento’s (Ministry of Development) oﬃcial
program as the Table of Contents, and that the texts served solely to
expound known science and in no way to serve as the basis for further
research. There were those who, being interested in science teaching,
protested about the policy concerning textbooks. Representative of
them was Eduardo Lozano y Ponce de Le´on. Under the pseudonym
L. Opando y Uceda, Lozano published “Programas y Libros de Texto”
(Programs and Textbooks) in Revista de la Sociedad de Profesores de
Ciencias (Opando y Uceda, 1875), and under the pseudonym “Un Ex-
treme˜no” the same article in the journal El Magisterio Extreme˜no (The
Extreme˜nan Schoolmaster) (Extreme˜no, 1875). In this same journal and
on the same theme, Ildefonso Fern´andez S´anchez published another
critical article (Fern´andez S´anchez, 1876). In his writings Lozano asked
for the programs to have reference strictly to the subject matter to be
dealt with and not to the methods to be used, and that the programs
should include suggestions of the books that were best suited to the
subject, but without the obligation of following them.

The immediate consequence of that educational policy was that the
diﬀerent editions of textbooks seemed rather to be reprintings: textbook
“immutability” from one edition to another was astonishing. Let us take
two cases as example. The Trait´e ´El´ementaire de Physique (Elemen-
tary Treatise on Physics) by A. Ganot was used in many Spanish and
European Institutes (secondary education) and Universities. The ﬁrst

SCED524.tex; 2/02/2008; 1:08; p.2

Heat and Kinetic Theory in 19th-Century Textbooks

3

Spanish language edition dates from 1853. The 18th Spanish edition
was printed in 1923, and even as late as 1945 an edition was published
in San Sebasti´an (Moreno Gonz´alez, 1988). In all this time there were
only small modiﬁcations made with respect to the ﬁrst French edition.
An even more extreme example, since it was a work with even more
antiquated ways of putting the material than Ganot, was the textbook
of Gonz´alez Valledor & Ch´avarri. The 2nd edition dates from 1851
(Gonz´alez Valledor & Ch´avarri, 1851) and the 10th edition from 1870
(Gonz´alez Valledor & Ch´avarri, 1870). In these twenty years and eight
new editions the work remained without a single signiﬁcant change,
notwithstanding the archaic ways of setting forth the subject matter
of the ﬁrst editions. A third example is less disappointing: Elementos
de F´ısica (Elements of Physics) by Enrique Iglesias Ejarque. The ﬁrst
edition of 1897 (Iglesias Ejarque, 1897) has quite a modern manner of
exposition. Nevertheless, while the following editions introduce small
amounts of additional material into the text, there are never any sig-
niﬁcant changes. The 8th edition dates from 1924 (Iglesias Ejarque,
1924) and the last that we can ﬁnd a reference to is the 10th edition
in 1933. Clearly one may conclude that physics textbooks had quite a
long eﬀective lifetime.

While there was a certain degree of diﬃculty in introducing new
material into the textbooks, the great problem was to eliminate con-
tent which was included by tradition even though it was antiquated.
The case of Eduardo S´anchez Pardo, the translator of Ganot’s work, is
signiﬁcant. In the prologue to that popularly used book:

The editor D. C´arlos Bailly-Bailli`ere being for his part desirous that our
public in general, and the pupils of our Institutes and Faculties in partic-
ular, follow science in her latest advances, charged us with the translation
of the latest edition of the cited Treatise on Physics. On taking on this
commitment, with the object that the Spanish edition be more complete,
we judged it convenient, corresponding thereby also to the wishes of the
editor, to conserve certain theories, the exposition of various experiments,
and the description of some of the instruments or apparatus that had
ﬁgured in earlier editions of the forementioned work, and that in the latest
edition had been totally or partially suppressed. (Ganot 1876, p. v) 1 2

Another of the characteristics of Spanish physics textbooks was their
orientation to student success in tests and examinations. Works that
are halfway between textbook and simple program of the curriculum
abound. Secondary education teachers often encouraged the students
to think little about the physical phenomena themselves but to learn
deﬁnitions, laws, and descriptions of apparatus. As clear examples we
could cite, amongst several works, the Resumen de F´ısica y Nociones de

SCED524.tex; 2/02/2008; 1:08; p.3

4

J. M. VAQUERO AND A. SANTOS

Qu´ımica (A Summary of Physics and Notions of Chemistry) (Santos de
Castro, 1865), and Deﬁniciones, Principios y Leyes de la F´ısica (Deﬁni-
tions, Principles, and Laws of Physics) (Paz Sabugo, 1892). Hence, for
most students learning was not meaningful but purely memorization.
Together with the lack of practical classes, this may have been one
of the causes of Spanish physics’ slow rate of development during the
19th-century.

2. ANALYSIS OF THE TEXTBOOKS

In order to analyze what we understand to have been the introduc-
tion of modern physics into Spanish textbooks, we asked ourselves the
following questions relative to the works that we consulted:

1. Are imponderable ﬂuids studied in the textbook?

2. Is the term caloric used to refer to heat?

3. Does the concept of energy appear in a general form?

4. Does the mechanical theory of heat appear?

5. Does the kinetic theory of gases appear?

Aﬃrmative responses to the ﬁrst two questions would indicate tra-
ditionalism, and to the last three, modernity. We would classify a
textbook as modern if questions 3 and 4 are answered aﬃrmatively.
If the kinetic theory of gases appears as well (question 5), then we
would consider the textbook to be quite complete. Table I lists the
responses to these questions for the 19th-century textbooks to which
we had access. The works are ordered by publication date. When the
edition is not given, reference is to the ﬁrst edition.

Most of the works consulted belong to the library of the Real So-
ciedad Econ´omica de Amigos del Pa´ıs in Badajoz (Spain). While not
exhaustive, the sample is signiﬁcant, since students of the city of Bada-
joz in the 19th-century were prepared in this centre for the entrance
examinations of the Schools of Engineering (high-level technical degree
courses, rather than purely Engineering in the English language sense)
or Military Academies.

Some comments are necessary concerning Table I. The books that
were published in Spain in the 1840s studied imponderable ﬂuids, and
dealt neither with energy, nor with the mechanical theory of heat, nor
with the kinetic theory of gases. This situation was natural since these
concepts were only being developed in Europe at this time. However

SCED524.tex; 2/02/2008; 1:08; p.4

Heat and Kinetic Theory in 19th-Century Textbooks

5

Table I. Responses to the ﬁve questions posed in the text, according to the diﬀerent
works consulted.

Textbook

1

2

3

4

5

No

No
No
No
No
No

No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No

No
Yes Yes No
(Ribero Serrano, 1844)
No
No
No
(Deguin, 1845), 2nd ed.
No
Yes Yes No
(Morquencho Palma, 1845)
No
Yes Yes No
(Santos de Castro, 1846)
No
Yes Yes No
(Pinaud, 1847)
No
No
Yes No
(Gonz´alez Valledor & Ch´avarri, 1851), 2nd ed.
No
Yes No
No
(Gonz´alez Valledor & Ch´avarri, 1856), 4th ed.
Yes No
No
No
(Gonz´alez Valledor & Ch´avarri, 1857), 5th ed.
Yes Yes No Yes No
(Rodr´ıguez, 1858)
Yes Yes No
No
(Fern´andez de Figares, 1861), 2nd ed.
Yes Yes No Yes No
(Santos de Castro, 1865)
No Yes No
No
No
(Boutet de Monvel, 1866)
No
Yes No
No
(Gonz´alez Valledor & Ch´avarri, 1868), 9th ed.
No
Yes Yes No
(Rico Sinobas & Santisteban, 1869), 7th ed.
No
No
(Gonz´alez Valledor & Ch´avarri, 1870), 10th ed. Yes No
No
Yes No
(Feli´u P´erez, 1874), 2nd ed.
No
Yes Yes No
(Rico Sinobas & Santisteban, 1875), 8th ed.
No
No Yes Yes
(Ganot, 1876), 7th ed.
No
No
(Fuertes Acevedo, 1879)
No Yes No
Yes Yes No Yes No
(Ramos Lafuente, 1880), 6th ed.
No Yes No
No
(Fuertes Acevedo, 1882), 2nd ed.
(Rico Sinobas & Santisteban, 1882), 10th ed.
Yes Yes No
No
No Yes Yes No
No
(M´arquez Chaparro, 1886)
No
No
(Pina Vidal, 1887)
No Yes No
No Yes Yes Yes
No
(Amig´o Carruana, 1889)
(Picatoste, 1889)
No
No
No
No Yes Yes No
No
(Feli´u P´erez, 1890), 7th ed.
No Yes Yes No
No
(Escriche Mieg, 1891)
No Yes Yes Yes
No
(Paz Sabugo, 1892)
(Garagarza Dujiols, 1892)
No Yes Yes No
No
No Yes Yes No
(Lozano, 1893), 3rd ed.
No
No Yes Yes No
(Mart´ın de Argenta & Mart´ınez Pacheco, 1893) No
Yes Yes Yes Yes No
(Rodr´ıguez Largo, 1895), 2nd ed.
(Ribera et al., 1895)
No Yes Yes Yes No
No Yes Yes No
No
(Feli´u P´erez, 1896), 8th ed.
No Yes Yes Yes
No
(Iglesias Ejarque, 1897)
No Yes Yes Yes
No
(Soler S´anchez, 1900), 2nd ed.
(Lozano, 1900)
No
No Yes Yes No

No

No

No
No

No

No

No

SCED524.tex; 2/02/2008; 1:08; p.5

6

J. M. VAQUERO AND A. SANTOS

some foreign authors already did not study imponderable ﬂuids (neither
did they use the term caloric to refer to heat), and their Spanish transla-
tions set an example for such ﬂuids to be abandoned. This was the case
with the textbook of Deguin, translated by Venancio Gonz´alez (Deguin,
1845). The translator would write his own textbook later (Gonz´alez
Valledor & Ch´avarri, 1851), and despite going through numerous edi-
tions, would never abandon imponderable ﬂuids. Another textbook
of a French author is Pinaud (1847), translated by Florencio Mart´ın
Castro, although here imponderable ﬂuids were still being studied in
the original.

The handbook of Morquencho Palma (1845) presents physics as a
science of Nature in general, including subjects such as geology and
geography. This was the concept of physics that existed in Europe at
the beginning of the century. On the positive side, the mechanical ideal
which was at the base of the development of physics in the 19th-century
did indeed have a reﬂection in Spanish textbooks. One reads in the
prologue of the work of Ribero Serrano (1844):

(. . . ) Eﬀectively, all the phenomena attributed to caloric, to light, and to
the electric ﬂuid are mensurable and calculable eﬀects; all are attributed
to forces, all consist of movements, and constitute, in sum, mechanics.
(Ribero Serrano 1844, p. i)3

The texts that we were able to consult from the 1850s are mainly
editions of the work of Gonz´alez Valledor & Ch´avarri (Gonz´alez Valle-
dor & Ch´avarri 1851, 1856, 1857). The principal characteristic of this
text was its immutability, edition after edition. Although it studied
imponderable ﬂuids, the term caloric was not used, and neither energy,
nor the mechanical theory of heat, nor the kinetics of gases appear in
the text. The other textbook that we consulted is that of Rodr´ıguez
(1858). Although imponderable ﬂuids are studied and the term caloric
is used, the author brieﬂy explains the theory of ondulations 4 (as the
mechanical theory of heat was ﬁrst known), and says of that theory
that “it is the one which today seems more correct” (p. 173). This
work was awarded a prize in a public competition under the auspices
of the Real Academia de Ciencias (Gaceta de Madrid, 9 September
1854). Neither the concept of energy in a general form nor the kinetic
theory of gases appear in Rodr´ıguez’s text. It is interesting too that in
this decade there appeared a physics textbook written in Latin which
followed the scholastic tradition (Sant, 1857).

The textbooks of Spanish authors of the 1860s were still studying
imponderable ﬂuids. They were also still using the term caloric to refer
to heat, except for the editions of Gonz´alez Valledor & Ch´avarri (1868,
1870), as we noted before. One French-authored textbook, Boutet de

SCED524.tex; 2/02/2008; 1:08; p.6

Heat and Kinetic Theory in 19th-Century Textbooks

7

Monvel (1866), did not study imponderable ﬂuids or use the term
caloric, but then neither did it use the energy concept or the theories
we are looking for. The same was the case with the textbook of Deguin
(1845), commented on above. A possible reason for these to be missing
is that the translator, Ram´on de la Sagra, used the 7th French edition.
The note of modernity is found in the textbook of Santos de Castro
(1865), in which there appears an idea concerning the mechanical the-
ory of heat, namely the hypothesis of ondulations, although for didactic
purposes the theory of emissions (caloric) was preferred. Thus, one
reads:

The system of ondulations is the most scientiﬁc, and the most admitted
in modern physics; but that of emission lends itself more to demonstra-
tions, for which reason it is generally preferred for the explanation of the
phenomena of the caloric. (Santos de Castro 1865, p. 204)5

The textbooks of the 1870s begin to abandon the traditional theses,
and show signs of modernity. The most traditional are Rico Sinobas
& Santisteban (1875), an 8th edition, and Feli´u P´erez (1874). The
latter already does not use the term caloric, and later editions were
progressively modernized.

The textbook of Ramos Lafuente (1880) studies imponderable ﬂuids,
and uses the term caloric. In its treatment of radiant heat, however, the
work seems very modern. As noted above for Santos de Castro (1865),
the author prefers the caloric hypothesis for its simplicity in teaching:

The admissible hypothesis is at present that of ondulations, in the light
of the advances in modern physics; but as it simpliﬁes the demonstra-
tions, many physicists prefer the hypothesis of emission to explain the
phenomena of heat. (Ramos Lafuente 1880, p. 148)6

The textbooks with a more modern spirit are those of Fuertes
Acevedo (1879) and Ganot (1876). M´aximo Fuertes Acevedo’s work
neither studies imponderable ﬂuids nor uses the term caloric. But en-
ergy does not appear as a general concept either, despite the mechanical
theory of heat being explained. Adolphe Ganot’s textbook was much
used in Europe. The ﬁrst Spanish edition is of the year 1853. We con-
sulted the 7th Spanish edition (Ganot, 1876). It contains a paragraph
explaining the dynamic theory of gases: gases are described as formed
by elastic molecules in motion, and the elasticity of a gas at a given
volume is proportional to the vis viva (total mass of the molecules
multiplied by the square of their speed). While making use of such
concepts as this (today, of course, replaced by kinetic energy), the text
does not deal with energy in a general form. As is to be expected with
this perspective, imponderable ﬂuids and the term caloric have been
forgotten, and the mechanical theory of heat is studied.

SCED524.tex; 2/02/2008; 1:08; p.7

8

J. M. VAQUERO AND A. SANTOS

All the textbooks of the 1880s that we consulted have abandoned im-
ponderable ﬂuids, with the exception of the handbook of Rico Sinobas
& Santisteban (1882) which is already in its 10th edition. Of the other
works, the most traditional is that of Picatoste (1889), since it neither
deals with energy in a general way nor introduces the theories we
are looking for. We then have the 2nd edition of the work of Fuertes
Acevedo (1882), with no substantial changes from the 1st edition. We
also consulted a Portuguese secondary education textbook, Pina Vidal
(1887), which has a similar perspective to those of Fuertes Acevedo
(1879, 1882). The textbook of M´arquez Chaparro (1886) is the ﬁrst
of the series of books that we consulted in which energy is dealt with
in a general fashion. The mechanical theory of heat is studied, but
the kinetic theory of gases has still not appeared. The 7th edition of
the work of Feli´u P´erez (1890) has almost nothing to do with the 2nd
edition that we commented on above (Feli´u P´erez, 1874). Now, energy
and the mechanical theory of heat are presented. In the prologue to the
6th edition, also included in the 7th, one reads:

With great insistence I have attempted in the treatment of heat to relate
together all the phenomena of thermo-dynamic theory. (Feli´u P´erez 1890,
p. v)7

The outstanding textbook of this decade is that written by Amig´o
Carruana (1889), published in Tarragona. The author held the chair of
physics and chemistry in the Instituto Provincial of Tarragona. This is
a modern text which includes the kinetic theory of gases, and in general
explains physical phenomena mechanistically. In the work’s prologue,
the author speaks about a book of his on mechanics published in 1885,
and gives great importance to this branch of physics:

The criterion that has inspired this treatise responds to the necessity
already recognized by all to explain the subject of Physics in a single
course, always preceded by a short course of Mechanics as foundation and
basis of the former (. . . ). (Amig´o Carruana 1889, p. 3) 8

As a continuation of thermodynamics, Amig´o Carruana describes
the kinetic theory of gases by following the ideas of Clausius and
introducing the deﬁnition of free path of a molecule as the distance
travelled between two consecutive collisions. He deduces Mariotte’s
Law, obtaining the formula pV = 1
3 nmv2, where p is the pressure of
the gas, V its volume, n the number of molecules, v the mean velocity,
and m the mass of a molecule. He also deduces Avogadro’s hypothesis
from the kinetic theory of gases (Vaquero, 1998). As an indication of
the little that this personality and his work have been studied, there
only appears one book of Amig´o Carruana in the Collected Catalogue
of Spain’s Bibliographic Heritage: 19th Century (Biblioteca Nacional,

SCED524.tex; 2/02/2008; 1:08; p.8

Heat and Kinetic Theory in 19th-Century Textbooks

9

1889). This is a textbook on elementary chemistry (Amig´o Carruana,
1892).

The main characteristic of the books of the 1890s is that they all
now treat energy in a general form, as well as the mechanical theory
of heat. The textbook of Rodr´ıguez Largo (1895) simultaneously uses
imponderable ﬂuids and the term caloric, but only as additional in-
formation. A more curious case is that of Ribera et al. (1895) whose
textbook uses the term caloric without studying imponderable ﬂuids.
The work of Escriche Mieg (1891) has the interest of studying heat
and light side by side 9, to bring out their relationship as vibratory
phenomena:

(. . . ) The molecular vibrations of the bodies, transmitted by the aether,
produce the feelings of HEAT in the touch and of LIGHT in the sight.
(Escriche Mieg 1891, p. 496)10

Other modern textbooks are those of Lozano (1893), the pharma-
cist Garagarza Dujiols (1892), Mart´ın de Argenta & Mart´ınez Pacheco
(1893), and Feli´u P´erez (1896).

The small book of Paz Sabugo (1892) contains only deﬁnitions and
principles. At no time is any idea developed, since the book’s object is
to serve as a collection of phrases for students to learn in preparation
for their examinations. As part of these examination aids, the author
prepared two plates which accompany the text, one on units and abbre-
viations of the decimal metric system, and another on physical units.
The kinetic theory of gases does not appear explicitly, but some of its
results do. For instance, one can read Maxwell’s Law:

The viscosity of a gas measured by the coeﬃcient of friction is independent
of the density. (Paz Sabugo 1892, p. 60)11

Another modern work is that of Iglesias Ejarque (1897). The author
indicates on the ﬁrst page in a footnote that the works that had been
consulted were “Spanish: Escriche, Feli´u, Mu˜noz, Rojas, and Rodr´ıguez
Largo. Foreign: Ganot, Jamin, Joubert, Maxwell, and Tyndall”. The
text contains a short paragraph on the Theory of Gases, in which
Bernouilli, Clausius, and Maxwell are cited. A kinetic interpretation
of pressure is also given, but neither is the concept of mean free path
introduced nor estimates of molecular speeds given.

The textbook of Soler S´anchez (1900), another modern work, has in
the book dedicated to heat an article on the Thermal Constitution of
Gases, in which the kinetic theory is described. A kinetic interpretation
of pressure is given, together with an explanation of high molecular
velocities, including numerical estimates. A short section is dedicated
to the Height of the Atmosphere, and another to the Mean Free Path, in
which one reads that “Crookes calls mean free path the space travelled

SCED524.tex; 2/02/2008; 1:08; p.9

10

J. M. VAQUERO AND A. SANTOS

Figure 1. The evolution of textbook contents with respect to the abandoning of
imponderable ﬂuids and the introduction of the concept of energy, the mechanical
theory of heat, and the kinetic theory of gases. The ﬁgure has been constructed by
calculating for each decade the percentage of aﬃrmative responses to the questions
formulated in the text. The intention of these results is not to provide full statistical
certainty, but to present qualitatively the ﬁndings of this investigation. One clearly
appreciates the decline in the use of imponderable ﬂuids and the rise of content
related to an atomic view of matter.

by the molecule between two of those collisions”. On the other hand,
the kinetic theory of gases is not mentioned by Lozano (1900).

We also consulted some 20th-century books. They all had a modern
perspective. The textbooks of Carrasco Garrorena (1925) and Monz´on
Gonz´alez (1928) did not include the kinetic theory of gases. The 6th
and 8th editions of Iglesias Ejarque (1915, 1924) present improvements
over the 1st edition. With respect to the kinetic theory of gases, a new
paragraph is included to explain molecular velocities. The textbook of
Gonz´alez Mart´ı (1904) explains van der Waals’s equation of state.

The last textbook that we wish to comment on is a translation of an
Italian book. It is the work of Castelfranchi (1932), a university text-
book of modern physics where the kinetic theory of gases is developed
completely. The topics in the book are surprising in their breadth and
modernity.

As a qualitative summary, Figure 1 shows the evolution of the re-
sponses to the questions that we formulated, according to the data
listed in Table I.

SCED524.tex; 2/02/2008; 1:08; p.10

Heat and Kinetic Theory in 19th-Century Textbooks

11

3. CONCLUSIONS

Spain’s educational policies in the 19th-century encouraged a great
similarity between the general physics textbooks of diﬀerent authors,
although there were voices such as that of Eduardo Lozano y Ponce de
Le´on, in discord with this policy. This situation led to the diﬀerences
between the successive editions of a textbook being minimal, and as a
result, the eﬀective lifetime of these textbooks was extremely long. A
noteworthy example is the Spanish translation of the work of A. Ganot
— the 1st edition was published in 1853 and the last we know of was
1945.

Likewise, there were diﬃculties in rooting out the antiquated content
of physics textbooks. In many of them, modern and old theories shared
the pages. A signiﬁcant example was the case of Eduardo S´anchez
Pardo, who ampliﬁed his translation (Ganot, 1876) with elements of
old editions that had been discarded from consideration in new foreign
editions. The result was to help make the recovery of Spanish physics
was a very slow process.

With respect to the term caloric, it was used in the Spain of this
period with diﬀerent acceptations: as an imponderable ﬂuid responsi-
ble for thermal phenomena (its original meaning), as a synonym for
heat (the latter being understood according to the mechanical theory
of heat), and as the cause of the phenomena of heat, whatever their
nature.

Also, during the analysis of the sources that were available, we found
the orientation towards examination preparation to be excessive in the
textbooks that we consulted. Some are a simple cookbook of laws and
physical phenomena that the students would have to learn if they were
to pass their examination. Hence, no interest was aroused in reﬂecting
on content or in carrying out experiments in practical classes. Certain
textbooks shamelessly encouraged totally memoristic learning, so that
content was not applied to new situations and was readily forgotten.

Another fact revealed by the analysis of the textbooks was the speed
with which the mechanical theory of heat gained acceptance. This the-
ory had become quite usual in many of the Spanish physics textbooks
well before the concept of energy had begun to be treated in a general
form. While this fact seems disconcerting from today’s viewpoint, it
must be pointed out that both the mechanical theory of heat and the
second law of thermodynamics had been proposed before the law of
conservation of energy was generally accepted.

The introduction of the kinetic theory into 19th-century Spain oc-
curred from approximately the 1870s onwards. In the 1880s, the theory
already appears more developed in one of the textbooks that we con-

SCED524.tex; 2/02/2008; 1:08; p.11

12

J. M. VAQUERO AND A. SANTOS

sulted. This was the work of Amig´o Carruana (1889), which stands out
for its mechanistic deductions of Mariotte’s Law and Avogadro’s Law.
The topics dealt with concerning the kinetic theory in the textbooks
that we consulted were: generalities of the theory, kinetic interpretation
of pressure, molecular velocities, mean free path, height of the atmo-
sphere, and the van der Waals equation. Lastly it should be remarked
that we found no original contribution to kinetic theory in these Spanish
works of the end of the 19th-century.

4. Acknowledgements

This work has been partially supported by the DGES (Spain) through
Grant No. PB97-1501 and by the Junta de Extremadura (Fondo Social
Europeo) through Grant No. IPR98C019.

Notes

1 The original text is: “Deseoso por su parte el editor D. C´arlos Bailly-Bailli`ere
de que nuestro p´ublico en general, y particularmente los alumnos de nuestros In-
stitutos y Facultades sigan ´a la ciencia en sus ´ultimos adelantos, nos encomend´o la
traduccion de la ´ultima edicion del citado Tratado de F´ısica. Mas al encargarnos de
este cometido, con objeto de que la edicion espa˜nola fuera mas completa, juzgamos
conveniente, correspondiendo por otra parte as´ı ´a los deseos del editor, conservar
algunas teor´ıas, la exposicion de varios experimentos y la descripcion de algunos
instrumentos ´o aparatos que en ediciones anteriores de la mencionada obra ﬁguraban,
y en la ´ultima h´anse total ´o parcialmente suprimido.”

2 Among the old material that was revived one can ﬁnd, for instance, sections on
Animal Electricity, Perreaux’s dynamometer, Alvergnat’s barometer, Carr´e’s device
for making ice or Sturm’s vision theory.

3 The original text is: “(. . . ) Efectivamente, todos los fen´omenos atribuidos al
cal´orico, ´a la luz y al ﬂuido el´ectrico, son efectos mensurables y calculables; todos
se atribuyen ´a fuerzas, consisten todos en movimientos, y constituyen en ﬁn la
mec´anica.”

4 According to the hypothesis of ondulations, as deﬁned in the 19th-century Span-
ish books we have consulted, heat is caused by the rapid motion of the molecules and
is transmitted through the aether by ondulations. Thus, all the heat phenomena are
referred to a unique cause, motion, in contrast to the heat understood as a substance
(caloric). The hypothesis of ondulations is not exactly the same as the wave theory
of heat (Brush, 1986), according to which heat is the vibrations of aether itself.

5 The original text is: “El sistema de las ondulaciones es el mas cient´ıﬁco, y el mas
admitido en la f´ısica moderna; pero el de la emisi´on se presta m´as a las demostra-
ciones, por lo que se preﬁere generalmente para la esplicacion de los fen´omenos del
cal´orico.”

6 The original text is: “La hip´otesis de las ondulaciones es la admisible en la
actualidad, atendidos los progresos de la f´ısica moderna; pero simpliﬁc´andose las

SCED524.tex; 2/02/2008; 1:08; p.12

Heat and Kinetic Theory in 19th-Century Textbooks

13

demostraciones por la hip´otesis de la emisi´on, muchos f´ısicos la preﬁeren para esplicar
los fen´omenos del calor.”

7 The original text is: “Con insistencia grande he procurado en el tratado del

calor hacer relacionar todos los fen´omenos con la teor´ıa termo-din´amica.”

8 The original text is: “El criterio que ha inspirado este tratado, responde ´a la
necesidad ya reconocida por todos, de explicar en un s´olo curso la asignatura de
F´ısica, precedida siempre de un cursillo de Mec´anica como fundamento y base de
aquella (. . . )”

9 On the other hand, Escriche Mieg does not distinguish radiant heat from heat

as energy of molecular motion

10 The original text is: “(. . . ) Las vibraciones moleculares de los cuerpos, trans-
mitidas por el ´eter, producen en el tacto la sensaci´on de CALOR y en la vista de
LUZ.”

11 The original text is: “La viscosidad de un gas medida por el coeﬁciente de

frotamiento es independiente de la densidad.”

References

Amig´o Carruana, J. M.: 1889, Tratado de F´ısica Elemental, Establecimiento

tipogr´aﬁco de Adolfo Alegret, Tarragona.

Amig´o Carruana, J. M.: 1892, Tratado de Qu´ımica Elemental, Imprenta de Hip´olito

Garc´ıa, Cartagena.

Biblioteca Nacional: 1989, Cat´alogo Colectivo del Patrimonio Bibliogr´aﬁco Espa˜nol.
Siglo XIX, (letter A and indices), Arco: Direcci´on General del Libro y Bibliotecas,
Madrid.

Boutet de Monvel, B.: 1866, Nociones de F´ısica Elemental y M´edica (translated by

Ram´on de la Sagra), L. Hachette y C´ıa, Paris.

Brush, S. G.: 1986, The Kind of Motion We Call Heat, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Carrasco Garrorena, P.: 1925, Elementos de F´ısica General, Librer´ıa de Victoriano

Su´arez, Madrid.

Castelfranchi, C.: 1932, F´ısica Moderna, Gustavo Gili, Barcelona.
Deguin, M.: 1845, Curso Elemental de F´ısica (translated by Venancio Gonz´alez

Valledor), Imprenta de D. I. Boix, Madrid.

Escriche Mieg, T.: 1891, Elementos de F´ısica y Nociones de Qu´ımica, Imprenta de

Pedro Ortega, Barcelona.

Extreme˜no, Un: 1875, ‘Programas y Libros de Texto’, El Magisterio Extreme˜no,

265–267.

Feli´u P´erez, B.: 1874, Curso Elemental de F´ısica Experimental y Aplicada y Nociones

de Qu´ımica Inorg´anica (2nd edition), Imprenta de Jos´e Rius, Valencia.

Feli´u P´erez, B.: 1890, Curso Elemental de F´ısica Experimental y Aplicada y Nociones

de Qu´ımica Inorg´anica (7th edition), Imprenta de Pedro Ortega, Barcelona.

Feli´u P´erez, B.: 1896, Curso Elemental de F´ısica Experimental y Aplicada (8th

edition), Tipograf´ıa de Comas Hermanos, Zaragoza.

Fern´andez de Figares, M.: 1861, Manual de F´ısica y Nociones de Qu´ımica (2nd

edition), Imprenta y librer´ıa de Don Jos´e Mar´ıa Zamora, Granada.

Fern´andez S´anchez, I.: 1876, ‘Libros de Texto’, El Magisterio Extreme˜no, 210–212.
Fuertes Acevedo, M.: 1879, Curso de F´ısica Elemental y Nociones de Qu´ımica,

Imprenta y litograf´ıa de V. Brid, Oviedo.

SCED524.tex; 2/02/2008; 1:08; p.13

14

J. M. VAQUERO AND A. SANTOS

Fuertes Acevedo, M.: 1882, Elementos de F´ısica y Nociones de Qu´ımica (2nd

edition), La Minerva Extreme˜na, Badajoz.

Ganot , A.: 1876, Tratado Elemental de F´ısica Experimental y Aplicada y de Me-
teorolog´ıa (7th edition, translated by Eduardo S´anchez Pardo & Eduardo Le´on
Ortiz), C´arlos Bailly-Bailli`ere, Madrid.

Garagarza Dujiols, F., 1892, Instrumentos y Aparatos de F´ısica de Aplicaci´on a la

Farmacia, librer´ıa de la viuda de Hernando y C´ıa, Madrid.

Gonz´alez Mart´ı: 1904, Tratado de F´ısica. With no place of publication or printer

given in the copy consulted.

Gonz´alez Valledor, V. & Ch´avarri, J.: 1851, Programa de un Curso Elemen-
tal de F´ısica y Nociones de Qu´ımica (2nd edition), Imprenta del colegio de
sordo-mudos, Madrid.

Gonz´alez Valledor, V. & Ch´avarri, J.: 1856, Programa de un Curso Elemental de
F´ısica y Nociones de Qu´ımica (4th edition), Imprenta del colegio de sordo-mudos,
Madrid.

Gonz´alez Valledor, V. & Ch´avarri, J.: 1857, Programa de un Curso Elemental de
F´ısica y Nociones de Qu´ımica (5th edition), Imprenta del colegio de sordo-mudos,
Madrid.

Gonz´alez Valledor, V. & Ch´avarri, J.: 1868, Programa de un Curso Elemental de
F´ısica y Nociones de Qu´ımica (9th edition), Imprenta del colegio de sordo-mudos,
Madrid.

Gonz´alez Valledor, V. & Ch´avarri, J.: 1870, Programa de un Curso Elemental de
F´ısica y Nociones de Qu´ımica (10th edition), Imprenta del colegio de sordo-
mudos, Madrid.

Harman, P. M.: 1982, Energy, Force, and Matter. The Conceptual Development of

Nineteenth Century Physics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Iglesias Ejarque, E.: 1897, Elementos de F´ısica, Imprenta de Crespo Hermanos,

Jerez.

Iglesias Ejarque, E.: 1915, Elementos de F´ısica (6th edition), Establecimiento

tipogr´aﬁco de Domingo Sar, Vitoria.

Iglesias Ejarque, E.: 1924, Elementos de F´ısica (8th edition), Imprenta y Librer´ıa

de Andr´es Mart´ın S´anchez, Valladolid.

Lozano, E.: 1893, Elementos de F´ısica, Imprenta de Jaime Jep´us y Roviralta,

Barcelona.

Lozano, E.: 1900, F´ısica, Manuales Soler, Barcelona.
M´arquez Chaparro, B.: 1886, Resumen de un Curso de F´ısica Experimental y

Nociones de Qu´ımica, Imprenta y litograf´ıa de Jos´e Mar´ıa Ariza, Sevilla.

Mart´ın de Argenta, V. & Mart´ınez Pacheco, J.: 1893, Nuevo Tratado de F´ısica y

Qu´ımica, Librer´ıa de Victoriano Su´arez, Madrid.

Monz´on Gonz´alez, J.: 1928, Nociones de F´ısica y Qu´ımica, Sucesores de Rivadeneyra,

Madrid.

Moreno Gonz´alez, A.: 1988, Una Ciencia en Cuarentena. Evoluci´on de la F´ısica en
la Universidad y Otras Instituciones Espa˜nolas de Mediados del Siglo XVIII a la
Crisis Finisecular del XIX, CSIC, Madrid.

Morquencho Palma, G.: 1845, Manual o Resumen de un Curso de F´ısica Ex-
perimental, y Nociones de Qu´ımica, Imprenta y librer´ıa de D. Ignacio Boix,
Madrid.

Opando y Uceda, L.: 1875, ‘Programas y Libros de Texto’, Revista de la Sociedad

de Profesores de Ciencias, Vol. VI, 232–235.

Paz Sabugo, M.: 1892, Deﬁniciones, Principios y Leyes de la F´ısica, Tipograf´ıa La

Econ´omica, Badajoz.

SCED524.tex; 2/02/2008; 1:08; p.14

Heat and Kinetic Theory in 19th-Century Textbooks

15

Picatoste, F.: 1889, Elementos de F´ısica y Qu´ımica, Librer´ıa de la Vda. de Hernando

y C´ıa, Madrid.

Pina Vidal, A.A.: 1887, Principios de Physica, Typographia da Academia Real das

Ciencias, Lisbon.

Pinaud: 1847, Programa de un Curso Elemental de F´ısica (translated by Florencio

Mart´ın Castro), Imprenta de Concha y C´ıa, C´aceres.

Ramos Lafuente, M.: 1880, Elementos de F´ısica (6th edition), Imprenta y librer´ıa

de la Vda. e hijo de Aguado, Madrid.

Ribera, J., Nacente, F. & Soler, P.: 1895, F´ısica Industrial o F´ısica Aplicada a la

Industria, la Agricultura, Artes y Oﬁcios, J. Rom´a, Barcelona.

Ribero Serrano, A.: 1844, Tratado Elemental de F´ısica Elemental y M´edica (7th

edition), Joaqu´ın del R´ıo, Madrid.

Rico Sinobas, M. & Santisteban, M.: 1869, Manual de F´ısica y Qu´ımica (7th edition),

Imprenta de Manuel Minuesa, Madrid.

Rico Sinobas, M. & Santisteban, M.: 1875, Manual de F´ısica y Qu´ımica (8th edition),

Imprenta de Manuel Minuesa, Madrid.

Rico Sinobas, M. & Santisteban, M.: 1882, Manual de F´ısica y Qu´ımica (10th

edition), Moya y Plaza, Madrid.

Rodr´ıguez, E.: 1858, Manual de F´ısica General y Aplicada a la Agricultura y a la

Industria, Eduardo Aguado, Madrid.

Rodr´ıguez Largo: 1895, Elementos de F´ısica, Madrid.
Sant, A.: 1857, Physica Theoretica et Experimentalis Ejusque Propagines et Appen-
dices Chimie, Astronomie et Historia Naturalis, Ex. Tip. Petra Sant, Caelsonae
[Solsona].

Santos de Castro, F.: 1846, Curso Elemental Completo de F´ısica Esperimental,

Imprenta de D. F. ´Alvarez y C´ıa, Sevilla.

Santos de Castro, F.: 1865, Resumen de F´ısica y Nociones de Qu´ımica, Francisco

´Alvarez, Sevilla.

Soler S´anchez: 1900, Elementos de F´ısica (2nd edition), Alicante.
Vaquero Mart´ınez, J.M.: 1998, ‘Dos Deduciones Cin´eticas de la Ley de los Gases
Perfectos en Libros Espa˜noles de F´ısica del Siglo XIX’, Revista Espa˜nola de
F´ısica, 12(4), 43–46.

SCED524.tex; 2/02/2008; 1:08; p.15

This figure "s_e.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0002042v1

