0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

3
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
0
4
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

SLAC-PUB-8357
physics/0007040
February 2000

Physicists Thriving with Paperless Publishing

Heath B. O’Connell1

Stanford Linear Accelerator Center

Stanford CA 94309

hoc@slac.stanford.edu

http://www.slac.stanford.edu/grp/lib/people/hoconnell.html

The Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC) and Deutsches Elektro-
nen Synchrotron (DESY) libraries have been comprehensively cataloguing
the High Energy Particle Physics (HEP) literature online since 1974. The
core database, SPIRES-HEP, now indexes over 400,000 research articles, with
almost 50% linked to fulltext electronic versions (this site now has over 15
000 hits per day). This database motivated the creation of the ﬁrst site in
the United States for the World–Wide Web at SLAC. With this database
and the invention of the Los Alamos E-print archives in 1991, the HEP
community pioneered the trend to “paperless publishing” and the trend to
paperless access; in other words, the “virtual library.” We examine the im-
pact this has had both on the way scientists research and on paper-based
publishing. The standard of work archived at Los Alamos is very high. 70%
of papers are eventually published in journals and another 20% are in con-
ference proceedings. As a service to authors, the SPIRES-HEP collaboration
has been ensuring that as much information as possible is included with each
bibliographic entry for a paper. Such meta-data can include tables of the
experimental data that researchers can easily use to perform their own anal-
yses as well as detailed descriptions of the experiment, citation tracking, and
links to full-text documents.

1Work supported by the US Department of Energy contract DE-AC03-76SF00515.

Invited talk at the AAAS Annual Meeting and Science Innovation Exposition, February
17-22, 2000 in Washington, DC

1

1 Introduction

The World Wide Web is now ubiquitous. At a time when every advertisement
on television seems to end with a URL, it is of some interest to note that the
SLAC Library had the ﬁrst Web server in North America (indeed the ﬁrst
outside Europe), which it set up to aid the research of High Energy/Particle
physicists. In this talk we explore the role technology has played in the or-
ganisation and dissemination of information in High Energy Physics (HEP),
where paper is now a medium of last resort, and discuss why HEP provided
the ideal conditions for the rapid adoption of new technology.

2 The Compulsive Communicators

Communication has long played a vital role in physicists’ research. Not
content to wait for the publication of their work in journals, they, or perhaps
their departments, would send out preprints of their work to institutions or
other researchers they personally knew (once the duplication process became
aﬀordable). Naturally because of the cost and eﬀort involved in this, large
departments and famous scientists enjoyed a numerical advantage both in
sending and receiving. However, for every poor soul in a small, out of the
way department lamenting intellectual starvation, a well known researcher
would be suﬀering from an overstuﬀed mailbox. By the 1960’s the sheer
number of preprints had somewhat perversely made the communication of
research more diﬃcult, due to information overload.

Since its foundation in 1962, the SLAC Library, at the request of the
director, W.K.H. Panofsky, had been actively collecting new preprints (as a
world centre for physics, it attracted some three thousand articles per year).
The details of each preprint were entered into a card catalogue, including
every author, no matter how many there were on the paper, which for an
experiment could easily be in the hundreds (the current record is over 1000).
From this catalogue, the library published a weekly list of new preprints for
the SLAC community.

In 1967 work began at Stanford University on a computer database system
that would be able to handle a practically limitless number of large biblio-
graphic records. It was decided early on that the SLAC Library’s preprint
card catalogue would be a suitable test subject for this database, and so
in March 1968 the SLAC Library began SPIRES, the Stanford Physics In-

2

formation REtrieval System. SPIRES was envisioned as a fully searchable
database, and each bibliographic record would contain the preprint’s author
list (with each author’s institution), title, report number, date.

The remaining bibliographic element, which turned out to be of vital
importance, was the paper’s reference list, that is the list of earlier papers
the present paper has cited [1]. Only references to published journal articles
would be included (as these were the most likely to be accurate), and they
would be stored by the journal, volume and ﬁrst page number. The impor-
tance of these reference lists was with SPIRES, one could search through
them for a given paper, and thus ﬁnd every preprint that cited the paper,
thereby establishing (in some way) the impact this paper had in the litera-
ture. Naturally, this is of considerable interest to physicists [2].

However, this activity was not limited to the New World. In 1962, the
Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron (DESY) in Hamburg, Germany, had be-
gun to publish a list named “High Energy Physics - An Index,” (HEPI)
of all the research literature it received. Included in this list was both the
published literature and unpublished preprints (whereas SLAC concentrated
mainly on preprints), amounting to some nine thousand documents per year.
Like SLAC, DESY provided the title, author and date, but instead of refer-
ences, HEPI staﬀ physicists assigned to each paper up to 23 keywords (or,
more often, key phrases) chosen from a controlled list.

Naturally it made sense for the SLAC and DESY teams to work together
in their coverage of the particle physics literature, and so preparations for
this began. By June 1969 speciﬁcations for the conversion of the DESY data
to SPIRES format were complete.

3 SPIRES and the Internet 1969–1990

In 1968 the Division of Particles and Fields (DPF) of the American Physical
Society funded the SLAC librarians, Louise Addis, Bob Gex and Rita Taylor
to publish a weekly preprint list for the entire particle physics community [3].
This list of all preprints entered in the past week could be easily generated
from the SPIRES-HEP database. In January 1969 the ﬁrst Preprints in Par-
ticles and Fields (PPF) list was sent out to over a thousand eager subscribers.
Therefore, to get your work known all around the world (or at least the title
of your work seen) all you would have to do would be send your preprint to
SLAC, and similarly you could browse the titles of all the week’s preprints

3

by just looking at one list. This established the idea of a central repository
for preprints.

A sister “Anti-preprints” list (PPA) recorded the preprints that had since
been published in journals. This allowed the original preprints to be dis-
carded, and proved quite popular with the journal editors, who were then
able to match references to preprints with the published article.

By 1974 both the SLAC and DESY libraries (and in later years other
collaborators [4]) were working on the single HEP database, and comprehen-
sively cataloguing preprints, and by extension, the published literature, in
high-energy physics.

This new PPF age, though, was not perfect. Receiving lists of new
preprints is all very well, but after several years one is left once again with a
stack of paper. Trying to ﬁnd a particular article or information on a certain
subject can be very diﬃcult. The Internet allowed a further development.

The problem of ﬁnding just the right preprints from this ever growing
body of research was not an issue for the SLAC community. The SPIRES
database allowed searches by date, author, institution, report number, title,
keywords (assigned by DESY) and a number of other ﬁelds. Simply by
logging in to their computer, SLAC physicists were able to search through
thousands of papers, and the paper PPF list would serve as a newspaper, with
a similar longevity. With the rise of the Internet anyone in the world could
now access this service. A program, QSPIRES [5], developed in 1985 [6] by
SLAC database systems developer George Crane, allowed physicists to search
the SPIRES database using E-mail and other bitnet message protocols (which
actually had priority over E-mail and hence were faster). One would send oﬀ
an E-mail query to the database and a swift reply would follow. This made
an enormous diﬀerence for people outside SLAC, especially those outside the
U.S., who had previously only been able to access SPIRES, through rare
and specially issued SLAC accounts. People were able to ﬁnd all the papers
by a particular author or from a certain institution, or ﬁnd out how many
citations their work had [1]. The PPF and PPA lists could also be sent by
E-mail.

4 TEX and the Single Archive

By 1990, lists of new articles were being sent to physicists by E-mail and peo-
ple were searching for articles in the SPIRES database via E-mail. Everything

4

was modern and electronic, up to the point where you actually wanted to
read a paper. In this case, the reader would have to request that an author
send a copy in the mail. Thus, if you were overseas it could take weeks to
months before you actually saw the article; this was clearly unacceptable.

Around this time another technical innovation had suﬃciently matured
to obviate this problem. High energy physics articles usually contain a lot of
mathematics, which makes them diﬃcult to write with a standard typewriter.
In the late 1970’s, Stanford computer scientist Donald Knuth [7] had begun
work on a special typesetting program, TEX (pronounced “tek” since the “x”
is actually a Greek χ), that could display mathematics beautifully [8]. After
1983 when the current version was released, the language soon proved very
popular with physicists and mathematicians as it gave them complete control
over the production of their documents.2

The underlying “TEX-ﬁle” was simply a normal, portable text ﬁle, in
which the mathematics was written using certain rules which could then
be processed on any computer into a viewable ﬁnal output format, such as
PostScript (PS), [9], changing

\int_0^1\frac{e^x}{2\pi} dx

to

Z 1

0

ex
2π

dx.

The PS ﬁle can then be printed out and read. Therefore, to send a paper,
all you would have to do is send the tex-ﬁle via E-mail and the person at
the other end could process it and print it out; another step in the commu-
nication process had entered the future. By 1990 the use of TEX in the HEP
community was almost universal.

With preprint list distribution, SPIRES database searches, requests for
papers, and even the transfer of these papers being done through E-mail, all
stages of the process were electronic and pretty much immediate . . . except
one. SLAC was still receiving the E-prints as “hard-copy”. Some authors
had begun sending their preprints as TEX ﬁles, but for some researchers
this would unfortunately lead to overstuﬀed electronic mailboxes, echoing a
problem of the Paper Days. In 1991, Paul Ginsparg of Los Alamos National
Laboratory (LANL) decided to do something about this. If authors could
send their papers electronically to a central repository, with author-supplied

2This paper has been written using a derivative of TEX

5

bibliographic data, a list could be sent out of each day’s additions and the
preprints could be obtained directly from this archive [10]. Here, TeX proved
a godsend, as it provided a means of storing rather small ﬁles that researchers
could request and then process into the viewable PS ﬁles at their home insti-
tutions. In August 1991, the ﬁrst paper was sent to the Los Alamos archive.
Twenty seven papers were sent that month3 and physicists began receiving
daily E-mails of the new papers sent to LANL.

Soon there were over 2000 subscribers to this daily E-mail notiﬁcation
and it gradually began to replace SLAC’s PPF list (though not the SPIRES
database itself) as the HEP community’s “newspaper” — its most immedi-
ate source of new research information. Far from competing, though, the
two services at LANL and SLAC, complemented each other nicely. SLAC
continued to process hard copy preprints that were never sent to LANL and
journal articles that had never been preprints, adding such information as
their references, experiment numbers, authors’ institutions, etc. The elec-
tronic preprints, E-prints, began to account for a good deal of the HEP
literature, and Ginsparg’s system allowed for considerable automation and
eﬃciency in SLAC’s work. A good deal of useful information could be har-
vested electronically from the ﬁles authors supplied to LANL (though there
was still much that had to be done by hand).

This evolution from preprints to E-prints had another important facet.
The E-prints were assigned a unique number of the form archive/0007040
(eg 9501251 for the 251st paper in January 1995), which the SLAC Library
immediately began to store as a new element in each record in the SPIRES
database. In the past “report numbers” had been assigned to preprints by the
author’s home institution in a less than completely systematic way and with
a variety of conventions, which made the tracking of citations too diﬃcult for
the SPIRES database. Thus, as mentioned earlier, only citations to published
journal articles were recorded, and the many citations made to an author’s
paper while it was an unpublished preprint were lost. The standardised E-
print number changed all that, since these numbers soon started appearing
in reference lists. After some work, these citations to unpublished works
could be registered. It is worth noting that the most cited HEP article in
1998 spent some ten months as an unpublished E-print [11]. The next step
was to ensure that the database recognised that the published article and
the E-print were essentially the same paper, and thus, that the true number

3In August 1999, over 800 particle physics papers were sent to the LANL archive.

6

of citations was the sum of the citations of both.
In some instances this
lead to double counting, which needed special programming to eliminate, as
it became fashionable to include both the E-print number and the journal
reference when citing an article!

5 The Mouse That Clicked

With the SPIRES database and the LANL archive you could ﬁnd a particular
paper and be reading it within minutes merely by sending E-mail, after just
a little work to process the TEX ﬁle and print it out. A lot had changed
in 20 years since the SLAC Library ﬁrst started sending out a list of all the
preprints it had received. However, the guiding philosophy behind computing
is that no work a person has to do can ever be “too little.” A new technology
was about to make the research process even easier.

In September 1991, SLAC physicist Paul Kunz, was visiting CERN,
Geneva, where he was shown the infant World Wide Web, which allowed in-
formation on diﬀerent computers to be accessed in a very user-friendly (and
now completely familiar) manner. Realising the Web interface would be per-
fect for searching the SPIRES database he told then librarian and SPIRES
database manager, Louise Addis, about it upon his return to SLAC. She was
quick to recognise the potential of this [12] and by December SLAC had the
ﬁrst WWW server in the Western Hemisphere.4 The E-mail access-system
became obsolete as more and more physics departments installed the free
software necessary to reach the SPIRES WWW interface [13]. A group was
formed at SLAC, the WWWizards [14] to provide help with WWW technol-
ogy [15].

The key feature of the WWW is linking. Therefore, when displaying
search results in the SPIRES database, a number of things could be linked
to each record. One of these was the full-text at Los Alamos which was being
stored in a minimal fashion as TEX source. As mentioned before, TEX ﬁles
need to be processed before they can be printed out. In the early stages,
many of the source ﬁles contained errors or idiosyncrasies that made them
diﬃcult to process. In order to enter all the relevant information into the
SPIRES database the SLAC Library staﬀ needed to print out each paper,
and so would process the TEX ﬁles sent to Los Alamos into PS ﬁles. At ﬁrst
this was done manually, which soon grew to be very time consuming. Luckily,

4There was no Initial Public Oﬀering.

7

the SLAC Library was helped by Paul Mende from Brown University who
created an automatic procedure. Accompanying ﬁgures could be faxed to
the SLAC Library, where they would be converted via NextFAX to a PS ﬁle.
The PS ﬁles (of both text and ﬁgures) were then stored on a server at SLAC.
The record in the SPIRES database would link to both the Los Alamos entry,
where the TEX source ﬁle was stored, and the SLAC PS server, where the
user could view the PS ﬁle.

Around the same time a similar script to convert TEX source to PS had
been written at Los Alamos by Tanmoy Bhattacharya, a physicist specialising
in the heavily computational subﬁeld of Lattice Gauge Theory.
Initially
for personal use, this PS generating code was built into a powerful tool by
Bhattacharya, Rob Hartill and Mark Doyle. By mid 1995, the LANL archive
was producing its own PS ﬁles thereby freeing the SLAC Library from this
task. Ultimately PS generation was incorporated into the LANL submission
process, and it came with an ultimatum: if your paper couldn’t be processed,
it wouldn’t be accepted. Many authors were shocked to ﬁnd that the TEX ﬁles
they had previously sent to Los Alamos could not be easily processed, thus
making their work less accessible, and welcomed this checking procedure.
With the ability to generate PS from directly from TEX source, PS that
had been generated from TEX was no longer acceptable, and by late 1996
submissions of such would be rejected [16]. For whatever reasons, this led
to some grumbling, but faced with being denied the opportunity to post to
LANL, there was no real alternative to complying.5

With all this in place the SPIRES database was linking to reliable PS ﬁles
generated and stored at the Los Alamos archive. The LANL archive would
also link to both references and citations stored in the SPIRES database.
This formed perhaps the ﬁrst publically available full-text, cross-linked sci-
entiﬁc database. Paper had been eliminated from the process and the virtual
library was born [6].

6 The Many Hands Interpretation

The model of authors sending their electronic texts to LANL has pushed the
eﬀort of publication onto the researchers themselves, who beneﬁt from an
inexpensive, immediate, wide-scale dissemination of their work. This idea

5An interesting and oftentimes amusing timeline of the development of the Los Alamos

archive can be found at [17].

8

has led many computer scientists to ponder automated systems for indexing
and retrieving these full-text papers. How much of the work of collecting
information on the literature can be realistically facilitated by the authors?
The combination of the Web, the SLAC Library’s automated systems and
the LANL archives provides an interesting testing ground for this question.
The goal of the LANL archive is to be as automated as possible, so that
it can exist without administrative intervention (as opposed to the SPIRES
database). To this end it has a number of checks to ensure that all submis-
sions meet the entry requirements (one we have already discussed ensures the
TEX ﬁle is successfully processed into PS). The basic bibliographic informa-
tion (author, title, etc.) data is supplied by the users in a neatly structured
format that can be downloaded into the SPIRES database automatically.
This raw information requires only minor attention from the Library staﬀ
who, among other things, ensure spelling consistencies, and add in the au-
thor aﬃliations from the INSTITUTIONS database.

Far and away the most time consuming part of this is collecting the
references of each paper, from which the citation searching is built [1]. As
citation results reﬂect some degree of professional accomplishment, physicists
tend to be rather interested in them and a good deal of their correspondence
with the SLAC Library concerns omissions or mistakes in the reference lists
(which is exacerbated by the posting to LANL of revised versions of E-prints,
which often contain additional references). Originally these reference lists
were typed into the database, but as another happy spin-oﬀ of TEX about
90% of them can now be extracted from the author’s ﬁle. Unfortunately, this
only makes a huge job large, as they still have to be checked by the Library
staﬀ, and authors regularly confound the reference extracting program by
adopting imaginative new ways of writing the journal-volume-page sequence,
or simply making errors in a reference.

Obviously the LANL model suggested there should be some way to place
the burden of constructing and checking the reference list on the authors
themselves (as they do with bibliographic information), before they send their
paper out to the world. Two things really stood in the way of this. First, the
original program that extracted the references was not deﬁnitive enough for
this sort of user-side checking, as there was no real way of specifying which
references the code would extract, and which it would not. The second
problem was that with physicists being rather busy, any new system would
have to result in less, not more, work for it to be widely adopted.

Once again, TEX helped with the solution. The SPIRES team developed

9

and oﬀered a new service: the database would display records in TEX format,
with the exact information needed to construct the reference as an additional
tag. The authors then had a very simple process of cut and paste to create
their reference lists, and the tag would sit invisibly in the TEX ﬁle (not
appearing in the ﬁnal PS ﬁle) waiting to be extracted at the SLAC library.
The strict structure of the CITATION tag and the simplicity of its extraction
allowed for the creation of a checking program that authors could use, for
example:

\bibitem{O’Connell:1997}
H.~B.~O’Connell,
‘‘Recent developments in $\rho\!-\!omega$ mixing,’’
Austral.\ J.\ Phys.\ {\bf 50}, 255 (1997)
[hep-ph/9604375].
%%CITATION = HEP-PH 9604375;%%

which becomes:

H. B. O’Connell, “Recent developments in ρ−ω mixing,” Austral. J. Phys.
50, 255 (1997) [hep-ph/9604375].

So far over ﬁve hundred papers have been written using this system.

A second way we’ve been experimenting with author–supplied data is
asking them to help us with another thing that is of great interest to them:
missing papers in our database. Traditionally adding them in was another
time consuming exercise that would require Library staﬀ to get the jour-
nal from the shelves and type in all the relevant information. Using a web
form that authors can ﬁll out themselves allows a paper to be added to the
database simply by cutting and pasting on the part of the Library staﬀ.

By inviting our users to help us in maintaining the database and au-
tomating as many processes as possible, we have been able to accomplish a
lot of additional work without spending signiﬁcant amounts of extra time.
This would not be possible, though, without the eagerness and attention to
detail that characterises the Physics community.

10

7 All the news that’s ﬁt to link

The WWW created a unique opportunity for the SPIRES database by pro-
viding a system that would conveniently attach to any record all the related
information both inside the database and around the world in a very compact
manner. Over the past six years we have worked on making this process as
eﬃcient as possible both in terms of computer programming and the output
display our users see [18]. I shall now discuss how this works.

A single record in the Literature database might have certain basic ele-

ments such as

• Title

• Author (and author’s institution) or corporate author

• Date

• Publication note

but the article could also be hyperlinked to

• the appropriate record in the EXPERIMENTS database

• full text of article at the journal server or the E-print server

• the references of the article

• other articles that cite it

• experimental data in the REACTIONS database,

• the record for the conference at which the paper was given

allowing the researcher to selectively explore any particular related item.
Thus an original record only ten lines long becomes a gateway to information
stored around the globe.

The construction of these links requires special care and co-operation with
outside services. One particular case that followed an evolutionary process
was linking to the published version of the document on journal home pages.
Optimally, this URL would point to a unique “abstract page,” rendered in
HTML so that the link to the journal server can be fast. Once there the user
can be presented with all the Journal services such as full text in a variety of

11

formats (the most common being PS or the newer Portable Document File
(PDF)). From the point of view of the publisher, this means that a URL
has to be found for every article. From our point of view this URL should
be calculable from the information we already have about the record, as it
then permits us to run in the URL automatically. Articles have always been
cited through the journal-volume-page (JVP) convention, so it made sense
that a number of major publishers, including the American Physical Society
[19] and Elsevier [20] adopted a URL scheme based on these three elements.
Setting up such a system does present something of a technical challenge for
the journals, but is well worth it in terms of presenting the simplest possible
interface to the outside world and providing reliable access to their wares.

The journals also link back into our database, mainly for the references of
the paper (though publishers have proven less eager to link to our database
record of the actual paper).
In an eﬀort which I hope will become more
widely adopted, we have worked closely with the American Physical Society’s
Physical Review [21] to share the bibliographic data (including reference lists)
and either update an existing record in our database, or add a new record,
when they publish new articles.

Where possible we have also tried to link to other literature databases.
Some, like the CERN Library’s database [22], have a signiﬁcant overlap
with our system (there are currently over ﬁfty thousand two-way links be-
tween SPIRES and CERN). Others, such as Harvard’s Astrophysics Data
System [23]and the American Mathematical Society’s Mathematical Reviews
(AMSMR) [24] cover a much smaller set of papers in our database, but
from a diﬀerent perspective and connect the paper to other academic disci-
plines. Here, once again, we need to work with the other databases to ensure
maximal eﬃciency and reliability in this linking. Our links to the Harvard
database use a JVP scheme, while those to CERN and AMSMR databases
use unique record keys. SPIRES can be linked to either way. There is also the
consideration that the link should bring additional information, rather than
just repeating what record in the SPIRES database (or else why bother?).
Therefore, we apply these links selectively.

8 So why HEP?

Why did the High Energy Physics community provide such a fertile ground
for this particular aspect of the so-called “Information Revolution”? We

12

have touched on the reasons throughout this talk, but it is useful, perhaps,
to summarise them to understand how this model might be more widely
adopted (or why it might not be).

The ﬁrst thing is that it has not been a revolution so much as an evolution.
Particle physicists have always been compulsive communicators. Generally
free of commercial or governmental restrictions, the habit of sending out ad-
vanced copies of work goes back to the days of carbon paper. They also have
a long standing tradition of international collaboration, so any new advances
in communication technology are eagerly adopted, and the high technological
literacy facilitates this. This is especially true of the experimental community
whose collaborations can have hundreds of members all over the world and
whose experiments depend on high speed computer network connections. It
is worth noting that the two SLAC physicists most closely involved in spin-
ning the web at SLAC, Paul Kunz and Tony Johnson are experimentalists,
though I should also point out that Paul Ginsparg of Los Alamos is a theorist.
In this environment the sheer quantity of existing literature necessitated
creating the organisation begun by the SLAC Library in the late 1960’s.
Through using this PPF list service, physicists became accustomed to the
idea of a central “clearing house” for preprints. As the use of E-mail spread
through the Physics community, particularly the High Energy sector, the
SPIRES E-mail interface was introduced in the mid 80’s and before long
was being used by thousands of researchers in over forty countries. The TEX
typesetting language, favoured by those needing to write complex mathemat-
ics, allowed one to send simple ASCII ﬁles using E-mail, thus giving rise to
the electronic distribution of preprints, which was centralised by Ginsparg’s
E-print archive. The World Wide Web then laid the ground for a highly
powerful way to integrate the various facets of research communication.
It should be acknowledged that these are rather special conditions.

It
is instructive to note that in other scientiﬁc communities where TEX is less
heavily used, the adoption of the LANL archives has been noticeably slower,
though in principle there is nothing to stop them (despite being built with
TEX in mind, the archive is not dependent on it, and will accept submis-
sions in a variety of formats). The TEX ﬂuent mathematics community, on
the other hand, though quick to adopt the new system, perhaps lacked the
detailed computing knowledge to play a leading role.

For diﬀerent research communities there are other obstacles. Faced with
the incredibly rapid and wholehearted adoption of this E-print scheme by
high energy physicists, the traditional journal publishers found it best to

13

not to oﬀer any real resistance. They had nothing to fear, really, as over
seventy percent of HEP papers sent to Los Alamos are eventually published
in journals and another twenty percent appear in conference proceedings. In
other ﬁelds, with newer archives, this is still something of a touchy subject,
such as in the biological and medical research communities, as can be seen in
the Biochemical Society’s response [25] to the NIH’s proposal for a preprint
server for the life sciences [26] (further reﬂections on eprints and the life
sciences can be found at [27]).

9 Conclusion

In this paper I have described the evolution of paperless publishing in a
particular academic community and how special circumstances conspired to
make this happen faster and more comprehensively than in any other ﬁeld.
In doing this I have hoped to convey the sense that this was indeed a process
of evolution rather than revolution.

It may be interesting to speculate what the future holds. Will more and
more of what used to be called “bibliographic data,” become author–supplied
“metadata” which annotates each article with various related information?
Can this metadata be shared to create cross-database, and cross-discipline,
linking [28]? Our experience shows that if you make the procedure simple
enough, and oﬀer an advantage to the authors for doing it (such as the ability
to check their reference list), they will use it. The challenge now is to bring
this to other scholarly communities [29].

We have begun in the SPIRES-HEP database to exploit Web technology
to handle information beyond the traditional bibliographic record or what
one could obtain from a print version (such as the full text and reference list).
These other facets range from the paper’s citation list, which is constantly
growing (if the author is fortunate), to the home-page of the experimental
collaboration that wrote the paper, to what information researchers might
really want out of a paper, in a form far more useful than could ever be deliv-
ered in paper (such as a computer ﬁle of experimental data or 3-D computer
images created by the author).

The ﬂuidity of this new, electronic means of publication also has implica-
tions for the traditional research process. At what point does an author “give
the ﬁnal answer” and the paper become “set in stone”? The LANL archive,
has neatly addressed this issue in an appropriate manner, by archiving each

14

version of an E-print with a date stamp, documenting any modiﬁcations in
the paper. Once the article is published in a journal, it is a ﬁnished piece
of work, with any subsequent alterations handled via errata. Other authors
may comment on the published paper, to which the author may reply, but
the comment and reply are treated as new articles, and the original is left un-
changed. One journal, however, has broken away from the traditional model.
Living Reviews in Relativity [30] exists solely on the Web, and allows authors
to constantly revise their articles. In part this is due to the pedagogical na-
ture of the journal; it seeks to provide reviews that aid learning, rather than
publish original research.

Well aware of the diﬃculties of predicting anything in the Internet world,
I have merely tried, in concluding, to state some of the current trends in
electronic publication.

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Louise Addis, Paul Ginsparg, Marek Karliner, Pat
Kreitz, Michael Peskin, Hartmut Preissner and Ann Redﬁeld for reading
this manuscript and oﬀering helpful comments and suggestions. I have also
enjoyed conversations on the topics mentioned here with Richard Dominiak,
Mark Doyle, Paul Ginsparg, Tony Johnson, John Jowett and Paul Kunz.

References

[1] In the SPIRES database we use the following terminology: if paper B
includes an earlier paper A in its “reference” list, then paper A is “cited
by” paper B [http://www.slac.stanford.edu/spires/hep/references.html]

[2] The SPIRES team produces a yearly list of the topcited papers (for that
year, and all-time), with a beautiful review written by SLAC’s Michael
Peskin. http://www.slac.stanford.edu/library/topcites

[3] L. Addis, “SLAC Library monitors underground Physics Press,” SLAC

News (June 1971).

[4] DESY, CERN, University of Durham, KEK, Yukawa Instititute and

Fermilab.

15

[5] H. Galic, “Guide to QSPIRES and the particle databases on SLACVM,”

SLAC-0393. SPIRES

[6] P. A. Kreitz, L. Addis and A. S. Johnson, “The Virtual library in action:
Collaborative international control of high-energy physics preprints,”
SLAC-PUB-7110 Presented at Grey Exploitations in the 21st Century:
The Second International Conference on Grey Literature, Washington,
D.C., 2-3 Nov, 1995;

L. Addis, H. Galic, P. Kreitz and A. Johnson, “The Virtual library in ac-
tion,” SLAC-PUB-8185 Presented at 209th American Chemical Society
National Meeting, Anaheim, CA, 2-6 Apr 1995.

[7] http://sunburn.stanford.edu/ knuth

[8] D. E. Knuth, “The TEX book,” Addison Wesley 1986 (see also

http://www.tug.org).

[9] http://www.postscript.org

[10] http://arXiv.org

[11] J. Maldacena, “The large N limit of superconformal ﬁeld theories and
supergravity,” Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 2, 231 (1998) [hep-th/9711200].

[12] T. Berners-Lee,

“Weaving the Web,” (Harper,

teresting
can
be
http://www.ﬁrstmonday.dk/issues/issue5 5/addis/

the development
Louise Addis’ First Monday

account
found

of
in

1999). An in-
of SLAC’s web server
interview

[13] http://www.slac.stanford.edu/spires/hep

[14] http://www.slac.stanford.edu/ﬁnd/wizards.html

[15] J. M. Deken, “First in the web, but where are the pieces?” SLAC-PUB-

7636. SPIRES

[16] http://arXiv.org/help/faq/whytex

[17] http://arXiv.org/new/91-94.html

16

[18] Much of the work for this linking was done by the former HEP
database manager, Hrvoje “Harv” Galic. A good account of the adop-
tion of new technologies to enhance the database can be found at
http://www.slac.stanford.edu/spires/spires news.html

[19] http://www.aps.org

[20] http://www.elsevier.com/npe

[21] http://prd.aps.org

[22] http://alice.cern.ch

[23] http://adsabs.harvard.edu

[24] http://www.ams.org/mathscinet/search

[25] http://www.biochemistry.org/ebiomedresp.htm

[26] www.nih.gov/welcome/director/pubmedcentral/pubmedcentral.htm

[27] http://arxiv.org/blurb/beagle99.html

[28] H. Van de Sompel and P. Hochstenbach, “Reference linking in a hybrid
library environment,” D-Lib Magazine 5 no. 4 and D-Lib Magazine 5
no. 10 [http://www.dlib.org]

[29] http://www.openarchives.org

[30] http://www.livingreviews.org

17

