1
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
5
0
2
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

String Theory: An Evaluation

Peter Woit
Department of Mathematics, Columbia University
woit@math.columbia.edu

February 2, 2008

For nearly seventeen years now most speculative and mathematical work
in particle theory has centered around the idea of replacing quantum ﬁeld
theory with something that used to be known as “Superstring Theory”, but
now goes under the name “M-Theory”. We’ve been told that “string theory
is a part of twenty-ﬁrst-century physics that fell by chance into the twentieth
century”, so this year the time has perhaps ﬁnally come to begin to evaluate
the success or failure of this new way of thinking about particle physics. This
article will attempt to do so from the perspective of a quantum ﬁeld theorist
now working in the mathematical community.

The theory has been spectacularly successful on one front, that of public
relations. Best-selling books and web sites are devoted to explaining the
subject to the widest possible audience. The NSF is funding a series of NOVA
programs on string theory, and the ITP at Santa Barbara is organizing a
conference to train high school teachers in string theory so that they can teach
it to their students. The newspaper of record informs us that “Physicists
Finally Find a Way to Test Superstring Theory” (NYT 4/4/00).

The strongest scientiﬁc argument in favor of string theory is that it ap-
pears to contain a theory of gravity embedded within it.
It is not often
mentioned that this is not yet a consistent quantum theory of gravity. All
that exists at the moment is a divergent series that is conjectured to be an
asymptotic perturbation series for some as yet undeﬁned non-perturbative
string theory (the terms in the series are conjectured to be ﬁnite, unlike the
situation in the standard quantization of general relativity). String theorists
actually consider the divergence of this series to be a virtue, since otherwise
they would have an inﬁnity (one for each compactiﬁcation of six dimensions)

1

of consistent theories of gravity on their hands, with no principle for choosing
amongst them.

String theory has lead to many striking new mathematical results. The
concept of “mirror symmetry” has been very fruitful in algebraic geometry,
and conformal ﬁeld theory has opened up a new, fascinating and very deep
area of mathematics. Unfortunately the mathematically interesting parts of
string theory have been pretty much orthogonal to those parts that attempt
to connect with the real world.

The experimental situation is best described with Pauli’s phrase “it’s
not even wrong”. No one has managed to extract any sort of experimental
prediction out of the theory other than that the cosmological constant should
probably be at least 55 orders of magnitude larger than experimental bounds.
String theory not only makes no predictions about physical phenomena at
experimentally accessible energies, it makes no predictions whatsoever. Even
if someone were to ﬁgure out tomorrow how to build an accelerator capable
of reaching Planck-scale energies, string theorists would be able to do no
better than give qualitative guesses about what such a machine might see.
This situation leads one to question whether string theory really is a scientiﬁc
theory at all. At the moment it’s a theory that cannot be falsiﬁed by any
conceivable experimental result. It’s not even clear that there is any possible
theoretical development that would falsify the theory.

String theorists often attempt to make an aesthetic argument, a claim
that the theory is strikingly “elegant” or “beautiful”. Since there is no well-
deﬁned theory, it’s hard to know what to make of these claims, and one is
reminded of another quote from Pauli. Annoyed by Heisenberg’s claims that
modulo some details he had a wonderful uniﬁed theory (he didn’t), Pauli sent
his friends a postcard containing a blank rectangle and the text “This is to
show the world I can paint like Titian. Only technical details are missing.”
Since no one knows what “M-theory” is, its beauty is that of Pauli’s painting.
Even if a consistent M-theory can be found, it may very well be a theory of
great complexity and ugliness.

From a mathematician’s point of view, the idea that M-theory will replace
the Standard Model with something aesthetically more impressive is rather
suspicious. Two of the most important concepts of the Standard Model
are that of a gauge ﬁeld and that of the Dirac operator. Gauge ﬁelds are
identical with connections, perhaps the most important objects in the modern
formulation of geometry. Thinking seriously about the inﬁnite dimensional
space of all connections has been a very fruitful idea that mathematicians

2

have picked up from physicists. The importance of the Dirac operator is well
known to physicists, what is less well known is that it is of similar importance
in mathematics where it plays the role of “fundamental class” in K-theory.
This is reﬂected in the central role the Dirac operator plays in the Atiyah-
Singer index theorem, one of the great achievements of twentieth century
mathematics.

To the extent that the conceptual structure of string theory is understood,
the Dirac operator and gauge ﬁelds are not fundamental, but are artifacts
of the low energy limit. The Standard Model is dramatically more “elegant”
and “beautiful” than string theory in that its crucial concepts are among
the deepest and most powerful in modern mathematics. String theorists are
asking mathematicians to believe in the existence of some wonderful new
mathematics completely unknown to them involving concepts deeper than
that of a connection or a Dirac operator. This may be the case, and one
must take this argument seriously when it is made by a Fields medalist, but
without experimental evidence or a serious proposal for what M-theory is,
the argument is unconvincing.

Given the lack of experimental or aesthetic motivation, why do so many
particle theorists work on string theory? Sheldon Glashow describes string
theory as “the only game in town”, but this begs the question. Why is it the
only game in town?

During much of the twentieth century there were times when theoreti-
cal particle physics was conducted quite successfully in a somewhat faddish
manner; there was often only one game in town. Experimentalists regu-
larly discovered new unexpected phenomena, each time leading to a ﬂurry
of theoretical activity and sometimes to Nobel prizes for those quickest to
correctly understand the signiﬁcance of the new data. Since the discovery
of the J/Ψ in November 1974, there have been no solid experimental results
that disagree with the Standard Model (except perhaps recent indications of
neutrino masses). It is likely that this situation will continue at least until
2006 when experiments at the LHC at CERN are scheduled to begin. To
a large extent particle theory research has continued to be conducted in a
faddish manner for the past quarter century, but now with little success.

Graduate students, post-docs and untenured junior faculty interested in
physics beyond the Standard Model are under tremendous pressures in a bru-
tal job market to work on the latest fad in string theory, especially if they are
interested in speculative and mathematical research. For them, the idea of
starting to work on an untested new idea that may very well fail looks a lot

3

like a quick route to professional suicide. Many physics researchers do not
believe in string theory but work on it anyway. They are often intimidated
intellectually by the fact that some leading string theorists are undeniably
geniuses, and professionally by the desire to have a job, get grants, go to
conferences and generally have an intellectual community in which to partic-
ipate.

What can be done? Even granting that string theory is an idea that
deserves to be pursued, how can theorists be encouraged to try and ﬁnd
more promising alternatives? Here are some modest proposals, aimed at
encouraging researchers to strike out in new directions:

1. Until such time as a testable prediction (or even a consistent compelling
deﬁnition) emerges from string theory, theorists should publicly acknowledge
the problems theoretical particle physics is facing, and should cease and
desist from activities designed to sell string theory to impressionable youths,
popular science reporters and funding agencies.

2. Senior theorists doing string theory should seriously reevaluate their
research programs, consider working on less popular ideas and encourage
their graduate students and post-docs to do the same.

3.

Instead of trying to hire post-docs and junior faculty working on
the latest string theory fad, theory groups should try and identify young
researchers who are working on original ideas and hire them to long enough
term positions that they have a chance of making some progress.

4. Funding agencies should stop supporting theorists who propose to
continue working on the same ideas as everyone. They should also question
whether it is a good idea to fund a large number of conferences and work-
shops on the latest string theory fad. Research funds should be targeted at
providing incentives for people to try something new and ambitious, even if
it may take many years of work with a sizable risk of ending up with nothing.
Particle theorists should be exploring a wide range of alternatives to string
theory, and looking for inspiration wherever it can potentially be found. The
common centrality of gauge ﬁelds and the Dirac operator in the Standard
Model and in mathematics is perhaps a clue that any fundamental physi-
cal model should directly incorporate them. Another powerful and unifying
idea shared by physics and mathematics is that of a group representation.
Some of the most beautiful mathematics to emerge from string theory in-
volves the study of (projective) representations of the group of conformal
transformations and of one-dimensional gauge groups (“loop groups”). This
work is essentially identical with the study of two dimensional quantum ﬁeld

4

theory. The analogous questions in four dimensions are terra incognita, and
one of many potentially promising areas particle theorists could look to for
inspiration.

During the 1960’s and early 1970’s, quantum ﬁeld theory appeared to be
doomed and string theory played a leading role as a theory of the strong
interactions. Could it be that just as string theory was wrong then, it is
wrong now, and in much the same way: perhaps the correct quantum theory
of gravity is some form of asymptotically free gauge theory? As long as the
best young minds of the ﬁeld are encouraged to ignore quantum ﬁeld theory
and pursue the so far fruitless search for M-theory, we may never know.

5

