Censorship and the peer review system

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, University of Technology Vienna,

Wiedner Hauptstraße 8-10/136, A-1040 Vienna, Austria

Karl Svozil∗

Abstract

In the best of all worlds, peer review amounts to benign censorship, saving trees, human efforts and money

spent by attempts to cope with erroneous or badly written papers. In the worst case, “peer review” amounts

to malign censorship, impede progress, and hence to a waste of human efforts and (mostly taxpayer’s)

money. It is argued that, by the way it is commonly executed by editorial boards and funding agencies, peer

review does often more bad than good. In an academic environment which is increasingly “objectivized”

and administered by quality measures of private business, careful peer review is almost punished, since it

amounts to “unproductive time.” If paid realistically, it would be excessively expensive. Very little attention

is also given to the quality of the review process. Alternatives to “peer review” are brieﬂy suggested and

discussed.

PACS numbers: 01.70.+w,01.65.+g

Keywords: Philosophy of science;History of science

2
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
8
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: svozil@tuwien.ac.at; URL: http://tph.tuwien.ac.at/˜svozil

1

I. WHAT IS “PEER REVIEW?”

How would you explain “peer review” (PR) to a layman? Maybe like so: Scientiﬁc results are

usually reported in articles in speciﬁc newspapers called (scientiﬁc) journals. The authors of the

articles do what they consider to be scientiﬁc research, then write up a summary of it and send this

(mostly) unsolicited text, often called “paper,” to a journal. An editorial board consisting of fellow

scientists decides whether or not this research report is published; i.e., printed as journal article.

The decision procedure is as follows. The manuscript is sent out to other “peer” researchers

in that area called “referees.” The referees review the manuscript and submit an evaluation to the

editorial board. Most of the time, this evaluation will contain critical remarks and suggestions to

improve the manuscript. Most importantly, it contains suggestions to refuse or accept publication

of the manuscript, maybe in a revised form. The editorial board receives the reports and, based

on but not restraint by the recommendation(s) of the referee(s), decides about refusal or accep-

tance. Usually, the referee report is send out anonymized to the authors, either with a request

to revise the manuscript, or to motivate the editorial board’s decision. This procedure can be it-

erated, either with the same or with another scientiﬁc journal. (Many journals also have ofﬁcial

appeals procedures.) Thus, taken at face value, PR appears to be a sort of censorship which assures

and certiﬁes the quality of research by sending reports back and forth between authors and their

“peers.” This complicated procedure could improve articles, prevent the authors from publishing

an embarrassing mistake, and the community at large from erroneous or low-quality work.

PR has been explained for publications, but most of this applies to the dissemination of money;

i.e., research funding, as well. This is very important, because besides ideas and concepts, money

steers research projects more than everything else does (with the possible exception of the re-

searcher’s passion to pursue a project). Without money, no scientist could survive; especially not

the experimentalists. They could not buy the equipment, pay the room rent, the stationary, their

communication links et cetera. Money most of the time comes from agencies which are more or

less directly funded from taxes; be it in civilian or military research. (Of course, there is much

applied industrial research as well, directed mainly at increasing proﬁts and share value. This is a

slightly different world with somewhat a different approach to research funding, which we shall

not discuss here.) I would like to emphasize this fact, because PR is the method by which tax

money is distributed to the scientiﬁc community. Therefore, at least as far as taxpayers are con-

cerned, PR has a political dimension. The more political questions being asked have to do with

2

the effectively of PR, its quality, and its possible alternatives.

Historically, PR was not always executed in a way it is implemented presently.

II. ANECDOTAL CASE STUDIES AGAINST “PEER REVIEW”

Whereas most scientiﬁc insiders have either been subconsciously brainwashed or have ra-

tionally convinced themselves into accepting PR as a sacrosanct demarcation criterion between

“good” and “bad” science (and are coping with it by various strategies), laymen, in particular

politicians and managers, are usually less convinced. Yet, they usually accept the claim that the

scientiﬁc community manages itself properly and cost-effectively without much interference from

the outside; mostly by benign censorship such as PR. Direct political intervention is usually con-

sidered as a bad sign, resulting in wasteful investments of research money.

However, some doubts remain. The Swizz “Wissenschaftsrat,” an ofﬁcial body advising the

Swizz government, for instance, started a monumental initiative to ﬁnd future hot spots of re-

search. Systematically, hundreds of professors were asked to locate them. After time passed by

the recommendations could be compared with what actually happened, and these recommenda-

tions turned out not to be very helpful, in some cases even distractive [1].

And there are some serious problems of PR. To set the stage, let me tell you some anecdotes

ﬁrst. Most scientists have their favorite, more or less funny little stories about their encounter with

PR. Here are some of these anecdotes which have bean told by trustworthy colleagues. I shall

anonymize the plots, as some of them might be considered to be upsetting to authors, referees

and editors, but I assure the readers that all of them are authentic. Highly respected journals are

involved which rank among the top in the science citation index. Upon request, I could disclose

details to every single one of them.

Paper A received the following, contradictory referee reports P RA1, P RA2. P RA1 basically
stated that the idea was crazy but the paper was nicely written and the formalism correct. P RA2

stated that the paper technically is unsatisfactory but the idea is very original. The paper got

accepted.

In another case, the reviewer explicitly stated that if he did not know that its author was such a

highly respected researcher, he would not accept the claims of the paper. He did not give too many

technical details as to why he resented the paper. The reviewer contacted the author “sideways”

(not through the editor but directly), declared his role in the review process and kindly attempted

3

to direct the author’s attention to a totally unrelated treatise written by the reviewer. The paper got

accepted.

Another renown researcher, after his retirement, wanted to know the scientiﬁc value of his

recent research articles. One issue was to test PR. He therefore attempted to publish the paper

not under his “label“ but invented a completely new author name. Many of these papers were

rejected immediately, for various reasons, which was certainly not this author’s experience when

publishing under his own name.

Another renown researcher stated that he does not submit research papers to PR journals any

more, because he simply refused to cope with the not very helpful, sometimes mean (as he per-

ceived it) comments of most reviewers. Instead, he publishes things only when invited to con-

tribute to collections of papers (he gets invitations very often).

A team of researcher had a very important result. They decided not to publish it in a “rapid

letter” journal but rather put it securely into a conference proceeding, thereby effectively avoiding

the risks of PR. The paper sparked off an avalanches of papers in very prestigious journals, among

them the letter journal.

Scientist A suggested to author B to write about a paper written by another author C who

had challenged some of A’s ﬁndings. Upon this request (and by scientiﬁc interest), B decided to

write a paper, which also contained some of A’s comments of C. The referees of the ﬁrst journal

rejected the paper. They did not give speciﬁc reasons but wrote that B did not at all understand the

original paper by A (remember: B wrote the paper on A’s request.) In the second round of peer

review of the second journal, the referee called the paper “perverse” and therefore recommended

rejection. Although it was a paper in mathematical physics, the editor decided to communicate this

judgment to the author and based his rejection on the not very speciﬁc but outspoken comments

of the referee. The paper ﬁnally, after over one year delay, was accepted by a third journal almost

immediately. Since then this “perverse” paper has been cited by various researchers in the area.

It took the assistant editor of letter journal devoted by its own understanding to the rapid dis-

semination of research results, 1.5 months to decide that the paper was too long to ﬁt as a letter (the

paper exceeded negotiable 5% of the acceptable length). During that time, it was not even sent out

to PR. After shortening it was rejected because although one reviewer recommended publication,

the other reviewer suggested mainly that this paper was the outcome of “a cottage industry.”

In reviewing a research proposal, one referee pointed out that that the popularity of a particular

website presenting a scientiﬁc result is totally irrelevant as a criterion for the need of its further

4

funding. The referee also pointed out that the applicant had published recently many papers in

what the referee considered as “hardly refereed research journals,” whereby he completely over-

looked other papers in more prestigious journals and also did not realize that these papers were

published as volumes of conference proceedings (biannual meetings of a scientiﬁc society), and

one was by invitation in the honor of a very renown researcher. Although two other referee reports

recommended funding, the board reviewing this proposal decided that this criticism was severe

enough and refused funding. The comments, together with other, mostly intimidating statements

of the referee, were communicated to the author as basis of the decision.

Many more such stories could be and have been told, probably the most stunning ones dealing

with papers which were rejected and later earned its author the nobel prize [2]. In order not to

be boring, I shall next just mention some basic observations about PR without much discussion.

These, of course, cannot be induced from such anecdotes but are subjective evaluations.

III. MORE ANALYTIC CRITICISM

The following collection of criticism does not claim to be complete.

Stated pointedly, PR neither means more money nor more scientiﬁc recognition for the anony-

mous referee. PR is not paid work and is done on a voluntary basis. It is not measured by pro-

fessional indicators and therefore is not very relevant for a scientist’s credentials. Its only reward

is a (mostly not very well recognizable and measurable) recognition for the reviewer. In a social

environment in which achievements tend to be recognized only when measurable, and the ulti-

mate measure tends to become money (although not too many researchers would concede that)

the motivation to put much efforts in PR become lower. Recall that, different from science, in

private industry and business, consulting tasks are very expensive and highly valued. So, the more

business-like science becomes, either PR must be reimbursed, or it will eventually break down

because no one is willing to work for nothing.

PR is very time-consuming if taken seriously. Yet most referees have no time. Rather, they

have to write papers or research proposals which itself are subject to PR.

Editors often are able to “steer” PR and its outcome by choosing the “proper” reviewers.

Editors do not sufﬁciently review the report of the reviewers. They take personally discrimi-

nating and intimidating PR as a matter of fact; i.e., they decide accordingly.

PR is a very decisive criterion for professional carriers, such as the decision to get tenure or

5

not. Ideally, they are an almost indispensable tool for science managers implementing funding

policies. Realistically, such decisions are as good as PR. There are even claims that PR is largely

for administrative rather than purely scientiﬁc purposes. However, this academic necessity of

“publish or perish” may have the effect of compelling many people to publish work of marginal

value, not for the scientiﬁc reasons, but simply out of necessity to sustain their academic careers.[4]

Established researcher would have more chances to publish the same paper as unknown new-

Paper is an unimportant limiting cost factor in the dissemination of research reports. Research

is increasingly published electronically—such as the physics and mathematics preprint server at

the URL http://arxiv.org—and reports are printed out on a “on demand” basis. All efforts

have to be made to preserve these archives, either electronically, and even by comprehensive paper

printouts for the future generations.

servers take over.

Research journals based upon PR effectively become less and less important as non-PR preprint

Authors have very little means to cope with incorrect or even mean PR. PR effectively acts

god-like. The appeals procedures are sometimes meaningless and a lip-service to the community.

All in all, very little attention is also given to the quality of the review process. There are very bad

reviewers who could be very good scientists.

The danger to the community from bad quality paper by “quacks” are overestimated. Most

“quacks” are not even able to produce a properly formatted manuscript and upload it to a preprint

PR unnecessarily prolongs publication of research articles.

PR unnecessarily binds energy of researchers to cope with unreasonable reports.

Researchers in PR may favor projects conﬁrming their own views and well-established conjec-

bees.

server.

tures.

PR discriminates underprivileged groups [3].

IV. ALTERNATIVE DECISION METHODS

Some defenders of PR may consider any one criticizing PR a “winer,” who cannot cope with

the constructive criticism of the anonymous peers. Others, while in principle accepting the fact

that PR sometimes fails and in such cases does more harm than good, will nevertheless point out

6

that, to adapt Sir Winston Churchill’s famous dictum about democracy, “peer review is the worst

of all forms of evaluation of scientiﬁc research, but unfortunately at the moment we do not have

any better one” (btw., I totally agree with Sir Winston Churchill).

Yet, there are very concrete alternatives to PR, some of which will be brieﬂy mentioned here,

which mostly do not have the negative effects described above. As concerns publication of re-

search reports, the preprint servers may take over the job of dissemination of scientiﬁc results

altogether. They are cheap, fast, effective, and can also be made available to researchers in poorer

countries. Some additional features such as anonymous and/or nonanonymous comments asso-

ciated with every paper version, and the possibility to revise papers may be able to serve as a

substitute for some good features of PR.

Feyerabend proposed to distribute research money by the implementation of the grand jury

system as it is already practiced in the courtrooms. This would prevent the distribution of money

by pressure groups consisting of peers, whose members are both applicants and evaluators (with

varying roles). Also, it would guarantee more chances to innovative, sometimes crazy-looking re-

search proposals, which may or may not be progressive, and which would have very little chances

in PR.

I would even like to propose a much more radical way of alternate research funding: to dis-

tribute a certain amount of money to research programs by a random selection, such as by throwing

dice; with a post mortem evaluation of all three funding groups. The random selection could for

instance be managed by a lottery. My personal preference of money spending would be 70:20:10

for peer review/jury selected/randomly selected, respectively. This post mortem evaluation should

be made by grand juries, not by any kind of “peers.”

It should also be noted that there are strong pressure groups which defend PR because they

proﬁt from it, ﬁnancially and otherwise. The revenues of publishing houses directly depends on

PR. Since, without PR, there would be less demand for a publisher that ever. Also, the researchers

in editorial boards derive much inﬂuence and gratiﬁcation from these positions and the privileges

associated with them. But

Almost needless to say, any deﬁciency of the methods, including PR, by which money is dis-

seminated to the scientiﬁc community, amounts to a waste of resources. Therefore, the methods

7

have to be carefully chosen, not only to foster science, but also for political reasons.

[1] H. Ursprung, Hochschulwachstum in der Zwangsjacke (Verl. d. Fachvereine an d. Schweiz.

Hochschulen u. Techniken (VdF), Z¨urich, 1986).

[2] J. S. Gans and G. B. Shepherd, Journal of Economic Perspectives 8, 165 (1994).

[3] A. Wold, Nature 387, 341 (1997), Nature added: This article was peer-reviewed by three males.

[4] http://www.mathpages.com/home/albro/albro27.htm

8

