3
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
5
0
1
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Depleted-Uranium Weapons:
the Whys and Wherefores

André Gsponer
Independent Scientiﬁc Research Institute
Box 30, CH-1211 Geneva-12, Switzerland
e-mail: isri@vtx.ch

Draft of a postface to a book
to be published by the Bertrand Russel Foundation

ISRI-03-03.13 January 21, 2014

Abstract

It is recalled that the only non-nuclear military application in which
present-day depleted-uranium alloys out-perform tungsten alloys is long-
rod penetration into a main battle-tank’s armor. However, this advantage is
only on the order of 10% and disappearing when the uranium versus tungsten
comparison is made in terms of actual lethality of complete anti-tank systems
instead of laboratory-type homogeneous armor steel penetration capability.
Therefore, new micro- and nano-engineered tungsten alloys may soon
be at least as good if not better than existing uranium alloys, enabling the
production of tungsten munition which will be better than uranium munition,
and whose overall life-cycle cost will be less due to the absence of the
problems related to the radioactivity of uranium.

The reasons why depleted-uranium weapons have been introduced into
arsenals and used in Iraq and Yugoslavia are analysed from the perspective
that their radioactivity must have played an important role in the decision
making process. It is found that depleted-uranium weapons belong to the dif-
fuse category of low-radiological-impact nuclear weapons to which emerging
types of low-yield, i.e., fourth generation, nuclear explosives also belong.

It is concluded that the battleﬁeld use of depleted-uranium, which broke
a 46 years long taboo against the intentional use or induction of radioactivity
in combat, has created a military and legal precedent which has trivialized the
combat use of radioactive materials, and therefore made the use of nuclear
weapons more probable.

1

1

Introduction

When conventional weapons containing depleted-uranium were used for the ﬁrst
time in combat during the 1991 Gulf War, immediate reaction came from the
general public, environmental groups, and antinuclear activists. This reaction has
now turned into a major environmental, medical, technical, legal, and political op-
position with many thousands “anti-depleted-uranium activists” in many countries
striving to outlaw the use of depleted-uranium in weapons and consumer goods.

What drove this reaction was common sense.

Indeed, while there was lit-
tle public or parliamentarian opposition to the development and possible use of
conventional weapons containing depleted-uranium before the Gulf War, the im-
mediate consequence of their actual use in Iraq was the realization that uranium
(whether natural, enriched, or depleted) is not a trivial material that can be assim-
ilated to tungsten or steel. In fact, it was this same common sense understanding
of the deep political signiﬁcance of the military use of a radioactive material that
drove the only parliamentarian reaction, by Senator Bob Dole, to the 1978 decision
by the U.S. Department of Defense to use depleted-uranium for making bullets
[1].

Of course, an important reason for the lack of signiﬁcant early opposition to
the military use of depleted-uranium is that its radiological impact is very much
lower than that of existing types of nuclear weapons: atomic and hydrogen bombs.
As is well known, depleted-uranium is only about half as radioactive than natural
uranium, which is a low radioactive material. But being radioactive makes that
any uranium based material is qualitatively different from any non-radioactive
material, which means that any use of uranium has important medical, technical,
legal, and political implications. Moreover, there is no doubt that these differences
have always been perfectly understood in professional circles, as is witnessed
by the considerable amount of legislation dealing with all types of radioactive
materials, and the special efforts that had to be made, for example in the United
States, to release depleted-uranium for commercial use [2], and to enable that it
could be incorporated in “conventional” weapons and possibly exported to foreign
countries [3].

The only context in which the use of depleted-uranium could have been “be-
nign” is that of a nuclear war. This is why many people perceived armor-piercing
munitions containing depleted-uranium as part of a strategy to deter a massive
tank attack by the nuclear-armed Warsaw Pact Organization. This made their ﬁrst
use during the 1991 Gulf War, which broke a 46 years long taboo against the
intentional use or induction of radioactivity in combat, particularly shocking.

2

It is therefore understandable that there has been a lot of over-reactions. On the
one side many opponents predicted apocalyptic consequences on the environment
and populations, and one the other side many governmental and ofﬁcial bodies
counter-reacteded by excessively down-playing the consequences of the use of
depleted-uranium weapons.

Consequently there have been many papers, both in newspapers and in pro-
fessional journals, discussing the near- and long-term environmental, medical,
and radiological consequencies of depleted-uranium weapons. On the other hand,
there has been surprisingly little published investigations on the whys and where-
fores of depleted-uranium weapons — namely the technical and military reasons
why they were ﬁrst introduced into the arsenals, and the strategic-political reasons
why they were then used in Iraq and former Yugoslavia, two non-nuclear weapon
states.

In particular, it appears that there is no published critical study of the much
claimed superiority of uranium-based compared to tungsten-based anti-tank wea-
pons, despite the fact that several major countries, most prominently Germany,
have equipped their tank ﬂeets with tungsten-based anti-tank weapons that are
claimed to be good enough to defeat the armor of all existing tanks.
In fact,
as will be seen in section 2, this paradox is easily dismissed by looking at the
professional literature, which shows that while depleted-uranium penetrators are
somewhat better than those made of tungsten alloys, the overall performance of
tungsten-based anti-tank weapons is not worse than that of their uranium-based
counterparts.

Moreover, it appears that there is no published critical study in which the only
fundamental property that distinguishes uranium from its competitors, namely the
fact that it is radioactive, is examined from the point of view of its strategic and
political consequences.1 In effect, the numerous studies in which radioactivity is
taken into account are only those dealing with the environmental, medical, and
legal consequences of the combat-use of depleted-uranium. The only exception
seems to be a study in which the radiological effect due to the large scale battleﬁeld
use of depleted-uranium is compared to that of existing and hypothetical fourth-
generation nuclear weapons [4]. This study will be reviewed in section 3, and put
into perspective with other elements which suggest the conclusion that possibly
the most powerful institutional force behind the development and deployment of
depleted-uranium weapons must have been the “nuclear lobby,” that in all nuclear-
weapon states is pushing towards the trivialization of the use of nuclear materials
of all kind, and of nuclear weapons of current or future types.

1The same remark applies to the pyrophoric property of uranium:

there appears to be no

published study discussing the quantitative importance of this effect in tank warfare.

3

Therefore, in this paper, an attempt will be made to understand the “whys and
wherefores” of depleted-uranium weapons — the technical and military advantages
which could have justiﬁed their introduction into arsenals, and the political and
strategic reasons which could explain their actual battleﬁeld use, despite their
environmental, medical, legal, and political drawbacks, which were known long
before they were developed and used. In section 4, this attempt will be merged with
what is already better-known about depleted-uranium weapons, and a conclusion
derived to give additional arguments for an immediate ban of depleted-uranium
weapons of all kind.

2 Are uranium alloys really better than tungsten

alloys for conventional weapons?

In a number of civilian and military applications the decisive physical characteristic
of a material is its density. The next decisive parameter is usually cost, which
means that the material should be made of an element that is reasonably abundant
on Earth. If the density has to be as high as possible, this leaves the choice between
four elements, namely tungsten, uranium, tantalum, and hafnium, which have as
maximum density 19.2, 19.0, 16.7, and 13.3. By comparison, in crystal rocks,
these elements are all about ten times less abundant than lead, density 11.3, which
itself is about thousand times less abundant than iron, density 7.8.

The main technical reason why high-density materials are important in conven-
tional weapons comes from the so-called “Root Density Law,” a very simple result
that can be derived as an exercise by students of a last-year high-school physics
class. It says that when a rod of length L, made of some material of density ρ1,
penetrates at very high velocity into another material of density ρ2, the maximum
penetration length under ideal conditions is qρ1/ρ2 × L. (By “ideal conditions”
it is meant that the two materials interact so fast and violently at their contact
interface that they immediately melt, which is why these conditions are named
“hydrodynamic limit.” However, even below this limit, the Root Density Law
is pertinent to compare processes in which kinetic energy is exchanged between
materials of different densities.)

For example, in the case of a tungsten or uranium anti-tank penetrator of
length L, the absolute maximum penetration depth into homogeneous steel is
q19/7.8×L ≈ 1.5×L. This means that the penetration power into a homogeneous
steel armor is at most 50% higher for a tungsten or uranium rod than for a steel rod.
Therefore, in all applications where the Root Density Law applies, and where steel

4

is replaced by a higher-density material, the potential beneﬁt is at most of 50%.
Moreover, if instead of comparing the differences between the use of a high-density
instead of a low-density material, one compares the differences between the use
of one high-density material with that of another high-density material (i.e., an
uranium alloy instead of a tungsten alloy), the differences to be expected from the
unavoidable disparities in the respective mechanical properties of the two alloys
will necessarily be smaller than 50% in any application where the conditions of
use are close to the “hydrodynamic limit.” In other words, when one is discussing
the merits and demerits of using an uranium instead of a tungsten alloy, one is in
fact discussing small differencies, on the order of 10 to 20%, not large differences
which could turn an uranium-based weapon into a “super-weapon” compared to
the same weapon made out of tungsten!

Therefore, the whole discussion in this section turns around the impact of
relatively small mechanical and metallurgical differencies between various alloys
based on either uranium or tungsten. Indeed, if these two elements had the same
physical and chemical properties, and would therefore form similar alloys when
combined with other elements, the obvious choice would be tungsten — and in
most cases uranium would immediately be discarded because of its radioactivity.
The problem is that in the conditions where the disparities in mechanical properties
of different alloys have a visible impact, i.e., below the hydrodynamic limit, there
are many concurrent processes in which each of these disparities have a different
effect: If one property is favorable in some process, it will not necessarily be so
in another one. Therefore, there is no alloy, based on either uranium or tungsten,
which has at the same time all the desirable properties. The result is that the
choice of a given alloy is a compromise, which is reﬂected by the ﬁfty years long
history during which either tungsten or uranium alloys have been considered as the
“best” for one weapons’s use or another. (For the history of their use in anti-tank
weapons, see [5, 6, 7, 8]. For a number of general and technical references on tank
warfare see [9, 10, 11].)

To understand where we stand today, we have to review the major conventional

weapons applications in which high-density materials are used:

• Penetration aids for bombs or cruise missiles;

• Shield plates for armored tanks;

• Munitions for anti-tank weapons;

• Munitions for ground-attack aircrafts or close-in-defense guns.

5

These four sets of applications are discussed in the next sub-sections, which
are organized in such a way that information given in any of them is useful to
understand the next sub-sections.

2.1 Penetration aids for bombs or cruise missiles

In these applications the high-density material is used to give more weight and
a slender proﬁle to the weapon, for example a free-fall or rocket-assisted bomb,
so that it will have more kinetic energy per unit frontal area when hitting the
target (an airport runway, a bunker, etc). This enables the warhead to penetrate
deeper into the target before the explosive is detonated by a delayed fuse, what
enormously increases the damage. Obviously, in such applications it is mandatory
that the nose of the penetrator, as well as the casing enclosing the warhead, remain
functional as long as possible. Their strength and hardness have therefore to be
as high as possible. From all what is known about the respective mechanical
properties of uranium and tungsten alloys, the ﬁrst choice is then clearly tungsten.
In the case where the warhead is a nuclear bomb, an option could be to prefer a
natural uranium alloy because its nuclear properties could make it part of the last
stage of a thermonuclear explosive. However, this may put excessive constraints
on the design of the nuclear payload, and it is likely that a separate forward posted
tungsten penetrator will be preferred.

In the case of long-range cruise missiles, the same reasoning applies, with the
difference that weight considerations have a different impact on the design. This
is because a cruise missile is both a delivery system and a bomb. If too much
weight is given to the warhead the range of the cruise missile will be considerably
shortened. Moreover, there is a an obvious trade-off between the amount of
high-explosives that is carried and the weight of the penetration aid. Either the
conventional warhead is made as powerful as possible (or eventually replaced by
a nuclear explosive) and the weapon is detonated on the surface or at a shallow
depth into the target, or some amount of high-explosive is sacriﬁced to increase
the weight of the penetrator in order to gain a factor which may be as large as
ten in the case of a deep penetration. The trouble is that the impact velocity of a
cruise-missile is not as large as that of a bomb. The impact conditions are even
likely to be well below the “hydrodynamic limit” so that little beneﬁt is to be
expected from the Root Density Law. A strong steel penetrator could therefore be
just as good as a heavy-metal penetrator, and the possibility that the cruise missiles
used in the Gulf War or in Yugoslavia carried a heavy-metal penetrator is only a
speculation since “there is no publically available information at all that supports
such an assumption” [12, p.165].

6

2.2 Shield plates for armored tanks

In the application to shield plates for armored tanks, it is important to know
that the shield of a modern battle-tank is designed to protect the crew and the
main components (engin, gun, ammunition, fuel-tank) from a large spectrum of
threats: conventional and nuclear bombs, shaped-charges delivered by bazookas or
precision-guided munitions, anti-tank rounds ﬁred by enemy tanks or heavy guns,
land mines, etc. This means that the shield of such a tank is a complicated structure
which comprises several layers of materials of different densities, interspaced with
composite or ﬁbrous materials, and possibly covered with reactive components
such as high-explosive charges which automatically detonate to interfere with or
destroy the dart or the penetrator of anti-tank weapons.

If one focuses on anti-tank rounds ﬁred by enemy tanks or heavy guns, also
called “kinetic energy projectiles,” the decisive element of a tank shield is that the
main structural material, a thick layer of armor steel, is supplemented by one or
two other layers, or arrays of plates, of some tough material able to deﬂect, bend,
break, or at least slowdown, the anti-tank projectiles in order to render them unable
to fully penetrate the main armor. The effectiveness of this shielding mechanism
has been demonstrated in many tanks built in the past decades. From recent
publications it appears, for example, that a long-rod penetrator emerging from a
1 cm thick steel plate hit at high obliquity has a residual penetration capability of
only about 50% of that of the original rod [13]. This shows that the “obliquity
advantage” of designing armored vehicles with glacis and sloped walls is quite
important, and explains why anti-tank weapons capable of penetrating more than
60 cm of homogeneous armor steel are required to defeat the armor of modern
tanks [5].

Therefore, an array of relative thin steel plates, put at an oblique position in front
of the main armor, has a considerable shielding effect. This effect can be further
enhanced by the use of “sandwiches” in which steel plates are combined with layers
of plastic or ceramic materials, or by replacing the steel with some higher density
material. This calls for a hard high-strength heavy alloy, with tungsten the ﬁrst
choice again, even though the U.S. has incorporated steel-clad depleted-uranium
plates in the M-1 tanks deployed in Iraq during the Gulf War. However, contrary
to the ﬁrst two applications in which the “Root Density Law” could bring an up to
50% improvement, the incorporation of heavy alloys in armor has only a marginal
effect on the overall performance of the shield, especially if the heavy-material
plates are thinner than the original steel plates to keep the total weight constant.
Moreover, the difference between using uranium instead of tungsten will have an
even more marginal effect, because there is no mechanical property of importance

7

in this application that is very signiﬁcantly different between alloys of either of
these two materials.

2.3 Penetrators for anti-tank weapons

In this application, the discussion is more complicated because a number of distinct
physical phenomena, which imply conﬂicting requirement on correlated mechan-
ical properties, have to be taken into account. For instance, anti-tank penetrators
are ﬁrst accelerated in a gun, where they are submitted to very high stress, vibra-
tions, etc., until they exit from the gun muzzle where they violently separate from
the “sabot” that was holding them during acceleration; second, they propagate
through air, where they can break because of bending or buckling; and third they
eventually encounter a tank shield, were everything is done to defeat their action.
In gunnery jargon: the internal, external, and terminal ballistics problems — to
which one has to add the lethality problem because piercing an armor is not enough
to inﬂict damage or loss of function behind the armor. Therefore, while in the
applications considered in the two previous sub-sections the problem naturally led
to a single set of requirements to be met by the properties of the material, leading
to relatively unsophisticated uranium or tungsten alloys, in the tank armor penetra-
tion application no single alloy has simultaneously the ideal properties suiting the
requirements of the three ballistic problems. This implies that over the past ﬁfty
years small differences between successive generations of uranium and tungsten
alloys have resulted in either the former or the later being perceived as “better or
worse” for one ballistic phase or another, or for the anti-tank ballistic problem as
a whole.

To discuss these problems it is best to start from the target and work backwards
to the gun, and add overall performance and lethality considerations at the end.
Moreover, in the perspective of assessing the possible advantages of the use of
uranium instead of tungsten, we will concentrate on the long-rod penetrators
that are ﬁred by the 120 mm caliber guns which today equip most of the main
battle-tanks in service in the major Western powers’s armies. Typically, these
penetrators are heavy-material rods of about 60 cm in length and 2 cm in diameter.
Therefore, according to the Root Density Law, the maximum penetration depth
should be about 60×1.5 = 90 cm in homogeneous armor steel, while the observed
maximum is only about 60 cm for penetrators shot by a tank gun. This is because
the impact velocities of tank ﬁred projectiles are in the range of 1200 to 1700 m/s,
which correspond to a transition region somewhat below the hydrodynamic limit
that is only reached in laboratory experiments where velocities of about 4000 m/s
are achieved [14, Figure 2].

8

The slow evolution in heavy-metal alloy physics and metallurgy which led
to such a penetration capability is described in a number of papers, for example
[6, 7] which emphasize depleted-uranium alloys and the 1950-1980 period, and [5]
which emphasizes tungsten alloys and the more recent period. In this evolution,
the yard-stick for comparing various alloys has become the depth of penetration
in “Rolled Homogeneous Armor” (RHA) steel, i.e., the best possible armor steel.
This gives a very telling and impressive ﬁgure of merit, which is however only
one parameter of importance in the anti-tank ballistic problem. Nevertheless,
without entering into the historical details, while tungsten alloys were in general
favored from the late 1950s until the early 1970s, the preference started to shift
in the United States towards uranium alloys in the mid-1970s after the successful
development of a new uranium alloy containing 0.75% per weight titanium [6].
This alloy overcome several technical and manufacturing problems that previously
gave the preference to tungsten. Moreover, the penetration capability of this U-
3/4Ti alloy in RHA steel was consistently better than any equal density tungsten
alloy. This improvement was the more so impressive that the U-3/4Ti holes into
RHA steel were both deeper and narrower than those produced by tungsten alloys,
all other things been equal.

Of course, at the beginning, the exact numbers showing how much the new
uranium alloy was better than the tungsten alloys available at the time were clas-
siﬁed (see, e.g., [7]). But since at least 1990 there are numerous unclassiﬁed
professional publications in which they are given, e.g., [15, 16, 17]. There are also
numerous publications in which the overall average advantage of uranium alloys
over tungsten alloys is given as a single number. For example, S.P. Andrews et al.,
working on contract for the U.S. Army, claim that “the ballistic performance of DU
alloys and tungsten alloys against monolithic semi-inﬁnite steel targets is similar
— at best 5 to 10% difference” [18, p.255]. Similarly, R.J. Dowding of the U.S.
Army Research Laboratory at the Aberdeen proving ground, states that “depleted-
uranium alloys outperform tungsten alloys by 10% at ordnance velocities” [19,
p.4].

Looking at the data, one ﬁnds as expected that the penetration advantage of
uranium over tungsten alloys is less pronounced for high velocity projectiles be-
cause the conditions are closer to the hydrodynamic limit. For instance, comparing
the penetration efﬁciencies at 1200 and 1700 m/s impact velocities, the advantages
are 25 and respectively 5% in reference [15, Fig.3], 20 and 15% in reference [16,
p.43], and ﬁnally 25 and 15% in reference [17, Fig.2]. But these numbers should
be taken with caution. While they clearly demonstrate an advantage of about 10
to 20% over the velocity range of interest for anti-tank weapons, they derive from
drawings that are quite poor according to normal scientiﬁc standards: There are
no error bars and the ﬁgures are clearly drawn to impress the non-specialists (see,

9

especially, reference [16]). Therefore, since these data constitute the main (if
not only) objective element that supports the thesis that uranium alloys are more
effective than tungsten alloys for anti-tank weapons, it is important to stress that
it is on this relatively small effect that much of the depleted-uranium controversy
is based, because most of the depleted-uranium expended in Iraq was precisely in
the form of anti-tank penetrators.

A second interesting feature shown by the data, e.g., reference [15], is that
the penetration dynamics of uranium rods is different from that of tungsten rods
with the same dimensions and weight. Normally, when a rod of some material
penetrates at high velocity into a target material, a mushroomed region forms near
the impacting end, and its nose erodes (as the penetrator burrows into the target)
by giving up material that is “back-extruded” from the penetrator-target interface
while the interface moves forward into the target. This process is explained and
illustrated in many papers, e.g., [20], as well as in computer animations available
on internet [21]. The interesting feature, which was ﬁrst observed with the U-3/4Ti
uranium alloy penetration data, is that while all available tungsten alloys retained
a mushroomed head during the full penetration process, the U-3/4Ti uranium alloy
penetrators formed a chiseled nose which resulted in the boring of a narrower
channel that led to deeper penetration than tungsten [15]. Unfortunately this
factual observation led to many simpliﬁed and exaggerated statements, which can
even be found in the professional literature, that somehow tungsten penetrators
have necessarily a “large mushroomed head,” while only uranium penetrators
would have a “self-sharpening nose.”

In reality, the 10 to 20% penetration advantage discovered around 1975 with
uranium alloys is due to a small effect that was apparently not properly understood
until 1990, when Lee S. Magness and Thimoty G. Farrand published the correct
explanation [15]. According to them, the reason why U-3/4Ti uranium alloy
penetrators keep a narrow proﬁle during penetration is due to a metallurgical
effect called “adiabatic shear banding” which implies that failures develop in the
highly stressed nose region in such a way that the edges of the mushroomed head
are quickly discarded, producing a sharpened or chiseled nose [15, 25]. This
shearing effect is small, as can be seen in shallow penetration simulations (e.g,
[20, 21]) but sufﬁcient to produce the 10 to 20% effect in deep penetrations that
is claimed, according to numerous accounts, to be the main reason for deciding to
produce large numbers of uranium penetrators since the late 1970s.

Soon after the origin of this technical advantage of uranium alloys was un-
derstood, and therefore shown not be due to any fundamental difference between
uranium and other heavy materials, a considerable impetus was given to many
research programs that were trying to ﬁnd better alloys of tungsten and other ma-

10

terials (i.e., tantalum and hafnium) to replace and possibly outperform uranium
alloys. The realization that “adiabatic shear behavior (...) aids the performance by
minimizing the size of a mushroomed head on the eroding penetrator” [15, p.473],
the “concerns over environmental problems” [18, p.249], and depleted-uranium’s
“drawbacks: health safety, cost of clean-up, environmental impact, political” [19,
p.4,12] led to world-wide efforts to ﬁnd substitute materials for uranium-based
anti-tank weapons that would be “without the perceived hazards and political dif-
ﬁculties associated with DU” [25, p.1188], an effort to which antinuclear activists
have substantially contributed by raising the public and parliamentarian awareness
of the problems associated with depleted-uranium.

For example, soon after the Gulf War, an ambitious program was initiated in
South Korea, where the proximity of China (the world’s largest producer of tung-
sten), the proximity of large potential markets such as Japan, and the uncertainties
of its relations with his northern neighbor, led to more than 13 patents and 23
scientiﬁc papers in less than ten years [22, 23, 24]. In this, and other research
programs, e.g., [19, 25, 26], the emphasis is on ﬁnding a tungsten or tantalum
alloy, or an amorphous material based for example on hafnium, or even a more
complex nanocrystalline material produced by nanotechnology [25], that would
exhibit adiabatic shear behavior and have the other required properties to be used
for anti-tank penetrators. Apparently, these programs are getting close to achieve
their objectives [19, 25, 24], and it remains to be seen whether these technical
advances will translate into environmentally more acceptable anti-tank weapons.

However, while these technical developments are clearly important to improve
one aspect of the terminal ballistic problem, one should not forget that they will
potentially yield only a small contribution to the overall performance of an anti-
tank system. Moreover, there is an even more important consideration: does
the perceived advantage of adiabatic shearing, namely a deeper but narrower
penetration tunnel, really translate into a higher tank lethality? The answer is
almost certainly no! The reason is that the motivation for seeking deeper but
narrower penetration tunnels is the use of a single ﬁgure of merit, the penetration
depth into semi-inﬁnite RHA steel (penetration criterion), which does not take into
consideration that the purpose of piercing an armor is to inﬂict damage behind the
armor: the penetration depth merely says that an armor of such a thickness will
just be perforated, with little energy left to inﬂict behind the armor damage.

Therefore, a more realistic ﬁgure of merit is to take, for example, the complete
perforation of a ﬁnite thickness of RHA steel plate (perforation criterion). In effect,
in that case some energy is left after perforation to inﬂict some damage behind
the armor [17, p.1160]. Using this simple change in the ﬁgure of merit, it was
found that while using the traditional penetration criterion uranium penetrators

11

outperform tungsten penetrators by about 15 to 25%, see [17, Fig.2], using the
perforation criterion there is no more any signiﬁcative difference between uranium
and tungsten penetrators, see [17, Fig.3]. The explanation of this important
result is easily found, and related to the fact that tungsten penetrator tunnels are
wider than uranium penetrator tunnels: “uranium penetrates RHA much more
effectively than tungsten; however, tungsten will produce a larger breakout effect.
Therefore, the two processes may cancel each other, depending on the predominant
failure mechanism of the target evaluated” [17, p.1163]. This result, obtained
after a detailed discussion of the complicated problem of objectively deﬁning
the protection level, or seen from the other perspective the kill probability, of an
armored vehicle, shows that serious methodological issues are still to be resolved
by the designers of armored vehicles and anti-armor weapons!

Indeed, if the United States and other major countries have proclaimed in the
past 25 years that uranium based anti-tanks were by far better than other anti-tank
weapons, several major countries, most prominently Germany,2 have not equipped
their tank ﬂeets with uranium-based anti-tank weapons, but rather continuously
improved the mechanical properties and the metallurgy of the tungsten alloy used
in their anti-tank penetrators [5]. And it turns out from what is known that these
weapons are good enough to defeat the armor of any existing tank. How is that
possible? A realistic criterion for objectively assessing the capabilities of these
weapons is obviously the ﬁrst step. But there are others, more direct technical
reasons. For instance, some crucial mechanical properties which are important
during the acceleration of the penetrator in a gun are signiﬁcantly worse for uranium
than for tungsten penetrators. “DU penetrators therefore need stiffer and heavier
sabots than tungsten rods, which compensates the slightly better impact behavior
of DU in RHA” [5, p.1194]. In a simpler language: what is gained by uranium
alloys in the armor penetration phase, is lost in the initial launch phase and during
the ﬂight to the target. But this does not close the discussion: many more effects
should be considered, especially in the interaction with complex multilayer tank
shields [18, p.255], and even more so in the assessment of the lethality behind the
armor [17]. However, as we have repeatably stated, each of these effects has a
small impact on the overall performance, so that whatever difference could exist
between the properties of one or another heavy-alloy of tungsten or uranium, they
have a far greater probability to cancel out, than to cumulate and give a small
advantage to either tungsten or uranium.

This is also true for one property that we have not yet considered, pyrophorism:
Finely pulverized uranium spontaneously ignites in air. This dramatic effect is
certainly adding a lethality component to uranium that tungsten, for example, does

2But also Israel, China, Switzerland, Sweden, etc.

12

not have. However, when a tank penetrator emerges behind an armor, it generates
an intense shower of melted metallic fragments and particles which can badly burn
the personnel, ignite the fuel-tank, or detonate the munition in the ammunition
store. This is true whatever material the penetrator is made of. Moreover, a modern
main battle-tank may be equipped with a controlled atmosphere to protect against
chemical weapons and avoid the propagation of ﬁres: there could be little oxygen
for uranium to burn! Nevertheless, the pyrophoric nature of uranium is adding a
degree of lethality, which may increase the level of overkill of a weakly shielded
armored vehicle defeated at short range, but not a degree that could signiﬁcantly
increase the kill radius of anti-tank rounds intended to defeat the best shielded
main battle-tanks.

2.4 Munitions for ground-attack aircrafts or close-in-defense

guns

In this last set of applications, the previous considerations about tank shields and
kinetic-energy anti-tank weapons enable a rather expeditious discussion.

Ground-attack aircrafts, such as the A-10 of the United States’s air forces,
have been designed and deployed “to counter massive Soviet/Warsaw Pact ar-
mored formations spearheading an attack into NATO’s Central Region (by ﬁring
armor piercing incendiary rounds) designed to blast through top armor of even
the heaviest enemy tanks” [6]. There are thus two elements to assess: the armor-
piercing and the incendiary capabilities ot the munition. First, as is now amply
demonstrated, the penetration superiority of uranium penetrators corresponds to
only a (small) effect in the case of long-rod penetrators plunging into thick armor:
this is not the case for ground-attack projectiles which are much less slender than
long-rod penetrators, and which are aimed to defeat the relatively thin top-armor
of battle-tanks and the walls of relatively lightly armored vehicles such as personal
carriers. Tungsten projectiles would be just as good. Considering the incendiary
effect of A-10 projectiles due to the pyrophoric properties of uranium, it has not
been possible to ﬁnd any professional-level paper in which it is compared to the
incendiary effect of tungsten shells containing an incendiary substance. Neverthe-
less, since the pyrophoric property of uranium is not such that most of it will burn
on impact, it can be inferred that a tungsten shell containing a sufﬁcient amount
of a truly effective incendiary substance could be just as devastating [27].

Finally, it remains to discuss the use of heavy materials in munitions for
close-in weapon systems, such as the U.S. Navy “Phalanx” designed to provide
In this application the
a last-ditch defense against sea-skimming missiles [6].

13

main reason for using heavy-metals is that a smaller and slimmer bullet has a
signiﬁcantly better external ballistics trajectory so that the precision of the system
is increased. On the other hand, since sea-skimming missiles, or for that matter
most types of precision-guided munitions and cruise missiles, are relatively “soft”
targets, the armor penetration capabilities of heavy-metal alloys are of secondary
importance. The interesting aspect in the history of this application is that after
deciding in 1978 to use an uranium alloy, the U.S. navy decided in 1989 to change
to tungsten alloys, “based on live ﬁre tests showing that tungsten met their per-
formance requirements while offering reduced probabilitys of radiation exposure
and environmental impact” [6]. Following this change from uranium to tungsten,
further developments were made on the projectile, and a new tungsten alloy led
to “improved ballistic performance by 50% compared to existing tungsten alloy
penetrators” [28]. While nothing is said about the reasons for this improvement,
it most probably comes from the superior internal ballistics behavior of tungsten
projectiles, which allows a tungsten bullet to be launched at a higher velocity than
an uranium bullet.

3 Are depleted-uranium weapons conventional or

nuclear weapons?

A central element in the depleted-uranium controversy is that it is both radioactive
and usable in civilian and military applications of nuclear energy, while the propo-
nents of its “non-nuclear” uses claim that it can be trivially assimilated to a heavy
material such as tungsten. This leads to questions ranging from “Is depleted-
uranium a nuclear or conventional material?” to “Are depleted-uranium weapons
conventional or nuclear weapons?’ as well as to more fundamental questions
such as “What is a nuclear material?” or “What is a nuclear weapon?” (and to
their converse where the adjective nuclear is replaced by conventional because
“conventional” may not necessarily mean the same as “non-nuclear”).

These are perfectly reasonable questions, but to which it is very difﬁcult to
give an answer without taking many technical, legal, political, and even historical
considerations into account. Such a comprehensive analysis is not possible in a
single paper, and certainly not in a paper written by a single author. Nevertheless,
it is possible to give a reasonable ﬁrst answer to the last two questions, i.e., “What
is a nuclear material or weapon?” and to show that these answers are very useful
in trying to answer the other questions. Moreover, in relation to deplete-uranium
weapons, it is possible to give important elements, which have not been much
discussed in the published literature, showing that their combat use cannot be

14

separated from the potential use of nuclear weapons [4]. This is what will be done
in the next three subsections.

3.1 Nuclear and conventional materials

Article XX of the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
which came into force in July 1957, deﬁnes a nuclear material as being either a
source material or a special ﬁssionable material. In a simpliﬁed language, which
hides many technical and legal subtleties, a special ﬁssionable material (e.g.,
uranium enriched in the isotopes 235 or 233, plutonium, etc.) is any ﬁssionable
material that has been artiﬁcially transformed or produced to make it more suitable
for use in a nuclear reactor or a ﬁssion explosive; and a source material (e.g.,
is any
natural uranium, uranium depleted in the isotope 235, thorium, etc.)
material suitable to be transformed (by enrichment, transmutation, etc.)
into a
special nuclear material. Therefore, the term nuclear material covers all materials
which may be used, either directly or after transformation, in a nuclear reactor or
in the core of a ﬁssion explosive, i.e., an “atomic bomb,” in which a self-sustaining
chain reaction takes place. Consequently, the term non-nuclear material covers
all other materials, even though they include light elements such as lithium which
is the main source of the explosive power of a fusion explosive, i.e., a “hydrogen
bomb.” On the other hand, article XX makes no qualitative distinction between
natural-uranium and depleted-uranium, which are therefore both nuclear materials.

In practice, such deﬁnitions, which have the merit to be clear and consistent
with both physical facts and common sense, were bound to create difﬁculties
because of the dual-use characteristics, i.e., military and civilian, of nuclear mate-
rials. Therefore, as soon the IAEA tried to implements its role in the safeguard of
nuclear materials, it had to introduce a quantitative element in order to establish a
complicated accounting system to trace the ﬂow of nuclear materials throughout
the world: “Effective weights” were assigned to nuclear materials on a subjective
scale were, for example, 1 ton of depleted-uranium would be equivalent to only 50
grams of special ﬁssionable material [29], even though 1 ton of depleted-uranium
could contain several kilograms of uranium 235. On the other end of the spectrum,
to deal with problems related to plutonium and highly enriched uranium, further
deﬁnitions had to be introduced, e.g., the term nuclear-weapon-usable material
to designate nuclear materials that can be used for the manufacture of nuclear
explosive components without transmutations or further enrichment.

The result was the beginning of a process which facilitated the non-military uses
and the international trade of nuclear materials, while at the same time stretching
out the scale used to classify these materials. Consequently, the materials sitting

15

at either ends of the scale started to become exceptions of one type or another. On
the one end, nuclear-weapon-usable materials became more and more inaccessible
to the non-nuclear-weapon states, with nuclear-weapon states putting more and
more direct pressure on those states, e.g., Yugoslavia, who had some amount of
nuclear-weapon-usable materials on their territory [30]. On the other end, the same
nuclear-weapon states made a lot of efforts to trivialize the use of the main by-
product of the nuclear industry: depleted-uranium. This can clearly be seen in the
case of the United States’s legislation [2, 3], but also in international agreements
such as the London Guidelines, which make exceptions for “source material which
the Government is satisﬁed is to be used only in non-nuclear activities, such as the
production of alloys or ceramics” [31, Annex A]. In this guideline, “Government”
refers to the exporting country, which means that such a government is authorize
to allow the export of depleted-uranium for the purpose of making, for example,
tank penetrators.

This “stretching out” process, which reﬂects the growing tension between
nuclear-weapon states and non-nuclear-weapon states, or would-be-nuclear-wea-
pon states, is also visible in the evolution of concepts such as “peaceful nuclear
activities” and “proliferation prone nuclear activities.” While nuclear-weapon
states insist on the peaceful and benign character of their broad and extensive
nuclear activities, they impose very narrow and restrictive deﬁnitions of these
activities by others. This was particularly visible in 1991 when the IAEA was
requested by the Security Council to carry out immediate on-site inspection in Iraq:
For the ﬁrst time, all activities prone to nuclear weapons proliferation had to be
explicitly and comprehensively deﬁned in an annex to a Security Council resolution
so that the inspection team had a clear mandate to carry out [32, Appendix]. This
annex conﬁrmed IAEA’s deﬁnitions of nuclear materials, but introduced other
deﬁnitions and restrictions, such as the prohibition of the production of “isotopes
of plutonium, hydrogen, lithium, boron and uranium,” which put on equal level
the materials that are of importance to both nuclear and thermonuclear weapons
[32, p.11].

To conclude this subsection, it can be asserted that the concept of nuclear
material as deﬁned by the Statute of the IAEA is still valid today. Therefore,
depleted-uranium is deﬁnitely a nuclear material according to international law,
even though there is a trend to trivialize its use in so-called “non-nuclear appli-
cations.” This trivialization is clearly in contradiction with the legal status of the
material, as well as with jurisprudence, because it is impossible to prove that a
nuclear material is used “only in non-nuclear activities” [31] or “solely to take
advantage of the high density or pyrophoric characteristics” [3].
In fact, such
“declarations of intent” are used as the main argument in the laborious argumenta-
tions put forward by those who argue that depleted-uranium weapons are neither

16

radiological or nuclear weapons see, e.g., [33].3

3.2 Nuclear and conventional weapons

The words of most international arms-control agreements, such as the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT),
do not include deﬁnitions of essential terms, such as “nuclear weapon” or “nuclear
explosion,” even though these terms refer to what is controlled or prohibited by the
treaties. The reason is the difﬁculty of deﬁning them in an unambiguous technical
language that would be acceptable to all parties. The deﬁnition and interpretation
of these terms are therefore left to each parties, which may share conﬁdentially their
interpretations with other parties, and possibly make them public in a declaration.

Consequently, in order to learn about what is really understood by the terms
“nuclear weapon” and “nuclear explosion” it is necessary to analyse the declara-
tions made by many countries, the statements they made during the negotiations,
the opinion of leading technical and legal experts, etc. Such an analysis is sketched
in chapter 2 of reference [34] where it is shown that the current practical deﬁnition
of a “nuclear explosion” is much narrower that one would intuitively think. In
fact, what is strictly forbidden by the CTBT are not explosions in which any kind
of nuclear reaction would produce some militarily useful explosive yield, but just
explosions in which a diverging ﬁssion chain reaction takes place. This is very far
from the idea of a treaty stipulating “not to carry out any nuclear test explosion or
any other nuclear explosion” (Article I of the CTBT) and leaves open the possibil-
ity of designing and testing new types of nuclear weapons in which no diverging
ﬁssion chain reaction takes place!

In fact, this is exactly what is happening throughout the world, not just in
the laboratories of the nuclear weapons states, but also in the major industrial
powers such as Japan and Germany. Using gigantic laser facilities, such the US
National Ignition Facility (NIF), France’s Laser Mégajoule, Japan’s GEKKO at
Osaka, and similar tools in Germany and other countries, enormous progress is
being made towards the design of small fusion bombs in full compliance with the
CTBT — which contrary to nuclear ﬁssion, does not fully restrict the explosive
use of nuclear fusion. This activity is now the main advanced weapons research
priority of the nuclear weapons laboratories, which claim that its purpose is just the
“stewardship” of stockpiled nuclear weapons. It is also the main route towards the

3Similar kind of “declarations of intent” are used instead of factual evidence to argue that
depleted-uranium weapons are neither incendiary or chemical weapons, despite of the pyrophoric
and toxic properties of uranium.

17

controlled release of fusion energy in countries such Japan and Germany, which
claim that these small fusion explosives are just for peaceful applications.

Concerning the deﬁnition of the term “nuclear weapon,” the main source of
difﬁculties is that the least unambiguous characteristics of the intuitive concept of
a nuclear weapon are of a qualitative and subjective rather than quantitative and
objective nature.
Indeed, it is the enormity of the difference in the destructive
power of nuclear weapons compared to conventional weapons that has historically
lead to the qualitative distinction between “nuclear” and “conventional” weapons.
Similarly, it is their indiscriminate nature, and their targeting at cities rather than
military forces, which lead to the concept of “weapons of mass destruction.”
Consequently, it now difﬁculty to argue that weapons made of a nuclear material
like depleted-uranium are nuclear weapons, or even that new types of weapons
in which a nuclear explosion takes places that is not forbidden by the CTBT are
nuclear weapons.

Therefore, it appears that the most commonly accepted deﬁnition of a “nu-
clear weapon” — that is of an enormously destructive weapon — has created a
situation in which less potent weapons based on similar materials or physical prin-
ciples, and producing similar effects, but on a smaller scale, become acceptable to
governments as if they were “conventional weapons.”

For example, when the UK parliamentary under-secretary of state for defence,

states that

“Nuclear, biological and chemical weapons are indiscriminate wea-
pons of mass destruction speciﬁcally designed to incapacitate or kill
large numbers of people. DU ammunition is not” [35]

he is right. However, he is ignoring an important element that is at the root of
the dialogues of the deafs that characterizes the depleted-uranium debate, namely
that depleted-uranium is a nuclear material, that it is radioactive, and that this
has important consequencies — especially in relation to nuclear weapons. It can
therefore be argued that depleted-uranium weapons are not conventional weapons.

Similarly, the fact that the explosive yields of the laboratory-scale fusion
explosions that will be produced in a few years, for example at the US National
Ignition Facility, will correspond to “only” a few kilogram equivalent of TNT does
not mean that these explosions are not nuclear explosions, which in fact they are
according to both physics and common sense.

18

3.3 Depleted-uranium and fourth-generation nuclear weapons

As we have just seen, the enormity of the gap in the damage produced by a
single “city-busting” nuclear weapon compared to that of conventional weapons
has lead to the contemporary situation in which a radioactive material such as
depleted-uranium is routinely used on the battleﬁeld, and in which new types
of nuclear explosives are being designed. These nuclear explosives could have
yields in the range of 1 to 100 ton equivalents of TNT, i.e., in the gap which
today separates conventional weapons from nuclear weapons which have yields
equivalent to thousands or millions of tons of TNT.

These new types of nuclear explosives are called fourth-generation nuclear
weapons (for an extensive discussion and a comprehensive bibliography see ref-
erence [34]). This name refers to a terminology in which the ﬁrst generation
corresponds to “atomic” or “nuclear” bombs, and the second to “hydrogen” or
“thermonuclear” bombs. The third generation corresponds then to the “tailored”
or “enhanced” effects warheads such as the Enhanced Radiation Warhead (ERW,
also called neutron bomb) that were never deployed in large numbers because
they never found any truly convincing military use. Moreover, since these third-
generation weapons still had the high yields and large radioactive fallouts charac-
teristic of the ﬁrst two generations they could not be used on the battleﬁeld as if
they were some kind of trivial tactical weapons.

In comparison to the previous generations, fourth generation nuclear explosives

are characterized by the following features :

• They will not contain a signiﬁcant amount of nuclear-weapon-usable mate-
rial (i.e., plutonium or highly enriched uranium) in which a diverging chain
reaction could take place so that their development and testing will not be
forbidden by the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty;

• They will produce relatively little radioactive fallout and residual radioac-

tivity because they will contain little or no ﬁssile materials at all;

• They will derive the bulk of their explosive yield from fusion (which is why
they may be qualiﬁed as “pure fusion” explosives) rather than from ﬁssion or
other nuclear reactions, so that their radioactive effects will be those induced
by fusion;

• They will have relatively low explosive yields so that they will not qualify

as weapons of mass destruction.

19

Consequently, compared to the third generation, fourth generation nuclear
explosives are much more likely to ﬁnd numerous military applications. In partic-
ular, it is well known that the amount of conventional explosive that is delivered by
precision-guided munitions like cruise missiles (i.e., 50 to 100 kg of chemical high
explosives) is ridiculous in comparison to their cost: Some targets can only be de-
stroyed by the expenditure of numerous delivery systems while a single one loaded
with a more powerful warhead could be sufﬁcient. Therefore, the availability of
fourth generation warheads with yields in the range of 1 to 100 ton equivalents
of TNT will constitute a very dramatic change in warfare, a change that can only
be compared to that of the ﬁrst use of nuclear weapons in 1945 or to the ﬁrst de-
ployment of intercontinental ballistic missiles in 1959. Indeed, fourth generation
nuclear weapons will have yields thousand time larger than conventional weapons,
that is thousand time smaller than nuclear weapons of the previous generations,
which means that their battleﬁeld use will be much more probable than ﬁrst, sec-
ond, or third generations nuclear weapons, especially since they correspond to a
strongly perceived military need.

In practice, while proponents of fourth generation nuclear weapons may con-
vincingly argue that they are not weapons of mass destruction, that just like
depleted-uranium weapons they can be used discriminately, etc., it will be more
difﬁcult for them to dismiss the fact that they nevertheless produce effects that
do not exist with conventional explosives: Namely an intense burst of radiation
during the explosion, and some residual radioactivity afterwards.

The proponents will therefore argue that the burst of radiation (mostly high-
energy fusion neutrons) will only affect the target area, and that the only long term
collateral damage will be the “low” residual radioactivity due to the dispersal of
the unburnt fusion fuel and to a smaller extent to the interaction of the neutrons
with the ground, the air, and the materials close to the point of explosion...

It is at this stage of the critical assessment of the military consequences of
the potential use of fourth generation nuclear weapons that an important ﬁnding
was made: The expenditure of many tons of depleted-uranium has a radiological
impact comparable to that of the combat use of many kilotons TNT equivalent of
pure-fusion nuclear explosives [4].

This ﬁnding, which is reported in the Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference of the Yugoslav Nuclear Society, Belgrade, Sep.30 - Oct.4, 2002,
was very surprising at ﬁrst. This is because it was totally unexpected that the
radiological impact of the battleﬁeld use of depleted-uranium could be compared
to that of the battleﬁeld use of a large number of hypothetical fourth generation
nuclear warheads. But this is what the laws of physics and what is known about the
effects of nuclear radiations on human being imply: The use of depleted-uranium

20

weapons creates a residual radioactive environment that provides a yardstick that
can be used by the proponents of fourth generation nuclear weapons to demonstrate
that the radioactive burden due to their use is “acceptable.”

For instance, it is found in reference [4] that the expenditure of one ton of
depleted-uranium in the form of bullets has a long-term radiological impact equiv-
alent to the use of many kilotons of hypothetical pure-fusion weapons. This means
that between 100 and 1000 precision-guided munitions (which today deliver only
10 to 100 kilograms of high-explosives), each carrying a pure-fusion warhead
with a yield of 1 to 10 tons of high-explosive equivalent, could be used to get a
similar radiological impact. Since about 400 tons of depleted-uranium were used
in Iraq, and about 40 in Yugoslavia, the radiological impact in these countries
correspond to that of the use of tenths of thousands of precision-guided munitions
tipped with fourth generation nuclear weapons, i.e., many more precision-guided
delivery systems than were actually used in these countries.

In conclusion, while depleted-uranium weapons create a low radioactive envi-
ronment, this radioactive burden is not less negligible than the predictable radio-
logical impact of the new types of nuclear weapons that are under development.
The battleﬁeld use of depleted-uranium has therefore created a military and legal
precedent for the use of nuclear weapons which produce a radioactive burden that
is much less than that of existing types of nuclear weapons, but which have a
destructive power about thousand times larger than conventional explosives.

4 Discussion and conclusion

In this paper two important new contributions have been made to the depleted-
uranium debate: (1) a critical appraisal of the conventional weapon’s use of heavy
materials showing that depleted-uranium alloys have no truly signiﬁcant technical
or military advantage over tungsten alloys for that purpose; and (2) an analysis
showing that depleted-uranium weapons cannot be assimilated to conventional
weapons and that they belong to the diffuse category of low-radiological-impact
nuclear weapons to which emerging types of nuclear explosives also belong.

These contribution enable to complete and reinforce the numerous arguments
that have been put forward to show that depleted-uranium weapons are illegal
according to international law and contrary to the rules of war. They also clarify
the discussion of the reasons why depleted-uranium weapons have been made and
why they were used in Iraq and Yugoslavia.

Since the main battleﬁeld use of depleted-uranium was in anti-tank weapons,

21

let us review some of the more obvious military reasons that must have played a
role in deciding to use them against Iraqi and Serbian armor:

1. The most effective ammunition available had to be used in order to get quick
results. But depleted-uranium munition are at best only marginally more
effective than tungsten munition. Moreover, the majority of Iraqi tanks
were not of the latest Soviet generation (such as the T-80), and the use of
depleted-uranium rounds in Yugoslavia against lightly armored tanks and
personnel carriers was a gross overkill. In fact, just as effective (and less
costly) non-radioactive anti-tank weapons were available in large numbers
during both the Iraqi and Yugoslavia campaigns.

2. Depleted-uranium munition have the additional advantage that uranium is
pyrophoric. But the incendiary effect of depleted-uranium anti-tank rounds
is only a marginal contribution to their tank lethality effect. On the other
hand, the pyrophoric property of uranium is the main short-term cause of
the dispersion of uranium in the environment.

3. Depleted-uranium munitions were available but had never been tested on the
battleﬁeld. But doing so broke a 46 years long taboo against the intentional
battleﬁeld use of radioactive materials. It is therefore particularly shocking
that during the Gulf War the British Ministry of Defence quickly adapted
depleted-uranium ammunition developed for the new Challenger-2 tank for
use on the existing Challenger-1 tank ﬂeet [33] so that the munition could
be labeled “combat proven” after the war.

4. Depleted-uranium is a radioactive material which inspires pride in its users,
fear in its victims, and strong reactions in the bystanders. Indeed, depleted-
uranium long-rod penetrators are the “favorite rounds” of tank gunners and
the “least acceptable rounds” to a large share of the public opinion and
environmental activists. Consequently, the numerous and often excessive
reactions of the anti-depleted-uranium activists unwillingly contributed to
the military propaganda machine by amplifying the military-psychological
advantage of using depleted-uranium instead of a non-radioactive material.

5. Depleted-uranium weapons have an overall long-term radiological effect
comparable to that of pure-fusion nuclear weapons. Like the previous rea-
son, there is no direct evidence that this reason was taken into account at some
stage of the decision making process. However, the analysis made in refer-
ence [4], as well as numerous indirect evidence (e.g., the care that is taken in
all published documents to avoid any discussion of the long-term radiologi-
cal impact of pure-fusion nuclear weapons) show that the military planners

22

are acutely aware of the full consequences of using depleted-uranium and
the lessons that can be learned from its use. In particular, it is undisputable
that the use of a radioactive material in Iraq and Yugoslavia has created
a military and legal precedent. Similarly, it is undisputable that this use
has provided a ﬁrst test of the acceptability of future weapons that would
produce a low level of radioactivity. In fact, the use of depleted-uranium
weapons has proved to be acceptable, both from a military point of view
because the induced radioactivity did not impair further military action, and
from a political standpoint because most political leaders, and shapers of
public opinion, did not object to their battleﬁeld use.

6. Depleted-uranium weapons are less expensive than tungsten weapons. This
reason has been left for the end because it is not strictly-speaking a military
reason and because it is fallacious in two respects. First, it is clear that
the cost of a single anti-tank round that is capable of destroying, or saving,
a main battle tank is marginal in comparison to the cost of such a tank.
Therefore, using a phrase that is much used in such a context, if “gold
plating” would improve the performance of anti-tank rounds, they would
all be gold plated! Consequently, it can be asserted that even if depleted-
uranium was more expensive than tungsten, but if depleted-uranium rounds
were only marginally better than tungsten rounds, uranium rounds would
still be preferred by the military. Second, it turns out that the market value
of depleted uranium is artiﬁcially low because it is a surplus of the nuclear
industry. However, this price is just that of the raw material and does
not include the additional costs (e.g., processing in ﬁre-proof glove-boxes,
storage behind radiation shields, clean-up of the environment after use, etc.)
which make that the full life-cycle cost of uranium is much higher than that
of tungsten. Therefore, if the full life-cycle cost is taken into account, the
preference easily goes to tungsten, an observation that the tungsten industry
has not failed to make [36]. To sum up, in a situation such as the Gulf War
where a full range of antitank weapons was available — including a number
of tungsten antitank weapons that it would have been of great interest to
compare in combat to uranium weapons — the price argument was truly of
secondary importance.

Thinking about these military reasons, it is evident that the argumentation is
very similar to that which is always developed in order to justify the introduction
of some new controversial weapon. In the case at hand, the discussion is even
strongly reminiscent of the “neutron bomb debate” of the mid 1980s [9, 10, 11].
In that debate, the proponents presented the neutron bomb as a kind of almost
magical superweapon that would defeat a Soviet tanks invasion without producing

23

large collateral damage to the surrounding towns and cities. The argument was
shown to be plain wrong by simply making an analysis of modern tank armor
technology and by calculating the protection that would be provided by such armor
against the neutrons from a neutron bomb [10]. Similar analyses were made in
section 2 of this paper (where as rather long argument was required to complete
the proof that depleted-uranium rounds are no “silver bullets”) and in reference
[4], using only published professional papers, and purely scientiﬁc arguments.
The conclusions are that depleted-uranium weapons are not superweapons of
any kind, and that their perceived military advantages, as well as their perceived
environmental disadvantages, are vastly exaggerated by both the proponents and
the opponents of the use of these weapons.

In the case of the neutron bombe debate, it turned out that rational and measured
arguments of the kind put forward in references [9, 10, 11] had a remakable impact
on the outcome of the debate which turned to the advantage of the opponents. It is
therefore of interest to see what such type of arguments can say about the possible
reasons why depleted uranium weapons have been put into arsenals despite of the
numerous environmental, medical, technical, legal, and political objections that
have been anticipated, and are still raised against their fabrication, deployment,
and use.

First of all, as can be seen in the professional literature, of which the bib-
liography of this paper only gives a limited overview, there has been a lively
debate in the ballistic weaponeers’s community about the merits and demerits of
depleted-uranium versus tungsten projectiles. This debate has been ongoing over
the past ﬁfty years, and the use of depleted-uranium in Iraq and Yugoslavia has
only reinforced the convictions of the weaponeers opposed to depleted-uranium.
In fact, while the US Navy had already reverted to tungsten years before the Gulf
War, no country that had decided not to use deplete-uranium penetrators changed
their policy after the Gulf War.

Second, the well known fact that the price of depleted uranium has been made
artiﬁcially low in order to encourage its use [1], as well as the observation that
the unclassiﬁed American technical literature is clearly biased in that it mostly
refers to the performance of anti-tank penetrators rather than to the performance
of complete anti-tank weapon systems, suggest that the push towards the use of
depleted-uranium has been much stronger than simply deserved but a small per-
ceived advantage of uranium alloys over tungsten alloys in one speciﬁc application:
long-rod penetration into homogeneous armor.

Third, there is a long history of events, which shows that the “nuclear lobby”
(that in the 1950s and 60s was the incarnation of “progress and modernity”) has
always had a very strong inﬂuence on the course of economic and military affairs

24

in all the nuclear powers. In particular, one can see its inﬂuence in the politics
behind the development of new nuclear weapons, for example the neutron bomb,
or new sources of nuclear energy, for example micro-explosion fusion, and it is
tempting to speculate that a policy which consists of making the price of a material
like depleted-uranium as low as possible is both an investment into the future and
a way to trivialize the use of radioactive materials in all circumstances.

Finally, there is the very grave military and legal precedent created by the
combat use of a radioactive material, which is a clear violation of the spirit, if not
the letter, of a norm that was in force since 1945. It cannot reasonably be argued
that nobody, at least at some level of competence and responsibility, was aware
of the full consequences of breaking such a norm. It is impossible, considering
the existence of a lively internal debate on the consequencies of the battleﬁeld use
of depleted-uranium and other nuclear materials, that these consequencies have
not been thoroughly investigated long before the Gulf War. Therefore, it must be
admitted that the choice made in favor of using depleted-uranium took into account
the fact that its battleﬁeld use would trivialize the military use of radioactive
materials, and therefore make the use of nuclear weapons more probable.

In conclusion, it can be argued that besides its military function, the use of
depleted-uranium in Iraq and Yugoslavia must have served a political purpose:
to prepare for the progressive introduction of fourth generation nuclear weapons
whose battleﬁeld use will cause a low (but non-negligible) residual radioactive
environment. It may even be possible to argue that depleted-uranium was used in
Iraq — and then in Yugoslavia where there was little military reasons for using it
— in order to test the opposition of the Western public opinion to the induction of
radioactivity on the battleﬁeld, and to get the World population accustomed to the
combat use of depleted-uranium and fourth generation nuclear weapons.

References

[1] “Making Bullets Out Of Depleted Uranium — Mr. Dole. Mr. President,
an article appeared in the Washington Star on March 14, reporting that
the Pentagon is about to start using depleted-uranium to produce bullets.
They seem to have chosen this material for bullets because uranium metal
is dense, and because depleted uranium is cheap. Needless to say, I ﬁnd
this proposal shocking. On the one hand this shows a complete lack of
sensitivity to the general fear of using radioactive materials. On the other
hand, only a strange set of policy decisions could have made this material
so cheap that anybody would consider using it for bullets.”

25

Opening paragraph of 140 lines long statement by Senator Bob Dole at the
95th Congress, 2nd session, Vol. 124 (part 29) March 17, 1978, page 7416.

[2] Back in 1971 the Atomic Energy Commission initiated a rulemaking to
permit the commercial use of depleted-uranium. See proposed amendment
at Federal Register 40, No. 7, January 10, 1975, pp. 2209-2211.

[3] The U.S. International Security and Development Cooperative Act of 1980
states that “depleted-uranium may be sold upon a ﬁnding that an export of
uranium depleted in the isotope U-235 is incorporated in defense articles
or commodities solely to take advantage of the high density or pyrophoric
characteristics unrelated to its radioactivity. Such exports shall be exempt
from the provisions of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 and from the Nuclear
Non-proliferation Act of 1978.”

[4] A. Gsponer, J.-P. Hurni, and B. Vitale, A comparison of delayed radio-
biological effects of depleted-uranium munitions versus fourth-generation
nuclear weapons, Report ISRI-02-07, Proceedings of the 4th Int. Conf.
of the Yugoslav Nuclear Society, Belgrade, Sep.30 - Oct.4, 2002, 14 pp.
Available at http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0210071 .

[5] W. Lanz, W. Odermatt, Dr. G. Weihrauch, Kinetic energy projectiles: de-
velopment history, state of the art, trends, 19th International Symposium on
Ballistics (7–11 May 2001, Interlaken, Switzerland) 1191–1197. Available
in pdf at http://www.tsgs.com/.ttk/symp_19/
TB191191.pdf .

[6] B. Rostker, Development of DU Munitions, in Environmental Exposure
Report, Depleted Uranium in the Gulf (II), (2000). Available in html at
http://www.gulflink.osd.mil/du_ii/du_ii_tabe.htm .
Curiously, in this section of the extremely well documented “Gulf Link”
web-site, the comparison of depleted-uranium versus tungsten munitions
is almost exclusively based on excerpts from a single document, reference
[7], which is a relatively old historical review, at a time when much more
informative unclassiﬁed documents were since long readily available, e.g.,
[15, 16].

[7] R.P. Davitt, A comparison of the advantages and disadvantages of depleted-
uranium and tungsten alloy as penetrator materials, Tank Ammo Section,
Report No. 107 (US Army Armament Research and Development Com-
mand, Dover, NJ, June 1980) Conﬁdential. Pages 3 and 4 available in
reference [6] at http://www.gulflink.osd.mil/du_ii/
du_ii_tabe.htm .

26

[8] Apparently, the ﬁrst use of uranium in ammunition was during World War
Two by Germany after 1943 because of a shortage in tungsten supply. See,
Albert Speer, Inside the Third Reich (Mac Millan, New York, 1970) 596
pp.

[9] A. Gsponer, La bombe à neutrons, La Recherche 15 (No.158, septembre

1984) 1128–1138.

[10] S. Sahin and A. Gsponer, Protection factors of modern ar-
mored tanks against enhanced-radiation and ﬁssion nuclear warheads,
Atomkernenergie–Kerntechnik 46 (1985) 278–284.

[11] J. Harris and A. Gsponer, Armour diffuses the neutron bomb, New Scientist

(13 March 1986) 44–47.

[12] T.E. Lilios, Assessing the risk from the depleted-uranium weapons used in
operation Allied force, Science and Global Security 8 (1999) 163–181.

[13] D. Yaziv, M. Mayseless and Y. Reifen, The penetration process of long rods
into thin metallic targets at high obliquity, 19th International Symposium on
Ballistics (7–11 May 2001, Interlaken, Switzerland) 1249–12559. Available
at http://www.tsgs.com/.ttk/symp_19/TB261249.pdf .

[14] R. Subramanian and S.J. Bless, Reference correlations for tungsten long
rods striking semi-inﬁnite steel targets, 19th International Symposium on
Ballistics (7–11 May 2001, Interlaken, Switzerland) 1249–12559. Available
at http://www.tsgs.com/.ttk/symp_19/TB101115.pdf .

[15] L.S. Magness, and T. G. Farrand, Deformation behavior and its relationship
to the penetration performance of high-density kinetic energy penetrator
materials, Proceedings of the 1990 Army Science Conference (Durham,
NC, May 1990) 465–479.

[16] Figure provided by the Groupement Industriel des Armements Terrestres
(GIAT), French Ministry of Defense, in R. Pengelley, Tank ammunition
development less spectacular, but smarter, International Defense Review,
No. 4/1994 (April 1994) 39–46.

[17] T. Farrand, L. Magness, and M. Burkins, Deﬁnition and uses of RHA equiva-
lences for medium caliber targets, 19th International Symposium on Ballis-
tics (7–11 May 2001, Interlaken, Switzerland) 1159–1165. Available in pdf
at http://www.tsgs.com/.ttk/symp_19/TB151159.pdf .

27

[18] S.P. Andrew, R.D. Caliguri, and L.E. Eiselstein, Relationship between dy-
namic properties and penetration mechanisms of tungsten and depleted-
uranium penetrators, 13th International Symposium on Ballistics (Stock-
holm, Sweden, 1–3 June, 1992) 249–256.

[19] R.J. Dowding, Materials for kinetic energy penetrators, text of transparen-
cies for a brieﬁng at the Structural Amorphous Metals Pre-Proposal Con-
ference (Arlington, VA, June 6, 2000) 21 pages. Available in html at
http://www.darpa.mil/dso/textonly/thrust/md/sam/
presentations/dowding.htm .

[20] J.B. Stevens, Finite Element Analysis of Adiabatic Shear Bands in Impact
and Penetration Problems, MA thesis (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University, 1996) 61 pp. Available in pdf at
http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/theses/
public/ etd-3753128097370/stevens.pdf .

[21] J. B. Stevens and R. C. Batra, Adiabatic shear banding in axisymmetric
impact and penetration problems (1996). Plots and computer animations
available in html at http://www.sv.vt.edu/research/
batra-stevens/pent.html .

[22] Tungsten Heavy Alloy for Anti-Tank Ammunition (Korean Agency for

Defense Development, 2001) 4pp. Available in html at
http://www.add.re.kr/eng/skill/1.asp .

[23] D.S. Kim, S. Nemat-Nasser, J.B. Isaacs, and D. Lischer, Adiabatic shear-
band in WHA in high-strain-rate compression, Mechanics of Materials 28
(1998) 227–236. Available in pdf at http://www-ceam.ucsd.edu/
sia/polycrystal/ adiabaticshearband.pdf .

[24] Soon H. Hong, Ho J. Ryu, and Woon H. Baek, Matrix pools in a partially
mechanically alloyed tungsten heavy alloy for localized shear deformation,
Materials Science and Engineering A333 (2002) 187–192. Available in pdf
at http://composite.kaist.ac.kr/public/PE56.pdf .

[25] L. Magness, L.Kecskes, M.Chung, D. Kapoor, F. Biancianello, and S.
Ridder, Behavior and performance of amorphous and nanocrystalline met-
als in ballistic impacts, 19th International Symposium on Ballistics (7–
11 May 2001, Interlaken, Switzerland) 1183–1189. Available in pdf at
http://www.tsgs.com/.ttk/symp_19/TB181183.pdf .

[26] J. B. Stevens and R. C. Batra, Adiabatic shear bands in the Taylor impact
test for a WHA rod, International Journal of Plasticity 14 (1998) 841–854.

28

Available in pdf at http://www.esm.vt.edu/˜rbatra/
pdfpapers/ plasticity1998(841-854).pdf .

[27] Like most metals (e.g., lithium, aluminum, thorium, etc.), uranium “burns”
(i.e., reacts violently with oxygen) under certains conditions. Usually, ura-
nium is described as a “combustible metal,” meaning that it burns under
appropriate conditions, but without producing ﬁercy ﬁres that would make
it a material of choice for use in incendiary weapons. Uranium is also py-
rophoric, meaning that it may ignite spontaneously, which is what happens
in air at ambiant temperature if it is in pouder form. When an uranium
projectile impacts on armor, its surface is instantly brought to a tempera-
ture of about 3000 degrees so that any particle that is spalled off, or the
remainder of the penetrator, burns until their temperatures fall below a
critical temperature. It is estimated that about 20% of a 300 grams “armor-
piercing incendiary (API)” projectile shot by an A-10 aircraft is burnt under
such conditions. If one assumes that the dominant oxydation process is the
U + O2 → UO2 reaction, the amount of energy set free is 270 kilojoules,
which corresponds to the combustion of about 6 grams of napalm. This en-
ergy is on the same order as the kinetic energy of the penetrator so that the
pyrophoric effect of uranium does not increase very much the total energy
dissipated in the target. Therefore, if a small amount (i.e., a few grams or a
few cubic centimeters) of a highly-effective metallic incendiary compound
such as “thermit” would be delivered within a hollowed tungsten projectile,
or in a follow-through capsule, a much larger incendiary effect would be
obtaind than with an equal weight uranium penetrator. Jean-Pierre Hurni,
private communication, 20 January 2003.

[28] Concurrent Technologies Corporation (2001) Information available in html

at http://www.ctc.com/index.cfm?fuseaction=1323 .

[29] The IAEA Safeguards System of 1965-68,

IAEA document

INF-

CIRC/66/Rev.2 (IAEA, Vienna, 1968).

[30] R. Stone, Belgrade Lab Sets New Course After Top-Secret Uranium Grab,

Science 297 (30 August 2002) 1456.

[31] Guidelines for Nuclear Transfers (Revised 1977 London Guidelines), IAEA
document INFCIRC/254/Rev.1/Part 1/Mod. 2 (IAEA, Vienna, April 1994).

[32] A. Gsponer, J.-P. Hurni and S. Klement, UN security council resolutions
687, 707 and 715 and their implications for a halt of all proliferation prone
nuclear activities — a technical and legal assessment, Report ISRI-96-06
submitted to Security Dialogue (12 February 1997) 11 pp. Available in pdf

29

at http://nuketesting.enviroweb.org/hew/Iraq/andre/
ISRI-06-06.pdf .

[33] H. Beach, The military hazards of depleted-uranium, Brieﬁng paper No.78
(International Security Information Service, London, January 2001) 14 pp.
Available in pdf or html at http://www.isisuk.demon.co.uk/
0811/isis/uk/regpapers/no78_paper.html .

[34] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, The Physical Principles of Thermonuclear
Explosives, Inertial Conﬁnement Fusion, and the Quest for Fourth Gener-
ation Nuclear Weapons, INESAP Technical Report No.1, Presented at the
1997 INESAP Conference, Shanghai, China, 8-10 September 1997, Sev-
enth edition, September 2000, ISBN: 3-9333071-02-X, 195 pp. Abstract
available at http://nuketesting.enviroweb.org/hew/News/
AnnounceReviews.html

A recent journalistic account of this report has been published by the
Sidney Morning Herald of 7 September 2002. Available at
http://www.smh.com.au/articles/2002/09/06/
1031115939075.html .

For a paper discussing the technology underlying the development and
mass production aspects of fourth generation nuclear weapons, see A.
Gsponer Nanotechnology and fourth-generation nuclear weapons, Disar-
mament Diplomacy, No. 67 (October/November 2002) 3–6. Available at
http://www.acronym.org.uk/dd/dd67/67op1.htm .

[35] Dr Lewis Moonie MP, letter to Dr Kim Howells MP about the legality of
Depleted Uranium (DU) weapons. Reference D/US of S/LM 1136/01/M
(25 March 2001). Excerpt and commentary available at
http://www.russfound.org/Launch/farebrother2.htm .

[36] The Economics of Tungsten, Roskill reports on metal and minerals, 7th

edition, (February 2001) 158pp. Available at
http://www.roskill.co.uk/tungsten.html .

30

