3
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
1
7
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Deﬁning civilization utilizing anthropic reasoning
Kevin A. Pimbblet

Address: Department of Physics, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, QLD 4072,

Australia

e-mail: pimbblet@physics.uq.edu.au

We utilize anthropic reasoning to demonstrate that we are typical observers of our reference class

under a self-sampling assumption by investigating the deﬁnition of what a civilization is. With

reference to the conﬂict between such reasoning and the observational lack of extra-terrestrial in-

telligent life, we conclude that a part of our theoretical understanding of the Universe will be at

Abstract

fault.

1 Introduction

There exist certain physical observations that we should not be at all surprised about. What we can

expect to observe is restricted a priori by the conditions that are necessary for us to exist in the ﬁrst
place1. Necessarily, if intelligent life forms did not evolve in the Universe, then such observations
could not take place at all2,3. Yet the question of what our own circumstances should be remains a
taxing issue4: are we typical of all observers in the Universe? Indeed, Bostrom5 suggests reasoning

that we should think of ourselves as a random sample derived from the set of all observers in our

reference class under a ‘self-sampling assumption’.

One immediate question that arises is how should we deﬁne our own reference class? Bostrom5
includes all observers who have existed in the past and all those who will exist in the future. Olum6

favours adding to Bostrom’s reference class all those observers who might potentially have existed

as well. Yet removing these extensions and conﬁning our reference class to only those observers
who exist presently, there is still conﬂict between anthropic reasoning and observation4 such that

we would expect ourselves to be part of a titanic (inter-) galactic civilization rather than being part

of a uniplanetary one. In numerical terms, only 1 in 100 million individuals would not be part of
such a civilization at a pan-galactic level4.

In general, the assumptions that underscore this anthropic reasoning are inﬂationary7:

in an

1

inﬁnite Universe, there logically exist such titanic civilizations3,4. Given that ‘they’ should already
be here and are not3, there are a number of scenarios for the resolution of this problem4. In this

work, we focus on an observational approach to resolving this conﬂict.

2 Deﬁning civilization

Observationally, it is self-evident that we are part of a civilization. The deﬁnition of what a

civilization is, however, is somewhat tricky and potentially arbitrary. For example, let us consider

ourselves as being part of a civilization based on present-day national boarders where voluntary

migration is uncommon. Unless we have emigrated away from our nation, we would not be surprised

to ﬁnd out that we are typical members of said civilization. Conversely, if we have migrated, we

would also be unsurprised that we constitute a small minority of the populous in our new residential

country.

By taking this example further, we can consider our national boundary to be the Earth. This in

turn expands our reference class to all individuals present on Earth. Again, we would be unsurprised

that we are a national of this planet. Assuming extra-terrestrial intelligence does exist, then we

may migrate to their planets where we would unsurprisingly be in the minority. Yet we could now

consider ourselves to be part of some greater civilization with a diﬀerent (arbitrary) border such

as a pan-galactic one that consisted of all intelligent life in the Galaxy. The reference class that

we now have is exactly as deﬁned in section 1. We conclude that we would still be typical galaxy

nationals despite our divergent heritages under the self-sampling assumption.

This line of reasoning indicates a type of selection eﬀect in how civilizations are deﬁned. Specif-

ically, we have used at each step only those observers whom we know by direct observation to

be existent. It appears that by only considering our observations rather than the (theoretically)

implied observations of vast civilizations, we are typical observers of our reference class; even when

accounting for a ﬁnite speed of light.

3 Implications

Returning to our present knowledge base, it is clear that we have only observed our own Earthbound

civilization. Further, it is highly probable that there is not any ‘local’ extra-terrestrial intelligence
waiting to be discovered3.

Importantly, we do not know anything about the existence of such

2

beings at larger distances. The inference that they may exist is theoretically based rather than

observationally. There is no observational evidence of absence beyond our local stellar region.

We therefore ﬁnd it probable that it is not anthropic reasoning that is at fault. Although more

detailed observations of exo-planets will be required, more likely the ﬂaw in the conﬂict lies within

a theoretical aspect coupled with the use of theoretical observers in our reference class. Speciﬁcally
with reference to Olum4, these ﬂaws are: few civilizations are able to grow to titanic proportions;

the Universe is ﬁnite; or large-scale inter-stellar colonization is near impossible.

4 Summary

We have investigated the deﬁnition of civilization and applied anthropic reasoning to suggest that

we are typical residents of our neighbourhood: whether this is in an Earthbound context or spatially

more extended. Thus we reject the supposition that anthropic reasoning is invalid and favour that

either our theoretical understanding of the Universe, our understanding of our colonization ability

or the use of theoretical observers is at fault.

Acknowledgements

KAP thanks the staﬀ at both the University of Durham and the University of Queensland for their

support. This work was supported by an EPSA University of Queensland research fellowship.

(1) B. Carter, Confrontation of cosmological theories with observations (Reidel, Dordrecht), 1974.

(3) J.D. Barrow and F.J. Tipler, The anthropic cosmological principle, (Clarendon Press, Oxford),

(5) N. Bostrom, Anthropic bias: Observation selection eﬀects, (Routledge, New York), 2002.

References

(2) R.H. Dicke, Nature, 192, 440, 1961.

1986.

(4) K.D. Olum, arxiv:gr-qc/0303070, 2003.

(6) K.D. Olum, Phil. Q., 52, 164, 2002.

(7) A.H. Guth, Phys. Rep., 333, 555, 2000.

3

