3
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
6
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
1
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dating of two Paleolithic human fossil bones from

Romania by accelerator mass spectrometry

Agata Olariu, G¨oran Skog⋄, Ragnar Hellborg•, Kristina Stenstr¨om•,
Mikko Faarinen•, Per Persson•,
Emilian Alexandrescu◦

Institute for Physics and Nuclear Engineering,

PO Box MG-6, 76900 Magurele, Bucharest, Romania
⋄Department of Quaternary Geology, Tornav¨agen 13, SE-223 63 Lund
•Department of Nuclear Physics, Lund University

S¨olvegatan 14, SE-223 62 Lund, Sweden
◦Institute of Archaeology, Bucharest

Abstract

In this study we have dated two human fossil remains found in Romania, by the

method of radiocarbon using the technique of the accelerator mass spectrometry. The

human fossil remains from Woman’s cave, Baia deFier, have been dated to the age

30150 ± 800 years BP, and the skull from the Cioclovina cave has been dated to the

age 29000 ± 700 years BP. These are the most ancient dated till now human fossil

remains from Romania, possibly belonging to the upper Paleolithic, the Aurignacian

period.

1 Introduction

In this study we have dated two human fossil remains found in Romania, by

the method of radiocarbon dating using the accelerator mass spectrometry

(AMS) technique, performed at the Pelletron accelerator in Lund Univer-

sity, Sweden. These are the most ancient dated human fossil remains from

Romania, attributed by some archaeologists to the upper Paleolithic, the

Aurignacian period. The ﬁrst skull, and scapulum and tibia remains were

found in 1952 in Baia de Fier, in the Woman’s Cave, in Hateg, Gorj county

in the province Oltenia, by Constantin Nicolaescu-Plopsor. Another skull

was found in Cioclovina cave, near commune Bosorod, Hunedoara county in

Transylvania, found by a worker at the exploitation of phosphate deposits, in

the year 1941. The skull arrived at Francisc Rainer, anthropologist, and Ioan

Simionescu, geologist, who published a study of this skull.[1] The absence of

stratigraphical observation information made the cultural and chronological

attribution of these skulls very diﬃcult, and a number of archaeologists ques-

tioned the Paleolithic character of these fossil remains. For this reason, the

dating of the two skulls by a physical analysis is decisive.

2 Experimental

Samples of bone were taken from the scapulum and tibia remains from the

Woman’s cave, from Baia de Fier, and from the skull from the Cioclovina

cave. The 14C content was determined in the two samples by using the AMS

2

system at Lund University. Normally, suﬃcient collagen for AMS measure-

ments can be extracted from bone fragments with masses of 1 g, or more

provided that at least 5 to 10% of the original collagen content is present.

But for the presently studied bone remains, because of the small available

quantity of very old bone samples, the determination of the radiocarbon

content in the bones was diﬃcult. We have essentially applied the Longin

method [2] for the extraction of collagen from the bone structure. We use

the collagen to refer to collagen that has undergone a degree of diagenesis.

The next step is the transformation of the collagen into pure carbon in an

experimental set-up for the preparation of samples for AMS technique [3].

The pure carbon, placed in a copper holder, is arranged in a wheel, together

with two standards of oxalic acid and one anthracite background sample.

The wheel with the samples and standards is put into the ion source of the

accelerator. The central part of the Lund AMS system is a Pelletron tandem

accelerator. The accelerator is run at a terminal voltage of 2.4 MV during

AMS experiments. The particle identiﬁcation and measuring system consists

of a silicon surface barrier detector of diameter of 25 mm. The computer sys-

tem alternately analyses the data of the 13C current received from a current

integrator and the 14C counts arriving from the particle detector, to obtain,

ﬁnally, the ratio 14C/13C for each sample. Each sample is measured 7 times.

The precision of the measurements for samples close to Modern [4] is around

1 % [5].

3

3 Results and Archaeological Considerations

Dating of the two sampes by the AMS-technique gave the following results:

Skull Woman’s cave, Baia de Fier, Gorj, Oltenia 30150 ± 800 years BP

Skull Cioclovina cave, Bosorod, Hunedoara

29000 ± 700 years BP

Fig. 1 shows the skull found alongside with fragments of scapulum, mandible

and a dyaphisis of tibia in Baia de Fier, in the Woman’s Cave, in Gorj county

in the province Oltenia, by C. S. Nicolaescu-Plopsor in 1952. C. S. Nicolaescu-

Plopsor worked for the establishing of the geologic and archaeologic stratig-

raphy . He found two Paleolithic layers from the lithic pieces, one Musterian

and one Aurignacian. In 1952 he found a skull, which he assumed to be a

homo sapiens fossilis. The skull has been found in a gallery known as the

”Musterian gallery”. In the following years he and his collaborators discov-

ered in a diﬀerent area of the same cave fragments of scapulum, mandibula

and tibia, this archeological material being attributed to the Middle Pale-

olithic (Musterian). Even though the skull was found in the layer, the levels

here are mixed and the stratigraphy is not clear. Most of the lithic materials

discovered in the Woman’s cave from Baia de Fier belong to the Musterian

period. The few Aurignacian pieces from this cave have been discovered near

the entrance of the cave, while the analyzed scapulum and tibia have been

found inside the cave. This circumstance renders diﬃcult the association of

the human remains with a speciﬁc historic cultural period.[6,7] Fig. 2 shows

4

the skull found in Cioclovina cave, near commune Bosorod, Hunedoara county

in Transylvania, which was found by a worker at the exploitation of phos-

phate deposits, in the year 1941. The stratigraphical conditions in which the

skull has been discovered were unclear from the moment of the discovery, and

the association with the few lithic pieces found in the cave is not established.

The skull arrived at Francisc Rainer, anthropologist, and Ioan Simionescu,

geologist, who published a study of this skull.[8] These authors advanced

the hypothesis that the skull belongs to the man of the type Homo sapiens

fossilis, with strong Neanderthalian characters. Unfortunately no further an-

thropological studies of this skull have been reported since then. Moreover,

certain authors have questioned the Paleolithical age of this skull. The skull

is now in the custody of Theodor Neagu from the Faculty of Geology of the

University of Bucharest. In this condition, the dating of the two human fossil

remains by physical analysis was crucial.

4 Conclusions

The analysis of the fossil remains from Baia de Fier and Cioclovina caves by

radiocarbon using the AMS technique have demonstrated that the remains

are very ancient and could be attributed to the period of upper Paleolithic

period, the Aurignacian. On the basis of the dating of the fossil remains

presented in this study, a future cultural identiﬁcation might be possible,

and in this way the fossil remains might be associated with other ﬁndings of

the same type from the Central and Eastern Europe.

5

References

507.

p.289.

p. 333-363

[1] Fr. Rainer and I. Simionescu, Sur le premier crˆane d’homme pal´eolithique trouv´e en

Roumanie, Analele Academiei Romane, Seria III, Tomul XVII, Bucharest, 1942, p.489-

[2] R.Longin, New method of collagen extraction for radiocarbon dating, Nature, v

230(1990), p. 241-242;

[3] J. S. Vogel, J. R. Southon, D.E. Nelson and T.A. Brown, Nucl.Instr. and Meth.B5(1984),

[4] M. Stuiver and H. Polach, Reporting of 14C Data, Radiocarbon, Vol. 19, No. 3 (1977)

[5] G. Skog, R. Hellborg, K. Stenstr¨om, P. Persson, B. Erlandsson, M. Faarinen and M.

Kiisk, 2002 Radiocarbon dating at the Lund Pelletron accelerator. In the Proceedings of

the XXXIV SNEAP meeting, Lund, Sweden, 21-24 October, 2001.

[6] C. S. Nicolaescu-Plopsor si colab., SCIV, 4,1953, 1-2, p. 195-207; idem, Materiale, 3,

1957, p.13-27; See and Al. Paunescu, The Paleolithic and the Mesolithic from the space

between Carpathians and Danube, Editura AGIR, Bucuresti 2000, p.310-324.

[7] C. S. Nicolaescu-Plopsor, SCIV, 7, 1956, 1-2, p. 14, 26, 28. There are, at the Insti-

tute of Archaeology ”Vasile Parvan”, records (booklet No. 2) regarding the researches

conducted by C. S. Nicolaescu-Plopsor in the Orastie Mountains, where one can ﬁnd

details of his discussions with Miclaus Cusu, a local worker from the exploitation of

phosphate deposits, who would have witnessed the discovery of the skull in 1941. See

also Al. Paunescu, The Paleolithic and the Mesolithic from the Transylvanian Space,

AGIR, Bucuresti, 2001, p.226-232 (in Romanian).

[8] Fr. Rainer and I. Simionescu, op. cit., p. 494.

6

Figure captions

Fig. 1.

Skull found in the Women’s cave, Baia de Fier Hateg, Gorj county

Fig. 2.

Skull found in the Cioclovina cave, near commune Bosorod, Hune-

in the province Oltenia

doara county in Transylvania

7

This figure "fig1.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0309110v1

This figure "fig2.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0309110v1

