3
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
0
0
9
0
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Evolution of economic entities under
heterogeneous political/environmental
conditions within a Bak-Sneppen-like
dynamics

Marcel Ausloos1, Paulette Clippe2 and Andrzej P¸ekalski3
1 SUPRAS(∗) and GRASP, B5, Sart Tilman Campus,
B-4000 Li`ege, Euroland,
2 GRASP, B5, Univ. de Li`ege,
B-4000 Li`ege, Euroland,
3 Institute of Theoretical Physics, University of Wroc law,
pl. Maxa Borna 9,
PL-50-204 Wroc law, Poland

February 2, 2008

Marcel.Ausloos@ulg.ac.be, Paulette.Clippe@ulg.ac.be, apekal@ift.uni.wroc.pl

email:

1

∗a member of SUPRATECS

Abstract

A model for economic behavior, under heterogeneous spatial eco-
nomic conditions is developed. The role of selection pressure in a
Bak-Sneppen-like dynamics with entity diﬀusion on a lattice is studied
by Monte-Carlo simulation taking into account business rule(s), like
enterprise - enterprise short range location ”interaction”(s), business
plan(s) through spin-oﬀs or merging and enterprise survival evolution
law(s). It is numerically found that the model leads to a sort of phase
transition for the ﬁtness gap as a function of the selection pressure.

Pacs: 89.65.Gh, 05.10.Ln, 89.75.-k, 07.05.Tp, 05.65.+b
Keywords: econophysics, evolution, external ﬁeld, selection pressure, diﬀu-
sion process, Bak-Sneppen model, Monte-Carlo

1 Introduction

In a previous paper [1] we have raised the question whether one could through
modern econophysics ideas and theories [2] touch upon questions related to
changing economic world conditions, e.g. globalization or mondialisation and
delocalization, and discuss the consequences of such politics. The Berlin wall
destruction and opening of markets in Eastern Europe and Central Asia to
so called liberal economy was said to be similar to an increase in ”physical
volume or available space”. The disparity in ”economic conditions”, like the
tax systems, or diﬀerent workers’ skills or wages, weather, available informa-
tion, ... seemed to be also similar to ”external ﬁeld” conditions in condensed
matter.

In a ﬁrst approach we have asked whether the evolution of the concentra-
tion of enterprises, their spatial distribution, their (so we say) ”ﬁtness” under
varying in time and space economic ﬁeld conditions can be derived from some
microscopic-like model as often found in statistical physics to describe com-
plex phenomena. We have raised the question whether macroeconomy seems
to work as a self-organized system [3], characterized by scaling laws, whether
models and theories pertaining to such features characterized by punctuated
equilibrium contain cycles or stable states [4, 5, 6].

In [1] we have introduced an economic world model as a lattice divided
into ν (= 3) regions of equal size. At the origin of time all ”ﬁrms” (enter-

2

prises, agents, ..) are located only in region I. A barrier preventing companies
to enter regions II and III is removed at a given t1 time. Each company (i)
is characterized by one real number fi, belonging to the [0,1] interval. Each
region is under some economic conditions, an ”external ﬁeld”, represented
by one real number, F also belonging to [0,1]. The best condition, ”by sym-
metry”, is F = 0.5. We have searched for the evolution of concentrations
in regions II and III as invaded according to a simple diﬀusion rule. A so
called business plan, based on a biased merging and spin-oﬀ creation alter-
native was considered for the enterprise evolution. The f value of the new
ﬁrms was considered to be obtained according to various types of memories
depending on the f of the company parents [1, 7].

In such a scheme, some attempt was made to connect macroeconomy and
econophysics [8] through questions concerning whether enterprises survive or
not, get better or worse, how the diﬀusion front moves toward regions II and
III, etc. One ingredient of the Monte-Carlo algorithm was to consider that
the evolution was randomly driven, in the sense that the entity picked up by
the Monte-Carlo procedure was independent of the position and f value of
the ﬁrm.

However some other dynamics can be imagined. In particular recall the
Bak-Sneppen evolution model [9] which has considered that species being
assigned a so called ﬁtness f have a better chance of surviving if f is large.
The population evolution is controlled through the entity with the minimal
ﬁtness at every discrete time step. This species is replaced by a new one,
with a new ﬁtness, taken from a uniform distribution on [0,1]. Moreover an
interaction is introduced, e.g. by (randomly) modifying the ﬁtness of the
neighbors of the chosen entity. This interaction represents a co-evolution of
related species. Many variants have been studied, including an anisotropic
Bak-Sneppen model [10], a tree growth [11] evolution with or without species
screening [12, 13], with or without long range interactions [14].... Applica-
tions of the Bak-Sneppen ideas occur in many ﬁelds, from biological problems,
like bacteria colony evolution [15, 16] to macro-economical processes [17, 18].
We reformulate the simple model presented in [1] for the evolution of
economic entities under varying economic conditions introducing a Bak-
Sneppen- like dynamics.
In Sect. 2, we present the new model algorithm
which therefore stresses the role of the selection pressure and the Bak-Sneppen-
like dynamics. In section 3, we outline a few results, like the diﬀusion front
penetration, and the concentration of entity evolution. It is numerically ob-

3

served that the model leads to a phase transition-like scenario for the ﬁtness
gap as a function of the selection pressure. A short conclusion is to be found
in Sect. 4.

2 Model and Monte Carlo Simulation Algo-

rithm

We consider a square symmetry lattice of linear dimensions Lx × Ly. The x
segment is divided into 3 parts (regions I, II and III) of equal size (Lx =150,
Ly = 201). The entities we consider, called thereafter ﬁrms, are located on
the lattice sites. A site may be either empty or occupied by one ﬁrm.

Each ﬁrm is characterized by its location on the lattice and a number
f ∈ [0, 1]. All external conditions inﬂuencing the dynamics of the ﬁrms
(labor conditions, ﬁscal system, availability of human and natural resources,
etc) are summarized in a single value F ∈ [0, 1] - the external ﬁeld. Since the
agreement between f and F will determine the ﬁrm’s survival, see below, we
shall call f the ﬁtness of the ﬁrms.

Initially all ﬁrms are located at random positions in region I with initial
density c(0) and with random values of the f ’s. Like in the Bak and Sneppen
extremal dynamics model [9] we choose a ﬁrm with the lowest appealing
ﬁtness from the ﬁeld point of view, do not remove the ﬁrm immediately from
the system as was done in the Bak and Sneppen model, but check the ﬁrm’s
survival chance. This depends on the diﬀerence between the ﬁtness of the
ﬁrm and the external ﬁeld and the selection pressure. If the ﬁrm does not
survive the check, it is removed from the system and all ﬁrms which are the
nearest neighbors (von Neumann neighborhood) of the chosen ﬁrm receive
new, random values for their ﬁtness.

If not removed, the ﬁrm may change position, merges with another ﬁrm

or creates spin-oﬀ(s).

After a certain time the border between the region I and region II is
opened, thus permitting the motion of ﬁrms into regions II and III. At the
same time the external ﬁeld changes in region I, assuming a new value FI,
diﬀerent from that in region II (FII) and III (FIII). There is only one such
change of the ﬁeld (in contrast to cases examined in [1]).

To complete a Monte Carlo Step (MCS) one has to pick as many ﬁrms

4

as there were at the beginning of that step.

The algorithm goes as follows:

1. The ﬁrm (i) which has its ﬁtness farthest away from the ﬁeld value
is picked. The search is made in the whole system, and the ﬁtness is
compared to the region ﬁeld value, i.e. the ﬁtness of a ﬁrm in the region
I is compared with FI, that in the region II with FII, etc.

2. The survival probability is calculated as

pi = exp(−sel|fi − F |),

(1)

and checked against a random number ri ∈ [0, 1] taken from a uniform
distribution. If ri > pi, the ﬁrm is removed from the system and its
nearest neighbors are given new, arbitrary, but within the [0,1] interval,
values of ﬁtness,

3. If the ﬁrm survived, then 7 random searches are made in the von Neu-
mann neighborhood (4 sites) for an empty place. As soon as the search
is successful, the ﬁrm moves there.

4. A random search is next made for a partner in the von Neumann neigh-

borhood of the new position. If found at the site j then

5. with a probability 0.01 the two ﬁrms merge, creating a new ﬁrm at the

location of the ﬁrst one, with a new ﬁtness given by

fi =

[(fi + fj) + sign[0.5 − r]|fi − fj|] ,

(2)

where r is a random number in [0,1]. The second ﬁrm is eliminated.
If the new ﬁtness for the (ﬁrst) ﬁrm is greater than 1, the ﬁrm is
eliminated too.

6. with a probability 0.99 the two ﬁrms produce a new (k) ﬁrm (spin-oﬀ)

with a ﬁtness given by the formula

fk =

[(fi + fj) + sign[0.5 − r]|fi − fj|] ,

(3)

1
2

1
2

5

15 random searches in the Moore neighborhood (9 sites) of the ﬁrst
ﬁrm are made to put the spin-oﬀ ﬁrm there at the ﬁrst found empty
site. If the attempts are unsuccessful, the new ﬁrm is not created.

After choosing all agents, one MC time step is done. We have in such a

way limited our investigations to 1500 MCS.

In each case, we have started with an initial concentration c = 0.8 in
region I, and have destroyed the wall between region I and II after 100 MCS.
The external ﬁeld takes values 0.3, 0.5, 0.6 in the three regions after t1 and
remains constant thereafter. The results reported in Sect. 3 refer to averages
over ten runs.

3 Results

In the following we stress results pertaining to cases demonstrating the new-
ness of the model with respect to our previous work [1].

In Fig. 1, the number of ﬁrms existing in the three regions is shown as
a function of time for a sel = 0.5. Recall that there are 10050 lattice sites
in each region. It is observed that there is a rapid decrease in concentration
in the ﬁrst region as soon as the I-II wall is open, but the death and birth
process stabilizes the concentration at nearly c = 0.4 after a few Monte-Carlo
steps, even though the concentrations in regions II and III still increase due
to the largely available space.

It is unclear whether for very long time the concentrations would level oﬀ
to the value of region I or to other values in regions II and III. However an in-
teresting qualitative information is seen through the position of the diﬀusion
front (going, recall from left to right, in this world) for various sel values.
(Fig.2). The break toward some stationary-like asymptotic concentration
value in region I, as seen in Fig. 1, seems to occur at the same time as the
front progresses, as seen in Fig. 2; the break seems to mark an apparently
diﬀerent growth law. We have not studied the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, but the
diﬀerence in behavior might be traced to the eﬀects of diﬀusion (together
with the birth and death) process in presence of (moreover here mobile) bar-
riers, as in [19, 20]. The front propagation for sel << 0.65 seems to be a
simple Brownian like process.

The complete spatial distribution and its evolution in time would require
a movie like display; instead we give snapshots for the value of the concentra-

6

tion along vertical columns, for a few Monte-Carlo times and two sel values
in Fig. 3(a-b) respectively. Recall that sharp ﬁeld gradients occur at x = 50
and 100. For the low sel (= 0.3) the concentration in region I hardly varies
with time (and column position), and remains near 0.4, as can be hinted
from Fig.1 for sel = 0.5. After suﬃcient Monte-Carlo steps the concentra-
tion seems to level oﬀ in region II, although it is not clear what would be
the ﬁnal concentration at very large MC time. For ”large” sel value the
concentration in region I is markedly decreased, and is quasi nonexistent in
regions II and III.

It is therefore of interest to emphasize the role of sel at an intermediary
time, as in Fig. 4, where it is seen that the behavior does not much diﬀer
from low to high sel except for the concentration amplitude, - which seems
to decrease linearly with sel in region I.

The ﬁtness value evolution in the three regions is not spectacular since it
”rather quickly” reaches the optimal one, as constrained by the external ﬁeld.
The ﬁtness optimal value in each region is easily reached and remain stable
with MCS. It is more interesting to display the behavior of the ﬁtness in line
with the Bak-Sneppen dynamics. Recall that the interest of the dynamics
is, beside the entity interactions, the choice of the less ﬁt for starting an
avalanche process. Therefore we have calculated the number (N) of times the
less ﬁt entity is reached (picked), and its ﬁtness value, during the process.
The data for N as a function of f in the case sel = 0.5 is shown in Fig. 5 on
a semi-log plot.

It is observed that the number of unﬁt entities is large and about the
same in the three regions. Moreover a rather well deﬁned gap occurs in the
distribution of ”picked ﬁrms”, - a gap centered on the external ﬁeld value.
This fgap can be displayed in Fig. 6 as a function of sel. Except for the
asymmetry due to the external ﬁeld value, the behavior of the gap can be
reconciled with what is expected for the density at liquid-gas transitions as a
function of temperature. The ﬁnite size of the system is likely the cause for
inducing a non zero gap at large sel. A critical sel value near 0.66 is found
whatever the external ﬁeld.

7

4 Conclusions

In summary, we have adapted a birth-death-diﬀusion process of macroeco-
nomic evolution with a Bak-Sneppen-like dynamics. From this set of results,
we have observed that there are relatively well marked eﬀects due to the
”selection pressure”, including a ”critical value” reminiscent of the critical
temperature at second order phase transitions. The constraining economic
(”external”) ﬁeld implies stable concentration distributions, as far as exam-
ined. The diﬀusion process is not spectacular, apparently being Brownian
like. We have not searched for avalanches as found in self-organized processes.
Result robustness should be further checked with respect to the parame-
ters which are involved : number of regions, lattice size(s), lattice symmetry,
initial concentration(s), ﬁeld time sequence(s), and time for F ﬁeld changes,
selection pressure, hopping distance for the diﬀusion process, number of ’spin
oﬀ’s, the latter creation probability, ...

Further improvements can be also suggested both from a macro and micro
economy point of view, as well as from physical system studies. A company
cannot be described by one scalar number fi, but a vector model coupled to
a vector ﬁeld should be more realistic. Moreover the role of the business plan
through the birth and death process description mapping merging and spin
oﬀ processes is also to be improved. The ﬁtness distribution and evolution
law(s) might also be changed for better reﬂecting macroeconomy ﬁndings.
Analytical work could be of interest to search for bifurcation and chaotic
conditions, if any.

Acknowledgments

MA and AP thank the CGRI and KBN for partial ﬁnancial support
allowing mutual visits during this work process. MA and PC also thank
an Action Concert´ee Program of the University of Li`ege (ARC 02/07-293).

8

References

[1] M. Ausloos, P. Clippe, and A. P¸ekalski, Simple model for the dynam-
ics of correlations in the evolution of economic entities under varying
economic conditions, Physica A 324 (2003) 330

[2] H. E. Stanley, M. Ausloos, J. Kert´esz, R. N. Mantegna, J. A. Scheinkman
and H. Takayasu, Preface of the International Scientiﬁc Organizing Com-
mittee, Physica A 324 (2003) xv

[3] P. Bak, How Nature Works: The science of self-organized criticality,

(Oxford UP, Oxford, 1997)

[4] M. Kalecki, A Macrodynamic Theory of the Business Cycle, Economet-
rica 3 (1935) 327; M. Kalecki, A Theory of the Business Cycle, Rev.
Econ. Studies 4 (1937) 77; M. Kalecki, Theory of Economic Dynam-
ics: An essay on cyclical and long-run changes in capitalist economy,
(Monthly Review Press, New York, 1965)

[5] A. Krawiec and M. Szyd lowski, The Kaldor-Kalecki Model of Business

Cycle, J. Nonlin. Math. Phys. 8 (2001) 266

[6] J. Mi´skiewicz and M. Ausloos, Logistic map approach to economic cycle,

submitted

[7] M. Ausloos, P. Clippe, and A. P¸ekalski, Model of macro-economic evo-

lution in spatially dependent economic ﬁelds, submitted

[8] G.R. Richards, Reconciling econophysics with macroeconomic theory,

Physica A 282 (2000) 325

[9] P. Bak and K. Sneppen, Punctuated equilibrium and criticality in a

simple model of evolution, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (1993) 4083

[10] D. A. Head and G. J. Rodgers, The anisotropic Bak-Sneppen model, J.

Phys. A 31 (1998) 3977

[11] N. Vandewalle and M. Ausloos, Self-organized criticality in phylogenetic-

like tree growths, J. Phys. I France 5 (1995) 1011

9

[12] M. Kramer, N. Vandewalle and M. Ausloos, Speciations and extinctions
in a self-organized critical model of tree-like evolution, J. Phys. I France
6 (1996) 599

[13] N. Vandewalle and M. Ausloos, The screening of species in a Darwinistic

tree-like model of evolution, Physica D 90 (1996) 262

[14] N. Vandewalle, H. Van Puyvelde, and M. Ausloos, Self-organized criti-
cality can emerge even if the range of interactions is inﬁnite, Phys. Rev.
E 57 (1998) 1167

[15] O.V. Kovalev, Yu. M. Pis’mak, and V.V. Vechernin, Self-Organized
Criticality in the Model of Biological Evolution Describing Interaction
of ”Coenophilous” and ”Coenophobous” Species, Europhys. Lett. 40
(1997) 471

[16] R. Donangelo and H. Fort, A model for mutation in bacterial popula-

tions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002) 38101

[17] G. Cuniberti, A. Valleriani, and J. L. Vega, Eﬀects of regulation on a

self-organized market, Quant. Fin. 1 (2001) 332

[18] T. Yamano, Regulation eﬀects on market with Bak-Sneppen model in

high dimensions, Intern. J. Mod. Phys. C 12 (2001) 1329

[19] A. P¸ekalski and M. Ausloos, Monte Carlo simulation of oxygen diﬀusion
in planar model of 123 YBCO. Low Temperature Regime and Eﬀect of
Trapping Barrier, Physica C 226 (1994) 188

[20] A. P¸ekalski and M. Ausloos, Surface Tracer diﬀusion in the Presence of
a Solid Barrier. A Monte-Carlo study, Surf. Sci. Lett. 344 (1995) L1271

10

Figure captions

Figure 1 – Average (over 10 runs) number of ﬁrms existing in the three
regions as a function of time for sel = 0.5 and ﬁeld values F =0.3, 0.5, 0.6
after t1=100 MCS.

Figure 2 – Position of the diﬀusion front for various sel values with
external ﬁeld values F = 0.3, 0.5, 0.6 after t1 = 100 MCS in the three regions
respectively.

Figure 3 – The concentration in the three regions for a few MCS when
the external ﬁeld takes values F =0.3, 0.5, 0.6 after t1=100 MCS for sel =
(a) 0.3 and (b) 0.8.

Figure 4 – The concentration in the three regions at t = 1000 MCS, for

external ﬁeld values F = 0.3, 0.5, 0.6 for diﬀerent sel values.

Figure 5 – Semi-log plot for the number N of (picked) ”less ﬁt entities”
(as deﬁned in the text) in the three regions after 1500 MCS when the external
ﬁeld values F = 0.3, 0.5, 0.6 respectively for sel = 0.5.

Figure 6 – Display of fgap, i.e. gap in picked f values, as a function of
sel in the three regions when the external ﬁeld values are F = 0.3, 0.5, 0.6
respectively.

11

sel = 0.5, 10 runs

I
II
III

8000

7000

6000

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

s
m

r
i
f
 

g
n

i

i
t
s
x
e

 
f

o

 
r
e
b
m
u
N

0

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

time

