3
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
6
1
0
1
3
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Science as a Culture - Its Implications ∗

Shyamal Sengupta

Abstract

This is a lecture on the ethics and role of science in promoting
rational and objective thinking in society. It was delivered by Prof.
Shyamal Sengupta of Kolkata, India. Prof. Sengupta, who passed
away recently, has inspired generations of Indian physicists by his ra-
tional viewpoints on science and by teaching his students the impor-
tance of a scientiﬁc outlook. We, some of his former students dedicate
this small corner of the archive to his fond memory. 1

∗Inaugural Lecture at ‘CMDAYS 99’ (held at Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India) by

Prof. Shyamal Sengupta

1Any comments on this article can be emailed to Supratim Sengupta (sen-
(tapo@ictp.trieste.it), Subrata Bal

gupta@physics.mcmaster.ca), Tapobrata Sarkar
(subrata@gauge.scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp), Saurya Das (saurya.das@uleth.ca)

1

Science as a methodology for probing the secrets of nature is well known.
During the last four hundred years science has created a gigantic store house
of exact knowledge of the physical world. On the other hand science as a
technology has maximised the use of scientiﬁc knowledge to transform the
economic conduction of the society.

There is a third aspect of science which is mostly overlooked and rarely
discussed. This is, science as a culture. It has deep and important implica-
tions, though not as clearly manifested as the other two. In India, ours is a
scattered and mostly ineﬀective scientiﬁc community. So far our community
needs are, to a large extent, met by the Western society. I believe one reason
for this is, we are lacking, collectively speaking, in scientiﬁc culture.

Science as a Culture : In 1874 Francis Galton, the father of biometry,
carried out a survey of 180 top ranking scientists of England and Wales. The
result was published in a book entitled English Men of Science. Their Nature
and Nurture. Some of the ﬁndings on the religious belief of scientists were
as follows.

• Eight out of ten scientist were members of the conventional church of

• Most of them showed a concern for human welfare much above the

England.

average people.

• Even these, who categorically stated, they had a religious bend, did not
believe in the christian doctrine of original sin and the doctrine of life
after death.

A typical answer was “though I believe in Christian religion, I do not
accept the authority of the Church to teach me how I can attain emancipa-
tion. I strongly deny any interference with my freedom of thought and the
freedom of my conscience.” It was clear, the study of science was changing
the outlook of scientists in matters not directly connected with science. This
we call the cultural aspects of science. The study of science aﬀects a

1

scientist’s thinking on life in general, his judgements, his value system. How-
ever, such an eﬀect seems possible only if the pursuit of science is inspired
at least partly, by the primary motivation. Today, particularly in developing
countries like India, many persons take to science because of money, fame,
power or for some other secondary reasons. In such cases it is possible to
develop a compartmentalised approach, not allowing scientiﬁc thinking to
percolate into one’s religious or cultural beliefs. A scientiﬁc community can
tolerate only a limited number of such workers. If the number is large, the
community ceases to be eﬀective.

The primary motivation for science starts from a natural curiosity about
the objective world and if properly nurtured, turns into a passion for problem
solving. Inability to arrive at a solution is sometimes so discomforting that if
some one else gives the solution, one feels relieved and delighted, even though
one misses the credit. When one really enjoys scientiﬁc activity, the solution
of a problem becomes of primary importance, who solves the problem is
relegated to the second place. One need not be a selﬂess idealist to achieve
this cultural state of the mind.
It seems natural when one is working in
the right atmosphere of a scientiﬁc community where the primary emphasis
is on knowledge rather than on the individual. Those who contribute to
scientiﬁc knowledge are important, but the totality of this knowledge is far
more signiﬁcant. As Edwin Hubble remarked in his book “The Realm of
the Nebulae,” - “Today the least of the men of science commands a wider
prospect (than Newton). Even the giants are dwarfed by the great ediﬁce in
which their achievements are incorporated.”

The emergence of such an objective mind is an important contribution of
science to human culture. To such a mind, facts are sacred and statements
based on facts are the only ones worthy of examination. Accurate and repro-
ducible facts are the basic elements on which the grand cumulative ediﬁce
of scientiﬁc knowledge stands. Conceptual and theoretical notions about the
objective world undergo abrupt changes as theories advance. But facts do
not change, they are made more and more accurate. Alteration, distortion,

2

or selective choice of facts to ﬁt a particular theory or idea is highly unethical
in the culture of science.

The habit of objective thinking has overtones beyond the realm of science.
For example, it oﬀers a new perspective to look at outstanding scientists for
personalities in other spheres such that their image can never be moulded
in pattern with the spiritual concept of an infallible guru. A successful sci-
entist is highly respected for his achievement, but this does not prevent the
community to reject or criticize his other ideas which are not supported by
facts. Galileo’s brilliant studies in mechanics does not justify his theory that
tides are caused by the earth’s rotation. Success of Newton’s gravitational
theory does not justify his corpuscular theory of light. Nobody is infallible
and authority cannot be sited as proof. Indeed, these ideas mark a big step
forward in the domain of human culture.

Coming to the group of talented scientiﬁc workers who constitute the
core of the scientiﬁc community, objective attitude makes at possible for two
or more persons to collaborate in solving a problem, though they may not
like each other because of diﬀerences in temperament. This is possible only
when all the collaborators agree that the solution of the problem is urgent
and important. Without such collaborative eﬀorts a meaningful scientiﬁc
community cannot be created and it would have been impossible for science
to make the gigantic progress we see now. The science community acting
as a wonderful sieve has allowed only the objective contributions from indi-
vidual scientists to enter the palace of scientiﬁc knowledge, leaving out their
oddities and subjective inclinations. When we think of Kepler constructing
a horoscope of the cosmos, Newton spending a huge lot of time on theology
and Einstein preoccupied with pure mathematical constructions of the mind
as gateway to understanding nature, then only can we appreciate the true
signiﬁcance of the important role played by the science community.

We have mentioned about ethics in science in connection with importance
of facts. As science was growing slowly in Europe, a well deﬁned ethical stan-
dard was also emerging. This standard is not implemented by law, indeed

3

there is no codiﬁed statement about the ethical principles to be observed.
These evolved as conventions and were implemented through community re-
actions. An unethical referee may reject a good paper and steal the idea to
write a paper himself. But the community reaction would be so strong that
few venture to take the risk. A few years back Nature published a paper,
reporting highly doubtful experimental results, on ‘water has memory’. The
scientiﬁc community reacted so strongly that the editor had to institute an
enquiry committee and ultimately he expressed regret and declared - “regard
the paper as unpublished.” Similar reactions were generated when supposed
results of cold fusion experiments were ﬁrst declared, not in a paper, but in
a press conference. Weakness of our scientiﬁc community is shown by the
fact that departure from ethics in India is quite frequent and go mostly un-
punished. This is why some years ago a society for scientiﬁc values was set
up by Professor A.S. Paintal. We do not go into further details. It is hoped
that from the brief discussion given above the reader can develop a broad
understanding of the nature of scientiﬁc culture.

Implications : Our assertion is not that science is such a distinct culture
that successful studies of science cannot be carried out in the background
of the culture of our society. In fact science has spread beyond the realm
of Western culture, as in Japan. The point is, essential elements of scien-
tiﬁc culture have to be integrated within the existing culture for developing
an eﬀective scientiﬁc community in the country. May be, in the long run,
interaction between the two would modify both to some extent.

1900 to 1930 is the so called golden age of physics in India. A few Indian
physicists, starting with Professor J.C. Bose, achieved remarkable success
and received international acclaim.

Considering the Indian background, the whole phenomenon seemed a
miracle. The dazzling event boosted our national pride and deeply impressed
young Indian physicists of subsequent generations. Unfortunately there was
also a diﬀerent fall out. Instead of interpreting the event as exceptional, we

4

developed the notion that this is the normal way discoveries in science are
made . As Professor Chandrasekhar puts it, “..... it gave a false picture, that
making discoveries is easy. It had a distorting eﬀect. I mean it was alright
in the twenties, but extended into later period, it was not. I started with a
totally glamorous view of science that persisted so long as I was in India. But
going to England was a shattering experience.”

The normal and continuous development of scientiﬁc knowledge occurs
through the eﬀorts of a competent and dedicated community of scientists.
It is in the background of such a community alone that a genius can ﬂower
into full glory. Unfortunately, neither the scientists of the golden era nor
any subsequent group gave much though to this problem. Today we have
so many people doing physics in our country, but to most of them it is an
entirely individualistic pursuit. We miss the sense of adventure in our work.
Instead there is isolation and frustration. This is well reﬂected in a letter
Professor K.S. Krishnan wrote to Chandrasekhar in 1936, on the question of
latter’s return to India from USA.

“On this side at any rate, I know the condition and with all my optimism
I feel the present scientiﬁc atmosphere quite
and enthusiasm for science.
oppressive and it may be an advantage if you postpone your return to India
by one or two years.”

Andre Weil, an eminent French mathematician of this century, came to
India at a very young age and joined Aligarh Musilim University as head
of the department of mathematics in 1930 and stayed for two years. He
In a
also visited Dacca University and met Professor S. N. Bose there.
recollection in 1979 (recorded by Dr. R. Banerjee), Professor Weil commented
- “The early thirties in India was a disturbed period, due to non-coperation
movement. Many of us hoped that the upheaval, initially with a political
content, could be an occasion for the national leaders for creating a condition
for the ﬂourishment of new ideas and foundation of scientiﬁc studies and
research in the country. I am sorry to say that this expectation has not been
fulﬁlled. As I found then, the atmosphere of intrigue that reigned in the

5

universities was paralysing in every sense. I am now retired as a professor,
and in my long career, I have seen many examples of intrigues and personal
rivalry in University sphere in various continents. But, believe me, what I
have witnessed during two years in India exceed by far what I have seen during
the rest of my life.” [We quote Weil’s comments at some length because he
developed a serious interest in India and its culture. He met, among many
Indian leaders, both Tagore and Gandhi. He learnt Sanskrit to read the Gita
and the Mahabharata in the original. This comment made in connection
with his reminiscences of Professor S. N. Bose is as yet unpublished. I thank
Dr.Purnima Sinha, a student of Prof. Bose for sending me a copy of the
interview].

Has the atmosphere changed radically after independence ? There is
hardly any indication. When Professor Chandrasekhar was requested to be
the chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission after Bhabha’s death, he
came to India and visited several scientiﬁc Institutions and also met many sci-
entists. Ultimately he declined the oﬀer and before leaving India commented,
“the problem is not with money, it is the atmosphere which is discouraging.”
In 1985, in an address before the IPA, Professor Virendra Singh, the
chairman, said, “presently the physics community in the country is rather
fragmented. A feeling of isolation is felt by most of the members.”

The above discussion reveals the true signiﬁcance of science as a culture.
We cannot create the right atmosphere for basic scientiﬁc activities, both
teaching and research unless we have imbibed scientiﬁc culture, i.e. unless
our minds are genuinely involved with the problem of the objective world, the
problems which we discuss either in the class rooms or in research seminars.
How this transformation can be achieved is a diﬀerent and complex problem.
It is not within the scope of the present discussion.

We conclude by mentioning another important implication of scientiﬁc
culture. Most of the existing cultures are based on religion and they origi-
nated at a time when little exact knowledge of the physical world existed.
After the spectacular advance of modern science it has become more and

6

more diﬃcult to accept these elements; of a culture which are bases on ob-
jective falsehood. It is not surprising, this impact is strongest on the christian
culture. A few years back, Galileo’s case was reopened by the Pope and the
mistake in the judgement was admitted. In the case of the shroud of Turin,
a shroud believed to be used to cover the body of Jesus Christ after it was
removed from the cross, scientists in 1978 wanted a small piece of the shroud
to do carbon dating to establish its age. The cardinal of the church refused.
But in 1988, the cardinal, of his own accord, sent pieces of the shroud to
three laboratories. After testing, it was deﬁnitely established that the date
of origin was later than 1200 AD, most probably between 1260 to 1390 AD.
The myth was exploded. Some years ago, the newly appointed Archbishop
in England declared that a person can remain a devout christian without
believing in any of the numerous miracles described in the New Testament.
Initially there were angry protests with a demand for the removal of the
Archbishop. But nothing serious happened. Very recently, on 23rd July
1999, Pope Paul redeﬁned the concept of heaven: it is not a place above the
clouds, it is a state of being close to God, as hell is a state of being separated
from God. It seems that objective truth creates a psychological pressure on
all thinking men which can be relieved only by getting rid of the objectively
false beliefs. The process is deﬁnitely very slow at present. But may be at
some critical stage it would be much faster.

Some day in the distant future, we hope all cultures of the world would
free themselves of elements of faith which contradict the objective knowledge
of science. Then all cultures will come closer and communication across the
cultural barriers will be easier. The age old conﬂict between the cultures
may then be resolved with much less diﬃculty. Perhaps, this would be the
greatest contribution of science to humanity .

7

