4
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
1
1
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ITER:
The International Thermonuclear
Experimental Reactor
and the
Nuclear Weapons Proliferation Implications
of Thermonuclear-Fusion Energy Systems

André Gsponer and Jean-Pierre Hurni
Independent Scientiﬁc Research Institute
Box 30, CH-1211 Geneva-12, Switzerland
e-mail: isri@vtx.ch

ISRI-98-01.30

ISRI-04-01.12 February 20, 2014

Abstract

This paper contains two parts:
(I) A list of “points” highlighting the strategic-political and military-
technical reasons and implications of the very probable siting of ITER (the
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor) in Japan, which should
be conﬁrmed sometimes in early 2004.

(II) A technical analysis of the nuclear weapons proliferation implica-
tions of inertial- and magnetic-conﬁnement fusion systems substantiating
the technical points highlighted in the ﬁrst part, and showing that while full
access to the physics of thermonuclear weapons is the main implication of
ICF, full access to large-scale tritium technology is the main proliferation
impact of MCF.

The conclusion of the paper is that siting ITER in a country such as Japan,
which already has a large separated-plutonium stockpile, and an ambitious
laser-driven ICF program (comparable in size and quality to those of the
United States or France) will considerably increase its latent (or virtual)
nuclear weapons proliferation status, and foster further nuclear proliferation
throughout the world.

The safety and environmental problems related to the operation of large-
scale fusion facilities such as ITER (which contain massive amounts of
hazardous and/or radioactive materials such as tritium, lithium, and beryl-
lium, as well as neutron-activated structural materials) are not addressed in
this paper.

1

Contents

Part (I)

ITER Siting Issues

• Mostly political points

• Problems related to tritium transportation, diversion, and theft

• Technical points related to thermonuclear weapons and their proliferation

• Japan’s expertise with tritium technology

Part (II)

Nuclear Weapons Proliferation Issues
of Thermonuclear-Fusion Energy Systems

1. Introduction

2. Thermonuclear weapons

2.1 Boosted ﬁssion bombs
2.2 Two-stage hydrogen bombs

3. Fusion energy systems and military technologies

4. Principles of magnetic and inertial conﬁnement fusion systems

5. Common proliferation implications of all fusion energy systems

5.1 Neutron abundance: Fusion-ﬁssion hybrids and plutonium breeders
5.2 Tritium abundance: Boosted-ﬁssion and pure-fusion nuclear weapons
5.3 Dedicated nuclear weapons materials production facilities
5.4 New or renewed enrichment technologies
5.5 Latent thermonuclear weapons proliferation
5.6 Induced nuclear weapons proliferation
5.7 Links to emerging military technologies

2

6. Speciﬁc proliferation implications of inertial conﬁnement fusion (ICF)

6.1 Nuclear weapon-effects research
6.2 Nuclear weapons-physics research
6.3 Ignition: Fourth generation nuclear weapons and inertial fusion energy
6.4 People

7. Speciﬁc proliferation implications of magnetic conﬁnement fusion (MCF)

7.1 Nuclear weapons effects
7.2 Military spin-offs of MCF technology
7.3 Examples of spin-off technologies expected for ITER

8. Proliferation implications of alternative fusion systems (AFS)

9. (De)classiﬁcation and latent proliferation

References

Tables

Figures

About the authors

Dr. André Gsponer received his PhD in physics in 1978 for an experiment
performed at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory as a research-associate at
the University of Chicago. Since 1978 he participated in numerous international
conferences dealing with ﬁssion-, fusion-, and accelerator-based nuclear energy
systems. He published many papers on the nuclear weapons proliferation aspects
related to these systems, and contributed to several hearings on them, especially
at the French and the European parliaments. Since 1982 he is directing ISRI,
an independent scientiﬁc research institute specialized in advanced science and
technology, and their implications for current and future nuclear weapons.

Dr. Jean-Pierre received his PhD in physics in 1987 from the University of
Geneva for a research in theoretical physics. Since the mid-1980s he is a senior
researcher at ISRI where he has contributed to many projects and papers dealing
both with pure science and with the technological impact of advanced nuclear
science on the proliferation of nuclear weapons.

3

Part (I)
ITER Siting Issues

What follows is a collection of strategic-political and military-technical points that
should be addressed in relation to the siting and construction of an experimental
fusion reactor such as the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor
(ITER), as well as more speciﬁc points to be considered in the case of Japan which
is the most likely country in which ITER will be sited.

It
This list is focused on the nuclear weapons proliferation implications.
does not address the safety and environmental risks associated with the operation
of thermonuclear fusion facilities, which mainly come from their use of massive
amounts of hazardous materials such as tritium, lithium, and beryllium: Accidental
tritium dispersal, lithium ﬁres, toxicity of beryllium, etc. Moreover, it does address
the problems related to the production and safe disposal of the large amounts of
long-lived low-radioactive waste generated by the activation of structural materials
bombarded by the neutrons produced in the fusion reactions [1, 2].

The points have been classiﬁed according to their main emphasis, leading to a
certain amount of repetition since there is considerable overlap between different
issues. For every one of these points references will be given, either to following
sections of this paper, or to technical papers in which more details are given.
Concerning the political aspects, apart from a few speciﬁc references, we refer the
reader to the vast literature, and to the numerous newspapers articles and analyses,
in which many of the political-diplomatic points mentioned here are discussed by
political scientists or diplomats, rather than by physicists like the authors of this
paper.

Mostly political points

• The January 30, 2003, decision of the United States to return to the ITER
project, almost ﬁve years after having withdrawn from it, must have been
motivated, at least in part, by political considerations related to the “new
nuclear arms-control environment” created by the Indian and Pakistani nu-
clear test of 1998, and by the more recent North Korean claim of having

4

assembled a number of nuclear weapons (see [3] and Sec.1).1 Since the
weapons now in the arsenals of these countries are deliverable by medium
to long-range missiles, they are most certainly “boosted” ﬁssion bombs,
meaning that they contain both some ﬁssile material (a few kilograms of
plutonium or enriched uranium) and a small amount of fusion material (a
few grams of tritium) to make them sufﬁciently compact, safe, and reliable
to enable military deployment (See Fig.1 and Sec.2.1). For this reason, any
international enterprise such as the construction of ITER, in which kilo-
gram amounts of tritium are used, becomes a senstive undertaking to which
the U.S. have to participate in order to have as much inﬂuence as possible
— especially since the current administration in Washington has taken a
much stronger stand on the strengthening of the U.S. nuclear arsenal than
on arms-control and disarmament.2

• Experimental fusion reactors such as ITER, as well the deployment of
commercial-scale fusion reactors, pose the problem of tritium proliferation
because their operation will imply the yearly use of kilograms of tritium
(See [7, Sec.6.2.5, p.28] and Sec.5.2), i.e., amounts comparable to those
used in an arsenal of several thousands “tritium-boosted” nuclear and ther-
monuclear weapons. For example, the total amount of tritium in the U.S.
nuclear stockpile is on the order of 100 kg, which corresponds to an average
on the order of 10 g per nuclear warhead.3

1Other political (and possibly ﬁnancial) considerations must have included the commitments of
Canada and China to ITER, along with an expression of interest from South Korea. Since Canada
withdrew in December 2003, the current participants in negotiations on ITER construction are
China, the European Union, Japan, the Russian Federation, South Korea, and the USA.

2Some of the post-1998 and post-September-11 decisions of the American government which
have signiﬁcantly contributed in complicating the “new nuclear arms-control environment” are:
the non-ratiﬁcation of the CTBT, the withdrawal from the ABM treaty, the deployment of a national
missile defense system, the possible modiﬁcation of existing weapons into “earth penetrators” or
“bunker-buster,” etc.

3The National Academy of Science report of December 20, 2002, recommending that the
U.S. enter ITER negotiations and pursue an appropriate level of involvement in ITER, strongly
emphasizes the importance of ITER for demonstrating full-scale tritium burning and breeding
technology [4, p.5-7]. However, the word “proliferation” does not appear at all in the report.
Moreover, while concerns about “proliferation” are mentioned as a minor item in some ofﬁcial
documents such as the ITER Technical Basis report [5, Sec.5.2.4.1, p.6], they are generally described
in positive terms emphasizing that a pure fusion reactor such as ITER will not contain ﬁssion
materials. (For a discussion of hybrid ﬁssion-fusion reactors see Sec.5.1.) Similarly, the reports of
the Special Committee on the ITER Project of the Japanese Atomic Energy Commission highlight
only the “reduced chances for nuclear weapons proliferation” in comparison with ﬁssion reactors
[6, p.266-267]: The problems with tritium proliferation and the close links between fusion energy
and thermonuclear weapons are never mentioned.

5

• The present stage of the ITER siting debate, in which a French site is
in competition with a Japanese site, reﬂects the current strategic-political
background: The European Union, Russia, and China are in favor of the
French site of Cadarache — which would locate ITER in a NPT-recognized
nuclear-weapon State; while the United States, South Korea, and Japan are
in favor of the Japanese site of Rokkasho [8] — which would locate ITER
in a non-nuclear-weapon State. An important reason for this split is that the
construction and operation of ITER will give the host country full access to
large-scale tritium technology (which is presently only available to nuclear-
weapon States and to Canada) because, once in full operation, ITER’s site
inventory of tritium will be about 2 kg, and ITER’s tritium consumption
about 1.2 kg per year [7, Table 6.2.5-1, p.29].4

• As a non-nuclear-weapon State and active proponent of nuclear disarma-
ment, Japan is particularly sensitive to the new arms-control environment
created by the testing of weaponized nuclear devices by India and Pakistan
in 1998, and by the more recent North Korean claim of having assembled
a number of nuclear weapons. For instance “Japan has been particularly
adamant against the expanding of the number of states with nuclear weapons
‘status’ beyond the current (P-5) permanent veto members of the UN Se-
curity Council” [3, p.16]. On the other hand, as a counterweight to this
new environment, Japan is likely to welcome the enhancement of the al-
ready massive latent5 nuclear capability provided by its ﬁssion reactor and
reprocessing facilities resulting from the siting of ITER in Japan, which will
give full access to large-scale tritium technology, and which in time may
comprise a large-scale indigenous tritium production capability, of a size
comparable to one sufﬁcient to maintain a large thermonuclear arsenal.

• A fusion reactor program (in which every operating commercial-scale re-
actor requires an inventory of at least 10 kg of tritium, see Sec.5.2) gives
a non-military justiﬁcation to acquire an industrial-scale tritium technology
— just like a fast-breeder reactor program (in which every reactor requires
an inventory of at least 1000 kg of plutonium) gave a civilian justiﬁca-

4For the record we mention that ﬁnancial and other political considerations also play an
important role in the ITER siting debate. For instance, Japan is ready to pay 48% of construction
costs and 42% of operating cost. But part of the $30 billions total cost of ITER could compensate
for the suppression of the Iraqi dept to Japan, as well as for the cost of sending Japanese troops to
Iraq. Moreover, some French political leaders consider that “the American choice is explained by
a will to ‘punish’ France for its attitude during the Iraqi crisis” [9].

5For a discussion of the concept of “latent” (or “virtual”) nuclear weapons proliferation, which
refers to the capability to manufacture nuclear weapons components and to assemble them on short
notice, see Sec.1 of this paper.

6

tion to the industrial scale reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel in countries
such a Japan. With the construction of a large fusion reactor, large-scale
tritium production in a non-nuclear-weapon State becomes “respectable,”
even though it is providing at the same time a status of latent (or virtual)
advanced nuclear-weapons-States.

• The nuclear weapons proliferations implications of the siting of ITER in
Japan is enhanced by the fact that Japan is already in possession of a large
stockpile of separated plutonium. Indeed, large-scale availability of tritium
would enable this reactor-grade plutonium to be used in highly efﬁcient
and reliable nuclear explosives “boosted” by a few grams of tritium each
(see Fig.2 and Sec.2.1). Such boosted bombs are sufﬁciently compact to
be used as warheads in relatively unsophisticated long-range missiles, or
as primaries in two-stage thermonuclear bombs — in which reactor-grade
plutonium can also be used in a third-stage to enhance the yield (see Fig.4
and Sec.2.2).6

• Considering that Japan already has a large inertial conﬁnement fusion (ICF)
program comparable in ambition to those the United-States and France (see
Tables 2 and 3), as well as an ambitious magnetic conﬁnement fusion (MCF)
program,7 the access to large-scale tritium-handling, and progressively to
large-scale tritium-breeding, capabilities will put Japan in a position similar
to advanced nuclear-weapon-states with regards to the making of very ad-
vanced nuclear weapons, as well as of fourth-generation nuclear weapons
in which fusion materials (i.e., deuterium, tritium, and lithium) will be used
instead of ﬁssile materials as the main explosive.

• Like India and Pakistan, South Korea has already a militarily signiﬁcant
indigenous tritium production capacity. This is because some tritium is
produced in the heavy-water of its four Canadian-built CANDU-type power
reactors, which also yield signiﬁcant amounts of high-grade plutonium in
their spent fuel. Therefore, South Korea’s participation to the ITER collab-
oration will further enhance its latent nuclear-weapons capability, especially
if ITER is built in Japan. Consequently, it will become less likely that North
Korea will dismantel its nuclear weapons, which may encourage further
countries to develop an actual nuclear-weapons capability.

• Since large-scale tritium technology is the only major thermonuclear weapon

6For more details, see below the “Technical points related to thermonuclear weapons and their

proliferation.”

7See reference [11] for an extensive discussion of past, present, and future ICF and MCF

research under the Japanese Ministry of Education, Sports, Culture, Science and Technology.

7

related technology not yet available to Japan, the siting of ITER in Japan
may encouraged further smaller and larger countries around the world, in-
cluding highly industrialized countries such as Germany, to enhance their
latent nuclear weapons capability. A major responsibility of the countries
promoting ITER’s construction in a non-nuclear-weapon State such as Japan
is therefore the additional impetus that is given to the nuclear arms race.

• In summary, building ITER at the Rokkasho site will turn Japan into a virtual
thermonuclear superpower. This will not be the result of a few deliberate
political decisions, but the consequence of many independent small steps,
which starting in the late 1940s institutionalized nuclear and thermonuclear
energy research in all countries, and turned them into powerful instruments
of foreign policy, because of their close connections with nuclear and ther-
monuclear weapons (see Sec.9). Like the dropping of an atomic bomb, or the
starting of a war of aggression, the next step — going from the virtual to the
actual state of proliferation — may then depend much less on a democratic
decision process than on the availability of the technology, which is why the
ITER siting decision should not be taken without a thorough parliamentary
assessment of all technical, political, and military implications.

Problems related to tritium transportation, diversion, and theft

• The transportation of large quantities of tritium to Japan is a new and partic-
ularly sensitive issue because at present most of the tritium never leaves the
national boundaries of nuclear-weapon States. The present-day industrial
and scientiﬁc uses of tritium are such that only relatively small amounts are
shipped between countries. On the other hand, “it is expected that about
25 kg of tritium will be transported during the course of ITER operations”
[8, p.18]. The Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute (JAERI) “has some
previous experience with tritium transportation from Canada (3 times) and
the USA (6 times). It is estimated for the deuterium-tritium operation in
ITER that approximately 150 g of tritium is transported six times a year by
using a transport package with a 50 g-T capacity each” [8, p.18].8

• Until now, all thermonuclear fusion facilities in which substantial amounts
of tritium are used were always built closed to a nuclear weapons facility or
research laboratory. This was the case, for example, of the Joint European
Torus (JET) which was built at Culham, i.e., near Aldermaston, the main

8For comparison, the current world tritium market corresponds to the shipment of about 100

g/year, mainly from Canada, and in very small batches.

8

U.K. nuclear weapons research laboratory. In the case of the Japanese site
of Rokkasho, it can be argued that a U.S. military base is located nearby.9
However, if tritium transportation is made using this base instead of a civilian
entry point to Japan, national and international political problems are likely
to result.

• Considering the political, social, and environmental problems already en-
countered with the transportation of spent nuclear fuel and separated plu-
tonium between France and Japan, the transportation of large amounts of
tritium between Canada and Japan will add a new dimension to the risks
associated with nuclear energy. For this reason it is likely that once the
ITER siting decision will be taken, discussion will start on the construction
of a dedicated tritium production facility in Japan, e.g., possibly a system
based on the use of a high-intensity accelerator of the kind which is already
under development in Japan (see end of Sec.5.3).

• However, while the construction of a tritium production facility close to
ITER will decrease the need for transportation over long distancies, it will
not completely suppress the possibility of tritium diversion or theft.

• The concealment of a military signiﬁcant amount of tritium after a diversion
or theft is much easier than that of a comparable amount of plutonium. This
is because a militarily signiﬁcant amount of tritium is comparatively much
smaller than a militarily signiﬁcant amount of plutonium (see Sec.5.2), and
because tritium is much lighter, much less radioactive, and more difﬁcult to
detect than plutonium.

• The problems of tritium diversion or theft are exacerbated by the fact that
small amounts of tritium can be used to considerably enhance the yield
of crude nuclear weapons that could be assembled by terrorists or minor
rogue states using low-grade materials such as reactor-grade plutonium and
low-enriched uranium.

Technical points related to thermonuclear weapons and their proliferation

• A few grams of tritium are sufﬁcient to “boost” ﬁssion explosives made of
a few kilograms of military- or reactor-grade plutonium. (As is explained
in section 2.1, this is because tritium boosting obviates the preignition prob-
lems which makes non-boosted plutonium weapons unreliable and unsafe).

9According to the International Herald Tribune: “The Japanese site has many assets:
the
proximity of a port, a ground of solid bedrock and the close proximity of a US military base” [10].

9

Such boosted explosives are sufﬁciently compact to be used in relatively
unsophisticated long-range missiles, or as primaries of a two-stage ther-
monuclear bombs (see Fig.4 and Sec.2.2).

• A few tens of grams of tritium are sufﬁcient to “boost” the “sparkplug”
of the secondary of a two-stage thermonuclear weapon, which can then be
made sufﬁciently small to be deliverable by a missile.
In such weapons
a “third-stage” made of a few tens of kilograms of ﬁssile material is often
used to provide additional yield without increasing the size and weight of the
warhead. While this third-stage (i.e., essentially a “blanket” surrounding the
secondary of a two-stage H-bomb) is preferably made of enriched uranium, it
can also be made of reactor-grade plutonium without degrading the military
performance of the device, which may correspond to yields in the range of
200–500 kilotons equivalent TNT (see Fig.4 and Sec.2.2).

• Next-generation (i.e., fourth-generation) nuclear weapons will have sub-
stantially lower yields (i.e., tons instead of kilotons) and will rely on fusion
materials rather than on ﬁssile materials for their main explosive charge (see
Sec.6.3). This means that the emphasis of safeguarding militarily useful
materials will gradually shift from ﬁssion materials such as plutonium to
fusion materials such as tritium.

• Both magnetic conﬁnement fusion (MCF) reactors such as ITER, and iner-
tial conﬁnement fusion reactors (ICF), such as the GEKKO XII laser facility
of the Institute of Laser Engineering at Osaka University in Japan, have
nuclear-weapon-materials proliferation implications due to their use of tri-
tium (see Sec.5). However, ICF facilities have the additional proliferation
problem that they enable the physics of thermonuclear weapons to be stud-
ied in the laboratory (see Sec.6). As a result, it is well known by nuclear
proliferation experts that Japan has not only the capability to build boosted
nuclear weapons, but also the potential to build two-stage thermonuclear
weapons that are likely to work ﬁrst-time without testing.10 Today, the main
impediment that would prevent Japan from building such second-generation
nuclear weapons on short notice is the unavailability of sufﬁcient amounts
of tritium.

• Any future commercial fusion reactor (based on the either the MCF or
ICF principle) poses the problem of tritium proliferation because during

10Quoting from the U.S. Department of Energy Ofﬁce of Arms Control and Nonproliferation
study of 1995, “one cannot rule out that a technologically advanced country would be able to ﬁeld
a very conservatively designed thermonuclear weapon that would present a credible threat without
nuclear testing” (see Sec.1 and Sec.2.1).

10

operation each such reactor will contain several tens of kilograms of tritium,
i.e., enough for an arsenal of several hundreds or thousands of boosted
nuclear and thermonuclear weapons (see Sec.5.2).

• Since 1 g of deuterium-tritium fuel produces about 340 GJ of energy, a
nominal 1 GW (electric) commercial fusion power plant with a thermal
efﬁcient of 30% would consume 10 mg of DT -fuel per second.11
If the
plant is based on the MCF principle this amount of fuel is burnt relatively
slowly in a steady-state plasma conﬁned by magnetic ﬁelds. However, if the
plant is based on the ICF principle, the fuel is burnt in a continuous salvo of
micro-thermonuclear-bombs (so-called “pellets”) exploding at the center of
a containment vessel. Assuming that one pellet is detonated each second,
the explosive yield of each pellet would be 3.4 GJ, i.e., equivalent to about
810 kg of TNT (see Sec.4).

• The many kilograms of tritium implied in the daily operation of a number of
GW-scale reactor in a fusion-based power industry will provide numerous
possibilities of diversion or theft of tritium for military or terrorist purposes.
With ICF reactors, one will have the additional problem of safeguarding
the fusion pellets themselves, because they may possibly be used as the
explosive charge of some future-generation nuclear weapons.

Japan’s expertise with tritium technology

• Japan’s scientiﬁc and technical experience with tritium goes back to 1956
with the delivery of the ﬁrst supply of tritium from England to the Tritium
Research Center (now called Hydrogen Isotope Research Center) at Toyama
University.

• Technical experience with gram amounts of tritium is currently available at
several Japanese laboratories, in particular at the Japan Atomic Energy Re-
search Institute (JAERI) at Tokai, where the technology for mass-producing
lithium-ceramic and beryllium pebbles to be used in tritium breeding blan-
kets of fusion reactors is being developed in collaboration with Japanese
industry [12]. These pebbles are likely to be used in ITER tritium breeding
experiments. But they could also be used in some future indigenous tritium
production facility. Further experience related to the use of tritium in ICF
pellets exists at the Institute of Laser Engineering at Osaka University.

11This corresponds to a consumption of 0.5 kg of tritium per day.

11

• Since 1994 JAERI and U.S. scientists are collaborating in research and
development related to tritium production in a fusion blanket. This has
lead to actual tritium fuel processing experiments using the TSTA (Tritium
Systems Test Assembly) at the Los Alamos National Laboratory [13]. TSTA
is the only existing simulated loop of the fusion processing cycle of a fusion
reactor capable of handling about 100 grams of tritium.

• According to current plans described in the ITER Technical Basis it is
expected that ITER will be operated with all tritium supplied by external
sources. “The maximum total tritium transportation per year will be about
1.2 kg/year in the ﬁrst ten years. Assuming a 50 g tritium transport container,
there will be two shipments every month” [7, Sec.6.2.5, p.28]. “A reasonable
estimate of the available tritium from Canada [where tritium is bred as a
byproduct of the operation of twenty CANDU-type reactors], for example,
is: 22 kg in storage by 2009; 1.5 kg/year from 2009” [7, Sec.6.2.5, p.28].

• It is expected that “the CANDU tritium supply [from Canada] will be avail-
able for use in ITER in its initial phase of operation, but will not enable ITER
to run its extended phase of operation at reasonable device availability” [14].
However, “typical tritium production capacity from ﬁssion reactors specially
designed for tritium production is only a few kg per year, and at the pro-
hibitive cost of about $200 million dollars per kg” [14]. This calls for
new tritium production facilities, e.g., accelerator or dedicated fusion-based
tritium breeders. Moreover, according to a Los Alamos study on tritium
supply for ITER : “Development and deployment of program components
which breed signiﬁcant quantities of tritium are needed soon” [15].

• Once the supply of tritium from Canada will be exhausted (because of the
foreseeable shut-down of aging CANDU reactors), or in case of a problem
with transportation, the most logical source of tritium would be a dedicated
facility in the host country. This could be a justiﬁcation for an accelerator
breeder system, based on a high-intensity proton accelerator of the kind
considered in Japan (and in South Korea) for neutron science and nuclear
waste transmutation (see end of Sec.5.3). To have such a production facility
available in due time, development is to start soon [15].

• In summary, while Japan has now experience and facilities to handle tritium
in gram amounts, it has not yet access to kilogram-amount tritium production
and processing technology, nor the justiﬁcation to develop it. However, if
ITER is built in Japan, the problems with transportation and medium to long-
term tritium supply will provide many political and technical justiﬁcations
to go ahead with a full-scale national tritium production program.

12

Part (II)
Nuclear Weapons Proliferation Issues
of Thermonuclear-Fusion Energy Systems12

1

Introduction

In the past decade there has been a growing awareness that the development of ther-
monuclear fusion systems is being accompanied by the spread of the knowledge
and materials required for the production of thermonuclear weapons.

This awareness is the result of a number of political and technical developments
which shifted part of the nuclear weapons proliferation’s debate away from its tra-
ditional focus (namely the nuclear-ﬁssion fuel cycle and its related enrichment and
reprocessing technologies) and started to highlight the military and political prob-
lems associated with emerging nuclear energy systems: Thermonuclear-fusion
systems for energy production and nuclear weapons simulation, accelerator-based
concepts for energy ampliﬁcation and tritium breeding, pulsed-power technologies
for civilian and military applications, etc.

Some of the more important political events which contributed to this shift
include the U.S. Government declassiﬁcation act of 1993 which “legitimized” the
growing involvement of non-nuclear-weapon States in the development of inertial
conﬁnement fusion systems; the last round of French and Chinese underground nu-
clear tests which highlighted the importance of actual data for comparison with the
output of future computer simulation programs; the negotiation and the conclusion
of a Comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty (CTBT) which saw the opposition of
India to the other parties because computer simulations and laboratory tests were
not included in the scope of the treaty; and the establishment of extensive and
well-funded nuclear weapons simulation and “stockpile stewardship” programs in
the United States and France which conﬁrmed the primordial importance of large
laser-fusion facilities for these purposes.

On the other hand, a surprising number of signiﬁcant technological break-
throughs were made during the same period: An increase by a factor of one million
of the intensity of ultrashort-pulselength high-power tabletop lasers, the capturing

12Updated version of an unpublished review, ISRI-98-01, based on a talk de-
livered at the Fachgespräch “Neue Nukleartechnologien im Spannungsfeld von
Naturwissenschaft und Ethik”, Darmstadt University of Technology, 13 March
1998.

13

and cooling of antimatter, the discovery of high-temperature superconductors, the
design of high-performance electromagnetic guns, the synthesis of super-heavy
elements and the discovery of several unexpected new types of nuclear species
(non-ﬁssile shape isomers, medium-weight superdeformed nuclei, halo nuclei,
etc.), the emergence of nanotechnology as a radical approach to the fabrications
of new materials and micromechanisms, the development of new techniques for
constructing ever more powerful supercomputer, etc. All these technologies have
direct military applications, for both non-nuclear and nuclear weapons, as well
as many applications for possible next-generation nuclear weapons and various
future thermonuclear energy systems.

However, much more than these evolutionary changes, the most important
nuclear-proliferation event of this last decade is certainly the May 1998 decision
of India to explode ﬁve ﬁrst- and second-generation nuclear devices (including
a two-stage hydrogen bomb),13 which after two weeks of suspense and intense
diplomatic activity were reciprocated by Pakistan with a series of six nuclear
explosions.14

Indeed, it soon became clear that if the bombs included in the tests were
relatively compact devices ready for delivery by aircrafts or missiles, they were
not some kind of “crude” second-world-war type of weapons, but fairly advanced
“tritium-boosted” devices — as are, most probably, those recently claimed to have
been assembled by North Korea. This highlighted the fact that thermonuclear-
fusion materials such as tritium, and the related scientiﬁc/technical knowhow, are
just as important as the much better known nuclear-ﬁssion materials for making
deliverable nuclear weapons. Moreover, it reminded that if countries like India,
Pakistan, and North Korea were able to deploy such weapons, countries that are
relatively much more advanced in science and technology should easily be able
to do the same, or better, especially if they have access to advanced nuclear and
thermonuclear facilities.

As a result, the current situation with nuclear weapons proliferation is in almost
every way different and more complex than it was only a couple of years ago. For

13A plausible description of the ﬁve Indian tests is as follows: one of the tests was a “certiﬁcation
test” of a conservative weaponized design that must be part of the current Indian arsenal, the “high-
yield test” was a crude two-stage hydrogen bomb, and the “low-yield tests” were three advanced
boosted devices for use as tactical weapons or H-bomb primaries.

14There is less technical information on the six Pakistani tests. However, according to an
interview of Abdul Quader Kahn, the architect of Pakistan’s nuclear program, the devices were
high efﬁciency, highly reliable enriched uranium devices. “One was a big bomb which had a yield
of about 30–35 kilotons [...]. The other four were small, tactical weapons of low yield.” In an
other interview, he conﬁrmed that “the devices tested on 28 May were boosted weapons, as were
some of the Indian tests.”

14

instance, the term “proliferation of nuclear weapons” used to cover (i) the increase
in the number and the quality of such weapons within the ﬁve “ofﬁcial” nuclear-
weapon States (namely15 China, France, Russia the U.K. and the U.S.A.); and (ii)
the spread of nuclear weapons to other countries. While the former is known as
vertical proliferation, the latter is called horizontal proliferation.

Today, with an overall trend towards a decrease in the number of deployed
nuclear weapons in the “ofﬁcial” nuclear-weapon States, the emphasis of vertical
proliferation is shifting away from the problem of more and better nuclear weapons
to the question of the feasibility of modifying existing types of nuclear weapons for
new missions such as deep earth penetration, or of radically new types of nuclear
weapons, i.e., fourth-generation nuclear weapons, that could possibly be better
adapted to perceived new military needs.

Similarly, with the stabilization and the possible decrease in the number of ad-
ditional countries likely to acquire ﬁrst- and second-generation nuclear weapons,16
the traditional horizontal proliferation concern (which mainly focussed on the pos-
sible spread of ﬁssion-weapons) is shifting to the problem of the proliferation of
thermonuclear-fusion weapons technology (and possibly of the technology of even
more advanced types of nuclear weapons) to Israel, India, and Pakistan, as well
as to countries which already have the technical capability to build nuclear-ﬁssion
weapons but which have decided not to build them.

Indeed, as we now know for a fact, during the 1950s to the 1980s, a number
of larger and smaller industrialized countries17 have acquired the technical and in-
dustrial capability (e.g., by means of “peaceful” nuclear activities) to manufacture
nuclear weapons components and to assemble them on short notice. Because such
an approach to a nuclear weapon capability is inherently ambiguous and does not
force a nation to signal or even decide in advance its actual intentions, it is termed
latent proliferation [16].18

15Article IX of the Nonproliferation treaty of 1968 deﬁnes a nuclear-weapon States as “one
which has manufactured and exploded a nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device prior to
1 January 1967.”

16E.g., in alphabetical order, Algeria, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Libya, South

Korea, Ukraine, Taiwan, etc.

17E.g., in alphabetical order, Argentina, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Germany, Italy, Japan, Poland,

South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, etc.

18In 1993-95, the concept of virtual nuclear arsenals has been suggested to describe a world
in which all assembled, ready-for-use nuclear weapons would be banned [17]. This would link
latent proliferation to deterrence in a way that has been termed factory deterrence by political
scientists [18], or technical deterrence, scientiﬁc deterrence, or deterrence by competence, by
In this review, we use the adjectives “latent” and “virtual”
nuclear weapons designers [19].
interchangeably to refer to the capability to manufacture nuclear weapons components and to
assemble them on short notice.

15

Moreover, it is now also recognized that some large industrialized countries,
e.g., Japan and Germany, have extended their latent proliferation capability to the
point where they could make not only atomic bombs but also hydrogen bombs that
could be built and delivered with a very high probability of success. In fact, quoting
from the U.S. Department of Energy Ofﬁce of Arms Control and Nonproliferation,

“one cannot rule out that a technologically advanced country would
be able to ﬁeld a very conservatively designed thermonuclear weapon
that would present a credible threat without nuclear testing” [20, p.27].

It is in this context of growing technical complexity and expanding political
ambiguity that this review is written. In order to reduce some of the uncertain-
ties associated with this situation, and to make the links between thermonuclear
weapons and thermonuclear fusion energy systems as clear as possible, it is there-
fore important to start by reviewing the main technical concepts. This is done in
section 2, 3 and 4 were some basic information on thermonuclear weapons and
fusion energy systems is recalled and updated to ﬁt into the contemporary debate.
The proliferation implications that are common to all thermonuclear fusion energy
systems will be addressed in section 5. Then, the more speciﬁc implications of
the main fusion systems (i.e., inertial conﬁnement fusion, ICF, and magnetic con-
ﬁnement fusion, MCF) will be expounded in sections 6 and 7, leaving for section
8 those of one example of the many alternative fusion systems (AFS) that are
being developed concurrently. Finally, before concluding, section 9 will discuss
some aspects of the problem of openness versus secrecy in matters of thermonu-
clear energy and thermonuclear explosives, and their implications for the latent
proliferation of thermonuclear weapons.

2 Thermonuclear weapons

Despite the tight secrecy that covers the technical details of how nuclear and
thermonuclear weapons are built, their principles are sufﬁciently well known to
be described fairly accurately [21].

Using the wording of the U.S. Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of declassiﬁcation,
the fundamental idea is that, “in thermonuclear weapons, radiation from a ﬁssion
explosive can be contained and used to transfer energy to compress and ignite a
physically separate component containing thermonuclear fuel” [22]. This is the
essence of the so-called “Teller-Ulam” principle that was declassiﬁed by the U.S.
in 1979, and which is used in all modern fusion explosives.

16

In practice, in order to apply this principle and build a device that is sufﬁciently
small to be deliverable by an aircraft or a missile, it was necessary to ﬁrst minia-
turize the ﬁssion bomb (also called the trigger, or the primary) that is producing
the radiation (i.e., soft x-rays) necessary to compress and ignite the fusion material
(also called the secondary, or second-stage). This miniaturization was achieved
by using a small amount of deuterium and tritium, a thermonuclear fuel mixture,
to enhance the performance of a ﬁssion bomb (See Fig.1). This technique is called
“boosting” because it was ﬁrst developed in order to increase the yield of ﬁssion
bombs. Boosting is now primarily used to decrease the overall weight and size
of ﬁssion bombs of a given yield, as well as to dramatically increase their safety.
Since boosting is presently used in essentially all modern nuclear weapons (i.e., in
all tactical or strategic weapons within all contemporary nuclear arsenals, includ-
ing Israel, India, Pakistan, and possibly North Korea) it is important to explain this
technique in some details.

2.1 Boosted ﬁssion bombs

Figure 2 is a simpliﬁed diagram of a boosted ﬁssion device. Its core consists of a
plutonium and/or enriched uranium shell (the “pit”) surrounded by a stainless steel
case, possibly a neutron reﬂector, and by chemical explosives. This corresponds to
the present-day concept of sealed pits, with the ﬁssile material permanently sealed
within the high explosives. A short time before detonating the device, the pit is
ﬁlled with a few grams of a deuterium-tritium (DT ) gas mixture at a pressure of
a few tens of atmospheres.

When the weapon is detonated, the pit and the case are imploded by the high
explosives at the same time as the DT gas. As the pit collapses into a solid ball,
the DT is compressed into a sphere of a few millimeter radius with a density tens
of times greater than its normal solid-phase density. At the same time the ﬁssile
material is compressed to a few times its normal density and the ﬁssion chain
reaction starts.

As the chain reaction develops the ﬁssile materials begins to emit x-rays and
neutrons which heat the DT at the center of the device. The temperature of this
mixture of fusionable materials therefore rises at the same time as the temperature
of the ﬁssile material. This leads to a remarkable phenomenon which is the cause
of the boosting process: the fusion fuel ignites before the ﬁssion chain reaction is
terminated [21].

Therefore, at a time when the diverging chain reaction has generated a yield
that is still negligible, the DT mixture burns out very quickly and generates a very

17

intense pulse of high-energy neutrons by the thermonuclear reaction: D + T −→
4He + n . These fusion neutrons interact with the ﬁssile material, causing it to
ﬁssion, and therefore to generate most of the yield of the explosion. In other words,
with boosting, the yield of a ﬁssion explosive is controlled by the very fast neutron
burst from the thermonuclear reactions: the ﬁssile material (apart from heating the
fusion fuel to ignition) is essentially a passive neutron and energy ampliﬁer in the
ﬁnal stage of the nuclear explosion. This leads to several important conclusions:

1) With boosting, it is possible to build a relatively high yield ﬁssion explosive
which is fairly compact because it uses only a relatively small amount of high
explosives to implode the ﬁssile material. The device can also be made relatively
light-weight because a thick neutron reﬂector and/or a heavy tamper surrounding
the ﬁssile material are not necessary.

2) In an actual weapon, before arming the device, the DT mixture, or just
the tritium, is stored outside of the pit in a separate reservoir. This facilitates
maintenance and insures that boosting will not happen in case of an accidental
detonation of the high explosives. Since the amount of high explosives needed
to implode a boosted-device is only on the order of a few kilograms, a boosted
ﬁssion-weapon is extremely safe because an accidental nuclear explosion is almost
impossible to take place. This increased safety is the most important single factor
which enabled so many nuclear weapons to be deployed for so many year. It is also
the main reason why threshold nuclear States such as India, Israel, Pakistan, and
North Korea rely on tritium-boosting technology to maintain a credible nuclear
arsenal.19

3) The most important technical aspects of boosting (e.g., that during the implo-
sion of the pit by chemical explosives the fusion fuel gets sufﬁciently compressed
without mixing with the ﬁssile material) can be tested without actually starting
ﬁssion or fusion reactions. This can be done outside of the scope of the CTBT, and
only requires conventional equipments that are available in most high-explosive
research laboratories.

4) Using boosting, it is straightforward to build highly efﬁcient and reliable

19The gun-assembly type enriched-uranium weapons that were built by South Africa are an
example of a very unsafe design. This reduces substantially the merit of the South African
government for having dismanteled these weapons. In the case of Pakistan, it is unlikely that their
nuclear deterrent would be based on primitive gun-assembly or implosion type weapons: besides
from being unsafe, they would be much too heavy and cumbersome to be delivered by the aircrafts
available in their air-force, or by their 1500 km range “Ghauri” missile that was tested for the ﬁrst
time shortly before the Indian government decided to become a declared nuclear power. Similarly,
in the case of North Korea, boosted ﬁssion devices are required for delivery by their long-range
missiles.

18

ﬁssion weapons using reactor-grade plutonium. In particular, the possibility of
a preinitiation of the chain reaction, which creates difﬁculties in making a non-
boosted ﬁssion bomb [23, 24], is no longer a serious problem.
In fact, two of
the ﬁve devices tested by India in May 1998 are believed to have used plutonium
that was not classiﬁed as weapons grade [25]. Moreover, independently of the
type of ﬁssile material used, the construction of “simple” and “deliverable” tritium-
boosted nuclear weapons can be easier than the construction of primitive Hiroshima
or Nagasaki type atomic bombs: the main problem is to acquire the few grams of
tritium that are needed for every weapon (see Fig.1).

Therefore, in summary, the very important advance in ﬁssion weapons consti-
tuted by boosting [26, p.312], and the fact that boosted bombs used as primaries are
“lower-bounding the size and mass of hydrogen bombs” [26, p.313], conﬁrm the
tremendous importance of tritium20 from the point of view of the nonproliferation
of ﬁssion weapons.

2.2 Two-stage hydrogen bombs

Let us return to the design of a two-stage thermonuclear weapon.
Its general
principle, the Teller-Ulam method, was given at the beginning of this section,
and is recalled in the caption of Fig.3. As with boosting, two conditions have to
be satisﬁed: (a) the thermonuclear fuel has to be sufﬁciently compressed for the
fusion reaction to be fast enough, and (b) the thermonuclear fuel has to be brought
to a sufﬁciently high temperature for the fusion fuel to be ignited. Both conditions
can be satisﬁed by using a boosted ﬁssion bomb as a powerful source of x-rays.21

Referring to Fig.3, the Teller-Ulam method is as follows: a ﬁssion bomb and
a container ﬁlled with fusion fuel (the secondary) are placed within a common
enclosure (the radiation case); while the radiation case and the envelope of the
secondary (the pusher/tamper) are made of heavy materials opaque to x-rays, the
remaining space within the radiation case (the hohlraum) is ﬁlled with light-weight
materials transparent to x-rays; as the primary ﬁssions, large amounts of x-rays
are radiated ahead of blast and instantaneously ﬁll the hohlraum; x-ray radiation
trapped within the hohlraum rapidly turns the hohlraum ﬁlling into a hot plasma;
radiation-driven thermalization insures that this plasma has very uniform pressure
and temperature so that its effects on the secondary are the same from all sides; the

20And therefore of thermonuclear fusion technology.
21This is why boosting is so important: the energy of the ﬁssion explosion (which is mostly
heat in the form of x-rays) can easily radiate away from the ﬁssile core without being attenuated
by the thick neutron reﬂector and the large amounts of high-explosives that would be needed for a
non-boosted ﬁssion bomb.

19

plasma reradiates longer wavelength x-rays that are absorbed by the surface of the
secondary; the surface of the secondary (the pusher/tamper) is heated to the point
where it vaporizes and material is ejected from it; the material ablated from the
pusher/tamper causes by reaction a pressure which pushes it inwards, imploding
the fusion fuel to very high densities. This satisﬁes condition (a).

Condition (b), ignition, is achieved by an optional element not yet discussed:
the sparkplug at the center of the secondary in Fig.3. It consists of a subcritical
amount of ﬁssionable material compressed at the same time as the secondary.
Because of the intense neutron background resulting from the explosion of the
primary, a ﬁssion chain reaction starts in the sparkplug as soon as it becomes
critical (in order to avoid a ﬁzzle, and to maximize the yield from the sparkplug, it
is generally boosted by a small amount of DT , on the order of 10 grams). Hence,
with a careful design, the sparkplug will explode just when the thermonuclear
fuel is imploded to its maximum density. It will then provide, in the form of x-
rays, neutrons and additional compression from within, a large amount of energy
sufﬁcient to insure that ignition will start even in the worst case.

Once the fusion reaction starts, the fusion fuel (e.g., liquid deuterium in the
ﬁrst H-bomb, dry deuterated lithium (Li6D) in the modern H-bombs, possibly
liquid deuterium-tritium in “neutron bombs,” etc.) will burn as long as it will
be contained by the “tamping effect” (i.e., inertia) provided by the weight of the
unablated part of the pusher/tamper. Hence the dual function of the envelope of
the secondary: “pusher” during the ablative compression process, “tamper” during
the thermonuclear burn and expansion of the fusion fuel.22

Consequently, when Edward Teller invented the sparkplug concept, soon after
discovering with Stan Ulam in 1951 a means for achieving very high compressions,
the whole scheme became thoroughly convincing. Indeed, as will be stressed much
later (1983) by Carson Mark, the Los Alamos physicist who led the theoretical
work on the ﬁrst hydrogen bomb: “Almost immediately (the Teller and Ulam
method) gave promise of a feasible approach to thermonuclear weapons, provided
only the design work be done properly” [27, p.162]. Thus, a major feature of the
Teller-Ulam design is that it provides a straightforward and intrinsically fail-safe
method for making a thermonuclear bomb. In fact, this method is so good that all
the ﬁrst hydrogen bombs of the ﬁve nuclear-weapon States worked the ﬁrst time.23
Most recently, this fact was conﬁrmed by India: it exploded a two-stage hydrogen
bomb in the series of ﬁve tests which was its second experimental campaign, 24

22A third possible function or the pusher/tamper, to be discussed at the end of this section, is to

provide additional explosive yield.

23This is why there is no doubt that any technologically advanced country can build a militarily

usable hydrogen bomb without nuclear testing [20, p.27].

20

years after its ﬁrst single experiment of 1974. According to an ofﬁcial Indian
statement, the device worked as expected, providing a total ﬁssion-fusion yield
of about 43 kilotons, a value that was intentionally kept low “to meet stringent
criteria like containment of the explosion and least possible damage to buildings
and structures in the neighboring villages.”

A sketch of a modern thermonuclear bomb is given in Fig.4. One recognizes
the same elements as in Fig.3, which are found in all thermonuclear explosives,
with a number of variations. For instance, while the secondaries of early H-
bombs were generally cylindrical, the most modern ones are probably of spherical
shape. In that case, instead of being made of plutonium or U 235, the sparkplug
could be a DT fuze which ignites the Li6D fuel when optimum compression is
reached. Finally, by chosing for the pusher/tamper an appropriate heavy material
it is possible to control the total yield of a thermonuclear weapon. This is because
the high-energy (i.e., 14 MeV) neutrons produced by fusion have sufﬁcient energy
to ﬁssion any kind of transuranic material such as all isotopes of uranium and
plutonium. Therefore, while the minimum yield of a given thermonuclear design
will be provided by using a non-ﬁssionable heavy material such as lead or bismuth
as the tamper, the use of depleted (i.e., mostly isotope 238), natural, or highly
enriched (i.e., mostly isotope 235) uranium will provide a range of increasing
yields because more and more ﬁssion reactions will be produced in the tamper.

This is why the pusher/tamper is sometimes called the “third-stage” of a
thermonuclear weapon. For example, assuming as in Fig.4 that the yield is 150kt
if the pusher/tamper is made of U 238, the yield will be 150kt if the pusher/tamper is
made of U 235. On the other hand, if the pusher/tamper is made of a lead or bismuth,
the yield will be signiﬁcantly lower, on the order of 50kt. This is most probably
what the Indian scientists have done in 1998 in order to be able to detonate the
device at a relatively low depth into the ground, and to minimize the background
signals which may overload the measuring instrumentation.

Finally, if plutonium is used for the pusher/tamper a yield somewhat higher
than with enriched uranium is obtained. This is why using plutonium for the “third
stage” is providing the highest possible yield for a given design. This option has
been implemented in some of the French thermonuclear weapons, and was an
important justiﬁcation for the French fast-breeder program,24 as it could be for the

24In 1978, less than a year after the construction of the fast-breeder Superphenix had been
undertaken, General Jean Thiry, former director of the French nuclear test site in the Paciﬁc Ocean,
advisor of the Managing Director of the French Atomic Energy Commission (CEA), wrote: “France
will be able to build atomique weapons of all kinds and with any type of range. At relatively low
cost, she will be in a position to produce large quantities of such weapons, with fast breeders
providing an abundant supply of the plutonium required.” Le Monde, 19 January 1978.

21

Indian plutonium reprocessing/recycling program [25]. Consequently, although
plutonium has some environmental disadvantages because it is more radioactive
than U 235, it offers an attractive alternative to the large-scale production of highly
enriched uranium because plutonium of any grade can be used for the “third stage”
of a thermonuclear weapon. Therefore, any country such as Japan which has a
large stockpile of separated plutonium will not need access to large amounts of
U 235 should it decide to make high-yield thermonuclear weapons.

3 Fusion energy systems and military technologies

The main fundamental difference between ﬁssion and fusion energy systems is
that the feasibility of fusion energy is still not proven, whereas the scientiﬁc and
technical feasibility of ﬁssion was established right from the beginning. Moreover,
in 1942, the construction and operation of the ﬁrst “atomic pile” by Enrico Fermi
and his collaborators proved to be so simple that it was possible to design, build
and put into operation several full-scale, 1000 MW size, reactors in less than two
years! In comparison, after almost ﬁfty years of fusion energy research, even the
most optimistic scientiﬁcally-competent proponent of fusion energy would not bet
to see an operating thermonuclear reactor in his life-time.

As a result, “thermonuclear fusion” is essentially a vast research program in
which many different concepts are still competing to possibly emerge as a techni-
cally, economically, and politically viable new source of energy. However, com-
pared to other energy research programs, fusion research is primarily done within
(or in close collaboration with) military establishments for at least three reasons:
First, they generally make use of high-energy density technologies which have
many military applications in areas such as radars, ordnance, detonics, weapons-
physics and weapons-effects simulation, etc. Second, any type of working fusion
system would be a powerful source of energy, neutrons, and militarily important
materials such as tritium. Third, any working fusion system that could be made
sufﬁciently compact would be a potential pure-fusion25 weapon, and could be used
as an explosive or as a radiation weapon.

Therefore, when examining the possibility of “non-electric power generation”
applications of thermonuclear fusion, one ﬁnds mostly dual-purpose civil-military
applications. This is clearly the case with the conclusions of a 2003 report to the
U.S. DOE Future Energy Science Advisory Committee (FESAC), which found
that the most promising opportunities for non-electric applications of fusion fall

25The concept of “pure-fusion” refers to the idea of burning or exploding fusion-fuel without

using ﬁssion-reactions or a ﬁssion-explosive as a primary.

22

into four categories [29]:

1. Near-Term Applications (production of medical isotopes and of neutrons for

Homeland Security missions);

2. Transmutation (of nuclear waste or surplus weapons-grade plutonium);

3. Hydrogen Production (for transportation);

4. Space Propulsion (for heavy payload deep-space or manned missions).

A further aspect which complicates the discussion of fusion energy systems
is that the technologies on which they are based also have many scientiﬁc ap-
plications,26 as well as considerable overlap with those of nuclear ﬁssion energy
systems. In fact, as is shown by the systematics of the numerous existing and pro-
posed (thermo)nuclear energy systems: ﬁssion, fusion, and various high-energy
beam processes, and their related technologies, are interdependent in many ways
[30].

For example, in the production of energy from ﬁssion or fusion, high-energy
beam technology is important because fusion is commonly initiated using such
beams (e.g., by heating a plasma in MCF, or compressing a DT pellet in ICF),
while fusion or ﬁssion materials (e.g., tritium or plutonium) can be produced using
particle accelerators, or enriched using lasers. Similarly, in its direct application to
military objectives, high-energy beam technology is important for directed-energy
applications such anti-ballistic missile defense and anti-satellite beam weaponry,
while compact ﬁssion or fusion reactors are important for powering military ships,
submarines, spacecrafts, and directed energy weapons.

Moreover, many ancillary technologies associated with thermonuclear fusion
and high-energy beams are of great military importance: High-power radio-
frequency generation for radars and electromagnetic warfare, superconductivity
and cryogenics for outer-space military platforms, high magnetic ﬁeld genera-
tion for magnetic compression and pure-fusion explosives, pulsed-power technol-
ogy for ﬂash x-ray radiography and electromagnetic guns, heatproof and heavy-
irradiation-proof materials and electronic devices for conventional and nuclear
explosives, micro- and nano-technology for mass-producing fourth-generation
nuclear weapons, etc.

26Which is why the quest for “pure knowledge” is often used as a justiﬁcation for developing
technologies which enable the study of extreme states of matter which only exist in nuclear weapons
and stellar explosions.

23

In the following sections several of these military applications will be described
in some details. They will generally come about as examples of implications (or
“spin-offs”) of various schemes which have a theoretical potential to become a
source of thermonuclear energy if some intrinsic limitations are overcome. Most
of the time, these spin-offs will not be directly connected to nuclear weapons or
proliferation per se. However, in all cases, it will be seen that the military and
proliferation impacts are sufﬁciently important to be of serious concern, especially
in non-nuclear-weapon States, because research on these ambiguous technologies
can be legitimized by their theoretical potential as future sources of energy.

To conclude this section, and before proceeding to a systematic analysis of
fusion energy systems, it is important to remark that it is a legitimate right for
all countries to pursue some exploratory research on all possible scientiﬁc devel-
opments that might have a revolutionary impact on military technology. In this
respect, it is precisely in the area where ﬁssion, fusion and high-energy beam
technologies overlap that the potential for new types of weapons is the greatest.
Moreover, if this set of now relatively standard technologies is extended to in-
clude more advanced atomic and nuclear processes (see Table 1), we see that there
is a relatively large number of physical processes available, which all have the
potential to release large amount of energy on a short time scale, and which are
therefore amenable to the design of new types of military explosives. This can be
seen as a conﬁrmation that atomic and nuclear physics are relatively new sciences,
and an indication that many surprising discoveries are still possible, with many
implications for new types of nuclear explosives.

4 Principles of magnetic and inertial conﬁnement

fusion systems

Since fusion reactions happen only at extremely high temperatures, the burning
fusion fuel is a plasma, i.e., a collections of electrons and atomic nuclei from
which the electrons have been stripped away. Such a plasma cannot be contained
by the wall of any vessel and must therefore be conﬁned, either by gravitation
as is the case in the sun27, or by electromagnetic ﬁelds if the reaction has to be
continuous, or else by its own inertia if the reaction is pulsed (as is the case in
nuclear weapons).

27The thermonuclear reactions which “power” the sun are the “carbon-cycle” and “proton-set”
fusion reactions. They are extremely slow and have nothing to do with the “deuterium-tritium”
based fusion reactions used in nuclear weapons and in all practically feasible fusion reactors.

24

This deﬁnes the two main categories of magnetic conﬁnement fusion (MCF)
and inertial conﬁnement fusion (ICF) systems. To these two generic categories one
has to add many alternative fusion systems (AFS) which use the basic features of
MCF and ICF in various conﬁgurations and combinations,28 and in association with
various technologies such as pulsed electromagnetic power, energy cumulation,
catalysis, etc. Even though they are often called “innovative,” “emerging,” or
“new,” most of these alternative or unconventional fusions systems have been
extensively studied in military laboratories starting in the 1950-1960s, just like
MCF and ICF systems.

Even though the details of magnetic conﬁnement fusion (MCF) systems are
very complicated, the general concept is sufﬁciently simple and intuitive that we do
not need to go into these details: It is enough for our purpose to say that we have a
magnetically conﬁned high-temperature plasma steadily burning in a vessel which
is heated by the energy released by the fusion reactions, and coupled to a turbine to
make electricity. While different kind of thermonuclear fuels could be considered
in theory, its is likely that MCF is only feasible using deuterium-tritium as the fuel,
so that the main thermonuclear reaction is D + T −→ 4He + n + (2.8 × 10−12J) .

The concept of inertial conﬁnement fusion (ICF) is that a sequence of tiny
fuel pellets containing deuterium and tritium are projected towards the center of
a reaction chamber where high-power laser or particle beam pulses strike each
pellet, compressing and heating its fuel, and releasing thermonuclear energy by
the reaction: D + T −→ 4He + n + (2.8 × 10−12J) . This nuclear energy is
converted into thermal energy in an absorbing blanket lining the inner surface of
the reaction chamber, and coupled to a turbine to make electricity.

Since 1 g of DT produces about 340 GJ of energy, a nominal 1 GW (electric)
fusion power plant with a thermal efﬁcient of 30% would consume 10 mg of DT
per second.29 If we assume that one pellet is detonated each second, the explosive
yield of each pellet would be 3.4 GJ, i.e., equivalent to about 810 kg of TNT.

Figure 5 is a simpliﬁed diagram of an advanced indirect-drive ICF target of the
kind that is extensively studied for future ICF reactors. Such a target consists of
a hohlraum containing a 1–10 mg DT fuel pellet. The concept of indirect drive
refers to the fact that in this type of target the driver energy is not directly deposited
onto an outer layer of the fuel but is ﬁrst converted into thermal x-rays conﬁned
in a hohlraum. In the U.S., this concept was declassiﬁed in 1979 at the same time
as the Teller-Ulam principle (Fig.3), using a wording that is almost identical: “In
some ICF targets, radiation from the conversion of the focused energy (e.g., laser

28Hence the sometimes used term magnetic-inertial conﬁnement (MIC) fusion.
29This corresponds to a consumption of 0.5 kg of tritium per day.

25

or particle beam) can be contained and used to compress and ignite a physically
separate component containing thermonuclear fuel” [22, p.103].

It is therefore not surprising that Fig.3 and Fig.5 are very similar, except for the
technique used to generate the soft x-rays ﬁlling the hohlraum. In laser driven ICF,
the hohlraum is generally a cylinder with openings at both ends to allow the laser
beams to heat the inner surface of the hohlraum, causing emission of x-rays. In
heavy-ion driven ICF, the heavy-ions are stopped in converters (i.e., small pieces
of high-Z materials placed within the hohlraum) which are strongly heated. With
other drivers, e.g., light-ion beams or antiprotons, the details would be different,
but the result the same: strong heating of the radiation case or of the converters
leading to x-ray emission into the hohlraum. Hence, any type of indirect drive ICF
system will enable the simulation of H-bomb physics in the laboratory.

A major problem, as for hydrogen bombs, is to succeed in compressing the
pellet to a very high density and igniting the fuel. This is why the largest ICF
system under construction in the United States is called the National Ignition
Facility because its main objective (which is same as those of its French and
Japanese competitors) is to achieve ignition. (See Table 2 for a list of the most
important laser ICF facilities in the world.)

The difﬁculty of this task is enormous, and it would be advantageous to ﬁnd
a technique similar to Teller’s “sparkplug” concept which considerably simpliﬁed
the design of H-bombs. Several such techniques are under investigation, and one
of the most promising is based on the invention of the “superlaser,” which enabled
a factor of one million increase of the power of table-top lasers.

“Superlasers” are ultra-short ultra-intense pulsed lasers with pulselengths in the
range of 10−15 to 10−12 s, i.e., femtoseconds to picoseconds,30 and beam intensities
on the order of 1020 W/cm2, i.e., sufﬁcient to induce strong relativistic, multi-
photon, nonlinear, and direct nuclear effects [31, 32, 33].31 Their invention ended
a twenty years long period over which laser intensity plateaued at a maximum of
about 1014 W/cm2.

The potential military applications of superlasers are so impressive that their
principles have been implemented on existing large laser systems built for inertial
conﬁnement fusion and weapons simulation, pushing their peak power by three
orders of magnitude from 1 TW to 1 PW which is why superlasers are more
commonly called “petawatt lasers.” As can be seen in Table 3, there are now
30A femtosecond, i.e., 1 fs = 10−15 s is on the order of the time taken by an electron to circle an

atom. This gives the order of magnitude of the minimum pulselength of an optical laser pulse.

31They are called superlasers in this review because their interactions with matter are qualitatively

very different from those of ordinary lasers.

26

superlasers in operation or under construction in all major industrial states.

Superlasers enable a two step approach to ICF similar to the “sparkplug” igni-
tion of a cold compressed fuel in H-bombs [34, 35]. The proposed “fast ignition”
scheme is as follows: ﬁrst, a capsule is imploded as in the conventional approach
to inertial fusion to assemble a high-density fuel conﬁguration; second, a hole is
bored by a superlaser through the capsule corona composed of ablated material;
ﬁnally, the fuel is ignited by fast electrons, produced in the superlaser-plasma
interactions, which then propagate to the center of the pellet. This new scheme en-
ables a factor of 10–100 reduction in total driver energy; it also drastically reduces
the difﬁculty of the implosion, and thereby allows lower quality target fabrication,
and less stringent beam quality and symmetry requirements from the implosion
driver [34, p.1626].

The whole subject of superlaser research and development is presently a do-
main of very intense activity. New institutes and specialized laboratories have been
created in several countries. For example, the Center for Ultrafast Optical Science
at the University of Michigan, the Max-Born-Institut für Nichtlineare Optik und
Kurzzeitspektroskopie (MBI) in Berlin, the Centre Etude Lasers Intenses et Appli-
cations (CELIA)in Bordeaux, or the Advanced Photon Research Center (APRC)
of the Japan Atomic Research Institute (JAERI) Kensai establishment. As shown
in Table 3, all the most advanced industrialized countries have now superlasers
with powers of at least 10 TW, and 100-1000 TW superlasers in operation or under
construction.

At present, with the closing and dismantling of the large American and French
lasers to allow for the construction of NIF and LMJ, the most powerful lasers and
superlasers in operation are in Japan and in England. Japan is in fact the current
world leader, and was able to announce on March 28, 2003, that APRC “succeeded
in the development of a compact laser system capable of generating the world’s
highest laser output power of 850 trillion watts (0.85 petawatts)” [36]. Contrary
to previous “proof of principle” petawatt-class superlasers which were quite large,
this compact superlaser is based on solid-state Ti:Sapphire ampliﬁer technology.

Germany, however, is proceeding very fast and trying to catch up with the rest
of the world [37]. This is done in collaboration with the Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory, with which Germany has passed “agreements” which were
previously only available to England and France, two nuclear-weapon States [37].
In the the foreword of the GSI Scientiﬁc report 2002, one reads : "The highly
appreciated delivery of components from the NOVA laser from Livermore gave a
push to the PHELIX laser project (...) petawatt operation for end of 2004/beginning
of 2005" [38, p.ii].

27

Superlasers are an example of a breakthrough that is the result of pure tech-
nological innovation. It was known since many years that one day a way would
be found to go from the 1014 W/cm2 standard laser intensity to the 1020 W/cm2
range because there is no fundamental obstacle until the laser intensity limit of
1024 W/cm2 is approached.32

However, there are other technologies (some of which listed in Table 1) which
have also the potential of facilitating the ignition of an ICF pellets, and even to
be sufﬁciently compact to be able to turn an ICF pellet into a fourth generation
nuclear weapon. One such technology is antimatter [39, 40, 41], and several other
possibilities (e.g., nuclear isomers [42]) are discussed in reference [21].

5 Common proliferation implications of all fusion

energy systems

There are seven main common sources of proliferation associated with all types of
fusion energy systems: neutron abundance, tritium abundance, new technological
routes to uranium enrichment, latent thermonuclear weapon proliferation, induced
nuclear weapon proliferation, and links to emerging military technologies.

5.1 Neutron abundance: Fusion-ﬁssion hybrids and plutonium

breeders

While ﬁssion produces about 200 MeV of energy and between two and three neu-
trons per split nuclei, whereas fusion of DT generates only 17.6 MeV of energy
and a single neutron per fused nuclei, the ﬁssion reaction is called “energy rich
– neutron poor” and the fusion reaction “neutron rich – energy poor”. There-
fore, ﬁssion is most appropriate for producing energy, and fusion for producing
neutrons.33

The consequence of this fundamental fact is that the most effective technique
for producing nuclear energy is to surround the reaction chamber of a fusion

32In contrast, technologies such as thermonuclear fusion for electricity generation are already
at their scientiﬁc limit. No technological breakthrough is to be expected for them. This is why,
assuming that all the details are worked out, whatever conﬁnement scheme is adopted, it is already
possible to compare these systems with other sources of electricity.

33This is why the most powerful nuclear weapons, i.e., those with the highest yield-to-weight
ratio, use a “third stage” in which the fusion neutrons from the second stage are used to ﬁssiona
uranium or plutonium blanket surrounding it.

28

reactor by a blanket in which the fusion neutrons produce additional neutrons
and breed plutonium, which is then burnt in ordinary ﬁssion reactors. This is the
concept of the “fusion-ﬁssion hybrid” [30], which takes advantage of the factor
200/17.6 ≈ 10 which favors fusion relative to ﬁssion as a supply of neutrons, and
ﬁssion relative to fusion as a source of energy.34

In the 1980s the main proliferation problem of these hybrids was felt to be the
consequences of their exceptional potential as plutonium breeders [43]. This was
because for a nominal power of 3000 MW (thermal) the best heavy-water ﬁssion
reactor would breed “only” 500 kg/Pu per year, while a hypothetical fusion-ﬁssion
hybrid of the same power would breed more than 5’000 kg/Pu per year.

Today, because of the existing surpluses of (both military and civilian) pluto-
nium and enriched uranium, the emphasis is different: a fusion hybrid is about
ten times more effective than a ﬁssion reactor to breed plutonium or tritium. In
particular, for a given material output, its production of heat, nuclear waste, and
traceable ﬁssion products such as 85Kr is at least ten times less than with a ﬁssion
reactor. This makes such a facility easier to hide from inspection.35 Moreover,
the sub-critical blanket of a hybrid reactor is more appropriate for plutonium
production than a critical ﬁssion reactor. With an appropriate design, continuous
extraction of plutonium is easy. Even for long neutron irradiation times in the blan-
ket, the quality of the plutonium produced in a fast hybrid blanket is better than
that produced in a critical reactor [44]. A rather small facility, e.g., 10 MW(th)
of fusion power, producing plutonium and tritium in a mixed uranium/lithium
blanket, could be sufﬁcient to maintain a minimal deterrent based on a few dozen
high quality boosted ﬁssion bombs.

Of course, one may object that any fusion facility would be big, expensive, and
very sophisticated. That is not necessarily the case. As will be seen in the section
on alternate fusion systems, some of them might be quite small and rudimentary.
Moreover, if an easy route to ICF is found, small scale ICF might become feasible.

One may also object that the DD fusion reaction, and even more so the
“aneutronic” fusion reactions such as 3HeD and 11Bp, will generate much less
neutrons. While this is true, it is also known since a long time, that “the DT reaction
is the only one which can be used exothermically by the magnetic conﬁnement
method of the tokamak, as the other interesting reactions produce too high a loss

34This factor of ten assumes that in a critical reactor one neutron is needed to maintain the chain
reaction, and that the fate of the another ﬁssion neutrons is similar to those from fusion once the
they are multiplied in a blanket.

35The only other systems which shows similar characteristics are the accelerator-breeders [43].
These hybrids are now promoted for the efﬁcient production of tritium for military purposes (see
end of Sec.5.3).

29

of energy by cyclotron radiation” [45, p.331]. The same is true for ICF: It is
unlikely that any fuel other than DT will enable the construction of economically
attractive fusion power plants. In conclusion, the DT fuel will always be the most
attractive, and it will be a serious nonproliferation challenge that no hypothetical
future “aneutronic-fusion” reactor will switch to the DT fuel cycle to produce
neutrons for various illegitimate purposes.

5.2 Tritium abundance: Boosted-ﬁssion and pure-fusion

nuclear weapons

Whatever conﬁnement-method used, a nominal 1 GW (electric) fusion power
plant with a thermal efﬁcient of 30% would consume 10 mg of DT per second.
If we assume a tritium burn efﬁciency of 30% (either in slow multi-second pulses
as in MCF, or in fast pellet-explosions as in ICF), the amount of tritium to be
processed and fed into the reaction chamber every day is 1.7 kg. This tritium
has to be regenerated and the idea is to breed this tritium in a lithium-blanket
surrounding the reaction chamber.36 Assuming that at least one tritium atom is
bred for every neutron incident on the blanket, and that about one tenth of the
blanket is reprocessed every day to extract the tritium, a minimum of 5 kg of
tritium will be constantly held in the blanket.37 With a ten-day supply of tritium
bottled to allow for reasonable down times, the total inventory is about 17+5 = 22
kg.

These ≈ 20 kilograms of tritium in every nominal 1 GW fusion power plant
have to be compared to the amount of tritium in a military inventory, which in the
case of the United States, is currently of about 100 kg. Since tritium has a half-life
of 12.3 years, about 5 kg of tritium has to be produced every year to maintain
this inventory. Hence, from a vertical proliferation point of view, a single 1 GW
fusion plant (which can easily breed more than the 0.5 kg of tritium needed every
day for its own consumption) is more than sufﬁcient to satisfy the tritium needs
of a large nuclear arsenal, and even to envisage supplying a pure-fusion weapons
arsenal which may require a signiﬁcantly larger tritium inventory.

From a horizontal proliferation point of view, there are two major problems:

• Whereas to make one crude ﬁssion weapon about 3–6 kg of plutonium have
to be diverted from a ﬁssion power-plant (i.e., about 1–2 % of its ﬁssile
material inventory), to make a tritium-booster for one ﬁssion weapon only

36The tritium breeding reaction is n + 6Li −→ T + 4He.
37This is ten times the daily consumption of 0.5 kg of tritium.

30

2 g of tritium have to be diverted from a fusion power-plant (i.e., about
0.01 % of its tritium inventory). Considering the existing difﬁculties with
plutonium accounting, such a level of tritium control seems impossible to
achieve in practice.

• Future nuclear arsenals will most probably be based on some kind of pure-
fusion weapons. Such fourth generation nuclear weapons will require only
small amounts of tritium per warhead. Assuming a relatively poor tritium
burn-efﬁciency of 20 % in these weapons, every milligram of tritium would
be worth the equivalent of about 100 kilograms of TNT.38 Hence, assuming
a modest breeding ratio of 1.1, a single 1 GW fusion plant would be able
to supply 0.05 kg of tritium daily, enough to fabricate every day 5’000
warheads with a yield equivalent to 1 ton TNT each.

5.3 Dedicated nuclear weapons materials production facilities

Priorities in the present fusion programs worldwide emphasize the development
of MCF systems for electricity production and ICF systems for nuclear weapons
simulation. However, there have been publications (e.g., [43, 46, 47]), and cer-
tainly a number of classiﬁed studies, suggesting that such systems could also be
used to breed large quantities of nuclear materials such as tritium and plutonium
for military purposes.

In the nuclear-weapon States, the arguments put forward in favor of the con-
struction of such facilities are (1) the need to replace aging facilities39 and (2)
the increased importance of tritium relative to ﬁssile materials in modern nuclear
weapons.40

As was emphasized in the two previous subsections, a fusion reactor can breed
up to ten times as much tritium or plutonium than a ﬁssion reactor of the same
power. Since disposal of heat is a major cost driver in any type of nuclear reactor,
a major advantage of fusion-based systems is that they will produce much less heat

38We will come back later on the military value of highly compact weapons with yields in the

hundreds to a few thousands of kg TNT.

39In the U.S.A, for example, tritium was produced only at the Savannah River complex. The

reactors at Savannah River are now over 50 years old and will most probably never be restarted.

40“The nation will have a continued need for an assured supply of tritium as long as nuclear
weapons exits. [...] Moreover, certain changes in the makeup of the stockpile, underway or being
considered, could actually increase the need for tritium even if the number of weapons declines.
Steps toward ‘modernization’ of weapons, such as ‘safer’ high explosives, or new missions calling
for tailored effects, may lead to weapons with substantially higher than typical amounts of tritium.
Long-range nuclear materials planning requires assuring plutonium production as well” [46, p.2].

31

for a given nuclear material output. This advantage becomes particularly important
if a fusion machine is speciﬁcally designed to maximize neutron production for
nuclear material breeding instead of heat production for electricity generation. This
kind of optimization requires the development of a neutron multiplying blanket
that poses fewers technical issues than a blanket for electric power generation.41

One approach, which minimizes heat production in the blanket, is to multiply
neutrons by the (n, 2n) reaction in beryllium embedded in the blanket.42 In this
way, the blanket can be designed to breed 1.6 useful neutrons per fusion reaction.
These neutrons can breed 1.6 tritons, and hence, an excess of 0.6 triton per fusion
reaction for a total energy release of about 25 MeV (see Table 5). As is shown in
this table, ﬁssion can also yield a net 0.6 triton per ﬁssion reaction, but with an
energy release of 200 MeV. Therefore, fusion produces eight times less heat than
ﬁssion relatively to breeding capacity.

In small MCF tritium breeders this large cost advantage may be offset by the
cost of plasma technology (magnets, vacuum, etc.) required to conﬁne the plasma.
However, since plasma technology costs do not scale directly with fusion power,
the capital cost of a magnetic conﬁnement fusion breeder is relatively insensitive
to thermal power and breeding capacity over a wide range [46, Sec.2]. This
leads proponents of this technology to conclude that “because the fusion driver
for a nuclear materials production facility would be smaller than a fusion power
reactor, the present status of magnetic fusion research is, relatively speaking, more
advanced for the purpose of breeding tritium than for energy applications [46,
p.6].”43

Similar arguments are used by proponents of inertial conﬁnement fusion who
stress that “defense money will be unavailable [for a future ICF machine] unless
it has a speciﬁc defense function such as tritium production or the destruction of
plutonium” [47].

In fact, while eventual future fusion reactors will pose a serious proliferation
problem because of the possibility to divert tritium towards military ends, the
declared nuclear powers will always prefer to rely on dedicated facilities to satisfy
their military needs. In this case, the main competition to fusion for supplying

41This is also the case for the design of the blanket of an experimental fusion reactor such as
ITER: In a research facility heat is an unwanted byproduct of fusion complicating the design of
the reactor and interfering with experiments such as the study of tritium breeding or of the effects
of neutrons on structural materials.

42This concept is included in most ITER blanket designs, for instance the Japanese mass-

production technology for ceramic tritium breeder pebbles under development at JAERI [12].

43This means that the blanket design for an experimental reactor such as ITER is better suited

for breeding tritium than for producing energy.

32

tritium in the future comes from accelerator based systems, which in addition
to many advantages similar to those of fusion, have the interest to be a feasible
extrapolation of existing proven technology.
In the event that such accelerator
breeders are built in the near term, e.g., in the U.S. [48, 49] or France [50, 51],
or possibly Japan [52, 53] or South Korea [54], fusion will remain an attractive
option for a more distant future.

5.4 New or renewed enrichment technologies

Natural uranium is a quite widely available commodity. However, to make a
ﬁssion-explosive, the difﬁculty is that natural uranium must either be burnt (e.g., in
a heavy water reactor) to produce plutonium, or enriched to separate the ﬁssile 235U
fraction from the more abundant non-ﬁssile 238U component. Many technologies
are available for uranium enrichment and some of the most efﬁcient ones make
use of lasers of various kinds.

While the large high-energy lasers used as drivers for ICF are not directly
applicable to laser-enrichment, the underlying technology is the same. Moreover,
superlasers may open new proliferation paths to laser-enrichment because they
can be used to pump isomeric nuclear states for gamma-ray lasers, energy storage,
and new military explosives [42]. When used to excite the ﬁrst isomeric state of
235U, superlasers may lead to a very effective and compact technique for 100%
uranium enrichment in one stage [55].

Concerning other enrichment technologies, the ones that are based on separa-
tion in an electromagnetic ﬁeld, i.e., the “calutron” method [56] and the “plasma
separation” process, are the ones that will most directly beneﬁt from the devel-
opment of high-current ion beams and superconducting magnets technologies for
ICF and MCF [43, 56, 57].

5.5 Latent thermonuclear proliferation

Thermonuclear fusion is being promoted by the nuclear-weapon States as a po-
tential source of energy and therefore a legitimate subject of study in non-nuclear-
weapon States. This leads to a growing situation of latent thermonuclear prolifer-
ation that will be examined in section 9.

33

5.6 Induced nuclear proliferation

Since thermonuclear fusion research and development creates the scientiﬁc and
technical basis for actual or latent thermonuclear weapons proliferation, in ei-
ther nuclear or non-nuclear-weapon States, it is legitimate for the less advanced
countries to be concerned by this situation. This may induce them to acquire the
knowledge and skills for making ﬁrst-generation nuclear weapons, which in turn
become a justiﬁcations for the nuclear-weapon States to produce more advanced
and usable nuclear weapons to effectively deter or counter this type of proliferation,
and so on...

5.7 Links to emerging military technologies

As was already explained in section 3, all technologies relevant to thermonuclear
energy have important military applications in nuclear and non-nuclear weapons.
Lasers, accelerators, superconductive devices, etc., are key components of new
kinds of non-nuclear weapons: Laser and particle beam-weapons, electromagnetic
guns, etc.

A clear example of the ambivalence of thermonuclear research with high-
energy lasers is the project to use the technology developed for the U.S. National
Ignition Facility (NIF) to build an Earth-based laser to clear near-Earth space
debris [58, p.15]: Such a device would also be an effective anti-satellite weapon.
Several other example will be cited in the following sections.

6 Speciﬁc proliferation implications of inertial

conﬁnement fusion (ICF)

The most direct proliferation contributions of ICF are obviously in the domains
of thermonuclear weapons’s physics and effects. These implications have been
expounded in a number of publications (see, e.g., [43, 21] and references therein).
Since the nuclear-weapon States are not shy at recognizing that ICF is essential
to their nuclear deterrent, it is interesting to compare the headlines of two formal
assessments of the relevance of ICF to the nuclear weapons program of the United
States:

First, in 1977, fourteen years after the signing of the Partial Test Ban Treaty
(PTBT), the main nuclear weapons’s applications of ICF were presented as follows

34

[59, Chart 6]:

• Provides support for underground tests

• Potential for large-scale weapon effects simulation

• Allows modeling of atmospheric nuclear explosions

• Provides unique capability for modeling of nuclear weapons physics

including:

1. Normalization of design codes

2. Studies of implosion physics

3. Measurements of critical materials properties

Second, in 1997, one year after the conclusion of the Comprehensive Test ban
Treaty (CTBT), in a review of the ICF program, the section about the “relevance
of the National Ignition Facility (NIF) to Science Based Stockpile Stewardship
(SBSS)” is highlighting the following items [60]:

• Certiﬁcation of the weapons stewards

• Code validation and materials properties

• People

• Ignition:

1. The study of burn in the presence of mix

2. The diagnosis of ICF plasma

3. High-energy-density phenomena

4. Proof-of-principle for inertial fusion energy (IFE)

Therefore, in both evaluations, the main emphasis is on showing how ICF is
compensating for the perceived losses due to a major arms-control agreement, and
the second on underlining the potential beneﬁts of ICF for the future of nuclear
weapons development.

In 1977, ICF was at its beginning. It was important to show that it would be a
powerful substitute for atmospheric tests and an effective simulator for weapons
effects studies. This substitution has progressively been done over the past twenty

35

years (with the help of ICF and a number of pulsed-power technologies) and will
be complete when large ICF facilities such as NIF will yield the very intense bursts
of neutrons that only underground nuclear explosions could provide.44

In 1997, SBSS is at its beginning. The age of building and testing multi-kiloton
to multi-megaton hydrogen bombs is gone, and a new generation of people is
needed: People to take care of the existing arsenal without underground tests, and
people to design and possibly build the next generation of nuclear weapons using
computer simulations and laboratory tests. Before coming to the implications of
ICF for this fourth generation of nuclear weapons, let us review the more trivial
military applications of ICF:

6.1 Nuclear weapon-effects research

ICF systems enable both nuclear and non-nuclear effects to be studied. The latter
consists of the effects of low and high altitude single and multiburst detonation in
the atmosphere. Such studies enable (a) prediction of the effects of subsequent
bursts in a multiburst environment; evaluation of the spatial extent and duration
of satellite communication interference; and (c) evaluation of radar shielding
effects which hinder detection of secondary missions [61]. Since 1964, because
of the PTBT, such problems cannot be studied with real nuclear explosions in the
atmosphere.

The total radiation ﬁeld of a nuclear explosion is composed of x-ray, gamma-
ray, neutron and electromagnetic pulse (EMP) components. The intensity of
each of these is strongly dependent upon the speciﬁc design and the yield of
the weapon. Also, the presence or absence of some of these radiations depend
on the environment in which the nuclear detonation occurs. For example, in an
underground explosion some of the radiation (e.g., EMP) will be absent compared
to an atmospheric or high altitude explosion [61].

Until the conclusion of the CTBT, synergistic testing was done through un-
derground explosions, but ICF provides now an alternative method for carrying
out such tests in the laboratory; an ICF exposure is expected to cost less than one
percent of an underground experiment.45 Furthermore, experiments with an ICF
facility are much more convenient and reproducible. For example, meter-sized

44In the meantime, the most intense neutron simulators have been accelerator-based systems
such as the LANSCE at Los Alamos, where the weapons neutron research (WNR) facility uses a
spallation neutron sources driven by a storage ring to reach instantaneous ﬂuxes of 1022 n/cm2/s
[43].

45However, for countries such as India, because of the complexity and huge investment cost of

large ICF facilities, underground tests are potentially less expensive than ICF simulations.

36

costly equipments such as reentry vehicles, missiles, satellites, can be exposed to
neutron ﬂuxes of 1013 to 1014 n/cm2/s, or 3 to 30 cal/cm2 x-rays, without com-
pletely destroying them. ICF systems can also be used for “nuclear hardening,”
and to “burn in” ready-to-ﬁeld equipments by exposing them to radiations and
replacing the weakest components that may have failed.

6.2 Nuclear weapons-physics research

After the discovery of the Teller-Ulam principle, and some major improvements
during the 1960s, progress on thermonuclear weapons slowed down dramatically.
In fact, despite more than 50 years of research and development, and after almost
two thousand test explosions, the scientiﬁc understanding of the details of the sec-
ondary system is still incomplete.46 If the CTBT would not have been concluded,
the continuation of full-scale testing would probably never have changed this sit-
uation, given the great number of complex phenomena that occur simultaneously
within the fraction of a microsecond of the explosion of an H-bomb.

A major problem with full-scale testing is that the secondary of an actual bomb
is buried deep inside the weapon, surrounded by a thick ablator and the radiation
case. Therefore, most experimental data on the thermonuclear part of the explosion
is indirect. In comparison, an ICF pellet is an almost naked secondary, and many
conﬁgurations can be tested at will, with much better diagnostic capabilities than
with underground nuclear tests. The promise of ICF is a complete description of
thermonuclear weapons physics from ﬁrst principles.

Laser and particle beams are capable of concentrating large amounts of energy
onto small targets. These targets may consist of non-nuclear materials, ﬁssile
materials, or fusion materials. The very high pressures and shock strengths possi-
ble with the kind of beams necessary to drive ICF systems, enable hydrodynamic
behavior and material equations of state to be studied in a parameter range com-
parable to that existing within exploding nuclear weapons (see Fig.6). The large
megajoule-scale ICF facilities currently under construction (e.g., NIF, LMJ, see
Table 3) will be particularly well suited for this purpose [63].

But proton beams from high-power generators, such as, for example, the
Karlsruhe Light Ion Beam Facility (KALIF) (see Table 4) in Germany enable
similar measurement with power densities of up to 200 TW/g and energies densities

46“We do not completely understand the physical processes involved in the operation of a nuclear
weapon” [62, p.24]. “We do not understand nuclear weapon processes well enough to calculate
precisely the transfer of energy within a weapon” [62, p.30]. For a more detailed development of
the subject of this subsection see, in particular, [21, Chap.3].

37

of several MJ/g [64]. As can be seen on Fig.6, such energies densities, equivalent
to 2 × 10−4 kt/kg, are only a factor of 100 less than NIF without ignition. Other
pulsed-power beam generators, such as the Saturn electron accelerator [65] in the
U.S.A., are also providing important nuclear weapons data, even though they are
primarily advocated as fusion energy research tools.47 This is also case of PBFA
(or “Z Machine”) at Sandia National Laboratory (see Table 4) which in 2003 was
able to produce a signiﬁcant amount of DD fusion neutrons that could previously
only be generated with laser beam facilities [66].

Moreover, lower-energy kilojoule-scale laser facilities equipped with a super-
laser for fast ignition — such as the 60 beams 50 kilojoule Japanese laser FIREX-II
(see Table 3)48 combined with a 4 beams 10 kilojoule petawatt superlaser — are
also expected to achieve ignition, and therefore to enable thermonuclear burn
studies comparable to those feasible with NIF or LMJ (see Fig.6).

The complexity of ICF target experiments requires that they be analysed by
simulating the experiment with two- and three-dimensional hydrocodes. Thus
veriﬁcation and improvement of weapon design code is an intrinsic part of ICF
experiments. Since ICF research is done in non-nuclear-weapon States, very
sophisticated computer codes have been developed and published by scientists
in such States. For instance, the two-dimensional hydrocode MULTI2D [67]
developed at the Max-Planck-Institut für Quantenoptik, in Garching, Germany, is
considered to be in several respects better and faster than LASNEX, the currently
standard (and partially classiﬁed) U.S. two-dimensional hydrocode. These codes
allow, in particular, the simulation of the dynamics and stability of implosion (of
either passive or nuclear materials) driven by x-rays, high-energy beams, or other
types of drivers: Chemical high-explosives, magnetic ﬁelds, electromagnetic guns,
etc.

Considerable scientiﬁc data necessary for the design of fusion systems is also
crucial for thermonuclear weapons. For example, the temperature- and pressure-
dependent opacity functions for high atomic-number elements were classiﬁed until
1993 because this information is needed to make such weapons. Techniques for
measuring these opacities are improving because of the availability of high-energy
lasers. These can be used to measure opacities directly at laser frequencies, or
indirectly by converting the laser radiation to x-radiation, and measuring opacities

47Laser facilities, however, provide a much “cleaner” working environment, especially with
respect to electromagnetic interferences from the pulsed-power equipment, and much better energy
deposition proﬁles because of the greater ﬂexibility of time-shaping the laser pulses.

48FIREX stands for “Fast Ignition Realization Experiment. For a description and planning
of the FIREX project, see the Annual progress reports 2001 and 2002 of the Institute of Laser
Engineering, Osaka University.

38

in the x-ray region which is the most relevant to nuclear weapons.

A last aspect of ICF which is of importance in weapons physics is that of
rate-dependent processes. An ICF system can easily expose a recoverable target
to neutron and x-ray ﬂuxes comparable to those of a full size nuclear explosion.

6.3 Ignition: Fourth generation nuclear weapons and inertial

fusion energy (IFE)

“Ignition,” the last item stressed in the 1997 assessment of ICF, refers to the
fact that macroscopic processes like thermonuclear plasma ignition are still not
well understood. Special ICF targets which absorb the driver energy and convert
it to x-rays enable H-bomb ignition physics to be studied directly. Moreover,
ignition techniques different from the Teller-Ulam concept can also be studied, or
discovered, using ICF. “Fast ignition” using a superlaser, or the replacement of
the “sparkplug” by a minute amount of antimatter [40], are examples of such new
concepts.

The important conclusion is that, whatever the details, successful ignition of
thermonuclear micro-explosions in the laboratory will open the way to two types
of applications which will most certainly remain in the military domain, i.e., new
types of nuclear weapons, and inertial fusion energy (IFE):

• Fourth generation nuclear weapons. Inertial conﬁnement fusion is basically
a continuous salvo of contained thermonuclear explosions. In a nominal
1 GW fusion power plant, the yield of these explosions will be equivalent
to about 100 or 1000 kg of TNT, assuming a rate of 10 or 1 detonations per
second, or else to about 10 tons of TNT, assuming a rate of one detonation
every 10 seconds. The military signiﬁcance of these yields derives from the
fact that the amount of conventional high-explosives (HE) carried by typical
warheads or bombs is limited to a range of a few 100 kg to a few tons.49
Since an ICF pellet weighs only a fraction of a gram, ICF based military
explosives would revolutionize warfare. Combined with precision guidance,
earth and concrete penetration, and other existing techniques, small and
lightweight ICF based warheads would destroy virtually all possible targets,
and render existing types of high-yield nuclear weapons obsolete. The

49The Scud ballistic missile warhead contains roughly 200 kg of HE and the Patriot anti-
missile warhead roughly 40 kg. A Tomahawk long-range cruise-missile carries a conventional
or thermonuclear warhead weighting about 120 kg, and a typical big air-dropped bomb weighs
between 500 and 2000 kg.

39

challenge, of course, is to replace the large laser- or particle-beam driver by
some sufﬁciently miniaturized device. This problem will not be discussed
here.50 However, it will be recalled that a single-use device is usually
much more compact and simple than a multi-purpose re-usable experimental
facility, and that very-high energy-density technologies such as antimatter
and superlasers are ripe to meet the challenge [21].51
In particular, in a
review of the use of antiprotons as a compact ICF driver [40] it has been
found that the number of antiprotons required for the fast ignition of ICF
pellets is several orders of magnitude smaller than was estimated by the
authors of the present review ten years earlier [39].

• Inertial fusion energy. Success with ignition, and a sufﬁcient reduction of
scale of the driver, would provide a very attractive substitute for the numerous
nuclear reactors used by the military.52 As for the possible civilian use of
IFE, the prospect is bleak. Considering the bad image that nuclear energy
has in general, it is unlikely that IFE will be found acceptable by the public
in democratic countries. For one thing, development of IFE will come in
parallel with fourth generation nuclear weapons which will use ICF pellets
as their main explosive charge. A daily load of ICF pellets for a medium
or full scale fusion power plant will consist of thousands of pellets, each of
them equivalent to one or several tons of high explosives. If these pellets
are not fabricated at the power plant, their shipment will have to be heavily
guarded. Moreover, because fusion pellets contain only weakly radioactive
materials, e.g., tritium, diversion will be difﬁcult to detect.

6.4 People

As Ted Taylor53 likes to say: “The most important things to make a bomb are
dedicated people and a good library.”54 This is made clear by the emphasis put
on “people” and “weapons stewards” by the U.S. National Academy of Science
in their 1997 assessment of the relevance of ICF to SBSS [60]. The trouble is that
this is also true for the non-nuclear-weapon States. World-wide thermonuclear

50For a development of this question see [21, Chap.4].
51These considerations about radically new types of nuclear weapons should not minimize the

potential of using ICF facilities for improving existing types of nuclear weapons [68].

52There are in the world more military nuclear reactors at sea, under the sea, and in various

military facilities, than nuclear power reactors producing electricity for civilian purposes.

53To whom we dedicated our report on fourth generation nuclear weapons [21].
54After that almost every book relevant to nuclear science had been removed from Iraq, some

people suggested that its nuclear scientists should be exiled [69].

40

energy research is creating a basis which allows the much more rapid development
of quite advanced thermonuclear weapons than would otherwise be possible.

7 Speciﬁc proliferation implications of magnetic

conﬁnement fusion (MCF)

Much of what has been said about ICF in the previous section applies to MCF, with
the obvious differences which derive from the fact that the operation of a MCF
device is characterized by a much smaller plasma density (and a correspondly
much longer burn time) than in an ICF device or a thermonuclear explosion. For
this reason, MCF physics and technology is less closely related to thermonuclear
weapons than is the case for ICF. However, there are several areas in which MCF is
providing speciﬁc direct or indirect contributions to nuclear weapons proliferation.
Let us brieﬂy mention two of them:

7.1 Nuclear weapons effects

Tokamak test reactors have been proposed for nuclear weapon-effects research
[70]. The main advantage is the very large volume with uniform irradiation ﬂux
of 1013 n/cm2/s offered. However, because of the very long pulselength compared
with ICF, tokamak test reactors are best suited for determining the permanent
damage due to neutron (and x-ray) radiation to total-dose-dependent rather than
dose-rate-dependent devices and subsystems.
In 1982, it was hoped that the
Princeton tokamak fusion test reactor could be used to help deﬁne an optimized
tokamak radiation effects facility that could have been implemented by the early
1990s in a suitable location [70].

7.2 Military spin-offs of MCF technology

In a compilation of several surveys, it was found that the most numerous technology
transfers from magnetic fusion research to other areas of science and technology
were in the domains of magnet technology, power supplies, materials technology,
particle beams, power supplies and vacuum technology [71]. These types of
spin-offs are similar to those found for high-energy particle accelerator physics
research, a domain which like MCF produces relatively few spin-offs of direct
importance to industrial development.

41

Superconductive magnet are of great importance for strategic military devel-
opments in outer space and ballistic missile defense, as well as for tactical de-
velopments such as electromagnetic-pulse generators and electromagnetic guns.
The use of cryogenic and superconductive magnets in space is been investigated
for pulsed-power generation, power conditioning and energy storage, and was
expected to play a major role in the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program
[72].

Superconductive magnets are also of great interest for the “plasma separation
process” [57] which is potentially the most attractive technique for very-high
throughput isotope separation [73, 74]. Large scale isotope enrichment is important
for the production of 235U as well as for the enrichment of various types of medium
weight nuclear species if “isotopic tailoring” becomes an important feature of new
materials. Such materials are expected to be necessary for making the ﬁrst wall of
MCF fusion vessels (in order to minimize their erosion and radioactivation due to
the intense neutron bombardment from the burning plasma) as well for a number
of military applications where similar or related properties are important.

7.3 Examples of spin-off technologies expected for ITER

To conclude this section, we quote in extenso the examples given in section 5.13
devoted to the spin-off beneﬁts of fusion technologies in the summary of the report
of the Special Committee on the ITER Project of the Japanese Atomic Energy
Commission. This is not to imply that the examples given by the Committee are
necessarily relevant to the proliferation of nuclear weapons, but an illustration that
they are indeed mostly dual-purpose technologies of great military signiﬁcance:

“Examples of spin-off technologies include the development of large
superconducting coils for ITER, which reduced the cost by 75% of
niobium/tin superconducting wire material necessary of the genera-
tion of the high-magnetic ﬁelds. This has allowed the high-magnetic
ﬁeld MRI used for medical diagnostics to become relatively common-
place. At the same time, the AC loss has been reduced by 80% of
that for conventional superconductors, even at the strong magnetic
ﬁeld of 13 tesla. This makes it feasible to increase the stored energy
in a superconducting power storage system by a factor of 5–7 when
compared with a system designed with conventional technology and
operating at 5–6 tesla. In addition, vacuum pumps for high thermal
efﬁciency refrigerating machines, which operate below 4 K, have been
developed and have been adopted at the Fermi National Accelerator

42

Laboratory in the US and CERN in Europe. This also demonstrates
the enormous contribution of fusion research to the frontiers of sci-
ence. The technology of producing large positive-ion-beam currents,
originally developed for the heating of fusion plasmas, has already
pervaded into the technologies for products used in daily life, such
the semiconductors used in the home electric appliances. In addition,
the large negative-ion-beam current technology developed for ITER
is expected to give birth to completely new research ﬁelds, such as the
creation of previously unknown materials. The negative-ion beam,
which has monochromatic energy, is also suitable for manufacture of
intricate semiconductor devices. This allows the realization of low-
cost, mass-produced single crystal silicon thin ﬁlms for solar cells.
Furthermore, high-power radio-frequency sources used for plasma
heating are already applied to the manufacture of high-performance
ceramics. Potential applications of these sources extend from solving
environmental problems to the radar used in outer space. The integra-
tion of component technology for the fusion reactor also advances the
systematic development of technologies addressing integration, such
as system engineering, control engineering, and safety engineering.
Additionally, an exploratory investigation related to the processing
of radioactive waste by utilizing a fusion reactor itself as an intense
neutron source is also being carried out and seems promising” [6,
p.274-275].

8 Proliferation implications of alternative fusion

systems (AFS)

Besides the two main contemporary contenders to fusion power, i.e., MCF and ICF,
a number of more or less attractive alternative schemes have been proposed: pinch
devices, magnetized fuels and magnetic compression devices, chemical explosive
driven systems, plasma focus, impact fusion, etc.

Like MCF and ICF, these concepts have generally been ﬁrst studied at nuclear
weapons laboratories because it was important to carefully evaluate their military
potential before letting the scientiﬁc community at large working on them.

A particularly interesting example from the point of view of horizontal ther-
monuclear weapons proliferation is the so-called plasma focus which has been

43

independently discovered in Russia in 1962 and the United States in 1964.55 Es-
sentially, this is a fast dynamic Z-pinch in which the stored magnetic energy is
rapidly converted into plasma energy and then compressed by its own magnetic
ﬁeld. It consists of two cylindrical electrodes between which a powerful electric
discharge is initiated with a capacitor bank in a DD or DT atmosphere, and is
therefore the simplest high-ﬂux fusion neutrons and x-rays generator that exists
[43, p.172].

In the United States, plasma focus development culminated in 1974 with a
device called “DPF 6 1/2” which produced ≈ 1020 DT -fusion neutrons at a
repetition rate of about four pulses per hour. If such discharges could be generated
at a higher rate and over long periods of time, a hybrid system could be built,
producing tens of kilograms of plutonium (or hundreds of grams of tritium) per
year [76, 77]. While this possibility seems to be relatively remote at present, and
will almost certainly never be cost effective, it should not be excluded as a simple
path to a nuclear weapon capability, similar in kind to the “calutron” enrichment
route taken by Iraq in the 1980s.

Because of its simple construction, and its richness in plasma physics phe-
nomena, dense plasma focus devices have been constructed in many advanced
(e.g., [78]) and developing countries. Looking at the recent literature, the latter
include, for example, India [79], Egypt [80], Malaysia [81], etc. The construction
and the operation of these devices, as well as the analysis of the data provided by
them, allow to train physicists specializing in experimental or theoretical plasma
physics, and give the possibility to travel abroad to actively participate in interna-
tional conferences. They may also provide some indigenous expertise in a number
of technical aspects connected with the physics of simple thermonuclear weapons,
including deuterium and tritium handling technology.

9

(De)classiﬁcation and latent proliferation

History of the past 50 years shows that most scientiﬁc and technical knowledge
pertinent to nuclear or thermonuclear weapons and reactors has been kept secret as
long as possible by all countries which had a lead in these areas. Similarly, history
shows that many (and possibly all) other countries were interested by nuclear and
thermonuclear energy primarily because of their military applications, and only

55The dense plasma focus is also known under the name of “Mather gun”, from the name of its
American inventor, Joseph W. Mather, who recently passed away. In his obituary [75], the DD
neutron yield of the most powerful DPF device known to have been built is mistyped 1012 instead
of 1018.

44

secondarily because of their potential applications as sources of energy.

The process of declassiﬁcation of information by the nuclear-weapon States is
therefore guided by political considerations in which military and foreign policy
reasons play the most important role. For example, as is shown by the analysis
of President Eisenhower “Atoms for Peace” initiative of 1953, and of the Western
Europe reaction to it, the atoms-for-peace policy of the United States was a foreign
policy concept — neither an energy policy nor a trade or economic policy [82, 83].
Its main rationale was to demonstrate ‘world leadership’ in order to bind neutral
or politically indifferent countries to the West. As a reaction to this sensational
turn in Washington’s nuclear attitude, Moscow began shortly thereafter to join
the proliferation of basic nuclear know-how and equipment — although only
within its own hemisphere, for instance China and Eastern Europe. Consequently,
most countries with sufﬁcient resources launched a nuclear power development
program which gave them a politically correct justiﬁcation to achieve a latent
nuclear weapon capability, which could become an actual capability if needed at
some point.

In the area of thermonuclear fusion, the secrecy that had been imposed on its
development was lifted in the mid-1950s when an outstanding Russian scientists,
I.V. Kurchatov, presented in England results obtained in the Soviet Union with
the magnetic pinch device. This led the United Kingdom to declassify part of
its controlled thermonuclear fusion research with the publication, in 1957, of a
series of six articles in the Proceedings of the Physical Society comprising the
fundamental paper of J.D. Lawson deﬁning the “Lawson criterion” for break-
even in thermonuclear fusion [84]. This in turn helped to persuade the American
authorities to declassify the whole magnetic conﬁnement approach to fusion. At
the second Atoms for Peace Conference in 1958, a complete disclosure was made
by the United States and was fully reciprocated by the Russians.

This sequence of events illustrates that the Soviets decided to use their lead-
ership in MCF research as part of their answer to Eisenhower’s atoms-for-peace
initiative. They did that because they felt that while their “tokamak” device was
far better than anything in the West, forcing declassiﬁcation in that area would not
reduce their advance in the ﬁeld.

From then on, more and more information was declassiﬁed, mostly following
the publication of a growing number of sensitive results in the scientiﬁc and
technical literature by an increasing number of researchers from all over the
world. While possibly many of these results have been published because of non-
existent or ineffective classiﬁcation policies in some countries, most of them have
been deliberately published (or not classiﬁed) for various reasons. In particular,
many signiﬁcant research results have been published by scientists simply in

45

order for them or their country to get credit for being the ﬁrst to have discovered
something. Similarly, as an element of their deterrence policy, threshold nuclear
States (especially India and Israel) and latent nuclear powers56 tend to display their
level of understanding of the physics of nuclear weapons by publishing results that
have not already been published by others.

In the last twenty years, however, the main push towards the declassiﬁcation
of thermonuclear weapons physics has come from the scientists of the two major
non-nuclear-weapon industrial powers: Japan and Germany. Japan, in particular,
has been so vigorously pursuing its very ambitious ICF program that it has found
itself in the position of the world leader at several occasions. In 1986, for example,
a thermonuclear neutron yield of 1012 was achieved with the Gekko XII laser —
a record that the U.S. and French nuclear scientists took several years to surpass.
Today, Japan is still leading the world with a pellet compression of 600 times its
initial solid density, a record achieved in 1989–90. Similarly, in 1998, Germany
has been the ﬁrst country in the world to publish unambiguous results showing
that thermonuclear reactions can be induced by a table-top size superlaser [86],
something that military laboratories in nuclear-weapon States had most probably
already done before, but not published for obvious reasons. Further progress in that
direction was than made by Japan, which was ﬁrst to report in 2002 a considerable
neutron yield enhancement with fast heating a compressed ICF pellet by means of
a petawatt superlaser beam [87].

On the theoretical side, where both Japan and Germany are publishing ev-
erything, important results have been disclosed starting around 1982, when Jür-
gen Meyer-ter-Vehn published his now famous energy gain model of fusion tar-
gets [88]. For instance, many detailed analytical and numerical simulations57 of
indirect-drive ICF, which use methods that are directly applicable to x-ray driven
thermonuclear weapons secondaries, have been published by Japanese and Ger-
man scientists, years before the corresponding calculations had been declassiﬁed
in the United States or France.

Consequently, when the United States Government decided in 1993 to de-
classify formerly secret material concerning the indirect-drive approach to ICF,
only a small part of what was declassiﬁed was really new to the open scientiﬁc
community. On the other hand, many European researchers in the ﬁeld expected

56In the late 1970s and early 1980s Swiss scientists published some of the most detailed simula-
tions of the dynamics of ﬁssion explosions that have ever been published. This was at a time when
Switzerland was still “defending” its status of a threshold nuclear-weapon State [85, p.70]. Later,
in 1985, the German Ministry of defense approached the Swiss government to obtain copies of
several technical reports on nuclear and thermonuclear weapons that had been produced by Swiss
scientists [85, p.81-82].

57Using very advanced two-dimensional hydrodynamic simulation codes, e.g., [67].

46

that the U.S. Government declassiﬁcation act of 1993 would increase the priority
given to ICF by their authorities. For example, in justifying its recommendation to
increase the European Union funding of ICF, a European Science and Technology
Assembly (ESTA) committee appointed in 1995 referred to this declassiﬁcation
act as if the mere fact of declassifying something would remove its military po-
tential [89]. Since this recommendation was not followed by the European Union
(possibly because of the opposition of France and the United Kingdom) some
scientists were led to qualify their governments as being “irresponsible” (see, e.g.,
[90]).

The problem is that latent thermonuclear proliferation, the fact that countries
such as Germany and Japan are able to build thermonuclear weapons on short
notice, and even to eventually equip themselves directly with fourth generation
nuclear weapons, bypassing the acquisition of previous generations of nuclear
weapons, is not a trivial situation at all. In particular, it is not the result of any
recent short-term political decision. It is neither something that can be changed
by trivial political action.

Latent thermonuclear proliferation is the result of political decision made in
the 1940s and 1950s which gave to (thermo)-nuclear science and (thermo)-nuclear
energy the privileged status they still have today. Because advanced thermonu-
clear research is now part of the normal scientiﬁc activity of all large industrial
countries, their emergence as latent thermonuclear powers was unavoidable. In
other words, latent thermonuclear proliferation and the possibility of fourth gen-
eration nuclear weapons in non-nuclear-weapon States is the result of a political
and technological dynamics which is today to a large extent out of the control of
both the scientiﬁc and political communities. In particular, this dynamics has in-
stitutionalized thermonuclear energy research in such a way that it is very difﬁcult
to stop it, even though it is more and more overlapping with the most advanced
thermonuclear weapons related research done in the nuclear-weapon States.

An aggravating circumstance is the increasing reliance on virtual capabilities
by both nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States. This is the direct conse-
quence of the unwillingness of the nuclear-weapon States to give up their nuclear
weapons, and of their decision to replace actual tests by “simulation” and “science
based stockpile stewardship” programs. Instead of having unambiguously kept or
rejected the nuclear option, the nuclear-weapons-states are therefore lead to foster
“visible technical deterrence.” In the words of the director of the nuclear weapons
technology program at the Los Alamos National Laboratory:

“As I see it, at the end of the Cold War the nuclear weapons laboratories
took a new mission. Not only must we maintain the stockpile, but we

47

must do so in a manner visible to the world, a manner that demonstrates
our technical competence in scientiﬁc and engineering ﬁelds that are
obviously related to nuclear weapons” [19, p.2].

This is precisely what Japan and Germany (and to a lesser extent some smaller
countries such as South Korea) are also able to do without having to spend
any resource on the maintenance of an expensive stockpile of high-yield nuclear
weapons, which is why the continuing expansion of their thermonuclear research
programs, and speciﬁc issues such as the possible siting of ITER in Japan, have
such important political and strategic implications.

10 Conclusions

In this review, we attempted a systematical analysis of the actual and latent nuclear
weapons proliferation implications of thermonuclear energy systems.

The ﬁrst conclusion is that the main ﬁndings conﬁrm those of earlier reviews
of the subject (e.g., [43]). For instance, the development of thermonuclear energy
systems (especially those based on ICF) enhances the knowledge of thermonu-
clear weapon physics, provides an impetus for the development of a number of
technologies which have mostly military applications, and leads to new methods
for producing large quantities of military useful nuclear fuels such as tritium.

The second conclusion is that the successful development of any kind of ther-
monuclear fusion power plant would pose very serious nonproliferation problems
because very large amounts of tritium (which are on the order of kilograms per
day) would be produced in these plants. Moreover, if the plants would be based on
inertial conﬁnement fusion, operation would require the detonation of many thou-
sands of “micro hydrogen bombs” every day, each of them with a yield measured
in tons equivalent of high explosives. Similarly to tritium, these pellets would have
to be safeguarded because they could possibly be used as very compact military
explosives which would revolutionize conventional and nuclear warfare.

The third conclusion is that the widespread availability of supercomputers, and
numerous scientiﬁc/technical advances such as the discovery of the superlaser,
tend to decrease the scientiﬁc and technological gap between the nuclear-weapon
and non-nuclear-weapon States. The result is that thermonuclear energy research
enhances the competence of the most advanced non-nuclear-weapon States to the
point where their status of latent thermonuclear powers becomes more and more
equivalent to one of actual thermonuclear powers.

48

References

http:www.iter.org

http:www.iter.ca

[1] For

the ofﬁcial view see the web site of

the ITER organization,

[2] For a critical view see the web site of the Canadian opposition to ITER,

[3] C.E. Singer, The new nuclear arms control environment: Trip report and
project conclusions, ACDIS occasional paper (Univerity of Illinois, Urbana-
Champaign, September 2001) 40 pp. Available at http://www.acdis.uiuc.edu

[4] J. Ahearne and R. Fonck, Interim report of the National Research Council
Burning Plasma Assessment Committee (Washington, December 20, 2002)
12 pp. Available at http://ﬁre.pppl.gov/fesac dev path wksp.htm

[5] Safety Chapter 5 of

the ITER Technical Basis Plant Description
Document G A0 FDR 01-07-13 R1.0 (13 July 2001). Available at
http://www.iter.org/ITERPublic/ITER/PDD5.pdf

[6] Summary of the report of the Special Committee on the ITER Project of
the Japanese Atomic Energy Commission, (May 17, 2000) available at
http://www.naka.jaeri.go.jp/SCI/6%20Chapter%205.pdf

[7] Plans Chapter 6 of

the ITER Technical Basis Plant Description
Document G A0 FDR 01-07-13 R1.0 (13 July 2001). Available at
http://www.iter.org/ITERPublic/ITER/PDD5.pdf

[8] Joint Assessment of Speciﬁc Sites ad hoc group, Rokkasho Site, JASS ad-
hoc group meeting ﬁndings, Rokkasho 2–5 October 2002 (24 January 2003)
45 pp. Available at http://www.iter.org

[9] ITER: Washington prend fait et cause publiquement pour le site japon-
ais, Agence France Presse (9 janvier 2003, 17h17). Available at
http://fr.news.yahoo.com/040109/202/3l16p.html

[10] U.S. backs Japan as fusion reactor site, International Herald Tribune (Jan-

uary 9, 2004). Available at http:www.iht.com/articles/124371.html

[11] Y. Suematsu (chair), Future Direction of National Fusion Research, (Coun-
cil for Science and Technology, Ministry of Education, Sports, Culture,
Science and Technology, Tokyo, January 8, 2003) 31pp. Available at
http://www.ofes.fusion.doe.gov/International/ja fusion wg report 2003.pdf

49

[12] H. Kawamura, Establishment of a mass-production technology for
(March 14, 2000) Available at

ceramic tritium breeder pebbles,
http://www.jaeri.go.jp/english/press/000314/

[13] S. Konishi, First large scale experiments on simulated fusion fuel pro-
cessing system under a Japan-US collaboration, (1995). Available at
http://inisjp.tokai.jaeri.go.jp/ACT95E/Frame95.htm

[14] M. Abdou, et al., U.S. participation in the ITER test blanket module (TBM)

program (2003) available at
www.apam.columbia.edu/fusion/Presentations Papers/ Abdou White Paper.pdf

[15] S. Willms, Tritium supply considerations, Presentation at the Fusion De-
velopment Paths Workshop (San Diego, January 14, 2003) available at
http://ﬁre.pppl.gov/fesac dev path wksp.htm

[16] H.A. Feiveson, Latent Proliferation: The International Security Implica-
tions of Civilian nuclear Power (Ph.D. Thesis, Woodrow Wilson School of
Public and International Affairs, Princeton university, 1972).

[17] M.J. Mazarr, Virtual nuclear arsenals, Survival /37/ (Autumn 1995) 7–26.

[18] K. Waltz, Thoughts about virtual nuclear arsenals, The Washington Quar-

terly /20/ (1997) 153–161.

[19] S. Younger, View from the nuclear weapons technology program ofﬁce,
Weapons Insider /3/ (Los Alamos National Laboratory, Nov./Dec. 1996)
1–2.

[20] Ofﬁce of Arms Control and Nonproliferation, The national ignition facility
(NIF) and the issue of nonproliferation, Final study, NN–40 (U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy, December 19, 1995) 82 pp.

[21] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, The physics of thermonuclear explosives,
inertial conﬁnement fusion, and the quest for fourth generation nuclear
weapons, INESAP Tech. Rep. No. 1 (IANUS, Darmstadt University of
Technology, Darmstadt, Germany, 1997, seventh edition, third printing,
October 2002) ISBN 3-933071-02-X, 177 pp.

[22] U.S. Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of Declassiﬁcation, Drawing back the
curtain of secrecy — Restricted data declassiﬁcation policy, 1946 to present,
RDD–1 (June 1, 1994) 118 pp. The most recent update of this docu-
ment, RDD–5 (January 1, 1999), is available at the DOE internet site:
www.doe.gov/html/osti/opennet/rdd-5.html

50

[23] E. Kankeleit et al., Bericht zur Waffentauglichkeit von Reaktorplutonium
(Technische Hochschule Darmstadt, Institut f¨r Kernphysik, Mai 1988) 77
pp.

[24] J.C. Mark, Explosive properties of reactor-grade plutonium, Science &

Global Security /4/ (1993) 111–128.

[25] India opens its third reprocessing plant, Nature 395 (25 September 1998)

316.

[26] L. Wood and J. Nuckolls, The development of nuclear explosives, in H. Mark
and L. Wood, eds., Energy in Physics, War and Peace — A festschrift cele-
brating Edward Teller’s 80th birthday (Kluwer Academic Publ., Dordrecht,
1988) 311–317.

[27] J.C. Mark et al.,Weapon design — We’ve done a lot but can’t say much, Los
Alamos Science (Los Alamos National Laboratory, Winter/Spring 1983)
159–163.

[28] R.C. Kirkpatrick and J.A. Wheeler, The physics of DT ignition in small

fusion targets, Nuclear Fusion /21/ (1981) 389–401.

[29] K. McCarthy (chair), Non-electric applications of fusion, Final report to

FESAC (July 31, 2003) 58 pp. Available at
http://www.ofes.fusion.doe.gov/More HTML/FESAC/FESACFinalNon-Elec.pdf

[30] A.A. Harms and J. Ligou, The systematics of emerging nuclear energy
concepts, Atomkernergie · Kerntechnik (Independent Jounal on Energy
Systems and Radiation) /36/ (1980) 3–6.

[31] M.D. Perry and G. Mourou, Terawatt to petawatt subpicosecond lasers,

Science /264/ (1994) 917–924.

[32] C.J. Joshi and P.B. Corkum, Interactions of ultra-intense laser light with

matter, Physics Today (January 1995) 36–43.

[33] G.A. Mourou, C.P.J. Barty and M.D. Perry, Ultrahigh-intensity lasers:
Physics of the extreme on the tabletop, Physics Today (January 1998) 22–
28.

[34] M. Tabak et al., Ignition and high gain with ultrapowerful lasers, Phys.

Plasmas /1/ (1994) 1626–1634.

51

[35] A. Pukhov and J. Meyer-ter-Vehn, Fast ignitor concept. Numerical simu-
lations, in S. Nakai and G.H. Miley, eds., Laser Interactions and Related
Plasma Phenomena /12/ (American Institute of Physics, New York, 1966)
213–218.

[36] K.

Yamakwa,
release

Ultra-high

power
28,

laser

developed,
at

Available

Press
http://www.jaeri.go.jp/english/press/2003/030328/

(JAERI, March

2003).

[37] A. Gsponer, Superlaser development in Germany, INESAP Bulletin No.19

(January 2002) 79. Available at
http://www.inesap.org/bulletin19/bul19art26.htm

[38] GSI scientiﬁc report 2002, Report GSI 2003-1, (GSI, February 2003). Avail-

able at http://www.gsi.de/annrep2002

[39] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, Antimatter induced fusion and thermonuclear
explosions, Atomkernenergie · Kerntechnik (Independent Jounal on Energy
Systems and Radiation) /49/ (1987) 198–203.

[40] L.J. Perkins, Antiprotons fast ignition for inertial conﬁnement fusion, Report
UCRL-ID-128923 (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, October 24,
1997) 19 pp; Fusion Technology 36 (1999) 219–233.

[41] L.J. Perkins, C.D. Orth, and M. Tabak, On the Utility of Antiprotons as
Drivers for Inertial Conﬁnement Fusion, Report UCRL-ID-TR-200850
(Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, June 15, 2003) 52 pp., submitted to
Nuclear Fusion.

[42] M.S. Weiss, Nuclear isomers: ultrahigh energy, Energy and Technology
Review (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, February 1993) 101–
102.

[43] A. Gsponer et al., Emerging nuclear energy systems and nuclear weapon
proliferation, Atomkernenergie · Kerntechnik (Independent Jounal on En-
ergy Systems and Radiation) /43/ (1983) 169–174.

[44] B.R. Leonard and U.P. Jenquin, The quality of ﬁssile fuel bred in a fusion
reactor blanket, in G. Kulcinski, ed., Proc. of the 2nd Topical Meeting on
the Techn. of Contr. Thermo. Nucl. Fusion, Richland, Wash., 21-23 Sept.
1976, Vol. II (1976) 711–722.

[45] H. Hora, Plasmas at High Temperature and Density, Lectures notes in
physics No. m1 (Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 1991) 442 pp.

52

[46] W.A. Lokke and T.K. Fowler, Stockpile tritium production from fusion,
Report UCRL–94003 (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 1986) 9
pp.

[47] C. Macilwain, Labs collide over rival tritium schemes, Nature /381/ (1996)

[48] J. Weisman, Could defense accelerator be a windfall for science?, Science

/26/ (1995) 914–915.

[49] G.P. Lawrence, High-Power proton Linac for APT: Status of De-
the 19th Int. Lin. Acc. Conf.,
1998) 26–30. Available at

sign and Development, Proc. of
LINAC98,
http://epaper.kek.jp/l98/PAPERS/MO2002.PDF

(Chicago, August 23–38,

[50] A. Gsponer, Energy ampliﬁer could have military uses, Nature /387/ (1997)

543.

226.

[51] J.-M. Lagniel, High-intensity linac studies in France, Proc. of the 19th
Int. Lin. Acc. Conf., LINAC98, (Chicago, August 23–38, 1998) 706–710.
Available at http://epaper.kek.jp/l98/PAPERS/WE2003.PDF

[52] M. Mizumoto, et al., A High Intensity Proton Linac Development for
, Proc. of the 19th Int. Lin. Acc.
the JAERI Neutron Science Project,
Conf., LINAC98, (Chicago, August 23–38, 1998) 349–353. Available at
http://epaper.kek.jp/l98/PAPERS/TU1004.PDF

[53] Y. Oyama, Present Status of
ton Accelerator Project
ing
Sources, Düsseldorf-Neuss,
http://www.fz-juelich.de/ess/datapool/icanspdf/Oyama-G2-ICANS Paper.pdf

J-PARC — High Intensity Pro-
16th Meet-
on Advanced Neutron
(May 12–15, 2003) 5pp. Available at

in
International Collaboration

ICANS-XVI,

Japan,

the

of

[54] B.H. Choi et al., Status of the low energy accelerator development for the
Korean multi-purpose accelerator complex (KOMAC), Proc. of an advisory
group meeting held in Tajon, South Korea, 1–4 November 1999, IAEA-
TECDOC-1365 (IAEA, August 2003) 153–165.

[55] K. Okamoto, Improvement of efﬁciency of isotope separation using nuclear
excitation by electron transition, J. of Nucl. Sci. and Tech., /14/ (1977)
762–765.

[56] A. Gsponer and J.-Hurni, Iraq’s calutrons: Electromagnetic isotope separa-
tion, beam technology, and nuclear weapon proliferation, Report ISRI-95-3
(19 October 1995) 56 pp.

53

[57] M.A. Hilal et al., High uniformity large solenoid for magnetic isotope
separation, IEEE Trans. Magn. /24/ (1988) 938–941; D.L. Walker et al.,
Engineering the largest isotope separation magnet, ibid, 874–877.

[58] C.R. Phipps et al., ORION: Clearing near-Earth space debris using a 20-
kW, 530-nm, Earth-based, repetitively pulsed laser, Laser and Part. Beams
/14/ (1996) 1–44.

[59] C.M. Stickley, Statement by Dr. C.M. Stickley, Director, Division of Laser
Fusion, on Inertial Conﬁnement Fusion, before the Senate Armed Services
Committee (U.S. Senate, 25 March 1977) 60 pp.

[60] S.E. Koonin et al., Review of the Department of Energy’s Inertial Conﬁne-
ment Fusion Program (National Research Council, National Academy of
Science, Washington, 1997) 55 pp.

[61] A.J. Toepfer and L.D. Posey, The application of inertial conﬁnement fusion
to weapon technology Report SAND-77-0913 (Sandia National Laboratory,
Albuquerque, 1978) 47 pp.

[62] S.B. Libby, NIF and national security, Energy and Technology Review
(Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, December 1994) 23–32.

[63] E.M. Campbell, N.C. Holme, S.B. Libby, B.A. Remington and E. Teller,
The evolution of high-energy-density physics: from nuclear testing to the
superlasers, Laser and Part. Beams /15/ (1997) 607–626.

[64] K. Baumung et al., Shock-wave physics experiments with high-power proton

beams, Laser and Part. Beams /14/ (1996) 181–209.

[65] R.E. Olson et al., Inertial conﬁnement fusion ablator physics experiments

on Saturn and Nova, Phys. Plasmas /4/ (1997) 1818–1824.

[66] B. Schwarzschild, Inertial-conﬁnement fusion with pulsed power yields

thermonuclear neutrons, Physics Today (July 2003) 19–21.

[67] R. Ramis and J. Meyer-ter-Vehn, MULTI2D — A computer code for two-
dimensional radiation hydrodynamics, Report MPQ 174 (Max-Planck-
Institut für Quantenoptik, Graching, August 1992) 47 pp.

[68] C.E. Pain and M.G. McKenzie, END RUN — The U.S. Government’s plan
for designing nuclear weapons and simulating nuclear explosions under the
Comprehensive test ban treaty (Natural Resources Defense Council, 1200
New York Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20005, August 1997) 73 pp.

54

[69] D. Albright and K. O’Neill, Iraq: Resettle the scientists, Bull. of the Atom.

Sci. (Jan./Feb. 1998) 17.

[70] D.L. Jassby, Tokamak fusion generators for nuclear radiation effects testing,

IEEE Trans. on Nucl. Sci. /NS-29/ (1982) 1519–1524.

[71] T. Umezu et al., Interactions with other ﬁelds, Nucl. fusion /20/ (1990)

1935–1949.

[72] E.M.W. Leung et al., Lightweight magnets for space applications, IEEE

Trans. Magnetics /MAG-23/ (1987) 1331–1335.

[73] J.G. Tracy, Isotope separation program — past and future, Nucl. Inst. and

Methods, /A282/ (1989) 261–266.

[74] A. Tikhomirov, Modern tendencies in the enrichment of stable isotopes and
their application in the USSR and elsewhere, Nucl. Inst. and Methods, /B70/
(1992) 1–4.

[75] H.S. Ahluwalia and K.D. Ware, Joseph Walter Mather, Physics Today (April

1998) 88.

[76] A.G. Fischer, The Fiscatron fusion reactor concept, Kerntechnik (Indepen-
dent Jounal on Energy Systems and Radiation) /20/ (1978) 182–184.

[77] V.A. Gribov, Feasibility study of developing a hybrid reactor based on
the DPF device, Atomkernenergie · Kerntechnik (Independent Jounal on
Energy Systems and Radiation) /36/ (1980) 167–169.

[78] H. Schmidt at al., Neutron and ion emission characteristics of the PO-
SEIDON plasma focus device, Atomkernenergie · Kerntechnik /44/ (1984)
191–194.

[79] R.K. Root and A. Shyam, Delayed hot spots in a low energy plasma focus,

Pramana – J. Phys. /1/ (1991) 93–103.

[80] W. Sharkawy, Magnetic tearing in plasma focus, Proc. of the 7th Int. Conf.
Emerg. on Nucl. Energy Syst. (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1994) 243–247.

[81] S.P. Moo and C.S. Wong, Time-resolved hard x-ray emission from a small

plasma focus, Laser and Part. Beams. /13/ (1995) 129–134.

[82] R. Kollert, Die Politik der latenten Proliferation. Milit¨arische Nutzung
‘friedlicher’ Kerntechnik in Westeuropa, Dissertation (Deutscher Univer-
sit¨atsverlag, Wiesbaden, 1994) 551 pp., ISBN-3-8244-4156-X.

55

[83] R. Kollert, “Atoms-for-peace:” A foreign policy concept of the Cold War
gets into a clue to latent proliferation, INESAP-Information Bulletin, No.
9 (May 1996) 22–24.

[84] J.D. Lawson, Some criteria for a power producing thermonuclear reactor,

Proc. Roy. Soc. /B70/ (1957) 6–10.

[85] J. St¨ussi-Lauterburg, Historischer Abriss zur Frage einer Schweizer Nuk-
learbewaffnung (Swiss Military Department, Federal Military Library and
Historical Service, Spring 1995, declassiﬁed 25 April 1996) 99 pp.

[86] G. Pretzler et al., Neutron production by 200 mJ ultrashort laser pulses, to

appear in Phys. Rev. /E/ (July 1998) 4 pp.

[87] Neutron yield enhancement with short-pulse heating, Nature, 418 (2002)

933.

[88] J. Meyer-ter-Vehn, On energy gain of fusion targets: The model of Kidder-

Bodner improved, Nucl. Fusion /22/ (1982) 561–565.

[89] J.M. Rojo, Recommendations and report of the ESTA Working Party
on inertial conﬁnement options to controlled thermonuclear fusion,
ESTA/ASS/96–202 (European Science and Technology Assembly, Brus-
sels, 4 April 1996) 21 pp.

[90] H. Bluhm, Guest editor’s preface: Inertial Fusion Energy (IFE) in Europe,

Laser and Part. Beams /15/ (1997) 483.

56

Laser beam driven ICF facilities
Location
System name

Country

Energy
[kJ]/[ns]

No. Wave
length

beams

USA

Japan

France

China

UK

Russia
India
Italy
Israel

USA

Japan

UK

China

Germany

South Korea

Glass lasers

Omega
Omega-UG
Nova
NIF
Gekko-XII
FIREX-II
Koyo
LULI
Octal
Phébus
Mégajoule
Shen-Guang-I
Shen-Guang-II
Shen-Guang-III
Helen
Vulcan
Delﬁn

LLE
LLE
LLNL
LLNL
Osaka
Osaka
Osaka
Palaiseau
Limeil
Limeil
Bordeaux
Shanghai
Shanghai
Shanghai
AWE
RAL
Moscow
Indore
Frascati
Soreq
Soreq
GSI
PHELIX booster GSI
Sinmyung-I

ABC
ALADIN
Continuum

Mercury
Nike
Ashura
Super-Ashura
Sprite
Titania
Tin-Guang

Taejon
KrF lasers

LANL
NRL
Ibaraki
Ibaraki
RAL
RAL
Shanghai
Iodine lasers

3/0.6
40/3
50/1
1800/5
30/1
50/3
4000/6

0.5/0.6
0.9/1
14/2.5
1800/15
1.8/1
6.4/1
60/1
1/1
3/1
3/1
0.4/3
0.2/2
0.1/3
0.07/7

0.1/15
4/10
0.08/0.5

1/5
5/4
0.7/15
7/22
0.09/60
0.85/0.5
0.4/

0.35
0.35 C
0.35
T
0.35 C
1.06
0.35 D
0.35 D
1.06
1.06
0.53
T
0.35 C
1.06
1.06
0.35 D
0.53
0.53
1.06
1.06
0.53
1.06
1.06

C

1.06

0.25
0.25 C
0.25
0.25 C
0.25
0.27

24
60
10
192
12
60∼96
400
6
8
2
288
2
8
60
3
6
108
4
2
1
1
1
1
1

1
56
6
12
6
1
1

12
1
1

Russia
Germany

Iskra-5
Asterix IV
Asterix IV

VNIIEP
Garching
Garching

15/0.25
2/5
1/0.3

1.30
1.30
1.30

Table 1: Major operating, planned, or dismantled laser driven ICF facilities. In
the last column C means that the facility is under construction, D that it is in the
design stage, and T that is has been taken to pieces. The wave length is in µm.

Superlasers

[J]

USA

Name

Location

Energy Duration

[ps]

Power
[TW]

Intensity
[W/cm2]

Petawatt
JanUSP

Trident

LABS II

LLNL(dismantled) 1000.00
15.00
LLNL
3.00
UM, Ann Arbor
1.50
LANL
1.00
UC, San Diego
0.25
LANL
0.07
UM, Ann Arbor
0.06
WSU, Pullman

20-0.500
0.085
0.400
0.300
0.020
0.300
0.025
0.026

(1000.0) > 1021
2 1021
200.0
4 1018
4.0
5.0 > 1019
50.0
∼ 1.0
3.0
2.0

1 1019

PW
Petawatt
PW-M

ILE
APRC (JAERI)
ILE
RIKEN

Vulcan
Astra
Titania
Sprite

RAL
RAL
RAL
RAL

CESTA, Bordeaux
CEL-V, Limeil
LOA, Palaiseau
LOA, Palaiseau
U. of Bordeaux

GSI, Darmstadt
MBI, Berlin
MPQ, Garching
MBI, Berlin
MPQ, Garching
IOQ, Jena

Petawatt
P-102

ELIA

PHELIX
Ti-Nd
ATLAS
Ti
ATLAS

BM

Japan

500.00
30.00
60.00
0.05

UK

360.00
1.00
1.00
0.25

France

1000.00
50.00
0.80
0.03
0.01

1300.00
10.00
5.00
0.30
0.80
0.22

Russia

China

Germany

0.500
0.030
0.500
0.500

0.700
0.100
0.400
0.380

1.000
0.500
0.030
0.100
0.010

1000.0 > 1020
850.0 > 1020
100.0 > 1019
1 1017
∼ 0.1

500.0
∼ 10.0
∼ 2.5
∼ 0.7

5 1020

4 1017

1000.0 Constr.
80.0 > 1019
5 1019
30.0
1 1018
∼ 0.3
1 1018
1.0

0.420 ∼ 1000.0 Constr.
0.100 ∼ 100.0 Constr.
0.100 ∼ 100.0 Constr.
∼ 10.0 < 1019
0.032
∼ 5.0 < 1018
0.130
∼ 2.2 < 1018
0.110

Progress-P St. Petersburg

55.00

1.500

∼ 30.0

1 1019

∼ 3.0

Table 2: Major operating or planned superlaser facilities. The interactions of
superlasers with matter are qualitatively very different from those of ordinary
lasers because they have sufﬁcient power (i.e., petawatt level) to induce strong
relativistic, multi-photon, nonlinear, and direct nuclear (e.g., ﬁssion or fusion)
effects.

Particle beam driven ICF facilities
Energy
No.
[kJ]/[ns] beams

System name Location

Country

USA

Europe

Saturn
PBFA–Z
ILSE

HIBALL
HIDIF

Germany KALIF

SNL
SNL
LBL
Karlsruhe

400/5
1500/20
6400/10
40/40
5000/20
3000/6

36
36
16 D

1

20 D
48 D

Table 3: Major operating or planned particle-beam driven ICF facilities. In the
last column D means that the facility is in the design stage.

Reactions → Products

− absorption plus leakage
− consumption
+ heat

Fusion D + T
breeder n + Be

→ n + 17.6MeV
→ 2.3n − 0.7n
1.6n + Li → 1.6T − 1T + 7.7MeV

Total:

0.6T + 25MeV

Fission
breeder

n + 235U → 2.5n − 0.9n − 1n + 200MeV
0.6n + Li → 0.6T + 3MeV

Total:

0.6T + 200MeV

Table 4: Fusion and ﬁssion tritium breeding reactions in dedicated production facil-
ities. Adapted from W.A. Lokke and T.K. Fowler, Report UCRL–94003, Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory (1986).

Nagasaki

130 cm

6 kg  Pu

120 kg  U

120 kg  Al

2500 kg  HE

> 3000 kg

complicated, UNSAFE, heavy

Boosted    

4 kg  Pu
or

15 kg  U235

~ 30 cm

< 100 kg

2 g  tritium

simple, SAFE, deliverable

Figure   1

Provided  a  few  grams  of  tritium  are  available,  an  unsophisticated  "boosted"

fission explosive will weigh less than 100 kg.  With present-day technology,

making and weaponizing such a weapon can be easier than a Nagasaki-type bomb.

Boosting

4 kg  Pu       /U239     235

2.2 g DT

1 dm   DT3

at 10 atm

 »  2.5
R »  2.7 cm

{

   »  30
R »  0.4 cm

{

   »  3
R »  3. 9cm

{

4 kg steel

uncompressed pit
R »  6 cm

compressed pit
R »  0.4 cm

5 cm

Figure 2 

Fissile material pit containing  2.2 g  of deuterium tritium fusion fuel shown

before and after compression by the shock waves generated by about  10 kg

of high explosives.

c
c
c
Teller-Ulam-Sakharov-Zel'dovich  principle

A-bomb

radiation case

hohlraum

sparkplug

pusher/tamper

fusion  fuel

       

primary

X-rays

secondary

5 cm

Figure 3:

"In thermonuclear weapons, radiation from a fission explosive can be contained

and  used  to  transfer  energy  to  compress  and  ignite  a  physically  separate

component containing thermonuclear fuel. (February 1979)".

Reference: U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Declassification, "Drawing back

the curtain of secrecy - Restricted data declassification policy, 1946 to present",
RDD-1,  (June 1, 1994) page 94.

Modern  150 - 300 kt  yield reentry vehicule

150 cm

chemical explosives

plutonium pit

DT booster

radiation case

polyurethane filling

DT fuze

6

Li   D  fuel

   

U or Pu pusher/tamper

40 cm

Weight:  less than 200 kg

     

Figure   4   Spherical  symmetry  of  the  secondary  enables  to  reach  the  highest

thermonuclear burn efficiency. A reentry vehicle weight of  200 kg  for a 150 -

300 kt yield is almost the engineering limit. The lower yield is obtained with

a U-238 pusher, while U-235 or plutonium (of any grade) gives the higher yield.  

Advanced indirect-drive ICF target

( 5 mg DT fuel )

Heavy ions

Laser beam

Antiprotons

X-rays

DT
fuel

hohlraum

1 cm

0.5 cm

        

Figure 5:

"In some ICF targets, radiation from the conversion of the focussed energy
(e.g   laser or particle beam) can be contained and used to transfer energy
to  compress  and  ignite  a  physically  separate  component  containing
thermonuclear fuel. (February 1979)".

Reference:  U.S.  Department  of  Energy,  Office  of  Declassification,
"Drawing  back  the  curtain  of  secrecy  -  Restricted  data  declassification
policy, 1946 to present", RDD-1,  (June 1, 1994) page 103.

)
t
k
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

10 4

10 2

1

10 -2

10 -4

10 -6

10 -8

Total energy versus energy density

Weapons test

y

a l i t

C r i t i c

Primary
hydro

DARHT

Saturn

Pegasus

Nova

Jupiter
Atlas

NIF

NIF with ignition

10 -6

10 -4

10 -2

1

10 2

Specific energy density (kt/kg)

Figure  6.   Total energy versus energy density for primary hydrodynamic tests (DARHT),

pulsed power facilities (Saturn, Pegasus, Atlas and Jupiter), inertial confinement

fusion facilities (NOVA and NIF), and weapons tests.  The French LMJ, and the

Japanese laser FIREX-II with fast ignition, will have characteristics similar to NIF.

