4
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
8
0
3
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Man-made climate change:
facts and ﬁction

Michael Dittmar and Anne-Sylvie Nicollerat

March 2004

Abstract

Important issues about climate change are summarized and discussed:
A large body of evidence shows that the world climate is getting warmer. Climate models give a con-
sistent explanation of this observation once human-made emissions of greenhouse gases are taken
into account. Furthermore, the main source of greenhouse gases comes from the burning of oil,
gas and coal, mainly in the industrialized countries. Without any change of behaviour, the possible
predicted consequences of this climate change for the coming decades are very disturbing. Today’s
(in)action’s will have long-term consequences for the entire biosphere and the living conditions of
many future generations.
The combination of the various points related to the climate change leads to a ﬁnal question: “For
how long will Humanity continue to bury its head in the sand?”

• The average “earth” surface temperature is increasing [1].

Measurements of the earth’s surface temperatures, studied for the entire planet and during
the last 50–100 years demonstrate that the earth is getting warmer. The so-called average
global temperature has increased since the late 19th century1 by 0.6 ± 0.2 ◦C. Observations
since 1976 indicate a signiﬁcant temperature increase of 0.17 ◦C every 10 years. The observed
temperature increase in the northern hemisphere is somewhat larger than that in the southern
one. Obviously, when scientists talk about a world average, you will ﬁnd regions where the
observed temperature variations are below or above this “world” average. It is thus normal
to ﬁnd regions with larger changes. For example, measurements performed for the last 30
years in Switzerland show an increase of between 1 and 2 ◦C, corresponding to an increase
of about 0.5 ◦C every 10 years [2]. It is not surprising either that some regions in the world
even got colder.

In addition, many phenomena consistent with this warming have been reported from all
around the planet [3]:

– With the exception of Antarctica and a few other places, a rapid glacier melting is
observed all around the world. Dramatic changes are seen for Alaska, Greenland, the
Himalaya, the Arctic ice shelf and many mountainous regions. The size of essentially
all glaciers in the Alps has shrunk enormously, as easily observed even by hikers who
visit the same glaciers in consecutive years [4].

– The winter season in many areas of the world became shorter, warmer, and the snow

coverage decreased strongly.
1This estimate is given with a 95% conﬁdence level.

1

– The mountain vegetation has changed according to the warmer temperature.

– More extreme weather conditions are being observed. However, the evidence does not
seem to be 100% unbiased, as sensational weathers and their consequences are more
extensively covered in the news today.

Such changes are especially visible in regions with high mountains, where diﬀerent temper-
ature zones can be studied easily by everybody. In this case, it might be interesting to ask
older people about their memories of winter snow coverage and temperatures.

In contrast to these qualitative facts, quantifying these changes is quite complicated. For
example it is diﬃcult to deﬁne a yearly world average temperature and it is even more diﬃcult
to measure this in a consistent way over something like the last 100 years. For example one
must be careful in using measurements in areas where the landscape has changed considerably
over the last 100 years. Consequently not all data can be used for a “world” average and
somebody has to decide whether a particular data set is usable. Despite these diﬃculties,
the community of scientists working on these questions, summarized regularly and in detail
in the reports from the IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), came to the
conclusion that the world average temperature increases much faster than at any given time
period during the last few thousand years, as demonstrated with various techniques such as
tree-rings and ice core studies.

• The earth’s atmosphere as a greenhouse?

The sun warms up the earth through its radiation or more simply through its light, allowing
the presence of life on our planet. An important part of this radiation is reﬂected back
resulting in an expectation of 255 degree Kelvin (-18 ◦C) for the surface temperature. How-
ever, an average temperature of 288 degree Kelvin (+15 ◦C) is observed. The diﬀerence,
well understood, originates from the various so-called greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
The most important greenhouse gases are water vapour (clouds), carbon dioxide (CO2) and
methane (CH4). These gases are transparent to the visible light coming from the sun, but
“trap”, like in a greenhouse, some fraction of the infrared light which is reﬂected back from
the earth surface. Eventually some kind of equilibrium builds up, which deﬁnes an average
world temperature. It is this greenhouse eﬀect that explains why the temperature on the
planet earth is about 33 ◦C warmer than the one calculated without it [5].
Consequently, there must be a correlation between the concentration of greenhouse gases
and the average temperature. Thus, an increase in the CO2 concentration must result in
a warmer average temperature. Such correlations between the atmospheric carbone dioxide
concentration and the average temperature, covering a period of several thousand years,
have been reported from the detailed analysis of ice cores from the Antarctica, Greenland
and other places [6].

• Are the observed recent temperature changes larger than normal climate variations responsible

for ice ages and warm “interglacial periods”?

It is a well known fact that the earth’s climate has changed all the time and that glacial
periods of a few thousand years are exchanged with warmer periods since millions of years.
Such changes are known to be very slow, with periods of thousands of years, and appear to
be strongly correlated with periodic changes of the average earth–sun distance with a known
period of about 50 thousand years. Resulting temperature changes have been estimated to be

2

up to 5 ◦C for about 50000 years. The corresponding fastest temperature changes, observed
during the warming periods at the end of the ice ages, are found to be about 1.5–2 ◦C per
1000 years. These “fastest natural” changes, corresponding to 0.15–0.2 ◦C for 100 years, are
very diﬀerent from the changes observed during the last 50 years (0.5 ◦C) [7]. Furthermore,
the latest observations indicate an even faster climate change, showing that out of the 10
warmest years on record, 9 are found after 1990 and the three warmest years ever were 1998,
2002 and 2003. It is also interesting that the summer of 2003 in central Europe has been so
exceptionally warm that it convinced many people about the reality of the changing climate.

A large variety of eﬀects are now included in the complicated multiparameter climate models.
Essentially all of these models demonstrate that the observed temperature changes are cor-
related to the measured atmospheric CO2 concentrations. These models are adjusted to the
data from previous periods, using for example the years from 1900 to 1980. Once this is done,
the model predictions for the years 1980 to 2000 can be tested with the observed tempera-
tures. Within these models, diﬀerent parameters may be varied, which allow for “natural”
ﬂuctuations and the ones expected from the CO2 concentration in the atmosphere. Using
this approach one ﬁnds that the only consistent description of the observed temperature
changes is obtained once the CO2 concentration is taken into account.

These climate models are able to describe the physics of the overall temperature change
and many regional phenomena such as precipitations. Nobody in the scientiﬁc community
claims that these models can be used to describe all climate eﬀects in detail. For example,
the overall increase of the earth’s surface temperature and many regional variations in the
In contrast, the temperature variations in the
northern hemisphere are nicely explained.
southern hemisphere (and especially in the Antarctic) and in the upper atmosphere above a
height of 10 km are currently not too well reproduced [8].

• What are the reasons for the observed increase of CO2 in the earth’s atmosphere?

Large amounts of carbon atoms are bound in plants (biomass) and the so-called fossil fuels
(oil, natural gas and coal). Basically, fossil fuels are accumulated very old biomass, produced
over hundreds of millions of years. Today, these fossil fuels are burned rapidly, resulting
mostly in CO2 and a large amount of thermal energy. Some fraction of this thermal energy
is transformed into mechanical and electric energy, which is then used intensively in indus-
trialized countries. These fossil fuel reserves are extensively used: during the last 50 years,
about half of the known world oil reserves have been burned [9].

It it important to remember how much the industrialized countries and their associated “way
of living” depend on the use of fossil fuels, and especially oil. Thinking that about 50% of the
known world oil has been used during the last 50 years, we are immediately confronted with
the question of how much more oil remains to be discovered. This is a diﬃcult question, and
many scientists specialized in geology believe that not much more oil will be discovered during
the coming years. Their most convincing argument is the fact that, despite very systematic
searches using the newest techniques, the largest amount of oil has been discovered roughly
between 1960 and 1970 and that new ﬁndings have been declining since [10].

Furthermore, strong indications show that the rate of world oil production has more or less
reached a maximum now. Consequently, the yearly world oil production will decrease soon,
perhaps already within the next 5 to 10 years. This prediction is based on the observation
that the extraction from individual oil ﬁelds, large or small, is following a Hubbert curve,
some kind of bell shape curve [11]. Once the maximum of the curve is passed, one observes

3

a decrease in the oil extraction for individual ﬁelds and for entire regions.
It seems that
even some unexpected discoveries of new oil ﬁelds similar to the ones in Saudi Arabia will
postpone this unavoidable decline of oil extraction and consumption at most by a few years.
Many warnings about this coming oil shock and its possible consequences can be found in
the literature [12].

• What will be the results of continuous economic growth and its associated increase of energy

consumption?

The correlation between todays CO2 concentration in the atmosphere, which increased from
roughly 280 ppm (parts per million) about 100 years ago to about 370 ppm today, and the
use of fossil fuels, mainly in the industrialized countries, is impressive. Following the current
trends, often called “business-as-usual scenario”, a CO2 concentration of 450 ppm is expected
for the year 2030. This will increase further to 600 ppm or more at the end of the century
[13].

Some scientists disagree with this demand-based scenario. Assuming that “the industrial
lifestyles” all around the world will change dramatically once the near-by Hubbert oil pro-
duction peak is reached, they claim that this “end-of “ the oil age will also imply that the
remaining coal can simply not be burned fast enough to achieve CO2 concentrations of 600
ppm [14].

In 1999, the world population of 6 billion people burned fossil fuels and biomass corresponding
to a world production of roughly 23000 million tons of CO2 [15]. This corresponds to about
3.8 tons of CO2 per year and per person. The industrialized countries (or the rich OECD
countries), about a 20% of the world population, produced almost 70% of the total world-
wide CO2, corresponding to about 12.3 tons per person. Out of these, the United States
contributed a total of 5500 million tons per year (roughly 20 tons per person). This can
be compared with some other CO2 production data per capita and per year from other
industrialized countries: 14.4 tons (Canada), 9.7 tons Germany and 5.7 tonnes in Switzerland.
This should be compared with some less industrialized large countries, which have much
smaller per capita CO2 production: 2.3 tons in China, 1.1 tons in India, 0.7 tons in Pakistan
and 1.8 tons in Brazil. A complete list of per capita CO2 production for all countries can be
found here [15]. These numbers clearly demonstrate who is to blame for the observed climate
change. Furthermore, we must know that the CO2 currently produced will remain for at least
100–200 years in the atmosphere. Thus, even assuming that today’s fossil-fuel burning could
from now on be kept at a constant level, the CO2 concentration in the atmosphere will
increase during the next 20–30 years to at least 450 ppm.

Using some modest assumptions about future CO2 emissions, the climate models can be used
to predict the resulting average world temperature, which is predicted to rise by another 2 to
5 ◦C within the next 50–100 years [16]. This can be compared with the 2003 record summer
temperatures in central Europe, which were measured to be 2–3 ◦C higher than the long-term
average European summer temperatures.

• Are the models, which predict consequences from the expected CO2 increase, optimistic?

Nobody knows what will happen exactly and the modeling errors are large. Thus even the
often quoted upper limit on the possible temperature increase of 5 ◦C might be too optimistic,
and even catastrophic scenarios are possible. For example, a temperature increase by about 8
◦C could result in the melting of the Antarctic ice shield, with a rise of the sea water level by

4

several meters, forcing billions of people into migration with (un?)imaginable consequences.
Such temperature changes could also result in the melting of the permafrost region in the
northern hemisphere, were a large amount of methane, known as a very powerful greenhouse
gas, might be released. Consequently, the temperature might increase even faster and the
possibility that life, as we know it, could become impossible for a large part of the planet
can not be excluded.

• How should humanity react?

The answer to this question is more speculative and only reﬂexion paths can be given here.
However, given all the known facts, the various extreme possibilities and the uncertainties
of today’s climate models into account, it seems that the time for thinking is over and that
world wide actions against the man-made climate change have to be started now.

Thinking in a rational way, humanity should apply standards, that are used for other domains
in our society! For example, the introduction of new medicines for public use requires some
type of safety proof, showing that there are no harmful secondary eﬀects. Applying a similar
standard would mean in this case that humanity has ﬁrst to show that the consequences for
the world climate are harmless, before the burning of the fossil fuels can be continued.

Perhaps humankind should simply not be allowed to touch the climate, as long as the con-
sequences are not understood. We can imagine a similar situation to that of parents who,
instead of trying to explain the dangers of electricity to small children, simply shout: “Do
not touch”!

• The Kyoto Protocol (1997) [17].

It is well known that the Kyoto Protocol, which tries to limit the CO2 production of the
industrialized countries to their emission values from 1990, would only result in a marginal
change of the world CO2 production, and that the CO2 concentration in the atmosphere
would still increase to about two times the pre-industrial level.

Nevertheless, once accepted, the Kyoto Protocol would demonstrate for the ﬁrst time in
human history that a minimal world-wide agreement for a major policy change would have
been achieved and more drastic measures could be imagined for the near future.

Unfortunately the Kyoto Protocol can now be considered as basically dead, as the current
Bush government of the United States (joined recently by the Russian government) has
decided to ignore it. Furthermore, the entire CO2 problem seems to be an irrelevant topic
in the current US election campaign and no near future changes in the US policy can be
envisaged. On the other hand, Europe is not doing better. Although it ratiﬁed the Kyoto
protocol, it is failing to apply it and raised its global CO2 emissions in the last years. Moreover
we note that some of the most urgent problems of the industrial societies like unemployement
seem to be related to the missing economic growth. Thinking only in traditional terms,
getting back to economic growth implies an increase in fossil fuel consumption [18].

• What needs to be done? What can be done?

Well, this is the domain where ﬁction, fantasy, dreams and nightmares have their place.

Before proposing answers to these questions, let us summarize the issues explained so far:

1. The world climate is getting warmer.

5

2. Climate models show that the burning of oil, gas and coal in the industrialized countries

is responsible for the climate change.

3. The expectations for the near future are very disturbing and many catastrophes are

highly probable.

4. Today’s (in)action’s will have long-term consequences for the entire biosphere and the

living conditions of many future generations.

Only a small minority of people think about or argue for a radical change. These people
basically demand that the rich industrial countries and their population reduce their use of
fossil energy in such a way that the overall CO2 production decreases as quickly as possible.

The following example can be considered as a moderate radical proposal for the next 25 years
(!). To limit the damage we could ask the yearly world CO2 emission to be reduced so that
the world emissions would be a factor of 2 smaller in the year 2025. This could be achieved
if the yearly world CO2 production were reduced by about 2% each year.

Can this be done, knowing that the world population is still increasing by roughly 70–80
million (about 1.3%) every year?

A possible way would be to require the consumption in the rich countries to be reduced such
that their CO2 production per capita will match the ones from countries like India within the
next 25 years, while the so-called developing countries would need to stabilize their current
per capita consumption. This scenario would require that the United States, central Europe
and other industrialized countries reduce the fossil fuel burning by roughly 10% per year,
and for the next 25 years.

Such a policy would certainly result in the reduction of some material comfort, not only in
the richer countries. Parts of this CO2 reduction can perhaps be compensated by a better
overall eﬃciency and by the development of renewable energies. However, an overall drastic
reduction in the consumption of material goods appears to be unavoidable in this scenario.
Such a policy could be enforced by requiring that the largest consumers within each society
had to reduce more dramatically than the ones.

Many people argue in favour of wait and see, or hope that the observations are not signiﬁcant
and that the models and their predictions are wrong. These people are joined by another
large group of people who think that nothing can be done anyway, as humans are stupid
(except themselves of course).

Another group of people, which live mainly in the “rich” countries, even naively hope that
climate change will have positive eﬀects on their region and their life. This is a very dangerous
and selﬁsh attitude.

Finally a large majority of the world population, either in the rich or in the poor regions, is
already fully occupied with everyday’s more or less serious survival problems.

Unfortunately, ignoring that the climate climate change is taking place with its possible
consequences will not make it disappear and, wanted or not, today’s fossil fuel burning
mainly by the rich countries is a serious problem for the whole of humanity.

Given the various issues related to the climate change, can we continue to bury our heads in
the sand ?
For the ones who feel powerless it might be good to remember: “Even a one thousand mile
path starts with one step” [19].

6

References

[1] These and many more details are summarized in the 2001 IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change) report “the scientiﬁc basis”. The entire report can be found at
www.grida.no/climate/ipcc tar/wg1/index.htm.

[2] Detailed temperature measurements from Switzerland can be found at www.umwelt-

schweiz.ch/fokus/2003 06/eng/box2.html.

[3] Detailed reports on climate change can be found for example in the journal “New Scientist”

at www.newscientist.com/hottopics/climate.

[4] A recent

Swiss Alps
www.swissinfo.org/sen/Swissinfo.html?siteSect=511&sid=1559085.

glaciers

report

about

the

in

can

be

found

at:

[5] Detailed
found
www.usgcrp.gov/usgcrp/Library/nationalassessment/overviewclimate.htm.

explanations

greenhouse

example

eﬀect

the

for

at:

www.ucar.edu/learn/1.htm

of

can

be
and

[6] Various measurements, discussed in [1], sections 2.4 and 6.3.1, show strong correlations be-

tween the CO2 concentration and the corresponding temperature.

[7] Long-term temperature changes are discussed in [1], section 2.4.3.

[8] It is certainly wrong to use a particular model in a region where the authors do not claim its
validity. But doing this to claim that the entire model must be wrong goes beyond scientiﬁc
honesty. Some discussion about the validity of climate models can be found in [1], section
8.10.3.

[9] A detailed discussion about

found at
the known world oil
www.hubbertpeak.com/index.asp. Many more detailed websites are summarized under
quasar.physik.unibas.ch/ ﬁsker/401/oil/oilsearch.html.

can be

reserves

[10] A detailed discussion by Colin J. Campbell about oil and when the known oil ﬁelds were

discovered can be found at www.hubbertpeak.com/campbell.

[11] The

Hubbert

curve

and

some

possible

consequences

are

discussed

at

www.oilcrisis.com/midpoint.htm.

[12] It is diﬃcult to overestimate the importance of oil for today’s industrial societies and for
modern agriculture on the entire planet. Consequently, it is easy to imagine absolute nightmare
scenarios for the coming decline of world oil production. Potential nightmare scenarios are
discussed for example at www.dieoﬀ.org.

[13] The expectations for the projected climate change are summarized in the IPCC report [1],

section 9.3.

[14] Such

a

study

has

recently

been

described

in

the

journal

“New Scientist”,

www.newscientist.com/news/news.jsp?id=ns99994216.

7

[15] Many details about the world-wide CO2 consumption (and many other interesting data) per
country or per capita are summarized in the United Nations report “Human development
indicators 2003”, at www.undp.org/hdr2003/indicator/indic 182 1 1.html

[16] The expected average temperature increase following the diﬀerent CO2 emission scenarios
can be found at www.grida.no/climate/ipcc tar/slides/large/05.02.jpg and within the IPCC
report [1].

[17] The text of the Kyoto Protocol can be found at http://unfccc.int/resource/convkp.html.

[18] A large amount of fossil fuels is used for mobility. Especially the consumption with cars
is rapidly increasing. A recent article from BBC News describes how European coun-
fail to fulﬁll the Kyoto agreement,
tries, because of their increased car traﬃc, will
news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/3253476.stm.

[19] Japanese proverb.

8

