4
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
8
0
4
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

I am the cat who walks by himself

Asher Peres∗

Abstract

The city of lions. Beaulieu-sur-Dordogne. The war starts. Drˆole de guerre. Going
to work. Going to school. Fleeing from village to village. Playing cat and mouse.
The second landing. Return to Beaulieu. Return to Paris. Joining the boyscouts.
Israel becomes independent. Arrival in Haifa. Kalay high
Learning languages.
school. Military training. The Hebrew Technion in Haifa. Relativity. Asher Peres.
Metallurgy. Return to France. Escape from jail. Aviva.

I am the cat who walks by himself,
and all places are alike to me.
Rudyard Kipling1

I am grateful to all those who contributed to this Festschrift which celebrates my 70th
birthday and therefore the beginning of my eighth decade. In the Jewish religion, there
is a prayer, “she-hehhyanu” to thank the Lord for having kept us alive and let us reach
this day. I am an atheist and I have no Lord to thank, but I wish to thank many other
people who are no longer alive and who helped me reach this point.

The city of lions

First, I thank my parents, Salomon and Salomea Pressman, for leaving Poland before
World War II and going to live temporarily in France, so that we remained alive. Other-
wise, I would not have been able to celebrate my seventh birthday. My family originated
in a city which was called Lemberg when my parents were born in the Austrian empire,
Lw´ow when I was born, Lviv (Ukraine) today. It also has a French name (L´eopol) and
other names too. This means the city of lions (in Russian, “lev” means lion). If it had a
Malay name, it would be Singapore. It is the geographical center of Europe, half-way be-
tween Rome and Moscow. You could live in that area in eight diﬀerent countries without
ever moving from your home. The boundaries moved.

My father had always been a ﬁghter. During World War I, when he was ten years
old, as the city was encircled by Russian troops and defended by the Austrians, there
was a famine. The young boy went to crawl between the two armies to unearth frozen
potatoes and bring them home to eat. When he was 14, in 1919, he left home and went

∗Department of Physics, Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, 32000 Haifa, Israel.
1R. Kipling, Just So Stories, MacMillan, London, 1902.

1

to Palestine, then under British mandate, to build roads and drain marshes. Three years
later, he got the malaria and retuned home to recuperate. Then he had to serve in the
Polish army and went to an oﬃcer’s course to reach the grade of “aspirant.” After that
he went to France to study electrical engineering, returned to Poland to marry, and then
again to France where he had found work building power lines.

My mother came from a family of modern Jews. She spoke Polish and German, not
Yiddish like in my fathers’ family which was more traditional. Her father, Asher Schapira,
was a journalist who was jailed several times for expressing socialist opinions. He died
when my mother was 16.
In the gymnasium where she learnt, one of her classmates
was Stanis law (Stanley) Ulam. They were close friends and lost contact only when World
War II started and Ulam was a professor of mathematics in the USA. (Lw´ow was a famous
center for research in mathematics, Stefan Banach taught there.) In 1933 my newlywed
mother went to France together with my father, and she followed him to remote places
where there was no electricity and he was building power lines.

Beaulieu-sur-Dordogne

And so it happens that I was born in a village, Beaulieu-sur-Dordogne, in the Corr`eze
district, one of the poorest areas of France. But it was more complicated than that. My
mother had no previous experience with childbirth and did not know what to do. The
labor lasted three days, and she was told that it was necessary to sacriﬁce the baby or
the mother. She answered: “not him, not me.” I am so grateful to my mother for having
been stubborn. After that, she could not have other children. She told me that when I
came out, I looked very tired. Thereafter, whenever I complained to her that I was tired,
she answered “you were born tired.”

My parents wanted to call me Asher after my deceased grandfather, according to the
Jewish tradition. However this was not a legal ﬁrst name in France. They called me
Aristide, after a popular French politician, Aristide Briand. That French name later
saved our lives, when we had to conceal our Jewish origin.

Soon after my birth, foreign workers and their families were expelled from France
because the economic depression had caused high unemployment. My father returned to
Poland to be unemployed there, and I learnt to speak (and count, and write) in Polish. I
was a happy Polish child. In 1937, foreign workers were allowed to come again to France,
but without their families. My father found work in Paris and went to a lawyer to declare
me a French citizen (anyone born in France could declare himself a Frenchman and the
lawyer did that on my behalf). Then the French consulate in Lw´ow issued a French
passport for me, heavily stamped non valable en Espagne (not valid in Spain): at that
time, many young Frenchmen were volunteering to ﬁght against the Franco regime and
the French government did not want me to join that war. The passport was then also
stamped with a Polish exit visa, and with Czechoslovakian and German transit visas.
The latter was issued by Deutsches Konsulat in Krakau, with Gothic characters and the
usual Nazi symbols (swastika and eagle). An adult took me with him in trains for two
days, until we reached France on 19 October 1938 (no need of visa, since I had a French
passport).

My father put me in a pension for children near Paris, and I quickly forgot Polish and
learnt French. My father came to see me every weekend and asked the French authorities

2

to let my mother join us (just taking care of her French son was not considered as “work”).
It took many months until my mother got a French visa, and ﬁnally she arrived six weeks
before the war broke out. I told the other children “you see, I also have a mother” but
I could not speak with her. I had forgotten Polish, and she also had forgotten most of
what she had known in French.

The war starts

We moved to my father’s apartment in Paris, and then the war started. My father,
who had always been a ﬁghter, volunteered to the Polish brigade in the French army and
told my mother that when we lose the war (there was no doubt about the outcome) she
should go to the small village where I was born and people knew her, and if he could he
would join us.

All adults in Paris were issued gas masks (children had no protection). When I saw
my mother trying her gas mask, I burst into tears. My mother decided not to go to the
shelter in case of air raid and to stay in our apartment. We lived in a modern building
and had six ﬂoors above us to protect us.

In October 1939, my mother tried to send me to the neighborhood school, but it refused
to accept me because I was not yet 6 years old. They had to accept me in February 1940
so that I entered in the middle of the year without any training in school discipline, and I
was punished several times for various mischiefs. The teacher once put me in the garbage
can.

Drˆole de guerre

The “funny war” (la drˆole de guerre) started in a rather civilized way (at least in
France). The French army was completely demoralized. The Germans would send ahead
a soldier speaking French, on a motorcycle. When he met French troops he shouted:
“Halt! Lay down your weapons! You are my prisoners.” And they were prisoners. There
was no risk. In the worst case, the French oﬃcer would say: pardon, it’s an error, you
are our prisoner. Not a single shot was ﬁred. (The war did not end so nicely, later I’ll
tell you about the atrocities.) In June 1940, Paris was encircled by the German army
and declared “open city”:
it was not defended to avoid destruction and the population
was allowed to leave it in trains that crossed the army lines. My mother and I took such
a train and after three days of zigzags arrived in Beaulieu, and rented there a room, the
very room where I was born.

Some time later, my father arrived in civilian clothes and with false papers that an
oﬃcer had obligingly given to him. Some Frenchmen were really helpful people. We soon
learnt that our radio had been stolen from our apartment and was held by someone in
a neighboring village. My father went there and brought back the radio, a rare item at
that time, so that we could listen to the BBC and later learn of the invasion of Russia
and the war on other fronts.

When I was 6 years old, I got my ﬁrst job in the bakery of the village. The task was to
glue bread tickets on large sheets that the baker would redeem for more ﬂour. It was not
a trivial task: “if there is a sheet for tickets of 200 grams, you scatter here and there a few

Going to work

3

tickets of 100 grams, as if these were errors.” There were also counterfeited tickets, not
quite the same color. “Don’t concentrate them in one area, but scatter them at random
places, so that they won’t attract attention.” When all the monthly sheets had been
ﬁlled, I was paid for my labour: a loaf of bread to bring home. I am grateful to the baker
who gave me my ﬁrst practical education.

Going to school

In October 1940, I went to school in Beaulieu. My parents wanted me to go to second
grade. The teacher hesitated and gave me an exam: I had to add and multiply numbers,
and I recited the alphabet: “a, b´e, c´e, . . . ” (not “a, be, ce” as the French say). I called
the letter j “iott” as in Polish. I passed the exam. Madame Salesse was a clever teacher.
It was a small village, and a small school. Each teacher had to hold two classes: ﬁrst and
second grade in one room, third and fouth in another room, and so on. Their technique
was the following: while the teacher was taking care of one half of the children, the other
half had to do exercises and learn by themselves. In this way, I learnt to learn. In that
small school, there was a truly outstanding group of teachers and I shall be grateful to
them all my life. I realized how great they were only after I returned to Paris.

These were the nicest years of my life. I was one of the children of the village and felt
perfectly at home. When I reached the third grade, there was a problem: the teacher,
Monsieur Lalite, was a prisoner of war and a young woman had been hired to replace
him. As she knew no one in the village, she questionned the children. One of them was
like me a Jewish refugee. His name was Wolf. “Where are you from?” He was born in
Germany. “Ah, the Germans are good soldiers!” and then she dictated to all the class:
Les Allemands sont de bons soldats.

When she asked me the same question, I answered that I was born here, in Beaulieu.
That did not sound right. Typical names in the Corr`eze district end in “ac” as in Jacques
Chirac, the French President. So she asked where were my parents from. I said from
Poland. “The poor Poles, they have lost the war.” (The poor French had also lost the
war.) Then she inquired about what the parents were doing, and I answered that my
father was cutting trees in the forest (this was an understatement, he actually was the
foreman of a group of lumberjacks). That impressed her: “You see that child, his father
has such a humble job and he is not ashamed of that. There are no silly jobs, there are
only silly people.” And she dictated to the class the French proverb: Il n’est point de sot
m´etier, il n’est que de sottes gens. (Some time later she must have learnt that my father
had a degree in electrical engineering.)

Fortunately, the true teacher returned soon, under an exchange program called la
rel`eve: young Frenchmen volunteered to work in Germany in farms or factories and
redeemed a prisoner of their choice (and also released German workers to ﬁght on other
fronts). After the war they were accused of collaborating with the enemy, a thorny moral
problem.

These were the happiest years of my life. I played with the other children of the village,
and like them went regularly to mass. I knew that there were Jewish children who had
taken refuge in the village and I also played with them, but I did not know that I was
one of them. There was a piano in the house where we lived and my mother gave piano
lessons to little girls, but I had no patience for that. On my 8th birthday, I received as

4

a gift my ﬁrst book which was not a book for the school: Just So Stories 2 by Rudyard
Kipling. It had a beautiful green binding with golden letters, for sure it had been printed
before the war. There were wonderful stories in the book, in particular “The cat who
walked by himself.” I don’t know what happened to the book, whether I abandoned it in
Beaulieu when we returned to Paris, or in Paris when we left for Israel. I hope that other
children enjoyed that book. I bought a new copy, in English, when I was in London in
1965.

Fleeing from village to village

The good life ended in the spring of 1944, when someone discovered that my father
was Jewish and tried to blackmail him. My father, who had always been a ﬁghter, went
to the woods and joined the partisans (FFI) where he got the rank of lieutenant. My
mother and I took refuge in the house of a courageous French woman, Germaine Cheylac,
who hid us in her house for several weeks (so that we would not be arrested in ours). I
am most grateful to Miss Cheylac for being so helpful with us. I still continued to go to
school until my father told us to take refuge further south, in a village called Nailloux
from which one could see the Pyrenees mountains on a clear day. People there knew my
father because he had also built power lines in that area before I was born. We went to a
family called Valette who owned a small hotel-restaurant and already had some refugees
in their hotel. There I also went to school, but that village was smaller than Beaulieu and
a single teacher had to hold all the classes. We both quickly realized that I knew more
than him and he started learning things from me.

Then, German troops came to Nailloux. They did not come to ﬁght, but to rest from
other ﬁghts. They took rooms in the village, ﬂirted with the French girls, and had for
some weeks a good life. Many came to eat in our restaurant. One of them once conﬁded,
when no other German could hear him: “Hitler kaputt.” If an oﬃcer had known, it would
have been death penalty. Sometime later there was such a shortage of food that people
ate their cats, and sometimes rats too. There was a rich supply of rats; some of them
were so big that the cats would rather not ﬁght them. Monsieur Valette once took me for
a trip through the woods, to catch frogs that were then killed by putting them in boiling
water. Absolutely delicious, even if you are not hungry. Another time, we collected a
large bag of snails, also quite tasty. I decided to learn German and bought a Berlitz book.
The ﬁrst lesson started Der Tee ist gut, very useful for speaking with soldiers.

We listened to the BBC (this was forbidden of course) with its encouraging slogans:

“The goal of ﬁfty one nations,
Capitulation without conditions.”3
On June 6, there were great news: the landing in Normandy. At once, everything changed.
The partisans tried to prevent German reinforcements to move North. Of course, they
could not stop a regular and much better equipped army, but they could harrass it and
slow it down. My father, who had always been a ﬁghter, blew up a bridge under a German
military train, and was later decorated with Croix de Guerre avec Etoile de Bronze (cross

2Histoires comme ¸ca, in French.
3There was also a recurring slogan that is hard to translate into English: Patience et courage, on les

aura, les Boches!

5

of war with a bronze star). The citation read: while his group was under heavy ﬁre and
almost encircled, he retreated only after having accomplished his mission, and brought
back all his men including two wounded ones, and all his equipment.

Playing cat and mouse

Partisans in the Nailloux region were less serious. One day they took over the village
and soon after them German troops entered and the partisans ﬂed away. The Germans
were very angry. They burst into the hotel and pointed their guns at us. Everyone raised
hands. A soldier disdainfully made a gesture to me to put down my hands. He told
us: there are plenty of dishes in the restaurant, the partisans have eaten here (which
was actually true, they must have been informed by our neighbor, who was a notorious
collaborator). Madame Valette calmly answered that this was a restaurant and many
people ate here. She added that some time earlier there were even more dishes because
German soldiers had eaten here. Meanwhile other soldiers searched the house for weapons
that would have been abandoned by the partisans.

Indeed, the partisans had left two guns in a back room. Fortunately, one of the servants
had seen the guns and thrown them in a ditch outside the house. That servant was
considered as the “idiot of the village.” (According to French tradition, in each village
there is someone whose IQ is even lower than that of the other villagers, and he is called
the idiot of the village.) I don’t remember the name of that idiot4 but I shall always be
grateful to him for his brilliant initiative that saved many lives, perhaps my own. Maybe
he was not really an idiot, he only pretented to be one.

Some days later, the partisans came again, arrested our neighbor the collaborator
and took him away. His daughter was hysterical and came to our hotel to cry. Madame
Valette brought her to a bed in a room upstairs and people tried to comfort her. Naturally
German soldiers also came after the partisans had ﬂed away. I was upstairs and looked
through the window, as any curious boy. I saw a soldier walking and pointing his gun
ahead of him. He also saw me and angrily shouted at me, but I could not understand.
Surely it was not “Der Tee ist gut.” Then the soldier briskly waved his hand, showing me
to get away from the window and inside the room: he did not want to hit me if he had
to open ﬁre. I am grateful to this unknown German soldier for having been concerned
about my safety, even though I was his enemy.

The second landing

On 15 August 1944, Allied troops landed on the Mediterranean shore of France and
started moving north. On August 22, Paris was liberated, as the French policemen turned
their light arms against the Germans. The German commander in Paris refused to obey
the orders of Hitler which had been to destroy the city. In the reception room of the hotel,
we had a large road map of France, and I had pinned on it small American and British
ﬂags, to follow the advance of the armies as related daily by the BBC.

The partisans came again and I pinned a small French ﬂag on our village Nailloux (I
was later reprimanded for this act of patriotism). Naturally, German troops soon arrived
too and searched through the hotel. An elegantly dressed oﬃcer entered the reception

4Maybe it was Jean-Fran¸cois, as in the song of Edith Piaf, Les Trois Cloches.

6

room. He saw the map and had a shock. Obviously, he did not listen to the BBC. That
was verboten to him. He looked at the map, and looked, and looked, and looked, for a
very long time. And then he quickly removed all my little ﬂags, and stole the map. He
was not angry at us. We were not angry at him. Obviously, he needed a good map to
ﬁnd his way out. We could always buy another road map in the local store, and the little
ﬂags were ready.

Return to Beaulieu

Some time later, we could return to Beaulieu-sur-Dordogne. Nothing had changed.
Germans were never seen there. On the Dordogne river, there was a long bridge, so
important strategically that its pillars had places ready for explosive charges, to blow up
the bridge. The locations for explosive charges were still clearly indicated. Miss Cheylac
was so happy to see us! I returned to school, in the class of Monsieur Faure.

However, further north, there had been the worst atrocities against the French people
during that war. In Oradour-sur-Glane, SS soldiers from division “Das Reich” killed 642
villagers by herding them into a church and burning the church. When Tulle, the capital
of the Corr`eze district, was liberated, 99 men whom the SS had taken as hostages were
found hanged to lampposts and balconies.

In December, most of France was liberated and there were battles in the Rhine valley,
near the Siegfried fortiﬁcation line that the Germans had built many years earlier. The
British soldiers had a song: “We shall hang our washing on the Siegfried line . . . ” My
father had enough of ﬁghting, and asked to be discharged from the FFI. We took a train
for Paris.
It was a long trip, because many bridges had been blown up and not yet
repaired, and this was also the end of my good life.

Return to Paris

In Paris, we returned to our apartment. By law, we had the right to recover it, although
we had not paid the rent during our absence. The people who had used it (and paid the
rent) had two weeks to ﬁnd other quarters. When we entered the apartment, we found
that most of its contents had been stolen, the furniture and rugs were damaged, but still
we were alive and at home.

I returned to the same neighborhood school that had accepted me for a few months
when I was six years old, but there was a diﬀerence. Now I was a country boy with
a funny southern accent, but my level of knowledge was far above that of the children
in Paris. The headmaster recommended to send me to a better school, and my parents
enrolled me in Lyc´ee Voltaire, a long walk away (or three m´etro stations).

There were other things I had to learn. Now I was Jewish, and need not go to mass. On
8 May 1945, Germany capitulated (without conditions, as promised) and the school gave
us one day of vacation. Soon however, there would be terrible news. No one remained
alive in our family in Poland (later we learnt that a child had been saved by a catholic
family which adopted him). My mother was so grieved that she lost her mind and for two
years could not function normally. My father was stronger. He found work in a factory of
electric appliances and designed new ones so cleverly that they sold well. In his contract,
he was to receive a small percentage of the sales, and as this small fraction became a lot

7

of money, he was ﬁred by his bosses who were not content with their much larger fraction.
Later he became a teacher in an ORT vocational school.

Lyc´ee Votaire was a large school and there were eight parallel classes with slightly
diﬀerent programs, labelled A (Latin, Greek, and one modern language), B (Latin and
two modern languages), C (Latin and one foreign language), and M (“modern” program:
no Latin, but two foreign languages). The Lyc´ee was in a lower middle class area (near
the P`ere Lachaise cemetery) and still, only two classes were “modern”. Parents wanted
their children to learn Latin, as had been obligatory for everyone until 1940. Only then,
following the shock of German occupation, the French government took the courageous
decision of making Latin not mandatory.

The Lyc´ee was not far from a Jewish area and about one quarter of the pupils were
Jewish and had lost her fathers in concentration camps. The Jewish children laughed
at me because I did not know Yiddish. Some of the French children were antisemitic, a
few of them virulently so. One of them declared that all the Jews should go to Palestine
(still under British mandate). He had nothing against their religion, but he loathed their
behavior. Except that one Jewish child was perfectly OK. You guess whom: a French
educated child, who had recently learnt that he was Jewish.

Joining the boyscouts

In the Lyc´ee, another Jewish boy, Maurice Goldman, invited me to join the boyscouts.
There were in France four organizations of boyscouts: Scouts de France (catholics),
Eclaireurs Unionistes de France (EUF, protestants), Eclaireurs Isra¨elites de France (EIF,
Jewish), and Eclaireurs de France (EDF, atheists). Of all the persons mentioned above,
Maurice is the only one with whom I still have contact. I met him during a stay in the
nuclear center of Saclay in 1956-57, and again during a visit to Coll`ege de France in 2001.
His expertise is NMR (that he calls RMN) and he is a member of the French Academy of
Sciences.

Another boyscout in our group is even more famous than him: Jacques Benveniste,
who was awarded twice the Ig-nobel Prize for the discovery of “water memory”5 and for
its transmission to other water over the Internet. His father was a physician and had a
telephone, Tru 19-33, which we used for transmitting urgent messages to others in our
group.

In the EIF, I passed various exams to acquire badges and raise in the ranks. I learnt the
names of months and holidays in the Jewish calendar (I still remember most of them),
and I had my ﬁrst festive Passover dinner. We had a rabbi to teach us more of our
religion. I often antagonized him. When Rabbi Feuerwerker told us that it was forbidden
to mix milk and meat products in the same meal, I asked him why. He said that it was
written in the Torah, and I asked why we had to do what was written in the Torah. The
rabbi recommended to expel me from the EIF, but my superiors refused. One evening he
asked us to choose a subject to teach us, and I proposed the life in Judea under Roman
occupation. He answered that nothing interesting happened at that time. Obviously I
should not have expected the learned rabbi to tell us that a prominent social activist
called Jesus was put to death by the Roman occupation forces, in connivance with Jewish
collaborators.

5J. Benveniste et al., Nature 333, 816 (1988). See also editorial on page 787.

8

Learning languages

At that time I also started to learn Hebrew for my Bar-Mitsva ceremony at age 13,
where I had to publicly read a passage of the Torah (Exodus, Chapt. 18). That passage
included a conversation between Moses and his father in law Jethro, the high priest of the
Midianites, who explained to Moses how to organize a hierarchy of public servants to rule
the people of Israel. I was already a rebel. I refused to chant the text in the traditional
fashion, and I read it in a natural way, as a conversation. People in the synagogue were
amazed and said that this was the right way of reading the Torah.

I also learnt two foreign languages in Lyc´ee Voltaire. Nearly everyone took English
as the ﬁrst foreign language. For the second one, the choice was between German and
Spanish. My father forbade me to learn German. He also forbade me to ever have any
contacts with German people (though he carefully added: not with the present gener-
ation). I still remember some Spanish, but by now most of it is olvidado. Starting to
learn two new languages simultaneously may cause confusion. Once I said “al” instead of
“sobre” (over). Most pupils took German as their other language, including the Jewish
ones who had lost their fathers. It was easier for them, because of the resemblance with
Yiddish.

Israel becomes independent

On 15 May 1948 Israel was declared an independent state and there was a great joy
in the Jewish community. We applied to the Israeli Consulate for an immigration visa.
At that time there was not yet in Israel a “law of return” which guarantees the right
of immigration to every Jew. The Consulate refused: “You have an apartment in Paris.
There are more than a million Jews in the camps, they have to come ﬁrst.” We came
more than a year later.

Just before we left Paris, there was Yom Kippur (the holiest day in the Hebrew calen-
dar) and I went to attend services in the neighborhood synagogue. There was a mixed
congregation, with people from Eastern Europe who spoke Yiddish, and people from
North Africa who did not. The rabbi started a sermon to explain that now there was a
State of Israel that we had to support. As he spoke in French, the East Europeans shouted
at him “Reth Yiddish!” He answered that not everyone understood that language, and
several people conﬁrmed that this was indeed true. The rabbi explained that he spoke
the language of the country where we lived, so that everyone should understand. This did
not help. The East Europeans continued to shout at him to prevent him from speaking.
Then the rabbi got very angry, and shouted back “Sales juifs!” (ﬁlthy Jews). That was
enough for me. I got up and left the synagogue, and never since then did I set foot in a
synagogue again.

To leave for Israel, I needed a new French passport. I was then 15 years old, and from
my picture in that passport it appears that I was a handsome young man. Indeed, all the
girls were running after me. But I was extremely shy, and I was running away from them.

We took a special train (le train juif , as the railroad employees called it) and arrived
in Marseille. For the ﬁrst time in my life, I saw the sea. We took the ship Negba. The sea

Arrival in Haifa

9

was calm and after a few days we reached the Holy Land. We were ﬁlled with emotion:
at last we are at home! We stayed overnight in the ship, and went ashore the following
morning. I shall never forget the welcome.

First, I was doused with a spray of DDT on my head (at that time I had plenty of
hair). Then we were bussed to an abandoned British army camp. In each barrack, there
were 60 beds. Our hosts didn’t even charge us the rent. I had never expected such an
hospitality.

My father was not unemployed a single day. He immediately found work. You guess
what: building power lines. So he could rent a room near Tel-Aviv and soon I could go
to school.

Kalay high school

I enrolled in the Kalay high school in Givatayim, which was run by the workers union
(histadruth). At that time, schools in Israel were run by political organizations, as they
had been during the British mandate before independence. That school had orders to
accept new immigrants, even if they didn’t know Hebrew, and to give them a 10% discount
on tuition fees.

Tuition fees? That was a new notion for me. In the French Republic where I was born,
which is the land of freedom, education is free: tuition free and religion free (that is,
antireligious). Now I had to learn many books of the Bible — only the Old Testament of
course. Since this was a socialist school, the Bible was not taught as a religious book, but
as an expression of the struggle of classes. The Bible teacher also taught us the precepts
of Karl Marx.

The pupils in that school were not supposed to go on to university studies but to start
new kibbutzim (collective farms). In addition to the mandatory studies in Bible, Hebrew,
Maths and English, there were also courses in history, biology and Arabic. I had other
plans. I asked to be exempted from Arabic, because I knew French that the school did
not teach. The management agreed, and when they gave me my ﬁnal certiﬁcate two
years later, I had a mark 10/10 in French. The ministry of education refused to accept
it because the school was not accredited for teaching French. The school then gave me a
passing grade 6/10 in Arabic.

I also did not want to learn history or biology, but physics and chemistry that the
school did not teach at all. I went to the ministry of education and proposed to pass my
matriculation exams as an external student, unrelated to any school. However, that was
permitted only to people who did not attend any school. They found a solution: I would
be examined with the pupils of a neighboring school in Ramat Gan (which belonged to
a right wing party). That school kindly allowed me to practice in their chemistry lab. I
had to learn the rest from books. For Marxism, there was no solution and I had to take
the exam in my school.

I passed the written exams in physics and chemistry in the Ramat Gan school. My
grade in physics was 8/10, because my book used cgs units, and the exam was in MKS.

I matriculated and got a deferment from military service, but I still had to do two
months of basic army training during the summer. I was not a very good soldier. I broke

Military training

10

my glasses, and the military optometrist who prescribed new ones said that my vision
was so acute that I would ﬁnd the most beautiful girl in the world to marry. (How did
he know so long in advance?)

Together with me in the army there were two French immigrants who had served for
one year in the French army in Indochina and were already very well trained. They had
to do again their military service in Israel. (Only later, in 1961, France and Israel made
an agreement to prevent duplicating military services, and I went to the French Consulate
in Haifa to regularize my situation.)

The Hebrew Technion in Haifa6

I enrolled in Technion in the department of mechanical engineering. I really wanted to
learn physics, but my father had warned me that I would never ﬁnd a job. (I am in good
company: Eugene Wigner learnt chemical physics because his father had told him that
he would not ﬁnd a job as a physicist.)

Some weeks before I started my studies, as I had nothing to do except giving private
lessons, I learnt from a mathematics book of my father and solved all 2500 exercises.
After that, I used not to come to lectures, but to learn by myself, at my own pace. I
would still come to one lecture by each teacher, to see who he was. When I came to a
lecture by Professor Zakon, the teacher of mathematics, I caught an error in a proof. He
was terriﬁed, and promised to give me the grade 100 provided that I never come to his
lectures.

In this way, I acquired a good reputation, got top grades sometimes without exam,
and had plenty of time left to learn physics. Only when I reached the fourth year I had
diﬃculties with the one of the teachers who lived in Tel-Aviv and did not know that I
had a good reputation.

Relativity

I learnt the elements of relativity theory from Einstein’s booklet The Meaning of Rela-
tivity, and stumbled on a diﬃculty: what were the Lorentz transformation laws of electric
and magnetic susceptibilies. I asked Prof. Nathan Robinson, the head of the physics lab-
oratory for freshman, whom I knew. He had studied many years earlier in the University
of Berlin, and in his student notebook he had the signatures of his teachers, including
Einstein and Planck. Meanwhile, however, he had specialized in rainfall measurements
and had no idea of what I asked. He sent me to ask a new professor who had just arrived
at Technion: Nathan Rosen who had been a close collaborator to Einstein.

Rosen also did not know the answer to my question (later I found it in Landau and
Lifshitz, Electrodynamics of Continuous Media). Rosen lent me his personal copy of
Tolman’s book Relativity, Thermodynamics, and Cosmology, from which I could learn
more. Then sometime during my second year of mechanical engineering, as I was supposed
to learn about bolts and nuts, I found that the Maxwell equations in curved space had a
property that the resulting wave equation was like that for particles of ﬁnite mass (the
Compton wavelength was equal to the radius of curvature of spacetime).

6Today called Technion — Israel Institute of Technology.

11

I wrote a short note and sent it to Prince Louis de Broglie,7 who was the perpetual
secretary of the French Acad´emie des Sciences. De Broglie kindly anwered that Madame
Tonnelat had found a similar result and I should quote her work.
I did that and he
accepted my note, which was published in Comptes Rendus 239, 1023 (1954). A copy of
his handwritten letter to me appears here.

I am most grateful to Prince Louis de Broglie. He was not only a prince by birth. He
also was a noble person who understood that beginners should be encouraged in their
ﬁrst steps, even if their work had little value.

Asher Peres

When I came to Israel, I informally restored my true ﬁrst name Asher. However my
formal documents (in the army, and my identity card) still had my French ﬁrst name
Aristide. Once my army commander called me “Artistide.” Also I had diﬃculties to cash
checks bearing the name Asher. I decided to legalize the situation, and also to change my
family name Pressman to a Hebrew name, as was then customary in Israel. Most people
tried to keep in the Hebrew name someting reminding the old one. There were plenty of
jokes. Someone would change his name from Bernstein to Ben-Satan (son of Satan).

The government agency who took care of name changes also gave advice on this matter.
They recommended to shorten Pressman into Peres (a mountain eagle, gypaetus barbatus),
or to keep all the consonants and become Afarsamon8 (a fruit, diospiros virsinata). I chose
Peres, and my parents reluctantly followed suit. That change of name later helped to save
me from jail when I returned to France for one year of studies in 1956.

With hindsight, I should have chosen Afarsamon, so as to be the ﬁrst author of my
future publications. For example the famous teleportation paper (1993) would have been
Afarsamon et al., instead of Bennett et al..

Metallurgy

In my third year I had a course in metallurgy. As usual, I went to have a look at
the teacher, Professor Taub, and I read a book: Cottrell, The Physics of Metals. When
the exam came, I answered with notions well beyond what the professor had taught. He
called me and proposed that I become his teaching assistant for the following year, or else
do some research. You guess what I chose. The project I had in mind was to measure
the cold work energy in copper: when a metal is subjected to plastic deformation, most
of the work done is released into heat, but a small part remains in the metal as internal
stresses. The diﬀerence can be measured by calorimetric methods. I proposed a direct
measurement by making an electric cell whose electrodes would be copper under stress
and unstrained copper. I estimated the potential diﬀerence to several millivolts.

This was a reckless idea. I did not know that electrochemistry is akin to black magic,
with unexplained surface phenomena called “polarization” and other parasitic eﬀects much
larger that what I intended to measure. I saw the potential diﬀerence change erratically
with time. To stabilize it, I introduced a third electrode (a grid, as in a triode) and let
an alternating current pass which was not recorded by the DC voltmeter. When I ﬁnally

7Nobel Prize in Physics, 1929.
8In Hebrew, the same character is used for f and p (and ph). Most vowels are not written.

12

obtained reproducible results, whatever they meant, Professor Taub let me publish them.9
This was my ﬁrst and last experimental paper. Thereafter I worked only on theory, which
is much safer.

Return to France

At that time, the French and Israeli governments agreed that the French would help
build a powerful nuclear reactor in southern Israel (its purpose was not disclosed, but it
was obvious). Israel needed to train a large number of experts for its maintenance, and
Technion was asked to send a metallurgy expert for training in France. Professor Taub
recommended to send me although I still was an undergraduate, because I knew French.
This assignment was considered as part of the military service that I had to start upon
graduation.

I obtained my ﬁrst Israeli passport (a nontrivial task at that time, because the gov-
ernment did not like Israelis to travel) and I went to the French Consulate in Haifa to
get a visa to study for one year. The Consulate gave me a visa for three months only,
specifying that it could not be extended under any circumstances. I arrived in Paris in
October 1956 and asked the scientiﬁc attach´e in the Israel Embassy, Mr. Shalevet Freier10
to help me. He put me in contact with a special police agent called Monsieur Cirinelli,
who accompanied me three times to Pr´efecture de Police to extend my visa.

I found a room with an old lady, Madame Grimon, who had an apartment in Ile Saint
Louis, the smaller of the two islands that had been the ancient Paris (the larger island has
the Notre-Dame cathedral). She rented two rooms in her apartment. Her other tenant
was Monsieur Goubault who had been a pilot in the French Air Force during World War I
and meanwhile had become an expert on wines. Ile Saint Louis is charming. Once I asked
in the street where could I buy a small lock and was answered “you won’t ﬁnd that in the
island, you must go to Paris.”

I started my studies in Centre d’Etudes Nucl´eaires de Saclay. My old friend Maurice
Goldman was also there, working on NMR with Anatole Abragam. First, I had a course
on nuclear reactor structure which gave me a formal degree in “atomic engineering,” and
then I went for a stage in the metallurgy department. A security guard there saw in my
foreign identity card that I was born in Beaulieu. He was born in Uzerche, also in the
Corr`eze district. For him I was un pays (a fellow countryman) and he liked me.

Escape from jail

My visits to Pr´efecture de Police with Monsieur Cirinelli arose suspicion. As my Israeli
passport showed, I was born in France. If I also had French citizenship, I should have
done my military service there, or else I had been condemned in absentia to one year in
prison, and after it still had to do the regular military service in France. Fortunately, the
French police is highly compartmented and the branch that keeps a watch on foreigners
is not the one that looks for deserters, because these are two disjoint sets. However, I
belonged to an even smaller subset: foreigners born in a remote village in rural France.
One day, I received a letter requesting to bring my birth certiﬁcate to the nearby police

9A. Peres, Bull. Research Council Israel 6C, 9 (1957).
10Freir later became the head of the Israel Atomic Energy Commission.

13

station. That was no problem. I asked my former teacher Madame Salesse in Beaulieu to
send me a birth certiﬁcate specifying that my parents had Polish citizenship, and all was
quiet for some time.

However in September I got another letter, ominously carrying both my old and new
I
names, asking me to report again to the police station. The nooze was tightening.
reported instead to the El-Al oﬃce, and asked to take the ﬁrst plane for Israel. This was
just before the Hebrew New Year and the other high holidays. All seats were booked
for several weeks, but I knew personally the El-Al clerk, Suzanne Puderbeutel. We had
played together when we were small children and our parents lived in the same building.
Recently we had gone once to the movies. I am grateful to Suzanne for giving me a seat
in the ﬁrst plane, so that I could ﬂy to safety.

After Suzanne, there is no one else I have to thank for “having kept me alive and let

me reach this day.” At last I was safe.

Aviva

I rented an apartment in Haifa (one room without kitchen) and I started to teach
nuclear engineering in Technion. This was considered as part of my military service in
Israel. I also started graduate work toward a PhD degree in physics under the guidance
of Professor Rosen.

On 5 January 1958, I took a train from Tel-Aviv to Haifa. Two pretty young women
wearing army uniforms took seats opposite to me and started speaking French. One of
them was indeed very pretty. I had always been terribly shy with women, but they could
not know that I was shy.
I decided to be courageous and I bravely entered into their
conversation, in French.

Two hours later, when the train arrived, Aviva and I exchanged addresses. We already
wanted to marry, but we did not reveal that to each other until some weeks later. We
actually married in August.

The rest of my story is in my formal CV.

14

