4
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
0
5
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Physics Education Research:
Or it’s so hard to ﬁnd good help these days1
Sanjoy Mahajan
Cavendish Laboratory/Astrophysics
University of Cambridge
Cambridge CB3 0HE
England
[Based on my talk at the session ‘Multiple Goals of Physics Education Research’, AAPT
Conference, Miami, FL (27 Jan 2004).]

Bob Ehrlich2 would like physics education research (PER) to produce more physics majors,
and Karen Cummings3 warns PER not to stray far from problem solving. But whose
problems do we teach students to solve?

In an article for the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, Bengt Carlson explained how
Stanislaw Ulam invented the technique of supercompression and described it to Edward
Teller. Carlson upbraids Teller for not acknowledging Ulam’s genius:

An astonishing breakthrough was at hand, but where were the signs of [Teller’s] elation?4
For Ulam had ﬁgured out how to trigger a fusion reaction, or how to build a hydrogen
bomb.

The priority contest of the insane has lasted over 50 years. Teller wanted the credit.
Ulam’s partisans, such Carlson, award Ulam the credit. None say ‘This instrument of
death was not my doing’, or even ‘I regret my part in its creation.’ Rather, Hans Bethe
remembered that ‘The ideas we had about triggering the H-bomb were all wrong but the
intellectual experience was unforgettable’.5

Teller was educated in the Hungarian education system, one of the ﬁnest environments
for a young mathematician, where he learnt deep conceptual understanding. Ulam, Teller,
and Bethe were legendary problem solvers. Their child, the hydrogen bomb, shows the
connection between physics and power. Their eagerness to struggle with the fascinating
problems of building it reﬂects the disembodied thinking that physics teaches.

Please, I want no more problem solvers!

1. Copyright 2004/05/03 by Sanjoy Mahajan. You may republish the entire text, in any medium
for any purpose, provided that you preserve this notice, do not change the text, and do not
impose further restrictions. Email me hsanjoy@mrao.cam.ac.uki for the current version.

2. ‘Does It Matter If Physics Educators Have Well-deﬁned Goals?’, AAPT Conference, Winter

2004, online at hhttp://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/sanjoy/science-society/i

3. ‘PER’s Bread and Butter’, AAPT Conference, Winter 2004; online at

hhttp://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/sanjoy/science-society/i

4. ‘How Ulam set the stage’, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, July/August 2003.
5. Brian Easlea, Fathering the Unthinkable: Masculinity, Scientists and the Nuclear Arms Race

(London: Pluto Press, 1983), p. 125.

1

What I want
I want a world based on mutual aid6 rather than on power, greed, and the violence to
satisfy greed. I want my teaching to encourage such a world. Physics, however, has grown
up as a child of war and to serve power. By not recognizing this intimate connection, we
supply students who will unwittingly or unwillingly make the world more miserable.

Pure physics and violence

The connection, so clear in building a hydrogen bomb, is also strong in pure physics.
Many physicists were upset when Congress canceled the Superconducting Supercollider.
American society, many of us felt, had abandoned man’s ancient quest to comprehend the
universe.

Through the US Freedom of Information Act, the physicist Charles Schwartz obtained
the horse’s own words, a War Department7 evaluation of the Superconducting Supercollider
(SSC) just before Reagan approved its funding:

The SSC project will have many spinoﬀs for the DoD, especially in technologies required
by the Strategic Defense Initiative, including particle beams, information processing, com-
puter control, pulse power sources, and high energy accelerators.

The nuclear weapons community will beneﬁt from the fundamental research on the
building blocks of atomic matter. The SSC will provide a valuable resource of scientiﬁc
personnel. Many of the scientists now in the [Department of Energy] nuclear weapons
laboratory complex received their training while working on particle accelerators.8

Quantum ﬁeld theory, anyone?

Other physicists were glad about the SSC’s demise because its huge cost sucked money
from the smaller, table-top experiments of condensed matter physics. The little guy versus
Big Science. Jeﬀ Schmidt cites a seemingly pure study of matter, ‘The interaction of
electromagnetic radiation with solid materials’:9

The objective of the proposed program of theoretical research is an increased understand-
ing of the interactions of electromagnetic radiation, particularly infrared, with matter.

Abstract, pure, and disinterested research? The War Department knows wherefore it
spends its money. Among the beneﬁts it saw:

The infrared optical properties of these materials are important to . . . [understanding] the
interaction of materials subjected to laser beams.10

6. Kropotkin, Mutual Aid: A Factor in Evolution (1902). Online at

hhttp://dwardmac.pitzer.edu/Anarchist Archives/i .

7. As it was long and accurately known. It was renamed in 1947 to the Defense Department. See

Orwell, 1984.

8. Charles Schwartz, ‘Political Structuring of the Institutions of Science’. In Laura Nader (editor),
Naked Science: Anthropological Inquiry into Boundaries, Power, and Knowledge (New York:
Routledge, 1996).

9. Jeﬀ Schmidt, Disciplined Minds: A Critical Look at Salaried Professionals and the Soul-Batter-
ing System that Shapes Their Lives (Lanham, Maryland: Rowan & Littleﬁeld, 2000), pp. 73–74.

10. Schmidt, p. 74.

2

Follow the laser beams to the Normandy room session or onto a front-page New York
Times article about American snipers in Iraq:11

In an age of satellite-guided bombs dropped at featureless targets from 30,000 feet, Army
snipers can see the expression on a man’s face when the bullet hits.

Their weapon of choice is ‘an M-14 riﬂe equipped with a special optic sight that has
crosshairs and a red aiming dot’. A sniper explains the results:

‘I shot one guy in the head, and his head exploded.’

Paraphrasing duPont’s slogan: Better living through optics and GPS.12

What to teach?

Maybe we should not teach physics. Or we should teach people enough physics so that
they are not intimidated by scientists and they feel conﬁdent enough as citizens to control
science.

It is ironic that I cannot talk to you about this topic in person because I am teaching

a physics course. I am equally caught in this dilemma and am serving the system.

I mostly teach approximation and order-of-magnitude physics. A favorite example of
the students is to estimate how many barrels of oil the United States imports every year.
I have used this question for years, but the invasion of Iraq has made it more relevant. One
reasonable method is to estimate the number of cars (one per person), the annual miles
driven per car, and convert their product into gallons and barrels. How big is a barrel?
Break it into length, width, and height and multiply. Eventually you get 3 billion barrels
per year.

How many barrels of oil does the US import annually?

3 × 108 people × 104 mi/yr × 1 gal
30 mi

∼ 1011 gal.

A barrel has diameter roughly 0.5 m, so

Vbarrel ∼ 1 m high × 0.5 m wide × 0.5 m deep ∼ 250 ℓ ∼ 60 gal.

So annual auto consumption:
Other transportation, reﬁning ineﬃciencies: × 2.
× 2.
All other uses:
× 0.5.
Fraction imported:

1.5 billion barrels

Imports:

3 billion barrels.

Students learn to break complicated problems into subproblems. They learn the power
of simple techniques (here, just multiplication) and enjoy applying physics to the world.

11. ‘In Iraq’s Murky Battle, Snipers Oﬀer U.S. a Precision Weapon’, 2 Jan 2004, p. A1.
12. ‘Better things for better living, through chemistry’, introduced in 1939.

3

Note how I appeal to the ‘power’ of this technique. The connection between physics and
power is diﬃcult to evade!

Physics also guards entry to well-paid, professional careers such as engineering and
medicine. By eliminating abstruse mathematics, the order-of-magnitude approach connects
physics to the real world and makes physics less intimidating. It is humane in a limited
way.

Limited, because these estimation skills are what management consultant ﬁrms such
as McKinsey look for in their interviews. One London ﬁrm asks my students: How many
hairs are there on a dog? Microsoft, a convicted corporate criminal, uses similar questions
in its interviews. People who can answer such questions have developed a quantitative
conﬁdence; they demonstrate that they solve new problems without fear. But whose
problems?

Nor is order-of-magnitude analysis limited to studying the oiligarchs. Fermi estimated
the size of the ﬁrst atomic bomb by dropping scraps of paper and seeing how far backwards
the shock wave pushed them. The English ﬂuid dynamicist G. I. Taylor estimated the size
of the same blast from ﬁreball photographs published in Life magazine. Leading war
physicists – such as Bethe, Feynman, and Fermi – were brilliant at approximation.

Again, whose problems am I preparing students to solve?
I mitigate the damage that I do by extending the oil problem.

I ask students to
estimate how much the United States spends on its military forces that guard Persian
Gulf Oil. They rightly guess $100 billion. We convert it to the more manageable ﬁgure
of 35 dollars of military spending per barrel of oil imported. This cost is almost exactly
the price of a barrel on the so-called open market. If the US government is so concerned
to obtain cheap oil for Americans, why not end the Persian Gulf protection force, use the
$100 billion to buy the oil, and give it to Americans for free? I leave this puzzle to you.

How much damage have I undone? I don’t know. My attempts to go farther are

subtly but strongly resisted.

As a protest against the war on Iraq, I constantly wear an A4-sized sign:

I have worn it since March 2003, when American and Britain invaded Iraq, and I wear it
while teaching thermodynamics to the 180 sophomore physics majors. Students ask about
it in and after class, and I have put my answer on the course website.13 I explain that as
an American citizen, a British citizen, and as a teacher of physics, a subject that enables
war, I feel a triple obligation to protest.

Fancy formulas, such as the Maxwell relations, are out in this course. I teach ther-
modynamics through estimation, group discussion, and class arguments over physics. One

13. hhttp://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/sanjoy/teaching/thermo/i .

Oil-
igarchy

4

problem, for example, asks students to estimate the thickness of ice formed on lakes during
a cold winter; another to estimate how long a turkey takes to cook.

The conservatives in the department dislike, even despise the non-traditional approach
and say that the course is, in their words, too political. They cite my oiligarchy sign and
point out that my course website condemns exams for ruining learning and making students
feel miserable about themselves.14 The progressives see that students might learn a lot
with the new teaching style (it’s the ﬁrst Cambridge physics course taught this way, so no
one yet knows for sure). Yet the progressives, who, like most of Britain, oppose the war,
also want me to remove the sign and the other so-called political aspects. With reason on
both points, they point out that such prudence will make it harder for the conservatives to
scupper the course and also might make people take my political message more seriously.
If the conservatives get their way, I would not teach the students to solve problems
skillfully, and the students would have no conception of the political and social role of
physics. If the progressives get their way, I would train the students to be skilled problem
solvers, and even enjoy physics, but with no conception of the political and social role of
physics. Which alternative is worse?

So in class I show the War Department statement about the Superconducting Super-
collider and we discuss the connection between physics and war. Can 15 minutes, in one
lecture out of hundreds that students attend in the year, compete against the prestige,
funding, and high salaries in war-ﬁnanced research (weapons of mass destruction) or in
bond and currency speculation (weapons of ﬁnancial mass destruction)?

Rule of thumb
To paraphrase John Bright, the anti-tariﬀ and antiwar Victorian MP:15

The US government, like all powerful governments, has done good things, but it has never
done a good thing merely because it was a good thing.

Since I teach approximation I will speak roughly: The US government serves the powerful
interests that run it, unless a massive popular movement forces on it an unwelcome policy.
For example, withdrawing from Vietnam.

Funding for physics increased greatly after World War 2. Physics education reform
began around the same time and accelerated after Sputnik. No popular movement forced
the government to fund physics or education reform.
I therefore wonder: So why the
funding? One answer is that physicists serve the state. The state worries when either
the supply or quality of servants falls: I do say, it’s so hard to ﬁnd good help these days.
To make more and better help is one job of PER, a ﬁeld where I have many friends and
colleagues, but a ﬁeld that I see as dangerous.

Cognitive revolution

14. See Alﬁe Kohn, Punished by Rewards: The Trouble with Gold Stars, Incentive Plans, A’s,
Praise, and Other Bribes (Boston: Houghton Miﬄin, 1993) and hhttp://www.alﬁekohn.orgi .

15. Bright’s quote is in Albert Jay Nock, Our Enemy the State (1935), Part III, Chapter 2.

5

PER arose from the cognitive revolution in psychology. Allen Newell, one of its pioneers,
worked at RAND studying the human mind as one piece of a large ‘information-processing
system’ that was the precursor to NORAD.16

Another pioneer was Jerome Bruner. During World War 2 he worked for the Psy-
chological Warfare Division in the Oﬃce of War Information.17 To education reform he
brought the skills of a psychological warrior. One ﬂagship NSF-funded curriculum of the
1950s, PSSC Physics,18 was designed for a comprehensive assault: ﬁlmstrips, textbooks,
readings, and workshops would together overcome student ignorance and educational con-
servatism. In Bruner’s words:

we [suggested] the analogy to a weapon system – proposing that the teacher, the book,
the laboratory, the teaching machine, the ﬁlm, and the organization of the craft might
serve to form a balanced teaching system.19

As historian John Rudolph concludes:

The modern Cold War weapon system was, in the minds of all these reformers, the epitome
of rational instrumentation – a powerful model to be emulated in seeking solutions to
educational problems.20

I conceive of education as growth in exploratory powers, curiosity, and conﬁdence, de-
scribed so well by Hassler Whitney21, Louis Benezet,22 and John Holt.23 However, in the
Sputnik-era reforms, the student mind was a target to be measured, mapped, re-engineered,
and overcome; and cognitive psychology provided the ammunition.

PER As Ideological Facelift

But why PER?

In 1958, only 18% of Americans thought that their government was ‘run by a few
big interests looking out for themselves.’24 But after the Vietnam war, many institutions
of American society took a drubbing. The President resigned rather than let us know
what other crimes he was involved in. The secret police (the FBI) was exposed spying on

16. Douglas D. Noble, The Classroom Arsenal: Military Research, Information Technology and

Public Education (London: Falmer Press, 1991), p. 42.

17. John Rudolph, Scientists in the Classroom (New York: Palgrave, 2002), p. 98.
18. Physical Science Study Committee, PSSC Physics: Teacher’s Resource Book and Guide (Bos-

ton: D. C. Heath, 1960).

19. Rudolph, p. 99.
20. Rudolph, p. 99.
21. Hassler Whitney, ‘Coming alive in school math and beyond’, Educational Studies in Mathe-

matics 18(3):229–242 (1987).

22. L. P. Benezet, ‘The Teaching of Arithmetic I, II, III: The Story of an Experiment’, Journal of
the National Education Association 24:241–244, 301–303 (1935); 25:7–8 (1936). The articles
are online at hhttp://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/sanjoy/benezet/i .

23. John Holt, How Children Learn (Penguin, 1983); and How Children Fail (Penguin, 1983).
24. Earl Babbie, You Can Make a Diﬀerence: The Heroic Potential Within Us All (New York:

St. Martin’s Press, 1985), Chapter 3. Online at
hhttp://www1.chapman.edu/wilkinson/socsci/sociology/Faculty/Babbie/YCMAD/i .

6

American citizens. The CIA was exposed overthrowing the governments of Guatemala,
Iran, and Chile to install torturing kleptocrats friendly to American corporations.

In 1980 the 18% who thought the government was run ‘by a few big interests’ had
become 77%. Our ruling institutions needed an ideological facelift. The presidency of
Jimmy Carter and its concern for human rights came at the right time. As rhetoric about
human rights ﬂowed liberally, so did torture equipment for the Shah and tanks and planes
for Indonesia to slaughter in East Timor.

Science suﬀered a similar sag in prestige. Dow Chemical became notorious for man-
ufacturing Agent Orange and napalm. In Silent Spring, Rachel Carson exposed how cor-
porations poisoned the environment with the products of science. Scientists, the servants
of the discredited state, lost public trust, and science itself acquired a bad odor.

Where would the state get more servants? Would the rest of society trust these

servants? Science needed many ideological nips, tucks, and lifts.

Developing at the right time from the cognitive revolution, PER arose to make a
kindler, gentler physics. Students would work in groups. Teachers would ﬁnd out what
students knew and teach accordingly. Students would do hands-on experiments and inquiry
lessons; they would learn how scientists investigate the world, and they would be inducted
into the so-called scientiﬁc method and epistemology. Students would become happy,
creative problem solvers and would learn that true science, unlike the authoritarian science
represented through the old teaching style, is a force for reason and good.

But this new science is not so new. For example, the Views about Science Survey
(VASS) claims to measure how ‘expert’ a student’s views about science are. No question
mentions the connection between science and war, because such a connection is outside
scientist) view of science. Yet in 1986, of recently graduated physics
the expert (i.e.
bachelors working in science or engineering, one-half worked on war projects.25 If physics
is what physicists do, does your PER-based physics course teach this connection? Or do
you strictly teach problem solving?

1984 vs Brave New World

Imperial rulers can choose from two strategies to coerce the people to work for the elite:
1984, which uses physical force; or Brave New World, which uses psychology. PER is a
timely hybrid: It employs advanced social science to further advanced physical science.

Physical science dominates in the 1984 approach. We prefer it for the browner peoples
of the far empire: Vietnam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, and for the darkest at home.
Thanks to the war ‘on’ terror, the less dark at home also feel the lash. But normally the
richer of the home population, to amuse themselves into passivity, get a brave new world
of Fox ‘News’, Super Bowl, Big Brother, cheap DVD recorders, and Hollywood movies and
celebrities. As Aldous Huxley warned:

25. Charles Schwartz, ‘Social responsibility in physics’, Social Responsibility, vol 2(1). Online at

hhttp://socrates.berkeley.edu/˜schwrtz/PhysBklt.htmli .

7

Table 1. US military spending in Fiscal Year 2002.

$billions Where (from Higgs, ‘Defense budget’)

344.4 War Department itself
138.7
50.9
18.5
17.6
17.5
8.5

Portion of interest on national debt due to past wars
Department of Veterans Administration
Defense-related parts of the Department of Energy budget
State Department and international assistance programs related to ’defense’
Agencies later incorporated into Department of Homeland Security
Other homeland security

596.1

Total

The most important Manhattan Projects of the future will be vast government-sponsored
enquiries into what the politicians and the participating scientists will call ‘the problem
of happiness’ - in other words, the problem of making people love their servitude.26

One example is PER, which wraps service to power in a humane shell.

War budget

In the ﬁscal year 2002, we – via our government – spent almost $600 billion on death.
That ﬁgure includes the nominal war budget plus its many disguises including veterans
pensions, foreign ‘aid’ to buy our weapons, nuclear-weapons programs in the Department
of Energy, and interest on the national debt due to past war spending.27

Killing consumed about one-half of the government budget even before we invaded

Iraq. In 1967 Martin Luther King warned:

A nation that continues year after year to spend more money on military defense than on
programs of social uplift is approaching spiritual death.28

One year later, he was shot dead, probably by the US government.29

Hippocrates

Modern science and the modern, absolute state arose together in the 17th century. We
got the heliocentric theory and Louis XIV, the Sun King, who proclaimed that ‘The state
is I’.30 Both science and the state worship Law with a capital L. Rulers, whether the soft
American or hard Russian variety, depend on science for ideological and physical power.

26. Huxley’s Foreword to Brave New World (1946).
27. Robert Higgs, ‘The Defense Budget Is Bigger Than You Think’,
hhttp://www.independent.org/tii/news/031222Higgs.htmli .

28. ‘Declaration of Independence from the war in Vietnam’, 4 April 1967, Riverside Church, New

29. See Bill Pepper, An Act of State: The Execution of Martin Luther King (London: Verso,

York, NY.

2003).

30. Lewis Mumford, The Myth of the Machine: The Pentagon of Power (London: Secker and

Warburg, 1970), especially Chapters 2 and 7.

8

As long as there is an elite, physics will serve it and cement its rule. When we develop
a society without an elite, we can reconsider whether to teach and fund physics. Until
then should we follow Hippocrates? He advised doctors as their ﬁrst commandment: First
do no harm. A step in stopping an evil is refusal to cooperate.31 Don’t teach physics. By
teaching physics, traditionally or in the reformed sense of PER, we train more servants
of the state and we legitimize science. As we thereby arm the state against ourselves, we
move farther from a peaceful, cooperative, and enjoyable world.

31. ´Etienne de la Bo´etie, The Politics of Obedience: The Discourse of Voluntary Servitude (New
York: Free Life Editions, 1975 [1552–53]). Online with an introduction by Murray Rothbard
at hhttp://www.mises.org/rothbard/boetie.pdfi .

9

