4
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
2
0
2
1
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Endogenous versus Exogenous Origins of Crises

Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics
and Department of Earth and Space Sciences
University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA
Laboratoire de Physique de la Mati`ere Condens´ee CNRS UMR 6622
Universit´e de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, 06108 Nice Cedex 2, France February 2, 2008

D. Sornette

Abstract

Are large biological extinctions such as the Cretaceous/Tertiary KT boundary
due to a meteorite, extreme volcanic activity or self-organized critical extinction cas-
cades? Are commercial successes due to a progressive reputation cascade or the
result of a well orchestrated advertisement? Determining the chain of causality for
extreme events in complex systems requires disentangling interwoven exogenous and
endogenous contributions with either no clear or too many signatures. Here, I review
several eﬀorts carried out with collaborators, which suggest a general strategy for
understanding the organization of several complex systems under the dual eﬀect of
endogenous and exogenous ﬂuctuations. The studied examples are: Internet down-
load shocks, book sale shocks, social shocks, ﬁnancial volatility shocks, and ﬁnancial
crashes. Simple models are oﬀered to quantitatively relate the endogenous organiza-
tion to the exogenous response of the system. Suggestions for applications of these
ideas to many other systems are oﬀered.

1 Introduction

Extreme events are pervasive in all natural and social systems: earthquakes, volcanic
eruptions, hurricanes and tornadoes, landslides and avalanches, lightning strikes, magnetic
storms, catastrophic events of environment degradation, failure of engineering structures,
crashes in the ﬁnancial stock markets, social unrests leading to large-scale strikes and
upheavel and perhaps to revolutions, economic drawdowns on national and global scales,
regional and national power blackouts, traﬃc gridlocks, diseases and epidemics and so on.
Can we forecast them, manage, mitigate or prevent them? The answer to these ques-

tions requires us to investigate their origin(s).

Self-organized criticality, and more generally, complex system theory contend that out-
of-equilibrium slowly driven systems with threshold dynamics relax through a hierarchy
of avalanches of all sizes. Accordingly, extreme events are seen to be endogenous [6, 5],
in contrast with previous prevailing views. In addition, the preparation processes before
large avalanches are almost undistinguishable from those before small avalanches, making
the prediction of the former basically impossible (see [54] for a discussion). But, how can
one assert with 100% conﬁdence that a given extreme event is really due to an endogenous
self-organization of the system, rather than to the response to an external shock? Most
natural and social systems are indeed continuously subjected to external stimulations,
noises, shocks, sollications, forcing, which can widely vary in amplitude. It is thus not clear

1

a priori if a given large event is due to a strong exogenous shock, to the internal dynamics
of the system organizing in response to the continuous ﬂow of small sollicitations, or maybe
to a combination of both. Adressing this question is fundamental for understanding the
relative importance of self-organization versus external forcing in complex systems and for
the understanding and prediction of crises.

This leads to two questions:

1. Are there distinguishing properties that characterize endogenous versus exogenous

shocks?

2. What are the relationships between endogenous and exogenous shocks?

Actually, the second question has a long tradition in physics.
It is at the basis of the
interrogations that scientists perform on the enormously varied systems they study. The
idea is simple: subject the system to a perturbation, a “kick” of some sort, and measure
its response as a function of time, of the nature of the sollicitations and of the various
environmental factors that can be controlled. In physical systems at the thermodynamic
equilibrium, the answer is known under the name of the theorem of ﬂuctuation-dissipation,
sometimes also refered to as the theorem of ﬂuctuation-susceptibility [64]. In a nutshell,
this theorem relates quantitatively in a very precise way the response of the system to an
instantaneous kick (exogeneous) to the correlation function of its spontaneous ﬂuctuations
(endogenous). An early example of this relationship is found in Einstein’s relation between
the diﬀusion coeﬃcient D of a particle in a ﬂuid subjected to the chaotic collisions of the
ﬂuid molecules and the coeﬃcient η of viscosity of the ﬂuid [18, 19]. The coeﬃcient η
controls the drag, i.e., response of the particle velocity when subjected to an exogenous
force impulse. The coeﬃcient D can be shown to be a direct measure of the (integral
of the) correlation function of the spontaneous (endogenous) ﬂuctuations of the particle
velocity.

In out-of-equilibrium systems, the existence of a relationship between the response
function to external kicks and spontaneous internal ﬂuctuations is not settled [51].
In
many complex systems, this question amounts to distinguishing between endogeneity and
exogeneity and is important for understanding the relative eﬀects of self-organization versus
external impacts. This is diﬃcult in most physical systems because externally imposed
perturbations may lie outside the complex attractor which itself may exhibit bifurcations.
Therefore, observable perturbations are often misclassiﬁed.

It is thus interesting to study other systems, in which the dividing line between endoge-
nous and exogenous shocks may be clearer in the hope that it would lead to insight about
complex physical systems. The investigations of the two questions above may also bring
new understanding of these systems. The systems to which the endogenous-exogenous
question (which we will refer to as “endo-exo” for short) is relevant include the following:

• Biological extinctions such as the Cretaceous/Tertiary KT boundary (meteorite ver-
sus extreme volcanic activity (Deccan traps) versus self-organized critical extinction
cascades),

• immune system deﬁciencies (external viral/bacterial infections versus internal cas-

cades of regulatory breakdowns),

2

• cognition and brain learning processes (role of external inputs versus internal self-

organization and reinforcements),

• discoveries (serendipity versus the outcome of slow endogenous maturation processes),

• commercial successes (progressive reputation cascade versus the result of a well or-

chestrated advertisement),

• ﬁnancial crashes (external shocks versus self-organized instability),

• intermittent bursts of ﬁnancial volatility (external shocks versus cumulative eﬀects

of news in a long-memory system),

• the aviation industry recession (9/11/2001 terrorist attack versus structural endoge-

nous problems),

side) and so on.

• social unrests (triggering factor or rotting of social tissue),

• recovery after wars (internally generated (civil wars) versus imported from the out-

It is interesting to mention that the question of exogenous versus endogenous forcing
has been hotly debated in economics for decades. A prominent example is the theory of
Schumpeter on the importance of technological discontinuities in economic history. Schum-
peter argued that “evolution is lopsided, discontinuous, disharmonious by nature... studded
with violent outbursts and catastrophes... more like a series of explosions than a gentle,
though incessant, transformation” [52]. Endogeneity versus exogeneity is also paramount
in economic growth theory [50]. Our analyses reviewed below suggest a subtle interplay
between exogenous and endogenous shocks which may cast a new light on this debate.

In the sequel, we review the works of the author with his collaborators, which have

investigated the endo-exo question in a variety of systems.

2 Exogenous and endogenous shocks in social net-

works

One deﬁning characteristics of humans is their organization in social networks. It is proba-
ble that the large brain, which makes what we are, has been shaped by social interactions,
and may have co-evolved with the size and complexity of social groups [16, 68]. A single
individual may belong to several intertwinned social networks, associated with their dif-
ferent activities (work colleagues, college alumny societies, friends, family members, etc.).
The formation and the evolution of social networks and their mutual entanglements control
the hierarchy of interactions between humans, from the individual level to society and to
culture. In this section, we review a few original probes of several social networks which
unearth a remarkable universality: the distribution of human decision times in social net-
works seem to be described by a power law 1/t1+θ with θ = 0.3 ± 0.1. This constitutes an
essential ingredient in models describing how the cascade of agent decisions leads to the
bottom-up organization of the response of social systems. We ﬁrst present such a model in
terms of a simple epidemic process of word-of-mouth eﬀects [25, 58, 57] and then discuss
the diﬀerent data sets.

3

2.1 A simple epidemic cascade model of social interactions

Let us consider an observable characterizing the activity of humans within a given social
network of interactions. This activity can be the rate of visits or downloads on an internet
website, the sales of a book or the number of newpaper articles on a given subject.

We envision that the instantaneous activity results from a combination of external
forces such as news and advertisement, and of social inﬂuences in which each past active
individual may impregnate other individuals in her network of acquaintances with the
desire to act. This impact of an active individual onto other humans is not instantaneous
as people react at a variety of time scales. The time delays capture the time interval
between social encounters, the maturation of the decision process which can be inﬂuenced
by mood, sentiments, and many other factors and the availabilty and capacity to implement
the decision. We postulate that this latency can be described by a memory kernel φ(t − ti)
giving the probability that an action at time ti leads to another action at a later time
t by another person in direct contact with the ﬁrst active individual. We consider the
memory function φ(t − ti) as a fundamental macroscopic description of how long it takes
for a human to be triggered into action, following the interaction with an already active
human.

Then, starting from an initial active individual (the “mother”) who ﬁrst acts (either
from exogenous news or by chance), she may trigger action by ﬁrst-generation “daughters,”
which themselves propagate the drive to act to their own friends, who become second-
generation active individuals, and so on. This cascade of generations can be shown to
renormalize the memory kernel φ(t − ti) into a dressed or renormalized memory kernel
K(t − ti) [53, 25, 58], giving the probability that an action at time ti leads to another
action by another person at a later time t through any possible generation lineage.
In
physical terminology, the renormalized memory kernel K(t) is nothing but the response
function of the system to an impulse. This is captured by the following equations

A(t) = s(t) +

dτ A(τ ) φ(t − τ ) =

dτ s(τ ) K(t − τ ) .

(1)

t

−∞

Z

t

−∞

Z

The meaning of these two equivalent formulations is the following. The s(t)’s are the
t
−∞ dτ A(τ ) φ(t − τ ) gives the additional
spontaneous exogenous activations. The integral
contribution due to past activities A(τ ) whose inﬂuences to the present are mediated by
t
the direct inﬂuence kernel φ of ﬁrst generation. The last integral
−∞ dτ s(τ ) K(t − τ )
expresses the fact that the present activity A(t) can also be seen as resulting from all past
exogenous sources s(τ ) mediated to the present by the renormalized kernel K, which takes
into account all generations of cascades of inﬂuences.

R

R

The following functional dependence is found to provide an accurate description, as we

shall discuss below:

K(t) ∼ 1/(t − tc)p ,

with p = 1 − θ .

The dependence (2) implies [53, 25, 58]

φ(t) ∼ 1/(t − tc)1+θ .

(2)

(3)

We should stress that the renormalization from the usually (but not always) unobserv-
able “bare” response function φ(t) with exponent 1 + θ in (3) to the observable “renormal-
ized” response function K(t) in (2) with exponent 1 − θ is obtained if the network is close

4

to critical, i.e., if the average branching ratio n is close to 1 (n is deﬁned as the average
number of daughters of ﬁrst generation per mother). In other words, there is on average
approximately one triggered daughter per active mother. This condition of criticality en-
sures, in the language of branching processes, that avalanches of active people triggered by
a given mother are self-similar (power law distributed). In contrast, for n < 1, the cascade
of triggered actions is “sub-critical” and avalanches die oﬀ more rapidly. It can be shown
[53, 25, 58] that there is in this case a characteristic time scale

t∗ ∼

1
(1 − n)1/θ

(4)

acting like a correlation time, which separates two regimes:

• for t < t∗, the renormalized response function K(t) is indeed of the form (2);

• for t > t∗, the renormalized response function K(t) crosses over to an asymptotic

decay with exponent 1 + θ, of the form of φ(t) in (3).

For n > 1, the epidemic process is super-critical and has a ﬁnite probability of growing
exponentially fast. We will not be concerned with this last regime which does not seem
relevant in the data discussed below.

In the absence of strong external inﬂuences, a peak in social activity can occur sponta-
neously due to the interplay between a continuous stochastic ﬂow of small external news
and the amplifying impact of the epidemic cascade of social inﬂuences.
It can then be
shown that, for n close to 1 or equivalently for |t − tc| < t∗, the average growth of the
social activity before such an “endogenous” peak and the relaxation after the peak are
proportional to [58, 27]

+∞

0
Z

K(t − tc + u)K(u)du ∼ 1/|t − tc|1−2θ ,

(5)

where the right-hand-side expression holds for K(t) of the form (2). The prediction that
the relaxation following an exogeneous shock should happen faster (larger exponent 1 − θ)
than for an endogeneous shock (with exponent 1 − 2θ) agrees with the intuition that
an endogeneous shock should have inpregnated the network much more and thus have
a longer lived inﬂuence.
In a nutshell, the mechanism at the origin of the endogenous
response function (5) is the constructive interference of accumulated small news cascading
through the social inﬂuence network. In other words, the presence of a hierarchy of nested
relaxations K(t) given by (2), each one associated with each small news, creates the eﬀective
endogenous response (5).

Dodds and Watts have recently introduce a general model of contagion which, by explic-
itly incorporating memory of past exposures to, for example, an infectious agent, rumor,
or new product, includes the main features of existing contagion models and interpolates
between them [15].

2.2

Internet download shocks

In Ref. [35], Johansen and Sornette report the following experiment. The authors were
interviewed by a journalist from the leading Danish newspaper JyllandsPosten on a subject

5

l

s
d
a
o
n
w
o
d
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
n
 
e
v
i
t
a
u
m
u
C

l

450

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

0

20

40

60

80

100

Days from publication of interview

Figure 1: Cumulative number of downloads N as a function of time t from the appearance
1−p t1−p + ct with
of the interview on Wednesday the 14 April 1999. The ﬁt is N(t) = a
b ≈ 0.58 ± 0.03. Reproduced from [35].

of rather broad and catchy interest, namely stock market crashes. The interview was
published on April 14, 1999 in both the paper version of the newspaper as well as in the
electronic version (with access restricted to subscribers) and included the URLs where the
authors’ research papers on the subject could be retrieved. It was hence possible to monitor
the number of downloads of papers as a function of time since the publication date of the
interview. The rate of downloads of the authors’ papers as a function of time was found
to obey a 1/tp power law with exponent b = 0.58 ± 0.03, as shown in ﬁgure 1.

Within the model of epidemic word-of-mouth eﬀect summarized in section 2.1, the
relaxation of the rate of downloads after the publication of the interview characterizes
the response function K(t) given by (2) with respect to an exogenous peak: prior to
the publication of the interview, the rate of downloads was slightly less than one per
day; it suddenly jumped to several tens of downloads per day in the ﬁrst few days after
the publication and then relaxed slowly according to (2). The reported power law with
exponent p ≃ 0.6 is compatible with the form (2) with θ = 0.4, which is within the range
of other values: θ = 0.3 ± 0.1.

Johansen [29] has reported another similar observation following another web-interview
on stock market crashes, which contained the URL of his articles on the subject. He
found again a power law dependence (2), but with an exponent p close to 1, leading in the
terminology of the model of epidemic word-of-mouth eﬀect to θ ≃ 0. Two interpretations
are possible: (i) the exponent θ is non-universal; (ii) the social network is not always
close to criticality (n ≃ 1) and the observable response function K(t) is then expected to
cross-over smoothly from a power law with exponent 1 − θ to another asymptotic power
law with exponent 1 + θ. According to this second hypothesis, the exponent p of the
relaxation kernel K(t) may be found in the range 1 − θ to 1 + θ, depending upon the range
of investigated time scales and the proximity 1 − n to criticality. We ﬁnd hypothesis (ii)
more attractive as it puts the blame on the non–universal parameter n, which embodies

6

the connectivity structure, static and dynamics, of social interactions at a given moment.
It does not seem unrealistic to think that n may not be always at its critical value 1, due to
many possible other social inﬂuences. In constrast, one could postulate that the power law
(3) for the direct inﬂuence function φ(t) between two directly linked humans may reﬂect a
more universal character. But, of course, only more empirical investigations will allow to
put more light on this issue.

Eckmann, Moses and Sergi [17] also report an original investigation probing the tem-
poral dynamics of social networks using email networks in their universities. They ﬁnd a
distribution of response times till a message is answered which seems to be a power law
with exponent less than 1 at early times (1 hour) to another power law with exponent
larger than 1 at long times (days), which could be a direct evidence of the direct response
function φ(t) deﬁned in (3). The relationship between their investigation and the previous
works using web downloads [35, 29] has been noted by Johansen [31].

2.3 Book sale shocks

Sornette, Deschatres, Gilbert and Ageon have used a database of sales from Amazon.com
as a proxy for commercial growth and successes [57]. Fig. 2 shows about 1.5 years of data
for two books, Book A (“Strong Women Stay Young” by Dr. M. Nelson) and Book B
(“Heaven and Earth (Three Sisters Island Trilogy)” by N. Roberts), which are illustrative
of the two classes found in this study. Book A jumped on June 5, 2002, from rank in the
2,000s to rank 6 in less than 12 hours. On June 4, 2002, the New York Times published an
article crediting the “groundbreaking research done by Dr. Miriam Nelson” and advising
the female reader, interested in having a youthful postmenopausal body, to buy the book
and consult it directly [8]. This case is the archetype of an “exogenous” shock. In contrast,
Book B culminated at the end of June 2002 after a slow and continuous growth, with no
such newspaper article, followed by a similar almost symmetrical decay, the entire process
taking about 4 months. We will show below that the peak for Book B belongs to the class
of endogenous shocks. Qualitatively, such endogeneous growth is well explained in Ref. [22]
by taking the example of the book “Divine Secrets of the Ya-Ya Sisterhood” by R. Wells,
which became a bestseller two years after publication, with no major advertising campaign.
Following the reading of this originally small budget book, “Women began forming Ya-
Ya Sisterhood groups of their own [...]. The word about Ya-Ya was spreading [...] from
reading group to reading group, from Ya-Ya group to Ya-Ya group” [22]. Generally, the
popularity of a book is based on whether the information regarding that book will be able
to propagate far and long enough into the network of potential buyers.

Another dramatic example of exogenous shocks is shown in ﬁgure 3: here the personal
trainer of Oprah Winfrey had his book presented 7 or 8 times during the Oprah Winfrey
Show, leading to dramatic overnight jumps in sales.

Each relaxation of sales for about 140 books that reached the top 50 in the Amazon.com
ranking system have been analyzed and shown to fall into two categories: the relaxations
described by a power law with an exponent close to 0.7 = 1−θ and the relaxations described
by a power law with an exponent close to 0.4 = 1 − 2θ, for θ ≃ 0.3. An example of such ﬁts
for the two books shown in ﬁgure 2 is presented in ﬁgure 4. In addition, Sornette et al. [57]
checked that an overwhelming majority of those sale peaks classiﬁed as exogenous from the
value of their exponent ≃ 0.7 = 1 − θ were preceded by an abrupt jump, in agreement with

7

 

B
o
o
k
 
B
S
a
e
s
/
D
a
y

l

500

100

50

10

5

1

01/01/02
01/01/02

04/01/02
04/01/02

07/01/02
07/01/02

01/01/03
01/01/03

04/01/03
04/01/03

07/01/03
07/01/03

10/01/02
10/01/02
Time

Figure 2: Time evolution over a year and a half of the sales per day of two books: Book
A (bottom, blue, left scale) is “Strong Women Stay Young” by Dr. M. Nelson and Book B
(top, green, right scale) is “Heaven and Earth (Three Sisters Island Trilogy)” by N. Roberts.
The diﬀerence in the patterns is striking, Book A undergoing an exogenous peak on June
5, 2002, and Book B endogenously reaching a maximum on June 29, 2002. Reproduced
from [57].

1000

500

l

y
a
D
/
s
e
a
S
A
 
k
o
o
B

 

100

 50

 10

  5

l

s
e
a
S

3
10

2
10

1
10

0
10
0

100

200

500

600

700

300
400
Time (days)

Figure 3: Time evolution of the book entitled “Get with the Program.” Each time the book
appeared on Oprah Winfrey Show (B.Greene is O. Winfrey’s trainer), the sales jumped
overnight.

8

1 − 2θ 

1 − 2θ 

1 − θ 

4
10

3
10

2
10

1
10

)
y
r
a
r
t
i
b
r
a
(
 
y
a
D
/
s
e
a
S

l

0.25

2.5

25

175

Time |t
c

 − t| (days)

Figure 4: The bottom curve (blue) shows the relaxation of the sales of Book A after the
peak of tc = June 5, 2002 as a function of the time t − tc from the time of the peak. The
least squares best ﬁt with a power law gives a slope ≈ −0.7. Since this peak is identiﬁed
as exogenous with theoretical slope 1 − θ, we get the estimate θ = 0.3 ± 0.1. The curve in
the middle (green shifted up by a factor 6) shows the relaxation of sales of Book B after
the peak of tc = June 29, 2002 as a function of the time t − tc from the time of the peak.
The least squares ﬁt gives a slope of ≈ −0.4, which provides the independent estimate
θ = 0.3 ± 0.1 from the theoretical endogenous exponent 1 − 2θ. The top curve (red shifted
up by a factor 25 with respect to the bottom curve) shows the acceleration of the sales of
Book B leading to the same peak at tc = June 29, 2002 as a function of the time tc − t to
the time of the peak. The time on the x-axis has been reversed to compare the precursory
acceleration with the aftershock relaxation. The least squares slope is ≈ −0.3 not far from
the prediction 1 − 2θ of the cascade model, with θ = 0.3 ± 0.1.

the epidemic cascade model of social interactions described in section 2.1. In constrast,
those sale peaks falling in the endogenous class according to their exponent ≃ 0.4 = 1 − 2θ
of their relaxation after the peak were found to be preceded by an approximately symmetry
growth described by a power law with the same exponent, as predicted by (5). An example
is shown also for book B in ﬁgure 4.

The small values of the exponents (close to 1 − θ and 1 − 2θ) both for exogenous and
endogenous relaxations imply that the sales dynamics is dominated by cascades involving
high-order generations rather than by interactions stopping after ﬁrst-generation buy trig-
gering. Indeed, if buys were initiated mostly by the direct eﬀects of news or advertisements,
and not much by triggering cascades in the acquaintance network, the cascade model pre-
dicts that we should then measure an exponent 1 + θ given by the “bare” memory kernel
φ(t), as already said. This implies that the average number n (the average branching ratio
in the language of branching models) of impregnated buyers per initial buyer in the social
epidemic model is on average very close to the critical value 1, because the renormaliza-

9

tion from φ(t) to K(t) given by (2) only operates close to criticality characterized by the
occurrence of large cascades of buys. Reciprocally, a value of the exponent p larger than 1
suggests that the associated social network is far from critical. Such instances can actually
be observed. Examples of cross-overs from the renormalized response function K(t) (2) to
φ(t) in (3) with an asymptotic decay with exponent 1 + θ has been documented [57, 14].
Note that it is possible to give an analytical description of this cross-over exhibited by
K(t) as a function n [25], thus allowing in principle to invert for n for a given data set.
This opens the tantalizing possibility of measuring the dynamical connectivity of the social
network, and possibly to monitor it as a function of time.

This ﬁndings open other interesting avenues of research. While this ﬁrst investigation
has emphasized the distinction between exogenous and endogenous peaks to set the funda-
mentals for a general study, repeating peaks as well as peaks that may not be pure members
of a single class are also frequent. In a sense, there are no real “endogenous” peaks, one
could argue, because there is always a source or a string of news impacting on the network
of buyers. What Sornette et al. [57] have done is to distinguish between two extremes, the
very large news impact and the structureless ﬂow of small news ampliﬁed by the cascade
eﬀect within the network. One can imagine and actually observe a continuum between
these two extremes, with feedbacks between the development of endogeneous peaks and
the attraction of interest of the media as a consequence, feeding back and providing a kind
of exogenous boost, and so on. In those and in more complicated cases, the epidemic model
of word-of-mouth eﬀects should provide a starting platform to predict the sales dynamics
as a function of an arbitrary set of external sources. Tracking dynamically the connectivity
n(t) of each social network relevant to a given product, it should also be possible to target
the most favorable times, corresponding to the largest n(t), for promoting or sustaining
the sales of a given product, with obvious consequences for marketing and advertisement
strategies. An additional extension includes the possible feedback of the marketing strat-
egy on the control parameter n(t) which could be manipulated so as to keep the system
critical, an ideal situation from the point of view of marketers and ﬁrms. Quantifying this
eﬀect requires to extend the simple epidemic model in the spirit of mechanisms leading
to self-organized criticality by positive feedbacks of the order parameter onto the control
parameter [60, 21]. Sornette et al.’s results suggest that social networks have evolved to
converge very close to criticality. As Andreas S. Weigend, chief scientist of Amazon.com
(2002-2004) wrote on his webpage: “Amazon.com might be the world’s largest laboratory
to study human behavior and decision making.” I share this view point.

Actually, I envision that an extension of Sornette et al.’s study to a broad database
of sales from all products sold by e-retailers like Amazon.com could give access to the
equivalent of the “social climate” of a country such as the USA and its evolution as a
function of time under the various exogenous and endogenous factors at work.
Indeed,
Amazon.com categorizes its products in diﬀerent (tradable) dimensions of possible interest
to a human being, such as

• Electronics (audia and video, camera and photo, software, computer and video games,

• Books, Music, DVD,

cell phones...),

• Oﬃce,

10

• Kids and Baby,

• Home and Garden (which includes pets),

• Gifts, Registries, Jewelry and watches,

• Apparel and Accessories,

• Food,

• Health, Personal Care, Beauty,

• Sports and Outdoors,

• Services (movies, restaurants, travel, cars, ...),

• Arts and Hobbies,

• Friend and Favorites,

with many sub-categories. Monitoring and analyzing the sales as a function of time in these
diﬀerent categories is like getting the temperature, wind velocity, humidity in meteorology
in many diﬀerent locations. The ﬂow of interest of society at large and of sub-groups could
in principle tells us how society is responding in its spending habits to large scale inﬂuence.
As an illustrative example, it has been shown that, during bullish periods characterized by
strong stock market gains (bubble regimes), the number of books written and sold related
to ﬁnancial investments soared [48, 47].

Another potentially fruitful application is the music industry and the impact on sales
versus Internet piracy of the quality of performers (endogenous eﬀect on the network of
potential buyers who can promote a CD by word-and-mouth in the network of potential
buyers) versus the promotion campaigns of short-lived performers and their one-only-hit
wonders [41]. Indeed, according to an internal study done by one of the big companies
that dominate the production and distribution of music, the drop in sales in America may
have less to do with internet piracy than with other factors, among them the decreasing
quality of music itself. The days of watching a band develop slowly over time with live
performances are over, according to some professionals. Even Wall Street analysts are
questioning quality.
If CD sales have shrunk, one reason could be that people are less
excited by the industry’s product. A poll by Rolling Stone magazine found that fans, at
least, believe that relatively few “great” albums have been produced recently [41]. This is
clearly an endo-exo question that can be analyzed with databases available on the Internet.

2.4 Social shocks

Roehner, Sornette and Andersen [49] have used the concept of exogeneous shocks to propose
a general method for quantifying the response function in order to advance the social
sciences. By using a database of newspaper articles called Lexis-Nexis, which is available
in many departments of political science or sociology, they have quantiﬁed the response to
shocks, such as the following:

11

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

I
J
D
 
r
o
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
e
r
g
g
a
 
b
a
r
a
-
i
t
n
a
 
s
u
s
r
e
v
 
s
e
l
c
i
t
r
a
 
r
e
p
a
p
s
w
e
N

Newspaper articles
Anti-arab aggressions
DJI (ante Sep.11 - current)

200

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

20

40

60

80

100

Number of days after September 11

Figure 5: Relaxation of three diﬀerent social variables after the shock of September 11,
2001. The solid line curve is the number of articles writing on the destruction of mosques
after the event; the broken line (scale on the right-hand side) shows the number of anti-arab
aggressions in California in the three months after September 11; the dotted line shows the
changes in the level of the Dow Jones Index with respect to its pre-Sep.11 level as given by
the diﬀerence DJI(pre-9/11)-DJI(current). Source: California’s Attorney General Oﬃce,
published in the San Jose Mercury News, 11 March 2002. Reproduced from [49].

• On October, 31, 1984, the Prime minister of India, Indira Gandhi, was assassinated
by two of her Sikh bodyguards. This event triggered a wave of retaliations against
Sikh people and Sikh property, not only in India (particularly in New Delhi), but in
many other countries as well.

• In the early hours of December, 6, 1992, thousands of Hindus converged toward the
holy city of Ayodhya in northern India and began to destroy the Babri mosque which
was said to be built on the birthplace of Lord Rama. The old brick walls came down
fairly easily and soon the three domes of the mosque crashed to the ground. This
event triggered a burst of protestations and retaliations which swept the whole world
from Bangladesh to Pakistan, to England or the Netherlands. In all these countries,
Hindu people were assaulted, Hindu temples were ﬁrebombed, damaged or destroyed.

• On September, 11, 2001, two planes crashed into the twin towers of the World Trade
Center in New York. This event triggered a wave of reactions against Islamic people
and property not only in the United States but also in other countries

For these diﬀerent events, Roehner et al. [49] show that diﬀerent quantitative measures
of social responses exhibit an approximate universal behavior, again characterized by a
power law, as shown in ﬁgure 5. This ﬁgure gives the time evolution after September 11,
2001 of newspaper articles, anti-arab agressions and the Dow Jones Industrial Average,
which are approximated by a power law ∼ 1/tp. Due to the coarseness of the measures,
the exponent p is not well-constrained: p = −1.8 ± 0.7 (newspaper articles), p = −1.4 ± 0.5
(anti-arab agressions) and p = −2.2 ± 1.6 (DJI). Comparing the reaction to September 11,

12

2001 in diﬀerent countries such as Canada, Great Britain and the Netherlands, Roehner
et al. [49] have suggested that the response function actually expresses an information on
“cracks” pre-existing in the social networks of the corresponding countries. For instance,
the number of attacks to Mosques has been larger in the Netherlands, which is in line
with other information on the concerns at high political levels (private communication to
the authors) about the integrity of the social tissue in the Netherlands, a fact illustrated
more recently on the political scene by the rapid rise and then assassination of the rightist
politician Fortuyn in May 2002. This line of evidence could be quantiﬁed within the
epidemic model of social inﬂuence by diﬀerent values of the connectivity parameter n in
diﬀerent countries.

Burch, Emery and Fuerst [9] have used also the unique opportunity oﬀered by the
“nine-eleven” terrorist attack to conﬁrm clearly the hypothesis that closed-end mutual
fund discounts from fund net asset values reﬂect small investor sentiment. Carter and
Simkins [10] investigated the reaction of airline stock prices to the 9/11 terrorist attack
and found that the market was concerned about the increased likelihood of bankruptcy in
the wake of the attacks and distinguished between airlines based on their ability to cover
short-term obligations (i.e., liquidity).

3 Exogenous and endogenous shocks in ﬁnancial mar-

kets

3.1 Volatility shocks

Standard economic theory holds that the complex trajectory of stock market prices is the
faithful reﬂection of the continuous ﬂow of news that are interpreted and digested by an
army of analysts and traders. Accordingly, large shocks should result from really bad
surprises. It is a fact that exogenous shocks exist, as epitomized by the recent events of
Sept. 11, 2001, and there is no doubt about the existence of utterly exogenous bad news
that move stock market prices and create strong bursts of volatility. A case that cannot
be refuted is the the market turmoil in Japan following the Kobe earthquake of Jan. 17,
Indeed, as long as
1995 that led to a total cost estimated around $200 billion dollars.
the science of earthquake prediction is still in its infancy, destructive earthquakes are not
endogeneized in advance in stock market prices by rational agents ignorant of seismological
processes. One may also argue that the invasion of Koweit by Iraq on Aug. 2, 1990 and
the coup against Gorbachev on Aug., 19, 1991 were strong exogenous shocks. However,
some could argue that precursory ﬁngerprints of these events were known to some insiders,
suggesting the possibility that the action of these informed agents may have been reﬂected
in part in stock markets prices. Even more diﬃcult is the classiﬁcation (endogenous versus
exogenous) of the hierarchy of volatility bursts that continuously shake stock markets.
While it is a common practice to associate the large market moves and strong bursts of
volatility with external economic, political or natural events [66], there is not convincing
evidence supporting it.

Perhaps the most robust observation in ﬁnancial stock markets is that volatility is
serially correlated with long-term dependence (approximately power law like). Volatility
autocorrelation is typically modeled using autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity

13

(ARCH) [20], generalized ARCH [7], stochastic volatility [3], Markov switching [23, 24],
nonparametric [45] and extensions of these models (see [44] for comparisons). Recent
powerful extensions include the Multifractal Random Walk model (MRW) introduced by
Muzy, Bacri and Delour [42, 4], which belongs to the class of stochastic volatility models.
Using the MRW, Sornette, Malevergne and Muzy [61] have shown that it is possible to
distinguish between an endogenous and an exogenous origin to a volatility shock. Tests
on the Oct. 1987 crash, on a hierarchy of volatility shocks and on a few of the obvious
exogenous shocks have validated the concept. This study shows that the relaxation with
time of a burst of volatility is distinctly diﬀerent after a strong exogenous shock compared
with the relaxation of volatility after a peak with no identiﬁable exogenous sources. This
study does not explain the origin of volatility correlation. But it identiﬁes the “natural”
response function of the system to an external shock, from which the stationary long-term
dependence structure of the volatility and its intermittent bursts derive automatically. In
other words, Sornette et al.’s study leads to the view that the properties of the volatility
can be in large part understood from a single characteristic, which is the response of the
agents to a new piece of news. This response function must ultimately be derived from
the behavior of ﬁnancial agents, for instance taking into account their sensitivity to wealth
changes, their loss aversion as well as their ﬁnite-time memory of past losses that may
impact their future decision [40].

The multifractal random walk is an autoregressive process with a long-range memory
decaying as t−1/2, which is deﬁned on the logarithm of the volatility. Using the MRW
model for the dependence structure of the volatility, Sornette et al. predict that exogenous
volatility shocks will be followed by a universal relaxation

≃ λ/t1/2 ,

where λ is the multifractal parameter, while endogenous volatility shocks relax according
to a power law

≃ 1/tp(V0) ,

with p(V0) ≃ λ2 ln(V0) ,

with an exponent p(V0) which is a linear function of the logarithm ln(V0) of the shock of
volatility V0. The diﬀerence between these behaviors and those reported above modeled
by the epidemic process with long-term memory stems from the fact that the stock market
returns r∆t(t) at time scale ∆t at a given time t can be accurately described by the following
process [42, 4]:

r∆t(t) = ǫ(t) · σ∆t(t) = ǫ(t) · eω∆t(t) ,

where ǫ(t) is a standardized Gaussian white noise independent of ω∆t(t) and ω∆t(t) is a
nearly Gaussian process with mean and covariance:

µ∆t =

ln(σ2∆t) − C∆t(0)

1
2

C∆t(τ ) = Cov[ω∆t(t), ω∆t(t + τ )] = λ2 ln

T
|τ | + e−3/2∆t !

 

.

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

where σ2∆t is the return variance at scale ∆t and T represents an “integral” (correlation)
time scale. λ is called the multifractal parameter: when it vanishes, the MRW reduces to
a standard Wiener process (standard continuous random walk). Such logarithmic decay of

14

log-volatility covariance at diﬀerent time scales has been evidenced empirically in [4, 42].
Typical values for T and λ2 are respectively 1 year and 0.04.

The MRW model can be expressed in a more familiar form, in which the log-volatility

ω∆t(t) obeys an auto-regressive equation whose solution reads

t

−∞

Z

∞

0
Z

ω∆t(t) = µ∆t +

dτ η(τ ) K∆t(t − τ ) ,

(11)

where η(t) denotes a standardized Gaussian white noise and the memory kernel K∆t(·) is
a causal function, ensuring that the system is not anticipative. The process η(t) can be
seen as the information ﬂow. Thus ω(t) represents the response of the market to incoming
information up to the date t. At time t, the distribution of ω∆t(t) is Gaussian with mean µ∆t
T e3/2
and variance V∆t =
. Its covariance, which entirely speciﬁes
∆t
the random process, is given by
(cid:17)

∆t(τ ) = λ2 ln

∞
0 dτ K 2
R

(cid:16)

C∆t(τ ) =

dt K∆t(t)K∆t(t + |τ |) .

(12)

Performing a Fourier transform, we obtain

ˆK∆t(f )2 = ˆC∆t(f ) = 2λ2 f −1

T f

sin(t)
t

"Z
0

dt + O (f ∆t ln(f ∆t))

,

(13)

#

which shows, using (10), that for τ small enough,

K∆t(τ ) ∼ K0s

λ2T
τ

for ∆t << τ << T ,

(14)

which is the above stated exogenous response function (6). This slow power law decay (14)
of the memory kernel in (11) ensures the long-range dependence and multifractality of the
stochastic volatility process (8).

The main diﬀerence between the MRW model and the previous class of epidemic process
is that the long-term memory appear in the logarithm of the variable in the former, as
shown from equation (11). As a consequence, the MRW basically describes a variable
with is the exponential of a long-memory process. It is the interplay between this strongly
nonlinear exponentiation and the long-memory which gives the multifractal properties to
the MRW and, as a consequence, the shock amplitude dependence of the exponents p(r)
of the relaxation of the volatility following endogenous shocks.
In contrast, the linear
long-term memory structure (1) of the epidemic processes of section 2.1 ensures universal
exponents which are independent of the shock amplitudes (but not of the endo-versus-exo
nature). In the epidemic process (1), the relationship between exogenous and endogenous
relaxations is expressed by the exponents of the power laws ∼ 1/t1−θ (exo) versus ∼ 1/t1−2θ
(endo). In the MRW, notice that the relationship between exogenous (6) and endogenous
relaxations (7) is through the multifractal parameter λ: the fact that an amplitude of the
exogenous response function impacts the power law exponent of the endogenous relaxation
is again a signature of the exponential structure of the multifractal model. The MRW
extends the realm of possible relationships between endogenous and exogenous responses
discussed until now.

15

3.2 Financial crashes

The endo-exo question also appears to be crucial for understanding ﬁnancial crashes. In
contrast with the previous examples, the distinction is not that much in the relaxation
or recovery after the shock but rather in the precursory behavior before the crash. An
endogenous crash might be expected to end a period of strong price gains due for instance
to speculative herding.
In contrast, an exogenous crash would be the response of the
ﬁnancial system to a very strong adverse piece of information.

Indeed, according to standard economic theory, the complex trajectory of stock market
prices is the faithful reﬂection of the continuous ﬂow of news that are interpreted and
digested by an army of analysts and traders [11]. Accordingly, large market losses should
result from really bad surprises only. It is indeed a fact that exogenous shocks exist, as
epitomized by the recent events of Sept. 11, 2001 and the coup in the Soviet Union on
Aug. 19, 1991, which move stock market prices and create strong bursts of volatility [61],
as discussed above. However, it is always the case? A key question is whether large losses
and gains are indeed slaved to exogenous shocks or on the contrary may result from an
endogenous origin in the dynamics of that particular stock market. The former possibility
requires the risk manager to closely monitor the world of economics, business, political,
social, environmental news for possible instabilities. This approach is associated with
standard “fundamental” analysis. The later endogenous scenario requires the investigation
of signs of instabilities to be found in the market dynamics itself and could rationalize in
part so-called “technical” analysis (see [1] and references therein).

Johansen and Sornette [37] have carried out a systematic investigation of crashes to

clarify this question. They have proceded in several steps.

1. They have developed a methodology to identify crashes as objectively and unambigu-
ously as possible. Speciﬁcally, they have studied the distribution of drawdowns (runs
of losses) in several markets: the two leading exchange markets (US dollar against the
Deutsch and against the Yen), the major world stock markets, the U.S. and Japanese
bond market and in the gold market. By introducing and varying a certain degree
of fuzziness in the deﬁnition of drawdowns, they have tested the robustness of the
empirical distributions of drawdowns.

2. By a careful analysis of these distributions, they have shown that the extreme tail
belongs to a diﬀerent population than the bulk (typically the 1% most extreme draw-
downs occur 10 to 100 times more often than would be predicted by an extropolation
of the distribution of the 99% remaining drawdowns).

3. These extreme events which seem to belong to a diﬀerent population have been called
“outliers” [33, 59, 36, 30]. Others have refered to such events as “kings” or “black
swans.” Johansen and Sornette [37] have taken these kings as the crashes that need
to be explained. Note that this procedure ensures that the deﬁnition of a crash is
relative to the speciﬁc market rather than obeying so arbitrary absolute rule.

4. Then, for each identiﬁed king, Johansen and Sornette [37] have checked whether a
speciﬁc market structure, called log-periodic power law (LPPL), is present in the
price trajectory preceding the occurrence of the drawdown king. The rational for this

16

Figure 6: The Hang-Seng composite index of the Hong Kong stock market from Nov.
1969 to Sept. 1999. Logarithmic scale in the vertical axis. The culmination of the bubbles
followed by strong corrections of crashes are indicated by the arrows and correspond to
the times Oct. 1971, Feb, 1973, Sept. 1978, Oct. 1980, Oct. 1987, April 1989, Jan. 1994
and Oct. 1997. This ﬁgure shows that the Hang-Sing index has grown exponentially on
average at the rate of ≈ 13.6% per year represented by the straight line corresponding to
the best exponential ﬁt to the data. Eight large bubbles (among them 5 are very large)
can be observed as upward accelerating deviations from the average exponential growth
characterized by LPPL signatures ending in a crash, here deﬁned as a more than 15% drop
in less than two weeks. The eight small panels at the bottom are given to show the LPPL
price trajectory over a period of six months preceding each of these 8 crashes. Constructed
from [59] and other papers from the author.

17

approach was based on their previous works [34, 38, 32, 59], in which they docu-
mented that the existence of such log-periodic power law signatures associated with
speculative bubbles before crashes. The work [37] is in this respect an out-of-sample
test of the LPPL bubble-crash hypothesis applied to a population of ﬁnancial time
series selected according to a criterion (outlier test in the distribution of drawdowns)
which is unrelated to the LPPL structure itself.

5. In this test, Johansen and Sornette [37] take the existence of a LPPL as the quali-
fying signature for an endogenous crash: a drawdown outlier is seen as the end of a
speculative unsustainable accelerating bubble generated endogenously.

6. With these criteria ﬁxed, Johansen and Sornette [37] identify two classes of crashes.
Those which are not preceded by a LPPL price trajectory are classiﬁed as exogenous.
It turns out that for those, it was possible to identify what seems to have been the
relevant historical event, i.e., a new piece of information of such magnitude and
impact that it is reasonable to attribute the crash to it, following the standard view
of the eﬃcient market hypothesis. Such drawdown outliers are classiﬁed as having
an exogenous origin.

7. The second class, characterized by LPPL price trajectories, is called endogenous.
Figure 6 illustrate a series of endogenous crashes preceded by LPPL bubble trajec-
tories on the Heng-Seng composite index of the Hong-Kong stock market, perhaps
one of the most speculative markets in the world. All the events shown belong to the
endogenous class.

8. Globally over all the markets analyzed, Johansen and Sornette [37] identiﬁed 49 out-
liers, of which 25 were classiﬁed as endogenous, 22 as exogenous and 2 as associated
with the Japanese “anti-bubble” starting in Jan. 1990. Restricting to the world
market indices, they found 31 outliers, of which 19 are endogenous, 10 are exogenous
and 2 are associated with the Japanese anti-bubble.

The combination of the two proposed detection techniques, one for drawdown outliers
and the second for LPPL signatures, provides a novel and systematic taxonomy of crashes
further substantiating the importance of LPPL (see also [55, 56, 67, 62, 63] for reviews and
extensions).

A more microscopic approach formulated in terms of agent-based models has also al-
lowed to identify some mechanisms for the occurrence of extreme events, such as the excess
bias on nodes in the de Bruijn diagram of active agent strategies [39], or the decoupling of
strategies which become transiently independent from the recent past [2].

4 Concluding remarks

Let us end by a discussion of other domains of applications.

While the idea is not yet developed, I think that beyond the products sold by e-retailers
discussed above, which are proxies of reputation and commercial successes, the endo-exo
question is relevant to understanding the characteristics of Initial Public Oﬀerings (IPO)
[28] and the movie industry [12]. In the later, the mechanism of information cascade derives

18

from the fact that agents can observe box oﬃce revenues and communicate word of mouth
about the quality of the movies they have seen.

Earthquakes are now thought to be due to a mixture of spontaneous occurrences driven
by plate tectonics and triggering by other previous earthquakes. Within such a picture [25]
which rationalize many of the phenomenology of seismic catalogs, Helmstetter and Sornette
have shown that there is a fundamental limit to earthquake predictability resulting from
the “exogenous” class of earthquakes which are not triggered by other earthquakes [26].
Furthermore, the rate of foreshocks preceding mainshocks can be understood from the idea
that mainshocks may result from endogenous triggering by previous events, as developed
above in section 2.1. The dependence with time of the seismic rate of foreshocks is predicted
and observed to follow (5). The memory kernels φ(t) given by (3) and K(t) given by (2)
correspond in the present case respectively to the bare and renormalized Omori law [43]
for triggered aftershocks [53, 25].

The weather and the climate also involve extremely complex processes, which are often
too diﬃcult to disentangle. This leads to major uncertainties in what are the important
mechanisms that need to be taken into account, for instance, to forecast the future global
warming of the earth due to anthropogenic activity coupled with natural variability. 9/11
has again oﬀered a unique window. Travis and Carleton [65] noted the following: “Three
days after suicide airplane hijackers toppled the World Trade Center in New York and
slammed into the Pentagon in Washington, D.C., the station crew noted an obvious absence
of airborne jetliners from their perch 240 miles (384 kilometers) above Earth. I’ll tell you
one thing that’s really strange: Normally when we go over the U.S., the sky is like a spider
web of contrails, U.S. astronaut and outpost commander Frank Culbertson told ﬂight
controllers at NASA’s Mission Control Center in Houston. ‘And now the sky is just about
completely empty. There are no contrails in the sky,’ he added. ‘It’s very, very weird.’ ‘I
hadn’t thought of that perspective,’ fellow astronaut Cady Coleman replied.” Travis and
Carleton [65] showed that a signiﬁcant elevation of the average diurnal temperature of the
US in the three days following 9/11 when most jetliners were grounded and no contrails
were present. This is the archetype of an exogenous response. It remains to be seen if
the endo-exo view point turns out to oﬀer new fruitful perspectives to make progress in
understanding and in forecasting the weather and the climate.

Finally, from a theoretical view point, another potentially interesting domain of research
is to extend the concept of the response function to nonlinear systems [46, 13] and to study
its relationship with the internal ﬂuctuations [51].

Acknowledgments:

I am grateful to my collaborators and colleagues who helped
shape these ideas, among them, Y. Ageon, J. Andersen, R. Crane, D. Darcet, F. Deschatres,
T. Gilbert, S. Gluzman, A. Helmstetter, A. Johansen, Y. Malevergne, J.-F. Muzy, V.F.
Pisarenko, B. Roehner and W.-X. Zhou.

References

[1] Andersen, J.V., S. Gluzman and D. Sornette, Fundamental Framework for Technical

Analysis, European Physical Journal B 14, 579-601 (2000).

[2] Andersen, J.V. and D. Sornette, A Mechanism for Pockets of Predictability in Complex

Adaptive Systems, (http://arXiv.org/abs/cond-mat/ab0410762)

19

[3] Anderson, T., Stochastic autoregressive volatility, Mathematical Finance, 4, 75-102

(1994).

64: 026103 (2001).

York, 1996).

[4] Bacry, E., J. Delour and J.-F. Muzy, Multifractal random walk, Physical Review E

[5] Bak, P., How Nature Works: the Science of Self-organized Criticality (Copernicus, New

[6] Bak, P. and M. Paczuski, Complexity, contingency, and criticality, Proc. Natl. Acad.

Sci. USA, 92, 6689-6696 (1995).

[7] Bollerslev, T., Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity, Journal of

Econometrics, 31, 307-327 (1986).

[8] Brody, J. Push up the weights, and roll back the years, The New York Times F 7

(June 4, 2002).

[9] Burch, T.R., D.R. Emery and M.E. Fuerst, What Can ‘Nine-Eleven’ Tell Us About
Closed-end Fund Discounts and Investor Sentiment, Financial Review, 38 (4), (2003).

[10] Carter, D.A. and B.J. Simkins, Do Markets React Rationally? The Eﬀect of
the September 11th Tragedy on Airline Stock Returns, working paper (2002)
http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract id=306133

[11] Cutler, D., J. Poterba and L. Summers, What Moves Stock Prices? Journal of Portfolio

Management, Spring, 4-12 (1989)

[12] De Vany, A. and Lee, C. Quality signals in information cascades and the dynamics of
the distribution of motion picture box oﬃce revenues. J. Econ. Dyn. & Control, 25,
593-614 (2001).

[13] Dellago, C. and S. Mukamel, Nonlinear Response of Classical Dynamical Systems to

Short Pulses, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 24(8), 1107-1110 (2003).

[14] Deschatres, F. and D. Sornette, in preparation

[15] Dodds, P.S. and D.J. Watts, Universal behavior in a generalized model of contagion,

Physical Review Letters, 92, 218701 (2004).

[16] Dunbar, R.I.M., The social brain hypothesis, Evol. Anthrop. 6, 178-190 (1998).

[17] Eckmann, J.P., E. Moses and D. Sergi, Entropy of dialogues creates coherent structures

in e-mail traﬃc, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 101(40), 14333-14337 (2004).

[18] Einstein, A., ¨Uber die von der molekularkinetischen Theorie der W¨arme geforderte
Bewegung von in ruhenden Fl¨ussigkeiten suspendierten Teilchen, Ann. Phys. 17, 549
(1905).

[19] Einstein, A., Investigations on the Theory of Brownian Movement (New York: Dover,

1956).

20

[20] Engle, R., Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity with estimates of the variance

of united kingdom inﬂation, Econometrica, 50, 987-1008 (1982).

[21] Gil, L. and D. Sornette, Landau-Ginzburg theory of self-organized criticality, Phys.

Rev.Lett. 76, 3991-3994 (1996).

[22] Gladwell, M., The tipping point: how little things can make a big diﬀerence, Back

Bay Books (2002).

[23] Hamilton, J., Rational-expectations econometric analysis of changes of regimes: an
investigation of the term structure of interest rates, Journal of Econometric Dynamics
and Control, 12, 385-423 (1988).

[24] Hamilton, J., A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series

and the business cycle, Econometrica, 57, 357-384 (1989).

[25] Helmstetter, A. and Sornette, D., Sub-critical and supercritical regimes in epi-
demic models of earthquake aftershocks, J. Geophys. Res. 107, NO. B10, 2237,
doi:10.1029/2001JB001580 (2002).

[26] Helmstetter and D. Sornette, Predictability in the ETAS Model of Interacting Trig-

gered Seismicity, J. Geophys. Res., 108, 2482, 10.1029/2003JB002485 (2003).

[27] Helmstetter, A., D. Sornette and J.-R. Grasso, Mainshocks are Aftershocks of Condi-
tional Foreshocks: How do foreshoc statistical properties emerge from aftershock laws,
J. Geophys. Res., 108 (B10), 2046, doi:10.1029/2002JB001991 (2003).

[28] Jenkinson, T. & Ljungqvist, A., Going Public: The Theory and Evidence on How
Companies Raise Equity Finance, Oxford University Press, 2nd edition (2001).

[29] Johansen A., Response time of internauts, Physica A. 296(3-4), 539-546 (2001).

[30] Johansen, A., Comment on “Are ﬁnancial crashes predictable?” Eur. Phys. Lett.

60(5), 809-810 (2002)

[31] Johansen, A., Probing human response times, Physica A, 338(1-2), 286-291 (2004).

[32] Johansen, A., O. Ledoit and D. Sornette, Crashes as critical points, International

Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 3 (2), 219-255 (2000).

[33] Johansen, A. and D. Sornette, Stock market crashes are outliers, European Physical

Journal B 1, 141-143 (1998).

[34] Johansen, A. and D. Sornette, Critical Crashes, RISK 12 (1), 91-94 (1999).

[35] Johansen, A. and D. Sornette, Download relaxation dynamics on the WWW following

newspaper publication of URL, Physica A 276/1-2, 338-345 (2000).

[36] Johansen, A. and D. Sornette, Large Stock Market Price Drawdowns Are Outliers,

Journal of Risk, 4(2), 69-110 (2001/02).

21

[37] Johansen, A. and D. Sornette, Endogenous versus Exogenous Crashes in Financial
Markets, in press in “Contemporary Issues in International Finance” (Nova Science
Publishers, 2004) (http://arXiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0210509).

[38] Johansen, A., D. Sornette and O. Ledoit, Predicting Financial Crashes using discrete

scale invariance, Journal of Risk 1 (4), 5-32 (1999).

[39] Johnson, N.F., P. Jeﬀeries and P. Ming Hui, Financial market complexity, (Oxford,

2003).

[40] McQueen, G. and K. Vorkink, Whence GARCH? A preference-based explanation for

conditional volatility, The Review of Financial Studies, 17, 915-949 (2004).

[41] Music’s brighter future, The music industry, Business Special, The Economist, Friday

November 12th (2004).

[42] Muzy, J.-F., J. Delour and E. Bacry, Modelling ﬂuctuations of ﬁnancial time series:
from cascade process to stochastic volatility model, The European physical Journal
B, 17, 537-548 (2000).

[43] Omori, F. On the aftershocks of earthquakes, J. Coll. Sci. Imp. Uni., 7, 111 (1894).

[44] Pagan, A. and G.W. Schwert, Alternative models for conditional stock volatility, Jour-

nal of Econometrics, 45, 267-290 (1990).

[45] Pagan, A. and A. Ullah, The econometric analysis of models with risk terms, Journal

of Applied Econometrics, 3, 87-105 (1988).

[46] Potter, S.M., Nonlinear impulse response functions, Journal of Economic Dynamics

& Control, 24(10), 1425-1446 (2000).

[47] Roehner, B.M., Patterns of Speculation: A Study in Observational Econophysics

(Cambridge University Press; 1st edition, 2002).

[48] Roehner, B.M. and D. Sornette, “Thermometers” of Speculative Frenzy, European

Physical Journal B 16, 729-739 (2000).

[49] Roehner, B.M., D. Sornette and J.V. Andersen, Response Functions to Critical Shocks
in Social Sciences: An Empirical and Numerical Study, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 15 (6),
809-834 (2004).

[50] Romer, D., Advanced macroeconomics (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1996).

[51] Ruelle, D., Conversations on nonequilibrium physics with an extraterrestrial, Physics

Today, 57(5), 48-53 (2004).

[52] Schumpeter, J.A., Business Cycles: A Theoretical, Historical and Statistical Analysis

of the Capitalist Process (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1939).

[53] Sornette, A. and D. Sornette, Renormalization of earthquake aftershocks, Geophys.

Res. Lett. 6, N13, 1981-1984 (1999).

22

[54] Sornette, D., Predictability of catastrophic events: material rupture, earthquakes,
turbulence, ﬁnancial crashes and human birth, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 99 SUPP1,
2522-2529 (2002).

[55] Sornette, D., Why Stock Markets Crash (Critical Events in Complex Financial Sys-

tems) (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2003).

[56] Sornette, D., Critical market crashes, Physics Reports 378 (1), 1-98 (2003).

[57] Sornette, D., F. Deschatres, T. Gilbert and Y. Ageon, Endogenous Versus Exogenous
Shocks in Complex Networks: an Empirical Test Using Book Sale Ranking, Phys.
Rev. Letts. 93 (22), 228701 (2004).

[58] Sornette, D. and A. Helmstetter Endogeneous Versus Exogeneous Shocks in Systems

with Memory, Physica A 318, 577 (15 Feb 2003)

[59] Sornette, D. and A. Johansen, Signiﬁcance of log-periodic precursors to ﬁnancial

crashes, Quantitative Finance 1, 452-471 (2001).

[60] Sornette, A. Johansen and I. Dornic, Mapping self-organized criticality onto criticality,

J.Phys.I France 5, 325-335 (1995).

[61] Sornette, D., Y. Malevergne and J.-F. Muzy, What causes crashes? Risk 16 (2), 67-71

(2003).

[62] Sornette, D. and W.-X. Zhou, Evidence of Fueling of the 2000 New Economy Bubble
by Foreign Capital Inﬂow: Implications for the Future of the US Economy and its
Stock Market, Physica A 332, 412-440 (2004).

[63] Sornette, D. and W.-X. Zhou, Predictability of Large Future Changes

in
in press in the International Journal of Forecasting (2004)

Complex Systems,
(http://arXiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0304601)

[64] Stratonovich, R.L. , Nonlinear Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics I: Linear and Non-

linear Fluctuation-Dissipation Theorems (Springer, Berlin; New York, 1992).

[65] Travis, D. J., A.M. Carleton and R.G. Lauritsen, Contrails reduce daily temperature

range, Nature, 418, 601 (2002).

[66] White E.N., Stock market crashes and speculative manias. In The international li-
brary of macroeconomic and ﬁnancial history, 13 (An Elgar Reference Collection,
Cheltenham, UK; Brookﬁeld, US, 1996).

[67] Zhou, W.-X. and D. Sornette, Non-Parametric Analyses of Log-Periodic Precursors

to Financial Crashes, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 14 (8), 1107-1126 (2003).

[68] Zhou, W.-X., D. Sornette, R.A. Hill and R.I.M. Dunbar, Discrete Hierarchical
in press in Proc. Royal Soc. London (2004)

Organization of Social Group Sizes,
(http://arXiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0403299)

23

