Interlinguistic similarity and language death dynamics

Jorge Mira∗

Departamento de F´ısica Aplicada, Universidade de Santiago

de Compostela E-15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain

Universidade de Santiago de Compostela E-15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain

´Angel Paredes†

Departamento de F´ısica de Part´ıculas,

(Dated: February 9, 2008)

Abstract

We analyze the time evolution of a system of two coexisting languages (Castillian Spanish and

Galician, both spoken in northwest Spain) in the framework of a model given by Abrams and

Strogatz [Nature 424, 900 (2003)]. It is shown that, contrary to the model’s initial prediction, a

stable bilingual situation is possible if the languages in competition are similar enough. Similarity

is described with a simple parameter, whose value can be estimated from ﬁts of the data.

PACS numbers: 89.65.-s

5
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
9
0
1
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: fajmirap@usc.es
†Electronic address: angel@fpaxp1.usc.es

1

There is hard evidence that the number of languages in the world is shrinking. Of

the roughly 6500 languages now spoken many of them are endangered or on the brink

of extinction. The situation has attracted the interest of many researchers in the ﬁeld

of complex adaptive systems, who have analyzed language dynamics [1, 2]. Among them,

Abrams and Strogatz [2] have recently proposed a simple and creative model for the dynamics

of language death.

In it, they consider a system of two languages competing with each

other for speakers, where the attractiveness of a language increases with both its number

of speakers and its perceived status (a parameter that reﬂects the social and economic

opportunities aﬀorded to its speakers).

This model, which satisfactorily ﬁts historical data on the decline of Welsh, Scottish

Gaelic, Quechua and other endangered languages, predicts that one of the competing lan-

guages will inevitably die out. The bilingual societies that do in fact exist are thought by

the authors to be, in most cases at least, unstable situations resulting from the recent merg-

ing of formerly separate communities with diﬀerent languages. Here we suggest that stable

bilingualism may be possible, and that whether it occurs or not may depend on the degree

of similarity between the two competing languages.

In Abrams and Strogatz’ model, bilingualism is strictly societal: two monolingual groups

coexist without there being any bilingual individuals. This model cannot account for situa-

tions such as that of Galicia (northwest Spain), where the outcome of competition between

two Romance languages, Galician (the low-status language throughout the period consid-

ered) and Castilian Spanish (the high-status language), has been the existence of a bilingual

majority alongside Galician and Castilian monolingual minorities [3] (Fig. 1).

It would appear to be relevant to this question that in the cases considered by Abrams and

Strogatz the admissibility of ignoring bilinguals is made plausible by the great dissimilarity

between the competing languages: conversation is impossible between Quechua and Spanish,

Welsh and English, and Scottish Gaelic and English monolingual speakers. By contrast,

Galician and Castilian are very similar: both arose from Latin, and limited conversation is

possible between monolingual speakers of Galician and monolingual speakers of Castilian.

Moreover, the similarity of their grammar and vocabulary makes it easy to learn one of these

languages when the other one is known. It therefore seems possible that the emergence and

survival of a socially signiﬁcant bilingual group may depend on the similarity between the

competing languages.

2

FIG. 1: Fraction of speakers vs. time in Galicia. Data from the Real Academia Galega (Royal

Academy of Galicia) [3]. We consider here only data obtained for dates prior to 1978, when the

status of Galician began to increase [4] as the result of political support that included its becoming

co-oﬃcial with Castilian. The data for 1945 may nevertheless be considered as anomalous, since

the use of Spanish languages other than Castilian was severely repressed following the end of the

Spanish Civil War in 1939. The smooth curves are the result of ﬁtting our modiﬁed Abrams-

Strogatz model; the parameters of the ﬁtted model are a = 1.50, sGalician = 0.26, c = 0.1 and k =

The Abrams-Strogatz model can be generalized to incorporate this notion as follows.

Denoting by X, Y and B the subsets of the population that are monolingual in language X,

monolingual in language Y, and bilingual, respectively, and by x, y and b the fractions of

the population that belong to these groups (x + y + b = 1), the rate of change of x is given

0.80.

by

dx
dt

= yPY X + bPBX − x(PXY + PXB)

(1)

(with analogous equations for dy/dt and db/dt), where Pαβ is the fraction of group α that

transfers to group β per unit time. Like Abrams and Strogatz, we take the probability per

unit time of a member of X beginning to speak Y to be given by a function of the form

csY (1 − x)a, where sY is the relative status of Y (0 ≤ sY ≤ 1; sX = 1 − sY ) and c and a are

3

constants; but we split this probability between the probability of becoming bilingual and

the probability of beginning to use only Y:

PXB = cksY (1 − x)a

PXY = c(1 − k)sY (1 − x)a

where the parameter k (0 ≤ k ≤ 1) reﬂects the ease of bilingualism and hence, according to

our hypothesis, the similarity of the two languages. k = 0 would represent situations where

conversation is impossible between monolingual speakers (like the cases chosen by Abrams

and Strogatz) and k = 1 implies X=Y. It is worth mentioning that the concept of distance or

similarity between languages has already been described from the theoretical point of view,

for example by Nowak et al. [5]; nevertheless, its calculation in practical cases is extremely

diﬃcult. Similarly,

and

and

For transfers from B to X we take PBX = PY X (since both B-to-X and Y -to-X transfers

involve loss of language Y, which mainly happens after death of the speaker), and similarly

PBY = PXY . We thus obtain a pair of coupled diﬀerential equations for x and y:

PY B = cksX(1 − y)a

PY X = c(1 − k)sX(1 − y)a.

dx
dt

dy
dt

= c[(1 − x)(1 − k)sX(1 − y)a

−x(1 − sX)(1 − x)a]

= c[(1 − y)(1 − k)(1 − sX)(1 − x)a

−ysX(1 − y)a]

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

which, obviously, reduces to the Abrams-Strogatz equation when k = b = 0.

In Fig. 1 it is shown that the modiﬁed model ﬁts successfully the data and yields, as

expected, a high similarity among both languages. An important fact is that we have found,

4

from empirical observations of our numerical studies, that for every value of sX there exists

kmin(sX, a), such that the language with less status dies out for all k < kmin, but for all

k > kmin both groups B and X survive. This can be understood because for k < kmin(sX, a)

there exist values 0 < xf , yf < 1 for which the right hand sides of Eqs. 6 and 7 vanish

and towards which there is also an asymptotic tendency. For k < kmin(sX, a), the only
solutions of dx

dt = 0 are given by x = 1, y = 0 (unstable point provided sX < 1/2) and

dt = dy

x = 0, y = 1.

In summary, we have shown that, in a model of competing languages, bilingualism is

possible. Similarity appears to be the key factor that enables the stability of bilingualism.

Our modiﬁcation of the Abrams-Strogatz model allows also to estimate a coeﬃcient of

similarity between two languages.

Acknowledgments

We wish to acknowledge the help of Professors Ant´on Santamarina Fern´andez and Manuel

Gonz´alez Gonz´alez, from the Departamento de Filolox´ıa Rom´anica and Instituto da Lingua

Galega, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, members of the Real Academia Galega

(Royal Academy of Galicia).

[1] J. A. Hawkings and M. Gell-Mann, The evolution of human languages (Addison-Wesley, Read-

ing, Massachusetts, 1992).

[2] D. M. Abrams and S. H. Strogatz, Nature, 424 (2003) 900.

[3] Seminario de socioling¨u´ıstica - Real Academia Galega, Usos ling¨u´ısticos en Galicia (Real

Academia Galega, Santiago, 1994).

[4] Euromosaic, Production and reproduction of the minority linguistic groups of the European

Union (European Commission, 1996).

[5] M. A. Nowak, N. L. Komarova, and P.Niyogi, Nature, 417 (2002) 611.

5

