5
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
3
1
3
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Economic networks and social communities in online-auction sites

J¨org Reichardt1 and Stefan Bornholdt1
1Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Bremen Otto-Hahn-Allee, D-28359 Bremen, Germany
(Dated: February 15, 2014)

Markets of individual traders exchanging goods can be seen as social and economic networks.
Given the abundance of these networks and their economic importance, it is surprising how lit-
tle detail is known about the structure and the evolution of such networks. We here study the
transactions of almost 1.9 million users of an online auction site during the Pre-Christmas season
of 2004. We analyze the topology of the resulting network and ﬁnd fat tailed distributions for a
number of fundamental network parameters. The network shows a high modularity and we are able
to group traders according to their primary buying interest during the time observed, solely based
on the network structure. The results help our understanding of the self-organization of markets
and society.

PACS numbers: 89.65-s, 89.75.Hc, 89.75.-k

INTRODUCTION

The complex system of social and economic processes
that we call “market” is often characterized in terms of
simple sum data, despite its complexity. Typical ques-
tions about markets are: How much is a trader selling
during a particular time span or how much is he buying?
What is the average cash ﬂow or the net balance? What
is the position of a trader in the rank list of trading vol-
ume? etc. These questions are natural, since economic
success is measured in exactly these terms. However, the
factors that determine economic success usually do not lie
at this coarse level of detail. Rather, the individual busi-
ness relations that traders maintain with each other - in
other words, the network structure of the market - make
up the true foundation of business success. The prototyp-
ical example of this are the relations that arise between
banks and businesses due to all kinds of liabilities. Risk
managers spend their day optimizing the structure of a
liability network in order to reduce the vulnerability to
failure (bankruptcy) of a particular node (business) and
at the same time maximize proﬁt. The same is true for
businesses that depend on a large number of suppliers
where managers also have to optimize their relations in
order to minimize risk of production loss due to short-
age of supplies and at the same time try to negotiate low
prices. In doing so, they shape the topology of economic
networks locally which leads to an evolution of the net-
work structure at a global scale [1]. The same applies to
retailers, where managing their customer relations forms
a vital part of maintaining their business [2]. Though
the above arguments are common knowledge it is sur-
prising how little data exists on such economic networks
and how little is known about their structure. It is only
understandable, when taking into account that knowl-
edge of the network structure, i.e. the business relations
that market agents maintain, is often kept secret and ev-
ery business will guard customer or supplier databases,
which could be used to study such networks, jealously.

Some researches have attempted to construct eﬀective
networks from correlation data in stock prices in order
to circumvent this problem [3, 4, 5].

The situation is diﬀerent for online markets and espe-
cially online auction sites, where the transparency of the
market is the key prerequisite for the users to trust each
other. Every user keeps his transactions and the feed-
back he/she received undisclosed in order to build trust
with other potential traders. To a certain extent, they
can be considered as ideal markets with fully informed
customers (an assumption often made in economics, but
rarely met in real markets). As an example, the bakery
at the other end of the city may have better bread at
a cheaper price than the one across the street, but still,
you keep buying yours across the street because you never
heard of the other option. Thus, online auction sites al-
low to study the self-organization of a market under real
economic constraints, provide excellent statistics due to
the enormous number of users and oﬀer a wealth of infor-
mation at a level of detail which is otherwise unattain-
able.

In this paper, we report (to our knowledge for the ﬁrst
time) on a large data set describing the transactions of
users of a large online auction site during a short pe-
riod of time. This snapshot already allows to study the
topology of a number of diﬀerent networks on this mar-
ket. We ﬁnd broad distributions for fundamental network
characteristics and typical signatures of modular and hi-
erarchical networks. Some networks can be identiﬁed as
social and cooperative networks due to their high assor-
tativity, while others tend to show signs of technological
networks.

EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH AND DATA SET

We logged the entire traﬃc on a large online auction
site (www.ebay.de) during 12 days between December 6th
and 20th, 2004. For every article sold, we recorded its

2

FIG. 2: Number of individual users vs. the number of articles
they bid on. For comparison, the blue line denotes a scaling
law with the exponent given in the ﬁgure.

FIG. 3: Number of individual sellers vs. the number of articles
sold. For comparison, the blue line denotes a scaling law with
the exponent given in the ﬁgure.

online trading platforms for private persons, the oppor-
tunities have quickly been seized by professionals which
oﬀer goods from their stores also over online auction sites
hence reaching a larger audience. At the same time, the
need for an actual store to sell things has diminished as
online auction sites provide all the infrastructure up to a
secure payment method and, as a result, more and more
people are turning into professional sellers.

FIG. 1: The typical interactions on an online auction site for
an auction of a single article. Bidders express their interest
in an article by bidding. The seller and the winning bidder
do actually exchange goods and money. Users of the auction
site, i.e. bidders, buyers or sellers, may change their role in
another auction of another article.

articles sold: 1.54
number of bids: 5.40
number of buyers: 0.93
number of users acting as sellers: 0.36
number of users acting as bidders and sellers: 0.14
number of users acting as buyers and sellers: 0.08

TABLE I: Summary of the dataset of online auctions obtained
between Dec. 6th and 20th, 2004. Numbers in millions.

name, the category it is listed in, the seller, the buyer,
and the highest bid from each bidder for that article.
Only articles that were sold in Germany and paid for in
Euro were considered. We denote as ”seller” a user who
acts as seller, as in one particular auction. A ”buyer” is
the winning bidder in that auction. Buyers form a subset
of the bidders. Any user may act as buyer, seller or bidder
in diﬀerent auctions, therefore making the sets of buyers,
sellers and bidders overlap. Table I summarizes the data
set.

The principle of a single auction may be understood
from Figure 1. Online auction sites mirror real markets as
there is demand and supply. The exchange of money for
goods takes place between seller and the winning bidder.
However, one is also able to obtain information about the
desires of potential buyers. Bidders, who do not win an
auction but place a bid have also expressed interest in or
a need for an article. One can try to quantify the strength
of this interest or need by the amount of money that is
bid. However, one should bear in mind that this is only a
sensitive measure if one has information about the ﬁnan-
cial background of a bidder. Somebody who is hungry
but poor will pay less for food than a person who is al-
ready satisﬁed and rich. Obviously, the amount of money
spent is not an adequate measure for need or desire. The
large asymmetry between the number of buyers and sell-
ers perhaps comes unexpected. Originally thought of as

3

FIG. 4: Number of individual users vs. the number of arti-
cles actually bought. For comparison, the blue line denotes a
scaling law with the exponent given in the ﬁgure.

FIG. 5: Cumulative distribution of the total amount of money
that a bidder has bid in all auctions he has participated in.
The thin solid corresponds to a ﬁt function of the form n(x) ∝
−γ with γ = 1.52 and a = 85, which is oﬀset from the
(x + a)
actual datapoints for better visibility.

NETWORKS IN THE MARKET

Before we look at the network structure of the online
auction site, let us investigate the distribution of bidding
and ”trading volume” per user. Figure 2 shows the distri-
bution of the number of bids, an individual user makes.
Figure 3 shows that of the number of articles, an indi-
vidual user actually sells. And, ﬁnally, Figure 4 plots the
distribution of the number of articles that a user actu-
ally buys during the time span observed. First, note how
extremely broad the distributions are. The top seller has
sold almost 3, 000 items. From its user name, one can
learn that it is a pawnbroker. Other users have bid on
more than 800 articles. When bidders have to face re-
ality, however, one can see that the distribution falls oﬀ
much faster. The top buyer has won only 201 auction.

The general behavior of these distributions is found
again, when one does not plot the number of items sold
or bought or bid on, but instead the total price that a
seller has earned, a buyer paid or a bidder bid. Cumu-
lative distributions of this ”transaction volume” for bid-
ders, sellers and buyers can be found in ﬁgures 5, 6 and
7 respectively.

In each of the distributions the vast majority of the
data points can be approximated by a modiﬁed scaling
law describing the number of users n(x) that have a trans-
action volume of at least x Euro. This scaling law has
the form n(x) ∝)(x + a)−γ. For the exponents γ we ﬁnd
a value of γ = 1.52 for the bidders, γ = 1.52 for the buy-
ers and γ = 1.36 for the sellers. These results conﬁrm
again the previous observation, that the sellers have the
broadest distribution, followed by the bidders and the
buyers. If one takes the seller’s income as a measure of

FIG. 6: Cumulative distribution of the total amount of money
that a seller has earned from selling his articles. The thin solid
corresponds to a ﬁt function of the form n(x) ∝ (x + a)−γ
with γ = 1.36 and a = 64, which is oﬀset from the actual
datapoints for better visibility.

”ﬁrm size” and compares with the ﬁndings by Axtell for
actual ﬁrm sizes, one ﬁnds the exponent of γ = 1.36 to
be larger than that found by Axtell of γ = 0.997 [6].

From this auction data set, a number of networks can
be constructed. The most obvious is the trader network
in which the users are the nodes and the links denote
an exchange of money or goods as depicted in Figure 8.
One can view this network as a directed network with

4

FIG. 7: Cumulative distribution of the total amount of money
that a buyer has paid for all articles he has bought. The thin
−γ
solid corresponds to a ﬁt function of the form n(x) ∝ (x+a)
with γ = 1.59 and b = 38, which is oﬀset from the actual
datapoints for better visibility.

FIG. 9: Degree distribution of the trader network in Figure 8.
The blue line denotes a scaling law with the exponent given
in the ﬁgure for comparison.

FIG. 8: Trader network. In this network, nodes denote users
of the auction site that have acted as buyers and/or selles on
the market and the links denote the exchange of goods and
money. This means, that only those users that have actually
traded are taken into consideration.

number of nodes: 1.2 million
number of links: 1.33 million

average money in-degree: 0.93
average article in-degree: 1.7
average article out-degree: 4.3
average degree: 2.2

average clustering coeﬃcient: 0.0005
assortativity: −0.03

TABLE II: Summary of basic parameters for the trader net-
work.

FIG. 10: Average clustering coeﬃcient of the trader network
in 8 for nodes of degree k.

arrows indicating the direction in which money or the
article is exchanged. The links can be weighted by the
price of the article. For this network, the distribution
of money in-degree (article out-degrees) is directly given
by the distribution of the number of items sold as shown
in Figure 3. Similarily, the distribution of money out-
degree (article in-degree) corresponds to the distribution
of articles bought in Figure 4. Table II summarizes the
basic parameters of the network.

The network is quite sparse with an average degree of
only 2.2. The assortativity coeﬃcient measures degree-
degree correlations as introduced in Ref. [7]. The slightly
negative assortativity hints at a dissortative network,

5

FIG. 11: Seller network. In this network, nodes denote users
of the auction site, that have acted as sellers and links de-
note that they have received bids from the same bidder. This
means, that the links denote a co-opetition situation. Linked
traders are either in competition because they sell similar
things or they could possibly cooperate, since together, they
fulﬁll complementary customers needs.

number of nodes: 0.34 million
number of links: 12.8 million
average degree: 75.2
average clustering coeﬃcient: 0.42
assortativity: 0.004

TABLE III: Summary of basic parameters for the seller net-
work with two sellers linked, if they have received bids from
the same bidder.

where high degree nodes preferentially link to low de-
gree nodes. The absence of a strong dissortativity here is
remarkable, as one would expect that nodes with a high
degree, the sellers, generally link to nodes with a low de-
gree, the buyers. This should lead to a more negative
assortativity coeﬃcient.

Figure 9 shows the degree distribution of the trader
network, treating the links as undirected. The distribu-
tion has a fat tail. For comparison with the raw data,
a scaling law p(k) ∝ k−γ is shown which has an expo-
nent of γ = 2.6. Figure 10 shows the distribution of the
clustering coeﬃcient vs. the degree of the nodes in the
network. For any node i with degree k, the clustering co-
eﬃcient c(k) denotes the probability, that the neighbours
of node i are linked. The average clustering coeﬃcient
results from averaging c(k) over the degree distribution.
The higher the clustering coeﬃcient, the more clique-like
is the neighborhood of node i.

Next, one can construct a network of sellers, where a
link between two sellers denotes that they sold to, or re-
ceived bids from the same user. Figure 11 shows this
principle. Hence, we are dealing with a set graph or
highly clustered graph [8]. For every bidder, there ex-
ists a clique of sellers that have received bids from him.
Hence, the network is a collection of overlapping cliques,
one for every unique set of sellers whose articles one bid-
der as expressed interest in. Analyzing this network will

FIG. 12: Degree distribution of the seller network in Figure
11.

FIG. 13: Average clustering coeﬃcient of the seller network
in 8 for nodes of degree k.

yield valuable information of how sellers compete for cus-
tomers if their range of products overlaps or how they
may cooperate because their product ranges are comple-
mentary. Without knowledge of the product ranges, we
cannot tell, however, if two sellers are in competition or
could cooperate.

The fundamental parameters of the network are sum-
marized in table III. Not all sellers appear in the net-
work, since not all sellers have received bids from users
that have additionally taken part in other auctions. One
notes how extremely dense the network is and also the
high clustering. Remarkably, if one only links sellers that
have sold to the same user, the number of nodes and links
drops to 0.22 million and 0.88 million which results in an

6

FIG. 14: Bidder network. In this network, bidders are linked
if they have bid on the same article. Hence, links denote a
common interest among bidders. Also, every article will form
a clique (fully connected subgraph) of the bidders for that
particular article. Hence, it is essentially a setgraph.

number of nodes: 1.77 million
number of links: 11.3 million
average degree: 12.8
average clustering coeﬃcient: 0.64
assortativity: 0.3

TABLE IV: Summary of basic parameters for the seller net-
work with two sellers linked, if they have received bids from
the same bidder.

average degree of only 7.9 which is about ten times lower
than the value in table III. The average clustering co-
eﬃcient, however, remains unchanged. The assortativity
coeﬃcient then is 0.04. So apparently, there are hardly
any degree correlations.

Figure 12 show the degree distribution of the seller net-
work. Again, the distribution is extremely broad, ranging
over almost 4 orders of magnitude. Its shape, however,
is distinctly diﬀerent from that of the trader network in
Figure 9 or the bidder network in Figure 15. Clearly,
the mechanism behind the construction of this network
is quite diﬀerent.

Figure 13 shows the distribution of the clustering coef-
ﬁcient vs. the node degree for the seller network. Again
the behavior is quite peculiar. While for smaller degrees,
clustering is very high and falls oﬀ extremely slow, for
larger degrees it falls oﬀ quite rapidly. Again, this behav-
ior is strikingly diﬀerent from that of the trader network
in Figure 10 and the bidder network in Figure 16.

As a last example of possible networks that can be com-
piled from market data, we analyze the bidder network.
In this network, a link is drawn between two bidders if
they have participated together in one auction. One can
interpret these links as common interest between bidders,
since they have tried to buy the same article. Again we
are dealing with a set graph which consists of overlapping
cliques, one for each article that has been in auction. Fig-
ure 14 illustrates this.

Table IV summarizes the basic network parameters.

FIG. 15: Degree distribution of the bidder network in Figure
14. The blue line denotes a scaling law with the exponent
given in the ﬁgure for comparison.

FIG. 16: Average clustering coeﬃcient of the seller network
in 14 for nodes of degree k.

The number of nodes in the network is diﬀerent from the
total number of bidders in the dataset, since not all bid-
ders have taken part in auctions together with other bid-
ders and hence did not receive any links. Natural for the
construction process of the network is the high clustering
coeﬃcient that had also been found in the seller network.
Interesting, however, is the high degree-degree correla-
tion that must be present for the assortativity coeﬃcient
of 0.3. This means, that bidders that have participated
with many other bidders in the same auction and hence
have a high degree, tend to be linked to bidders with a
similarly high degree. In other words, people, who take
part in popular auctions do so mainly with other people

7

group

pin

pout
M
N
4 × 10−4 5 × 10−6
1 22.4k 110k
−6
2 145.7k 1110k
1 × 10
3 67.5k 360k 1.6 × 10
4 105.2k 980k 1.8 × 10
5 193.0k 1710k 9.2 × 10
6 104.3k 550k
7 26.7k 150k

−4 5 × 10
−4 6 × 10
−4 5 × 10
−5 6 × 10

1 × 10−4 5 × 10−6
−6
2 × 10

−4 4 × 10

−6

−6

−6

TABLE V: Summary of basic parameters for the 7 major
communities found in the bidder network (numbered from
top left to bottom right). The average link density in the
network is hpi = 1.9 × 10

−5.

FIG. 18: Category spectrum of the bids forming the links in
community 1 of the bidder network shown in Figure 17.

is reduced to 0.41.

If we want to group bidders according to common in-
terests, we are eﬀectively trying to partition the graph
such that in every part the link density is very high, i.e.
the probability that two bidders from the same group
have bid on the same article is high, and at the outer
link density, i.e. the probability that two bidders from
diﬀerent groups have bid on the same article is low. If
one assumes stability of these interest groups, then one
can also predict, with which probability any two bidders
will bid on the same article in the future.

The grouping of bidders is hence a combinatorial op-
timization problem which can be solved with a recently
developed algorithm based on a q-state Potts modell [10].
We only show the result of applying this algorithm to
our data in Figure 17. This ﬁgure shows the adjacency
matrix of the giant component of the network of infor-
mative bidders. The matrix is of dimension 0.9 × 0.9
million. The rows and columns of the matrix are ordered
such that bidders from the same community stand next

FIG. 17: The adjacency matrix of the bidder network. The
rows and columns are ordered such that nodes that are found
to be in the same community by the community detection
algorithm are grouped together, while within these groups, a
random order is taken. One can identiy 7 major communities,
numbered 1 . . . 7 beginning from top left, and and a number
of smaller communities can be idendiﬁed.

who also like to take part in popular auctions. At the
same time, people who take part in auctions that only
appeal to a special audience, do so together with other
people, whose interest is rather specialized. This high
assortativity coeﬃcient is a typical feature of a social
network.

Figure 15 shows the degree distribution of the bidder
network. Again, the distribution is very broad, covering
almost 4 orders of magnitude.
Its shape is distinctly
diﬀerent from that of the seller network, even though it
is also a set graph. Rather, it resembles the distribution
of the trader network.

In Figure 16 the distribution the clustering coeﬃcient
vs. the degree of a node is shown. For low node degrees
the clustering is almost one since every action induces a
clique in the graph. For larger degrees, the clustering falls
oﬀ smoothly. This behavior of the clustering coeﬃcient
already hints at some hierarchical modularity [9].

COMMUNITY ANALYSIS OF THE MARKET

We now try to analyse the structure of the bidder
network in more detail. Especially, since a link in this
network corresponds to a common interest between two
bidders, we want to learn whether the bidders can be
grouped into communities according to their interests.
To do so, we ﬁrst reduce the bidder network to a net-
work of ”informative bidders”. We call a bidder infor-
mative, if he/she has bid on more than one article, since
the grouping a non informative bidder is trivial once the
other bidders have been grouped. This reduces the num-
ber of nodes in the network to 0.9 million and the number
of links to 7.4 million. The average number of links in
this reduced network is 16.5 and the average clustering

to each other in the matrix. The algorithm ﬁnds 7 major
communities of diﬀerent sizes and a large number of sig-
niﬁcantly smaller groups. Table V summarizes the basic
characteristics of the communities.

In order to validate the communities we found, we plot
a category histogram of the articles that constitute the
intra community links. In such a histogram, the category
in which an article is listed is used as a bin for the number
of bidders its has attracted. At the highest level of detail,
there are about 34 thousand diﬀerent categories in which
articles can be listed. These detailed category names
are strings that consist of the top category name, the
next level-category name etc. until the deepest level is
reached. These strings were ordered alphabetically and
their rank in this order makes up the x-axis in the ﬁgures
18 through 24. This orders the categories in a way that
the bins are correctly grouped into sub-categories along
the x-axis. The vertical lines in the spectra mark the
borders between the 32 top categories of the auction site.
Figure 18 shows the category histogram of community
1. The bids made by bidders from this community, and
hence the links, lie almost completely in the sports cat-
egory. A closer inspection reveals that these bidders are
mainly seeking winter sport equipment. This is not sur-
prising, given the time span of observation was shortly
before Christmas. Note that this is the most dense of the
major communities, i.e. the probability that two mem-
bers of this group have bid on the same item is highest
which also make it the most speciﬁc one.

Figure 19 shows the category histogram of commu-
nity 2. This is the most diverse community in the data
Items bid on are mainly found in Stamps, Coins,
set.
Gourmet Food, Antiques, Beauty, Collectibles and Jew-
ellery. One interpretation of this is, that these are regular
users, who are collectors of something and also use the
auction site to order christmas presents. Especially, since
the Food items are mainly alcoholic beverages and a large
portion of the Beauty articles are perfumes. One could
apply the analysis again to only this community of uses
in order to ﬁnd out more speciﬁc information.

In Figure 20, the category histogram for community
3 is shown. This one is again very speciﬁc as bids
are made almost exclusively on items from the Do-It-
Yourself, Business and Industry and the Automobile and
Motorcycle category. So the bidders in this category can
be described as ”do-it-yourselfers”, especially since closer
inspection reveals, that also the items bid on in the Busi-
ness and Industry as well as in the Automotive category
are mainly tools and spare parts.

The category histogram for community 4 is shown in
Figure 21, again a highly speciﬁc category. Bids are made
almost exclusively on items from the Toy Models and the
Toys categories. With these two categories in mind, the
bidders in this community are already well described.

8

FIG. 19: Category spectrum of the bids forming the links in
community 2 of the bidder network shown in Figure 17.

FIG. 20: Category spectrum of the bids forming the links in
community 3 of the bidder network shown in Figure 17.

FIG. 21: Category spectrum of the bids forming the links in
community 4 of the bidder network shown in Figure 17.

Figure 22 shows the community histogram of commu-
nity 5. The bids are mainly made on items form the cat-
egories Cellular Phones, Computers, Photography and
TV & Video consumer electronics. So apparently, the
bidders in this community mainly bid on electronic de-
vices and technical gadgets. Some bids are also placed
on items in the musical Instruments category or in the
collectibles category. These bidders are presumably very
technology oriented.

Community number 6, the category histogram of which
is shown in Figure 23 is again a highly speciﬁc one. Bids
are mainly made on items from the categories of Films
and DVDs, Books, Music, can concert and event Tickets.
Most likely, these bidders are content oriented people.
It is surprising, how diﬀerent community 6 and 5 are,
even though one would expect that their interests overlap
somehow.

Finally, Figure 24 shows the category histogram of
community 7. Once again, the bids are made in only two
main categories: Baby and Toys. Almost with certainty,
one can assume that the bidders in this community are
parents of small children or at least have some close re-
lation with a young child.

FIG. 22: Category spectrum of the bids forming the links in
community 5 of the bidder network shown in Figure 17.

FIG. 23: Category spectrum of the bids forming the links in
community 6 of the bidder network shown in Figure 17.

9

FIG. 24: Category spectrum of the bids forming the links in
community 7 of the bidder network shown in Figure 17.

CONCLUSION

In this article, we have studied the network of economic
interactions that forms on an online auction site. We
showed the general properties of the emerging networks.
These include fat tailed distributions of the number of
interactions and their volume, as well as high clustering
in the networks. We studied degree-degree correlations
for connected nodes in the network and found that they
are absent except in the case of the bidder network. Also
we found a clustering coeﬃcient that decreases with in-
creasing degree of the nodes in all networks. This feature
shows signs of hierarchical modularity. We further stud-
ied the community structure of the network using a re-
cently developed algorithm and ﬁnd that the users can be
grouped into social communities with very distinct bid-
ding habits based on the network structure alone. This
yields a detailed picture of the society structure in the
market, with so far unreached precision. Surprisingly, the
communities found do not correspond to speciﬁc auction
categories in a one-to-one fashion, but rather to complex
combinations of categories, instead. However, in terms of
social parameters, the communities can often have deﬁ-
nitions of pronounced simplicity.

[1] M. Boss, H. Elsinger, M. Summer, and S. Thurner,

arXiv:cond-mat/0309582 (2003).

[2] D. Helbing, S. L¨ammer, and T. Seidel, Phys. Rev. E 70,

[3] L. Kullmann, J. Kertesz, and K. Kaski, Phys. Rev. E.

066116 (2004).

66, 026125 (2002).

[4] G. Bonnano, G. Caldaralli, F. Lillo, and R. N. Mantegna,

Phys. Rev. E. 68, 046130 (2003).

[5] G. Bonnano, G. Caldaralli, F. Lillo, S. Miccich´e, N. Van-
derwalle, and R. N. Mantegna, Eur. Phys. J. B 38, 363
(2004).

[6] R.L.. Axtell, Science 293, 1818 (2001).
[7] M. E. J. Newman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 208701 (2002).

[8] M. E. J. Newman, Phys. Rev. E. 68, 026121 (2003).
[9] E. Ravasz, A. Somera, D. A. Mongru, Z. N. Oltvai, and

A.-L. Barab´asi, Science 297, 1551 (2002).

[10] J. Reichardt and S. Bornholdt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,

218701 (2004).

10

