Transfer Entropy Analysis of the Korean Stock Market

Seung Ki Baek,∗ Woo-Sung Jung, Okyu Kwon, and Hie-Tae Moon

Department of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology,

Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea

Abstract

We investigate the information dynamics of the Korean stock market in terms of transfer entropy

which makes it possible to detect the strength and direction of information transfer. The analysis

of transfer entropy shows that the market undergoes qualitative changes in the mid-1980’s and

the late 1990’s, and this suggests sudden increases of the ﬂux of information ﬂows in the market

at those times. These correspond to the Seoul Olympics Games and the Asian ﬁnancial crisis,

respectively, which are two major events increasing information sources of the Korean ﬁnancial

market.

PACS numbers: 05.20.Gg, 89.65.Gh, 89.70.+c

Keywords: Transfer Entropy, Information Flow, Econophysics, Stock Market

5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
6
0
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: garuda@kaist.ac.kr; Fax: +82-42-869-2510.

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Recently, economy has become an active research area for physicists. They have inves-

tigated stock markets using statistical tools, such as the correlation function, multifractal,

spin-glass models, and complex networks [1]. As a consequence, it is now found evident that

the interaction therein is highly nonlinear, unstable, and long-ranged.

All those companies in the stock market are interconnected and correlated, and their

interactions are regarded as the important internal force of the market. The correlation

function is widely used to study the internal inference of the market. However, the correlation

function has at least two limitations: First, it measures only linear relations, although a

linear model is not a faithful representation of the real interactions in general. Second, all it

says is only that two series move together, and not that which aﬀects which: in other words,

it lacks directional information. Therefore participants located in hubs are always open to

interpretative ambiguity: they can be either the most inﬂuential ones or the weakest ones

subject to the market trend all along. To overcome those limitations of the linear statistics,

we rely in this study on the information theoretic approach.

Information is already an important keyword in analyzing the market or in estimating the

stock price of a given company. It is quantiﬁed in rigorous mathematical terms [2], and the

mutual information, for example, appears as a meaningful choice replacing a simple linear

correlation even though it still does not specify the direction. The directionality, however,

is required to discriminate the more inﬂuential one between correlated participants, and can

be detected by the transfer entropy (TE) [3].

This concept of transfer entropy has been already applied to the analysis of ﬁnancial time

series by Marschinski and Kantz [4]. They calculated the information ﬂow between the Dow

Jones and DAX stock indexes and obtained conclusions consistent with empirical observa-

tions. While they examined interactions between two huge markets, we may construct its

internal structure among all participants, as one visualizes the geometry of the whole market

using the correlation function [5]. Korean Stock Exchange (KSE) is a representative emerg-

ing market unlike the mature ones such as NYSE or DAX, and it would be worth looking

into its evolution, in particular, during the past two decades when the Korean economy has

made a substantial change.

2

II. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND

Transfer entropy [3] from J to I is deﬁned as follows:

TJ→I = X p(in+1, i(k)

n , j(l)

n ) log

p(in+1|i(k)

n , j(l)
n )
p(in+1|i(k)
n )

.

In terms of relative entropy, it can be rephrased as the distance from the assumption that
J has no inﬂuence on I (i.e. p(in+1|i(k)

n )). One may rewrite Eq. (1) as:

n ) = p(in+1|i(k)

n , j(l)

TJ→I = H(i(k+1)

n+1 , j(l)
= hI(k; n) − hIJ (k, l; n),

n ) − H(i(k)

n , j(l)

n ) − H(i(k+1)

n+1 ) + H(i(k)
n )

from the property of conditional entropy. Then the second equality clearly shows that the

transfer entropy measures the change of entropy rate with knowledge of the process J. Eq.

(2) is practically useful, since the transfer entropy is decomposed into entropy terms and

there has been already well developed technique in entropy estimation.

There are two choices in estimating entropy of a given time series. First, the symbolic

encoding method divides the range of the given dataset into disjoint intervals and assign

one symbol to each interval. The dataset, originally continuous, becomes a discrete symbol

sequence. Marschinski and Kantz [4] took this procedure and also introduced the concept

called eﬀective transfer entropy. The other choice exploits the generalized correlation integral

Cq. Prichard and Theiler [6] showed that the following holds:

Hq(x, 2ǫ) ≈ − log2[Cq(x, ǫ)],

where ǫ determines the size of a box in the box-counting algorithm. We deﬁne the fraction

of data points which lie within ǫ of x(t) by

B(x(t), ǫ) =

Θ(ǫ − |x(t) − x(s)|),

1
N X

s6=t

where Θ is the Heaviside function, and calculate its numerical value by the help of the

box-assisted neighbor search algorithm [7] after embedding the dataset into an appropriate

phase space. The generalized correlation integral of order 1 is then given by

log C1(x, ǫ) =

log B(x(t), ǫ).

Notice that Hq is expressed as an averaged quantity along the trajectory x(t) and it implies

a kind of ergodicity which converts an ensemble average Pi pi log pi = hlog pii into a time

1
N X

t

3

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

average, log pi(t). Temporal correlations are not took into consideration since the daily data

already lacks much of its continuity.

It is rather straightforward to calculate entropy from a discrete dataset using symbolic

encoding. But determining the partition remains as a series problem, which is referred

to as the generating partition problem. Even for a two-dimensional deterministic system,

the partition lines may exhibit considerably complicated geometry [8, 9] and thus should

be set up with all extreme caution [10]. Hence the correlation integral method is often

recommended if one wants to handle continuous datasets without over-simpliﬁcation, and

we will be taking this route. In addition, one has to also determine the parameter ǫ. In a

sense, this parameter plays a role of deﬁning the resolution or the scale of concerns, just as

the number of symbols does in the symbolic encoding method.

Before discussing how to set ǫ, we remark on the ﬁnite sampling eﬀect: Though it is

pointed out that the case of q = 2 does not suﬀer much from ﬁniteness of the number of

data [11], then the positivity of entropy is not guaranteed instead[3]. Thus we choose the

conventional Shannon entropy, q = 1 throughout this paper. There have been works done

[12, 13, 14] on correcting entropy estimation. These correction methods, however, can be

problematic when calculating transfer entropy, since the ﬂuctuations in each term of Eq. (2)

are not independent and should not be treated separately [15]. We actually found that a

proper selection of ǫ is quite crucial, and decided to inactivate the correction terms here.

In principle, we need to scan the range of ǫ in order to ﬁnd which resolution we should

concentrate on to extract meaningful results from a time series. For reducing the compu-

tational time, however, the value of ǫ is chosen in comparison with these autoregressive

processes [15]:

with random noises ηi

X and ηi

Y , and parameters α = 0.5, β = 0.6, and γ = 0.5. The

mean and variance are adjusted for the observational data. Figure 1 depicts the transfer

entropies in both direction and their ratio. TX→Y converges to a ﬁnite value while TY →X

simply approaches to zero. We require ǫ to be such that we can discriminate a positive value

from zero by an order of magnitude:

Xi+1 = αXi + ηi

X

Yi+1 = βYi + γXi + ηi

Y

TX→Y /TY →X ∼ O(10).

4

(6)

(7)

(8)

Thus it should be noted that the absolute values are probably inaccurate; the limited size

of the dataset allows us to inspect only its qualitative tendencies.

III. DATA ANALYSIS

This study deals with the daily closure prices for 228 stocks listed on KSE from the

beginning of 1980 to the end of 2000. We select 228 companies which have remained in the

market over the period of 21 years, and assume 200 trading days to constitute one period,

rather than a year, for computational convenience. This divides the whole dataset into 23
periods. i(k)

n of Eq. (1) is set as the nth day closure price of the ith stock, and k as one day.

Figure 2 shows that the TE histograms consist of two kinds of distribution: one is around

the zero point and the other is centered at a positive value. While the former only results

from the lack of information ﬂow between many of the participants, the latter has evident

signiﬁcance, which is taken into account in making a network structure of the market. A

network of the stock market is basically fully-connected, but we may ignore the nodes whose

TE’s are smaller than a certain threshold; TE≤ 0.05. In fact, the number of durable edges

are small (only less than 10% survived over ten periods) and the network structure is highly

fractured at this time scale.

In order to examine the market evolution, we employ the 5-periods window; the nth

window includes the interval from the nth period to the (n + 4)th period. Two quantitative

changes are then found to occur in the mid-1980’s and the late 1990’s (Fig. 3). In other

words, we classify the whole time series into three epochs, whose borders are characterized

by the collapse of TE’s down to the zero point. Since the linear correlation function indicates

larger correlation after the mid-1980’s [16], this result is rather counter-intuitive.

A possible interpretation for the evolution of TE’s distribution is that the characteristic

time scale of interaction is varied over a period of time. Figure 4(a) shows the early 1980’s

data with replacing in+1 in Eq.

(1) to in+k; k = 1, 2, 5. We observe that changes in

TE distribution with varying k and with shifting of window are remarkably similar. This

similarity indicates a kind of market acceleration, that is, one day in the middle epoch

corresponded to almost four days in the early 1980’s from the viewpoint of information ﬂow.

The daily data’s time scale is rather too large for catching the rapid information ﬂow in

the 2nd and 3rd epoch. If high frequency data becomes available, this assertion would have

5

been veriﬁed in more detail. The faster velocity in propagation and diﬀusion of information

is mainly due to the development of the communication media [17]. A similar argument is

recently claimed in the physics literature using linear statistics [18] and our result conﬁrms

that such idea is validated in more general terms.

Increasing information supply may also be a reason for the characteristic time scale change

(Fig. 5): After mid-1980’s, the Korean market has grown to be prosperous, and the 1988

Seoul Olympics Games hasten its globalization. In particular, the 1997 Asian ﬁnancial crisis

makes the Korean market’s response to the external markets much more sensitive [19]. As

for the Korean market, all of these events mean the increasing source of information. And

the more information is supplied, the shorter life it enjoys, since any incoming one sharply

depreciate the old one in an eﬀective market.

IV. CONCLUSION

We calculated the transfer entropy with the daily data of the Korean stock market. The

concept of transfer entropy provides a qualitative value of general correlation and also the

direction of information. The analysis shows that the market underwent two qualitative

change since early 1980’s, one of which occurred in mid-1980’s and the other in late 1990’s.

These changes are detected from the collapsing distributions of transfer entropy. After exam-

ining diﬀerent time scales, we propose that the result indicate the changes of characteristic

time scale, or the acceleration of the market. Other statistical analysis also suggests similar

observation [16, 18] and our interpretation is consistent with the common knowledge on the

history of the Korean stock market.

Acknowledgments

We thank J.-S. Yang for exciting discussions.

[1] W.B. Arthur, S. N. Durlauf and D. A. Lane, The Economy as an Evolving Complex System II,

(Perseus Books, 1997); R. N. Mantegna and H. E. Stanley, An Introduction to Econophysics,

6

(Cambridge University Press ,2000); J.-P. Bouchaud and M. Potters, Theory of Financial

Risks (Cambridge University Press ,2000); B. B. Mandelbrot, Quant. Finance, 1, 124 (2001).

[2] C. E. Shannon C. E. and W. Weaver W., The Mathematical Theory of Information (University

of Illinois Press, 1994).

[3] T. Schreiber, Phys. Rev. Lett, 85, 461 (2000).

[4] R. Marschinski and H. Kantz, Eur. Phys. J. B, 30, 275 (2002).

[5] R. N. Mantegna, Eur. Phys. J. B, 11 193 (1999); W.-S. Jung, S. Chae, J.-S. Yang and H.-T.

Moon, preprint arXiv:physics/0504009.

[6] D. Prichard and J. Theiler, Physica D, 84 476 (1995).

[7] H. Kantz and T. Schreiber, Nonlinear Time Series Analysis, (Cambridge University Press,

1997).

[8] P. Grassberger and H. Kantz, Phys. Lett. A, 113, 235 (1985).

[9] F. Christiansen and A. Politi, Phys. Rev. E, 51 R3811 (1995).

[10] E. M. Bollt, T. Stanford, Y.-C. Lai and K. Zyczkowski, Phys. Rev. Lett., 85, 3524 (2000).

[11] P. Grassberger and I. Procaccia, Physica D, 9, 189 (1983).

[12] P. Grassberger, Phys. Lett. A, 128, 369 (1988).

[13] H. Herzel, A. O. Schmitt and W. Ebeling, Chaos Solitons & Fractals, 4, 97 (1994).

[14] M. S. Roulston, Physica D, 125, 285 (1999).

[15] A. Kaiser and Schreiber T., Physica D, 166, 43 (2002).

[16] W.-S. Jung, S. Chae, J.-S. Yang, O. Kwon and H.-T. Moon, Analysis in correlation for the

Korean stock market, Fluctuations and Noise 2005, 24-26 May 2005, USA

[17] N. Takasaki and T. Ozawa, Inf. Econ. Policy, 1, 177 (1983).

[18] J.-S. Yang, Private Communication.

[19] F. Climent and V. Meneu, Int. Rev. Econ. Financ., 12, 111 (2003).

7

