5
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
6
1
4
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cascade Dynamics of Multiplex Propagation

Damon Centola,1, 2, ∗ Michael W. Macy,2 and V´ıctor M. Egu´ıluz3, †
1Department of Sociology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027
2Department of Sociology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853‡
3Instituto Mediterr´aneo de Estudios Avanzados IMEDEA (CSIC-UIB), E-07122 Palma de Mallorca, Spain
(Dated: August 16, 2013)

Random links between otherwise distant nodes can greatly facilitate the propagation of disease
or information, provided contagion can be transmitted by a single active node. However we show
that when the propagation requires simultaneous exposure to multiple sources of activation, called
multiplex propagation, the eﬀect of random links is just the opposite: it makes the propagation more
diﬃcult to achieve. We calculate analytical and numerically critical points for a threshold model in
several classes of complex networks, including an empirical social network.

PACS numbers: 87.23.Ge, 89.65.-s, 89.75.Hc, 87.19.Xx

Introduction.– Recently much attention has been paid
to complex networks as the skeleton of complex systems
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. For example, recent advances in complex
systems have shown that most real networks display the
small world property: they are as clustered as a regu-
lar lattice but with an average path length similar to a
random network [1]. More precisely, it has been shown
that surprisingly few bridge links are needed to give even
highly clustered networks the “degrees of separation”
characteristic of a “small world”. Interestingly, these ran-
dom links signiﬁcantly increase the rate of propagation of
contagions such as disease and information [1, 6, 7]. For
simple propagation –such as the spread of information
or disease– in which a single active node is suﬃcient to
trigger the activation of its neighbors, random links con-
necting otherwise distant nodes achieve dramatic gains
in propagation rates by creating “shortcuts” across the
graph [8, 9]. Sociologists have long argued that bridge
links between disjoint neighborhoods promote the diﬀu-
sion of information and innovation, a regularity known
as the “strength of weak links” [8].

In addition to simple propagation, multiplex propa-
gation, in which node activation requires simultaneous
exposure to multiple active neighbors, is also common
in the social world. Fads, stock market herds, lynch
mobs, riots, grass roots movements, and environmental
campaigns (such as curb side recycling) share the im-
portant property that a bystander’s probability of join-
ing increases with the level of local participation by her
neighbors [10]. In this case, one neighbor acting alone is
rarely suﬃcient to trigger a cascade. These cascades of-
ten display a second important property: they typically
unfold in clustered networks. Empirical studies have con-
sistently found that recruitment to social movements is
most eﬀective in locally dense networks characterized by

∗Electronic address: dc288@cornell.edu
†Electronic
URL: http://www.imedea.uib.es/physdept
‡URL: http://hsd.soc.cornell.edu

address:

victor@imedea.uib.es;

strong interpersonal ties [11, 12]. Short cycles expose
potential recruits to multiple and overlapping inﬂuences
that provide the strong social support required to moti-
vate costly investments of time, eﬀort, and resources.

In this paper, we use a threshold model to analyze the
eﬀect of bridge ties in complex networks on the dynamics
of multiplex propagation. [10, 13, 14]. Our results show
that contrary to the results for cascades in small worlds
networks [1, 6, 7], for multiplex propagation, random
links to distant nodes reduce propagation rates. More-
over, too many random links can prevent cascades from
occurring altogether. To test the results of our model,
we examine its predictions on an empirical network with
scale-free degree distribution.

The threshold model.– The system is composed of a set
of N agents located at the nodes of a network. Each
agent can be in one of two states: 1 indicates that the
agent is active, otherwise its state is 0. Each agent is
characterized by a ﬁxed threshold 0 ≤ T ≤ 1. The dy-
namics are deﬁned as follows. Each time t a node i is
selected at random. Then

1. if its state is 1 (active), then it will remain active;

2. however, if its state is 0, then it becomes active,
changing its state to 1, if only if the fraction of its
neighbors in the active state is equal to or larger
than T .

In order to isolate the eﬀect of the network topology
from the eﬀect of threshold distribution, we assign every
node an identical threshold T , which determines the frac-
tion of neighbors required to activate it. By deﬁnition,
a single active seed is insuﬃcient for multiplex propaga-
tion. Hence, we seed the network by randomly selecting
a focal node and activating this node and all of its neigh-
bors. For any graph, there is a critical threshold Tc above
which propagation is not possible.

Critical Thresholds in Regular and Random Graphs.–
First, we compare critical thresholds in random and reg-
ular networks with identical size N and average degree
hki.

2

0
10

-1

10

-2

10

p
 
y
t
i
l
i
b
a
b
o
r
p
 
g
n
i
r
i

w
e
r

10

-3
0.1

0.2

0.3
threshold T

0.4

0.5

FIG. 1: Cascade window for small-world networks. Re-
sults are averaged over 1000 realizations in a 10,000 node
network. The shaded area indicates when cascades occur for
small-world networks obtained after rewiring (red diamonds)
or permuting (black circles) links.

As deﬁned by the cascade condition in Ref. [13], for
a random graph of size N in which all the nodes have
the same degree hki ≪ N and the same threshold T , as
N approaches inﬁnity the probability that two nodes in
the initial seed neighborhood will have a common neigh-
bor approaches zero. Thus, the critical threshold for a
random graph is approximated by

(1)

(2)

r
c =

T

1
hki

,

T 1d
c =

1
2

.

which corresponds to the limiting case of simple prop-
agation, and shows that multiplex propagation cannot
succeed on sparse random graphs.

The critical threshold for a regular one-dimensional

lattice is [9]

While in a one-dimensional ring with average degree hki
the critical threshold is independent of the interaction
length [Eq. (2)], in a random graph with the same aver-
age degree hki the critical threshold decreases with hki
[Eq. (1)]. Thus, the diﬀerence between the critical thresh-
olds of regular one-dimensional lattices and random net-
works increases with the average degree hki, making the
one-dimensional lattice much more vulnerable to multi-
plex propagation than an equivalent random network.

This feature is also observed in two-dimensional lat-
tices. In a two-dimensional lattice with near and next-
nearest neighbors (also called a Moore neighborhood) the
critical threshold is [9]

FIG. 2: Bridges between neighborhoods in (left) a regular
lattice and (right) after some rewiring. Rewiring deceases the
bridge width between i and j making cascade propagation
more diﬃcult.

As the interaction length in the two-dimensional lat-
tice increases, the critical threshold approaches the upper
limit of 1/2 [9]. Thus, increasing hki increases the diﬀer-
ences in the critical thresholds between regular and ran-
dom networks, making clustered regular networks able
to support comparatively greater amounts of multiplex
propagation than random networks.

Small-world networks.– We next explore the transi-
tion in critical thresholds that occurs in the small-world
regime between perfect regularity and pure randomness
by randomizing links in a two-dimensional regular lattice
with nearest and next-nearest neighbors. We study the
eﬀects of bridge ties on the success of multiplex propa-
gation using two diﬀerent perturbation algorithms. One
is the usual rewiring technique [1]: each link is broken
with probability p and reconnected to a randomly se-
lected node. We then observed the likelihood of success-
ful cascades, as p increases from 0 to 1, repeating the
experiment for diﬀerent threshold values. The second al-
gorithm rewires links in such a way that nodes keep their
degrees (and thus the original degree distribution is con-
served) by permuting links [15]: a link connecting nodes
i and j is permuted with a link connecting nodes k and
l. For both cases, a cascade is successful if it reaches at
least 90% of network nodes.

For T > T 2dnn

= 3/8 (the critical threshold for p = 0),
cascades are precluded for all p. Permuting links such
that all nodes have the same degree k = 8, if T < 1/8
(the critical value for p = 1), cascades are guaranteed for
all p. Thus, for multiplex propagation randomization is
only meaningful within the window 1/8 ≤ T ≤ 3/8. Fig-
ure 1 reports the phase diagram for cascade frequency
for thresholds in this range, as the original regular neigh-
borhoods (hki = 8) are randomized with probability
0.001 ≤ p ≤ 1. Despite small diﬀerences between the two
algorithm used for the perturbation of the network, the
phase diagram shows that cascades are bounded above
by Tc = 3/8 and below by Tc = 1/8. As thresholds are
increased, the critical value of p decreases, making cas-
cades less likely in the small-world network region of the
phase space.

c

T 2dnn
c

=

= 0.375 .

3
8

(3)

Figure 2 shows the eﬀects of perturbation on two neigh-
borhoods with the focal nodes i and j. i’s neighborhood

20

10

0
60

40

20

e
m
T

i

0
200
150
100
50
0
0.001

3

10000

s
e
d
o
n
 
e
v
i
t
c
a

1000

100

0.01

0.1

rewiring probability p

1

10

0

FIG. 3: Time to activate all the nodes (N = 10000) for an
initial seed for T = 0.12, 0.24, and 0.36. Time has been av-
eraged over 100 realizations. The randomized networks have
been obtained using the permutation algorithm.

is a seed neighborhood (shaded) and j’s neighborhood
In Figure 2a, the nodes k, k′,
(outlined) is inactive.
and k′′ are shared by both neighborhoods i and j. By
acting as bridges between the two neighborhoods, these
nodes allow multiplex propagation to spread from one to
the other. Random rewiring reduces the width of the
bridge between the neighborhoods by reducing the com-
mon neighbors shared by i and j, as shown in Figure 2b,
where random rewiring has eliminated two of the com-
mon neighbors of i and j. In the resulting network, i’s
neighborhood can only activate j through k; thus, if j
requires multiple sources of activation, i’s neighborhood
will no longer be suﬃcient to activate j.
When ties are randomly rewired,

local changes to
neighborhood structure dramatically aﬀects the dynam-
ics of propagation. Fig. 4 shows the diﬀerent growth rates
of cascades in regular and rewired networks. In a regular
lattice the growth of active nodes follows a power law
with an exponent around 2, due to the two dimensional
nature of the network. However in the small network the
growth initially follows an exponential law and then it
rapidly expands and activates all the nodes.

In Fig. 3 we show the average time required for the
initial seed to reach the full population for diﬀerent val-
ues of the threshold and the rewiring probability p, us-
ing the permutation algorithm. For simple propagation,
random perturbation of ties reduces propagation time as
expected. However, perturbing the network lowers its
critical threshold, thus reducing the viability of conta-
gions that spread by multiplex propagation. As shown
in Fig. 3, at the critical point Tc, rates for multiplex
propagation diverge, increasing to inﬁnity with increas-
ing p. Thus, although random links can increase the rate
of propagation, they can also preclude propagation by
lowering the critical threshold of the network.

10

20

30

40

50

time

FIG. 4: Total number of active nodes as a function of time
from an initial seed of 9 active neighbor nodes and T = 0.24
for one realization. While for (circles) the regular lattice (p =
0) the curve follows a power law growth (solid line increases as
(time)2), (squares) for a small-world network (following the
permutation algorithm with p = 0.1) the growth is initially
exponential (solid line).

Empirical scale-free networks.- Regular lattices are an
important theoretical demonstration of multiplex propa-
gation because they can have very wide bridges between
near-neighbors. Nevertheless, except for special cases
where spatial patterns of interaction dominate the struc-
ture of the network of interaction [16], regular lattices are
not a good representation of real networks. We therefore
extended our analysis to an empirical social network. In
particular, we consider the Internet Movie Data Base as
an illustrative example. Figure 5 reports the average rel-
ative size of cascades, hsi, in the Internet movie database
(IMDB). It is worth noting that due to the nature of the
transition for cascade behavior, the average frequency
of cascades is equivalent to the average relative size of
cascades, hsi. The black line shows hsi for the original
network (p = 0), where Tc ≃ 0.1, while the red line rep-
resents the randomized IMDB (p = 1). In the random-
ized graph, Tc ≃ 0.04 (approximately 1/hki for estimated
hki = 25). Consistent with our results for regular lattices,
the socially clustered IMDB network supports multiplex
propagation that cannot propagate on the randomized
network.

Conclusions.– Using a threshold model, we have an-
alyzed simple and multiplex propagation in diﬀerent
classes of complex networks. The relevant bridging mech-
anism for multiplex propagation is not the dyadic link
but multiple short paths between source and target. As
a regular lattice is randomized, there are fewer common
neighbors to provide multiple simultaneous sources of ac-
tivation. Thus, while networks with long range links
have been shown to promote simple propagation in small-

>
s
<

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.05

0.1

0.2

0.25

0.15
Threshold T

FIG. 5: Eﬀect of perturbation on multiplex propagation in
the IMDB network. For the unperturbed network (black cir-
cles), Tc ≃ 0.1. For the randomized network (red triangles),
Tc ≃ 0.04 (approximately 1/z for hki ≃ 25). The perturbed
network cannot support multiplex propagation that is possi-
ble on the real structured social network. The randomized
network has been obtained permuting links in order to keep
the original degree distribution [15].

4

world networks, they inhibit multiplex propagation. This
implies that random links do not promote diﬀusion if the
credibility of information or the willingness to adopt an
innovation depends on receiving independent conﬁrma-
tion from multiple sources.

The qualitative diﬀerences between multiplex and sim-
ple propagation caution about extrapolating from the
spread of disease or information to the spread of par-
ticipation in political, religious, or cultural movements.
These movements may not beneﬁt from “the strength of
weak links” and may even be hampered by processes of
global integration. More broadly, many of the important
empirical studies of the eﬀects of small-world networks on
the dynamics of cascades may need to take into account
In
the possibility that propagation may be multiplex.
fact, for the dynamics of multiplex propagation, our re-
sults highlight the inhibitory eﬀects of networks typically
thought to be advantageous for cascades.

D.M.C. acknowledges support from a NSF IGERT Fel-
lowship and a NSF Human Social Dynamics grant (SES-
0432917). M.W.M. acknowledges support from the NSF
(SES-0241657 and SES-0432917). V.M.E acknowledges
support from McyT (Spain) through project CONOCE2.
We also thank Steve Strogatz, Duncan Watts and Jon
Kleinberg for helpful comments and suggestions.

[1] D.J. Watts, S.H. Strogatz, Nature 393, 440 (1998).
[2] S.H. Strogatz, Nature 410, 268 (2001).
[3] R. Albert A.-L. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47 (2002).
[4] S.N. Dorogovtsev, J.F.F. Mendes, Adv. Phys. 51, 1079

(2002).

[5] M.E.J. Newman, SIAM Review 45, 167-256 (2003).
[6] D.J. Watts, Am J. Soc. 105, 493 (1999).
[7] M.E.J. Newman, J. Stat. Phys. 101, 819 (2000).
[8] M. Granovetter, Am. J. Soc. 78, 1360 (1973).
[9] S. Morris, Rev. Econ. Studies 67, 57 (2000).
[10] M. Granovetter, Am. J. Soc. 83, 1420 (1978).
[11] D. McAdam, Am. J. Soc. 92, 64 (1986).

[12] D. McAdam and R. Paulsen, Am. J. Soc. 99, 640 (1993)
[13] D.J. Watts, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 5766 (2002).
[14] P.S. Dodds, D.J. Watts, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 218701

(2004).

[15] S. Maslov, K. Sneppen, and U. Alon, in Handbook of
Graphs and Networks, edited by S. Bornholdt and H.G.
Schuster (Wiley-VCH and Co., Weinheim, 2003).

[16] R.V. Gould, Insurgent Identities: Class, Community, and
Protest in Paris from 1848 to the Commune. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press (1995).

