Automated Trading Systems: Developed and Emerging
Capital Markets

O. Hudak

Department of Corporate Finance, Faculty of Finance, Cesta na amﬁteater 1,
SK - 974 01 Banska Bystrica, Slovak Republic

5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
3
0
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Abstract

Automated trading systems on developed and emerging capital markets are
studied in this paper. The standard for developed market is automated trading
system with 40-days simple moving average. We tested it for the index SIX
Industrial for 1000 and 730 trading days. The Buy and Hold trading system
was 7.80 times more proﬁtable than this etalon trading system for active trading.
Simple taking of proﬁtable standard trading system from a developed capital
market does not lead to optimal results on the emerging capital markets. We
then studied optimized standard trading system based on the simple moving
average. The parameter of optimization was the number of weeks. We took
the range from 1 to 100 weeks. An optimal system was that with 5 weeks.
This trading system has some of its characteristics comparable with the etalon
trading system on the NYSE Composite Index. The emerging market is more
risky than the developed market. The proﬁt on the emerging market is also
higher. The range of optimized system parameter is quite robust. Observed
was increase of number of trades in the range from the 21 weeks to the 25
weeks. This indicates creation of a new optimal middle range trading system.
Results of testing for liquid shares are quantitatively similar.

2

1

Introduction

Can active management of a portfolio of securities add value? That was the
question [1] which was discussed for developed capital markets. Those capital
markets have their properties, which are studied and understood to quite a large
extension [2]. There exist algorithmic prescriptions, called automated trading
systems, for trading on these markets. It means that there exist algorithmic
prescriptions generating buy and sell signals. These algorithmic prescriptions
are unambiguously deﬁned rules based on fundamental and technical analysis.
They are taking into account investment characteristics of an investor. While
development in prices in future is diﬀerent from that in history, reaction of
buyers and sellers on period of similar development on the market is similar. To
deﬁne these algorithmic prescriptions for the nearest period it is necessary to
test and to optimize these algorithmic prescriptions on recent historical data.
From similarity of reaction of buyers and sellers on similar situations we obtain
for using these algorithmic prescriptions with tested and optimized parameters
consistency. They are robust. In longer periods it is necessary to combine these
algorithmic prescriptions with reoptimalisation of them, using for example a
method of shifting window. Main methods of using automated trading systems
are as analysis of development on the capital market and as an investment
strategy, where buyers and sellers are acting after every buy or sell signal.

This paper has the following sections: Automated Trading Systems, Etalon
- Developed Capital Market, Emerging Capital Markets, Automated Trading
Systems and Emerging Capital Markets, and Summary. We studied here auto-
mated trading systems on developed and emerging capital markets. Main results
are the following ones. The standard for developed markets automated trading
system with 40-days simple moving average was used for the index SIX Indus-
trial from the emerging slovak capital market. It was tested for 1000 and 730
trading days. It is not an optimal trading system for the emerging market due
to the fact that the Buy and Hold trading system was 7.80 times more proﬁtable
than this etalon trading system for active trading. Simple taking of proﬁtable
standard trading system from a developed capital market thus does not lead
to optimal results on the emerging capital markets. We then studied optimized
standard trading system based on the simple moving average. The parameter of
optimization was the number of weeks in the moving average. We took the range
from 1 to 100 weeks. An optimal system was that with 5 weeks. This trading
system then has some of its characteristics comparable with the etalon trading
system 40-days simple moving average trading on the NYSE Composite Index.
The emerging market is more risky than the developed market. The proﬁt on
the emerging market is also higher. The range of optimized system parameter
is quite robust. Observed was increase of number of trades in the range of the
21 weeks to the 25 weeks. This indicates creation of new optimal middle range
trading system. Results of testing for liquid shares are quantitatively similar to
the results of testing for the SIX 30 Industrial index.

3

2 Automated Trading Systems

Advantages of automated trading systems are, [2], in automated decision pro-
cess, in discipline, in higher consistency of results with elimination of emotions,
automated elimination of loss to lower levels and automated using of every prof-
itable trend, and in ﬁnding every important trend. Disadvantages are that no
system is working universally good for every conditions on the market, as the
market develops its characteristics are changing and thus we should not relay on
historical data only. It may happen that buy and sell signals may not be realized
due to some other reasons (low liquidity, broker inability to realize the trade,
realization of the trade at a price completely diﬀerent from that signaled by the
trading system, and other random events which may lead to the situation in
which buy and sell signals cannot be realized). There are complementary meth-
ods to lower disadvantages of the trading system, they are based on the following
of and analyzing of several automated trading systems and indicators simulta-
neously (almost all of these trading systems should give the same trading signal
and none of them should give an opposite signal), new algorithms are looking
for and tested (artiﬁcial intelligence, etc.). To use automated trading systems
it is necessary to satisfy conditions like liquidity of the market with securities,
large set of historical data as concerning price (at least 5 years for middle period
range of trading or to have at least 30 generated trades during the period which
historical data cover) [3]. Normality of distribution of returns [4] on emerging
and developed markets should be veriﬁed. A user of the automated trading
systems should have deﬁned its characteristics like investment horizon, whether
he/she is an aggressive or conservative investor. It is necessary to know rate
of returns for investment of free (not invested on the capital market) ﬁnances
to banks, and to be able to reinvest to the same securities. Eﬀective commis-
sion fees should be known. Stop-loss characteristics for an investment should
be known. An investor should has enough reserve funds to survive the worst
situations on the market. The automated trading system should be deﬁned
unambiguously and should be simple. Deﬁning the algorithm of the trading
system one should preserve basic principles of ﬁnancial modeling, [5]. There
is a principle of independence, a principle of minimization of constrains and a
principle of top-down approach.

Automated trading systems should be compared with etalons of automated
trading systems. It is necessary to compare risk and performance of these sys-
tems. System based on passive strategy Buy and Hold (BH) is one etalon. An-
other etalon on developed capital markets is automated trading system based
on 40-days moving average indicator. There are such criteria of risk for a given
trading system like the longest and the deepest fall of the price in an open posi-
tion (this is connected with reserve funds), number of trades (commission fees),
number of win trades (small number of win trades with large proﬁt does not
mean that such a system would be consistent in the future).

4

3 Etalon - Developed Capital Market

As an etalon for a developed capital market we will use standard passive ref-
erence automated system Buy and Hold. Standard active etalon automatic
trading system for developed capital market is 40-days simple moving average
system, [2]. We used 19-years (January 1977 - December 1996) period for index
NYSE Composite. For 40-days simple moving average automated trading sys-
tem we obtained proﬁt 94.44 for this period. The etalon Buy and Hold system
gives us for the same period only 85.01 points. Number of trades for 40-days
simple moving average automated trading system was 57. It means 3.20 trades
per year. 35 percents were proﬁtable. The largest loss in points was 10.60
percents from the level 145.32 of the index in the year 1986. The largest loss
in percents was 22.53 percents from the level 60.24. The index of risk for this
automated trading system deﬁned as the ratio of total proﬁt to the largest loss
has the value 6.13.

4 Emerging Capital Markets

An eﬃcient capital market is that market in which every security price equals to
its investment value (NPV - Net Present Value) at all times. Presence of the (log-
) normality distribution of returns on eﬀective markets most of the time is that
point which forms a base for analyzing returns on diversiﬁed portfolios when the
holding period is relatively short. The only correct measures of returns and risk
are mean return per a given period and the standard deviation. It is an empirical
evidence that the (log-) normal distribution of returns is not present all the time
with the same parameters on eﬃcient markets (trends are changing), and it is
not true that such a distribution of returns is present on eﬃcient markets as
such for given every time periods. The aim of many econophysical models is
to explain both phenomena. However simple tests of presence of normality of
distribution of returns on eﬃcient capital markets should be done ﬁrst. It is not
known whether an emerging capital market is or it is not an eﬃcient market
in the sense in which every security price equals its investment value at all
In the case of the emerging capital market testing of the presence of
times.
the (log-) normal distribution is even more important than in the case of the
eﬃcient capital market.
It is necessary to ﬁnd the answer to the questions:
what are the correct measures of mean returns and risk on emerging markets?
Recently we tested normality of distribution of returns on the slovak capital
market, which is an emerging capital market, within the period of years 1993
(the starting year of capital market trading) - 1996. We studied presence [4] of
normally distributed returns on the slovak capital market from the short time
point of view as concerning main capital market indexes, industrial indexes, and
for shares. We used a simple sign-test which was appropriately modiﬁed. As an
etalon we considered the capital market of the U.S.A. We have found that main

5

indexes of the slovak capital market (SAX, SEVIS 100, RMS F, RMS I, SIX
ALL, SIX 50, SIX 30 Industrial) and indexes of industries on the same market,
as well as those shares with the highest market capitalization, have comparable
values of the index measuring presence of normality of distribution with those
values of this index for the etalon market. On the emerging market we have
found an industrial structure as concerning presence of the normality of returns.
With increasing time and liquidity of shares on the emerging market the presence
of the normality of returns increases. From our results it follows that the risk
may be described by the standard deviation of returns for main indexes of the
slovak capital market and for some of industrial indexes of the same market, as
well as for those shares which have the highest market capitalization.

5 Automated Trading Systems and Emerging

Capital Markets

As an emerging capital market we used the slovak capital market. We tested
this market. Our aim was to ﬁnd its characteristics for analysis, and for trading
(where however number of trading days is smaller for the emerging market with
respect to the period of 19 years of the etalon above). We used for testing
of automated trading systems the methodology from [3]. As an market index
we used the index SIX 30 Industrial. Further we tested a set of liquid shares
from shares traded on Bratislava Stock Exchange (where in the period which
we studied 777 diﬀerent share titles were traded) and a set of liquid shares from
the RMS Slovakia over the counter market (where in the period studied 639
diﬀerent share titles were traded). We used two time periods for the index and
shares from the Bratislava Stock Exchange (1000 and 730 trading days) and
one time period for shares traded on the RMS Slovakia (730 trading days, there
were not 1000 trading days on this market). We used data from the beginning
of trading on the Bratislava Stock Exchange in 1993. End of the time period is
on 31st August 1996. The time period 730 trading days does not contain data
from the beginning of trading until the spring of 1994. We considered Long
positions traded on the closing price last value in a given week for shares and
on the last value of the index for a given week in trades only. Thus trading
was on the Closing price for shares and on the value of the index. Number of
weeks which we used to wait to conﬁrm the signal buy or the signal sell was 0
weeks. Thus we traded aggressively. We considered zero commission fees. We
assumed that there existed possibility to reinvest all of the investment again
into the same share title or index.

Main results which we obtained were the following. For the standard auto-
mated trading system with 40-days simple moving average for the index SIX
Industrial (1000 trading days) we have found rate of return (per annum) 3.68
percents. There were 4 trades, one of them was proﬁtable. The largest loss

6

was 71.87 points. The ratio of total proﬁt to the largest loss is 1.43 . The Buy
and Hold trading system was 7.80 times more proﬁtable. Thus we can see that
simple procedure of taking proﬁtable standard trading system from a developed
capital market and to use it on an emerging capital market does not lead to
optimal results on the emerging capital market. Or even it does not lead to ac-
ceptable results on this market, see number of trades and number of win trades
which is very low.

We then optimized this standard trading system based on the simple moving
average. The parameter of optimization was the number of weeks. We took the
range from 1 to 100 weeks for the SIX 30 Industrial (1000 trading days trading
period). An optimal system was that with 5 weeks. It is 25 trading days. The
rate of return (per annum) was 89.59 percents. Number of trades was 13. There
were 4 win trades, e.i. 30.08 percents of trades. This number is comparable with
the etalon, the NYSE Composite Index. Number of trades per year is 3.71 .
This number is also comparable with the NYSE Composite etalon. The largest
loss was 120.30 points. The ratio of the total proﬁt to the largest loss is 20.63,
which is better than on the etalon market. The emerging market is however
more risky than the developed market. The Buy and Hold trading system was
0.32 times less proﬁtable. As the optimal range for active trading using trading
system based on the simple moving average we have found range from 3 to 7
weeks. This range is quite robust. We have also observed increase of number of
trades in the range of the 21 weeks to the 25 weeks using trading system based
on the simple moving average. This increase indicates creation of a new optimal
middle range trading system. Testing the same system on the same index for
730 trading days we obtained quantitatively similar characteristics as for 1000
trading days period. Results for liquid shares are also similar quantitatively.

6 Discussion

In this paper we discussed basic automated trading systems for developed and
emerging capital markets. Can active management of a portfolio of securities
add value? That question [1] was discussed for developed capital markets. Ac-
tive management of portfolio uses usually automated trading systems. They
are algorithmic prescriptions generating buy and sell signals which may add
value. These rules are taking into account investment characteristics of an in-
vestor. We used an empirical fact known from developed capital markets that
while development in prices in future is diﬀerent from that in history, reaction
of buyers and sellers on period of similar development on the market is similar.
Thus it has sense to deﬁne these algorithmic prescriptions for the nearest pe-
riod on the market by testing and optimizing these algorithmic prescriptions on
recent historical data. From similarity of reaction of buyers and sellers on simi-
lar situations we obtain prescriptions with parameters which are consistent and
robust. In longer periods these algorithmic prescriptions are reoptimized, using

7

the method of shifting window. Automated trading systems are used mainly to
analyze development on the capital market and as an investment strategy, where
buyers and sellers are acting after every buy or sell signal. In section Automated
Trading Systems we discussed advantages and disadvantages of these systems.
Automated trading systems may be used when conditions like liquidity of the
market with securities and large set of historical data as concerning price are
fulﬁlled. Normality of distribution of returns on developed capital markets is
usually present. However it should be veriﬁed. It is known that this distribution
is only roughly describing distribution of returns, see for example [6]. We discuss
properties of developed capital markets as well as of emerging capital markets.
The empirical analysis of developed capital markets lead to description of distri-
bution of return on these markets by Truncated Lvy Flight distributions. It is
not known whether this distribution is present on emerging capital markets and
it is diﬃcult to verify presence of this distribution on emerging capital markets
due to their speciﬁc properties. We used properties of normal distribution of
returns which is most of the time present on the developed and in some time
periods on emerging capital markets, as we veriﬁed this fact. A user of the
automated trading systems has its characteristics like investment horizon and
whether he/she is an aggressive or conservative investor. In test we are using
in general rate of returns for investment of free (not invested on the capital
market) ﬁnances into banks. It is assumed that there is present possibility to
reinvest return into the same securities. Eﬀective commission fees should be
known. We used in our tests zero commission fees. We did not used stop-loss
characteristics for trading systems because the standard 40-days moving average
method on developed capital markets does not use them. It is assumed that an
investor has enough reserve funds to survive the worst situations on the market.
Automated trading system tested in our paper was compared with the etalon
of automated trading systems, with Buy and Hold system. Another etalon on
developed capital markets is automated trading system based on 40-days mov-
ing average indicator mentioned above. We tested this etalon for a developed
capital market and for an emerging capital market. We have found that on the
emerging capital market this etalon is not a good etalon. The parameter of
40 days should be changed. Criteria of risk for a given trading system like the
longest and the deepest fall of the price in an open position, number of trades
and number of win trades may be used on emerging capital markets. We used
19-years (January 1977 - December 1996) period for the NYSE Composite In-
dex. For 40-days simple moving average automated trading system we obtained
proﬁt 94.44. The etalon Buy and Hold system gives us for the same period only
85.01 points. Thus active trading on developed capital market gives a value.
Number of trades for 40-days simple moving average automated trading system
was 57 during all the period. Thus 3.20 trades per year were found. 35 percents
of the trades were proﬁtable. The largest loss was 10.60 percents from the level
145.32 of the index in the year 1986. The largest loss in percents was 22.53
percents from the level 60.24. For this automated trading system we have found

8

the ratio of total proﬁt to the largest loss with the value 6.13.

On the eﬃcient capital market every security price equals to its investment
value (NPV) almost all the time. This is not true on emerging capital markets.
Tests of presence of the (log-) normal distribution of returns on eﬀective markets
and on emerging markets show that these markets are diﬀerent. On developed
capital markets most of the time this presence is a base for analyzing returns
on diversiﬁed portfolios when the holding period is relatively short (CAPM and
similar models). Then the only correct measures of returns and risk are mean
return per a given period and the standard deviation of returns. It is an empir-
ical evidence that the (log-) normal distribution of returns on developed capital
markets is not present (with 95 percent probability for a given time period,
or with a similar probability) all the time. Trends are changing on developed
capital markets and thus the same parameters of the normal distribution of re-
turns on eﬃcient markets cannot be used for longer time periods and moreover
it is not true that such as a distribution of returns ((log-) normal)is present
on eﬃcient markets as such for given time periods. Simple tests of presence of
normality of distribution of returns on eﬃcient capital markets should be thus
done ﬁrst also. Many of indicators in technical analysis and many models in
fundamental analysis are using the fact of presence of this distribution on devel-
oped capital markets (in practical sense). On emerging capital markets security
price does not equal to its investment value (NPV) at time periods which are
much more frequent than those for the developed capital market. In the case
of the emerging capital market testing of the presence of the (log-) normal dis-
tribution of returns is necessary for the same reasons as for developed capital
market. Moreover it is necessary to ﬁnd the answer to such questions like what
are the correct measures of mean returns and risk on emerging markets? Tests
of presence of normal distribution of returns on the emerging slovak capital
market within the period of years 1993 (starting year of capital market trading)
to 1996 were performed in this paper. In this period the market was certainly
an emerging market, thus we do not study latter years on this market in which
it is approaching developed market properties more. Results of our tests of
presence of normally distributed returns, from the short time point of view, as
concerning main capital market indexes, industrial indexes, and for shares for
slovak capital market using a simple sign-test of hypothesis of presence of this
distribution with 95 percent probability which was appropriately modiﬁed have
shown that main indexes of the slovak capital market (SAX, SEVIS 100, RMS
F, RMS I, SIX ALL SIX 50, SIX 30 Industrial), and indexes of industries of
the same market, as well as those shares with the highest market capitalization,
are reaching comparable values of the index measuring presence of normality
with those values of this index for the etalon market (NYSE in USA). With
increasing time and liquidity of shares on the emerging market the presence
of the normality of returns increases. From our results it follows that the risk
may be described by the standard deviation of returns for main indexes of the
slovak capital market and for some of indexes for industries of the same market,

9

as well as for those shares which have the highest market capitalization. We
did not tested presence of the TLF distribution for the slovak capital market.
Thus the question whether an active management of a portfolio of securities can
add value may be extended to emerging capital markets. This was done in this
paper. As an emerging capital market we used the slovak capital market, as it
was mentioned. For testing we used the methodology used for testing developed
capital markets, [3]. We used the index SIX 30 Industrial as an market index.
We tested also a set of liquid shares from shares traded on Bratislava Stock
Exchange and a set of liquid shares from the RMS Slovakia over the counter
market. Two time periods for the index and shares from the Bratislava Stock
Exchange (1000 and 730 trading days) and one time period for shares traded
on the RMS Slovakia market (730 trading days) were studied. Data from the
beginning of trading on the Bratislava Stock Exchange in 1993 were used. The
time period 730 trading days does not contain data from the beginning of trad-
ing until the spring of 1994. Thus we eliminated trading days at the beginning
of trading on the market when prices on the market were developing from those
resulted from the coupon privatization to those resulting from trading on the
emerging capital market. We considered Long positions in trades on the last
Close price value in a given week for shares and on the last value of the index
for a given week in trades only. Short position trading is forbidden on slovak
capital market. Trading using software was done on the Closing price for shares
and on the value of the index. We traded as aggressive investors, number of
weeks which we used to wait to conﬁrm the signal buy or the signal sell was 0
weeks. This corresponds to the etalon for active trading systems on developed
capital markets which is 40-days simple moving average trading system. Zero
commission fees were considered. It was assumed that there existed possibility
to reinvest all of the investment returns from a given period (from the period
with open Long position) again into the same share title or index. In its simplest
form we did not gave money into bank when Long position was closed. This
simpliﬁcation also correspond to the mentioned etalon.

The standard etalon automated trading system with 40-days simple moving
average on the index SIX Industrial (1000 trading days) lead to the rate of
return (per annum) 3.68 percents. There were 4 trades, only one of them was
proﬁtable. The largest loss was 71.87 points. The ratio of total proﬁt to the
largest loss is 1.43 . The Buy and Hold trading system was 7.80 times more
proﬁtable. The passive trading is more proﬁtable than the active trading using
the standard etalon automated trading system from developed capital markets.
We see that it is not possible simply to take standard trading system etalon
from a developed capital markets and to use it for emerging capital markets. It
does not lead to optimal results on the emerging capital market. It leads even
to such unacceptable results on this market as low number of trades and low
number of win trades.

We then optimized this standard trading system. The parameter of opti-
mization was the number of weeks in the simple moving average. We took the

10

range from 1 week to 100 weeks for the parameter for the SIX 30 Industrial
index with 1000 trading days trading period. An optimal system was that with
5 weeks which corresponds to 25 trading days. The rate of return (per annum)
was 89.59 percents for this optimized trading system for this period. This is
larger than the rate of returns using Buy and Hold trading system. Number
of trades was 13. There were 4 win trades, e.i. 30.08 percents of trades. This
number is comparable with the etalon for active trading on the developed mar-
ket on the NYSE Composite Index. Number of trades per year is 3.71 . Again
this number is also comparable with the NYSE Composite etalon. The largest
loss was 120.30 points. The ratio of the total proﬁt to the largest loss is 20.63,
which is larger than that for trading using the etalon for developed market and
trading with this etalon system on the SIX 30 Industrial. The ratio is larger
than that on the developed market. The emerging market is more risky than the
developed market which corresponds to higher rate of returns on the emerging
market than on the developed market. The Buy and Hold trading system was
0.32 times less proﬁtable than the trading using the optimized trading system.
The optimal range of the parameter for active trading using trading system
based on the optimized simple moving average is that range for which the re-
sults are near the results for the optimized system. We have found that the
optimal range of the parameter is from 3 to 7 weeks with maximum for 5 weeks.
This range is quite robust around the optimal range of 5 weeks. As we so above
the 40-days simple moving average trading systems is unacceptable in this case.
Observed increase of the number of trades in the range of 21 weeks to 25
weeks using trading system based on simple moving average indicates creation
of a new optimal for middle range trading system. The same system tested on
the same index for 730 trading days gave quantitatively similar characteristics
as for 1000 trading days period. Thus characteristics of the emerging market
were similar whether we took into account the period of beginning of trading
or not. Results of testing for liquid shares are also quantitatively similar to the
results of testing optimized trading system on the index SIX 30 Industrial. This
index contains in its portfolio liquid shares, so the observed similarity is not
surprising. Automated trading systems known from developed capital markets
do not have the same properties on emerging capital markets. It is necessary
for emerging capital markets to test these systems again.

Acknowledgements

Part of the results presented here was preliminary presented in the authors talk
given in slovak on the seminar Infoﬁnex 1997 in Banska Bystrica. The author
would like to express his thanks to the organizers of seminar for invitation. The
paper was supported by the grant VEGA No. 1/0495/03.

11

References

[1] Ambachtsheer K.P. and Farrell J.L., ”Can Active Management Add

Value?”, Financial Analysts Journal (nov.-dec. 1979)]

[2] Pring M.J., Technical Analysis Explained, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, 1991

[3] Colby R.W. and Meyers T.A., The Encyclopedia of Technical Market

Indicators, Business One IRWIN, Homewood, 1991

[4] Hudak O., ”Tests of normal distribution of returns presence on capital
markets”, proc. ”Statistical methods in banking, ﬁnances and insurance”,
VIII. Slovak Statistical Conference, Donovaly, 1996

[5] Miller R.M., Computer-Aided Financial Analysis, Addison-Wesley

Pub.Comp., 1991

[6] Mantegna R.N. and Stanley H.E., An Introduction to Econophysics, Cor-
relations and Complexity in Finance, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 2000

12

