5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
0
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Community Structure of Econophysicist Collaboration
Networks

Peng Zhang1,Menghui Li1, Jinshan Wu2, Zengru Di1, Ying Fan1∗,

1. Department of Systems Science, School of Management,
Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, P.R.China
2. Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, B.C. Canada, V6T 1Z1

August 1, 2013

Abstract

This paper uses a database of collaboration recording between Econophysics
Scientists to study the community structure of this collaboration network, which
with a single type of vertex and a type of undirected, weighted edge. Hierarchical
clustering and the algorithm of Girvan and Newman are presented to analyze the
data. And it emphasizes the inﬂuence of the weight to results of communities
by comparing the diﬀerent results obtained in diﬀerent weights. A function D is
proposed to distinguish the diﬀerence between above results. At last the paper
also gives explanation to the results and discussion about community structure.

Keyword: Weighted Networks, Community Structure, Dissimilarity

PACS: 89.75.Hc 05.40.-a 87.23.Kg

1

Introduction

In recent years, as more and more systems in many diﬀerent ﬁelds can be depicted
as complex networks, the study of complex networks has been gradually becoming an
important issue. Examples include the world wide web, social networks, biological
networks, food webs, biochemical networks and so on[1, 19, 2, 9, 6, 20]. As one of
the important properties of networks, community structure attracts us much atten-
tion. Community structure is the groups of network vertices. Within the groups there
have dense internal links among the nodes, but between groups the nodes loosely con-
nected to the rest of the network[8]. Communities are very useful and critical for us to

∗Author for correspondence: yfan@bnu.edu.cn

1

understand the functional properties of complex structure better. So the problem of
detecting and analyzing underlying communities is an important mission to us.

The idea of ﬁnding communities is closely related to the graph partitioning in
graph theory, computer science and sociology[5]. The study of community structure
in networks has a long history, so several types of algorithms have been developed
for ﬁnding the community structure in networks. Early algorithms such as Spec-
tral bisection[4] and the Kernighan-Lin algorithm[4] perform poorly in many general
cases. To overcome the problems, in recent years, many new algorithms have been
proposed[8, 10, 11, 12, 13]. As one of these algorithms, the algorithm of Girvan and
Newman (GN) is the most successful one.
It is a divisive algorithm. The idea be-
hind it is edge betweenness, a generalization of the betweenness ﬁrstly introduced by
Freeman[14]. The betweenness of an edge in network is deﬁned to be the number of the
shortest paths passing through it. It is very clearly that edges which connect commu-
nities, as all shortest paths connect nodes in diﬀerent communities have to run along
it, have a larger betweenness value. By removing the edge with the largest betweenness
at each step, we can gradually split the whole network into isolated components or
communities.

The application of GN algorithm has acquired successful results to diﬀerent kinds of
networks[8, 9]. Such as in [9], the authors use the GN algorithm to study the community
structure of the collaboration network of jazz musicians. The analysis to the results
reveals the presence of communities which have a strong correlation with the recording
location of the bands, and also shows the presence of racial segregation between the
musicians.

In recent years, most of the real-worlds which have been studied were represented as
non-weighted networks by neglecting lots of data. The researchers paid more attention
to the communities under the inﬂuence of the topology of the network. However, the
weight of edges is important and may aﬀect the results of communities, and it can
tell us more information than whether the edge is present or not. For example, in a
social network there are stronger or poorer connections between individuals, and the
weight of edges are applied to describe the diﬀerent strengths. So when we try to detect
communities in this network, we should consider the weights into the process. It may
give us better results closely according with facts than ignoring them.

In [21], we built an Econophysics Scientiﬁc Collaboration Network and gave some
statistical results about this network. In this paper, we focus on the investigation of
community structure of this network. We get the results of communities by using GN
algorithm and hierarchical clustering. We also obtained the communities in diﬀerent
conditions including weighted, non-weighted, and diﬀerent weights. In latest months,
Newman has pointed out that applying the original GN algorithm to the weighted
networks would obtain poor results, and gave the generalization of the GN algorithm
to a weighted network[22]. In [5], Newman and Girvan deﬁne a function Q to measure
where the best division for a given network, and also a generalization of Q to the
weighted networks was proposed in this paper. We applied it to our network and found
the peaks of Q correspond closely to the expected divisions.

2

The outline of this article is as follows.

In Section 2 we describe in detail our
work. First, we introduce our database and the Econophysics Scientiﬁc Collaboration
Network which was built on the database brieﬂy. Then we describe the algorithms and
the deﬁnition of the diﬀerent weights that were used to ﬁnd underlying communities in
our network. At last, we give the results by each condition and the compare between
them. In Section 4 we give our conclusions.

2 The communities acquired by diﬀerent algorithms

A network is composed of a set of vertices and edges which represent the relationship
In the Econophysicist collaboration network[21], each node
between the two nodes.
If the two scientists have collaborated one or more papers,
represents one scientist.
they would be connected by an edge.
In order to distinguish the diﬀerent level of
collaboration, we deﬁne the weights on the edges. So it’s a weighted network. Here we
take the largest cluster from the network as the subject of our research. It is a sparse
network including 271 nodes and 371 edges.

The weight is the crucial factor in our network analysis. Edge weights represent
the strength or capacity of the edges. The weight of this network is deﬁned as: wij =
tanh(tij), where tij is the number of papers which the researchers have collaborated.
The reason we prefer the tanh function in empirical studies is that, ﬁrst, it has the
saturation eﬀect, which makes the contribution less for larger connecting times; second,
it normalizes the maximum value to 1, which is the usual strength of edge in non-weight
networks[21]. As the similarity is used here as the weight, the larger the weight is, the
closer the relation between the two ends nodes is. The weight and connection provide
us a natural description for the distance of two nodes.

In this part, we present two methods, hierarchical clustering and the algorithm of
GN, on the analysis of community structure in our network. Because GN algorithm
performs well in many networks and hierarchical clustering is the principal technique
used in social networks in current.

In practical situation the algorithms will normally be used on networks for which
the communities are not known ahead of time. This raises a new problem: how do we
know when the communities found by the algorithm are good ones? To answer this
question, in [3], Newman proposed a measure of the quality of a particular division of
a network, which they call it the modularity. Then they deﬁne a modularity measure
by

Q =

[Aij −

]δ(ci, cj)

1
2m X
ij

kikj
2m

(1)

This quantity measures the fraction of the edges in the network that connect nodes
of the same community minus the expected value of the same quantity in a network
with the same community division but random connections between the vertices. Aij
Pj Aij
represents the edge between nodes i and j, the degree ki is deﬁned as ki =

3

(2)

(3)

, and m = 1
2 Pij Aij. ci is the community to which vertex i is assigned. Newman
has generalized the above measure to weighted networks[22]. Here we use the similar
formula to our weighted network with similarity weight range from 0 to 1:

Q =

[wij −

]δ(ci, cj)

1
2m X
ij

wiwj
2m

where wij represents the weight in the edge between nodes i and j, wi is the weight of
node i: wi =

Pj wij , and m = 1

2 Pij wij.

Using hierarchical clustering method to ﬁnd communities, we start from an empty
graph with all nodes and no edges. Then we connect the edges in order of decreasing
similarity. In our network, we use the measure dij which describes the similarity to be
the short path between a pair (i, j) of vertices, where the shorter path represents the
bigger similarity. When the nodes are clustered to be the communities, we deﬁne the
distance between diﬀerent communities as follows

Dpq = max
i∈p,j∈q

dij.

p, q are any two communities. The measure dij equals to the shortest path between

a pair (i, j) of vertices.

We have got the result from above hierarchical clustering method.

It shows the
modules in this result and also a peak in Q function. The best division has 23 clusters.

GN method has got better results for community analysis. As mentioned in the
section of introduction, the idea behind the algorithm of GN is edge betweenness. And
the betweenness of an edge is deﬁned to be the number of the shortest paths passing
through it. To search the shortest paths between any two vertices, we use the Dijkstra
algorithm. For the determination of shortest path, the similarity weight wij ∈ [0, 1]
has been transformed to dissimilarity weight by ˜wij = 1
, and then ˜wij ∈ [1, ∞]
wij
is corresponding to the ”distance” between nodes. All paths are calculated under this
dissimilarity weight from now on if not mentioned. The principal ways of GN algorithm
are as follows [5]:

1.Calculate betweenness scores for all edges in the network.

2.Find the edge with the highest score and remove it from the network.

3.Recalculate betweenness for all remaining edges.

4.Repeat from step 2 until all links are removed.

The best result given by maximum Q has 10 clusters. The GN algorithm and the
hierarchical clustering which are based on the equation 3 all show the modules in the
results. In the best divisions, we analyze the communities with the data. The results
of algorithm of GN is better than hierarchical clustering. Because the result in the
best division of GN algorithm shows that the scientists, who are in the same university,
institute or interested in similar research topic, are clustered to one community. It is

4

Figure 1: The best division of Econophysics Scientist Collaboration Network, with the
divisions detected by GN algorithm represented by diﬀerent colors.

close to the reality. For example, in ﬁgure 1 the members of the red community are most
from Boston University USA. And there are other communities which the members are
focused on the same topic, as the yellow one. Meanwhile even the hierarchical clustering
shows the modules, the result is not consistent with the reality.

3 The comparison of diﬀerent formation of communities

In the above section, we obtained that the results of GN algorithm and hierarchical
clustering are diﬀerent. How to quantify the diﬀerence between them? We deﬁne a
function D to measure it. The idea behind the function is to discuss the similarity
and dissimilarity between sets A and B. Let’s discuss the similarity and dissimilarity
of two sets A and B deﬁned as subset of Ω. The idea is quite trivial, the similarity
is represented by A ∩ B, the dissimilarity should corresponds to
.
(cid:1)
Therefore, the normalized similarity and dissimilarity can be deﬁned as

A ∩ ¯B
(cid:0)

¯A ∩ B

∪

(cid:1)

(cid:0)

s = |A∩B|
|A∪B|

d =

|(A∩ ¯B)∪( ¯A∩B)|
|A∪B|

.






5

(4)

Figure 2: The comparison of modularity detected by GN algorithm and hierarchical
clustering with Maximum minimum method. The peak are in 10 and 23 clusters re-
spectively.

In a way more convenient to be generalized to classiﬁcation systems with more than
only two sets, we can rewrite above expression by the characteristic mapping of set
sign (X, ω), which is deﬁned as following,

sign (X, ω) = 


1 for ω ∈ X

0 for ω ¯∈X

.


This mapping from X to {1, 0} can be very machinery calculated for any element ω in
Ω and for any subset X. It’s easy to check

|A ∩ B| =

A ∩ ¯B

(cid:1)

(cid:0)






(cid:12)
(cid:0)
(cid:12)

Pω∈Ω sign (A, ω) sign (B, ω)
∪

¯A ∩ B

=

(cid:1)(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Pω∈Ω |sign (A, ω) − sign (B, ω)|

.

(6)

And also

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
Therefore, by the characteristic mapping, the similarity and dissimilarity are reex-
pressed by

(cid:1)(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:1)

|A ∪ B| = |A ∩ B| +

A ∩ ¯B
(cid:0)

∪

¯A ∩ B
(cid:0)

s =

Pω∈Ω sign(A,ω)sign(B,ω)
Pω∈Ω[sign(A,ω)sign(B,ω)+|sign(A,ω)−sign(B,ω)|]

.

d =

Pω∈Ω|sign(A,x)−sign(B,ω)|
Pω∈Ω[sign(A,ω)sign(B,ω)+|sign(A,ω)−sign(B,ω)|]
Consider a particular division of a network into k communities. There are two
formations of k communities by diﬀerent algorithms. we can deduce the comparison of
them into many pairs of comparison between sets.The principal way is:

1. Construct the correspondence between the two subsets from diﬀerent conditions





(5)

(7)

(8)

6

2. Compare every corresponding pair.

3. At last, integrate all the results from comparison of every single pair.

Correspondence relation here means, for every subset Xi in classiﬁcation Xk, to ﬁnd
the counterpart Yi in Yk, by the similarity measurement. Here Xi and Yi correspond to
above A and B. After that we will get two ordered set X and Y , where the elements
at the corresponding order are a pair of counterparts. And then apply the dissimilarity
measure onto every pair to get a measurement of the total dissimilarity.

k
i=1 dXiYi
D = P
k

(9)

Under this deﬁnition, d will be normalized in [0, 1], where (0, 1) means no and large

diﬀerence respectively.

The principle of the ﬁrst step is to compare every single set Xi from X with all
the Yi in Y , and group it with the one having largest similarity. However, at some
cases, this may lead to a very ugly correspondence, for instance, many Xi correspond
to the same Yi. at this time, we choose the largest one of them and group the Xi
which correspond the largest one with the Yi. other Xi should found the counterpart
again in rest Yi. But in some times, we want to discuss the diﬀerent formations of
communities, for example, we want to compare the dissimilar between the best division
of GN algorithm and hierarchical clustering. As obtained above, we know that the
number of communities are diﬀerent. it meant some Yj in hierarchical clustering don’t
have any counterparts.
In this case, the ﬁrst step still can be done by treating the
whole group as a large subset, and treating no counterpart as empty set Φ. The k
equal to the larger number. Here we give two examples, the ﬁrst one, a network,
including N nodes, was divided into two communities by two algorithms. One division
is two equal communities. The other division is a node and the rest nodes. Calculating
the dissimilar of two algorithm, we got d ≈ 0.75. The second example is a network,
including N nodes, was divided into N communities. calculating the dissimilar of the
whole network and the N communities, d ≈ 1.

We use this algorithm to analyze the dissimilar of hierarchical clustering and GN
algorithm, and the result was shown in ﬁgure 3. With the same number of communities,
the Q curves and dissimilarity D for the results from diﬀerent algorithm are shown. we
also focus on the dissimilar of best division of them, Dbest = 0.756, which means they
are quite diﬀerent.

3.1 The inﬂuence of weight to the results of communities

Now we turn to the eﬀects of weight on the community structure of weighted networks.
In [23], in order to study the impaction of weight to the topological properties of
network,we have introduced the way to re-assign weights onto edge with p = 1, −1 for
weighted networks. Set p = 1 represents the original weighted network given by the

7

Figure 3: The dissimilarity D of the results from hierarchical clustering and GN algo-
rithm with same clusters.

Figure 4: the Q of diﬀerent weights in GN algorithm

(cid:0)

(cid:0)

ordered series of weights which gives the relation between weight and edge but in a
decreasing order,

W (p = 1) =

wi1j1 = w1 ≥ wi2j2 = w2 ≥ · · · ≥ w(iL)(jL) = wL

(10)

p = −1 is deﬁned as the inverse order as

W (p = −1) =

wi1j1 = wL ≤ · · · ≤ w(iL−1)(jL−1) = w2 ≤ w(iL)(jL) = w1

(11)

In this paper, we use the comparison of the communities which formed in non-weighted
and re-assign weights onto edges with p = 1, −1 to show the inﬂuence of weight to the
results of communities.

We obtained the inﬂuence of weight to the results of communities from the function
Q and the dissimilarity. Using GN algorithm to detect communities, the inﬂuence of
weight were shown in ﬁgure 4,5. In the ﬁgure 4, although the communities number of

.

(cid:1)

,

(cid:1)

8

Figure 5: A: The dissimilarity of non-weighted and weighted network in GN algorithm.
The dissimilarity of the best division is: D10,13 = 0.42. B: The dissimilarity of weighted
and inverse weighted network in GN algorithm. The dissimilarity of the best division
is: D10,12 = 0.25.

best division in diﬀerent weights are quite same, the components of each community are
quite diﬀerent. The same things happened in using hierarchical clustering to analyze
the network. Comparing these ﬁgures, we found that the weight have bigger inﬂuence
in GN algorithm.

4 Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we study the community structure of scientists collaboration network
by using hierarchical clustering algorithm and the algorithm of GN. And we also pay
much attention to the inﬂuence of the weight to results of communities. It has been
found that GN algorithm gives better results. Scientists who are in the same university,
institute or interested in similar research topic are clustered to one community. In order
to study the topological role of the weight, we have introduced a measure to describe
the diﬀerence of two kinds of communities. Then we investigate the diﬀerent results of
clustering for non-weighted, weighted, and inverse weighted networks. The weight do
have inﬂuence on the formation of communities but it is not very signiﬁcant for our
network of econophysicits. We guess that maybe our network is a sparse network, so
the existence or not of edges have bigger inﬂuence to community structure of networks
than the weight.

References

[1] R. Albert and A.-L. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47 (2002).

9

[2] M. E. J. Newman, The structure and function of complex networks, SIAM Review

45, 167-256 (2003).

[3] M. E. J. Newman, M. Girvan, Mixing patterns and community structure in net-
works,in Statistical Mechanics of Complex Networks, R. Pastor-Satorras, J. Rubi
and A. Diaz-Guilera (eds.), pp. 66-87, Springer, Berlin (2003)

[4] M. E. J. Newman, Detecting community structure in networks, Eur. Phys. J. B

38, 321-330 (2004).

[5] M. E. J. Newman and M. Girvan, Finding and evaluating community structure in

networks, Phys.Rev. E 69, 026113 (2004).

[6] M. E. J. Newman, Coauthorship networks and patterns of scientiﬁc collaboration,

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 5200-5205 (2004).

[7] F. Radicchi, C. Castellano, F. Cecconi, V. Loreto, and D. Parisi, Deﬁning and iden-
tifying communities in networks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 2658-2663(2004).

[8] M. Girvan and M. E. J. Newman, Community structure in social and biological

networks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 7821-7826 (2002).

[9] Community structure in jazz.

[10] Fang Wu, B.A. Huberman, Finding Communities in Linear Time: A Physics Ap-

proach, cond-mat/0310600.

[11] J. Reichardt, S. Bornholdt, Detecting fuzzy community structures in complex net-

works with a Potts model, cond-mat/0402349.

[12] S. Fortunato, V. Latora, M. Marchiori, A Method to Find Community Structures

Based on Information Centrality, cond-mat/0402522.

[13] Luca Donetti and Miguel A. Mu˜noz, Detecting Network Communities: a new

systematic and eﬃcient algorithm, cond-mat/0404652

[14] L. Freeman, A set of measure of centrality based upon betweenness, Sociometry

40, 35 (1977).

[15] M. E. J. Newman, The structure of scientiﬁc collaboration networks, Proc. Natl.

Acad. Sci. USA 98, 404-409 (2001).

[16] C.-M. Ghima, E. Oh, K.-I. Goh, B. Kahng, and D. Kim, Packet transport along
the shortest pathways in scale-free networks, Eur. Phys. J. B 38, 193-199 (2004).

[17] R.Guimer`a, L. Danon, A. D´iaz-Guilera, F. Giralt, and A. Arenas, Self-similar
community structure in a network of human interactions, Phys. Rev. E 68, 065103
(2003).

10

[18] Haijun Zhou, Distance, dissimilarity index, and network community structure,

Phys. Rev. E67, 061901 (2003)

[19] R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Baraba´ai, Nature 401, 130-131(1999).

[20] R. J. Williams and N. D. Martinez, Simple rules yield complex food webs, Nature

404, 180-183 (2000).

[21] Ying FanMenghui Li, Jiawei Chen, Liang Gao, Zengru Di, Jinshan Wu. Net-
work of Econophysicists: A Weighted Network to Investigate the Development
of Econophysics. International Journal of Modern Physics B, vol18, (17-19), 2505-
2511(2004).

[22] M. E. J. Newman, Analysis of weighted networks, Phys. Rev. E. 70. 056131(2004).

[23] Menghui Li, Zengru Di, Jiawei Chen, Liang Gao and Jinshan Wu, Weighted net-
works of scientiﬁc communication: the measurement and topological role of weight,
Physica A 350 643-656(2005).

11

