5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Surviving opinions in Sznajd models on complex
networks

F. A. Rodrigues and L. da F. Costa

February 2, 2008

1 Abstract

The Sznajd model has been largely applied to simulate many sociophysical phe-
nomena. In this paper we applied the Sznajd model with more than two opinions
on three diﬀerent network topologies and observed the evolution of surviving
opinions after many interactions among the nodes. As result, we obtained a
scaling law which depends of the network size and the number of possible opin-
ions. We also observed that this scaling law is not the same for all network
topologies, being quite similar between scale-free networks and Sznajd networks
but diﬀerent for random networks.

2

Introduction

Von Neumann and Ulam introduced the concept of cellular automata in the
early 1950’s. Ever since, this concept has attracted continuing interest and
has been subject to deep mathematical and physical analysis. A good deal of
the popularity of cellular automata arises from their simplicity and potential
to model many complex systems. The applications of this theory range from
modelling biological pattern formation [1] to sociophysical phenomena [2].

In sociophysics, attention has been focused on modeling social phenomena,
such as elections and propagation of information [2]. With this respect, partic-
ularly successful models have been developed by Sznajd-Weron [3], Deﬀuant et.
al [4] and Krause and Hegselmann [5], which diﬀer as for their deﬁnitions but
tend to produce similar results.

Among those three models, the one developed by Sznajd is the most ap-
propriate for simulation in networks and lattices, because it considers just the
interactions between the nearest neighbors. The Sznajd model has been devel-
oped based on Ising model and been successfully applied to model sociological
In this paper we simulate the Sznajd model on
and economics systems [6].
networks with diﬀerent topologies. The results turned out to be dependent on
the network topology only for small values of the ratio between the number of
possible opinions and the network size.

1

3 Sznajd model on complex networks

Complex networks are formed by a set of nodes (i = 1, 2...N ), which are linked
one another through edges.
In biological networks, for example, proteins or
genes can be linked according to their interactions [7]. In case of social networks,
one can represent connections as deﬁned by human relations such as friendship
[8], relations between jazz musicians [9], collaborations in scientiﬁc researchers
networks[10] and intermarriage between families [11].

To explain real network topologies, some models of complex networks have
been developed, including random graphs [12, 13], small-world networks [14],
scale-free networks [15] and, more recently, Sznajd complex networks [16].

As complex networks oﬀer a more structured and realistic topology than
regular lattices, the simulation of sociophysics models in these networks can
produce more accurate results [17]. Stauﬀer at. al. simulated the Deﬀuant et.
al. model in scale-free networks [18], obtaining the result that diﬀerent surviv-
ing opinions in scale-free networks depend on the network size and the number
of possible opinions. Moreover, Bernardes et. al [19], developed a model using
the Sznajd model on a scale-free network which reproduced Brazilian election
results. It was shown that the distribution of number of votes per candidate
follows a hyperbolic law, in agreement with real elections results. Thus, sim-
ulation of sociophysical models on complex networks structures can reproduce
real phenomena and suggest insights on the rules that guide de distribution of
opinion dynamics.

3.1 Models of networks

The random graph is the simplest complex network model. The number of
nodes on random graphs is constant and new edges randomly connect them
with probability p. Thereby, the distribution of connections in the network will
follow the Poisson distribution. Thus, the node degree, given by the number of
connections of each node, of the majority of network nodes will be next to the
average.

In the case of scale-free networks, recently added nodes have greater proba-
bility to connect with those which have more connections. This process, called
preferential attachment, generates a heterogeneous network, where most nodes
will have a few number of connections, while a few nodes will a have high num-
ber of connections. The connectivity distribution, P (k), for this network follows
a power law distribution, P (k) ∼ k−γ, where k is the number of links.

The Sznajd network is constructed by considering the geographical distribu-
tion of nodes and the evolution of Sznajd dynamics with feedback (contras) [16].
In this way, the network starts with a constant number of nodes distributed in
a box of side L at random. Then, nodes distant less than dmax are connected in
order to obtain the network U as shown in Figure 1(a). Then, the edges of this
network are activated with uniform probability p, thus obtaining a network K,
as shown in Figure 1(b). At each step, an edge (i, j) is sampled at random from
the initial network U . If the edge is present in the network K, all neighbors of i
and j are identiﬁed in U and connected in K. Otherwise, all neighbors of i and
j are disconnected in K. Another edge of U is sampled with probability q and
the respective edge in K receives the contrary value to the current dominant
opinion in the network. After stabilization, the geographical Sznajd network

2

is obtained and it is observed the presence of network communities, formed by
sets of densely connected nodes.

Examples of random network, scale-free networks and Sznajd networks are
presented in Figure 2. In our simulation, we used these three topologies to ana-
lyze the distribution of surviving opinions while varying the size of the network
and the number of possible opinions.

3.2 Simulations

The most widespread version of the Sznajd model uses a square lattice with two
opinions, Q = ±1 [20], where each individual i (i = 1, 2, ..., N ) has equal number
of neighbors. The simulation of this model starts by distributing opinions at
random on the lattice. Then, at each step, two neighbor pairs are selected
and if they have the same opinion all their neighbors are made to agree with
them. If the initial state of the system has more than half opinions as 1, the
ﬁnal consensus is reached with all individuals reaching this opinion. Thus, a
phase transition is observed [20]. Nevertheless, such a model is very simple and
cannot reproduce some real results. To overcome the limitations, improvements
were added to the Sznajd model in order to consider more than two opinions
(q = 1, 2...Q) as well as more sophisticated real topologies, including complex
networks [19, 21].

The simulation of the Sznajd model on complex networks is similar to per-
formed on lattices: a pair of neighboring nodes are chosen at random and
checked if they have the same opinion. If they do, all their nearest neighbors
assume that same opinion.

4 Results

For the three models of networks (i.e. random graph, scale-free network and
Sznajd network), Q diﬀerent opinions were randomly distributed initially among
the nodes. The interaction between nodes proceeds by choosing uniformly a
node and one of its neighbors at random. Nobody can convince anyone [4, 5] if
the two opinions diﬀer by more than |ǫ|; in our simulation we adopted ǫ = 1.
So, if two neighbor nodes have opinion q = 2, they can convince just their
neighbor with opinions q = 1 or q = 3. This process was executed for several
numbers of opinions, varying from 2 to Q, and the number of surviving opinions
was recorded at each step for diﬀerent network sizes.

In Figure 3 it is shown the scaling behavior of the number of surviving
opinions as a function of the Q possible opinions.
In fact, if the number of
people, N , is much larger than the number of possible opinions, Q, the number
of surviving opinions, S, will tend to agree with Q, and no opinion will disappear
during the process. However, when the number of opinions Q is much larger
than the number of people N , the number of surviving opinions S will become
N , i.e. each person keeps its own opinion. This relation can be mathematically
expressed as

(1)

where f is constant for Q ≪ N and f = N/Q for Q ≫ N , valid for large Q, S
and N [22].

S
Q

= f (

),

Q
N

3

5 Discussion

The obtained results are similar to those considering the Deﬀuant model on
a scale free network [18]. Therefore, the distribution of surviving opinions for
Sznajd simulation yields two limits: (i) when there are many people and few
opinions, all opinions have some followers and (ii) when there are few people
and many opinions, each person will keep her/his own opinion. The interval
between these two extremes follows a scaling law.

As shown in Figure 3, the scaling number of surviving opinions depends on
the network topology. For random graph the scaling of surviving opinion is not
well deﬁned for N ≫ Q. However, for scale-free network and Sznajd networks,
the number of surviving opinions is well determined for larger networks. As
social networks are not guided by random distribution of connections [23], the
Sznajd model is more likely to reproduce dynamical behavior of opinions in
real social networks. Note that the scale-free and Sznajd network models im-
plied similar opinion dynamics, while the random model produced results which
originates from Equation 1 for small values of Q/N .

6 Conclusion

In this paper we simulated the Sznajd model in three diﬀerent network topolo-
gies, namely random, scale-free and Sznajd network models. Starting from a
network with N agents and varying the number of possible opinions from 2...Q,
we simulate the Sznajd interaction between the agents and calculated the num-
ber of surviving opinions after a large number of interactions. As result, we
obtained that the number of surviving opinions undergoes two states: (i) when
the number of agents is much larger than the number of opinions, the number
of surviving opinions tends to be the same as for possible opinions, where all
opinions have some followers; and (ii) when the number of possible opinions is
much larger than the number of agents, the number of surviving opinions will
tend to that number of agents, and each person will keep her/his own opinion.
The behavior described by Equation 1 is best ﬁtted by scale-free networks
and Sznajd networks, where the distribution of connections between nodes is
not uniform. For random graphs, this behavior is valid just when Q > N . As
real social networks are not described by random graphs, the Sznajd model is
appropriate to model dynamical behavior of opinions on this kind of networks.

7 Acknowlegments

Luciano da F. Costa is grateful to FAPESP (proc. 99/12765-2), CNPq (proc.
308231/03-1) and the Human Frontier Science Program (RGP39/2002) for ﬁ-
nancial support. Francisco A. Rodrigues acknowledges FAPESP sponsorhip
(proc. 04/00492-1).

References

[1] W. Alt, A. Deutsch, and G. A. Dunn. Dynamics of Cell and Tissue Motion.

Birkhuser-Verlag, Basel, 1997.

4

[2] D. Stauﬀer. Sociophysics simulations. Computing in Science and Engineer-

ing, 5(3):71–75, 2003.

[3] K. Sznajd-Weron and J. Sznajd. Opinion evolution in closed community.

Int. J. Mod. Phys. C, 11(6), 2000.

[4] G. Deﬀuant, D. Neau, F. Amblard, , and G. Weisbuch. Mixing beliefs
among interacting agents. Advances in Complex Systems, 3:87–98, 2000.

[5] R. Hegselmann and U. Krause. Opinion dynamics and bounded conﬁ-
dence:models, analysis and simulation. Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and
Social Simulation, 3(2), 2002.

[6] K. Sznajd-Weron. Sznajd model and its aplications. physics/0503239.

[7] A. L. Barabasi and Z. N. Oltvai. Network biology: understanding the cells

functional organization. Nature, 5:101–113, 2004.

[8] A. Rapoport and W. J. Horvath. A study of large sociogram. Behavioral

[9] P. M. Gleiser and L. Danon. Community structure in jazz. Advances in

Science, 6:279–291, 1961.

complex systems, 6(4), 2003.

Rev. Mod. Phys, 74, 2002.

[10] R. Albert and A. Barabasi. Statistical mechanics of complex networks.

[11] J. F. Padgett and C. K. Ansell. Robust action and the rise of the Medici.

Am. J. Sociol., 98:1400–1424, 1993.

[12] B. Bollob´as. Random graphs. Academic Press, Inc., 1985.

[13] P. Erd˝os and A. R´enyi. On random graphs. Publicationes Mathematicae,

6:290–297, 1959.

[14] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz. Collective dynamics of ’small-world’ net-

works. Nature, 393:440–442, 1998.

[15] A.L. Barab´asi, R. Albert, and H. Jeong. Scale-free characteristics of random
networks: the topology of the world-wide web. Physica A, 281:69–77, 2000.

[16] L. da F. Costa. Sznajd complex networks. cond-mat/0501010.

[17] D. Stauﬀer and H. Meyer-Ortmanns. Simulation of consensus model of
deﬀuant et al on a barab´asi-albert network. Int. J. Mod. Phys. C, 15(2):241–
246, 2004.

[18] D. Stauﬀer, A. Sousa, and C. Schulze. Discretized opinion dynamics of the
Deﬀuant model on scale-free networks. Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and
Social Simulation, 7(3), 2004.

[19] A.T. Bernardes, D. Stauﬀer, and J. Kert´esz. Election results and the sznajd

model on barabasi network. Eur. Phys. J. B, 25:123–127, 2002.

[20] D. Stauﬀer and A. O. Sousa S. Moss de Oliveira. Generalization to square
lattice of sznajd sociophysics model. Int. J. Mod. Phys. C, 11(6):1239–1245,
2000.

5

[21] D. Stauﬀer and H. Meyer-Ortmanns. Simulation of consensus model of Def-
fuant et. al. on a Barab´asi-Albert network. Int. J. Mod. Phys. C, 15(2):241–
246, 2004.

[22] D. Stauﬀer.

Sociophysics Simulations

II: Opinion Dynamics.

physics/0503115.

[23] M. E. J. Newman. Structure and function of complex networks. SIAM

Review, 45(2):167–256, 2003.

6

Figure 1: (a) The construction of Sznajd network starts with a geographical
distribution of nodes at random and linking them that are distant less than a
deﬁned euclidian distance dmax. (b) Then, each of the network links is activated
with probability p. (c) Finally, the feedbakc Sznajd and contrary feedback are
7
applied, thus resulting the Sznajd network.

Figure 2: The simulation of Sznajd model is carried out for three diﬀerent
topologies: (a) random graphs,(b) scale-free networks and (c) Sznajd networks.

8

Figure 3: Scaling of the number S of surviving opinions for N = 10, 100, 1000
as a function of the number of possible opinions. We see at the right part of the
graph, when N ≫ Q, all person keep his/her own opinion. On the other hand,
at the left hand side of the graph, Q ≫ N , each opinion is shared by many
people.

9

