On the exposure to mobile phone radiation in trains

J. Ferrer and L. Fern´andez-Seivane

Departamento de F´ısica, Universidad de Oviedo, 33007 Oviedo, Spain

J. M. Hernando

Departamento de Se˜nales, Sistemas y Radiocomunicaciones,

Universidad Polit´ecnica de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain

M. B. Cast´an, L. Garc´ıa, and J. M. V´azquez

Departamento de Tecnolog´ıas de la Red,

Telef´onica M´oviles Espa˜na, 28224 Madrid, Spain

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Abstract

This report presents theoretical estimates of the Power Density levels which may be reached inside trains.

Two possible sources of high levels of radiation are discussed. The ﬁrst one arises since the walls of the

wagons are metallic and therefore bounce back almost all radiation impinging on them. The second is due

to the simultaneous emission of a seemingly large number of nearby telephones. The theoretical study

presented here shows that Power Densities stay at values below reference levels always.

5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
4
1
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Typeset by REVTEX

1

Development in our society is tied up to the increasing usage of devices that generate Electro-

magnetic Fields (EF). Mobile telephony has indeed become an integral part of modern style of life.

But, while mobile handsets have made life easier and more pleasant, concern has also grown as to

the possible adverse consequences for human and animal health of short and long-term exposure

to their emissions.

Absorption of radiation in the frequency range of mobile telephones is determined by the Spe-

ciﬁc Absorption Rate (SAR), which is measured in Watt/Kg. The International Commission on

Non-Ionizing radiation (ICNIRP) has set a basic restriction on SAR for the body parts of the gen-
eral public of 2 Watt/Kg.1 For practical purposes, ICNIRP has established a Power Density S in air
of ν/200 Watt/m2 as an alternative reference level, where ν is the frequency of the EF measured

in MHz. Since mobile telephone antennas emit radiation at either 0.9 or 1.8 GHz their reference
levels are of 4.5 or 9 Watt/m2, respectively. Compliance with the reference level ensures compli-

ance with the basic restriction. Additionally, since a substantial amount of the radiation emitted

by a mobile handset is absorbed by its own user, information of the SAR at the head is disclosed

for all handsets made by members of the so-called Mobile Manufacturers Forum.2 Typical values,

which range between 0.5 and 1.1 Watt/Kg, are always smaller than ICNIRP basic restriction.

There has been some recent controversy as to whether Power Densities far exceeding ICNIRP

reference levels could be attained in the interior of train wagons, whose metallic case prevents

leakage of the radiation emitted by the handsets to the outside world. Some authors have argued

that the wagon windows would not sufﬁce to dissipate the radiation and, therefore, large levels of

radiation would be absorbed both by the user and by other passive-user travelers, with potentially

damaging health effects.3,4 If conﬁrmed, such predictions would lead to a serious public health

issue, since millions of persons pick either commuter or long-distance trains every day, and a

substantial percentage of them use their mobile phones during their trips.

We address in this article two possible coexisting scenarios of high levels of radiation. The

Proximity scenario is due to the fact that it is plausible that a passenger be in close proximity to

a large number of telephones in use, due to the small dimensions of a wagon, thereby receiving

radiation from all those handsets. The Sauna scenario corresponds to a situation where the level of
ambient radiation inside the wagon cavity, Ssauna, is large due to a very low capability of drains to
suck radiation out. In contrast, we ﬁnd that Ssauna is small, since it is proportional to the effective
output power of all handsets, P, divided by the total effective area of all dissipating surfaces, Sef f

2

Ssauna =

P

Sef f

(1)

This equation may be interpreted as a sort of generalized Gauss’ law, which takes account of the

partial transparency of the boundaries. Not only windows, but also passengers take their share in
Sef f , making it eventually a large denominator, and reducing the ambient levels of Ssauna. This

can be understood from a common experience with own’s microwave oven: it takes always a

considerably shorter amount of time to warm up one cup of coffee than, say, three or four.

Power Density distributions inside train wagons vary widely depending on both the shape of

the wagon and windows, and on the number and position of passengers and emitting handsets. We

could therefore perform a large number of simulations of the possible conﬁgurations of sources

and drains of EF, followed by the adequate statistical analysis of the obtained data. But we believe

that a better option is to set a qualitative description that focuses on the general laws governing the

physical behavior of the radiation ﬁeld in the train.

We discuss the Sauna scenario ﬁrst. We model the wagon as a metallic cavity whose windows

are covered by glass. We call V the total volume enclosed by such a case, and SM , SW , the surface

areas of the metallic walls and the windows. The ﬂoor of the wagon is covered by a rubber sheet

of area SF . The wagon is populated by C seats and D passengers, each of which has an area sC,

sD. There are H handsets inside the wagon, all emitting radiation at the same frequency ν. We call
their total output power, averaged over time PH , and P0 = PH /H the output power per handset.
There exists a residual radiation coming from the outside world, whose power is Pres.

We therefore have a cavity ﬁlled with microwave radiation in a single mode of frequency ν.

That is to say, the cavity is ﬁlled with a large number N of photons of frequency ν. The basic rules

of equilibrium Statistical Physics say that the energy of the ﬁeld is U = h ν (N + 1/2). Then, the

Power Density can be expressed as

The number of photons in the cavity in the stationary state Nst will be a balance between those

fed inside it and those lost at its surfaces,

The rate of photons that are poured in by the handsets or through the windows is

Ssauna =

c U
V

≈ h ν c
V

N

dN
dt

=

dNin
dt

− dNout
dt

= 0

P = PH + Pres = h ν

dNin
dt

3

(2)

(3)

(4)

The number of photons that disappear through all the lossy surfaces may be estimated by the

following simple reasoning. We ﬁrst notice that photons propagate in all directions. We therefore

deﬁne the current density of photons at a given angle ˆu = (θ, φ) and at any point in the cavity as

d~
dΩ

=

c N
V

ˆu
4 π

We assume that a beam of photons traveling along direction ˆu impinges on a lossy surface

S. We call t(θ) the rate of photons that are lost either by absorption within the obstacle, or by

transmission to the outside world. The total number of photons that are lost per unit solid angle

and time, after impinging on the surface S is

d ˙N (ˆu)
dΩ

=

d~S · d~
dΩ

t(θ)

ZS

and the total number of photons lost per unit time at such surface may be estimated as

˙Nout =

π/2

2 π

dθ

dφ

0
Z

0
Z

d ˙N(~u)
dΩ

≈ c S T
V

N

where T is the angle- and surface-averaged coefﬁcient t(θ).

The total number of photons lost through all surfaces is

where the effective surface

dNout
dt

=

c Sef f
V

N

Sef f = SM TM + SW TW + SF TF + C sC TC + D sD TD

takes account of the partial transparency of each speciﬁc surface through its averaged lossy coef-

Eq. (3) provides then with the number of photons in stationary situations

from which we can compute the Power Density, to ﬁnd Eq. (1). We may also give an estimate of

the average electric ﬁeld inside the case, since the total energy of the EF is roughly proportional

ﬁcient Ti.

to its square,

whereby

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Nst =

V
h c ν

P

Sef f

U ≈ h ν Nst ≈ V

E2

120 π c

E ≈

120 π P
Sef f

s

4

Eq. (1) provides with a qualitative estimate of the Power Density in terms of a few physical

quantities which can be simply measured, such as surface areas, numbers of handsets and pas-

sengers and lossy coefﬁcients.

It is actually not that simple to determine accurately the lossy

coefﬁcients Ti, but we believe it worthy to make here an educated estimate of them.5 For practical

purposes, TM for aluminum may be set to zero, so that the metallic term drops out of the equation.

The lossy coefﬁcient of glass, which makes up the windows, is approximately equal to one, and
therefore, TW ≈ 1. The conductivity of rubber at microwave frequencies is of order 1 sec−1, in
Gaussian units. Then we ﬁnd that TF ≈ 0. Since the metallic parts of seats do not matter, we only

need to ﬁnd the absorption coefﬁcient of wool, or similar manufactures, which is again very small;
then TC ≈ 0, and the seats term also drops out. We ﬁnally assume that reﬂection of EF at each
passenger mostly occurs at the skin, and use its conductivity σ ≈ 5 × 109 sec−1 to ﬁnd TD ≈ 0.5.6
Such estimates allow us to provide a simpler version of Eq. (1),

P

Ssauna ≈

SW + D TD sD

(13)

As a reference, the average surface area of a passenger ranges from 1.5 to 2 m2, and SW is of
about 30-40 m2 for many train wagons. Eq. (13) can then be used to make rough estimates of
Ssauna absorbed by passengers and benchmark them against references levels supplied by ICNIRP
or other institutions. We ﬁnd that Ssauna saturates to P/TD D sD, when the surface area of passen-
gers is much larger than that of windows. Such Power Density is much smaller than the reference

levels of ICNIRP even when all passengers in the train are using simulateneously one handset.

A previous estimate of this magnitude, performed by Hondou3 yielded a Power Density
Ssauna = P/SW . Hondou assumed that the radiation emitted by all handsets had to be absorbed by

each individual passenger, therefore predicting pretty alarming levels of radiation. Fig. 1 indeed
shows how his predictions for Ssauna exceed our estimates by at least one order of magnitude.

The most crude simpliﬁcation in the model is the assumption that radiation is emitted at a

constant pace, in an homogeneous and isotropic fashion throughout the whole wagon, and in a

single mode of frequency ν. A more accurate handling of the sources of radiation and dissipation

should only lead to a quantitative correction to the output power as long as the number of active

handsets is large enough.

We now turn to describe the proximity scenario. We suppose that there is a shell of several

active handsets G placed at a close distance d around a probe. We moreover assume that their

antennas are directly oriented towards the probe. Then, a straightforward application of Gauss’s

5

theorem yields a Power Density

Sprox =

A G P0
4 π d2

where A = 1 if the radiation pattern is isotropic or some number of order 5/4 if it is dipolar. We

notice that the contribution from a second shell is much smaller than the previous estimate and

can therefore be discarded. Kramer and coworkers, who have also discussed the proximity effect,

reached similar conclusions.7

The Power Density at the head of a mobile phone user might be estimated by assuming that the

handset is usually placed side by side to an ear. A simple calculation then shows that about a third
of the output power P0 is directed towards the head, a value roughly consistent with the numerical

simulations by Dimbylow and coworkers.6 The average Power Density coming from this source

is, accordingly,

Shead =

A P0
3 Shead

where Shead is the area of the zones in the head hit by the radiation.

The total Power Density is, to conclude, the sum of the three discussed contributions

(14)

(15)

(16)

ST = Ssauna + Sprox + Shead

We now take a worst case scenario to place an upper bound on ST in an actual train. We choose
a small wagon with a ﬂoor area of 35 m2, that is populated by 300 passengers. Such packed

situations have been argued to occur in some commuter trains in Japan.3 The average distance

among passengers is therefore of 35 cm. We also assume that all of them are using a handset at
the same time. We take P0 = 0.25 Watt, that corresponds to the time-averaged output power of a

GSM-900 handset, whose peak output power of about 2 Watt is distributed among 8 channels. We
ﬁnally assume that Shead ∼ 0.05 m2.

Then, the most important sources of radiation are the direct exposure to own’s telephone and
that due to the Proximity scenario, each providing Sprox,head ∼ 1.5 Watt/m2. The Sauna effect
provides a mere Ssauna ∼ 0.3 Watt/m2, where we do not even take into account that only radiation
poured out of the handsets towards the ceiling or the ﬂoor contributes to P in this case. The added

contribution of the three sources lead in any case to a total Power Density smaller than ICNIRP

reference levels, no matter the number of emitting handsets and the size of the windows.

As a summary, we ﬁnd that the Power Density levels in a train are always smaller than ICNIRP

reference levels, no matter the number of passengers each wagon may contain and the number of

handsets in use.

6

1 Guidelines for limiting exposure to time-varying Electric, Magnetic and Electromagnetic Fields (up to

300 GHz), International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection, http://www.icnirp.de.

2 Mobile Manufacturers Forum, http://www.mmfai.org.

3 T. Hondou, J. Phys. Soc. Jap. 71, 432 (2002).

4 T. Hondou, J. Phys. Soc. Jap. 71, 3101 (2002).

5 M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, Pergamon Press (1980).

6 P. J. Dimbylow and S. M. Mann, Phys. Med. Biol. 39, 1537 (1994).

7 A. Kramer and J. Froehlich and N. Kuster, J. Phys. Soc. Jap. 71, 3100 (2002).

7

FIG. 1: Power Density Ssauna as a function of the number of passengers D, assuming that all of them are
using a telephone at the same time, and have an area sD = 1.5 m2. We also suppose that SW = 30 m2
and P0 = 0.25 Watt / m2. Solid and dashed lines are a plot of Eq. (1) and the S predicted by Hondou,

respectively.

8

)

2

m

/
t
t
a

W

(
 

a
n
u
a
s

S

2,5

1,5

2

1

0,5

0
0

50 100 150 200 250 300

D

Fig. 1, J. Ferrer et al.

9

