5
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
0
5
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Socioeconomic Development and Stability:
A Complex Network Blueprint

Luciano da Fontoura Costa,
Instituto de F´ısica de S˜ao Carlos.
Universidade de S˜ao Paulo, S˜ao Carlos,
SP, Caixa Postal 369, 13560-970,
Fone +55 16 3373 9858, FAX +55 1633 71 3616,
Brazil, luciano@if.sc.usp.br

21st March 2005

ABSTRACT: Complex networks provide ﬂexible and powerful resources for char-
acterizing, modeling and simulating a wide range of real world complex systems. The
current work discusses how such a versatile new area can be applied in order to aid
economical development and stability at several scales and contexts. The following
activities are involved: (a) compilation of several types of data related to socioeco-
nomic development, including several types of transportation systems, availability of
human and natural resources, communication and energy networks, climate and geo-
graphical features, as well as endemic diseases, to name but a few; (b) representation
of such data in terms of multilayer interacting complex networks (cond-mat/0406369)
registered geographically; (c) application of traditional and new methods for complex
networks characterization and analysis. Such an approach allows the identiﬁcation
of bottlenecks and deﬁcits/surpluses, simulation of system development under vary-
ing constraints and perturbations, as well as the application of optimization methods
in order to help identify the most effective strategies leading to social and economic
wealth and stability. In addition to its practical implications, such an approach also
emphasizes several issues of substantial theoretical interest, including the integration
of networks of different natures, the interplay between the dynamics of topological
and node state evolution, the effects of geographical constraints, community ﬁnding,
as well as the interesting problem of how to optimize such systems with respect to
network topology and dynamics in order to achieve speciﬁc objectives expressed by
merit ﬁgures. The discussed methodology is particularly interesting for applications in
developing countries because of the greater potential for economic evolution in such
nations. This manuscript also includes a brief review of complex networks approaches
to socioeconomics modeling.

1

’... it is hard to turn ideas into wealth in the absence of social connect-
edness, which in the age of the Internet still requires something more than
bandwidth and high-speed connectivity.’
(F. Fukuyama, The Great Disruption)

1 Introduction

The main activity in science is the art of model building. Good models require sound
representation of the phenomenon of interest in terms of a reduced set of most rele-
vant variables and parameters. Because all models are necessarily incomplete, it is
important to obtain particularly effective representations, which should be able to ac-
count for the relevant variables under constraints imposed by the chosen parameters.
By being naturally oriented to representing connections and relationships, graph the-
ory stands out as particularly general and suitable for model representations. Indeed,
almost all discrete data structures can be understood as a particular instance of graphs.
As the relationships between variables and parameters typically change with time, it
is also necessary that the adopted representations be capable of expressing dynamical
changes in both network topology as well as the dynamics undergone by the states of
the nodes. With this respect, the seminal works by Flory [1], Rapoport [2], Erd¨os and
R´enyi [3] on random networks have been substantially expanded in the recent years
mainly through the consideration of principles from statistical physics and dynamic
systems, especially regarding the characterization and modeling of scale free network
models [4].

A direct indication of the impressive success of complex network research is the
large and ever increasing related scientiﬁc production, accounting for about 1 or 2 new
arxiv manuscripts per day (http://arxiv.org/archive/ ). Indeed, the catalisis of scien-
tiﬁc investigation, interaction and dissemination allowed by the WWW and internet
resources as arxiv provides further evidence of the impact of immediate wide dissem-
ination of data, results and knowledge. One particularly interesting portion of the de-
velopments in complex network has been aimed at applying concepts, measurements
and models in order to mimic and predict the behavior of real complex systems in-
cluding the internet (e.g. [5, 6, 7, 8]), WWW (e.g. [9, 10]), protein and metabolic
interactions (e.g. [11, 12]), transportation systems (e.g. [13, 14, 15]), opinion forma-
tion (e.g. [16, 17, 18, 19]), epydemiology (e.g. [20, 21]), among many other relevant
issues. Because of its ﬂexibility and power for developing good integrative models of
complex systems, it becomes particularly interesting to consider the systematic appli-
cation of this new area as means to represent, model, predict and optimize the behavior
of socioeconomic systems.

Socioeconomics environments rank among the most complex systems known to
humanity, involving a whole range of entities and relationships. By selecting a set of
reference entities (e.g. institutions or cities), it is possible to obtain a series of integrated
complex networks [22] registered by geography, each representing speciﬁc types of re-
lationships. Several concepts, measurements and modeling approaches derived from
the area of complex network research can then be applied in order to characterize sev-
eral topological and dynamical features of such systems, allowing the prediction of the

2

response of the system to modiﬁcations, the identiﬁcation of promising development
strategies, the enhancement of the stability of the whole system, optimization in order
to achieve speciﬁc objectives, as well as its resilience to disruptions (e.g. epidemics
and catastrophes), to name but a few possibilities.

This text describes a possible blueprint for such investigations, which are relevant
not only for their immediate implications and potential for optimizing commonwealth,
but also for poising several interesting theoretical issues arising from the integration
of networks and optimization of topology-dynamics under pre-speciﬁed optimality in-
dices. It should be emphasized at the outset that it is the broad integrative perspective
of considering several types of evolving geographically registered geographical net-
works, with emphasis on applications to third-world socioeconomics, which provides
the main motivation for the present work. It should also be noted that any result arising
from such a type of simulations need to be treated with the greatest caution because of
the several non-linear and unpredictable effects which are known to operate in socioe-
conomics. However, it is expected that the systematic and integrative use of concepts
and methods from complex network research, itself a very dynamic research area, can
provide valuable means for optimizing socioeconomic development and stability.

This article starts by brieﬂy reviewing some of the main complex network ap-
proaches to socioeconomics and follows by discussing the representation of the mod-
eled systems in terms of multi-layer, geographically registered networks, as well as
simulation and optimization possibilities.

2 A Brief Review of Complex Network Approaches to

Socioeconomics and Related Issues

Previous developments involving complex network approaches to socioeconomics re-
ported in the literature are brieﬂy reviewed in the following. One of the ﬁrst socioeco-
nomics related applications of complex networks was reported by Guardiola et al. [23],
where the web of trust scheme between users of PGP was considered as a model for
trust networks, leading to good resilience to intentional attack. The use of small-world
models for socioeconomic systems was investigated by Elgazzar [16] through simula-
tion of the Sznajd dynamics [24, 17] on small-world networks. The issue o geograph-
ical embedding of networks [25, 26, 27] as a constraint to U.S. Internet infrastructure
and its implications for economy and politics was considered in [28]. Spatial con-
straints have also been found to affect networking and internet architectures [29], in
the sense that computing resources would tend to be placed as close as possible to the
source of data in order to avoid expensive network trafﬁc. The network topology of the
Austrian Interbank market was investigated by Boss and collaborators [30], indicating
that the contract size distribution follow an extensive power law. The issue of grid
computing has been addressed in terms of resource allocation and regulation [31, 32]
as well as by adopting complex network interconnections [33]. Bonanno et al. [34] in-
vestigated the possibility to extract meaningful economic information from portfolio of
stocks and its implications for comparison of the topological properties of networks. A
model of wealth dynamics and transactions among economic agents by considering dif-

3

ferent network connectivities was investigated by Garlaschelli and Loffredo [35]. The
effect of information cascades over economic recessions in the U.S., assuming a ran-
dom network model was described by Cook [36], while studies of cascades of failures
as a consequence of attacks have been covered in [37]. The possibility of representing
economic variables of different nature in terms of multiple interconnected networks,
called Solomon networks, have been considered for Ising simulations of the dynamics
of economic systems [22]. Bipartite network models have been used to simulate rela-
tionship between countries and currencies in world exchange arrangements web [38],
considering assortativity aspects. The stability in supply/production networks has been
investigated by Helbing [39] who analysed, by considering different network topolo-
gies, how networks of damped oscillators tend to be subject to increasing oscillations.
Topological investigations of networks deﬁned by traders exchanging goods have been
considered by Reichardt and Bornhold [40], who analysed the 2004 pre-Christmas sea-
son and identiﬁed high modularity. A review of econophysics has been presented by
Di [41], and a review of quantitative modelling of ﬁnancial markets has been reported
by Farmer and Lo [42].

3 Representation

One of the ﬁrst important decisions while modeling a socioeconomic system is to deﬁne
and represent in a careful way its most representative components. Such components
can be divided into two categories: states and relationships. In socioeconomics net-
works, local states correspond to properties of the main considered sites or places (e.g.
cities, institutions, etc.). Examples of states include but are not limited to:

(a) Human resources: The involved individuals, possibly subdivided into workers, con-
sumers, experts, etc.

(b) Natural resources: The existing (or prospected) energy sources, organic and inor-
ganic assets, rivers and lakes, climatic features, etc.

(c) Storage capabilities: The local potential for storing raw and processed materials.

(d) Industrial resources: The facilities available locally which can be used to pro-
cess raw materials as well as high technological means for obtaining more sophisticate
goods.

(e) Financial resources: May include the bank and ﬁnance systems which can be found
in the locality.

(f) Endemic diseases: The epidemics and pathologies which continuous or periodically
affect humans and animals in the region.

(g) Cultural and social features: The cultural traditions and social features and values.

(g) Scientiﬁc and technological assets: The level of scientiﬁc and technological devel-
opment at each locality.

Note that several of such states are not straightforward to be quantiﬁed, implying

some degree of arbitrariness.

4

Figure 1: Socioeconomics complex network models may involve several geographical
networks characterized by the fact that the nodes have deﬁnite spatial positions. Each
network γi represents one of the considered types of relationship. Note that the regis-
tration between these networks is accomplished through the spatial congruence of the
nodes position. The interactions between the several layers are not represented in this
diagram.

Global states are typically maps of local states into overall properties of the mod-
eled system, such as overall production, debt or surplus, total birth/death rates, etc.
The relationships between the localities follow naturally, deﬁning a complex network
for each considered type of interaction [22]. A particularly interesting possibility is
to integrate such networks geographically, i.e. each site is represented as a node with
geographical position and several types of edges are deﬁned between such common
nodes, yielding an integration of several geographical networks in a way that reminds
the topographical connections between cortical layers [43]. Figure 1 illustrates a simple
hypothetical socioeconomic model involving six cities and p relationship networks.

Examples of relationships relevant for socioeconomic systems are listed in the fol-

lowing:

(A) Transportation: Essential for economic integration, allowing human, raw mate-
rials, and processed goods displacement. Each type of transportation (e.g. railway,
motorways, airways) can be represented as a speciﬁc complex network, facilitating the
analysis of the complementarity between such resources.

(B) Energy distribution: The existing network allowing access to several types of en-

5

ergy (e.g. electrical and gas).

(C) Communications: The interconnections allowing information exchange between
the considered localities, possibly subdivided into networks for cell and ﬁxed tele-
phony, satellite, optic ﬁbers, etc.

(D) Financial and political trusts and alliances: Corresponding to the network of gov-
ernment and private ﬁnancial agencies.

(E) Borrow/Loan relationships: The directed network deﬁned by borrowing and debts
between the involved localities.

(F) Cultural and social links: Networks established by common share of common
beliefs and traditions.

(G) Distributed computing: Including wide range distributed computing facilities, such
as grid computing.

Observe that most such networks are typically dynamical (in the sense that their
topology will vary with time) and weighted. Flow or resources conservation may even-
tually be observed. Except for communications networks, all the above networks are
typically represented as digraphs (i.e. involving oriented edges).

4 Characterization and Simulation

Once a part of a socioeconomic system has been represented in terms of geographi-
cally integrated networks, a series of measurements can be used to characterize and
analyse their topology. The choice of measurements should be performed with basis
on the speciﬁc issues of interest. For instance, in the case of transportation systems,
statistics of shortest paths are of special relevance. The reader is reported to a recent
survey [44] for a comprehensive review of complex network measurements. Of spe-
cial interest are the speciﬁc demands implied for the topological characterization of the
geographically registered coexisting networks, motivating new measurements capable
of expressing the topological interactions between the several layers (e.g. [43]). An-
other particularly relevant issue is the identiﬁcation of communities in the integrated
networks. A particularly interesting possibility is to consider the identiﬁcation of well-
deﬁned communities in one of the layers as a subsidy for identiﬁcation of communities
in the remainder layers, as well as the analysis of overlaps and divergences between
such clusters. Perspectives of special interest also include the development of models
describing the topological evolution of the networks at each layer and as a whole.

The simulation of the dynamics of the network states can be performed by assum-
ing several methods including spin dynamics (e.g. [22, 45]), cellular automata, and
systems of coupled differential equations. Global feedback can also be considered in
such formulations [22]. Important related aspects involve the synchronization of events
in the networks as well as the appearance of instabilities and oscillations [39]. A par-
ticularly interesting possibility is to link the dynamics of the network individual states
with the dynamics of topological changes in the network structure (e.g. [19]).

6

While the simulation of the dynamical evolution of the network states can lead to
valuable insights about socioeconomic development and stability, it is also interest-
ing to consider the optimization of the network architecture and constraints in order to
achieve speciﬁc goals. Provided merit ﬁgures are clearly established in terms of prop-
erties of the modeled system, a series of optimization approaches ranging from linear
programming to genetic algorithms can be applied in order to identify improvements
to the topology of the network or its dynamical evolution. For instance, once a govern-
ment have decided to explore a recently discovered source of raw material or to ﬁnd
the best way to protect indigenous fauna and ﬂora, optimization of the topology of the
network under constrains imposed by its states can be performed in order to evaluate
possible development strategies. Of course, such approaches are inherently limited by
the suboptimality (i.e. convergence to local minima) characterizing most non-linear
optimization methods.

5 Concluding Remarks

This article has discussed how complex network concepts and methods can be exten-
sively used to model socioeconomic systems. After reviewing brieﬂy the main related
literature, a blueprint has been proposed and discussed. Such a model involves multi-
layer networks [22] whose nodes are registered in terms of the geographical positions
of the entities which they represent [43]. Several interesting issues are motivated re-
garding the characterization and simulation of such networks. As far as the analysis of
the topological features of the multiple networks are concerned, adaptations of tradi-
tional measurements and new features capable of taking into account and quantifying
the interconnections between different layers are of special interest. Two mains pos-
sibilities are deﬁned regarding the dynamics of state evolution: (i) the simulation of
the dynamics on static diverse topologies; and (ii) the simulation of state dynamics on
networks whose topology undergoes dynamic evolution.

Several are the difﬁculties constraining such investigations. To begin with, it is im-
portant to gather reliable, uptodated and representative data related to each socioeco-
nomic features considered in the model. A particularly challenging issue concerns the
deﬁnition of the merit ﬁgures used for the optimization of the topology and weights of
the network, which often implies political, ethical and/or arbitrary nature (e.g. should
transgenic products or abortion be allowed?). Also, the high complexity of the in-
volved systems severely constraints the time window for predictions, implying that
the greatest caution should be taken when analysing characterization and simulation
results. Despite such difﬁculties, it should still be possible to adopt a progressive
approach starting with only a few layers and gradually increasing complexity. An
example of a particularly feasible and interesting starting point is to investigate the
efﬁciency of coexisting transportation networks (e.g. railways, motorways, airport sys-
tems) while trying to identify how such systems can be improved (e.g. minimize the
average shortest path) by small topological modiﬁcations (e.g. the inclusion of a new
railway link). Such models can be easily upgraded by including the availability of nat-
ural and human resources, consequently deﬁning interesting problems of optimizing
ﬂow and production-consuming interactions.

7

The author is currently conducting related efforts considering the Brazilian econ-
omy and would highly appreciate to receive comments and suggestions and to consider
collaborations in any theoretical or practical related aspects.

References

[1] P.J. Flory. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 63:3083, 1941.

[2] A. Rapoport. Bull. Math. Bioph., 19:257–277, 1957.

[3] P. Erd¨os and A. R´enyi. Pub. Math., 6:290–297, 1959.

[4] R. Albert and A. L. Barab´asi. Statistical mechanics of complex network. Rev.

Mod. Phys., 74:47–97, 2002. cond-mat/0106096.

[5] M. P. Faloutsos, P. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos. Comput. Commun. Rev., 29:251,

[6] J. Corbo and T. Petermann. Selﬁsh peering and routing in the internet. 29, 2004.

1999.

cs.GT/0410069.

[7] M. Barthelemy, B. Gondran, and E. Guichard. Large scale cross-correlations in

internet trafﬁc. Phys. Rev. E, 66:056110, 2002. cond-mat/0206158.

[8] M. Barthelemy, B. Gondran, and E. Guichard. Spatial structure of the internet

trafﬁc. Physica A, 319:633–642, 2002. cond-mat/0208553.

[9] R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Barab´asi. Nature, 401:130, 1999.

cond-

mat/9907038.

[10] B. Kahng, Y. Park, and H. Jeong. Robustness of the in-degree exponent for the

world-wide web. page 130. cond-mat/0112358.

[11] H. Jeong, S. P. Mason, A.-L. Barab´asi, and Z. N. Oltvai. Lethality and centrality

in protein networks. Nature, 411:41–42, 2001. cond-mat/0105306.

[12] R. Albert and H. G. Othmer. The topology of the regulatory interactions predicts
the expression pattern of the segment polarity genes in Drosophila melanogaster.
J. Theor. Biol., 223:1–18, 2003. cond-mat/0311019.

[13] G. Bagler. Analysis of the airport of India as a complex weighted network. 2004.

cond-mat/0409773.

[14] P. Sen, S. Dasgupta, A. Chatterjee, P. A. Sreeram, G. Mukherjee, and S. S. Manna.
Small-world properties of the Indian railway network. Phys. Rev. E, 67(036106),
2003. cond-mat/0208535.

[15] A. Turtschi R. Gumiera, S. Mossa and L. A. N. Amaral. Structure and efﬁciency

of the world-wide airport network. cond-mat/0312535.

8

[16] A. S. Elgazzar. Applications of small-world networks to some socio-economic

systems. 2002. cond-mat/0212071.

[17] S. Fortunato and D. Stauffer. Computer simulations of opinions. In A. Albeverio,
V. Jentsch, and H. Kantz, editors, Extreme events in nature and society, pages
477–498. Springer-Berlin, 2005. cond-mat/0407276.

[18] M. Hohnisch, S. Pittnauer, S. Solomon, and D. Stauffer. Socioeconomic interac-

tion and swinges in business conﬁdence indicators. 2003. cond-mat/0312511.

[19] L. da F. Costa. Sznajd complex networks. Intl. J. Mod. Phys., 2005. accepted.

[20] N. Masuda and N. Konno. Multi-state epidemic processes on complex networks.

2005. cond-mat/0504329.

[21] B. Azendr´oi and G. Cs´anyi. Polynomial epidemics and clustering in contact net-

works. 2004. q-bio.PE/0406013.

[22] T. Erez, M. Hohnisch, and S. Solomon. Statistical economics on Solomon-

networks. 2004. cond-mat/0406369.

[23] X. Guardiola, R. Guimera, A. Arenas, A. Diaz-Guilera, D. Streib, and L. A. N.
Amaral. Macro- and micro-structure of trust networks. 2002. cond-mat/0206240.

[24] D. Stauffer, A.O. Sousa, and S. Moss de Oliveira. Int. J. Mod. Phys. C, 11:1239,

2000.

[25] D. ben Avraham, A. F. Rozenfeld, R. Cohen, and S. Havlin. Geographical em-

bedding of scale-free networks. 2003. cond-mat/0301504.

[26] S. Itzkovitz and U. Alon. Subgraphs and network motifs in geometric networks.

2004. cond-mat/0409163.

[27] C. Andersson, A. Hellervik, and K. Lindgren. A spatial network explanation for

a hierarchy of urban power laws. 2003. cond-mat/0306439.

[28] S. P. Gorman and R. Kulkarni. Spatial small worlds: New geographic patterns for

an information economy. cond-mat/0310426.

[29] Jim Gray. Distributed computing economics. 2004. cs.NI/0403019.

[30] M. Boss, H. Elsinger, M. Summer, and S. Thurner. The network topology of the

Interbank market. cond-mat/0309582.

[31] R. Buyya. Economic models for management of resources in grid computing.

ITCom 2001, 2001. cs.DC/0106020.

[32] K. Lai, L. Rasmusson, E. Adar, S. Sorkin, L. Zhang, and B. A. Huberman. Ty-
coon: An implementation of a distributed, market-based resource allocation sys-
tem. 2004. cs.DC/0412038.

9

[33] L. da F. Costa, G. Travieso, and C. A. Ruggiero. Complex grid computing. Eur.

Phys. J. B, 44:119–128, 2005. cond-mat/0312603.

[34] Networks of equities in ﬁnancial systems. Eur. Phys. J. B, 38:363–371, 2004.

[35] D. Garlaschelli and M. I. Loffredo. Wealth dynamics on complex networks. 2004.

cond-mat/0401300.

cond-mat/0402466.

[36] P. Ormerod. Information cascades and the distribution of economic recessions in

the United States. 2004. cond-mat/0402648.

[37] Emergent rewirings for cascades on correlated networks.

2005.

cond-

mat/0503615.

[38] X. Li, Y. Y. Jin, and G. Chen. On the topology of the world exchange arrange-

ments web. 2004. cond-mat/0407046.

[39] D. Helbig and S. L¨ammer. Supply and production networks: From the bullwhip

effect to the business cycles. 2005. cond-mat/0411486.

[40] J. Reichardt and S. Bornholdt. Economic networks and soclial communities in

online-auction sites. 2005. cond-mat/0503138.

[41] Y. Wang, J. Wu, and Z. Di. Physics of econophysics. 2004. cond-mat/0401025.

[42] J. D. Farmer and A. W. Lo. Frontiers of ﬁnance: Evolution of efﬁcient markets.

PNAS, 96:9991–9992, 1999.

[43] L. da F. Costa and L. Diambra. Topographical maps as complex networks. Phys.

Rev. E, 71:021901, 2005. cond-mat/0306530.

[44] L. da F. Costa, F. A. Rodrigues, and G. Travieso. A survey of topological complex

network measurements. 2005. To be posted in cond-mat.

[45] I. Bose and S. Banerjee. A stochastic model of wealth distribution. 2005. cond-

mat/0504137.

10

