5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
8
1
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Basics of Modelling the Pedestrian Flow

Armin Seyfried, Bernhard Steﬀen and Thomas Lippert

Central Institute for Applied Mathematics
Forschungszentrum J¨ulich GmbH, 52425 J¨ulich, Germany

E-mail: A.Seyfried@fz-juelich.de, B.Steﬀen@fz-juelich.de, Th.Lippert@fz-juelich.de

February 9, 2014

Abstract

For the modelling of pedestrian dynamics we treat persons as self-driven objects moving in
a continuous space. On the basis of a modiﬁed social force model we analyze qualitatively
the inﬂuence of various approaches for the interaction between the pedestrians on the
resulting velocity-density relation. To focus on the role of the required space and remote
force we choose a one-dimensional system for this investigation. For those densities,
where in two dimensions also passing is no longer possible and the mean value of the
velocity depends primarily on the interaction, we obtain the following results: if the model
increases the required space of a person with increasing current velocity, the reproduction
of the typical form of the fundamental diagram is possible. Furthermore we demonstrate
the inﬂuence of the remote force on the velocity-density relation.

1

Introduction

Microscopic models are state of the art for computer simulation of pedestrian dynamics. The
modelling of the individual movement of pedestrians results in a description of macroscopic
pedestrian ﬂow and allows e.g.
the evaluation of escape routes, the design of pedestrian
facilities and the study of more theoretical questions. For a ﬁrst overview see [1, 2]. The
corresponding models can be classiﬁed in two categories: the cellular automata models [3, 4,
5, 6, 7] and models in a continuous space [8, 9, 10, 11]. We focus on models continuous in space.
They diﬀer substantially with respect to the ‘interaction’ between the pedestrians and thus
to the update algorithms as well. The social force model for example assumes, among other
things, a repulsive force with remote action between the pedestrians [8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17].
Other models treat pedestrians by implementing a minimum inter-person distance, which can
be interpreted as the radius of a hard body [10, 11].
One primary test, whether the model is appropriate for a quantitative description of pedes-
trian ﬂow, is the comparison with the empirical velocity-density relation [18, 19, 20, 21]. In
this context the fundamental diagram of Weidmann [22] is frequently cited. It describes the
velocity-density relation for the movement in a plane without bottlenecks, stairs or ramps. A
multitude of causes can be considered which determine this dependency, for instance friction
forces, the ’zipper’ eﬀect [23] and marching in step [24, 25]. As shown in [25] the empirical
velocity-density relation for the single-ﬁle movement is similar to the relation for the movement
in a plane in shape and magnitude. This surprising conformance indicates, that lateral inter-
ferences do not inﬂuence the fundamental diagram at least up to a density-value of 4.5 m−2.

1

This result suggests that it is suﬃcient to investigate the pedestrian ﬂow of a one-dimensional
system without loosing the essential macroscopic characteristics. We modify systematically
the social force model to achieve a satisfying agreement with the empirical velocity-density
relation (fundamental diagram). Furthermore we introduce diﬀerent approaches for the in-
teraction between the pedestrians to investigate the inﬂuence of the required space and the
remote action to the fundamental diagram.

2 Modiﬁcation of the Social Force Model

2.1 Motivation

The social force model was introduced by [8]. It models the one-dimensional movement of a
pedestrian i at position xi(t) with velocity vi(t) and mass mi by the equation of motions

dxi
dt

= vi

mi

dvi
dt

Xj6=i

= Fi =

Fij(xj, xi, vi).

(1)

The summation over j accounts for the interaction with other pedestrians. We assume that
friction at the boundaries and random ﬂuctuations can be neglected and thus the forces are
reducible to a driving and a repulsive term Fi = F drv
. According to the social force
model [8] we choose the driving term

i + F rep

i

F drv

i = mi

v0
i − vi
τi

,

(2)

(3)

i

where v0
is the intended speed and τi controls the acceleration. In the original model the
i
introduction of the repulsive force F rep
between the pedestrians is motivated by the observa-
tion that pedestrians stay away from each other by psychological reasons, e.g. to secure the
private sphere of each pedestrian [8]. The complete model reproduces many self-organization
phenomena like e.g. the formation of lanes in bi-directional streams and the oscillations at
bottlenecks [8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. In the publications cited, the exact form of this repulsive
interaction changes and the authors note that most phenomena are insensitive to its exact
form [16]. We choose the force as in [13].

F rep
i =

−∇Ai (kxj − xik − di)−Bi

Xj6=i

The hard core, di, reﬂects the size of the pedestrian i acting with a remote force on other
pedestrians. Without other constraints a repulsive force which is symmetric in space can lead
to velocities which are in opposite direction to the intended speed. Furthermore, it is possible
that the velocity of a pedestrian can exceed the intended speed through the impact of the
forces of other pedestrians. In a two-dimensional system this eﬀect can be avoided through
the introduction of additional forces like a lateral friction, together with an appropriate choice
of the interaction parameters. In a one-dimensional system, where lateral interferences are
excluded, a loophole is the direct limitation of the velocities to a certain interval [8, 12].
Another important aspect in this context is the dependency between the current velocity and
the space requirement. As suggested by Pauls in the extended ellipse model [26] the area
taken up by a pedestrian increase with increasing speed. Thompson also based his model on
the assumption, that the velocity is a function of the inter-person distance [10]. Furthermore

2

Schreckenberg and Schadschneider observed in [18, 19], that in cellular automata model’s
the consideration, that a pedestrian occupies all cells passed in one time-step, has a large
impact on the velocity-density relation. Helbing and Moln´ar note in [8] that the range of
the repulsive interaction is related to step-length. Following the above suggestion we specify
the relation between required space and velocity for a one-dimensional system.
In a one-
dimensional system the required space changes to a required length d. In [25] it was shown
that for the single-ﬁle movement the relation between the required lengths for one pedestrian
to move with velocity v and v itself is linear at least for velocities 0.1 m/s < v < 1.0 m/s.

d = a + b v with a = 0.36 m and b = 1.06 s

(4)

Hence it is possible to determine one fundamental microscopic parameter, d, of the interaction
on the basis of empirical results. This allows focusing on the question if the interaction and the
equation of motion result in a correct description of the individual movement of pedestrians
and the impact of the remote action. Summing up, for the modelling of regular motions of
pedestrians we modify the reduced one-dimensional social force model in order to meet the
following properties: the force is always pointing in the direction of the intended velocity v0
i ;
the movement of a pedestrian is only inﬂuenced by eﬀects which are directly positioned in
front; the required length d of a pedestrian to move with velocity v is d = a + b v.

2.2 Interactions

To investigate the inﬂuence of the remote action both a force which treats pedestrians as sim-
ple hard bodies and a force according to Equation 3, where a remote action is present, will
be introduced. For simplicity we set v0
i > 0, xi+1 > xi and the mass of a pedestrian to mi = 1.

Hard bodies without remote action

Fi(t) =

v0
i −vi(t)
τi

(

−δ(t)vi(t)

: xi+1(t) − xi(t) > di(t)
: xi+1(t) − xi(t) ≤ di(t)

with di(t) = ai + bivi(t)

(5)

The force which acts on pedestrian i depends only on the position, its velocity, and the po-
sition of the pedestrian i + 1 in front. As long as the distance between the pedestrians is
larger than the required length, di, the movement of a pedestrian is only inﬂuenced by the
driving term. If the required length at a given current velocity is larger than the distance
the pedestrian stops (i. e. the velocity becomes zero). This ensures that the velocity of a
pedestrian is restricted to the interval vi = [0, v0
i ] and that the movement is only inﬂuenced
by the pedestrian in front. The deﬁnition of di is such that the required length increases with
growing velocity.

Hard bodies with remote action

Fi(t) =

(

Gi(t)
max (0, Gi(t))

:
:

vi(t) > 0
vi(t) ≤ 0

(6)

with

Gi(t) =

v0
i − vi(t)
τi

− ei

1
xi+1(t) − xi(t) − di(t) (cid:19)

(cid:18)

fi

and di(t) = ai + bivi(t).

3

Again the force is only inﬂuenced by actions in front of the pedestrian. By means of the re-
quired length, di, the range of the interaction is a function of the velocity vi. Two additional
parameters, ei and fi, have to be introduced to ﬁx the range and the strength of the force.
Due to the remote action one has to change the condition for setting the velocity to zero.
The above deﬁnition assures that the pedestrian i stops if the force would lead to a negative
velocity. With the proper choice of ei and fi and suﬃciently small time steps this condition
gets active mainly during the relaxation phase. Without remote action this becomes impor-
tant. The pedestrian can proceed when the inﬂuence of the driving term is large enough to
get positive velocities.

This diﬀerent formulation of the forces requires diﬀerent update algorithms, which will be
introduced in the next section. A special problem stems from the periodic boundary conditions
enforced for the tests of the fundamental diagram, as these destroy the ordering by causality,
which otherwise could avoid blocking situations.

2.3 Time stepping algorithm

The social force model gives a fairly large system of second order ordinary diﬀerential equa-
tions. For the hard body model with remote action, where the right hand side of the ODE’s
is continuous along the solution, an explicit Euler method with a time step of ∆t = 0.001 s
was tested and found suﬃcient. Within that time, the distance between two persons does not
change enough to make the explicit scheme inaccurate.
The situation for the hard body model without remote force is more complicated. Here
the right hand side is a distribution, and the position of the Dirac spikes is not known a
priory. Hence the perfect treatment is an adaptive procedure, where each global time step
is restricted to the interval up to the next contact. Unfortunately, this is a complicated and
time consuming process. For a simple time step we choose the following procedure: Each
person is advanced one step (∆t = 0.001 s) according to the local forces. If after this step the
distance to the person in front is smaller than the required length, the velocity is set to zero
and the position to the old position. Additionally, the step of the next following person is
reexamined. If it is still possible, the update is completed. Otherwise, again the velocity is set
to zero and the position is set to the old position, and so on. This is an approximation to the
exact parallel update. It is not completely correct, however. To test its independence from
the ordering of persons, computations using diﬀerent orders were performed. The diﬀerences
were minute and not more than expected from reordering of arithmetic operations.

3 Results

To enable a comparison with the empirical fundamental diagram of the single-ﬁle movement
[25] we choose a system with periodic boundary conditions and a length of L = 17.3 m. For
both interactions we proofed that for system-sizes of L = 17.3, 20.0, 50.0 m ﬁnite size eﬀects
have no notable inﬂuence on the results. The values for the intended speed v0
i are distributed
according to a normal-distribution with a mean value of µ = 1.24 m/s and σ = 0.05 m/s. In
a one-dimensional system the inﬂuence of the pedestrian with the smallest intended speed
masks jamming eﬀects which are not determined by individual properties. Thus we choose
a σ which is smaller than the empirical value and veriﬁed with σ = 0.05, 0.1, 0.2 m/s, that a
greater variation has no inﬂuence to the mean velocities at larger densities.

4

In reality the parameters τ, a, b, e and f are diﬀerent for every pedestrian i and correlated
with the individual intended speed. But we know from experiment [25] that the movement
of pedestrians is inﬂuenced by phenomena like marching in step and in reality the action of a
pedestrian depends on the entire situation in front and not only on the distance to the next
person. Therefore it’s no point to attempt to give fully accurate values of this parameter and
we may choose identical values for all pedestrians. We tested variations of the parameters
and found that the behavior changes continuously. According to [17], τ = 0.61 s is a reliable
value.
For every run we set at t = 0 all velocities to zero and distribute the persons randomly
with a minimal distance of a in the system. After 3 × 105 relaxation-steps we perform
3 × 105 measurements-steps. At every step we determine the mean value of the velocity
over all particles and calculate the mean value over time. The following ﬁgures present the
dependency between mean velocity and density for diﬀerent approaches to the interaction
introduced in section 2.2. To demonstrate the inﬂuence of a required length dependent on
velocity we choose diﬀerent values for the parameter b. With b = 0 one get simple hard
bodies.

empirical
b=0.0
b=0.56
b=1.06

]
s
/
m

[
 
v

 1.4

 1.2

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0

 0

 0.5

 1

 2

 2.5

 3

 1.5
ρ [1/m]

Figure 1: Velocity-density relation for hard bodies without a remote action in comparison with
empirical data from [25]. The ﬁlled squares result from simple hard bodies. The introduction
of a required length with b = 0.56 s leads to a good agreement with the empirical data.

Figure 1 shows the relation between the mean values of walking speed and density for hard
bodies without remote action, according to the interaction introduced in Equation 5. If the
required length is independent of the velocity, one gets a negative curvature of the function
v = v(ρ). The velocity-dependence controls the curvature and b = 0.56 s results in a good
agreement with the empirical data. With b = 1.06 s we found a diﬀerence between the
velocity-density relation predicted by the model and the empirical fundamental diagram. The
reason for this discrepancy is that the interaction and equation of motion do not describe the
individual movement of pedestrian correctly. To illustrate the inﬂuence of the remote force,

5

we ﬁx the parameter a = 0.36 m, b = 0.56 s and set the values which determine the remote
force to e = 0.51 N and f = 2.

without remote action, b=0.56
with remote action, b=0
with remote action, b=0.56

]
s
/
m

[
 
v

 1.4

 1.2

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0

 0

 0.5

 1

 2

 2.5

 3

 1.5
ρ [1/m]

Figure 2: Velocity-density relation for hard bodies with remote action in comparison with hard
bodies without a remote action (ﬁlled circles). Again we choose a = 0.36 m and b = 0.56 s.
The parameter e = 0.51 N and f = 2 determine the remote force. With b = 0 one gets a
qualitative diﬀerent fundamental diagram and a gap for the resulting velocities.

The fundamental diagram for the interaction with remote action according to Equation 6
is presented in Figure 2. The inﬂuence is small if one considers the velocity-dependence of
the required length. But with b = 0 one gets a qualitative diﬀerent fundamental diagram.
The increase of the velocity can be expected due to the eﬀective reduction of the required
length. The gap at ρ ≈ 1.2 m−1 is surprising. It is generated through the development of
distinct density waves, see Figure 3, as are well known from highways. From experimental
view we have so far no hints to the development of strong density waves for pedestrians [25].
The width of the gap can be changed by variation of the parameter f which controls the
range of the remote force. Near the gap the occurrence of the density waves depends on the
distribution of the individual velocities, too.

4 Discussion and summary

For the investigation of the inﬂuence of the required space and remote action on the fun-
damental diagram we have introduced a modiﬁed one-dimensional social force model. The
modiﬁcations warrant that in the direction of intended speed negative velocities do not occur
and that the motion of the pedestrians is inﬂuenced by objects and actions directly in front
only. If one further takes into account that the required length for moving with a certain
velocity is a function of the current velocity the model-parameter can be adjusted to yield a
good agreement with the empirical fundamental diagram. This holds for hard bodies with and
without remote action. The remote action has a sizeable inﬂuence on the resulting velocity-

6

ρ=1.16 [1/m]

ρ=1.21 [1/m]

t
 

←

 0  2  4  6  8  10  12  14  16
L

 0  2  4  6  8  10  12  14  16
L

Figure 3: Time-development of the positions for densities near the velocity-gap, see Figure
2. For ρ > 1.2 m−1 density waves are observable. Some individuals leave much larger than
average gaps in front.

density relation only if the required length is independent of the velocity. In this case one
observes distinct density waves, which lead to a velocity gap in the fundamental diagram.

Thus we showed that the modiﬁed model is able to reproduce the empirical fundamental
diagram of pedestrian movement for a one-dimensional system, if it considers the velocity-
dependence of the required length. For the model parameter b which correlates the required
length with the current velocity, we have found that without remote action the value b = 0.56 s
results in a velocity-density relation which is in a good agreement with the empirical funda-
mental diagram. However, from the same empirical fundamental diagram one determines
b = 1.06 s, see [25]. We conclude that a model which reproduces the right macroscopic depen-
dency between density and velocity does not necessarily describe correctly the microscopic
situation, and the space requirement of a person at average speed is much less than the av-
erage space requirement. This discrepancy may be explained by the ’short-sightedness’ of
the model. Actually, pedestrians adapt their speed not only to the person immediately in
front, but to the situation further ahead, too. This gives a much smoother movement than
the model predicts.

The above considerations refer to the simplest system in equilibrium and with periodic bound-
ary conditions. In a real life scenario like a building evacuation, where one is interested in
estimates of the time needed for the clearance of a building and the development of the den-
sities in front of bottlenecks, one is confronted with open boundaries and conditions far from
equilibrium. We assume that a consistency on a microscopic level needs to be achieved before
one can accurately describe real life scenarios. The investigation presented provides a basis
for a careful extension of the modiﬁed social force model and an upgrade to two dimensions
including further interactions.

7

We thank Oliver Passon for careful reading and Wolfram Klingsch for discussions.

Acknowledgments:

References

[1] M. Schreckenberg and S. D. Sharma (eds), Pedestrian and Evacuation Dynamics,

Springer, Berlin (2002);

[2] E. R. Galea (ed), Pedestrian and Evacuation Dynamics, CMS Press, London (2003);
[3] M. Muramatsu, T. Irie and T. Nagatani, Jamming transition in pedestrian counter ﬂow,

Physica A 267, 487-498 (1999);

[4] V. J. Blue and J. L. Adler, Cellular automata microsimulation of bi-directional pedes-
trian ﬂows, Transportation Research Record, Journal of the Transportation Research
Board 1678, 135-141 (2000);

[5] K. Takimoto and T. Nagatani, Spatio-temporal distribution of escape time in evacuation

process, Physica A 320, 611-621 (2003);

[6] C. Burstedde, K. Klauck, A. Schadschneider and J. Zittartz, Simulation of pedestrian
dynamics using a two-dimensional cellular automaton, Physica A 295, 507-525 (2001);
[7] A. Keßel, H. Kl¨upfel, J. Wahle and M. Schreckenberg, Microscopic simulation of

[8] D. Helbing and P. Moln´ar, Social force model for pedestrian dynamics, Phys. Rev. E 51,

pedestrian crowd motion, in [1];

4282-4286 (1995);

[9] S. P. Hoogendoorn and P. H. L. Bovy, Normative pedestrian behaviour theory and
modelling, Proceedings of the 15th International Symposium on Transportation and
Traﬃc Theory, Adelaide, 219-245 (2002);

[10] P. Thompson and E. Marchant, A computer model for the evacuation of large building

populations, Fire Safety Journal 24, 131 (1995);

[11] V. Schneider and R. K¨onnecke, Simulating evacuation processes with ASERI, in [1];
[12] P. Moln´ar, Modellierung und Simulation der Dynamik von Fußg¨angerstr¨omen, Shaker,

Aachen (1996);

[13] D. Helbing, I. Farkas and T. Vicsek, Freezing by heating in a driven mesoscopic system,

Phys. Rev. Let. 84, 1240-1243 (2000);

[14] D. Helbing, I. Farkas, and T. Vicsek, Simulating dynamical features of escape panic,

[15] D. Helbing, Traﬃc and related self-driven many-particle systems, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73,

Nature 407, 487-490 (2000);

1067-1141 (2001);

[16] D. Helbing, I. Farkas, P. Molnar and T. Vicsek, Simulation of pedestrian crowds in

normal and evacuation situations, in [1];

[17] T. Werner and D. Helbing, The social force pedestrian model applied to real

life

scenarios, in [2];

[18] T. Meyer-K¨onig, H. Kl¨upfel and M. Schreckenberg, Assessment and analysis of evacua-

tion processes on passenger ships by microscopic simulation, in [1];

8

[19] A. Kirchner, H. Kl¨upfel, K. Nishinari, A. Schadschneider and M. Schreckenberg,
Discretization eﬀects and the inﬂuence of walking speed in cellular automata models for
pedestrian dynamics, J. Stat. Mech. P10011 (2004);

[20] S. P. Hoogendoorn, P. H. L. Bovy and W. Daamen, Microscopic pedestrian wayﬁnding

and dynamics modelling, in [1];

[21] www.rimea.de;
[22] U. Weidmann, Transporttechnik der Fußg¨anger, Schriftenreihe des IVT Nr. 90, zweite

[23] S. P. Hoogendoorn, W. Daamen, Pedestrian behavior at bottlenecks, Transportation

[24] P. D. Navin and R. J. Wheeler, Pedestrian ﬂow characteristics, Traﬃc Engineering 39,

erg¨anzte Auﬂage, ETH Z¨urich (1993);

Science 39/2, 0147-0159 (2005);

31-36 (1969);

[25] A. Seyfried, Bernhard Steﬀen, Wolfram Klingsch and Maik Boltes, The fundamental dia-
gram of pedestrian movement revisited, available from http://arxiv.org, physics/0506170
(2005);

[26] J. L. Pauls, Suggestions on evacuation models and research questions, Conference Pro-
ceedings of the 3rd International Symposium on Human Behaviour in Fire (2004).

9

