5
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
2
6
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Relating the dynamics of road traﬃc in a stochastic cellular
automaton to a macroscopic ﬁrst-order model

EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Sven Maerivoet1, Steven Logghe2, Ben Immers3, and Bart De Moor1
1 Department of Electrical Engineering ESAT-SCD (SISTA)

Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
Phone: +32 (0)16 32 17 09 Fax: +32 (0)16 32 19 70
URL: http://www.esat.kuleuven.ac.be/scd
e-mail: sven.maerivoet@esat.kuleuven.ac.be

2 Transport & Mobility Leuven

Vital Decosterstraat 67A bus 0001, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
Phone: +32 (0)16 31 77 30 Fax: +32 (0)16 31 77 39
URL: http://www.tmleuven.be
e-mail: steven@tmleuven.be

3 Department of Civil Engineering Katholieke Universiteit Leuven

Kasteelpark Arenberg 40, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
Phone: +32 (0)16 32 16 69 Fax: +32 (0)16 32 19 76
URL: http://www.esat.kuleuven.ac.be/scd
e-mail: ben.immers@bwk.kuleuven.be

Received: June 28, 2005 / Revised version: February 21, 2014

Abstract. In this paper, we describe a relation between a microscopic traﬃc cellular automaton (TCA)
model (i.e., the stochastic TCA model of Nagel and Schreckenberg) and the macroscopic ﬁrst-order hydro-
dynamic model of Lighthill, Whitham, and Richards (LWR). The innovative aspect of our approach, is that
we explicitly derive the LWR’s fundamental diagram directly from the STCA’s rule set, by assuming a sta-
tionarity condition that converts the STCA’s rules into a set of linear inequalities. In turn, these constraints
deﬁne the shape of the fundamental diagram, which is then speciﬁed to the LWR model. Application of
our methodology to a simulation case study, allows us to compare the tempo-spatial behavior of both
models. Our results indicate that, in the presence of noise, the capacity ﬂows in the derived fundamental
diagram are overestimations of those of the STCA model. Directly specifying the STCA’s capacity ﬂows
to the LWR fundamental diagram, eﬀectively remedies most of the mismatches between both approaches.
Our methodology sees the STCA complementary to the LWR model and vice versa, so the results can be
of great assistance when interpreting the traﬃc dynamics in both models. Especially appealing, is the fact
that the STCA can visualise the higher-order characteristics of traﬃc stream dynamics, i.e., the fans of
rarefaction waves.

PACS. 45.70.Vn Granular models of complex systems; traﬃc ﬂow – 47.11.+j Computation methods in
ﬂuid dynamics – 89.40.-a Transportation

1 Introduction

Considering the existing relations between the stochas-
tic TCA model of Nagel and Schreckenberg [1,2] and the
macroscopic ﬁrst-order model of Lighthill, Whitham, and
Richards (LWR) [3,4], from traﬃc ﬂow theory, there are
already numerous links between both modeling approaches.
An example is the so-called totally asymmetric simple ex-
clusion process (TASEP) [5], which corresponds to the
LWR model with a noisy and diﬀusive conservation law
if a random sequential update is assumed [2,6]. Another
example is the STCA which can be approximated by a so-

called mean ﬁeld theory (MFT), and its successive reﬁne-
ments, such as the car-oriented mean-ﬁeld theory (COMF),
and the recently developed site-oriented cluster-theoretic
approach [7,8,9,10,11,12,13]. A more elaborate discussion
can be found in [14]. In summary, we can say that there
already exist several methods for bridging both the macro-
scopic LWR and the microscopic STCA models (note that
we do not consider the class of hybrid models, as we are
only interested in direct analogies between both macro-
scopic and microscopic models, and not in pure combina-
tions of these model classes).

2

Sven Maerivoet et al.: Relating the dynamics of road traﬃc in a stochastic CA to a macroscopic ﬁrst-order model

In this paper, we reconsider the STCA and LWR mod-
els, but we take a diﬀerent approach at studying their re-
lation: we consider a TCA model as a particle-based dis-
cretisation scheme for macroscopic traﬃc ﬂow models. It
is from this latter point of view that our work addresses
the common structure between both models. Our main
goal is therefore to provide a means for implicitly incor-
porating the STCA’s stochasticity into the LWR model
[15]. Instead of considering the classic angle of using e.g., a
mean-ﬁeld theory, we take a diﬀerent approach at studying
their relation. By considering a TCA model as a particle-
based discretisation scheme for macroscopic traﬃc ﬂow
models, we can addresses the common structure between
both models. This allows us to provide a means for ex-
plicitly incorporating the STCA’s stochasticity into the
LWR model (which is in fact deterministic in nature).
Note that we use the term implicit to denote the fact
that the STCA’s stochasticity is not introduced in the
equations by means of explicit noise terms. Rather, our
methodology implies that the stochasticity is introduced
through the shape of the LWR’s fundamental diagram.

This paper is organized as follows: in section 2, we
brieﬂy recapitulate both the modeling approach taken by
traﬃc cellular automata models (with the STCA in partic-
ular), and the macroscopic ﬁrst-order hydrodynamic LWR
model. We then consider a methodology for implicitly in-
corporating the STCA’s stochasticity into the LWR’s tri-
angular fundamental diagram in section 3. Continuing, we
apply this technique to a small case study in section 4,
which points us to some discrepancies between both mod-
eling approaches. Highlighting some of the resulting arti-
facts, and investigate the main reason for the diﬀerence
in behavior, we move on to section 5 where we present an
alternate derivation of the fundamental diagrams. Finally,
the paper concludes with section 6, stating a summary of
our ﬁndings.

2 Recapitulating the STCA and LWR models

With respect to the modeling of traﬃc ﬂows, there are
largely two model classes possible, i.e., the microscopic
and macroscopic approach, respectively. In the former class,
interactions between vehicles in a traﬃc stream are ex-
plicitly modeled, giving rise to car-following and lane-
changing submodels. With respect to the latter class, traf-
ﬁc streams are mostly treated as inviscid but compress-
ible ﬂuids. In this section, we brieﬂy recapitulate a special
class of microscopic models, i.e., traﬃc cellular automata
(TCA) models. We then describe a stochastic TCA model,
called the stochastic traﬃc cellular automaton (STCA),
after which we conclude with an overview of the most
prominent features of the macroscopic ﬁrst-order hydro-
dynamic LWR model.

2.1 Traﬃc cellular automata (TCA) models

In the ﬁeld of traﬃc ﬂow modeling, microscopic traﬃc
simulation has always been regarded as a time consum-

ing, complex process involving detailed models that de-
scribe the behavior of individual vehicles. Approximately
a decade ago, however, new microscopic models were being
developed, based on the cellular automata programming
paradigm from statistical physics. Let us ﬁrst describe the
operation of a single-lane traﬃc cellular automaton as de-
picted in Fig. 1. We assume N vehicles are driving on a
circular lattice containing K cells, i.e., periodic bound-
ary conditions (each cell can be occupied by at most one
vehicle at a time). Time and space are discretized, with
∆T = 1 s and ∆X = 7.5 m, leading to a velocity dis-
cretization of ∆V = 27 km/h. Furthermore, the velocity
vi of a vehicle i is constrained to an integer in the range
{0, . . . , vmax}, with vmax typically 5 cells/s (correspond-
ing to 135 km/h).

t

t + 1

i

∆X

j

∆T

j

i

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the operation of a single-lane
traﬃc cellular automaton (TCA); here, the time axis is oriented
downwards, the space axis extends to the right. The TCA’s
conﬁguration is shown for two consecutive time steps t and
t + 1, during which two vehicles i and j propagate through the
lattice. Without loss of generality, we denote the number of
empty cells in front of vehicle i as its space gap gsi .

Each vehicle i has a space headway hsi and a time

headway hti, deﬁned as follows:

hsi = gsi + li,
hti = gti + ρi.

(1)
(2)

In these deﬁnitions, gsi and gti denote the space and
time gaps respectively; li is the length of a vehicle and ρi is
the occupancy time of the vehicle (i.e., the time it ‘spends’
in one cell). Note that in a traﬃc cellular automaton the
space headway of a vehicle is always an integer number,
representing a multiple of the spatial discretization ∆X
in real world measurement units. So in a jam, it is taken
to be equal to the space the vehicle occupies, i.e., hsi = 1
cell.

Local interactions between individual vehicles in a traf-
ﬁc stream are modeled by means of a rule set. In this
paper, we assume that all vehicles have the same physical
characteristics. The system’s state is changed through syn-
chronous position updates of all the vehicles, based on a
rule set that reﬂects the car-following behavior. Note that
most rule sets of TCA models do not use the space head-
way hsi or the space gap gsi, but are instead based on the
number of empty cells di in front of a vehicle i. Keeping
equation (1) in mind, we therefore adopt the convention
that, for a vehicle i its length li = 1 cell. This means that
when the vehicle is residing in a compact jam, its space
headway hsi = 1 cell and its space gap is consequently

Sven Maerivoet et al.: Relating the dynamics of road traﬃc in a stochastic CA to a macroscopic ﬁrst-order model

3

gsi = 0 cells. This abstraction gives us a rigorous justiﬁca-
tion to formulate the TCA’s update rules more intuitively
using space gaps.

2.2 The stochastic traﬃc cellular automaton (STCA)
model of Nagel and Schreckenberg

In 1992, Nagel and Schreckenberg proposed a TCA model
that was able to reproduce several characteristics of real-
life traﬃc ﬂows, e.g., the spontaneous emergence of traﬃc
jams [1,2]. Their model is called the NaSch TCA, but
is more commonly known as the stochastic traﬃc cellu-
lar automaton (STCA). It explicitly includes a stochastic
noise term in one of its rules. The STCA then comprises
the following three rules (note that in Nagel and Schreck-
enberg’s original formulation, they decoupled acceleration
and braking, resulting in four rules):

R1: acceleration and braking

vi(t) ← min{vi(t − 1) + 1, gsi(t − 1), vmax},

(3)

R2: randomisation

ξ(t) < p =⇒ vi(t) ← max{0, vi(t) − 1},

(4)

R3: vehicle movement

xi(t) ← xi(t − 1) + vi(t).

(5)

The STCA contains a rule for increasing the speed of a
vehicle and braking to avoid collisions, i.e., rule R1, equa-
tion (3). It furthermore also contains rule R2, equation (4),
which introduces stochasticity in the system. At each dis-
crete time step t, a random number ξ(t) ∈ [0, 1[ is drawn
from a uniform distribution. This number is then com-
pared with a stochastic noise parameter p ∈ [0, 1] (called
the slowdown probability); as a result, there is a probabil-
ity of p that a vehicle will slow down to vi(t)− 1 cells/time
step. According to Nagel and Schreckenberg, the randomi-
sation of rule R2 captures natural speed ﬂuctuations due
to human behavior or varying external conditions. The
rule introduces overreactions of drivers when braking, pro-
viding the key to the formation of spontaneously emerging
jams. Finally, rule R3, equation (5), allows for the actual
movement of vehicles in the system. The STCA model is
called a minimal model, in the sense that all these rules
are a necessity for mimicking the basic features of real-life
traﬃc ﬂows.

To get an intuitive feeling for the STCA’s system dy-
namics, we have provided two time-space diagrams in Fig. 2.
Both diagrams show the evolution for a global density of
k = 0.2 vehicles/cell, but with p set to 0.1 for the left
diagram, and p = 0.5 for the right diagram. As can be
seen in both diagrams, the randomisation in the model
gives rise to many unstable artiﬁcial phantom mini-jams.
The downstream fronts of these jams smear out, forming
unstable interfaces [16]. This is a direct result of the fact
that the intrinsic noise (as embodied by p) in the STCA
model is too strong: a jam can always form at any den-
sity, meaning that breakdown can (and will) occur, even

in the free-ﬂow traﬃc regime. For low enough densities
however, these jams can vanish as they are absorbed by
vehicles with suﬃcient space headways, or by new jams
in the system [17]. It has been experimentally shown that
below the critical density, these jams have ﬁnite life times
with a cut-oﬀ that is about 5 × 105 time steps and in-
dependent of the lattice size. When the critical density is
crossed, these long-lived jams evolve into jams with an in-
ﬁnite life time, i.e., they will survive for an inﬁnitely long
time) [18,2,11].

Fig. 2. Typical time-space diagrams of the STCA model. The
two shown closed-loop lattices each contain 300 cells, with a
visible period of 580 time steps (each vehicle is represented
as a single colored dot). Both diagrams have a global density
of k = 0.2 vehicles/cell. Left: the evolution of the system for
p = 0.1. Right: the evolution of the system, but now for p = 0.5.
The eﬀects of the randomisation rule R2 are clearly visible in
both diagrams, as there occur many unstable artiﬁcial phantom
mini-jams. Furthermore, the speed w of the backward propa-
gating kinematic waves decreases with an increasing p.

2.3 The macroscopic ﬁrst-order traﬃc ﬂow model of
Lighthill, Whitham, and Richards (LWR)

Considering traﬃc as an inviscid but compressible ﬂuid,
it follows from this assumption, that densities k, space-
mean speeds vs, and ﬂows q are deﬁned as continuous
variables, in each point in time and space, hence leading
to the names of continuum models, ﬂuid-dynamic models,
or macroscopic models.

The ﬁrst aspect of such a ﬂuid-dynamic description of
traﬃc ﬂow, consists of a scalar conservation law (‘scalar’
because it is a ﬁrst-order PDE). A typical derivation can
be found in [19] and [20]: the derivation is based on con-
sidering a road segment with a ﬁnite length on which no
vehicles appear or disappear other than the ones that en-
ter and exit it. After taking the inﬁnitesimal limit (i.e.,
the continuum hypothesis), this will result in an equation
that expresses the interplay between continuous densities
and ﬂows on a local scale:

+

(6)

= 0,

∂k(t, x)
∂t

∂q(t, x)
∂x
with the density k and ﬂow q dynamically (i.e., time
varying) deﬁned over a single spatial dimension. Lighthill
and Whitham were among the ﬁrst to develop such a traf-
ﬁc ﬂow model in 1955 [3]. One year later, Richards inde-
pendently derived the same ﬂuid-dynamic model [4], albeit
in a slightly diﬀerent form. Because of the nearly simul-
taneous and independent development of the theory, the

4

Sven Maerivoet et al.: Relating the dynamics of road traﬃc in a stochastic CA to a macroscopic ﬁrst-order model

model has become known as the LWR model, after the ini-
tials of its inventors who receive the credit. In some texts,
the model is also referred to as the hydrodynamic model,
or the kinematic wave model (KWM), attributed to the
fact that the model’s solution is based on characteristics,
which are called kinematic waves (e.g., shock waves).

Crucial to their approach, was a fundamental hypoth-
esis, essentially stating that ﬂow is a function of den-
sity, i.e., there exists a qe(k(t, x)) equilibrium relationship,
more commonly known as the fundamental diagram. Cen-
tral to their theory, Lighthill and Whitham assumed that
the fundamental hypothesis holds at all traﬃc densities,
not just for light-density traﬃc but also for congested traf-
ﬁc conditions.

In order to solve the partial diﬀerential equation (6),
we also need the fundamental relation of traﬃc ﬂow the-
ory, which relates the macroscopic traﬃc ﬂow character-
istics density k (vehicles/kilometre), space-mean speed vs
(kilometres/hour), and ﬂow q (vehicles/hour) to each other
as follows:

q = k vs.

(7)

In general however, there are two restrictions, i.e., the
relation is only valid for (1) continuous variables, or smooth
approximations of them, and (2) traﬃc composed of sub-
streams (e.g., slow and fast vehicles) which comply to the
following two assumptions:

Homogeneous traﬃc

There is a homogeneous composition of the traf-
ﬁc substream (i.e., the same type of vehicles).

Stationary traﬃc

When observing the traﬃc substream at dif-
ferent times and locations, it ‘looks the same’.
Putting it a bit more quantitatively, all the vehi-
cles’ trajectories should be parallel and equidis-
tant [21].

The latter of the above two conditions, is also referred
to as traﬃc operating in a steady state or at equilibrium.
Employing the fundamental diagram qe(k), relates the two
dependent variables in equation (6) to each other, thereby
making it possible to solve the partial diﬀerential equa-
tion. Thus, reconsidering equation (6), taking into account
the fundamental diagram, the conservation law is now ex-
pressed as:

kt + qe(k)x = 0,

(8)

in which we introduced the standard diﬀerential cal-
culus notation for PDEs. Recognising the fundamental re-
lation of traﬃc ﬂow theory (7), the conservation law (8)
can also be cast in a non-linear wave equation, using the
chain rule for diﬀerentiation [19]:

kt +

dqe(k)
dk

kx = 0.

Analytically solving the previous equation using the
method of characteristics, results in shock waves that travel
with speeds equal to:

w =

dqe(k)
dk
i.e., the tangent to the qe(k) fundamental diagram.
As a consequence, solutions, being the characteristics, of
equation (9) have the following form:

(10)

,

k(t, x) = k(x − wt),

(11)

with the observation that the density is constant along
such a characteristic. Whenever in the solution of the con-
servation equation, two of its characteristics intersect, the
density takes on two diﬀerent values (each one belong-
ing to a single characteristic). As this mathematical quirk
is physically impossible, the entropy solution states that
both characteristics terminate and breed a shock wave; as
such, these shock waves form boundaries that discontin-
uously separate densities, ﬂows, and space-mean speeds
[19]. The speed of such a shock wave is related to the
following ratio [22]:

wshock =

∆q
∆k

,

(12)

with ∆q = qu −qd and ∆k = ku −kd the relative diﬀer-
ence in ﬂows, respectively densities, up- and downstream
of the shock wave.

Note that going from a low to a high density regime
typically results in a shock wave, whereas the reverse tran-
sition is accompanied by an emanation of a fan of charac-
teristics (also called expansion, acceleration, or rarefaction
waves). In shock wave theory, the densities on either side
of a shock are well deﬁned (i.e., unique solutions exist);
along the shock wave however, the density jumps discon-
tinuously from one value to another.

Because of the well-deﬁned properties of the LWR model,

it is possible to derive analytical solutions to certain types
of problems. These solutions can even be drawn graphi-
cally in a time-space diagram, thereby clearly showing the
evolution of ﬁrst-order macroscopic traﬃc ﬂow character-
istics (e.g., the speed of backward-travelling jams, . . . ).
Besides the previous analytic derivation of a solution to
the conservation law expressed as a PDE, it is also possi-
ble to treat the problem numerically. Converting the PDEs
into ﬁnite diﬀerence equations (FDEs), and solving them
numerically stable, can be done by casting the LWR model
in the context of Godunov FDE methods, allowing for ar-
bitrary qe(k) fundamental diagrams [23,24].

3 Implicitly incorporating the STCA’s
stochasticity

(9)

As mentioned in the introduction, we reconsider the STCA
and LWR models, taking a diﬀerent approach at studying
their relation. Our main goal is to provide a means for
implicitly incorporating the STCA’s stochasticity into the
LWR model. To this end, we provide a practical method-
ology for specifying the fundamental diagram to the LWR
model. Assuming that a stationarity condition holds on

Sven Maerivoet et al.: Relating the dynamics of road traﬃc in a stochastic CA to a macroscopic ﬁrst-order model

5

the STCA’s rules, we incorporate the STCA’s stochastic-
ity directly into the LWR’s fundamental diagram.

Relating both the STCA and the LWR models is now
done using a simple two-step approach, in which we ﬁrst
rewrite the STCA’s rules into a single rule, leading to a set
of linear inequalities. These constraints can be considered
as a vse (hs) fundamental diagram (see e.g., the left part
in Fig. 4). This latter diagram can then be converted into
an equivalent triangular ﬂow versus density qe(k) funda-
mental diagram.

3.1 Rewriting the STCA’s rule set

Considering a vehicle’s average speed, the STCA’s rules
R1 and R2, equations (3) and (4) respectively, state that
a vehicle slows down with probability p, and that it does
not slow down with probability 1−p. As such, they can be
rewritten into the following single rule that is expressed
in continuous speeds and space gaps:

vi(t) ← p · min{vi(t − 1) ✟✟+1 ✟✟−1, gsi(t − 1) − 1,
vmax − 1} + (1 − p) · min{vi(t − 1) + 1,
gsi(t − 1), vmax},

(13)

with vi(t) ← max{0, vi(t)}. Furthermore, the following

two algebraic relations always hold:

a · min{b, c} = min{ab, ac},

min{a, b} + min{c, d} = min{a + c, a + d,
b + c, b + d}.

(14)

(15)

Applying relation (14) to our rule (13), yields the fol-

lowing result:

vi(t) ← min{pvi(t − 1), p(gsi (t − 1) − 1), p(vmax − 1)}
+min{(1 − p)(vi(t − 1) + 1), (1 − p)gsi (t − 1),

(1 − p)vmax}.

(16)

Using relation (15) to this result, allows us to obtain

a formulation with a single minimum-operator:

vi(t) ← min{ pvi(t − 1) + (1 − p)(vi(t − 1) + 1),

pvi(t − 1) + (1 − p)gsi (t − 1),
pvi(t − 1) + (1 − p)vmax,
p(gsi (t − 1) − 1) + (1 − p)(vi(t − 1) + 1),
p(gsi (t − 1) − 1) + (1 − p)gsi (t − 1),
p(gsi (t − 1) − 1) + (1 − p)vmax,
p(vmax − 1) + (1 − p)(vi(t − 1) + 1),
p(vmax − 1) + (1 − p)gsi (t − 1),
p(vmax − 1) + (1 − p)vmax}.

(17)

Expanding all the terms between parentheses gives the

following result:

vi(t) ← min{ ✘✘✘✘✘

pvi(t − 1) − p,

pvi(t − 1) + vi(t − 1) + 1 − ✘✘✘✘✘
pvi(t − 1) + gsi (t − 1) − pgsi(t − 1),
pvi(t − 1) + vmax − pvmax,
pgsi(t − 1) − p + vi(t − 1) + 1 − pvi(t − 1) − p,
✘✘✘✘✘
pgsi(t − 1) − p + gsi (t − 1) − ✘✘✘✘✘
pgsi(t − 1),
pgsi(t − 1) − p + vmax − pvmax,
pvmax − p + vi(t − 1) + 1 − pvi(t − 1) − p,
pvmax − p + gsi (t − 1) − pgsi(t − 1),
✘✘✘✘pvmax − p + vmax − ✘✘✘✘pvmax}.

(18)

And ﬁnally, regrouping for p yields:

vi(t) ← min{ vi(t − 1) + 1 − p,

p(vi(t − 1) − gsi(t − 1)) + gsi (t − 1),
p(vi(t − 1) − vmax) + vmax,
p(gsi(t − 1) − vi(t − 1) − 2) + vi(t − 1) + 1,
gsi(t − 1) − p,
p(gsi(t − 1) − vmax − 1) + vmax,
p(vmax − vi(t − 1) − 2) + vi(t − 1) + 1,
p(vmax − gsi (t − 1) − 1) + gsi(t − 1),
vmax − p}.

(19)

If we now assume traﬃc is stationary (see e.g., Da-
ganzo’s description of stationary traﬃc in section 2.3),
then we can assert that the state of a vehicle at time t
is the same as its state at time t − 1, i.e., vi(t) = vi(t − 1)
and gsi(t) = gsi(t − 1). As a result, equation (19) gets
transformed into the following set of linear inequalities
that express constraints on the relations between vi(t),
gsi(t), p, and vmax:

p(gsi(t) − vi(t) − 2) + ✟

✟✟✟
vi(t) + 1 − p ≥ ✟✟✟
vi(t)
p(vi(t) − gsi(t)) + gsi(t) ≥ vi(t)
p(vi(t) − vmax) + vmax ≥ vi(t)
✟✟
vi(t) + 1 ≥ ✟
vi(t)
gsi (t) − p ≥ vi(t)
p(gsi(t) − vmax − 1) + vmax ≥ vi(t)
vi(t) + 1 ≥ ✟✟✟
vi(t)
p(vmax − gsi(t) − 1) + gsi(t) ≥ vi(t)
vmax − p ≥ vi(t)

p(vmax − vi(t) − 2) + ✟✟✟

✟✟

(C1),
(C2),
(C3),
(C4),
(C5),
(C6),
(C7),
(C8),
(C9).

Let us now examine each of these nine constraints C1

through C9.

• Constraint C1 states that 1 − p ≥ 0, i.e., p ≤ 1. This
logically follows from the STCA’s condition that p ∈
[0, 1].
• Constraint C2 states that p(vi(t) − gsi(t)) + gsi (t) ≥
vi(t), i.e., gsi(t)✘✘✘✘
(1 − p) ≥ vi(t)✘✘✘✘
(1 − p). This corresponds
to vi(t) ≤ gsi(t), which states that vehicles strive for
collision-free driving.

6

Sven Maerivoet et al.: Relating the dynamics of road traﬃc in a stochastic CA to a macroscopic ﬁrst-order model

• Constraint C3 states that p(vi(t) − vmax) + vmax ≥
vi(t), i.e., vmax✘✘✘✘
(1 − p) ≥ vi(t)✘✘✘✘
(1 − p). This corresponds
to vi(t) ≤ vmax, which logically follows from the STCA’s
condition that vi(t) ∈ {0, . . . , vmax}.

• Constraint C4 states that p(gsi(t) − vi(t) − 2) + 1 ≥ 0,

i.e., vi(t) ≤ gsi (t) − 2 + 1

p (for p 6= 0).

• Constraint C5 states that gsi (t)−p ≥ vi(t), i.e., vi(t) ≤
gsi (t)−p, which is a more stringent constraint than C2
and C4.

• Constraint C6 states that p(gsi (t)−vmax−1)+vmax ≥

vi(t), i.e., vi(t) ≤ vmax(1 − p) + p(gsi (t) − 1).

• Constraint C7 states that p(vmax − vi(t) − 2) + 1 ≥ 0,

i.e., vi(t) ≤ vmax − 2 + 1

p (for p 6= 0).

• Constraint C8 states that p(vmax−gsi(t)−1)+gsi (t) ≥

vi(t), i.e., vi(t) ≤ gsi(t)(1 − p) + p(vmax − 1).

• Constraint C9 states that vmax−p ≥ vi(t), i.e., vi(t) ≤
vmax − p, which is a more stringent constraint than
C3 and C7.

Taking the previous considerations into account, we
can see that constraints C1, C2, and C3 are always sat-
isﬁed. The remaining three pairs of similar constraints on
the relations between vi(t), gsi(t), p, and vmax, are the
following: constraints C5 and C9, C4 and C7, and C6 and
C8.

In order to gain insight into the more diﬃcult con-

straints C6 and C8, we ﬁrst rewrite them as follows:

(C6) vi(t) ≤ p

|{z}
slope

,
gsi(t) + (1 − p)vmax − p
}

|

{z
intercept

(C8) vi(t) ≤ (1 − p)
| {z }
slope

gsi(t) + p(vmax − 1)
,
}

|

{z
intercept

where we have separated the terms containing gsi(t).
Plotting the speed vi(t) versus the space gap gsi(t) in
Fig. 3, allows us to more easily interpret the combined
eﬀects of these two constraints. On the one hand, if we
continuously change p = 0 → 1, then constraint C6 goes
from a horizontal line at vi(t) = vmax, to a slanted line
with a slope of +1, intercepting the horizontal and vertical
axes at +1 and −1, respectively. In all cases, the point at
(vmax + 1,vmax) remains invariant. On the other hand,
changing p = 0 → 1 turns constraint C8 from a slanted
line with a slope of +1, passing through the origin, into a
horizontal line at vi(t) = vmax − 1. In all cases, the point
at (vmax − 1,vmax − 1) remains invariant.

3.2 Deriving the fundamental diagram

The next step of our approach, considers the most deter-
mining linear inequalities C5, C6, C8, and C9 as bound-
aries in a vse (gs) fundamental diagram. As such, we note
the following observations:

• Increasing the slowdown probability p, holding

vmax constant:

vi(t)
vmax

C6

vi(t)

vmax − 1

1

C8

1

1

vmax + 1

gsi (t)

vmax − 1

gsi (t)

Fig. 3. A visual representation of the constraints C6 and C8.
Left: as p = 0 → 1, C6 changes from a horizontal line at vi(t) =
vmax, to a slanted line with a slope of +1, intercepting the
horizontal and vertical axes at +1 and −1, respectively. Right:
at the same time, constraint C8 changes from a slanted line
with a slope of +1, passing through the origin, into a horizontal
line at vi(t) = vmax − 1.

– The average speed vﬀ in the free-ﬂow regime de-

creases towards vmax − p.

– The transition point at the critical space gap gsc

– The space gap gsj , corresponding to the jam den-

remains invariant.

sity, increases.

• Decreasing the maximum speed vmax, holding

p constant:
– The average speed vﬀ in the free-ﬂow regime de-

creases towards vmax − p.

– The transition point at the critical space gap gsc

decreases.

– The space gap gsj , corresponding to the jam den-

sity, remains invariant.

From equation (1) from traﬃc ﬂow theory, it follows
that a vehicle’s space headway hs is equal to its space gap
gs (i.e., the distance between the vehicle’s frontal bumper
and that one of its direct frontal leader), plus the vehi-
cle’s own length l. As such, the derived vse (gs) fundamen-
tal diagram can be converted into a vse(hs) fundamental
diagram. Because we originally started from a single-cell
TCA model (i.e., the STCA model with all vehicles having
the same unit length), we can use our convention which
states that a vehicle’s length li ≥ 1 cell ∝ ∆X (see our
discussion at the end of section 2.1 for more details).

Let us now consider the relation between the macro-
scopic traﬃc ﬂow characteristic density k and the mi-
croscopic characteristic average space headway hs, i.e.,
hs = k−1 [25,21]. This allows us to eﬀectively transform
the vse (hs) fundamental diagram into a vse (k) fundamen-
tal diagram. As can be seen in the left part of Fig. 4, in-
creasing the stochasticity leads to the same observations
that we previously mentioned. Finally, using the funda-
mental relation of traﬃc ﬂow theory (7) (see section 2.3),
our constraints are transformed into an equivalent trian-
gular qe(k) fundamental diagram. Applying this technique
results in the following analytical expressions for the pa-
rameters of the LWR’s fundamental diagram:

vﬀ = (vmax − p)

∆X
∆T

3.6,

(20)

Sven Maerivoet et al.: Relating the dynamics of road traﬃc in a stochastic CA to a macroscopic ﬁrst-order model

7

kcrit =

1000
(vmax + l) ∆X

,

kjam =

1000
(l + p) ∆X

,

(21)

(22)

consists of 1500 cells (11.25 km), while the second and
third segments B and C each consist of 750 cells (i.e.,
each approximately 5.6 km long). The maximum speed for
segments A and C is vA,C
max = 5 cells/time step, whereas
it is vB
max = 1 cell/time step for segment B. The capacity
ﬂows for all three segments are denoted as qA,C
cap.

cap and qB

with l = 1 cell as the length of all vehicles in the single-
cell STCA model. The capacity ﬂow is calculated using
the fundamental relation (7), resulting in the following
expression:

qcap = kcrit vﬀ.

(23)

traﬃc

demand

As is visible in the right part of Fig. 4, an increase of
the stochasticity leads to a lower capacity ﬂow qcap, an
invariant critical density kc, and a smaller jam density kj.

vs

vmax

vmax − p

deterministic

stochastic

q

qcap

∆X

k

−1
j

−1
c

k

hs

kc

kj

−1

k

∆X

Fig. 4. Left: deriving a stationary vse (hs) fundamental di-
agram from the STCA’s constraints C1 – C9. The stochastic
diagram has a higher inverse jam density, but the same inverse
critical density as its deterministic counterpart (for the same
vmax). Right: an equivalent triangular qe(k) fundamental dia-
gram.

In conclusion, we note how rewriting the STCA’s rule
set allowed us to obtain a stationary triangular qe(k) fun-
damental diagram. This fundamental diagram, which im-
plicitly incorporates the STCA’s stochasticity, can then
be speciﬁed as a parameter to the macroscopic ﬁrst-order
LWR model of section 2.3.

4 Application to an illustrative case study

After deriving a relation between the STCA and LWR
models by means of the process explained in the previous
section 3, we now apply our methodology to a small case
study. We ﬁrst describe the setup of the test scenario, after
which we interpret and discuss our obtained results.

4.1 Description of the case study

The case study we consider, is modeled as a single-lane
road that has a middle section with a reduced maximum
speed (corresponding to e.g., an elevation, a speed limit,
. . . ). This road consists of three consecutive segments A,
B, and C, as depicted in Fig. 5, whereby vehicles enter
the road at segment A, travel through segment B, and
exit it at the end of segment C. For the STCA, we assume
a temporal and spatial discretisation of ∆T = 1 s and
∆X = 7.5 m, respectively. The ﬁrst road segment A then

0 km

11 km

17 km

22 km

135 km/h

27 km/h

135 km/h

Section A

Section B

Section C

Fig. 5. The single-lane road of the case study we consider,
consisting of three consecutive segments A, B, and C. As-
suming temporal and spatial discretisations of ∆T = 1 s and
∆X = 7.5 m, respectively, segment A is composed of 1500 cells,
while segments B and C are each composed of 750 cells. The
maximum speed for segments A and C is vmax = 5 cells/time
step, whereas it is vmax = 1 cell/time step for segment B.

cap + qB

This road is simulated using both the STCA and the
LWR model, each time for 3000 time steps. As for the
boundary conditions, we assume an overall inﬂow of qB
cap/2,
except from time step 200 until time step 600, where we
have created a short traﬃc burst of increased demand,
with an inﬂow of (qA,C
cap)/2. Fig. 6 shows a close up
of the individual vehicle trajectories for the STCA in a
time-space diagram, near the border between segments A
and B. As can be seen from the trajectories, heavy con-
gestion sets in and ﬂows upstream into segment A, where
it starts to dissolve at the end of the traﬃc burst. The re-
sult is a typical triangular-shaped region that contains a
queue of slow-moving vehicles (the backward propagating
waves are clearly distinguished as the pattern of parallel
black and white stripes).

max = 5 cells/time step) and B (vB

Fig. 6. A close up of the individual vehicle trajectories for
the STCA in a time-space diagram, near the border between
segments A (vA,C
max = 1
cell/time step), for p = 0.1 everywhere in the system. We can
see the formation and dissolution of an upstream growing con-
gested region at the end of segment A, related to the short
traﬃc burst.

8

Sven Maerivoet et al.: Relating the dynamics of road traﬃc in a stochastic CA to a macroscopic ﬁrst-order model

Applying our previously discussed methodology, we
construct a stationary triangular qe(k) fundamental di-
agram. Its parameters are calculated by means of equa-
tions (20) – (23). The results are listed in Table 1, with
the TCA’s parameters expressed in cells/time step, ve-
hicles/cell, and vehicles/time step, respectively, and the
LWR’s parameters expressed in kilometres/hour, vehicles/-
kilometre, and vehicles/hour, respectively.

vmax = 1 (p = 0.1)
TCA
0.90
0.50
0.91
0.45

LWR
24.30
66.67
121.20
1620.08

vﬀ
kcrit
kjam
qcap

vmax = 5 (p = 0.1)
TCA
4.90
0.17
0.91
0.83

LWR
132.30
22.22
121.20
2939.71

vﬀ
kcrit
kjam
qcap

vmax = 1 (p = 0.5)
TCA
0.50
0.50
0.67
0.25

LWR
13.50
66.67
88.89
900.05

vﬀ
kcrit
kjam
qcap

vmax = 5 (p = 0.5)
TCA
4.50
0.17
0.67
0.77

LWR
121.50
22.22
88.89
2699.73

vﬀ
kcrit
kjam
qcap

Table 1. The resulting parameters for the triangular funda-
mental diagrams, as calculated by means of equations (20) –
(23). The TCA’s parameters are expressed in cells/time step,
vehicles/cell, and vehicles/time step, respectively, whereas the
LWR’s parameters are expressed in kilometres/hour, vehi-
cles/kilometre, and vehicles/hour, respectively.

4.2 Results and discussion

The result of numerically solving the LWR model for the
case of p = 0.1 using the Godunov method [23,24], is de-
picted in the right part of Fig. 7. Note that for the LWR
model, each cell in the Godunov scheme corresponds to 5
(i.e., vA,C
max) consecutive cells of the STCA model. Com-
paring the tempo-spatial behavior of the LWR model to
that of the microscopic system dynamics of the STCA
model (i.e., the left part of Fig. 7), we ﬁnd a good qualita-
tive agreement between the two approaches. With respect
to the ﬁrst-order traﬃc ﬂow characteristics, we note that
the buildup and dissolution of congestion queues are fairly
analogous for both techniques.

In Fig. 8, we show the results when repeating the same
experiment, but this time for the stochastic noise p = 0.5
for all three segments. However, as revealed by the shape
of the dark triangular region in the LWR model (right
part), the buildup and dissolution of congestion queus
seems to be exaggerated, especially in the upstream ﬂow-
ing queue of segment A.

It is interesting to note that the STCA model reveals a
higher-order eﬀect that is not visible in the LWR model:
there exists a fan of forward propagating density waves
in segment B (see the left parts of Fig. 7 and Fig. 8). As
such, in its tempo-spatial diagram, the STCA seems to

Fig. 7. Time-space diagrams showing the propagation of den-
sities during 3000 time steps for the road in the case study. Left:
the microscopic system dynamics of the STCA model. Right:
the results for the LWR model. In both cases, p = 0.1, with
darker regions corresponding to more congested traﬃc con-
ditions. There is a qualitatively good agreement between the
two approaches on the level of ﬁrst-order traﬃc ﬂow charac-
teristics: the buildup and dissolution of congestion queues are
fairly analogous for both techniques.

Fig. 8. Time-space diagrams showing the propagation of den-
sities during 3000 time steps for the road in the case study. Left:
the microscopic system dynamics of the STCA model. Right:
the results for the LWR model. In both cases, p = 0.5, with
darker regions corresponding to more congested traﬃc condi-
tions. As revealed by the shape of the dark triangular region
in the LWR model (right part), the buildup and dissolution
of congestion queus is exaggerated, especially in the upstream
ﬂowing queue of segment A.

be able to visualise the characteristics that constitute the
solution of the LWR model.

In order to more rigourously quantify the discrepancies
between the time-space diagrams of both STCA and LWR
models, we provide their absolute diﬀerences in Fig. 9.
The left part shows the diﬀerences for p = 0.1, whereas
the right part shows the diﬀerences for p = 0.5. The most
important features to look at, are the dark colored regions
which indicate larger diﬀerences between both modeling
approaches. We can clearly see that there is a problem
with respect to a quantitative agreement between both
STCA and LWR models. It appears as though the LWR
model overestimates the STCA’s capacity ﬂows. As a re-
sult, it dissolves its jams more quickly in segment B, and
it predicts a more severe onset of congestion in segment
A (i.e., the triangular-shaped region containing the spill-
back queue is more pronounced in the LWR’s case). The
sharply pronounced darker regions in the tempo-spatial
left part of segment B, are due to the fact that the LWR
model does not visualise the characteristics of its solution,
in contrast to the STCA model which is able to give an
indication of them.

Sven Maerivoet et al.: Relating the dynamics of road traﬃc in a stochastic CA to a macroscopic ﬁrst-order model

9

part). As can be seen, the introduction of noise in the
fundamental diagram, leads to a ‘spreading’ of the solu-
tion. For small noise levels, some of the characteristics
are revealed; for larger noise levels, the characteristics are
clearly pronounced, leading to long jam dissolution times.

Fig. 9. Time-space diagrams showing the diﬀerences in densi-
ties for the STCA and LWR models, during 3000 time steps for
the road in the case study. Darker regions indicate large diﬀer-
ences between both modeling approaches. Left: the diﬀerences
for p = 0.1 are less pronounced, showing only a dark edge at
the bottom triangular-shaped region in segment A. Right: the
diﬀerences for p = 0.5, showing signiﬁcant discrepancies in the
bottom of the triangular-shaped region in segment A.

One of the main reasons for this discrepancy between
both modeling approaches, lies in the derivation of a trian-
gular qe(k) fundamental diagram for the LWR model, as
was explained in section 3. Because we assumed a station-
arity condition on the STCA’s rule set, the resulting con-
straints implied an invariant critical density, and always
overestimated the STCA’s capacity ﬂows. In our opinion,
the diﬀerent behavior of both models, mainly stems from
this artifact. As a result, the discrepancies will become
more articulated when increasing the stochastic noise p.

5 Alternate derivation of the fundamental
diagram

Considering the results of the previous approach, i.e., de-
riving the LWR’s fundamental diagram based on the STCA’s
rule set, and the problems related to it, the next step is
to specify the fundamental diagram directly, based on the
empirically observed behavior of the STCA model. In the
following two sections, we ﬁrst discuss the eﬀects of ex-
plicitly adding noise to the LWR’s fundamental diagram,
after wich we discuss our obtained results when specifying
the fundamental diagram directly.

5.1 The eﬀect of adding noise to the LWR’s
fundamental diagram

Adding noise to the LWR model can mainly be accom-
plished via two ways: either by explicitly incorporating
noise terms in the LWR equations (e.g., the conservation
equation), or as a noise term in the qe(k) relation (i.e.,
the fundamental diagram). We refrain from changing the
LWR’s conservation equation, because this amounts to in-
troducing some form of numerical diﬀusion, similar to the
viscosity terms that are originally encountered in the con-
servation equation’s (6) right-hand side (which we set to
zero in order to obtain the inviscid LWR model).

In Fig. 10, we show the results of supplying additive
uniformly distributed noise of 0.1 (left part) and 0.5 (right

Fig. 10. Time-space diagrams showing the propagation of
densities during 3000 time steps for the road in the case study.
Depicted are the results for the LWR model, with noise levels
of 0.1 (left) and 0.5 (right). Higher noise levels clearly reveal
the typical characteristics of the solution, and introduce longer
jam dissolution times.

5.2 Specifying the fundamental diagram directly

Instead of deriving the fundamental diagram based on the
approach taken in section 3, we now try to obtain the val-
ues for the critical densities and capacity ﬂows directly, by
looking at the STCA’s (k,q) diagrams in Fig. 11. Consider-
ing the STCA’s (k,q) diagrams in Fig. 11, we can estimate
its capacities at approximately qB
cap = 0.34 vehicles/time
step ≈ 1220 vehicles/hour, and qA,C
cap = 0.67 vehicles/time
max = 1 and vA,C
step ≈ 2400 vehicles/hour for vB
max = 5
cells/time step, respectively. The stochastic noise p was set
to 0.1 for all three segments. Changing p to 0.5 for these
segments, we can estimate the capacities at approximately
qB
cap = 0.15 vehicles/time step ≈ 540 vehicles/hour, and
qA,C
cap = 0.34 vehicles/time step ≈ 1220 vehicles/hour for
vmax = 1 and vmax = 5 cells/time step, respectively.

Fig. 11. The (k,q) fundamental diagrams for the STCA
model. Left: two diagrams for vB
max = 1 cells/time step. Right:
two diagrams for vA,C
max = 5 cells/time step. Each time, the
slowdown probability p ∈ {0.1, 0.5}. Note how a slower maxi-
mum speed makes the diagrams more curved, and how an in-
creasing slowdown probability leads to a lower critical density
and capacity ﬂow.

10

Sven Maerivoet et al.: Relating the dynamics of road traﬃc in a stochastic CA to a macroscopic ﬁrst-order model

Instead of calculating the capacity ﬂows from the av-
erage free-ﬂow speeds and the critical densities, as was
done by means of equation (23), we now specify these ca-
pacity ﬂows directly to the LWR’s fundamental diagrams
and calculate the critical densities from them. The results
we obtained are visualised in the time-space diagrams of
Fig. 12. Because the STCA’s capacity ﬂows are now better
approximated (and not overestimated as with the previ-
ous methodology), there seems to be a better qualitative
agreement for both noise levels with the STCA’s time-
space diagrams in the left parts of Fig. 7 and Fig. 8.

Note that the LWR model is able to correctly capture
the ﬁrst-order eﬀects of jam buildup and dissolution, and
that, due to its microscopic treatment, the STCA model
allows us to visualise the higher-order eﬀects inside jam.
However, as is evidenced by this and the previous sec-
tion, it is very important to correctly capture the capacity
ﬂows in the STCA model, otherwise a growing discrep-
ancy between the LWR and STCA model is introduced
with higher noise levels.

6 Conclusions

In this paper, we presented an alternate methodology for
implicitly incorporating the STCA’s stochasticity into the
macroscopic ﬁrst-order LWR model. The innovative as-
pect of our approach, is that we derive the LWR’s funda-
mental diagram directly from the STCA’s rule set, by as-
suming a stationarity condition that converts the STCA’s
rules into a set of linear inequalities. In turn, these con-
straints deﬁne the shape of the fundamental diagram that
is then speciﬁed to the LWR model.

For noise-free systems, our method is exact. In the
presence of noise, however, the capacity ﬂows in the de-
rived fundamental diagram are overestimations of those
of the STCA model. This discrepancy can be explained as
follows: the underlying assumption for the LWR model, is
that the fundamental diagram is assumed to be exact, and
implicitly obeyed, i.e., the existing equilibrium relation is
representative for the real traﬃc situation. In the origi-
nal LWR formulation, this relation was also assumed to
hold also for non-stationary traﬃc (which is a more or less
reasonable assumption if we consider long and crowded
roads). Our calculations have shown that a direct transla-
tion of the STCA’s rule set into the LWR’s fundamental
diagram, does not always result in a valid fundamental
diagram, especially for higher noise levels. As such, there
is can be a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between an average fun-
damental diagram (STCA) and a stationary fundamental
diagram (LWR). Directly specifying the STCA’s capacity
ﬂows to the LWR fundamental diagram, eﬀectively reme-
dies most of the mismatches between both approaches.

Our methodology sees the STCA complementary to
the LWR model and vice versa, so the results can be
of great assistance when interpreting the traﬃc dynam-
ics in both models. Especially appealing, is the fact that
the STCA can visualise the higher-order characteristics of
traﬃc stream dynamics, i.e., the fans of rarefaction waves.
Nevertheless, because the LWR model is only a coarse rep-
resentation of reality, there are still some mismatches be-
tween the two approaches. One of the main concerns the
authors discovered, is as hinted at earlier, the fact that us-
ing a stationary fundamental diagram (i.e., an equilibrium
relation between density and ﬂow), always overestimates
the practical capacity of a stochastic cellular automaton
model. As such, it is vital to correctly capture the capac-
ity ﬂows in both STCA and LWR models, a remark that
we feel is valid for all case studies.

Fig. 12. Time-space diagrams showing the propagation of
densities during 3000 time steps for the road in the case study.
Left: the results for the LWR model with p = 0.1. Right: the
results for the LWR model with p = 0.5. In both diagrams, the
fundamental diagram was speciﬁed directly to the LWR model,
by explicitly stipulating the capacity ﬂows of the STCA model.
As a result, there seems to be a better qualitative agreement
for both noise levels with the STCA’s time-space diagrams in
the left parts of Fig. 7 and Fig. 8.

In Fig. 13 we have depicted the absolute diﬀerences
between this approach and the STCA’s time-space dia-
grams. Comparing this to the previous results of Fig. 9,
we can see that in both cases the buildup and dissolution
of congestion queues is in good qualitative agreement for
both noise levels. As such, we come the conclusion that it
is vital to correctly capture the capacity ﬂows of the STCA
model. Neglecting this property, can result in severe dis-
tortion of the system dynamics for higher noise levels.

Fig. 13. Time-space diagrams showing the diﬀerences in den-
sities for the STCA and LWR models, during 3000 time steps
for the road in the case study. Darker regions indicate large
diﬀerences between both modeling approaches. Left: the dif-
ferences for p = 0.1. Right: the diﬀerences for p = 0.5. In both
cases, the diﬀerences are less pronounced, showing only dark
edges at the bottom of the triangular-shaped region in segment
A.

Sven Maerivoet et al.: Relating the dynamics of road traﬃc in a stochastic CA to a macroscopic ﬁrst-order model

11

macroscopic model. In M. Schreckenberg, editor, Proceed-
ings of the Workshop on Traﬃc and Granular Flow ’03,
Delft, The Netherlands, October 2003. Delft University of
Technology.

16. Kai Nagel, Peter Wagner, and Richard Woesler. Still ﬂow-
ing: old and new approaches for traﬃc ﬂow modeling. Op-
erations Research, 51(5):681–710, 2003.

17. S. Krauß, Kai Nagel, and Peter Wagner. The mechanism
of ﬂow breakdown in traﬃc ﬂow models. In Proceedings of
the International Symposium on Traﬃc and Transporta-
tion Theory (ISTTT99), Jerusalem, 1999.

18. Kai Nagel. Life-times of simulated traﬃc jams. Interna-

tional Journal of Modern Physics C, 5(3):567–580, 1994.

19. Nathan Gartner, Hani Mahmassani, Carroll J. Messer,
Henry Lieu, Richard Cunard, and Ajay K. Rathi. Traﬃc
Flow Theory: A State-of-the-Art Report. Technical report,
Transportation Research Board, December 1997.

20. Ansgar J¨ungel. Modeling and Numerical Approximation of
Traﬃc Flow Problems. Universit¨at Mainz, December 2002.
21. Carlos F. Daganzo. Fundamentals of Transportation and
Traﬃc Operations. Elsevier Science Ltd., 2 edition, 1997.
ISBN 0-08-042785-5.

22. L.A. Pipes. Hydrodynamic approaches.

In D.L. Ger-
lough and D.G. Capelle, editors, An Introduction to Traﬃc
Flow Theory, Washington, D.C., 1964. Highway Research
Board. Special Report 79.

23. Carlos F. Daganzo. A ﬁnite diﬀerence approximation of
the kinematic wave model of traﬃc ﬂow. Transportation
Research B, 29B(4):261–276, 1995.

24. J.P. Lebacque. The Godunov scheme and what it means
for ﬁrst order traﬃc ﬂow models.
In J.B. Lesort, edi-
tor, Proceedings of the 13th International Symposium on
Transportation and Traﬃc Theory (ISTTT). Pergamon,
Oxford, November 1996.

25. J.G. Wardrop. Some theoretical aspects of road traﬃc re-
search. In Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers,
volume 1 of 2, 1952.

Acknowledgements

Dr. Bart De Moor is a full professor at the Katholieke Uni-
versiteit Leuven, Belgium. Our research is supported by: Re-
search Council KUL: GOA AMBioRICS, several PhD/postdoc
& fellow grants, Flemish Government: FWO: PhD/postdoc
grants, projects, G.0407.02 (support vector machines), G.0197.02
(power islands), G.0141.03 (identiﬁcation and cryptography),
G.0491.03 (control for intensive care glycemia), G.0120.03 (QIT),
G.0452.04 (new quantum algorithms), G.0499.04 (statistics),
G.0211.05 (Nonlinear), research communities (ICCoS, ANMMM,
MLDM), IWT: PhD Grants, GBOU (McKnow), Belgian Fed-
eral Science Policy Oﬃce: IUAP P5/22 (‘Dynamical Sys-
tems and Control: Computation, Identiﬁcation and Modelling’,
2002-2006), PODO-II (CP/40: TMS and Sustainability), EU:
FP5-Quprodis, ERNSI, Contract Research/agreements: ISMC/IPCOS,
Data4s,TML, Elia, LMS, Mastercard.

References

1. Kai Nagel and Michael Schreckenberg. A cellular au-
tomaton model for freeway traﬃc. Journal de Physique
I France, 2:2221–2229, 1992.

2. Kai Nagel. High-speed microsimulations of traﬃc ﬂow.

PhD thesis, Universit¨at zu K¨oln, March 1995.

3. M.J. Lighthill and G.B. Whitham. On kinematic waves:
II. A theory of traﬃc ﬂow on long crowded roads. In Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society, volume A229, pages 317–345,
1955.

4. Paul I. Richards. Shockwaves on the highway. Operations

Research, 4:42–51, 1956.

5. B. Derrida, E. Domany, and D. Mukamel. An exact solu-
tion of a one-dimensional asymmetric exclusion model with
open boundaries. Journal of Statistical Physics, 69:667–
687, 1992.

6. Kai Nagel. Particle hopping models and traﬃc ﬂow theory.

Physical Review E, 53(5):4655–4672, May 1996.

7. M. Schreckenberg, A. Schadschneider, K. Nagel, and
N. Ito. Discrete stochastic models for traﬃc ﬂow. Physical
Review E, 51(4):2939–2949, April 1995.

8. Andreas Schadschneider and Michael Schreckenberg. Car-
oriented mean-ﬁeld theory for traﬃc ﬂow models. Journal
of Physics A, 30:69–75, 1997.

9. Andreas Schadschneider and Michael Schreckenberg. Gar-
den of Eden states in traﬃc models. Journal of Physics A,
31:225–231, 1998.

10. Ludger Santen. Numerical Investigations of Discrete Mod-
els for Traﬃc Flow. PhD thesis, Universit¨a zu K¨oln, 1999.
11. Andreas Schadschneider. The nagel-schreckenberg model
revisited. European Physical Journal B, 10(3):573–582,
August 1999.

12. Debashish Chowdhury, Ludger Santen, and Andreas
Schadschneider. Statistical physics of vehicular traﬃc and
some related systems. Physics Reports, 329:199–329, 2000.
13. Andreas Schadschneider. Traﬃc ﬂow: A statistical physics

point of view. Physica A, 313:153–187, 2002.

14. Sven Maerivoet. Cellular automata models of road traﬃc
– Analytical results, PhD thesis Chapter 4, pages 198–200.
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 2005.

15. Sven Maerivoet, Steven Logghe, Bart De Moor, and Ben
Immers. A comparison of a cellular automaton and a

