Transportation Planning and Trafﬁc Flow Models

Sven Maerivoet∗

and Bart De Moor†
Department of Electrical Engineering ESAT-SCD (SISTA)

Phone: +32 (0) 16 32 17 09 Fax: +32 (0) 16 32 19 70

URL: http://www.esat.kuleuven.be/scd

Katholieke Universiteit Leuven

Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, 3001 Leuven, Belgium

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
2
1
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

In this paper, we focus on the different trafﬁc ﬂow models
that exist in literature. Due to our frequently encountered
confusion among trafﬁc engineers and policy makers, this
paper goes into more detail about transportation planning
models on the one hand, and trafﬁc ﬂow models on the
other hand. The former deal with households that make
certain decisions which lead to transportation and the use
of infrastructure, as opposed to the latter which explic-
itly describe the physical propagation of trafﬁc ﬂows in a
road network. Our goal is not to give a full account (as
that would be a dissertation of its own, given the broad-
ness of the ﬁeld), but rather to impose upon the reader a
thorough feeling for the differences between transporta-
tion planning and trafﬁc ﬂow models. Because of the high
course of progress over the last decade (or even during
the last ﬁve years), this paper tries to chronicle both past
models, as well as some of the latest developments in this
area.

PACS numbers: 89.40.-a

Keywords:
land-use, trip-based, activity-based, trans-
portation economics, macroscopic, mesoscopic, micro-
scopic

Contents

1.3.2 Approaches to activity-based modelling 10
1.3.3 Towards elaborate agent-based simulations 11

1.4 Transportation economics . .

. . .
1.4.1 The economical setting . .
1.4.2 Towards road pricing policies

. . . .
. . . .
. .

2 Trafﬁc ﬂow propagation models

. . . .
2.1 Macroscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models .
2.1.1 The continuum approach .
. . . .
2.1.2 The ﬁrst-order LWR model . . . .
2.1.3 Analytical solutions of the LWR model 18
2.1.4 Numerical solutions of the LWR model 20
. . .
2.1.5
Flavours of the LWR model
2.1.6 Higher-order models . . .
. . . .
2.1.7 Critiques on higher-order models
. . . .

2.2 Mesoscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models . .

22
23
24
26

2.2.1 The different meanings of ‘mesoscopic’ 26
2.2.2 Mesoscopic models considered from a gas-kinetic perspecti
2.2.3

Improvements to the mesoscopic modelling approach 28

2.3 Microscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models

.

. . . .

29

31

. . . .

Psycho-physiological spacing models 32

2.3.1 Classic car-following and lane-changing models 29
2.3.2 Optimal velocity models .
2.3.3
32
2.3.4 Trafﬁc cellular automata models .
2.3.5 Models based on queueing theory
32
2.3.6 Microscopic trafﬁc ﬂow simulators 33
34
2.3.7 Calibration and validation issues .
35
2.4 Submicroscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models . . . .
2.5 The debate between microscopic and macroscopic models 36

1 Transportation planning models

1.1 Land use and socio-economical behaviour
. . . .

1.1.1 Classic land-use models
1.1.2 The modern approach to land-use models

.

3 Conclusions

A Glossary of terms

3

1.2 Trip-based transportation models .

. . . .
1.2.1 Basic entities and assumptions . .
. . . .
1.2.2 The four steps . . .
. . . .
. . . .
.
1.2.3
1.2.4 Dynamic trafﬁc assignment
. . .
1.2.5 Critique on trip-based approaches
1.3 Activity-based transportation models . . .
. . . .

1.3.1 Historic origins . .

Static trafﬁc assignment

. . . .

∗sven.maerivoet@esat.kuleuven.be
†bart.demoor@esat.kuleuven.be

A.1 Acronyms and abbreviations . . .
. . .
A.2 List of symbols . . .

. . . .

. . . .
. . . .

Due to our frequently encountered confusion among traf-
ﬁc engineers and policy makers when it comes to trans-
portation planning models and the role that trafﬁc ﬂow
models play therein, this paper strives to alleviate that
bewilderment. The material elaborated upon in this pa-
per, spans a broad range going from transportation plan-
ning models that operate on a high level and deal with
households that make certain decisions which lead to

2
2
2

4
4
4
6
8
9
9
10

1

12
13
14

16
17
17
18

36

37
37
39

transportation and the use of infrastructure, to trafﬁc ﬂow
models that explicitly describe the physical propagation
of trafﬁc ﬂows in a road network.

1 Transportation planning models

Before going into detail about the possible mathematical
models that describe the physical propagation of trafﬁc
ﬂows, it is worthwhile to cast a glance at a higher level,
where transportation planning models operate. The main
rationale behind transportation planning systems, is that
travellers within these systems are motivated by making
certain decisions about their wishes to participate in so-
cial, economical, and cultural activities. The ensemble
of these activities is called the activity system. Because
these activities are spatially separated (e.g., a person’s liv-
ing versus work area), the need for transportation arises.
In such a system, the so-called household activity pat-
terns form the main explanation for what is seen in the
transportation network.

These models have as their primary intent the perform-
ing of impact and evaluation studies, and conducting
‘before and after’ analyses. The fact that such trans-
portation studies are necessary, follows from a counter-
intuitive example whereby improving the transportation
system (e.g., by making extra infrastructure available),
can result in an increase of the travel times. This phe-
nomenon, i.e., allowing more ﬂexible routing that results
in more congestion, is known as Braeß’ paradox, after Di-
etrich Braeß [33]. The underlying reason for this counter-
intuitive behaviour, is that people generally only selﬁshly
try to minimise their own travel times, instead of consid-
ering the effects they have on other people’s travel times
as well [228].

As transportation is inherently a temporal and spatial phe-
nomenon, we ﬁrst take a look at the concept of land-
use models and their relation to the socio-economical be-
haviour of individual people. In the two subsequent sec-
tions, we consider two types of transportation planning
models, i.e., the classic trip-based models, and the class
of activity-based models, respectively. The section con-
cludes with a brief reﬂection on the economist’s view on
transportation systems.

1.1 Land use and socio-economical be-

haviour

As already stated, transportation demand arises because
of the desire to participate in a set of activities (e.g., so-
cial, economical, cultural, . . . ). In order to deduce this
derived transportation demand, it is necessary to map the
activity system and its spatial separations. This process
is commonly referred to as land use, mainly playing the
role of forging a relation between economical and geo-
graphical sciences. In general, land-use models seek to
explain the growth and layout of urban areas (which is not

2

strictly determined by economical activities alone, i.e.,
ethnic considerations et cetera can be taken into account),

Because transportation has spatial interactions with land
use and vice versa, it can lead to a kind of chicken-and-
egg problem [252]. For example, building a new road will
attract some economical activity (e.g., shopping malls et
cetera), which can lead to a possible increase of the travel
demand. This in turn, can lead to an increase of extra
economical activity (because of the well-suited location),
and so on, resulting in a local reorganisation of the spa-
tial structure. Resolving this chicken-and-egg paradox, is
typically done by means of feedback and iterations be-
tween land-use and transportation models, whereby the
former provide the basic starting conditions for the latter
models (with sometimes a reversal of the models’ roles).

In the following two sections, we ﬁrst shed some light on
several of the archetypical land-use models, after which
we take a look at some of the more modern models for
land use in the context of geosimulation.

1.1.1 Classic land-use models

The discussion given in this section, talks about several
kinds of land-use models that — at their time — were
considered as landmark studies. That said, the models
presented here should be judged as being general in that
they deal with (pre-)industrial American societies in the
ﬁrst part of the 20th century. They are devised to gain in-
sight into the general patterns that govern the growth and
evolution of a city. As such, they almost never ‘ﬁt’ per-
fectly, leading to the obvious criticism that they are more
applicable to American cities than elsewhere. Notwith-
standing these objections, the models remain very use-
ful as explanations for the mechanisms underpinning the
socio-economical development of cities.

One of the oldest known models describing the relation
between economic markets and spatial distances, is that
of Johann Heinrich von Th¨unen [283]. As the model was
published in 1826, it presents a rather ‘pre-industrial’ ap-
proach:
the main economical ingredients are based on
agricultural goods (e.g., tomatoes, apples, wheat, . . . ),
whereas the transportation system is composed of roads
on which carts pulled by horses, mules, or oxen ride.
The spatial layout of the model, assumes an isolated
state (self-sustaining and free of external inﬂuences), in
which a central city location is surrounded by concentric
regions of respectively farmers, wilderness, ﬁeld crops,
and meadows for grazing animals. All farmers aim for
maximum proﬁts, with transportation costs proportion-
ally with distance, thus determining the land use around
the city centre.

Some 100 years later, inspired by von Th¨unen’s simple
and elegant model, Ernest W. Burgess developed what is
known as the concentric zone model [40]. It was based
on observations of the city of Chicago at the beginning
of the 20th century. As can be seen in the left part of
Fig. 1, Burgess considered the city as growing around a

central business district (CBD), with concentric zones of
respectively the industrial factories and the low-, middle-,
and high-class residents. The outermost ring denotes the
commuter zone, connecting the CBD with other cities.
As time progresses, the city develops and the radii of
these concentric zones would grow by processes of ‘in-
vasion’ and ‘succession’: an inner ring will expand, in-
vading an outer ring that in turn has to grow, in order to
make space.

Fifteen years after Burgess’ theory, Homer Hoyt intro-
duced reﬁnements, resulting in the sector model [139].
One of the main incentives, was the observation that
low-income residents were typically located in the vicin-
ity of railroads. His model accommodates this kind of
observation, in that it assumes that a city expands around
major transportation lines, resulting in wedge-shaped
patterns (i.e., sectors), stretching outward from the CBD.
A typical example of this development, can be seen in
the right part of Fig. 1.

L

I

L

I

L

M

M

CBD

H

CBD
I
L
M
H
C

Figure 1: Typical examples of two models relaying the
evolution of land use. Left: the concentric zone model of
Burgess. Right: the sector model of Hoyt. In both ﬁgures,
CBD corresponds to the central business district, I to the
industrial factories, L, M, and H to the low-, middle-, and
high-class residents respectively. In the Burgess model at
the left, C denotes the commuter zone.

Halfway the previous century, Chauncy D. Harris and Ed-
ward L. Ullman were convinced that the previous types
of models did not correspond to many of the encoun-
tered cities. The main reason for this discrepancy, was
to be found in the stringent condition of a central area
being surrounded by different zones. As a solution to
this shortcoming, Harris and Ullman presented their mul-
tiple nuclei model [108]. Their theory assumed that in
larger cities, small suburban areas could develop into
fully ﬂedged business districts. And although Harris and
Ullman did not dispose of the CBD as the most important
city centre, their smaller ‘nuclei’ would take on roles of
being areas for specialised socio-economical activities.

To end our discussion of classic land-use models, we
highlight the work of Peter Mann in 1965 [187], who
considered a hybrid model for land-use representation.
He combined both Burgess’s and Hoyt’s models, when
deriving a model that described a typical British city. In
his model that studied the cities of Huddersﬁeld , Not-
tingham, and Shefﬁeld, the CBD still remained the cen-

3

tral location, surrounded by zones of pre- and post 1918
housing respectively. Dispersed around the outer con-
centric zone, the low-, middle-, and high-class residents
would live. A most notable feature of Mann’s model, is
the fact that he considered the industrial factories to be
on one side of the city, with the high-class residents di-
ametrically opposed (the rationale being that high-class
residents would prefer to stay upwind of the factories’
smoke plumes).

1.1.2 The modern approach to land-use models

In the current time of living, most modern citizens have a
different behaviour than their former counterparts at the
beginning of the 20th century.
It seems there is an in-
creased trend towards expansion, as people are feeling
more comfortable about covering larger distances, e.g.,
working in a busy city centre or at a remote industrial
facility, coupled with living on the countryside). The ac-
tivities related to working, living, and recreation appear
to occur at substantially different spatial locations. Fur-
thermore, several urban regions are composed of unique
ethnic concentrations, among other things leading to the
conclusion that the emphasis on the geographical aspect
of a city gets less important during its evolution.

Recognising these radical changes in the development,
modern land-use models approach the integration of an
activity system from a completely different perspective.
The growth of a city is represented as the evolution of a
multi-agent system, in which a whole population of in-
dividual households is simulated. Due to the tremen-
dous increase in computational power over the last two
decades, these large-scale simulations are now possible.
As an example, it is feasible to consider residential segre-
gation in urban environments: within these environments
(e.g., the city and housing market), individual agents
(i.e., households) interact locally in a well-deﬁned man-
ner, leading to emergent structures, i.e., the evolving city.
Besides data surveys that try to capture the households’
behaviour, the basic landscape and mapping data is fed
into geographical information systems (GIS) that is cou-
pled with a computer aided design (CAD) representa-
tional model of the real world (although the difference
between the traditional GIS and CAD concepts is slowly
fading away) [285]. A recent example of such an all-
encompassing approach, is the work related to the Urban-
Sim project, where researchers try to interface existing
travel models with new land use forecasting and analysis
capabilities [284]. It is being developed and improved by
the Center for Urban Simulation and Policy Analysis at
the University of Washington.

To conclude this section, we refer to the work of Benen-
son and Torrens, who adopted the terminology of geosim-
ulation [25]. Their methodology is based on what they
call the ‘collective dynamics of interacting objects’. As
such, geosimulation hinges on the representation of what
we would call a socio-economy that is simulated, tak-
ing into account hitherto neglected dynamic effects (e.g.,

demographic changes, shifts of the economic activities,
. . . ).

1.2 Trip-based transportation models

The relation between activity patterns and the transporta-
tion system has a long history, starting around 1954 with
the seminal work of Robert B. Mitchell and Chester
Rapkin [196]. They provided the ﬁrst integrated study,
establishing a link that introduced a framework for trans-
portation analysis, primarily intended for studying large
scale infrastructure projects [192]. Their methodology
was based on four consecutive steps (i.e., submodels),
collectively called the four step model (4SM). In 1979,
Manheim casted the model’s structure into a larger
framework of transportation systems analysis, encap-
sulating both activity and transportation systems [186].
Central to this framework, was the notion of ‘demand
and performance procedures’, which we can validly call
demand and supply procedures. In a typical setup, they
respectively represent the trafﬁc that wants to use this
infrastructure and the road infrastructure. For a more
historically tinted recollection of the trip-based approach,
we refer the reader to the outstanding overview of Boyce
[30].

With respect the 4SM’s history, a subtle — almost
forgotten — fact is that the classic four step model
was actually conceived independently from the in-
tegrated network equilibrium model proposed by
Beckmann, McGuire, and Winsten in the mid-ﬁfties;
the 4SM can actually be perceived as a trimmed-
down version of this latter model [30]. Intriguingly,
over the years, the work of the ‘BMW trio’ has had
profound impacts on the mathematical aspects of de-
termining network equilibria, optimal toll policies,
algorithms for variational inequalities, stability anal-
yses, supply chains, . . . [5, 207, 30, 31].

In the next four sections, we consider the basic entities
and assumptions of the four step model, followed by
a brief overview of the four individual submodels with
some more detail on the fourth step (trafﬁc assignment),
concluding with some remarks on the criticisms often ex-
pressed against the four step model. For a more extensive
survey of the four step model, we refer the reader to the
books of Shefﬁ [255] and Ortuzar and Willumsen [226].

1.2.1 Basic entities and assumptions

The basic ingredients on which the four step model is
rooted, are the trips. These trips are typically consid-
ered at the household level, and relate to aggregate in-
formation (individuals are no longer explicitly consid-
ered). This level of detail, essentially collapses the whole
tempo-spatial structure of transportation planning based
on individual travellers into bundles of trips, going from
one point in the transportation network to another.

4

In the four step model, one of the most rigid assump-
tions is that all trips describe departure and arrival within
the planning period (e.g., the morning commute). Fur-
thermore, the usage of the model’s structure is intended
for large-scale planning purposes, excluding small infras-
tructural studies at e.g., a single intersection of urban
roads. Another assumption is based on the fact that an
entity within the four step model has to make certain de-
cisions, e.g., what is the departure time, which destination
is picked, what kind of transportation (private or public)
will be used, which route will be followed, . . . In many
cases, these decisions are considered concurrently, but
the four step model assumes they are made independently
of each other. And ﬁnally, as each submodel needs input,
most of the data is aggregated into spatial zones (often
presumed to be distinguished by socio-economic char-
acteristics) in order to make the model computationally
feasible. These zones are typically represented by their
centrally located points, called centroids.

1.2.2 The four steps

the ﬁrst three steps (I)
Within the four step model,
– (III) can collectively be seen as a methodology for
setting up the travel demand, based e.g., on land use and
other socio-economical activities. This travel demand
is expressed as origin-destination (OD) pairs (by some
respectively called ‘sources’ and ‘sinks’), reﬂecting the
amount of trafﬁc that wants to travel from a certain
origin to a certain destination (these are typically the
zones mentioned in the previous section). The last step
(IV) then consists of loading this travel demand onto the
network, thereby assigning the routes that correspond to
the trips.

(I) Trip generation
In an essential ﬁrst step, transportation engineers look
at all the trips that on the one hand originate in certain
zones, and on the other hand arrive in these zones.
As such, the ﬁrst step comprises what are called the
productions and attractions. Central to the notion of a
trip, is the motive that instigated the trip. An example
of such a motive is a home-based work trip, i.e., a trip
that originates in a household’s residential area, and
arrives in that household’s work area. Other examples
include recreational and social motives, shopping, . . . and
the chaining of activities. Based on these intentions,
productions and attractions consist of absolute counts,
denoting the number of trips that depart from and
arrive in each zone. Because of this, productions and
attractions are in fact trip ends. Both of them are derived
using techniques based on regression analysis, category
analysis, or even logit models. As different models can
be used for the derivations of the number of productions
and attractions, an a posteriori balancing is performed
that equalises both results. In the end, step (I) gives the
magnitude of the total travel demand on the network.
Note that all activities (i.e., the original motives) are at

this point in effect transformed and aggregated into trips.
More importantly, these trips are only considered for a
speciﬁc time period (e.g., the morning rush hour).

(II) Trip distribution
Once the total number of productions and attractions for
all zones in the transportation network is known, the next
step then consists of deriving how many trips, originat-
ing in a certain zone, arrive at another zone.
In other
words, step (II) connects trip origins to their destinations
by distributing the trips. The result of step (II) is then the
construction of a complete origin-destination table (OD
table). In such an OD table (or OD matrix as some peo-
ple say), an element at a row i and a column j denotes
the total number of trips departing from origin zone Oi
and arriving in destination zone Dj. Diagonal elements
denote intra-zonal trips. Note that step (II) does not state
anything about the different routes that can be taken be-
tween two such zones; this is something that is derived
in the ﬁnal step (IV). Because of the implicit assump-
tion in step (I), namely that all trips are considered for a
speciﬁc time period, the same premise holds for all the
derived OD tables. Consequently, the four step model is
applied for different time periods, e.g., during rush hours
or off-peak periods. In this context, we advise to use the
nomenclature of time-dependent or dynamic OD tables,
denoting OD tables that are speciﬁed for a certain period,
e.g., from 07:00 until 08:00 (or even tables given for con-
secutive quarter-hours).

Considering the fact that an OD table contains a large
amount of unknown variables (it is a considerably under
determined system of equations), several techniques have
been introduced to deal with this problem by introducing
additional constraints. If an OD table for a previous pe-
riod (called a base table) is known, then a new OD table
can be derived by using a so-called growth factor model.
Another method is by using gravity models (also known
as entropy models, see e.g., the discussion in by Helbing
and Nagel [122]), which are based on travel impedance
functions. These functions reﬂect the relative attractive-
ness of a certain trip e.g., based on information retrieved
from household travel surveys. In most cases, they are
calibrated as power or exponential functions. One of the
harder problems that still remains to be solved, is how
to deal with so-called through trips, i.e., trips that origi-
nate or end outside of the study area. Horowitz and Patel
for example, directly incorporate rudimentary geograph-
ical information and measured link ﬂows into a model
that allows to derive through-trip tables, using a notion
of external stations located in an external territory. Ap-
plication of his methodology to regions in Wisonsin and
Florida, result in reasonable estimates of link ﬂows that
are comparable with empirically obtained data [137].

Besides using results from productions and attractions,
gathering the necessary information for construction of
OD tables can also be done using other techniques. An
equivalent methodology is based on the consideration
of turning fractions at intersections. The process can be

5

largely automated when using video cameras coupled
with image recognition software. Furthermore, there
literally exist thousands of papers devoted to the estima-
tion of origin-destination matrices, mostly applicable to
small-scale vehicular transportation networks and local
road intersections. Some past methodologies used are
the work of Nihan and Davis who developed a recursive
estimation scheme [223],
the review Cascetta and
Nguyen who casted most earlier methods into a uniﬁed
framework [44], and Bell who estimated OD tables
based on constrained generalised least squares [21]. An
example of a more recent technique is the work of Li and
De Moor who deal with incomplete observations [167].

(III) Mode choice / modal split
Once the origin-destination table for the given network
and time period is available, the next step deals with the
different modes of transportation that people choose be-
tween. Typical examples are the distinction between pri-
vate and public transportation (both vehicular and rail-
road trafﬁc). The ‘split’ in this step, refers to the fact that
the OD table obtained from step (II), is now divided over
the supported transportation modes. To this end, discrete
choice theory is a popular tool that allows a disaggrega-
tion based on the choice of individual travellers, e.g., by
using utility theory based on a nested logit model [23]. A
modern trend in this context is to work with fully multi-
modal transportation networks; these multi-layered net-
works provide access points for changing from one layer
(i.e., mode of transportation) to another [273].

Historically, steps (I) — production and attraction — and
(III) were executed simultaneously, but nowadays they
are considered separate from step (I): the main reason
is the fact that the modal choice is not only dependent
on e.g., a household’s income, but also on the type of
trip to be undertaken, as well as the trip’s destination.
As a result, the modal split can be intertwined with step
(II), trip distribution, or it can be executed subsequently
after step (II). In the former case, the same kind of travel
impedance functions are used in combination with an
adjusted gravity model, whereas in the latter case, a
hierarchic logit model can be used.

(IV) Trafﬁc assignment
At this point in the four step model, the total amount of
trips undertaken by the travellers is known. The fourth
and ﬁnal step then consists of ﬁnding out which routes
these travellers follow when going from their origins to
their destinations, i.e., which sequence of consecutive
links they will follow ? In a more general setting, this pro-
cess is known as trafﬁc assignment, because now the total
travel demand (i.e., the trips) are assigned to routes in the
transportation network. Note that in some approaches,
an iteration is done between the four steps, e.g, using the
trafﬁc assignment procedure to calculate link travel times
that are fed back as input to steps (II) and (III).

It stands to reason that all travellers will endeavour to take
the shortest route between their respective origins and

destinations. To this end, a suitable measure of distance
should be deﬁned, after which a shortest path algorithm,
e.g., Dijkstra’s algorithm [81], can calculate the possi-
ble routes. Such a notion of distance typically includes
both spatial and temporal components, e.g., the physical
length of an individual link and the travel time on this
link, respectively. The use of the travel time is one of
the most essential and tangible components in travellers’
route choice behaviour. Note that in a more general set-
ting, the distance can be considered as a cost, whereby
travellers then choose the cheapest route (i.e., the quick-
est route when time is interpreted as a cost). Daganzo
calls these formulations the forward shortest path prob-
lem, as opposed to the backward shortest path problem
that tries to ﬁnd the cheapest route for a given arrival time
[73].

The basic principles that underlay route choice behaviour
of individual travellers, were developed by Wardrop in
1952, and are still used today. In his famous paper, relat-
ing space- to time-mean speed, Wardrop also stated two
possible criteria governing the distribution of trafﬁc over
alternative routes [289]:

User equilibrium (W1): “The journey times
on all the routes actually used are equal, and
less than those which would be experienced by
a single vehicle on any unused route.”

System optimum (W2): “The average journey
time is a minimum.”

The above two criteria are based on what is called the
Nash equilibrium in game theory [209], albeit that now
a very large number of individuals are considered1. In
the ﬁrst criterion (W1), it is assumed that all individu-
als’ decisions have a negligible effect on the performance
of others. Two, more important, fundamental principles
here are the fact that in the equilibrium situation, there is
no cooperation between individuals assumed, and that all
individuals make their decisions in an egoistic and ratio-
nal way [107]. In real-life trafﬁc, everybody is expected
to follow the ﬁrst criterion (W1), such that the whole sys-
tem can settle in an equilibrium in which no one is better
off by choosing an alternative route. In this respect, the
work of Roughgarden is interesting because it provides
a mathematical basis for the quantiﬁcation of the worst
loss of social welfare due to selﬁsh routing, and the man-
agement of networks that limit these effects in order to
obtain a socially desirable outcome [254]. In contrast to
this user equilibrium situation, the second criterion (W2)

1The difference between a Wardrop and a Nash equilibrium is a
subtle but important one. In the Wardrop case, an inﬁnite number of
individuals is considered, each seeking their own optimum. Note that
the concept ‘inﬁnite number of individuals’ can practically be approxi-
mated by ’a large amount of individuals’. The Nash case also considers
an inﬁnite number of individuals, but they are now grouped into a ﬁ-
nite number of classes, with each class seeking its own optimum. If
in this latter case the number of classes goes to inﬁnity, then the Nash
equilibrium converges to a Wardrop equilibrium [112].

6

is unlikely to occur spontaneously. However, when the
perceived cost of a route by a traveller is changed to a
generalised or marginal cost (i.e., including the costs of
the effects brought on by adding an extra vehicle to the
travel demand), then a system optimum is achieved with
respect to these latter costs. In any case, as some people
will be better off, others will be worse off, but the trans-
portation system as a whole will be best off.

The above two principles, are a bit idealistic,
in the
sense that there are many exceptions to these behavioural
guidelines. For example, in urban city centres, a signiﬁ-
cant part of the congestion can be brought on by vehicles
looking for parking space. Furthermore, many drivers
just follow their usual route, because this is the route they
know best, and they know what to expect with respect to
travel time. In a broader setting, this make these ‘stan-
dard’ routes more appealing to road users than other un-
familiar alternative routes. In some cases however, trav-
ellers will opt for these less known routes, thereby possi-
bly entering the risk of experiencing a higher travel time
as has been concluded in the work of Chen and Recker
[50]. Another fact that we expect to have a non-negligible
effect on the distribution of trafﬁc ﬂows, is that nowadays
more and more people use intelligent route planners to
reach their destinations. These planners take into account
congestion effects, as the trip gets planned both spatially
and temporally. This will result in a certain percentage
of the population that is informed either pre-route or en-
route, and these people can consequently change their
departure time or actual route (e.g., through route guid-
ance), respectively. Another interesting research prob-
lem arises because transportation infrastructure managers
should then be able to adapt their policies to the changing
travel patterns. For example, how should a policy maker
optimally control the trafﬁc when only 20% of the popu-
lation will follow the proposed route guidance ?

Due to the importance of the subject, we have devoted
two separate sections in this dissertation to the concept of
trafﬁc assignment. In these sections, we discuss the traf-
ﬁc assignment procedure in a bit more detail, considering
two prominent methodologies from a historic perspec-
tive, namely static versus dynamic trafﬁc assignment.

1.2.3 Static trafﬁc assignment

The classic approach for assigning trafﬁc to a transporta-
tion network, assumes that all trafﬁc ﬂows on the network
are in equilibrium. In this context, the static trafﬁc as-
signment (STA) procedure can be more correctly consid-
ered as dealing with stationary of steady-state ﬂows: the
travel demand and road infrastructure (i.e., the supply)
are supposed to be time-independent, meaning that the
calculated link ﬂows are the result of a constant demand.
In a typical setup, this entails the assignment of an hourly
(or even daily) OD table to the network (e.g., during on-
and off-peak periods), resulting in average ﬂows for the
speciﬁed observation period. Because the STA methodol-
ogy neglects time varying congestion effects (it assumes

constant link ﬂows and travel times), various important
phenomena such as queue spill back effects are not taken
into account.

In general, several possible techniques exist for achiev-
ing an STA. The ﬁrst one assumes (i) that all drivers will
choose the same cheapest route between a pair of origins
and destinations, (ii) that they all have the same perfect
information about the links’ impedances, and (iii) that
these impedances are considered to be constant, i.e., inde-
pendent of a link’s trafﬁc load (so no congestion buildup
is taken into account). As the methodology implies, this
is called an all-or-nothing assignment (AON). A second
technique reﬁnes this notion, whereby differences among
drivers are introduced (i.e., giving rise to imperfect in-
formation), resulting in a stochastic assignment. In this
methodology, the link travel impedances are assumed to
be probabilistically distributed: for each link in the net-
work, an impedance is drawn from the distribution after
which an AON assignment is performed on the resulting
network. This Monte Carlo process is repeated until a
certain termination criterion is met.

Both previous methods carry a signiﬁcant drawback with
respect to link capacities, that is to say, no effects are
taken into account due to the fact that an increased ﬂow
on a link will generally result in an increase of the travel
time (i.e., the link’s impedance). To this end, a third
method introduces capacity restraints such that an in-
crease of the travel demand on a link, will result in a
higher cost (thereby possibly changing the route with
the cheapest cost). This method is called an equilib-
rium assignment, and just like as in the second method,
a stochastic equilibrium assignment version can be de-
rived, taking into account travellers’ imperfect knowl-
edge. The underlying assumption is that all travellers
behave according to Wardrop’s user equilibrium (W1).
Furthermore, the capacity restraints are included in the
travel impedance functions, as they are now synony-
mously called travel time (loss) functions, congestion
functions, volume delay functions, link impedance func-
tions, or even link performance functions. A popular form
of these functions that express the travel time T in func-
tion of the ﬂow q on a link, is the Bureau of Public Roads
(BPR) power function [38]:

T = Tff

1 + α

 

β

q
qpc (cid:19)

(cid:18)

.

!

(1)

In this BPR relation, the coefﬁcients α and β determine
the shape of the function. An example of such a function
is depicted in Fig. 2. For low ﬂows, the BPR function
is rather ﬂat and the travel time corresponds to the travel
time Tff under free-ﬂow conditions. When higher ﬂows
occur on the link, the coefﬁcient β determines the thresh-
old at which the BPR function rises signiﬁcantly (in some
formulations it asymptotically approaches the capacity
ﬂow). The travel time will increase with the ratio of the
ﬂow q and the so-called practical capacity qpc. This latter
characteristic is derived from the value of the travel time

under congested conditions. As a result, the practical ca-
pacity is different from the maximum capacity of a link
as deﬁned by a fundamental diagram. Finally, note that
a serious disadvantage associated with these BPR func-
tions in combination with static trafﬁc assignment, is the
fact that the travel demand on the network at a certain
time does not always correspond to the actual physical
ﬂows that can be sustained. Under congested conditions,
this implies that the ﬂows in the STA approach can be
higher than the physically possible link capacities (which
are different from the previously mentioned practical ca-
pacities), leading to an incorrect assignment with faulty
oversaturated links.

T

Tff

0

qpc

q

Figure 2: The Bureau of Public Roads (BPR) function,
relating the travel time to the ﬂow. It is based on the travel
time Tff under free-ﬂow conditions and the practical ca-
pacity qpc of the link under consideration.

Once the travel time of a link can be related to its cur-
rent ﬂow using e.g., a BPR function, an iterative scheme
is adopted to calculate the equilibrium trafﬁc assignment.
Popular implementations are the Frank-Wolfe algorithm
[91], and the method of successive averages (MSA). The
former method is based on principles of optimisation the-
ory, as demonstrated by Beckmann et al. [20, 31] who re-
formulated the Wardrop equilibrium as a convex optimi-
sation problem, consisting of a single objective function
with linear inequality constraints based on the Karush-
Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions, thereby resulting in a
global minimum. Because travellers do not have perfect
information, Daganzo and Shefﬁ formulated a variation
on Wardrop’s ﬁrst criterion (W1), whereby all trafﬁc dis-
tributes itself over the network with respect to a perceived
travel time of the individual drivers [77]. The resulting
state of ﬂows on the network is called a stochastic user
equilibrium (SUE), as opposed to the deterministic user
equilibrium (DUE). Note that a further discrimination is
possible, as proposed by the work of Chen and Recker,
who also make a distinction between travellers’ percep-
tion errors on the one hand, and network uncertainty (i.e.,
stochasticity of the travel times) on the other hand [50].
For a thorough overview of the STA approach, we refer
the reader to the work of Patriksson [229].

Although, as mentioned earlier, time varying congestion
effects are not taken into account, the STA approach does
ﬁt nicely into the concept of long-term transportation

7

planning. For short-term analyses however, these effects
can have a signiﬁcant impact on the end results, thus
requiring a more detailed approach to trafﬁc assignment.

1.2.4 Dynamic trafﬁc assignment

As explained in the previous paragraphs, the static trafﬁc
assignment heavily relies on simple travel time functions
(e.g., BPR). An associated problem with these is the
difﬁculty in capturing the concept of ‘capacity of a
road’. In reality, congestion is a dynamic phenomenon,
whereby its temporal character is not to be neglected.
To tackle theses problems inherent to the STA approach,
a more dynamic treatment of trafﬁc assignment is nec-
essary [180]. A fundamentally important aspect in this
dynamic trafﬁc assignment (DTA) procedure, is the fact
that congestion has a temporal character, meaning that
its buildup and dissolution play an important role:
the
history of the transportation system should be taken into
account (e.g., congestion that occurs due to queue spill
back) [66]. Neglecting this time dependency by assum-
ing that the entry of a vehicle to a link instantaneously
changes the ﬂow on that link, results in what is called
Smeed’s paradox. This leads to incorrect behaviour as
a result of a violation of the so-called ‘ﬁrst-in, ﬁrst-out’
(FIFO) property, because now a vehicle can leave link
earlier then a vehicle that enters it later (i.e., arriving
earlier by departing later) [260]. The methodology of
dynamic trafﬁc assignment was now designed to deal
with all these particular aspects. The DTA technique is
composed of two fundamental components:

Route choice
Just as in the STA approach, each traveller in the trans-
portation network follows a certain route based on an
instinctive criterion such as e.g., Wardrop’s (W1). The
associated component that takes care of travellers’ route
choices, can be complemented to allow for imperfect
information. Another, more important, aspect related to
the route choice, is a traveller’s choice of departure time.
An STA approach assumes that all trafﬁc of a given OD
table is simultaneously assigned to the network, whereas
DTA coupled with departure time choice can spread the
departures in time (leading to e.g., realistically spreading
of the morning peak’s rush hour).

Dynamic network loading (DNL)
Instead of using simple travel time functions, a DTA ap-
proach typically has a component that loads the trafﬁc
onto the network. In fact, this step resembles the phys-
ical propagation of all trafﬁc in the network.
In or-
der to achieve reliable and credible results, a good de-
scription of the network’s links is necessary, as well as
the behaviour of trafﬁc at the nodes connecting the links
within this network (i.e., this is a mandatory requirement
to achieve correct modelling of queue spill back). The

8

DNL component in the DTA approach has been an ac-
tive ﬁeld of research during the last decade, and it still
continues to improve the state-of-the-art. Testimonies in-
clude the use of analytic models that give correct repre-
sentations of queueing behaviour, as well as detailed sim-
ulations that describe the propagation of individual vehi-
cles in the transportation network. Note that in the case
of simulation-based (also called heuristic) trafﬁc assign-
ment, the route choice and DNL components can be iter-
atively executed, whereby the former establishes a set of
routes to follow, and the latter step feedbacks information
to the route choice model until a certain termination cri-
terion is met (e.g., a relaxation procedure). Furthermore,
using simulation-based trafﬁc assignment with very large
road networks is not always computationally feasible to
calculate all shortest paths. As a result, it might be ben-
eﬁcial to resort to simpliﬁcations of either the simulation
model (e.g., using faster queueing models), or the num-
ber of paths to consider (e.g., based on the hierarchy in-
herently present in the road network) [253]. Finally, we
mention the work of Astarita who provides an interesting
classiﬁcation of DNL models, based on the discretisation
with respect to the spatial and temporal dimensions, as
well as with respect to the modelling of the trafﬁc de-
mand [10].

Despite the appealing nature of simulation-based DTA,
there is in contrast to the STA approach, no uniﬁed frame-
work that deals with the convergence and stability issues
[94, 93, 233].

Some examples of these DTA mechanisms are: Gawron
who uses a queueing model to develop a simulation-
based assignment technique that is able to deal with
large-scale networks and is proven to be empirically sta-
ble [94, 93], Bliemer who developed an analytical DTA
approach (with different user-classes) based on a vari-
ational inequality approach [26], Bliemer’s work fur-
thermore culminated in the development of INteractive
DYnamic trafﬁc assignment (INDY) [185] which — in
combination with the OmniTRANS2 commercial trans-
portation planning software — can be used as a fully
ﬂedged DTA analysis tool [280], Lo and Szeto who de-
veloped a DTA formulation based on a variational in-
equality approach leading to a dynamic user equilib-
rium [174], the group of Mahmassani who is actively en-
gaged in the DTA scene with the development of the DY-
NASMART (DYnamic Network Assignment-Simulation
Model for Advanced Roadway Telematics) simulation
suite [189], . . . An excellent comprehensive overview of
several traditional DTA techniques is given by Peeta and
Ziliaskopoulos [234].

Another important ﬁeld of research, is how individual
road travellers react to the route guidance they are given.
In his research, Bottom considered this type of dynamic
trafﬁc management (DTM), providing route guidance to
travellers whilst taking into account their anticipated be-
haviour during e.g., incidents [28]. Taking this idea one

2http://www.omnitrans-international.com

step further, it is possible to study the interactions be-
tween the behaviour of travellers in a road network, and
the management of all the trafﬁc controls (e.g., trafﬁc sig-
nal lights) within this network. An example of such a
dynamic trafﬁc control (DTC) and DTA framework, is
the work of Chen who considers the management from
a theoretic perspective based on a non-cooperative game
between road users and the trafﬁc authority [51].

1.2.5 Critique on trip-based approaches

Considering its obvious track record of the past several
decades, the conventional use of the trip-based approach
is — to our feeling — running on its last legs. By ‘con-
ventional’ we denote here the fact that the current state-
of-the-practice is still ﬁrmly based on the paradigm of
static trafﬁc assignment, despite the recent (academic)
progress on the front of dynamic trafﬁc assignment tech-
niques. The four step model still largely dominates the
commercial business of transportation planning, although
its structure remained largely unchanged since its original
inception. As mentioned earlier, in the case of STA, all
trips are assumed to depart and arrive within the speci-
ﬁed planning period. This leads to an unnatural discrep-
ancy between models and reality in congested areas dur-
ing e.g., a morning rush hour: some travellers want to
make a trip and, in the former case, are perfectly allowed
to achieve this trip, whereas in the latter case they are in
fact physically unable to make the trip due to dynamical
congestion effects.

In order to facilitate this disagreement between the bal-
ancing of travel demand versus supply (i.e., the trans-
portation infrastructure), the DTA approach is gaining
importance as more features are provided. An exam-
ple of such a feature includes the framework of conges-
tion pricing, where we have an incorporation of depar-
ture time choice models coupled with the derivation of
optimal road tolls. Some noteworthy studies that have
been carried out in this respect, are the work of de Palma
and Marchal who present the METROPOLIS toolbox, al-
lowing the simulation of large-scale transportation net-
works [78], the work of Lago and Daganzo who com-
bined a departure time equilibrium theory with a ﬂuid-
dynamic model in order to assess congestion policy mea-
sures [159], the work of Szeto and Lo who coupled route
choice and departure time choice with the goal of nu-
merically handling large-scale transportation networks
[261, 175]. Closely related to Lago’s and Daganzo’s
work is that of Yperman et al., who determined an op-
timal pricing policy, describing the demand side with a
bottleneck model and an analytical ﬂuid-dynamic model
as the DNL component [298].

At this point, we should mention some of the compli-
cations associated with the traditional method of mod-
elling trafﬁc ﬂow propagation using queue-based analo-
gies. Historically, there have been two different queueing
techniques with FIFO discipline that describe this aspect
in a trip-based assignment procedure:

9

• Point queues (also called vertical queues): this type
of queue has no spatial extent. Because vehicles
can always enter the queue, and leave it after a
certain delay time, congestion is incorrectly mod-
elled. A well-known example of a model based on
this queueing policy is Vickrey’s bottleneck model
[281].

• Spatial/physical queues (also called horizontal
queues): a queue of this type has an associated ﬁnite
capacity, i.e., a buffer storage. Vehicles can only
enter the queue when there is enough space for them
available.

The correct modelling of congestion effects such as
queue spill back, is of fundamental importance when as-
sessing certain policy measures like e.g., road pricing
schemes. To this end, the use of vertical queues should
be abandoned, in favour of horizontal queues. How-
ever, even horizontal queues have problems associated
with them: the buildup and dissolution of congestion in a
transportation network are ﬂawed, e.g., vehicles that are
leaving the front of a queue instantly open up a space at
the back of this queue, thus allowing an upstream vehi-
cle to enter. This leads to shorter queue lengths, because
the physical queueing effect of individual vehicles (i.e.,
the upstream propagation of the empty spot) is absent
[93, 256, 47, 159]. In order to alleviate this latter issue,
a more realistic velocity should be adopted for the back-
ward propagating kinematic wave, thus calling for more
advanced modelling techniques that explicitly describe
the propagation of trafﬁc (e.g., ﬂuid-dynamic approaches,
models with dynamical vehicle interactions, . . . ).

As often is the case, a model’s criticisms can be found in
its underlying assumptions. In the case of the four step
approach, it is obvious that all information regarding in-
dividual households is lost because of its aggregation to
a trip level. As was already recognised from the start, the
individual itself loses value during this conversion pro-
cess. This opened the door towards another approach
to transportation planning, more precisely activity-based
modelling (ABM) which is discussed in the next section.

A ﬁnal complaint that is more common around many of
these grotesque models, is their requirement of a vast
amount of speciﬁc data. In many cases, a diverse range of
national studies are carried out, having the goal of gath-
ering as much data as possible. Regardless of this op-
timism, some of the key problems remain, e.g., it is still
not always straightforward to properly interpret and adapt
this data so it can be used as input to a transportation plan-
ning tool.

1.3 Activity-based transportation models

As it was widely accepted that the rationale for travel de-
mand can be found in people’s motives for participating
in social, economical, and cultural activities, the classic
trip-based approach nevertheless kept a strong foothold

in the transportation planning community. Instead of fo-
cussing attention elsewhere, the typical institutional pol-
icy was to ameliorate the existing four step models [191].
However, some problems persistently evaded a solution
with the trip-based approach, e.g., shops that remain open
late, employers who introduce ﬂexible working hours, the
consideration of joint activities by members of a house-
hold, . . .

In the next few sections, we illustrate how all this changed
with the upcoming ﬁeld of activity-based transportation
planning. We ﬁrst describe its historic origins, after
which we move on to several of the approaches taken in
activity-based modelling. The concluding section gives a
concise overview of some of the next-generation mod-
elling techniques, i.e., large-scale agent-based simula-
tions.

1.3.1 Historic origins

The historic roots of the activity-based approach can
probably be traced back to 1970, with the querulous
work of Torsten H¨agerstrand [106]. He asserted that re-
searchers in regional sciences should focus more on the
intertwining of both disaggregate spatial and temporal as-
pects of human activities, as opposed to the more aggre-
gate models in which the temporal dimension was ne-
glected. This scientiﬁc ﬁeld got commonly termed as
time geography; it encompasses all time scales (i.e., from
daily operations to lifetime goals), and focusses on the
constraints that individuals face rather than predicting
their choices [194].

Central to H¨agerstrand’s work was the notion of so-called
space-time paths of individuals’ activity and travel be-
haviour. In a three-dimensional space-time volume, two
spatial dimensions make up the physical world plane,
with the temporal dimension as the vertical axis. The
journey of an individual is now the path traced out in
this space-time volume: consecutive visits to certain lo-
cations are joined by a curve, with vertical segments de-
noting places where the individual remained stationary
during a certain time period. The complete chain of ac-
tivities (called a tour) is thus joined by individual trip
legs. In this respect, the space-time path represents the
revealed outcome of an unrevealed behavioural process
[191]. An example of such a path can be seen in Fig. 3:
we can see a woman going from her home in Boulder
(Colorado, USA), to the university’s campus, followed
by a visit to the post ofﬁce and grocery store, and ﬁnally
returning home [80]. Note that H¨agerstrand extended his
notion in the space-time volume to include space-time
prisms that encapsulate and effectively constrain all of a
person’s reachable points (i.e., all his/her possible space-
time paths), given a certain maximum travel speed as well
as both starting and ending points within the volume [61].
This environment is sometimes also referred to as a per-
son’s action space, enveloping that person’s time budget.

Contrary to the belief that the ﬁeld of activity-based trans-
portation planning found its crux with the dissatisfac-

Figure 3: An example of a space-time path showing an
individuals’ activity and travel behaviour in the space-
time volume:
the two spatial dimensions make up the
physical world plane, with the vertical axis denoting the
temporal dimension. In this case, we can see a woman
going from her home in Boulder (Colorado, USA), to the
university’s campus, followed by a visit to the post of-
ﬁce and grocery store, and ﬁnally returning home (image
reproduced after [80]).

tion of trip-based modelling, it grew and emerged spon-
taneously as a separate research study into human be-
haviour [191]. The underlying idea however remained the
same as in the trip-based approach, namely that travel de-
cisions arise from a need to participate in social, econom-
ical, and cultural activities. But as opposed to the more
aggregated trip-based view, the basic units here are indi-
vidual activity patterns, commonly referred to as house-
hold activity patterns. In this context, the activity-based
approach then studies the interactions between members
of a household, and the relation to their induced travel
behaviour [12].

1.3.2 Approaches to activity-based modelling

Departing from H¨agerstrand’s initial comments, activity-
based research progress has been slowly but steadily. In
contrast with the development of the trip-based approach
that culminated in the four step model, there is no ex-
plicit general framework that encapsulates the activity-
based modelling scheme. There were however early com-
prehensive studies into human activities and their related
travel behaviour, e.g., the synopsis provided by Jones et
al. [145]. As the ﬁeld began to mature, certain ingredi-
ents could be recognised, e.g. [12]:

• the generation of activities, which can be regarded
as the equivalent of the production/attraction step in
trip-based modelling,

• the modelling of household choices, i.e., with re-
spect to their activity chains; this includes choosing
starting time and duration of the activity, its location
as well as a modal choice,

10

• the scheduling of activities, outlining how a house-
hold plans and executes the tasks of its members for
long-, middle-, and short-term activities, going from
year- and lifetime-long commitments, to daily oper-
ations.

During the last three decades, many research models that
encompass activity scheduling behaviour have been de-
veloped. An excellent overview is given by Timmer-
mans, who makes a distinction between simultaneous and
sequential models [265]. The former class is based on
full activity patterns (e.g., for one whole day), whereas
the latter is based on an explicit modelling of the activ-
ity scheduling process. Simultaneous models comprise
utility-maximisation models and mathematical program-
ming models (e.g., Recker’s household activity pattern
problem – HAPP, [247]). Sequential models are fre-
quently implemented as so-called computational process
models (CPM), acknowledging the belief that individu-
als do not arrive at optimal choices, but rather employ
context-dependent heuristics.

As an example, we illustrate the seminal STARCHILD
model, which was originally a simultaneous model based
on the maximisation of individuals’ utilities. Based on
H¨agerstrand’s notion and derivatives thereof, i.e.,
the
central idea that an individual’s travel behaviour is con-
strained by its space-time prism, Recker et al developed
the STARCHILD research tool addressing activity-based
modelling [248, 249]. The model hinges on three inter-
dependent consecutive steps: (i) the generation of house-
hold activities, (ii) constructing choice sets for these ac-
tivities, as well as scheduling them, and (iii) constrain-
ing these choices within the boundaries of the space-
time prism [191]. Note that the principal critique to the
model’s operation, was — and today still is — its need for
an extensive amount of speciﬁcally tailored data that en-
compasses H¨agerstrand’s concepts. Just as with the four
step model, these data are arduous to come by. In short,
most of the data are based on and transformed from e.g.,
conventional trip-based surveys, travel diaries (e.g., the
MOBEL (Belgium) and MOBIDRIVE (Germany) sur-
veys of Cirillo and Axhausen [59]) and the like, although
more recently passive GPS based information is collected
[12, 191, 194].

In the future, a complete integration of activity genera-
tion, scheduling, and route choice (DTA) is expected to
take place, on the condition that suitable empirical data
will become available. We must however be careful not
to be too optimistic, as e.g., Axhausen states that depend-
ing on the ‘research-political’ adoption of the activity-
based approach, “both a virtuous circle of progress or
a vicious circle of stagnation are a possibility for the
future” [12]. An even more harsh argumentation was
voiced by Timmermans, who looked back at the devel-
opment of the integration between land-use models and
transportation planning [266]. In his overview, he iden-
tiﬁed three waves, i.e., (i) aggregate spatial interaction-
based models, (ii) utility-maximising multinomial logit-

based models, and (iii) activity-based detailed microsim-
ulation models. His ﬁnal conclusion states that, despite
the advances in ﬁner levels of spatial detail, the scien-
tiﬁc ﬁeld has not undergone any signiﬁcant theoretical
progress. And although there exists a pronounced need
for better behavioural models, the critique remains that
this implies a tremendous complexity, hence the insinu-
ation that many of the approaches are in fact based on
black-box models.

1.3.3 Towards elaborate agent-based simulations

One of the most notable critiques often expressed against
classic trip-based approaches such as the four step model,
is the fact that all eye for detail at the level of the in-
dividual traveller is lost in the trip aggregation process.
Activity-based modelling schemes try to circumvent this
disadvantage by starting from a fundamentally different
basis, namely individual household activity patterns. To
this end, it is necessary to retain all information regarding
these individual households during the planning process.

As hinted at earlier, an upcoming technique that ﬁts
nicely in this concept, is the methodology of multi-agent
simulations. In such models, the individual households
are represented as agents; the models then allow these
agents to make independent decisions about their actions.
These actions span from long-term lifetime residential
housing decisions, the mid-term planning of daily activ-
ities, to even short-term decisions about an individual’s
driving behaviour in trafﬁc. The following description
of such a simulation system is based on the work of the
group of Nagel et al. [199, 13, 14, 15, 202, 122]:

• As a ﬁrst step, a synthetic population of agents is
generated. There is a close relation with the com-
mon land-use models, as these agents come from
populations that should be correctly seeded, i.e.,
they should entail a correct demographic representa-
tion of the real world. Once the synthetic population
is available to the model, the next step is to gener-
ate activity patterns (i.e., activity chains), generate
these activities’ locations, and ﬁnally the scheduling
of the activities, as described in the previous section.
Finally, mode and route choice form the bridge be-
tween the activity-based model and the transporta-
tion layer. As a consequence, it is beneﬁcial to deal
with agents’ plans directly, rather than to rely on the
information contained in OD tables [13].

• The component that represents the physical propa-
gation of agents throughout e.g., the road network,
sits at the lowest level of the model. In this case, the
necessary ingredients constitute the physical propa-
gation of individual vehicles in the trafﬁc streams.
Popular models are trafﬁc cellular automata and/or
queueing models, allowing a fast and efﬁcient sim-
ulation of individual agents in a network. Higher
level models such as e.g., pure ﬂuid-dynamic mod-
els are inherently not suitable because they operate

11

on a more aggregated basis and consequently ignore
the individuality of each agent in the system. Note
that this latter type of model can be deemed appro-
priate, on the condition that they can incorporate the
tracking of individual particles by e.g., a smoothed
particle hydrodynamics method [14].

• An important issue that revolves around the two pre-
vious aspects, is the clear absence of a rigidly de-
ﬁned direction of causality, i.e., when exactly do
people choose their travel mode, is it before the
planning of activities, or is it rather a result from the
planning process ? This problem can be dealt with
in a broader context, wherein agents make certain
plans about their activities, and iteratively learn by
replanning and rescheduling (either on a day-to-day
or within-day basis). This process of systematic re-
laxation continues until e.g., a Wardrop equilibrium
(W1) is reached (see step (IV) in section 1.2.2 for
more details). However, note that the question of
whether or not people in reality strive to reach such
an equilibrium, and whether or not such an equilib-
rium is even reached, remains an open debate. At
this stage in the model, we are clearly dealing with
aspects from evolutionary game theory, be it cooper-
ative or non-cooperative. In this context, the concept
of within-day replanning by agents is getting more
attention, as it constitutes a necessary prerequisite
for intelligent transportation systems, i.e., when and
how do travellers react (e.g., en-route choice) to
changes (e.g., control signals, incidents, . . . ) in their
environment [14] ?

The above description of a multi-agent activity-based
simulation system may seem straightforward, neverthe-
less, no complete practical implementation exists today.
The model suite that comes the closest to reaching the
previously stated goals, is the TRansportation ANaly-
sis and SIMulation System (TRANSIMS3) project. This
project is one part of the multi-track Travel Model Im-
provement Program of the U.S. Department of Trans-
portation, the Environmental Protection Agency, and the
Department of Energy in the context of the Intermodal
Surface Transportation Efﬁciency Act and the Clean Air
Its original development
Act Amendments of 1990.
started at Los Alamos National Laboratory, but a com-
mercial implementation was provided by IBM Business
Consulting.

Since its original inception, TRANSIMS has been ap-
plied to a various range of case studies. One of the most
notable examples, is the truly country-wide agent-based
detailed microsimulation of travel behaviour in Switzer-
land (see also Fig. 4) [282, 245]. A similar study encom-
passing the iteration and feedback between a simulation
model and a route planner, was carried out for the region
of Dallas [198, 204]. In the context of large-scale agent-
based simulations, queueing models were employed as a
TRANSIMS component by the work of Simon et al. for

the city of Portland [256], as well as the work of Gawron
[93, 94] and Cetin et al. [47]. Because of the computa-
tional complexity involved in dealing with the enormous
amount of agents in real-world scenarios, a popular ap-
proach is the use of parallel computations, as described
in the work of Nagel and Rickert [203]. Another exam-
ple of this last type of simulations, is the work of Chopard
and Dupuis who applied the methodology of large-scale
simulations to the city of Geneva [53, 52, 83].

Figure 4: An example of a multi-agent simulation of the
road network of Switzerland, around 08:00 in the morn-
ing: each vehicle is indicated by a single grey pixel, with
low-speed vehicles coloured black. The image clearly re-
veals more vehicular activity (and congestion) in the city
centres than elsewhere in the country (image reproduced
after [282]).

As a ﬁnal remark, we would like to draw attention to
some more control-oriented aspects of multi-agent sim-
ulations. In this respect, the transportation system is con-
sidered as a whole, whereby the agents are now the lo-
cal controllers within the system (e.g., trafﬁc lights, vari-
able message signs, . . . ), instead of individual house-
holds as was previously assumed. Using a coordinated
control approach, is it then possible to achieve a sys-
tem optimum. An example of such a control system is
the Advanced Multi-agent Information and Control for
Integrated multi-class trafﬁc networks (AMICI4) project
from The Netherlands. As one of its goals, it strives to
provide routing information to different classes of road
users, as well as controlling them by means of computer
simulated agents who operate locally but can be steered
hierarchically.

1.4 Transportation economics

Most of the work related to trafﬁc ﬂow theory has
been considered by researchers with roots in engineer-
ing, physics, mathematics et cetera. With respect to trans-
portation planning, the scene has shifted somewhat dur-
ing the last couple of decades towards policy makers who

3http://www.transims.net

4http://www.amici.tudelft.nl

12

test and implement certain strategies, based on e.g., the
four step modelling approach. Around 1960 however,
another branch of scientists entered the ﬁeld of trans-
portation planning: economists developed standard mod-
els that viewed transportation as a market exchange be-
tween demand and supply.

Generally stated, the economics of transportation does
not exclusively focus on trafﬁc as a purely physical phe-
nomenon, but also takes into account the fact that trans-
portation incurs certain costs, both to the individual as
well as to the society as a whole [172].

In the following sections, we describe the setting in which
economists view transportation, after which we discuss
the concept of road pricing.

1.4.1 The economical setting

In the context of economic theory, a transportation sys-
tem can be seen as an interaction between demand (prof-
its) and supply (costs). In a static setting, both demand
and supply are frequently described by means of func-
tions: they are expressed as the price for a good asso-
ciated with the quantity of that good. In transportation
economics, quantity is frequently identiﬁed as the num-
ber of trips made (e.g., by the macroscopic characteristic
of trafﬁc ﬂow) [20]. In the remainder of this section, we
use the term travel demand to denote the demand side,
as opposed to the supply side which is composed of the
transportation infrastructure (including changes due to in-
cidents, . . . ). In a more broader context, travel demand
is typically described as the amount of trafﬁc volume
that wants to use a certain infrastructure (i.e., the sup-
ply): when demand thus exceeds the infrastructure’s ca-
pacity under congested conditions (implying queueing),
this supply effectively acts as a constraint to the present
volume of trafﬁc ﬂow.

According to the aforementioned conventions, a demand
side function is expressed as a certain cost associated with
a level of ﬂow (i.e., number of trips). We call such a
curve a travel demand function (TDF), and it is typically
decreasing with increasing ﬂow; an example of such a
function can be seen as the dotted curve in Fig. 5. Note
that, to be correct, the depicted curve actually represents a
marginal travel demand: it gives the additional proﬁt that
is received with the obtaining of one extra unit (the total
amount of proﬁt is just the area under (i.e., the integral of)
the demand curve). Translated to a transportation system,
this means that the beneﬁts of a traveller tend to decrease
with increasing travel demand (i.e., congestion).

In similar spirit, we can consider a supply side curve, i.e.,
price (costs) versus quantity (ﬂow). One of the most used
approaches for describing trafﬁc ﬂow operations at the
supply side from an economical point of view, is the use
of an average cost function (ACF) [277] as proposed by
A.A. Walters in 1961 [288]. The theory was based on the
description of trafﬁc ﬂow by means of fundamental dia-
grams. Consider for example Greenshields’ simple lin-

13

ear relation between density k and space-mean speed vs
[105, 182]. The corresponding vse(q) fundamental dia-
gram, consists of a tilted parabola, lying on its side [182].
As the travel time T is inversely proportional to the space-
mean speed vs, Walters’ idea was to assume certain costs
related to the travel demand. Some examples of these
costs are those associated with [27, 110, 111]:

• (i) the construction of the transportation infrastruc-

ture,

• (iii) taxes,

• (ii) vehicle ownership and use,

• (iv) travel time, i.e., value of time (VOT),

• and (v) environmental and social costs.

Based on these costs, and using the relation between
travel time and travel demand, Walters derived a func-
tional relationship for the economical cost C associated
with the travel demand q. This relationship (i.e., the
ACF) denotes the supply side of transportation eco-
nomics; an example is the thick solid curve in Fig. 5.

Once both travel demand and average cost functions
are known, they can be used to determine the equilib-
rium points that occur at their intersection(s): given
both curves, the transportation system is assumed to
settle itself at these equilibria, with a certain travel
cost associated with the equilibrium trafﬁc demand.
Note that because of the nature of the analysis proce-
dure, i.e., using static (stationary) curves, the result-
ing travel costs are average costs, hence the name of
the average cost function.

There are some distinct features noticeable in the relation
described by the average cost function. For starters, the
curve does not go through the origin, i.e., at low travel de-
mands there is already a ﬁxed cost incurred. The depicted
cost then typically increases with increasing travel de-
mand, mainly due to the contribution of the value of time
associated with the travel time. The most striking feature
however, is the fact that the curve contains a backward-
bending upper branch [86]. This peculiar branch has an
asymptotic behaviour, i.e.,

lim
q→qcap→0

C(q) = +∞,

(2)

where we have denoted the path taken by the limit, i.e.,
passing through the capacity ﬂow qcap towards the upper
branch, which in fact corresponds to an increase towards
the jam density kjam. Also note the presence of an in-
ﬂection point (for concave qe(k) fundamental diagrams),
which can be located analytically by differentiating the
functional relation twice, and solving it with a right hand
side equal to zero.

C

0

congested

hypercongested

ACF

TDF

qcap

q

Figure 5: A graphical illustration of the economics of
transportation operations: the dotted curve represents the
demand side, i.e., the travel demand function (TDF),
whereas the thick solid curve represents the supply side,
i.e., the average cost function (ACF). Both curves express
the cost C associated with the number of trips made (e.g.,
level of trafﬁc ﬂow q). The latter curve is said to have two
states, namely the congested and the hypercongested area
(identiﬁed as the backward-bending part of the curve).
Points where both demand and supply curves intersect
each other denote equilibrium points: given both curves,
the transportation system as assumed to settle itself at
their intersection(s), with a certain travel cost associated
with the equilibrium trafﬁc demand.

In contrast to the nomenclature adopted by the traf-
ﬁc engineering community and in this dissertation,
economists typically refer to the lower branch of
Fig. 5 as the congested state, and to the upper branch
as the hypercongested state. Their line of reasoning
being the conviction that in a certain sense, conges-
tion also occurs when the speed drops below the free-
ﬂow speed on the free-ﬂow branch [277, 172, 259].

With respect to the relevance of this hypercongested state,
there has been some debate in literature. Among most
economists there seems to be a consensus, in the sense
that the hypercongested branch is actually a transient phe-
nomenon [296, 172]. Walters thought of the branch as
just a collection of inefﬁcient equilibria, but it was shown
by Verhoef that all equilibria obtained on the hypercon-
gested branch are inherently unstable [277, 259]. An-
other argument, that discards the use of the branch, goes
as explained by Yang and Huang [296]: many traditional
economical models of transportation assume a static (sta-
tionary) model of congestion, similarly as in classic static
trafﬁc assignment described in section 1.2.3. Under this
premise, the relations as described by the fundamental di-
agrams, should be considered for complete links, and not
only — as is usual in trafﬁc ﬂow theory — at local points
in space and time. Therefore, a link may contain two
different states: a free-ﬂow state and a congested state.
Hence, the average cost function should only describe the
properties that are satisﬁed on the whole link, and as a re-
sult this excludes the global hypercongested regime.

Several ad hoc solutions exist for dealing with this prob-

lem, which is a consequence of using cost functions based
on stationary equilibria: some of these solutions typi-
cally entail the use of vertical segments near the capac-
ity ﬂow in Fig. 5, resulting in ﬁnite queueing delays on
heavily congested links [277, 296, 259, 278]. Another
much used solution that ignores the backward-bending
branch, is to directly specify the average cost function
based on a link’s observed capacity, instead of deriving
it through the fundamental diagram of space-mean speed
versus ﬂow [172]. Note that in most cases, the economic
interpretation of capacity is different from the one in traf-
ﬁc ﬂow theory:
the capacity considered by economists
has a lower value as opposed to its engineering counter-
part. A similar example that speciﬁes the relation be-
tween travel demand and travel time (e.g., VOT), is the
BPR travel impedance function as described in section
1.2.3. Notwithstanding these proposed speciﬁc solutions,
the mainstream tendency nowadays seems to imply the
use of trafﬁc ﬂow models that explicitly describe the dy-
namics of congestion, either by using queueing models,
or more elaborate models based on ﬂuid dynamics or de-
tailed simulations of individual vehicles [296].

1.4.2 Towards road pricing policies

In an economical treatment of transportation, road users
in general only take into account their own private costs,
such as (ii) vehicle ownership and use, (iii) taxes, and
(iv) costs related to the travel time. Note that because,
as mentioned earlier, we are working with marginal cost
functions, the cost (i) related to the transportation infras-
tructure is not taken into account (as this is only a one-
time initial cost).

To this end, we consider the average cost function from
two different points of view: on the one hand, we have the
private costs borne by an individual traveller, and on the
other hand, we have the external costs that the traveller
bears to the rest of society. In accordance with economic
literature, we call the former associated cost function the
marginal private cost function (MPCF), and the latter the
marginal social cost function (MSCF). The extra costs
to society brought on by individual travellers, are called
negative externalities.

In Fig. 6, we have depicted the resulting equilibria that
arise from the intersections of the travel demand function
with both marginal private and social cost functions (note
that we disregard the upper backward-bending branch of
the average cost function as was shown in Fig. 5).
In
an unmanaged society, i.e., where no measures are taken
to change individual travellers’ behaviour, the resulting
equilibrium will be found at que, which is in fact a user
equilibrium corresponding to a cost as dictated by the
marginal private cost function (MPCF) [9]. As travellers
handle selﬁshly, not considering the costs inﬂicted upon
other travellers (e.g., more road users imply more conges-
tion for everybody), this pricing method is termed aver-
age cost pricing. At this equilibrium, the unpaid external

14

cost to society equals the difference between the MSCF
and MPCF curves at a demand level of que.

C

TDF

welfare beneﬁt

MSCF

MPCF

optimal
toll

0

qso

que

q

Figure 6: An economical equilibrium analysis based
on a travel demand function (TDF) represented by the
dotted curve, and marginal private and social cost func-
tions (MPCF and MSCF) represented by the thick solid
curves. The user equilibrium is located at a demand of
que, whereas the system optimum is located at a lower de-
mand of qso. The welfare beneﬁt (indicated as the grey
triangular region) can be gained by levying a congestion
toll equal to the difference between the marginal social
and private cost function deﬁned at the system optimum
demand level qso.

As early as in 1920, Arthur Cecil Pigou noted that road
users do not take into account the costs they inﬂict upon
other travellers. In order to rectify this situation, he pro-
posed to levy governmental taxes on road use. Pigou ac-
tually discussed his idea in a broader economic setting,
by making a distinction between the private and the so-
cial costs. Charging of a suitable governmental tax could
change the balance so the negative externalities would be
included, resulting in a new equilibrium [237]. This pro-
cess is called internalising the external costs.

Some years later in 1924, Frank Hyneman Knight further
explored Pigou’s ideas5: Knight fully acknowledged the
fact that congestion justiﬁed the levying of taxes. In con-
trast to Pigou however, Knight raised some criticism in
the sense that not governmental taxes were necessary, but
instead private ownership of the roads would take care of
tax levying and consequently resulting in a reduction of
congestion [150].

In 1927, Frank Plumpton Ramsey cast this methodology
— called marginal cost pricing — in the light of social
welfare economics. This latter type employs techniques
from a branch that is called micro-economics, which is an
economical treatment of society based on the behaviour
of individual producers and consumers. Welfare eco-
nomics embraces two important concepts:

Efﬁciency: a measure for assessing how much bene-
ﬁt society gains from a certain policy rule. It can

5Note that Knight apparently was clued in his research by an error
made on Pigou’s behalf in his study of a two-route road network [30].
Even more intriguing, is the fact that this type of problem was already
considered as far back as 1841, with the work of the German economist
Johann Georg Kohl [151].

be considered with the (strict) Pareto criterion (in-
vented by Vilfredo Pareto), which states that efﬁ-
ciency improves if a policy rule implies an increase
of welfare for at least one individual, but no other in-
dividual of society is worse off. Nicholas Kaldor and
John Hicks restated Pareto’s criterion, but this time
from the point of view of those who gain and those
who lose, respectively. Their Kaldor-Hicks criterion
states that society gains welfare, but not everybody
receives personal gain, i.e., there will be winners and
losers. The crucial assumption on the Kaldor-Hicks
criterion is that the winners could fully compensate
the losers, in theory; whether or not this happens at
all, is not the issue.

Equity: if society beneﬁts from a certain policy rule,
then its efﬁciency can be measured using e.g., the
Pareto criterion as stated earlier. However, nothing
is said about the size of the beneﬁt each individuals
of society receives. This is were the concept of eq-
uity enters the picture: it refers to a fair distribution
of the total beneﬁts over all individuals in society
(note that in this case, there typically is a strong cor-
relation with the income distribution).

In this context, Ramsey thus stated a policy rule, imply-
ing a maximisation of the social welfare [244].
In the
ﬁeld of transportation, this can be done by marginal cost
pricing, also called road pricing, congestion tolls, . . . The
nature of the measure is that it signiﬁes a demand-side
strategy, with the goal of inducing a change in travellers’
behaviour. Road pricing typically entails a shift from on-
peak to off-peak periods, switching mode (e.g., from pri-
vate to public transportation), car pooling, route change,
. . . Considering again Fig. 6, we can see that if users were
to consider the marginal social cost function, instead of
only their marginal private cost function, this would shift
the resulting equilibrium from que to qso, which is a so-
cial optimum. As said at the beginning of this section,
travellers do not take into account the negative external-
ities they cause to the rest of society, and as such, they
can be charged with an optimal toll that is deﬁned as the
difference between both marginal social and private cost
functions. Levying the correct congestion toll, would re-
move the original market failure, resulting in a net social
welfare beneﬁt that is visualised as the grey triangular re-
gion in Fig. 6. Note that in an ideal world, congestion
tolls exactly match the caused negative externalities. In
practice however, this can not be accomplished, result-
ing in so-called second-best pricing schemes. Practical
real-life examples of this are tolling the beltway around
a city upon entering it (e.g., London’s recent congestion
charge), using step-tolls, tolling at ﬁxed time periods in-
stead of based on trafﬁc conditions, . . . [173]

Reconsidering the work of Wardrop with respect to the
criteria (W1) and (W2) highlighted in section 1.2.2,
Beckmann, McGuire, and Winsten found that the system
optimum qso can be reached if the standard cost (i.e., jour-
ney time) is replaced with a generalised cost, which is

15

just the marginal social cost function as described earlier
[20]. Consequently, the total travel time in the system
can be minimised (from an engineering perspective), by
levying a so-called efﬁciency toll, which corresponds to
Ramsey’s optimal toll.

One of the most notable extensions in the economic treat-
ment of transportation and congestion tolls, is the semi-
nal work of the late Nobel prize winner William Vickrey
[281]. As already stated in section 1.2.5, correct mod-
elling of e.g., queue spill back, is of fundamental im-
portance when assessing the effectiveness of road pric-
ing schemes for example. Vickrey’s bottleneck model is
one step in this direction: it is based on the behaviour
of morning commuters, whereby the model takes into ac-
count the departure times of all travellers. As everybody’s
desire is to arrive at work at the same time, some will
arrive earlier, others later. Besides the traditional travel
time costs, travellers therefore also experience so-called
schedule delay costs. Levying suitable tolls that depend
on the travellers’ arrival times, allows to reach a system
optimum [8, 172]. It is important to realise here that the
levied toll should vary over time and space, in order to
correspond to the governing trafﬁc conditions.

To most people in society road pricing is a highly unpop-
ular measure, as well as a controversial political issue,
whereby public acceptance is everything [188, 109, 110,
111]. Alternatives to road pricing can include upgrading
existing roads and/or public transportation services, strict
control-oriented regulation by means of advanced trafﬁc
management systems (ATMS), issuing elaborate parking
systems, fuel taxes, et cetera [7]. In spirit of second-best
pricing schemes, it was a wise thing in the UK to con-
nect London’s congestion charge to the simultaneous im-
provement of public transportation [258]. Similarly, the
cordon toll system in the city of Oslo, Norway, quickly
found acceptance among the population [109]. Neverthe-
less, road pricing is considered an unfair policy measure
to most people: households (and ﬁrms) with higher in-
comes, can more easily afford to pay the charge, hence
they will keep the luxury of travelling at their own discre-
tion, whilst others might not be able to pay the required
toll. As a consequence, an inconsiderate internalisation
of the external costs, does not lead to an equitable Pareto
optimal scenario. Despite this resistance, there does seem
to be a general consensus among members of society that
congestion caused by trafﬁc induced by recreational ac-
tivities, is not tolerated during peak periods; congestion
tolling for these travellers is deemed appropriate.

Despite the advances in the methodology underlying
road pricing, there is still one major gap that has yet to
be ﬁlled in, i.e., the equity of the principle, or otherwise
stated: where do the gained social welfare beneﬁts
(i.e., tax revenues) go in the redistribution ? As Small
states, road pricing is more acceptable to the broad
public, if it is presented as a complete ﬁnancial package
[257]. As welfare economists debate on whether or
not the revenues should go back to the transportation
sector or rather elsewhere, Small asserts that inclusion

of the former is mandatory for achieving substantial
support from both the political side and the investors.
Complementary, in order to satisfy the global population,
it is advisory to use the collected charges in order to
diminish e.g., labour taxes, as they are perceived as being
too high [103, 110, 111].

In the end, we should note that both economists
and trafﬁc engineers are essentially talking about
the same subject, although by approaching it from
In the ﬁeld of economics, road
different angles.
pricing policies are introduced based on average
cost functions, allowing an optimisation of the
social welfare. This effectively corresponds to the
engineers’ idea of static trafﬁc assignment, based on
a system optimum using travel impedance functions
(see e.g., section 1.2.3). The validity of using
these average cost functions (with or without their
backward-bending parts as explained in section
1.4.1), has instigated several debates in road pricing
literature, most notably between Else and Nash
[87, 208], Evans and Hills [88, 89, 130], and Ohta
and Verhoef [224, 225, 279].

In continuation, the approach followed by Vickrey’s
bottleneck model provides a nice, ﬁrst alternative,
using schedule delay costs (see sections 1.2.5 and
1.4.2). Although Vickrey’s idea introduces a hitherto
absent time dependence, it has the disadvantage that
spatial extents are neglected through the assumption
of point-queues (see section 1.2.5). Lo and Szeto
have rigourously shown that hypercongestion is es-
sentially a spatial phenomenon, and that by neglect-
ing this facet, a road pricing policy might actually
worsen trafﬁc conditions [176]. The correct way out
of this problem, is by explicitly taking the tempo-
spatial characteristics of trafﬁc ﬂows into account.
As an engineering analogy, this can be accomplished
by introducing dynamic trafﬁc assignment (see sec-
tion 1.2.4) which uses physical propagation models
to describe the buildup and dissolution of congestion
(see also some of the models presented in section
1.2.5, e.g., the work of Lago and Daganzo [159]).

2 Trafﬁc ﬂow propagation models

In contrast to the previous section, which dealt with high
level transportation planning models, the current section
considers trafﬁc ﬂow models that explicitly describe the
physical propagation of trafﬁc ﬂows. In a sense, these
models can be seen as being directly applicable for the
physical description of trafﬁc streams. There exist sev-
eral methods for discriminating between the families of
models that describe trafﬁc ﬂow propagation, i.e., based
on whether they operate in continuous or discrete time (or
even event-based), whether they are purely deterministic
or stochastic, or depending on the level of detail (LOD)

16

that is assumed, . . . More detailed explanations can found
in the overview of Hoogendoorn and Bovy [134]. In this
dissertation, we present an overview that is based on the
latter method of discriminating between the level of de-
tail. We believe that this classiﬁcation most satisfactorily
describes the discrepancies between the different trafﬁc
ﬂow models. Thus, depending on the level of aggrega-
tion, we can classify the propagation models into the fol-
lowing four categories:

• macroscopic (highest level of aggregation, lowest
level of detail, based on continuum mechanics, typ-
ically entailing ﬂuid-dynamic models),

• mesoscopic (high level of aggregation, low level of
detail, typically based on a gas-kinetic analogy in
which driver behaviour is explicitly considered),

• microscopic (low level of aggregation, high level
of detail, typically based on models that describe
the detailed interactions between vehicles in a trafﬁc
stream),

• and submicroscopic (lowest level of aggregation,
highest level of detail, like microscopic models but
extended with detailed descriptions of a vehicles’ in-
ner workings).

Note that some people regard macroscopic models
more from the angle of network models. In this case,
the focus lies on performance characteristics such
as total travel times (a measure for the quality of
service), number of trips, . . . [92] To this end, sev-
eral quantitative models were introduced, such as Za-
havi’s so-called α relation between trafﬁc ﬂow, road
density, and space-mean speed [299], and Prigogine
and Herman’s two-ﬂuid theory of town trafﬁc [128].

2.1 Macroscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models

In this section, we take a look at the class of trafﬁc
ﬂow models that describe trafﬁc streams at an aggregated
level. We ﬁrst introduce the concept behind the models
(i.e., the continuum approach), after which we discuss the
classic ﬁrst-order LWR model. Because of its historical
importance, we devote several sections to the model’s an-
alytical and numerical solutions, as well as to some exten-
sions that have been proposed by researchers. We con-
clude our discussion of macroscopic models with a de-
scription of several higher-order models, and shed some
light on the problems associated with both ﬁrst-order and
higher-order models.

2.1.1 The continuum approach

Among the physics disciplines, exists the ﬁeld of contin-
uum mechanics that is concerned with the behaviour of
solids and ﬂuids (both liquids and gasses). Considering
the class of ﬂuid dynamics, it has spawned a rich variety

of branches such as aerodynamics, hydrodynamics, hy-
draulics, . . .

Underlying these scientiﬁc ﬁelds, is the continuity as-
sumption (also called the continuum hypothesis) that they
all have in common. In a nutshell, this assumption states
that ﬂuids are to be treated as continuous media (in con-
trast to e.g., molecular gasses, which consist of distinct
particles). Stated more rigourously, the macroscopic spa-
tial (i.e., the length) and temporal scales are considerably
larger than the largest molecular corresponding scales
[62]. As a consequence, all quantities can be treated as
being continuous (in the inﬁnitesimal limit). The deci-
sion to use either a liquid-like or a gas-like treatment, is
based on the Knudsen number of the ﬂuid: a low value
(i.e., smaller than unity) indicates a ﬂuid-dynamic treat-
ment, whereas a high value is indicative of a more gran-
ular medium. In this section, we consider the former ap-
proach. In the latter case, we enter the realm of statistical
mechanics that deals with e.g., kinetic gasses, requiring
the use of the Boltzmann equation (as will be explained
in section 2.2 on mesoscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models).

Historically, the ﬂuid-dynamic approach found its roots
in the seminal work of Claude Louis Navier (1822),
Adh´emar de Saint-Venant (1843), and George Gabriel
Stokes (1845) [101]. This gave rise to what we know as
the Navier-Stokes equations (NSE), formulated as a set
of non-linear partial differential equations (PDEs). For
our overview, the most relevant equation is actually the
local conservation law, stating that the net ﬂux is accom-
panied by an increase or decrease of material (i.e., ﬂuid).
In general, we can discern two subtypes: compressible or
incompressible ﬂuids, and viscous or inviscid ﬂuids. In-
compressibility assumes a constant density (and a high
Mach number), whereas inviscid ﬂuids have a zero vis-
cosity (with a corresponding high Reynolds number) and
are typically represented as the Euler equations.

Note that the NSE are still not fully understood. The fact
of the matter is that the Clay Mathematics Institute has
devised a list of Millennium Problems6, among which a
deeper fundamental understanding of the NSE holds a re-
ward of one million dollar. Because the original Navier-
Stokes equations are too complex to solve, scientists de-
veloped solutions to speciﬁc subproblems, e.g., Euler’s
version of inviscid ﬂuids. As an example, we give the
Burgers equation, as derived by Johannes Martinus Burg-
ers [39], for a one-dimensional ﬂuid in the form of a hy-
perbolic conservation law:

∂u
∂t

+ u

= ν

∂u
∂x

∂2u
∂x2 ,

(3)

in which the u ∈ R typically represents the velocity, and
ν is the viscosity coefﬁcient. For inviscid ﬂuids, ν = 0,
such that equation (3) corresponds to a ﬁrst-order par-
tial differential equation. This type of hyperbolic PDE
is very important, as its solution can develop discontinu-
ities, or more clearly stated, it can contain shock waves

6http://www.claymath.org/millennium

17

which are of course directly relevant to the modelling of
trafﬁc ﬂows. The inviscid Burgers PDE can be solved
using the standard method of characteristics, as will be
explained in further detail in the next three sections.

2.1.2 The ﬁrst-order LWR model

Continuing the previous train of thought, we can consider
trafﬁc as an inviscid but compressible ﬂuid. From this
assumption, it follows that densities, mean speeds, and
ﬂows are deﬁned as continuous variables, in each point in
time and space, hence leading to the names of continuum
models, ﬂuid-dynamic models, or macroscopic models.

The ﬁrst aspect of such a ﬂuid-dynamic description of
trafﬁc ﬂow, consists of a scalar conservation law (‘scalar’
because it is a ﬁrst-order PDE). A typical derivation can
be found in [92] and [147]: the derivation is based on con-
sidering a road segment with a ﬁnite length on which no
vehicles appear or disappear other than the ones that en-
ter and exit it. After taking the inﬁnitesimal limit (i.e., the
continuum hypothesis), this will result in an equation that
expresses the interplay between continuous densities and
ﬂows on a local scale. Another way of deriving the con-
servation law, is based on the use of a differentiable cu-
mulative count function
N (t, x) that represents the num-
ber of vehicles that have passed a certain location [215]:

e

k(t, x) = −∂

N (t, x)/∂x and q(t, x) = ∂
⇓

N (t, x)/∂t,

e
∂2
= −

∂k(t, x)
∂t

N (t, x)
∂t ∂x
e
∂k(t, x)
∂t

and

⇓

+

∂q(t, x)
∂x

=

e
∂2

N (t, x)
∂t ∂x
e

,

∂q(t, x)
∂x

= 0,

(4)

with the density k and ﬂow q dynamically (i.e., time vary-
ing) deﬁned over a single spatial dimension. Lighthill and
Whitham were among the ﬁrst to develop such a trafﬁc
ﬂow model [169] (note that in the same year, Newell had
constructed a theory of trafﬁc ﬂow at low densities [218]).
Crucial to their approach, was the so-called fundamental
hypothesis, essentially stating that ﬂow is a function of
density, i.e., there exists a qe(k(t, x)) equilibrium rela-
tionship [182]. Essentially to their theory, Lighthill and
Whitham assumed that the fundamental hypothesis holds
at all trafﬁc densities, not just for light-density trafﬁc but
also for congested trafﬁc conditions. Using this trick with
the fundamental diagram, relates the two dependent vari-
ables in equation (4) to each other, thereby making it pos-
sible to solve the partial differential equation.

One year later, in 1956, Richards independently derived
the same ﬂuid-dynamic model [251], albeit in a slightly
different form. The key difference, is that Richards
focusses on the derivation of shock waves with respect
to the density, whereas Lighthill and Whitham consider
this more from the perspective of disruptions of the ﬂow

18

[239]. Another difference between both derivations, is
that Richards ﬁxed the equilibrium relation, whereas
Lighthill and Whitham did not restrict themselves to an
a priori deﬁnition; in Richards’ paper, we can ﬁnd the
equation V = a(b − D), with V the space-mean speed,
D the density, and a and b ﬁtting parameters [251].
Note that all three authors share the following same
comment: because of the continuity assumption,
the
theory only holds for a large number of vehicles, hence
the description of “long crowded roads” in Lighthill and
Whitham’s original article.

Because of the nearly simultaneous and independent
development of the theory, the model has become
known as the LWR model, after the initials of its in-
ventors who receive the credit.
In some texts, the
model is also referred to as the hydrodynamic model,
or the kinematic wave model (KWM), attributed to
the fact that the model’s solution is based on char-
acteristics, which are called kinematic waves (e.g.,
shock waves).

2.1.3 Analytical solutions of the LWR model

Reconsidering equation (4), taking into account the fun-
damental diagram, the conservation law is now expressed
as:

kt + qe(k)x = 0,

(5)

in which we introduced the standard differential calculus
notation for PDEs. Recognising the fundamental relation
of trafﬁc ﬂow theory, i.e., q = k vs, equation (5) [182]
then becomes:

kt + (k vse(k))x = kt +

vse (k) + k

(cid:18)

dvse (k)
dk

(cid:19)

kx = 0.

(6)

The above hyperbolic PDE, can be translated into the
Burgers equation (3), using a suitable transformation to
a dimensionless form as explained in the rigourous math-
ematical treatment provided by J¨ungel [147]. The con-
servation law (5) can also be cast in a non-linear wave
equation, using the chain rule for differentiation [92]:

Analytically solving the previous equation using the
method of characteristics, results in shock waves that
travel with speeds equal to:

kt +

dqe(k)
dk

kx = 0.

w =

dqe(k)
dk

,

(7)

(8)

i.e., the tangent to the qe(k) fundamental diagram. This
tangent corresponds to the speed w of the backward prop-
agating kinematic wave [182]. As a consequence, solu-
tions, being the characteristics, of equation (7) have the
following form:

k(t, x) = k(x − wt),

(9)

with the observation that the density is constant along
such a characteristic. Note that in order to obtain shock
waves that are only decelerating, the used qe(k) funda-
mental diagram should be concave (a property that is of-
ten neglected) [79]:

d2qe(k)
dk2 ≤ 0.

(10)

Starting from an initial condition, the problem of ﬁnd-
ing the solution to the conservation PDE, is also called
an initial value problem (IVP), whereby the solution de-
scribes how the density evolves with increasing time. The
problem is called a generalised Riemann problem (GRP)
when we consider an inﬁnitely long road with given con-
stant initial densities up- and downstream of a disconti-
nuity.

Because the method of characteristics can result
in
non-unique solutions, a trick is used to select the correct,
i.e., physically relevant, one. Recall from equation (3)
that the right-hand side of the Burgers PDE contained a
viscosity term ν. The general principle that is adopted for
selection of the correct solution, is based on the Oleinik
entropy condition, which regards the conservation law as
a diffuse equation. In this context, the viscosity coefﬁ-
cient is multiplied with a small diffusion constant ǫ. In
the vanishing viscosity limit ǫ → 0, the method returns a
unique, smooth, and physically relevant solution instead
of inﬁnitely many (weak) solutions [164, 201]. For more
details with respect to the application of trafﬁc ﬂows, we
refer to the excellent treatment given by J¨ungel [147].

Ansorge, Bui et al., Velan and Florian later reinter-
preted this entropy condition, stating that it is equiv-
alent to a driver’s ride impulse [6, 37, 276]. Drivers
going from free-ﬂow to congested trafﬁc encounter
a sharp shock wave, whereas drivers going in the re-
verse direction essentially pass through all interme-
diate points on the fundamental diagrams, i.e., the
solution generates a fan of waves. It is for this latter
case that the ‘ride impulse’ is relevant: it denotes the
fact that stopped drivers prefer to start riding again,
resulting in a fan of waves.

A more intuitive explanation can also be given based on
the anticipation that drivers adopt when they approach
a shock wave: their equilibrium speed vse(k) is also a
function of the change in density, e.g.:

vse (k)

.
= vse (k) −

ν
k

∂k
∂x

.

(11)

19

Substituting this new equilibrium relation in equation (6),
results in a right-hand side equal to ν ∂2k
∂x2 . Applying the
same methodology based on the vanishing viscosity limit
of the entropy solution, results in the same unique solu-
tion. Because the shock waves are in fact mathematical
discontinuities, and as such, inﬁnitesimally small, they
In
are typically ‘smeared out’ by numerical schemes.
fact, this is just the equivalent of introducing an artiﬁcial
viscosity (as explained earlier), which allows diffusion
(i.e., the combined effect of dissipation and dispersion)
of the shock waves. Note that this diffusion is a con-
sequence of the numerical solution, and not necessarily
corresponding to the real diffusion processes in a viscous
ﬂuid. This numerical smoothing helps to retain numerical
stability of the ﬁnal solution.

Whenever in the solution of the conservation equation,
two of its characteristics intersect, the density takes on
two different values (each one belonging to a single char-
acteristic). As this mathematical quirk is physically im-
possible, the entropy solution states that both character-
istics terminate and breed a shock wave; as such, these
shock waves form boundaries that discontinuously sepa-
rate densities, ﬂows, and space-mean speeds [92]. The
speed of such a shock wave is related to the following
ratio [239]:

wshock =

∆q
∆k

,

(12)

with ∆q = qu − qd and ∆k = ku − kd the relative differ-
ence in ﬂows, respectively densities, up- and downstream
of the shock wave.

Note that going from a low to a high density regime typ-
ically results in a shock wave, whereas the reverse tran-
sition is accompanied by an emanation of a fan of char-
acteristics (also called expansion, acceleration, or rar-
efaction waves). In shock wave theory, the densities on
either side of a shock are well deﬁned (i.e., unique solu-
tions exist); along the shock wave however, the density
jumps discontinuously from one value to another. In this
latter respect, equation (12) is said to satisfy the Rankine-
Hugoniot jump condition.

The previous remarks with respect to the entropy con-
dition, are closely related to the concavity of the qe(k)
fundamental diagram, as deﬁned by equation (10): for
concave qe(k) fundamental diagrams, all shock waves
are compression waves going from lower to higher densi-
ties. However, for qe(k) fundamental diagrams that con-
tain convex regions, application of the entropy condition
can return the wrong solution [165]. Although the mathe-
matics of using these kinds of fundamental diagrams has
been worked out, see for example the work of Li [168], a
uniﬁed physical interpretation is still lacking [181, 201]:
instead of only deceleration shock waves and accelera-
tion fans, we now also have acceleration shock waves and
deceleration fans. Finally, it is important to realise that
for non-smooth qe(k) fundamental diagrams, the entropy
condition is not applicable and no fans occur because the
correct unique solution is automatically obtained [276].

In Fig. 7, we have depicted a classic example that is of-
ten used when illustrating the tempo-spatial evolution of
a trafﬁc ﬂow at a trafﬁc light (left part), based on the LWR
ﬁrst-order macroscopic trafﬁc ﬂow model with a triangu-
lar qe(k) fundamental diagram (right part). The applica-
tion of the trafﬁc ﬂow model is visible in the time-space
diagram to the left. A trafﬁc light is located at position
xlight; it is initially green, and at tred it turns red until tgreen
when it switches back to green. The initial conditions at
the road segment are located at point 1(cid:13) on the fundamen-
tal diagram. Because all characteristics of the solution are
tangential to the fundamental diagram, the results can be
elegantly visualised when using a triangular diagram: ex-
cept for the fan of rarefaction waves (we approximate the
non-differentiable tip of the triangle with a smooth one,
such that we can show the fan 4(cid:13) for all didactical intents
and purposes), only two kinematic wave speeds are pos-
sible. When the trafﬁc light turns red, a queue of stopped
vehicles develops. Inside this queue, the jam density state
kj holds, corresponding to point 2(cid:13) on the fundamental
diagram. The upstream boundary of the queue is demar-
cated by the shock wave 3(cid:13) that is formed by the intersec-
tions of the characteristics 1(cid:13) and 2(cid:13). Downstream of the
jam, there are no vehicles: because we are working with
a triangular fundamental diagram, the characteristics are
parallel to the vehicle trajectories (their speeds are equal
to the slopes of points on the free-ﬂow branch). The ini-
tial regime at state 1(cid:13) and the ‘empty’ regime downstream
of the queue are separated from each other by a contact
discontinuity or slip. When the trafﬁc light turns green
again, the queue starts to dissipate, whereby the solution
of characteristics becomes a fan of rarefaction waves 4(cid:13),
taking on all speeds between states 2(cid:13) and 1(cid:13) on the fun-
damental diagram. A ﬁnal important aspect that can be
seen from Fig. 7, is the fact that in the LWR model the
outﬂow from a jam, i.e., going from a high to a low den-
sity regime, always proceeds via the capacity-ﬂow regime
at qcap: so there is no capacity drop in the LWR model be-
cause the outﬂow is always optimal.

To conclude our summary of analytical derivations, we
point the reader to the signiﬁcant work of Newell, who
in 1993 cast the LWR theory in an elegant form. The
key ideas he introduced were on the one hand the use
of cumulative curves for deriving the conservation law,
and on the other hand the use of a triangular qe(k) funda-
mental diagram [215]. Due to Newell’s work, trafﬁc ﬂow
analysis in this respect gets very simpliﬁed, as it is now
possible to give an exact graphical solution to the LWR
model for both free-ﬂow and congested conditions [216].
To complete his theory, Newell also provided us with
a means to include multi-destination ﬂows, i.e., speciﬁ-
cations of which off-ramp vehicles will use to exit the
motorway [217]. Note that for the LWR model with a
parabolic qe(k) fundamental diagram and piece-wise lin-
ear and piece-wise constant space and time boundaries,
respectively, Wong and Wong recently devised an exact
analytical solution scheme. Their method is based on the
efﬁcient tracking and ﬁtting of generated and dispersed
shock waves within a time-space diagram [295].

2.1.4 Numerical solutions of the LWR model

Besides the previous analytic derivation of a solution to
the conservation law expressed as a PDE, it is also pos-
sible to treat the problem numerically. By trying to ﬁnd
a numerical solution to the PDEs, we enter the ﬁeld of
computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD). In a typical setup,
the ‘ﬂuid domain’ is ﬁrst discretised into adjacent cells
(called a one-dimensional mesh) of size ∆X (note that all
cells need not to be equal in size), after which an iterative
scheme is used to update the cells’ states (e.g., the density
k in each ﬂuid cell) at discrete time steps m ∆T with m ∈
N0. Typically, this entails ﬁnite difference schemes (or in
a broader context, ﬁnite element methods or ﬁnite volume
methods), which replace the continuous partial derivative
with a difference operator, thereby transforming the con-
servation equation into a ﬁnite difference equation (FDE).
Examples of these difference operators are the forward
difference operator ∆f (x) = f (x + 1) − f (x) and the
backward difference operator ∇f (x) = f (x) − f (x − 1),
which is not to be confused with the gradient vector of
f (x). Examples of ﬁnite difference schemes are the cen-
tral scheme, the Lax-Friedrichs scheme, the downwind
scheme, the upwind scheme, the MacCormack scheme,
the Lax-Wendroff scheme, the Steger-Warming Flux Split-
ter scheme, the Rieman-based Harten-van Leer-Lax and
Einfeldt scheme, . . . For a more complete overview of
these schemes, we refer the reader to the work of Hel-
bing and Treiber [124], J¨ungel [147], and Ngoduy et al.
[222]. A practical software implementation of a moving-
mesh ﬁnite-volume solver for the previously mentioned
hyperbolic PDEs, can be found in van Dam’s TraFlow-
PACK software [272]. LeVeque also developed a numer-
ical solver, called CLAWPACK, that is designed to com-
pute numerical solutions to hyperbolic partial differential
equations using a wave propagation approach [166]. A
central precaution for all these schemes, is the so-called
Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) condition which guar-
antees numerical stability of the algorithms; for trafﬁc
ﬂows, it has the physical interpretation that no vehicles
are allowed to ‘skip’ cells between consecutive time steps
(i.e., all physical information that has an inﬂuence on the
system’s behaviour should be included):

∆T ≤

∆X
vff

.

(13)

Just over a decade ago, Daganzo constructed a numerical
scheme based on ﬁnite difference equations. It is known
as the cell transmission model (CTM), which solves the
LWR model using a trapezoidal qe(k) fundamental dia-
gram [63]. At the heart of his model lies a discretisa-
tion of the road into ﬁnite cells of width ∆X, each con-
taining a certain number of vehicles (i.e., an average cell
density). When time advances, these vehicles are trans-
mitted from upstream to downstream cells, taking into
account the capacity constraints imposed by the down-
stream cells. The CTM converges to the LWR model
in the limit when ∆X → 0.
In 1995, Daganzo ex-

20

x

xlight

4

2

1

3

q

qcap

1

4

3

2

kj

k

tred

tgreen

t

kc

Figure 7: Example of an analytical solution based on the LWR ﬁrst-order macroscopic trafﬁc ﬂow model with a triangular
qe(k) fundamental diagram. Left: a time-space diagram with a trafﬁc light located at position xlight. It is green, except
during the period from tred until tgreen. The solution is visually sketched by means of the characteristics that evolve during
the tempo-spatial evolution of the trafﬁc ﬂow. Right: a triangular fundamental diagram, with the initial conditions at state
1(cid:13). When the trafﬁc light is red, a queue develops in which the jam density state at point 2(cid:13) holds. Its upstream boundary
is demarcated by the shock wave 3(cid:13). When the queue starts to dissipate, the solution of characteristics generally becomes
a fan of rarefaction waves 4(cid:13).

tended the model to include network trafﬁc, i.e., two-
way merges and diverges, thereby allowing for the cor-
rect modelling of dynamic queue spill backs [64]. He
also cast the model in the context of Godunov FDE meth-
ods7, allowing for arbitrary qe(k) fundamental diagrams.
The exchange of vehicles between neighbouring cells is
then governed by so-called sending and receiving func-
tions [65]. Lebacque derived a similar numerical scheme
that performed the same functions as Daganzo’s CTM,
at approximately the same time (the debate on whomever
was ﬁrst is still not resolved) [161, 162]. In his derivation,
he employed the terms demand and supply functions to
denote the exchange of vehicles between cells. He also
provided the means to handle general (i.e., multi-way)
merges and diverges. Both the original cell transmission
model and an implementation of the Godunov scheme for
the LWR model with an arbitrary qe(k) fundamental di-
agram, were provided by Daganzo et al. in the form of
a software package called NETCELL [46]. Note that, as
mentioned earlier, numerical methods tend to smear out
the shock waves; this diffusion is therefore a consequence
of the solution methodology and not of the LWR model
itself [177].

Daganzo also developed another methodology for numer-
ically solving the LWR equations, based on a variational
formulation. Rather than extending the existing concept
of a conservation equation coupled with a vanishing vis-
cosity limit, he derived a solution based on the principles
behind cumulative curves. The initial value problem be-
comes well-posed, and the methodology is able to handle
complex boundary conditions. In short, the problem is

7Sergei K. Godunov’s numerical solution of PDEs is considered as
a breakthrough in computational ﬂuid dynamics: it provides a unique
solution based on a stable Riemann problem [102, 162, 70].

transformed into ﬁnding shortest paths in a network of
arcs that comprise the kinematic waves; as a surplus, the
method is computationally more efﬁcient than traditional
solutions based on conservation laws [74, 75].

Traditional cell-based numerical methods are fairly com-
putationally intensive, because they have to discretise the
road entirely (even in regions where there is no variation
in density), resulting in a solution that is composed of
linear shock waves and continuous fans (i.e., the rarefac-
tion waves).
In order to derive a solution that is com-
putationally more efﬁcient, Henn proposed to replace the
continuous fans of rarefaction waves with a discrete set
of angular sectors (i.e., the density now varies with dis-
crete steps). The efﬁciency now stems from the fact that,
instead of a whole array of cells, only list structures need
to be maintained [126].

Only recently, a combination of Daganzo’s CTM with a
triangular qe(k) fundamental diagram and Newell’s cu-
mulative curves was constructed by Yperman et al, result-
ing in the link transmission model (LTM). Because whole
links can be treated at once, the LTM’s computational ef-
ﬁciency is much higher than that of classic numerical so-
lution schemes for the LWR model, whilst retaining the
same accuracy [?].

With respect to the applicability of the LWR model to
real-life trafﬁc ﬂows, we refer the reader to two studies:
the ﬁrst was done by Lin and Ahanotu in the course of the
California Partners for Advanced Transit and Highways
(PATH) programme (formerly known as the Program on
Advanced Technology for the Highway). In their work,
they performed a validation for the CTM with respect
to the formation and dissipation of queues, concluding
that the most important ﬁrst-order characteristics (corre-

21

lations in measurements of free-ﬂow trafﬁc at successive
detector stations, and the speed of the backward propagat-
ing wave under congested conditions) perform reasonable
well when comparing them to ﬁeld data [171].

A second, more thorough and critical study was done by
Nagel and Nelson. In it, they scrutinise the LWR model,
both with concave qe(k) fundamental diagrams and those
with convex regions. Their main conclusion states that
it remains difﬁcult to judge the model’s capabilities on
a fair basis, largely due to the fact that there do not ex-
ist many real-world data sets which also contain a geo-
metrical description of the local infrastructural road lay-
out. This latter ingredient is a requirement for assessing
whether or not an observed trafﬁc breakdown is either
spontaneously induced or due to the presence of an active
bottleneck (because the LWR model constitutes a strictly
deterministic model) [201].

2.1.5 Flavours of the LWR model

Considering this elegant ﬁrst-order trafﬁc ﬂow model,
its main advantages are that it is simple, and in a sense
reproduces the most important features of trafﬁc ﬂows
(i.e., shock waves and rarefaction waves). However, be-
cause of its restriction to a ﬁrst-order partial differential
equation, certain other effects, such as stop-and-go traf-
ﬁc waves, capacity drop and hysteresis, trafﬁc ﬂow in-
stabilities, ﬁnite acceleration capabilities, . . . can not be
represented [169].
In many cases, these ‘deﬁciencies’
can be tackled by switching to higher-order models, as
will be elaborated upon in section 2.1.6. Interestingly, in
their original paper, Lighthill and Whitham recognised
the fact that drivers tend to anticipate on downstream
conditions, changing their speed gradually when crossing
shock waves. This in fact necessitates a diffusion term in
the conservation equation that captures a density gradi-
ent.

Instead of using a higher-order model, trafﬁc ﬂow engi-
neers can also resort to more sophisticated approaches,
such as extensions of the ﬁrst-order model. To conclude
this section, let us give a concise overview of some of
the model ﬂavours that have been proposed as straight-
forward extensions to the seminal LWR model.

An interesting set of extensions launched, was created by
Daganzo, dealing with two classes of vehicles, of which
one class can use all lanes of a motorway, whereas the
other class is restricted to a right-hand subset of these
lanes. When the capacity of the latter vehicles in regular
lanes is exceeded, a queue will develop in those lanes, but
the former vehicles will still be able to use the other lanes;
this is called a 2-pipe regime. Similarly, if the capacity of
the yet freely ﬂowing vehicles is exceeded, all lanes en-
ter a queued state, which is called a 1-pipe regime. In
short, interactions between vehicles in this and the fol-
lowing models are nearly always considered from a user
equilibrium perspective [68]. Daganzo et al. applied the
theory to a case where there is a set of special lanes on
which only priority vehicles can drive. The theory was

also suited to describe congestion on a motorway diverge,
such that the motorway itself can still be in the free-ﬂow
regime [69]. For the special case of queue spill back at
a motorway’s off-ramp, Newell also provided a graphi-
cal solution that is based on the use of cumulative curves
[220].

Continuing the previous train of thought, Daganzo pro-
vided a logical extension: he again considered differ-
ent lanes, but now introduced two different types of
drivers: aggressive ones (called rabbits) and timid ones
(called slugs). Daganzo himself states that a correct traf-
ﬁc ﬂow theory should involve both human psychology
and lane-changing aspects, leading him to such a be-
havioural description [71]. The theory was also used
to explain the phenomenon of a capacity funnel [182]:
according to the theory, once a capacity drop occurs,
the recovery to the capacity-ﬂow regime can not occur
spontaneously, thereby requiring an exogeneous mech-
anism. Daganzo provides an explanation, called the
pumping phenomenon: drivers temporarily accept shorter
time headways downstream of an on-ramp, leading to
a ‘pumped state’ of high-density and high-speed trafﬁc,
or in other words, a capacity-ﬂow regime [72]. Chung
and Cassidy later provided a validation of the theory, by
applying it to describe merge bottlenecks on multi-lane
motorways in Toronto (Canada) and Berkeley (Califor-
nia). In their study, they introduced the concept of semi-
congestion, denoting a regime in which on vehicle class
enters a state with a reduced mean speed, whereas the
other vehicle class can still travel unimpeded. Their ﬁnd-
ings indicated an agreement between both shock wave
speeds empirically observed and predicted by the model
[58].

An interesting case to which the LWR theory can be ap-
plied, is the problem of moving bottlenecks as stated by
Gazis and Herman [96]. Examples of such bottlenecks
are slower trucks on the right shoulder lanes, which can
impede upstream trafﬁc. Newell was among the ﬁrst to
try to give a satisfactory consistent treatment of this type
of bottlenecks. The trick he used was to translate the
problem into a moving coordinate system that is travel-
ling at the bottleneck’s velocity. This resulted in a de-
scription of a stationary bottleneck, after which the clas-
sic LWR theory can be applied [219]. Although the the-
ory is sound, there exist some serious drawbacks, mainly
due to its underlying assumptions. For example, the mov-
ing bottlenecks are assumed to be long convoys, and other
drivers’ behaviours are not affected by the bottlenecks’
speeds; even more serious is the fact that the theory is
not valid for very light trafﬁc conditions, and that several
strange effects are predicted by the theory (e.g., a bottle-
neck with increasing speed can result in a lower upstream
capacity). To this end, Mu˜noz and Daganzo applied the
previously mentioned behavioural model with rabbits and
slugs to the problem of a moving bottleneck. Their the-
ory performs satisfactorily and agrees well with empiri-
cally observed motorway features. However, because of
the fact that it relies on the LWR model, it is not entirely

22

valid for bottlenecks that travel at high speeds under light
trafﬁc conditions. In this latter case, they state that driver
differences are much more important than the dynamics
dictated by the kinematic model [197].

Another theory that deals with the problem of moving
bottlenecks, is the one proposed by Daganzo and Laval:
they treat moving bottlenecks as a sequence of consec-
utive ﬁxed obstructions that have the same capacity re-
straining effects. Despite the fact that the previous the-
ory of Mu˜noz and Daganzo has a good performance, it
does not easily lend itself to discretisation schemes that
allow numerical solutions. In contrast to this, the hybrid
theory (ﬁxed obstructions coupled with the LWR model
dynamics) of Daganzo and Laval holds high promise
as they have shown that it can be discretised in a nu-
merically stable fashion [76]. As a continuation of this
work, Lavel furthermore investigated the power of these
ﬁxed obstructions, allowing him to capture lane-changes
as random events modelled by moving bottlenecks in a
LWR 1-pipe regime. It is suggested that (disruptive) lane
changes form the main cause for instabilities in a trafﬁc
stream. This leads the ‘Berkeley school’ to the statement
that incorporating lane-change capabilities into multi-
lane macroscopic models seems a prerequisite for ob-
serving effects such as capacity drops, kinematic waves
of fast vehicles, . . . [160] In this respect, Jin provides a
theory that explicitly takes into account to effects of lane
changes [144]. The starting point in this model, is the
presence of certain road areas in which trafﬁc streams
mix. The underlying assumption here is that all lane
changes lead to the same trafﬁc conditions in each lane:
the crucial element in the model is that vehicles perform-
ing lane changes are temporarily counted twice in the
density total. This new ‘effective density’, is then used
to transform the qe(k) fundamental diagram, leading to
a reversed lambda shape. However, because the current
version of the theory employs a small artiﬁcial constant
to introduce the lane changes, we question its practical
applicability when it comes to calibration and validation.

To conclude this overview of the ﬁrst-order models, we
highlight two other successful attempts at increasing the
capabilities of the classic LWR model. A ﬁrst important
extension was made by Logghe, who derived a multi-
class formulation8 that allows for the correct modelling
of heterogeneous trafﬁc streams (e.g., preserving the
FIFO property for interacting classes). Classes are
distinguished by their maximum speed, vehicle length,
and capacity (all intended for a triangular qe(k) funda-
mental diagram). A central ingredient to his theory, is
the interactions between different user classes that reside
on a road: in this respect, each class acts selﬁshly, with
slower vehicles taking on the role of moving bottlenecks.
Besides being able to construct analytical and graphical
solutions, Logghe also provided a stable numerical
scheme, as well as a complete network version with

road inhomogeneities, and two-way merges and diverges
[177]. A second extension was made by Jin; it actually
deals with a whole plethora of extensions, in particular
for inhomogeneous links (e.g., lane drops), merge and
diverge zones, and mixed-type vehicles (i.e., having
different qe(k) fundamental diagram characteristics).
All these models are then combined in a description for
a multi-commodity kinematic wave model for network
trafﬁc, whereby the commodities signify vehicles taking
different paths [143].

A ﬁnally important aspect that is mainly related to
lane changes, is the anisotropy property of a trafﬁc
stream. This property basically states that drivers
are not inﬂuenced by the presence upstream vehi-
cles. In a sense, most models describing the acceler-
ation behaviour of a vehicle, only take into account
the state of the vehicle directly in front. For most
macroscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models, this anisotropy con-
stitutes a necessary ingredient. However, in his orig-
inal paper, Richards very subtly points out that the
fact of whether or not drivers only react to the con-
In
ditions ahead, remains an open question [251].
contrast to this, Newell states that a driver is only in-
ﬂuenced by downstream conditions, leading to a nat-
ural cause-and-effect relation, making the problem
mathematically well-posed [216]. Recently, Zhang
stated that the anisotropy property is likely to be vi-
olated in multi-lane trafﬁc ﬂows. His explanation
is closely tied to the concavity character of a qe(k)
fundamental diagram (non-concave regions can lead
to characteristics that travel faster than the space-
mean speed of the trafﬁc stream). He also provides
an intuitive reasoning based on Daganzo’s rabbits
and slugs, whereby tailgating vehicles induce slower
downstream vehicles to ‘make way’. Note that for
single-lane trafﬁc ﬂows, the anisotropy property is
expected to hold because of the FIFO property (ve-
hicles can not pass each other), although there are
exceptions in the case of some higher-order macro-
scopic trafﬁc ﬂow models [305].

2.1.6 Higher-order models

The development of higher-order macroscopic models
came as a response to the apparent shortcomings of the
ﬁrst-order LWR model. Harold Payne was among the
ﬁrst in 1971 to develop such a higher-order model [231].
In those days, ramp metering9 control strategies were ba-
sically an all-empirical occasion. Payne recognised the
necessity to include dynamic models in the control of on-
ramps; the celebrated LWR model however, was found to
perform unsatisfactorily with respect to the modelling of
real-life trafﬁc ﬂows. One of these shortcomings, was the

8At approximately the same time, Chanut and Buisson constructed
a ﬁrst-order model that incorporates vehicles with different lengths and
free-ﬂow speeds [49]. Their model can be considered as a trimmed-
down version of Logghe’s multi-class formulation.

9Ramp metering is an ATMS whereby a trafﬁc light is placed at
an on-ramp, such that trafﬁc enters the highway from the on-ramp by
drops. We refer the reader to the work of Bellemans [22] and Hegyi
[114] for an overview and some recent advancements.

23

kt + (k vs)x = 0,

(14)

2.1.7 Critiques on higher-order models

model’s inability to generate stop-and-go waves. Zhang
later traced this to be a consequence of the model’s persis-
tent reliance on a single equilibrium curve (i.e., the fun-
damental diagrams) [306].
In the LWR model, drivers
are assumed to adapt their vehicle speed instantaneously
according to the fundamental diagram when crossing a
shock wave, a phenomenon termed the no-memory effect
(i.e., they encounter inﬁnite accelerations and decelera-
tions [300]). One option that leads to a solution of the
previously mentioned problems, is to introduce different
fundamental diagrams for vehicles driving under differ-
ent trafﬁc conditions; this avenue was explored by Newell
[213] and Zhang [301]. Another, more popular type of
solution was proposed by Payne (as well as by Whitham
some years later [291]): they suggested to add an equa-
tion to the LWR conservation law (6) and its fundamental
diagram10. This new dynamic speed equation was de-
rived from the classical car-following theories of Gazis
et al. [97] (see also section 2.3.1 for more details). An
important aspect is this derivation, is the fact that the car-
following model includes a reaction time, resulting in a
momentum equation that relates the space-mean speed of
a vehicle stream to its density. As a result, vehicles no
longer instantaneously change their speed when crossing
a shock wave. Payne’s second-order macroscopic traf-
ﬁc ﬂow model is now described by the following pair of
PDEs, i.e., a conservation law and a momentum equation:

dvs = vst + vsvsx

=

convection

| {z }

vse (k) − vs
τ

−

c2(k)
k

kx

,

(15)

relaxation

anticipation

|

{z

}

| {z }

with vst and vsx denoting the partial derivatives of the
space-mean speed with respect to time and space, re-
spectively, vse the traditional fundamental diagram, and
τ the reaction time. The function c(k) corresponds to the
model-dependent sound speed of trafﬁc (i.e., the typical
speed of a backward propagating kinematic shock wave);
examples of c(k) are [307]:

1
2τ

dvse (k)
dk

−

−

r

−

v
τ
r
dvse (k)
dk

k

(Payne)

(16)

(Whitham)

(17)

(Zhang)

(18)

with v being a parameter in equation (17).

In equation (15), the left hand side corresponds to the
derivative of the speed, i.e., the acceleration of vehicles.

10Note that Lighthill and Whitham originally proposed to extend the
conservation law in their model with relaxation and diffusion terms, but
the idea did not receive much thought at the time [169].

24

As can be seen from the formulation, Payne identiﬁed
three different aspects for the momentum equation: a
convection term describing how the space-mean speed
changes due to the arrival and departure of vehicles at the
time-space location (t, x), a relaxation term describing
how vehicles adapt their speed to the conditions dictated
by the fundamental diagram, but with respect to a certain
reaction time (as opposed to the instantaneous adaption
in the LWR model), and ﬁnally an anticipation term de-
scribing how vehicles react to downstream trafﬁc condi-
tions.

In continuation of the above derivation, many other
higher-order models have been based on the Payne-
Whitham (PW) second-order trafﬁc ﬂow model. An ex-
ample is the work of Phillips, who changed the reaction
time τ in the relaxation term of equation (15) from a con-
stant to a value that is dependent on the current density
[236]. Another example is due to K¨uhne, who artiﬁcially
introduced a viscosity term into equation (15), in order
to smooth the shock waves [157]. The physical role that
viscosity plays in a vehicular trafﬁc stream is however
not entirely understood: according to Zhang, the viscos-
ity reﬂects the resistance of drivers against sharp changes
in speeds [306]. For a rather complete overview of exten-
sions to the PW model, we refer the reader to the work of
Helbing [121].

Higher-order models have been successfully applied in
various computer simulations of trafﬁc ﬂows, e.g., the
original FREFLO implementation by Payne [232], the
work of Kwon and Machalopoulos who developed KRO-
NOS which is an FDE solver for a motorway corridor
[158], the METANET model of Messmer and Papageor-
giou [193], . . . Despite their success, it was Daganzo who
in 1995 published their ﬁnal requiem, which stood out
as an obituary for all higher-order models [67]. From a
theoretical perspective, there were some serious physical
ﬂaws that littered these second-order models. Most no-
tably was the fact that there exist two families of charac-
teristics (called Mach lines) in the Payne-Whitham type
models. On the one hand, there are characteristics that
imply a diffusion-like behaviour, which under certain cir-
cumstances can lead to negative speeds at the end of a
queue, i.e., vehicles travelling backwards. On the other
hand, there are characteristics that have the property of
travelling faster than the propagation of trafﬁc ﬂow. This
latter gas-like behaviour means that vehicles can get in-
ﬂuenced by upstream conditions (because information is
sent along the characteristics), which is a clear violation
of the anisotropy property for single-lane trafﬁc as ex-
plained in the previous section. From a physical point of
view, the relaxation term in equation (15) may even intro-
duce a ‘suction process’ because slower vehicles can get
sucked along by leading faster ones [113].

Several years after these critiques, Papageorgiou re-
sponded directly to the comments stated in Daganzo’s

article [227].
In his response, Papageorgiou put a lot
of emphasis at the incapabilities of ﬁrst-order trafﬁc
ﬂow models for use in a trafﬁc control strategy (e.g.,
ramp metering). He very brieﬂy reacts to the anisotropy
violation, by mentioning that in multi-lane trafﬁc ﬂows,
the space-mean speeds of the different lanes are not
all the same, leading to characteristics that are allowed
to travel faster than the space-mean speed of all lanes
combined. With respect to negative speeds (and hence,
negative ﬂows), he proposes to simply include an a
posteriori check that allows to set the negative ﬂows
equal to zero. One year later,
in 1999, Heidemann
reconsidered these higher-order models, but this time
from the perspective of mathematical ﬂaws. His main
argument was the fact that the models led to an internal
inconsistency, because they ignored some aspects related
to the conservation law [115]. However, after careful
scrutiny, Zhang later refuted Heidemann’s claims:
the
inconsistencies that plague the models are a result of the
insistence on the universality of a conservation law and
the imposing of arbitrary solutions. As a consequence,
the Payne-Whitham type of models are mathematically
consistent theories, although they may suffer from the
aforementioned physical quirks [307].

Note that the dynamic speed equation (15), can also
be cast in another form that is more closely related
to a gas-kinetic analogy. With this in mind, we can
rewrite the momentum equation as follows [134]:

dvs = vst + vsvsx

transport
vse (k) − vs
| {z }
τ

−

Px
k

=

+

vsxx

, (19)

ν
k

relaxation

pressure

viscosity

|

{z

| {z }

}

|{z}

with now P denoting the trafﬁc pressure and ν
the kinematic trafﬁc viscosity (as introduced by
K¨uhne [157]). The convection term has been re-
labelled a transport term, describing the propaga-
tion of the speed proﬁle with the speed of the vehi-
cles. The pressure term reﬂects the change in space-
mean speed due to arriving vehicles having different
speeds, and the viscosity term reﬂects changes due
to the ‘friction’ between different successive vehi-
cles. The classic Payne model is obtained if we set
P = kc2(k) and ν = 0.

In contrast to Papageorgiou’s response which did not pro-
vide a deﬁnite answer, Aw and Rascle carefully examined
the reason why the PW model exhibited the strange phe-
nomena indicated in Daganzo’s requiem [11]. The root
cause of this behaviour can be traced back to the spatial
derivative Px of the pressure term in equation (19). Their
solution suggests to abandon the transport and relaxation
terms, and replace the spatial derivative of the pressure P
(which is a function of the density k) with a convective
(Lagrangian) derivative, i.e., D/Dt = ∂t + (vs · ∇) =

∂t + vs∂x, with (vs · ∇) called the advective derivative
term [240]:

(vs + P (k))t + vs (vs + P (k))x = 0.

(20)

This new formulation allows to remedy all Daganzo’s
stated problems [11]. Because of the somewhat limited
character of their derivation of equation (20), Rascle add
a relaxation term to the equation’s right-hand side, and
developed a numerically stable discretisation scheme, as
well as showing convergence to the classic LWR model
when the relaxation tends towards zero [246].

To end our overview of higher-order models, we illustrate
two other types. The ﬁrst model is actually a third-order
model created by Helbing. It is based on the two PDEs of
the Payne-Whitham type models, but is extended with a
third equation that describes the change in the variance of
the speed, denoted by Θ [118]. Helbing derived his equa-
tions using a gas-kinetic analogy, resulting in the follow-
ing Navier-Stokes-like equation (it is typically encoun-
tered in the pressure term for P ):

Θt + vsΘx =

2(Θe(k) − Θ)
τ

+

relaxation

vsx (ν vsx − P )

{z

}

+

2
|
k

ν
|
k

pressure
κ
k

viscosity

vsxx +
{z

Θxx

,
}

(21)

}

{z

|
with now the equilibrium relation vse (k, Θ) of equation
(19) also depending on the speed variance Θ. In addition
to the viscosity ν, the dynamic speed variance equation
(21) also contains an equilibrium relation Θe(k, vs) for
the variance of the speed, and κ which is a kinetic coef-
ﬁcient that is related to the reaction time τ , the density
k, and the speed variance Θ. For ν = κ = 0, Hel-
bing’s model reduces to an inviscid Euler type model as
explained in section 2.1.1 [149]. Whereas in the LWR
model there is only one family of characteristics, and in
the PW model there are two families, the Helbing model
generates three different families of characteristics; this
implies that small perturbations in the trafﬁc ﬂow propa-
gate both with the trafﬁc ﬂow itself, as well as in upstream
and downstream direction relative to this ﬂow [134].

The second model we illustrate, is the non-equilibrium
model of Zhang. Because of the relaxation terms in
the Payne-Whitham equations, drivers initially tend to
‘overshoot’ the equilibrium speed as dictated by the
vse(k) fundamental diagram. It takes a certain amount
of time for them to adapt to their speed to the new
trafﬁc conditions (i.e., a change in density is accom-
panied by a smooth change in space-mean speed), af-
ter which they converge on the diagram. This latter as-
pect gives rise to the empirically observed scatter in the

25

(k,q) phase space, leading Zhang to the terminology of
‘non-equilibrium models’ because of the deviation from
the one-dimensional equilibrium fundamental diagram
[300].

In his model, Zhang considers equilibrium trafﬁc to be
a state in which dvs/dt = ∂k/∂x = 0.
In similar
spirit of Payne’s theory, Zhang constructs his model using
an equilibrium relation between density and space-mean
speed (i.e., the fundamental diagram), a reaction time that
allows relaxation, and an anticipation term that adjusts
the space-mean speed to downstream trafﬁc conditions.
This results in a macroscopic model that contains equa-
tion (14) as the conservation law, as well as the following
momentum equation:

dvs = vst + vsvsx

=

vse(k) − vs
τ

− k

dvse (k)
dk

(cid:18)

2

(cid:19)

kx,

(22)

with the last anticipation term showing the dependence
on the spatial change of the density. Zhang also com-
plements the theory with a ﬁnite difference scheme that
allows to solve the equations in a numerically stable fash-
ion, based on an extension of the Godunov scheme that
satisﬁes the entropy condition referred to in section 2.1.3
[303].

Just as with the improved PW model of Aw and Ras-
cle,
this model alleviates Daganzo’s stated problem
of wrong-way travel, even though there are also two
families of characteristics, travelling slower, respectively
faster, than the space-mean speed of trafﬁc. An impor-
tant fact here is that for the slower characteristics, the
associated shock waves and fans correspond perfectly
to those of the ﬁrst-order LWR model. However, the
shock waves and fans associated with the faster family
of characteristics can still violate the anisotropy property
of trafﬁc (although they decay exponentially), but in
the end, Zhang questions its universal validity, stating
that trafﬁc might occasionally violate this principle due
to the heterogeneity of a trafﬁc stream [302, 305]. The
violation of anisotropy, i.e., drivers get inﬂuenced by
is sometimes referred to as gas-like
upstream trafﬁc,
behaviour, because in contrast to ﬂuid-dynamics, gas
particles are not anisotropic.
In an attempt to remove
this faulty behaviour, Zhang developed yet another
non-equilibrium model that removed the gas-like be-
haviour,
thereby respecting the anisotropy property.
Moreover, both families of characteristics in his model
satisfy the condition of travelling at a lower speed than
the space-mean speed of the trafﬁc stream, but still
keeping the one-to-one correspondence between the
slower characteristics and those of the ﬁrst-order LWR
model. At present, it is however unclear if this new
model can generate stop-and-go waves, although there
are indications that it can because of the non-equilibrium
transitions that can occur [304].

Despite the signiﬁcant progress that has been made
on the front of higher-order macroscopic trafﬁc ﬂow
models, the Berkeley school ﬁrmly holds its faith
in ﬁrst-order models and their extensions. Its main
reason is because of the numerical solution schemes
that are well developed and understood. This is not
the case for higher-order models, as these contain
other characteristics
that complicate the ﬁnite
difference schemes (because information is now
carried both up- and downstream, and because their
numerical schemes initially were ﬂawed [303, 160]).
Related to this critique, is the fact that in contrast to
the ﬁrst-order model, no analytical solutions exist
for the higher-order models.

Another reason for sticking with ﬁrst-order models,
is because the school believes that ﬁrst-order char-
acteristics are sufﬁcient for the description of trafﬁc
ﬂows [45]. Using a triangular qe(k) fundamental di-
agram that captures the most important trafﬁc ﬂow
characteristics (i.e., the free-ﬂow speed vff, the ca-
pacity qcap, the jam density kj, and the backward
kinematic wave speed w), results in a further ele-
gance of the models.

2.2 Mesoscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models

The previous section dealt with macroscopic models that
described trafﬁc streams at an aggregated level, derived
from a ﬂuid-dynamic analogy. This section describes
how trafﬁc can be modelled at this aggregate level, but
with special consideration for microscopic characteristics
(e.g., driver behaviour). Because of the ambiguity that
surrounds mesoscopic models, we ﬁrst elucidate what is
meant by the term mesoscopic (i.e., it is something be-
tween a macroscopic and a microscopic approach). In the
sections thereafter, we zoom in on a derivation of meso-
scopic models based on a gas-kinetic analogy. For an
outstanding overview of gas-kinetic models, we refer the
reader to the work of Tamp`ere [262].

2.2.1 The different meanings of ‘mesoscopic’

Considering the amount of literature that has been gener-
ated during the last few decades, it seems to us that there
exists no unanimous consensus as to what exactly consti-
tutes mesoscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models. In general, there are
three popular approaches when it comes to mesoscopic
models [134]:

• Cluster models

When considering vehicles driving on a road, a pop-
ular method is to group nearby vehicles together
with respect to one of their trafﬁc ﬂow characteris-
tics, e.g., their space-mean speed. Instead of having
to perform detailed updates of all vehicles’ speeds
and positions, the cluster approach allows to treat
these vehicles as a set of groups (called clusters,

26

cells, packets, or macroparticles); these groups are
then propagated downstream without the need for
explicit lane-changing manoeuvres (leading to the
coalescing and splitting of colliding and separating
groups).

Examples of this kind of models, are the CONtin-
uous TRafﬁc Assignment Model (CONTRAM) of
Leonard et al. [163], the work of Ben-Akiva et al,
called Dynamic network assignment for the Man-
agement of Information to Travellers (DynaMIT),
which is based on a cell transmission model with a
cell of a link containing a set of vehicles with iden-
tical speeds [24], the Mesoscopic Trafﬁc Simulator
(MesoTS) of Yang, which allows fast predictions of
future trafﬁc states [297], . . .

• Headway distribution models

This rather unknown and somewhat outdated class
of models, places the emphasis on the probabil-
ity distributions of time headways of successive ve-
hicles (this aggregation makes them mesoscopic).
Two popular examples are Buckley’s semi-Poisson
model [36], and Branston’s generalised queueing
model [34]. As clariﬁed in the summary of Hoogen-
doorn and Bovy, the original versions of these head-
way distribution models assume homogeneous traf-
ﬁc ﬂows and they are inadequate at describing the
proper dynamics of trafﬁc ﬂows [134].

• Gas-kinetic models

The third and most important characterisation of
mesoscopic models comes from a gas-kinetic anal-
ogy. Because macroscopic models aim towards
obeying the fundamental diagram (either instanta-
neously as in the ﬁrst-order LWR model or through
a relaxation process as in higher-order models), the
focus there lies on the generation and dissipation of
shock and rarefaction waves. As a consequence,
more complex and non-linear dynamics can not be
reproduced. To remedy this, gas-kinetic models im-
plicitly bridge the gap between microscopic driver
behaviour and the aggregated macroscopic mod-
elling approach.

In the next sections, we will ﬁrst give an overview of the
original gas-kinetic model as derived by Prigogine and
Herman, after which we discuss some of the recent suc-
cessful modiﬁcations that allow for heterogeneity in the
trafﬁc stream (i.e., multi-class modelling), as well as the
inclusion of more speciﬁc driver behavioural characteris-
tics.

2.2.2 Mesoscopic models considered from a gas-

kinetic perspective

As opposed to the macroscopic trafﬁc ﬂows models that
are derived from a conservation equation based on the

Navier-Stokes equations, mesoscopic models can be de-
rived from a gas-kinetic analogy. From individual driv-
ing behaviour (termed a microscopic approach), a macro-
scopic model is derived. The earliest model can be traced
back to the work of the late Nobel laureate Ilya Prigogine,
in cooperation with Frank Andrews and Robert Herman
[241, 242]. A central component in their theory, is the
concept of a phase-space density (PSD):

k(t, x, vs) = k(t, x) P (t, x, vs),

(23)

e

in which P (t, x, vs) denotes the distribution of the vehi-
cles with space-mean speed vs at location x and time t;
the concept of this distribution originated in Boltzmann’s
theory of gas dynamics. For the above density function, a
kinetic conservation equation can be derived, looking as
follows [121]:

k
d
dt
e

=

kt + vs

kx =

kt

+

kt

,

int

(24)

acc

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

e

e

e

e

with now the two terms on the right hand side denoting
the accelerations of and interactions between the vehi-
cles; they are also called gains and losses, relaxation and
slowing down, or continuous and discrete terms, respec-
tively [149, 262]. Equation (24) is called the Prigogine-
Herman kinetic model and it actually describes three pro-
cesses:

1. Similar to the macroscopic conservation equation,
kx describes a convective behaviour: ar-
the term vs
riving and departing vehicles cause a change in the
distribution

e
k of vehicle speeds.

e

(cid:17)

acc

kt

2. The ﬁrst term on the equation’s right hand side,
, describes the acceleration behaviour of ve-
hicles, which is assumed to be a density-dependent
(cid:16)
relaxation process of the speed distribution P of
equation (23) towards some pre-speciﬁed target
speed distribution P0 (typically based on an equi-
librium speed).

e

int

e

(cid:17)

kt

3. The second term on the equation’s right hand side,
, describes the interactions between vehicles,
as fast vehicles either must slow down or overtake
(cid:16)
slower ones (hence implying inherently multi-lane
trafﬁc). The decision on when to either slow down
or to overtake (which is assumed to be a discrete
event), is governed by the probabilities (1 − π) and
π, respectively. The interaction term is called a col-
lision equation, in analogy with the physics of the
Boltzmann equation (where the collision term de-
scribes the scattering of the gas molecules). Because
there occur joint distributions in this latter equation
(i.e., the probability of a faster vehicle encountering
a slower one), a common assumption called vehicu-
lar chaos is used, which states that vehicles’ speeds
are uncorrelated, hence allowing to split the joint
distribution.

27

More than a decade later, Paveri-Fontana criticised
the assumption of vehicular chaos in the interaction
term [230]. He subsequently proposed an improved
gas-kinetic model, in which he extended the phase-space
density of equation (23) with a dependence on the
k(t, x, vs, vdes); in Prigogine’s
desired speed vdes, i.e.,
original derivation, this desired speed was incorrectly
considered to be a property of the road, instead of being
a driver-related property [121].

e

to the inclusion of non-local interaction (braking) term,
and hence their model is referred to as the non-local
gas-kinetic trafﬁc ﬂow model [119, 117]. Interestingly,
this non-locality can generate effects that are similar to
the ones induced by viscosity/diffusion terms in macro-
scopic trafﬁc ﬂows models, causing smooth behaviour at
density jumps [121]. The power of their model is also
demonstrated as it is able to reproduce all trafﬁc regimes
encountered in Kerner’s three-phase trafﬁc theory [148].

An interesting property of the gas-kinetic modelling
approach instigated by the seminal work of Pri-
gogine, is that for densities beyond a certain critical
density, Nelson and Sopasakis found that the model
solutions split into two distinct families. The current
hypothesis surrounding this phenomenon states that
this corresponds to the widely observed data scat-
ter in the empirically obtained (k,q) fundamental di-
agrams [211].

2.2.3 Improvements to the mesoscopic modelling ap-

proach

Signiﬁcant contributions to the gas-kinetic mesoscopic
model have been sporadic; after the work of Paveri-
Fontana, Nelson was among the ﬁrst to tackle the compu-
tational complexity associated with the four-dimensional
phase-space density
k(t, x, vs, vdes) [210]. In his deriva-
tion, he reformulated the relaxation and interaction terms
both as discrete events, based on a bimodal distribution
of the vehicles’ speeds (i.e., corresponding to stopped
and moving vehicles). In contrast to the classic model
which uses a relaxation process in the acceleration term,
Nelson furthermore based his derivation on a microscopic
behavioural model [121, 134, 262].

e

Building on the work of Nelson (which is, as he de-
scribes, just a ﬁrst initial step towards constructing a suit-
able kinetic model), Wegener and Klar derived a kinetic
model in similar spirit, based on a microscopic descrip-
tion of individual driver behaviour with respect to accel-
erations and lane changes. Attractive to their work, is the
fact that they also pay attention to the numerical solutions
of their model, with respect to the description of homo-
geneous trafﬁc ﬂows [290].

Noting that
trafﬁc ﬂow
the correct reproducing of
behaviour at moderate to higher densities still troubled
the existing mesoscopic models, Helbing et al. explored
an interesting avenue. Not only did they capture the
effect that vehicles require a certain ﬁnite space (leading
to an Enskog- instead of a Boltzmann-equation), they
also generalised the interaction term of equation (24).
This last method allowed them to dismiss the traditional
assumption of vehicular chaos, i.e., they were now able
to treat correlations between vehicles’ speeds (which
have a substantial inﬂuence at higher densities). The
trick to obtain this behaviour, was to assume that drivers
react to the downstream trafﬁc conditions. This leads

Central to some of the recently proposed models,
is the step process that transforms one model class
into another. Starting from microscopic driver be-
havioural principles (e.g., accelerating, braking, . . . ),
a mesoscopic model is deduced. This mesoscopic
model can then be translated into an equivalent
macroscopic one by applying the method of mo-
ments. This allows to obtain PDEs that describe
the dynamic evolution of the density k, space-mean
speed vs, and its variance Θ (an exception to this
methodology is the previously mentioned model of
Wegener and Klar that obtains dynamic solutions di-
rectly [290]). As an example, Helbing et al. also
devised a numerical scheme for their previously dis-
cussed model. It was implemented in a simulation
package called MASTER [120].

Important progress was made by the work of Hoogen-
doorn et al., who extended the gas-kinetic trafﬁc ﬂow
models with multiple user classes, in the sense that dif-
ferent classes of drivers have different desired speeds.
In order to achieve this, they replaced the traditional
phase-space density with a multi-class phase-space den-
sity (MUC-PSD). The kinetic conservation equation thus
describes the tempo-spatial evolution of this MUC-PSD
(i.e., the interactions between different user classes), after
which an equivalent system of macroscopic model equa-
tions is derived. The generalisation power of their model
is exempliﬁed as the previously mentioned model of Hel-
bing et al., which is just a special case, having only one
class [132, 133]. The developed multiclass gas-kinetic
model is currently being integrated in a macroscopic sim-
ulation model for complete road networks, called HE-
LENA, which allows prediction of future trafﬁc states,
and hence to assess the effectiveness of policy measures
[135].

Recently, Waldeer derived a kinetic model that is based
on the description of a driver’s acceleration behaviour (as
opposed to his observed speed behaviour). This novel
approach attempts to alleviate the unrealistic jumps in
speeds that are typically encountered in kinetic models.
To this end, Waldeer extends the phase-space density
even further, including a vehicle’s acceleration in addi-
tion to its position, speed, and desired speed (leading to
an even more complex system). Because now the acceler-
ation is updated discretely, the speed will change contin-
uously as a result [287]. Furthermore, Waldeer provided
a numerical scheme for solving his model, by employing
a Monte Carlo technique that is frequently used in non-

28

equilibrium gas-kinetic theory [286].

2.3.1 Classic car-following and lane-changing mod-

To end this overview of gas-kinetic models, we men-
tion the important work of Tamp`ere, who signiﬁcantly
extended the previous modelling approaches [262, 264].
In his work, he used the generalised phase-space density
(as derived by Hoogendoorn [132]), which incorporates
a dependency on the trafﬁc state S (e.g., encompassing
vehicles’ speeds and their desired speeds). As it is an
increasingly recognised fact that a complete trafﬁc ﬂow
model should contain elements which describe the human
behaviour (see for example the comments made by Da-
ganzo [71, 72]), Tamp`ere proposes to include a driver’s
activation level. His human-kinetic model (HKM) is, just
like that of Helbing et al. and Hoogendoorn, able to re-
produce all known trafﬁc regimes. Because of the de-
pendency of the PSD on a behavioural parameter (i.e.,
the activation level that describes a driver’s awareness of
the governing trafﬁc conditions), the model is well-suited
to evaluate the applicability of advanced driver assis-
tance systems (ADAS). As another illustrating example,
the phenomenon of a capacity funnel can be realistically
explained and reproduced [263]. However, despite the
progress related to incorporating human behaviour into
mathematical models for trafﬁc ﬂows, Tamp`ere argues
that most of the work can currently not be validated be-
cause there is no appropriate data yet available.

2.3 Microscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models

Having discussed both mesoscopic and macroscopic traf-
ﬁc ﬂows models, we now arrive at the other end of the
spectrum where the microscopic models reside. Whereas
the former describe trafﬁc operations on an aggregate
scale, the latter kind is based on the explicit consideration
of the interactions between individual vehicles within a
trafﬁc stream. The models typically employ character-
istics such as vehicle lengths, speeds, accelerations, and
time and space headways, vehicle and engine capabili-
ties, as well as some rudimentary human characteristics
that describe the driving behaviour.

The material in this section is organised as follows:
we ﬁrst introduce the classic car-following (and lane-
changing) models as well as some of their modern succes-
sors, after which we discuss the optimal velocity model,
then introduce the more human behaviourally psycho-
physiological spacing models, which are subsequently
followed by a brief description of trafﬁc cellular automata
models. After some words on models based on queueing
theory, the section concludes with a concise overview of
some of the (commercially) available microscopic traf-
ﬁc ﬂow simulators, as well as some of the issues that are
related to the calibration and validation of microscopic
trafﬁc ﬂow models.

More detailed information with respect to microscopic
models (more speciﬁcally, car-following models), can be
found in the book of May [190], the overview of Rothery
[92], the work of Ahmed [2], and the overview of Brack-
stone and McDonald [32].

29

els

Probably the most widely known class of microscopic
trafﬁc ﬂow models is the so-called family of car-
following or follow-the-leader models. One of the oldest
‘models’ in this case, is the one due to Reuschel [250],
Pipes [238], and Forbes et al. [90]. It is probably best
known as the “two-second rule” taught in driving schools
everywhere11 . An earlier example of this line of reason-
ing is the work of Herrey and Herrey, who speciﬁed a safe
driving distance that also included the distance needed to
come to a full stop [129].

It still remains astonishing that the seemingly daunting
and complex task that encompasses driving a vehicle,
can be executed with such relative ease and little exer-
cise, as is testiﬁed by the many millions of kilometres
that are driven each year. In spite of this remark, the ﬁrst
mathematical car-following models that have been devel-
oped, were based on a description of the interaction be-
tween two neighbouring vehicles in a trafﬁc stream, i.e.,
a follower and its leader. In this section, we historically
sketch the development of car-following theories, as they
evolved from conclusions about early experiments into
more sophisticated models.

The above mentioned model was originally formulated
as the following ordinary differential equation (ODE) for
single-lane trafﬁc:

dvi(t)
dt

=

vi+1(t) − vi(t)
T

,

(25)

with vi(t) and vi+1(t) the speeds of the following, re-
spectively leading, vehicle at time t, and T a relaxation
parameter. For the above case, the underlying assump-
tion/justiﬁcation is that vehicle i (the follower) tries to
achieve the speed vi+1(t) of vehicle i + 1 (its leader),
whilst taking a certain relaxation time T into account.

As equation (25) describes a stable system, Chandler et
al. were among the ﬁrst to include an explicit reaction
time τ into the model (e.g., τ =1.5 s), leading to desta-
bilisation of vehicle platoons [48]. This reaction encom-
passes both a perception-reaction time (PRT), i.e., the
driver sees an event occurring (for example the brake
lights of the leading vehicle), as well as a movement
time (MT), i.e., the driver needs to take action by apply-
ing pressure to the vehicle’s brake pedal [92]. Introduc-
ing this behaviour, resulted in what is called a stimulus-
response model, whereby the right-hand side of equation
(25) describes the stimulus and the left-hand side the re-
sponse (the response is frequently identiﬁed as the ac-
celeration, i.e., the actions a driver takes by pushing the
acceleration or brake pedal). The relaxation parameter
is then reciprocally reformulated as the sensitivity to the
stimulus, i.e., λ = T −1, resulting in the following ex-
pression:

11Note that, in his article, Pipes actually stated his safe-distance rule
as keeping at least a space gap equal to a vehicle length for every 15
km/h of speed you are travelling at [238, 134].

response = sensitivity × stimulus

dvi(t + τ )
dt

= λ (vi+1(t) − vi(t)).

(26)

Additional to this theoretical work, there were also some
early controlled car-following experiments, e.g., the ones
done by Kometani and Sasaki, who add a non-zero ac-
celeration term to the right-hand side of the stimulus-
response relation, in order to describe collision-free driv-
ing based on a safety distance [152, 153].

Equation (26) is called a delayed differential equation
(DDE), which, in this case, is known to behave in an un-
stable manner, even resulting in collisions under certain
initial conditions. Gazis et al. remedied this situation by
making the stimulus λ dependent on the distance, i.e., the
space gap gsi between both vehicles [97]:

dvi(t + τ )
dt

= λ

vi+1(t) − vi(t)
xi+1(t) − xi(t)

.

(27)

Further advancements to this car-following model were
made by Edie, who introduced the current speed of the
following vehicle [84]. Gazis et al, forming the club of
people working at General Motors’ research laboratories,
generalised the above set of models into what is called the
General Motors non-linear model or the Gazis-Herman-
Rothery (GHR) model [95]:

dvi(t + τ )
dt

= λ vm

i (t)

vi+1(t) − vi(t)
(xi+1(t) − xi(t))l ,

(28)

with now λ, l, and m model parameters (in the early days,
the model was also called the L&M model [98]). For a
good overview of the different combinations of parame-
ters attributed to the resulting models, we refer the reader
to the book of May [190], and the work of Ahmed [2].

A recent extension to the classic car-following theory, is
the work of Treiber and Helbing, who developed the in-
telligent driver model (IDM). Its governing equation is
the following [268, 267, 269]:

dvi
dt

1 −

= amax 




|

δ

vi
vdes (cid:19)

(cid:18)

−

(cid:18)

g∗
s (vi, ∆vi)
gsi

(cid:19)

acceleration

deceleration

, (29)

2








|

}

{z

{z

}
with amax the maximum acceleration, vdes the vehicles’
desired speed, and ∆vi the speed difference with the lead-
ing vehicle (we have dropped the dependencies on time
t for the sake of visual clarity). The ﬁrst terms within
the brackets denote the tendency of a vehicle to acceler-
ate on a free road, whereas the last term is used to al-
low braking in order to avoid a collision (the effective
desired space gap g∗
s (vi, ∆vi) is based on the vehicle’s

30

speed, its relative speed with respect to its leader, a com-
fortable maximum deceleration, a desired time headway,
and a jam space gap). The ﬁner qualities of the IDM are
that it elegantly generalises most existing car-following
models, and that it has an explicit link with the non-local
gas-kinetic mesoscopic model discussed in section 2.2.3
[267]. It is furthermore quite capable of generating all
known trafﬁc regimes. Based on the IDM, Treiber et al.
also constructed the human driver model (HDM), which
includes a ﬁnite reaction time, estimation errors, tempo-
ral and spatial anticipation, and adaptation to the global
trafﬁc situation [270].

Similar to the work of Kometani and Sasaki, Gipps pro-
posed a car-following model based on a safe braking
distance, leading to collision-free dynamics [100]. The
model is interesting because no differential equations are
involved (i.e., the speeds are computed directly from one
discrete time step to another), and because it can capture
underestimation and overreactions of drivers, which can
lead to trafﬁc ﬂow instabilities. In similar spirit of Gipps’
work, Krauß developed a model that is based on assump-
tions about general properties of trafﬁc ﬂows, as well as
typical acceleration and deceleration capabilities of ve-
hicles. Fundamental to his approach, is that all vehicles
strive for collision-free driving, resulting in a model that
has the ability to generalise most known car-following
models [155, 156].

Another example of a recently proposed car-following
model, is the ‘simple’ model of Newell, who formulates
his theory in terms of vehicle trajectories whereby the
trajectory of a following vehicle is essentially the same
as that of its leader12. Remarkable properties are that
the model has no driver reaction time, and that it cor-
responds to the ﬁrst-order macroscopic LWR trafﬁc ﬂow
model with a triangular qe(k) fundamental diagram (see
section 2.1.3) [221]. The model furthermore also agrees
quite well with empirical observations made at a signal-
lised intersection, which support the model and conse-
quently also the ﬁrst-order macroscopic LWR model [3].

As a ﬁnal example, we brieﬂy illustrate Zhang’s car-
following theory which is based on a multi-phase vehicu-
lar trafﬁc ﬂow. This means that the model is able to repro-
duce both the capacity drop and hysteresis phenomena,
because his theory is based on the asymmetry between
acceleration and deceleration characteristics of vehicles
[182]. The model also holds a generalisation strength,
as it is possible to derive all other classic car-following
models [308].

With respect to the stability of the car-following models,
there exist two criteria, i.e., local and asymptotic stability
(also called string stability). The former describes how
initial disturbances in the behaviour of a leading vehicle
affect a following vehicle, whereas the latter is used to
denote the stability of a platoon of following vehicles. By
such a stable platoon it is then meant that initial ﬁnite dis-
turbances exponentially die out along the platoon. Early

12A similar model was proposed earlier by Helly [125, 99, 221].

experiments by Herman et al. already considered these
criteria for both real-life as for the developed mathemati-
cal car-following models [127].

As an example, we graphically illustrate in Fig. 8 the
asymptotic stability of a platoon of some 10 identical ve-
hicles. We have used the simple car-following model of
Gazis et al. of equation (27) to describe how a following
vehicle changes his acceleration, based on the speed dif-
ference and space gap with its direct leader in the platoon
(the sensitivity λ was set to 5000 m/s2 with a reaction
time τ = 1 s). The left part of the ﬁgure shows all the ve-
hicles’ positions, whereas the middle and right parts show
the speeds and accelerations of the 2nd , the 5th , and the
10th vehicle respectively. We can see that all vehicles are
initially at rest (homogeneously spaced), after which the
leading vehicle applies an acceleration of 1 m/s2, decel-
erates with -1 m/s2, and then comes to a full stop. As can
be seen, the ﬁrst 4 following vehicles mimic the leader’s
behaviour rather well, but from the 5th following vehicle
on, an instability starts to form (note that all following
vehicles suffer from oscillations in their acceleration be-
haviour). This instability grows and leads to very large
accelerations for the last vehicle, which even momen-
tarily reaches a negative speed of some -150 km/h; this
is clearly unrealistic (the vehicles shouldn’t be driving
backwards on the road), indicating that the speciﬁed car-
following model is unsuitable to capture the realistic be-
haviour of drivers under these circumstances.

In continuation of this small excerpt on stability, we refer
the reader to the work of Zhang and Jarrett who analyt-
ically and numerically derive the general stability condi-
tions (in function of the reaction time and the sensitiv-
ity to the stimulus) for the previously mentioned classic
car-following models [309], the work of Holland who de-
rives general stability conditions and validates them with
empirical data containing non-identical drivers (i.e., ag-
gressive and timid ones); central to Holland’s work is
the source for instability with respect to a breakdown
of a trafﬁc ﬂow. He relates this event to a so-called
anticipation time that describes the duration for a wave
containing an instability to travel to the current driver
[131]. Finally, we mention that stability analysis is of
paramount importance for e.g., automated vehicle tech-
nologies (‘smart cars’) such as intelligent or adaptive
cruise control (ICC/ACC), as in for example the platoon-
ing experiments in the PATH project where a platoon of
vehicles autonomously drives close to each other at high
speeds.

To conclude this section, we shed some light on the typ-
ical mechanisms behind lane-changing models. With re-
spect to microscopic models for multi-lane trafﬁc, it is
a frequent approximation to only take lateral movements
between neighbouring lanes into account (as opposed to
the within-lane lateral dynamics of a vehicle). In such
cases, a vehicle changes a lane based on an incentive:
these lane changes can then be classiﬁed as being discre-
tionary (e.g., to overtake a slower vehicle), or mandatory
(e.g., to take an off-ramp). When a vehicle (i.e., driver)

has decided to perform a lane change, a check is made
on whether or not it is physically possible to merge in to
the adjacent lane (note this lane changing process also de-
scribes vehicles turning at street intersections). This latter
process is called the gap acceptance behaviour: if there
is no such possibility (as it is frequently the case in dense
trafﬁc), a driver may initiate at forced merging, in which
case the following vehicle in the target lane might have to
yield. This interaction between forced merging and yield-
ing can be frequently observed at on-ramps where heavy
duty vehicles enter the motorway. Although it seems in-
tuitive that there is an asymmetry between the frontal and
backward space gaps in the target lane (i.e., the former is
usually smaller than the latter due to the human behaviour
associated with forced merging and yielding), there is in
our opinion nevertheless not enough empirical data avail-
able to calibrate the microscopic models that describe
lane-changing (see for example the work of Ahmed [2]).
One way to obtain a correct behaviour is to use a kind of
a black box approach, in which for example the down-
stream capacity of a motorway section is used as a mea-
sure for calibrating the interactions (i.e., lane changes)
between vehicles in a trafﬁc stream. Note that as tech-
nology advances, new detailed data sets are constructed.
An example is the work of Hoogendoorn et al. who use
a remote sensing technique to capture vehicle trajectories
based on aerial ﬁlming of driving behaviour under con-
gested conditions [136].

2.3.2 Optimal velocity models

Closely related to the previously discussed classic car-
following models, are the so-called optimal velocity mod-
els (OVM) of Newell and Bando et al. Whereas the previ-
ous car-following models mostly describe the behaviour
of a vehicle that is following a leader, the OVMs modify
the acceleration mechanism, such that a vehicle’s desired
speed is selected on the basis of its space headway, in-
stead of only considering the speed of the leading vehicle
[121]. Newell was the ﬁrst to suggest such an approach,
using an equilibrium relation for the desired speed as a
function of its space headway (e.g., the vs(hs) fundamen-
tal diagram [212].

Bando et al. later improved this model, resulting in the
following equation that describes a vehicle’s acceleration
behaviour [16]:

dvi(t)
dt

= α (V (hsi (t)) − vi(t)) ,

(30)

in which V () is called the optimal velocity function
(OVF). The difference between this desired speed, asso-
ciated with the driver’s current space headway, and the
vehicle’s current speed, is corrected with an acceleration
αV (), with now α a coefﬁcient expressing the sensitivity
of a driver. Speciﬁcation of the optimal velocity func-
tion (typically a sigmoid function such as tanh) is done
such that it is zero for hsi → 0, and bounded to vmax for
hsi → +∞; this latter condition means that the model is

31

]

m

[
 

n
o

i
t
i
s
o
P

400

200

0

−200

−400

−600

−800

−1000

0

]

/

h
m
k
[
 

d
e
e
p
S

100

50

0

−50

−100

−150

−200

0

]

2

s
/
m

[
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
e
c
c
A

l

3

2

1

0

−1

−2

−3

−4

0

10

20

30

60

70

80

90

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

10

20

30

60

70

80

90

40

50

Time [s]

Time [s]

40

50

Time [s]

Figure 8: An example based on Gazis et al.’s car-following model of equation (27), indicating an asymptotically unstable
platoon of 10 vehicles. Left: the time-space trajectories of all ten vehicles (the leading vehicle is shown with a thick solid
line). We can see an instability occurring at the 6th (⋆) vehicle, growing severely such that the last vehicle even has to drive
backwards at a high speed of -150 km/h. Middle: the speeds of the ﬁrst, the 2nd (◦), the 6th (⋆), and the last vehicle (×).
Note the oscillations and negative values for the speeds of the vehicles at the end of the platoon. Right: the accelerations
of the ﬁrst, the 2nd (◦), and the 6th (⋆) vehicle (example based on [141]).

able to describe the acceleration of vehicles without the
explicit need for a leader as in the previous car-following
models.

Interestingly, the OVM requires, in contrast to the clas-
sic car-following models, no need for a reaction time in
order to obtain spontaneous clustering of vehicles [156].
Unfortunately, the model is not always free of collisions,
and can result in unrealistically large accelerations [206].

2.3.3 Psycho-physiological spacing models

Instead of using continuous changes in space gaps and
relative speeds, it was already recognised in the early six-
ties that drivers respond to certain perception thresholds
[32]. For example, a leading vehicle that is looming in
front of a follower, will be perceived as having approxi-
mately the same small size for a large duration, but once
the space gap has shrunk to a certain size, the size of the
looming vehicle will suddenly seem a lot bigger (i.e., like
crossing a threshold), inducing the following vehicle to
either slow down or overtake.

The underlying thresholds with respect to speeds, speed
differences, and space gaps, were cast into a model by
the work of Wiedemann et al. [292]. In this respect, the
models are called psycho-physiological spacing models,
and although they seem quite successful in explaining the
trafﬁc dynamics from a behavioural point of view (even
lane-change dynamics can be included based on suitable
perception thresholds), calibration of the models has nev-
ertheless been a difﬁcult issue [32].

2.3.4 Trafﬁc cellular automata models

In the ﬁeld of trafﬁc ﬂow modelling, microscopic traf-
ﬁc simulation has always been regarded as a time con-
suming, complex process involving detailed models that
describe the behaviour of individual vehicles. Approxi-
mately a decade ago, however, new microscopic models

were being developed, based on the cellular automata
programming paradigm from statistical physics. The
main advantage was an efﬁcient and fast performance
when used in computer simulations, due to their rather
low accuracy on a microscopic scale. These so-called
trafﬁc cellular automata (TCA) are dynamical systems
that are discrete in nature, in the sense that time advances
with discrete steps and space is coarse-grained (e.g., the
road is discretised into cells of 7.5 metres wide, each
cell being empty or containing a vehicle). This coarse-
graininess is fundamentally different from the usual mi-
croscopic models, which adopt a semi-continuous space,
formed by the usage of IEEE ﬂoating-point numbers.
TCA models are very ﬂexible and powerful, in that they
are also able to capture all previously mentioned basic
phenomena that occur in trafﬁc ﬂows [18, 56]. In a larger
setting, these models describe self-driven, many-particle
systems, operating far from equilibrium. And in contrast
to strictly gaseous analogies, the particles in these sys-
tems are intelligent and able to learn from past experi-
ence, thereby opening the door to the incorporation of
behavioural and psychological aspects [55, 294, 121].

Not only in the ﬁeld of vehicular trafﬁc ﬂow mod-
elling, but also in other ﬁelds such as pedestrian be-
haviour, escape and panic dynamics, . . . the cellular au-
tomata approach proved to be quite useful.
It is now
feasible to simulate large systems containing many ‘in-
telligent particles’, such that is it possible to observe
their interactions, collective behaviour, self-organisation,
. . . [140, 274, 123, 121, 199, 200, 54]

2.3.5 Models based on queueing theory

In this ﬁnal section dealing with types of microscopic
trafﬁc ﬂow models, we brieﬂy summarise some of the
models that are based on the paradigm of queueing the-
ory. Early applications of queueing theory to the ﬁeld of
transportation engineering are mostly related to descrip-
tions of the behaviour signallised and unsignallised in-

32

tersections, overtaking on two-lane roads with opposing
trafﬁc, . . . [60]. Another more theoretically oriented ap-
plication can be traced back to the work of Newell, who
gives a nice summary of the mathematical details related
to the practical application of the methodology. Newell
was one of the few people who directly questioned the
usefulness of cleverly devising a lot of methods and solu-
tions, whereby corresponding problems remained absent
[214]. In his later work, Newell reintroduced the concept
of arrival and departure functions (i.e., the cumulative
curves as brieﬂy described in section 2.1.2), giving an an-
alytical but still highly intuitive method for solving traf-
ﬁc ﬂow problems, and drawing parallels with the well-
known and studied ﬁrst-order macroscopic LWR model
[215, 216, 217].

During the mid-nineties, Heidemann developed several
queueing-based trafﬁc ﬂow models, of which the most
powerful version deals with non-stationary conditions
and is able to model the capacity drop and hysteresis
phenomena, as well as providing an explanation for the
wide scatter observed in empirical fundamental diagrams
[116, 182].

Central to the approach in this ﬁeld, is the partitioning
of a road into equal pieces of width 1/kjam. Each of
these pieces is then considered as a service station op-
erating with a service rate µ = kjam · vff. Equivalently,
vehicles arrive at each service station with an arrival rate
λ = k · vff, with the assumption that k is the prevailing
density and that trafﬁc can ﬂow unimpeded in the free-
ﬂow trafﬁc regime. When vehicles enter the motorway,
they can get stuck inside the queues, thereby reducing
the space-mean speed in the system. Different queueing
policies can be speciﬁed in the form of service and arrival
distributions. In queueing theory, the Kendall notation is
adopted, whereby a system is described as A/S/m with
A the arrival distribution, S the service distribution, and
m the number of servers (i.e., service stations). Typical
forms are the M/M/1 queues that have an exponentially
distributed arrival time, exponentially distributed service
time, and one server (with an inﬁnite buffer).

Recently, Van Woensel extended the existing queueing
models for trafﬁc ﬂows, leading to e.g., analytical deriva-
tions of fundamental diagrams based on G/G/m queues
that have general distributions for the arrival and service
rates with multiple servers [293]. The methodology also
includes queues with ﬁnite buffers, and has been applied
to the estimation of emissions, although we question the
validity of this latter approach (which is essentially based
on a one-dimensional fundamental diagram) as we be-
lieve dynamic models are necessary, e.g., to capture tran-
sients in trafﬁc ﬂows [275].

Queue-based models were also used to describe large-
scale trafﬁc systems, e.g., complete countries, as was
mentioned in section 1.2.5 [47]. In that section, we al-
ready mentioned that queues with ﬁnite buffer capacities
are to be preferred in order to correctly model queue spill
back. However, with respect to a proper description of
trafﬁc ﬂow phenomena, some of the problems can not

be so easily solved, e.g., the speed of a backward prop-
agating kinematic shock wave. Take for example vehi-
cles queued behind each other at a trafﬁc light: once the
light turns green, the ﬁrst-order macroscopic LWR model
correctly shows the dispersal of this queue. In a queue-
based model however, once a vehicle exits the front of the
queue, all vehicles simultaneously and instantly move up
one place, thus the kinematic wave propagates backwards
at an inﬁnite speed !

To conclude this short summary on queueing models, we
mention the work of J´ulvez and Boel, who present a simi-
lar approach, based on the use of Petri nets13. Their work
allows them to construct complete urban networks, based
on the joining together of short sections, with continuous
Petri nets for the propagation of trafﬁc ﬂows, and discrete
Petri nets for the description of the trafﬁc lights [19, 146].

2.3.6 Microscopic trafﬁc ﬂow simulators

In continuation of the previous sections that gave an
overview of the different types of existing microscopic
trafﬁc ﬂow models, this section introduces some of the
computer implementations that have been built around
these models. In most cases, the computer simulators in-
corporate the car-following and lane-changing processes
as submodels, as opposed to strategic and operational
modules that work at a higher-level layer (i.e., route
choice, . . . ).

Whereas most microscopic trafﬁc simulators allow to
build a road network, specify travel demands (e.g., by
means of OD tables), there was quite some effort spent
over the last decade, in order to achieve a qualitative visu-
alisation (e.g., complete virtual environments with trees,
buildings, pedestrians, bicycles, . . . An example of such a
virtual environment is shown in Fig. 9, which is based on
VISSIM’s visualisation module. Note that in our opinion,
the usefulness of these virtual scenes should not be un-
derestimated, as in some cases a project’s approval might
hinge on a good visual representation of the results. It is
one thing for policy makers to judge the effects of replac-
ing a signallised intersection with a roundabout, based on
a report of the observed downstream ﬂows of each inter-
section arm, but it gives a whole other feeling when they
are able to see how the trafﬁc streams will interact ! Even
in the early sixties, it was recognised that a visual rep-
resentation of the underlying trafﬁc ﬂow process, was an
undeniable fact for promoting its acceptance among traf-
ﬁc engineers [99]. With respect to this latest comment,
Lieberman even states that “There is a need to view vehi-
cle animation displays, to gain an understanding of how
the system is behaving, in order to explain why the result-
ing statistics were produced” [92].

13Petri nets (invented in the sixties by Carl Adam Petri) are a for-
malism for describing discrete systems [235]; they consist of directed
graphs of ‘transitions’ and ‘places’, with arcs forming the connections
between them. Places can contain ‘tokens’, which can be ‘consumed’
when a transition ‘ﬁres’.

33

ﬂow simulators until 1998 is provided by the Simulation
Modelling Applied to Road Transport European Scheme
Tests, or better known as the SMARTEST report [4].

When using one of these microscopic simulators, it
is important to understand the assumptions and limi-
tations inherent to the implemented models, in order
to judge the results objectively. Indeed, as with any
model, the question on whether some observed be-
haviour arises due to the implemented model, or as
a result of the imposed boundary conditions, should
always be asked, understood, and answered.

2.3.7 Calibration and validation issues

Due to the sometimes large amount of parameters typi-
cally involved in microscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models, their
computational complexity is often a signiﬁcant disadvan-
tage when compared to meso- or macroscopic models (al-
though there are some exceptions, e.g., the trafﬁc cellu-
lar automata models of section 2.3.4). From the point of
view of model calibration and validation, this poses an
interesting conundrum, as in many cases not all param-
eters are equally inﬂuential on the results (thus requir-
ing some sensitivity analyses). In this sense, microscopic
models contain a real danger of purporting to convey a
sort of fake accuracy. Different parameter combinations
can lead to the same phenomenological effects, leaving
us pondering as to what exactly is causing the observed
behaviour [262]. As there is no clear road map on how to
calibrate microscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models, we here give a
small sample of some of the numerous attempts that have
been made.

There is the work of Jayakrishan and Sahraoui who dis-
tinguish between calibration in the conceptual (i.e., at
the level of the underlying mathematical model) and op-
erational (i.e., within the global context of the study)
phases; they apply their operational methodology to both
PARAMICS (micro) and DYNASMART (macro), using
the California Freeway Performance Measurement Sys-
tem (PeMS) database from the PATH project to feed and
couple both models [142].

Based on a publicly available data set of a one-lay road
corridor of six kilometres long (the data contained de-
tailed cumulative curves), Brockfeld et al.
systemati-
cally tested the predicted travel times of some ten well-
known microscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models. As a result of a
non-linear optimisation process to calibrate the models,
they found that the intelligent driver model and the cell-
transmission model perform the best (i.e., below an error
rate of 17%), due to the fact that these models require the
least amount of parameters (there were even some mod-
els such as the Gipps-based ones that had hidden param-
eters). Their ﬁnal conclusion is noteworthy, as they state
that “creating a new model is often done, however cali-
brating this model to reality is a formidable task, which
explains why there currently are more models than results
about them” [35].

Figure 9: A screenshot of the VISSIM microscopic traf-
ﬁc ﬂow simulator, showing a detailed virtual environment
containing trees, buildings, pedestrians, . . . (image repro-
duced after [243]).

Quite a large amount of microscopic trafﬁc ﬂow mod-
els have been developed, in most cases starting from a
research tool, and — by the law of proﬁt — naturally
evolving into full-blown commercial packages, including
e.g., dynamic trafﬁc assignment and other transportation
planning features. Note the sad observation that this com-
mercialisation inherently tends to obscure the underlying
models. In such cases, privacy concerns, company poli-
cies, and project contracts and agreements prohibit a total
disclosure of the mathematical details involved. Some of
these computer models are listed here. For starters, the
Generic Environment for TRafﬁc Analysis and Modeling
(GETRAM) couples the multi-modal trafﬁc assignment
model EMME/2 to the Advanced Interactive Microscopic
Simulator for Urban and Non-Urban Networks (AIM-
SUN2) model [17]. Next, the Parallel microscopic traf-
ﬁc simulator (Paramics), initially developed at the Edin-
burgh Parallel Computing Centre, but afterwards bought
by Quadstone [43, 170]. Subsequently, Yang developed
a MIcroscopic Trafﬁc ﬂow SIMulator (MITSIM) [297],
and Maerivoet constructed a MIcroscopic TRAfﬁc ﬂow
SIMulator (Mitrasim 2000) which was mostly based on
and inﬂuenced by MITSIM’s and Paramics’ dynamic be-
haviour [179]. Two further examples are the Open Source
Software (OSS) package called Simulation of Urban MO-
bility (SUMO), developed at the Deutsches Zentrum f¨ur
Luft- und Raumfahrt [154], and the VISSIM programme
In addi-
developed by the German PTV group [243].
tion, there is the INteractive DYnamic trafﬁc assignment
(INDY) model [185], and the INTEGRATION software
package developed by Van Aerde et al. This latter sim-
it is microscopic in
ulator deserves a special mention:
nature, but the speeds of the vehicles that are propagated
through the network, are based on a macroscopic vse(hs)
fundamental diagram for each link [1]. Finally, we men-
tion the TRansportation ANalysis and SIMulation System
(TRANSIMS) project [205], . . .

An extensive overview of all existing microscopic trafﬁc

34

Related to the previous study, Hourdakis et al. present an
automated systematic calibration methodology based on
an optimisation process, applied to the AIMSUN2 sim-
ulator. The data used for the calibration procedure stem
from a twenty kilometres long motorway in Minneapo-
lis, Minnesota. The process ﬁrst involves a calibration
of the global model parameters (i.e., to get the macro-
scopic ﬂows and speeds correct), after which the local
parameters are dealt with (i.e., ramp metering setups, et
cetera). In their results, Hourdakis et al. state an obtained
average correlation coefﬁcient of 0.961 for manual cali-
bration (the results for the automated calibration are sim-
ilar), which is quite high (they mostly explain this due to
the data’s high level of detail, as well as the quality of the
simulator software) [138].

Recently, Chu et al. extended the systematic, multi-stage
calibration approach for
the PARAMICS simulator.
Based on data of a highly congested six kilometres long
corridor network in the city of Irvine, Orange County,
California,
they ﬁrst calibrate the driving behaviour
models, then the route choice model, after which estima-
tion and ﬁne-tuning of the OD tables is done. Despite
the good reproduction of travel times, their calibration
methodology was done manually, and an automated
optimisation procedure remains future work [57].

Other examples of calibration of microscopic trafﬁc ﬂow
models, include the work of Dowling et al., who give
an extensive account on the application of commercially
available simulation tools to typically encountered trafﬁc
engineering problems [82], and the work of Mahanti
which is primarily based on the correct representation of
OD tables [184].

To end this section, we state some important princi-
ples that are — in our opinion — related to a correct
calibration methodology. First and foremost, we be-
lieve that all trafﬁc ﬂow models (whether they are
macro-, meso- or microscopic in nature), should be
able to accurately reproduce and predict the encoun-
tered delays, queue lengths, and other macroscopic
ﬁrst-order characteristics (i.e., the kinematic wave
speed, a correct and realistic road capacity, . . . ). One
way to test this is the use of cumulative curves, as
they provide an elegant way to automatically per-
form a good calibration. It is for example possible to
consider the difference between observed and sim-
ulated curves, and then use a Kolmogorov-Smirnov
goodness-of-ﬁt statistical test to decide on whether
the difference is statistically signiﬁcant, or if it is just
a Brownian motion with a zero mean. Only when
these ﬁrst-order effects can be correctly reproduced,
the next step can be to consider second-order effects
such as waves of stop-and-go trafﬁc, oscillations, . . .

Furthermore, it is important to take into account the spa-
tial nature of the study area, i.e., a detailed description of
the road infrastructure, with bottleneck locations as well
as up- and downstream boundary conditions. With re-

spect to the model that is created within the computer, it
is paramount to know how the model behaves on both the
link as well as the node level. Because the models are
most of the time working with fairly homogeneous road
links (e.g., constant elevations, no road curvature, . . . ), it
might be necessary to allow for small deviations from (or
ﬁxes to) reality (e.g. inserting extra intermediate nodes in
the network in order to artiﬁcially obtain bottlenecks).

2.4 Submicroscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models

As the level of modelling detail is increased, we enter
the realm of submicroscopic models. Traditional mi-
croscopic models describe vehicles as single operating
units, putting emphasis on the interactions between dif-
ferent (successive) vehicles. In addition to this, submi-
croscopic models push the boundaries even further, giv-
ing detailed descriptions of a vehicle’s inner workings.
This typically entails modelling of the physical charac-
teristics such as engine performance, detailed gearbox
operations, acceleration, braking, and steering manoeu-
vres,
. . . Complementary to the functioning of a vehi-
cle’s physical components, submicroscopic models can
also describe a human driver’s decision taking process in
much more detail than is usually done. Some examples
of submicroscopic models are:

• van Arem’s Microscopic model for Simulation of
Intelligent Cruise Control MIXIC: it contains a
driver model (for deciding on and executing of lane
changes, car-following behaviour, and the appli-
cation of intelligent (or adaptive) cruise control –
ICC/ACC) and a vehicle model (dealing with the en-
gine, the transmission, road friction, aerodynamic,
rolling, and slope resistance) [271].

• In similar spirit, Minderhoud has developed the Sim-
ulation model of Motorways with Next generation
vehicles (Simone);
this model focusses on intel-
ligent driver support systems, such as ICC/ACC,
platoon driving, centralised control of vehicles, et
cetera. In contrast to most other (sub)microscopic
models, Simone explicitly allows for rear-end col-
lisions to occur under certain parameter combina-
tions. As there is a close coupling between driver
behaviour related parameters and those of the simu-
lation, these collision dynamics enable the modeller
to ﬁnd realistic values (or ranges) for these parame-
ters [195].

• Ludmann’s Program for the dEvelopment of Lon-
gitudinal micrOscopic trafﬁc Processes in a Sys-
temrelevant environment (PELOPS), is akin to the
previous two models.
It is however more techno-
logically oriented with respect to the car-following
behaviour of vehicles, aiming at merging both a
driver’s perceptions and decisions, the car’s han-
dling, and the surrounding trafﬁc conditions. At
the core of the model, there are four modules that

35

respectively describe vehicle routing in a road net-
work, human decision taking (i.e., car-following,
tactical decisions with respect to lane-changing,
. . . ), vehicle handling (i.e., a driver’s physical acts of
steering, accelerating and braking, . . . ), and ﬁnally
a module that describes physical vehicle character-
istics (traction on elevations, engine capabilities, ex-
haust gas modelling, . . . ) [178, 85].

To conclude this section, we like to mention an often sci-
entiﬁcally neglected area of research, namely the popular
ﬁeld of simulation in the computer gaming industry. Over
the last couple of decades, numerous arcade-style rac-
ing simulations have been developed, allowing a player
to be completely immersed in a three-dimensional vir-
tual world in which racing at high speeds is paramount.
Examples of these kinds of programmes are the highly
addictive world of Formula 1 racing, street racing in
city environments, off-road rally races, . . . The underly-
ing submicroscopic models in these games, have over
the course of several years been evolved to incorporate
all sorts of physical effects. Friction characteristics (e.g.,
pavement versus asphalt), road elevation, wet conditions,
air drag and wind resistance (including effects such as
slip streaming and downforce), car weight depending on
fuel consumption, tyre wear, . . . have had inﬂuences on
what we commonly refer to as car handling, i.e., realistic
behaviour with respect to car acceleration, braking, and
steering. Thanks to the increasing computational power
of desktop computers, graphics cards, as well as dedi-
cated gaming consoles (e.g., Microsoft’s Xbox, Sony’s
PlayStation, Nintendo’s GameCube, . . . ), the path to a
whole plethora of extra realistic effects has been paved:
skidding, under- and oversteering, sun glare, overly real-
istic collision dynamics (in our opinion, this is where the
arcade sensation plays a major role), . . .

2.5 The debate between microscopic and

macroscopic models

Deciding which class of models, i.e., microscopic, or
macroscopic (and we also include the mesoscopic mod-
els), is the correct one to formulate trafﬁc ﬂow problems,
has been a debate among trafﬁc engineers ever since the
late ﬁfties. Although the debate was not as intense as
say, the one between ﬁrst- and higher-order macroscopic
trafﬁc ﬂow models (see section 2.1.7 for more details),
it nevertheless sparkled some interesting issues. As is
nearly always the case, the true answer to the above ques-
tion depends on the kind of problem one is interested in
solving [98].

In the beginning years of trafﬁc ﬂow engineering, a
bridge was formed between the microscopic General Mo-
tors car-following model of equation (28), and the Green-
berg macroscopic model [104, 95]. This proved to be
quite a signiﬁcant breakthrough, as it was now possible to
obtain all known steady-state macroscopic fundamental
diagrams, by integrating the car-following equation with

suitably chosen parameter values [98]. A recent example
of this kind of linking, was done by Treiber and Helbing,
who provided a micro-macro link between their non-local
gas-kinetic mesoscopic model (see section 2.2.3) and the
intelligent driver model (see section 2.3.1) [119, 117].

Besides this explicit
translating of microscopic into
it
macroscopic (mesoscopic) models and vice versa,
is also possible to develop hybrid models that couple
macroscopically modelled road links to microscopically
modelled ones. Examples include the work of Magne
et al., who develop a hybrid simulator that couples a
METANET-like second-order macroscopic trafﬁc ﬂow
model with the SImulation TRAﬁc (SITRA-B+) micro-
scopic trafﬁc ﬂow model. Special attention is given to
the interfaces between macroscopically and microscop-
ically modelled road segments; each macroscopic time
iteration in the simulator, is accompanied by a number of
microscopic iterations [183]. In similar spirit, the work
of Bourrel and Henn links macroscopic representations
of trafﬁc ﬂows to microscopic ones, using interfaces that
describe the transitions between them. As an application
of their methodology, they describe the translation be-
tween the ﬁrst-order macroscopic LWR model and a ve-
hicle representation of this model (based on trajectories)
[29]. Another avenue was pursued by the Wilco [41] and
Wilco et al. [42], who developed an integration frame-
work between the MITSIMLab microscopic model and
the Mezzo mesoscopic model. By building upon a meso-
scopic approach, the strength of their work lies in the fact
that no aggregation and disaggregation of ﬂows needs to
be performed.

3 Conclusions

The material elaborated upon in this paper, spanned a
broad range going from transportation planning models
that operate on a high level, to trafﬁc ﬂow models that ex-
plicitly describe the physical propagation of trafﬁc ﬂows.

As explained in the introduction, we feel there is a fre-
quent confusion among trafﬁc engineers and policy mak-
ers when it comes to transportation planning models and
the role that trafﬁc ﬂow models play therein. To this
day, many transportation planning bureaus continue to
use static tools for evaluating policy decisions, whereas
the need for dynamic models is getting more and more
pronounced [180].

Even after more than sixty years of trafﬁc ﬂow modelling,
the debate on what is the correct modelling approach
remains highly active. On the transportation planning
side, many agencies still primarily focus on the tradi-
tional four-step model (4SM), because it is the best intu-
itively understood approach. In contrast to this, activity-
based modelling (ABM) is gaining momentum, although
it remains a rather obscure discipline to many people. At
the basis of this scrutiny towards the ABM, lies the ab-
sence of a generally accepted framework such as the one
of the 4SM. It is tempting to translate the ABM approach

36

to the 4SM, by which e.g., the ABM’s synthetic popula-
tion generation (including activity generation, household
choices and scheduling) corresponds to the 4SM’s pro-
duction and attraction, distribution, and modal split (or
to discrete choice theory in a broader setting), thereby
generating (time dependent) OD tables. Similarly, the
ABM’s agent simulation can be seen as an implementa-
tion of the 4SM’s trafﬁc assignment. However, it remains
difﬁcult to gain insight into this kind of direct translation
and the resulting travel behaviour, although the ABM’s
scientiﬁc ﬁeld is continuously in a state of ﬂux thanks to
the increasing computational power.

On the trafﬁc ﬂow modelling side, the debate on whether
or not to use macro-/meso- or microscopic models still
continues to spawn many intriguing discussions. De-
spite the respective criticisms, it is widely agreed upon
that modelling driver behaviour entails complex human-
human, human-vehicle, and vehicle-vehicle interactions.
These call for interdisciplinary research, drawing from
ﬁelds such as mathematics, physics, and engineering, as
well as sociology and psychology (see e.g., the overview
of Helbing and Nagel [122]).

A Glossary of terms

A.1 Acronyms and abbreviations

4SM
four step model
AADT annual average daily trafﬁc
ABM activity-based modelling
ACC
ACF

adaptive cruise control
average cost function

ADAS
AIMSUN2

AMICI

AON
ASDA
ASEP
ATIS
ATMS
BCA
BJH
BJH-TCA

BL-TCA
BML
BML-TCA

BMW
BPR
CA
CA-184
CAD
CBD
CFD
CFL
ChSch-TCA

CLO
CML
CONTRAM

COMF
CPM
CTM
DDE
DFI-TCA

DGP
DLC
DLD
DNL
DRIP
DTA
DTC
DTM
DUE
DynaMIT

advanced driver assistance systems
Advanced Interactive Microscopic
Simulator for Urban and Non-Urban
Networks
Advanced Multi-agent Information and
Control for Integrated multi-class trafﬁc
networks
all-or-nothing
Automatische StauDynamikAnalyse
asymmetric simple exclusion process
advanced traveller information systems
advanced trafﬁc management systems
Burgers cellular automaton
Benjamin, Johnso, and Hui
Benjamin-Johnson-Hui trafﬁc cellular
automaton
brake-light trafﬁc cellular automaton
Biham, Middleton, and Levine
Biham-Middleton-Levine trafﬁc cellular
automaton
Beckmann, McGuire, and Winsten
Bureau of Public Roads
cellular automaton
Wolfram’s cellular automaton rule 184
computer aided design
central business district
computational ﬂuid dynamics
Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy
Chowdhury-Schadschneider trafﬁc
cellular automaton
camera Linkeroever
coupled map lattice
CONtinuous TRafﬁc Assignment
Model
car-oriented mean-ﬁeld theory
computational process models
cell transmission model
delayed differential equation
deterministic Fukui-Ishibashi trafﬁc
cellular automaton
dissolving general pattern
discretionary lane change
double inductive loop detector
dynamic network loading
dynamic route information panel
dynamic trafﬁc assignment
dynamic trafﬁc control
dynamic trafﬁc management
deterministic user equilibrium
Dynamic network assignment for the
Management of Information to
Travellers

DYNASMART DYnamic Network Assignment-
Simulation Model for Advanced
Roadway Telematics
elementary cellular automaton
expanded congested pattern
Emmerich-Rank trafﬁc cellular
automaton
ﬂoating car data

ECA
EP
ER-TCA

FCD

37

FDE
FIFO
FOTO
GETRAM

GHR
GIS
GNSS

GoE
GP
GPRS
GPS

GRP
GSM
GSMC

HAPP
HCM
HCT
HDM
HKM
HRB
HS-TCA

ICC
IDM
INDY
ITS
IVP
JDK
KKT
KKW-TCA

KWM
LGA
LOD
LOS
LSP
LTM
LWR
MADT
MC-STCA

ﬁnite difference equation
ﬁrst-in, ﬁrst-out
Forecasting of Trafﬁc Objects
Generic Environment for TRafﬁc
Analysis and Modeling
Gazis-Herman-Rothery
geographical information systems
Global Navigation Satellite System
(e.g., Europe’s Galileo)
Garden of Eden state
general pattern
General Packet Radio Service
Global Positioning System
(e.g., USA’s NAVSTAR)
generalised Riemann problem
Groupe Sp´eciale Mobile
Global System for Mobile
Communications
household activity pattern problem
Highway Capacity Manual
homogeneously congested trafﬁc
human driver model
human-kinetic model
Highway Research Board
Helbing-Schreckenberg trafﬁc cellular
automaton
intelligent cruise control
intelligent driver model
INteractive DYnamic trafﬁc assignment
intelligent transportation systems
initial value problem
JavaTM Development Kit
Karush-Kuhn-Tucker
Kerner-Klenov-Wolf trafﬁc cellular
automaton
kinematic wave model
lattice gas automaton
level of detail
level of service
localised synchronised-ﬂow pattern
link transmission model
Lighthill, Whitham, and Richards
monthly average daily trafﬁc
multi-cell stochastic trafﬁc cellular
automaton
Mesoscopic Trafﬁc Simulator
mean-ﬁeld theory

MesoTS
MFT
MITRASIM MIcroscopic TRAfﬁc ﬂow SIMulator
MITSIM
MIXIC

MIcroscopic Trafﬁc ﬂow SIMulator
Microscopic model for Simulation of
Intelligent Cruise Control
mandatory lane change
moving localised cluster
measure of effectiveness
matrix-product ansatz
marginal private cost function
method of successive averages
marginal social cost function
moving synchronised-ﬂow pattern

MLC

MOE
MPA
MPCF
MSA
MSCF
MSP

38

MT
MUC-PSD
NaSch
NAVSTAR
NCCA
NSE
OCT
OD
ODE
OSS
OVF
OVM
Paramics
PATH

PCE
PCU
PDE
PELOPS

PeMS

PHF
PLC
pMFT
PRT
PSD
PW
QoS
SFI-TCA

Simone

SMS
SOC
SOMF
SP
SSEP
STA
STCA
STCA-CC

SUE
SUMO
T2-TCA

TASEP

TCA
TDF
TMC
TMS

movement time
multi-class phase-space density
Nagel and Schreckenberg
Navigation Satellite Timing and Ranging
number conserving cellular automaton
Navier-Stokes equations
oscillatory congested trafﬁc
origin-destination
ordinary differential equation
Open Source Software
optimal velocity function
optimal velocity model
Parallel microscopic trafﬁc simulator
California Partners for Advanced Transit
and Highways
Program on Advanced Technology for
the Highway
passenger car equivalent
passenger car unit
partial differential equation
Program for the dEvelopment of
Longitudinal micrOscopic trafﬁc
Processes in a Systemrelevant
environment
California Freeway Performance
Measurement System
peak hour factor
pinned localised cluster
paradisiacal mean-ﬁeld theory
perception-reaction time
phase-space density
Payne-Whitham
quality of service
stochastic Fukui-Ishibashi trafﬁc
cellular automaton
Simulation model of Motorways with
Next generation vehicles
single inductive loop detector

Transport European Scheme Tests
space-mean speed
self-organised criticality
site-oriented mean-ﬁeld theory
synchronised-ﬂow pattern
symmetric simple exclusion process
static trafﬁc assignment
stochastic trafﬁc cellular automaton
stochastic trafﬁc cellular automaton
with cruise control
stochastic user equilibrium
Simulation of Urban MObility
Takayasu-Takayasu trafﬁc cellular
automaton
totally asymmetric simple exclusion
process
trafﬁc cellular automaton
travel demand function
Trafﬁc Message Channel
time-mean speed

SLD
SMARTEST Simulation Modelling Applied to Road

kx

e
λ

µ

ν
Oi
π

P
Px

qpc
qso

que

T

Tff
u

vdes
vst

vsx

S
τ
Θ
Θe(k, vs)

vse (k, Θ)

V ()
wshock

e

k(t, x) with

the partial derivative of
respect to space
the sensitivity to the stimulus in a
car-following model
the arrival rate at a server in queueing
theory
the service rate of a server in queueing
theory
the backward difference operator applied
to f (x)
the gradient vector of f (x)
the kinematic trafﬁc viscosity coefﬁcient
an origin zone i
the probability of overtaking (as opposed
to slowing down)
the trafﬁc pressure
the partial derivative of the trafﬁc pressure
with respect to space
the distribution of the vehicles with SMS
vs at (t, x)
the practical capacity
travel demand associated with a system
optimum
travel demand associated with a user
equilibrium
a trafﬁc state in the human-kinetic model
a driver’s reaction time
the variance of the speed
an equilibrium relation between the speed
variance, the density, and the SMS
a travel time
a relaxation parameter (in Pipes’ car-
following model)
a travel time under free-ﬂow conditions
the velocity (in the context of a Navier-
Stokes ﬂuid)
the desired speed of drivers
the partial derivative of the space-mean
speed with respect to time
the partial derivative of the space-mean
speed with respect to space
an equilibrium relation between the SMS,
the density, and the speed variance
the optimal velocity function
the speed of a shock wave

TOCA

TRB
TSG
UDM
UMTS

VDT
VHT
VMS
VMT
VOT
WSP
WYA

amax
c(k)
C(q)

∆f (x)

∆k

∆q

∆X

∆T

Dj
ǫ

κ

kt

kx

e
kt

e

g∗
s (vi, ∆vi)

k(t, x, vs)

time-oriented trafﬁc cellular
automaton

TRANSIMS TRansportation ANalysis and SIMulation

System
Transportation Research Board
triggered stop-and-go trafﬁc
ultra-discretisation method
Universal Mobile Telecommunications
System
velocity-dependent randomisation trafﬁc
cellular automaton
total vehicle distance travelled
total vehicle hours travelled
variable message sign
total vehicle miles travelled
value of time
widening synchronised-ﬂow pattern
whole year analysis

VDR-TCA

∇f (x)

A.2 List of symbols

P (t, x, vs)

the maximum acceleration in the IDM
the sound speed of trafﬁc
the economical cost associated with the
travel demand q
the forward difference operator applied
to f (x)
the difference in density up- and
downstream of a shock wave
the difference in ﬂow up- and
downstream of a shock wave
the width of a cell in a numerical
discretisation scheme
the size of a time step in a numerical
discretisation scheme
a destination zone j
a small diffusion constant for the
viscosity ν
the effective desired space gap in
the IDM
a kinetic coefﬁcient related to τ , k,
and Θ
the partial derivative of k(t, x) with
respect to time
the partial derivative of k(t, x) with
respect to space
the phase-space density at (t, x)
associated with SMS vs
the partial derivative of
respect to time

k(t, x) with

e

39

Acknowledgements

Dr. Bart De Moor is a full professor at the Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, Belgium. Our research is supported
by: Research Council KUL: GOA AMBioRICS, sev-
eral PhD/postdoc & fellow grants, Flemish Govern-
ment: FWO: PhD/postdoc grants, projects, G.0407.02
(support vector machines), G.0197.02 (power islands),
G.0141.03 (identiﬁcation and cryptography), G.0491.03
(control for intensive care glycemia), G.0120.03 (QIT),
G.0452.04 (new quantum algorithms), G.0499.04 (statis-
tics), G.0211.05 (Nonlinear), research communities (IC-
CoS, ANMMM, MLDM), IWT: PhD Grants, GBOU
(McKnow), Belgian Federal Science Policy Ofﬁce:
IUAP P5/22 (‘Dynamical Systems and Control: Com-
putation,
Identiﬁcation and Modelling’, 2002-2006),
PODO-II (CP/40: TMS and Sustainability), EU: FP5-
Quprodis, ERNSI, Contract Research/agreements:
ISMC/IPCOS, Data4s,TML, Elia, LMS, Mastercard.

References

[1] M. Van Aerde, B. Hellinga, M. Baker, and
H. Rakha. INTEGRATION: An overview of traf-
ﬁc simulation features. In Proceedings of the 75th
Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research
Board, Washington, D.C., 1996.

[2] Kazi Iftekhar Ahmed. Modeling Driver’s Acceler-
ation and Lane Changing Behavior. PhD thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, February
1999.

[3] Soyoung Ahn, Michael J. Cassidy, and Jorge
Laval. Veriﬁcation of a simpliﬁed car-following
theory. Transportation Research B, 38B(5):431–
440, June 2004.

[4] Staffan Algers, Eric Bernauer, Marco Boero, Lau-
rent Breheret, and Carlo Di Taranto. Simulation
Modelling Applied to Road Transport European
Scheme Tests (SMARTEST) – Review of Micro-
Simulation Models. SMARTEST Project Deliver-
able D3, Institute for Transport Studies, University
of Leeds, March 1998. Transport RTD Programme
of the 4th European Framework Programme.

for Managing Externalities”, Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts, September 1994. Lincoln Institute of
Land Policy.

[8] Richard Arnott, Andr´e de Palma, and Robin Lind-
sey. Recent developments in the bottleneck model.
In Kenneth J. Button and Erik T. Verhoef, editors,
Road pricing, trafﬁc congestion and the environ-
ment, pages 79–110, Cheltenham, U.K., 1998. Ed-
ward Elgar Pub.

[9] Richard Arnott and Kenneth Small. The eco-
nomics of trafﬁc congestion. American Scientist,
82:446–455, September 1994.

[10] V. Astarita. Node and link models for network traf-
ﬁc ﬂow simulation. Mathematical and Computer
Modelling, (35):643–656, 2002.

[11] A. Aw and M. Rascle. Resurrection of “second
order” models of trafﬁc ﬂow ? SIAM Journal on
Applied Mathematics, 60(3):916–938, 2000.

[12] K.W. Axhausen. Activity-based modelling: Re-
In D. Sim-
search directions and possibilities.
monds and J.J. Bates, editors, New Look at Multi-
Modal Modelling. Department of Environment,
Transport and the Regions, London, Cambridge
and Oxford, October 2000.

[13] Michael Balmer, Nurhan Cetin, Kai Nagel, and
Bryan Raney. Towards truly agent-based traf-
ﬁc and mobility simulations.
In Third Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multi-agent Systems (AAMAS’04), volume 1,
pages 60–67, New York City, New York, USA,
July 2004.

[14] Michael Balmer, Kai Nagel, and Bryan Raney.
Large-scale multi-agent simulations for
trans-
portation applications.
Journal of Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 8(4):205–222, May 2004.

[15] Michael Balmer, Bryan Raney, and Kai Nagel.
Coupling activity-based demand generation to a
truly agent-based trafﬁc simulation – activity time
In Proceedings of the EIRASS work-
allocation.
shop on Progress in activity-based analysis, Maas-
tricht, The Netherlands, 2004.

[5] Eitan Altman and Laura Wynter. Equilibrium,
games, and pricing in transportation and telecom-
munication networks. Networks and Spatial Eco-
nomics, 2, 2003.

[16] M. Bando, K. Hasebe, A. Nakayama, A. Shibata,
and Y. Sugiyama. Dynamic model of trafﬁc con-
gestion and numerical simulation. Physical Re-
view E, 51(2):1035–1042, 1995.

[6] Rainer Ansorge. What does the entropy solution
mean in trafﬁc ﬂow theory ? Transportation Re-
search B, 24B(2):133–143, 1990.

[7] Richard Arnott. Alleviating trafﬁc congestion: Al-
ternatives to road pricing. In Proceedings of the
Taxation, Resources and Economic Development
(TRED) Conference on “Alternative Strategies

[17] J. Barcel´o. Microscopic trafﬁc simulation: A tool
for the analysis and assessment of its systems. In
Proceedings of the Half Year Meeting of the High-
way Capacity Committee, Lake Tahoe, July 2002.

[18] R. Barlovi´c, J. Esser, K. Froese, W. Knospe,
L. Neubat, M. Schreckenberg, and J. Wahle.
Online trafﬁc simulation with cellular automata.

40

Trafﬁc and Mobility:
Simulation-Economics-
Environment, pages 117–134, July 1999. Institut
f¨ur Kraftfahrwesen, RWTH Aachen, Duisburg.

[19] F. Basile, C. Carbone, P. Chiacchio, R. Boel, and
C. Avram. A hybrid model for urban trafﬁc con-
In Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE SMC
trol.
Conference, Den Haag, The Netherlands, October
2004.

[20] Martin Beckmann, Charles Bartlett McGuire, and
Christopher B. Winsten. Studies in the Economics
of Transportation. Number RM-1488. Yale Uni-
versity Press, May 1955.

[21] Michael G.H. Bell. The estimation of origin-
destination matrices by constrained generalised
least
Transportation Research B,
squares.
25B(1):13–22, 1991.

[22] Tom Bellemans. Trafﬁc Control on Motorways.
PhD thesis, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, De-
partment of Electrical Engineering ESAT-SCD
(SISTA), May 2003.

[23] M.E. Ben-Akiva and S.R. Lerman.

Discrete
Choice Analysis:
Theory and Application to
Travel Demand. MIT Press, Cambridge Mas-
sachusetts, 1985.

[24] Moshe Ben-Akiva, Michel Bierlaire, H.N. Kout-
sopoulos, and R. G. Mishalani. Dynamit: Dy-
namic network assignment for the management of
information to travelers. In Proceedings of the 4th
Meeting of the EURO Working Group on Trans-
portation, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 1996.

[25] Itzhak Benenson and Paul M. Torrens. Geosimu-
lation: Automata-based Modeling of Urban Phe-
nomena. John Wiley and Sons, Ltd., July 2004.
ISBN 0470843497.

[26] M.C.J. Bliemer. Analytical dynamic trafﬁc assign-
ment with interacting user-classes: theoretical ad-
vances and applications using a variational in-
equality approach. PhD thesis, Faculty of Civil
Engineering and Geosciences, TU Delft, Delft,
The Netherlands, 2001.

[27] Bruno De Borger and Stef Proost, editors. Re-
forming Transport Pricing in the European Union,
A modelling approach. Edward Elgar Publishing,
2001. ISBN 1840641290.

[28] Jon Alan Bottom. Consistent Anticipatory Route
Guidance. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, September 2000.

[29] Emmanuel Bourrel and Vincent Henn. Mixing
micro and macro representations of trafﬁc ﬂow:
A ﬁrst theoretical step.
In Proceedings of the
9th meeting of the Euro Working Group on Trans-
portation, pages 610–616, Bari, Italia, Polytechnic
of Bari, June 2002.

41

[30] David E. Boyce.

Forecasting travel on con-
gested urban transportation networks: Review and
prospects for network equilibrium models. In Pro-
ceedings of TRISTAN V: The Fifth Triennial Sym-
posium on Transportation Analysis, Le Gosier,
Guadeloupe, June 2004.

[31] David E. Boyce, Hani S. Mahmassani, and Anna
Nagurney. A Retrospective on Beckmann, McGuire
and Winsten’s Studies in the Economics of Trans-
portation. To appear in revised form in Papers in
Regional Science, April 2004.

[32] Mark Brackstone and Mike McDonald. Car fol-
lowing: A historical review. Transportation Re-
search F, 2(4):181–196, 2000.

[33] Dietrich Braeß.

¨Uber ein paradoxon aus
der verkehrsplanung. Unternehmensforschung,
(12):256–268, 1969.

[34] D. Branston. Models of single lane time headway
Transportation Science, 10:125–

distributions.
148, 1976.

[35] Elmar Brockfeld, Reinhart D. K¨uhne, Alexan-
der Skabardonis, and Peter Wagner. Towards a
benchmarking of microscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models.
In Proceedings of the 82nd Annual Meeting of
the Transportation Research Board, Washington,
D.C., January 2003.

[36] D.J. Buckley. A semi-poisson model of trafﬁc
ﬂow. Transportation Science, 2(2):107–132, 1968.

[37] D.D. Bui, P. Nelson, and S.L. Narasimhan. Com-
putational realizations of the entropy condition
in modelling congested trafﬁc ﬂow. FHWA/TX-
92/1232-7, Texas Transportation Institute, 1992.
Federal Highway Administration report.

[38] Bureau of Public Roads, U.S. Department of Com-
merce, Urban Planning Division, Washington D.C.
Trafﬁc Assignment Manual, 1964.

[39] Johannes Martinus Burgers.

A mathematical
model illustrating the theory of turbulence. Ad-
vances in Applied Mechanics, 1948. Academic
Press, New York.

[40] Ernest W. Burgess. The growth of the city.

In
Robert E. Park, Ernest W. Burgess, and Roder-
ick D. McKenzie, editors, The City, pages 47–62.
University of Chicago Press, 1925.

[41] Wilco Burghout. Hybrid microscopic-mesoscopic
trafﬁc simulation. PhD thesis, Royal Institute of
Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 2004.

[42] Wilco Burghout, Haris N. Koutsopoulos, and Ing-
mar Andreasson. Hybrid mesoscopic-microscopic
In Proceedings of the 84th
trafﬁc simulation.
Annual Meeting of The Transportation Research
Board, January 2005.

[43] Gordon Cameron, Brian J. N. Wylie, and David
McArthur. PARAMICS – Moving Vehicles on the
Connection Machine. Technical report, Edinburgh
Parallel Computing Centre (EPCC), The Univer-
sity of Edinburgh, 1994. IEEE, ISSN 1063-9535.

[44] Ennio Cascetta and Sang Nguyen. A uniﬁed
framework for estimation or updating origin-
destination matrices from trafﬁc counts. Trans-
portation Research B, 22B(6):437–455, 1988.

[45] M.J. Cassidy and Michael Mauch. An observed
trafﬁc pattern in long freeway queues. Transporta-
tion Research A, 35:149–162, 2001.

[46] Randall Cayford, Wei-Hua Lin, and Carlos F. Da-
ganzo. The NETCELL simulation package: techni-
cal description. UCB-ITS-PRR-97-23, California
PATH Research Project, University of California,
Berkeley, May 1997. ISSN 1055-1425.

[47] Nurhan Cetin, Adrian Burri, and Kai Nagel.
A large-scale agent-based trafﬁc microsimulation
In Proceedings of the
based on queue model.
3rd Swiss Transport Research Conference (STRC),
Monte Verit`a, Ascona, Switserland, March 2003.

[48] R.E. Chandler, R. Herman, and E.W. Montroll.
Trafﬁc dynamics: studies in car following. Op-
erations Research, 6:165–184, 1958.

[49] St´ephane Chanut and Christine Buisson. Godunov
discretization of a two-ﬂow macroscopic model
for mixed trafﬁc with distinguished speeds and
lengths. In Proceedings of the 82nd Annual Meet-
ing of the Transportation Research Board, Wash-
ington, D.C., January 2003.

[50] Anthony Chen and Wilfred W. Recker. Consider-
ing risk taking behavior in travel time reliability.
In Proceedings of the 80th Annual Meeting of The
Transportation Research Board, 2001. UCI-ITS-
WP-00-24.

[51] Owen Jianwen Chen. Integration of Dynamic Traf-
ﬁc Control and Assignment. PhD thesis, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, June 1998. Pro-
motor: Moshe E. Ben-Akiva.

[52] Bastien Chopard, Alexandre Dupuis, and Pascal
Luthi. A cellular automata model for urban traf-
ﬁc and its application to the city of geneva.
In
M. Schreckenberg and D.E. Wolf, editors, Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Trafﬁc and Gran-
ular Flow ’97, pages 153–168, Duisburg, 1997.
Springer.

[53] Bastien Chopard, Pierre-Antoine Queloz, and Pas-
cal O. Luthi. Trafﬁc models of a 2d road net-
work. In Proceedings of the 3rd CM users’ Meet-
ing, Parma, October 1995.

42

[54] D. Chowdhury, K.Nishinari, and A. Schadschnei-
der. Self-organized patterns and trafﬁc ﬂow in
colonies of organisms. Phase Transitions, 77:601–
624, 2004.

[55] Debashish Chowdhury, Ludger Santen, and An-
dreas Schadschneider. Vehicular trafﬁc: A sys-
tem of interacting particles driven far from equi-
librium. Current Science, 77(411), 1999.

[56] Debashish Chowdhury, Ludger Santen, and An-
dreas Schadschneider. Statistical physics of ve-
hicular trafﬁc and some related systems. Physics
Reports, 329:199–329, 2000.

[57] Lianyu Chu, Henry X. Liu, Jun-Seok Oh, and Will
Recker. A calibration procedure for microscopic
trafﬁc simulation.
In Proceedings of the 83rd
Transportation Research Board Annual Meeting,
Washington, D.C., USA, 2004.

[58] Koohong Chung and Michael J. Cassidy. Testing
Daganzo’s Behavioral Theory for Multi-lane Free-
way Trafﬁc. UCB-ITS-PWP-2002-9, University of
California, Berkeley, November 2002.

[59] Cinzia Cirillo and Kai W. Axhausen. Comparing
urban activity travel behaviour. In Proceedings of
the 81st Annual Meeting of the Transportation Re-
search Board, Washington (DC), January 2002.

[60] D.E. Cleveland and D.G. Capelle. Queueing the-
In D.L. Gerlough and D.G.
ory approaches.
Capelle, editors, An Introduction to Trafﬁc Flow
Theory, pages 49–96, Washington, D.C., 1964.
Highway Research Board. Special Report 79.

[61] John Corbett. Torsten H¨agerstrand: Time Geog-
raphy. Regents of University of California, Santa
Barbara, 2005.

[62] Mark S. Cramer.

Foundations of Fluid Me-
Cambridge University Press, 2004.

chanics.
http://www.navier-stokes.net.

[63] Carlos F. Daganzo. The cell transmission model.
part I: A simple dynamic representation of high-
way trafﬁc. Transportation Research B, 28B:269–
287, 1994.

[64] Carlos F. Daganzo. The cell transmission model.
part II: Network trafﬁc. Transportation Research
B, 29B(2):79–93, 1995.

[65] Carlos F. Daganzo. A ﬁnite difference approx-
imation of the kinematic wave model of trafﬁc
ﬂow. Transportation Research B, 29B(4):261–
276, 1995.

[66] Carlos F. Daganzo. Properties of link travel time
functions under dynamic loads. Transportation
Research B, 29B(2):95–98, 1995.

[67] Carlos F. Daganzo. Requiem for second-order
ﬂuid approximations of trafﬁc ﬂow. Transporta-
tion Research B, 29B(4):277–286, 1995.

[80] Dave Dettloff. Mapping a Prism. Course “Car-
tography 2”, University of Colorado, Boulder, July
2001.

[68] Carlos F. Daganzo. A continuum theory of trafﬁc
dynamics for freeways with special lanes. Trans-
portation Research B, 31B(2):83–102, April 1997.

[81] E. W. Dijkstra. A note on two problems in connec-
tion with graphs. Numerische Mathematik, 1:269–
271, 1959.

[69] Carlos F. Daganzo. A simple physical principle
for the simulation of freeways with special lanes
and priority vehicles. Transportation Research B,
31B(2):103–125, April 1997.

[82] Richard Dowling, Joseph Holland, and Allen
Huang. Guidelines for Applying Trafﬁc Microsim-
ulation Modeling Software. California Department
of Transportation, September 2002.

[70] Carlos F. Daganzo. The lagged cell-transmission
model.
In Proceedings of the 14th International
Symposium on Transportation and Trafﬁc Theory
(ISTTT), Jerusalem, Israel, 1999.

[83] Alexandre Dupuis and Bastien Chopard. Parallel
simulation of trafﬁc in geneva using cellular au-
tomata. Parallel and Distributed Computing Prac-
tices Journal, 1(3):79–92, September 1998.

[71] Carlos F. Daganzo.

A behavioral

theory of
multi-lane trafﬁc ﬂow. part I: Long homogeneous
Transportation Research B,
freeway sections.
36B(2):131–158, 2002.

[72] Carlos F. Daganzo.

A behavioral

theory of
multi-lane trafﬁc ﬂow. part II:merges and the on-
set of congestion. Transportation Research B,
36B(2):159–169, 2002.

[73] Carlos F. Daganzo. Reversibility of the time-
dependent shortest path problem. Transportation
Research B, 36(7):665–668, 2002.

[74] Carlos F. Daganzo. A variational formulation of
kinematic waves: Solution methods. UCB-ITS-
RR-2003-7, Institute of Transportation Studies and
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineer-
ing, University of California, Berkeley, California,
November 2003.

[75] Carlos F. Daganzo. A variational formulation
of kinematic waves: basic theory and complex
boundary solutions. Transportation Research B,
39B(2):187–196, 2005.

[76] Carlos F. Daganzo and Jorge Andr´es Laval. On
the Numerical Treatment of Moving Bottlenecks.
UCB-ITS-PWP-2003-10, University of California,
Berkeley, July 2003.

[84] L.C. Edie. Car following and steady-state theory
for non-congested trafﬁc. Operations Research,
9:66–76, 1961.

[85] Dirk Ehmanns and Almut Hochst¨adter. Driver-
model of lane change maneuvers.
In 7th World
Congress on Intelligent Transport Systems, Turijn,
November 2000.

[86] P.K. Else. A reformulation of the theory of optimal
congestion taxes. Journal of Transport Economics
and Policy, 15:217–232, 1981.

[87] P.K. Else. A reformulation of the theory of optimal
congestion taxes: a rejoinder. Journal of Transport
Economics and Policy, 16:299–304, 1982.

[88] A.W. Evans. Road congestion pricing: when is it
a good policy ? Journal of Transport Economics
and Policy, 26:213–234, 1992.

[89] A.W. Evans. Road congestion pricing: when is it
a good policy ? a rejoinder. Journal of Transport
Economics and Policy, 27:99–105, 1993.

[90] T.W. Forbes, H.J. Zagorski, E.L. Holshouser, and
W.A. Deterline. Measurement of driver reactions
to tunnel conditions. In Proceedings of the High-
way Research Board, volume 37, pages 345–357,
1958.

[77] C.F. Daganzo and Y. Shefﬁ. On stochastic mod-
els of trafﬁc assignment. Transportation Science,
11(3):253–274, 1977.

[91] Marguerite Frank and Philip Wolfe. An algorithm
for quadratic programming. Naval Research Lo-
gistics Quarterly, 3:95–110, 1956.

[78] Andr´e de Palma and Fabrice Marchal. Real cases
applications of the fully dynamic METROPOLIS
tool-box: an advocacy for large-scale mesoscopic
transportation systems. Networks and Spatial Eco-
nomics, 2(4):347–369, 2002.

[79] J.M. Del Castillo and F.G. Ben´itez. On the func-
tional form of the speed-density relationship –
I: General theory. Transportation Research B,
29B(5):373–389, 1995.

[92] Nathan Gartner, Hani Mahmassani, Carroll J.
Messer, Henry Lieu, Richard Cunard, and Ajay K.
Rathi. Trafﬁc Flow Theory: A State-of-the-Art Re-
port. Technical report, Transportation Research
Board, December 1997.

[93] Christian Gawron. An iterative algorithm to de-
termine the dynamic user equilibrium in a trafﬁc
simulation model. International Journal of Mod-
ern Physics C, 9(3):393–407, February 1998.

43

[94] Christian Gawron. Simulation-Based Trafﬁc As-
signment. PhD thesis, Universit¨at zu K¨oln, Febru-
ary 1998.

[110] Timothy D. Hau. Economic fundamentals of road
pricing: A diagrammatic analysis, part I – Funda-
mentals. Transportmetrica, 1(2):81–117, 2005.

[95] D. Gazis, R. Herman, and R. Rothery. Nonlinear
follow-the-leader models of trafﬁc ﬂow. Opera-
tions Research, 9:545–567, 1961.

[96] D.C. Gazis and R. Herman. The moving and
Transportation Science,

‘phantom’ bottleneck.
26:223–229, 1992.

[97] D.C. Gazis, R. Herman, and R.B. Potts. Car-
following theory of steady-state trafﬁc ﬂow. Op-
erations Research, 7:499–506, 1959.

[98] Denos C. Gazis. The origins of trafﬁc theory. Op-
erations Research, 50(1):69–77, January 2002.

[99] D.L. Gerlough. Simulation of trafﬁc ﬂow. In D.L.
Gerlough and D.G. Capelle, editors, An Introduc-
tion to Trafﬁc Flow Theory, pages 97–118, Wash-
ington, D.C., 1964. Highway Research Board.
Special Report 79.

[100] P.G. Gipps. A behavioural car following model for
computer simulation. Transportation Research B,
15B(2):105–111, 1981.

[101] Ray Girvan. Going with the ﬂow. Scientiﬁc Com-

puting World, March 2003.

[102] Sergei K. Godunov. A difference scheme for
numerical computation of discontinuous solutions
of equations of ﬂuid dynamics. Matematicheskii
Sbornik, 47(89):271–306, 1959.

[103] Kristel Gofﬁn. Elke reis zijn prijs. Dossier mo-

biliteit – snelbericht, 19:11–13, December 2004.

[104] H. Greenberg. An analysis of trafﬁc ﬂow. Opera-

tions Research, 7:78–85, 1959.

[105] Bruce D. Greenshields. A study of trafﬁc capac-
ity. In Highway Research Board Proceedings, vol-
ume 14, pages 448–477, 1935.

[106] Torsten H¨agerstrand. What about people in re-
gional science ? Papers of the Regional Science
Association, 24(1):7–21, 1970.

[107] J. N. Hagstrom and R. A. Abrams. Characteriz-
ing Braeß’s paradox for trafﬁc networks. In Pro-
ceedings of IEEE 2001 Conference on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, pages 837–842, 2001.

[111] Timothy D. Hau. Economic fundamentals of road
pricing: A diagrammatic analysis, part II – Relax-
ation of assumptions. Transportmetrica, 1(2):119–
149, 2005.

[112] A. Haurie and P. Marcotte. On the relationship be-
tween Nash-Cournot and Wardrop equilibria. Net-
works, 15:295–309, 1985.

[113] A. Hegyi, B. De Schutter, J. Hellendoorn, S.P.
Hoogendoorn, and C. Tamp`ere. Gelijke behandel-
ing voor verkeersstroommodellen. Verkeerskunde,
52(4):32–36, 2001.

[114] Andr´as Hegyi. Model Predictive Control for Inte-
grating Trafﬁc Control Measures. PhD thesis, The
Netherlands TRAIL Research School, Delft Uni-
versity of Technology, February 2004.

[115] Dirk Heidemann. Some critical remarks on a class
of trafﬁc ﬂow models. Transportation Research B,
33B(2):153–155, April 1999.

[116] Dirk Heidemann. A queueing theory model of
nonstationary trafﬁc ﬂow. Transportation Science,
35(4):405–412, November 2001.

[117] D. Helbing, A. Hennecke, V. Shvetsov, and
M. Treiber. Micro- and macrosimulation of free-
way trafﬁc. Mathematical and Computer Mod-
elling, 35:517–547, 2002.

[118] Dirk Helbing. Gas-kinetic derivation of navier-
stokes-like trafﬁc equations. Physical Review E,
53(3):2266–2381, 1996.

[119] Dirk Helbing. From microscopic to macroscopic
trafﬁc models.
In J. Parisi, S.C. Muller, and
W. Zimmermann, editors, A Perspective Look at
Nonlinear Media. From Physics to Biology and
Social Sciences, pages 122–139. Springer, Berlin,
1998.

[120] Dirk Helbing. MASTER: macroscopic trafﬁc sim-
ulation based on a gas-kinetic, non-local trafﬁc
model. Transportation Research B, 35B(2):183–
211, February 2001.

[121] Dirk Helbing.

many-particle systems.
Physics, 73:1067–1141, October 2001.

Trafﬁc and related self-driven
Reviews of Modern

[108] Chauncy D. Harris and Edward L. Ullman. The
nature of cities. Annals of the American Academy
of Political and Social Science, 242:7–17, 1945.

[122] Dirk Helbing and Kai Nagel. The physics of trafﬁc
and regional development. Contemporary Physics,
45(5):405–426, September 2004.

[109] Bj¨orn H˚arsman. Urban road pricing acceptance. In
Proceedings of the IMPRINT-EUROPE seminar,
Brussels, Belgium, November 2001.

[123] Dirk Helbing and Tam´as Vicsek. Optimal self-
organization. New Journal of Physics, 1(13):1–17,
1999.

44

[124] Dirk Helbing and Martin Treiber. Numerical simu-
lation of macroscopic trafﬁc equations. Computing
in Science and Engineering, 1(5):89–99, Septem-
ber 1999.

[137] Alan J. Horowitz and Minnie H. Patel. Through
trip tables for small urban areas: A method for
quick response travel forecasting. Transportation
Research Record, 1685:57–64, 1999.

[125] W. Helly. Simulation of bottlenecks in single lane
trafﬁc ﬂow. In Theory of Trafﬁc Flow, pages 207–
238. Elsevier Publishing Co., 1961.

[126] Vincent Henn. A wave-based resolution scheme
for the hydrodynamic LWR trafﬁc ﬂow model. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Trafﬁc and Gran-
ular Flow ’03, Delft, The Netherlands, October
2003.

[127] R. Herman, E.W. Montroll, R.B. Potts, and R.W.
Rothery. Trafﬁc dynamics: analysis of stability
in car-following. Operations Research, 7:86–106,
1959.

[128] Robert Herman and Ilya Prigogine. A two-ﬂuid
approach to town trafﬁc. Science, 204:148–151,
1979.

[129] E.M.J. Herrey and H. Herrey. Principles of physics
applied to trafﬁc movements and road conditions.
American Journal of Physics, 13:1–14, 1945.

[130] P. Hills. Road congestion pricing: when is it a
good policy ? a comment. Journal of Transport
Economics and Policy, 27:91–99, 1993.

[131] E.N. Holland. A generalised stability criterion
for motorway trafﬁc. Transportation Research B,
32B(2):141–154, February 1998.

[132] Serge P. Hoogendoorn. Multiclass continuum
modelling of multilane trafﬁc ﬂow. PhD thesis,
Technical University Delft, 1999. Delft University
Press.

[133] Serge P. Hoogendoorn and Piet H.L. Bovy. Con-
tinuum modeling of multiclass trafﬁc ﬂow. Trans-
portation Research B, 34B(2):123–146, 2000.

[134] Serge P. Hoogendoorn and Piet H.L. Bovy. State-
of-the-art of vehicular trafﬁc ﬂow modelling. Pro-
ceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engi-
neers, 215(1):283–303, 2001.

[135] S.P. Hoogendoorn, H. van Lint, and H.J. van
Zuylen. Macroscopic network model for mul-
ticlass multilane trafﬁc ﬂow prediction.
In
Michael A.P. Taylor, editor, Transportation and
trafﬁc ﬂow theory in the 21st century, pages 625–
651. Oxford: Pergamon, Elsevier Science, 2002.

[136] S.P. Hoogendoorn, H.J. Van Zuylen, M. Schreuder,
B. Gorte, and G. Vosselman. Microscopic trafﬁc
data collection by remote sensing. In Proceedings
of the 82nd Annual Meeting of the Transportation
Research Board, Washington, D.C., January 2003.

[138] J. Hourdakis, P. Michalopoulos, and J. Kottom-
mannil. A practical procedure for calibrating mi-
croscopic trafﬁc simulation models. Transporta-
tion Research Record, 1852:130–139, 2003.

[139] Homer Hoyt. The Structure and Growth of Resi-
dential Neighborhoods in American Cities. Land-
mark Publication Housing, 1939.

[140] Ben Immers, Marcel Westerman,

Sturen zonder structuren.

and Hans
de Ruiter.
In Pro-
ceedings Colloquium Vervoersplanologisch Speur-
werk, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, November
1998.

[141] L.H. Immers and J.E. Stada. Verkeersmodellen.
Departement Burgerlijke Bouwkunde, Faculteit
Toegepaste Wetenschappen, Katholieke Univer-
siteit Leuven, October 1998. Cursus H111.

[142] R. Jayakrishan, Jun-Seok Oh, and Abd-El Kader
Sahraoui. Calibration and Path Dynamics Is-
sues In Microscopic Simulation for ATMS and
ATIS. UCI-ITS-WP-00-22, Institute of Transporta-
tion Studies, University of California, Irvine, CA
92697-3600, U.S.A., December 2000.

[143] Wen-Long Jin. Kinematic Wave Models of Net-
work Vehicular Trafﬁc. PhD thesis, University of
California, Davis, September 2003.

[144] Wen-Long Jin. A kinematic wave theory of lane-

changing vehicular trafﬁc, March 2005.

[145] P.M. Jones, M.C. Dix, M.I. Clarke, and I.G. Heg-
gie. Understanding Travel Behavior. Gower,
Aldershot, UK, 1983.

[146] J. J´ulvez and R. Boel. Modelling and control-
ling trafﬁc behaviour with continuous petri nets.
In Proceedings of the 16th IFAC World Congress,
Prague, July 2005.

[147] Ansgar J¨ungel. Modeling and Numerical Approx-
imation of Trafﬁc Flow Problems. Universit¨at
Mainz, December 2002.

[148] Boris S. Kerner. The Physics of Trafﬁc – Empiri-
cal Freeway Pattern Features, Engineering Appli-
cations, and Theory. Understanding Complex Sys-
tems. Springer, 2004. ISBN 3-540-20716-3.

[149] Axel Klar, Reinhart D. K¨uhne, and Raimund We-
gener. Mathematical models for vehicular traf-
ﬁc. Surveys on Mathematics for Industry, (6):215–
239, 1996.

[150] Frank Hyneman Knight. Some fallacies in the in-
terpretation of social cost. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 38:582–606, 1924.

45

[151] Johann Georg Kohl. Der Verkehr und die An-
siedelungen der Menschen in ihrer Abh¨angigkeit
Dresden,
des Gestaltung der Erdoberﬂ¨ache.
Leipzig, Germany, 1841.

[163] D. R. Leonard, P. Power, and N. B. Taylor.
CONTRAM: structure of the model. TRL Re-
port RR 178, Transportation Research Laboratory,
Crowthorn, 1989.

[152] E. Kometani and T. Sasaki. On the stability of traf-
ﬁc ﬂow. Journal of Operations Research, Japan,
2:11–26, 1958.

[153] E. Kometani and T. Sasaki. Dynamic behavior of
trafﬁc with a nonlinear spacing.
In R. Herman,
editor, Theory of Trafﬁc Flow, pages 105–119. El-
sevier, Amsterdam, 1961.

[154] Daniel Krajzewicz. Simulation of Urban MObility
– SUMO. Deutsches Zentrum f¨ur Luft- und Raum-
fahrt (DLR), December 2004.

[155] S. Krauß. Towards a uniﬁed view of microscopic
trafﬁc ﬂow theories.
In M. Papageorgiou and
A. Pouliezos, editors, IFAC/IFIP/IFORS Sympo-
sium, volume 2, Chania, Greece, June 1997. IFAC
- International Federation of Automatic Control.

[156] Stefan Krauß. Microscopic Modeling of Trafﬁc
Flow: Investigation of Collision Free Vehicle Dy-
namics. PhD thesis, Deutsches Zentrum f¨ur Luft-
und Raumfahrt, April 1998.

[157] R.D. K¨uhne. Macroscopic freeway model for
dense trafﬁc-stop-start waves and incident detec-
tion. In N. Vollumler and R. Hamerslag, editors,
Proceedings of the 9th International Symposium
on Transportation and Trafﬁc Theory (ISTTT9),
pages 21–42, 1984.

[158] E. Kwon and P.G. Machalopoulos. Macroscopic
simulation of trafﬁc ﬂows in complex freeway seg-
ments on a personal computer. In Proceedings of
the 6th Vehicle Navigation and Information Sys-
tems Conference, pages 342–345, Seattle, Wash-
ington, D.C., 1995.

[159] Alejandro Lago and Carlos F. Daganzo. A Network
Model of Departure Time Choice with Spillovers
and Merging Effects. Part I: A Building Block.
UCB-ITS-RR-2003-5, Institute of Transportation
Studies, University of California at Berkeley, July
2003.

[160] Jorge Andr´es Laval. Hybrid Models of Trafﬁc
Flow: Impacts of Bounded Vehicle Accelerations.
PhD thesis, Graduate Division of the University of
California, Berkeley, 2004.

[161] J.P. Lebacque. Les mod`eles macroscopiques de
traﬁc. Annales de Pont, 67:28–45, 1993. 3rd trim.

[162] J.P. Lebacque. The Godunov scheme and what
it means for ﬁrst order trafﬁc ﬂow models.
In
J.B. Lesort, editor, Proceedings of the 13th Inter-
national Symposium on Transportation and Traf-
ﬁc Theory (ISTTT). Pergamon, Oxford, November
1996.

[164] Randall J. LeVeque. Numerical Methods for Con-

servation Laws. Birkh¨auser Verlag, Basel, 1992.

[165] Randall J. LeVeque. Some trafﬁc ﬂow models il-
lustrating interesting hyperbolic behavior. In Min-
isymposium on Trafﬁc Flow. SIAM Annual Meet-
ing, July 2001.

[166] Randall J. LeVeque. CLAWPACK Version 4.2
User’s Guide. University of Washington, Decem-
ber 2003.

[167] Baibing Li and Bart De Moor. Dynamic identi-
ﬁcation of origin-destination matrices in the pres-
ence of incomplete observations. Transportation
Research B, 36:37–57, 2002.

[168] Tong Li. Global solutions of nonconcave hyper-
bolic laws with relaxation arising from trafﬁc ﬂow.
Journal of Differential Equations, 190:131–149,
2003.

[169] M.J. Lighthill and G.B. Whitham. On kinematic
waves: II. A theory of trafﬁc ﬂow on long crowded
roads. In Proceedings of the Royal Society, volume
A229, pages 317–345, 1955.

[170] Quadstone Limited. Paramics-online v3 – System
Overview. Technical report, Quadstone Limited,
16 Chester Street, Edinburgh EH3 7RA, Scotland,
November 2000.
(URL: http://www.paramics-online.com).

[171] Wei-Hua Lin and Dike Ahanotu. Validating the
Basic Cell Transmission Model on a Single Free-
way Link. PATH technical note 95-3, Institute of
Transportation Studies, University of California,
Berkeley, 1995.

[172] Robin Lindsey and Erik Verhoef. Congestion
modeling.
In D.A. Hensher and K.J. Button,
editors, Handbook of Transportation Modelling,
chapter 21. Elsevier Science, Ltd., 2000.

[173] Robin Lindsey and Erik Verhoef. Trafﬁc con-
gestion and congestion pricing. In D.A. Hensher
and K.J. Button, editors, Handbook of Transport
Systems and Trafﬁc Control, pages 77–105. Else-
vier/Pergamon, Amsterdam, 2001.

[174] Hong K. Lo and W.Y. Szeto. A cell-based varia-
tional inequality formulation of the dynamic user
optimal assignment problem. Transportation Re-
search B, 36:421–443, 2002.

[175] Hong K. Lo and W.Y. Szeto. Modeling advanced
static versus dy-
Transportation Research B,

traveler information services:
namic paradigms.
38B(6):495–515, July 2004.

46

[176] Hong K. Lo and W.Y. Szeto. Road pricing model-
ing for hyper-congestion. Transportation Research
A, 2005.

Technological, Energy and Environmental Topics
in Transport, Palazzo delle Stelline, Corso Ma-
genta, 63, Milano, Italy, October 1998.

[177] Steven Logghe. Dynamic modeling of heteroge-
neous vehicular trafﬁc. PhD thesis, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, June 2003.

[189] Maryland Transportation Initiative, University of
Maryland. DYNASMART-X 0.930 User’s Guide,
December 2003.

[178] J. Ludmann. Beeinﬂussung des Verkehrsablaufs
auf Straßen – Analyse mit dem fahrzeugori-
entierten Verkehrssimulationsprogramm PELOPS.
PhD thesis, Institut f¨ur Kraftfahrwesen Aachen,
1998.

[179] Sven Maerivoet. Het gebruik van microscopis-
che verkeerssimulatie bij een onderzoek naar de
ﬁleproblematiek op de antwerpse ring. Master’s
thesis, Universitaire Instelling Antwerpen, June
2001. Promotor: prof. dr. Serge Demeyer.

[180] Sven Maerivoet. Models in Aid of Trafﬁc Man-
agement. Seminar slides for ‘Transportmodellen
ter ondersteuning van het mobiliteits- en vervoers-
beleid’, May 2004. Federaal Wetenschapsbeleid,
Belgium.

[181] Sven Maerivoet and Bart De Moor. Non-concave
fundamental diagrams and phase transitions in a
The Eu-
stochastic trafﬁc cellular automaton.
ropean Physical Journal B – Condensed Matter
Physics, 42(1):131–140, November 2004.

[182] Sven Maerivoet and Bart De Moor. Trafﬁc Flow
Theory. TR 05-, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven,
Department of Electrical Engineering ESAT-SCD
(SISTA), July 2005.

[183] Laurent Magne, Sylvestre Rabut,

and Jean-
Franc¸ois Gabard. Towards an hybrid macro-micro
trafﬁc ﬂow simulation model. In INFORMS Salt
Lake City Spring 2000 Conference, May 2000.

[184] Bhanu Prasad Mahanti. Aggregate calibration
of microscopic trafﬁc simulation models. Mas-
ter’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
September 2004.

[185] K.M. Malone, M.C.J. Bliemer, C.H. Menard, and
H.H. Versteegt. Testing INDY for use as the Dy-
namic Trafﬁc Assignment model in the Dutch Na-
tional Model. 03-7N-084-73431, TNO Inro, Delft,
June 2003. ISBN 90-5986-015-2.

[186] Marvin L. Manheim. Fundamentals of Trans-
portation Systems Analysis. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts, 1979.

[187] Peter Mann. Modelling Study of a Typical British

City, 1965.

[188] Edoardo Marcucci. Road pricing: Old beliefs,
present awareness and future research patterns. In
Proceedings of the International Symposium on

[190] Adolf D. May. Trafﬁc Flow Fundamentals. Pren-
tice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632,
1990. ISBN 0-13-926072-2.

[191] Michael G. McNally.

The Activity-Based Ap-
proach. UCI-ITS-AS-WP-00-4, Center for Ac-
tivity Systems Analysis, University of California,
In Hensher and Button (eds.),
December 2000.
“Handbook of Transportation Modeling”, Perga-
mon.

[192] Michael G. McNally.

The Four Step Model.
UCI-ITS-AS-WP-00-5, Center for Activity Sys-
tems Analysis, University of California, December
2000. In Hensher and Button (eds.), “Handbook of
Transportation Modeling”, Pergamon.

[193] A. Messmer and M. Papageorgiou. METANET:
A macroscopic simulation program for motor-
way networks. Trafﬁc Engineering and Control,
31:466–470, 1990.

[194] Harvey J. Miller. Activities in space and time. In
P. Stopher, K. Button, K. Haynes, and D. Hensher,
editors, Handbook of Transport 5: Transport Ge-
ography and Spatial Systems. Pergamon/Elsevier
Science, 2004.

[195] Michiel M. Minderhoud. Supported driving: im-
pacts on motorway trafﬁc ﬂow. TRAIL Thesis
T99/4, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The
Netherlands, 1999.

[196] Robert B. Mitchell and Chester Rapkin. Urban
Trafﬁc: A Function of Land Use. Columbia Uni-
versity Press, New York, 1954.

[197] Juan Carlos Mu˜noz and Carlos Daganzo. Mov-
ing bottlenecks: A theory grounded on exper-
imental observation.
In M.A.P. Taylor, editor,
Proceedings of the 15th International Symposium
on Transportation and Trafﬁc Theory (ISTTT15),
pages 441–462. Pergamon-Elsevier, 2002.

[198] Kai Nagel. Experiences with iterated trafﬁc mi-
crosimulations in dallas. Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Trafﬁc and Granular Flow ’98, 1998. D.E.
Wolf and M. Schreckenberg, Springer Verlag.

[199] Kai Nagel. Distributed intelligence in large scale
trafﬁc simulations on parallel computers. In Col-
lective Cognition: Mathematical Foundations of
Distributed Intelligence. Santa Fe Institute, Au-
gust 2002.

47

[200] Kai Nagel. Trafﬁc networks. In S. Bornholdt and
H.G Schuster, editors, Handbook on Networks,
January 2002.

[201] Kai Nagel and Paul Nelson. A critical comparison
of the kinematic-wave model with observational
data. In Hani S Mahmassani, editor, Proceedings
of the 16th International Symposium on Trans-
portation and Trafﬁc Theory (ISTTT16). Univer-
sity of Maryland, July 2005.

[202] Kai Nagel and Bryan Raney. Transportation plan-
ning II: Complex systems applications for trans-
portation planning.
In M. Koll-Schretzenmayr,
M. Keiner, and G. Nussbaumer, editors, The Real
and Virtual Worlds of Spatial Planning, chap-
ter 16. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2004.

[203] Kai Nagel and Marcus Rickert. Parallel implemen-
tation of the TRANSIMS micro-simulation. Par-
allel Computing, 27(12):1611–1639, 2001.

[204] Kai Nagel, Marcus Rickert, Patrice M. Simon, and
Martin Pieck. The dynamics of iterated trans-
portation simulations. In Proceedings of the TRI-
annual Symposium on Transportation ANalysis
(TRISTAN-III), San Juan, Puerto Rico, 1998.

[205] Kai Nagel, Paula Stretz, Martin Pieck, Shannon
Leckey, Rick Donnelly, and Christopher L. Bar-
rett. TRANSIMS trafﬁc ﬂow characteristics. Tech-
nical report, Los Alamos National Laboratory,
June 1998.

[206] Kai Nagel, Peter Wagner, and Richard Woesler.
Still ﬂowing: old and new approaches for trafﬁc
ﬂow modeling. Operations Research, 51(5):681–
710, 2003.

[207] Anna Nagurney. Inﬂuence of beckmann, mcguire,
and winsten’s studies in the economics of trans-
portation.
the 50th North
American Regional Science Association Meeting,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, November 2003.

In Proceedings of

[208] C.A. Nash. A reformulation of the theory of
Journal
optimal congestion taxes: a comment.
of Transport Economics and Policy, 26:295–299,
1982.

[209] J.F. Nash. Non-cooperative games. Annals of
Mathematics Journal, 54:286–295, 1951.

[210] Paul Nelson. A kinetic model of vehicular trafﬁc
and its associated bimodal equilibrium solutions.
Transport Theory and Statistical Physics, 24(383),
1995.

[211] Paul Nelson and Alexandros Sopasakis.

The
Prigogine-Herman kinetic model predicts widely
scattered trafﬁc ﬂow data at high concentra-
tions. Transportation Research B, 32B(8):589–
604, November 1998.

[212] Gordon F. Newell.

Instability in dense highway
trafﬁc, a review. In Proceedings of the 2nd Inter-
national Symposium on the Theory of Road Trafﬁc
Flow, pages 73–83, OECD, London, 1963.

[213] Gordon F. Newell.

Theories of instability in
dense highway trafﬁc. Operations Research So-
ciety Japan, 5:9–54, 1963.

[214] Gordon F. Newell. Applications of Queueing The-
ory. Chapman & Hall, 2nd edition, 1982. ISBN
0412245000.

[215] Gordon F. Newell. A simpliﬁed theory of kine-
matic waves in highway trafﬁc, part 1: General
theory. Transportation Research B, 27B(4):281–
287, 1993.

[216] Gordon F. Newell. A simpliﬁed theory of kine-
matic waves in highway trafﬁc, part 2: Queueing
at freeway bottlenecks. Transportation Research
B, 27B(4):289–303, 1993.

[217] Gordon F. Newell. A simpliﬁed theory of kine-
matic waves in highway trafﬁc, part 3: Multi-
destination ﬂows.
Transportation Research B,
27B(4):305–313, 1993.

[218] Gordon F. Newell. Theory of highway trafﬁc ﬂow
1945-1965. Transportation Research A, 30(6):479,
November 1996.

[219] Gordon F. Newell. A moving bottleneck. Trans-
portation Research B, 32B(8):531–537, 1998.

[220] Gordon F. Newell. Delays caused by a queue at
a freeway exit ramp. Transportation Research B,
33B:337–350, 1999.

[221] Gordon F. Newell. A simpliﬁed car-following the-
ory: a lower order model. Transportation Research
B, 36B(3):195–205, March 2002.

[222] D. Ngoduy, S.P. Hoogendoorn, and H.J. van
Zuylen. Cross-comparison of numerical schemes
for macroscopic trafﬁc ﬂow models. Transporta-
tion Research Record, 2003.

[223] Nancy L. Nihan and Gary A. Davis. Recur-
sive estimation of origin-destination matrices from
input-output counts. Transportation Research B,
21B(2):149–163, 1987.

[224] H. Ohta. Probing a trafﬁc congestion controversy:
density and ﬂow scrutinized. Journal of Regional
Science, 41:659–680, 2001.

[225] H. Ohta. Probing a trafﬁc congestion controversy:
response to comment. Journal of Regional Sci-
ence, 10:695–699, 2001.

[226] Juan de Dios Ortuzar and Luis G. Willumsen.
Modelling Transport. Wiley, 3rd edition, October
2001. ISBN 0-471-86110-3.

48

[227] Markos Papageorgiou. Some remarks on macro-
scopic trafﬁc ﬂow modelling. Transportation Re-
search A, 32(5):323–329, 1998.

[228] Eric I. Pas and Shari L. Principio. Braess’ paradox:
Some new insights. Transportation Research B,
31B(3):265–276, 1997.

[229] M. Patriksson. The Trafﬁc Assignment Problem:
Models and Methods. VSP International Science
Publishers, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 1994. ISBN
90-6764-181-2.

[230] S.L. Paveri-Fontana. On Boltzmann like treat-
ments of trafﬁc ﬂow. Transportation Research,
9(225), 1975.

[231] Harold J. Payne. Models of freeway trafﬁc and
control. Mathematical Models of Public Systems
(Simulation Council Proceedings), 1:51–61, 1971.

[232] Harold J. Payne. FREFLO: A macroscopic simu-
lation model of freeway trafﬁc. Version 1 – User’s
guide, ESSOR, 1978.

[233] S. Peeta and T.-H. Yang. Stability issues for dy-
namic trafﬁc assignment. Automatica, 39:21–34,
2003.

[234] Srinivas Peeta and Athanasios K. Ziliaskopoulos.
Foundations of dynamic trafﬁc assignment: The
past, the present and the future. Networks and Spa-
tial Economics, 1:233–265, 2001. Kluwer Aca-
demic Publishers, The Netherlands.

[235] Carl Adam Petri.

Kommunikation mit Auto-
Schriften des IIM, Institut f¨ur Instru-

maten.
mentelle Mathematik, Bonn, Germany, 1962.

[236] W.F. Phillips. Kinetic model for trafﬁc ﬂow with
continuum implications. Transportation Research
Planning and Technology, 5:131–138, 1979.

[242] Ilya Prigogine and Robert Herman. Kinetic Theory

of Vehicular Trafﬁc. Elsevier, New York, 1971.

[243] PTV.

PTV Vision

software

SUM/VISEM/VISEVA/VISSIM).
Trafﬁc Mobility Logistics, 2005.

suite

(VI-
PTV AG –

[244] Frank Plumpton Ramsey. A contribution to the
theory of taxation. Economic Journal, 37:47–61,
March 1927.

[245] Bryan Raney, Nurhan Cetin, Andreas V¨ollmy,
Milenko Vrtic, Kay Axhausen, and Kai Nagel. An
agent-based microsimulation model of swiss travel
– ﬁrst results. Networks and Spatial Economics,
3:23–41, 2003.

[246] M. Rascle. An improved macroscopic model of
trafﬁc ﬂow: Derivation and links with the lighthill-
whitham model. Mathematical and Computer
Modelling, (35):581–590, 2002.

[247] W.W. Recker. The household activity pattern prob-
lem: General formulation and solution. Trans-
portation Research B, 29B(1):61–77, 1995.

[248] W.W. Recker, M.G. McNally, and G.S. Root. A
model of complex travel behavior: Part I – the-
ory. Transportation Research A, 20A(4):307–318,
1986.

[249] W.W. Recker, M.G. McNally, and G.S. Root.
A model of complex travel behavior: Part II -
operational model. Transportation Research A,
20A(4):319–330, 1986.

[250] A. Reuschel.

Fahrzeugbewegungen in der
kolonne bei gleichfoermig beschleunigtem oder
verzoegertem leifahrzeug. Z. Oesterr. Ingr. Ar-
chitekt. Vereines, 95:59–62,73–77, 1950.

[237] Arthur Cecil Pigou. The Economics of Welfare.
Macmillan and Co., 4th (1932) edition, 1920.

[251] Paul I. Richards. Shockwaves on the highway. Op-

erations Research, 4:42–51, 1956.

[238] L.A. Pipes. An operational analysis of trafﬁc dy-
namics. Journal of Applied Physics, 24(3):274–
281, 1953.

[239] L.A. Pipes. Hydrodynamic approaches. In D.L.
Gerlough and D.G. Capelle, editors, An Introduc-
tion to Trafﬁc Flow Theory, Washington, D.C.,
1964. Highway Research Board. Special Report
79.

[240] James F. Price. Lagrangian and Eulerian Repre-
sentations of Fluid Flow. Woods Hole Oceano-
graphic Institution, Woodshole, Massachusetts,
USA, 02543, January 2005.

[241] Ilya Prigogine and Frank C. Andrews. A Boltz-
mann like approach for trafﬁc ﬂow. Operations
Research, 8(789), 1960.

[252] J.-P. Rodrigue, B. Slack, and C. Comtois. The Ge-
ography of Transport Systems. Routledge, Lon-
don, 2005.

[253] S. Rosswog, C. Gawron, S. Hasselberg, R. B¨oning,
and P. Wagner. Computational aspects in traf-
ﬁc simulation problems. Future Generation Com-
puter Systems, 17(5):659–665, March 2001.

[254] Tim Roughgarden. Selﬁsh Routing. PhD thesis,
Faculty of the Graduate School of Cornell Univer-
sity, May 2002.

[255] Yosef Shefﬁ. Urban Transportation Networks:
Equilibrium Analysis with Mathematical Pro-
gramming Methods. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ 07632, 1985. ISBN 71998500.

49

[256] Patrice M. Simon, J¨org Esser, and Kai Nagel. Sim-
ple queueing model applied to the city of port-
land. International Journal of Modern Physics C,
10(5):941–960, 1999.

[257] Kenneth A. Small. Using the revenues from con-
gestion pricing. Transportation, 19(4):359–381,
1992.

[258] Kenneth A. Small. Road pricing and public transit:
Unnoticed lessons from london. Access, 26, 2005.
University of California Transportation Center.

[259] Kenneth A. Small and Xuehao Chu. Hyperconges-
tion. Journal of Transport Economics and Policy,
37(3):319–352, September 2003.

[260] R. Smeed. Some circumstances in which vehi-
cles will reach their destinations earlier by starting
later. Transportation Science, 1:308–317, 1967.

[261] W.Y. Szeto and Hong K. Lo. A cell-based si-
multaneous route and departure time choice model
with elastic demand. Transportation Research B,
38B(7):593–612, August 2004.

[262] Chris M.J. Tamp`ere. Human-Kinetic Multiclass
Trafﬁc Flow Theory and Modelling. TRAIL The-
sis Series nr. T2004/11, TRAIL Research School,
P.O. Box 5017, 2600 GA Delft, The Netherlands,
December 2004.

[263] Chris M.J. Tamp`ere, Serge P. Hoogendoorn, and
Bert van Arem. Capacity funnel explained using
the human-kinetic trafﬁc ﬂow model. In Proceed-
ings of the workshop on Trafﬁc and Granular Flow
’03, Delft, October 2003. T.U. Delft, The Nether-
lands.

[264] Chris M.J. Tamp`ere, Bert van Arem, and Serge P.
Hoogendoorn. Gas kinetic trafﬁc ﬂow mod-
elling including continuous driver behaviour mod-
els. Transportation Research Record, 1852:231–
238, 2004.

[265] Harry Timmermans. Models of activity schedul-
In Proceedings of the 5th Work-
ing behaviour.
shop of The Nordic Research Network on Mod-
elling Transport, Land-Use and the Environment,
pages 33–47, Nyn¨ashamn, Sweden, September
2001. NorFA – The Nordic Academy for Ad-
vanced Study.

[266] Harry Timmermans. The saga of integrated land
use-transport modeling: How many more dreams
before we wake up ? In Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Travel Behaviour Re-
search, Lucerne, Switserland, August 2003.

[267] M. Treiber, A. Hennecke, and D. Helbing. Con-
gested trafﬁc states in empirical observations and
microscopic simulations.
Physical Review E,
62:1805–1824, 2000.

[268] Martin Treiber and Dirk Helbing. Explanation of
Observed Features of Self-Organization in Trafﬁc
Flow. e-print cond-mat/9901239, 1999.

[269] Martin Treiber and Dirk Helbing. Microsimula-
tions of freeway trafﬁc including control measures.
Automatisierungstechnik, 49:478–484, 2001.

[270] Martin Treiber, Arne Kesting, and Dirk Helbing.
Delays, Inaccuracies and Anticipation in Micro-
scopic Trafﬁc Models. Submitted to Physical Re-
view E, March 2005.

[271] B. van Arem, A.P. de Vos, and M.J.W.A. Vander-
schuren. The microscopic trafﬁc simulation model
MIXIC 1.3.
INRO-VVG 1997-02b, TNO Inro,
Department of Trafﬁc and Transport, Delft, The
Netherlands, January 1997.

[272] Arthur van Dam. TraFlowPACK software doc-
In A Moving Mesh Finite Vol-
umentation.
ume Solver for Macroscopic Trafﬁc Flow Models,
chapter 5, pages 57–71. TNO-INRO, May 2002.

[273] Rob van Nes. Design of multimodal transport
networks - A hierarchical approach. PhD thesis,
Technische Universiteit Delft, Delft, The Nether-
lands, September 2002.

[274] Henk J. van Zuylen. Het spel van de regels; Het
richting geven aan chaotische maatschappelijke
processen. Technische Universiteit Delft, 1999.

[275] Nico Vandaele, Tom Van Woensel, and Aviel Ver-
bruggen. A queueing based trafﬁc ﬂow model.
Transportation Research D, 5:121–135, 2000.

[276] Shane Velan and Michael Florian. A note on the
entropy solutions of the hydrodynamic model of
trafﬁc ﬂow. Transportation Science, 36(4):435–
446, November 2002.

[277] Erik T. Verhoef. Time, speeds, ﬂows and densities
in static models of road trafﬁc congestion and con-
gestion pricing. In Proceedings of the 38th Meet-
ing of the European Regional Science Association,
Vienna, Austria, August 1998.

[278] Erik T. Verhoef. Speed-ﬂow relations and cost
functions for congested trafﬁc: Theory and empir-
ical analysis. Transportation Research A, 2005.

[279] E.T. Verhoef. Probing a trafﬁc congestion contro-
versy: a comment. Journal of Regional Science,
41:681–694, 2001.

[280] H.H. Versteegt, K.M. Malone, A.I. Martins, R.J.
Castenmiller, and M.C.J. Bliemer. Follow-up study
on testing INDY for use as a Dynamic Trafﬁc As-
signment model in the Dutch National Model. 03-
7N-233-74021, TNO Inro, December 2003.

[281] William S. Vickrey. Congestion theory and trans-
American Economic Review,

port investment.
59:251–260, 1969.

50

[282] Andreas Voellmy, Milenko Vrtic, Bryan Raney,
Kay Axhausen, and Kai Nagel. Status of a tran-
sims implementation for switzerland. Networks
and Spatial Economics, December 2001.

[283] Johann Heinrich von Th¨unen.

Der isolirte
Staat in Beziehung auf Landwirthschaft und Na-
tional¨okonomie, volume I. Hamburg, Perthes,
1826.

[284] Paul Waddell. Urbansim: Modeling urban devel-
opment for land use, transportation and environ-
mental planning. preprint. Journal of the American
Planning Association, 68(3):297–314, 2002.

[285] Paul Waddell and Gudmundur F. Ulfarsson. Intro-
duction to urban simulation: Design and develop-
ment of operational models. In David A. Hensher,
Kenneth J. Button, Kingsley E. Haynes, and Peter
Stopher, editors, Handbook of Transport Geogra-
phy and Spatial Systems, volume 5 of Handbooks
in Transport, chapter 13. Elsevier, August 2004.

[286] K.T. Waldeer. Numerical investigation of a meso-
scopic vehicular trafﬁc ﬂow model based on a
stochastic acceleration process. Transport Theory
and Statistical Physics, 33(2):31–46, 2004.

[287] K.T. Waldeer. A vehicular trafﬁc ﬂow model based
on a stochastic acceleration process. Transport
Theory and Statistical Physics, 33(2):7–30, 2004.

[288] A.A. Walters. The theory and measurement of
private and social cost of highway congestion.
Econometrica, 29(4):676–697, 1961.

[289] J.G. Wardrop. Some theoretical aspects of road
trafﬁc research. In Proceedings of the Institution
of Civil Engineers, volume 1 of 2, 1952.

[290] Raimund Wegener and Axel Klar. A kinetic model
for vehicular trafﬁc derived from a stochastic mi-
croscopic model. Transportation Theory Statisti-
cal Physics, 25(7):785–798, 1996.

[291] Gerald Beresford Whitham. Linear and Nonlinear

Waves. Wiley, New York, 1974.

[292] R. Wiedemann. Simulation des Straßenverkehrs-
ﬂusses. Technical report, Institutes f¨ur Verkehr-
swesen der Universit¨at Karlsruhe, 1974.

[293] Tom Van Woensel. Models for uninterrupted
trafﬁc ﬂows – A queueing approach. PhD the-
sis, Universiteit Antwerpen, Faculteit Toegepaste
Economische Wetenschappen, UFSIA–RUCA,
January 2003.

[294] Dietrich E. Wolf. Cellular automata for trafﬁc sim-

ulations. Physica A, 263:438–451, 1999.

[295] S.C. Wong and G.C.K. Wong. An analytical
shock-ﬁtting algorithm for LWR kinematic wave

51

model embedded with linear speed-density rela-
tionship. Transportation Research B, 36(8):683–
706, September 2002.

[296] Hai Yang and Hai-Jun Huang.

Principle of
marginal-cost pricing: How does it work in a gen-
eral road network ? Transportation Research B,
32B(1):45–54, 1998.

[297] Qi Yang. A Simulation Laboratory for Evalu-
ation of Dynamic Trafﬁc Management Systems.
PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
June 1997.

[298] Isaak Yperman, Steven Logghe, and Ben Immers.
Strictly Pareto-improving congestion pricing in a
multi-destination network. In Proceedings of the
84th Annual Meeting of the Transportation Re-
search Board, Washington, D.C., 2005.

[299] Y. Zahavi. Trafﬁc performance evaluation of road
networks by the α-relationship. Trafﬁc Engineer-
ing and Control, 14(5–6), 1972.

[300] H.M. Zhang. A theory of nonequilibrium traf-
ﬁc ﬂow. Transportation Research B, 32B(7):485–
498, 1998.

[301] H.M. Zhang. A mathematical theory of trafﬁc
hysteresis. Transportation Research B, 33B:1–23,
1999.

[302] H.M. Zhang. Structural properties of solutions
arising from a nonequilibrium trafﬁc ﬂow theory.
Transportation Research B, B34:583–603, 2000.

[303] H.M. Zhang. A ﬁnite difference approximation of
a non-equilibrium trafﬁc ﬂow model. Transporta-
tion Research B, 34B(4):337–365, 2001.

[304] H.M. Zhang. A non-equilibrium trafﬁc model de-
void of gas-like behavior. Transportation Research
B, 36B(3):275–290, March 2002.

[305] H.M. Zhang. Anisotropic property revisited – does
it hold in multi-lane trafﬁc ? Transportation Re-
search B, 37B(6):561–577, July 2003.

[306] H.M. Zhang. Driver memory, trafﬁc viscosity and
a viscous vehicular trafﬁc ﬂow model. Transporta-
tion Research B, 37(1):27–41, January 2003.

[307] H.M. Zhang. On the consistency of a class of
trafﬁc ﬂow models. Transportation Research B,
37(1):101–105, January 2003.

[308] H.M. Zhang and T. Kim. A car-following theory
for multiphase vehicular trafﬁc ﬂow. Transporta-
tion Research B, 39B(5):385–399, June 2005.

[309] Xiaoyan Zhang and David F. Jarrett. Stability anal-
ysis of the classical car-following model. Trans-
portation Research B, 31B(6):441–462, 1997.

