5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
6
0
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Nanotehnology and Soiety: A disussion-based undergraduate ourse

Charles Tahan,

Riky Leung,

G. M. Zenner,

K. D. Ellison,

W. C. Crone,

and Clark A. Miller

3

4

5

6

2

1

1

3

5

Department of Physis,

Department of Soiology,

4

Materials Researh Siene and Engineering Center,

Graduate Shool,

Department of Engineering Physis,

LaFol lette Shool of Publi A(cid:27)airs,

University of Wisonsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706

2

6

Nanotehnology has emerged as a broad and exiting, yet ill-de(cid:28)ned, (cid:28)eld of sienti(cid:28) researh

and tehnologial innovation.

Important questions have arisen about the tehnology's potential

eonomi, soial, and environmental impliations by prominent tehnology leaders, nanotehnol-

ogy boosters, siene (cid:28)tion authors, poliy o(cid:30)ials, and environmental organizations. We have

developed an undergraduate ourse that o(cid:27)ers an opportunity for students from a wide range of

disiplines, inluding the natural and soial sienes, humanities, and engineering, to learn about

nanosiene and nanotehnology, to explore these questions, and to re(cid:29)et on the broader plae of

tehnology in modern soieties. The ourse is built around ative learning methods and seeks to

develop the students' ritial thinking skills, written and verbal ommuniation abilities, and general

knowledge of nanosiene and nanoengineering onepts. Continuous assessment was used to gain

information about the e(cid:27)etiveness of lass disussions and enhanement of students' understanding

of the interation between nanotehnology and soiety.

I.

INTRODUCTION

sope. We desribe here a nontehnial ourse for un-

dergraduates that introdues a broad audiene to NSE

Nanotehnology is ool. Though not profound or prov-

and STS in one venue. The ourse is open to all ma jors

able, this truth has great allure to students and eduators

and satis(cid:28)es a humanities requirement for undergradu-

both. As publi attention to nanosale siene and engi-

ate students. Though designated a 200-level lass, the

neering (NSE) spotlights researh ongoing in labs aross

ourse was made open to all grade levels, from freshman

the ountry, students are pulled toward areers in siene,

to seniors. Disussion-based and requiring ative student

engineering, and related soial sienes or businesses. Ed-

involvement, the ourse fouses on key readings, group

uators not only have a new (cid:28)eld of endeavor and ques-

disussion sessions, role-playing exerises, essay assign-

tions to explore but also another hook to gain the atten-

ments and exams, and a semester-long researh pro jet

tion and interest of these reative learners and ohorts.

with (cid:28)nal presentation.

Indeed, NSE raises many important questions that need

The ourse, Nanotehnology and Soiety, was taught

addressing, espeially at the intersetion of tehnology

in two manifestations in the spring of 2005. Two setions

and soiety. This is evident if one looks at government

of a STS ourse, STS 201 - Where Siene Meets Soi-

funding of the (cid:28)eld in the USA, with apportioned money

ety, were designated for NSE and eah was designed and

spei(cid:28)ally for environmental and soietal impat stud-

lead by a graduate student spei(cid:28)ally trained on NSE

ies [1, 2℄. The ability to reate nanosale materials and

and STS in the previous semester. STS 201 is regularly

devies will generate new ways for people to understand

taught as a small (cid:28)rst-year seminar and satis(cid:28)es either a

and exploit nature, raising omplex and important ques-

humanities or soial sienes requirement within the uni-

tions about who will have aess to these new apabili-

versity's ore liberal arts urriulum. It is well known by

ties, how they will be applied, by whom, and with what

(cid:28)rst-year advisors in the College of Letters and Siene

onsequenes for individual and soial relationships.

and the College of Engineering and has proven suessful

It is inumbent on siene and engineering eduators

in drawing students from humanities, siene, and en-

to partner with their ounterparts in the soial sienes

gineering. This paper details the setion [3℄ taught by

and publi poliy to bring the onversation about the

o-author Tahan, a physis graduate student; the other

onnetions between tehnology and soiety to under-

setion was taught by o-author Leung, a soiology grad-

graduate students aross ampus. Before this pro jet,

uate student. Both build on a similar ore urriulum

a urriular gap existed in NSE eduation at the Uni-

developed in the prior semester's training [4℄.

versity of Wisonsin-Madison (UW), as well as elsewhere

aross the ountry. Nanotehnology eduation has pri-

marily foused on the (cid:28)eld's tehnial aspets, plaing

II. PREPARATION

little emphasis on issues suh as the soial and ethial

impliations of design hoies, publi attitudes toward

In order to develop an e(cid:27)etive undergraduate ourse

new tehnologies, or nanotehnology poliy.

in nanotehnology and soiety, we (cid:28)rst needed to edu-

A ourse on nanotehnology and its soietal implia-

ate the eduators. To this end, a seminar was reated

tions an serve multiple purposes. Reruitment, edua-

for advaned graduate students in the sienes, engineer-

tion, introdution to NSE from a beginner's perspetive,

ing, humanities, and soial sienes to explore questions

and siene and tehnology studies (STS) all fall in its

about the onnetions between nanotehnology and so-

2

ietal issues and to re(cid:29)et on the broader plae of teh-

1. Introdution to Nanotehnology and Soiety. (Class

nology in modern soieties. The instrutors for this ef-

1, 2, 3, Essay 1) How do we de(cid:28)ne nanotehnology?

fort (o-authors Zenner, Ellison, Crone, and Miller) ame

2. Nanosiene/tehnology (Class 4, 5, 10, 12, 14, 37-44)

from bakgrounds in engineering, poliy, and the human-

ities. Additionally, to develop, implement, and evaluate

(a) Poliy Reports and Reviews

this program, a unique partnership was initiated through

(b) Topis: New E(cid:27)ets at Nanosale; Quantum vs.

a National Siene Foundation funded Nanotehnology

Classial; Nano-Manufaturing; Quantum Dots and

Undergraduate Eduation (NUE) grant between the Ma-

Nanopartiles; Carbon; Medial Appliations

terials Researh Siene and Engineering Center (MR-

() Student researh pro jets and presentations

SEC) and the Robert and Jean Holtz Center for Siene

3. Nanoteh in Culture (Class 6, 8, 9, 22, 24, 46)

and Tehnology Studies, a newly established foal point

for researh and teahing in the history, soiology, and

(a) Nanoproduts and Business.

What

real

philosophy of siene, tehnology, and mediine at UW.

The seminar was o(cid:27)ered to graduate students for ei-

ther one or three redits through an Engineering Pro-

fessional Development ourse (EPD 690) titled Seminar

nanoproduts are on the market now and what's

nanohyped?

(b) Siene Fition. How does siene (cid:28)tion bring si-

ene/tehnology to the publi? (See Refs. [24, 25, 26℄)

in Nanotehnology and Soiety: Analytial & Pedagogi-

() In the News. How has nano seeped into the media?

al Approahes. Students who hose the one-redit op-

4. Revolutions and the History of Siene and Tehnol-

tion were expeted to attend the seminar's (cid:28)rst hour,

ogy. (Class 31, 46, Essay 3) Is nanoteh a new industrial

read and disuss lass materials, and write a one-page

revolution?

response essay eah week. This part of the seminar, at-

5. Tehnology and Soiety (Class 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 16, 24,

tended by ten graduate students and post dotoral as-

32, 46, Essay 2)

soiates in the Fall 2004 semester, foused on theories

(a) Progress. Do tehnologial innovations neessarily

and approahes to understanding the soial dimensions

ontribute to progress?

of tehnology, applied to the ase study of nanotehnol-

(b) Tehnology as Forms of Life. How does tehnology

ogy. More detailed ourse information is provided on the

a(cid:27)et the way we live?

UW MRSEC website under (cid:16)Nanotehnology Courses(cid:17)

() Soial Choies. How do the users shape the devel-

[5℄ and in a onferene proeeding [4℄.

opment of tehnology?

The three-redit option of EPD 690 had an additional

(d) The Politis of Tehnologial Change.

Is teh-

emphasis on the development of teahing skills and the

nology politial?

reation of a teahing portfolio. Students who hose this

6. How Government Drives Tehnology (Class 23, 25, 46,

option attended a seond hour of the seminar in addition

Essay 4)

to the (cid:28)rst, and developed an annotated syllabus and

teahing materials for an undergraduate seminar in nan-

(a) Nanotehnology Funding Initiatives. How muh

otehnology and soiety that would integrate the teh-

money is being put into nano?

nial and soial dimensions of NSE. As suh, this por-

(b) Funding Agenies. What agenies handle nanoteh

tion of the ourse was designed for future eduators who

funding?

want to teah nanotehnology and soiety topis, either

() The Military and Tehnology. How do the mili-

as stand-alone ourses or as part of another ourse. These

tary's needs shape our world?

students also lead the disussion in the (cid:28)rst hour on a ro-

7. Weighing the Risks (Class 33, 34, 35, 36, 46, Essay 4)

tating basis, giving them an opportunity to test various

ative learning tehniques suh as think-pair-share, jig-

(a) Risk Analysis. How does soiety deide what kinds

saw, town-meeting formats, group disussion, blakboard

exerises, et. This seond part of the seminar introdued

of risks are aeptable given the possible onsequenes

of pursuing a ertain tehnology or siene?

(b) Nanotoxiology. Is NSE expliitly more dangerous

approahes, materials, and skills for teahing undergrad-

than miro?

uates how to think ritially about the soial aspets of

tehnology. Four graduate students ompleted the three-

() Aidents. What is a normal aident?

redit version of the ourse and developed their own syl-

8. Thinking About the Future (Class 30, 45, 47)

labi, inluding the two who went on to teah their own

ourses in the spring. One of these ourses is desribed

(a) Prophets, Worriers, and Haks. What do the

here.

minds of today (or at least those who get media at-

tention) think about nanoteh? (e.g. [27, 28℄)

III. GOALS AND COURSE CONTENT

(b) More Siene Fition.

() Re(cid:29)etions. What have we learned?

STS 201: Nanotehnology and Soiety sets broad goals

Table I: Approximate ourse outline for 47 lasses (eah 50

in both its sope and ontent. As stated in the student

minutes). We list one possible question with eah topi as an

syllabus, the ob jetives of this ourse are summarized

example. The ourse materials an be found online [3℄.

below.

1. Introdue the broad (cid:28)eld of nanotehnology and the

basi siene and tehnology behind it.

2. Consider the soietal impliations of nanoteh in

the ontext of soial, sienti(cid:28), historial, politial,

environmental, philosophial, ethial, and ultural

ideas applied from other (cid:28)elds and prior work.

3. Develop your questioning, thinking, idea produ-

ing, and ommuniation skills, both written and

verbal.

Sine this was primarily a humanities ourse, the fous

is on understanding the impliations of tehnology and

its interations with soiety, spei(cid:28)ally applied to NSE.

From a deeper urriulum perspetive, the goals inlude

3

Men

x
e
S

l
e
v
e
L

s
r
o
j
a
M

Women

Freshman

Juniors

Seniors

Biochemistry
Computer Sciences

Sophomores

Nuclear Engineering, Business, Atmospheric
& Oceanic Studies, Undecided

Math, Pharmacy, Botany, Chem Eng., Zoology,
Communicative Disorders, Journalism/Sociology

5

10

15

20

Number of Students

the following.

Figure 1: Enrollment in one setion of STS 201: Nanoteh-

1. Introdue the various soial theories of tehnology,

in eah ategory (e.g., Female (5), Freshman (4), ma joring in

nology and Soiety. The (cid:28)gure gives the number of students

suh as tehnologial determinism and the soial

Business (2), and so on).

onstrution of tehnology.

2. Explore the wider soial, historial, and ultural

ontexts in whih nanosale siene and engineering

The lass outline given in Table I is mostly hrono-

are embedded.

logial exept that the nanosiene subtopis were dis-

tributed throughout the lass instead of in one lump.

3. Examine the tehnial and soial elements of nan-

The lass began its (cid:28)rst week looking at more general

otehnologial systems.

introdutory texts on nanotehnology, suh as in popu-

4. Provide skills and resoures for learning about the

then began looking at the STS topis one-by-one, inter-

lar siene magazines, think-tank and orporate reports,

tehnologial

infrastrutures of modern soieties

hanging STS with NSE. The last few weeks were spent

and the potential impats of developments in nan-

with the students reporting on their researh in a spe-

otehnology.

i(cid:28) topi in NSE. The last week ended in a review and

5. Investigate why people sometimes ome to fear

re(cid:29)etion.

new tehnologies, inluding studies of tehnologial

utopias and dystopias, aidents, risk, and onerns

about loss of ontrol.

The STS readings used throughout the ourse were in-

trodutory in nature (suh as in Refs. [12, 13, 14, 15, 16,

17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23℄), assuming an audiene not fa-

miliar with the more omplex analytial tehniques and

An obvious question is how muh siene was inluded?

terms that may be assumed in higher level soiology or

Although this is not a tehnial ourse, the students were

history of siene ourses. The spei(cid:28) readings for this

required to learn some of the basi siene of the nan-

setion are available online [3℄. The urriulum in bulk

otehnologies disussed in lass. It is best to illustrate

onsisted of omponents whih introdued a onept or

the level with an example. Let's take the quintessen-

framework in STS and then used STS as a means to apply

tial nanotehnology of nanorystals, or quantum dots.

or interpret that onept. As a spei(cid:28) example, we have

The students were expeted to learn some primitive semi-

taken one subtopi of the ourse and listed in some detail

ondutor physis in order to understand why nanosale

in Table II the atual timeline and ontent of how this

semiondutor rystals exhibit new properties, suh as

partiular sub jet, How Government Drives Tehnology:

hanges in olor emission, at ertain size thresholds. The

The Military and Tehnology, was addressed. Humani-

notion of a bandgap between ore (valene) eletron levels

ties, siene, multimedia, and disussion are interwoven

and free (ondution) levels was introdued with a dis-

to form a learning blok. This is typial of the ourse in

ussion of light (photon) exitation. The students were

general.

expeted to learn how the distane between the eletron

levels hanges with dereasing size and why (quantum

on(cid:28)nement e(cid:27)ets). This understanding ould then be

IV. REQUIREMENTS AND OUTPUT

ompared and applied to the appliation of quantum dots

for medial ontrast imaging.

Instrutor designed le-

Beause this was primarily a disussion-based humani-

tures, in addition to siene texts for a lay audiene, e.g.

ties ourse, lass partiipation (inluding homework) was

Refs. [6, 7, 8, 9℄, provided the main learning materials.

highly valued and vital to exploring the issues fully. It

4

•

How Government Drives Tehnology: The Military and

1. You are interviewing for a job at MKinsey, a presti-

Tehnology

gious onsulting (cid:28)rm. During your interview you men-

(cid:21) Day 1

the soietal

impliations of tehnology,

spei(cid:28)ally

tion that you have some experiene thinking about

1. Read The US National Nanotehnology Ini-

nanotehnology. Seeing a possible avenue for future

tiative After 3 Years by M. Roo [2℄

growth, your interviewer asks you to go home and

2. Read Command Performane: A Perspe-

tive on Military Enterprise and Tehnologial

Change by D. Noble [21℄

write a two to three-page exeutive summary de(cid:28)ning

nanotehnology (whih she, a non-sientist, an under-

stand) and postulating on spei(cid:28) areas where MKin-

sey may be able to do nano-onsulting in the future.

3. Group work on worksheet for Command Per-

You must really impress her to get the job.

formane artile

4. Instrutor-lead disussion and review

2. Does nanotehnology have politis? Make your ase,

for or against, using the artiles we've talked about in

(cid:21) Day 2

lass (e.g., L. Winner's Do Artifats Have Politis? ).

1. Students (cid:28)nd and present to lass examples

3. Is the (cid:28)eld of nanotehnology a revolution or just evo-

of military nanotehnology they found in the

lution?

news

4. Testimony before the ongressional subommittee on

2. Read Super Soldiers, MIT Tehnology Re-

the (cid:28)rst review of the National Nanotehnology Initia-

view, by D. Talbot [10℄

tive. Write a brief testimony to ongress where you

3. Wath video Super Soldiers (Institute for Sol-

address the following. Government investment in nan-

dier Nanotehnologies) [11℄

oteh researh. (Should the government ontinue fund-

4. Debate in lass inorporating urrent and

ing of nanoteh? In what spei(cid:28) areas? How?) Pub-

prior understanding: L. Winner vs. D.

Rums(cid:28)eld

li partiipation in the evolution and funding of nan-

otehnology.

(Should the publi be brought into the

nanoteh development proess? How?) You will rep-

resent a spei(cid:28) politial group (military, AAAS, et.)

assigned in lass.

Table III: Essay assignments (abbreviated).

Table II: Extended example of one subtopi of the ourse.

weighed at 25% of the grade total, inluding the expeta-

tion that students partiipate or lead group disussions,

present before the lass, and partiipate in debates, mok

hearings, or other ooperative ativities. Reading was

and out of lass.

assigned for nearly every lass but homework was oa-

The (cid:28)nal 30% of the ourse requirement was assessed

sional and ould inlude small writing or researh assign-

from an individual researh pro jet and lass presenta-

ments to be shared with the lass. One example was an

tion. A list of topis was developed by the instrutor,

assignment where the students hose from a list of profes-

and eah student seleted one to researh and beome the

sors at the UW listed as doing NSE researh and reported

lass (cid:16)expert(cid:17) on it. We do not inlude a omplete list of

bak to the lass on what the partiular researh group

the nanotopis but examples inlude Nano-Nulear Bat-

was doing and if they thought it was NSE. Another ex-

teries, Nanotehnology and Caner, NanoFiltration, and

ample was an assignment to (cid:28)nd a NSE produt in the

Nanotehnology and Agriulture. This provided a means

news, learn about it, and teah what they learned to the

to explore in more depth some of the di(cid:27)erent sub(cid:28)elds

rest of the lass. Assignments suh as these ated as a

of NSE and allow the students to teah eah other in-

means to diversify researh into the ontinually hanging

stead of sitting through letures by the instrutor. The

forefront of NSE and to highlight examples of humani-

motivating goal was to produe a pamphlet on key nan-

ties/STS topis we were disussing in lass.

otehnologies ira 2005 that may have value to future

To a large extent, the ourse was about onneting

iterations of the lass and to the publi.

It also pro-

disparate questions, onepts, fats, and ideas, and then

vided an opportunity for more advaned students in the

produing new ones. Writing is a vital proess in this

lass to ontribute partiular expertise, say in biohem-

endeavor in that it is the formal way of integrating ideas

istry, that may be outside the realm of the instrutor's

and ommuniating. In that vein, there were four, 2-3

speialty.

Intended for a lay audiene, approximately

paged, double-spaed response or op-ed type essays for

two-thirds of eah roughly (cid:28)ve double-spaed page report

eah of the main topis overed. Eah of the four graded

overed the siene behind the hosen nanotopi with the

essays made up 5% of the lass grade for a total of 20%.

last one-third on the soietal impliations. Eah student

The topis of these are listed in Table III.

also gave a 20 minute presentation, either with Power-

Two formal exams aounted for another quarter of the

Point or on the blak-board, before the lass on their re-

students grade. One midterm and one (cid:28)nal eah over

searh pro jet. These student reports and presentations

the readings, terms, onstruts, and siene learned in

are available on the web [3℄.

5

Very
Comfortable

Comfortable

Slightly
Comfortable

Not
Comfortable

1. The science of

nanotechnology.

17%

48%

35%

PRE

15%

80%

POST

2. Any science or

engineering field.

36%

36%

28%

PRE

25%

50%

25%

POST

3. Science and

society issues.

21%

42%

33%

PRE

35%

50%

15%

POST

4. Nanotechnology
and society.

22%

43%

35%

50%

45%

PRE

POST

V. ASSESSMENT

In addition to the traditional evaluation of student

work disussed in the previous setion, several surveys

were given throughout the semester to gauge the stu-

dents hanging pereptions of the ourse and to provide

feedbak on further improvement. A summary of both

the evaluation and assessment results are given here.

A brief pre-assessment was given on the seond day of

lass and two, more detailed post-assessments were given

in the last week of lass, in addition to several uno(cid:30)-

ial feedbak surveys throughout the semester. These,

together with the midterm and (cid:28)nal exams and es-

say/researh writing assignments, show that the enrolled

students found the ourse valuable and that many of the

learning goals outlined in the syllabus were met. One

typial student omment was: (cid:16)I really enjoyed the lass.

tions towards using/reating tehnology.(cid:17)

The pre-assessment attempted to gauge the omfort

and knowledge levels of the topis to be studied in the

Not only did I learn about what advanes have been

Figure 2: Pre- and post-assessment answers to the question:

ahieved (or will be soon), but also the soial implia-

(cid:16)Please rate your omfort level with the following topis.(cid:17)

ourse as well as of NSE in general. Figure 2 shows the re-

luding, for example, inreased reativity, quantum on-

sults of the omfort level assessment before and after the

(cid:28)nement e(cid:27)ets, and biologial oinidenes (suh as the

bulk of the ourse. Of partiular note is the general in-

ability of nanopartiles to ross the blood-brain barrier),

rease in omfort level aross all topis and the improve-

as well as more spei(cid:28) examples. All the students were

ment in the area of nanotehnology and soiety; by the

able to give three orret examples of spei(cid:28) nanoteh-

end of the ourse 95% of the lass laimed to be (cid:16)omfort-

nologies. Moreover, the students were able to formulate

able(cid:17) or (cid:16)very omfortable(cid:17) with the sub jet, a tremen-

three meaningful questions about the soietal implia-

tions of NSE, a question on the pre-assessment that was

dous improvement. In addition, the pre-assessment asked

the students to de(cid:28)ne (cid:16)nanotehnology(cid:17) and list several

left mostly blank.

nanotehnologies they knew of, as well as whether and

The post-assessment inluded additional questions to

where they had heard the term before. About a quar-

judge the impat of the ourse on the students. The stu-

ter of the lass said that this ourse was the (cid:28)rst time

dents were asked expliitly to summarize the lass in a

they had ever heard the term nanotehnology. The oth-

sentene or two; several omments are representative of

ers ited news, tv, or siene (cid:28)tion as their soure of in-

the responses.

(cid:16)This lass gave me a good overview of

trodution. Initially, most students desribed nanoteh-

the siene of nanoteh and its soietal impliations. I

nology in abstrat terms as tehnology that was (cid:16)tiny(cid:17),

now feel muh better about urrent trends in the (cid:28)eld.(cid:17)

(cid:16)mirosopi(cid:17), or (cid:16)advaned.(cid:17) The most ommon answers

Another student spoke similarly: (cid:16)This lass goes over

were variations on (cid:16)the study of small partiles or very

tehnology of the last hundred years (approx.) and fo-

small tehnology(cid:17) or ompletely irular de(cid:28)nitions suh

uses spei(cid:28)ally on nanotehnology. Ma jor issues in-

as (cid:16)study/design/manufaturing of produts/ob jets at

the nanosale.(cid:17) Only one student ited 1×10−9

meters as

volve evolution of tehnology, politial involvement, and

soial e(cid:27)ets.(cid:17) To fully interpret the post-assessment re-

a benhmark. As to examples of nanotehnology, before

sults, it's useful to revisit the makeup of the lass and

the ourse students ited (cid:16)advaned/really-fast omput-

the motivations of the students.

ers(cid:17) as the most ommon example for nanotehnology,

Many of the students (14) took the lass to ful(cid:28)ll a

followed by (cid:16)medial/mediine(cid:17), and (cid:16)stain free pants.(cid:17)

humanities requirement with about half also iting gen-

The (cid:28)nal exams and post-assessment asked these same

eral interest in (cid:16)nanotehnology.(cid:17) Many of the students

questions again plus additional, more in-depth questions

did not ome from a humanities bakground but instead

about the students knowledge of NSE.

from the engineering and natural sienes, business, and

The (cid:28)nal exam provided an opportunity to test the

related. From this starting point, we assess how the lass

students hopefully improved understanding and knowl-

was appreiated.

edge of NSE. When asked to (cid:16)de(cid:28)ne nanotehnology(cid:17)(cid:22)a

Most students (17) said they would take the lass again

non-trivial question(cid:22)virtually all the students were able

if they ould go bak in time. Only slightly less (14)

to formulate a working de(cid:28)nition of NSE on par with or

would atually take it again even if it didn't ful(cid:28)ll some

surpassing the status quo de(cid:28)nitions found in the ommu-

requirement, though a quarter would not. Nearly all

nity. The students universally were also able to ite ex-

(17 yes, 3 maybes) would reommend the ourse to an-

amples of new phenomena that our at the nanosale in-

other student. All said their knowledge of the siene of

6

NSE improved beause of this ourse. One student om-

skills and onepts to present day issues in nanotehnol-

mented: (cid:16)I knew very little about [nanotehnology℄ and

ogy and soiety. Although assessment annot be quanti-

I was surprised by how muh there is.(cid:17) All said their

tative in this regard, we found that the students did rea-

knowledge of (cid:16)what nano is(cid:17) improved. Nearly all (17)

sonably well (with some variation in skill level) in think-

said the ourse made them very or extremely well pre-

ing reatively and knowledgably on the issues in ques-

pared to explain, in general, what NSE is all about to

tion. Not only did they show a growing understanding of

someone else. For example, one omment stated that the

how nanotehnology will and an e(cid:27)et soiety (with past

ourse (cid:16)provides a basi, layman's de(cid:28)nition as well as

tehnologies as test ases), but how soiety an form the

an in-depth de(cid:28)nition.(cid:17) Nearly all (18) onsidered (cid:16)Nan-

evolution and appliation of tehnology. The sub jets of

otehnology and Soiety(cid:17) a valuable (cid:28)eld of intelletual

the essays, shown in Table III, should eluidate this.

pursuit, whih was somewhat surprising to us onsidering

A rewarding take-home message from the post-

the newness and ambiguity of the (cid:28)eld when we started.

assessment and in-lass surveys was that the students

Did the ourse modify the areer path of the students?

overwhelmingly

preferred

disussion/group-oriented

Before the ourse, most students were planning on pur-

lasses over leture-oriented lasses in most ases. (cid:16)Some

suing a areer in siene and engineering (3 were not, 2

of the more siene based aspets are taught better in

maybe), and none were onsidering one in nanotehnol-

leture format. This was done for the main part. But

ogy. Students were largely not enouraged to hange to

impliations on soiety is better in disussion format.(cid:17)

a more nano-related areer (8 maybe, 10 no), but the

Another good point was made that justi(cid:28)es the struture

ourse did enourage them to keep an eye out for oppor-

of the ourse as taught: (cid:16)nanoteh is hanging so fast,

tunities and relations to NSE in the their planned (cid:28)eld

it'd be bad to try and follow a pre-established leture

(15 yes). Again, the ourse did not drastially enour-

shedule.(cid:17)

age the students to pursue a areer in STS or poliy (5

maybe, 16 no). Three-quarters of the lass said that their

perspetive on siene, tehnology, and soietal implia-

VI. DISCUSSION AND REFLECTION

tions hanged as a result of the lass. Take one student's

omment: (cid:16)Before the ourse, I thought any/all tehno-

A humanities ourse that fouses on tehnology, suh

logial improvements were good. Now I understand more

as Nanotehnology and Soiety, reates unique hallenges

of the soial issues of new tehnology.(cid:17)

alongside its new opportunities for eduation. With over

Most of the students thought the lass was halleng-

half the lass omposed of siene or engineering ma jors,

ing enough, though a few expeted more. Most thought

there was a natural bias against the more open-ended,

the ourse ouldn't or only might be improved upon sig-

sub jetive questions we pose in a (cid:28)eld suh as this one.

ni(cid:28)antly. About a quarter of the students would have

In other words, many students expeted a lass about

liked to see more siene, about a quarter thought there

nanotehnology. In this situation, it is the instrutor's

was too muh, and the last half thought it was a good

responsibility to expand the students world view suh

mix. Many omments were similar, (cid:16)just right, any more

that the true ontent of the ourse beomes digestible

siene and it wouldn't have been understood.(cid:17) All in

and even motivating. This requires some onvining.

all, there seemed to be a good balane between siene

Clarity, from day one, is the (cid:28)rst step in good stu-

and soietal issues for the diverse skill level of the stu-

dent engagement. The philosophy and ontent of the

dents. Another omment agrees: (cid:16)Just right, it allowed

ourse must be learly and repeatedly explained, fous-

us to gain/appreiate what it an do and [the℄ hazards

ing on why this sub jet is worthwhile and what will

nanoteh has. Plus we didn't have to have a omplete

be gained from a signi(cid:28)ant time investment. The in-

understanding of nanoteh to see soietal impliations.(cid:17)

strutor's (CT) tehnial bakground helped somewhat

As to the struture of the lass, the presentations were

in that it gave redibility and a starting point for a

appreiated. One student's observation was typial: (cid:16)the

new diretion of intelletual pursuit. In the end though,

pro jets were a big help and allowed us to over a wide

personal attention(cid:22)learning the students' names, ma-

variety of topis.(cid:17) The students also preferred in-lass a-

jors, areer plans, interests(cid:22)beomes neessary to enlist

tivities, debates, town-hall meetings, and generally doing

the whole lass in learning, espeially in the ontext of

the work themselves over traditional leture. Many om-

group work, lass partiipation, and ative learning (non-

ments requested more even though most of the ourse

leture-based) ativities. Not surprisingly, this entails a

was that way. The researh pro jet presentations were

great amount of e(cid:27)ort on the instrutor's part. It is also

universally thought to be a good idea, but the students

tremendously rewarding.

would have preferred more spei(cid:28)ity and diretion from

Teahing the ourse required a lot of leadership. We

the instrutor in general. One omment summarizes

pushed and pulled in new diretions as the ourse navi-

niely, (cid:16)Yes.

I think these were the best part. They

gated through di(cid:27)erent paes and types of ontent. As

ould have been better if the topis/questions were more

a pratial matter, we bouned bak and forth between

spei(cid:28) and written better.(cid:17)

STS and NSE to keep interest and integrate onepts and

Finally, the essay assignments provided a means to ap-

theories learned throughout. Sine this was the (cid:28)rst time

ply and test the appliation of higher order analytial

the ourse was o(cid:27)ered, extra preparation was needed for

7

eah lass. The ourse shedule was also quite (cid:29)uid as

to model the progress and requirements of the pro jet on

the order and depth of the ourse material was ontinu-

a real-world researh group, where the students would

ally alibrated to math the students learning pae and

need to meet milestones and share their progress with

the instrutors growing experiene. Beause we did not

the rest of the lass at group meetings, taking and re-

know what types of students would enroll, the previous

sponding to feedbak. The formal lass presentation was

semester's planning (see Setion 2) inevitably hanged.

one step in this proess of produing a world-readable re-

In fat, we had originally thought the ourse would be

port. The implementation of this approah was good but

mostly freshman, using the history of STS 201 as a guide.

not perfet. Some of the students would have bene(cid:28)ted

Instead, we attrated a muh more diverse and older stu-

from more hand-holding and spei(cid:28)ation. Despite the

dent body.

instrutor's not limitless time, the assessments showed

Older students from siene and engineering ma jors

that the experiene was found valuable by virtually all

tend to be more resistant to ative learning tehniques

of the students.

In all, realisti time onstraints were

and lass partiipation due to their limited experiene

not a barrier to preparing and teahing an e(cid:27)etive an

with suh lass formats. They are also in general more

interesting ourse from our perspetive.

ompetent overall, be it in writing, reading, or analyti-

Sientists and tehnologists, as well as siene students,

al omprehension abilities, whih an lead to boredom

think about the soietal rami(cid:28)ations of tehnology all

in mixed skill-level environments. We made this into an

the time. From an interesting newspaper artile to a

opportunity, however. The researh pro jets and essay

siene (cid:28)tion show, sientists have long found many av-

assignments provided a good means to hallenge the stu-

enues to think outside the lab. But thinking ritially

dents while keeping everyone engaged at their ability-

and struturally about suh issues in a ourse like this

level. The NSE reports in partiular allowed the more

(modeled on the ollaboration and experiene of siene

advaned to show their abilities. In this manner, the stu-

and tehnology studies, history of siene, and publi pol-

dents themselves beame teahers or knowledge enters

iy professionals) is generally a new, and we have found,

and were assigned to be the lass expert on their parti-

quite worthwhile experiene. An exiting new (cid:28)eld of

ular nano-topi. The nano-report researh pro jets be-

study like nanotehnology an provide the meat of a new

ame ontinuing eduational tools for both the researher

onept in tehnology and soiety eduation,

learning

and the rest of the lass in researh and ommuniation

about the issues of tehnologial hange alongside teh-

tehniques as well as general knowledge.

nologial developments, in real-time. We an eduate the

So how muh work did it take? For the students, the

ongressman, the business lass, and the soiety-shapers

right balane had to be maintained between university re-

before they make the deisions that will push Ameria

quirements and their expetation and ommitment level

into the future, and the sientists and engineers before

(good but not in(cid:28)nite). The lass deided olletively to

they build it.

meet as groups in-lass but have homework and assign-

ments be individual outside of lass. The ommitment

was not there for a ompletely group pro jet type ourse.

The philosophy of work tended to be an expetation of

Aknowledgments

reading preparation and group disussion in lass. For

important onepts or theories in STS, the lass settled

into a routine of working in groups on work sheets or

We are grateful to the National Siene Foundation

quizzes provided by the instrutor, then as a lass re-

through the Materials Researh Siene and Engineer-

viewing their work. The nanosiene disussions tended

ing Center (MRSEC) on Nanostrutured Materials and

to be more whole lass oriented with individual students

Interfaes (DMR-0079983) and through the Nanoteh-

ontributing their researh or perspetive. In our experi-

nology Undergraduate Eduation (NUE) grant, An Inte-

ene, after the learning goals were set by the instrutor,

grated Approah to Teahing Nanotehnology and Soiety

the lass preferred to do the work in small groups. The

(DMR-0407075). Both programs are at the University of

amount of work required on the students part was similar

Wisonsin-Madison.

to other ourses at the UW.

We would like to thank the EPD 690 students for their

The instrutor had more extensive duties.

In addi-

help in thinking about the omplex issues surrounding

tion to all that omes with preparing a (cid:28)rst-time ourse

nanotehnology and soiety. In partiular, we would like

(with no standard text), the researh pro jets in partiu-

to thank Anne Bentley and Adam Creuziger for partii-

lar required speial attention. The students learned more

pating in the seond portion of the ourse and reating

about NSE through the pro jets and applied their new-

syllabi and other ourse materials. CT would like to per-

found soietal analytial toolset to explore the rami(cid:28)a-

sonally thank Robert Joynt for allowing him to develop

tions of their nano-topi. The instrutor's philosophy was

and teah this ourse while pursuing his Ph.D. in physis.

[1℄ M. C. Roo, J. Nanopart. Res. 5, 181 (2003).

[2℄ M. C. Roo, J. Nanopart. Res. 6, 1 (2003).

8

[3℄ C. Tahan,

Nanotehnology

and

Soiety,

URL

Press (1998).

http://www.tahan.om/harlie/nanosoiety/ourse201/

[18℄ J. Brokman, The Next Fifty Years, Vintage Books

[4℄ W. C. Crone, G. M. Zenner, C. A. Miller, K. D. Elli-

(2002).

son, and A. K. Bentley, in Proeedings of the 2005 SEM

[19℄ S. Jasano(cid:27), G. E. Markle, J. C. Petersen, and T. Pinh,

Annual Conferene and Exposition on Experimental and

Handbook of Siene and Tehnology Studies, Sage Pub-

Applied Mehanis (Portland, OR, 2005), vol. 68, pp. 1-4.

liations (1995).

[5℄ UW-Madison MRSEC

Nano

Courses,

URL

[20℄ A. H. Teih, Tehnology and the Future, Wadsworth Pub-

http://www.mrse.wis.edu/Edet/ourses/

lishing (2002).

[6℄ Understanding Nanotehnology

(Sienti(cid:28) Amerian,

[21℄ M. R. Smith, Military Enterprise and Tehnologial

2004).

Change: Perspetives on the Amerian Experiene, MIT

[7℄ I. Amato, Nanotehnology: Shaping the world atom by

Press (1987).

atom, National Siene and Tehnology Counil, USA

[22℄ C. Perrow, Normal Aidents, Prineton University Press

(2000).

(1999).

[8℄ Swiss Re, Nanotehnology, Smal l Matter, Many Un-

[23℄ A. Irwin, Misunderstanding Siene: The Publi Reon-

knowns (2004), URL http://www. swissre.om/

strution of Siene and Tehnology, Cambridge Univer-

[9℄ R. Waser, Nanoeletronis and Information Tehnology,

sity Press (2004).

WILEY-VCH (2003).

[24℄ M. Flynn, Soul of the City, Analog, Feb. 1989, L100-105

[10℄ D. Talbot, Super Soldiers, MIT Teh Review, 105 (8),

[25℄ The New Breed, The (New) Outer Limits, Season 1. (A

44-50 (2002)

nanotehnology professor reates a strain of "nanobots"

[11℄ MIT

Institute

for

Soldier

Nanoteh-

that an ure anything. His sik brother-in-law (a soiol-

nologies,

Promotional

Video,

URL

ogist) injets himself with the nanobots whih "improve"

http://web.mit.edu/isn/aboutisn/isnvideo.html

him, eventually leading to a horri(cid:28) death.)

[12℄ L. Winner, The Whale and the Reator, U. Chiago Press

[26℄ Learning Curve, Stargate SG1, Season 3. (A soiety

(1986).

is disovered that aquires knowledge by implanting a

[13℄ Langdon Winner, Testimony to the Committee on Si-

few of their hildren with nanites at birth, before the

ene of the U.S. House of Representatives on The Soi-

brain has fully developed. The nanites at as additional

etal Impliations of Nanotehnology, Wednesday, April 9

synapses, allowing the hildren to learn vast amounts of

(2003).

knowledge very quikly. When the hild has reahed 12

[14℄ D. Makenzie and J. Wa jman, The Soial Shaping of

years of age, his or her nanites are harvested and one is

Tehnology, Open University Press (1999).

given to every adult itizen, sharing their knowledge.)

[15℄ G. Cross and R. Szostak, Tehnology and Amerian So-

[27℄ K. E. Drexler, Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of

iety: A History, Prentie Hall (1995).

Nanotehnology, Anhor Books (1987)

[16℄ H. Collins and T. Pinh, The Golem: What You Should

[28℄ D. Mulhall, Our Moleular Future, Prometheus Books

Know About Siene, Cambridge University Press (1998).

(2002)

[17℄ H. Collins and T. Pinh, The Golem at Large: What You

Should Know About Tehnology, Cambridge University

