5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
9
0
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Criterion for traﬃc phases in single vehicle data and empirical test of a microscopic
three-phase traﬃc theory

Boris S. Kerner 1, Sergey L. Klenov 2, and Andreas Hiller 3
1, 3 DaimlerChrysler AG, REI/VF, HPC: G021, 71059 Sindelﬁngen, Germany and
2 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Department of Physics, 141700 Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region, Russia

A microscopic criterion for distinguishing synchronized ﬂow and wide moving jam phases in single
vehicle data measured at a single freeway location is presented. Empirical local congested traﬃc
states in single vehicle data measured on diﬀerent days are classiﬁed into synchronized ﬂow states
and states consisting of synchronized ﬂow and wide moving jam(s). Then empirical microscopic
characteristics for these diﬀerent local congested traﬃc states are studied. Using these characteris-
tics and empirical spatiotemporal macroscopic traﬃc phenomena, an empirical test of a microscopic
three-phase traﬃc ﬂow theory is performed. In accordance with real traﬃc, a model of an “open”
road is applied; traﬃc demand at model boundaries is taken from empirical data. Spatiotemporal
congested model patterns emerge, develop, and dissolve due to self-organization eﬀects. In accor-
dance with the microscopic criterion for the traﬃc phases, the synchronized ﬂow and wide moving
jam phases are found in single vehicle model data associated with diﬀerent locations within the
spatiotemporal congested model patterns. Simulations show that the microscopic criterion and
macroscopic spatiotemporal objective criteria lead to the same identiﬁcation of the synchronized
ﬂow and wide moving jam phases in congested traﬃc.
It is found that microscopic three-phase
traﬃc models can explain both microscopic and macroscopic empirical congested pattern features.
It is obtained that microscopic frequency distributions for vehicle speed diﬀerence as well as funda-
mental diagrams and speed correlation functions can depend on the spatial co-ordinate considerably.
It turns out that microscopic optimal velocity (OV) functions and time headway distributions are
not necessarily qualitatively diﬀerent, even if local congested traﬃc states are qualitatively diﬀerent.
The reason for this is that important spatiotemporal features of congested traﬃc patterns are lost in
these as well as in many other macroscopic and microscopic traﬃc characteristics, which are widely
used as the empirical basis for a test of traﬃc ﬂow models, speciﬁcally, cellular automata traﬃc ﬂow
models.

PACS numbers: 89.40.+k, 47.54.+r, 64.60.Cn, 64.60.Lx

I.

INTRODUCTION

Freeway traﬃc is a complex dynamic process, which
unfolds in space and time. Speciﬁcally, in initial free
ﬂow complex spatiotemporal congested patterns are ob-
served. Therefore, for an adequate comparison with real-
ity a model should exhibit features of the onset of conges-
tion and of empirical spatiotemporal congested traﬃc pat-
terns. To observe these patterns, measurements of traﬃc
variables (e.g., ﬂow rate and vehicle speed) as functions of
time at many diﬀerent freeway locations should simulta-
neously be made on a long enough freeway section. From
spatiotemporal analysis of such data measured over many
days and years on various freeways in diﬀerent countries,
it has been found that there are two diﬀerent phases in
congested traﬃc, synchronized ﬂow and wide moving jam
(see references in the book [1]). Thus, there are three-
traﬃc phases: 1. Free ﬂow. 2. Synchronized ﬂow. 3.
Wide moving jam.

The fundamental diﬀerence between synchronized ﬂow
and wide moving jam is determined by the following
macroscopic spatiotemporal objective (empirical) crite-
ria [1]. The wide moving jam exhibits the characteris-
tic, i.e., unique, and coherent feature to maintain the
mean velocity of the downstream jam front, even when
the jam propagates through any other traﬃc states or
freeway bottlenecks. In contrast, synchronized ﬂow does

not exhibit this characteristic feature, in particular, the
downstream front of synchronized ﬂow is often ﬁxed at a
freeway bottleneck.

Congested traﬃc occurs mostly at freeway bottlenecks.
Just as defects and impurities are important for phase
transitions in physical systems, so are bottlenecks in traf-
ﬁc ﬂow. In empirical observations, the following funda-
mental spatiotemporal features of phase transitions and
congested patterns have been found [1]:

(1) The onset of congestion at a bottleneck is asso-
ciated with a local phase transition from free ﬂow to
synchronized ﬂow. This F→S transition exhibits prob-
abilistic nature. In particular, the F→S transition can
be induced by a short-time disturbance that plays the
role of a critical nuclei for the phase transition.

(2) There can be spontaneous and induced F→S tran-

sitions at a freeway bottleneck.

(3) Wide moving jams can emerge spontaneously only

in synchronized ﬂow, i.e., due to F→S→J transitions.

(4) There are two main types of congested patterns
at an isolated bottleneck: A synchronized ﬂow pattern
(SP) and a general pattern (GP). An SP consists of syn-
chronized ﬂow only, i.e., no wide moving jams emerge in
the SP. An GP is a congested pattern, which consists of
synchronized ﬂow upstream of the bottleneck and wide
moving jams that emerge spontaneously in this synchro-
nized ﬂow.

To explain the complex dynamic process of freeway
traﬃc, a huge number of traﬃc ﬂow models have been
introduced. The last few years have seen a rapid devel-
opment of traﬃc ﬂow physics in relation to new model-
ing approaches (see the reviews [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], the
book [1], and the conference proceedings [9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16]).

Past traﬃc ﬂow theories and models reviewed in [2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7] cannot explain and predict the spatiotemporal
features of traﬃc mentioned in item (1)–(4) above. The
only one exception is the characteristic features of wide
moving jam propagation that can be shown in some of
these models [1]. To explain empirical results of item
(1)–(4), Kerner introduced three-phase traﬃc theory [17,
18]. The hypotheses of this theory are the basis of a
microscopic three-phase traﬃc theory [19, 20, 21, 22].
Recently, some new microscopic models in the context
of three-phase traﬃc theory have been suggested [23, 24,
25].

Microscopic three-phase traﬃc theory of Ref. [19, 20,
21, 22] can explain macroscopic spatiotemporal con-
gested pattern phenomena [1]. Macroscopic traﬃc ﬂow
characteristics can depend strongly on the pattern type
and on the freeway location within the pattern. Thus,
we can expect that this conclusion is also valid for sin-
gle vehicle (i.e., microscopic) traﬃc ﬂow characteristics.
However, single vehicle data measured at many diﬀerent
freeway locations, which can be suﬃcient for a reliable
spatiotemporal analysis of the whole congested pattern
structure, are not available up to now.

In this paper, a microscopic empirical criterion for the
synchronized ﬂow and wide moving jam phases in con-
gested traﬃc is found. This criterion enables us to distin-
guish the phases in empirical single vehicle data measured
at a single freeway location, i.e., even without a spa-
tiotemporal congested pattern analysis required for appli-
cation of the macroscopic spatiotemporal objective crite-
ria for the traﬃc phases. Based on the associated empiri-
cal single vehicle data analysis, an empirical test of a mi-
croscopic three-phase traﬃc theory of Ref. [19, 20, 21, 22]
is performed.

The article is organized as follows. Empirical ﬁnd-
ings are considered in Sect. II. Firstly, a microscopic
empirical criterion for the phases in congested traﬃc is
suggested and used for an empirical single vehicle data
analysis (Sect. II B). Based on this analysis, empirical
microscopic characteristics of local congested states are
found (Sect. II C). Finally, some of the fundamental
empirical macroscopic spatiotemporal pattern features
In Sect. III, micro-
are brieﬂy discussed (Sect. II D).
scopic and macroscopic congested model patterns and
their characteristics are compared with empirical results.
Firstly, model spatiotemporal congested pattern evolu-
tion under time-dependence of traﬃc demand taken from
empirical results is studied and compared with the em-
pirical macroscopic spatiotemporal patterns of Sect. II D.
Then these spatiotemporal congested patterns are used
to ﬁnd model microscopic characteristics from single ve-

2

hicle data associated with diﬀerent locations within the
patterns. Finally, a proof of the microscopic criterion for
the phases in congested traﬃc as well as a comparison
of empirical and microscopic traﬃc model characteristics
are presented.

II. EMPIRICAL RESULTS

A. Congested States in Single Vehicle Data

Single vehicle characteristics are usually obtained ei-
ther in driver experiments or through the use of detectors
(e.g., [26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35]). In the latter
case, data from a single freeway location or aggregated
data measured at diﬀerent locations are used [36]. For
empirical tests of traﬃc ﬂow models time headway distri-
butions (probability density for diﬀerent time headways)
and optimal velocity (OV) functions (the mean speed as
a function of space gap between vehicles at a given den-
sity) are often used (e.g., [28]).

Single vehicle data have been measured from June 01,
2000 till September, 30, 2000 on a two-lane section of
the freeway A92-West with two sets of double induction
loop detectors (D1 and D2) between intersections “AS
Freising S¨ud” (I2) and “AK Neufahm” (I3) near M¨unich
Airport in Germany (intersection I1: “AS Flughafen” in
Fig. 1 (a)). Each detector set consists of two detectors
for the left (passing) and right lanes. A detector registers
a vehicle by producing a current electric pulse whose du-
ration ∆ti is related to the time taken by the vehicle to
traverse the induction loop. This enables us to calculate
the gross time gap between two vehicles i and i + 1 that
have passed the loop one after the other τ (gross)
i,i+1 . There
are two detector loops in each detector. The distance
between these loops is constant. This enables us to cal-
culate the individual vehicle speed vi, the vehicle length
di = vi∆ti, as well as the net time gap (time headway)
between the vehicles i and i + 1: τi,i+1 = τ (gross)
− ∆ti.
i,i+1
Local dynamics of the average speed and ﬂow rate
(one-minute average data) for four typical days at which
congested traﬃc have been observed are shown in Fig.
1 (b). The local congested traﬃc dynamics from July
17, 2000 is designated below as “example 1”, whereas
the dynamics from July 27, August 03, and 27, 2000 are
designated as “examples 2–4”, respectively.

From consideration of the ﬂow rate for the examples
1–4, it can be seen that even if within the local dynam-
ics for the examples 2–4 there are moving jams, then
these jams should mostly be narrow moving jams, i.e.,
these examples should correspond to the synchronized
ﬂow phase. Indeed, there are no drops in the ﬂow rate,
which are typical for wide moving jams [1], during the
whole time of congested traﬃc existence in the examples
2–4. In contrast, in the example 1 there are short-time
drops both in the average speed and ﬂow rate within the
local congested dynamics (example 1, left in Fig. 1 (b)).

Such drops are usually typical for wide moving jams [41].
However, from these macroscopic data (example 1, Fig.
1 (b)) measured at a single location only we cannot make
a conclusion with certainty whether these drops are as-
sociated with the wide moving jam phase or not. Nev-
ertheless, this conclusion can be made, if a microscopic
criterion for the traﬃc phases presented below is applied.

B. Traﬃc Flow Interruption Eﬀect as Microscopic
Criterion for Wide Moving Jam

The characteristic wide moving jam feature to propa-
gate through a bottleneck while maintaining the down-
stream jam velocity, which distinguishes the wide mov-
ing jam from synchronized ﬂow (in accordance with
the macroscopic spatiotemporal objective criteria for the
traﬃc phases in congested traﬃc), can be explained by a
traﬃc ﬂow discontinuity within a wide moving jam. Traf-
ﬁc ﬂow is interrupted by the wide moving jam: There is
no inﬂuence of the inﬂow into the jam on the jam outﬂow.
For this reason, the mean downstream jam front velocity
and the jam outﬂow exhibit fundamental characteristic
features, which do not depend on the jam inﬂow [1]. A
diﬀerence between the jam inﬂow and the jam outﬂow
changes the jam width only. This traﬃc ﬂow interrup-
tion eﬀect is a general eﬀect for each wide moving jam.
The jam outﬂow becomes independent of the jam in-
ﬂow, when the traﬃc ﬂow interruption eﬀect within a
moving jam occurs. This is realized, when due to a very
low vehicle speed or a vehicle standstill the maximum
gross time headway τ (gross)
between two vehicles within
the jam is considerably longer than the mean time delay
τ (ac)
in vehicle acceleration at the downstream jam front
del
from a standstill state [37]:

max

max ≫ τ (ac)
τ (gross)
del .

(1)

Indeed, the time delay τ (ac)
del determines the jam out-
ﬂow [38]. Under the condition (1), there are at least sev-
eral vehicles within the jam that are in a standstill or if
they are still moving, it is only with a negligible low speed
in comparison with the speed in the jam inﬂow and out-
ﬂow. These vehicles separate vehicles accelerating at the
downstream jam front from vehicles decelerating at the
upstream jam front: The inﬂow into the jam has no in-
ﬂuence on the jam outﬂow. Then the jam outﬂow is fully
determined by vehicles accelerating at the downstream
jam front. As a result, the mean downstream jam front
velocity is equal to vg = −1/(τ (ac)
del ρmax) [1] (ρmax is the
density within the jam) regardless of whether there are
bottlenecks or other complex traﬃc states on the freeway.
In other words, this jam propagates through a bottleneck
while maintaining the mean downstream jam front veloc-
ity vg, i.e., in accordance with the macroscopic objective
spatiotemporal criteria for the traﬃc phases in congested
traﬃc (Sect. I) this jam is a wide moving jam.

3

Thus, the traﬃc ﬂow interruption eﬀect can be used as
a criterion to distinguish between the synchronized ﬂow
and wide moving jam phases in single vehicle data. This
is possible even if data is measured at a single freeway
location. This enables us to ﬁnd dependence of single
vehicle characteristics on diﬀerent local microscopic con-
gested pattern features (Sect. II C).

The interruption of traﬃc ﬂow within a moving jam
shown in Fig. 2 (a) is clearly seen in the time-dependences
of gross time headways τ (gross) (Fig. 2 (b, c)) and of the
value 3600/τ (gross) (Fig. 2 (d)). Before and after the jam
has passed the detector D1 (due to the jam upstream
propagation [41]) there are many vehicles that traverse
the induction loop of the detector. Within the jam, there
are no vehicles traversing the detector with synchronized
ﬂow gross time headways < 4 sec during a time interval
(this time interval is labeled “ﬂow interruption” in Fig. 2
(b)), when the speed within the jam is approximately
zero (Fig. 2 (a)). This means that traﬃc ﬂow is discon-
tinuous within the moving jam, i.e., this moving jam is
associated with the wide moving jam phase. If all gross
time headways for the time interval are considered (Fig. 2
(c)), then it can be seen that the “real” duration of ﬂow
interruption within the wide moving jam, i.e., when ve-
hicles do not move through the detector at all, is equal to
approximately 20 sec: There is a vehicle with the gross
time headway ≈ 20 sec. Later, some vehicles, which are
within the jam, exhibit gross time headways about 5 sec
or longer. The latter can be explained by moving blanks
within the jam (see Sect.11.2.4 in [1]). This is correlated
with the result that only after the jam (at t > 7:36) has
passed the detector, synchronized ﬂow gross time head-
ways (1–4 sec) are observed (Fig. 2 (c)). Similar results
are found for other moving jams in single vehicle data.

In examples 2–4 (Fig.

1 (b)), there also are many
moving jams during the time intervals of congested traf-
ﬁc. For example, the speed within two moving jams in
Fig. 2 (e) (the example 2) is also very low. Neverthe-
less, in contrast with the wide moving jam in Fig. 2 (a)
rather than wide moving jams these moving jams should
be classiﬁed as narrow moving jams [1]. This is because
there are no traﬃc ﬂow interruptions within these mov-
ing jams (Fig. 2 (f, g)). Indeed, upstream, downstream
of the jams, and within the jams there are many vehicles
that traverse the induction loop of the detector: There
is no qualitative diﬀerence in the time-dependences of
gross time headways for diﬀerent time intervals associ-
ated with these narrow jams and in traﬃc ﬂow upstream
or downstream of the jams (Fig. 2 (f)).

This can be explained if it is assumed that each vehicle,
which meets a narrow moving jam, must decelerate down
to a very low speed within the jam, can nevertheless ac-
celerate later almost without any time delay within the
jam: The narrow moving jam consists of upstream and
downstream jam fronts only. Within the upstream front
vehicles must decelerate. However, they then can accel-
erate almost immediately at the downstream jam front.
These assumptions are conﬁrmed by single vehicle data

shown in Fig. 2 (f, g), in which time intervals between dif-
ferent measurements of gross time headways and for the
value 3600/τ (gross) for diﬀerent vehicles exhibit the same
behavior away and within the jams. Thus, regardless of
these narrow moving jams traﬃc ﬂow is not discontinu-
ous, i.e., the narrow moving jams belong indeed to the
synchronized ﬂow traﬃc phase.

This single vehicle analysis enables us to conclude that
congested traﬃc in the example 1 is associated with a se-
quence of wide moving jams propagating in synchronized
ﬂow. In contrast, congested traﬃc in the examples 2–4
is mostly associated with diﬀerent states of the synchro-
nized ﬂow phase.

C. Dependence of Single Vehicle Characteristics on
Local Congested Pattern Features

1. Time Headway Distributions

Although local traﬃc dynamics in the example 1 is
qualitatively diﬀerent from the examples 2–4, the related
time headway distributions found for diﬀerent density
ranges are qualitatively the same (Fig. 3 (a)). Moreover,
the distributions are both qualitatively and even approx-
imately quantitatively the same as those found for con-
gested traﬃc on diﬀerent freeways in various countries
(e.g. [26, 27, 32, 33]). Thus, based only on these time
headway distributions it is not possible to distinguish dif-
ferent synchronized ﬂow local dynamics in the examples
2–4 one from another and also from the example 1 with
wide moving jams.

However, the time headway distributions for the exam-
ple 1 with wide moving jams exhibit some peculiarities:
If time headway distributions for vehicles whose speed
v > 50 km/h, v < 30 km/h, and v < 20 km/h are drawn
separately, then it turns out that the lower the speed,
the more shifted become the time headway distributions
to longer time headways (Fig. 3 (b)). As should be ex-
pected, the time headway distributions for the vehicles
away from the jams (with v > 50 km/h) are almost the
same as those for synchronized ﬂow without a wide mov-
ing jam sequence (examples 2–4). In contrast, vehicles
within wide moving jams exhibit appreciable longer time
headways, which are the longer, the lower the speed. As
a data analysis shows, these time headways are mostly
associated with moving blanks within the jams. How-
ever, even these diﬀerences in the time headway distri-
butions say nothing about jam duration, speed distribu-
tions between the jams, and many other spatiotemporal
congested traﬃc characteristics.

We can conclude that the microscopic characteristic
of congested traﬃc “time headway distribution” cannot
be used for clear distinguishing spatiotemporal congested
pattern features. This is because within time headway
distributions most of spatiotemporal traﬃc characteris-
tics are averaged. Because the sum of wide moving jam
duration in the example 1 is shorter than the synchro-

4

nized ﬂow duration, it is almost impossible to distin-
guish much longer time headways associated with mov-
ing blanks within the jams. Only when the share of the
jams in the time headway distribution increases (Fig. 3
(b), v < 20 km/h), the eﬀect of moving blanks can be
identiﬁed.

2. Optimal Velocity (OV) Functions

OV functions are space gap (headway) dependencies of
the mean vehicle speed calculated for diﬀerent given den-
sity ranges [26]. The OV functions found do not exhibit
some qualitative diﬀerences for the diﬀerent examples 1–
4 of local congested traﬃc dynamics (Fig. 4). They are
qualitatively the same as the OV functions ﬁrst derived
for aggregated single vehicle data in [26]: At smaller
headways the speed increases with headways consider-
ably, whereas for larger headways there is a saturation
eﬀect for the speed growth.

We can conclude that microscopic OV functions can-
not also be used for clear distinguishing spatiotemporal
congested pattern features. This is because within OV
functions many of the spatiotemporal traﬃc characteris-
tics are averaged.

D. Spatiotemporal Macroscopic Congested
Patterns

In Sects. II D and II E, a brief discussion of empir-
ical macroscopic spatiotemporal traﬃc features consid-
ered in [1, 18] is made that is necessary for the empirical
test of a microscopic three-phase traﬃc theory.

Results of empirical

investigations reviewed in the
book [1] enable us to conclude that there are a huge
number of diﬀerent congested traﬃc patterns, whose spa-
tiotemporal structure depends on type, feature, and lo-
cation of a freeway bottleneck(s), on other peculiari-
ties of a freeway network, as well as on traﬃc demand,
weather, and other traﬃc conditions. At ﬁrst glance all
these look like very diﬀerent patterns, however, it turns
out they exhibit clear common features and characteris-
tics [1]. Empirical investigations of data measured over
many days and years on freeways in various countries
show that common traﬃc phenomena and characteris-
tics of congested patterns, which are most frequent ob-
served, are as follows. (i) GP emergence and evolution
that occur at an on-ramp bottleneck (Sect. II D 1). (ii)
Complex congested pattern emergence and transforma-
tion that occur at two adjacent oﬀ- and on-ramp bottle-
necks (Sect. II D 2).

1. General Pattern at On-Ramp Bottleneck

In Fig. 5, general pattern (GP) formation at an on-
ramp bottleneck is shown [1]. Firstly, an F→S transition

occurs at the bottleneck (up-arrow at detector D6). Syn-
chronized ﬂow propagates upstream (up-arrows S at de-
tectors D5–D4), whereas free ﬂow remains downstream
(detector D7): The downstream front of synchronized
ﬂow is ﬁxed at the bottleneck.

Upstream of the bottleneck the pinch eﬀect in synchro-
nized ﬂow is realized: The speed decreases (detector D5)
and density increases. Narrow moving jams emerge spon-
taneously in the pinch region in synchronized ﬂow (detec-
tors D5–D4). These jams propagate upstream. Some of
the jams transform into wide moving jams: The region of
wide moving jams propagating upstream is formed (de-
tectors D3–D1).

2. Complex Pattern Emergence and Transformation on
Freeways with two Diﬀerent Adjacent Bottlenecks

Characteristic features of complex pattern emergence
and transformation are often observed at a freeway sec-
tion with two adjacent bottlenecks: An oﬀ-ramp bot-
tleneck that is downstream and an on-ramp bottleneck
that is upstream [1]. In the example in Fig. 6, ﬁrstly a
widening SP (WSP) at the oﬀ-ramp bottleneck emerges.
Moreover, an expanded pattern (EP) appears, in which
synchronized ﬂow aﬀects both bottlenecks. The EP ap-
pears after synchronized ﬂow of the initial WSP covers
the on-ramp bottleneck. Secondly, the WSP transforms
into an GP at the oﬀ-ramp bottleneck.

After the synchronized ﬂow covers the on-ramp bottle-
neck, wide moving jams begin to emerge downstream of
the on-ramp bottleneck within the initial WSP: Rather
than the WSP remaining, an GP appears at the oﬀ-
ramp bottleneck, i.e., congestion emergence at the up-
stream bottleneck leads to intensiﬁcation of congestion
at the downstream bottleneck. Wide moving jams (la-
beled 1–4 in Fig. 6 (b)) that emerge within the GP, i.e.,
between the oﬀ-ramp and on-ramp bottlenecks, propa-
gate through the on-ramp bottleneck while maintaining
the mean velocity of the jam downstream front.

E. Spatial Dependence of Empirical Macroscopic
Traﬃc Flow Characteristics

Because a qualitative behavior of the congested traﬃc
dynamics strongly depends on a chosen detector loca-
tion within a pattern, local pattern characteristics are
functions on the spatial co-ordinate. In particular, the
fundamental diagram depends both on the pattern type
and on a location within a congested pattern at which
the ﬂow rate and speed are measured. The fundamental
diagram consists of the branches for free ﬂow (curves F )
and congested traﬃc (curves C in Fig. 7).

In the case of the GP at the on-ramp bottleneck (Fig. 5
(b, c)), at the locations D6 and D5 the braches C for
congested traﬃc are associated with synchronized ﬂow
In synchronized ﬂow at D6, the branch C has a
only.

5

positive slope in the ﬂow–density plane. This behavior is
changed for the pinch region of synchronized ﬂow (D5).
Due to narrow moving jam emergence in the pinch region
at greater densities the branch C has a slightly negative
slope, whereas at smaller densities of synchronized ﬂow
it has a slightly positive slope, i.e., there is a maximum
on the branch C. However, this maximum is very weak:
The ﬂow rate does not approximately depend on density
within the pinch region of the GP.

This is explained in Fig. 7 (b), in which empirical data
from the time interval 06:45—8:00 of the strong conges-
tion condition are used only. In this case, in the pinch
region (at D5) the part on the curve C with the positive
slope disappears and the ﬂow rate is almost independent
on density (only at greater density there is a slight de-
crease in ﬂow rate due to narrow moving jam emergence
in the pinch region). This also means that the part of
the curve C with the positive slope at D5 is associated
with the time interval after 8:00, when strong congestion
changes to weak congestion.

At the locations D4 and D3, wide moving jams begin
to form. For this reason, the branch C asymptotically ap-
proaches the line J with greater density [1]. In the region
of wide moving jams (D2, D1), the branch C lies on the
line J with greater densities associated with the outﬂow
from wide moving jams. The positive slope of the branch
C at D4–D1 (as at the location D5) at smaller densities
is associated with the time interval after 8:00 when the
ﬂow rate upstream of the on-ramp bottleneck qin and the
ﬂow rate to the on-ramp qon decrease appreciably and
synchronized ﬂow is formed in which the ﬂow rate is an
increasing density function. If data related to this time
interval is not taken into account, then for the region of
wide moving jams the whole branch for congested traﬃc
C lies on the line J only [39].

Because the empirical fundamental diagram for con-
gested traﬃc depends considerably on the spatial loca-
tion within the pattern, some “global”, aggregated, and
other averaged fundamental diagrams, which are often
used for an empirical test of traﬃc ﬂow models (e.g., [28]),
cannot answer the question whether a model can show
and predict spatiotemporal traﬃc phenomena.

Another important macroscopic empirical characteris-
tic whose spatial dependence should be shown by a traf-
ﬁc ﬂow model is the speed correlation function (see Fig.
12.8 in [1] associated with Fig. 5 (a)). The period of
the speed correlation function Tc has a minimum value
(about 5 min for the GP) within the pinch region. Propa-
gating upstream some of these jams disappear and other
transform into wide moving jams. As a result, Tc in-
creases in the upstream direction reaching the maximum
value (about 10 min for the GP), when the region of wide
moving jams is formed completely.

III. MICROSCOPIC AND MACROSCOPIC
TRAFFIC MODEL CHARACTERISTICS

In numerical simulations of a microscopic three-phase
traﬃc theory presented below, single vehicle model data,
which should be compared with empirical microscopic
traﬃc characteristics of Sects. II B and II C, are related to
spatiotemporal congested model patterns. In turn, these
patterns as well as their features should correspond to
empirical observations. For this reason, before we com-
pare microscopic model and empirical results, it is nec-
essary to prove whether macroscopic features of these
spatiotemporal congested model patterns are associated
with empirical congested patterns of Sect. II D.

To reach this goal, ﬁrstly empirical time-dependence of
traﬃc demand and drivers’ destinations (whether a ve-
hicle leaves the main road to an oﬀ-ramp or it further
follows the main road) associated with these empirical
macroscopic patterns are used in model simulations at
the upstream model boundaries of the main road and
of an on-ramp. At downstream model boundary con-
ditions for vehicle freely leaving a modeling freeway sec-
tion(s) are given, which are not associated with congested
traﬃc propagating upstream. Then spatiotemporal con-
gested model patterns emerge, develop, and dissolve in
this open freeway model with the same types of bottle-
necks as those in empirical observations (Sect. III A). Fi-
nally, single vehicle model data are analysed for diﬀerent
locations within these patterns (Sects. III B and III C).

Note that a study of statistical features of free ﬂow sat-
isfactory investigated both empirically and theoretically
in many previous works (see references in e.g., [4, 5]) is
beyond the scope of the article. Because the aim of the
paper is to study congested pattern features, we can use
the models of Ref. [20, 21, 22] in which a very simpliﬁed
model of free ﬂow is used.

We use models of bottlenecks and model parameters of
Ref. [20, 21, 22] (see a detailed consideration of the mod-
els, their physics and parameters in Sects. 16.2, 16.3, and
20.2 of the book [1]). When some other model parame-
ters are used, they will be given in ﬁgure captions.

A. Macroscopic Spatiotemporal Features of
Congested Pattern Evolution

1. Occurrence and Evolution of General Pattern under
Strong Congestion

For numerical simulation of empirical GP occurrence
and evolution at an on-ramp bottleneck (Fig. 5 (b, c)),
a model of two-lane freeway with an on-ramp bottleneck
is used (Sect. 16.2 in [1]). At the upstream boundary
of the main road, the time-dependence of the ﬂow rate
qin(t) associated with empirical data measured at the de-
tector D1 has been applied (Fig. 8 (a, b)). Empirical
detector measurements (Fig. 5 (b, c)) are compared with
simulated results at the same virtual detector locations

6

D1–D6 as those in empirical data. As wide moving jams
are observed during the time interval 7:15–9:00 at the far-
thest available upstream detector D1, the ﬂow rate qin(t)
is approximated by a line. The ﬂow rate to the on-ramp
qon(t) used in the simulations is taken from measurements
in the on-ramp lane.

In simulations, GP emergence and evolution (Fig. 8
(c, d)) are qualitatively and quantitatively the same as
those in empirical observations (Fig. 5). In particular, in
accordance with the empirical study, the following main
eﬀects are found:

(i) A local ﬁrst-order F→S transition at the bottleneck
(labeled S at D6, Fig. 8 (e)). Over time traﬃc demand
(qon(t) and qin(t)) in an initial free ﬂow at the on-ramp
bottleneck increases. Whereas at D7 just downstream of
the bottleneck and just upstream of the bottleneck at D5
free ﬂow remains, at D6 within the merging region of the
on-ramp an abrupt decrease in speed is observed.

(ii) A probabilistic nature of the F→S transition: In
diﬀerent realizations performed at the same qon(t) and
qin(t), an F→S transition can occur at diﬀerent ﬂow rates
at the bottleneck.

(iii) Upstream propagation of a wave of induced F→S
transitions. Whereas free ﬂow further remains at D7
downstream of the bottleneck, F→S transitions are in-
duced by upstream propagation of the upstream front of
synchronized ﬂow (labeled S in Fig. 8 (e), D5 and D4).
(iv) Pinch region formation with narrow moving jam
emergence within synchronized ﬂow. A self-compression
of synchronized ﬂow upstream of the bottleneck (D5, D4)
is observed: Average speed decreases and density in-
creases. In this pinch region, narrow moving jams emerge
and grow in amplitude propagating upstream.

(v) Formation of wide moving jams. Some of nar-
row moving jams transform into wide moving jams (D3).
As a result, a region of wide moving jams upstream of
the pinch region is formed (D3–D1). Wide moving jams
propagate upstream while maintaining the mean velocity
of their downstream front. In the wide moving jam out-
ﬂow either free ﬂow or synchronized ﬂow can occur. In
the ﬁrst case, in the ﬂow–density plane the line J reaches
free ﬂow region (Fig. 8 (f)). In the second case, the left
co-ordinates of the line J are related to the average speed
and ﬂow rate in synchronized ﬂow (Fig. 8 (g)).

(vi) Strong congestion conditions. During the time be-
fore t ≈ 8:00, strong congestion conditions are realized in
the pinch region. The average ﬂow rate (10 min averaging
time interval) displays only minor changes in the vicinity
of the limit (minimum) ﬂow rate q(pinch)
, which does not
depend on traﬃc demand, speciﬁcally when the ﬂow rates
qon(t) and qin(t)) increase; the frequency of narrow mov-
ing jam emergence reaches the maximum possible value
for chosen model parameters.

lim

(vii) GP evolution. When the ﬂow rates qon(t) and
qin(t) begin to decrease, the initial GP under the strong
congestion condition transforms into an GP under the
weak congestion condition.
In this case, the average
speed in the pinch region increases and the average ﬂow

rate ceases to be a self-sustaining value that is close to
q(pinch)
; the frequency of narrow moving jam emergence
lim
in the pinch region decreases.

(viii) Return S→F transitions. When the ﬂow rates
qon(t) and qin(t) further decrease, return S→F transitions
ﬁrstly occur upstream of the bottleneck and later at the
bottleneck. As a result, the congested pattern dissolves
and free ﬂow returns at the bottleneck.

(ix) Hysteresis Eﬀects. At each detector location F→S
and return S→F transitions cause hysteresis eﬀects in the
ﬂow–density plane [42].

2. WSP Emergence and its Transformation into GP and
EP

For numerical simulation of WSP emergence at an oﬀ-
ramp bottleneck and the subsequent WSP transforma-
tion into an EP and an GP at an on-ramp bottleneck
(Fig. 6), the same model as in Sect. III A 1, however, with
an oﬀ-ramp bottleneck downstream and an on-ramp bot-
tleneck upstream is used. At the road upstream bound-
ary, the time-dependence of the ﬂow rate qin(t) associ-
ated with empirical data measured at the detector D8
(see Fig. 2.2 in [1]) has been applied. During the time
interval, when wide moving jams are observed, qin(t) is
approximated by a line (Fig. 9 (a)) as in Sect. III A 1.
The ﬂow rate to the on-ramp qon(t) is taken from mea-
surements in the on-ramp lane. The empirical ﬂow rate
to the oﬀ-ramp qoﬀ (t) is used to calculate the percentage
of vehicles η(t) in the ﬂow rates qin(t) and qon(t), which
leave the main road to the oﬀ-ramp (Fig. 9 (b)).

In simulations, congested pattern emergence and evo-
lution (Fig. 9) are qualitatively the same as those in em-
pirical observations (Fig. 6). In particular, in accordance
with the empirical study (Fig. 6), the following main ef-
fects are found:

(i) A local ﬁrst-order F→S transition occurs at some
distance upstream of the oﬀ-ramp bottleneck (D23, la-
beled S in Fig. 9 (e)). A wave of induced F→S tran-
sitions propagates upstream (labeled S in Fig. 9 (e), at
D22–D18). A widening synchronized ﬂow pattern (WSP)
is formed due to these F→S transitions.

(ii) Transformation of the WSP into an expanded pat-
tern (EP). After the upstream front of the WSP reaches
the upstream bottleneck (on-ramp bottleneck), this front
induces an F→S transition at the on-ramp bottleneck
(D16 in Fig. 9 (e)). Due to subsequent propagation of this
synchronized ﬂow front upstream of the on-ramp bottle-
neck, the EP occurs in which synchronized ﬂow aﬀects
both downstream and upstream bottlenecks.

(iii) Intensiﬁcation of downstream congestion due to
upstream congestion. After the EP has appeared, wide
moving jams begin to form downstream of the on-ramp
bottleneck within synchronized ﬂow of the initial WSP:
The initial WSP transforms into an GP between the oﬀ-
ramp and on-ramp bottlenecks. This intensiﬁcation of
downstream congestion (congestion formation upstream

7

(iv) Hysteresis Eﬀect of Pattern Existence.

of the oﬀ-ramp bottleneck) due to upstream congestion
(congestion upstream of the on-ramp bottleneck) exhibits
the same features as those in empirical data (Sect. II D 2).
At
t >13:30 the ﬂow rates qon(t) and qin(t) become apprecia-
bly smaller than at the time of the F→S transition at the
oﬀ-ramp bottleneck. Nevertheless, due to the hysteresis
eﬀect of congested pattern existence the EP persists dur-
ing a very long time aﬀecting both bottlenecks.

3. Spatial Dependence of Macroscopic Congested Traﬃc
Pattern Characteristics

Spatial theoretical dependences of the fundamental di-
agrams and speed correlation functions are qualitatively
the same (Figs. 10 and 11) as those characteristics in
empirical investigations (Fig. 7 and Fig. 12.8 in [1]), re-
spectively.

At the on-ramp bottleneck (D6), the fundamental dia-
gram (Fig. 10 (a)) is associated with the Z-shaped speed–
ﬂow rate characteristic (Fig. 10 (b)) that is usual for a
ﬁrst-order F→S transition [1, 43]; on the branch for syn-
chronized ﬂow (branch C) the ﬂow rate is an increasing
density function.
In the pinch region of the GP (D5),
the fundamental diagram exhibits a maximum point: At
greater densities the ﬂow rate slightly decreases with den-
sity, whereas at smaller densities the ﬂow rate is a weak
increasing density function. At greater densities associ-
ated with the strong congestion condition, the branch C
lies above the line J. This is related to growing character
of narrow moving jams in the pinch region. If only the
time interval for the strong congestion condition within
the pinch region of the GP is considered, the ﬂow rate
is approximately constant: It is only a very weak den-
sity function (D5, Fig. 10 (c)). Upstream of the pinch
region, the greater the distance a freeway location from
the pinch region, the closer the branch C to the line J at
greater densities. Within the completely formed region
of wide moving jams (D2, D1), the branch C lies on the
line J at greater densities. If the time interval in which
only wide moving jams are observed is considered, the
branch C lies on the line J for all densities (D1, Fig. 10
(c)) [39].

The speed correlation function for the GP (Fig. 11)
exhibits the same features as those in empirical results.

B. Simulations of Microscopic Criterion for Wide
Moving Jam

Simulations show that the microscopic criterion for
wide moving jam phase presented in Sect. II B enable
us to distinguish clearly between the wide moving jam
and synchronized ﬂow phases in local microscopic (single
vehicle) congested traﬃc states.

Indeed, in Fig. 12 the same dependences and charac-
teristics as those in empirical results (Fig. 2) are pre-

sented for a wide moving jam (Fig. 12 (a–d)) and two
narrow moving jams (Fig. 12 (e–g)) associated with two
diﬀerent local microscopic congested traﬃc states related
to two diﬀerent locations within the GP in Fig. 8 (c–
e). A comparison of the empirical (Fig. 2) with related
simulated results (Fig. 12) fully conﬁrms all conclusions
about the traﬃc phase identiﬁcation in congested traf-
ﬁc formulated in Sect. II B.
In addition, within model
wide moving jams there are often gross time headways
between vehicles that are about 4–7 sec. As found, they
are related to moving blanks within the jams. This con-
ﬁrms the assumption made in Sect. II B that such gross
time headways within empirical wide moving jams are
explained by moving blanks.

If the microscopic criterion is applied for the moving
jams, which propagate through the on-ramp bottleneck
in Fig. 9 (e), then we ﬁnd that within each of these jams
traﬃc interruption occurs, i.e., the condition (1) is satis-
ﬁed. This means that corresponding to the microscopic
criterion these moving jams are wide moving jams. The
same conclusion is made from the macroscopic spatiotem-
poral objective criteria for traﬃc phases in congested
traﬃc. Indeed, these jams propagate through the bottle-
neck while maintaining the mean jam downstream front
velocity. Thus, the microscopic criterion and macroscopic
objective spatiotemporal criteria for the traﬃc phases
lead to the same result by phase identiﬁcation in con-
gested traﬃc.

max

≈ 2 (model time delay τ (ac)
del

To prove the latter conclusion, a numerical experi-
ment is performed additionly (Fig. 13). In this numer-
ical experiment, metastable free ﬂow is realized at an
on-ramp bottleneck. Firstly, a narrow moving jam is in-
duced downstream of the on-ramp bottleneck (Fig. 13
(a), left). Indeed, an application of the microscopic cri-
terion to this moving jam shows (Fig. 13 (b–d), left) that
In this
there is no traﬃc interruption within the jam.
case, we ﬁnd τ (gross)
/τ (ac)
≈
del
1.74 sec). Rather than the jam propagating through the
on-ramp bottleneck, the moving jam is pinned at the bot-
tleneck leading to an F→S transition with subsequent lo-
calized SP (LSP) formation upstream of the bottleneck
(Fig. 13 (a), left). Secondly, another moving jam is in-
duced at the same location downstream of the bottle-
neck (Fig. 13 (a), right). However, there is ﬂow interrup-
tion within this jam (Fig. 13 (b–d), right). Accordingly
to the microscopic criterion for the phases in congested
traﬃc, this jam is a wide moving jam. In this case, we
ﬁnd τ (gross)
≈ 10. In contrast with former narrow
moving jam, this jam propagates through the bottleneck
while maintaning the mean downstream jam front veloc-
ity (Fig. 13 (a), right). As in empirical observations [1],
wide moving jam propagation through metastable free
ﬂow state at the bottleneck leads to LSP formation as in
the case of the former narrow moving jam. In contrast
with the narrow moving jam, synchronized ﬂow within
the LSP has no inﬂuence on wide moving jam propaga-
tion (Fig. 13 (a), right). It is found that to identify a
moving jam as a wide moving jam based on the micro-

/τ (ac)
del

max

8

/τ (ac)

/τ (ac)

del > 5.

scopic criterion with certainty the following numerical
relation should be satisﬁed τ (gross)

max
The relative large number 5 found for this criterion
is associated with ﬂuctuations. We have found that in
some of diﬀerent realizations made at the same ﬂow
rates and initial conditions for jam excitation, when 3
< τ (gross)
del < 5, a moving jam is a wide moving jam
max
(it propagates through the bottleneck while maintaining
the mean velocity of the jam downstream front), but in
the other realizations the jam is a narrow moving jam
(it is pinned at the bottleneck causing an F→S transi-
tion at the bottleneck). This is because of ﬂuctuations
of vehicle motion within the jam, in the jam inﬂow and
outﬂow, as well as ﬂuctuations through random vehicle
lane changing. In particular, it can turn out that within
a moving jam a vehicle changes lane before it passes the
detector. Then a time headway measured by the detec-
tor increases. This random lane changing has obviously
no relation to ﬂow interruption within a moving jam. A
more detailed study of ﬂuctuations is beyond the scope
of this article.

C. Spatial Dependence of Single Vehicle Model
Characteristics

Here, single vehicle model characteristics associated
with the GP at the on-ramp bottleneck are compared
with empirical results. However, the GP in Fig. 8 exists
about two hours only.
In order to make more reliable
statistical characteristics from single vehicle model data,
after the ﬂow rates qon(t) and qin(t) taken from measure-
ments reach their maximum values, these ﬂow rates do
not change in simulations any more. Then an GP that
occurs at the bottleneck does not dissolve over time at
all. The characteristics of this GP are the same as those
for the GP in Fig. 8 (c–e) before 8:00.

1. Model Time Headway Distributions and OV Functions

Time headway distributions related to synchronized
ﬂow (D5, D4, Fig. 14 (a)) are qualitatively the same as
empirical ones (Fig. 3). In the model, time intervals be-
tween wide moving jams at D3–D1 (Fig. 8 (e)) are con-
siderably shorter than in the empirical example 1 (Fig. 1
(b)). For this reason, longer time headways associated
with moving blanks within wide moving jams can be seen
in the model time headway distributions (D1, Fig. 14 (a))
even without speed separation of time headways made in
Fig. 3 (b).

Quantitative diﬀerences between empirical and model
results (Figs. 3 and 14 (a)) at small time headways are
explained by model time step that is equal to 1 sec, i.e.,
considerably shorter time headways cannot be observed.
There are very diﬀerent vehicles and drivers in real
traﬃc, speciﬁcally aggressive and timid driver behavior

are related to shorter and longer drivers’ time delays, re-
spectively. In the model of identical vehicles and drivers
used above, chosen driver time delays are more close to
aggressive drivers rather than to timid ones. This ex-
plains why longer time headways do not appear in the
model time headway distributions in Fig. 14 (a).
If
the microscopic model with various drivers (Sect. 20.2
in [1]) is used, then a quantitative correspondence with
any known empirical result of time headway distribu-
tions through the appropriate choice of the percentage of
slow (timid) drivers and their characteristics is possible
(Fig. 14 (b)). It is important that in this case the fun-
damental spatiotemporal features of congested patterns
discussed above do not change, as this has been found
in [22].

Model OV functions (Fig. 15 (a)) show the same
characteristics as those for the empirical OV functions
(Fig. 4). This is true for the models with identical ve-
hicles and with various drivers’ and vehicles’ character-
istics. The same conclusion can be drawn for the KKW
CA model (Fig. 15 (b, c)), in which under the same con-
ditions as those in Fig. 8 an GP, which is qualitatively the
same, occurs at the on-ramp bottleneck (Fig. 15 (b)) [44].

2. Speed Adaptation Functions

Analyzing single vehicle data, in Ref. [45] it has been
found that in congested traﬃc a distribution pδv(δv) for
vehicle speed diﬀerence δv = vi+1 − vi associated with
two vehicles i and i+1, which are registered at a detector
location one after another, have a very sharp maximum
at δv = 0: There is an attraction of vehicles to a region
with a very small speed diﬀerence in congested traﬃc.

This behavior has been explained by the speed adap-
tation eﬀect [1, 22]: If a vehicle cannot overtake the pre-
ceding vehicle, then within a synchronization distance
the vehicle tends to adapt the vehicle speed to the speed
of the preceding vehicle, i.e., the speed diﬀerence δv → 0.
The less the probability of overtaken, the more vehicles
due to the speed adaptation eﬀect should move with
small speed diﬀerence δv to each other. The probabil-
ity of overtaken is a decreasing function of the speed.
The decrease of probability of overtaken becomes ap-
preciable already at higher densities in free ﬂow. When
synchronized ﬂow occurs, probability of overtaken drops
abruptly. Speciﬁcally, there is a strong attraction of vehi-
cles in synchronized ﬂow to a region with small speed dif-
ference associated with the speed adaptation eﬀect within
the synchronization distance. As a result, the function
pδv(δv) has a very sharp maximum in synchronized ﬂow.
This eﬀect is found in numerical simulations at loca-
tions D6 and D5 at which synchronized ﬂow without wide
moving jams occurs (Fig. 16 (a)). However, when wide
moving jams appear (D3–D1), then at a given vehicle
space headway range the width of frequency distribution
pδv(δv) increases. This means that the frequency distri-
bution pδv(δv) in congested traﬃc is a function of the spa-

9

tial co-ordinate and of local dynamics within a congested
pattern (Fig. 16 (b, c)): At freeway locations within the
pattern in which many wide moving jams propagate (D1,
D2, Fig. 8 (e)), the distribution pδv(δv) at a given δv
becomes greater than at the locations at which synchro-
nized ﬂow without wide moving jams is realized (D5).

IV. DISCUSSION

Based on empirical and model results presented, the

following conclusions can be made:

(i) A microscopic criterion for the wide moving jam
phase in single vehicle data presented in the article en-
ables us to identify qualitatively diﬀerent local micro-
scopic congested traﬃc states in both empirical and sin-
gle vehicle model data measured at a single freeway lo-
cation.

(ii) A comparison of empirical and simulated freeway
traﬃc phenomena shows that a microscopic three-phase
traﬃc theory of Ref. [19, 20, 21, 22] can explain both
microscopic and macroscopic empirical congested pattern
features.

(iii) Empirical microscopic (single vehicle) time head-
way distributions and OV functions found in the arti-
cle for qualitatively diﬀerent empirical local microscopic
congested traﬃc states can been reproduced in the micro-
scopic theory for the associated diﬀerent congested states
satisfactorily.

(iv) Time headway distributions, and distributions for
vehicle speed diﬀerence can depend on the spatial co-
ordinate considerably. However, the signiﬁcance of these
spatial changes of the traﬃc characteristics depends on
the congested pattern type. In particular, if wide moving
jam duration is small in comparison with synchronized
ﬂow duration, then time headway distributions and fre-
quency distributions for vehicle speed diﬀerence do not
depend on the freeway location appreciably.

(v) If time-dependencies of traﬃc demand and drivers’
destinations related to macroscopic empirical data are
given at the upstream model boundaries of the main
road and an on-ramp, then simulated spatiotemporal
congested patterns emerge, develop, and dissolve due to
self-organization eﬀects in traﬃc ﬂow in accordance with
empirical observations.

In general, main features of empirical OV functions and
time headway distributions are not necessarily qualita-
tively diﬀerent, even if local traﬃc dynamic characteris-
tics within congested patterns are qualitatively diﬀerent.
Therefore, these and many other empirical traﬃc ﬂow
characteristics (e.g., global and aggregated fundamental
diagrams, hysteresis eﬀects, etc.) could be considered
secondary ones in comparison to spatiotemporal traﬃc
pattern features (item (1)–(4) in Sect. I).

This is because important spatiotemporal features of
phase transitions and congested patterns (item (1)–(4)
in Sect. I) are lost in these and many other macroscopic
and microscopic traﬃc characteristics, which are widely

used as the empirical basis for tests of traﬃc ﬂow models.
Thus, it is not justiﬁed to use these macroscopic and
microscopic characteristics as the solely empirical basis
for a decision whether a traﬃc ﬂow model can describe
real traﬃc ﬂow or not [46].

Firstly, a comparison of empirical features of phase
transitions in traﬃc ﬂow and spatiotemporal congested
patterns with associated model solutions for a model of
freeway with those freeway bottlenecks, which aﬀect the

empirical patterns, has to be performed. Then micro-
scopic model characteristics of single vehicle model data
associated with diﬀerent locations within the patterns are
studied. Finally, these microscopic model characteristics
are compared with empirical microscopic characteristics
of single vehicle data. This data should be related to
qualitatively the same empirical local congested model
states as those in the model states.

10

[8] R. Mahnke, J. Kaupuˇzs, I. Lubashevsky, Phys. Rep. 408,

[26] L. Neubert, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider, M. Schreck-

[1] B.S. Kerner. The Physics of Traﬃc (Springer, Berlin,

New York 2004).

[2] N.H. Gartner, C.J. Messer, A. Rathi (eds.). Special
Report 165: Revised Monograph on Traﬃc Flow The-
ory (Transportation Research Board, Washington, D.C.
1997).

[3] D.E. Wolf. Physica A 263, 438 (1999).
[4] D. Chowdhury, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider. Physics

Reports 329, 199 (2000).

[5] D. Helbing. Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 1067–1141 (2001).
[6] T. Nagatani. Rep. Prog. Phys. 65, 1331–1386 (2002).
[7] K. Nagel, P. Wagner, R. Woesler. Operation Res. 51,

681–716 (2003).

1-130 (2005).

[9] J.-B. Lesort (editor). Transportation and Traﬃc The-
ory, Proceedings of the 13th International Symposium
on Transportation and Traﬃc Theory (Elsevier Science
Ltd, Oxford 1996)

[10] A. Ceder (editor). Transportation and Traﬃc Theory,
Proceedings of the 14th International Symposium on
Transportation and Traﬃc Theory (Elsevier Science Ltd,
Oxford 1999)

[11] M.A.P. Taylor (editor). Transportation and Traﬃc The-
ory in the 21st Century, Proceedings of the 15th Interna-
tional Symposium on Transportation and Traﬃc Theory
(Elsevier Science Ltd, Amsterdam 2002)

[12] D.E. Wolf, M. Schreckenberg, A. Bachem (editors). Traf-
ﬁc and Granular Flow, Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Traﬃc and Granular Flow, October 1995
(World Scientiﬁc, Singapore 1995)

[13] M. Schreckenberg, D.E. Wolf (editors). Traﬃc and Gran-
ular Flow’ 97, Proceedings of the International Workshop
on Traﬃc and Granular Flow, October 1997 (Springer,
Singapore 1998)

[14] D. Helbing, H.J. Herrmann, M. Schreckenberg, D.E. Wolf
(editors). Traﬃc and Granular Flow’ 99, Proceedings
of the International Workshop on Traﬃc and Granular
Flow, October 1999, (Springer, Heidelberg 2000)

[15] M. Fukui, Y. Sugiyama, M. Schreckenberg, D.E. Wolf
(editors). Traﬃc and Granular Flow’ 01, Proceedings
of the International Workshop on Traﬃc and Granular
Flow, October 2001, (Springer, Heidelberg 2003)

[16] S.P. Hoogendoorn, P.H.L. Bovy, M. Schreckenberg, D.E.
Wolf (editors). Traﬃc and Granular Flow’ 03, Proceed-
ings of the International Workshop on Traﬃc and Gran-
ular Flow, October 2003, (Springer, Heidelberg 2005) (in
press).

[17] B. S. Kerner. Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3797 (1998).

[18] B. S. Kerner, Phys. Rev. E 65, 046138 (2002).
[19] B.S. Kerner, S.L. Klenov: J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 35,

L31 (2002)

[20] B.S. Kerner, S.L. Klenov, D.E. Wolf, J. Phys. A: Math.

Gen. 35 9971–10013 (2002).

[21] B.S. Kerner, S.L. Klenov, Phys. Rev. 68 036130 (2003)
[22] B.S. Kerner, S.L. Klenov, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 37

8753–8788 (2004).

[23] L.C. Davis, Phys. Rev. E 69 016108 (2004).
[24] H.K. Lee, R. Barlovi´c, M. Schreckenberg, D. Kim, Phys.

Rev. Let. 92, 238702 (2004).

[25] R. Jiang, Q.S. Wu, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 37, 8197–8213

(2004).

enberg. Phys. Rev. E 60, 6480 (1999).

[27] W. Knospe, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider, M. Schreck-

enberg. Phys. Rev. E 65, 056133 (2002).

[28] W. Knospe, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider, M. Schreck-

enberg. Phys. Rev. E 70, 016115 (2004).
[29] R. J. Cowan. Trans. Rec. 9, 371–375 (1976).
[30] M. Koshi, M. Iwasaki, I. Ohkura. ‘Some Findings and
an Overview on Vehicular Flow Characteristics’. In:
Procs. 8th International Symposium on Transportation
and Traﬃc Theory ed. V. F. Hurdle, et al (University of
Toronto Press, Toronto, Ontario 1983) pp. 403.
[31] T. Luttinen. Transportation Res. Rec. 1365 (1992).
[32] P.H.L. Bovy (editor). Motorway Analysis: New Method-
ologies and Recent Empirical Findings (Delft University
Press, Delft 1998).

[33] B. Tilch, D. Helbing, in: [14], p.333.
[34] J. Banks. Trans. Rec. B 37, 539–554 (2004).
[35] G.S. Gurusinghe, T. Nakatsuji, Y. Azuta, P. Ranjitkar,
Y. Tanaboriboon. ‘Multiple Car-Following Data Using
Real-Time Kinematic Global Positioning System’. In:
Preprints of the 82nd TRB Annual Meeting TRB Paper
No.: 03-4137 (TRB, Washington D.C. 2003).

[36] Sometimes for better statistical conclusions, traﬃc vari-
ables obtained from various days or/and many diﬀerent
locations are aggregated to a data set; this data base of
aggregated data is further used for calculation of traﬃc
ﬂow characteristics.

[37] Below the condition (1) is applied for vehicles in the
left (passing) freeway line in which person vehicles move
mostly. When there are many long vehicles in traﬃc ﬂow,
rather than the maximum gross time headway, the maxi-
mum time headway τmax should be used in the condition
(1) for ﬂow interruption within a moving jam, i.e., this
condition should be replaced by τmax ≫ τ (ac)
del . This is
because at a low speed of a very long vehicle within a

moving jam, the condition (1) can sometimes be satis-
ﬁed, if the jam is still a narrow one.
[38] Corresponding to empirical results τ (ac)
[39] A model

del ≈ 1.5 − 2 sec [1].
fundamental diagram, which consists of a
branch for free ﬂow and a branch for congested traﬃc
that entirely coincides with the line J, has ﬁrst been
found in the Kerner-Konh¨auser theory of wide moving
jam propagation [40] (see Fig. 12 (a) in [40]). The branch
for congested traﬃc in this global fundamental diagram
is related to a sequence of free ﬂow and wide moving
jam(s) on a homogeneous circular road: When the whole
number of vehicles on the road increases (density aver-
aged over the whole road increases), then the total jam
width(s) on the road increases and the total width of
free ﬂow regions between the jam(s) decreases. As a re-
sult, the average ﬂow rate decreases in accordance with
the line J. A free ﬂow state, at which the braches for free
ﬂow and congested traﬃc merge on the fundamental dia-
gram, corresponds to the wide moving jam outﬂow. The
ﬂow rate qout in this wide moving jam outﬂow is smaller
than the maximum ﬂow rate in free ﬂow at which mov-
ing jams emerge spontaneously in free ﬂow. Thus, this
fundamental diagram has a reversed-λ-form. Later, the
same results have been found in many other traﬃc ﬂow
models (see references in the review [5]).
In contrast with these model results, in real traﬃc, when
the branch for congested traﬃc C coincides with the line
J (D1, Fig. 7 (b)), then this branch is related to syn-
chronized ﬂow states associated with the outﬂows from
diﬀerent wide moving jams. This is because in empiri-
cal investigations a variety of diﬀerent synchronized ﬂow
states, all of them belong to the line J, are formed in
the jam outﬂows. This is in accordance with results of
three-phase traﬃc theory [1]. In contrast, two-phase traf-
ﬁc theories [5, 40] can explain only two points on the em-
pirical branch for congested traﬃc: The point associated
with the ﬂow rate in the jam outﬂow qout at which the
braches for free ﬂow and congested traﬃc merge on the
fundamental diagram and the point (ρmax, 0) within the
jam [1].

[40] B.S. Kerner, P. Konh¨auser. Phys. Rev. E 50, 54–83

(1994).

[41] From a comparison of a local traﬃc dynamics measured
at D2 (not shown) with the dynamics at D1 in Fig. 1 (b)
(example 1) has been found that the moving jams propa-
gate upstream with the mean velocity of the downstream
jam fronts vg ≈ − 15.8 km/h.

11

[42] It must be noted that during these F→S→F hysteresis
eﬀects traﬃc ﬂow is not interrupted. This is qualitatively
diﬀerent from F→J→F, S→J→S, S→J→F, and F→J→S
“hysteresis eﬀects” in the ﬂow–density plane caused by
wide moving jam propagation through a detector loca-
tion. In the latter cases, there is ﬂow interruption within
the jam (Sect. II B): The jam inﬂow q(J)
is indepen-
in
dent of the jam outﬂow q(J)
out = qout, if free ﬂow
out < q(J)
is formed in the jam outﬂow). When q(J)
in , i.e.,
the jam width increases over time, the ﬂow rate mea-
sured at the detector becomes smaller after wide moving
jam propagation through the detector location. In con-
trast, when q(J)
in , i.e., the jam width decreases over
time, the ﬂow rate becomes greater after wide moving
jam propagation. Thus, a very complex “hysteresis ef-
fects” in the ﬂow–density plane are possible. For their
understanding, a spatiotemporal analysis of traﬃc pat-
tern emergence and evolution is necessary.

out > q(J)

out (q(J)

[43] Our investigations show that the theoretical fundamental
diagram, which follows from a Z-dependence for an F→S
transition on a homogeneous road [21] (see Fig. 17.3 (a)
in [1]), is also qualitatively the same as those for empirical
synchronized ﬂow within a moving SP that emerges away
from bottlenecks [1] (see Fig. 10.13 (a) in [1]).

[44] As follows from Fig. 15 (b, c), OV functions presented in
Ref. [28] with the reference to the KKW CA model are
not associated with the KKW CA model. Thus, conclu-
sions about microscopic features of the KKW CA model
made in Ref. [28] are incorrect.

[45] P. Wagner, I. Lubashevsky. cond-mat/0311192 (2003).
[46] In particular, the analysis made explains why the Nagel-
Schreckenberg CA model and its variants [47], which
in accordance with [20] cannot show and predict the
main empirical spatiotemporal features of traﬃc ﬂow
(item (1)–(4) in Sect. I), even though the models show
the global empirical fundamental diagram, empirical OV
functions and time headway distributions satisfactory, as
found in the empirical test of these models [28].

[47] K. Nagel, M. Schreckenberg: J Phys. (France) I 2, 2221
(1992); K. Nagel, M. Paczuski. Phys. Rev. E 51, 2909
(1995); M. Schreckenberg, A. Schadschneider, K. Nagel,
N. Ito. Phys. Rev. E 51, 2939 (1995); R. Barlovi´c, L. San-
ten, A. Schadschneider, M. Schreckenberg. Eur. Phys. J.
B. 5, 793 (1998); W. Knospe, L. Santen, A. Schadschnei-
der, M. Schreckenberg. J. Phys. A 33, L477 (2000).

12

FIG. 1: Macroscopic characteristics of empirical single vehicle data: (a) – Sketch of detector arrangement. (b) – Local traﬃc
dynamics (one-minute average data) of the speed (left) and ﬂow rate (right) on four diﬀerent days in both freeway lanes.

13

FIG. 2: Microscopic criterion for wide moving jam: (a–d) – Empirical single vehicle data for speed within a wide moving jam in
the left lane (a) and the associated time distributions of gross time headways τ (gross) for diﬀerent scales of the time headways
(b, c) and of the value 3600/τ (gross) (d) related to the example 1 in Fig. 1 (b). (e–g) – Empirical single vehicle data for speed
within a sequence of two narrow moving jams in the left lane (e) and the associated time distributions of τ (gross) (f) and of
3600/τ (gross) (g) related to the example 2 in Fig. 1 (b).

14

FIG. 3: Empirical time headway distributions: (a) – For the examples 1–4 in Fig. 1 (b) for diﬀerent density ranges: curve 1 –
20 < ρ < 30, curve 2 – 30 < ρ < 40, curve 3 – 40 < ρ < 50 vehicles/km. (b) – Time headway distributions associated with the
example 1 for diﬀerent speed ranges: curve 4 – v > 50, curve 5 – v < 30, curve 6 – v < 20 km/h. Left lane.

15

FIG. 4: Empirical OV functions for the examples 1–4 in Fig. 1 (b) for diﬀerent density ranges: Curves 1 – 20 < ρ < 30, curves
2 – 30 < ρ < 40, curves 3 – 40 < ρ < 50 vehicles/km. Left lane.

16

FIG. 5: GP upstream of the bottleneck at the eﬀectual on-ramp D6 on a section of the freeway A5-South: (a) – Sketch of the
freeway section (left) with detector arrangement within the intersection I1 (right). (b) – Vehicle speed averaged across all lanes
(left) and total ﬂow rate across the freeway (right) in space and time. (c) – Vehicle speed in diﬀerent freeway lanes within the
GP at diﬀerent detectors. Data from April 15, 1996. Explanation of the section and the on-ramp bottleneck at D6 see in [1].

17

FIG. 6: Congested pattern evolution on a section on the freeway A5-North with oﬀ-ramp (at D25-oﬀ) and on-ramp (at D16)
bottlenecks: (a) – Sketch of the section (middle) with detector arrangement within the intersection I3 (left) and I4 (right). (b)
– Vehicle speed over time shown at diﬀerent detectors. Explanation of the section and the on-ramp and oﬀ-ramp bottlenecks
see in [1].

18

FIG. 7: Empirical fundamental diagram at diﬀerent freeway locations for the left freeway lane related to the GP in Fig. 5:
(a) – All data is used [1]. (b) – Only data before 8:00 is used. Dotted line shows the line J, which represents the upstream
propagation of the wide moving jam downstream front; qout is the ﬂow rate in free ﬂow formed by the wide moving jam outﬂow.

19

FIG. 8: Simulation of GP evolution: (a, b) – Time dependences of ﬂow rates qin (a) and qon (b). (c, d) – Speed (c) and ﬂow
rate (d) averaged across the road in space and time for spontaneous GP emergence and evolution. (e) – Speed at diﬀerent
detectors as a function of time for the GP. (f) – The line J when free ﬂow (left) and synchronized ﬂow (right) is formed in
the wide moving jam outﬂow for the wide moving jam labeled “jam 1” within the GP in (e). qout is the ﬂow rate in free ﬂow
formed by the wide moving jam outﬂow.

20

FIG. 9: Simulations of congested pattern evolution at two adjacent bottlenecks: (a, b) – Time dependences of ﬂow rates qin,
qon (a) and the percentage of vehicles η that leave the main road to the oﬀ-ramp (b). (c, d) – Speed (c) and ﬂow rate (d)
averaged across the road in space and time. (e) – Speed at diﬀerent detectors as a function of time. vfree oﬀ = 65 km/h.

21

FIG. 10: Fundamental diagrams and Z-characteristic: (a, b) – Theoretical spatial dependence of the fundamental diagram
(a) and the Z-characteristic for the F→S transition at the bottleneck (D6) (b) for the GP shown in Fig. 8. (c) – Theoretical
fundamental diagrams for GP under strong congestion. Arrows in (a, b) show F→S transitions (from the branch F to the
branch C) and S→F transitions (from the branch C to the branch F ) at the related detectors.

22

FIG. 11: Simulated speed correlation functions at diﬀerent detectors for the GP in Fig. 8.

23

FIG. 12: Simulations of microscopic criterion for traﬃc phase identiﬁcation in diﬀerent local microscopic congested traﬃc states
related to diﬀerent locations within the GP shown in Fig. 8 (c–e): (a–d) – Single vehicle model data related to the location D2
for speed within a wide moving jam in the left lane (a) and the associated time distributions of gross time headways τ (gross)
for diﬀerent scales of the headways (b, c) and of the value 3600/τ (gross) (d). (e–g) – Single vehicle model data related to the
location D4 for speed within a sequence of two narrow moving jams in the left lane (e) and the associated time distributions
of τ (gross) (f) and of 3600/τ (gross) (g).

24

FIG. 13: Comparison of microscopic criterion with macroscopic spatiotemporal objective criteria for the phases in congested
traﬃc. Figures left are related to a narrow moving jam, ﬁgures right are related to a wide moving jam: (a) – The catch eﬀect of
a narrow moving jam at an on-ramp bottleneck with subsequent LSP formation at the bottleneck (left) and wide moving jam
propagation through the bottleneck with LSP formation at the bottleneck (right). Average vehicle speed (one-minute data) in
space and time. (b) – Single vehicle model data for vehicle speed. (c, d) – gross time headways (c) and the value 3600/τ (gross)
(d) related to (b). qin = 1830, qon = 270, qout = 1810 vehicles/h/lane.

25

FIG. 14: Model time headway distributions at diﬀerent detectors within general patterns: (a) – Simulations of the model
(b) – Simulations of the model for heterogeneous ﬂow with various driver and
of identical vehicles related to Fig. 8 (e).
vehicle characteristics of Sect. 20.2 in [1] with 30% of fast, 35% of slow, and 35% of long vehicles; v(1)
free = 120 km/h; other
0 (v), p(j)
parameters for fast vehicles are the same as those for identical vehicles in Sect. 16.3 of Ref. [1]; τ (a, j)
0 (v) =
(a(j) + b(j) min(1, v/10)), j = 2, 3; a(2) = 0.42, b(2) = 0.13 for slow vehicles (j = 2) and a(2) = 0.3, b(2) = 0.18 for long vehicles
(j = 3).

(v) = τ /p(j)

del

26

FIG. 15: Model OV functions at diﬀerent detectors within general patterns: (a) – Simulations of the model of identical vehicles
related to Fig. 8 (e). (b, c) – Simulations of an GP (b) and associated OV functions (c) for the KKW CA model (Sect. 20.2
in [1]). Curves 1–4: ρ = 20–30, ρ = 30–40, ρ = 40–50, and ρ = 50–60 vehicles/km, respectively.

27

FIG. 16: Simulations of speed adaptation eﬀect at diﬀerent detector locations within the GP in Fig. 8 (e): (a) – Frequency pδv
as a function of δv for diﬀerent ranges of the space headway : curves 1 – 0–12.5 m, curves 2 – 12.5–25 m, curves 3 – > 25 m
(densities ρ > 50 vehicles/km, 30 < ρ < 50, and ρ < 30 vehicles/km, respectively). (b) – Frequency pδv as a function of δv at
diﬀerent detectors regardless of space headways. (c) – Spatial dependence of relative frequency pδv/p0 at diﬀerent given values
of the speed diﬀerence δv: curve 1 – δv = ± 0.5 m/s, curve 2 – δv = ± 1 m/s, curve 3 – δv = ± 1.5 m/s, curve 4 – δv = ± 2.0
m/s. p0 = pδv |δv=0.

