5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
4
0
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Hans Bethe and the Global Energy Problems.

Boris Ioﬀe
Institute of Theoretical and Experimental Physics,
B.Cheremushkinskaya 25, 117218 Moscow,Russia

Abstract

Bethe’s view-point on the global energy problems is presented. Bethe claimed
that the nuclear power is a necessity in future. Nuclear energetic must be based
on breeder reactors. Bethe considered the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons as
the main problem of long-range future of nuclear energetics. The solution of this
problem he saw in heavy water moderated thermal breeders, using uranium-233,
uranium-238 and thorium as a fuel.

1 My contacts with Bethe.

I heard Bethe’s name ﬁrst time in 1947.
I was the student of the 3rd course of the
physical faculty of Moscow University. I was not satisfyed by the level of education there,
especially by the teaching of theoretical physics – all the best russian theoreticians –
Landau, Tamm, Leontovich and others were expelled from the University, because they
did not share the oﬃcial points of view of Marxist philosophy. After some doubts – if
I am able to be a theoretical physicist or not – I decided to try to give up to Landau
his theoretical minimum. I passed successfully the ﬁrst entering exam on mathematics
and Landau gave me the program of the whole minimum. That time among now well
known Landau Course of Theoretical Physics only 3 1
2 books were published: Mechanics,
Classical Field Theory, Mechanics of Condensed Matter and the ﬁst part of Statistics
(Classical Statistics). All other parts of the Course the student should study mostly by
reading original papers, which were in German and English. (It was implicitly assumed
that the student ﬂuently knows both languages – a very nontrivial case at that time.) In
the program of Quantum Mechanics there were 3 papers of H.Bethe: the theory of atomic
levels in the ﬁelds of crystall [1]; the theory of collisions of fast electrons with atoms [2];
the theory of deuteron [3]. Especially, it was very hard to study the ﬁrst and the second
papers – about 75 pages each in German, the language, which I learned only being a boy
and almost forget and with enormous amount of complicated calculations. I repeated all
of them! Just starting from this moment I have a great respect to Bethe.

1

When I passed all Landau examinations, became a member of Landau seminar and
met Landau very often, as a rule 2–3 times a week, I realized that he also has a great
respect to Bethe. He called him every time – Hans Albrecht, not by the last name
(Pomeranchuk called Bethe in the same way.) The comparison with Bethe results was
the highest estimation by Landau.

I would like to tell also about the indirect connection of our work with one Bethe
In 1951 the Pomeranchuk group at ITEP, in which I
remark, now almost forgotten.
participated, started to work on the project of hydrogen bomb, called “Tube” (Truba).
This was the continuation of the work, performed earlier by Zeldovich and Landau groups.
In US a similar project was developed by Teller and was known as “Classical Super”.
In short the idea of the project was the following. A long cylinder is ﬁlled by liquid
deuterium. At one end of the cylinder the atomic bomb and the intermediate device
ﬁlled by deuterium and tritium are situated. It was expected, that after atomic bomb
explosion the fusion reaction will start in D + T mixture, resulting in high temperatures
and the shock wave will propagate along the cylinder, inducing D + D fusion with the
explosion (in principle) of unlimited power for a long enough tube. The essential step in
the project was the calculation of energy balance. The main source of energy loss was
the bremsstrahlung – production of γ-rays in electron – ion collisions, since γ-rays leave
the system. In course of propagation in the cylinder, γ-rays undergo Compton scattering.
Because the bremsstrahlung spectrum is softer, than the electron spectrum, the energy
of γ’s increases at Compton scattering. (Sometime this process is called inverse Compton
scattering.) The calculation of this increasing of energy loss due to Compton scattering
and the calculation of the energy balance with account of this eﬀect was the main task of
the Pomeranchuk group with collaboration with the Zeldovich group. Much later, I read in
[4], that at the conference at Los Alamos in April 1946, where Teller presented the results
of his calculations of Classical Super, Bethe made a remark, that the account of inverse
Compton scattering of γ’s (not accounted by Teller), will result in negative energy balance
and that the hydrogen bomb of this type will not explode. In our calculations after hard
work we came to the same conclusion – the energy balance was negative. Bethe intuitive
prediction was marvelous! (This story is described in more details in [5],[6].) E.Teller and
his group came to the similar conclusion.

I met Hans the ﬁrst time in 1994, when he visited ITEP. He was invited into ITEP
Director oﬃce, where were also few ITEP physicists, including myself. According to the
standard procedure, ITEP Director Prof.I.V.Chuvilo told to the guest about the main
investigations proceeding in the Institute, and suggested the program of his visit: to see
ﬁrst this installation, then that and so on. But Bethe refused to follow this program
– he said: I would like to have a conversation with ITEP theoreticians and ﬁrst of all
I would like to know, what they are doing in QCD. So, we went to my oﬃce and for
about two hours, I explained Hans our results in QCD: the calculations of baryon masses,
based on the leading role of spontaneous violation of chiral symmetry in QCD vacuum,
the calculations of baryon magnetic moments etc. Hans listened very attentively, put
questions and it was clear, that he would like to understand the subject completely. Only
one time, after about 1 hour of conversation he said: I would like to rest for 10 minutes.
I left the room, came back in 10 minutes and the conversation was continuing. (Hans was
87 at that time!)

2

2 The necessity of nuclear power.

Bethe interest to nuclear power arises naturally, since starting from 30-ies he became one
of the best specialists in nuclear physics. It is enough to recall his reviews on theoretical
nuclear dynamics [7], his paper on diﬀraction scattering of nucleons on nuclei [8] his
lectures on nuclear theory [9]. In 1942-1946 Bethe was the Head of Theoretical Division
at Los Alamos. In 1956-1957 Bethe participated in experimental work, where the inelastic
cross sections of ﬁssion spectrum neutrons were measured on various elements [10]. These
data are important for construction of power nuclear reactors, especially of the breeders
on fast neutrons.

Starting from 70-ies Bethe was greatly concerned over global energy problems – over
the balance of energy production and consumption in the world in future. In two papers
[11],[12] published in 1976,1977 he discussed these problems. Bethe expected that the
consumption of energy will steadily increase in next decades, but the production of oil,
the main source of energy, will drop around the year 2000 and the oil (and gas) prices
will jump up. Now we know, that his prediction about rising of oil and gas prices was
correct and also, what he did not discussed, few developing countries, like China, India,
Brasil are joining now the club of main energy consumers. Bethe considered two ways to
avoid the future energy crises.

The ﬁrst one was the energy conservation – the improving the eﬃciency with which the
energy is consumed. He stressed the necessity of great eﬀorts towards energy conservation:
besides the technical and industrial progress, public education and tax or other incentives
are needed [10]. However, in this way only a temporary solution (for the next 10-20 years)
of the problem may be achieved:
in the long range perspective the energy conservation
will not help very much.

The second way is the intensive use of new sources of energy. Among these coal,
nuclear fusion and solar power were considered. Bethe was sceptical about the extensive
use of coal, especially in Europe, where the coal resources are restricted and deep mining is
needed. The use of nuclear fusion requires the solution of many hard engineering problems.
So, Bethe expected [11], that, in the best case, fusion might contribute only few percent
of USA’s power supply not to early as in 2020. The solar power was considered in more
details in [10] and the conclusion was: solar power is likely to remain extremely expensive
in USA, Europe and Japan, but “it might be just the right thing for certain developing
countries, which have large desert areas and rather modest total energy needs”. Bethe
concludes, that all alternative sources of energy, including wind, biological sources, should
be investigated and developed, but they cannot solve the future energy problems.

The ﬁnal conclusion was: there is no alternative to nuclear power. “The nuclear power
is a necessity not merely an option. A necessity if we want to make a smooth transition
from our present oil– and gas–based economies to the post–oil world” [12].

3

3 The advantages and problems of nuclear energet-

ics.

Bethe emphasized that the main problem of long-range future of nuclear energetics based
on breeder reactors is the problem, how to provide the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons. He shared the point [13], that this goal cannot be achieved, if the facilities,
where plutonium or weapon-grade uranium are produced, like reprocessing or isotope sep-
aration plants, would be widely distributed over the world. Bethe believed, that the wide
spread of nuclear energetics may be reconciled with non-proliferation of nuclear weapons,
if the fuel for nuclear reactors will be not only uranium, but also thorium. He supported
the proposal by T.B.Taylor and H.A.Feiverson [13] as a possible scheme of future nuclear
energetics. According to it the nuclear power plants should be of two types. The ﬁrst
type are the power plants with thermal reactors using 233U, 238U and thorium as a fuel.
The moderator in such reactors should be heavy water. As the most perspective heavy
water reactors. Bethe considered Canadian reactors CANDU1 Then one may expect a
high, close to 1 conversion coeﬃcient (the ratio of new formed ﬁssion elements – 233U and
239P u, 241P u to the burned ones). The ratio of 233U to 238U must be chosen in such a
way, that after chemical separation of uranium, it will not be suitable for nuclear weapons.
Also, the concentration of plutonium should be much smaller than those of 233U. The
nuclear power plants of the second type are the plants with breeder reactors on 238U and
plutonium. The blankets of breeders would be made of thorium so as to produce 233U
for thermal reactors. The plutonium produced in thermal reactors would be fed back to
breeder reactors. The number of fast breeders should be much smaller, than the number
of thermal reactors.

The problem of nonproliferation of nuclear weapons is weaker in the proposed by Bethe
two-component scheme of nuclear energy plants, than in case of energy production by fast
breeder reactors. The number of breeder reactors in two-components scheme is relatively
small, they should be under international management and located in countries of the
great internal stability. The plants for reprocessing breeder blanket should be located in
close proximity to them. Only the thermal reactors would be sold in international trade.
Of course, as mentioned by Bethe, to in order prevent proliferation, some international
agreement is necessary and, therefore, some restrictions to national sovereignty. But this
is the price for the world peace.

Bethe expected that nuclear energetics formed in this way will cover all energy con-
sumption of the world for many thousand years and electric energy, produced on nuclear
power stations will be cheaper, than those produced on the stations using fossil fuel. (It
must be mentioned that the last conclusion was based on the economical calculations per-
formed before Three Mile Island and Chernobyl accidents. After that the requirements
to the safety on nuclear power stations strenghtened, essentially in USA, what resulted
1In 1995 I participated at E.Wigner Memorial Meeting of APS, where Bethe presented his recollections
on Wigner. There was also a talk “Wigner as nuclear engineer” given by Alvin Weinberg. After this
talk I give a remark about the development of nuclear reactors theory in the USSR (stressing that it
was independent from those un US) and about construction of heavy water reactors in USSR. After the
Meeting I had a conversation with Bethe – he did not know about heavy water reactors in the USSR.
(The description of the development of heavy water reactors in USSR is given in [14]).

4

in three times increasing of their costs in USA. At the same time the price of fossil fuel
also increased. So, new economical analysis must be used now.)
In carrying out this
program the problems of chemical separation of the fuel containing thorium, uranium
and plutonium as well as engineering problems must be solved. One of the most hard
technical problems is the problem of remote handling of the fuel. The reason is that in
the fuel, containing 233U in the reactor core, due to (n, 2n) reaction by fast neutrons 232U
is formed and the products of radiative chain, started from 232U, are highly radioactive.
But, on the other side, the same circumstance provides the protection against theft.

The other serious problems arising from wide use of nuclear energetics are: the problem
of waste disposal, and the release of radioactivity by nuclear power stations, especially in
case of fatal accidents on nuclear reactors.

In discussion of the problems of wast disposal Bethe refers to the Report to the Amer-
ican Physical Society by the Study Group on Nuclear Fuel Cycles and Waste Manage-
ment (APS Study Group) [15]. He cites the general conclusion of the Report: “Eﬀective
long-term isolation for spent fuel, high-level or transuranic wastes can be achieved by
geological emplacement ... Many waste repository sites with satisfactory hydrogeology
can be identiﬁed in continental USA in a variety of geology formations. Bedded salt can
be a satisfactory medium for a repository , but certain other rock types, notably granite
and possibly shale, could oﬀer even greater long-term advantages. Irrespective of the time
scale, adopted for reprocessing, two geological demonstration facilities in diﬀerent media
should be completed”. (Emphasis by Bethe). The wastes must be solidiﬁed, then the
solid wastes should be fused with borosilicate glass and put in stell cylindres. It is hard to
imagine how the radioactive material could get out into environment from the repository
at the depth of 500 m below the ground after such treatment or how the terrorists could
penetrate there.

In some other countries (France, Russia) the decisions about waste disposal are close to
recommendations, presented in the Report, although in USA the ﬁnal decision about waste
depository is not taken till now. It must be mentioned, that in recent years the proposal of
transmutation by accelerators of radioactive transuranium elements into nonradioactive
ones is under discussion and corresponding experiments are under way. Bethe was strongly
interested in this proposal and supported the construction of accelerator for this purpose.
In discussion of the problem of radioactivity release by nuclear power plant, Bethe
remarks ﬁrst, that in case of routine operation the radioactive exposure of a person living
permanently near the fence of the power plant is negligable in comparison with natural
radioactivity. The main danger arises in cases of serious accidents on reactors. The
possibility and the consequences of such accidents were studied in 1975 USA Atomic
Energy Commision Reactor Safety Study (the results were presented in the so called
Rasmussen report) and by American Physical Society’s Study Group on Light Water
Reactor Safety. Later, in 1986, after the Chernobyl accident a special American panel
was formed for its study. Hans Bethe participated in the APS Study Group and in the
panel.

The Rasmussen report considered the nuclear reactor core meltdown accident fol-
lowed by release of radioactivity in the athmosphere, when the containment failed to keep
it inside. The report estimated the probability of such an event as 1/200000 per 1000
megawatts electrical reactor year. Of course, this estimation was purely theoretical, be-

5

cause no such accident was happend before. The number of fatalities from radiation was
estimated as 300. The APS study did not analyse the probability of such accident, but
by accounting the delayed cancers, came to much higher estimation of fatalities – about
10000. Even if we take the APS estimation, remarks Berthe [16], the number of fatalities
from the accident – about 5 per year for the whole USA – is not very high in comparison
with other types of non-nuclear accidents. Naturally, Bethe shared the important con-
clusions of APS Study Group [17]: 1) the necessity of improval of containment design; 2)
mitigation of accident consequences.
The main points of the report of U.S. panel, studyed the Chernobyl accident was pre-
sented by Bethe [18]. Bethe stressed, that “Chernobyl–type reactor design is seriously
ﬂawed”. The reactor is inherently unstable as a physical system: the power of reactor
increases with increasing of temperature or the content of steam in the cooling water.
This is the main source of this catastrophic accident. (I would like to mention, that this
point of view completely concides with mine [5, 6]). The Chernobyl reactor did not have
a containment. Therefore,the blow-up of the reactor immediately results in crash of the
roof of reactor building and radioactivity was ejected in the athmosphere. Both these de-
fects are absent in U.S. light-water reactors. Moreover, the containments in U.S. reactors
are equipped with water sprays, which cool down the steam and radioactive products,
condensing them within the containment. The most dangerous ﬁssion products – iodine
and cesium (in the form of cesium iodide) are highly soluble in the water, ejected by
sprays. For these reasons, remarks Bethe, in Three Mile Island accident it was released
to the enviroment about one-millionth of the amount of iodine that was ejected into ath-
mosphere at Chernobyl. No amounts of cesium or strontium were detected at Three Mile
Island accident. Bethe concludes, that the likelihood of seriously damaging accident is
clearly much smaller for U.S. light-water reactors than for the Chernobyl-type. But both
the accident at Chernobyl and the less serious one at Three Mile Island indicate “that
continued concern for safety is maintained over the full lifetime of U.S. plants” [17] (I
add: and over the whole world).

I am thankful to G.Brown for information about Bethe’s activity in nuclear energetics
and to U.Meissner for his hospitality at the Bonn University, where this paper was written.
This work was supported in part by U.S. CRDF Cooperative Grant Program, Project
RUP2-2621-MO-04, RFBR grant 03-02-16209 and the funds from EC to the project
“Study of Strongly Interacting Matter” under contract 2004 No R113-CT-2004-506078.

References

[1] H.A.Bethe, Ann.d.Phys., 3, 133-208 (1929)

[2] H.A.Bethe, Ann.d.Phys., 5, 325-400 (1930)

[3] H.A.Bethe and R.E.Peierls, Proc.Roy.Soc.A, 148, 146 (1935)

[4] R.Rhodes, Dark Sun, Simon and Schuster, N.Y., 1995, p.254

6

[5] B.L.Ioﬀe, Osobo secretnoe zadanie, Novy Mir magazine, No.5, pp.144-155, 1999,
No.6, pp.161-172, in Russian; English translation in: Handbook of QCD, ed. by
M.Shifman, v.1, pp.18-52, World Scientiﬁc, 2001

[6] B.L.Ioﬀe, Without Retouching , Phasis, 2004 (in Russian).

[7] H.A.Bethe

and R.F.Bacher, Rev.Mod.Phys. 8,

193

(1936); H.A.Bethe,

Rev.Mod.Phys. 9, 71 (1937)

[8] H.A.Bethe and G.Placzek, Phys.Rev. 57, 1075 A (1940)

[9] H.A.Bethe, Elementary Nuclear theory, John Wiley and sons, N.Y., 1947; H.A.Bethe
and P.Morrison, Elementary nuclear theory, 2-nd edition, John Wiley and sons, N.Y.,
1956

[10] H.A.Bethe, J.R.Beyster and R.E.Carter, Journal of Nuclear Energy, 3, 207, 273

(1956), 4, 3 147 (1957)

[11] H.A.Bethe, Sci.American, 234, 21 (1976)

[12] H.A.Bethe, The Debate on Nuclear Power, in: “Nuclear Power and Its Fuel Cycle”,

v.7, p.3-17 (IAEA), Vienna, 1977

[13] H.A.Feiveson and T.B.Taylor, The Bull. of the Atomic Scientists, Dec.1976, p.14

[14] B.L.Ioﬀe and O.V.Shvedov, Atomnaya Energia, 86, 310(1999)

[15] Report to APS by the study group of nuclear fuel cycles and waste management,

Rev.Mod.Phys. 50, S1-185, January, 1978, part II

[16] H.A.Bethe, The Bull. of Atomic. Scuientists, Sept. 1975, p.40

[17] F. von Hippel, Bull. of Atomic Scientists, Sept., 1975, p.37

[18] H.A.Bethe, Bull. of Atomic Scientists, Dec. 1986, p.45

7

