5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
9
0
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The distribution of wealth in the presence of

altruism for simple economic models

M. Rodr´ıguez-Achach ∗ and R. Huerta-Quintanilla

Departamento de F´ısica Aplicada Unidad M´erida, Cinvestav-IPN, Km. 6

Carretera Antigua a Progreso, M´erida 97310, Yucat´an, M´exico.

Abstract

We study the eﬀect of altruism in two simple asset exchange models: the yard

sale model (winner gets a random fraction of the poorer player’s wealth) and the

theft and fraud model (winner gets a random fraction of the loser’s wealth). We

also introduce in these models the concept of bargaining eﬃciency, which makes

the poorer trader more aggressive in getting a favorable deal thus augmenting his

winning probabilities. The altruistic behavior is controlled by varying the number

of traders that behave altruistically and by the degree of altruism that they show.

The resulting wealth distribution is characterized using the Gini index. We compare

the resulting values of the Gini index at diﬀerent levels of altruism in both models.

It is found that altruistic behavior does lead to a more equitable wealth distribution

but only for unreasonable high values of altruism that are diﬃcult to expect in a

real economic system.

Key words: economic models; econophysics; altruism

PACS: 87.23.Ge, 89.65.Gh, 89.90.+n

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

2 February 2008

1 Introduction

The study of wealth and income distributions in an economical system is a

problem of interest from both the practical and theoretical points of view

and, as expected, has a long history. Pareto did some of the ﬁrst studies on

the subject (1). He proposed that the wealth and income distributions obey

universal power laws, but subsequent studies have shown that this is not the

case for the whole range of wealth values. Mandelbrot (2) proposed that the

Pareto conjecture only holds at the higher values of wealth and income. The

initial part (low wealth or income) of the distribution has been recently iden-

tiﬁed with the Gibbs distribution (3; 4; 5), while the middle part, according

to Gibrat (6), takes the form of a log–normal distribution.

Very recently, this and other aspects of the economy have been treated under

the “econophysics” point of view, mainly applying the ideas and tools of sta-

tistical mechanics and Monte Carlo simulations with some degree of success

and promising results (economists however, are still very skeptical about re-

sults obtained from these methods, see (7) for an interesting discussion). The

wealth distribution of any country, as many other economic quantities, results

from very complicated processes involving production, taxes, regulations and

even fraud. Despite this complexity, very simple models that provide some

insight into the whole process have been devised that qualitatively reproduce

some of the features of real economies.

We can treat an economy in its simplest form as an interchange of wealth

between pairs of people, or “agents” at successive instants of time (See Hayes

∗ Corresponding author

Email address: achach@gema.mda.cinvestav.mx (M. Rodr´ıguez-Achach).

2

(8) for an interesting review). Every time two agents interact, wealth ﬂows

from one to the other according to some rule. In the so–called “yard sale”

(YS) model, the winner takes a random fraction of the wealth of the poorer

player, while in the “theft and fraud” (TF) model, the winner takes a random

fraction of the loser’s wealth. There is no production or consumption of wealth

in these models, nor taxes, savings etc. Under these circumstances, the yard

sale model produces a collapse of the economy: all the wealth ends in the hands

of a single agent, a phenomenon known as condensation. The theft and fraud

model on the other hand does not collapse but leads to a wealth distribution

given by the Gibbs distribution. See (9; 5; 4) for details.

The two models mentioned above are oversimpliﬁed, toy–model versions of a

real economy, and several authors have made some reﬁnements to introduce

more realistic situations, for example, allowing the agents to go into debt (10),

change in the agents’ probability of winning according to the relative wealth of

the traders (11), constant and fractional savings (12), and altruistic behavior

(13), among others. In particular, the introduction of altruism in these models

has not been studied in depth, and therefore in this paper we investigate the

eﬀect that altruistic behavior has on the dynamics of the models and the

changes that can produce in the distribution of wealth.

2 Models

In all models we use a ﬁxed number N of individuals with an identical initial

amount of money m to trade. The total wealth of the community, Nm, remains

ﬁxed in time. At each time step, two traders i and j are chosen at random.

The winner (which is also randomly chosen) takes an amount T from the loser.

3

The traders wealth w at time t + 1, assuming that i is the winner, will be

Then, another two traders interact, and the process is repeated N times, which

constitutes one Monte Carlo step (MCS). The amount T of the transaction is

wi(t + 1) = wi(t) + T
wj(t + 1) = wj(t) − T.

deﬁned as

T = αMIN(wi(t), wj(t)),

for the YS model and

T = αwj(t),

for the TF model assuming that agent j loses the transaction. The parameter

α is a uniformly distributed random number in the interval [0,1].

Altruistic behavior is introduced in the above models in the following way.

First, a certain fraction p of the N traders is deﬁned as altruists. An altruistic

agent remains in that condition for the whole simulation. Second, a rate of

altruism r is deﬁned and is the same for all of the pN altruistic agents. Suppose

that agents i and j trade at time t and that i is richer than j. If agent i wins

and is an altruist we will have

wi(t + 1) = wi(t) + T − r(∆ + T ),
wj(t + 1) = wj(t) − T + r(∆ + T ),

where ∆ = (wi − wj)/2. With this deﬁnition, if an agent is not altruistic at all

(r = 0), the transactions proceed as in the original YS and TF models. If the

agent is totally altruistic (r = 1), the richer agent will give the other enough

4

(1)
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)
(6)

of his money so that their fortunes become equal.

Since both of the previous models can be considered too simplistic to represent

an economy, several attempts have been made to make these models more

realistic, as mentioned in the introduction. Here we follow Sihna (11), who

introduces a the concept of “bargaining eﬃciency”: a rich agent who owns

1000 units and loses 1 unit during a deal is only losing a 0.1% of his wealth.

However, an agent who loses the same 1 unit but whose wealth is of only 5

units is losing 20% of his fortune. Therefore it is expected that in a trade

between a rich and a poor agent, the poorer will be more aggressive in getting

a favorable deal, and that the aggressiveness will be a function of the relative

wealths of the agents.

The implementation of the above concept is made via the following “Fermi

function”: The probability that agent i wins in a trade with agent j is given

by:

p(i|i, j) =

1 + exp(β[ xi
xj

− 1])

,

1

where β parametrizes the signiﬁcance of the relative wealth of the agents. For

any β > 0, the poorer agent has a greater probability of winning the trade.

3 Results for the YS and TF models with altruism

We ﬁrst investigate the eﬀect of altruism in the YS model. In order to quantify

the inequality in the wealth distribution we use the Gini index (14) deﬁned as

(7)

(8)

G =

PN

i=1 PN

j=1 |xi − xj|
2N 2µ

,

5

where µ is the average wealth. A perfect distribution of wealth where every-

body has the same amount of money will give a value of G = 0. The other

extreme where one individual has all the money has a Gini value of 1.

It is known that in this model we have condensation: all the money ends up

in the hands of a single trader, which represents the extreme case of wealth

inequality. Altruism does not change this situation. In ﬁgure 1 we see the re-

sults of several simulations with 1000 traders that start with an initial fortune

of 100 (these values will remain ﬁxed for all the simulations in this paper). In

the curve with open circles we have p = r = 0, that is, the pure YS model

without altruism at all. Condensation takes place at about 1000 MCS. If we

introduce altruism, condensation still takes place, the only diﬀerence is that it

takes longer to reach. The curve with solid circles has values of p = r = 0.95,

almost everybody is near totally altruistic, however, only at the beginning we

see a diﬀerence in the Gini index compared to the pure YS model. As time

goes by, we quickly arrive at the condensate phase. Only when we set p = 1, or

everybody is altruistic, we get saturation of the Gini index. In the ﬁgure, the

curve with crosses has p = 1 and r = 0.1 which gives a value of G = 0.62. This

saturation is, however, uninteresting since the addition of a single non–altruist

takes the system to the condensate phase.

In the TF model condensation does not take place. The eﬀect of altruism has

been studied by using several values for the fraction and rate of altruism in

the model. For each set of values of p and r we let the system reach a stable

distribution at about 300 MCS and obtain a value for the Gini index. As ﬁgure

2 shows, at low values of p and r the Gini index is high, resulting in an uneven

distribution of wealth. Higher values of altruism result in a lower value of G,

as expected.

6

4 Introducing bargaining eﬃciency in the transactions

We now introduce the bargaining eﬃciency concept in the models. Figures 3

and 4 show the results for the TF and YS models respectively. It is interesting

that the condensation that occurs in the YS model disappears with the imple-

mentation of this scheme. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 4. Note that, comparing

with the TF model (ﬁgure 2), the YS model with bargaining eﬃciency yields

lower values of the Gini index for the same degree of altruism, that is, in order

to attain a certain value of G, we need lower values of r and p in the YS model

with bargaining eﬃciency (with β = 1) than in the stand–alone TF model.

If we compare the results for the TF model with and without bargaining

eﬃciency (ﬁgures 2 and 3), we see that G is smaller in the bargaining eﬃciency

case, but only for small values of the altruism parameters. In fact, for some

values of these parameters, the wealth is better distributed in the stand–alone

TF model. This is shown in ﬁgure 5. What the data in this ﬁgure says is: if

you take a TF economy without altruism, the addition of bargaining eﬃciency

(giving the poor more chances to win) reduces the Gini index, that is, the

wealth is more evenly distributed. However, if, in addition to the fact that the

chances to win are biased in favor of the poor you also have altruism in your

economy, then at a certain point, the pure TF economy performs better in

terms of wealth distribution.

This behavior can be understood in the following way. Take the case of no

altruists at all. In this situation the money is changing hands all the time, and

at any point in time you can ﬁnd extremely rich agents and very poor ones,

which gives you a high value for G. If in these conditions you give the poor

7

more chances to win then you are leveling the ﬁeld and G diminishes. This is

the behavior at low values of r in ﬁgure 5. Now take the other extreme, almost

everyone is altruistic at a high rate. Every time a rich wins a poor, he will give

the poor money so that their fortunes will be almost the same. This situation

gives you a low value for G, but if now you give the poor more chances to win

in addition to the altruism which is already helping him, then they beneﬁt in

excess and G increases.

We ﬁnally perform a set of simulations to study the eﬀect of changing the ag-

gressiveness of bargaining, which is controlled by the parameter β. The higher

value of this parameter, the most chances has the poorer of the two traders

to win the transaction. These simulations emphasize the behavior discussed

above. By enhancing the bargaining eﬃciency, the Gini index decreases, but

only when the altruism is low, for example when r = p = 0.4 (see the upper

curve in ﬁgure 6). When altruism is high the behavior is interesting, since

the Gini index ﬁrst begins to decrease when β increases, and then reaches a

minimum value and starts to increase for higher values of β. This means that

there is an optimum value for the bargaining parameter β for which the wealth

distribution reaches its more equitable form, at least under the Gini criteria.

In ﬁgure 7 we present similar curves as in ﬁgure 6 but for the YS model. In

this case the Gini index decreases monotonically as β increases, except for

the bottom curve where there is a very small increment in G after the initial

decrease.

8

5 Conclusions

We have investigated the eﬀect of altruistic behavior in the YS and TF models

with and without bargaining eﬃciency. We found that it is no easy to get rid

of the condensate phase (when a single agent owns all the wealth) in the YS

model. Only in the extreme case of 100% altruists condensation does not take

place. When bargaining eﬃciency is introduced in the YS model, condensa-

tion is eﬀectively avoided and a stable wealth distribution is achieved. The

distribution of wealth becomes more equitable as the altruism is increased. In

the stand–alone TF model, it is also observed that G decreases when altruism

is increased.

The introduction of bargaining eﬃciency gives interesting results since, for

small values of altruism, it has the eﬀect of decreasing the Gini index and

thus leads to a better wealth distribution, however, at high values of altruism

it can have the contrary eﬀect and increase the value of G, and this behavior

is more pronounced in the TF model. This implies that in these models, when

high rates of altruism are present, there is no necessity of giving the poor more

chances to win, because the wealth distribution will get worst.

An important point is that, despite the fact that we do observe a better

distribution of wealth in both models when the altruism is increased, this eﬀect

is observed only at too high values of the altruism parameters. For example,

in the stand–alone TF model, the value of the Gini index without altruism is

about 0.65. From ﬁgure 2 we can see that in order to decrease it only to 0.55 we

need to have approximately half of the population behaving as altruists, with

an altruism rate of about 0.3. A value of r = 0.3 means that the rich agent

9

will give the poor one 30% of the diﬀerence in their fortunes, a value that is

hard to expect in real life. Of course, we are dealing here with oversimpliﬁed

models but, as other authors have found, they can be valuable to shed some

light in a very complex issue, and our ﬁndings indicate that altruism cannot

be expected to change the way wealth is distributed in a signiﬁcant way.

Acknowledgments. We want to thank JL Gonz´alez-Velarde for his useful com-

ments.

10

References

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

V. Pareto, Cours d’Economie Politique, Lausanne, 1897.

B. Mandelbrot, Int. Econom. Rev. 1 (1960) 79.

B. K. Chakrabarti and S. Marjit, Ind. J. Phys. B 69 (1995) 681.

A. Dragulescu and V. M. Yakovenko, Physica A 299 (2001) 213.

A. Chakraborti and B. K. Chakrabarti, Eur. Phys. J. B 17 (2000)

R. Gibrat, Les in´egalit´es ´economiques, Paris, 1931.

R. Leombruni and M. Richiardi, Phys. A (2005), in press.

B. Hayes, Am. Sci. 90 (2002) 400.

S. Ispolatov, P. L. Krapivsky and S. Redner, Eur. Phys. J. B 2

167.

(1998) 267.

723.

S. Sihna, Phys. Scripta T106 (2003) 59.

A. Chakraborti, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 13 (2002) 1315.

R. Trigaux, Phys. A 348 (2005) 453.

Z. M. Berrebi and J. Silber, Quart. J. Econom. 100 (1985) 807.

[10]

A. Dragulescu and V. M. Yakovenko, Eur. Phys. J. B 17 (2000)

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Figure 1. Time evolution of the Gini index in the YS model. Open circles are

for a simulation without altruism at all. Solid circles are for 95% of altruists

and 0.95 of altruism. Crosses are for 100% of altruists and 0.1 of altruism.

Figure 2. Contour plot of the Gini index as function of the fraction of altruists

p and the rate of altruism r in the TF model. Results are averaged over at

11

least 5000 realizations.

Figure 3. Contour plot of the Gini index as function of the fraction of altruists

p and the rate of altruism r for the TF model with bargaining eﬃciency with

β = 1. Results are averaged over at least 5000 realizations.

Figure 4. Same as ﬁgure 3 but for the YS model with bargaining eﬃciency,

and β = 1. Results are averaged over at least 5000 realizations.

Figure 5. Curves of G as function of r for a ﬁxed value of p = 0.9. The curve

with open circles is the stand–alone TF model, while the ﬁlled circles curve is

for the TF model with bargaining eﬁciency and β = 1.

Figure 6. The Gini index as function of the bargaining parameter β under the

TF dynamics. Each curve is for diﬀerent altruism parameters, which, from

top to bottom curves, are the following: r = p = {0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9}.

Results are averaged over 1000 realizations.

Figure 7. The Gini index as function of the bargaining parameter β under the

YS dynamics. Each curve is for diﬀerent altruism parameters, which, from top

to bottom curves, are the following: r = p = {0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 0.95}. Results are

averaged over at least 1000 realizations.

12

