5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
1
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Production networks and failure avalanches

G´erard Weisbuch∗
Stefano Battiston∗∗
∗Laboratoire de Physique Statistique∗
de l’Ecole Normale Sup´erieure,
24 rue Lhomond, F-75231 Paris Cedex 5, France.
∗∗Centre Analyse et Math´ematique Sociale, EHESS, Paris
email:weisbuch@lps.ens.fr

December 2, 2013

Abstract

Although standard economics textbooks are seldom interested in
production networks, modern economies are more and more based
upon suppliers/customers interactions. One can consider entire sec-
tors of the economy as generalised supply chains. We will take this
view in the present paper and study under which conditions local
failures to produce or simply to deliver can result in avalanches of
shortage and bankruptcies across the network. We will show that a
large class of models exhibit scale free distributions of production and
wealth among ﬁrms and that metastable regions of high production
are highly localised.

1 Networks of ﬁrms

Firms are not simply independent agents competing for customers
on markets. Their activity involves many interactions, and some of

∗Laboratoire associ´e au CNRS (URA 1306), `a l’ENS et aux Universit´es Paris 6 et Paris

7

1

them even involve some kind of cooperation. Interactions among ﬁrms
might include:

• information exchange[3][4],[5];
• loans[7],[8];
• common endeavours[9];
• partial ownership[6];
• and of course economic transactions allowing production[10] (the

present paper).

Economic activity can be seen as occurring on an economic network
(“le tissu ´economique”): ﬁrms are represented by vertices and their
interactions by edges. The edges are most often asymmetric (think for
instance of providers/customers interactions). The availability of em-
pirical data has provoked research on the structure of these networks:
many papers discuss their “small world properties”[1] and frequently
report scale free distribution[2] of the connections among ﬁrms.

The long term interest of economic network research is rather the
dynamics creating or occurring on these nets: how are connections
evolving, what are the ﬂuxes of information, decisions[4],[5], economic
transactions etc ... But dynamic studies lag behind statistical ap-
proaches because of conceptual diﬃculties and because time series
of individual transactions are harder to obtain than time aggregated
statistics.

The recent cascade of bankruptcies that occurred in Eastern Asia
in 1997, provoked some research on the inﬂuence of the loans network
structure on the propagation of “bad debts” and resulting avalanches
of bankruptcies ([7],[8]) . One of the most early papers on avalanche
distribution in economic networks is due to Bak et al [10].
It con-
cerns production networks: edges represent suppliers/customers con-
nections among ﬁrms engaged in batch production activity. The au-
thors describe the distribution of production avalanches triggered by
random independent demand events at the output boundary of the
production network.

These papers ([7],[8] and[10]) are not based on any empirical de-
scription of the network structure, but assume a very simple interac-
tion structure: star structure in the ﬁrst case[7],[8], periodic lattice in
Bak et al paper[10]. They neither take into account price dynamics.
The present paper is along these lines: we start from a very sim-
ple lattice structure and we study the consequences of simple lo-

2

cal processes of orders/production (with or without failure)/delivery/
proﬁt/investment on the global dynamics: evolution of global produc-
tion and wealth in connection to their distribution and local patterns.
In the spirit of complex systems analysis, our aim is not to present spe-
ciﬁc economic prediction, but primarily to concentrate on the generic
properties (dynamical regimes, transitions, scaling laws) common to
a large class of models of production networks.

A minimal model of a production network will ﬁrst be introduced
in section 2. Simulation results are presented in section 3. Section 4
is a discussion of the genericity of the obtained results: reference is
made to comparable soluble models. We also summarise the results of
several variants of the simplest model. The conclusion is a discussion
of possible applications to geographical economics.

2 A simple model of a production net-
work

We can schematise the suppliers/customers interactions among ﬁrms
by a production network, where ﬁrms are located at the vertices and
directed edges represent the delivery of products from one ﬁrm to its
customers (see ﬁgure 1).

Independent local failures to produce (or to deliver) by a ﬁrm might
give rise to the propagation of shortage across the production network.
We have chosen a simple periodic lattice with three input connec-
tions of equal importance and three output per ﬁrm. The network is
oriented from an input layer (say natural resources) towards an output
layer (say the shelves of supermarkets). The transverse axis can be
thought as representing either geographical position or some product
space while the longitudinal axis relates to production. We here use
a one dimensional transverse space to facilitate the representation of
the dynamics by two-dimensional patterns, but there is no reason to
suppose geographical or product space to be one-dimensional in the
real world.

In real economies, the network structure is more heterogenous with
ﬁrms of unequal importance and connectivity. Furthermore some de-
livery connections go backwards. Most often these backward connec-
tions concern equipment goods; neglecting them as we do here implies
considering equipment goods dynamics as much slower than consump-
tion goods dynamics. Anyway, since these backward connections enter

3

l

k

k−1

0

Input

(Natural resources)

k+1

v’

Output
(supermarket)

v

Production

YD

Figure 1: Firms are located at the nodes of the lattice. Production (Y D)
ﬂows from the resource input layer (k = l) to the output layer (k = 0),
orders (Y ) ﬂow backward.

Orders

Y

4

positive feedback loops, we have no reason to suppose that they would
qualitatively disrupt the dynamics that we further describe.

At each time step two opposite ﬂows get across the lattice: orders
are ﬁrst transmitted upstream from the output layer; production is
then transmitted downstream from the input layer to the output layer.

• Orders at the output layer

We suppose that orders are only limited by the production ca-
pacity1 A0i of the ﬁrm in position 0, i, where 0 indicates the
output layer, and i the transverse position in the layer.

Y0i = q · A0i

(1)

Y0i is the order in production units, and q a technological pro-
portionality coeﬃcient relating the quantity of product Y to the
production capacity A, combining the eﬀect of capital and labor.
q is further taken equal to 1 without loss of generality.

• Orders

Firms at each layer k, including the output layer, transfer orders
upstream to get products from layer k + 1 allowing them to pro-
duce. These orders are evenly distributed across their 3 suppliers
upstream. But any ﬁrm can only produce according to its own
production capacity Aki. The planned production Yki is then a
minimum between production capacity and orders coming from
downstream:

Yki = min(q · Aki, X
v

Y(k−1)i
3

)

(2)

v stands for the supplied neighborhood, here supposed to be the
three ﬁrms served by ﬁrm k, i (see ﬁgure 1).
We suppose that resources at the input layer are always in excess
and here too, production is limited only by orders and production
capacity.

• Production downstream

Starting from the input layer, each ﬁrm then starts producing
according to inputs and to its production capacity; but produc-
tion itself is random, depending upon alea. We suppose that at
1A number of simplifying assumptions of our model are inspired from [8], especially

the assumption that production is limited by production capacity, not by market.

5

each time step some catastrophic event might occur with con-
stant probability P and completely destroy production. Fail-
ures result in canceling production at the ﬁrm where they occur,
but also reduce production downstream, since ﬁrms downstream
have to reduce their own production by lack of input. These
failures to produce are uncorrelated in time and location on the
grid. Delivered production Y d
ki by ﬁrm k, i then depends upon
the production delivered upstream from its delivering neighbor-
hood v′

i at level k + 1:

Y d
ki = ( X
i′∈v′
i

Y d
(k+1)i′ ·

Yki
Pi′′∈vi′ Yki′′

) · ǫ(t)

(3)

– Whenever any of the ﬁrms i′ ∈ v′

i at level k + 1 is not able to
deliver according to the order it received, it delivers down-
stream at level k to its delivery neighbourhood vi′ in pro-
portion of the initial orders it received, which corresponds
to the fraction term;

– ǫ(t) is a random term equals to 0 with probability P and 1

with probability 1 − P.

The propagation of production deﬁcit due to local independent
catastrophic event is the collective phenomenon we are interested
in.

• Proﬁts and production capacity increase

Production delivery results into payments without failure. For
each ﬁrm, proﬁts are the diﬀerence between the valued quantity
of delivered products and production costs, minus capital decay.
Proﬁts Πki are then written:

Πki = p · Y d

ki − c · Y d

ki − λAki

(4)

where p is the unit sale price, c is the unit cost of production, and
λ is the capital decay constant due to interest rates and material
degradation. We suppose that all proﬁts are re-invested into
production. Production capacities of all ﬁrms are thus upgraded
(or downgraded in case of negative proﬁts) according to:

Aki(t + 1) = Aki(t) + Πki(t)

(5)

• Bankruptcy and re-birth.

6

We suppose that ﬁrms which capital becomes negative go into
bankruptcy. Their production capacity goes to zero and they
neither produce nor deliver. In fact we even destroy ﬁrms which
capital is under a minimum fraction of the average ﬁrm (typ-
ically 1/500). A re-birth process occurs for the corresponding
vertex after a latency period: re-birth is due to the creation of
new ﬁrms which use the business opportunity to produce for the
downstream neighborhood of the previously bankrupted ﬁrm.
New ﬁrms are created at a unique capital, a small fraction of the
average ﬁrm capital (typically 1/250).2.

The dynamical system that we deﬁned here belongs to a large class
of non linear systems called reaction-diﬀusion systems (see e.g.
[18])
from chemical physics. The reaction part here is the autocatalytic loop
of production and capital growth coupled with capital decay and death
processes. The diﬀusion part is the diﬀusion of orders and production
across the lattice. We can a priori expect a dynamical behaviour
with spatio-temporal patterns, well characterised dynamical regimes
separated in the parameter space by transitions or crossovers, and
scale free distributions since the dynamics is essentially multiplicative
and noisy. These expectations guided our choices of quantities to
monitor during simulations.

3

Simulation results

3.1 Methods and parameter choice

Unless otherwise stated, the following results were obtained for a pro-
duction network with 1200 nodes and ten layers between the input
and the output.

Initial wealth is uniformly and randomly distributed among ﬁrms:

Aki ∈ [1.0, 1.1]

(6)

One time step correspond to the double sweep of orders and pro-
duction across the network, plus updating capital according to proﬁts.
The simulations were run for typically 5000 time steps.

2Adjusting these capital values relative to the average ﬁrm capital < A > is a standard
hypothesis in many economic growth models: one supposes that in evolving economies
such processes depend upon the actual state of the economy[16] and not upon ﬁxed and
predeﬁned values.

7

The ﬁgures further displayed correspond to:
• a capital threshold for bankruptcy of < A > /500;
• an initial capital level of new ﬁrms of < A > /250;

In
Production costs c were 0.8 and capital decay rate λ = 0.2.
the absence of failures, stability of the economy would be ensured
by sales prices p = 1.0. In fact, only the relative diﬀerence between
these parameters inﬂuences stability. But their relative magnitude
with respect to the inverse delay between bankruptcy and creation of
new ﬁrm also qualitatively inﬂuence the dynamics.

In the limits of low probability of failures, when bankruptcies are
absent, the linear relation between failure probability P and equilib-
rium price p is written:

p = c + λ +

· P

l
2

(7)

where l is the total number of layers. The l
2 comes from the fact that
the integrated damage due to an isolated failure is proportional to the
average number of downstream layers. The slopes at the origin of the
breakeven lines of ﬁgure 2 verify this equation.

Most simulations were monitored online: we directly observed the
evolution of the local patterns of wealth and production which our
choice of a lattice topology made possible. Most of our understanding
comes from these direct observations. But we can only display global
dynamics or static patterns in this manuscript.

3.2 Monitoring global economic performance

The performance of the economic system under failures can be tested
by checking which prices correspond to breakeven: the capital dynam-
ics being essentially exponential, the parameter space is divided in two
regions, where economic growth or collapse are observed. Drawing the
breakeven manifolds for instance in the failure probability P and sale
price p plane allows to compare the inﬂuence of other parameters .
The growth regime is observed in the low P and high p region, the
collapse regime in the high P and low p region.

Figure 2 displays four breakeven manifolds corresponding to dif-

ferent lattice depths.

At low failure probability, the breakeven lines follow equation 7.
At higher values of P, interactions among ﬁrms failures are important,
hence the non linear increase of compensating prices.

8

3 layers
5 layers
8 layers
10 layers

L=1240 refract=20 

growth regime 

e
c
i
r
p
 
e
l
a
s

 3.5

 3

 2.5

 2

 1.5

 1

 0

 0.02  0.04  0.06  0.08  0.1  0.12  0.14  0.16  0.18  0.2  0.22

failure proba

decay regime

Figure 2: Regime diagram in the sale price versus probability of failure plane.
The time lag between bakruptcy and re-birth is 20. Two regions of growth
and economical collapse at large times are separated by lines which position
are ﬁxed by simulation parameters. We here varied the production network
depth: The red ’+’ line was obtained for a 3 layers net, the green ’x’ line for
a 5 layers net, the blue ’*’ line for an 8 layers net, and pink square line for a
10 layers net.

9

Breakeven manifold are a simple test of the economic performances
of the network: when performances are poor, the compensating sales
price has to be larger. We checked for instance that increasing the
bankruptcy threshold and new ﬁrms initial capital increase global eco-
nomic performance. On the other hand, increasing the time lag be-
tween bankruptcy and the apparition of new ﬁrms increase breakeven
sale prices in the non-linear region.

Among other systematic tests, we checked parent models with

more realistic representations of production costs such as:

• Inﬂuence of capital inertia; production costs don’t instantly read-
just to orders: capital and labour have some inertia which we
modeled by writing that productions costs are a maximum func-
tion of actual costs and costs at the previous period.

• Inﬂuence of the cost of credit: production failures increase credit

rates.

Both variants of course yield higher breakeven sale prices; nevertheless
these variants display the same generic properties that we will discuss
in the next sections.

Most further results, dynamical and statistical, are based on runs
close to the breakeven price in order to avoid systematic drifts and
recalibrations.

3.3 Time evolution

The simplest way to monitor the evolution of the system is to display
the time variations of some of its global performance. Figure 3 displays
the time variations of total delivered production Y d, total wealth A,
total undelivered production due to failures and the fraction of active
ﬁrms for a 1200x10 lattice, with a probability of failure of 0.05 and a
compensation sale price of 1.185. Time lag between bankruptcy and
and new ﬁrm creation is either 1 (for the left diagram) or 5 (for the
right digram).

The features that we here report are generic to most simulation at
breakeven prices. During the initial steps of the simulation, here say
1000, the wealth distribution widens due to the inﬂuences of failures.
Bankruptcies cascades do not occur as observed by checking the num-
ber of active ﬁrms, until the lowest wealth values reach the bankruptcy
threshold. All quantities have smooth variations. Later, for t > 1000

10

 1e+09

 1e+08

 1e+07

 1e+06

 100000

 10000

 1000

 100

 10

 1

wealth
defauts
production
active firms
Amax

wealth
defauts
production
active firms
Amax

N=1200,  price 1.185 lag=1 l=10

N=1200,  price 1.185 lag=5 l=10

 0

 500  1000  1500  2000  2500  3000  3500  4000  4500  5000

 0

 500  1000  1500  2000  2500  3000  3500  4000  4500  5000

time

time

Figure 3: Time evolution of wealth (red ’+’), production (blue ’*’), destroyed
production (green ’x’), active ﬁrms (magenta empty squares) and production
by the largest ﬁrm (cyan hollow squares). The network has 10 layers, 200
ﬁrms per layer, P = 0.05 (the failure probability). The left diagram corre-
sponds to a small time lag (1) between bankruptcy and ﬁrm re-birth, right
diagram corresponds to a larger time lag (5). Vertical scale is logarithmic,
which permits to have the four quantities displayed on the same time plot
but reduces the apparent amplitude of ﬂuctuations occurring when time is
larger than 1000.

 1e+07

 1e+06

 100000

 10000

 1000

 100

 10

 1

11

one observes large production and wealth ﬂuctuations characteristic
of critical systems.

At larger time lag (5) between bankruptcy and ﬁrm re-birth, when
bankruptcies become frequent, they can cascade across the lattice and
propagate in both network directions as seen on the right diagram of
ﬁgure 3. A surprising feature of the dynamics is that avalanches of
bankruptcies are not correlated with production level. Even when only
one tenth of the ﬁrms are active, the total production is still high. In
fact, in this model, most of the total production is dominated by large
ﬁrms, and avalanches which concern mostly small ﬁrms are of little
consequence for the global economy.

Battiston etal study more thoroughly the time dynamics of a re-
lated model (large sale price ﬂuctuations possibly inducing bankrupt-
cies and lack of payment) in [11] .

3.4 Wealth and production patterns

Like most reaction-diﬀusion systems, the dynamics is not uniform
in space and display patterns. The wealth and production patterns
displayed after 5000 time steps on ﬁgure 4 and 5 were obtained for
P = 0.05 . They reﬂect wide distributions and spatial organisation.
In these diagrams, production ﬂows upward. The upper diagram dis-
plays wealth A and the lower one production Yd. The intermediate
bar is the colour scale, black=0, violet is the maximum wealth or pro-
duction. (We in fact displayed square roots of A and Yd in order to
increase the visual dynamics of the displays; otherwise large regions
of the patterns would have been red because of the scale free distri-
butions of A and Yd, see further).

The important result is that although production has random ﬂuc-
tuations and diﬀuses across the lattice, the inherent multiplicative (or
autocatalytic) process of production + re-investment coupled with lo-
cal diﬀusion results in a strong metastable local organisation: the dy-
namics clusters rich and productive ﬁrms in ”active regions” separated
by ”poor regions” (in red or black).

These patterns are evolving in time, but are metastable on a long
time scale, say of the order of several 100 time steps as seen on the
succession of production patterns at diﬀerent steps of the simulation
as one can observe on ﬁgure 6: successive patterns at time 1250, 1750
and 2250.

The relative importance of active (and richer) regions can be checked

12

Figure 4: Patterns of wealth(upper pattern) and production (lower pattern)
after 5000 iterations steps with the parameter set-up of ﬁgure 3 (left) (time
lag =1), for a 200x10 lattice. . For both patterns the output layer is the last
one above. The intermediate line is the colour code, with minimal amplitude
at the extreme left. We observe alternance of highly productive regions
(in pink, blue and green colour), with less active regions (in red). Local
production failures represented by black dots are randomly distributed across
the production pattern. Only one bankrupted ﬁrm is observed on the wealth
pattern.

Figure 5: Patterns of wealth(upper pattern) and production (lower pattern)
after 5000 iterations steps with the parameter set-up of ﬁgure 3 (right) (time
lag is 5). The same alternance of active and less active regions is observed,
but with a larger time lag (5), we also get large zones of bankrupted ﬁrms in
black.

Figure 6: Successive patterns of wealth after 250, 750, 1250, 1750 and 2250
time steps with the parameter set-up of ﬁgure 3 (right, time lag = 5) for a
1200x10 lattice.

13

by a Zipf plot[12]. We ﬁrst isolate active regions by ”clipping” the dow-
stream (along k axis) integrated wealth at a level of one thousandth
of the total production3.

clipping level
 

Clipping vertically integrated wealth

h
t
l
a
e
w

 0.06

 0.05

 0.04

 0.03

 0.02

 0.01

 0

 0

 200

 400

 600

 800

 1000

 1200

Figure 7: Separating richer regions. Downstream integrated wealth levels
(green ’+’) are plotted as a function of their transverse position. The clipping
level indicated by the red line isolates richer regions (those wealth peaks
above the red line).

We then transversally (along i axis) integrate the wealth of active

regions and order these regional wealths to get the Zipf plots.

All 3 Zipf plots display some resemblance with standard Zipf[12]
plots of individual wealth, ﬁrm size and city size. For the model
discussed here, the size decrease following approximately a power law.
The apparent4 exponent is one when the time lag is 1.
It is much
higher when the time lag is 5.

3Clipping here means that when the production level is lower than the threshold it is

set to zero

sible for the kinks in the Zipf plot

4the approximate algorithm that we use to isolate high productivity regions is respon-

14

lag5
lag1
lag1adapt

Zipf plot of rich regions 

 1

 0.1

 0.01

h
t
l
a
e
w
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r

 0.001

 1

 10

 100

Figure 8: Zipf plot of wealth of the most active regions for the standard
and adaptive ﬁrms models (cf. section 4.2). The vertical axis display the
production relative to the total production. The red ’+’ correspond to the
standard model with time lag = 5, green ’x’ to time lag = 1, and blue ’*’ to
the adaptive ﬁrms model with time lag = 1.

15

Zipf plots of output5 active regions (not shown here) display the

same characteristics.

When the time lag is 5, the most productive region accounts for
for
more than 50 perc. of total production. The ﬁgure is 18 perc.
the second peak. The distribution typically is ”winner takes all”. The
equivalent ﬁgures when the time lag is 1 are 10 and 8.5 perc..

In conclusion, the patterns clearly display some intermediate scale
organisation in active and less active zones: strongly correlated active
regions are responsible for most part of the production. The relative
importance of these regions obeys a Zipf distribution.

3.5 Wealth and production histograms

The multiplicative random dynamics of capital and the direct obser-
vation of wealth and production would lead us to predict a scale free
distribution6 of wealth and production.

The cumulative distribution functions (cdf) of wealth and produc-
tion observed on ﬁgure 8 are indeed wide range and do not display
any characteristic scale: The data wealth and production were taken
for the same conditions as the previous ﬁgures at the end of the simu-
lation, i.e. after 5000 time steps. The medium range of the cdf when
time lag is 1 (ﬁgure 8a) extends on one and a half decade with an
apparent slope of 1 ± 0.05 in log-log scale.

This observed dependence of the wealth cdf, log normal at lower
A values followed by power law at intermediate A values, is consistent
with expressions derived for pdf in the literature on coupled diﬀerential
equations with multiplicative noise. Bouchaud and M´ezard[14] e.g.
obtained:

P (w) = Z

exp − 1−µ
w
w1+µ

(8)

(where w stands for the wealth relative to average wealth ¯A), from
the diﬀerential system:

dAi
dt

= ηi(t) · Ai + J · ( ¯A − Ai).
5rather than vertically integrating production, we applyed the clipping, horizontal in-

(9)

tegration and ordering algorithm to ﬁrms at the output layer (k = 0)

6What we mean here by scale free is that no characteristic scale is readily apparent from
the distribution as opposed for instance to gaussian distributions. Power law distributions
are scale free. A ﬁrst discussion of power law distributions generated by multiplicative
processes appeared in [13].

16

where ηi(t) is a random multiplicative noise, with variance σ2; µ =
1 + J

σ2 .
At higher wealth, the straight line giggles and drops much faster:
this is because of the underlying region structure. The last 80 perc.
of the wealth is concentrated in two rich regions and its distribution
is dominated by local diﬀusion phenomena in these regions.

The departure form the standard (equ.8) distribution is even more
noticeable when avalanches are present. The large wealth shoulder
is bigger (95 perc. of production) and the ﬁrst point at zero wealth
stands well above the rest of the distribution: it corresponds to those
50 perc. of the ﬁrms which are momentarily bankrupted. The fraction
of bankrupted ﬁrms ﬂuctuates in time and so does the slope of the
linear segment7.

A

A

 100000

 10000

 1000

 100

 10

 1

 1

 100000

 10000

 1000

 100

 10

 1

 1

CDF of Wealth lag 1

CDF of Wealth lag 5

 10

 100

 1000

 10000

 10

 100

 1000

 10000

Figure 9: Cumulative distribution of wealth (red ’+’) after 5000 iteration
steps. Parameter choices are the same as the previous ﬁgures.

In conclusion, the observed statistics largely reﬂect the underlying
region structure: at intermediate levels of wealth, the diﬀerent wealth
peaks overlap (in wealth, not in space!): we then observed a smooth
cdf obeying equation 8. At the large wealth extreme the ﬁne structure
of peaks is revealed.

7both ﬂuctuations are correlated since the slope of the linear segment depends upon

the number of ﬁrms in the distribution

17

4 Conclusions

The simple model of production networks that we proposed presents
some remarkable properties:

• Scale free distributions of wealth and production.
• Large spatial distribution of wealth and production.
• A few active regions are responsible for most production.
• Avalanches of bankruptcies occur for larger values of the time
lag between bankruptcy and ﬁrm re-birth. But even when most
ﬁrms are bankrupted, the global economy is little perturbed.

Are these properties generic to a large class of models? we will ﬁrst
brieﬂy report on equations which display similar behaviour and then
examine the results which we obtained with variants of the model.

4.1 Formal approaches of similar dynamics

A number of models which display equivalent phenomena have been
proposed and formally solved. We kept our own notation to display
similarities:

• Growth by deposition on surfaces[15], Edwards/Wilkinson:

dA
dt

= D · ∆A + η(x, t)

(10)

A stands for the distance to the interface. D is the surface diﬀu-
sion constant of the deposited material and ηi(t) is an addititive
noise. Other models were proposed by Karkar/Parisi/Zhang,
Derrida/Spohn[15], etc.

• Generalised Volterra-Lotka from econophysics: (Bouchaud[14],

Cont, Mezard, Sornette, Solomon[16] etc.)

dAi
dt

= Ai · ηi(t) + X
j

JijAj − X
j

JjiAi

(11)

A stands for individual wealth of agents and ηi(t) is a multi-
plicative noise. Agents are involved in binary transactions of
”intensity” Jij. Mean ﬁeld formal solutions displays scale free
distribution of wealth. Simulations display patterns on lattice
structures (Souma etal[17]).

18

• Solomon etal[18]. Reaction-Diﬀusion AB models.

dA
dt

= k · A · η(x, t) + D · ∆A

(12)

A is the chemical concentration of a product involved in an auto-
catalytic chemical reaction, D is its diﬀusion constant. Simula-
tions and formal derivations yield spatio-temporal patterns sim-
ilar to ours.

4.2 Variants of the original model

We started checking three variants, with for instance more realistic
production costs taking into account:

• Inﬂuence of capital

inertia: production costs don’t instantly
readjust to orders; capital and labour have some inertia which
we modeled by writing that productions costs are a maximum
function of actual costs and costs at the previous period.

• Inﬂuence of the cost of credit: production failures increase credit

rates.

The preliminary simulations conﬁrm the genericity of our results.

The third variant is a model with ”adaptive ﬁrms”. The lattice
connection structure supposes a passive reactive behaviour of ﬁrms.
But if a ﬁrm is consistently delivering less than the orders it receives,
its customers should order less from it and look for alternative sup-
pliers. Such adaptive behaviour leading to an evolutive connection
structure would be more realistic.

We then also checked an adaptive version of the model by writing
that orders of ﬁrm i are proportional to the production capacity A of
the upstream ﬁrms connected to ﬁrm i. Simulations gave qualitative
results similar to those obtained with ﬁxed structures.

We observe that adaptation strongly re-enforce the local structure
of the economy. The general picture is the same scale free distribution
of production and wealth with metastable patterns. Due to the strong
local character of the economy:

• Avalanches of production are observed (see ﬁgure 9), even when

time lag is short (time lag of 1).

• The spatial periodicity of the active zones is increased (see ﬁgure
9 with larger density of smaller zones). But again the activity
distribution among zones is like ”winner takes all” (ﬁgure 7).

19

Figure 10: Wealth and production patterns for a network of ”adaptive” ﬁrms.
The conventions and parameters are the same as for ﬁgures 3, 4 and 5, for a
200x10 lattice. Time lag is 1, the two upper patterns correspond to t = 1500,
the lower ones were taken when t = 1998.

4.3 Checking stylised facts

Even though the present model is quite primitive8 it is still tempting
to draw some conclusions that could apply to real economies. The
most striking result to our mind is the strong and relatively stable
spatial disparities that it yields. Let us compare this prediction to
large and persistent
the economic situation of developing countries:
disparities in wealth and production level as compared to developed
countries. We can even go further and raise questions about the inﬂu-
ence of the depth of the production network or the kind of investment
needed:

• One generally agrees that disparities between developing and de-
veloped countries increased since industrial revolution. This is
also a period during which production became more specialised,
8We e.g. discuss a ”Mickey Mouse” economy with ﬁxed prices independent from supply
and demand. Introducing price dynamics is not a major challenge: we would simply face
an ”embarras de richesse” having to choose among either local or global prices. In fact both
kind of adjustment have already been tested: global adjustment in the case of production
cost connected to production failure through credit costs, or local adjustment in the case of
adaptive behaviour. We have already shown that they don’t change the generic properties
of the dynamics.

20

which translates in our model as increasing the network depth:
for instance a shoemaker would in the past make and sell a pair of
shoes from leather obtained from a cattle breeder. Nowadays the
shoe production and delivery process involve many more stages.
Our simulations have shown that increasing depth increases the
fragility of economies to failures and bankruptcies. The new in-
dustrial organisation may have detrimental eﬀects on developing
economies.

• Obviously investment policies in developing countries yield some
coordination across the whole production chain. Bad economic
results might be due to very local conditions but can also reﬂect
the lack of suppliers/producers connections.

The above remarks are not counter-intuitive and these conclusions
could have been reached by verbal analysis. What is brought by the
model is the dramatic and persistent consequences of such apparently
trivial details.

Acknowledgments: We thank Bernard Derrida and Sorin Solomon
for illuminating discussions and the participants to CHIEF Ancona
Thematic Institute, especially Mauro Gallegati. CHIEF was sup-
ported by EXYSTENCE network of excellence, EC grant FET IST-
2001-32802. This research was also supported by COSIN FET IST-
2001-33555, E2C2 NEST 012975 and CO3 NEST 012410 EC grants.

References

[1] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, Collective dynamics of small-

world networks, Nature 393, 440 442 (1998).

[2] R. Albert and A.L. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74,(2002), 47.

[3] Davis, G.F. and Greve, H.R., Corporate elite networks and gover-
nance changes in the 1980s, Am. J. of Sociology, 103, 1-37 (1996).

[4] Battiston, S., Bonabeau, E., Weisbuch G., Decision making dy-

namics in corporate boards, Physica A, 322, 567 (2003).

[5] Battiston, S., Weisbuch G., Bonabeau, E., Decision spread in the
corporate board network, 2003, to appear on Adv.Compl.Syst.

[6] ”Battiston, S., Caldarelli G., Garlaschelli D., The hidden topol-

ogy of shareholding networks, 2003, submitted.

21

[7] “Towards a New Paradigm in Monetary Economics” (Raﬀaele
Mattioli Lectures) by Joseph Stiglitz, Bruce Greenwald, Cam-
bridge ch 7

[8] ”A new approach to business ﬂuctuations: heterogeneus interact-
ing agents, scaling laws and ﬁnancial fragility” D. Delli Gatti, C.
Di Guilmi, E. Gaﬀeo, G. Giulioni, M. Gallegati and A. Palestrini,
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2004.

[9] Powell, W. W.; Koput, K. W.; Smith-Doerr, L. ”Interorganiza-
tional Collaboration and the Locus of Innovation: Networks of
Learning in Biotechnology. ” Administrative Science Quarterly,
1996, Vol. 41 Issue 1, p116,

[10] Bak P., Chen K., Scheinkman J. and M. Woodford (1993), ”Ag-
gregate Fluctuations from Independent Sectoral Shocks: Self-
Organized Criticality in a Model of Production and Inventory
Dynamics”, Ricerche Economiche, 47:3-30.

[11] Battiston S., Delli Gatti D., Gallegati M., Greenwald B., Stiglitz
J.E.,(2005) ”Credit Chains and Bankruptcies Avalanches in Sup-
ply Networks”, submitted.

[12] Zipf, G.K., 1949. ”Human behavior and the principle of least

eﬀort” -Hafner.
Benoit B. Mandelbrot 1951. ”Adaptation d’un message sur la
ligne de transmission. I Quanta d’information.”, Comptes rendus
(Paris): 232, 1638-1740.

[13] Kesten, H. (1973) ”Random diﬀerence equations and renewal the-
ory for products of random matrices”. Acta Math. 131, pp. 207-
248.

[14] JP Bouchaud, M Mezard ”Wealth condensation in a simple model
of economy” Arxiv preprint cond-mat/0002374, 2000 - arxiv.org

[15] T. Halpin-Healey and Y.-C. Zhang, Phys. Rep. 254, 215 (1995).
M. Kardar, G. Parisi, and Y.-C. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56
(1986), 889.
B Derrida, H Spohn, ”Polymers on disordered trees, spin glasses,
and traveling waves” J. Stat. Phys, 51, P. 817, (1988).

[16] Solomon,

S. Generalized Lotka-Volterra

(GLV) Models
http://xxx.lanl.gov/pdf/cond-mat/9901250
in Applications
of simulation to social sciences, Ballot and Weisbuch ed.,
Hermes, Paris (2000).

22

D Sornette, R Cont, ”Convergent multiplicative processes re-
pelled from zero: power laws and truncated power laws” Arxiv
preprint cond-mat/9609074, 1996 - arxiv.org .

[17] W Souma, Y Fujiwara, H Aoyama ”Small-World Eﬀects in
Wealth Distribution” Arxiv preprint cond-mat/0108482, 2001 -
arxiv.org

[18] Shnerb N. M., Louzoun Y.,Bettelheim E., Solomon S. (1999)
”The importance of being discrete - life always wins on the sur-
face” http://xxx.lanl.gov/pdf/adap-org/9912005

23

