5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
6
1
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Prospects for Money Transfer Models

Yougui Wang∗, Ning Ding, and Ning Xi

Department of Systems Science, School of Management, Beijing Normal
University, Beijing, 100875, People’s Republic of China ygwang@bnu.edu.cn

Summary. Recently, in order to explore the mechanism behind wealth or income
distribution, several models have been proposed by applying principles of statistical
mechanics. These models share some characteristics, such as consisting of a group
of individual agents, a pile of money and a speciﬁc trading rule. Whatever the
trading rule is, the most noteworthy fact is that money is always transferred from
one agent to another in the transferring process. So we call them money transfer
models. Besides explaining income and wealth distributions, money transfer models
can also be applied to other disciplines. In this paper we summarize these areas as
statistical distribution, economic mobility, transfer rate and money creation. First,
money distribution (or income distribution) can be exhibited by recording the money
stock (ﬂow). Second, the economic mobility can be shown by tracing the change in
wealth or income over time for each agent. Third, the transfer rate of money and its
determinants can be analyzed by tracing the transferring process of each one unit
of money. Finally, money creation process can also be investigated by permitting
agents go into debts. Some future extensions to these models are anticipated to be
structural improvement and generalized mathematical analysis.

Key words: Transfer model, Distribution, Mobility, Transfer rate, Money creation

1 Introduction

Money does matter to an economy. To understand the role that money plays
in the performance of economic system, many theoretical studies have been
performed in traditional economics. Recently, a small branch of “econophysi-
cists” shifted their attentions to this issue. Several models have been developed
by applying principles of statistical mechanics to the questions of income and
wealth distribution [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. These models share some characteristics,
such as consisting of a group of individual agents, a pile of money and a
speciﬁc trading rule. The most noteworthy fact is that money is always trans-
ferred from one agent to another in the transferring process. So this kind of
models could be referred as money transfer models. The prime theme of con-
structing such models is to explore the mechanism behind wealth or income

2

Yougui Wang, Ning Ding, and Ning Xi

distribution. In fact, they can be applied more widely in some other economic
issues. In this paper, we prospect for some applications of these transfer mod-
els and anticipate that considerable achievements can be made on the basis
of them. We also argue that further improvements should be accomplished to
make these models much more realistic.

The purpose of this paper is to identify what issues could be analyzed on
the basis of money transfer models. This kind of models is very easy to grasp,
for only two elements are involved: money and agents. Money is possessed or
held by agents, and may be transferred among them via trading. Based on
these models, recent eﬀorts were mainly devoted to the formation of monetary
wealth distribution, the circulation of money [6, 7] and creation of money [8].
We would like to summarize and expand the scope of their applications in the
following four routes.

2 Applications

2.1 Distribution

Money transfer models are originally used to demonstrate steady distributions
of money. This can be achieved by recording the quantity of money stock
possessed by each agent in the simulations. In the basic model proposed by A.
Dr˘agulescu and V.M. Yakovenko, the money distribution follows a Boltzmann-
Gibbs law [1]. B.K. Chakrabarti et al. introduced the saving behavior into the
model [2, 3], and found the money distribution obeys a Gamma law when all
the agents are set with the same saving factor, but a power law as the saving
factor is set randomly. N. Ding et al. introduced the preferential dispensing
behavior into the trading process and also obtained a stationary power-law
distribution [4]. From these results we can see that the shape of distribution
is determined by the trading rule.

Besides these theoretical studies, econophysicists also performed the em-
pirical studies on the distribution in the economy, following the earlier Pareto’s
work. The analysis showed that in many countries the income distribution typ-
ically presents with a power-law tail, and majority of the income distribution
can be described by an exponential distribution [9, 10, 11]. It is worthy noting
that account of these empirical studies is taken of income distribution. Income
corresponds to money ﬂow which is diﬀerent from money amount. However, all
the distributions presented in previous simulations do not refer to the money
ﬂow. Actually, in the money transferring process, we can also record the level
of money ﬂow received by each agent during a given period. The statistics
of them yields the ﬂow type distribution. Thus, embodying the money ﬂow
generation mechanism, the transfer models can also provide a convenient tool
for investigating the mechanism behind the income distribution in reality.

Prospects for Money Transfer Models

3

2.2 Mobility

During the simulations of money transfer models, the amount of money held
by agents varies over time. This phenomenon is called mobility in economics.
In the view of economists, mobility is an indispensable supplement to distribu-
tion because the former can cure the anonymity assumption of the latter [12].
And the analysis of mobility is greatly helpful to comprehend the dynamic
mechanism behind the distribution. In addition, like distribution, economic
mobility should be an essential criterion when evaluating a relevant theoretical
model.

In the transferring process, the economy will reach its steady state and
the distribution will keep unchanged. After that, the amount of money still
ﬂuctuates over time for each agent, meanwhile the rank of each agent shifts
from one position to another. To show the mobility phenomenon with clarity,
we can record agents’ rank instead of the amount of money. The time series
of rank for any agent’s can be obtained by sorting all of agents according to
their money in the end of each round. We performed some simulations and
the primary results show all of agents are equal in the economies of models
in Ref. [1] and [2]. They have the same probability to be the rich or the poor.
It can be found that the frequency of the rank ﬂuctuation decreases as the
saving rate increases. By contrast, the economy in Ref. [3] is stratiﬁed where
agents are not equal any longer for their saving rates are set diversely. Based
on these results, it can be concluded that diﬀerent models exhibit diﬀerent
mobility characters.

2.3 Transfer Rate

In reality, money does not remain motionless. Instead, it is transferred from
hand to hand consecutively. This phenomenon is called the circulation of
money in economics. The term usually used to describe the circulation is the
velocity of money, which can be computed by the ratio of total transaction
volume to the money stock. In fact, it refers to the transfer rate of money that
measures how fast the money moves between agents. This rate can be observed
by recording the time intervals for each unit of money to be held. This kind
of time interval is called ”holding time” or ”latency time” of money. It can be
found that there is not only a distribution of money among agents, but also
a steady distribution of holding time as the economy reaches its equilibrium
state. The holding time distribution also shifts its shape depending on the
trading rule. For instance, in the simulation of the model with uniform saving
factor the stationary distribution of holding time obeys exponential law, while
in the model with diverse saving factor the distribution changes to a power
type [7].

The transfer rate of money has an inverse relation with the average holding
time of money. When the circulation process is in the nature of Poisson one,

4

Yougui Wang, Ning Ding, and Ning Xi

the probability distribution of the latency time of money takes the following
form [6]

e

− t

T ,

(1)

P (t) =

1
T
where 1/T corresponds to the intensity of Poisson process, and T signiﬁes
the average holding time of money. In this case, the velocity of money can be
written as

1
T
Since the average holding time is governed by the money holders (agents
in the models), the above equation suggests that the velocity is determined
by the behavior patterns of economic agents. Employing the well-known life-
cycle model in economics, Wang et al. demonstrated that the velocity of money
can be obtained from the individual’s optimal choice [13]. Thus the study on
the transferring process provides a new insight into the velocity of money
circulation.

V =

(2)

.

2.4 Money Creation

With the help of money transfer models, we can still discuss the impact of
money creation on the statistical mechanics of money circulation. In reality,
most part of the monetary aggregate that circulates in the modern economy is
created by debts through banking system. Thus money creation has important
inﬂuence on the characteristics of monetary economic system.

Recently, some investigations have been carried out in this line mainly
from two perspectives. One is from physics perspective. Adrian Dr˘agulescu
and Victor Yakovenko demonstrated the equilibrium probability distribution
of money follows the Boltzmann-Gibbs law, allowing agents to go into debt
and putting a limit on the maximal debt of an agent [1]. Robert Fischer and
Dieter Braun analyzed the process of creation and annihilation of money using
a mechanical method and examined how money creation aﬀects statistical
mechanics of money [8]. The other is from economics perspective. It is known
that the essence of money creation can be represented by the required reserve
ratio from the multiplier model of money in economics. Thus we can examine
the dependence of monetary wealth distribution and the velocity of money on
the required reserve ratio based on a transfer model of money and computer
simulations. We extended a money transfer model by introducing a banking
system, where money creation is achieved by bank loans and the monetary
aggregate is determined by the monetary base and the required reserve ratio.
The simulation results show that monetary wealth follows asymmetric Laplace
distribution, and the velocity decreases as the required reserve ratio increases.
For more details you can see Ref. [14].

Prospects for Money Transfer Models

5

3 Discussion and Conclusion

The money transfer models were constructed originally for explaining the real
income or wealth distribution. They also can be applied to other economic
issues, such as economic mobility, transfer rate and money creation. These
applications will bring this kind of models to be rival to the prevailing models
in monetary economics. Of course, the current version of these models is far
from perfectness. In order to fulﬁll the goal, some further improvements and
modiﬁcations are required. One is to make the agents in the model closer to
rational economic ones. Another one is to analyze the model in a generalized
mathematical way, which would help us to understand the model deeply and
completely and show the right way to structural modiﬁcation.

References

1. Dr˘agulescu A, Yakovenko VM (2000) Statistical mechanics of money. The Eu-

ropean Physical Journal B 17:723–729

2. Chakraborti A, Chakrabarti BK (2000) Statistical mechanics of money: how
saving propensity aﬀects its distribution. The European Physical Journal B
17:167–170

3. Chatterjee A, Chakrabarti BK, Manna SS (2004) Pareto law in a kinetic model

of market with random saving propensity. Physica A 335:155–163

4. Ding N, Wang Y, Xu J, Xi N (2004) Power-law distributions in circulating
money: eﬀect of preferential behavior. International Journal of Modern Physics
B 18:2725–2729

5. Hayes B (2002) Follow the money. American Scientist 90:400–405
6. Wang Y, Ding N, Zhang L (2003) The circulation of money and holding time

distribution. Physica A 324:665–677

7. Ding N, Xi N, Wang Y (2003) Eﬀects of saving and spending patterns on

holding time distribution. The European Physical Journal B 36:149–153

8. Fischer R, Braun D (2003) Transfer potentials shape and equilibrate monetary

systems. Physica A 321:605–618

9. Dr˘agulescu A, Yakovenko VM (2001) Evidence for the exponential distribution

of income in the USA. The European Physical Journal B 20:585–589

10. Silva AC, Yakovenko VM (2005) Temporal evolution of the thermal and su-
perthermal income classes in the USA during 1983–2001. Europhysics Letters
69:304–310

11. Souma W (2001) Universal structure of the personal income distribution. Frac-

12. Schiller BR (1977) Relative earnings mobility in the United States. The Amer-

ican Economic Review 67:926-941

13. Wang Y, Qiu H (2005) The velocity of money in a life-cycle model. Physica A

tals 9:463–470

in press

14. Xi N, Ding N, Wang Y (2005) Dependence of distribution and velocity of money
on required reserve ratio. In: Takayasu H (eds) this contributed works. Springer,
Tokyo

