5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
1
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
5
1
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Velocity of Money in a Life-Cycle Model

Yougui Wang ∗, Hanqing Qiu

Department of Systems Science, School of Management, Beijing Normal
University, Beijing, 100875, People’s Republic of China

Abstract

The determinants of the velocity of money have been examined based on life-cycle
hypothesis. The velocity of money can be expressed by reciprocal of the average
value of holding time which is deﬁned as interval between participating exchanges
for one unit of money. This expression indicates that the velocity is governed by be-
havior patterns of economic agents and open a way to constructing micro-foundation
of it. It is found that time pattern of income and expense for a representative in-
dividual can be obtained from a simple version of life-cycle model, and average
holding time of money resulted from the individual’s optimal choice depends on the
expected length of relevant planning periods.

Key words: velocity of money, holding time, life-cycle hypothesis,
micro-foundation
PACS: 89.65.Gh, 87.23.Ge, 05.90.+m, 02.50.-r

1 Introduction

The topic of money dynamics recently attracted considerable research interest
within statistical physics [1,2,3,4,5,6]. Motivated by the initial work of Vilfredo
Pareto in 1897 on distribution of income among people in some countries[7]
and some recent empirical observations of econophysicists [8,9,10,11], several
money transfer models have been developed for the equilibrium money dis-
tribution based on the analogy between market economics and kinetic theory
of gases [1,2,3,4,10]. Adrian Dr¨agulescu and Victor Yakovenko proposed a
model of agents exchanging randomly in a closed economy and demonstrated
that the equilibrium probability distribution of money follows the exponen-
tial Boltzmann-Gibbs law due to time-reversal symmetry and conservation
∗ Corresponding author. Email: ygwang@bnu.edu.cn(Y. Wang)

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

2 February 2008

of money [1]. The research group of Bikas K. Chakrabarti investigated the
statistical mechanics of money similarly, considering eﬀects of the saving be-
havior of the agents [2,3]. Based on these studies of the subject, Wang et.al.
introduced a new aspect of the problem: the probability distribution of money
holding times [12,13]. These works expand the scope of such investigations
from focusing on the static distribution of money to discussing the circulation
of money.

The velocity of money circulation is a central matter in monetary theory which
has attracted much attention for hundreds of years[14]. Although exploration
of the velocity can be traced backward to the earlier works in 1660s[15], most
of current investigations of velocity is commonly attributed to Irving Fisher
who presented an inﬂuential exchange equation MV = P Y , where M is the
amount of money in circulation, V is the velocity of circulation of money, P
is the average price level and Y is the level of real income [16]. From this
equation, the velocity of money can be computed as the ratio of transaction
volume or aggregate income to money stock. Basing on this equation, many
theoretical and empirical research works on the velocity have been carried
out to examine its determinants[17,18,19,20]. However, the Fisher Equation
just proposed a deﬁnition and a measurement of velocity in any way, it could
not uncover the intrinsic properties of the velocity. It resembles Ohm’s law,
though with the help of the equation V = RI, resistance R can be calculated
by dividing supplied voltage V by consequent current I, it is determined by its
internal characteristics, rather than those two variables. Just as Rothbard[21]
reminds us, “it is absurd to dignify any quantity with a place in an equation
unless it can be deﬁned independently of the other terms in the equation.”
Thus, by analogy with resistance, the velocity must have a “life of its own”
characterized by the money holders.

The purpose of this paper is to analyze the circulation velocity of money on
the base of micro analysis. In our recent work, the velocity was expressed as
a statistical function of holding time of money[12]. This relation provides a
novel channel through which the velocity can be determined by individual goal-
directed behavior. With the help of the life-cycle hypothesis, an alternative
approach without taking any aggregate macroeconomic variables into account
is presented for examining the monetary velocity.

2 Holding Time versus Velocity of Money

To use money, people must hold money. However, what they are holding now
must be spent on something on certain moment later, so a given amount of
money can be used again and again to ﬁnance people’s purchases of goods and
services. In other words, the money one person spends for goods and services

2

at any given moment can be used later by the recipient of that money to
purchase yet other goods and services. As a result, there must be an interval
of time between the receipt of income and its disbursement over which money
is held.

This interval was ever called the “average period of idleness” or “interval of
rest” of money by Wicksell[22]. It is obvious that the interval is not a character
of money itself, but a character of its holder’s behavior in utilizing the money.
As Mises[23] has made clear, “money can be in the process of transportation,
it can travel in trains, ships, or planes from one place to another. But it is in
this case, too, always subject to somebody’s control, is somebody’s property.”
So we called it holding time of money, placing emphasis on the preﬁx holding.

The length of holding time is determined by the holder’s motives to use money
which are usually sorted into three types within the theory of money de-
mand: the transactions-motive, the precautionary-motive and the speculative-
motive[24]. At any given moment, money in an economy may have diﬀerent
holding times, due to either diﬀerent holders or various motives of holding
money.

It is reasonable to assume that money spreads over the domain of holding
times (0, ∞). Under continuous assumption, there must be a portion of money
P (τ ) dτ whose holding time is between τ and τ + dτ. P (τ ) is deﬁned as the
probability density of money which has the following property

∞

Z
0

P (τ ) dτ = 1.

We know that the distribution of money over the holding time in an economy
evolves with time. That is to say, the holding time of the same unit of money
may be altered at diﬀerent moment due to the alteration of holder. Under
certain conditions we can get an equilibrium state where the distribution of
money over holding time is stationary. In this state, any single money’s holding
time may strongly ﬂuctuate over time, but the overall probability distribution
of money does not change.

Given a stationary distribution of money over the holding time, we then have
two variables which are related to each other. The ﬁrst one is average holding
time of money ¯τ which is deﬁned as the expectation of the holding time of
money, i.e.,

∞

¯τ =

Z
0

P (τ ) τ dτ.

The second one is the circulation velocity of money which can be expressed

(1)

(2)

3

by the mathematical expectation of 1/τ as follows[13]

∞

V =

Z
0

P (τ )

dτ.

1
τ

It follows immediately that the velocity is inversely related to the average
holding time.

Since money is identical for participating trade in an economy, it is always
spent randomly in exchange process. Thus the exchange process for money
is of Poisson type, and the probability density function of money takes the
following form[12]

where λ corresponds to the intensity of the Poisson process. With a few ma-
nipulations we get

P (τ ) = λe−λτ ,

V =

1
¯τ

.

(3)

(4)

(5)

This simple and explicit expression gives an intuitive view of the inverse re-
lation between the velocity and the average holding time: the longer average
holding time of money, the smaller the velocity of money, and vice versa.

At ﬁrst glance, this relationship does not bring forth anything new since hold-
ing time and velocity of money are just diﬀerent sides of the same coin. How-
ever, the relationship implies that all the impacts of factors associated with
the velocity must takes their eﬀects through inﬂuencing people’s choices of
holding time. Thus, the velocity of money could be investigated by examining
how economic agents make decisions on the holding time of money. As we will
illustrate in the later sections, this viewpoint of monetary circulation can open
a new venue to identifying the determinants of the velocity.

An economic system consists of various agents who may utilize money, such as
consumers, ﬁrms, and investors etc. Each kind of agents has its own character
when they make economic decisions involved with money. To calculate the
average holding time of money in an economy, we should ﬁrst consider sepa-
rately various behavior patterns of these agents according to their respective
motives of holding money, and then put them together. The main purpose of
this paper is to show how the holding time can link the economic decisions and
the velocity of money. Thus We choose only one kind of agents, consumers,
as a representative to examine how their spending decisions could be reﬂected
by the velocity. The available model for analyzing such kind of agents is the
life-cycle hypothesis which is well-known in economics.

4

3 The Life-Cycle Model

The popular life-cycle hypothesis was produced by Franco Modigliani, Richard
Brumberg and Albert Ando which has been so far used as a theoretical basis
for many empirical investigations[25]. The primary theme of this hypothesis is
to examine why people save and why the amount they do. The model considers
a representative individual who expects to live T years more, whose lifetime
utility is

T

U =

Z
0

u(C(t)) dt,

u′(·) > 0, u′′(·) < 0;

where u(·) is the instantaneous utility function with the following properties

and C(t) is consumption in time t. The individual has initial wealth of W0 and
expects to earn labor income Y (t) in the working periods of his or her life.
The individual can save or borrow at an exogenous interest rate, subject only
to the constraint that any outstanding debt must be repaid at the end of his
or her life. For simplicity, the interest rate is set to zero. Thus the individual’s
budget constraint is

T

Z
0

C(t) dt ≤ W0 +

Y (t) dt.

T

Z

0

The individual is maximizing the lifetime utility Eq. (6) subject to the budget
condition Eq. (7). We can solve this constrained optimization problem by using
the Lagrangian method. The corresponding Lagrangian is given by

T

T

L = Z

0

u(C(t)) dt + θ[W0 + Z

0

Y (t) dt −

C(t) dt],

T

Z
0

where θ is the Lagrange multiplier. The ﬁrst-order condition for C(t) is

u′(C(t)) = θ.

Since (8) holds in every moment, the marginal utility of consumption is con-
stant. And since the level of consumption uniquely determines its marginal
utility, this means that consumption must be constant. Thus we have C(t) = C
for all t. Substituting this fact into the budget constraint yields

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

C =

[W0 + Z

0

Y (t) dt].

1
T

T

5

The results indicate that people want to smooth their consumption even
though their income may ﬂuctuate in their life time.

It is worth to note that the life-cycle hypothesis is a purely microeconomic
theory. Along with “permanent income” hypothesis which was formulated by
Milton Friedman[26], it builds microeconomic footings for the consumption
function in which behavior is goal-directed. Thus this hypothesis can be re-
gard as the micro-foundation of total consumption which is a part of aggre-
gate demand. In this model, we can see that no aggregate variable appears,
so according to the exchange equation proposed by Fisher it seems that the
life-cycle hypothesis could not provide anything useful for analyzing the ve-
locity of money. However, as we will illustrate below, with the help of the
concept of holding time of money, the micro-foundation of velocity can also
be constructed upon this hypothesis.

4 Results and Discussion

For simplicity of exposition, we adopt a very simple version of life-cycle model
where an individual will work for only T0 periods in his life, within which
his labor income Y (t) = Y , and has no income in the left retiring periods.
Assuming the individual begins with assets of W0 = 0 and dies with assets
of WT = 0, he will then have a amount of W = Y T0 that can be spent in
his entire life. From Equation (9), we can see that he will be able to spend
C = Y T0/T each time unit.

In this case, money is the sole form of the individual’s assets, and there is
a complete receipt-payment process of money in the individual’s entire life,
in which the income Y (t) is the inﬂow of money and consumption expending
C(t) is the outﬂow. Thus the average holding time of money corresponds to
the delay time in this process, which can be computed by the following form

In the model above the average holding time in the period of lifetime can thus
be obtained as follows

¯τ = R

T
0 [C(t) − Y (t)]t dt
T
0 Y (t) dt
R

.

¯τ =

(1 −

)T.

1
2

T0
T

6

(10)

(11)

According to Equation (5) we then get

V =

2
T − T0

.

(12)

(13)

(14)

From this result we can see that the velocity of money depends reversely on
the diﬀerence between the expected length of life and that of working periods.
The larger the diﬀerence is, the smaller the velocity, and vice versa.

Now consider a special case directly follows from Equations (11) and (12).
When T0 = T which means that there is no retirement for the individual, so
that we have ¯τ = 0 and V → ∞. This implies that as soon as people receive
the money they would pay them out immediately. This result is obviously un-
reasonable, since it originates from a strict assumption that income is injected
into people’s account consecutively as a ﬂow. However, people get their salary
or income discretely in reality. So we can assume that total wealth the indi-
vidual gets in his life is as the same as above, i.e., W = Y T0, but the income
is paid at equal time intervals to the individual. Assuming that there is n
times income paying in the working periods, then at each time the amount he
gets is Y T0/n, and the average interval for paying is Ts = T0/n. After these
assumptions being considered, the labor income takes the following form

Y (t) =

δ(t − kTs),

Y T0
n

¯τ =

(1 −

)T +

Ts.

1
2

T0
T

1
2

where δ(·) is delta function and k = 0, 1, · · · , n − 1.

In this case, according to Equation (9) the individual’s consumption over the
lifetime is still smooth. Substituting these facts into Equation (10), we obtain

From this result we can see even when T0 = T the average holding time
becomes ¯τ = 1

2Ts rather than ¯τ = 0, in accordance with the reality.

The results we have obtained in this model indicate that the velocity depends
on neither amplitude of income nor other characteristics of the individual, but
only the time pattern of income and expending. Thus we can conclude that
the velocity is an independent entity and has a “life of its own.” Although the
velocity is always value of aggregate transactions divided into money stock, it
is the velocity which determines the aggregate transactions, rather than the
reverse.

Even though this conclusion is restricted by the speciﬁc assumptions of the
life-cycle model, it still holds by altering and/or adding some other variables

7

when the assumption is relaxed into a more general case. What this simple
version of life-cycle model conveys us is how people distribute their income to
their spending plan. This plan can last for a certain period such as whole life in
this model, it can also last for a shorter or a longer one. Meanwhile, the income
can be allocated to various spending plans which may have diﬀerent planning
periods. Whether the time period of plan is long or short, so long as the time
pattern of income is given, the time pattern of consumption expenditure can be
obtained by maximizing the representative individual’s goal. Then the average
holding time is given by Equation (10). As a result, the micro-foundation for
velocity of money has been constructed.

Strictly speaking, the velocity we obtained above corresponds to consumption
velocity rather than the ratio of GDP (gross domestic product) to the money
stock. In order to cover the whole velocity, other main components of GDP,
such as investment and government spending, should also be included. As
mentioned above, the average holding time of money in the whole economy is
determined not only by consumers’ but also the other economic agents’ behav-
iors. Whatever the economic agents are, according to the method we provide
above, the corresponding average holding time can be deduced from their
own optimal choice. Therefore, the theories of consumption and investment in
macroeconomics provide micro-foundation not only for aggregate demand but
also for the circulation velocity of money.

5 Summary

We have proposed an alternative approach for understanding the velocity of
money circulation on the base of micro analysis. A concept of holding time of
money has been introduced to reﬂect money holders’ behavior. It is found that
the velocity of money can be expressed by a mathematical expectation value of
the inverse of holding time of money. The velocity and the average holding time
are reversely related to each other and the main determinant of them is the
agents’ behaviors. This relationship suggests that the micro-foundation of the
velocity can be constructed by examining a representative individual behavior.
Employing the life-cycle hypothesis, We demonstrate that the average holding
time can be obtained by maximizing the representative individual’s lifetime
utility. The velocity is found to be determined by the time pattern of income
and dispense which results from the individual’s optimal choice. We believe
that this study promises a fresh insight into the velocity of money circulation.

8

This research was supported by the National Science Foundation of China
under Grant No. 70371072 and 70371073. The authors beneﬁtted from collab-
oration with Ning Ding and Li Zhang. We are also grateful to Zhonghua Cai
for helpful discussions, suggestions and comments.

Acknowledgments

References

[1] A. Dr¨agulescu, V. Yakovenko, Eur. Phys. J. B 17 (2000) 723.

[2] A. Chakraborti, B.K. Chakrabarti, Eur. Phys. J. B 17 (2000) 167.

[3] A. Chatterjee, B. K. Chakrabarti, S. S. Manna, Physica A 335 (2004) 155.

[4] S. Ispolatov, P. L. Krapivsky, S. Redner, Eur. Phys. J. B 2 (1998) 267.

[5] A. Chakraborti, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 13 (2002) 1315.

[6] B. Hayes, Am. Scientist 90 (2002) 400.

[7] V. Pareto, Cours d’Economie Politique, Librairie Droz, Geneva, 1897.

[8] H. Aoyama, Y. Nagahara, M. P. Okazaki, W. Souma, H. Takayasu, M. Takayasu,

Fractals 8 (2000) 293.

[9] A. Dr˘agulescu, V. M. Yakovenko, Physica A 299 (2001) 213.

[10] A. Dr˘agulescu, V. M. Yakovenko, Eur. Phys. J. B 20 (2001) 585.

[11] F. Levy, Science 236 (1987) 923.

[12] Y. Wang, N. Ding, L. Zhang, Physica A 324 (2003) 665.

[13] N. Ding, N. Xi, Y. Wang, Eur. Phys. J. B 36 (2003) 149.

[14] W. A. Barnett, D. Fisher, A. Serletis, Journal of Economic Literature 30 (1992)

[15] T. M. Humphrey, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly

2086.

79(4) (1993) 1.

[16] I. Fisher, The Purchasing Power of Money, Macmillan, New York, 1911.

[17] D. Laidler, The Golden Age of the Quantity Theory, Princeton University Press,

Princeton, N.J., 1991.

[18] P. Bridel, Cambridge Monetary Thought, St. Martin’s Press, NewYork, 1987.

[19] M. Friedman ed., Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money, University of

Chicago Press, Chicago, 1956.

9

[20] M. Friedman, A. J. Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-

1960 , Princeton University Press for NBER, Princeton, 1963.

[21] M. N. Rothbard, Man, Economy, and State, Ludwig Von Mises Inst., Auburn,

Alabama, 2004, p.841.

[22] K. Wicksell, Interest and Prices, 1898, Translated by R. F. Kahn, with an

introduction by Bertil Ohlin, Macmillan, London, 1936.

[23] L. von Mises, Human Action: A Treatise on Economics, 4th Revised Edition,

Fox & Wilkes, San Francisco, 1996, p.402.

[24] J. M. Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, the

Royal Economic society, Macmillan Press, London, 1973.

[25] F. Modigliani, A. Ando, American Economic Review 53 (1963) 55.

[26] M. Friedman, A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton University

Press, Princeton, 1957.

10

