5
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
6
1
7
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Disordered cellular automaton traﬃc ﬂow model:

Phase separated state, density waves and self

organized criticality

K. Fourrate and M. Loulidi

LMPHE, D´epartement de Physique B.P.1014,

Facult´e des Sciences, Agdal, Rabat, Morocco.

Abstract

We suggest a disordered traﬃc ﬂow model that captures many features of traﬃc ﬂow.

It is an extension of the Nagel-Schreckenberg (NaSch) stochastic cellular automata for

single line vehicular traﬃc model. It incorporates random acceleration and deceleration

terms that may be greater than one unit. Our model leads under its intrinsic dynam-

ics, for high values of braking probability p, to a constant ﬂow at intermediate densities

without introducing any spatial inhomogeneities. For a system of fast drivers p → 0, the

model exhibits a density wave behavior that was observed in car following models with

optimal velocity. The gap of the disordered model we present exhibits, for high values of

p and random deceleration, at a critical density, a power law distribution which is a hall

mark of a self organized criticality phenomena.

PACS numbers: 45.70.Vn, 02.50.Ey, 05.65.+b

Key words: Traﬃc ﬂow, cellular automata, complexe systems

1

1 Introduction

The investigation of traﬃc ﬂow has attracted the interest of physicists already a long

time ago. Diﬀerent approaches have been proposed[1,2]. One can distinguish macroscopic

and microscopic ones. In macroscopic models the traﬃc is viewed on the one hand as a

compressible ﬂuid formed by the vehicles and then analyzed using hydrodynamical ﬂuid

theories[3], on the other hand as a gas of interacting particles and then treated using

kinetic theories of gases based on the Boltzmann equation[4].

In the car-following theories[5 and references therein], which are a typical example of

microscopic approaches, individual vehicles are distinguished and the equation of motion,

for each one, is the analogue of the Newton’s equation. Many car-following models have

been proposed depending on a sensitivity parameter and reaction time. But, they lead to

unrealistic description of the behavior of free vehicles which have a large distance to the

next vehicle ahead and suﬀer from serious problems in the low -density limit. To over-

come these problems an optimal velocity Vopt was introduced and a typical form[6] gives

satisfactory results compared with empirical data. But, it has been found empirically

that Vopt depends on the traﬃc state[7]. For a detailed study of all the above approaches

and theories we refer the reader to the review articles Ref 5,8 and references therein.

CA approach can be considered as a powerful tool, in statistical physics, to model local

and nonlocal interactions[9]. Nowadays, the simulation of traﬃc using cellular automata

approach[10] stands out for its simplicity. It is a microscopic description of traﬃc ﬂow

governed by simple rules that each individual driver follows.

The stochastic traﬃc CA model introduced by Nagel and Schreckenberg[11] (NaSch) is

governed by simple rules. It simulates single-lane one way traﬃc and is able to reproduce

the main features of traﬃc ﬂow as backward moving shock waves and the so-called funda-

mental diagram, J = J(ρ). In real traﬃc the system dynamics is very complex. However,

the stochasticity introduced into the model takes into account of some events due to

human driving: the maximum speed ﬂuctuations, overreactions at braking and retarded

acceleration. The NaSch model has been intensively studied using both analytical and

2

numerical methods[12]. Many extensions of this model have been established in order to

understand the rich variety of physical phenomena exhibited by vehicular traﬃc[13,14].

Some of these phenomena, observed in vehicular traﬃc under diﬀerent circumstances,

include transitions from one dynamical phase to another, criticality and self-organized

criticality, metastability and hysteresis, phase-segregation, etc. We note that no one of

these extensions is able to reproduce the main phenomena of real traﬃc ﬂow all together.

Since inhomogeneities have relevant eﬀects on the systems dynamics, many kind of

disorder were involved in traﬃc ﬂow models. It was shown numerically that the NaSch

model with a quenched random deceleration probabilities displays queueing of cars with

a power law distribution of gaps between the cars at low densities[15]. The jammed phase

behavior is similar to that observed in the standard NaSch model. The introduction of

defects in NaSch model has a very high impact on the fundamental diagram and the dy-

namics of the model[16,17]. One distinguishes between two kind of defects, the sitewise

and the particlewise disorder. The later case produces phase separated stationary states,

which consists of a large jam behind the slowest vehicle and a large gap in front of it at

low densities. The single defect site induces a third phase, which is also a phase separat-

ing, located between free ﬂow regime and jamming phase where the ﬂow is constant[17].

This intermediate phase was already observed in the asymmetric exclusion model, which

corresponds to the NaSch model with vmax = 1, for the sitewise disorder[18].

Since the CA approach may give, in a simple way, a good description of real traﬃc and

captures the main phenomena observed by analyzing empirical data[7,19], we suggest an

extension of the NaSch model that includes explicitly random incrementation of driver

velocities. However, we think that it should be more realistic to take into account of non

uniform acceleration and deceleration of vehicles as the drivers act diﬀerently. In the road

you ﬁnd careful drivers, which don’t drive fast, as well as careless ones, which drive at

their maximum speed. Depending on the distance ahead and the velocity of the vehicle

the drivers may accelerate or decelerate more than one unit at each time step. Usually

the competition between quenched randomness and dynamic ﬂuctuations induces phase

transitions between a disordered-dominated phase and ﬂuctuation-dominated phase with

3

qualitatively distinct behaviors. Thus, we expect that a model with random acceleration

should induce new dynamical states especially for intermediate densities since the fast

drivers are stuck by the slowest ones. The model is deﬁned in section 2 and depending

either on random acceleration or deceleration we show numerically in section 3 that it

presents some interesting phenomena which were observed separately in diﬀerent varieties

of traﬃc ﬂow models[19-21,23]. In section 4 we study the gap distribution in order to

show that the model exhibits a critical self organized behavior. The conclusion of our

mean results is given in section 5.

2 Deﬁnition of the model

The disordered traﬃc ﬂow model we present is a probabilistic CA where not only space

and time are discret, but also the state variable of the vehicles. As in the NaSch model

each cell can be empty or occupied by exactly one vehicle n and the state of each one is

characterized by its velocity vn which can take one of the vmax + 1 allowed integer values

v = 0, 1, 2, .., vmax. We denote the position and the velocity of the n-th vehicle by xn

and vn respectively . Then, gn = xn+1 − xn − l, where l is the vehicle length, is the gap

between the n-th vehicle and vehicle n + 1 in front of it. At each time step t → t + 1, the

N vehicles arrange themselves on a ﬁnite lattice of length L following a parallel update

according to the following rules:

Step 1: Acceleration.

If vn < vmax, the velocity of the n-th vehicle is increased by an sites, i.e.

vn → min(vn + an, vmax)

where an = [pngn] + 1.

Step 2: Deceleration.

If (gn + 1) ≤ vn, the velocity of the n-th vehicle is reduced to gn, i.e.

(1)

(2)

vn → min(vn, gn)

4

If vn > 0, with probability p the velocity of the n-th vehicle is decreased randomly by dn

vn → max(0, vn − dn)

with the probability p

(3)

Step 3: Randomization.

sites, i.e.

where dn = [qnmin([vmax], gn)] + 1.

Step 4: Vehicle mouvement.

Each vehicle moves forward according its new velocity vn obtained from the steps 1-3, i.e.

The symbol [A] denotes the integer part of A and the quenched pn and qn variables are

randomly distributed in the interval [c, 1] according to the distribution laws:

xn → xn + vn

ϕ(p) =

n + 1

(1 − c)n+1 (p − c)n

(4)

(5)

and

(1 − c)n+1 (1 − q)n
As the model we suggest is an extension of the NaSch model, the four steps quoted

ψ(q) =

(6)

n + 1

above are necessary to reproduce the basic features of real traﬃc[5,13].

In step 1 the

driver beneﬁts from all the distance to the vehicle ahead and drives as fast as possible

without crossing the maximum speed limit. He might move [pngn] + 1 sites. In step 2, to

avoid collision between vehicles, the driver reduces its velocity and adjusts it according

to the distance to the vehicle ahead to be in security from any crash. The diﬀerent

behavioral patterns of the individual drivers as non deterministic acceleration as well

as overreaction while slowing down are reﬂected in step 3. This step is crucial for the

spontaneous formation of traﬃc jams. In real traﬃc the driver ability to drive more or

less fast is a pertinent parameter in the dynamics of vehicles. The distributions given

above reﬂect the fact that the ’careless’ drivers drive as fast as possible. They correspond

to higher values of pn and lowest values of qn. On the other hand the ’careful’ drivers

drive slowly since their corresponding probabilities pn and qn are the lowest respectively

the highest.

5

3 Numerical investigations of the fundamental dia-

gram

Our numerical investigations are performed on a ring composed of L sites. The density

of the vehicles is given by ρ = N/L where N is the number of vehicles. The ﬂow < J >

is expressed as ρ < v > where the mean velocity < v > of the vehicles is deﬁned as

the fraction of the sum of movable vehicle velocities among N vehicles. The length of the

vehicles, l, will be taken as the unit of space coordinate. We use a parallel updating sheme

since it takes into account the reaction-time and can lead to a chain of overreactions. In

what follow we will present the results obtained essentially from the distribution deﬁned

in eq(5,6) for n = 1. In order to analyze the eﬀects of diﬀerent random variables we will

discuss 3 cases:

3.1 deceleration eﬀects

We suppose that our vehicle drivers are all ”careful” and they drive as slow as possible.

They accelerate just by one unit at each time step while in the breaking step 3 they may

reduce their velocity as maximum as possible. The fundamental diagram in this case,

which corresponds to pn = 0 for all vehicles, depends on the randomization parameter

values p. However weak the value of p is, the ﬂow, which usually presents a sharp max-

imum, exhibits a smooth variation at its maximum value (Fig. 1a). This is due to the

fact that the mean velocity of vehicles, v = v(ρ), is a decreasing function of ρ, even at

low densities(Fig. 1b).

The existence of very slow vehicles in the system induces a jamming regions even at

very low densities. The fast vehicles pile up behind the slowest ones. As a matter of fact,

the space-time diagram presents, for intermediate values of p, a macroscopic high density

region conﬁned between relatively free ﬂow ones(Fig. 2a). This results from the fact that

the slowest vehicles, which are randomly distributed in the system, act like a blockage.

6

Figure 1: (a)The fundamental diagram of the model and (b) ρ-dependence of the velocity

for vmax = 5 in the case of random decelerations and uniform acceleration.

7

Thus, the ﬂow gets a slower value than in the Nasch model. By increasing the global den-

sity within the segregated phase the bulk densities of these regions remain constant, only

their length changes. Consequently, the average ﬂow is constant in the segregated phase,

because the average density in the vicinity of the high density region does not depend on

the global density. This intermediate phase, which is located for ρlow < ρ < ρhigh may

be illustrated looking at the density proﬁle which is plotted in ﬁg 2b. For any particular

choice of random qn variables according to the distribution law g(q)(eq. 6) one observes a

separation into macroscopic high and low density regions. As the disorder average wasn’t

taken into account the density ﬂuctuations observed in both regions result from the ran-

dom decelerations of vehicles. They may also result from the interaction between vehicles

that cause a formation of local jams (gaps) in the ’free’ ﬂow(congested)region.

Thus, the average on the disordered qn variables leads to a quasi-constant ﬂow in the

segregated phase(Fig 3). As a result, one can distinguish, in the fundamental diagram,

three diﬀerent phases depending on the global density namely low density phase, high

density phase and intermediate phase for ρlow < ρ < ρhigh. By increasing ρ in this inter-

mediate phase, the ﬂow presents a slow linear decrease. Its slope which is a decreasing

function of p vanishes for some randomization parameter values.

This phase separation located in our model was found in systems with ramps and systems

with a stationary defect[8,19]. For intermediate densities ρlow < ρ < ρhigh the ﬂow is

constant for these models. In this regime J(ρ) is limited either by the capacity of the

ramp or the defect site. Even though the perturbations in these models are diﬀerent, they

all exhibit a plateau formation in the fundamental diagram as well as phase separation in

the system independently of the nature of blockage. In the case of ramps it is the local

increase of the density that decreases the ﬂow locally. In the model with a stationary

defect the increased slowdown parameter leads to a local decrease of the ﬂow.

In our

model the ”careless” drivers decelerate more than one unit and they act as a blockage in

the system. Thus, the increased slowdown vehicles leads to a local decrease of the ﬂow.

8

Figure 2:

(a)The space-time diagram of the model and (b) the corresponding site-

dependence of the density, in the case of random decelerations and uniform acceleration,

for ρ = 0.3 and randomization parameter p = 0.8.

9

Figure 3: The fundamental diagram for p = 0.6 showing a plateau at intermediate densi-

ties.

p.

Other variants of the model deﬁned above may be obtained by modifying step2 or

both step2 and step3 in the dynamics rules (eq. 2-3). If we assume that in the second

step the vehicles may decelerate by reducing their velocities to be at a distance to the

vehicle ahead more large than one unit such that vn → min(vn, gn + 1 − dn), the model

presents a plateau formation in the fundamental diagram even for very low values of the

randomization parameter p. The same result is obtained by changing both step2 and

step3 of the model rules:

step2:

vn → min(vn, gn + 1 − dn)

step3:

vn → max(0, vn − 1)

with a probability p

(7)

Since the deceleration eﬀects in these model variants are emphasized, a plateau formation

in the fundamental diagram occurs even at lower values of the randomization parameter

3.2 Acceleleration eﬀects

Even though that the acceleration of vehicles is over estimated we think that it is

worthwhile to study the eﬀects of randomness of a such parameter. Those eﬀects on the

10

fundamental diagram and on the dynamics of the model are studied by setting qn = 0 and

choosing randomly the variables pn for all vehicles. In this situation all the drivers are

’careless’ and drive as fast as possible. By performing numerical investigations we show

that, for low values of p, the fundamental diagram(Fig. 4a) has quite similar form to that

one obtained in the NaSch model. Thus, the distinction between these models should be

formulated at microscopic level.

As usual, the fundamental diagram depends on the randomization parameter p. For low

values of p it presents two diﬀerent regimes with respect to the density. At low density the

system is in a free ﬂow state and all the vehicles move, up to a certain density ρ1, at their

maximum speed (Fig 4b). By increasing p this free ﬂow region decreases considerably , i.e.

ρ1 decreases, because the vehicles may frequently break and then reduce their speed more

than one unit. This leads to the formation of spontaneous jams that are scattered in the

space time diagram(Fig. 5a). By increasing the density more jams arise and are grouped

together leading to a large strip of jammed region separated by free ﬂow regions(Fig. 5b).

Depending on the randomization parameter p the microscopic state of the system exhibits

diﬀerent structures. Indeed, for low values of p the system may selforganize into a density

wave state(Fig. 6). For a such values of p most of the vehicles accelerate randomly and

beneﬁt from the distance of the vehicle ahead. In addition, the velocity of all vehicles

in jammed region is limited by the slowest one. Then, if most of the vehicles located

at the jammed region drive fast(slow)we have Jin < Jout (Jin > Jout), where Jin(Jout)

denotes the number of entring(leaving) vehicles in the jammed region per unit of time.

As the incoming vehicles pile up behind the jam we have ρout < ρin where ρout(ρin) is the

density of vehicles that leave(drive in) the jam. Consequently, the domain-wall between

two stationary regions, free ﬂow and congested region, propagates either in the opposite

or the same direction of moving vehicles with the velocity vshock, which depends on the

values of Jin and Jout. From mass conservation we obtain

As a result, the jammed regions wave from side to side. A such behavior was observed

(8)

vshock =

jout − Jin
ρout − ρin

11

Figure 4: (a)The fundamental diagram of the model and (b)ρ-dependence of the velocity

for vmax = 2 in the case of random accelerations and uniform deceleration.

12

in car following models with an optimal velocity that takes into account the character-

istics of diﬀerent vehicles[20]. In those models the diﬀerent maximum velocities among

vehicles are included in the optimal velocity function while in our CA model all vehicles

keep the same vmax and the characteristics of diﬀerent drivers are induced in the acceler-

ation terms. We note that the model presents regular oscillating behavior (Fig. 6a) for

vanishing value of the randomization parameter, i.e. p = 0, while for ﬁnite values of p the

breaking rule induces some irregularities. Detailed numerical investigations of the phase

transition among the freely moving phase, the density wave phase and the homogeneous

congested phase show that there is a critical value of the randomization parameter, pc

above which the density wave does not appear[21]. If we denote by gf (gi) respectively vf

(vi) the average headway and velocity within (out of) the jam we may introduce an order

parameter s = gf − gj or s = vf − vj and study the dynamics of the jammed region and

the critical behavior of this inhomogeneous phase.

3.3 Acceleration and deceleration eﬀects

In real traﬃc we found both ”careful” and ”careless” drivers. Then, both variables pn

and qn should be chosen randomly. For very low values of randomization parameter p,

most of vehicles drive fast. Consequently, at intermediate densities the steady state of the

system reaches a density wave state with local ’defects’ that are caused by spontaneous

jams. This microscopic structure results from the interaction between the fast vehicles

and the slowest ones.

As in the case of slow drivers, i.e pn = 0, a region of constant ﬂow occurs for high values
of p(p > 1

2). It becomes larger than in the previous case. Indeed, the faster drivers are

blocked by the slowest ones and they pile up behind the jammed region. Consequently, the

system exhibits, at intermediate densities, a high density band conﬁned between relatively

free ﬂow regions.

13

Figure 5: The space-time diagram of the model,(a)ρ = 0.1 and (b)ρ = 0.2, in the case of

random acceleration and uniform decelerations for vmax = 5 and p = 0.8.

14

Figure 6: The space-time diagram of the model in the case of random decelerations and

uniform acceleration for vmax = 5, (a)ρ = 0.15 and p = 0, (b) ρ = 0.2 and p = 0.05 and

(c)the spatio-temporal evolution of the gap, for ρ = 0.2 and p = 0.05. A density wave

behavior is detected.

15

Figure 7: The gap distribution of the model, in the case of random decelerations and

accelerations, for vmax = 2, p = 0.05 and diﬀerent values of ρ.

4 The Gap distribution of the model

Looking at the gap distribution over a wide range of densities in the congested ﬂow

region we see that it depends on the maximal velocity vmax and the randomization param-

eter p. In the case of high values of vmax it exhibits, for low values of p, two maxima (Fig.

7). The position of the maxima do not change considerably over a wide range of densities.

The ﬁrst maximum is assumed for the value zero. This means that the steady state of the

system in the congested phase is of a densely packed queue and the two maxima of the

gap distribution may be associated simply to a free ﬂow phase with random distributed

local inhomogeneities that are densely packed jams. We note that in a continuum limit of

the NaSch model[22] the ﬁrst maximum was observed at a non vanishing value and such

a behavior was associated to a phase separation into congested and free ﬂow regions. By

decreasing the density, the ﬁrst maximum vanishes and the gap distribution exhibits only

one maximum that corresponds to the free ﬂow regime.

For high values of p located in a narrow interval, i.e. pc1 < p < pc2, the model displays,

in the case of careful drivers, a power law gap distribution in the vicinity of some critical

16

density(Fig. 8). This behavior is a feature of the self organized criticality (SOC)[23]. The

distribution doesn’t change considerably with the system size and ﬁnite size data collapse

of the form

P (g) = g−τ f (g/Lν)

(9)

Using a ﬁnite size analysis it’s easy to see that P (g) = L−βf (g/Lν) with β/ν = τ . The

critical exponents τ and ν vary continuously with the randomization parameter p and the

maximum velocity vmax. The SOC behavior results from the fact that the fast vehicles

built behind the slowest ones forming platoons separated by large gaps. The power law

decay of the gap distribution was illustrated analytically for the asymmetric exclusion

model with random rates using some statistical estimates[24]. The numerical estimation

of the critical densities and the critical exponent τ of the gap distribution of our model are

represented in table 1 for vmax = 2 and vmax = 5. We note that the SOC behavior was also

observed in a stochastic traﬃc model with random deceleration probabilities[15]. It was

pointed out that the NaSch model with random randomization parameter probabilities

self organizes into a stable queueing phase at low densities and has a power law gap distri-

bution. This model belongs to the same universality class of the BFL model[25] while our

model belongs to another universality class as the critical exponents τ are rather diﬀerent.

vmax

p

ρc

τ

2

5

0.7

0.19

0.755

0.8

0.18

0.812

0.75

0.1

0.915

0.8

0.11

0.972

17

Table 1: The estimations of the critical exponents τ of gap distributions at critical den-

sities ρc for diﬀerent vmax and diﬀerent values of the randomization parameter p.

Figure 8: The log-log plot of the gap distribution for vmax = 2, ρc = 0.1 and p = 0.75, in

the case of random accelerations and uniform deceleration, and for diﬀerent system sizes

L ranging from L = 860 to L = 3440. The ﬁnite size scaling analysis gives a good ﬁt of

our data with the exponents τ = 0.903 and ν = 0.083. The inset shows the ﬁnite size ﬁt

with β = 0.075.

In the case of ’careful’ drivers, all vehicles accelerate just by one unit at each time

step but they may decelerate by reducing their velocity as maximum as possible. The

probability that one driver decelerates as maximum as possible is realized for 1 −δ < qn <
1, where δ << 1 and is calculated from the distribution given in eq (6): pm ∼ δ2/2. At low

densities the system evolves according to its own dynamics and is however interrupted by

relatively small perturbations at vanishingly small rates. Consequently, the system gets

enough time to organize itself and relax back to its corresponding steady state before it is

perturbed again. This eﬀectively separates completely the time scales for perturbing the

system and its response. This inﬁnite time scale separation is required by SOC behavior.

The system is then self similar and the scale invariance is due to the fact that the jams

are fractal in the sens that there are smaller sub-jams inside large jams.

18

5 Conclusion

The dynamics of the disordered traﬃc ﬂow, which is based on the NaSch model, pre-

sented in this paper bears considerable structures and many of interesting features of

traﬃc ﬂow. Random acceleration and deceleration terms were introduced in the CA

rules. Within numerical investigations we have shown that the model presents under its

own dynamics many interesting phenomena that were observed separately in diﬀerent va-

rieties of traﬃc ﬂow models namely the segregated phase, the density wave state and the

SOC behavior. Depending on the randomization parameter p a rich variety of fundamen-

tal diagrams is obtained. For intermediate values of p and low densities the fundamental

diagram may trigger transitions from free to congested ﬂow under its own dynamics with-

out introducing any external perturbation like defects or on and oﬀ-ramps[7,13]. We may

assume that at intermediate densities the slow vehicles act like a defect site leading to a

blockage. As a matter of fact an intermediate phase, where the current is quasi-constant,

is inserted between free ﬂow and jamming phases. The analysis of the microscopic struc-

ture of the space time diagram for low values of p shows that the system may organize

itself into a wave density phase where the jams (gaps) oscillate. Such behavior was pointed

out by Nagatani in the optimal velocity model[20]. The gap distribution of our model

in the case of slow drivers exhibits, for some values of randomization parameter p and

at low densities, a power law behavior in the vinicity of a critical density signaling the

existence of SOC phenomenon. The critical exponents are rather diﬀerent from those

obtained in a disordered traﬃc ﬂow model where the quenched disorder was incorporated

in the random deceleration probabilities[18]. The model we suggest doesn’t belong to the

same universality class of the BFL model as the former model does. Finally, we note that

the disorder introduced in our model is the essential ingredient to observe all the traﬃc

features mentioned above since they don’t occur in the case of uniform acceleration and

deceleration[26],i.e pn = cst and qn = cst.

The model we present in this paper presents many interesting features of traﬃc ﬂow

and may be developed in order to capture other pertinent phenomena observed in traﬃc

19

ﬂow as the hysteresis and the synchronized state.

Aknowlendgements

We thank A. Schadschneider for his critical reading the manuscript and for his rele-

vant comments and suggestions. The authors are grateful to the high education ministry

MESFCRS for the ﬁnancial support in the framework of the program PROTARSIII, grant

no:D12/22.

20

References

[1] Traﬃc and Granular Flow,edited by D. E. Wolf, M. Schreckenberg and A. Bachem

(World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1996).

[2] Traﬃc and Granular Flow ’97’, edited by M. Schreckenberg and D. E. Wolf, (Springer,

Singapore, 1998).

New York, 1971).

[3] K. Nagel, Phys. Rev. E 53, 4655, (1996) and references therein.

[4] I. Prigogine and R. Herman, Kinetic theory of vehicular traﬃc, (American Elsevier,

[5] D. Chowdhury, L. Santen and A. Schadschneider, Phys. Rep. 329, 199 (2000).

[7] L. Neubert, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider and M. Schreckenberg, Phys. Rev. E60,

[6] T. Nagatani, Physica A253, 353(1998).

6480 (1999).

[8] D. Helbing, Rev. Mod. Phys.73 (2001).

[9] A. Benyoussef, N. El Haﬁdallah, A. El Kenz, H. Ez-Zahraouy and M. Loulidi, Phys-

ica A322, 506-520(2003); N. Boccara, Automata networks models of interacting pop-

ulations in Cellular Automata, Dynamical Systems, Neural Networks,eds. E.Goles

and S.Martinez (Kluwer Dordrecht, 1994); P. Bak, C. Tang and K. Wiesenfeld,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 381 (1987); Phys. Rev. A 38, 364 (1988).

[10] S. Wolfram, Theory and applications of Cellular automata, (World Scientiﬁc, 1986);

Cellular Automata and Complexity (Addison-Wesly, 1994).

[11] K. Nagel and M. Schreckenberg, J. Phys. (France) I2, 2221 (1992).

[12] A. Schadschneider, Eur. Phys. J. B10, 573 (1999).

21

[13] A. Schadschneider, Physica A 285, 101 (2000); R. Barlovic, L. Santen, A. Schad-

schneider and M. Schreckenberg, Eur. Phys. J. B 5, 793 (1998); A. Schadschneider

and M. Schreckenberg, J. Phys. A30, L69 (1997); J. Phys. A31, L225 (1998);

M. Schreckenberg, A. Schadschneider, K. Nagel and N. Ito, Phys. Rev. E51,

2939(1995).

[14] W. Knospe, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider and M. Schreckenberg, Physica A265, 614

(1998); A. Pottmeir, R. Barlovic, W. Knospe, A. Schadschneider and M. Schreken-

berg, Physica A308, 471 (2002).

[15] D. V. Ktitarev, D. Chowdhury and D. E. Wolf, J. Phys. A30, L221 (1997).

[16] W. Knospe, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider and M. Schreckenberg, Physica A265,

614 (1998).

Physica A308, 471 (2002).

[17] A. Pottmeir, R. Barlovic, W. Knospe, A. Schadschneider and M. Schrekenberg,

[18] M. Bengrine, A. Benyoussef, H. Ez-Zahraouy and F. M’hirech, Phys. Lett. A253,

135 (1999); G. Tripathy and M. Barma, Phys. Rev. E58, 1911 (1998); H. Emmerich

and E. Rank, Physica A216, 435 (1995); S. A. Janowski and J. L. Lebowitz, J. Stat.

Phys. 77, 35 (1994).

[19] B. S. Kerner and H. Rehborn, Phys. Rev. E53, R4275 (1996).

[20] T. Nagatani, Physica A 284, 405 (2000), Phys. Rev. E 61,3564 (1999).

[21] K. Fourrate and M. Loulidi, work in progress

[22] S. Krauss, P. Wagner and C. Gawron, Phys. Rev. E54, 3707 (1996).

[23] P. Bak, C. Tang, and K. Wiesenfeld, Phys. Rev. A 38, 364 (1988); C. Tang and

P. Bak, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 2347 (1988); J. Stat. Phys. 51, 797 (1988); P. Bak

and K. Chen, Physica D 38, 5 (1989); K. Wiesenfeld, C. Tang, and P. Bak, J. Stat.

22

Phys. 54, 1441 (1989); P. Bak, How nature works: the science of self-organized

criticality. - (Springer Verlag,1996); D. Dhar, e-print cond-mat/9909009.

[24] J. Krug and P. A. Ferrari, J. Phys.A29, L465 (1996); J. Krug, Braz. J. Phys.

30,97(2000)(cond-mat/9912411); M. R. Evans, Europhys. Lett. 36,13 (1996).

[25] I. Benjamini, P. A. Ferrari and C. Landim, Stoch. Proc. Appl. 61, 181 (1996).

[26] K. Fourrate and M. Loulidi, unpublished.

23

