5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
2
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Does the scale-free topology favor the emergence of cooperation?

Zhi-Xi Wu ∗, Xin-Jian Xu, and Ying-Hai Wang †
Institute of Theoretical Physics, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou Gansu 730000, China
(Dated: February 15, 2014)

In a recent Letter [F.C. Santos and J. M. Pacheco Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 098104 (2005)], the
scale-free networks are found to be advantageous for the emergence of cooperation. In the present
work an evolutionary prisoner’s dilemma game with players located on a Barab´asi-Albert scale-free
network is studied. The players are pure strategist and can follow two strategies: either to defect
or to cooperate. Serval alternative update rules determining the evolution of each player’s strategy
are considered. Using systematic Monte Carlo simulations we have calculated the average density
It is shown that the results obtained
of cooperators as a function of the temptation to defect.
by numerical experiments depend strongly on the dynamics of the game, which could lower the
important of scale-free topology on the persistence of the cooperation.

PACS numbers: 87.23.Kg, 02.50.Le, 87.23.Ge, 89.75.Fb

Cooperation is widespread in many biological, social
and economic systems [1]. Understanding the emergence
and persistence of cooperation in these system is one of
the fundamental and central problems [1, 2]. In investi-
gating this problem the most popular framework utilized
is game theory together with its extensions to an evo-
lutionary context [3]. One simple game, the Prisoner’s
Dilemma game (PDG), has attracted most attention in
theoretical and experimental studies [4].
In the stan-
dard PDG, the players can either defect or cooperate;
two interacting players are oﬀered a certain payoﬀ, the
reward R, for mutual cooperation and a lower payoﬀ, the
punishment P , for mutual defection. If one player coop-
erates while the other defects, then the cooperator gets
the lowest sucker’s payoﬀ, S, while the defector gains the
highest payoﬀ, the temptation to defect T . Thus, we ob-
tain T > R > P > S. It is easy to see that defection is
the better choice irrespective of the opponent’s selection.
For this reason, defection is the only evolutionary stable
strategy in fully mixed populations [3].

Since the cooperation is abundant and robust in na-
ture, considerable eﬀorts have been expended trying to
understanding the evolution of cooperation on the basis
of the PDG [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. These extensions
include those in which the players are assumed to have
memory of the previous interactions [5], or players are
spatially distributed [6], or allowing the players to vol-
untary participating [7]. In addition, dynamic network
model [9] and dynamic payoﬀ matrices [10] were also in-
troduced to sustain high concentration of cooperation in
PDG. In a recent Letter [8], Santos and Pacheco have
studied the PDG and another famous game, the snow-
drift game (commonly known as the hawk-dove or chicken
game), on scale-free networks and observed interesting
evolutionary results:, due to the underlying network gen-
erated by growth and preferential attachment (or the

∗Electronic address: wupiao2004@yahoo.com.cn
†Electronic address: yhwang@lzu.edu.cn

scale-free topology), the cooperation can be greatly en-
hanced and becomes the dominating trait throughout the
entire range of parameters of both games [8].

In the present work, we study the PDG on Barab´asi-
Albert scale-free network [17, 18]. Serval alternative
update rules determining the evolution of each player’s
strategy are considered in the following. Using system-
atic Monte Carlo (MC) simulations we have calculated
the average density of cooperators as a function of the
temptation to defect.
It is shown that the results ob-
tained by numerical experiments depend strongly on the
dynamics of the game, which could suggest that the scale-
topology of the underlying interacting network may not
be the crucial factor persisting the high density of the
cooperators. Of particular interesting, we have found
that the system undergoes a phase transition, from ac-
tive state (coexistence of cooperators and defectors) to
absorbing state (only defectors surviving) when allow-
ing “worse ”strategy (adopted by the player who gains a
lower payoﬀ) to be imitated in the evolution of the game.
The model and simulation. We consider the PDG with
pure strategist: the players can follow two strategies, ei-
ther to defect or to cooperate (C). Each player interacts
with its neighbors and collects payoﬀ depended on the
payoﬀ parameters. The total payoﬀ of a certain player is
the sum over all interactions. Following common studies
[6, 8, 11, 12, 14], we also start by rescaling the game such
that it depends on a single parameter, i.e., we can choose
R = 1, P = S = 0, and T = b (1 ≤ b ≤ 2.0) represent-
ing the advantage of defectors over cooperators, without
any loss of generality of the game. After each round,
the players are allowed to inspect their neighbors’ pay-
oﬀs and, according to the comparison, determine their
strategies to be adopted in the next round. To investi-
gate how the dynamics of the game aﬀect the evolution
of the cooperation, three kinds of updating rules which
determine the transformation of each player’s strategy
are considered in the following.

I) Best-takes-over. It is commonly observed that peo-
ple try to imitate a strategy of their most successful
neighbor [10]. Thus, we ﬁrst use a deterministic rule

according to which the individual with the highest gain
in a given neighborhood reproduces with certainty. Since
we study the PDG on scale-free network whose elements
(or nodes) possess heterogeneous connectivity [18]. To
avoid an additional bias from the higher degree of some
nodes, the gain of the certain player is calculated as the
average payoﬀ of the individual interactions: the sum of
the payoﬀ from each neighbor is divided by the number of
the neighbors. It is important to note that this rule does
not reduce to the replicator dynamics when applied to
individual-based models of populations without spatial
structure [15]. This updating rule has also been widely
adopted in the studying of the PDG [9, 10, 11, 12].

II) Betters-possess-chance. Technically, the rule I) is
particularly simple to implement, but its biological rel-
evance is rather limited because it assumes a noise free
environment. Thus in the second case the stochasticity is
add to the dynamics, and we adopt the updating method
just as the one used in Ref.
[13] (the unique point dif-
[8] is to consider average payoﬀ of the
ferent from Ref.
players rather than the total payoﬀ), i.e., evolution is
carried out implementing the ﬁnite population analogue
of replicator dynamics [4, 13] by means of the following
transition probabilities: In each generation, whenever a
site i is updated, a neighbor j is drawn at random among
all its neighbors; whenever Ej > Ei (i.e., only the better
players have the chance to reproduction, and if Ei > Ej
the player does not change its strategy), the chosen neigh-
bor takes over site i with probability given by

W =

Ej − Ei
T − S

,

(1)

where Ei and Ej correspond to the average payoﬀs ac-
cumulated by the player i and j in the previous round
respectively.

III) Payoﬀ-diﬀerence-dependent. One can see that, for
both the above rules, the error mutation is not permit-
ted, i.e., the players who gain lower average payoﬀs have
no chance to replace a neighbor who does better than
them. The update rule dependent on the payoﬀ diﬀer-
ence, which was adopted widely in Refs.
[7, 13, 14, 16]
can overcome this diﬃcult. Given the average payoﬀs
(Ei and Ej ) from the previous round, player i adopts the
neighbor j’s strategy with the probability

W =

1
1 + exp [−(Ej − Ei)/κ]

,

(2)

where κ characterizes the noise introduced to permit irra-
tional choices. This update rule states that the strategy
of a better performing player is readily adopted, whereas
it is unlikely, but not impossible, to adopt the strategies
of worse performing payers. The parameter κ incorpo-
rates the uncertainties in the strategy adoption. In the
limit of large κ values, all information is lost, that is,
player i is unable to retrieve any information from Ej
and switches to the strategy of j by tossing a coin [13].
Generate a random number r uniformly distributed be-
tween zero and one, if r < W , the neighbor’s strategy is
imitated.

2

 

 

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2.0

FIG. 1: Average density of cooperator ρc as a function of
the temptation to defect b in a evolutionary system driven by
update rule I (Best-takes-over).

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

y
t
i
s
n
e
d

 

e
g
a
r
e
v
a

y
t
i
s
n
e
d

 

e
g
a
r
e
v
a

 

 

b

b

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2.0

FIG. 2: Average density of cooperator ρc as a function of
the temptation to defect b in a evolutionary system driven by
update rule II (Betters-possess-chance). For the sake of com-
parison, the evolutionary results adopting the original model
in Ref. [8] are also given out using squares.

Initially, the two strategies was randomly distributed
among the players with equal probability 1/2. The above
rules of the model are iterated with parallel updating by
varying the value of b. The total sampling times are
11000 MC steps and all the results shown below are av-
erages over the last 1000 steps.

Results and discussion. In the following we show the
results of simulations performed in a system of N =
10000 players located on BA scale-free networks with av-
erage connectivity of the vertices ﬁxed as 4 (the construc-
tion of the network can refer to Refs. [17, 18]). Our key
quantity is the average density of players adopting the
strategy C in the equilibrium state. First we consider

y
t
i
s
n
e
d

 

e
g
a
r
e
v
a

0.75

0.60

0.45

0.30

0.15

0.00

 0.04

 0.03

 0.02

 

 

b

1.0

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

FIG. 3: Average density of cooperator ρc as a function of
the temptation to defect b in a evolutionary system driven
by update rule III (Payoﬀ-diﬀerence-dependent). Squares,
circles and triangles correspond to diﬀerent noise intensity
κ = 0.04, 0.03, 0.02 respectively.

the model driven by the rule I. The simulation results are
shown in Fig. 1. The cooperators and defectors coexist
and coevolution throughout the entire range of parame-
ter b. With the increasing of the temptation to defect,
the average density of cooperators decreases monoton-
ically. The cooperation is inhibited quickly with slow
increasing of b and sustains a low level in a wide range of
the parameter, which is clearly diﬀerent from the results
obtained in Ref.
[8] using diﬀerent dynamics where the
cooperators dominate the whole region of b.

The results of the evolution of the game under the up-
dating rule II are reported in Fig. 2. Similar to the for-
mer case, cooperators can exist and survive in the whole
region of b. However, the cooperation in the region of
large values of b, namely b > 1.4, is extremely inhibited
when allowing more “better ”players’s strategies to be
imitated. The density of cooperators maintains a minor
level and is almost invisible in the Figure. To compare
distinctly with the results of Ref. [8], we also calculated
the average density of C by taking account into total
payoﬀ diﬀerence, just as what has been done in Ref. [8],
instead of average payoﬀ diﬀerence in the update rule II.
As expected, we recover qualitatively the results of Ref.
[8]: cooperation becomes the dominating trait through-
out the entire range of parameter of the game. The minor
diﬀerence comes from the average times of the results.
Due to the computational resource limit, here the exper-
iment results average over 20 simulations for the same

3

network of contacts (less than the 100 simulations in Ref.
[8]). The diﬀerence between the two results is distinct.
The cooperation is no longer dominating whenever the
average payoﬀ diﬀerence is considered in rule II.

the

consider

Now we

case of payoﬀ-diﬀerence-
dependent. Figure 3 shows the b dependence of the av-
erage density of cooperators in the coexistence region for
diﬀerent intensity of the noise κ = 0.02, 0.03, 0.04. Once
again, the cooperation is not the favorable choice of the
players in a wide range of b. Of particular interesting,
one can observe that there arises two separate phase (co-
existence phase and absorbing phase) of the evolution.
As indicated, the average density of C decreases mono-
tonically with increasing b until a certain threshold value
where the cooperators vanish and an absorbing state (all
defectors) forming. The threshold value depends on the
level of the noise: the smaller intensity of the noise κ, the
larger threshold bc. These phenomena are reminiscent of
the studies in Ref. [14], where the players are located on
a two dimensional square lattice with periodic boundary
and interact with their four nearest neighbors.

Conclusions. To sum up, we have explored the gen-
eral question of cooperation formation and sustainment
on BA scale-free networks based on diﬀerent driving dy-
namics. The simulation results suggest that the topology
of the underlying interacting network, i.e., the scale-free
structure, may not be the crucial factor for the emergence
and the persistence of the cooperation, whose evolution-
ary result depend strongly of the dynamics governing the
game. These results are diﬀerent from those obtained in
a recent work Ref. [8] whose researches support that the
scale-free networks are advantageous for the emergence
of cooperation. Of particular interesting, we have found
that the system undergoes a phase transition, from active
state to absorbing state when allowing “worse ”strategy
to be imitated in the evolution of the game. A lots of
things are waited to do further. Here we only consid-
ered the case of PDG. Does the results obtained in the
present work are also suitable for the case of the snow-
drift game when considering diﬀerent dynamics? how
the fraction of cooperators goes to zero when taking ac-
count into the payoﬀ-diﬀerence-dependent rule? What is
the relationship between the extinction behavior of co-
operators with the case studied by Szab´o and T˝oke [14]
(there they found that the extinction behavior of the co-
operators on square lattice when increasing b belongs to
universality class of directed percolation)? Work along
these lines is in progress.

This work was supported by the Doctoral Research

Foundation awarded by Lanzhou University.

[1] J. Maynard Smith, E. Szathm´ary, The Major Transitions

in Evolution (Oxford, 1995).

tionary perspective (Oxford Univ. Press, Princetion, NJ,
1997).

[2] L.A. Dugatkin, Cooperation Among Animals: An Evolu-

[3] J. Hofbauer and K. Sigmund, Evolutionary Games

4

and Population Dynamics(Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1998).

(2002).

[11] G. Abramson and M. Kuperman, Phys. Rev. E 63,

[4] H. Gintis, Game Theory Evolving (Princeton University,

030901 (2001).

Princeton, NJ, 2000).

[5] M.A. Nowak and K. Sigmund, Nature 355, 250 (1992)
[6] M.A. Nowak and R. M. May, Nature 359, 826 (1992);

Int. J. Bifurcation Chaos 3, 35 (1993).

[7] G. Szab´o and C. Hauert, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 118101

[8] F.C. Santos and J. M. Pacheco, Phys. Rev. lett. 95,

[9] M.G. Zimmermann et al., Phys. Rev. E 69, 065102

(2002).

(2004).

098104 (2005).

[10] M. Tomochi and M. Kono, Phys. Rev. E 65, 026112

[12] B.J. Kim et al., Phys. Rev. E 66, 021907 (2002).
[13] C. Hauert and M. Doebeli, Nature 428, 643 (2004).
[14] G. Szab´o and C. T¨oke, Phys. Rev. E 58, 69 (1998).
[15] C. Hauert and G. Szab´o, Am. J. Phys. 73, 405 (2005)
[16] G. Szab´o and C. Hauert, Phys. Rev. E 66, 062903 (2002);
G. Szab´o and J. Vukov, ibid. 69, 036107 (2004); J. Vukov
and G. Szab´o, ibid. 71, 036133 (2005).

[17] A.-L. Barab´asi and R. Albert, Science 286, 509 (1999).
[18] R. Albert and A.-L. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47

(2002).

