FISIKALIPI-05002
Scientiﬁc and Financial Performance Measure : A
Simultaneous Model to Evaluate Scientiﬁc
Activities

L.T. Handoko∗

Group for Theoretical and Computational Physics, Research Center for Physics,
Indonesian Institute of Sciences1, Kompleks Puspiptek Serpong, Tangerang 15310,
Indonesia

Abstract

An alternative model to measure simultaneously scientiﬁc and ﬁnancial
performances of scientiﬁc activities is proposed. This mathematical model
focuses only on the ﬁnal scientiﬁc outcomes in each ﬁscal year to gurantee the
objectivity. The model is suited for the purpose of immediate and quantitative
evaluation needed by policy makers to make decision in the subsequent ﬁscal
year. The model can be applied to any branches of science, while it is also
adjustable to varying macro-economic indicators. This enables the policy
makers to evaluate equally scientiﬁc activities in various ﬁelds of science. It
is argued that implementing the model could realize a fair, transparent and
objective reward and punishment system in any scientiﬁc activities in order
to improve both individual and institutional performances.

Keywords : scientiﬁc and ﬁnancial, R&D policy, evaluation method

5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
5
0
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Email : handoko@lipi.ﬁsika.net
1http://www.ﬁsika.lipi.go.id

1 Introduction

Management is an important aspect of human-being and its activities, including any
kind of scientiﬁc activities. Management as the regulator and also the executor of
regulation needs appropriate tools to implement the existing regulations. Regulation
has been created as a common norm and commitment which should be followed by
all (individual and institutional) fellows in order to establish a mutual relationship.
Since mutual relationship is a crucial point to realize common purposes of all involved
fellows and motivate them to work together.

In the context of scientiﬁc activity, scientiﬁc management plays an important
role, much more than another non-scientiﬁc (bureaucracy, business, etc) activities.
This reﬂects the nature of scientiﬁc activity which is strongly based on the indi-
vidual with unlimited degree of freedom. Because independency and freedom are
necessary conditions for any scientiﬁc activities. On the other hand since a scientiﬁc
activity is mostly supported by public fund, all scientiﬁc fellows and its activities
should be accountable for public. In a real life, however fully transparent, easily-
understandable and accountable scientiﬁc activities are often diﬃcult to be realized.
This is moreless due to the nature of scientiﬁc activity which is in most cases invisible
and unpredictable. Fortunately, in contrast with non-scientiﬁc activities, scientiﬁc
activities are always supposed to generate objective and measureable outcomes in a
period of duration.

This means there is an urgent niche on a speciﬁc tool to measure scientiﬁc per-
formance based on the scientiﬁc outcomes. Because scientiﬁc outcome is the only
element which is measureable. Moreover, performance measurement is not only lim-
ited to scientiﬁc performance, but also takes into account its economic potential.
So far, scientiﬁc activities are almost justiﬁed by the aspect of economic potential
using the method of cost-beneﬁt analysis [1, 2]. While the scientiﬁc performance is
measured naively based on the scientiﬁc outcomes. These methods clearly separate
scientiﬁc and ﬁnancial aspects, although both aspects are closely related each other.
More than that, in daily practice it is hard to measure the objectivity on cost-beneﬁt
method since it adopts somehow absurd references as future potential which is yet
unpredictable.

It is also known more complete method as scientiﬁc and technical human capital
(STHC) [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] which observes a lot of aspects. Though the
method looks ideal, this model is very complicated and involves a lot of subjec-
tive parameters. This reduces the accuracy and validity of the method as an easy,
transparent and objective measurement tool.

Therefore it is clear that as long as concerning scientiﬁc activity, performance
should be measured based on the achievement of scientiﬁc outcome without consid-
ering its process. Inversely, this point makes scientiﬁc activity is easy to measure
and quantize. Motivated by this fact, I propose an alternative tool in this paper
called the Scientiﬁc and Financial Performance Measure (SFPM) Model.

The paper is organized as follow. In Sec. 2 all assumptions introduced in the
model and its theoretical aspects are given, followed by an example on how the model
should be applied in the ﬁeld of physical sciences in Sec. 3. Before concluding the

2

paper, a detail quantitative analysis is described in Sec. 4.

2 Theoretical framework

Now let us ﬁrst discuss the assumptions required in the model. As mentioned
above, the ﬁrst assumption in the model is all measurements are based only on
scientiﬁc outcomes regardless its process. The scientiﬁc outcome itself is deﬁned as
: all outcomes generated in a scientiﬁc activity which have been recognized by
independent third parties in a form of either scientiﬁc documents or other real
activities.

Secondly, the measurement is done in a year basis, i.e. it takes into account all
scientiﬁc outcomes in a ﬁscal year. This assumption is required since the tool is
intended to measure the performances compared to the total budget granted in a
ﬁscal year.

Next assumption is, each outcome is ranked based on its “diﬃculty to accom-
plish”, and is then assigned with an appropriate scientiﬁc point (SP ) based on its
“scientiﬁc weight” representing the “scientiﬁc importance”. The order number (NO)
of all relevant scientiﬁc outcomes must be in order without duplication. On the other
hand, the scientiﬁc point of an outcome may be the same with another neighboring
scientiﬁc outcomes, but it must be smaller (greater) than another outcomes with
diﬀerent points above (below). This diﬀerentiates scientiﬁc outcomes in term of
its ﬁnancial contributions though the scientiﬁc importances might be comparable.
Determination of the orders and the points of scientiﬁc outcomes may diﬀer depend
on the nature of each ﬁeld of science.

Further, it is also assumed some parameters as maximum scientiﬁc point (PM ),
descending rate of scientiﬁc point (PD, in percents) and total scientiﬁc point treshold
per-scientist (PT ). These parameters should be the same for all ﬁelds of science.
This method then enables a universal evaluation and comparation among diﬀerent
branches of science. It should be remarked that the absolute value of scientiﬁc point
itself is less important, because it only represents the scale of discrepancies among
scientiﬁc outcomes. Once the maximum scientiﬁc point and its descending rate have
been determined, a series of available scientiﬁc points for each scientiﬁc outcome can
be obtained through the formula,

SP =

PM , PD × PM , P 2
(cid:8)

D × PM , · · · , P

nO−1
D

× PM , P

nO
D × PM

,

(1)

(cid:9)

where nO denotes the number of relevant scientiﬁc outcomes in a ﬁeld. Remark
that one should take the integer of (SP )i for the sake of simplicity. Concerning the
appropriateness, it is natural to restrict the scales of parameters for instance to be
in order of,

PM > 100 , PT > 100 , PD = (50 ∼ 90)% .

(2)

if one puts the minimum value of SP should be greater than 1 and nO > 10. Namely
if one takes PM = 10 in this case, then the number of available (SP )i is too small
compared with nO and leads to a diﬃculty in assigning the scientiﬁc point for each
relevant scientiﬁc outcome. This will be clariﬁed through an illustration given in

3

Sec. 3. While the parameter PM works just as an overwhole scaling factor, it should
be remarked that PT and PD are not absolute and subject to further detail analysis.
However, a general prescription to determine these parameters quantitatively will
be discussed in detail in Sec. 4.

Economic aspect related to ﬁnancial performance is represented by the economic
coeﬃcient (CE) which holds for all branches of science in a national scope. This
parameter should be determined initially, and thereafter can be made varying au-
tomatically related to the macro economic indicators as inﬂation, economic growth,
currency rate, etc.

Finally, using all assumptions introduced above one can consider the ratios to
measure the scientiﬁc and ﬁnancial performances. For this purpose, I propose the
following formulae,

RS ≡

1
nP × PT

nO

Xi=1

[(SP )i × (QO)i] ,

(3)

to represent the ratio of scientiﬁc performance with nP denotes the number of sci-
entists involved in the collaboration which generates the outcomes and QO is the
quantity of each scientiﬁc outcome. On the other hand, the ratio of ﬁnancial per-
formance is given by,

RF ≡

CE
BT

nO

Xi=1 (cid:20)

(SP )i × (QO)i
(NO)i

(cid:21)

,

(4)

(5)

where BT is the total budget granted to the activity. From these equations, it is
clear that RF is related directly to the scientiﬁc point and the order number of each
scientiﬁc outcome.

Of course the ﬁnancial performance here measures only the “indirect” ﬁnancial
outcomes generated in a scientiﬁc activity or by a scientist in a ﬁscal year. However
incorporating the “direct” ﬁnancial outcomes, if any, is rather trivial, that is just
adding it up to RF . This means the total ratio for ﬁnancial performance RT
F becomes,

RT

F ≡ RF +

FO
BT

,

where FO is the total amount of direct ﬁnancial outcomes in the same unit as BT
and CE.

As shown in Eq. (3), the model ignores the weight of each member in a scientiﬁc
collaboration or institution which generates the scientiﬁc outcomes. This means,
every member is awarded the same scientiﬁc point. This simpliﬁcation is taken to
avoid further subjectivity in the evaluation. However, this point might be relevant
only when one evaluates the performance of individual scientist.

Now we are ready to apply the model in a speciﬁc ﬁeld of science to get the

feeling on how the model should be applied and could be usefull.

4

3 Application

From research management perspective, the model suggests two levels of regulators
to keep the fairness and objectiveness in determining all parameters introduced
above, that is

1. The oﬃcial bureaucracy with an authority on scientiﬁc activity.

The management in this level is responsible for determining the values of global
parameters which hold for all branches of scientiﬁc activities, i.e. PM , PD, PT
and CE.

2. The relevant scientiﬁc community.

The scientiﬁc community in a speciﬁc ﬁeld is responsible for determining the
order and assigning the appropriate values of scientiﬁc point according to its
order for all relevant scientiﬁc outcomes in the ﬁeld. Because these parameters
are unique for a speciﬁc ﬁeld.

Once all parameters are ﬁxed, the system is ready for evaluating previous scien-
tiﬁc activities and also decision-making of future scientiﬁc activities as well. Here,
let us illustrate and apply the model in the ﬁeld of physical sciences. Because the
global physics community has already several comprehensive databases comprising
a lot of scientiﬁc outcomes available on the net which are very usefull in this study.
Taking simple statistics of the published papers in peer-reviewed journals, confer-
ence proceedings and so on, it has been found that concerning relevant scientiﬁc
outcomes in the ﬁeld as shown in the second column in Tab. 1, the appropriate
scale for maximum scientiﬁc point should be PM = 200. Again it does not matter
if one takes 300 or even 400 for PM , since it only reﬂects the whole scale of evalu-
ation. The relevant scientiﬁc outcomes listed in the table are all kind of outcomes
retrieved from three major databases in physics [12, 13, 14]. Putting for instance
the descending rate PD = 75% and using Eq. (1), one obtains a series of available
values for scientiﬁc points,

SP = {200, 150, 112, 84, 63, 47, 35, 26, 19, 14, 10, 7, 5, 3, 2, 1} .

(6)

Assuming the scientiﬁc points are taken as written in the third column and the
economic coeﬃcient has been namely taken to be US$ 100, one can directly calculate
the ﬁnancial points (FO) using the convertion formula for a single outcome, i.e.
nO = 1,

(FO)i =

CE × (SP )i
(NO)i

.

(7)

The results are written in the last column for the order numbers and the scientiﬁc
points assigned in the ﬁrst and third columns in Tab. 1.

Utilizing Tab. 1 and Eqs. (3) and (4), one can immediately calculate the whole
performance of an individual scientist, a single scientiﬁc project and a scientiﬁc
institution using their real outcomes in a ﬁscal year. Since everything is simply
mathematics, once the global parameters and the order of scientiﬁc outcomes for a
speciﬁc ﬁeld have been determined, the rest can be done automatically to get the

5

NO

SCIENTIFIC OUTCOME

International regular journal

International scientiﬁc award

1. Foreign patent
2.
3. Local patent
4. Book published by foreign publisher
5. National scientiﬁc award
6. Copyright
7.
8. Trademark
9. Supervising passed PhD disertation
10. Book published by local publisher
11.
International proceeding
12. Pupular article in foreign media
13. Book translation
14. Supervising passed MSc theses
15.
16. Trainer
17. Supervising passed BSc theses
18. Local regular journal
19. Local proceeding
20. Popular article in local media

Invited speaker

SP
200 US$
200 US$
150 US$
150 US$
150 US$
112 US$
112 US$
84 US$
63 US$
63 US$
47 US$
47 US$
47 US$
35 US$
26 US$
26 US$
19 US$
14 US$
10 US$
US$
7

FINANCIAL
20,000,-
10,000,-
5,000,-
3,750,-
3,000,-
1,867,-
1,600,-
1,050,-
700,-
630,-
427,-
392,-
362,-
250,-
173,-
163,-
112,-
78,-
53,-
35,-

Table 1: An example of relevant scientiﬁc outcomes in the ﬁeld of physics science,
the scientiﬁc points and the ﬁnancial convertions for PM = 200, PD = 75% and
CE = US$ 100,-.

total score. For example if a physicist, granted with a totally US$ 5,000 research
fund, has published two papers in major international journals and one book through
an international publisher, then the scientiﬁc and ﬁnancial performances in that
ﬁscal year become,

RS =

RF =

(150 × 1) + (112 × 2)
1 × 250

(3, 750 × 1) + (1, 600 × 2)
5, 000

×100% = 109% ,

×100% = 139% ,

(8)

for PT = 250.
In this case only the indirect ﬁnancial outcomes have been taken
into account since the direct one is absent. The same procedure should be taken to
obtain the performances for an institution or a single project.

For the order of scientiﬁc outcomes and its scientiﬁc points one can rely on
the common sense recognized by relevant scientiﬁc community in the ﬁeld. So the
remaining problem is how to reduce the subjectivity in determining the global pa-
rameters. This problem stays on the oﬃcial bureaucracy as mentioned above who
might not be familiar with the scientiﬁc standards. In the next section a general
prescription to deal with this problem is discussed.

6

4 Further analysis

At this stage, one can obtain easily the correlation between the scientiﬁc and ﬁnan-
cial performances using Eqs. (3) and (4) as follows,

for each outcome. The slope is determined by the angle θi which satisﬁes the relation,

(RF )i = tan θi × (RS)i ,

tan θi =

CE × PT × nP
BT

1
(NO)i

.

(9)

(10)

This correlation function is depicted in Fig. 1 for the 1st till the nO−th scientiﬁc
outcome with nP = 1. The horizontal length for each outcome is determined by
(RS)i = (PD)

× (PM /PT ).

i

The allowed region in the RS − RF plane is given in Fig. 2. One can roughly
divide the region into two areas, the upper and lower areas from the treshold line.
The treshold line shows the equilibrium condition where the scientiﬁc and ﬁnancial
performances are completely equal, i.e. tan θtreshold = 1. It can be argued that this
line might be used to determine whether a scientiﬁc outcome relative to its total
budget is categorized as applied (ﬁnancial oriented) or non-applied (scientiﬁc ori-
ented) outcome. This mathematical deﬁnition of applied and non-applied outcome
is new and provides a new way to categorize the outcomes in any scientiﬁc activities.
From this point of view, the deﬁnition of “applied” and “non-applied” are rather
mathematical than subject to wide interpretation as the conventional view. This
means, as experienced in daily life, the interpretation of applied and non-applied
outcomes are non-trivial and dynamic depending on how much the total budget (BT )
and how many person are needed to generate the outcomes. This result generalizes
common sense of “applicability”, but it is actually more natural. Since something is
“applicable” if someone is able to accomplish it with less budget than another ones
which require more regardless how much the potential revenue can be obtained in
the future which is always the subject of subjectivity.

Moreover as shown in Eq. (10), this result also proves quantitatively that the
number of scientists in a collaboration is proportional to the level of “applicability”
of their outcomes. Actually one can observe that, for instance theoretical studies
which are less applicable are generally worked out by groups with less people than
the experimental ones.

On the other hand, the treshold line could be utilized to determine the values
of PD. One ﬁrst puts a speciﬁc scientiﬁc outcome, which can be clearly categorized
as either applied or non-applied outcome for a reference value of BT , to be on
the treshold line. Thereafter, another scientiﬁc outcomes can be put into one of
two regions relative to the previous one. The parameter PD then can inversely be
extracted such that all outcomes stay on the desired regions for given values of
PM and PT . PT can be obtained in advanced through statistic analysis on some
existing databases of scientiﬁc outcomes in the related ﬁeld. This prescription at
least would signiﬁcantly reduce the ambiguity in determining the global parameters
as mentioned in Sec. 2.

7

RF

RF

x

DP

x

DP2

x

DP3

x

no
DP
. . .

m line

u

maxim

applied region

treshold line

e

m i n i m u m  li n

θ = 45o

non−applied region

R
S

0

(x

)
/
PM PT

RS

0

Figure 1: Correlation between RF and RS
for each scientiﬁc outcome per-person.

Figure 2: Treshold between the appliend
and non-applied sciences in term of its sci-
entiﬁc and ﬁnancial performances.

5 Conclusion and discussion

A new alternative tool, the SFPM Model, to evaluate scientiﬁc and ﬁnancial per-
formances has been discussed. In the model, a simultaneous relation between scien-
tiﬁc and ﬁnancial performances has been formulated assuming that the quantitative
scores should be extracted only from the scientiﬁc outcomes. The model solves
a crucial problem on how to measure simultaneously both scientiﬁc and ﬁnancial
performances of scientiﬁc activities in various ﬁelds. It provides a simple tool for
immediate evaluation which is in practical daily management urgently needed. Since
the model is based on the completely quantitative measurements, it could avoid any
ambiguities and then guarantees the objectiveness of evaluation process. A sus-
tainable evaluation utilizing the model could also measure and integrate long-term
scientiﬁc and ﬁnancial performances in complement with the other known evaluation
methods.

Here, I list several advantages of measurement tool based on the SFPM Model,

• Since it is based only on the scientiﬁc outcomes, the objectivity and trans-

parency of measurement can be guaranteed.

• A single year base method makes the evaluation process and decision-making
for next ﬁscal year easier, since the result reﬂects an up-to-date real condition.

• In long term, the whole annual evaluations of each fellow can be compiled to
implement better compensation system. For example, the evaluation result

8

can be used as a basic reference to distribute and allocate human resources
and funding to each individual or institution.

• The same tool can be used to evaluate the advisability of incoming proposals

in term of the promising targets claimed in.

Implementing the SFPM measurement tool consistently and continously in long
term for each individual, scientiﬁc project and institution could generate perfor-
mance indicators in each level. This has a great potential to help identifying the
fundamental problems related to scientiﬁc activities in a regional or national scale.
Combining the result with a consistent compensation system could also improve the
whole scientiﬁc performance.

Most of the parameters introduced above are not absolute and only indicate the
scale, which make them easy to be determined without requiring deep considera-
tion. However, more serious consideration is still required for few of them, which
especially constitute all ﬁelds absolutely as descending rate of scientiﬁc point (PD)
and total scientiﬁc point treshold per-scientist (PT ). The parameter PT can be de-
termined in a comprehensive way by for instance taking the average of all scientiﬁc
outcomes generated by scientists around the world. The data can be retrieved easily
through the existing databases available on the net. This result further can be used
together with the treshold line method described in Sec. 4 to determine quanti-
tatively the appropriate descending rate PD. Therefore, further research utilizing
available databases providing global [12, 13, 14, 15] and local [16] scientiﬁc outcomes
on the net is highly recommended.

Finally, we would like to notice that an online calculator applying this model is
now under construction. Technically, this kind of online tool can be embedded in any
existing databases (patent, bibliography, etc) to enable a full automatic evaluation
process for research institutions and scientists around the world. An example with
the scope of Indonesian scientiﬁc community is still under progress through the
DBRIpTek database [16, 17].

Acknowledgment

We would like to appreciate D. Sajuti for providing the problem which initially
motivated this work, and A. Kusnowo for fruitfull discussion during the ﬁnal stage
of this work. This project is partly funded by Riset Kompetitif LIPI (ﬁscal year
2005).

References

[1] B. Bozeman and J. Melkers, Evaluating R&D impacts: Methods and practice,

Boston, Kluwer Academic Publishers (1993). .

[2] R. Kostoﬀ, H. Averch and D. Chubin, Evaluation Review 18 (1994) 3.

9

[3] G. Becker, Journal of Political Economics 70 (1962) S9.

[4] T. W. Schultz, The economic value of education, New York, Columbia Univer-

sity Press (1963). .

[5] M. Polanyi, The tacit dimension, London, Cox & Wyman (1967). .

[6] M. Polanyi, The logic of tacit inference : Knowing and being, London, Routledge

& Kegan Paul (1969). .

[7] B. Bozeman, Policy Studies Journal 14 (1986) 519.

[8] P. Bourdieu, Handbook of theory and research for the sociology of education

New York, Greenwood (1986). .

[9] P. Bourdieu and L. Wacquant, An invitation to reﬂexive sociology, Chicago,

University of Chicago Press (1992).

[10] J. C. Coleman, American Journal of Sociology 94 (1988) S95.

[11] J. C. Coleman, Foundations of social theory, Cambridge, The Belknap Press of

Harvard University Press (1990).

[12] SLAC Spires, http://www.slac.stanford.edu/spires/.

[13] arXiv.org - e-Print archive, http://www.arxiv.org.

[14] Astrophysics Data System - NASA ADS, http://adsabs.harvard.edu.

[15] Google Scholar, http://scholar.google.com.

[16] DBRIpTek

- Database Riset,

Ilmu Pengetahuan

dan Teknologi,

http://www.dbriptek.lipi.go.id (2003).

[17] OCSP

-

Online

Calculator

for

Scientiﬁc

Performance,

http://www.dbriptek.lipi.go.id/ocsp/ (2005).

10

