5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
6
1
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Correlation Networks Among Currencies

Takayuki Mizuno1a, Misako Takayasua, Hideki Takayasub

aDepartment of Computational Intelligence and Systems Science, Interdisciplinary
Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology, G3-52
4259 Nagatuta-cho, Yokohama 226-8502, Japan
bSony Computer Science Laboratories Inc., 3-14-13 Higashigotanda,
Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 141-0022, Japan

Abstract

By analyzing the foreign exchange market data of various currencies, we derive a
hierarchical taxonomy of currencies constructing minimal-spanning trees. Clustered
structure of the currencies and the key currency in each cluster are found. The
clusters match nicely with the geographical regions of corresponding countries in
the world such as Asia or East Europe, the key currencies are generally given by
major economic countries as expected.

Key words: Econophysics, Foreign exchange market, Network
PACS: 89.65.Gh,89.75.Hc,02.50.Sk

Introduction
A value of currency is expected to reﬂect the whole economic status of the
country, and a foreign exchange rate is considered to be a measure of economic
balance of the two countries. In the real world there are several economic blocks
such as Asia, but it is not clariﬁed whether such economic blocks aﬀect the
foreign exchange rate ﬂuctuations or not. From the viewpoint of physics, the
foreign exchange market is a typical open system having interactions with
all information around the world including price changes of other markets.
Also, the mean transaction intervals of foreign exchange markets are typically
about 10 seconds, and it is not clear how the market correlates with the
huge scale information of a whole country or the economic blocks. In order
to empirically establish the relations between microscopic market ﬂuctuations
and macroscopic economic states, it is important to investigate the interaction
of currency rates in the high precision data of foreign exchange markets.

1 Corresponding author.
E-mail address: mizuno@smp.dis.titech.ac.jp (T.Mizuno)

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Preprint

24 September 2013

The correlations among market prices have been analyzed intensively for
stock prices by using minimal-spanning trees or self-organizing maps [1] [2]
[3] [4] [5]. The interaction among stocks is expected to be caused by infor-
mation ﬂow, and direction of the information ﬂow has been investigated from
a cross-correlation function with a time shift [6][7][8]. L. Kullmann, et al.
and J. Kertesz, et al. introduced a directed network among companies for
the stocks [7][8]. We observe the interaction among foreign exchange markets
using minimal-spanning tree.

We construct a currency minimal-spanning tree by deﬁning correlation among
foreign exchange rates as the distance. The minimal-spanning tree is a kind of
currency map and is helpful for constructing a stable portfolio of the foreign
exchange rates. We use correlation coeﬃcient of daily diﬀerence of the loga-
rithm rate in order to detect the topological arrangement of the currencies.
The correlation coeﬃcient is computed between all the possible pairs of rates
in a given time period. We classify the currencies on the minimal-spanning tree
according to the correlation coeﬃcients, and ﬁnd key currencies in each clus-
ter. We analyze 26 currencies and 3 metals from January ‘99 up to December
‘03 provided by Exchange Rate Service [9].

Method of hierarchical taxonomy of currencies
We introduce a method of hierarchical taxonomy of currencies. We ﬁrst deﬁne
correlation function between a pair of foreign exchange rates in order to quan-
tify synchronization between the currencies. We focus on a daily rate change
dPi(t) deﬁned as

dPi(t) ≡ log Pi(t + 1day) − log Pi(t),

(1)

where Pi(t) is the rate i at the time t. Using the rate change, correlation
coeﬃcient between a pair of the rates can be calculated by cross-correlation
function as

Cij =

r

hdPi · dPji − hdPii hdPji
2

(hdP 2

i i − hdPii

)(

dP 2
j

− hdPji

)

,

2

D

E

(2)

where hdPii represents the statistical average of dPi(t) for a given time. The
correlation coeﬃcient Cij has values ranging from –1 to 1.

We get n × n matrix of Cij by calculating the cross-correlation function for all
combinations among the given rates when n kind of foreign exchange rates are
given. It is clear that the matrix has symmetry Cij = Cji with Cii = 1 from the
deﬁnition of Eq.(2). We apply the correlation matrix to construct a currency
minimal-spanning tree (MST), and can intuitively understand network among
the foreign exchange rates using the MST. The MST forms taxonomy for a

2

topological space of the n rates. The MST is a tree having n − 1 edges that
minimize the sum of the edge distances in a connected weighted graph of the
n rates. The edge distances satisfy the following three axioms of a Euclidean
distance: (i) dij = 0 if and only if i = j, (ii) dij = dji, (iii) dij ≤ dik + dkj.
Here, dij expresses a distance for a pair of the rate i and the rate j. We
need Euclidean distances between the rates in order to construct the MST.
However, the correlation coeﬃcient Cij does not satisfy the axioms. We can
convert the correlation coeﬃcient by appropriate functions so that the axioms
can be applied [1]. One of the appropriate functions is

dij =

2(1 − Cij),

q

(3)

where dij is a distance for a pair of the rate i and the rate j.

We construct a MST for the n rates using n × n matrix of dij. One of methods
which construct MST is called Kruskal’s algorithm [10][11]. The Kruskal’s
algorithm is a simple method consisting of the following steps: In the ﬁrst
step we choose a pair of rates with nearest distance and connect with a line
proportional to the distance. In the second step we also connect a pair with
the 2nd nearest distance. In the third step we also connect the nearest pair
that is not connected by the same tree. We repeat the third step until all the
given rates are connected in one tree. Finally, we achieve a connected graph
without cycles. The graph is a MST linking the n rates.

dij between two successive rates encountered
We introduce maximal distance
when moving form the starting rate i to the ending rate j over the shortest
b
dad is dbc
part of the MST connecting the two rates. For example, the distance
when the MST is given as
b

a – b — c – d,

dij satisﬁes axioms of Euclidean
where dbc ≥ max {dab, dcd}. The distance
distance and a following ultrametric inequality with a condition stronger than
b
the axiom (iii) ˆdij ≤ ˆdik + ˆdkj [12],

dij ≤ max
b

dik,
b

dkj
b

n

.

o

(4)

dij is called Subdominant ultrametric distances [10][13]. A space
The distance
connected by the distances provides a well deﬁned topological arrangement
b
that has associated with a unique indexed hierarchy. For a set of foreign ex-
change rates, we describe the hierarchy by constructing MST. The result will
be elaborated in the next section.

3

Correlation networks among currencies
The traders in a foreign exchange market are always observing many other
markets. Among them, they pay a special attention to the currencies of the
countries which economically inﬂuences the country using the currency they
are trading. For example, traders of Swiss Franc pay attention to Euro. There-
fore, correlation between CHF(Swiss Franc)/USD and EUR(Euro)/USD is
strong and there is a time delay of order less than a minute between the two
rates because changes of EUR/USD feed back to CHF/USD of the future
[6]. We investigated 26 currencies and 3 metals in New York market from Jan-
uary ‘99 to December ‘03 as listed in Table.1. Probability density distributions
of correlation coeﬃcients among the currencies and the metals measured by
USD(United States Dollar) for each year are shown in Fig.1. Here, the corre-
lation coeﬃcients are calculated from logarithm rate changes. The nontrivial
various correlations are found for each year.

We clarify the market networks using MST. We ﬁrst analyze the currencies
and the metals measured by USD. The MST is constructed by the Kruskal’s
algorithm using database of changes of the foreign exchange rates and the
metal prices. We show the MST and an indexed hierarchical tree associated
with the MST in Fig.2(a) and (b). We focus on EUR in Fig.2(a). Neighbors
of the EUR are European currencies, such as Swiss Franc, Hungarian Forint,
and Norwegian Krone. Other currencies also connect with the currencies of
geographically close countries in the MST. From these results we notice that
the currencies and the metals cluster with East Europe, West Europe, Oceania,
South Amelica, Asia, and metal.

We can ﬁnd more clearly these clustered structures by observing the indexed
hierarchical tree in conjunction with the MST in Fig.2(b). In the right side of
the indexed hierarchical tree, the West Europe cluster (SEK-Swedish Krona,
NOK-Norwegian Krone, CHF, EUR) and the East Europe cluster (SKK-
Slovakian Koruna, CZK-Czech Koruna, HUF-Hungarian Forint) connect be-
tween EUR and HUF form Europe cluster. The Europe cluster also connects
GBP-British Pound and PLZ-Polish Zloty. We can also clearly ﬁnd the Ocea-
nia cluster (AUD-Australian Dollar, NZD-New Zealand Dollar), the Asian
cluster (IDR-Indonesian Rupee, JPY-Japanese Yen, SGD-Singapore Dollar,
THB-Thai Baht), the South American cluster (BRR-Brazilian Real, CLP-
Chilean Peso, MXP-Mexican Peso), and the metal cluster (Au-Gold, Ag-Silver,
Pt-Platinum). The key currencies which connect with some currencies are
EUR, HUF, AUD, JPY and MXP in the clusters. Therefore, the clusters
match nicely with the geographical regions of corresponding countries in the
world, and the key currencies are generally given by major economic countries.

We next investigate relations between USD and other currencies. The metal
cluster is almost independent of the currency clusters in Fig.2(a) and (b).
Especially, the platinum most loosely connects with the currencies in the

4

metal cluster. We focus on the platinum with few inﬂuences to the curren-
cies, and construct a MST using the currencies and the metals measured by
the platinum. Fig.3(a) and (b) show the MST and an indexed hierarchical
tree associated with the MST. Unlike Fig.2(a), one currency has big inﬂu-
ence to other many currencies in Fig.3(a). The currency is USD as naturally
expected; namely, USD has substantial weight in the global world economy.
There are some European currencies centered around the EUR in the left side
of Fig.3(a). The currencies (EUR, CHF, NOK, SEK, GBP) form the hierar-
chical tree which does not contain USD in Fig.3(b). Only European currencies
are inﬂuenced by EUR rather than USD.

Discussion
Each country’s currency inﬂuences currencies of neighboring countries. We
showed correlation networks among currencies by using MST. We found some
clusters in the correlation networks. The clusters match nicely with the geo-
graphical regions of corresponding countries in the world. The key currencies
are generally given by major economic countries in the clusters. It was con-
ﬁrmed that USD is virtually the standard global currency because especially
USD has big inﬂuence to other currencies. Therefore, minor currency depends
on USD and the key currency of the region where it belongs. Traders gen-
erally handle the job of only one foreign exchange rate in exchange markets.
Therefore, the dependence among currencies means that the traders are al-
ways observing not only the market they trade in, but also markets of USD
and the key currencies. They feed back the changes of the currencies in their
own trading.

In ﬁnancial engineering, many models independently describe a foreign ex-
change rate, assuming that interactions among diﬀerent currencies can be
processed by random noises of the exchange rate based on the concepts of a
mean ﬁeld approximation. The theory should be improved for minor curren-
cies.

We expect that the hierarchical taxonomy of currencies is helpful for the im-
provement. We ﬁnally discuss the correlation networks from a standpoint of
monetary systems. In international trades between two traders, one of the
both traders has to exchange currency in an exchange market except when
the both traders are using the same currency. Therefore, there are exchange
risks, such as exchange fee, in the international trades. Governments are inter-
ested in regional currency without the exchange risks such as the Euro because
they want to invigorate international trades in a region. When introducing the
regional currency, we have to determine basket ratio of the regional currency
in consideration of economical dependency among the countries. The econom-
ical dependency can be clariﬁed using our theory of the correlation networks.
Therefore, we expect that the correlation networks are helpful in future mon-
etary system.

5

Acknowledgement
T. Mizuno is supported by Research Fellowships of the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science for Young Scientists.

References

[1] R. N. Mantegna and H. E. Stanley, An Introduction to Econophysics -Correlation

and Complexity in Finance-, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.

[2] R. N. Mantegna, Hierarchical Structure in Financial Markets, Eur. Phys. J. B

11 pp.193-197, 1999.

[3] S. Micciche, F. Lillo, G. Bonanno and R. N. Mantegna, Univariate and
in The Application of
multivariate statistical aspects ofequity volatility,
Econophysics – Proceedings of the Second Nikkei Econophysics Symposium,
Springer Verlag Tokyo, 2004, 30-42.

[4] G. Bonanno, G. Caldarelli, F. Lillo and R. N. Mantegna, Topology of correlation
based minimal spanning trees in real and model markets, Physical Review E 68,
046130, 2003. cond-mat/0211546.

[5] A.A.Zherebtsov, Yu.A.Kuperin, Application of Self-Organizing Maps

for

clustering DJIA and NASDAQ100 portfolios, cond-mat/0305330.

[6] T. Mizuno, S. Kurihara, M. Takayasu and H. Takayasu, Time-scale dependence
of correlations among foreign currencies, in The Application of Econophysics
– Proceedings of the Second Nikkei Econophysics Symposium, Springer Verlag
Tokyo, 2004, 24-29.

[7] L. Kullmann, J. Kertesz, K. Kaski, (2002) Time-dependent cross-correlations
between diﬀerent stock returns: A directed network of inﬂuence, Phys. Rev. E 66,
026125.

[8] J. Kertesz, L. Kullmann, A. G. Zawadowski, R. Karadi and K. Kaski, Time
dependent correlations and response in stock market data and models, in The
Application of Econophysics – Proceedings of the Second Nikkei Econophysics
Symposium, Springer Verlag Tokyo, 2004, 43-50.

[9] Exchange Rate Service: http://paciﬁc.commerce.ubc.ca/xr/ .

[10] D. B. West, Introduction to Graph Theory, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs NJ,

1996.

[11] C. H. Papadimitriou and K. Steigitz, Combinatorial Optimization, Prentice-

Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs NJ, 1982.

[12] R. Rammal, G. Toulouse, and M. A. Virasoro, Ultrametricity for Physicists,

Rev. Mod. Phys. 58, 765-788, 1986.

[13] J. P. Benzecri, L’analyse des donnees 1, La Taxinomie (Dunod, Paris,1984)

6

[14] Hokky

Situngkir, Hierarchical Taxonomy

in Multi-Party

System,

nlin.PS/0405005.

7

Table.1 The set of Daily data for 26 currencies and 3 metal

8

Code Currency

AUD Australian Dollar

BRR Brazilian Real

GBP

British Pound

CAD Canadian Dollar

CLP

Chilean Peso

COP Colombian Peso

CZK Czech Koruna

EUR Euro

HUF Hungarian Forint

IDR

JPY

Indonesian Rupiah

Japanese Yen

MXP Mexican Peso

NZD New Zesland Dollar

NOK Norwegian Kroner

PEN

Peruvian New Sole

PHP

Philippines Peso

PLZ

Polish Zloty

RUR Russian Ruble

SGD Singapre Dollar

SKK Slovakian Koruna

ZAR

South African Rand

KRW South Korean Won

SEK

Swedish Krona

CHF

Swiss Franc

THB

Thai Baht

USD

U.S. Dollar

Au

Ag

Pt

Ounce of Gold in New York market

Ounce of Silver in New York market

Ounce of Platinum in New York market

9

Fig.1 PDF of correlation coeﬃcient for currencies measured by US dollar for
every year.

Fig.2 (a): MST for the currencies and the metals measured by USD. (b):
Indexed hierarchical tree obtained for the currencies and the metals.

Fig.3 (a): MST for the currencies and the metals measured by ounce of plat-
inum. (b): Indexed hierarchical tree obtained for the currencies and the metals.

10

This figure "Fig2a.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0508164v1

This figure "Fig2b.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0508164v1

This figure "Fig3a.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0508164v1

This figure "Fig3b.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0508164v1

