Europhysics Letters

PREPRINT

5
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
3
2
8
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

From sand to networks: a study of multi-disciplinarity

R. Lambiotte 1 and M. Ausloos 1
1 SUPRATECS, Universit´e de Li`ege, B5 Sart-Tilman, B-4000 Li`ege, Belgium

PACS. 89.75.Fb – Structures and organization in complex systems.
PACS. 87.23.Ge – Dynamics of social systems.
PACS. 89.75.Hc – Networks and genealogical trees.

Abstract. – In this paper, we study empirically co-authorship networks of neighbouring scien-
tiﬁc disciplines, and describe the system by two coupled networks. By considering a large time
window, we focus on the properties of the interface between the disciplines. We also focus on
the time evolution of the co-authorship network, and highlight a rich phenomenology including
ﬁrst order transition and cluster bouncing and merging. Finally, we present a simple Ising-like
model (CDIM) that reproduces qualitatively the structuring of the system in homogeneous
phases.

Introduction. – Since the pioneering works of Barabasi and Albert [1, 2], ”complex net-
works” have become a more and more active ﬁeld, attracting physicists from the whole sub-
ﬁelds of statistical physics, ranging from theoretical non-equilibrium statistical physics to
experimental granular compaction. These complex structures are usually composed by large
number of internal components (the nodes), and describe a wide variety of systems of high
technological and intellectual importance, examples including the Internet [3], business rela-
tions between companies [4], ecological networks [5] and airplane route networks [6]. As a
paradigm for large-scale social networks, people usually consider co-authorship networks [7],
namely networks where nodes represent scientists, and where a link is drawn between them if
they co-authored a common paper. Their study has been very active recently, due to their com-
plex social structure [8], to the ubiquity of their bipartite structure in complex systems [9] [10],
and to the large databases available (arXiv and Science Index).

In this paper, we analyze data for such collaboration networks and focus on the develop-
ment of neighbouring scientiﬁc disciplines in the course of time, thereby eyeing the spreading
of new ideas in the science community. Let us stress that the identiﬁcation of the mechanisms
responsible for knowledge diﬀusion and, possibly, scientiﬁc avalanches, is primordial in order
to understand the scientiﬁc response to external political decisions, and to develop eﬃcient
policy recommendations. In section 2, we concentrate empirically on this issue by studying
data extracted from the arXiv database. To do so, we discriminate two sub-communities of
physicists, those studying ”complex networks” and those studying ”granular media”. This
choice is motivated by the relative closeness of these ﬁelds, that allows interactions between
sub-communities (inter-disciplinarity collaboration), and the passage of a scientist from one
ﬁeld to the other (scientist mobility). The data analysis highlights that most contacts be-
tween the two disciplines are driven by inter-disciplinary collaborations, and reveals complex
c(cid:13) EDP Sciences

2

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

Fig. 1 – Small disconnected island from data collected between March 2004 and March 2005.
Dashed/Solid lines represent a collaboration in granular media/networks. In that system, J. Kertesz
plays a central and inter-disciplinary role.

time-dependent properties. In section 3, we present a simple model based on the empirical
observations. It is important to point that science spreading is usually modeled by master
equations with auto-catalytic processes [11], or by epidemic models on static networks [12].
In this article, however, we present a novel approach where the structure of the network itself
evolves in an epidemic way.

Empirical data. – The data set contains all articles from arXiv in the time interval
[1995 : 2005], that contain the word ”network” or (exclusive ”or”) the word ”granular” in
their abstract and are classiﬁed as ”cond-mat”. In the following, we assume that this simple
semantic ﬁlter is suﬃcient to distinguish the collaborations between scientists. Nonetheless, we
recognize that the method does not ensure a perfect characterisation of the papers subject, e.g.
some ”network papers” may not focus on complex networks, such as The response function
of a sphere in a viscoelastic two-ﬂuid medium by Levine and Lubensky [13].
In order to
discriminate the authors and avoid spurious data, we checked the names and the ﬁrst names
of the authors. Moreover, in order to avoid multiple ways for an author to cosign a paper,
we also took into account the initial notation of the prenames. For instance, Marcel Ausloos
and M. Ausloos are the same person, while Marcel Ausloos and Mike Ausloos are considered
to be diﬀerent. Let us stress that this method may lead to ambiguities if an initial refers to
two diﬀerent ﬁrst names. Nonetheless, we have veriﬁed that this case occurs only once in the
data set (Hawoong, Hyeong-Chai and H. Jeong), so that its eﬀects are negligible. Given this
identiﬁcation method, we ﬁnd 3297 scientists and 2305 articles. Among these scientists, 105
have written their articles by themselves, i.e. without co-author. As these people are excluded
from the co-authorship network, we neglect them in the following.
In the 3192 remaining
scientists, 2270 ones have written at least one ”network” article, and 1072 ones have written
at least one ”granular” article. The 150 scientists who have written articles in the two ﬁelds
are obviously multi-disciplinary scientists, and thereby ensure direct communication between
the two scientiﬁc ﬁelds.

R. Lambiotte and M. Ausloos: From sand to networks: a study of multi-disciplinarity3

Fig. 2 – 5 main islands from the data collected between March 1995 and March 2005. The large
connected island encompasses 36% of the total number of scientists.

Fig. 3 – Zoom on the main island from data collected between March 2004 and March 2005. The
system shows two well-separated homogeneous phases, that are connected by one multi-disciplinary
scientist (A. Barrat). It is important to note that, if this author is active in both ﬁelds, his collabo-
ration networks are distinct in each ﬁeld.

4

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

Fig. 4 – In (a), time evolution of the proportion of ”network” links in the main island. In (b), time
evolution of the number of nodes (scientists) in the two largest connected islands. The vertical lines
point to the critical events occuring in the system (see main text).

In order to build the co-authorship network, we apply the usual method [14], namely we
consider a network of scientists placed at nodes, with a link between them if they co-authored
a common paper. In order to discriminate the collaboration type between scientists (Fig.1),
we use diﬀerent edge shapes, namely solid and dashed lines. Moreover, we also discriminate
scientists as ”granular”, ”network” or ”multi-disciplinary” scientists, depending on their col-
laborations. By convention, if more than 70% of their links are ”granular”/”network”, the
author is considered as ”granular”/”network”, and is depicted by a circle/rectangle. Else, the
author is multi-disciplinary and is depicted by an ellipse. For a color-based version of the
discrimination, see [15]. As a result (Fig.2), the system is made of two coupled networks, i.e.
diﬀerent networks layed on the same nodes. It consists in a large connected island of 1180
scientists and of a multitude of small disconnected clusters, –reminiscent of the clique habits
of authors. Let us stress that the main island exhibits typical features of social networks, e.g.
strongly connected scientists [16] and modular structures [17]. In order to study the interface
between the two scientiﬁc ﬁelds, we have focused on the 150 multi-disciplinary scientists i
in the system, each of them being characterized by N i
N ”granular”/”network” links.
i=1 N i
Data analysis shows that their total number of links N = 1
N is equal to 733.
In contrast, the total number of collaboration pairs (i, j) that are related by both kinds of
links is equal to 63, i.e. there are 126 such links. This shows that most contacts between
the two disciplines are driven by a change of the collaboration network (Fig.3), and not by
a cooperative switch of the collaboration network. In other word, when a scientist works in
two ﬁelds, he works in each ﬁeld with diﬀerent persons. Let us stress, however, that there
are notable exceptions, such as the triplet made of (F. Coppex, M. Droz, A. Lipowski) who
work actively together in both ﬁelds. It is also important to note the existence of well-deﬁned
phases, namely regions of the network homogeneously connected by ”granular”/”network”
links, thereby conﬁrming that authors collaborate primarily with others with whom their
research focus is aligned [18].

G and N i

G + N i

2 P50

In the remainder of this section, we focus on the time evolution of the above coupled net-
works. To do so, we consider overlapping time windows of 3 years, starting at July 1996, that
we move forward in time by small intervals of 1 month. This method ensures a smooth time
evolution of the diﬀerent variables. Moreover, since now on, we characterize time windows by
the date of the center value, e.g. we denote the interval [01/2002; 12/2004] by 07/2003. In

R. Lambiotte and M. Ausloos: From sand to networks: a study of multi-disciplinarity5

Fig. 5 – Merging of the two main sub-islands in the system. The left and right ﬁgure correspond
respectively to September 2003 and January 2004.

the following, we study in detail the properties of the main percolated island. The time evolu-
tion of the proportion of ”network” links in this island exhibits remarkable features (Fig.4a).
There are obviously two important dates in the evolution, one around November 2000 where
the system shows a ﬁrst order transition from a ”granular” state to a ”network” state, and
one around May 2002 where strong perturbations develop in the system. In order to ﬁnd the
origin of these critical behaviours, we have focused on the two largest connected islands in
the system (Fig.4b). Detailed analysis shows that the second largest island, centered around
scientists like A.L. Barabasi, grows faster than the largest island, that is more focused on gran-
ular media and encompasses scientists like H. J. Herrmann. Consequently, around November
2000, there is switch between the ﬁrst and the second island, associated to discontinuities in
the quantities describing the main island. This is therefore a ﬁrst order transition, in anal-
ogy with equilibrium statistical mechanics. Around May 2002, another critical phenomena
takes place, namely the two main islands merge together, thereby increasing the proportion
of ”granular” links in the largest island. It is interesting to note that, in August 2002, the two
islands separate and recollide two months later. This bouncing and merging of the islands
(Fig.5) is responsible for the ﬂuctuations observed in (Fig.4a).

Fig. 6 – (a) Bifurcation diagram of CDIM, with 1000 agents, 10 links/agent, and pD = 1
(b)
2 .
Bifurcation diagram for the overlap coeﬃcient of the same system. In both ﬁgures, the vertical line
points to the bifurcation point.

6

EUROPHYSICS LETTERS

Collaboration-Driven Ising Model. –

In this last section, we introduce a very simple
agent model, the Collaboration-Driven Ising Model (CDIM), that is based upon the above
observations and is able to reproduce the self-organized emergence of phases in the system.
To do so, we consider a stationary network, i.e. with constant number of scientists and of
collaborations. There are 2 possible kinds of collaboration, A and B (”granular”/”network”),
between two scientists (no article written by 3, 4... scientists). The main assumptions follow.
On the one hand, we assume that the state of the nodes is characterized by their previous
collaborations, e.g. a scientist with a majority of A collaborations is a A scientist. Conse-
quently, we neglect the inﬂuence of other internal variables (no spin) on the scientist future
collaborations. On the other hand, we assume that scientists have a preference to work in
their own ﬁeld. Practically, we consider a random network composed by K nodes, and N
links. Initially, the N links are randomly distributed as A and B links. At each time step,
one link is removed and a new link is added between 2 randomly selected nodes, i and j. The
kind of the added link, A or B, depends on the previous links of i and of j. To model this
N j
mechanism, we calculate the proportions of links A for i and for j, pi
N j ,
A
A and N i denote respectively the number of links A and the total number of links of
where N i
the node i. These quantities measure the ability of i/j to work in the ﬁeld A. We deﬁne the
pair ability to be the average pij
A < 1
2 ,
the selected pair should collaborate in the ﬁeld A/B. We implement this mechanism with the

A ≤ 1. Therefore, if pij

, with 0 ≤ pij

N i and pj

A = N i

A > 1

A+pj
2

2 /pij

A =

A =

(pi

A)

A

p

ij
A

−pD
T
Z

pD

ij
A

−p
T
Z

and PB = e

probabilities PA = e
for the selected pair to collaborate in A/B. In
these expressions, Z is a normalizing constant, T plays the role of a temperature and charac-
terizes the curiosity of scientists, i.e. their ability to work in new ﬁelds. pD is a drift term,
that breaks the internal symmetry, and mimics the external eﬀect of political decisions on the
dynamics.

Simulations show that for high T , A and B links are randomly distributed in the network.
Decreasing this parameter, structures develop in the system and lead to the emergence of
separated phases for each scientiﬁc discipline, as those observed in ﬁgure 3. Then, at some
critical temperature TC, a symmetry breaking takes place, associated with the spontaneous
supremacy of one of the scientiﬁc disciplines A or B. The bifurcation diagram (1000 agents, 10
links/agent) for the model without external ﬁeld (pD = 1
2 ) is plotted in ﬁgure 6a, and conﬁrms
the analogy with a ferromagnetic transition. In order to characterize the interface between
the 2 coupled networks, we calculate the overlap coeﬃcient, deﬁned by Ω = <N i
AN i
B>
B> − 1,
<N i
A><N i
where the averages are performed over the nodes i. By construction, Ω = 0 if the links A
and B are independently distributed. In contrast, Ω < 0 indicates that few actors work in
A and B simultaneously, i.e. the network is composed of well separated phases, where some
scientists ensure exchanges between the scientiﬁc communities. The bifurcation diagram for
the overlap coeﬃcient (Fig.6b) clearly shows that a decrease of T is associated to a structuring
of the network in separated phases. At the critical point TC, a qualitative change takes place.
Finally, let us stress that CDIM is analytically tractable in the mean ﬁeld approximation.
Indeed, by assuming that detailed balance takes place for the stationary solution, and that
the ﬂuctuations of the number of links/node are negligible, study of the dynamics master
equation [19] show that T T
2 , independently of the number of nodes and links of the
network [20] . We have veriﬁed by simulations that TC remains in the vicinity of 1
2 , for a large
number of parameters. Moreover, deviations from the theoretical value |TC − T T
C | decrease
when ﬂuctuations of the number of links/node decrease, as expected.

C = 1

R. Lambiotte and M. Ausloos: From sand to networks: a study of multi-disciplinarity7

Conclusion. – Inter-connections between distinct scientiﬁc disciplines play a central role
in primordial phenomena, including the emergence of crises and trends in complex social
networks, the diﬀusion of diﬀerent topics in science and scientiﬁc avalanches, i.e. emergence of
new research topics that rapidly attract large parts of the scientiﬁc community. In this paper,
we focus empirically on this issue by studying data collected from the arXiv database, thereby
highlighting the main mechanisms leading to multi-disciplinarity, as well as a rich and complex
phenomenology. We also use the observations in order to build a simple stationary model for
connected multidisciplinary scientists. Qualitatively, its features are those of an Ising model
for magnetic systems, even though its dynamics is driven by the collaboration links, and not by
spin attached to nodes. For instance, the eﬀect of the parameter pD is very similar to that of an
external magnetic ﬁeld, and leads to hysteresis and metastability [20]. It is worthwhile to stress
that this preliminary model (CDIM) suﬀers limitations that avoid a quantitative comparison
with the observed data. Indeed, CDIM does not incorporate mechanisms leading to power
law degree distributions, and neglects many-author collaborations [22], social eﬀects (habits
of authors to publish in close communities), non-stationary features,... A generalization of
CDIM that accounts for these eﬀects is under progress.

Acknowledgements R.L. would like to thank A. Scharnhorst, I. Hellsten, K. Suchecki
and J. Holyst for fruitful discussions. This work has been supported by European Commission
Project CREEN FP6-2003-NEST-Path-012864.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Albert and A-L Barabasi,Rev. of Mod. Physics, 74 (2002) 47
[2] A.-L. Barabasi and R. Albert, Science 286 (1999) 509
[3] R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani, Evolution and Structure of the Internet : A Statistical

Physics Approach, Cambridge University Press, 2004

[4] S.-M. Yoon and K. Kim, arXiv physics/0503017
[5] R.J. Williams and N.D. Martinez Nature 404 (2000) 180
[6] A. Barrat, M. Barthelemy, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Vespignani, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA

[7] M. E. J. Newman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,98, (2001), 404
[8] M. E. J. Newman, D. J. Watts, and S. H. Strogatz, PNAS, 99, (2002), 2566
[9] A.L. Barabasi, H. Jeong, Z. Neda, E. Ravasz, A. Schubert and T. Vicsek, Physica A, 311, (2002),

101 (2004) 3747

590

[10] J. J. Ramasco, S. N. Dorogovtsev and R. Pastor-Satorras, Physical Review E, 70, (2004), 036106
[11] E. Bruckner, W. Ebeling and A. Scharnhorst Scientometrics 18 (1990) 21
[12] J.A. Holyst, K. Kacperski and F. Schweitzer, Annual Review of Comput. Phys. 9 (2001) 253
[13] A.J. Levine, T.C. Lubensky, Phys Rev E 63 (2001) 041510
[14] M. E. J. Newman, Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001) 016132
[15] www.creen.org/rlambiot/sandNetwroks.html
[16] M. E. J. Newman, S. H. Strogatz and D. J. Watts, Phys. Rev. E, 64, (2001), 026118
[17] E.A. Variano, J.H. McKoy, H. Lipson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 2004 188701
[18] M. Girvan, and M. E. J. Newman PNAS, 99 (2002) 7821
[19] R. B. Griﬃths, C.-Y. Weng, and J. S. Langer, Phys. Rev. 149, 301 (1966)
[20] R. Lambiotte and M. Ausloos, in preparation
[21] A. Aleksiejuk, J.A. Holyst and D. Stauﬀer, Physica A 310 (2002) 260
[22] R. Lambiotte and M. Ausloos, arXiv physics/0507154

