5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
5
1
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fractal Dimensions in Perceptual Color Space: A Com-
parison Study Using Jackson Pollock’s Art

J. R. Mureika

Department of Physics, Loyola Marymount University

1 LMU Drive, Los Angeles, California 90045-8227

Email: jmureika@lmu.edu

Abstract

The fractal dimensions of color-speciﬁc paint patterns in various Jackson Pollock paint-

ings are calculated using a ﬁltering process which models perceptual response to color
diﬀerences (L∗a∗b∗ color space). The advantage of the L∗a∗b∗ space ﬁltering method

over traditional RGB spaces is that the former is a perceptually-uniform (metric) space,

leading to a more consistent deﬁnition of “perceptually diﬀerent” colors. It is determined

that the RGB ﬁltering method underestimates the perceived fractal dimension of lighter

colored patterns but not of darker ones, if the same selection criteria is applied to each.

Implications of the ﬁndings to Fechner’s ’Principle of the Aesthetic Middle’ and Berlyne’s

work on perception of complexity are discussed.

Keywords: fractal, perception, abstract expressionist art, color spaces

The use of fractal analysis to explain aesthetic properties of art

is becoming a subject of great interdisciplinary interest to physi-

cists, psychologists, and art theorists. Previous studies have ad-

dressed the classiﬁcation of abstract expressionist art by the fractal

dimension of the pigment patterns on the canvas as a method of

artist authentication. Moreover, it has been proposed that the

fractal structure of the pigment patterns is somehow connected to

1

the aesthetic “value” of the painting. The patterns in question

have traditionally been selected using ﬁltering algorithms of RGB

primaries, a perceptually non-uniform color space in which “dis-

tances” between perceptually just-diﬀerentiable colors is not the

same for lighter and darker hues. Although RGB-based analyses

have had success in devising categorization schemes for abstract

paintings (see the cited literature), the use of this color space lim-

its analysss which seek to cross-compare the fractal dimension of

diﬀerent color patterns from a perceptual stance. The following re-

port summarizes the results of a fractal analysis performed on sev-

eral paintings by the renowned artist Jackson Pollock, this time in

a perceptually-uniform color space which more closely replicates

how the visual cortex would identify and diﬀerentiate individual

colors. The data provides better insight into the fractal dimension

and aesthetic nature of speciﬁc light and dark pigment patterns,

and posits that the artist may have primarily used darked colors

to engage the viewer.

1 Fractals in Abstract Expressionist Art

Fractals are implicitly tied to the notions of chaos and irregularity [1, 2, 3],

and over the past 15 years have been increasingly associated with human

perception issues. The problem of structure identiﬁcation and discrimination

in music, art, and visual processing has beneﬁtted greatly from this cross-

disciplinary endeavor. For example, the authors of [4, 5] pose the question

2

of whether or not humans are “attuned” to the perception of fractal-like

optical and auditory stimuli. Similarly, the results reported in [6] show that

the quantitative accuracy of human memory possesses a fractal-like signature

which can be measured in task repitition. Speciﬁcally, when subjects were

asked to perform tasks such as repeatedly drawing lines of speciﬁc lengths

or shapes, the statistical variations in the lengths have been shown to be not

purely random noise, but fractally ordered “1/f ” noise.

Recently, the use of fractal dimension analysis techniques for the study of

paintings has become of interest [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12], which in the case of works

by Jackson Pollock suggest that the fractal dimension of the paint patterns
cluster suspiciously around the value DF ∼ 1.7. In Reference [11, 12], the

analysis is extended to paintings by diﬀerent artists and addresses the full

multifractal spectrum of the patterns. Furthermore, to overcome the problem

of proper color choice (the focus of discussion in this paper), the notion of

a visual fractal was introduced [11]. Instead of direct observation of colors,

the focus instead shifted to edge structures. This is eﬀectively an analysis

of luminance gradients within the image, and not directly on the RGB color

ﬁeld distribution.

Implicitly related to this topic, the authors of [13] discuss the perceptibil-

ity of hierarchical structures in abstract or non-representational constructs.

In fact, rapid object recognition and categorization via boundary isolation

versus “blob” identiﬁcation is a subject of growing scientiﬁc interest (see [14]

and related references therein). Similarly, the degree of complexity present

in a scene is largely believe to be critical in maintaining the interest of an

observer [15, 16]. The fractal dimension is a natural measure of such com-

3

plexity.

The predominant question remains: “where is the fractal”? Does one

calculate this statistic based on a pattern of a speciﬁc color? If so, how

is this color selected and speciﬁed? A simple choice would be to pick the

most abundant values of red, green, and blue (hereafter RGB) primaries and

digitally deconstruct the image to remove the appropriate matching pieces.

Patterns which match this selection criteria can be called “physical colors”,

since the RGB primaries deﬁne the image as it appears (on the canvas).

However, the human visual processing system has evolved in such a way

that the actual physical world is not always what is perceived by the brain.

There is a long-standing argument addressing the questions of how we process

scenes, what elements are important to a visual ﬁeld, and so forth. As

previously mentioned, the analysis in References [11, 12] studies the edge

structure of paintings, based on the notion that we perceive contrast changes

separately (or independently) from individual colors.

Similarly, perceived diﬀerences between colors themselves are non-trivial

to quantify. In fact, use of RGB primaries for perceptual image analysis is

ﬂawed because the color space in question is not perceptually uniform. In

this paper, previously-reported fractal dimensions for various paintings by

Jackson Pollock are re-computed using what will be termed perceptual color

selection, as opposed to physical color selection. The latter uses the simple
RGB primaries, while the former involves computations in the CIE-L∗a∗b∗

color space.

The following paper will analyze six paintings by Jackson Pollock by
determining the fractal dimension of speciﬁc patterns formed in the L∗a∗b∗

4

color space. This data will be compared to the fractal dimensions of the

same color patterns in the usual RGB color space, and thus the results can

be understood to represent the perceptual distinctions of colors on the canvas.

2 The Basics of Perception

Before attacking the problem of detecting visual fractals, a brief primer on

color vision and perception is in order. In fact, it was physicists who had the

ﬁrst major say in the foundations of this science, known in the literature as

“psychophysics”.

In the early 1800s, the Trichromacy Theory of vision was postulated by

Thomas Young, and was later expanded upon by Helmholtz and Maxwell

(later dubbed the Young-Helmholtz Theory, much to the dismay of Maxwell)

[17]. The assertion was that color vision is the result of simultaneous stimu-

lation of three photoreceptors in the eye, based on the RGB primary break-

down. Physiological conﬁrmation of this hypothesis did not come until the

1960s, when three distinct cellular receptors in the eye (cones) were discov-

ered to have peak sensitivities to light of λ = 440 nm (blue), 540 nm (green),

and 580 nm (actually more yellow than red).

Meanwhile, the late 1800s saw the emergence of Karl Ewald Konstantin

Hering’s Opponent Theory of vision [17].

Instead of a trichromatic basis

for vision, Hering proposed that the perception of colors was derived from

the contrasting of opposite color/intensity pairs: red-green, yellow-blue, and

light-dark. Again, experimental physiological evidence for such a mechanism

was revealed in the 1950s. In this case, two chromatic signals and a third

5

achromatic one were detected in the optical nerve under various stimulation

experiments.

Note that unlike the Trichromacy Theory, the Opponent Theory allows

for object recognition based on luminosity or hue gradients alone, and hence

no explicit color information is required. So, while the raw color stimuli may

be perceived, it may not be this information which is transmitted to the

visual cortex for eventual processing.

Most modern theories of color perception tend to constitute a mixture of

the two aforementioned postulates in some fashion. This, of course, leads to

the immediate question: is there a preferential order for object and color de-

tection? Is one a primary mechanism, and the other secondary? Or, are they

mutually independent processes which serve to provide diverse information

about the scene considered? There is still no clear answer to these musings,

although much work has been devoted to such studies (see texts such as e.g.

[18] and references therein for further reading).

3 CIE Color Systems

The Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage, or CIE as it is more often

known, was formed in an attempt to address and standardize the myriad

aspects of color deﬁnition, reproduction, and perception via a rigorous set of

mathematical standards and transformations. Since actual color perception

can vary depending on the external conditions (ambient lighting) and internal

conditions of the observer (neurophysiology of vision mechanism), a set of

“invariant” standards is useful in describing ideal conditions under which

6

observations and comparisons can be made.

In order to establish consistent external lighting variables, the CIE deﬁned

the Standard Illuminants to be those conditions which represent the complete

spectral power distribution of a particular state. The most widely-used of

these standards are the D-illuminants, which characterize the conditions of

“average daylight”. In the present work, all CIE conversions will reference the

D65 Illuminant, which corresponds to standard average daylight with a spec-

tral temperature of 6500 K [17, 19]. Note that the D-Illuminants standards

cannot be reproduced by any known physical source of light. Conversely, the

earlier A, B, and C-Illuminants were based on the spectral power distribu-

tions of (ﬁltered) incandescent tungsten light (2854 K) [17]. This mild lack

of chromatic reproducibility is an inherent problem with digital analyses of

images, however with a 24-bit color system it is doubtful that it constitutes

a large concern.

It should be noted that CIE color systems are primarily designed for

industrial (textile) color-matching and color gamut consistency in color dis-

plays. While many of their intricacies are based on human perception princi-

ples, they are not meant to fully represent the neural processes which occur

in vision. For the purposes of this manuscript, however, they are certainly a

good ﬁrst-pass approach at the problem.

4 Filtering Visual Fractals

To date, the color-ﬁlter process has relied on the fact that the target colors

are the mixture of RGB triplets. Such a color basis is certainly not unreason-

7

able, and in fact forms a large base of the tristimulus theory of color vision.

However, further inspection of color theory reveals that the three-dimensional

RGB space is not perceptually uniform. That is, two colors which are a ﬁxed

distance βRGB away from a base stimulus may not be equally diﬀerent from

a perceptual stance.

4.1 Alternate Color Representations

Furthermore, the RGB speciﬁcation is deﬁcient in the sense that, as an addi-

tive color scheme, it cannot reproduce all observed colors. In 1931, the CIE

set out to formulate an accurate color space. Known as the CIE XYZ space,

these tristimulus primaries themselves are not visible in the same sense as

R, G, and B, but are rather an “imaginary” basis introduced to allow for

reproduction of all observable colors. Speciﬁc colors C(λ) are matched by

combining appropriate amounts of red, green, and blue primaries (denoted r,

g, and b). However, in many cases, it was noted that perfect matches could

not be made in such a fashion. Instead, one could match combinations of

two of the three primaries with a suitable combination of the target color

and the third primary. Arithmetically, this implies

C(λ) + rR = bB + gG

(1)

and so the target C(λ) is formed by a negative contribution from one of

the primaries. The CIE XYZ system thus reproduces the entire spectrum of

observable colors.

For a standard D65 Illuminant observer, the transformation is a simple

8

linear one of the form

X

Y

Z






















0.412424

0.212656

0.0193324

=

0.357579

0.715158

0.119193

(2)















R

G

B








0.180464 0.0721856

0.950444

with the inverse transform yielding negative coeﬃcients, as indicated above.

The exact form of the matrix in Equation 2 is somewhat dependent on the

color gamut and standard white being used for display purposes.

In the

case of this paper, the matrix values are for the sRGB color scheme (for

“standard RGB”), and will primarily be adopted for the analysis herein.

However, comparison with other transformation schemes will be discussed.

Unfortunately, while the XYZ space is more physically realistic in terms of

color reproducibility, it is still not perceptually uniform. The CIE addressed

these issues, and oﬀered several solutions as recently as 1976.

4.2 CIE-L∗a∗b∗ Space: Perceptual Uniformity

A truly perceptually-uniform space, the CIE-L∗a∗b∗ color space is a non-

linear transformation of the XYZ space:

L∗ = 116 f (Y /Y0) − 116

∗

a

= 500 [f (X/X0) − f (Y /Y0)]

b∗ = 200 [f (Y /Y0) − f (Z/Z0)]

(3)

where f (X/X0) = (X/X0)

3 if (X/X0) > 0.008856, and f (X/X0) = 7.787(X/X0)+

1

16/116 otherwise [17]. Here, the values (X0, Y0, Z0) = (0.3127, 0.3290, 0.3583)

9

are the standard (white) tristimulus values for a 2◦ observer in the D65 illu-

minant (in general, one can make the approximation X0 = Y0 = Z0 = 1/3).
The coordinate L∗ represents the perceived luminosity, and covers the range

of luminance scales (0 being black, 100 being white). The remaining coordi-
nates a∗ and b∗ are the relative red-green and blue-yellow content, analogous

to Hering’s Color Opponent theory and more realistic ocular color detection

The perceptual color diﬀerence is then the Euclidean distance in L∗a∗b∗

processes [17].

space,

βL∗a∗b∗ =

(∆L∗)2 + (∆a∗)2 + (∆b∗)2

(4)

p

One immediately notes from the form of Equation 4 that the structures of
the RGB and L∗a∗b∗ color spaces are quite diﬀerent. This suggests that the

relative structures obtained by color-ﬁlter processes are largely dependent on

the color-matching system at hand. Speciﬁcally, one might expect that the
patterns selected by RGB ﬁltering criteria do not conform to those of a L∗a∗b∗

ﬁlter. That is, the physical distribution of like colors may not correspond to

the perceived distribution of colors. If the structures are suﬃciently diﬀerent,

then this can weaken arguments which suggest that patterns of speciﬁc fractal

dimension are pleasing to observers.

The diﬀerence in measured spectra may indeed by a visual eﬀect, if the

eye functions on a similar uniform “cut-oﬀ” level for like-color discrimination.

However, the actual color information of the system may not be the most

important contributor to ﬁrst order visual processing systems.

10

5 Analysis and Results

The images analyzed herein are digital scans at 300 dpi, with side lengths

ranging from 1000-2000 pixels.

In this case, each pixel corresponds to a

length scale on the order of a few 0.1 cm. Pixels corresponding to a target
L∗a∗b∗ color (within an allowed color radius) are ﬁltered to form a “perceived”

representation of a particular pattern. The fractal dimension of the resulting

pattern is determined by the traditional box-counting technique, where the

covering boxes range in size from d =1024 px to d =4 px, or length scales
of roughly 1.5 − 2.5 m to a few millimeters. The box-counting analysis thus

covers about three orders of magnitude.

The calculated fractal dimensions DF for both RGB and L∗a∗b∗ spaces

are displayed in Table 1. What is immediately apparently and interesting
to note is that L∗a∗b∗ space is much more sensitive to changes in lighter

colors, implying that the calculated dimensions for cream or white blobs with

equal β in RGB space will in general not be the same in the perceptually-

uniform space. This suggests that the overall structure of the blobs may

depend on the individual who perceives them, and hence the structures may

be perceptually diﬀerent than their physical color distribution (RGB space)

suggests. Figures 1 and 2 demonstrate how the physical RGB distribution of
a light color is signiﬁcantly less than the perceptual L∗a∗b∗ distribution for

the same color.

In fact, for an equal value of βL∗a∗b∗, the values of DF in L∗a∗b∗ space

for lighter colors are consistently higher than the equivalent values in RGB

space (for ﬁxed βRGB). This result in justiﬁable based on the nature of the
preceptually-uniformity of L∗a∗b∗ space. In traditional RGB spaces, lighter

11

colors are occupy a much larger volume than darker colors. Thus, an analysis

which uses a color radius βRGB will miss signiﬁcant portions of the space, and

will ﬁlter a pattern having a shallower range of “undistinguishable colors”.
The transformation to L∗a∗b∗ space shrinks the volume of the lighter colors

(which correspond to higher luminosity values), thus the associated analysis

will include a much richer depth of colors (and hence a larger pattern will
result)1.

In many cases, the former light color dimensions surpass the DF for the

darker colors, whereas before they were less than or equal to them. If it is

true that a viewer will have a preference for mid-range values of the fractal
dimension, DF ∼ 1.3 −1.7 (as suggested by the Principle of Aesthetic Middle

[21] and also supported by recent data from [9]), then it can be inferred that

the darker patterns “ﬁx” the fractal dimension for the whole painting. This

is a similar conclusion to that observed in painting “construction” by Taylor

et. al. [8], who dubbed this the anchor layer.

The color spaces used in this analysis correspond to .average. human color

receptor responses. Individual variations in these responses, as well as those

who possess color deﬁciencies (color-blindness), could certainly impact the

perceived dimensionality of the patterns. Indeed, it might be that the artist

himself did not “see” the same pattern as did his audience. However, color

blindness conditions are more a function of decreased color hue sensitivity,
rather than luminosity perception (which is the dominant channel in L∗a∗b∗
1An interesting “test” of such perceptual distinction of patterns would be to study the

diﬀerences in fractal dimensions calculated from paintings by diﬀerent artists who largely

use subtle, non-luminous colors.

12

space). Further studies could address these perceptual diﬀerences.

As a result, these conclusions can thus be thought of as a preliminary

assessment of perceptual color fractals. Further experimentation, comple-

mented by psychological behavioral data, is certainly required before deﬁnite

conclusions can be made.

5.1 Choice of Color Scheme and Illuminant

As previously mentioned, there are numerous possible choices of RGB-XYZ

transformation matrices used in Equation (2). These depend on the color

system being used (e.g. NTSC, PAL), the palette adopted by computer

monitors, and ultimately the standard white deﬁned by the illuminant. Ta-

ble 1 oﬀers a comparison to another D65 illuminant transformation labeled

“Adobe RGB-XYZ”, having components








0.576700

0.297361

0.0270328

0.185556

0.627355

0.0706879

0.188212 0.0752847

0.991248








(5)

It is clear from the results that the choice of scheme is mostly inconsequen-

tial to the dimensions being calculated. Discrepancies can be noted in few

of the color patterns considered. In fact, these could be explained away as

an improper choice of RGB primaries to begin with. This cross-comparison

could actually be used as a method for determining the “actual” RGB co-

ordinates required for the analysis. In any event, the conclusions from the

previous section are still supported: for a ﬁxed color space radius, lighter col-

ored patterns will have a perceptually higher fractal dimension than darker

ones.

13

6 Discussion and Conclusions

Calculating the fractal dimension of patterns based on their RGB coordinates

in the digital representation is not reﬂective of visual selection criteria for
the same colors due to the non-metric nature of the space. The L∗a∗b∗

color space is a more natural choice which reﬂects the color response of the

human perception system, and is a consistent metric space. This study has

suggested that if the fractal dimensions for dark patterns are in agreement

with previous analysis methods (which they should be, since the color spaces

for darker colors overlap fairly closely), then the lighter colored patterns

possess a much higher fractal dimension approaching DF = 2. This implies

that the distribution of lighter colors – having higher complexity – would

saturate the visual system.

These results can be related to Fechner’s “Principle of the Aesthetic Mid-

dle”, which states that a viewer will tolerate for the longest period of time

a visual scene of moderate complexity [21]. This was experimentally veriﬁed

by Berlyne [15, 16] for statistical distributions, and more recently applied to

fractal analysis by Taylor [9, 10]. The latter reported that human preference
for fractals of dimension D ∼ 1.3 is the highest.

However, this work has found that the dimensions for the color patterns

are signiﬁcantly above the “aesthetic middle” dimension of 1.3. What then

are the motivations for painting patterns which speciﬁcally are not aestheti-

cally pleasing to the average viewer? This is currently an open question which

has no single satisfactory answer. Borrowing again from the ﬁeld of aesthetic

research, it is possible to explain Pollock’s choice of dimensions by appealing

to the Peak Shift Eﬀect, one of the “Eight Laws of Artistic Experience” [22].

14

The Peak Shift Eﬀect is an experimentally-veriﬁed cognitive phenomenon in

which visual interest or identiﬁcation is strengthened by overtly enhancing

key characteristics of an object or image (such as the “larger-than-life” fea-

tures of caricatures in political cartoons). These enhanced characterisics are

explicitly not aesthetically pleasing, but their purpose is to grab attention

and convey key recognition information in a rapid fashion (see [23] for a

detailed discussion).

Alternatively, the relevance to the present work can be understood by

considering the relative diﬀerence in fractal dimensions between perceptual

colors in Pollock’s work. That is, based on the notion that lowest fractal

dimensions are more appealing to observers, this indicates that it is primarily

the darker patterns play a role in capturing the interest of the observer. This

is consistent with Taylor’s earlier notion of the anchor layer, and in fact

serves as a method of “identifying” the most salient pattern on the canvas.

In fact, the “attractiveness” of the pattern (based on lower fractal dimension)

and the assertions of this paper could be experimentally veriﬁed through eye

saccade-type or other subject perception experiments.

One could speculate that Pollock deliberately “tuned” his paintings to

contain these color visual structures, based on an intuitive understanding

of the visual arts and aesthetics. This would then indicate a third level of

structure in his paintings, in addition to the physical fractals of the paint

blobs, as well as the edge fractals created by the luminosity gradients of

overlapping pigments [12]. If this is indeed true, then it further exempliﬁes

the artistic genius which he demonstrated in creating visually-complex, yet

emotionally compelling, non-representational scenes.

15

Acknowledgments

I thank Gerald Cupchik (University of Toronto at Scarborough Division of

Life Sciences) for insightful discussions.

References

co. (1983)

[1] Mandelbrot, B. B. The Fractal Geometry of Nature, W. H. Freeman and

[2] Falconer, K., Fractal Geometry: Mathematical Foundations and Appli-

cations, John Wiley and Sons (1995)

[3] Barnsley, Michael F., Fractals Everywhere (2nd ed.), Academic Press

[4] Gliden. D. L., Schmuckler, M. A., and Clayton, K., Psych. Rev. 100,

Professional (1993)

460 (1993)

Perf. 19, 641 (1993)

Austin Preprint

1998);

(2000)

[5] Schmuckler, M. A., and Gliden. D. L., J. Exper. Psych.: Hum. Percep.

[6] Gliden, D. L., “1/f Noise in the Fundamental Forms of Psychology”, UT

[7] Taylor, R. P., Micolich, A. P., and Jonas, D., Physics World (October

1999); Nature 399 (3 June 1999); “Splashdown”, New Scientist (25 July

[8] Taylor, R. P., Micolich, A. P., and Jonas, D., J. Conscious. Stud. 7, 137

16

[9] Spehar, B. et al., Comp. Graph. 27, 813-820 (2003)

[10] R. P. Taylor et al., J. Non-lin. Dyn., Psych. Life Sci. 9, 89 (2005)

[11] Mureika, J. R. Cupchik, G. C. Dyer, C. C. “Multifractal ﬁngerprints

in the visual arts”, Leonardo 37 (1), February 2004

[12] Mureika, J. R. Phys. Rev. E 72 (4) (2005)

[13] Avital, T., and Cupchik, G. C., Empirical Studies of the Arts 16, 59

(1998)

[14] Schyns, P. G., and Oliva, A., Psych. Sci. 5 (4), 195 (1994)

[15] D. E. Berlyne, Aesthetics and Psychobiology, Appleton-Century-Crofts,

Meredith Corporation (1971)

[16] D. E. Berlyne and J. Ogilvie, “Dimensions of Perception of Paintings”,

in Studies in the New Experimental Aesthetics: steps toward an objective

psychology of aesthetic appreciation, D.E. Berlyne (Ed.)

[17] Nassau, K., Color for Science, Art and Technology, Elsevier Science B.

V. (1998)

[18] Kaiser, Peter K., and Boynton, Robert M., Human Color Vision (Second

Edition), Optical Society of America (1996)

[19] Foley, J., van Dam, A., Feiner, S., and Hughes, J., Computer Graphics:

Principles and Practice (second edition in C), Addison-Wesley Publish-

ing Co. (1996)

[20] Robertson, Bryan, Jackson Pollock, Thames and Hudson Ltd. (1968)

17

[21] Arnheim, R. (1985), “The other Gustav Theodor Fechner”, in A Century

of Psychology as Science, (pp. 856-865), S. Koch & D. Leary, (Eds.), New

York: McGraw-Hill; Fechner, G. (1978), Die Vorschle der Aesthetik (2

vols.), Hildesheim: Georg Holms. (original work published in 1876)

[22] Ramachandran, V. S. and Hirstein, W., J. Consci. Stud. 6 (6-7), 15–51

(1999)

[23] Mureika, J. R., submitted to J. Consci. Stud.

18

Color ID

DF (RGB) DF (L∗a∗b∗; sRGB D65) DF (Adobe RGB D65)

Reﬂections of the Big Dipper (1947)

Black

Yellow

Black

White

Black

Yellow

Black

Gray

Black

White

Gray

Yellow-gray

1.77

1.35

1.77

1.57

1.76

1.56

1.73

1.71

1.74

1.68

1.70

1.30

Number One A 1948

Undulating Paths

Number One 1949

Blue Poles (1952)

1.78 (0.04)

1.53 (0.08)

1.78 (0.03)

1.79 (0.04)

1.75 (0.05)

1.79 (0.04)

1.82 (0.03)

1.83 (0.03)

1.49 (0.07)

1.78 (0.02)

1.54 (0.05)

1.59 (0.04)

Autumn Rhythm (1950)

1.77 (0.04)

1.70 (0.06)

1.76 (0.04)

1.81 (0.03)

1.75 (0.05)

1.80 (0.04)

1.83 (0.03)

1.84 (0.03)

1.52 (0.07)

1.79 (0.03)

1.51 (0.05)

1.64 (0.03)

Table 1: Comparison of fractal dimensions calculated by RGB and L∗a∗b∗

ﬁltering processes for two diﬀerent RGB-XYZ transformations (D65 illumi-
nants). The radii in L∗a∗b∗ color space are chosen to produce approximately

the same value of DF for darker colors (in this case, βL∗a∗b∗ = 15). The

number in parenthesis is the error in the least-square ﬁt used to calculate the

fractal dimension.

19

Figure 1: Portion of black pigment ﬁlter of Autumn Rhythm showing (a) raw
image, (b) physical RGB distribution, and (c) perceptual L∗a∗b∗ distribution

corresponding to the data in Table 1.

20

Figure 2: Portion of white pigment ﬁlter of Autumn Rhythm showing (a) raw
image, (b) physical RGB distribution, and (c) perceptual L∗a∗b∗ distribution

corresponding to the data in Table 1.

21

