5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
7
0
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Optimal evolution on random networks: from social to airports networks.

Philippe Curty
Scimetrica Research, 3007 Bern, Switzerland
(Dated: February 18, 2014)

Social movements, neurons in the brain or even industrial suppliers are best described by agents
evolving on networks with basic interaction rules. In these real systems, the connectivity between agents
corresponds to the most eﬃcient state of the system. The new idea is that connectivity adjusts itself
because of two opposite tendencies: information percolation, decision making or coordination are better
when the network connectivity is small. When agents have many connections, the opinion of a person
or the state of a neuron tend to freeze: agents ﬁnd always a minority among their advisors to support
their opinion. A general and new model reproduces these features showing a clear transition between
the two tendencies at some critical connectivity. Depending on the noise, the evolution of the system is
optimal at a precise critical connectivity since, away from this critical point, the system always ends up
in a static phase. When the error tolerance is very small, the optimal connectivity becomes very large,
and scale free networks are obtained like the airports network and the internet. This model allows for the
ﬁrst time to have a general theory of evolution of agents on networks where evolving scale free networks
are now a special case of a larger class of networks.

What are the necessary conditions allowing a consen-
sus among an assembly of voters? Why, sometimes, do
all people share the same opinion in a short time? For
example, we consider a school class of students who want
to make an important travel, and have to choose between
two destinations: Alaska or Rio de Janeiro. Every stu-
dent has naturally a strong preference for one of the des-
tinations. If students are isolated then nobody changes
his opinion, and no consensus shall be found. When stu-
dents take advice from one or two friends in the class,
they may change their opinion quickly and a consensus
will be achieved. Now if each student has many friends,
he will always ﬁnd a small group among his friends that
shares his opinion and support his choice. Hence stu-
dents will keep their opinion and no consensus is found
although every student is connected to a large number
of friends. In a neural network, the number of connec-
tions among neurons, dendritic tree, plays an important
role like a social network. What is the optimal number
of incoming connections on a neuron? In the following
article, we will see how to reproduce quantitatively these
behaviours using the language of opinion dynamics, and
analyse the consequences on various ﬁelds like neural net-
works, supply networks of ﬁrms or scale free networks.

There exist already several models where opinion dy-
namics of a community of agents is simulated. Among
them are the voter model [1]: a 2-states spin is selected at
random and it adopts the opinion of a randomly-chosen
neighbour. This step is repeated until the system reaches
consensus. Each agent has zero self conﬁdence since he
merely adopts the state of one of his neighbours. A sim-
ilar model due to K. Sznajd-Weron and J. Sznajd [2]
was designed to explain certain features of opinion dy-
namics resumed by the slogan ”United we stand, divided
we fall”. This leads to a dynamics, in that individu-
als placed on a lattice can choose between two opinions,
and in each update a pair of neighbours sharing common
opinion persuade their neighbours to join their opinion.
[3].
It is equivalent to the voter model as shown in ref.

The local majority rule model described in ref. [4, 5] con-
siders groups of agents where members adopt the opinion
of the local majority.

It is commonly believed that correlated behaviour in
ﬁnancial markets or large opinion changes in human so-
ciety is due to information that is shared by everyone at
the same time. For example in a ﬁnancial market, herd-
ing can be produced by the central market price, or by
a rumor that propagates rapidly among traders. Infor-
mation is collected from the action of each traders and
is reﬂected in the price of stocks. However sometimes
opinions changes occurs only because of local interaction
among agents as we shall see later.

Some models describe the consequence of ”herding”
behaviour [6, 7] in ﬁnancial markets. However, in this
class of models, herding behaviour is put by hand since
the size of herds is controlled by an external parameter.
The question answered by this class of models is related
to the consequence of herding on distribution of ﬁnan-
cial price data. In our case we are interested at ﬁnding
the source of herding, why people follow sometimes the
same trend in a short time although they seem to act
independently. The aim of the present work is to study
the dynamics of a ensemble of agents connected on a ran-
dom network, and to determine what are the conditions
to have consensus or disorder under a fundamental inter-
action rule.
State -
Each agent has an opinion (state) O ∈
{−1, 0, +1} with three possible values that can represent
{vote A, do not vote, vote B} for a vote, or {buy, wait,
sell} in a ﬁnancial market. In real life, an agent can be
a single person or a group of people that share the same
opinion. The formation of opinion is determined by the
confrontation, i.e. summation, of the opinion of the agent
with the opinion of each advisor. Contrary to the voter
model or the majority model [5], here agents have a the
same self-conﬁdence or strength as each of their advisors,
provided they have an opinion +1 or -1.
Algorithm (ﬁxed connectivity G) - Now we con-

2

N = 2048
N = 1024
N = 512
N = 256

1

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
P

 
r
e
d
r
O

0,8

0,6

0,4

0,2

0

0

sider a community of N agents where each agent i has
an opinion Oi(t) ∈ {−1, 0, +1} at time t. Each agent can
be either an advisor or being advised by other agents. In
each update, we sum the opinion of an agent picked at
random with each opinion of G advisors chosen at ran-
dom among all agents. The sign of this sum represents
his new opinion. More explicitly, at each time step t:

1. An agent i is selected at random.

2. The new opinion Oi(t + 1) is the sign of the sum of
the opinion of the agent i with each opinion Oik (t)
of a random advisors group Ai = {i1, ..., iG}:

Oi(t + 1) = sign

[Oi(t) + Oik (t)]

(1)

!

G

 

k=1
X

where sign(0) = 0.

3. Instead of point 2., with probability r, the new
opinion Oi(t + 1) is +1 or -1 taken at random.

The recursion relation (1) means that agents change
their opinion only if all advisors have an opposite opin-
ion (unanimity rule). The algorithm is completely deter-
ministic when no random opinion is introduce during the
simulation, i.e. if r = 0. The situation r > 0 is more re-
alistic since it is reasonable to assume that people change
their opinion sometimes at random.

The key parameter is the number of advisors per agent
or connectivity G. For G = 1 agent merely change the
opinion when the advisor has an opposite opinion. This
case is similar to the voter model [1]. For G = 2, i.e. one
agent and two advisors, the algorithm is equivalent to the
majority model [5]:
if advisors have the same opinion,
they form the majority of the three agents (two advisors
plus the advised agent). The two limiting cases are then:
Small connectivity (hierarchical society): each agent fol-
lows a small number of advisors and opinions can change
easily. Starting from a random conﬁguration, opinions or
informations scatter rapidly through the network result-
ing in a rapid consensus. A long range order appear due
to strong correlations between advisors and agents. The
majority and voter models belong to this category, and
are therefore opinion dynamics with weak self-conﬁdence
and rapid decision making.
Large connectivity (complex society): Agents tend to keep
their own opinion because the probability that all advi-
In-
sors have the same and opposite opinion is small.
formation cannot be transmitted through the network,
and eventually no long range order or consensus can
emerge: opinions are essentially random. The diversity
or complexity of a community increases with its size. The
connectivity G of an agent is proportional to his self-
conﬁdence: agents with many advisors have large self-
conﬁdence since they keep their opinion when they ﬁnd
at least one advisor sharing their opinion.

5

10

15

Connectivity G

FIG. 1: Average absolute opinion (order parameter) ˜O(G)
for connectivities G ∈ {1, 2, ...} and diﬀerent system sizes.
The noise is r = 0.05. The transition between consensus and
disorder is located near Gc ≈ 8.

Results - Computer simulations have been done using
diﬀerent values of the noise r and diﬀerent group sizes.
Statistics are done over 10 to 20 runs where each run has
104 updates per agent. As shown in ﬁgure 1 for r = 0.05,
the order parameter (average absolute opinion)

˜O :=

1
N

h |

Oi(t)| it,

(2)

i
X
which is averaged over time t, has a breakdown at a crit-
ical group size Gc(r) marking a clear separation between
two diﬀerent regimes. For G > Gc, there is no global co-
ordination. Opinions are essentially random and ˜O = 0.
At G = Gc, opinions oscillate between ordered and ran-
dom states. For G < Gc, opinions are correlated and
rapidly evolve either to the average consensus -1 or +1
depending on initial conditions: ˜O > 0. A similar noise
driven phase transition has been found for the majority
model in ref. [4], and it corresponds in our model to the
case G = 2.

When all links between agents are reciprocal no phase
transition occurs: reciprocity reduce the transmission of
information through the network.
Analytical Approach - The critical point Gc, found
in simulations, separating the correlated phase and the
random phase can be derived analytically. To do that,
we consider a system with a inﬁnite number of agents,
and we neglect eﬀects of loops. The connectivity G of an
agent is then equal in average to the number of agents
that an agent advises, i.e. G = Gout.

Now we look for the probability P that an agent
changes his opinion. Only opinions that are -1 or +1 are
taken into account since 0 opinions disappear quickly. If
we have n agents with opinion +1, then x = n/N is the
probability of ﬁnding an agent with opinion +1. If the
noise is zero, the probability PG that an agent i changes
his opinion from -1 to +1 or from +1 to -1 is given by
the probability to ﬁnd the agent i with opinion −1 and G

r
e
t
o
v

y
t
i
r
o
a
m

j

0.5

0.4

r
e
s
o
N

i

0.3

0.2

0.1

consensus

disorder

1

2

3

4

6

5
Connectivity G

7

8

9 10 11 12

FIG. 2: Phase diagram in the {r, G} plane showing two dif-
ferent regimes: consensus and disorder. The thick line is the
analytical solution rc(G) from equation (6). Points are results
from computer simulations.

3

approach is that the number of advisors is a discrete
quantity. Hence it is not possible to study the phase
transition as a function of a continuous parameter.
Moreover a ﬁxed number of advisors is not very realistic
because people usually have diﬀerent numbers of advi-
sors. In order to get closer to reality and to study the
transition with a continuous parameter, advisors groups
are now formed according to a probability p of growing
the group size by one advisor. The algorithm starts with
empty groups, and at each time step t:
1. An agent i is selected at random.
2. With probability p, increase the group size by one
advisor: Gi → Gi + 1. Otherwise, i.e. with probability
1 − p, perform point 2. of the static model, and remove
one advisor: Gi → Gi − 1.
3. Instead of point 2., with probability r, a new opinion
+1 or -1 is taken at random.

advisors with opinions +1 plus the corresponding proba-
bility to ﬁnd the agent i with opinion +1 and G advisors
with opinions −1:

1

r = 0

Group Size

PG =

G
1 + G

x(1 − x)

+ (1 − x)x

G

(3)

G

(cid:3)

where the factor G
1+G is introduced in order to take into
account that empty groups, i.e. G = 0, induce no opinion
change.
If we add a noise r with uniform distribution
between 0 and 1, the total probability P of changing the
opinion is 1/2 with probability r plus PG with probability
1 − r:

P =

+ (1 − r)PG.

(4)

(cid:2)

r
2

Consensus is reached when the probability of changing
the opinion because of the advisors is larger than the
probability of changing randomly the opinion:

(1 − r)PG > r/2 ⇒ consensus.

(5)

For a random conﬁguration with x = 1/2, the critical
noise rc, which separates consensus and disorder, is de-
termined by the condition (1 − rc)PG = rc/2. This leads
to:

rc =

1
1 + 2G−1 (1 + G−1)

.

(6)

rc has a maximum at G ≈ 0.801.

In ﬁgure 2, the results of simulations are shown to-
gether with the analytical results from equation (6) show-
ing a qualitative good agreement. Note that the majority
rule (G = 2) leads to a larger consensus phase than the
voter model (G = 1). The transition points for the inﬁ-
nite system are obtained by computing the intersection
of reduced fourth order cumulants [8] for diﬀerent system
sizes.
Dynamical Groups - Until now, each agent had the
same number of advisors. A drawback of this static

r
e

t

e
m
a
r
a
P

 
r
e
d
r
O

0,8

0,6

0,4

0,2

0
0

0.01

0.05

σ

0,2

0.1

0.15

0,4
Probability p

0,6

0,8

FIG. 3: Average absolute opinion (order parameter) ˜O of
the dynamical model for N = 400 agents and diﬀerent value
of noise r, and the corresponding average relative group size
hGii/N . The circles show the standard deviation σ of ˜O for
r = 0.05.

In ﬁgure 3, the order parameter ˜O is plotted for diﬀer-
ent values of the noise r showing two transitions. Follow-
ing a line deﬁned by a constant order parameter: when
p is very small, most agents have zero advisor, and infor-
mation cannot percolate through the network ( ˜O = 0).
When p increases, there is a critical probability p where
agents have enough connections in order to establish con-
sensus in the entire network, and ˜O > 0. If we increase
again p, a second transition occurs where groups of advi-
sors are so large that agents cannot change their opinion
anymore ( ˜O = 0). Simulations for r = 0 are not con-
clusive since they suﬀer of a very slow dynamics. The
standard deviation of ˜O is also reported and it exhibits
maxima at the two transition points.

The phase diagram of the dynamical model is shown in
ﬁgure 4. The transition points for the inﬁnite system are
obtained with fourth order cumulant for diﬀerent system
sizes. We note that for small groups G, the transition oc-
curs at a smaller noise r compared with the static model

y
t
i
r
o
a
m

j

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

r
e
s
o
N

i

stable disorder

optimal evolution

stable

consensus

0

5

10

15

20

25

Average Connectivity

FIG. 4: The critical connectivity (points) marks the tran-
sition between stable consensus and stable disorder phases.
The transition coincides with the maximum of the standard
deviation or activity σ of the order parameter. Computer
simulations have been done for diﬀerent noise r and probabil-
ity p. The standard deviation is maximum in the red region
between the two phases where it is lower (blue).

shown in ﬁgure 2 whereas rc is larger for big groups. The
standard deviation σ is also shown in colors: it is max-
imal at the transition and minimal in the stable phases
either disorder or consensus. An interesting feature is
that the majority rule G = 2 is the less noise sensitive
of all decision procedures. This is a hint showing that
communities use in general the majority rule because it
is the most error tolerant system.

Optimal evolution - we consider now the class of sys-
tems evolving on random network and constrained by
the unanimity rule. These systems can be a social net-
work, supply networks or even scale free networks like
the airports network. Considering a given error tolerance
or noise, there is a unique average critical connectivity
hGci where the system has a phase transition between
a consensus phase and a disordered phase.
If the sys-
tem decreases its connectivity, individuals or nodes can
change their state according to their advisors resulting
in a rapid consensus: then all nodes have the same state.
This consensus phase is stable and does not allow nodes
to change their state anymore and no evolution is pos-
sible. When the system increases its connectivity, nodes
tend to keep their states ending in a disorder phase. This
disorder phase remains frozen as long as the connectivity
is large and nodes keep their state. In this static phase,
the system cannot have an evolution. The only point
where this class of systems can change their state and
have an evolution is at the average critical connectivity
hGci. Depending on the particular noise of the system,
at hGci, the agents of the systems change all the time
between consensus and disorder. Since the system is in
a critical and unstable state, a small perturbation in one
node can then result in avalanche of changes in a large
part of the system. This critical state is therefore the
only point where the evolution of the system can be op-

4

timal. Note that the evolution of the underlying random
network itself is a diﬀerent problem.
Social networks -
In a real networks of people, the
probability p can be interpreted as a ”social pressure”
which forces people to be near an ideal number of advi-
sor. Extreme opinions that propagate rapidly are dan-
gerous for the stability of the social cohesion. On the
other side, people taking into account too many diﬀerent
sources of information are unable to change their opin-
ion. Hence there is a number of advisors that allows an
optimal evolution. Hence social networks self-organise in
order to ﬁnd the most eﬃcient state which corresponds
to the average critical connectivity hGci.
If we deﬁne
the ”social activity” as the standard deviation σ of the
order parameter ˜O, then σ is maximum at the transi-
tion as shown in ﬁgure 3. We consider only the upper
transition, and not the percolation transition where Gc
is small. Hence the most eﬃcient social state corresponds
to the maximum of social activity conﬁrming the previ-
ous intuitive considerations. This evolution is related to
the concept self-organised criticality as introduced by P.
Bak et al in ref. [9]. A diﬃculty is to estimate the noise
level that is present in a real process of decision making.
For example a noise level of r = 0.1, which seems rea-
sonable, leads to Gc ≈ 5. Of course the number of real
contacts, either groups or single persons, of an agent is
larger than Gc since not every contact is an advisor.
Supply networks - For example, a complex object
like a car needs several components produced by other
ﬁrms. These ﬁrms transform material produced by other
ﬁrms as well. Hence the ﬂux of products forms a net-
work where +1 means that the product has reached its
destination, and -1 the contrary. Like in other networks,
there is a most eﬃcient connectivity among ﬁrms:
it is
more diﬃcult to have hundred of suppliers since you have
high coordination costs. On the other hand, having a
few suppliers induces dependence and decreases ﬂexibil-
ity. Therefore there is an optimal number Gc of suppliers
depending on the error tolerance r. Our conclusions are
a generalisation of empirical cost studies for a single ﬁrm
as a function of the number of suppliers (see [10]).
Neural networks - Neurons are either active +1 or
inactive -1. A neuron has G incoming dendrites and its
threshold of activation determines if the rule is a majority
rule, ”or” function, or a unanimity rule, ”and” function,
or a mixed rule. Since neurons are less complex than
humans and have less external inﬂuences, the noise level
r in the neural network is smaller than in opinion dy-
namics. Depending on the activation thresholds, neurons
have a maximum activity at the critical connectivity Gc,
and form therefore a scale ﬁxed network. Bornholdt and
R¨ohl [11] used a detailed algorithm of neural networks
construction and showed that, indeed, connectivity is de-
termined by a self-organised mechanism between ordered
and disordered dynamics.
Scale free networks - a special case is obtained for
zero noise, r = 0: the critical connectivity is inﬁnite, i.e.
Gc → ∞ as shown by equation (6). The network never

5

ﬁnds its equilibrium and no average connectivity can
be deﬁned.
In the airports network, the noise level is
very low since, in general, airports are only in function
when all airplanes arrive at destination (unanimity rule).
The routers in the internet network are subject to zero
error tolerance. A router is operating only when all
incoming packets are distributed without error. Hence,
in these networks, the most eﬃcient state is at an inﬁnite
connectivity, which cannot be reached. This explains
why they are continuously increasing the connectivity.
The growing process of these scale free networks has
large nodes have a bigger
been described in ref.
probability to have additional links, and performance
increase with the number of connections.

[12]:

In conclusion, a general model of organisation is pre-
sented in the framework of opinion dynamics of agents
with advisors. By varying the number of advisors, one
can tune the self-conﬁdence of agents. This model is as
generalisation of existing opinion models: for one advisor,
the voter model is obtained, and two advisors is equiva-
lent to a majority rule. When varying the connectivity G,
a phase transition occurs at a certain value Gc between a

phase of consensus and a phase of disorder. Gc depends
on the noise or error tolerance of the system and on the
particular underlying network. When agents have a few
number of advisors, information percolates through the
network since agents change their opinion frequently, and
a consensus is found. Financial crashes may therefore oc-
cur in stocks markets when traders have a few sources of
information. In the case of large advisor groups, agents
tend to keep their opinion since large groups have less
frequently the opposite opinion as the agent, and a little
noise causes disorder. Finally, it is shown that real social
networks, neurons in the brain and industrial networks
organise themselves at the maximum of activity, precisely
at the critical connectivity Gc that sets a ﬁxed scale for
the system depending on the error tolerance. The air-
ports network or the internet, where error tolerance is
near zero, have a large optimal connectivity tending to
inﬁnity, and evolve as scale free networks.

A future issue is the role of the structure of the net-
work, and the relation between the network and the sys-
tem.

This work was funded in part by the Swiss National
Science Foundation and ICTP Trieste for infrastructure.

[1] P. Cliﬀord and A. Sudbury, Biometrika 60, 581 (1973).
[2] K. Sznajd-Weron and J. Sznajd, International Journal

of Modern Physics C 11, 1157 (2000).

[3] L. Behera and F. Schweitzer,

International Journal of

Modern Physics C 14, 1331 (2003).

[7] V. Egu´iluz and M. Zimmermann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85,

[8] K. Binder, Z. Phys. B 43, 119 (1981).
[9] P. Bak, C. Tang and K. Wiesenfeld, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59,

[4] C. Huepe-Minoletti and M. Aldana-Gonzalez, Journal of

[10] J. Y. Bakos and E. Brynjolfsson, Journal of Organiza-

Statistical Physics 108, 527 (2002).

tional Computing 3, 3 (1993).

[5] P. L. Krapivsky and S. Redner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,

[11] S. Bornholdt and T. Roehl, Phys. Rev. E 67, 066118

5659 (2003).

381 (1987).

(2003).

[6] R. Cont and J. Bouchaud, Macroeconomic Dynamics 4,

[12] A.-L. Barabasi and R. Albert, Science 286, 509 (1999).

238701 (2003).

170 (2000).

