February 2, 2008

THE DECREASE IN PHYSICS
ENROLLMENT

Samina S. MASOOD
Department of Mathematics, School of Arts and Science,
SUNY Institute of Technology, Utica, NY 13504
Email: masoods@sunyit.edu

Abstract

We discuss and analyze the fact that physics is generally losing its ability
to captivate students who may possess the potential to enhance the quality of
our future in this age of technology. We have tried to investigate the reasons
behind this low enrollment in the light of the results of a few surveys with the
undergraduate students in diﬀerent physics courses and in current relevant
college programs. It is not an exclusively descriptive issue, so our analysis
is a way to delineate the details of the matter leading to the suggestions for
future improvements.

5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
0
2
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

It is now well known that physics is losing its hook on the popular choices
of elective undergraduate courses. The gradual decrease in physics enrollment
is a thought-provoking issue for us all. Physicists are all concerned about
the future of physics in this age of technology. But this problem is even
more serious in the US where the great development in technology has been
achieved through the continuous eﬀorts of a few decades. Now, if this trend
of low enrollment persists, most of the relevant physics programs may fade
out and as a consequence, we may have to compromise standards, probably
not the best thing to do. As a reality, students do not prefer to enroll
in physics in the presence of other options. With increasing technological
demands, though, it should be the other way around. So, we should accept
the responsibility of failing to provide compelling reason to learn physics.

Nowadays, students will register in physics courses only if they have to
take it to fulﬁll the mandatory needs of their major programs. In this situa-
tion, the physics undergraduate major and even independent physics depart-
ments are already disappearing from the community colleges. We would like
to discuss here the root cause of this issue and point out those factors that
lead to this situation. Avoiding these causes one by one should be consid-
ered as a part of the solution to the problem. We look at this issue based on
our discussions with students at diﬀerent levels from more than ﬁfteen years
of teaching and our personal experience of working with the physics com-
munity in diﬀerent continents at diﬀerent levels for more than two decades.
We understand that we have to think about this issue very carefully with-
out ignoring minor details. Some research is being done on a few related
topics but, according to our information, this topic has not yet been dis-
cussed thoroughly elsewhere. In the reference section we have mentioned a
few references [1-5] for the interested readers for further study of some of the
individual topics. In the next section we give an overview of this problem in
detail and point out the basic reasons for the decline in enrollment. In section
III we discuss a few of the important factors in more detail. In sections IV, V
and VI more individual issues are discussed. The last section VII emphasizes
some of our immediate suggestions. This discussion will include the details
of the underlying problems and procedures to get rid of these causes as a
solution. Especially sensitive topics are brieﬂy mentioned for completeness.
The authors request readers not to take it personally.

2

II. OVERVIEW OF THE PROBLEM

When we start thinking about the reasons for the low enrollment, it ap-
pears to be a very tricky question. We cannot simply describe the reasons
behind it. We need to analyze it in the complete scenario of educational
system, employment opportunities, teaching and research needs and future
perspectives. But we have to pause for a moment and ask ourselves a ques-
tion before this. Do we all really care so much about it? Usually, we don’t.
Probably we are convinced that we just need trained people in the ﬁeld of
technology and not basic sciences. It is probably because we just need very
few experts in basic sciences and a large number of engineers and technicians
to work for the development of technology. Several technologists can work
with scientists even without any specialized high level science background.
This is true. Data analysis and other computational help are examples. They
could be handled without very strong science background to start with, as
long as you are working in an active research atmosphere and have expert
help available. However, we still need physicists to propose the basic design
and purpose of the experiment. They can check the feasibility of certain
features of the designs of new projects and contribute to the interpretation
of the experimental results. Therefore, it is necessary to keep on producing
quality physicists for our future needs. There should be much larger num-
ber of physics majors so that adequate physics training could be provided to
enough future technologists. And we could even produce a suﬃcient number
of competent physicists to fulﬁll future needs. Obviously we do not want to
run the higher level physics education programs mostly for the foreign stu-
dents. Available data [6] indicates the growing enrollment of foreign students
at the undergraduate level. However, the ratio of foreigner graduate students
in physics is increasing even more. To avoid this, we need to have physics
majors in most of the colleges, in addition to the research universities. Oth-
erwise, we might face more serious consequences in the future and almost
limit the physics programs to the research universities and the institutes of
technology.

We should start this analysis by convincing ourselves that physics is a
very interesting subject. Physics is one of the very important undergraduate
majors for most of the specialized engineering and technology programs. Let
us look at the reasons why physics should be considered a good undergraduate
major in support of most of the technical programs.

3

1. Physics is a very useful basic science subject and has to be taken as a
basic requirement for several undergraduate/graduate degree programs
in Science and Engineering.

2. Some very important issues in Imaging Science, Astronomy, Cosmology
and Space Sciences can only be understood in the light of physics.

3. Physics knowledge is sometimes crucial in designing the projects in en-
vironmental science, medical diagnostics, defense, and many other areas
related to the improvement of human security and livelihood. Espe-
cially, the working of all type of equipments can better be understood
with physics background.

4. Development in modern technology needs multi-disciplinary contribu-

tions and physics is indispensable in this regard.

5. Fundamental research in physics, undoubtedly, has its own importance
and applications. Findings of basic research help in determining new
directions of development in technology. There is still so much to be
done in the ﬁeld of physics as in any other ﬁeld of science.

6. Good physics teaching is essential to produce good physics teachers,

simply to teach undergraduate courses in the future.

Moreover, I personally believe that physics plays a constructive role in the
development of personalities and societies. Especially, in the current period
of scientiﬁc and technological development, physics knowledge is very helpful
in improving daily life. It even helps in self-reliance, human safety and money
savings. Some of the common issues are safety tips in driving, energy and
fuel conservation, the use and maintenance of appliances and several other
related things. Physics labs give some hands-on experience in equipment
handling and attract students to physics. Dr. Richard Hake has discussed
the eﬀectiveness of interactive engagements based on an extensive survey
[7]. Physics courses could be useful for minor repairs at home even without
any speciﬁc training. Moreover, the eﬀect of physics on personality and the
approach towards life is not ignorable. Science courses help to develop the
scientiﬁc approach in our daily life and make us more reasonable and practi-
cal persons. So in general, physics helps to improve the quality of daily life.
These are known facts but we have to communicate it to the students in an

4

appropriate way so that they can realize the general importance of this sub-
ject. One of the options is to introduce interesting inter-disciplinary courses
to increase the popularity of science, especially physics and its applications
to daily life. Some of the already existing similar courses could be introduced
in other colleges also.

It is also worth mentioning at this stage that our topic is physics in
general, which includes both fundamental physics and applied physics. How-
ever, applied physics can only develop in the presence of good knowledge of
fundamental physics, either theoretical or experimental. In applied physics,
the basic concepts of physics are used to develop application of physics in
diﬀerent directions. Applied physics directly helps in the development of
engineering and technology. This division includes all branches of physics,
depending on the demands and requirements. All the branches of physics
have a lot of overlap among themselves. This discussion is not in the scope
of our topic at the moment.

In fact, almost every good physics department has to have a couple of
very good groups in theoretical physics to work on the basic physics issues
and also to help the big experimental groups whenever they are needed. All
the big experimental labs also have a very strong theory division/department.
Theorists do independent theoretical or mathematical research work and also
can suggest new experiments based on their research. They are not conﬁned
to the analysis of the ﬁnal results or helping experimentalists in designing the
experiment or interpreting the results. They suggest and help in designing
new experiments also. In addition to that, they can teach a great variety
of the basic physics courses with their broad based theoretical background.
We are personally convinced that the theorist should teach the experimen-
talists so that they can have some exposure to the theoretical / mathemat-
ical approach also. Similarly, for the theorists it is always better to have
some exposure to the experimental approach, though they get it through
teaching labs to some extent. Basic physics knowledge with a mathemati-
cal approach could be very helpful for engineers and technologists. In this
situation, physics should obviously be considered a great second undergrad-
uate major for future engineers. This even helps to develop interdisciplinary
courses very well. With all this relevance with modern educational programs,
the lack of interest in the subject is strange and unnatural. We now have
to ﬁnd out the reasons why students are losing their interest in this subject,
leading to low enrollment in physics courses.

5

We will also like to mention that our analysis is mainly based on the com-
munity colleges, state colleges and small institutes that only oﬀer a limited
number of undergrad or graduate programs. It also includes surveys from an
institute of technology. However, this survey and analysis may not be so true
for the research universities or institutes with advanced physics programs.
They have a much better funding situation and much better equipment.
In these institutes, active researchers are teaching elementary level physics
courses with low teaching load and less job dependence on instructor evalua-
tion. They have help in grading and have graduate students for the individual
support of the undergraduate students in elementary physics courses. In this
situation, they can aﬀord to have large lecture sections. Teachers do not
have an excessive load of individual guidance during their oﬃce hours. They
have broad-based knowledge of physics and can be impressive and eﬀective
teachers and can become role models for students because of their academic
standing. They have the liberty to try new eﬀective teaching tools [8] and
do not have to compromise standards for job security. Their job security
depends primarily on their participation in research activities and research
funding. So, they have a much better situation and are still able to manage
research programs. This diﬀerence in situation supports our analysis below.
But these places are usually expensive places and most students cannot af-
ford to go to these institutes, especially during the ﬁrst couple of years of
college. This is the very time when most decide their goals and future pro-
fession. Therefore, in the future physics majors will be coming mostly from
better ﬁnancial backgrounds and from expensive colleges only.

However, it is also noticed that in the community colleges or even some-
times in the state colleges, less qualiﬁed teachers are preferred to more qual-
iﬁed ones and these colleges tend to discourage research also. Moreover,
engineers at some places are teaching the physics. We personally have seen
cases where engineers are preferred over the physics doctorate degree holders
for physics teaching because the recruiters were not physics degree holders
themselves. Here standards are obviously diﬃcult to maintain. A similar
kind of eﬀect on the quality of teaching could be observed if a theoretical
physicist with a limited knowledge of engineering applications is teaching
engineering courses. So it is just a question of having more qualiﬁcation and
broader background in the course to be taught.

In the next section we will mention the reasons for low enrollment in a
little more detail. We have also incorporated accumulated data based on sev-

6

eral surveys from diﬀerent colleges in New York State that were performed
during the past several years. Some of this analysis is based on direct ex-
perience of teaching at diﬀerent levels starting from very elementary level
physics courses to the highly specialized Ph.D. courses. During this time, we
directly worked with students from diﬀerent cultural and ethnic background
and we were exposed to the teaching systems of a few diﬀerent countries. It
is also worth mentioning that we have not included a quantitative analysis
of this data in this discussion, though our conclusions are partly drawn from
this data.

III. LOSS OF INTEREST IN PHYSICS

The ﬁrst reason is obviously the image of the subject itself.

It is un-
doubtedly a subject that needs adequate math background and dedication.
The math component of the subject is a big repelling factor for students.
Especially, non-science majors do not like to take physics because it needs
much more involved math at every level, compared to other courses. I have
taught astronomy courses to non-science majors and have seen this diﬀer-
ence a lot. Yet, astronomy is a popular course because it can be taught to
students without substantial math background. Students, even after ﬁnish-
ing the pre-requisite math courses, have diﬃculty using calculators for very
simple numerical calculations. They do not like to play with numbers at all.
At least 70% of the non-science majors in astronomy courses do not have the
concept of units and knowledge of scientiﬁc notation. They learn to plug in
numbers in a formula but still are not able to evaluate the result. Though
ﬁrst math course in college is always a pre-requisite. Use of the calculator
is a diﬃcult task for them, though they are expected to know this, as they
are not supposed to be able to pass pre-requisite math courses without this
skill. Keeping track of all the units or other minor details of calculations is
not even mentionable. These students cannot be expected to feel comfort-
able in the ﬁrst algebra based course of physics. In this situation, physics
courses with minimum math component are very mathematical courses for
them even if they have at least covered the prerequisites. They may, for
example, consider conceptual physics, physical science and/or introductory
astronomy as very mathematical courses. But, I think the minimum required
math background for physics courses is what is actually needed to improve
the quality of daily life. Math itself is not a very popular subject either,

7

though this discussion is beyond our current topic. Math majors do not
have to take physics because physics is not usually required for math ma-
jors. However, mathematical concepts are generally considered to be diﬃcult
to understand for non-math majors. Understanding the concepts of physics
with the help of mathematical equations is even more challenging. Students
prefer to give it up without even trying. Apparently, this subject looks more
demanding and less interesting. Students think that they will have to spend
a lot of their study time to pass the course and would not be able to get good
grades out of it, either. They don’t even ﬁnd it interesting. In this situa-
tion, it becomes a complicated problem. So we need to make it suﬃciently
attractive in both ways to get better enrollment in physics. We see diﬀerent
types of students in diﬀerent level physics courses. It is also true that we
need dedicated students in physics and only such students can survive in the
higher-level courses. Regardless of the very low number of physics majors,
our discussion is not about the physics majors. However, non-science majors
mostly prefer other science courses to physics. Let us ﬁrst look at the reasons
that why physics is losing its popularity among the undergraduate students
and cannot attract many promising students.

After these introductory remarks, we can include a somewhat quantitative
analysis based on student surveys. We tried to collect some data from the
undergraduate students to ﬁnd out that what they think about it. Here is
data collected from 300 randomly picked undergraduate students in diﬀerent
science and non-science programs in diﬀerent colleges in New York State
altogether. Almost half of these students were science majors. It includes
community colleges, state colleges and a private institute of technology. We
are not going to analyze this data individually at the moment. Also note
that the following ﬁgures refer to students who had not yet taken physics.
When some of these students did study physics their opinion was signiﬁcantly
changed. We are still in the process of data collection and would like to report
the detailed quantitative analysis of this study later. The overall results from
the students who have never studied physics courses in a college are as follows:

1. Around 80% of the students think that physics is a very diﬃcult math-
ematical subject. And most of these students had inadequate math
background.

2. 40% have no interest in physics and consider it a useless and boring

subject.

8

3. 50% of the registered students want to pass physics courses to fulﬁll

the requirement of the degree but do not like physics.

4. 70% students of the undergrad algebra based physics class (including
around 20% non-science majors) think that this subject will consume
most of their time outside a classroom and still not yield good grades.
It could even have a bad eﬀect on their other grades. Some of them
even liked it as a subject or liked the teacher.

Some randomly picked students were asked a common question during
discussions on what is the use of physics. For them, it is a pretty abstract
subject that teaches the applications of mathematical equations. They can-
not ﬁnd any reason for studying physics and its connections to daily life.
Most of these students never even try to take physics so this image may be
from their exposure to physics from high schools and from their friends who
took physics at some level. These results are not surprising for physics teach-
ers, because we usually come across similar remarks. Almost every school
has a more-or-less similar type of situation, though the colleges with two-year
physics programs and less qualiﬁed teachers have even higher numbers of the
above comments. This leads to further decrease in the physics enrollment as
well as a job cut in physics. As a natural consequence, the interest in the sub-
ject is reduced and the production of good physics teachers in the future will
become more diﬃcult. Most of the small colleges have squeezed their physics
programs and reduced faculty size. But, the others have made physics a
requirement for more programs, to keep a better level of physics enrollment.
However, this can help the undergraduate programs only. Attracting more
students to physics majors is an even bigger challenge.

At this point, we cannot ignore the fact that a signiﬁcant percentage of
teachers are not able to play a role in the improvement of standards and
/or attracting more students to physics and change this image of the subject
itself. It is not because they are not competent enough to do that or they
do not care about the promotion of the subject. It is mainly because they
do not have job security. A large proportion of teachers have a great limi-
tation in playing a big role in attracting students to the subject. There is
no room to try new techniques or policies to increase standards and take the
risk of getting students less happy with teachers. It will always lead to the
insecurity of a teacher’s job. After all, they need money for their survival.
New teachers would have to care more about the student’s evaluation than

9

the standards, anyway. When teachers have to compromise on standards for
their job security, their dedication level is obviously aﬀected by it. When
their job commitment is not acknowledged at all and the ﬁnancial pressures
and insecurity leads them to the frustration level where they are badly dis-
couraged to work for standards and / or to contribute good research. We
need to discuss in detail the role of teachers to justify that the teacher’s
frustration is not only for them, it has the long-lasting eﬀects on future de-
velopment. Anyway, we discuss some of the major factors behind this image
of physics, the limitations produced by it and the suggestions to improve
the image of physics among students. It is an even much more complicated
issue and needs to be discussed thoroughly. We can brieﬂy summarize these
problems as follows:

1. Lack of appropriate math background among students.

2. Decreasing ratio of serious students for the sake of knowledge and
growth in the easy-going approach among students to get a degree
for better jobs and salaries, quickly.

3. Shortage of outside the classroom time for students.

4. Lack of understanding of the subject from the beginning.

5. Pressure on the contract teachers because of the security of teaching

jobs that greatly depends on the student’s evaluation.

All of these points could separately be a research topic in itself. We have
also postponed the discussion of the eﬀect of this adjunct culture (due to the
presence of part-time teaching faculty) on physics research. There are many
adjuncts that are as specially interested in research and could contribute to
good physics research if some job security and peace of mind is provided to
them as the necessary components for the original research. We have seen
adjuncts who would still like to do some research after teaching for some-
thing like twenty hours in a week. However, their research eﬀorts are not
even acknowledged by the institutes where they are teaching as adjuncts.
Though they will use the college addresses and all that. In addition to job
insecurity, the rules for research grants also need to be revised for the pro-
motion of research in the country. We will come back to the details of this
issue somewhere else. However, we will give here some of the analysis based

10

on our long-time involvement in physics teaching and our tremendous inter-
est in the promotion of physics in developing countries. In these countries,
limited resources and ﬁnancial issues are bigger obstacles in higher studies,
in general and physics education, in particular. Apparently these problems
are not limited to one college course only. They have much deeper roots
and need more detailed investigation to reach the root cause of the problem.
We will look at some of the immediate issues individually in the following
sections.

IV. MATHEMATICAL BACKGROUND

Mathematics is a very important tool to learn and understand physics.
Diﬃcult physics problems can be resolved, with equations and their physical
interpretation. A good math background is always needed for physics be-
cause the mathematical equations always help in understanding the physical
concepts. So, math courses are prerequisites for the physics courses. These
prerequisites are an additional problem for physics enrollment, but we cannot
do much about it because some math is needed for understanding physics.
On the other hand, most of the students cannot develop appropriate math
skill because they do not have enough background. Also their aptitude for
math learning and the level of math teaching varies from college to college
and even from teacher to teacher. There are other similar types of problems
in the math courses, which we will brieﬂy discuss here.

It is almost natural to think, in this computer age, that we do not need
to spend a lot of time on learning and practicing math if we can easily
use computers to get mistake-free reliable results. Computers can easily
do almost all the mathematical calculations for us. The only thing needed
is computer proﬁciency, which almost all modern students have, and are
getting better in time. There is no problem in stating that their use makes
research life easier and mistake-free and also saves time. Nobody can disagree
with the fact that computation becomes a lot more reliable and quicker and
even more detailed with computers. However, elementary physics needs a
little more understanding of math to start with. Some hand calculation skill
is needed to go through the derivation of physics equations and also the
interpretation. Students need some practice in simple math to at least get
used to playing with numbers. But calculators are usually introduced at
the elementary level; this does not permit the students to understand very

11

basic ideas of arithmetic. This easygoing approach in math helps to generate
math fear because they never get used to the calculations, properly. It has
also been noticed that there is not so much a lack of math aptitude, as it is
the lack of time and dedication to use math. This is because students are
introduced to the easier way, using calculators and computers at very early
stages of their student life. We would recommend encouraging school kids to
do more hand calculations and to play more with numbers by hand in the
elementary schools. Kids could be taught computers for other purposes but
should be discouraged to use calculators for many calculations, even in the
middle schools. Math skill is deﬁnitely aﬀected by the basic training. This
way, students will have enough skill to play with numbers and will be more
used to hand calculations. Thereby, math teaching could become easier at
higher levels.

Another big reason for lack of math interest and even math fear is linked
with the problems of teachers. The performance of the teachers is usually
judged in the light of students grades at all levels. So, to show better grades
of the students for their own job security, they have to adopt examining and
In this process,
grading systems that can help students get good grades.
sometimes, there can be compromises on the standards and loopholes are
created in their knowledge and practice. This is obviously dependent on the
individual school and the teacher. Again, high school standards are not our
topic at the moment but its impact on college educations is inevitable. These
problems have some long-lasting eﬀects on the high school graduates who are
college freshmen. As a result, students are not usually getting appropriate
math training before entering the colleges. High school teachers are under
the pressure of getting a high rate of graduation and have to keep it high
for their job security. So they have to compromise on standards sometimes.
Students usually have very limited practice. Study of sorted topics and exam
preparation is the usual attitude of students. They use short-cut methods to
get good grades even without adequate knowledge and the required practice
for higher-level education. In short:

1. Lack of practice in math does not let the students develop enough
interest in advanced math, even if they have enough interest to start
with

2. Financial responsibilities including ﬁnancial arrangements for their col-
lege education. Shortage of time outside the classroom and several

12

other factors are additional issues.

3. Students have to study a number of courses at the same time. So they
In this situation ﬁnding

do not have enough time for each subject.
extra time for the math practice is not possible.

In this situation, math background plays a big role in the declining trend
of physics enrollment. The detailed discussion of declining math background
is a complete research topic in itself. Physicists in the ﬁeld are very well
aware of this problem and try to minimize its impact on the standards of
physics courses. There are two usual approaches to handle this issue. Some
of the teachers try to assume minimum math background and go over the
mathematical steps in detail to make things clearly understandable to physics
students. Others try to reduce math in their elementary level courses and try
to explain the physical concepts using examples from daily life and certain
analogies. Sometimes both of these methods are used to overcome math
deﬁciency.
It depends on the personal judgment of teachers about their
class on how weak math background can be treated properly. Sometimes if
this weakness is limited to a few students, then individual attention to those
students and/or tutoring through learning centers in colleges can give enough
help. But this could only be helpful if students are willing to get help from
them and have a strong urge to study physics. This seems to be lacking these
days. However, along with all the individual and collective eﬀorts made by
teachers in this direction some of the highly contributing problems are listed
in the next section.

V. COMMON PROBLEMS OF PHYSICS TEACH-

ERS

Now we come to a comparatively sensitive issue in the sense that some
of us may not agree with it at all or may strongly disagree at certain points.
However, we are trying to address this issue honestly and sincerely because
when it comes to the analysis, it should be genuine and very honest. Our
point of view may be diﬀerent from others but our analysis is fair as it is
based on our experience and on study of the issue in detail. And I think that
we as physicists want to promote physics and want to see it as a popular
subject. All of our discussions here are for the sake of this purpose.

13

Physics is a subject that can only be taught eﬀectively with full dedica-
tion. This dedication is only possible with job security and ﬁnancial satisfac-
tion. All teachers do not have this now. With ﬁnancial worries and job issues,
it becomes very diﬃcult to concentrate on standards rather than concerning
oneself about evaluations by students in order to get a new teaching contract
for the new semester or the new quarter. Tenured teachers are proved to be
much better teachers due to job security and ﬁnancial stability. They also
have much more liberty to choose courses of their own interest and introduce
new courses. They can pay more attention to teaching standards and try new
eﬀective tools on students for better results. They obviously cannot aﬀord
to do extensive surveys or work on the long research projects including the
research in physics education.

On the other hand, contract teachers cannot aﬀord this. However, even
among the tenured teachers, everyone does not have equal interest in physics
education, obviously. But almost 20-30% teachers and sometimes even more
are on quarterly/monthly or yearly contracts. The continuation of their job
is not usually based on the quality of their teaching or how much they care
about the eﬀective teaching. These teachers have extensions in their con-
tracts depending on the evaluation by students. This instructor evaluation
is apparently the only way to check the teaching ability of contract teachers.
If, due to some reason they take more interest in standards and do not care
about the evaluations, they may be sent home, even if they demonstrate their
dedication to students and their role in eﬀective teaching is unquestionable,
otherwise. They do not even have options to pick up courses of their own
choice and show their real teaching abilities and their professional strength.
The opportunity is missed to show their full abilities or their own teaching
style, due to the risk of losing their teaching assignments. They usually have
to teach in the presence of mentors or tenured teachers and are expected
to follow the styles and standards of their mentors. They have no way to
introduce/try new ways to improve the quality. Their abilities are not tested
even if they have more experience and knowledge. It is just their status that
is counted. In a way, their contributions to the improvement of standards
is not even tested or judged. All they need is good instructor evaluations,
which depends on several other factors also.

Usually, the majority of students do not like teachers who are more de-
manding and are committed to raise standards. The student’s background
and their seriousness in study and the expectations from the course itself are

14

some of the additional factors. There are several unknown parameters for new
teachers, which can change evaluations altogether, regardless of the teaching
quality or eﬀectiveness. So the method of selection of contract teachers does
not help much in eﬀective teaching. Schools save money in hiring contract
teachers instead of full-time visiting positions, at the cost of the standards
of education. They can pay half of the minimum salary without any em-
ployment beneﬁts to contract teachers and ignore the standards. Contract
teachers can be acceptable for several subjects, but physics has a diﬀerent sit-
uation. So these less expensive contract positions are aﬀecting the standards
of physics teaching badly, not because colleges do not hire equally qualiﬁed
teachers, it is because they cannot get best out of their abilities.

Another issue associated with contract positions is the availability of
teachers to students outside the classroom. This especially occurs when
adjunct instructors come to the campus for a very limited time. They do
not have proper oﬃces and cannot usually be available other than at the
class time. If they give a couple of oﬃce hours for their own satisfaction,
most of the students cannot see them in this given limited time because of
the their schedule and most of the colleges do not require oﬃce hours for
adjuncts because they do not want to pay them for this. Most of the adjunct
faculty has to have some other source of income in addition to teaching so
their involvement is not at the same level as that of the full-time faculty.
Some colleges oﬀer students help from other teachers, which may not be
equally helpful either. Moreover, since adjunct positions are not long-term
positions so adjuncts cannot have longer term planning with students for
next term courses or undergrad research involvement and so on. Because of
their minimum exposure to their teaching departments, they do not attend
any meetings or understand very well the requirements of programs for which
they are teaching. Again the simple solution to all these issues is to replace
adjunct positions with full time short term contract positions at least, so that
the part time faculty can work in one college at a time and spend some more
time with students and teach more eﬀectively and peacefully. They could be
given more workload to compensate the salaries, so that they do not have
to drive from one place to another place, which deﬁnitely aﬀect the quality
of teaching. Adjunct teachers can easily make an amount of money that is
comparable to the regular starting salary of an undergraduate level teacher
with some additional workload. The only problem is the beneﬁt package
that could be available for the adjunct positions in special situations also.

15

So instead of distributing this money among diﬀerent colleges, some better
arrangements could be done.

Some of the other common job problems for the qualiﬁed physics teach-
ers are brieﬂy unveiled here. The physics job market is normally low. There
are several reasons behind this. Low enrollment of physics students is a big
factor in reduced teaching positions. Teaching jobs are not well-paid jobs
anyway. On the other hand, physicists are not much demanded in other jobs
either. Especially, there are not so many openings in the ﬁeld of theoretical
physics. Usually, physicists have to depend on their side skills for livelihood
and not their main expertise in physics. So the bright students would always
be attracted to those programs which are most demanded for better paying
jobs. On the other hand, we cannot deny the fact that physics majors have
to be hard-working students with good mathematics background. Especially
for theoretical physics, a strong math background and full interest in the
subject with full commitment is needed. So it was a growing ﬁeld when
brilliant students chose physics because of the better job opportunities. The
low enrollment in physics courses and in physics program lead to job cuts in
physics everywhere and physics programs squeezed. The other factor leading
to the low enrollment is the funding mechanism. The deﬁciency in basic the-
oretical physics research funds is a big discouragement for attracting brilliant
students to adopt physics as a career. So physics is not an attractive career
any more.

VI. OTHER ISSUES

Some of the other important issues contributing to our topics are related
directly or indirectly to social and economic issues and aﬀect education in
general. One of the big problems, which students have to face during studies,
is related to the economic matters. Usually, college students have to take care
of all their ﬁnancial needs. For that purpose they have to work during studies.
Part-time jobs are still manageable, but some of the students have to work
a lot to fulﬁll their ﬁnancial needs, which includes college spending also. Of
course, they take this out of their study time and hence prefer to take the
subjects that do not need a lot of out-of-the-classroom time. Sometimes,
they have to take several courses to make their study less expensive and save
on college fees for a semester. In that case, they have a stipulated period
of time for every subject. In this situation, they are not usually able to ﬁt

16

physics in their schedule and if they do, they cannot do well.

Furthermore, most of the elementary level physics classes are comprised
of a very diverse academic background and include diﬀerent majors. These
students come from all diﬀerent places. It means that even the same prerequi-
sites indicate diﬀerent academic levels, depending on their previous institute
and teachers. And, it is even more complicated in colleges. They come from
diﬀerent majors including all science and liberal arts majors, and even have
spent diﬀerent numbers of years in college. They have diﬀerent reasons to
enroll in physics courses. Some of them like physics and may even end up
selecting physics as a career, whereas others would be sitting there just to
In this case, it is
complete the required credits and not to learn physics.
really very diﬃcult to teach large classes. This means if you are teaching a
couple of hundreds of students you can always make four or ﬁve classes out
of them with quite diﬀerent backgrounds and diﬀerent course goals.

In this situation a teacher cannot equally satisfy all the students at the
same time. The level of the course has to be kept at the point where most
of the students can pass it. This is how we run into the risk of losing some
of the interested physics students who could have continued if they were
taught in a diﬀerent way. They could have put in more individual time
to develop a better understanding of the subject. These types of students
need a little bit more one-on-one discussion time with teachers and need to
have more questions asked in class. It is impossible to satisfy them in big
classes. Smaller class size could be very helpful in physics teaching because
a teacher can pay individual attention to the students. Knowing that there
are diﬀerent reasons for the lack of interest in diﬀerent types of physics at
diﬀerent levels, we should try to resolve these issues, in general.

Physics is being taught in high schools and colleges at diﬀerent levels. We
can classify these courses as the elementary, medium and higher-level courses.
The students have their ﬁrst exposure to compulsory physics courses in high
schools. Compulsory physics courses at the college level come afterwards.
These courses are either based on algebra or simple calculus. They are oﬀered
to big groups of students with a great variety of background and interest.
In this situation, it becomes very diﬃcult for teachers to make the subject
attractive enough for the students to prefer physics to other better paying,
easy-to-understand and seemingly more relevant subjects.

Once the students choose physics as a major subject, then their interest
is clear. Now, just to keep the students interested in the subject, the physics

17

courses have to be kept parallel (in time consumption) to the courses in other
disciplines. So, class demonstrations and problem solving strategies are used
to help them learn the topics quickly and properly understand the concepts.
This is very eﬀective in developing working knowledge of the basic physics
concepts among students of the engineering departments. However, in our
point of view, deeper understanding of physics requires a combination of the
observational/experimental as well as the mathematical approach, even at
the elementary level. Suﬃcient theoretical background is needed to develop
a real interest in the subject. For the rest of their career they can easily
learn and understand through the physical demonstrations and the problem
solving techniques.

Physics teaching is also done in engineering departments to give engineers
the relevant physics background. Usually, the emphasis is on working knowl-
edge and providing suﬃcient practice to use the relevant equations to solve
given problems. This is understandable in that the main objective is to cre-
ate acceptable and safe designs and resolve engineering problems. However,
I would think that good engineers should also have a better background in
the relevant areas of physics. This will help them throughout their career to
face any unforeseen situation and make innovative designs. For this purpose,
the engineering departments can arrange a couple of courses to develop this
background. Good physics background with hands-on experience is equally
helpful in medicine, experimental chemistry and biology, especially, when it
comes to the use of optical, electronic or mechanical equipment. So all the
science majors should have reasonable exposure to physics to develop better
understanding in their own subjects also. Here, I would like to mention a
personal experience. I asked about 60 students of Mechanical Engineering
to deﬁne the word ‘mechanics’. Nobody could answer this question. Then
I asked, what is Mechanical Engineering? And the answer was!! Problem
Solving. We would expect them to at least know the role of mechanics in
building modern inventive mechanical designs.

The next issue is funding. Since undergraduate research funds are mainly
allocated for the experimental or applied science projects, new students are
encouraged to choose their major research projects in experimental/applied
physics areas.
It is an established fact that there are several theoretical
physicists from developing countries, which could convert from theoretical
to experimental physics research after working for some time with the ex-
perimental research groups. However, a lot of work is required to develop

18

enough mathematical background to participate in theoretical research. In
recent times, any good experimental group requires computational skills and
theoretical physicists with good mathematical and physical background could
serve this need and become an irreplaceable part of an experimental group.
They could even replace computer engineers sometimes, because of their in-
sight in physics.

High-level physics teaching is not our topic at the moment, because when
the students reach that level, they already have suﬃcient interest and learn-
ing capabilities to cope with the complexities of the subject. Therefore, the
student’s response and interest in the subject makes teaching enjoyable and
academically challenging for the teachers. But that interest is only devel-
oped under favorable circumstances. At that stage, subject knowledge of
the teachers is appreciated more than their handling of students or teaching
styles.

VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

In this section we will like to conclude our discussion by brieﬂy mentioning
what we think about this issue.
It is clear that the decrease in physics
enrollment should be taken seriously and we should try to take care of this
problem in the light of all the above available details. It might lead to very
serious consequences if it was not controlled at this stage. Some of our
concerns are clear from the available statistical data [6]. However, we would
like to emphasize a few points that include ways to re-establish the physics
departments and to initiate undergraduate majors in two-year colleges. In
this time of availability of more qualiﬁed physicists than suitable jobs, two-
year colleges can also hire more qualiﬁed physicists who can participate in
raising educational standards in such institutes. If the teaching load could be
lowered to some extent and research is at least not discouraged, it will also
lead to improvement in the educational standards. This strategy will attract
serious researchers who want to participate in the improvement of physics
education, also. Instructor evaluations are very important but they should
be more used to help committed teachers to determine the eﬀectiveness of
their teaching methods and should not be used as the sole criteria for the
teacher’s job extension.

We will even recommend at least full-time temporary hiring instead of the
adjunct position. Lab teaching could be handled by adjuncts but the full-

19

time teachers should preferably teach lectures so that they can give enough
time to students.
In that case lab teaching can also be done by full-time
faculty and could be more organized and eﬀective to attract more students
and improve the image of the subject itself. Moreover, better ways for the in-
structor evaluation procedure could be developed incorporating the student’s
interest in the subject in the evaluation procedures. We are already aware
of the fact that some colleges have very good evaluation procedure and the
obvious diﬀerence in the teaching standards could be easily observed. An-
other convenience could be achieved by introducing a comparatively uniform
procedure of instructor evaluation so that the instructor evaluations in dif-
ferent institutes could be compared. Some further research is required in this
direction. Undergraduate physics research programs are the eﬀective ways
to promote physics among students.

VIII. RECOMMENDATIONS

In the end, we would like to give a few suggestions to secure our future
standards in technology and science. These are obviously some of the possi-
ble moves in the direction of the promotion of physics among the incoming
generation. We know that these are not very easy steps, especially to take
all at once. We understand the limitations of diﬀerent policy making bodies
and are aware of the ﬁnancial constraints. However, some of the improve-
ments are possible partially or completely. Consideration of these issues will
at least help to protect us from the further decline in standards of physics
education. This is the ﬁrst needed move. We know some of these things are
already adopted by certain places, however we have to mention them here to
suggest it to everybody. Some of the recommendations are as follows:

1. Promotion of science interest in elementary schools, in particular by
developing calculation skill in math. We would recommend completely
banning the use of calculators in elementary schools. Even at higher-
level school students should be discouraged to use calculators for simple
numerical calculations.

2. School trips can be organized to some research labs and students could
be provided with opportunities to meet renowned scientists of the area.
Some other programs can be designed to involve college/university
teachers to work with school students.

20

3. Lesson the pressure for a high graduation rate. So, job security and
promotion of teachers should be less dependent on a high graduation
rate. They should be required to involve students in more practice in
solving problems. State exams could be designed to accommodate the
testing of student’s math practice and their broad knowledge.

4. In all high schools, those teachers who have degrees in the relevant
subject should be teaching math and science courses. Preferably, M.S
degree in the relevant subject and should be a requirement. Some of
the schools already have these standards.

5. Community colleges and state colleges should give more full-time po-
sitions instead of hiring adjuncts for teaching those courses. So many
highly qualiﬁed people are looking for physics jobs these days that it
should not be diﬃcult to hire one teacher who can teach for example
every undergraduate course. Physics degree holders should preferably,
do physics teaching. Preference should be given to doctorate degree
holders.

6. Instructor evaluation by students should be considered as input data
for further improvement in teaching and not the sole criteria for job
extension.

7. The teaching load in colleges should be reduced to improve the quality
of teaching. Teachers should have enough to organize lectures and
design experiments properly.

8. Qualiﬁed technicians should also be provided to run physics labs prop-
erly. These technicians can take care of the equipment, which are never
used by many colleges, just because teachers have no time. This ex-
pensive equipment could be used to introduce new experiments.

9. Research should not be discouraged in colleges at all. Actually college
teachers should be encouraged to establish research collaboration with
universities. In this way, they will also be more aware of the learning
needs of students who want to transfer to other colleges to do research
in basic sciences. They can play their role to promote basic sciences
by getting new ideas and having discussions with their colleagues in
research institutes.

21

10. Physics courses for engineers should be designed more clearly, so as to
relate physics to engineering applications. Students should be able to
learn and understand physical concepts so that they can properly apply
them in their engineering courses.

11. Research grants should be given to contract teachers by colleges to

involve undergraduate students in research.

12. More inter-disciplinary courses should be designed to make students
more familiar with physics and other science courses. Especially, the
courses, which can link natural sciences and social science together,
could be very interesting. For this purpose, teachers with more than
one master degree could be very helpful.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: The author would like to thank Prof. Alan
Miller of the Physics Department of Syracuse University to read the manuscript
and to give very helpful suggestions.

REFERENCES

1. Milton W. Cole and Carla Zembal Saul, ‘Enhancing Science Education
in Elementary Schools‘, arXiv: physics/0207051 (to appear in Ameri-
can Journal of Physics)(2002)

2. Karl Svozil, ‘Peer Review in Context‘, arXiv: physics/0208046 (2002)

3. N.D.Finkelstein, ‘Teaching and Learning Physics‘ arXiv: physics/0505091(2005)

4. Emily M.Reiser and Mark E. Markes, ‘An inferential analysis of the
eﬀect of activity based physics instruction on the persistent misconcep-
tions of lecture students‘ arXiv: physics/0506208(2005)

5. William J.Gerace and Ian D. Beatty, ‘Teaching vs.learning: Chang-
ing perspectives on problem solving in physics instructions‘ arXiv:
physics/0508131(2005)

6. Roman Czujko, www.aip.org/statistics/trends/reports/june9talk.pdf

7. Richard R. Hake, Am. J. of Physics 66, 64 (1998)

8. Extensive surveys like the one in Ref. 7 and several other articles on

similar type of subjects

22

