Firm Projects and Social Behaviour of Investors

J. Hudakova

Matematical - Economical Consultancy
Stierova 23
SK-040 11 Kosice, Slovak Republic

O. Hudak

Faculty of Finance, Matej Bel University,
Cesta na amﬁteater 1, SK-974 15 Banska Bystrica, Slovak Republic,
e-mail: ondrej.hudak@umb.sk

5
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
0
1
9
0
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Abstract

An investor is estimating net present value of a ﬁrm project and performs risk
analysis. Usually it is created portfolio hierarchies and make comparison of
variants of project based on these hierarchies. Then one ﬁnds that portfolio
which corresponds to the particular needs of individual groups within the ﬁrm.
We have formulated a new type of NPV analysis based on the fact that normal
distribution of NPV is observed for some projects in some industries. The ex-
pected risk of the project is given by variance, in which there is σn the standard
deviation of the year n cash ﬂow, σI the standard deviation of the investment I
in the time zero, ρI,n the correlation coeﬃcient of the year n cash ﬂow deviation
from the average and of the investment I at time zero deviation from the mean
investment at time zero, ρn,n the correlation coeﬃcient of the year n cash ﬂow
deviation from the average and of the year n cash ﬂow deviation from the aver-
age. The aim function of the investor into the project was found. The investor
is characterized by the constant A. The larger constant A the larger preference
is given to the project NPV and the larger acceptable risk of the project, and
vice versa. We have found that there are contributions in which we have the
aim-function-like contribution to the aim function, which is discounted and in
which the risk of the n-th year risk is discounted in the second order. Further
there is aim-function-like contribution to the aim-function which comes from
the initial investment I and its risk σ2
I .

2

1

Introduction

A social group of investors investing in a ﬁrm project and of buyers buying
products of the ﬁrm project is characterized as any general group [1] - [5].
We assume that individual behaviour of investors and buyers is inﬂuenced by
the need to associate with other investors and buyers (agents) to obtain the
approval of other agents in the group of agents which is characterized by large
nonrational and emotional element in decisions. Making decisions an agent
equates own needs with those of the other agents from the group. Agents from
the group may interact. The interaction of investors and buyers consists of the
exchange of information and it costs some money. The exchanged information
is assumed to be well deﬁned, and we assume that agents interact in such a
way that they give reference to the origin of the information if asked by other
agents. The information is thus private [6].

TUTUTU

2 Net Present Value of the Project

An investor is estimating NPV (net present value) of a ﬁrm project. Then
he/she performs risk analysis. In [7] it is described for example how software
SAP for Banking controls risk on the market. Static and dynamic risk control
of market risk is focused either on the NPV calculations or on periodic results.
The software enables to manage the risk for interest rate changes, currency ﬂuc-
tuations, market volatility and other quantities. Analysing of NPV and Value
at Risk (VaR) the software measures and controls market risk using diﬀerent
simulation scenarios. Quick recognition of any proﬁt risk and proﬁt-and-loss
calculations is based on combining gap analysis and strategy management pos-
sibilities included in this software. It is possible to obtain the balance sheet view
of risk. Gap analysis enables to control the liquidity risk. Static analysis of mar-
ket risk for the ﬁrm (bank) is based on existing portfolios or exposures. The
software enable to calculate NPV for diﬀerent bank products, then using scenar-
ios for development of yield curves, volatility or exchange rate simulations, it is
possible to perform VaR analyses (Monte Carlo f.e.), historic simulations, vari-
ance and covariance calculations. This scenarios may be tested on the historical
data. Then it is possible to create portfolio hierarchies and make comparison
based on these hierarchies. Then one can use this analysis to ﬁnd that portfolio
which corresponds to the particular needs of individual groups within the ﬁrm
(bank). Thus this software provides consistent management of the market and
default risk, see [7]. As we can see the software enable to create various scenar-
ios of development and to choose that product which corresponds to the needs
of the group.

Recently [8] published NPV-at-Risk method in infrastructure project in-
vestment evaluation. Authors note that an investment in privately ﬁnanced
infrastructure projects requires careful consideration which take into account
high levels of ﬁnancial, political, and market risks. A systematic classiﬁcation
of existing evaluation methods by the authors has shown that it is possible to
develop a new method the net-present-value-at-risk (NPV-at-risk) method by
combining the weighted average cost of capital and dual risk-return method.
The authors evaluate two hypothetical power projects and have shown that

3

their method can provide a better decision for risk evaluation of, and invest-
ment in, privately ﬁnanced infrastructure projects. For systematic classiﬁcation
of existing evaluation methods see in this paper.

There are evidences that distribution of Net Present Value (NPV) of the
same projects in the same industry has normal distibution [9] - [29] However
there exists also evidence that this distribution may be in some cases diﬀerent
from the normal distribution, see the literature cited for discussion. Then there
is an interesting problem: how the behaviour of distribution of NPV of a ﬁrm
projects may be characterized for a given ﬁrm project in a given industry. An-
other interesting problem is how to describe NPV of a ﬁrm project taking into
account the risk of the project using characteristics of the distribution of NPV
of ﬁrm projects.

While the ﬁrst problem is diﬃcult, there is not enough data for various ﬁrm
projects in various industries, the second problem may be solved for those ﬁrm
project NPV of which is normally distributed. So in this paper we will assume
that the distribution of NPV of ﬁrm projects is normal. It is however clear that
this is not true for all possible projects, see references above for discussion this
point.

One can ask now whether an opposite type of analysis to those described
above does not correspond better to reality. We will not develop various sce-
narios and then choose the most convenient for the investor, we will assume
that the group (ﬁrm) is characterized by a risk aversion characteristics, which
is intrinsic to this group (ﬁrm) and then using an aim function we will per-
form the analysis of the project in which the NPV, its risk and an aversion of
the investor are included. This type of analysis is used in fact for analysis of
NPV for investment into shares and bonds on capital markets. In general an
investment on a capital market may be considered also as a ﬁrm project. It is
known that on liquid developed markets in equilibrium there exists equivalence
between investing into the shares ﬁnancing a given ﬁrm project and investing
directly into the ﬁrm project. In this paper we thus formulate such a type of
analysis of NPV and risk of investment into project which is based on the aim
function as in the case of shares in the Markowitz model [30] - [33].

It is known that there exists normal distribution of NPV of projects in some
industries, see in [9] - [29]. In some case this distribution seems not to be normal
as we mentioned. We will consider the ﬁrst case here in this paper only.

It is assumed that, for simplicity, there exists an investment I /which is a
negative value if it is an investment of the investor for which other sources of
investment like grants, subsidiarisation, etc. are less then his own sources, and
it is positive if it is an inverse situation/ in time zero, and that there is a cash
ﬂow CFn from the project every n-th year. The project life-time is assumed to
be N years. Then the NPV of such an investment is

N P V =

n=N

X
n=1

CFn
(1 + r)n + I

(1)

The estimation of NPV in (1) is usually such that it is assumed that cash
ﬂow CFn in the year n has certainty to realize in the future with probability
1.
It is assumed that the investment I has certainty to realize in the near
future /time zero/ with probability 1. This is a simpliﬁcation, neverthless this
assumption is used to be used. This assumption is however in general not

4

true. Investors then have to perform Risk and Sensitivity Analysis of the type
described above, or similar with various scenarios, however assuming certainty
to realize the investment and the cash ﬂows with probability 1 in every possible
case of scenario. We do not consider here exclusive cases of an investment and
cash ﬂows. Then investors consider variations of the investment and cash ﬂows
for the same case. To consider which project is for a given investor the most
proﬁtable at a given expected risk, or which project is the less risky for an
expected proﬁt one should consider uncertainty in looking for such an optimal
project. Uncertainty in cash ﬂows and /in principle also in the investment in the
time zero/ lead investors in fact to work with expected cash ﬂows for the future
periods, and with expected investment I in zero time. Expectations of investors
should include not only expected cash ﬂow for every year n and for the expected
investment I in the zero-th year, but also expected risk of net present value σ2
N P V
. Most of the projects has normal distribution of NPV as we mentioned above.
So we will assume in the following in this paper that this distribution of NPV
for projects /in a given industry/ is a normal distribution. Note that NPV of
a project contains for every year cash ﬂow which is usually positive /however
it may be also negative/ and the initial investment is a negative return usually
/however, as we already discussed it may be also a positive quantity/.

There exists a mean value of the NPV for projects of the same type in a
given industry because we consider projects of the same type in one industry for
simplicity. More complicated cases of diﬀerent projects in the same industry, and
of projects in diﬀerent industries may be described generalizing our description
assuming, that there is a liquid market with projects. Less liquid market of
projects we do not consider here. Note that the mean value of the NPV, N P V
of the project is given by

N P V =

n=N

X
n=1

CF n
(1 + r)n + I

(2)

3 The Risk of the Net Present Value of the

Project

The risk of the NPV of the project is for normal distribution of NPV charac-
terized by a variance of the NPV of the project. If we consider M time periods
over which we calculate the variance of the project /we consider an industry in
which there are investments in the project of the same type over longer time
period - M time periods/. The the variance is deﬁned as

σ2 =

1
M − 1

m=M

X
i=1

(N P Vi − N P V )2

(3)

Here N P Vi is the NPV of the project in time i. We assume the liquid market
with projects, so we can assume that at every time i there is a possibility to
invest in the project. We will average over projects which start in diﬀerent time
i. There is a rare case that the same project in the same industry starts exactly
at the same time i. So we will not consider this possibility.

We can rewrite the diﬀerence in the deﬁnition of the variance

5

N P Vi − N P V =

n=N

X
n=1

− CF n

CF i
(1 + r)n + (Ii − I)
n

where CF i

n is the expected value of the cash ﬂow in the year n and in the
time i /time on the market with the project/, and where Ii is the expected
investment into the project in time i /time on the market with the project/.
Here I is the mean value of the investment I into the project over the time on
the market with the project. The quantity CF i
n is the value of the cash ﬂow CF
into the project as it is expected in the year n and i denotes that we consider
the time on the market with the project.

The expected risk of the project is then, substituting from (4) into (3),

written in the form

(4)

(5)

σ2 =

1
M − 1

m=M

X
i=1

n=N
(

X
n=1

− CF n)2

(CF i
n
(1 + r)2n

[

+(Ii − I)2 − 2(Ii − I)

− CF n

CF i
n
(1 + r)n

]+

n=N.n=N

2

X
n=1,n>n

(CF i
n

− CF n)(CF i
n
(1 + r)n+n

− CF n)

The expected risk of the project may be written from (5) in the form

σ2 =

n=N

X
n=1

2

σn

(1 + r)2n +σ2

I

−2

n=N

X
n=1

ρI,nσI σn

1
(1 + r)n +2

n=N.n=N

X
n=1,n>n

ρn,nσnσn

1
(1 + r)n+n

(6)
where σn is the standard deviation of the year n cash ﬂow, σI is the standard
deviation of the investment I in the time zero, ρI,n is the correlation coeﬃcient of
the year n cash ﬂow deviation from the average and of the investment I at time
zero deviation from the mean investment at time zero, ρn,n is the correlation
coeﬃcient of the year n cash ﬂow deviation from the average and of the year n
cash ﬂow deviation from the average.

We can see from the (6) that the risk of the cash ﬂow and the zero time
investment is a sum of the discounted risk of the risk of the year n cash ﬂow, of
the zero time investment risk, of the risk associated with the correlation of the
zero time investment I and the year n cash ﬂow and of the risk associated with
the correlation of the year n cash ﬂow and the year n cash ﬂow. The later two
terms are discounted correspondingly. Thus the risk of the NPV of the project
consists of discounted contributions of the cash ﬂow risks and correlations. The
larger the rate of return in discounting coeﬃcient, the smaller contribution from
the risk of the year n cash ﬂow, from the year n cash ﬂow deviation from the
average correlation with the zero time investment I deviation from the average
and from the year n cash ﬂow deviation from the average correlation with from
the year n cash ﬂow deviation. The smaller the rate of return in discounting
coeﬃcient, the larger contribution from the risk of the year n cash ﬂow, from
the year n cash ﬂow deviation from the average correlation with the zero time
investment I deviation from the average and from the year n cash ﬂow deviation
from the average correlation with from the year n cash ﬂow deviation.

6

4 The Aim Function of the Investor into the

Project

The investor has an expected NPV of the project. To estimate this expected
value we will use the historical values of NPV of the project in the industry. To
describe the expected risk of the project we will use the historical value of the
risk of the project. We assume thus that expected NPV and expected risk of
the project do not diﬀer too much from recent historical data on projects with
N years of their life. This assumption is good for projects for which N is larger
than let us say two business cycles. This assumption is good also for projects
in which N is two-three months. The assumption is expected not to be good
for projects in which N is nearly one to three years because the business cycle
leads to diﬀerent behaviour of such projects in recent period with respect to the
period in the next one to three years.

The investor is characterized by the constant A, which is nonnegative. The
larger constant A the larger preference is given to the project NPV and the larger
acceptable risk of the project. The smaller constant A the smaller preference is
given to the project NPV and the smaller acceptable risk of the project.

The aim function has the form

The aim function can be rewriten now into the form using (1), (5) and (7):

F = −A.N P V + σ2

F = −A.(

n=N

X
n=1

CFn
(1 + r)n + I) + σ2

(7)

(8)

and

n=N

n=N

2

σn

1

F =

X
n=1

X
n=1

I )−2

ρI,nσI σn

(1 + r)n )+(A.I+σ2

(1 + r)n (−A.CFn+

1
(1 + r)n +2
(9)
As we can see there are contributions in the sum which have the aim-
function-like contribution form to the aim function, which is discounted and
in which the risk of the n-th year risk is discounted in the second order. This
is the ﬁrst term in (9). The second term in (9) contains aim-function-like con-
tribution to the aim-function which comes from the initial investment I and
its risk σ2
I . However the investment is a negative cash ﬂow (expected). The
third term in (9) contains the contribution of the cash ﬂow risk (as standard
deviation) in the n-th year and the investment risk (as standard deviation) and
the correlation coeﬃcient ρI,n between the returns of the investments I in the
year 0 (for a set of the same projects) with respect to the mean investment I
in the year 0 (for a set of the same projects), and the cash ﬂow in the year
n minus a mean cash ﬂow (for a set of the same projects). This contribution
contains discounting coeﬃcient in the n-th order. The last term contains the
contribution of the cash ﬂow risk (as standard deviation) in the n-th year and
the cash ﬂow risk (as standard deviation) in the n-th year and the correlation
coeﬃcient ρn,n between the returns of the cash ﬂow in the year n (for a set of
the same projects) with respect to the mean cash ﬂow in the year n (for a set

7

n=N.n=N

X
n=1,n>n

ρn,nσnσn

1
(1 + r)n+n

of the same projects), and the cash ﬂow in the year n minus a mean cash ﬂow
(for a set of the same projects) for the same year.

We can distinguish several cases in the aim function (9) to understand better
the processes behind it. For simplicity we can consider the case in which ρI,n =
0, i.e. the returns of investment in the year 0 and the returns of the cash ﬂow in
the year n are uncorrelated. This case is not realistic too much, however using
it we can discuss properties of the aim function F of investors investing into
projects easier, and in some cases this assumption is not so much unrealistic:
when the cash ﬂow ﬂuctuates too much for the year n for diﬀerent ﬁrms with
the same project. This may happen in the industry in which there are ﬁrms
with large dispersion of cash ﬂows in the year n around some mean value near
zero. In general however this mean value may be expected to be positive. This
case will be discussed later on.

For simplicity we can consider also the case in which there is almost no
correlation between cash ﬂow returns in the year n and in the year n for general
n and n, ρn,n = 0, . The curve of cash ﬂow dependence on the year of the
project may be very ﬂuctuating around zero, and then this our assumption is
realistic. In general the curve of cash ﬂow dependence on the year of the project
may be ﬂuctuating around some value which is non-zero, mostly positive. This
case we will consider latter on.

If we consider the mentioned simple cases of ρI,n = 0 and ρn,n = 0, then the

aim function (9) takes a simple form:

F =

n=N

X
n=1

1

(1 + r)n (−A.CFn +

(1 + r)n ) + (A.I + σ2
I )

2

σn

(10)

As we can see from (10) the larger the constant A the more preferred pos-
σn
itive cash ﬂow CFn and the larger acceptable risk
(1+r)n , which is however
discounted. The constant A is the same for every year so for the year 0 the
larger the constant A the smaller preferred investment I and the smaller risk of
the investment I, assuming positive investment I.

2

5 Summary and Discussion

An investor is estimating NPV (net present value) of a ﬁrm project. Then
he/she usually performs risk analysis. In [7] it is described for example how
software SAP for Banking controls risk on the market. It is possible to create
portfolio hierarchies and make comparison based on these hierarchies. Then one
can use these analyses to ﬁnd that portfolio which corresponds to the particular
needs of individual groups within the ﬁrm (bank). The software enable to create
various scenarios of development and to choose that product which corresponds
to the needs of the group. This approach is typical approach for estimating NPV
of a ﬁrm project and taking into account risk. There are methods which try
to improve this approach. One of them was published recently [8] and is using
NPV-at-Risk method in infrastructure project investment evaluation. Distribu-
tions of Net Present Value (NPV) of the same projects in the same industry
has usually normal distibution [9] - [29] in some cases, as it is observed from
data. There exists evidence that this distribution may be in some cases diﬀerent
from the normal distribution. Thus there is an interesting problem: how the

8

distribution of NPV of a ﬁrm project in a given industry may be characterized
for a given ﬁrm project in a given industry. Another interesting problem is
then how to describe NPV of a ﬁrm project taking into account the risk of the
project using characteristics of the distribution of NPV of ﬁrm projects. With
the ﬁrst problem we do not deal in this paper because there is not enough data
for various ﬁrm projects in various industries to characterize distributions of
NPV. The second problem may be solved for those ﬁrm project NPV of which
is normally distributed. In this paper we assumed that the distribution of NPV
of a ﬁrm project in a given industry is normal. This assumption is not true for
all possible projects. We have used in our paper an opposite type of analysis to
those described above and described in literature. We do not develop various
scenarios and then choose the most convenient scenario for the investor, we will
assume that the group (ﬁrm) is characterized by a risk aversion characteristic,
which is intrinsic to this group (ﬁrm) and then using an aim function we may
perform the analysis of the project in which the NPV, its risk and an aversion
of the investor are included. This type of analysis of NPV is used in fact in
analysis of NPV for investment into shares and bonds on capital markets. Note
that in general an investment on a capital market may be considered also as
a ﬁrm project.
It is known that on liquid developed markets in equilibrium
there exists equivalence between investing into the shares ﬁnancing a given ﬁrm
project and investing directly into the ﬁrm project. In this paper we thus formu-
lated such a type of analysis of NPV and risk of investment into project which
is based on the aim function as in the case of shares in the Markowitz model
and which takes into account risk aversion of the ﬁrm. The analysis is based
on the fact that normal distribution of NPV is observed for some projects in
some industries. While this formulation is new approach how to analyse NPV
and it is quite straightforward, the aim function for agents investing into ﬁrm
projects /and for agents buying products of this project and reselling it further
which is a kind of arbitrage process on the market with a given project in a
given industry/ may be futher generalized which will not be done in this paper
to describe analysis of NPV for which normal distribution is absent.

We assumed that, for simplicity, there exists an investment I /which is a
negative value if it is an investment of the investor for which other sources of
investment like grants, subsidiarisation, etc. are less then his own sources, and
it is positive if it is inverse situation/ in time zero, and that there is a cash
ﬂow CFn from the project every n-th year. The project life-time is assumed
to be N years. The NPV of such an investment is calculated using well known
expression. The estimation of NPV is then such that it is assumed that cash ﬂow
CFn in the year n has certainty to realize in the future with probability 1. It is
assumed that the investment I has certainty to realize in the near future /time
zero/ with probability 1. Investors then have to perform Risk and Sensitivity
Analysis of the type described above, or similar with various scenarios. They are
assuming for every scenario certainty to realize the investment and the cash ﬂows
with probability 1. Then investors consider various scenarios of the investment
and cash ﬂows for the same project. Note that we do not consider in this
paper the case with investment and cash ﬂow from diﬀerent possible excluding
mutually projects. To consider which project is for a given investor the most
proﬁtable at a given expected risk, or which project is the less risky for an
expected proﬁt one should consider uncertainty in looking for such an optimal
project. Uncertainty in cash ﬂows and /in principle also in the investment in

9

the time zero/ lead investors in fact to work with expected cash ﬂows for the
future periods, and with expected investment I in zero time. Expectations of
investors should include not only expected cash ﬂow for every year n and for
the expected investment I in the zero-th year, but also expected risk of net
present value σ2
N P V . Most of the projects has normal distribution of NPV as
we mentioned above. So we assumed in our paper that this distribution of NPV
for projects /in a given industry/ is a normal distribution. NPV of a project
contains for every year cash ﬂow which is usually positive /however it may be
also negative/ and the initial investment is a negative usually /however, as we
noted it may be also a positive quantity/.

There exists a mean value of the NPV for projects of the same type in a given
industry. In our paper we consider projects of the same type in one industry
only. We assume, that there is a liquid market with the project in the industry.
We have found the mean value of the NPV, N P V of the project. Then we
discussed the risk of the NPV of the project. The risk of the NPV of the project
is for normal distribution of NPV a variance of the NPV of the project. We
calculated the variance of the project. We consider an industry in which there
are investments in the project of the same type over longer time periods. We
considered N P Vi, the NPV of the project starting in time i. We assumed the
liquid market with projects, so we can assume that at every time i there is a
possibility to invest in the project. We averaged over projects which start in
diﬀerent time i. The rare case that the same project in the same industry starts
exactly at the same time i was not considered here.

We have found the diﬀerence of the NPV and the mean value of NPV N P V .
The expected risk of the project was then found.
It is given by variance, in
which there is σn the standard deviation of the year n cash ﬂow, σI the standard
deviation of the investment I in the time zero, ρI,n the correlation coeﬃcient
of the year n cash ﬂow deviation from the average and of the investment I at
time zero deviation from the mean investment at time zero, ρn,n the correlation
coeﬃcient of the year n cash ﬂow deviation from the average and of the year n
cash ﬂow deviation from the average. The risk of the cash ﬂow and the zero time
investment was found to be a sum of the discounted risk of the year n cash ﬂow,
of the zero time investment risk, of the risk associated with the correlation of the
zero time investment I and the year n cash ﬂow and of the risk associated with
the correlation of the year n cash ﬂow and the year n cash ﬂow. The later two
terms are discounted correspondingly. Thus the risk of the NPV of the project
consists of discounted contributions of the cash ﬂow risks and correlations. The
larger the rate of return in discounting coeﬃcient, the smaller contribution from
the risk of the year n cash ﬂow, from the year n cash ﬂow deviation from the
average correlation with the zero time investment I deviation from the average
and from the year n cash ﬂow deviation from the average correlation with from
the year n cash ﬂow deviation. The smaller the rate of return in discounting
coeﬃcient, the larger contribution from the risk of the year n cash ﬂow, from
the year n cash ﬂow deviation from the average correlation with the zero time
investment I deviation from the average and from the year n cash ﬂow deviation
from the average correlation with from the year n cash ﬂow deviation.

The aim function of the investor into the project was found. The investor
expects an NPV of the project. To estimate this expected value we may use
the historical NPV of the project in the industry. To describe the expected
risk of the project we may use the historical value of the risk of the project.

10

We assume thus that expected NPV and expected risk of the project do not
diﬀer too much from recent historical data on projects with N years of their
life. This assumption is good for projects for which N is larger than let us say
two business cycles. This assumption is good also for projects in which N is
two-three months. The assumption is expected not to be good for projects in
which N is nearly one to three years because the business cycle leads to diﬀerent
behaviour of such projects in recent period with respect to the period in the
next one to three years.

The investor is characterized by the constant A, which is nonnegative. The
larger constant A the larger preference is given to the project NPV and the larger
acceptable risk of the project. The smaller constant A the smaller preference is
given to the project NPV and the smaller acceptable risk of the project.

The aim function explicit form was found. In this form we have found that
there are contributions in which we have the aim-function-like contribution to
the aim function, which is discounted and in which the risk of the n-th year risk
is discounted in the second order. Further there is aim-function-like contribution
to the aim-function which comes from the initial investment I and its risk σ2
I .
The investment is a negative cash ﬂow (expected) usually. The contribution of
the cash ﬂow risk (as standard deviation) in the n-th year and the investment risk
(as standard deviation) and the correlation coeﬃcient ρI,n between the returns
of the investments I in the year 0 (for a set of the same projects) with respect
to the mean investment I in the year 0 (for a set of the same projects), and the
cash ﬂow in the year n minus a mean cash ﬂow (for a set of the same projects)
are also present in the aim function. This contribution contains discounting
coeﬃcient in the n-th order. The last term contains the contribution of the
cash ﬂow risk (as standard deviation) in the n-th year and the cash ﬂow risk (as
standard deviation) in the n-th year and the correlation coeﬃcient ρn,n between
the returns of the cash ﬂow in the year n (for a set of the same projects) with
respect to the mean cash ﬂow in the year n (for a set of the same projects),
and the cash ﬂow in the year n minus a mean cash ﬂow (for a set of the same
projects) for the same year, again discounted.

To understand better the aim function and the processes behind it we may
consider several simpliﬁed cases. For simplicity we can consider the case in
which ρI,n = 0, i.e. the returns of investment in the year 0 and the returns
of the cash ﬂow in the year n are uncorrelated. This case is not realistic too
much, however using it properties of the aim function F of investors investing
into projects may be understood easier. In some cases this assumption is not
so much unrealistic: when the cash ﬂow ﬂuctuates too much for the year n for
diﬀerent ﬁrms with the same project. This may happen in the industry in which
there are ﬁrms with large dispersion of cash ﬂows in the year n around some
mean value near zero. In general however this mean value may be expected to
be positive.

For simplicity we can consider also the case in which there is almost no
correlation between cash ﬂow returns in the year n and in the year n for general
n and n, ρn,n = 0, . The curve of cash ﬂow dependence on the year of the
project may be very ﬂuctuating around zero, and then this our assumption is
realistic. In general the curve of cash ﬂow dependence on the year of the project
may be ﬂuctuating around some value which is non-zero, mostly positive.

If we consider the mentioned simple cases of ρI,n = 0 and ρn,n = 0, then from
the aim function it follows that the larger the constant A the more preferred

11

2

positive cash ﬂow CFn and the larger acceptable risk σn
(1+r)n , which is however
discounted. The constant A is the same for every year. Note that for the year
0 the larger the constant A the smaller preferred investment I and the smaller
risk of the investment I, assuming positive investment I. Thus we have described
the aim function of NPV for investors investing in a project from an industry
in the case in which the distribution of NPV is normal one. This aim function
may be used in analysis of NPV and risk of a project for investors diﬀering in
preference with respect to risk. That investmet and cash ﬂows are the most
acceptable for an investor with a given constant A which give the minimum of
the aim function.

Acknowledgment

The ﬁrst author has done this work during her scientiﬁc stay in Matematical -
Economical Consultancy ﬁrm. The second authors was supported by the VEGA
project 1/0495/03.

References

[1] T. Plummer, The Psychology of Technical Analysis, Rev. Ed., Probus

Pub.Comp., Chicago-Cambridge, 1993

[2] D. Lewis, The Secret Language of Success, Carroll and Graf Pub. Inc.,

USA, 1989

[3] N. Rivier, Journal de Physique, C9 N12 T46 (1985) 155

[4] N. Rivier, Physica, 23D (1986) 129

[5] O. Hudak,

Topology

and

Social

Behaviour

of Agents,

http://arXiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0312723 , 2003

[6] I. Molho, The Economics of Information, Blackwell Pub., Oxford,

Malden, 1997

[7] see on http://www.sap.com

[8] S. Ye and R.L.K. Tiong, NPV-at-Risk Method in Infrastructure Project
Investment Evaluation, Journal of Construction Engineering and Man-
agement, Vol. 126, No. 3, May/June 2000, pp. 227-233

[9] Ch.-F. Lee, Statistics for Business and Financial economics, World Sci-

entiﬁc, 1998, p. 273

2002, p. 42

[10] J. Sabal, Financial Decisions in Emerging Markets, Oxford Univ. Press,

[11] J.L. Grant, J.A. Abate, Focus on Value: A Corporate and Investor Guide

to Wealth Creation, J. Wiley and Sons, 1996, p. 117

[12] H.L. Beenhakker, Investment Decision Making in the Private and Public

Sectors, Greenwood Pub. Group, 1996, p. 159

12

[13] P. Fernandez, Valuation Methods and Shareholder Value Creation, El-

sevier, 2002, p. 551

[14] H. Khatib, Economic Evaluation of Projects in the Electricity Supply

Industy, IEE Power and Energy Series 44, 2003, p. 180

[15] K. Wang, M.L. Wolverton, Real Estate Valuation Theory, Springer, Re-

search Issues in Real Estate Vol. 8, 2002, p. 419

[16] S. Harrison, J. Herbohn, R. Irons, P. Rowland, Capital Budgeting¿ Fi-
nancial Appraisal of Investment Projects, Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003,
p. 177

[17] J.G. Siegel, J.K. Shim, Finance, Barons Educational Series EZ-102,

1991, p. 65

[18] H.L. Beehakker, The Global Economy and International Financing,

Greenwood Pub. Group, 2000, p. 145

[19] J. Fisher, P. Mosbaugh, Language of Real estate appraisal, Dearborn,

Real Estate Education, 1990, p. 129

[20] W.K. Brauers, Optimization Methods for a Stakeholder Society: A Rev-

olution in Economic Thinking by Multi-Objects, Springer, 2004, p. 92

[21] M. Loosemore, T.E. Uher, Essentials of Construction Project manage-

ment, UNSW Press, 2003, p. 352

[22] L.H. Jacobs, The Revolution in Corporate Finance, Blackwell Pub.,

2003, p. 92

[23] J.N. Luftman, Competing in the Information Age: Align in the Sand,

Oxford Univ. Press, 2002, p. 103

[24] R.Ch. Moyer, J.R. McGuigan, W.J. Kretlow, ContemporaryFinancial

management, Thomson South-Western, 2005, p. 379

[25] Ch. Narrison, The Fundamentals of Risk Measurements, McGraw Hill

Professional, 2002, p. 394

[26] P. Belli, J.R. Anderson, H.N. Barnum, J.A. Dixon, J.-P. Tan, Economic
Analysis of Investment Operations: Analytical Tools and practical Ap-
plications, The World Bank, 2000, p. 156

[27] C.S. Patterson, The Cost of Capital: Theory and Estimation, Green-

wood Pub. Group, 1995, p. 296

[28] R. Brown, H. Campbell, Beneﬁt-Cost Analysis: Financial and Economic
Appraisal using Spreadsheets, Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003, p. 201

[29] J.C. Goodpasture, Quantitative Methods in Project Management, J.

Ross Pub., 2003, p. 263

[30] A. Greenspan, Commercial Banks and the Central Bank in a Market
Economy, in Readings on Financial Institutions and Markets, P.S. Rose
editor, 5th ed., R.D. Irwin Inc., Homewood, Boston, 1993, p. 294

13

[31] J. von Neumann and O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic

Behaviour, 3rd. ed., Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1953

[32] J. Lintner, The Market Price of Risk, Size of Market and Investors Risk

Aversion, Journal of Business, April (1968)

[33] W.F. Sharpe, Integrated Aset Allocation, Financial Analysts Journal,

September - October (1987)

14

