5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
1
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Compromise and Synchronization
in Opinion Dynamics

Alessandro Pluchino, Vito Latora, Andrea Rapisarda

Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Universit´a di Catania,
and INFN sezione di Catania, Via S. Soﬁa 64, I-95123 Catania, Italy

Abstract

In this paper we discuss two interesting models of opinion dynamics. We present
ﬁrst a brief review of the Hegselmann and Krause compromise model in two dimen-
sions, showing that it is possible to simulate the opinion dynamics in the limit of
an inﬁnite number of agents by solving numerically a rate equation for a contin-
uum distribution of opinions. Then we discuss the OCR model, which represents an
alternative point of view in opinion dynamics and allows to study under which con-
ditions a group of agents with a diﬀerent natural tendency (rate) to change opinion
can ﬁnd agreement. Within this model, inspired to the Kuramoto model, consensus
is viewed as a synchronization process.

1 Introduction

It is well known that, from the behavioral revolution to cybernetics and be-
yond, the so called ’soft’ social sciences have emulated both the intellectual
and methodological paradigms of the ’strong’ natural sciences [1]. The cer-
tainty and stability of the Newtonian paradigm has represented for decades
the cornerstone of sciences like psichology, economy and sociology, which have
been largely inspired by classical mechanics and statistical thermodynamics.
Clearly this trend has continued since quantum mechanics and chaos and
complexity revolutions have leaded to a reconsideration of the relevance of
the Newtonian paradigm to all natural phenomena.
In the last years, disciplines such as econophysics, sociophysics and opinion
dynamics has largely demonstrated the power of agent-based computational
models in simulating complex adaptive systems (ﬁnancial markets, cultural
evolution, social structures, voter communities) in which large numbers of in-
dividuals are involved in massively parallel local interactions [2,3]. In these
models individuals are modeled as autonomous interacting agents with a vari-
able degree of internal complexity and the simulations represent computational

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

20 February 2014

laboratories to study the evolution of a given social system under controlled
experimental conditions.
Of course in many cases individual cognitive behavior is oversempliﬁed, as for
example in opinion dynamics models where humans are reduced to integer or
real numbers representing their opinions [4,5]. In more complicated models
individuals are simulated by means of simple neural networks or associative
memories, but in any case the simpliﬁcation adopted could seem completely
unrealistic. On the other hand, also the Kepler’s laws assumption of Earth as
a point-mass was not realistic at all, but for the purpose of describing celestial
motion it turned out very successful. Furthermore, the aim of agent-based sim-
ulations is to give us information on averages over many people but not on the
fate of one speciﬁc person. And in this sense, despite of their semplicity, these
models seem to work very well. For example, the Sznajd model prediction of
the distribution of votes among candidates in Brazilian and Indian elections
is encouraging, although it could not predict how many votes one candidate
in one speciﬁc election could get[6]
Following these lines of research, in the ﬁrst part of this paper we give a
brief review of one of the most known opinion dynamics model, the so called
compromise model of Hegselmann and Krause [4], showing some recent result
about its continuum version in a two-dimensional opinion space [7]. In the
second part of the paper we present an alternative point of view in opinion
dynamics, discussing a new perspective based on the suggestion of a possible
role of synchronization in opinion formation. By means of the so called ’Opin-
ion Changing Rate’ model, a modiﬁed version of the Kuramoto model adapted
to a social context, we study under which conditions a group of agents with a
diﬀerent natural tendency (rate) to change opinion can ﬁnd agreement [8].

2 Discrete and Continuum Opinion Dynamics in the 2-vector HK

Consensus Model

For the sociologist Robert Axelrod [9] ”culture” is modelized as an array
of features, each feature being speciﬁed by ”traits”, which are expressed by
numbers. The number of features or dimensions is nothing but the number of
components of a vector, and two persons interact if and only if they share at
least one common feature (i.e. the same value of the corresponding vector com-
ponent). In this model, two persons are ”culturally closer” the more features
they have in common and the number of these common features is, in turn,
related to the probability of the two individuals to interact. Starting from the
Axelrod model, several simple agent-based models of opinion formation have
been devised, mostly by physicists [3,4,5].
In general, a typical scalar opinion formation model starts by assigning ran-
domly a real number (chosen in a given interval) to every agent of the system.

2

Then the dynamics starts to act, and the agents rearrange their opinion vari-
ables, due to mutual discussions. At some stage, the system reaches a conﬁg-
uration which is stable under the dynamics. This ﬁnal conﬁguration may rep-
resent consensus, when all agents share the same opinion, polarization, when
one has two main clusters of opinions (”parties”), or fragmentation, when sev-
eral opinion clusters survive. However, a discussion between two persons is
not simply stimulated by their common view/preference about a speciﬁc is-
sue, but it in general depends on the global aﬃnity of the two persons, which
is inﬂuenced by several factors. So, for a more realistic modeling of opinion
dynamics, one should represent the opinions/attitudes like vectors (as in the
Axelrod model), and not like scalars. In this section we will focus on the 2-
vector version of the Hegselmann and Krause (HK) compromise model and we
will show that it is possible to simulate the discrete opinion dynamics in the
limit of an inﬁnite number of agents by solving numerically a rate equation
for a continuum distribution of opinions [7].
The HK model [4] is based on the concept of bounded conﬁdence, i.e. on the
presence of a parameter ǫ, called conﬁdence bound, which expresses the com-
patibility among the agents in the opinion space. If the opinions of two agents
i and j diﬀer by less than ǫ, their positions are close enough to allow for a dis-
cussion between i and j which eventually leads to a variation of their opinions,
otherwise the two agents do not interact with each other. The physical space
occupied by the agents living in a society, or a community, can be modelized
as a graph, where the vertices represent the agents and the edges relationships
between agents. So we say that two agents are friends and could eventually
talk to each other if there is an edge joining the two corresponding vertices (in
graph language, if the two vertices are neighbours). In the following we will
consider only the general case of a society where everybody talks to everybody
else.
The dynamics of the HK model, usually simulated by means of Monte Carlo
(MC) algorithms, is very simple: one chooses at random one of the agents and
checks how many neighbours (in the physical space) of the selected agent are
compatible with it (i.e.lie inside the conﬁdence range in the opinion space).
Next, the agent takes the average opinion of its compatible neighbours. The
procedure is repeated by selecting at random another agent and so on. The
type of ﬁnal conﬁguration reached by the system depends on the value of the
conﬁdence bound ǫ. For a scalar opinion space [0, 1] it has been shown that
consensus is reached for ǫ > ǫc, where the critical threshold ǫc is strictly re-
lated to the type of graph adopted to modelize society: actually, it can take
only one of two possible values, ǫc ∼ 0.2 and 0.5, depending on whether the
average degree of the graph (i.e. the average number of neighbours) diverges,
as in our case of a completely connected graph, or stays ﬁnite when the num-
ber of vertices goes to inﬁnity [10]. On the other hand, the 2-vector HK model
on a completely connected graph is much less studied than the 1-dimensional
version. In this case the opinion space is represented by the points (x, y) of
a bidimensional manifold, that in general is a square [0, 1] × [0, 1] and the

3

Fig. 1. Sequence of snapshots of the 2D squared opinion space for the 2-vector dis-
crete HK model with N = 2000 agents and ǫ = 0.25. The points in the upper-left
panel represent diﬀerent randomly distributed opinions at t=0. In the other pan-
els, where we show successive (but not consecutive) time steps of a Monte Carlo
simulation with simultaneous update, opinions merge together in diﬀerent clusters.
Finally, in the lower-left panel (t=12) the consensus is reached and all the opin-
ions occupate the same position. In the second-last panel, the number of opinions
concentrated in the bottom clusters is also indicated (see text).

conﬁdence range is a circle whose radius is the conﬁdence bound ǫ.
In Fig.1 we plot a sequence of snapshots of the opinion space for a discrete
conﬁguration of N = 2000 agents and a value ǫ = 0.25. Each point in the ﬁrst
snapshot (upper-left panel) represents the opinion of one agent at time t=0.
Then the system evolves by means of simultaneous updates (i.e. all the opin-
ions are updated at each MC time step) merging the opinions in bigger and
bigger clusters until a stationary state is reached. After 12 time steps (lower-
right panel) consensus is fully obtained and all the opinions lie on the same
cluster. More in general, from extended numerical simulations it results [7]
that the consensus threshold for the discrete 2-vector HK model is ǫc ∼ 0.24,
a value slightly greater than that one found for the scalar model with the same
topology. This value tends to the value ǫc ∼ 0.23 when the number of agents
grows.
If we look at the basis of the triangle in the second-last snapshot of Fig.1,
just before reaching ﬁnal consensus, we can see that the two big clusters at
the vertices, made by around 500 opinions and lieing at a reciprocal distance
greater than the conﬁdence bound (thus a-priori not interacting), are keeping
in contact only by means of a small cluster of 21 agents. Such a phenomenon
is very frequent in the Monte Carlo simulations of the HK model when the
system is approaching consensus (in both one and two dimension); indeed,

4

Fig. 2. Sequence of snapshots of the 2D circular opinion space for the 2-vector
discrete HK model with N = 2000 agents and ǫ = 0.25. The dynamics is the same
than in Fig.1. The diﬀerent shape of the space inﬂuences the dynamical evolution
of the opinions and consensus is reached in a shorter time (t=6) than in the case of
Fig.1.

almost always consensus is reached only because of this phenomenon. And
this is interesting since it models an important feature of real social networks,
i.e. the existence of the so called Connectors, ”people with a special gift for
bringing the world together” [11] which play the role of a bridge between
otherwise not interacting social groups, thus ensuring the cohesiveness of the
entire network.
Another peculiar feature of the HK model, clearly visible in the upper snap-
shots of Fig.1, is the fact that the dynamics always starts to act from the edges
of the opinion space, where the opinion distribution is necessarily inhomoge-
neous, so that it is essentially the shape of the opinion space which rules the
symmetry of the resulting cluster distribution. In order to better appreciate
this eﬀect, we plot in Fig.2 the temporal evolution of the same system of Fig.1,
but with a circular opinion space. In this case, even if the ﬁnal conﬁguration
is the same as before, the resulting dynamics is diﬀerent and, for the same
value of conﬁdence bound, consensus is reached more quickly (six MC time
steps with simultaneous update) due to the greater symmetry of the opinion
space. The circular simmetry has a remarkable eﬀect also on the consensus
threshold, that in this case tends to that one of the correspondent scalar HK
model, i.e. ǫ ∼ 0.2.
In a recent paper [7] we showed that the 2-vector HK model on a completely
connected graph and with a squared opinion space can be described by a sim-
ple rate equation for a continuum distribution of opinions P (x, y, t), that one
can easily solve numerically (this procedure has already been used to investi-

5

Fig. 3. Final conﬁgurations of the 2-vector HK model with a continuum distribution
of opinions. From top left to bottom right: ǫ=0.08,0.10,0.15; 0.20,0.22,0.24.

gate the scalar compromise model of Deﬀuant et al. [12]). The advantages of
the evolution equation over discrete Monte Carlo simulations are that one can
directly deal with a system with arbitrarily many agents and that the ﬁnal
cluster conﬁgurations for a continuum distribution are much more symmetric
and regular, thus allowing a better resolution of the progressive merging of
opinion clusters.
This is clearly visible in Fig.3, where we show the ﬁnal conﬁgurations of the
opinion space for several values of the conﬁdence bound. In this case the
squared (x, y) opinion space has been reduced to a grid of 100 × 100 bins.
All the simulations start from a ﬂat ditribution P (x, y, t = 0) = const and
the dynamics runs until the distribution P (x, y, t) reaches a stationary state
for a given value of the conﬁdence bound [7]. As one can see that, for small
value of ǫ, a regular lattice of clusters appears, with a squared shape inherited
by the shape of the opinion space (as happened for the discrete HK model).
Going on, for greater values of ǫ, one can observe the progressive merging of
the pairs of clusters with reciprocal distance less than the conﬁdence bound
radius. Finally, above the critical threshold ǫ ∼ 0.23, consensus is completely
reached. This result conﬁrms the threshold value found with the MC simu-
lations for a discrete dynamics of opinions in the limit of a great number of
agents and encourages further applications of the rate equation technique to
other opinion formation models.

6

3 The Opinion Changing Rate model: a role for synchronization

in opinion formation

Many of the most popular opinion formation models [4], as for example the
HK model we presented in the previous section, have the limitation of not
taking into account the individual inclination to change, a peculiar feature of
any social system. In fact each one of us changes ideas, habits, style of life or
way of thinking in a diﬀerent way, with a diﬀerent velocity. There are conser-
vative people that strongly tend to maintain their opinion or their style of life
against everything and everyone. There are more ﬂexible people that change
ideas very easily and follow the current fashions and trends. Finally, there are
those who run faster than the rest of the world anticipating the others. These
diﬀerent tendencies can be interpreted as a continuous spectrum of diﬀerent
degrees of natural inclination to changes.
In a recent paper [8] we showed how such an individual inclination to change,
diﬀerently distributed in a group of people, can aﬀect the opinion dynamics
of the group itself. If we switch from the question ”Could agents with initial
diﬀerent opinions reach a ﬁnal agreement?” into the more realistic one ”Could
agents with a diﬀerent natural tendency to change opinion reach a ﬁnal agree-
ment?”, we can introduce a new concept, the natural opinion changing rate,
that is very similar to the characteristic frequency of an oscillator. In such a
way, we can treat consensus as a peculiar kind of synchronization (frequency
locking), a phenomenon which has been very well studied in diﬀerent contexts
by means of the celebrate Kuramoto model[13].
The Kuramoto model of coupled oscillators is one of the simplest and most
successful models for synchronization. It is simple enough to be analytically
solvable, still retaining the basic principles to produce a rich variety of dy-
namical regimes and synchronization patterns. The dynamics of the model is
given by

˙θi(t) = ωi +

sin(θj − θi)

i = 1, . . . , N

(1)

K
N

N

X
j=1

where θi(t) is the phase (angle) of the ith oscillator at time t (−π < θi(t) < π),
while ωi is its intrinsic frequency randomly drawn from a symmetric, unimodal
distribution g(ω) with a ﬁrst moment ω0 (typically a Gaussian distribution or
a uniform one). These natural frequencies ωi are time-independent. The sum
in the above equation is running over all the oscillators so that this is an exam-
ple of a globally coupled system. The parameter K ≥ 0 measures the coupling
strength in the global coupling term. For small values of K, each oscillator
tends to run independently with its own frequency, while for large values of
K, the coupling tends to synchronize (in phase and frequency) the oscillator
with all the others. In a beautiful analysis, Kuramoto showed that the model,

7

despite the diﬀerence in the natural frequencies of the oscillators, exhibits a
spontaneous transition from incoherence to collective synchronization, as the
coupling strength is increased beyond a certain threshold Kc [14].
Fascinated by the Kuramoto model, we started to ask us if a similar synchro-
nization mechanism could play a role in consensus formation. The existence
of a critical threshold for synchronization in Kuramoto model, very similar
to the consensus threshold found in the majority of the opinion formation
models (like the HK one), was a good starting point. Of course, at variance
with the phases in the Kuramoto model, in our model we do not need periodic
opinions nor limited ones: in fact, here opinions have a very general meaning
and can represent the style of life, the way of thinking or of dressing etc.
Thus we do not consider periodic boundary conditions but we assume that
xi ∈] − ∞ + ∞[ ∀i = 1, ..., N. Actually, as stressed in the introduction, in our
model we are not so much interested in the particular opinion of each agent:
rather, we want to see under what conditions it is possible to ﬁnd agreement
among agents with a diﬀerent velocity (rate) in changing their opinion. From
here follows the name of our model: the Opinion Changing Rate (OCR) model
[8].
The dynamics of the OCR model is governed by the following set of diﬀerential
equations:

˙xi(t) = ωi +

sin(xj − xi)e−α|xj−xi|

i = 1, . . . , N

(2)

K
N

N

X
j=1

Here xi(t) is the opinion (an unlimited real number) of the ith individual at
time t, while ωi represents the so called natural opinion changing rate, i.e.
the intrinsic inclination, or natural tendency, of each individual to change his
opinion (corresponding to the natural frequency of each oscillator in the Ku-
ramoto model). As in the Kuramoto model, also in the OCR model the ω’s
are randomly drawn from a given symmetric, unimodal distribution g(ω) with
a ﬁrst moment ω0. Usually a uniform distribution centered at ω0 is used. In
this way we simulate the fact that in a population there are: 1) conservative
individuals, that naturally tend to change their opinion very slowly, and thus
are characterized by a value of ωi smaller than ω0; 2) more ﬂexible people,
with ωi ∼ ω0, that change idea more easily and follow the new fashions and
trends; 3) individuals with a value of ωi higher than ω0, that tend to anticipate
the others with new ideas and insights. In the equation (2) K, as usual, is the
coupling strength. The exponential factor in the coupling term ensures that,
for reciprocal distance higher than a certain threshold, tuned by the parameter
α, opinions will no more inﬂuence each other. Such a requirement is inspired
to the conﬁdence bound concept saw in the previous section. At this point
we can study the opinion dynamics of the OCR model by solving numerically
the set of ordinary diﬀerential equations (2) for a given distribution of the
ω’s (natural opinion changing rates) and for a given coupling strenght K. In

8

Fig. 4. OCR model for N = 1000 and K = 1.0 (incoherent phase). In panels (a)
and (b) we report, for each time step, 1000 points corresponding respectively to the
opinions and opinion changing rates of the N agents, while in panels (c) and (d) we
show, respectively, the ﬁnal distribution of opinions and the time evolution of the
order parameter R.

particular, we want to ﬁnd out if, as a function of K, there is a transition from
an incoherent phase, in which people change opinion each one with his natural
rate ωi, to a synchronized one in which all the people change opinion with the
same rate and share a common social trend, a sort of ’public opinion’.
In order to measure the degree of synchronization of the system we decided to
adopt an order parameter R(t) related to the standard deviation of the opinion
changing rate ˙xj(t), such that R = 1 in the fully synchronized phase, where
all the agents have exactly the same opinion changing rate (and very similar
opinions), while R < 1 in the incoherent or partially synchronized phase, in
which the agents have diﬀerent opinion changing rates and diﬀerent opinions.
Our numerical simulations have been performed typically with N=1000 agents
and with an uniform distribution of the initial individual opinions xi(t = 0)
in the range [-1,1]. The natural opinion changing rates ωi are taken from a
uniform distribution in the range [0,1] We ﬁx the value of the coupling K and
we let the system to evolve until a stationary (asymptotic) value R∞ for the
order parameter is obtained. In this way it is easy to recognize a Kuramoto-
like transition from an incoherent phase (for K < Kc ∼ 1.4) to a partially
coherent (for K ∈ [1.4, 4.0]) and, ﬁnally, to a fully synchronized phase (for
K > 4.0) [8]. We now focus on the details of the dynamical evolution in each
of the three phases.
In Fig.4 we analize the case of very small coupling, K = 1.0. In the left part
we show the time evolution of the opinions and of the opinion changing rates
(angular velocities or frequencies). In the right part, instead, we plot the ﬁnal
distribution of opinions and the order parameter time evolution. Because of
the weak interactions we are in the incoherent phase and each agent tends to
keep his natural opinion changing rate. It follows that the diﬀerent opinions

9

Fig. 5. OCR model for N = 1000 and K = 2.0 (partially coherent phase). Same
quantities as in Fig.4.

diverge in time without reaching any kind of consensus. In correspondence,
the order parameter R takes the minimum possible value that, at variance
with the Kuramoto model, is not zero. We could look at this case as to an
′anarchical′ society.
In Fig.5 we plot the same quantities than before but in the case K = 2.0. The
coupling is still weak but strong enough to give rise to three diﬀerent clus-
ters of evolving opinions, each with a characteristic changing rate: the largest
number of the agents, representing what we could call the ”public opinion”,
moves with an intermediate rate along the opinion axis, but there is a consis-
tent group of people remaining behind them and also a group of innovative
people (quicker in supply new ideas and ingenuity). From a political point of
view, we could interpret this situation as a sort of ’bipolarism’ with a large
number of ’centrists’. In this case the order parameter is larger than in the
previous example, but still less than one since the opinion synchronization is
only partial.
Finally, in Fig.6 we report the case K = 4.0. Here the coupling is so strong
that all the opinions change at the same rate and we observe a single ﬁnal
cluster in the opinion distribution. In this ′dictatorial′ society all the agents
think in the same way and follow the same trends and fashions. Although the
natural frequencies of the agents are - as in the previous examples - diﬀerent
from each others, their opinion changing rates rapidly synchronize (frequency
locking) and thus the order parameter R reaches a saturation value equal to
one.
Summarizing, it has been found [8] that in order to ensure a ’bipolarism’ - i.e.
an equilibrium between conservative and progressist components - a chang-
ing society needs a level of coupling K strictly included in a narrow window
(1.5 < K < 2.5) inside the partially synchronized phase. Otherwise such an
equilibrium will be broken and the ﬁnal result will be anarchy or dictatorial
regime. But it is worth to observe that these conclusions have been obtained

10

Fig. 6. OCR model for N = 1000 and K = 4.0 (synchronized phase). Same quantities
as in the previous ﬁgures.

Fig. 7. OCR model for N = 100 and a value of K increasing with a constant rate
from 0.1 up to 10.1. Same quantities as in the previous ﬁgures.

for systems with ﬁxed coupling K, simulating societies with a stable degree of
interconnections among their members. Thus it is interesting to explore what
happens if the coupling is let to increase its value during the dynamics, in
order to simulate a society in which the interconnections between the agents
increase in time, due for example to the improvement in transport or in com-
munications.
In Fig.7 we show the results for a system in which the coupling is uniformly
increased from K = 0.1 to K = 10.1. The agents’ opinions initially spread
freely, and then rapidly freeze in a large number of non-interacting clusters
with diﬀerent changing rates and variable sizes. Actually, it results that this
particular cluster distribution, that could be socially interpreted as a multi-
polarism, cannot be obtained in simulations with a constant coupling. This
could suggest that the increase of interactions between the members of a soci-

11

ety is determinant in order to stabilize a plurality of diﬀerent non-interacting
clusters of opinions (diﬀerent ideologies, political parties, etc.) typical of a
multipolar democracy. It seems to suggest also that a stable bipolarism is
possible only in societies with a ﬁxed degree of internal interconnections.

4 Conclusions

In this paper we have shown that even simple opinion formation models seem
to capture many general features of real social systems. In the ﬁrst part we
have extended the scalar opinion dynamics of Krause-Hegselmann to the case
in which the opinion is not just a scalar but a 2-vector with real-valued com-
ponents. We investigated a community where everybody talks to everybody
by means of Monte Carlo simulations of discrete opinion distributions (for
squared or circular opinion space) and by solving numerically a rate equation
for a continuum opinion distribution. By studying the consensus thresholds
we found that the continuum case can be considered as the limit of the dis-
crete one for a great number of agents. In the second part of the paper we
discussed a possible role for synchronization in opinion dynamics. Following
ref.[8], we investigated a social variation of the Kuramoto model, the so called
Opinion Changing Rate model (OCR). The concept of ’opinion changing rate’
transforms the usual approach to opinion consensus into a synchronization
problem. As happened for the Kuramoto model, the OCR model exhibits a
phase transition from an incoherent phase to a synchronized one and shows
many interesting features with a clear social meaning.

References

[1] L.D.Kiel, E.Elliot Chaos theory in the social sciences The University of
Michigan Press (1996) In praise of soft science Editorial (2005), Nature,
435(7045), 1003.

[2] L.Tesfatsion, Economic agents and markets as emergent phenomena, PNAS,
vol.99 (2002) 7191-7192 J.M.Epstein and R.Axtell, Growing Artiﬁcial Societies
(1996) MIT Press, Cambridge MA W.B.Arthur, S.N.Durlauf and D.A.Lane,
The Economy as an Evolving Complex System II, Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA, vol. XXVII

[3] D.Stauﬀer, Sociophysics Simulations (2003) in ’Computer Simulations’, Co-
published by the IEEE CS and the AIP D.Stauﬀer, Sociophysics Simulations
II: Opinion Dynamics (2005) arXiv:physics/0503115

[4] R. Hegselmann and U. Krause, Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social

Simulation 5, issue 3, paper 2 (jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk) (2002).

12

[5] K. Sznajd-Weron and J. Sznajd, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 11, 1157 (2000). G.
Deﬀuant, D. Neau, F. Amblard and G. Weisbuch, Adv. Complex Syst. 3, 87
(2000). S. Galam, Physica A 336 (2004) 49 and refs. therein.

[6] A.T.Bernardes, D.Stauﬀer and J.Kertsz, Eur.Phys.J. B 25, 123-127 (2002)
M.C.Gonzale,A.O.Sousa and H.J.Herrmann, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C, 15, No.1, 1-
13 (2004) D.Stauﬀer, Montecarlo simulations of the Sznajd model, J.of Artiﬁcial
Societies and Social Simulations (2002) vol.5, no.1

[7] S.Fortunato, V.Latora, A.Pluchino and A.Rapisarda Vector Opinion Dynamics
in a Bounded Conﬁdence Consensus Model arXiv:physics/0504017, to appear
in International Journal of Modern Physics C (2005)

[8] A.Pluchino, V.Latora and A.Rapisarda Int. J. Mod. Phys. C, 16, No.4, 515-531

(2005)

[9] R. Axelrod, J. Conﬂict Resolut. 41, 203 (1997).

[10] S. Fortunato, On the Consensus Threshold for the Opinion Dynamics of Krause-
Hegselmann, cond-mat/0408648 at www.arXiv.org, to appear in Int. J. Mod.
Phys. C 16, issue 2 (2005).

[11] M.Gladwell, The Tipping Point, Abacus (2001)

[12] E. Ben-Naim, P. Krapivsky and S. Redner, Physica D 183, 190 (2003).

[13] Y. Kuramoto, in it International Symposium on Mathematical Problems in
Theoretical Physics, Vol. 39 of Lecture Notes in Physics, edited by H. Araki
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1975).

[14] S. H Strogatz, Physica D, 143 1 (2000). Chemical Oscillations, Waves, and

Turbulence (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1984).

13

