A Map of the Nanoworld:
Sizing up the Science, Politics, and Business of the
Inﬁnitesimal

Debashish Munshi,a Priya Kurian,b Robert V. Bartlett,c Akhlesh Lakhtakiad,e

aDepartment of Management Communication, Waikato Management School,
University of Waikato, Private Bag 3105, Hamilton, New Zealand

bDepartment of Political Science and Public Policy,
University of Waikato, Private Bag 3105, Hamilton, New Zealand

cDepartment of Political Science,
Purdue University, 100 N. University Street, West Lafayette, IN 47907-2098, USA

dDepartment of Engineering Science and Mechanics,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802-6812, USA

eDepartment of Physics,
Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ, UK

Abstract: Mapping out the eight main nodes of nanotechnology discourse that have
emerged in the past decade, we explore how various scientiﬁc, social, and ethical
islands of discussion have developed, been recognized, and are being continually rene-
gotiated. We do so by (1) identifying the ways in which scientists, policy makers,
entrepreneurs, educators, and environmental groups have drawn boundaries on is-
sues relating to nanotechnology; (2) describing concisely the perspectives from which
these boundaries are drawn; and (3) exploring how boundaries on nanotechnology are
marked and negotiated by various nodes of nanotechnology discourse.

5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
0
2
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1

Introduction

Nanotechnology is the art and science of making materials, devices, and systems with
very small but very precise architectures that are invisible to optical microscopes.
Can inﬁnitesimal multi-molecular physical particles be technologically eﬃcacious and
yet socio-ethically acceptable? In this paper, we map the main nodes of nanotechnol-
ogy discourse that have emerged in recent years. We explore how various scientiﬁc,
social, and ethical islands of discussion have developed, been recognized, and are be-
ing continually renegotiated. An understanding of the distinctive characteristics of
these distinct islands, their rates and directions of development, and the impact of
any commerce among them will better allow researchers and policymakers to eval-
uate complex scientiﬁc and socioethical issues pertaining to technoscience and the
environmentnamely, what in the future may be permitted, encouraged, or prohib-
ited economically, legally, technically, socially, or morally, by whom, and in which
contexts.

Nanotechnology is on the verge of becoming a “gigaideology” [1] but most dis-
cussions on this subject are not multidimensional, multidisciplinary, or fully open.
Some discourse nodes focus on an imagined utopia of a superworld where minuscule
nanorobots will be “able to eliminate cancer, infections, clogged arteries, and even
old age” [2], or of a dreamland of virtual reality [3, 4]. The discourse in other nodes
revolves around the prospect of either a dystopia of an unstable world [5] or of the
fury of uncontrolled self-replication that can run amok in the world [6].

To our knowledge, no attempt has been made as yet to survey and describe these
islands of discussion, to examine their interactions and degrees of isolation, or, indeed,
to point out any commonalities among them. The lack of consensus in the views
on nanotechnology, in fact, has much to do with the multiple conceptions of the
notion of boundaries. Boundaries are not simple demarcations along scientist-public
lines, inasmuch as there are as many conﬂicting conceptions among nanoscientists
themselves as there are among journalists, business leaders, and social-humanistic
researchers.

Our aims in this paper are:

(1) to identify how scientists, policymakers, en-
trepreneurs, educators, and environmentalists have drawn boundaries on issues re-
lating to nanotechnology; (2) to describe concisely the perspectives from which these
boundaries are drawn; and (3) to explore how boundaries on nanotechnology are
marked and negotiated by various nodes of nanotechnology discourse.

The process of demarcating boundaries starts with the very deﬁnition of nanotech-
nology. While the US deﬁnition is that at least one dimension of a nanoparticle or

2

the relevant length scale of an exploited phenomenon must lie between 1 and 100
nanometers (nm) long for a product or a process to be called nanotechnology [7, 8],
British thinkers insist that the nanotechnological range is between 0.2 nm to 100 nm
[9]. The magnitude of the diﬀerence in these two positions can be gauged by the
fact that 1 nm is far less than a mere speck in the eye. Chop an inch-long piece of
thread into 25 equal pieces and then chop each of those pieces into a million equal
pieces. Those tiny pieces would be about 1 nm long. A human hair is about 80,000
nm in diameter, a red blood cell is about 7000 nm in diameter, globular proteins are
6 nm in diameter, quantum dots are 1 to 2 nm in diameter, and the crucial gate ox-
ide layers in metal-oxide-semiconductor devices that are the workhorses of integrated
electronics are nowadays 2 nm thick. These are all manufacturable dimensions today.
But a hydrogen atom is about 0.1 nm in diameter, which means that the sub-nm
length scales have traditionally belonged to chemistry. Is nanotechnology then the
same, even partially, as chemistry? The answer to that question depends on one’s
perspectives. Notwithstanding the prominence of chemists in nanotechnology, many
nano-technoscientists distance themselves from chemists.

Nanotechnology may use chemistry, but is not merely chemistry. It is also physics,
electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, computational science, materials sci-
ence, and more. The delineation of the distinctive features of nanotechnology is not
an easy task yet, as John DiLoreto of the American Chemistry Council recently ac-
knowledged [10]. In part, the problems in exact deﬁnition come from the amorphous
nature of nanotechology, which made a British panel argue in favor of the term “nan-
otechnologies” rather than “nanotechnology” [9].

Examining the literature produced in the technoscientiﬁc disciplines that nanotech-
nology spans as well as on the socioethical ramiﬁcations of nanotechnology in the
near future, we ﬁnd that ignorance of some or all key aspects of nanotechnology
is widespread. This feature sets the current societal discussions on nanotechnology
apart from the discussions on genetically modiﬁed plants and animals, inasmuch as
the techniques used to analyze the latter are not fruitful for the former.

2 Nodes of nanotechnology discourse

Our analysis of the literature on nanotechnology reveals the following eight nodes of
societal discussion on nanotechnology:

(1) Technoscientists, especially those either working on or supervising some nan-

otechnological application who, almost invariably, tend to glorify nanotechnology;

3

(2) Leaders of business and industry who want to cash in on the projected beneﬁts

by developing a market for nanotechnology-driven products;

(3) Oﬃcial or quasi-oﬃcial bodies that generate a signiﬁcant amount of literature;

(4) Social science and humanities researchers who tend to focus on the social,
economic, political, legal, religious, philosophical, and ethical implications of nan-
otechnology;

(5) Fiction writers with imaginative scenarios, both utopian and dystopian;

(6) Political activists, particularly those with an environmental worldview, who
tend to extend to nanotechnology the issues long raised by them with regard to
biotechnology;

(7) Journalists and popular science writers who report on current events, perspec-

tives, and funding regimes relating to the ﬁeld; and

(8) John Q. and Jane D. Public, who are yet to signiﬁcantly grapple with or discuss

nanotechnology in any depth.

We elaborate on each of the eight nodes in turn.

2.1 Node 1: Technoscientists

Research at universities is driven by funding from government agencies as well as from
industries. This funding was responsible for the spectacular growth of US universities
during and after the Second World War, and the lessons learnt therefrom are now
being used by technoscientiﬁc managers as well as policymakers in Europe, Japan,
China, and India. Furthermore, industrial research is normally predicated on ﬁnan-
cial success. In this environment, not surprisingly, entrepreneurial technoscientists—
whether at universities, industries, or government agencies—have learnt to align their
research eﬀorts with the latest terms in vogue. While most researchers are motivated
by funding possibilities for their research areas, not a small percentage of them may
have hopes of monetary beneﬁts from commercialization of their research products.

In consequence, it seems that nanotechnology is suddenly everywhere in technosci-
entiﬁc circles. Many advances that were inevitable due to normal improvements and
advances in conventional R&D are being attributed to nanotechnology, just because
size-reduction techniques have brought one, two, or all three length dimensions into
the neighborhood of 100 nm. Cosmetics containing ultraﬁne clays and oil particles feel
much better on the skin; plastics reinforced with carbon nanoﬁbers are likely much
stronger yet lightweight; better lithographic techniques have densiﬁed the doping of

4

semiconductor real estate in integrated chips; and so on. These normal improvements
are not revolutionary; instead, they exemplify the so-called incremental technology
[11] that has fueled much hype in the business world and continues to do so [12].
There is anecdotal evidence in technoscientiﬁc circles that those technoscientists who
are either unable or reluctant to nanofy their research areas by mere size-reduction
are contemptuous of this hype.

There is, of course, nanotechnology research going on that elicits much admiration
from technoscientists. Carbon nanotubes, quantum dots, sculptured thin ﬁlms, single-
electron transistors, nanoﬂuidic sensors, and biomimetic substances are all examplar
products of evolutionary nanotechnology [1, 13]. None of these advances has yet had
any signiﬁcant presence in the marketplace, and all kinds of miraculous beneﬁts are
claimed for the entire world based on mere projections of laboratory experiments.
Yet there is something exciting about every example of evolutionary nanotechnology,
whether in the product or in the process or both, as it has features that cannot be
explained simply by size-reduction.

The initial, and still unfulﬁlled, promise of nanotechnology is bolder than evolution-
ary nanotechnology. It is called radical nanotechnology [11]. Widely cited is Richard
Feynmans 1959 vision of “manipulating and controlling things on a small scale”, so
that the “entire 24 volumes of the Encyclopedia Brittanics [be written] on the head of
a pin” [14]. Eric Drexler in 1981 translated that vision into the concept of molecular
manufacturing [15], which has engendered apocalyptic visions of nanomachines run-
ning amok and producing what some have described as “grey goo” [16]. But Drexler
has been at pains to point out “that the easiest and the most eﬃcient systems will
not have the capabilities required for autonomous runaway manufacturing” [17], and
indeed technoscientiﬁc capabilities for the foreseeable future fall short of Feynmans
vision [18]. Yet, scenarios encompassing radical technology not only have created
hype but also fear in the general population [16, 19]. Visions of “robot[s] the size of a
blood cell” and “nanobots[s] that could do surgery without leaving any visible scars”
[20] exemplify as-yet unwarranted hype. Increasingly, technoscientiﬁc commentators
are warning against hype, possibly hoping to avert public backlash against funding
for nanotechnology and even other technoscientiﬁc research.

Most of the technoscientiﬁc literature is glib enough to not indicate possible failures.
This is normal in technoscientiﬁc literature, because the emphasis is on publishing
positive and upbeat results, whereas negative issues are considered as unnecessary
distractions. There are at least 25 print journals and at least one virtual journal
that are either wholly or substantially dedicated to nanotechnology today, in addi-
tion to a vast array of other scientiﬁc and technical journals that occasionally publish
accounts of nanotechnology research. A large number of scientiﬁc conferences have

5

a few sessions dedicated to nanotechnology, not to mention specialist conferences
on nanotechnology. Major learned societies have formed Technical Groups, Work-
ing Groups, Subcommittees, etc., to manage the explosive growth in nanotechnology.
Yet, the (British) Institute of Physics’ Nanotechnology is perhaps the only technosci-
entiﬁc journal that has occasionally published articles not written by nanaotechnology
researchers. Of these articles, there is only one on socioethical issues emanating from
possible industrial and economic success in nanotechnology [21].

Skepticism about nanotechnology as a panacea has been rarely oﬀered by techno-
scientists on economic grounds [22, 23]. Likewise, safety issues have been rarely raised
by nano-technoscientists [24, 25, 26]. However, the 2004 report of the Royal Society
of London and the Royal Academy of Engineering [9] greatly improves on two earlier
US reports [8, 27] to raise warning ﬂags about dangers to public health as well as
to environment, and vehemently cautions against complacency as well as continued
ignorance. The health risks of nanotechnology are expected to use the same biological
pathways as many potential applications of nanotechnology in medicine [9]. Whether
or not the US Food & Drug Administration is justiﬁed in “believ[ing] that the exist-
ing battery of pharmacotoxicity tests is probably adequate for most nanotechnology
products that [FDA] will regulate” [28] is a moot point, given the lack of serious
research on the toxicity of nanomaterials [9], no doubt because of competition from
conventional products that cost much less to fabricate [29].

2.2 Node 2: Leaders of business and industry

The world of business and industry has ushered in the age of nanotechnology with
cautious optimism. In their 2003 book [30], Uldrich and Newberry set the agenda
for a climate of enthusiasm. Within a decade, the book proclaims, nanotechnology
will be at the core of products worth a trillion dollars in the US alone and will
drive commercial applications in an entire range of industries from agriculture to
manufacturing. Uldrich and Newberry’s wonderland of miniature marvels conjures
up images of not only unimaginable improvements to existing products and services
but also the invention of entirely new materials and products that will revolutionize
the way we live.

Yet industry leaders have so far warmed up to the idea of investing in enterprises
seeking the improvement of existing products and not so much to the creation of
fundamentally new materials. Claims of improvement are most common for the paint
and the cosmetics industries, as well as for their user industries. Semiconductor
industries are also beginning to claim the beneﬁts of nanolithography for shrinking
device sizes and increasing packing densities in integrated chips. Many of the claimed

6

advances are not only real but also cost-eﬀective; but these advances fall in the realm
of incremental nanotechnology, which is far from revolutionary. Venture capitalists,
seeking to invest large amounts of liquid cash for relatively quick proﬁts, generally
form partnerships with university researchers with an entrepreneurial bent. Nano
start-up companies are based on a key patent or two, and the capital supplied by the
venture capitalists is then invested to turn the patents into marketable products.

According to an exhaustive report [31] published by Lux Research, Inc., a U.S-
based advisory ﬁrm that looks into the business dimensions of nanotechnology, the top
start-up companies adopting nanotechnologies that have begun generating revenues
are in the ﬁelds of specialty chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and semiconductor capital
equipment. The report anticipates that activity in the nanotech sphere will soon shift
from basic research to applications development as over 1500 start-ups worldwide
develop.

The general aura of optimism is reﬂected in the number of major corporations
that have decided to adopt nanotechnology. About “63 per cent of the 30 companies
comprising the Dow Jones Average (Dow) are currently funding R&D in nanotech-
nology” [31]. A major ﬁnancial management company, Merrill Lynch, in fact, now
publishes a ‘Nanotech Index’ to help investors keep track of companies that deal
with nanotechnology. “We believe nanotechnology could be the next growth inno-
vation,” Merrill Lynchs global technology strategist, Steven Milunovich, stated in a
press release issued in April 2004 [32].

This optimism is, however, tempered by several notes of caution. As Baker and
Aston [12] point out, investors, torn between an alluring new market and the fear of
a dot-com-like bubble, are struggling to get a grip on exactly what nano means for
them”. For many investors the promise of nanotechnology looks real enough for them
to be interested in, but what keeps them back is a coherent translation of the scientiﬁc
jargon behind much of the research being carried out in laboratories. This is where the
complexities of boundaries surface again. The demarcation of boundaries is facilitated
by composite sets of “claims, activities, and institutional structures that deﬁne and
protect knowledge practices” [33] and in the case of nanotechnology, the knowledge
practices of technoscientists are not yet easily readable on business spreadsheets. The
boundary demarcation problem is embedded in the discourses on nanotechnology that
reﬂect conﬂicting desires to protect the unquestioned authority of scientiﬁc progress
on the one hand (see Node 1) and to defend the basic proﬁt-oriented instincts of
business.

Business instincts are honed on experience but investors have not had much in-
formation in easily understood terms yet. The introduction to a 2005 international
conference on nanotechnology and business held in Brussels stated [34] that despite

7

nanotechnology being heralded as “the next industrial revolution”, many businesses
“still don’t understand the potential of the technology”. While encouraging busi-
nesses to look to this emerging ﬁeld, this introduction described the ﬁeld as complex
and went on state that “there is a vital need to understand the concepts and the
pitfalls, and to recognize when the right time to invest is and which applications are
commercially viable”.

The companies that are making signiﬁcant investments in nanotechnology are ones
that already have years of experience in the technology sector. Not surprisingly,
“BASF, Dow Chemical, DuPont, General Electric, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, and NEC
hold most of the nanotech patents [35]. As indicated earlier, most of these companies
are involved in incremental nanotechnology but hold out for a molecular revolution
that will change the face of business.

2.3 Node 3: Oﬃcial or quasi-oﬃcial bodies

A signiﬁcant “oﬃcial literature has been generated by government agencies, interna-
tional governmental organizations, and government-supported science and technology
academies. This activity was undoubtedly generated as nanotechnology is “widely
seen as having huge potential [for] . . . many areas of research and application,” [9,
p. vii] and is “attracting investments from [g]overnments and from businesses” [9, p.
vii]. Furthermore, nanotechnology “may raise new challenges in the safety, regulatory
or ethical domains that will require societal debate.” [9, p. vii]

The US government took the initiative early in September 1998 when it regularized
a forum for inter-agency discussions that began in 1996 as the Interagency Working
Group on Nanotechnology. In August 1999, after catalyzing and nurturing numerous
workshops and studies, this group submitted a draft plan for federal action. President
Clinton announced the National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI) in 2000. The NNI
is a R&D program to coordinate inter-agency eﬀorts to realize the full potential of
nanotechnology, to facilitate technology transfer to fuel the national economy, and to
educational resources as well as a skilled workforce. Realizing that nanotechnology is
a transformative social force, the NNI coordinators regularly broadcast its activities
to the general public on www.nano.gov.

Societal issues were the focus of a workshop conducted by the US National Science
Foundation in September 2000 [8]. In addition to the economic and industrial path-
ways for nanotechnology research and development, the conferees also examined the
societal changes that nanotechnology could engender. Possible impacts on the en-
vironment, energy generation and consumption, water puriﬁcation and desalination,

8

agricultural yields, space exploration, national security, and the free-market econ-
omy were discussed. An adequate assessment of societal impacts may be possible
only after several decades, because there are bound to be unintended or second-order
consequences of nanotechnology, although the near-term emergence of radical nan-
otechnology was dismissed. The inclusion of social scientists in the NNI right from
the beginning was recommended, as also the education of future social scientists on
nanotechnology and its human dimensions.

The British government in 2003 commissioned the Royal Society and the Royal
Academy of Engineering to deﬁne nanotechnology and to assess its current status
and its future prospects, as well as to identify and predict socioethical challenges that
nanotechnology could engender. After extensive consultation with technoscientists,
policymakers, and others in July 2004, the British panel released a comprehensive
report [9] that maps the opportunities of nanotechnology. The report did not cover
socioethical uncertainties in much detail, possibly due to the dearth of data. As
a result, the voices of technoscientists (who constitute the membership of the two
academies) were more prominent in the report. Some social scientists did provide
input to the Working Group of the panel, but the general lack of societal debate on
the social implications of nanotechnology [36] left the social aspects underrepresented.

Among the critical issues raised by the British panel was the absence of standards
for the nanotechnology workplace, both in terms of environmental impacts as well as
with the possible risks of either deliberate or accidental introduction of nanoparticles
in human beings and organisms. Nanometrology is particularly important to the issue
of workplace standards. The American Society for Testing of Materials International
(ASTM Int’l) has set up Committee E56 on Nanotechnology to develop “consensus
standards” [37]. Working with experts from six major partners—the Institute of Elec-
trical and Electronics Engineers, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, the
international oﬃces of the US National Science Foundation, the Americal Institute of
Chemical Engineering, Japans National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and
Technology, and Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International—Committee
E56 aims to develop an “approved terminology document” to streamline discussions
in and between governments, industries, and academic research institutions [37].

The Japanese government takes its obligations to industry very seriously. It identi-
ﬁed nanotechnology as one of four “priority areas” in its Second Science and Technol-
ogy Plan [38]. A national committee for terminology and standards was established
in late 2004. This committee is surveying Japanese organizations connected with
nanotechnology and is also championing the creation of global standards by the In-
ternational Standards Organization.

Collectively, the many government and oﬃcial reports constitute the node of this

9

serious discourse that can be and is accessed across most of the other nodes, al-
though most oﬃcial reports themselves only acknowledge and explicitly draw upon
the technoscientiﬁc and business discourse nodes (as well as other oﬃcial reports).

2.4 Node 4: Social science and humanities researchers

Some early scholarly researchers from the social sciences and humanities have at-
tempted to explore the social, economic, political, legal, religious, philosophical, and
ethical implications of nanotechnology for human societies, but these researchers have
not produced literatures yet, nor have they coalesced into functioning research com-
munities. This discourse node is still in a very early stage of development, which can
be seen in its almost entirely outward focus—rarely do the scattered writings cite
other published scholarly works in the humanities and social sciences, in part because
even as late as 2005 there is still little to be cited. Instead, occasional articles refer ex-
tensively to journalistic reports, reports from government agencies and oﬃcial bodies,
the self-promoting pronouncements of technoscientists and the business community,
and the treatments of nanotechnology in ﬁction.

For example, only a skeletal legal scholarship addresses the implications of nan-
otechnology. Although legal issues are frequently mentioned in non-legal periodicals
and online forums, attention in law reviews and journals has been scarce. A pioneer-
ing overview article by Fiedler and Reynolds appeared in 1994 [39]. A few years later,
Lin-Easton [40] oﬀered a more specialized legal focus on the application of the pre-
cautionary principle of international environmental law, and Reynolds [41] explored
environmental regulation of nanotechnology. Developments in nanotechnology raise
some obvious and not-so-obvious issues with regard to intellectual property rights,
which were addressed by Newberger [42] and by Halluin and Westin [43]. Other ar-
ticles, such as by Kerr and Bassi [44], appeared in law journals but consist more of
political and ethical analysis than legal scholarship. A general and superﬁcial overview
of the legal implications of nanotechnology across its projected stages is contained in
Smith [45]. With the exception of Lin-Easton and Reynolds, these writers do not
cite each other or other legal researchers. Rather, the many and lengthy footnotes
common to legal scholarship are ﬁlled with citations to works from the other nodes
of discourse.

A similar pattern emerges in other areas of the humanities and social sciences.
Some political scientists look at the political implications of nanotechnology, but
tend primarily to cite literature from the technoscience, business, and oﬃcial report
nodes (e.g., Kay and Bosso [46]). The most developed subliterature is that which
focuses on the political implications of nanotechnology as it aﬀects military security

10

[47]. Some ethicists have begun looking at nanotechnology [21, 48, 49], but much
more common are “lighthouse beacon” articles by technoscientists and practitioners
urgently calling for more serious attention to the profound ethical issues being raised
by nanotechnology (e.g., [50]). In the US, the National Science Foundation has funded
initiatives to study the social implications of nanotechnology [8]. Much of the early
literature derives directly from the promotional eﬀorts of NSF oﬃcials [51, 52]. A few
instances of social research not funded by NSF have also begun to appear [53].

Perhaps the most developed area in the social sciences, not surprisingly, is that of
scientometrics, the measurement and analysis of science, which is often done through
bibliometrics, the measurement and analysis of publications. A signiﬁcant literature
exists that reports on research measuring and analyzing, for example, growth and
trends [54], nanotechnology interdisciplinarity [55, 56, 57], patterns of research col-
laboration [55, 57], and patents [58]. This literature would seem to be highly relevant
to nearly all other social science studies of nanotechnology, but so far it has been
little cited outside of its own small research community.

Humanistic scholarship uses other discourse nodes as the raw material for analysis,
and applies well-established humanistic theories and concepts, but the contributions
are also few and scattered, do not speak to each other, and certainly do not build
on each other. Examples include Bendle’s [59] and Elliott’s [60] analyses of the
transhuman or posthuman ideology underlying much of the discourse found in all the
other nodes. A more substantial scholarship consists of critical reviews of nanoﬁction
and theoretical comparisons of it and various other nanotechnology narratives, part
of the ﬁction node to which we now turn.

2.5 Node 5: Fiction writers

Fiction writers from early on have explored the potentials of nanotechnology, raising
questions that have in some instances then been taken up in other nodes. Almost
all of the emergent science ﬁction on nanotechnology has been based on the concerns
of current science, even as it stretches any scientiﬁc consensus on what is plausible.
And, as we have seen with the early science ﬁction of the 20th century, life can imitate
art, and the blurring boundaries of fact and ﬁction are part of the development of a
narrative in “the construction of a new science and industry” [61].

When Drexler presented a utopic vision of an age of nanotechnology in 1986 [62],
while also identifying its dystopic underside—the “grey goo” problem when minia-
ture “assemblers” replicate themselves endlessly—science ﬁction writers responded
by charting the risks embedded in the topographies of the future. Perhaps the most

11

popular work of this genre is Crichton’s Prey [63], illustrating the devastating con-
sequences that result when cutting-edge technoscience joins hands with corporate
greed and human fallibility. The novel paints a chilling picture of the convergence
of nanotechnology, biotechnology, and computer science that leads to the creation
of deadly “swarms” of self-replicating “micro-robots”. Such a scenario may not be
feasible given the state of nanotechnology today, but for Crichton, it seems inevitable
that “sometime in the twenty-ﬁrst century, our self-deluded recklessness will collide
with our growing technological power” [63, p. x].

Another signiﬁcant theme in some of the most popular science ﬁction envisions
convergences in the ﬁelds of nanotechnology, biotechnology and computer science—
not unlike the recent US government-funded initiative on NBIC (nanotechnology,
biotechnology, information technology and cognitive science) [27]; see the discussion
on Node 7. Stephensons Diamond Age is an inﬂuential novel that envisages the coming
of a new age of nanotechnology, when “matter compilers” can make almost anything
anyone could want [64].

These literatures, in turn, have given rise to a critical review literature.

In a
sweeping review of the scientiﬁc and science ﬁction writings on nanotechnology, Mil-
burn pointed to the blurring of boundaries between the two despite (indeed, precisely
because of) attempts by scientists to distance themselves from the “negative asso-
ciations of science ﬁction” [65]. The imagined futures of nanotechnology conjured
up by nanoscientists, which attract billions of dollars for R&D from government and
industry, are in fact coterminous with science ﬁction, embodying Baudrillard’s notion
of hyperreality [65]. So thin is the line between fact and ﬁction that “we might almost
say that reality is jealous of ﬁction, that the real is jealous of the image . . . . It is a
kind of duel between them. . . ” [66, p. 28].

The Baudrillardian hyperreal concept of nanotechnology pictured in ﬁction, com-
puter games, and ﬁlms is more than just science or hard technology—it has evolved
into a distinct culture [61]. In this culture, there is no distinction between what is hu-
man and what is non-human. If, as Fukuyama has argued the most signiﬁcant threat
posed by contemporary biotechnology is the possibility that it will alter human na-
ture and thereby move us into a ‘posthuman’ stage of history” [67, p. 7] present-day
nano-narratives already reveal our posthuman futures.

In addressing the latent perils of biotechnology, Fukuyama wrote that “human na-
ture shapes and constrains the possible kinds of political regimes, so a technology
powerful enough to reshape what we are will have possibly malign consequences for
liberal democracy and the nature of politics itself” [67, p. 7]. This is already evident
in the Jonathan Demme ﬁlm, The Manchurian Candidate (2004) wherein nanotech-
nology is used to re-jig the central nervous system of a key player in a political tussle.

12

Just as Alduous Huxley’s book Brave New World provided an advance peep into the
world of biotechnology, the newer works of ﬁction with nano-narratives are providing
the template for conceptualizing the posthuman future of nanotechnology.

2.6 Node 6: Political activists

Activists, many with an environmentalist worldview, are wary of the race to the
posthuman world. McKibben abhors the idea of giving up “our citizenship in the
land of the ﬁnite, which is the place that humans have known, and trade it for a
passport to the inﬁnite” [5, p. 224]. Furthermore, he says that the children of the
world should not have to contemplate being launched “into a future without bounds,
where meaning may evaporate” or to “live always in the future and never in the now
where humans have always dwelt” [5, p. 224].

In his 2003 book [5], McKibben has argued that society should turn its back on
nanotechnology and other complex new technologies which threaten “not just our
survival, but our identity” [68]. He is one of the growing numbers of members of action
groups, think tanks, social movements, and churches that have become involved in
evaluating the implications of nanotechnology for the environment, health, human
rights, and global justice [69].

Britains Prince Charles too has helped raise the salience of nanotechnology by his
reported “qualms” about its possible impacts, which caused uproar among British
scientists and the government who said he was distorting the debate [70]. Yet,
as Goldsmith pointed out, prior to the princes involvement, “there was no debate.
And. . . there were no signs that any such debate was about to be launched, despite
the gold-rush excitement fuelling nanotechnologys phenomenal expansion” [71]. Al-
though both McKibben and Prince Charles have been dismissed as naysayers by many
technoscientists, more grudging respect is forthcoming for ETC (the Action Group on
Erosion, Technology and Concentration), a Canada-based activist group, which has
produced a series of inﬂuential reports on the social implications of nanotechnology
[72, 73, 74]. It has urged caution in using nanotechnology, pointing to the possibility
of “microorganisms . . . manipulated through nanotechnology to take over the function
of machines but that begin reproducing out of control”, and has called for a morato-
rium on its development given evidence of the potential toxicity of nanoparticles [75].
The call for a moratorium was echoed by Greenpeace International in July 2003 [76,
77].

The website of ETC states that [78]:

13

While nanotechnology oﬀers opportunities for society, it also involves pro-
found social and environmental risks, not only because it is an enabling
technology to the biotech industry, but also because it involves atomic
manipulation and will make possible the fusing of the biological world
and the mechanical. There is a critical need to evaluate the social impli-
cations of all nanotechnologies; in the meantime, the ETC group believes
that a moratorium should be placed on research involving molecular self-
assembly and self-replication.

In its most recent report on nanotechnology, NanoGeoPolitics [74], ETC has provided
a critical overview of three diﬀerent nanotechnology governance approaches that it
says are emerging: “(1) Optimists—‘technology is good’—Full speed ahead (with
‘responsible’ drivers at the wheel); (2) Realists—‘technology is neutral’—Invite a
few of the passengers to suggest alternative routes (the ‘upstream’ approach); (3)
Sceptics—‘technology is political’—Get out the map and let everyone decide if they
want to take a trip and if car, bike or bus is the best way to go” [74, p. 7].

Activists—who have been politicized by policy debates over genetic modiﬁcation
of organisms—contribute in-depth reports, opinion pieces, and polemics to periodi-
cals and mainstream media outlets such as the New York Times as well as to their
own websites. Magazines such as The Ecologist now run a regular column enti-
tled Nanowatch that keeps a close and critical watch on new developments in nan-
otechnology. Writing for this column on “nano-pollution”, Thomas [79] described re-
search where ﬁsh exposed to water containing nanotechnologys “miracle molecules”—
fullerenes, aﬀectionately called “buckyballs by enthusiasts—suﬀered severe brain dam-
age in just 48 hours. Thomas pointed out that this was the tenth report since the
ﬁrst published in 1997 that warned of toxicity of nano-materials. The Ecologist
has also published articles more broadly on the implications and risks of converging
technologies, labelled variously as NBIC by the US government (see Node 5); GNR—
genetics, nanotech and robotic—by Bill Joy of Sun Microsystems; and GRAIN—
genetics, robotics, artiﬁcial intelligence and nanotech—by corporate environmental
consultant Douglas Mulhall [80]. Thomas [80] quoted Ray Kurzweil of MIT as de-
scribing this convergence as “the singularity—the point at which our technologies
become the driving force in human evolution” so much so that the “world will be
transformed beyond recognition” [60]. Such convergences, hailed by techno-optimists
such as Kurzweil, are viewed with considerable concern by anti-nanotechnology ac-
tivists, some predicting the creation of destructive “green goo of uncontrollable life
forms” arising from the linking of biotechnology and nanotechnology [19]. Others
warn of the possibility in the near future of a “nano surveillance society” in the
context of the “war on terrorism” [81].

14

Recognising that nanotechnology oﬀers both potential beneﬁts and risks, many of
them yet unanticipated, some activists have called for the application of the precau-
tionary principle as a way of managing nanotechnology [82]. Montague wrote that
the insurance industry has expressed concern about the environmental and health
hazards of nano-particles, and quotes a report by Swiss Re, a large reinsurance com-
pany that states, “The Precautionary Principle demands the proactive introduction
of protective measures in the face of possible risks, which science at present—in the
absence of knowledge—can neither conﬁrm nor reject” [82]. A recent report indicates
that other insurance companies are joining hands with academic scientists to evaluate
the risks posed by manufactured nanomaterials [26].

The varied activist reports and websites devoted to nanotechnology do monitor and
respond to developments in Nodes 1 and 3, but with limited impact as yet on policy.
It is primarily when their concerns get magniﬁed through attention from the main-
stream popular press that we see some acknowledgement from the technoscientists
and government research-funding bodies. It is to the discourses of the popular press
that we now turn.

2.7 Node 7: Science journalists and popular science writers

Negotiating the techno-utopian and techno-dystopian fault lines are professional sci-
ence journalists and popular science writers. Such writers, who report on and analyze
current cutting edge developments in science and technology, have produced a lively
node of discussion about nanotechnology for more than a decade. Some of these writ-
ers have sought to glorify the world that they see nanotechnology creating. Others
have suggested that public funding for nanotechnology be stopped or radically cur-
tailed and governmental oversight be clamped on industrial eﬀorts until the signiﬁcant
social, legal and ethical ramiﬁcations of nanotechnology have been mapped out; some
argue for turning the clock back because no good will come out by tinkering with the
fundamental mechanisms of nature.

In terms of sheer volume, much of the writing in this category comprises of short
reports on current developments in nanotechnology; the opening of new nanotechnol-
ogy centres, such as the one at Purdue University and the MIT-Army nanotechnology
centre in 2002; a plan by the European Commission and the US National Science
Foundation to actively cooperate in research; and the great outpouring of funding
for nanotechnology research and projects from governments and the private sector.
Also to be found is reporting on nano-related events, such as the soaring futuristic
visions of institutions including the Foresight Institute, whose founders believe that
nanotechnology will give people “mastery over matter” [83]. In some ways, this node

15

echoes the discourses of Nodes 1, 2, and 3 but there is very little, if any, exchange
with Node 4.

Much less common is critical journalism that looks at the current nanohype with
any degree of scepticism. Writing in the Wall Street Journal, Gomes [84] urged caution
in the face of venture capitalists working the Silicon Valleys “hype machine. . . gearing
up to sell you a second-hand trend.” The popular press has also reported on critiques
of nanotechnology extended by groups such as the Canada-based ETC, which urge
applying the precautionary principle to new technologies [85]. Indeed, the dangers of
nanotechnology have been ﬂagged by even technophiles with impeccable technolog-
ical credentials such as Bill Joy and even the Foresight Institute that has called for
government oversight of nanotechnology development [6, 86].

Fundamental to the concerns being raised are questions about whether they can
move up the food-chain and reach humans and what exactly nanoparticles do when
they enter the human body. Normally harmless conventional compounds can prove
to be dangerous on a nanometre scale, as can new nanoparticles being created by
scientists [9,19]. Illustrating the fundamental divisions between techno-optimists and
sceptics is a debate between Roger Highﬁeld, the science editor of the Daily Telegraph,
and Bill McKibben, published in October 2003 [87]. For Highﬁeld, “there is nothing
intrinsically good or bad about technology, whether it is GM or nanotechnology,
just what we do with it”. McKibben argues instead for foregoing those technologies
oﬀering a quantum leap in technological power that “threaten human meaning and
“human societies”. The debate captures the two ends of the spectrum of views on the
place and role of technology in society, oﬀering little hope of resolving such a divide.

Just as research on the ethical implications of nanotechnology is scarce, as dis-
cussed for Node 4, reporting on the issue is generally conﬁned to relatively brief
statements about funding or legislative measures to deal with ethical issues. Malakoﬀ
reported in Science that the US House and Senate have passed bills requiring studies
of “nanotech’s dark side” [88]. Similarly, a 2003 editorial in Nature, while decrying the
“patent nonsense” of some anti-nanotech campaigns, called for scientists to engage
in an “honest debate” with the public “about the potential risks of nanotechnology
and how they can be managed” [89]. Among the few comments addressing at the
implications for Third World agricultural production of nano-materials such as nano-
textiles, Thomas has called for “strong global rules to ensure that new technologies
are only deployed if the interests of the poor and the vulnerable are protected” [90].

The paucity of debate and critical analysis on the implications of nanotechnol-
ogy in the popular media is reﬂected in the general lack of public awareness of the
implications of nanotechnology, as explored next.

16

2.8 Node 8: General public

The general public is, at best, dimly aware of the dimensions of nanotechnology,
although the awareness is slowly growing, partly in response to initiatives taken by
various governmental and nongovernmental groups [20, 91, 92, 93, 94].

The ﬁrst representative US national survey of public perceptions of nanotechnology
revealed that public awareness of and knowledge about nanotechnology is extremely
limited, although “Americans’ initial reaction to nanotechnology is thus far generally
positive, probably rooted in a generally positive view of science overall” [53, p. 395].
Americans do not presume that nanotechnology will lead only to beneﬁts and that
there are no potential risks; and “the most discouraging aspect to the data is respon-
dents’ lack of trust in business leaders to minimize nanotechnology risks to human
health” [53, p. 395]. Of course, anti-nanotechnology activists will likely ﬁnd this lack
of trust to be the most encouraging ﬁnding of the survey.

Not surprisingly, although scant, the publics view of nanotechnology probably dif-
fers from country to country, depending on national scientiﬁc aspirations and climate.
This has been exempliﬁed by Gaskell et al. [95] who analyzed the coverage of nan-
otechnology in two inﬂuential newspapers: the New York Times and the Independent
(London). Both newspapers recorded a sixfold increase in the coverage of the risks of
nanotechnology from 2000 to 2003, but the US newspapers coverage of the beneﬁts
increased almost ﬁvefold in contrast to the twofold increase in the UK newspaper
over the same period. This diversity reﬂects the diﬀerences between the cultures of
higher and lower technological optimism. Even more importantly, the slant of news
coverage not only reﬂects the current society but also shapes its future.

3 Conclusion

The discussions around nanotechnology epitomize the contemporary processes of mak-
ing the future present. As Rosenberg and Harding have pointed out, we are “living
through boom times for the future”, an era in which there is a “remarkable prolifer-
ation of words and images about the future” [96, p. 3]. In such an era, discourses
around nanotechnology grapple with the tensions around the boundaries of the real
and the hyper-real, development and disaster, human and the posthuman.

Nanotechnology has arisen at a time when biotechnology and information technol-
ogy are not only highly advanced but continue to grow dramatically. The convergence
of these three technologies is fraught with exciting developments for the future of hu-
mankind, some with the potential to be extremely beneﬁcial but others that may

17

be extremely deleterious. Government-convened American [27] and British [9] panels
have recognized the double-edged nature of this convergence. Even more interesting
is the inevitable coupling of these three technologies with cognition science, which
has been forecast in movies such as Gattaca (1997) and The Manchurian Candidate
(2004), and has also drawn the attention of the US government [27].

Since everyone is in the dark about some or all major aspects of nanotechnology and
other emergent technologies, a massive program of general education and information
is essential in todays industrial societies, as has been recognized for some years now
[2, 8, 97]. A tabulation of the potential social, legal, and ethical implications of
nanotechnology over the next three to four decades [98] clearly indicates that formal
as well as informal education of technoscientists, politicians, economists, lawyers,
social scientists, school teachers, and indeed every citizen is warranted.

Formal education must be imparted at pre-university and university levels to all
students, irrespective of areas of specialization, because the societal ramiﬁcations of
the emergence of nanotechnology and of its convergence with information technology,
biotechnology, and cognition science have the potential to be totally transformative—
in the same way that the emergence of agriculture must have been at one time. Infor-
mal education too has to be conducted at several levels. At one level, multidisciplinary
teams from universities, industry, and the government should conduct seminars for
industry leaders, government oﬃcials, and legislators. At another level, town councils
should fund series of public lectures and panel discussions. Schools, public libraries,
and community groups should be provided ﬁnancial support by government agencies
and private foundations to catalyze understanding of all four emergent technologies
for all adult learners. Intramural as well as extramural competitions in writing essays,
creating items of visual arts, and debates in educational institutions would constitute
yet another level of informal education.

It is only through eﬀorts such as these that we will begin to see a fuller range
of discourses in Node 8. A better educated public, indeed a focused education of
all segments of society in ways suggested above, is likely to facilitate serious and
necessary engagement with the issues, concerns and discussions across all nodes. On-
going critical review of the boundaries that demarcate each node will provide both
researchers and policymakers with an informed and nuanced basis for evaluating rapid
developments in technoscience more holistically in the future.

18

References

[1] A. Lakhtakia (ed), Nanometer structures: Theory, modeling, and simulation,

SPIE Press, Bellingham, WA, USA, 2004.

[2] R. Merkle, 2001. Nanotechnology: What will it mean? IEEE Spectrum, Jan-

uary, pp. 19-21.

[3] R. Kurzweil, The age of spiritual machines: When computers exceed human

intelligence. St Leonards, NSW, Australia: Allen & Unwin, 1999.

[4] D. Mulhall, Our molecular future: How nanotechnology, robotics, genetics and
artiﬁcial intelligence will transform our world, Prometheus Books, New York, NY,
USA, 2002.

[5] B. McKibben, Enough: Staying human in an engineered age, Henry Holt, New

York, NY, USA, 2003.

[6] B. Joy, The dark side of technology, Vital Speeches of the Day 66 (23) (2000),

[7] US National Nanotechnology Initiative, http://www.nano.gov/html/facts/whatIs

p. 706.

Nano.html

[8] M.C. Roco and W.S. Bainbridge (eds), Societal implications of nanoscience and

nanotechnology, US National Science Foundation, Arlington, VA, USA, 2001.

[9] Royal Society and Royal Academy of Engineering, Nanoscience and nanotech-
nologies: opportunities and uncertainties, RS Policy document 20/04, RAEng Policy
document R2.19, London, United Kingdom, 2004.

[10] J. DiLoreto, Nanotechnology product stewardship—American Chemistry Coun-
cil Nanotechnology Panel recognizes value of ASTM Committee E56 eﬀorts, ASTM
International Standardization News 33 (7) (2005), pp. 32-35.

[11] R. Jones, The future of nanotechnology, Physics World 17 (8) (2004), pp.

25-29.

2004), pp. 64-71.

ken, NJ, USA, 2003.

[12] S. Baker and A. Aston, The business of nanotech, Business Week (14 February

[13] C.P. Poole, Jr., and F. J. Owens, Introduction to nanotechnology, Wiley, Hobo-

[14] R.P. Feynman, There’s plenty of room at the bottom, Engineering and Science

23 (5) (1960), pp. 22-36.

19

[15] K.E. Drexler, Molecular engineering: an approach to the development of gen-
eral capabilities for molecular manipulation, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 78 (1981),
pp. 5275-5278.

[16] P. Ball, Nanotechnology in the ﬁring line, www.nanotech.org (23 December

2003).

48-57.

[17] C. Phoenix and E. Drexler, Safe exponential manusfacturing, Nanotechnology

15 (2004), pp. 869-872.

[18] M. Roukes, Plenty of room, indeed. Scientiﬁc American (September 2001), pp.

[19] G. Brumﬁel, A little knowledge. . . , Nature 424 (2003), pp. 246-248.

[20] http://www.nanoscience.cam.ac.uk/schools/nano/index.html

[21] A. Mnyusiwalla, A.S. Daar and P.A. Singer, ‘Mind the gap’: science and ethics

in nanotechnology, Nanotechnology 14 (2003), pp. R9-R13.

[22] J.J. Gilman, Nanotechnology, Mater. Res. Innovat. 5 (2001), pp. 12-14.

[23] R. Roy, Local economy: Nanotech not the answer, Centre Daily Times (State

College, PA, USA) (7 September 2004), p. A6.

[24] Y. Gogotsi, How safe are nanotubes and other nanoﬁlaments?, Mater. Res.

Innovat. 7 (2003) pp.192-194.

[25] During a meeting of the Technical Group on Nanotechnology of SPIE—The
International Society for Optical Engineering, held on 5 August 2004 in Denver, CO,
USA, one of us (AL) presented a summary of Ref.
[9] and emphasized the safety
and health issue. A large fraction of the audience of technoscientists did not consider
the issue as signiﬁcant, and one person in the audience ﬂatly declared that she was
unconcerned about future detrimental eﬀects to her health.

[26] C.O. Robichaud, D. Tanzil, U. Weilenmann and M.R. Wiesner, Relative risk
analysis of several manufactured nanomaterials: An insurance industry context, En-
viron. Sci. Technol. 10.1021/es0506509 (2005).

[27] M.C. Roco and W.S. Bainbridge, Converging technologies for improving human
performance: Nanotechnology, biotechnology, information technology and cognitive
science, US National Science Foundation, Arlington, VA, USA, 2002.

[28] D.E. Marlowe, Nanotechnology and the US Food and Drug Administration,

ASTM International Standardization News 33 (7) (2005), 28-31.

20

[29] See the letters by N.H. Nevshehir, M. Zelvin, and S. Brauer on p. 20 of the 7

March 2005 issue of Business Week.

[30] J. Uldrich and D. Newberry, The next big thing is really small: How nanotech-
nology will change the future of your business, Crown Business, New York, NY, USA,
2003.

[31] Lux Research, Inc., The Nanotech Report 2004.

Investment overview and

market research for nanotechnology, New York, NY, USA, 2004.

[32] Merrill Lynch issued a press release on April 1, 2004 to announce the creation
of a Nanotech Index to track the evolving nanotechnology industry. Available online
at http://www.ml.com/index.asp?id=7695−7696−8149−6261−13714−13728

[33] J. T. Klein, Crossing boundaries: Knowledge, disciplinarities, and interdisci-

plinarities, Charlottesville, VA, USA, University Press of Virginia, 1996, p. 1.

[34] Nanotechnology:

Issues for Business 2005, Brussels, Belgium, 25-26 April

(2005). http://www.euconferences.com/events.asp?ID=2&Type=Event

[35] A. Aston, Beaming in on nano gold, Business Week (27 June 2005).

[36] R.W.S. Dunkley, Nanotechnology: social consequences and future implications,

Futures 36 (2004), pp. 1129-1132.

[37] P. Picariello, New ASTM International Committee E56 on Nanotechnology,

ASTM International Standardization News 33 (7) (2005), p. 27.

[38] H. Shindo, Nanotechnology standardization in Japan, ASTM International

Standardization News 33 (7) (2005), pp. 36-39.

[39] F. A. Fiedler and G. H. Reynolds, Legal Problems of Nanotechnology: An
Overview, Southern California Interdisciplinary Law Journal, 3 (1994), pp. 593-630.

[40] P. C. Lin-Easton, It’s Time for Environmentalists to Think Small–Real Small:
A Call for the Involvement of Environmental Lawyers in Developing Precautionary
Policies for Molecular Nanotechnology, Georgetown International Environmental Law
Review, 14 (2001), pp. 107-134.

[41] G. H. Reynolds, Environmental Regulation of Nanotechnology: Some Prelim-

inary Observations, Environmental Law Reporter (2001), pp. 10681-10866.

[42] B. Newberger, Intellectual Property and Nanotechnology, Texas Intellectual

Property Law Journal, 11 (2003), pp. 649-657.

[43] A. P. Halluin and L. P. Westin, Nanotechnology: The Importance of Intellectual

21

Property Rights in an Emerging Technology, Journal of the Patent and Trademark
Oﬃce Society, 86 (2004), pp. 220-236.

[44] I. Kerr and G. Bassi, Not That Much Room? Nanotechnology, Networks and

the Politics of Dancing, Health Law Journal, 12 (2004), pp. 103-123.

[45] R. H. Smith, Social, Ethical, and Legal Implications of Nanotechnology, Soci-
etal Implications of Nanotechnology, National Science Foundation, Washington, DC,
2001, pp. 203-211.

[46] W. D. Kay and C. J. Bosso, A Nanotech Velvet Revolution? Issues for Social

Science Inquiry, STEP Ahead, 3 (2005), pp. 2-3.

[47] J. Altmann, Military Uses of Nanotechnology: Perspectives and Concerns,

Security Dialogue 35 (2004), pp. 61-79.

[48] P. B. Thompson, Social Acceptance of Nanotechnology, Societal Implications
of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, National Science Foundation, Washington, DC,
2001, pp. 198-202.

[49] V. Weil, Ethical Issues in Nanotechnology, In: M. C. Roco and W. S. Bain-
bridge, eds., Societal Implications of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, National Sci-
ence Foundation, Washington, DC, 2001, pp. 193-198.

[50] R. M. Satava, Disruptive Visions: Moral and Ethical Challenges from Advanced
Technology and Issues for the New Generation of Surgeons, Surgical Endoscopy 16
(2002), pp. 1403-1408.

[51] M. C. Roco, Broader Societal Issues of Nanotechnology, Journal of Nanoparticle

Research 5 (2003), pp. 181-189.

[52] W. S. Bainbridge, Sociocultural Meanings of Nanotechnology: Research Method-

ologies, Journal of Nanoparticle Research 6 (2004), pp. 285-299.

[53] M. D. Cobb and J. Macoubrie, Public Perceptions about Nanotechnology:

Risks, beneﬁts and Trust, Journal of Nanoparticle Research 6 (2004), pp. 395-405.

[54] T. Braun, Nanoscience and Nanotechnology in the Balance, Scientometrics 38

(1997), pp. 321-325.

[55] M. Meyer, Nanotechnology: Interdisciplinarity, Patterns of Collaboration and

Diﬀerences in Application, Scientometrics 42 (1998), pp. 195-205.

[56] H. Eto, Interdisciplinary information Input and Output of a Nano-Technology

Project, Scientometrics 58 (2003), pp. 5-33.

22

[57] J. Schummer, Multidiciplinarity, Interdisciplinarity, and Patterns of Research
Collaboration in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Scientometrics 59 (2004), pp. 425-
465.

[58] A. Hullmann, Publications and Patents in Nanotechnology: An Overview of

Previous Studies and the State of the Art, Scientometrics 58 (2003), pp. 507-527.

[59] M. F. Bendle, Teleportation, Cyborgs and the Posthuman Ideology, Social

Semiotics 12 (2002), pp. 45-62.

[60] C. Elliott, Humanity 2.0, Wilson Quarterly 27 (2003), pp. 13-20.

[61] J. Gimzewski and V. Vesna, The nanoneme syndrome: Blurring of fact and
ﬁction in the construction of a new science. Technoetic Arts 1 (1) (2003), pp. 7-24.

[62] K.E. Drexler, Engines of creation: The coming era of nanotechnology, Anchor-

Doubleday, New York, NY, USA, 1986.

[63] M. Crichton, Prey, HarperCollins Publishers, New York, 2002.

[64] N. Stephenson, The diamond age, or a young lady’s illustrated primer, Bantam

Books, New York, 1995.

[65] C. Milburn, Nanotechnology in the age of posthuman engineering: Science

ﬁction as science, Conﬁgurations 10 (2) (2002), pp. 261-295.

[66] J. Baudrillard, The spirit of terrorism, Verso, London, UK, 2002.

[67] F. Fukuyama, Our posthuman future: Consequences of the biotechnology rev-

olution, Farrar, Straus, & Giroux, New York, NY, USA, 2002.

[68] See the blurb on the jacket of Ref. [5].

[69] ETC; Intermediate Technology Development Group; Research Foundation for
Science, Technology and Ecology headed by Vandana Shiva; Greenpeace; and the
International Centre for Bioethics, Culture and Disability are excellent examples.

[70] B. Feder, Prince’s technology qualms create a stir in Britain, New York Times

(19 May 2003), p. C3.

[71] Z. Goldsmith, Editorial, The Ecologist 34 (7) (2004), p. 4.

[72] ETC, Down on the farm: The impact of nano-scale technologies on food and
agriculture, November 2004, http://www.etcgroup.org/documents/ETC−DOTFarm2004.
pdf

[73] ETC, Nanotechs “second nature” patents: Implications for the global south,

23

Communiques No. 87 & 88, March/April and May/June 2005, http://www.etcgroup.
org/documents/Com8788SpecialPNanoMar-Jun05ENG.pdf

[74] ETC, NanoGeoPolitics: ETC Group surveys the political landscape, Special
Communique No. 89, July 2005, http://www.etcgroup.org/documents/Com89Special
NanoPoliticsJul05ENG.pdf

[75] B. Feder, Research shows hazards in tiny particles, New York Times (14 April

2003), p. C8.

Trust, London, UK, 2003.

[76] A.H. Arnall, Future technologies, today’s choices, Greenpeace Environmental

[77] A. Regalado, Greenpeace warns of pollutants from nanotechnology, Wall Street

Journal (25 July 2003), p. B1.

[78] http://www.etcgroup.org/key−defs.asp

[79] J. Thomas, Nanowatch, The Ecologist 34 (4) (2004), p. 13.

[80] J. Thomas, Future perfect?, The Ecologist 33 (4) (2003), p. 32.

[81] J. Thomas, Little Brothers watching you, The Ecologist 33 (9) (2003), p.16.

[82] P. Montague, Welcome to NanoWorld: Nanotechnology and the precautionary

principle imperative, Multinational Monitor 25 (9) (2004), p. 16-19.

[83] B. Schecter, They’ve seen the future and intend to live it, New York Times (16

July 2002), p. F4.

[84] L. Gomes, Boom town: Beware of Valley’s new fad: Nanotechnology, Wall

Street Journal (6 May 2002), p. B1.

[85] B. Feder, Nanotechnology has arrived; a serious opposition is forming, New

York Times (19 August 2002), p. C3.

[86] R. Service, Is nanotechnology dangerous?, Science 290 (2000), p. 1526.

[87] R. Highﬁeld and B. McKibben, Technology: Will it save us or kill us?, The

Ecologist 33 (10) (2003), pp. 40-42 & 57.

[88] D. Malakoﬀ, Congress wants studies of Nanotechs “dark side”, Science 301

[89] Don’t believe the hype, Nature 424 (2003), p. 237.

[90] J. Thomas, Atomising Third World economies, The Ecologist 34 (8) (2004), p.

(2003), p. 27.

18.

24

[91] A. Lakhtakia, Nanotechnology oﬀers promise on a smaller scale, Centre Daily

Times (State College, PA, USA) (31 January 2005), p. A6.

[92] http://www.nanojury.org/

[93] http://www.uea.ac.uk/env/cer/index.html

[94] http://www.nano-and-society.org/

[95] G. Gaskell, T.T. Eyck, J. Jackson and G. Veltri, Public attitudes to nanotech-

nology in Europe and the United States, Nature Materials 3 (2004), p. 496.

[96] D. Rosenberg and S. Harding, Introduction: Histories of the future. In: D.
Rosenberg and S. Harding (Eds.), Histories of the future. Duke University Press,
Durham, NC, USA, 2005.

[97] A. Lakhtakia, Taking nanotechnology to schools, http://www.arXiv.org/physics/

0505007

[98] R.H. Smith, Social, ethical, and legal implications of nanotechnology, In: M.
C. Roco and W. S. Bainbridge, eds., Societal Implications of Nanoscience and Nan-
otechnology, National Science Foundation, Washington, DC, 2001. pp. 203-211.

25

