5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
0
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
7
0
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fourth Generation Nuclear Weapons:
Military effectiveness and collateral effects

Andre Gsponer
Independent Scientiﬁc Research Institute
Box 30, CH-1211 Geneva-12, Switzerland
e-mail: isri@vtx.ch

Version ISRI-05-03.12 July 23, 2013

Abstract

The paper begins with a general introduction and update to Fourth Gen-
eration Nuclear Weapons (FGNW), and then addresses some particularly
important military aspects on which there has been only limited public
discussion so far. These aspects concern the unique military character-
istics of FGNWs which make them radically different from both nuclear
weapons based on previous-generation nuclear-explosives and from con-
ventional weapons based on chemical-explosives: yields in the 1 to 100
tons range, greatly enhanced coupling to targets, possibility to drive pow-
erful shaped charged jets and forged fragments, enhanced prompt radiation
effects, reduced collateral damage and residual radioactivity, etc.

1

Introduction

Sixty years after the only use of nuclear weapons in warfare, this paper is discussing
the elaboration and characteristics of a forthcoming generation of war-ﬁghting
nuclear weapons which has been under serious consideration for more than ﬁfty
years, and which may become a reality within a decade or two.

Many technical and some political aspects of these fourth-generation nuclear
weapons (FGNW) have been discussed in earlier reports [1, 2]. The present paper
will recall some of them, while focusing on the military effectiveness and collateral
effects of the concepts which can currently be perceived as the most likely to move
from the laboratory to the battle-ﬁeld.

The paper will therefore not address the full spectrum of possibilities that exist
for designing new types of nuclear weapons (which in the professional scientiﬁc

1

literature comprises many concepts, including very hypothetical ones such as
“quark” or “black hole” bombs) but only truly realistic design which are at most
a few decades away from being usable on the battle-ﬁeld. Neither will the paper
discuss more conservative and near-term possibilities based on the reﬁnment of
existings weapons, such as “simple, rugged designs” [3, p.11], or “robust earth
penetrators” [4], even though some comments will made when useful to put them
in perspective with the development of FGNWs.

In particular, we will specialize to explosive devices in which the main source of
militarily useful energy (i.e., yield) is the deuterium-tritium (DT ) fusion reaction.
As will be seen, when used as the dominant process in a nuclear weapon, this
reaction leads to very different military effects than those of ﬁrst and second
generation nuclear weapons (i.e., “A” and “H” bombs), where in fact the dominant
source of yield is ﬁssion, and where fusion plays only a secondary role in enhancing
the ﬁssioning of large amounts a ﬁssionable materials.

This means that the discussion of FGNWs requires some intellectual effort
— especially for non-technical minded people — because FGNWs are in many
ways very different from previous generation weapons. This can be illustrated by
comparing a few salient features of typical ﬁrst and fourth generation explosives:

First generation:

6 kg P u

10 kt yield at 10% efﬁciency

Fourth generation: 25 mg DT

1 ton yield at 50% efﬁciency

Consequently, going from the ﬁrst to the fourth generation implies a total
change of perspective about nuclear weapons: A “change of paradigm” where
the concept of very-large-yield and big nuclear weapons for deterrence-use is
shifting towards the concept of very-high-precision and compact nuclear weapons
for battle-ﬁeld-use — with yields in the 1 to 100 tons1 range, that is intermediate
between conventional and contemporary nuclear weapons.

Moreover, another important paradigm shift [2, Endnote 39] is the move to-
wards “virtual nuclear weapons” and “virtual nuclear weapon States” [5], as well
to “factory deterrence” [6], “technical deterrence,” or “deterrence by competence”
[7]. This is because FGNWs do not need to be actually built and deployed before
that can play signiﬁcant strategic and political roles. What matters, as in the case
of the proliferation of so-called “peaceful nuclear energy,” is technological deter-
rence, that is the ability to master the technology and to apply it if necessary to
military ends.

1We use italics when tons, kt, or Mt refer to tons of TNT equivalent.

≈

≈

2

Finally, as can be seen by the references given in the bibliography, this paper
is an opportunity to make a synthesis of much of the work done since 1982 (the
year of the creation of ISRI) on third and fourth generation nuclear weapons. This
does not mean that there are no other references to consult: quite the contrary,
as can be seen from the numerous references cited in these ISRI documents.
Similarly, there will be a special emphasis on the use of microscopic amounts of
antimatter to trigger FGNWs, even though other potent ignition technologies are
concurrently under development. The main reason for this is that antimatter is
the most promising technology for achieving the extremely high energy-densities
required to ignite thermonuclear detonation-waves in very compact thermonuclear
explosives.

2 Second and third generation nuclear weapons

Almost all nuclear weapons which are currently in the arsenals of ofﬁcial and de
facto nuclear-weapons-states are so-called “second generation nuclear weapons.”
In these weapons a small amount of tritium (a few grams, in the form of DT gas)
is used to insure the reliability and safety of the nuclear ﬁssion-explosives, which
can be used on their own (“boosted ﬁssion bombs”), or as primaries of two-stage
thermonuclear weapons (“hydrogen bombs”). Weapons which in contemporary
arsenals do not use “tritium boosting” have generally sub- or low-kiloton yields,
and are mostly used as special weapons such as atomic demolition munition.

2.1 Boosting

Tritium boosting, which in practice consists of imploding thin hollow ﬁssile-
material spheres containing DT gas, is relatively easy to implement. This is
because the high-explosive technique required for that purpose is the same as the
one used for imploding metallic liners in anti-tank shaped charges [8]. Tritium
boosting has a number of signiﬁcant technical and military advantages, which
explain why it is used in essentially all militarized nuclear weapons, including in
India, Pakistan, and North-Korea. These advantages comprise:

high-efﬁciency with relatively low-compression and thin reﬂector/tamper;

low weight and small size;

•

•

•

3

intrinsic-safety capability (zero or negligible yield when the tritium is not in

preinitiation-proof capability (resistance to neutrons from spontaneous-
ﬁssion or other warheads);

the weapon2);

•

•

high transparence to X-rays.

The last advantage derives from the fact that a boosted device does not need
a thick and heavy neutron-reﬂector/tamper to insure a sufﬁcient yield, so that
most of the energy released by the neutron chain-reaction (which at the end of
the ﬁssion explosion is found in the form of hard-X-rays) can easily escape from
the ﬁssioned material. The ﬁrst effect of these X-rays is to heat the surrounding
materials, such as the compressed reﬂector/tamper and the detonation products
of the high-explosive that imploded these materials, as well as the shell of heavy
material (e.g., steel or uranium – sometimes called the “barrel shell”) which is
generally used to contain the high-explosives. Consequently, if this outer-shell is
sufﬁciently thick and opaque to X-rays (e.g., 1 cm of uranium), it will become
extremely hot and therefore behave as a secondary-source of X-rays: This is
the principle of the “hot soft-X-ray source” which is used as the “primary” of a
two-stage H-bomb.3

2.2 Two-stage thermonuclear weapons

In two-stage thermonuclear weapons, the fusion material (i.e., lithium-deuteride,
LiD) is generally packaged as a cylindrical or spherical shell sandwiched between
an outer-shell of heavy material (the pusher/tamper) and an inner-shell of ﬁssile
material. This inner-shell (the spark-plug) is generally boosted with some DT
gas. As suggested by its name, the purpose of the spark-plug is to ignite the fusion
material at the appropriate time, i.e, once it has been sufﬁciently compressed.
This whole package is call the “secondary” of the thermonuclear weapon, and is
enclosed together with the “primary” in a thick and heavy “radiation case” which
is designed to contain the soft-X-rays from the primary as long as possible (See
Fig. 1).

2The boost gas has a small neutron moderating effect which can be exploited to design a weapon
in such a way that a diverging chain reaction stops at an early stage when no boost gas is present
in the pit. This is difﬁcult to achieve in practice and required many tests in the past, in particular to
ensure “one-point safety” (which in fact can only be secured when there is no boost gas in the pit).
3Since the diameter of this outer-shell is about ten times the diameter of the compressed ﬁssion
material, the duration of the soft-X-ray pulse from the barrel shell will also be about ten times the
duration of the X-ray pulse from the ﬁssioned material — an important consideration if the pulse
is to compress the fusion material of an H-bomb secondary.

4

Fission and fusion fractions

Yield
[kt]

Fission Fusion
[%]

[%]

Mike

10400

B-28

W-88

W-88

800

325

475

77

80

70

80

23

20

30

20

Table 1: Estimated ﬁssion and fusion fractions in the ﬁrst (Mike) and latest (W-88)
United States’s thermonuclear weapons.

The explosion proceeds than as follows: The soft-X-rays from the primary
ﬁll the radiation case and start interacting with the outer casing of the secondary
(the pusher/tamper). The material at the surface of the pusher/tamper is ablated
under the effect of these X-rays, and by reaction creates an enormous pressure
that starts compressing the whole secondary. When the compression is such that
ﬁssion reactions can start in the spark-plug, sufﬁcient heat can be generated at the
center of the secondary so that fusion reactions can start as well in the compressed
fusion material. Under suitable conditions, the fusion reaction can then continue
on its own, until a substantial fraction of the fusion fuel is burnt, generating large
amounts of energy and high-energy fusion-neutrons.

To further increase the energy of the H-bomb, the fusion neutrons are generally
used to induce ﬁssion reactions in the pusher/tamper, as well as in the radiation case,
which for that purpose are made out of natural or enriched uranium, or out of low-
grade plutonium.4 As a result, one get a “third stage” which in most thermonuclear
weapons provides the main contribution to the total yield. Consequently, in
contemporary thermonuclear weapons, most of the yield actually comes from
ﬁssion rather than fusion, as can be seen in Table 1.

To conclude this brief introduction to second generation nuclear weapons, let

us summarize their main characteristics:

•

Most of the yield of thermonuclear weapons is produced in a “third stage”
which is ﬁssioned by the fusion neutrons leaking out from the second stage.

4Any plutonium (even reactor grade) can be used for that purpose, especially if it just used
for the part of the radiation case that surrounds the secondary. This is a major nuclear weapons
proliferation problem associated with separated plutonium. The use of reactor grade plutonium in
its thermonuclear weapons is apparently the option chosen by India [9].

5

At the end of the thermonuclear explosion the weapon is therefore primarily
a very powerful source of X-rays.

The “50% ﬁssion, 50% fusion” estimate used in unclassiﬁed fallout calcu-
lations is optimistic: thermonuclear weapons are actually more dirty.

First and second generation nuclear weapons are primarily gigantic sources
of soft-X-rays generating heat and blast. The ﬁssion neutrons leaking out
from the weapons have a comparatively smaller effect.

The yields are typically very large, on the order of kilotons to megatons,
essentially because of the “tyranny of the critical mass” which implies that
ﬁssion-based explosions will normally have yields in the kiloton range or
higher.

Finally, as a transition to the next subsection, it is important to remark that a
two-stage H-bomb demonstrates that a powerful source of X-rays can be used to
produce mechanical work, i.e., to strongly compress the material of the secondary.
This leads to other possible applications, where the ablation pressure is used
to accelerate a missile or a space-craft (nuclear-driven rocket), or to squeeze a
shaped-charge liner (nuclear-driven plasma-jet).

2.3 Third generation nuclear weapons

Third generation nuclear weapons are basically “tailored and special effects”
warheads and systems developed between the 1960s and 1980s, mainly for tactical
uses or ballistic missile defense. Examples of these developments comprise the
following concepts:

ERW — Enhanced Radiation (neutrons, hard X-rays)

RRR — Reduced Residual Radiation (enhanced blast)

EMP — enhanced ElectroMagnetic Pulse

DEW — Directed Energy (plasma-jet or X-ray-laser)

EPW — Earth Penetrating Warhead

ETC — ...

6

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Teller-Ulam-Sakharov-Zel'dovich  principle

A-bomb

radiation case

hohlraum

sparkplug

pusher/tamper

fusion  fuel

       

primary

X-rays

secondary

5 cm

Figure 1:

"In thermonuclear weapons, radiation from a fission explosive can be contained
and  used  to  transfer  energy  to  compress  and  ignite  a  physically  separate
component containing thermonuclear fuel. (February 1979)".

Reference: U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Declassification, "Drawing back
the curtain of secrecy - Restricted data declassification policy, 1946 to present",

RDD-1,  (June 1, 1994) page 94.

Figure 1: Fig. 3 of Ref. [1]

7

Most of these weapons were never deployed on a large scale for of a number
of technical and political reasons. In particular, third generation nuclear weapons
require a ﬁssion-explosive as trigger, which implies that their yield tends to be too
high for battle-ﬁeld uses, and that they necessarily produce large-scale radioactive
pollution, etc.

As will be seen in the sequel of this paper, most third generation concepts
can be re-considered in the context of fourth generation nuclear weapons. This is
because the suppression of the ﬁssion-explosive trigger, and the reliance on fusion
rather than ﬁssion as the main source of yield in FGNWs, enable to envisage
devices of much lower yield and much reduced radiological impact.

2.4 The “Robust Nuclear Earth Penetrator” debate

The limitations in the military usefulness of third generation concepts, as well as
the relations of third- to fourth-generation nuclear weapons, are well illustrated
by the on-going debate on the development by the United States of an improved
EPW version of the B61, the “Robust Nuclear Earth Penetrator” [4].

The current version, B61-11 (that is the 11th modiﬁed version of the 100 to
500 kt B61 gravity bomb whose development started in 1961), entered service in
1997. It has a penetration capability of a few meters in solid rock or reinforced
concrete.
In the new version, this range would be extended to about 15 to 30
meters. This leads to three remarks:

1. If the maximum penetration range is extended from 6 to 30 meters, which is
a formidable technical challenge, the military effectiveness of the weapon
will only be marginally improved. This is because the B61 cannot destroy
targets at depths or distances much larger than 30 to 100 meters below
or away from the point of explosion. Therefore, the only way to have a
truly more effective weapon would be to design a third-generation tandem-
warhead device, such as a “DEW plus EPW” combination, which appears to
bo both very complicated and difﬁcult to develop without extensive nuclear
testing. On the other hand, a FGNW tandem-warhead system with a large
penetration capability could possibly be more feasible and easier to develop.

2. Any nuclear weapon detonated below the surface of the Earth creates a
radioactive hot spot, containing the highly-radioactive ﬁssion-products, as
well as the ﬁssile materials that have not been ﬁssioned during the explo-
sion — that is more than 90% of the initial ﬁssile-materials content of the

8

warhead.5 This leads to numerous problems, especially if the weapon con-
tained plutonium. Indeed, most of the un-ﬁssioned plutonium left in the
cavity created by an underground nuclear explosion can later be recovered,
possibly by terrorists, and reused to manufacture nuclear weapons. This is
the problem of “plutonium mines,” which is a major nuclear proliferation
concern in countries such as Kazakhstan [10] and Algeria, where numerous
plutonium-based nuclear explosives were detonated underground.

Consequently, earth penetrating warheads like the B61 use highly-enriched
uranium as ﬁssile material, because in that case the un-ﬁssioned U-235
cannot be recovered after the explosion as it will be intimately mixed with
the U-238 from the non-enriched uranium components of the weapon.

On the other hand, the un-burnt fraction of the tritium used for boosting
is much less a problem. First because tritium is very volatile and easily
drifts away from the point of explosion, second because its half-life is only
twelve years, and third because its radio-toxicity is relatively small. For
these reasons, in the case of FGNWs, the related problem of “tritium mines”
is potentially much less serious than the problem of “plutonium mines.”

3. To extend the penetration range of the B61-11, the crucial improvements to
be made are not in the major nuclear components of either the primary or
the secondary (which are intrinsically rugged, see Ref. [4]) but rather in the
penetrator casing, and in the nuclear package’s ancillary components, which
in any warhead are the most delicate and fragile ones: The fuzeing and
initiation systems, the high-explosive detonators, the neutron generators,
the safety and security devices, etc. It is primarily the resistance to failure of
these key components that has to be improved by order of magnitude factors
to make them compatible with the dramatically increased stresses stemming
from the higher impact velocities required to achieve deeper penetration.

Some of these improvements are directly linked to advances in the ﬁelds of
micro-electromechanical engineering and nanotechnology [11]. Since these
potential advances signiﬁcantly overlap with the requirements of many fu-
ture weapons, both conventional and nuclear, it is possible that an important
reason for considering an improved version of the B61-11 is simply to de-
velop these technologies as they will be needed, for instance, to weaponize
FGNWs.

5In the case of an air-burst, the ﬁssion products and non-ﬁssioned ﬁssile materials are dispersed

over a large surface or carried away in the form of nuclear fallout.

9

3 Fourth generation nuclear weapons

As we said in the introduction, there is no standard deﬁnition of fourth generation
nuclear weapons. Nevertheless, for the purpose of this paper, we may use either
of the two deﬁnitions:

•

•

“Nuclear explosive devices based on atomic and nuclear processes that are
not restricted6 by the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT),” or

“Nuclear explosive devices based on low-yield thermonuclear pellets trig-
gered by compact non-ﬁssion primaries.”

The second deﬁnition recognizes the technical fact that radically new, but
realistic, types of nuclear weapons will most probably use highly-compressed
deuterium-tritium pellets as the main source of their explosive energy. This means
that while ﬁssion was the main source of yield in the ﬁrst three generations, the
main source of yield in the fourth generation will be the fusion reaction

D + T

He4 (3 MeV) + n (14 MeV).

(1)

→

The physics of the ignition and burn of such DT pellets is vigorously studies
in all nuclear weapons states, as well as in a few other technologically advanced
countries, most prominently in Japan and in Germany [1, 2].

3.1 Inertial conﬁnement fusion experiments and FGNW

Inertial conﬁnement fusion (ICF), which basically consists of exploding very
small amounts of thermonuclear fuel highly compressed by lasers or other means,
enables to study the physics of thermonuclear secondaries in the laboratory (see
Fig. 2). While this technique has the potential to be used in a thermonuclear-
reactor to produce energy, it has primarily been developed as an alternative to the
underground testing of nuclear weapons, and as a tool for designing new types of
nuclear weapons [1].

The world’s two largest ICF facilities are presently under construction in the
USA at Livermore (NIF)7 and in France at Bordeau (LMJ). However, the most

6The fact that the development and deployment of fusion-based FGNWs is not restricted by the
CTBT, and that such weapons may also be developed and deployed by non-nuclear weapon States,
is discussed in Chap. 2 of Ref. [1].

7For a recent appreciation of the progress on NIF see Ref. [12].

10

powerful ICF facility presently in operation is in Japan at Osaka (ILE), with
ambitious plans to upgrade it. Another powerful and ﬂexible facility presently
under construction is in Germany at Darmstadt (GSI), which has the effect to put
Germany in the same “club” as the other most advanced countries in this ﬁeld, i.e.,
the United States, France, Japan, and the United Kingdom.

Basically, as can be seen by comparing Fig. 1 and 2, ICF reproduces in the
laboratory the same arrangement than the one on which two-stage H-bomb are
based:
the “Teller-Ulam principle.” Provided the compression and ignition of
thermonuclear pellets is well understood, and yield in excess of a few tons can be
obtained by simple and reliable means, there is a possibility of using these pellets
as the main explosive of a FGNW.

In practice, according to reasonable extrapolations of the present understanding
of the physics of ICF, it is very likely that ignition and burn of ICF pellets will be
fully understood within the next decade or so, with the help of experiments made
at NIF, LMJ, and other facilities.8 Moreover, advanced pellets containing about
5 mg of DT such as depicted in Fig. 2 and 3, which are considered for use in
future ICF power plants, will have yields on the order of 0.1 ton, assuming a burn
efﬁciency of 25%.

In order to use these pellets in a FGNW, the remaining problem — which
of course is a formidable technical challenge — will be to design a compact
trigger, i.e., a non-ﬁssion primary, to compress and ignite them in a weaponizable
conﬁguration. For this purpose, as is indicated at the top and bottom of Fig. 3, some
of the most attractive technologies are superlasers, nuclear isomers, and antimatter.
Before discussing these technologies, let us recall why such “high-energy-density”
materials and processes are required.

3.2 Microexplosions and high energy-density

Let us consider a sphere of ﬁssion or fusion material of radius R and density
ρ > ρ0, its normal density. If this sphere is totally ﬁssioned or fused, one will
get a maximum possible yield Ymax that is proportional to its volume and density.
Therefore, if one introduces a burn efﬁciency η, the yield can be written as:

Y = ηYmax where Ymax ∝

ρR3.

(2)

In the case of a ﬁssionable material, a ﬁrst approximation formula for the

8For a recent review of ICF physics see Ref. [13].

11

Advanced indirect-drive ICF target

( 5 mg DT fuel )

Heavy ions

Laser beam

 Antimatter

X-rays

DT
fuel

hohlraum

1 cm

0.5 cm

        

Figure 2:

"In some ICF targets, radiation from the conversion of the focussed energy
(e.g   laser or particle beam) can be contained and used to transfer energy
to  compress  and  ignite  a  physically  separate  component  containing
thermonuclear fuel. (February 1979)".

Reference:  U.S.  Department  of  Energy,  Office  of  Declassification,
"Drawing  back  the  curtain  of  secrecy  -  Restricted  data  declassification
policy, 1946 to present", RDD-1,  (June 1, 1994) page 103.

Figure 2: Fig. 13 of Ref. [1]

12

efﬁciency is given by the expression

ρR

ωc

,

−
ρR

ηf ission ≈
100 g/cm2
where the parameter ωc is called the “critical fast-neutron-opacity” (ωc ≈
for 239P u, and 160 g/cm2 for 235U). As can be seen, there is a minus sign in this
expression which means that there will be some yield only if the product ρR, called
“opacity,” is larger that ωc: This is the mathematical translation of the fact that
with ﬁssion there is a critical mass below which (at any given density) a ﬁssion
chain reaction is not possible.

(3)

In the case of a fusionable material, the efﬁciency is given in good approxima-

tion by the expression

ηf usion ≈

ρR
ρR + B

,

(4)

6 g/cm2 for DT , and
where the parameter B is called the “burn parameter” (B
17 g/cm2 for 6Li2DT ). In that case, there is no critical mass and there is some
yield at any given density.

≈

There are therefore two intrinsic advantages in fusion over ﬁssion explosives:
there is no critical mass, and there can be some yield at any given density, i.e.,
at any compression of the material.9 However, in either ﬁssion or fusion, it is
desirable that the efﬁciency is as close as possible to η = 1. Looking at equations
(3) and (4), this implies that the product ρR has to be as large as possible, meaning
that for a given amount of material the density has to be as large as possible. Thus,
if high-efﬁciency is desired at small yields (i.e., small R), it is necessary that the
density ρ be very high.

But equations (3) and (4) are quasi-static approximations that are only valid
if the ﬁssion or fusion material can be considered as being instantly compressed
to the density ρ, and if the ﬁssion or fusion reaction starts at that moment only.
Indeed, many practical problems arise during compression, such as instabilities
and preignition, which can only be alleviated if the implosion is very fast, i.e., the
implosion velocity very high.

To ﬁnd the key parameter leading to both high density and high implosion-
velocity, let us recall the main features of any explosive process, e.g., chemical
reaction, nuclear reaction, X-ray-driven ablation, etc. They are

Maximum pressure:

p

Q,

Detonation velocity: D

pQ/ρ,

∝

∝

(5)

(6)

9This implies that the yield of FGNWs will be easily and continuously adjustable, contrary to

A and H-bombs in which yield-adjustment is difﬁcult.

13

High energy-density techniques and materials

Electric energy
Magnetic energy
Kinetic energy
Chemical energy

0.01
0.1
1
10

Magnetic compression
Laser (NIF, LMJ)
Soft X-rays***
Nuclear isomers**

0.1–1
1–10
420
1–1000

Fusion energy
Fission energy
Annihilation energy*

100
1000
10000
*** 1 kt in 10 dm3
** Not yet demonstrated
* No fundamental problem

kJ/cm3
kJ/cm3
kJ/cm3
kJ/cm3
MJ/cm3
MJ/cm3
MJ/cm3
MJ/cm3
GJ/cm3
GJ/cm3
GJ/cm3

Table 2: Typical maximum energy densities provided by various physical processes
or materials.

where Q, [J/m3], is the energy density characteristic of the process. Then, for a
material under very high pressure, assuming the Thomas-Fermi approximation,
one has

Density:

ρ

Implosion velocity:

p3/5
D

≈

∝
v

Q3/5,
Q1/5.

ρ

v

∝

∝

⇒

⇒

(7)

(8)

Therefore, one can conclude that the key parameter is the maximum energy-density
provided by the material or process used to compress the ﬁssion or fusion fuel to
be ignited and burnt. It follows that the development of nuclear and thermonuclear
explosives is directly correlated to that of high energy-density techniques and
materials, of which the most important ones are compared in Table 2.

In order to interpret this table let us ﬁrst consider what could be achieved if a
chemical high-explosive such as RDX was used to compress LiD, the fusion fuel
used in the secondary of H-bombs. The approximate characteristics of RDX are:
Q = 10 kJ/cm3, D = 0.8 cm/µs, and p = 0.4 Mbar = 40 GPa. Assuming that
one does nothing complicated (i.e., no shock convergence, no “levitation,” etc.),
the maximum static compression can be found by looking up standard equation
2.2. Assuming ρ0 = 0.9 g/cm3, equation (4)
of state tables, which give ρ/ρ0

≈

14

gives an efﬁciency ηf usion = 0.5 for R
8.5 cm. This corresponds to about 5 kg
≈
of LiD, and therefore to 125 kt of yield if that fuel could be ignited under these
conditions. Consequently, if a smaller yield is desired, a much higher energy-
density then provided by RDX is required to achieve the correspondingly larger
compression.

The same conclusion is reached if one realizes that the 5 kg of LiD of that
example is on the order of the typical amount used in a contemporary thermonuclear
weapon secondary. In such a weapon the energy-density of the X-rays required to
10 dm3, i.e., 420 MJ/cm3, that
implode the secondary is
is 42,000 times more than the energy density provided by RDX.

1 kt in a volume of

≈

≈

It is thus out of question to directly use chemical explosives to compress a small
pellet of thermonuclear fuel and expect a reasonable efﬁciency: This requires at
least a powerful laser such as NIF or LMJ, or else a novel technology such as
magnetic compression [14, 15, 16], nuclear isomers, or antimatter.

An interesting aspect of this table is that it shows that all techniques which
have energy densities in the MJ/cm3 range provide this energy in the form of
electromagnetic waves, i.e., “photon gases” of increasing temperatures: About
1 eV for lasers, 10–100 eV for magnetized ﬂuids, 1 keV for soft X-rays, 1 MeV
for nuclear isomers. Consequently, the basic concept is always somehow related
to the Teller-Ulam principle: compressing a secondary by means of a hot photon
gas generated by a primary.

In conclusion, we conﬁrm what is indicated in Fig. 3, namely that some of
the most promising techniques for compressing and igniting ICF pellets are high-
power lasers, nuclear isomers, and antimatter.

3.3 Petawatt-class lasers (superlasers)

As was explained in the previous sections, the two main issues in exploding a
thermonuclear pellet are (i) to implode the pellet to high density as fast as possible,
and (ii) to ignite the pellet by heating it at the moment it has reached maximum
compression.

Compressing the pellet without excessively pre-heating it is called “adiabatic
compression.” In most countries the currently preferred method for this is to use
high-energy laser beams, like at the NIF and LMJ facilities, or heavy-ion beams
like in Germany where a number of studies have been made on this option [1].
The principle is to strongly heat the radiation case (i.e., the walls of the capsule
containing the pellet, see Figs. 2 and 3) which then creates a hot X-ray bath that

15

Two-step indirect-drive ICF target

( 5 mg DT fuel )

COMPRESSION

Heavy ions

Laser beam

 Antimatter 

sparkplug

x-rays

DT fuel

1 cm

hohlraum

0.5 cm

Nuclear isomers

Superlasers

Antiprotons

IGNITION

Figure  3:

The most promising  indirect-drive  ICF targets  achieve  high compression  and
fast ignition by a two-steps process similar to the "sparkplug" ignition concept
used in early hydrogen-bombs.

Figure 3: Fig. 25 of Ref. [1]

16

implodes the pellet.

As laser or heavy-ion beam drivers are very large, their use is restricted to
experimental facilities, or to possible future ICF energy-production reactors. For
weaponized ICF devices, much more compact techniques are required: For ex-
ample antimatter, as is suggested at the top of Fig. 3. However, less “exotic”
techniques than antimatter may also be used as compact drivers for compression:
high-explosive driven magnetic-compression [14, 15, 2], or else high-explosive
driven chemical-lasers [17], for example.

To ignite the pellet after compression, a different method is required because
ignition has to be achieved on a much shorter time-scale than compression. For
example, while a 1 MJ energy laser pulse of a few nanosecond duration is suitable
for compression, ignition may require a pulse of only 1 kJ energy, but of a duration
several thousand times shorter, i.e., less than one picosecond. Thus, while high-
energy lasers are needed for compression, high-power lasers are required for
ignition.

Laser suitable for fast ignition are called petawatt lasers — or “superlasers”
because their pulse duration is so short that they concentrate so much energy in so
little time that they can produce nuclear reactions directly [1]. These superlasers
are based on a technique called “chirped pulse ampliﬁcation” that was invented
in the mid-1980s, and which enabled a one-million-fold increase of the power of
table-top lasers. kJ-energy superlasers are in existence or under construction in
only a few countries: the USA, Japan, France and Germany.

In Germany, a 1 kJ petawatt superlaser named PHELIX is under construction
at GSI [18]. Since Germany is a non-nuclear-weapon State, it is politically very
disturbing that PHELIX will be built in collaboration with the Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory (LLNL), and that there will be a “cooperation agreement”
between GSI and LLNL that will be similar to those LLNL has with the French
and British nuclear weapons laboratories [19].

3.4 Nuclear isomers

Nuclear isomers are long-lived excited states of an atom’s nucleus. Some nuclear
isomers are naturally occurring, but most of them are produced in artiﬁcial nuclear
reactions by colliding beams of nuclei and particles. Nuclear isomers decay back
to the ground state after some time, which can vary from picoseconds to billions
of years, therefore releasing energy in the form of gamma radiation.

If a method could be found to release that energy instantaneously in a gamma-

17

ray burst, rather then slowly and at random over time, one would have a new
method for controlled high-energy storage and release.

The possibility of practical applications of isomers, including for military
purposes, has been highlighted in the past few years by the claim that a method
for the controlled energy release from one particular isomer, Hafnium-178m, had
been discovered. However, more precise experiments recently showed that this is
actually not the case [20].

Consequently, the state of affairs with nuclear isomers is somewhat similar to
that of “super-heavy elements” some decades ago, when the theoretical prospect
for the large scale synthesis of these elements was uncertain: it is only recently
that it has become deﬁnitely clear that the production cross-sections of stable
super-heavy elements are too small for any practical applications to be feasible.

In the case of nuclear isomers, the possibility of the existence of a suitable iso-
mer for practical applications (such as a compact energy sources for compressing
and/or igniting thermonuclear pellets) is entirely open. It could be a matter of pure
chance that such an isomer exists, and that a method for the controlled release of
its energy could be found.

Research on nuclear isomers is extensively carried out at a number of facilities
around the world, especially in the USA, Russia, France, Japan, and Germany.
These facilities are based on high-intensity radioactive beams and are generally
justiﬁed in view of their prospect for studying short-lived nuclear species, which
are still not fully understood from the fundamental nuclear physics point of view.
But should an isomer suitable for practical applications exist, it is most likely that
it would be found at one of these facilities.

In this context it is important that Japan is building an ambitious project to
generate the world’s most powerful beams of protons, as well as a large radioactive-
ion-beam facility [21]; and that Europe is planning a next-generation radioactive-
ion-beam facility called EURISOL to come online sometimes after 2013 [22].

3.5 Antimatter

Antimatter has the distinctive feature of having a ﬂavor of being a “science ﬁction
technology” while in fact there is no fundamental scientiﬁc problem with that
technology and its potential applications. The problems are that antimatter is
expensive to produce in large quantities at present, and that numerous engineering
problems have still to be solved before it can be used in practical applications.

The situation is similar to that of microcomputers or hand-held cellular tele-

18

phones: Their scientiﬁc feasibility was established in the 1950s, but their construc-
tion and large-scale manufacturing required thirty to forty years of engineering
research and development.

For example, the theory I presented at a 1986 conference, demonstrating the
scientiﬁc feasibility of a new generation of nuclear weapons in which the few
kilograms of ﬁssile primary are replaced by microgram amounts of antihydrogen,
i.e., [23, 24, 25], has never been disputed. On the contrary, that presentation is
now recognized as being the ﬁrst presentation at an open scientiﬁc conference of
the correct physical processes leading to the ignition of a thermonuclear explosion
using less than a few micrograms of antimatter as trigger, and the correctness of
the theory has been conﬁrmed in many reports, see, e.g., Refs. [26, 27].

As a matter of fact, antimatter is seriously considered as a potential energy
source for a new generation of nuclear explosives since at least the end of the
1940s, especially by Edward Teller and collaborators in the United States [24].10

Antimatter is currently a very active area of research, characterized by a con-
siderable overlap with fundamental nuclear and sub-nuclear research because
antiparticles are particularly powerful tools for studying the fundamental laws of
physics at very high energies. There is therefore a large consensus, as well as a
convergence of interests, which make that the development of antimatter science
and technology does not need to be funded by large defense programs, simply
because it is a high priority item for pure scientiﬁc research as well.

Consequently, the number of antimatter-based research facilities has mush-
roomed around the world, with the result that some large and primarily national
facilities (e.g., in Japan [28] and Germany [29, 21]) are becoming directly com-
petitive with intergovernemental laboratories (such as CERN) which should be the
proper place for conducting “pure science” in a strictly international setting. It
is also remarquable that in the past ten years a rather exotic ﬁeld like antimatter-
plasma physics has become a large subject of research, with several percent of all
professional advanced plasma-physics publications dedicated to it, including con-
tributions from countries such as Brazil which has developed a strong theoretical
basis for mastering the subject.

In the case of Germany, a large world-class antimatter research facility has
been proposed in November 2001, i.e., the International Accelerator Facility for
research with Heavy Ions and Antiprotons [29], which is now called Facility for
Antiproton and Ion Research (FAIR). Already in November 2002 it was clear to

10In a telephone conversation with me, Prof. Hans-Peter Duer at MPI Munich, who was student
of Teller in the 1950s, and who published with him a paper on antimatter interactions with nuclei,
told me: “Now I understand why Teller was so much interested by antimatter!”

19

external observers that FAIR was to be accepted with only minimal discussion by
the German authorities, even though it was the third-largest out of seven national
research facilities reviewed at the time by the Wissenschaftsrat, or national science
In fact, the decision to fund FAIR at a total cost of 750 million
council, [30].
EURO at 2000 price was taken in February 2003 already, with the expectation that
it should open by the end of the decade [21]. Moreover, the FAIR facility quickly
became the top priority in the new long-term plan compiled by the Nuclear Physics
European Collaboration Committee [22].

As a result, by 2010, the world’s two largest antiproton factories will be in
Europe, at CERN near Geneva, and GSI near Darmstadt, i.e., only about 1000 km
apart from each other. This has not escaped the attention of US scientists working
on the practical applications of antimatter, who emphasized that

“a dedicated antiproton source (the main barrier to copious anti-
hydrogen production) must be built in the US, perhaps as a joint
NASA/DOE/NIH project. This is because the only practical sources
in the world are at CERN and the proposed facility at GSI in Germany”
[31].

This may look as a quite unusual situation: why would the world’s richest
and most powerful country not have a large dedicated antiproton source? Part of
the answer to this is already contained in a twenty-years old report of the RAND
corporation which basically concluded that as long as US scientist would have full
access to antimatter produced at CERN “a production/accumulation facility, such
as the one at CERN, although desirable, wouldn’t in the near future have to be
built in the United States” [32, p.43]. In this spirit, one could also add that it could
certainly be in the interest of the United States to let Europe have a few unique
advanced and costly facilities in order to motivate its researchers, and to attract
those from Eastern Europe and Russia.11

However, the main reason is more probably that the production of antiprotons
is not the most difﬁcult technological problem in the way of practical applications
of antimatter. In fact, the 1014 antiprotons per year to be produced in 2010 at the
AD facility at CERN, or at FAIR at GSI, correspond already to about 1 nanogram
per year. If presently available technology would be used to build a fully dedicated
“antimatter factory,” rather than a general purpose “research facility,” one could
easily produce more that 1 microgram of antimatter per year right now [25]. As
1 microgram is sufﬁcient to trigger one thermonuclear weapon, such a facility will

11Similar reasons explain the support given by the United States to the creation of CERN in the

early 1950s [33].

20

only be a factor 365 away from the implicit goal that the US and Soviet governments
set forth in the 1940s, namely to produce enough material for making one atomic
bomb every day!

As a matter of fact, the United States and other countries are still investigating
the best technique for producing very large quantities of antimatter. One such
technique is based on the idea of creating a “quark-gluon plasma,” which is studied
in laboratories such as CERN, RHIC at BNL (the Brookhaven National Laboratory
near New York), and FAIR at GSI. Creating such a plasma is essentially trying to
reproduce in the laboratory what happened at the beginning of the universe, a tiny
fraction of a second after the big bang. At that moment there were equal amounts
of matter and antimatter in the universe, all matter and energy being in a so-called
"primordial plasma" state. If the cooling-down process of the primordial plasma
into either matter or antimatter could be controlled, one would possibly have the
most efﬁcient method for producing antimatter on a large scale! There is therefore
no surprise that weapons-laboratory scientists are in fact much interested by this
supposedly purely “astrophysical” state of matter [34], especially since the idea
itself originated from Edward Teller and collaborators in 1973 already [35] (see
also [36]).

There is also another serious and almost trivial question: How can antimatter
safely be stored and manipulated as it spontaneously interacts with any matter
coming close to it? This is the subject of considerable research for which many
options are in competition. Clearly, there is little reasons for building a full
scale antimatter factory before this question is fully answered, and the related
technologies sufﬁciently developed.

3.6 Micro/nano-technology and nuclear bullets

Possibly the most fascinating aspect of antimatter technology is that it leads to the
prospect of “nuclear bullets,” i.e., thermonuclear explosive devices that would have
the size of an egg and an explosive yield of a few tons high-explosive equivalent.

In order for this to become possible, it is necessary to be able to store and
deliver microgram amounts of antimatter in well controlled manners. The most
likely solution to this problem will probably require that antimatter be stored within
a condensed material, in which special sites will function as micro- on nano-metric
sized “traps” where particles of antimatter will be conﬁned in a metastable state
sufﬁciently away from ordinary matter. Triggering the release of that antimatter
could produce an explosion by interactions with the condensed material, or could
be controlled, and the antimatter moved to another place if it could momentarily

21

Figure 4: Small antimatter trap. (Angels and Demons, Atria Books, 2005, ISBN
0-7432-7506-3, p. 71. Credit: CERN/ Photo Researcher, Inc.)

behave as a superconducting ﬂuid within the condensed material [24, Appendix].12

Such a condensed-matter solution will be much more suitable and rugged
than currently used electromagnetic traps (see Fig. 4), and in line with the con-
temporary emphasis on micro-electromechanical engineering and nanotechnology
[11]. Moreover, as already mentioned in the Sec. 2.4, the development of new
high-yield earth penetrating weapons is also depending upon substantial develop-
ment in the these same technologies [11]: It is therefore not impossible that an
antimatter-triggered earth penetrating weapon could be more robust than one ﬁtted
with a ﬁssion-primary — which would certainly result in a weapon that would be
radiologically much cleaner since no ﬁssile material would be used at all.

In summary, if it were not for a few electro-mechanical devices that may be
necessary for some essential tasks such as increasing the security, safety, and
reliability of a weapon, or for triggering the initiating system, it is quite possible
that future FGNWs could use no loose or moving parts at all (or else so much
miniaturized that their ruggedness could be pushed to the limit). In that case the
weapons could be essentially compact solid-state devices, i.e., “full like eggs,”
and therefore amenable to mass-production and scaling provided they would not
use any process that is bound to a critical scale or mass. This is clearly possible
in theory with techniques such as inertial conﬁnement fusion, antimatter, micro-
electromechanical engineering, and nanotechnology.

12That idea actually originates from Dr. Jean-Pierre Hurni.

22

3.7 Pure antimatter bombs?

During 2004 a number of newspaper articles referred to a US Air Force program
related to development of new types of explosives and high-energy fuels based
on antimatter, which emphasized the use of positrons (i.e., anti-electrons) rather
than antiprotons annihilation energy [37, 38]. The difference with antiprotons is
that positrons are 1876 times lighter, and therefore worth 1876 times less energy
when annihilating. However, since positrons are much easier to be produced than
antiprotons, and could even be efﬁciently produced using superlasers, it could be
that positrons may be competitive to antiprotons as an antimatter-based source of
energy for certain applications.

Another major difference between positrons and antiprotons is that upon anni-
hilation positrons produce two 0.511 MeV gamma-rays, while antiprotons produce
on average four 187 MeV gamma-rays, and three 236 MeV pions which are di-
rectly suitable for heating a thermonuclear fuel. Nevertheless, by letting them
simply annihilate in any material, a small amount of positrons can produce quite
a big bang: About 21.4 tons for one milligram of positrons.

It turns out that this latter possibility has been popularized by a highly success-
ful novel, “Angels and Demons,” in which a terrorist group called the “illuminati”
is threatening to destroy the Vatican with 0.25 g of positrons stolen from CERN,
i.e., an amount worth 5 kt of explosive yield [39]. As a result, this novel has
succeeded in getting millions of people to understand that a new generation of nu-
clear weapons was scientiﬁcally possible, therefore starting some kind of a public
discussion on the prospect of such weapons. The irony is that this is precisely
one thing I have been trying to do in the past twenty years — without success.
Moreover, there is only one CERN scientist mentioned by name in the novel:
Nobel laureate Georges Charpak [39, Sec.8], who was my ﬁrst boss when I started
working at CERN in 1971. Unfortunately, when I later published a book in which
I mentioned my worries about the prospect of antimatter weapons [40], Charpak
did not like it at all: In a 1997 book about nuclear energy and nuclear weapons
he called me an “illuminati” because of these concerns [41, p.16]. Somehow the
author of “Angels and Demons” picked-up the ideas of antimatter-weapons and
illuminati — and took them as the basis for a bestseller...

Returning to the subject of positron-based antimatter explosives, it should be
stressed that by taking a suitable material and letting a large number of positrons
annihilate in it, that material could be brought to a sufﬁciently high temperature to
become an effective source of soft X-rays that could be used to implode a secondary
containing a thermonuclear pellet. Therefore, just like with antiprotons, it makes
much more sense using positrons as a primary charge (i.e., a trigger) rather than

23

as the main charge of an explosive (See top of Fig. 2 and 3). As a matter of fact,
this is similar to the economics of three-stage second generation nuclear weapons,
where minimal amounts of expensive Pu-239 (or U-235) and tritium are used to
burn a sizable amount of inexpensive LiD and a lot of “lower-grade” uranium or
plutonium: In the case of fourth generation nuclear weapons, a minimal amount
of very expensive antimatter or nuclear isomers will be used to trigger the burn of
a larger amount of “less-costly” thermonuclear fuel such as DT or Li2DT .

In conclusion, whether based on antiprotons or positrons, pure antimatter
weapons are unlikely to be manufactured on a large scale because of the high
cost of both types of antimatters. Moreover, in the case of positrons, high-density
storage is less likely to be possible than with antiprotons. This is because positrons
annihilate with electrons, which implies that ﬁnding or designing an appropriate
material in which they could be stably conﬁned in large number is more difﬁcult,
something that is well known from over sixty years of research on the interactions
of positrons with materials.

4 Target coupling

In this section we intend to examine the military effectiveness of FGNW and to
compare it to those of non-nuclear and previous generation nuclear weapons. As
before we will focus on the case of DT -fusion based FGNW, and for the purpose
of this section assume that such weapons can be built and deployed.

The basic concept used in quantifying and comparing the effectiveness of
weapons is that of “coupling,” which refers to the efﬁciency of the way the
energy13 of the weapons is transferred to a given target in order to damage or
destroy it. This implies that it is necessary to understand under which form energy
is initially released by the weapon to the environment (Sec. 4.1), and how this
energy is transferred to the target (Sec. 4.2).

But before going into this, it is useful to recall a few elementary facts about
physical interactions between a projectile and a target, which will illustrate the
main concepts that will be used in the sequel of this section.

Let us therefore consider a projectile of mass m and initial velocity v0, and a
target of mass M and velocity V that is initially at rest, V0 = 0. One may think

13As will be seen in a few lines, because energy and momentum are separately conserved in
physical interactions, one should in principle distinguish between “energy coupling” and “momen-
tum coupling.” But since most of the damage comes from the energy that is inelastically transferred
to a target, “energy coupling” provides a measure of the damage that can potentially be made.

24

of the projectile as a bullet, but it could just as well be a neutron from a nuclear
weapon, or else an air molecule pushed by a shock wave propagating through the
atmosphere.

To simplify we consider the one-dimensional case in which the projectile and
the target are restricted to move along a line. Because energy and momentum are
separately conserved one has two equations: One for the momentum

mv0 = mv + MV,

where v and V are the ﬁnal velocities of the projectile and the target, respectively;
And another one for the energy

1
2

mv2

0 =

mv2 +

MV 2 + Eint,

1
2

1
2

where apart from the ﬁnal kinetic energies a term Eint has been added to take into
account the changes in target (and possibly projectile) internal energies. There are
therefore three unknowns, and only two equations. However, in several important
cases one can make reasonable hypotheses, and solve the problem.

The ﬁrst important case is when the interaction is elastic, that is when Eint = 0.
This is a reasonable ﬁrst approximation to the case where the projectile is a
molecule of air put in motion by a shock wave, and the target a layer of a solid
material hit be the shock wave. One can than solve the system, and after some
algebra ﬁnd the energy Et given to the target as a function of the initial kinetic
energy Ep = 1
2mv2
0 of the projectile. The answer, which can be found in many
elementary books of mechanics, is

mM

Et = 4

(m + M)2 Ep ≈

4

m
M

Ep,

(11)

where the approximation correspond to the limit m
M. Consequently, when
the projectile mass is much smaller than the target mass, and the interaction is
elastic, very little energy can be transferred from the projectile to the target, and
the coupling is very small.

≪

The second important case is when the interaction is fully inelastic, that is when
the projectile entirely penetrates into the target, and all its energy and momentum
are transferred to it. As the ﬁnal velocity of the projectile and target will be equal,
v = V , one has from Eq. (9)

(9)

(10)

(12)

V =

m
(m + M)

vp,

25

and solving for Eint one ﬁnds

Eint =

M
(m + M)

Ep ≈

Ep,

(13)

where the approximation correspond to the limit m
M. Consequently, when
the projectile mass is much smaller than the target mass, and the interaction is
fully inelastic, almost all of the projectile energy is transferred to the target in the
form of internal energy — which contrary to kinetic energy directly contribute
to damaging the target. This situation corresponds to the case of a high energy
neutron penetrating deep into a target material, where after a number of elastic and
inelastic interactions with individual nuclei, most of its energy ultimately ends up
in internal energy, i.e., heating of the target.

≪

4.1 Initial energy from conventional or nuclear weapons

In non-nuclear weapons, as is well known, the lethal energy is initially in the form
of heat and pressure, i.e., the two basic manifestations of thermodynamic energy.
This is because the chemical detonation reaction leads to a very fast decomposition
of the explosive material, so that the reaction products left after the detonation are
very hot and consequently under very high pressure. The detonation products
will therefore tend to push the directly adjacent materials away, launching a shock
wave through all surrounding materials, which will warm up both under the effect
of this shock wave and because of the heat radiated away by the hot detonation
products.

In a nuclear weapon the situation is quite different because the lethal energy that
affects the immediately surrounding materials is mostly in the form of a variety
of radiations: electromagnetic radiations such as X- and gamma-rays; nuclear
radiations such as neutrons; and possibly sub-nuclear radiations such as pions if
the weapon contained a signiﬁcant amount of hadronic antimatter (i.e., antiprotons
rather than positrons).

Consequently, since the kinetic energy of the expanding materials of a nuclear
bomb generally corresponds to a small fraction of the radiated energy, the imme-
diate vicinity of a nuclear explosive is that of an extremely-intense pulsed-source
of radiations. Depending on the type of the bomb, the dominant kinds of emitted
radiations are as follows:

Hot ﬁssion bomb: soft X-rays and some ﬁssion neutrons;

H-bomb: soft X-rays and some ﬁssion and fusion neutrons;

•

•

26

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Pure fusion bomb: 14 MeV neutrons and soft X-rays;

Pure isomer bomb: 0.1 to 5 MeV gamma-rays;

Pure positron bomb: 0.511 MeV gamma-rays;

Pure antiproton bomb:

200 MeV pions and gamma-rays.

≈

In all these devices it is assumed that the explosive charge is contained in a
casing such that any low-energy neutral or charged particles — e.g., the X-rays
from a ﬁssioning material, or the He4 nuclei produced in the DT reaction (1) —
will not be able to escape, so that their energy will directly contribute to heating
the bomb’s materials and casing, which will thus radiate soft X-rays into the
surroundings.

4.2 Initial work from conventional or nuclear weapons

As we have recalled at the beginning of the previous subsection, the initial work
of a conventional explosive on the surrounding materials is primarily to launch a
shock wave through them, and secondarily to warm them up through the effect of
this shock wave and the heat radiated by the hot detonation products.

In the case of nuclear explosives the situation is more complicated because the
different kinds of radiations can have a variety of effects, especially if they are
very penetrating, as is the case for high-energy neutrons and gamma-rays. The
most important of these effects are as follows:

Generate a ﬁre-ball (in air or a material). This is primarily the effect of
the soft X-rays which have a relatively short mean-free path in any material,
including air. This material will heat up and the resulting ﬁre-ball will
radiate longer wavelength electromagnetic energy, i.e., a heat wave leading
to various thermal effects.

Launch a shock-wave (in air or in a material). This is primarily the result
of the expansion of the soft X-rays-generated ﬁre-ball into the surroundings,
which launches a shock wave leading to blast effects.

Heat the surface of a material. Hard X-rays and low-energy gamma-rays
able to propagate over some distances in low-density intervening materials
(e.g., air) will be absorbed at the surface of any high-density material.

27

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Ablate a material and produce a shock wave in it.
If surface heating is
sufﬁciently strong, the material will vaporize (i.e., “ablate”) and by reaction
(i.e., “rocket effect”) a large pressure will be exerted on it, launching a
shock-wave into the material.

Accelerate or compress a material. If the ablation pressure is sufﬁciently
strong, a material can be accelerated to high velocity by rocket-effect; and
if the ablation pressure is simultaneously exerted on all sides, a material can
be compressed to high-density as is the case of the secondary in a two-stage
thermonuclear weapon.

Transfer momentum to a material. Either directly through the effect of
radiations, or indirectly by means of shock waves propagating through an
intervening medium, momentum can be transferred to a material which can
be directly accelerated to high velocity without being ablated.

Heat the volume of a material. Penetrating high-energy radiations (neu-
trons, pions,14 or high-energy gamma-rays) will easily cross a low-density
intervening medium such as air and deposity their energy deep into any
high-density material. As a result, a substantial (i.e., centimeter to meter-
thick) layer of a bomb-irradiated material can be brought to a temperature
sufﬁciently high for it to melt, vaporize, or even explode.

Energize a working material. A special case of volume heating is that in
which a “working material” is intentionally placed near a nuclear explosive
in order to heat it to high-temperature so that it can do mechanical work on
other materials. This is the nuclear analog of a steam machine, in which
super-heated water (i.e., steam) is used to produce motion.

Forge and project missiles. A super-heated working material can be used to
forge a material into a missile and project it to a large distance.

Form and send high-velocity jets. A super-heated working material can be
used to form and send high-velocity (plasma) jets to some distance.

This list calls for three remarks:

1. The above list includes only the primarily “mechanical” effects of nuclear
Important non-mechanical effects such as the production of

explosives.

14Volume heating by pions is the process by which a very small amount amount of antiprotons
can ignite a “spark” in a compressed thermonuclear fuel and thus trigger a large-scale thermonuclear
detonation [23].

28

an electromagnetic-pulse affecting electronic equipments, and the prompt
or delayed radiations affecting living bodies (and electronic equipments to
some extent) can be considered as collateral effects in that perspective.

2. As was stressed in the introduction to this section, many physical processes
(such as energy and momentum transfer, transformation of kinetic into
internal energy, etc.) have to be simultaneous taken into account, so that none
of the effects in the list are “pure effects” that would be fully independent
from the other effects.

3. Because they produce mainly blast and thermal effects, ﬁrst and second
generation nuclear weapons can basically be considered as gigantic conven-
tional weapons — except of course for their radioactive fallout and other
radiation effects.

4.3 Coupling to homogeneous and heterogeneous targets

From the previous discussion it is clear that a deﬁnition such as

coupling === fraction of the total initial explosion-energy

actually transferred to an intended target,

must be supplemented by due consideration to the physical processes involved in
the energy transfer from the source to the target, and to the target response to the
energy coupled to it.

This is because conventional explosives, and ﬁrst and second generation nu-
clear explosives, primarily couple their energy to the target by means of shock-
waves propagating through the intervening medium: air, water, earth, rocks, etc.
This means that the coupling of these weapons can be qualiﬁed as indirect, inde-
pendently on whether the target is (relatively) close or distant from the point of
explosion.15

In the case of fourth generation nuclear explosives, however, the coupling
can be qualiﬁed as direct, unless the target is sufﬁciently far away from the
point of explosion (so that the radiations are absorbed in the intervening medium
before interacting with the target). In other words, the fact that these weapons
are primarily very intense sources of penetrating radiations means that they can

15It is only in outer-space nuclear explosions that direct coupling of X-rays is the main target

interaction mechanism.

29

produce direct work on the target, and therefore induce a very different response
than if the target was just hit by a shock wave.

The reason is that when a shock wave strikes a high-density material after
propagating in a lower density medium (e.g., striking the ground after propagating
through air), most of the energy in the shock wave is reﬂected, and only a small
fraction of the energy of the initial shock wave is given to secondary shock waves
propagating through the target material. Consequently, as is well known, indirect
coupling by means of shock waves is very poor, because such waves are reﬂected
at the boundaries between low and high-density materials. For example, for both
conventional and current generation nuclear weapons, less than 10% of the energy
striking a relatively heavy target (e.g., a main battle-tank, a bunker, or the ground)
is actually coupled to it, even for explosions very close to the target, i.e., “surface
bursts!” As a matter of fact, for ideal (absolutely rigid) materials, incoming shock
waves are fully reﬂected.

For this reason, other methods of indirect coupling than shock waves had to
be invented in order to increase target coupling . This led to the development
of “kinetic-energy penetrators” and “shaped-charges” to defeat tank walls and
reinforced concrete bunkers, and of “earth-penetrators” to defeat underground
targets [4].

To summarize, because of the importance of shock reﬂection at boundaries, one
can classify typical military targets in essentially two categories — homogeneous
and heterogeneous:

Homogeneous targets: slab of steel, concrete wall, ground, etc.

•

Most of the impinging shock wave energy will be reﬂected, and the reduced
energy transmitted shock will propagate through the target until it reaches
the back surface — where part of its energy will be reﬂected again, and some
of it transmitted into the following medium. There will be damage only if
the material’s response is inelastic, i.e., in order of occurrence as function
of shock strength: rear-side spall, crushing, melting, or vaporizing.

•

Heterogeneous targets: multi-layer or composite tank-walls, well-designed
bunkers, structures deeply buried under a geological cover, etc.

Because of the number of boundaries and possibly intentionally large dif-
ferences in densities of the different layers, the secondary shocks will be
reﬂected many times, and their energy diffused and absorbed in such a way
that only a small fraction of the initial energy will be transmitted behind
a properly designed multilayer shield. Again, there will only be damage

30

if the materials’s yield strengths are exceeded, which may be of limited
consequences if it does not happen behind the shield.

4.4 FGNW coupling

Let us suppose that the yield from an idealized DT -based FGNW consists of about
20% in soft X-rays and 80% in 14 MeV neutrons. Let us also take into account
that relative to a surface at some distance from the point of explosion, 50% of each
of these radiations will ﬂow forwards, and 50% backwards.

If we suppose that this weapon has a yield in the range of a few tons, and is
detonated in air at a relatively short distance from a target, say a few meters, most
of the forwards going X-rays will reach the target where they will heat the surface,
which may melt or vaporize up to the point of launching a shock into it. Because
that shock is produced directly on the target, it will be much stronger that if it have
produced indirectly by means of a shock wave propagating through air, as well
as much stronger that if it would have been produced by the expanding ﬁre-ball
hitting the target.

The main effect, however, will come from the neutrons. Not just because they
correspond to a circa ﬁve times larger source of energy, but because neutrons can
easily penetrate inside any material where they can deposit their energy locally
and produce volume heating of the material. This means that the coupling can
be very high, since there is little reﬂection in comparison to shock waves, and
little losses in comparison to surface effects where part of the absorbed energy is
back-radiated or lost as kinetic energy of the ablated material.

Of course, to calculate the distribution with depth of volume heating by 14 MeV
neutrons requires some knowledge of nuclear physics. However, this knowledge
is readily available since the 1950s because it is directly related to the problem
of calculating the heat generated by neutrons and gamma-rays in the shields of
nuclear reactors [42, 43]. Nowadays, there are also many computer simulation
programs which enable to make these calculations much more easily and precisely.

As an example, Fig. 5 shows the neutron heating effect of a 1 ton equivalent
point source of 14 MeV neutrons detonated 1 meter away from a thick slab of
polyethylene (CH2), taken as representative (from the neutron-heating point of
view) of the light materials used in modern multi-layered tank armor [44]. As can
be seen, heating is maximum at about 2 cm below the surface, and then decays
exponentially with a half-length of about 10 cm.16 Therefore, the energy deposited

16If the heating of the surface by X-rays is included, the maximum would disappear and energy

31

CH2 target

]
3

m
c
/
J
[
n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p
e
d

y
g
r
e
n
E

1200

1100

1000

900

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Depth [cm]

Figure 5: Energy deposition by a 1 ton equivalent point source of 14 MeV neutrons
detonated 1 meter away from a thick slab of polyethylene. (Figure from Ref. [44].)
32

in the ﬁrst 10 cm has a density of about 0.5 kJ/cm3, more than enough to vaporize
the material. Moreover, if the point of explosion is put at 30 cm rather than 100 cm,
or if the explosive yield is increased from 1 to 10 tons, the energy density would
become comparable to that of the detonation products of a powerful chemical
explosives.

The same neutron heating calculation can be repeated with other materials:
earth, concrete, aluminum, iron, uranium, etc. The result is that the magnitudes,
as well as the distributions with depth, are generally rather similar to those of
light-weight materials such as CH2, despite that in heavier materials the nuclear
interactions of neutrons are very different from those in light-weight materials
(i.e., much less elastic scattering, but more inelastic scattering instead). It is only
for very heavy material, or in materials such as uranium where 14 MeV neutrons
can induce ﬁssion, that the magnitude of energy deposition can be larger by a
factor of two or more.

To summarize, and to phrase the results in a simpliﬁed form because what
matters here are orders of magnitude rather than high precision, one has found
that:

•

Because most of the energy of a DT -based FGNW is in the form of highly
penetrating neutrons, almost all of the forwards going energy is coupled into
any target located less than a few meters away from the point of detonation.
This implies a coupling coefﬁcient of almost 50%, that is ten times higher
than for any conventional or previous generation nuclear weapons;17

•

The combined surface and volume heating effects of a 1 ton FGNW deto-
nated 1 meter away from any solid target leads to an energy deposition of
about 1 kJ/cm3 in the ﬁrst 10 cm of any material.

To make some further simpliﬁcations, this means that the energy deposition
by 14 MeV neutrons is comparable to that of myriads of “femto” kinetic-energy
or shaped-charge penetrators, and that while a 1 ton chemical explosion 1 m away
from a 10 cm thick steel plate will barely damage it, a 1 ton FGNW explosion at
the same 1 m distance will burn a 1 m2 hole through it. Consequently, as suggested
by Edward Teller in 1991, FGNWs with explosive yields of a few tons may render
many modern weapons obsolete:

deposition would decrease with depth starting from the surface.

17The limit of 50% of total FGNW energy coupling to a target can of course only be reached
for a very wide target, e.g., the ground. Nevertheless, for a ﬁnite width target, what matters is
the factor of about ten in coupling increase relative to conventional or previous generation nuclear
weapons.

33

“Shall one combine the newly acquired accuracy with smaller nuclear
weapons (perhaps even of yields of a few tons) to be used against
modern weapons such as tanks and submarines” [45]?

5 Thermonuclear-driven jets and projectiles

While the ten-fold greater target-coupling of FGNWs is the ﬁrst major difference
between these weapons and those of the ﬁrst and second generations, the second
major difference is that the radiations from FGNWs can easily be used to energize
a working material and therefore to produce other effects than just heat or blast. As
a matter of fact, this second difference was already one of the militarily-attractive
feature of third generation nuclear weapons, where radiations from advanced
nuclear or thermonuclear explosives were used in directed energy warheads (DEW)
to produce powerful plasma-jets or X-ray laser-beams.

An implicit reason for considering such applications is that while about 50% of
the radiations moving forwards will directly interact with the target, the other 50%
will be scattered through air unless somehow used. In other words, if a sizable
fraction of the backwards-radiated energy could be used to drive a forwards going
device, the coupling and hence the lethality of FGNWs could be substantially
increased. Moreover, as was already considered in the case of third generation
nuclear weapons, the same technique could be used for driving several such devices
at once, possibly pointing in several directions, so that several targets could be
simultaneously engaged by the same FGNW.

In this section we are therefore going to examing how FGNWs can be used to
drive jets and projectiles — leaving aside other possible applications such driving
powerful laser beams or electromagnetic-pulse generators.

But, just like at the beginning of Sec. 4, we have to ﬁrst recall that many
different physical processes are at work when an object is irradiated by an intense
source of X-rays and neutrons. For instance, several distinct processes can lead
to the acceleration of a projectile, and depending on its physical composition
and geometry, one or another of these processes will provide the dominant thrust
mechanism accelerating the material to high velocity.

For example, projectiles can be accelerated to very high velocities by means
of X-ray ablation [46], or by means of neutrons from a nuclear explosion [47, 48,
49].18

18Small projectiles can also be ablatively accelerated by means of high power proton beams,

such as generated by the KALIF facility at Karlsruhe [50], [51, p.270,].

34

As a matter of fact, the maximum momentum that the neutrons from a fourth-
generation nuclear explosive can transfer to a projectile (and therefore the max-
imum velocity it may reach) can easily be estimated using Eq. (12).
Indeed,
each incoming neutron absorbed by the projectile will transfer a small amount
of momentum to it, and for Nn neutrons the total transferred momentum will
V , where V is given by Eq. (12). As a neutron has a mass
be Nn ×
10−27 kg, and thus a velocity vn = 52, 000 km/s for an energy of
mn = 1.7
14 MeV, the maximum velocity that can be reached by a projectile of mass M is
then

mn ×
×

Vmax = Nn(Y )

m
(m + M)

vn ≈

130 [tons]
M [kg]

[km/s],

(14)

×

1021Y is the number of neutrons corresponding to a
where Nn(Y ) = 1.45
yield of Y tons absorbed by the projectile. If M = 100 kg and Y = 1 ton, the
maximum velocity is therefore about 1.3 km/s. However, as most of the energy
absorbed by the projectile will contribute to heating rather than accelerating it, the
projectile may not go very far before disintegrating — unless only the rear part of
the projectile is heated, and therefore acts as a working ﬂuid pushing the front part
ahead by rocket-effect.

Thus, as can be seen from this example, the practical design of thermonuclear-
driven devices is most likely to be very complicated, so that the discussion pre-
sented in the following subsection has to be understood as a description of idealized
concepts, which may look quite different in practice.

5.1 Conventional shaped-charges

Shaped-charges of conventional explosives were ﬁrst used on a large scale in
warfare towards the end of World War Two when the Americans introduced the
“Bazooka,” and the Germans the “Panzerfaust” anti-tank weapons. The basic idea
of these weapons was to overcome the poor coupling of the blast-waves from a
high-explosive charge by converting a fraction of its detonation energy into the
kinetic energy of a forward going jet of metal, which by exerting a much greater
pressure at the point of impact could penetrate into thick armor steel.

The actual concept was to use a hollow-charge of explosive lined with a thin
sheet of metal (usually of conical shape) which upon detonation of the explosive
would be squeezed towards the axis and vigorously projected forward in the form
of a powerful jet. The details of the designs and performances of these weapons
are given in many papers and books, but for a good introduction the original papers
published in the 1940s are still up to date, e.g., [52].

35

Of course, since these early days, the design of shaped charges has considerably
evolved [8], and current weapons are perfected using very advanced computer
simulations techniques. This enables to very precisely follow the collapse of the
liner and the formation of the jet, as well as to optimize its performance in defeating
various targets [53]. It is also by a sophisticated interplay between simulation and
experiment that some of the most powerful shaped charges have been designed
and shown to be able to pierce up to 340 cm of high-strength armor-steel [54].
In that case a large hemispherical charge lined with molybdenum was used (See
Fig. 7), and remakable agreement between simulation and experiment was found.

A ﬁnal important aspect of shaped charges is that they can be used not just to
form and project a thin high-velocity jet, but also to forge and accelerate a fragment
of substantially larger mass, albeit of lower velocity. This is of interest because
high-velocity jets tend to be unstable and therefore to have a rather short range
in air, while forged fragments can travel much larger distances before striking a
target [8].

5.2 “Nuclear” and “thermonuclear” shaped-charges

When addressing the question of nuclear- or thermonuclear-driven shaped charges,
it is important to ﬁrst dissipate a possible misunderstanding due to the fact that
in the 1950s the name “atomic hollow-charge” has been used for a very different
concept, namely the possibility of using jets of conventional-explosive-driven
shaped-charges to compress and ignite a thermonuclear fusion fuel [55]. At that
time this concept was thought to be plausible because jets of beryllium with
velocities up to 90 km/s had been formed in some experiments. But with hindsight
it is now clear that any combination of such jets cannot be used to ignite a
thermonuclear fuel because their kinetic energy is far too low to focus sufﬁcient
energy in a sufﬁciently short time on a pellet.

The principle of a nuclear-driven-driven shaped-charge is to replace the energy
from the conventional explosive by the energy from a nuclear explosive. Since
most of the energy from a ﬁssion explosive is in the form of X-rays, this means
using these X-rays to collapse a liner and form a jet, i.e., to replace the high-
In theory, this
explosives’s detonation products by a high-energy photon gas.
concept is perfectly sound, and can be seen as a simple variation of the Teller-
Ulam principle used to compress the secondary of a H-bomb. In practice, it seems
that this idea was studied in the context of third generation nuclear weapons, but
it is not known whether it was fruitful or not. In particular, it could be that since
there is no “energy-multiplication” as in a H-bomb secondary, the energy imparted
to the jet was found to be too small to be of any use compared to the vast energy

36

wasted in the ﬁssion explosive needed to drive the jet.

Another concept which has been proposed is to replace the chemical explosive
by a thermonuclear explosive. This is because a thermonuclear detonation reaction
is analogous to a chemical detonation reaction in the sense that they can both
support a detonation-wave propagating through them. However, in comparison
to chemical ones, thermonuclear detonation-waves are extremely thick in non-
compressed fusion fuels [56]. Nevertheless, provided the thermonuclear fuel
could be somehow precompressed, and properly ignited, it may be possible to
conceive what could be called a “thermonuclear shaped-charge” [57, p. 121]. The
trouble with this concept is that the resulting device could be gigantic, with yields
in to kt to Mt range, or more...

5.3 FGNW-driven jets and projectiles

Merging and generalizing the ideas developed in Sec. 4 and in the previous subsec-
tions, it is obvious that both the X-rays and the neutrons from a FGNW explosive
can be used to heat and shock various working materials or ﬂuids in order to
achieve several purposes. For instance:

1. The neutrons and/or X-rays can drive or forge one or several projectiles
or fragments (thermonuclear-driven “grenades” or “guns”). This can be
achieved, for example, by absorbing the X-rays in a high density material
which by rocket-effect will be accelerated, or by absorbing the neutrons in
a working ﬂuid which will forge and project a missile.

2. The neutrons and X-rays can heat a working ﬂuid and form jets (thermo-
In that case a working ﬂuid super-heated by the
nuclear-driven “jets”).
neutrons will replace the high-explosive detonation products to pinch a liner
and form a high-velocity jet.

3. The forwards and/or backwards X-rays and/or neutrons can separately or

cooperatively drive the components of a multi-warhead weapon.

In the ﬁrst two cases it is evident that a single FGNW explosive can project
several missile or drive several shaped-shaped charges at once, resulting in a multi-
warhead system (See Fig. 6). In the third case, reference is made to the possibility
of using the radiation moving backwards relative to a target as a driver for one or
several forwards moving jets or missiles.

To give an example of a possible design of a dual-warhead system, one can refer
to Fig. 7 and imagine that the hemispherical shell of high-explosives is replaced by

37

Figure 6: A single FGNW charge can drive several warheads at once: Here,
symbolically depicted, a forged-penetrator following a shaped-charge jet.

a simple working-material such as polyethylene. If we now suppose that we have
a very intense point source of neutrons at the focal point of the hemisphere, these
neutrons will be able to super-heat the working-material which will function just
as effectively as high-explosive detonation-products in driving the shaped-charge
jet. Consequently, the target (which is located on the left of Fig. 7) will be ﬁrst
irradiated by the forwards going neutrons, and then penetrated by the powerful jet
driven by the backwards going neutrons. Of course, if the point source of neutrons
is replaced by a realistic fourth-generation nuclear explosive, the nascent jet will
have to traverse its debris in order to move towards the target. However, there
are several ways to circumvent this problem, and the example given here is just
intended to present the general idea.19

In order to develop such complicated fourth-generation warheads, it is clear
that both sophisticated computer simulations and numerous experiments at inertial
conﬁnement fusion facilities such as NIF and LMJ will be necessary. It is only
once such simulations and experiments, which will correspond to neutron yields
equivalent to at most a few kg of high-explosives, that it will be possible to
envisage doing experiments at neutron yields equivalent to a few tons. For this
to happen much progress will have to be made, and it may turn out that driving
jets and projectiles with FGNWs could be not much more effective than with third
generation nuclear weapons. On the other hand, the large coupling efﬁciency of
FGNWs discussed in the previous section will remain, and still be one the most
important elements responsible for the military effectiveness of FGNWs.

19While it is premature to go into many details, one can nevertheless remark that whereas the
working material can be simple and inexpensive, it still has to be carried with the weapon. It
could therefore be advantageous to make use of the delivery system’s own material. For example,
the shaped charge liner could be the fuel tank of a cruise-missile, and the working material the
remaining of the fuel.

38

Figure 7: FGNW-driven shaped-charge concept: The hemispherical shell of high-
explosives is replaced by a working-material such as polyethylene. An intense
point-source of neutrons located at the focal point of the hemisphere is very
uniformly super-heating this working-material, which will function just like the
detonation-products of a super-high-explosive in collapsing the liner and driving
the shaped-charge jet. (Illustration from Ref. [54].)

6 Collateral effects

As a consequence of the accuracy of the latest-generation of precision-guided
missiles, it has become more and more important to reduce collateral damage,
that is to “reduce destruction outside the radius of an intended target — while
enhancing destructive force on the target” [58], see Fig. 8.20 In this section we
try to see to what extent the characteristics of FGNWs correspond to this goal,
especially in comparison to other types of weapons.

6.1 Mechanical and thermal effects

The mechanical and thermal effects of conventional and nuclear weapons are
well-known [59, 60]. For instance, their scaling laws with explosive yield are
Y 1) for thermal effects, and third-
simple power laws: direct proportionally (
Y 1/3) for blast over-pressure. The factor of three difference
root dependence (
20However, “effective utilization of precision munitions demands that a premium be placed on

∝

∝

the collection and analysis of target information” [3, p. 15].

39

Figure 8: As a consequence of increased accuracy, new weapons are required
that will “reduce destruction outside the radius of an intended target — while
enhancing destructive force on the target.” (Illustration for Ref. [58].)

in the exponent of these power-laws makes that, in comparison to blast effects,
thermal effects are generally negligible in conventional explosives, but dominant
in Mt-yield nuclear explosives (which are in fact gigantic incendiary bombs). This
means that for kt-yield nuclear weapons, and FGNWs with yields between 1 and
100 tons, both effects should be taken into consideration.

A ﬁrst signiﬁcant difference between DT -based FGNWs and all other types of
explosives is that up to 80% of the yield is in form of high-energy neutrons, so that
only about 20% of the total yield contribute directly to heat and blast effects. With
proper scaling, this factor of 5 difference means that a FGNW will have a factor
of 5 smaller incendiary effect, and a factor 3√5 = 1.7 reduced blast effect21 —
provided on assumes that the energy of the neutrons will be absorbed either in the
intended target, or else in a large volume of air that will not be sufﬁciently heated
to signiﬁcantly contribute to the heat and blast waves. One can therefore conclude
that for a given total yield, FGNWs will have somewhat reduced collateral effects
in terms of heat and blast.

The second signiﬁcative difference between DT -based FGNWs and all other
types of explosives is the high direct-coupling with intended targets made possible
by the ﬂux of high-energy neutrons. Since according to the discussion in Sec. 4.4
this increased coupling corresponds to a factor of about 10 relative to a conventional
or nuclear explosive, the factor of 5 considered in the previous paragraph is actually
equivalent to a factor of about 50 when the comparison is not made in terms of

21In reality, and for multi-warhead systems, the factor of 5 could be more like 3 or 4, leading to

a smaller reduction in collateral heat and blast effects.

40

total explosive yields, but in terms of the energy that is actually coupled to the
intended target. Under these conditions, the reduction factors in collateral heat
and blast effects become truly signiﬁcant, i.e., 50 and 3√50 = 3.7, respectively.

However, direct-coupling to a ﬁnite-size target has a 1/r2 dependence on the
distance r between the point of explosion and the surface of the target, and this
distance should be on the order of a few meters at most for a circa 1 ton FGNW
to be effective. This requires truly high accuracy in delivery, and a corresponding
accuracy in the knowledge of the target coordinates.

Finally, as will all types of explosive weapons, debris will be sent at random to
large distances from the target. But since the kinetic energy available for sending
these debris is directly related to blast energy, this collateral effect should be
proportionally reduced in FGNWs.

6.2 Prompt radiation effects

The lethal effect of high ﬂuxes of high-energy neutrons has been much debated
during the “neutron bomb” controversy of the 1970s to the mid 1980s [60, 61].
From these publications one knows fairly accurately the radiation dose produced
by a pure DT -fusion explosion in air, which as a function of total yield Y [tons]
and distance r [meter] can be interpolated by

D(r) = 108 Y

r
360

r2 exp(
In this expression the radiation dose D(r) is expressed in units of “rad,” rather
than of “rem” or “Gy,” because for prompt radiation effects one does not need to
take the relative radiobiological effectiveness into account.

[rad].

(15)

−

)

One can therefore ﬁnd the distance below which the “instant permanent inca-

pacitation” is close or equal to 100% :

1 ton FGNW :

more than 10’000 rad below 100 m,
> 24 oC body temperature rise,
> 99% lethal within 1 hour.

And the distance beyond which the probability of survival is higher than 50% :

1 ton FGNW :

less than 300 rad beyond 300 m,
1 oC body temperature rise,
< 50% lethal within 1 month.

41

In these two boxes, the instantaneous full-body temperature rise produced
by the given dose is calculate in order to provide an intuitive explanation of the
prompt biological effect of high-doses of radiations. As can easily be understood,
an instantaneous full-body temperature rise from 37 to about 60oC will have a very
big impact on physiology, which explains the immediate loss of consciousness and
nearly instantaneous death. On the other hand, a 1oC temperature rise will not
have such a strong physiological effect, and death will be due to radiation sickness,
which can be medically treated to some extent.

If instead of unprotected soldiers or people one considers heavy battle-tanks,
which provided some shielding against radiations, the kill radius will be smaller
[61]. Nevertheless, assuming a protection factor of 20, the tank crew will by
instantly killed by a 1 ton FGNW exploding at a distance of less than 20 meters.
In tank warfare language, this corresponds to a “radiation-kill,” while a direct hit
would have produce a “hard-kill.”

In this context, a June 1994 interview of Russian Nuclear Energy Minister
Viktor Nikitovich Mikhailov is signiﬁcant.22 According to a Reuter press release
he said:

“a new generation of nuclear weapons could be developed by the year
2000 unless military research is stopped. [... This] fourth generation
of nuclear weapons could be directed more accurately than current
arms. [... The] new weapons could be programmed to wipe out people
while leaving buildings standing. [... It is] a toss-up whether Russia
or the United States would be the ﬁrst country to devise the new arms”
[62].

In conclusion, it is clear that FGNWs have a strong potential to be used as
anti-personnel weapons, which in the case of the neutron bomb debate of the
1980s created a lot of controversy and even political unrest. The corresponding
debate with FGNWs is likely to be controversial as well, even though the absence
of a ﬁssion-trigger in the weapon will make it more “acceptable” to some people.
Further complications will arise since neutrons can be rather effective against
biological agents, and even against possible future “nanorobots” which could be
designed to selectively disperse chemical and biological weapons.

22V.N. Mikhailov is one of the scientists who helped develop the current generation of Russian

nuclear weapons.

42

6.3 Delayed radiological effects

In assessing the delayed radiological effects of FGNWs, a somewhat surprising
ﬁnding was made in trying to compare the long-term radiological burden generated
by their battle-ﬁeld use to other forms of radioactive pollution [63].

The reason is that the two main delayed radiological effects of FGNWs (i.e., the
dispersal of the unburnt tritium, and the activation of the ground and other materials
by high-energy neutron irradiation) are relatively simple to estimate, which enables
to calculate the total “burden” due to the expenditure of a given yield by integrating
these estimates over time. The same procedure can be applied to other weapons
producing a different form of radiological pollution, and comparisons can be made.

Taking for example the use of depleted-uranium23 penetrators as anti-tank
weapons, and assuming comparable battle- and post-battle (e.g, total dispersal of
all radioactive materials, no cleaning-up of the battle-ﬁeld, etc.), one obtains the
following equivalence in terms of radiological burdens:

1 ton FGNW

1 kg U-238

≈

If one applies this equivalence relation to the 400 tons of U-238-munition which
have been expended during the 1991 war in Iraq, one ﬁnds that the corresponding
long-term radiological burden is equivalent to the hypothetical use of hundreds of
thousands of FGNWs, each with a yield of 1 ton.

Of course, both the methodology and the interpretation of the results can be
criticized, especially if one focuses on short rather then long term effects.24 Indeed,
there is a vast difference in the life-time of tritium and uranium, which is only
partially compensated by the greater radio-toxicity of uranium relative to tritium.

Nevertheless, the comparison is useful to highlight the considerably smaller
radioactive burden induced by FGNWs relative to the previous generations of
nuclear weapons. It can also inferred that [63, 64]:

•

Tritium dispersal and induced ground-radioactivity will to a large extent not
impair further military action;

23It should be recalled that despite being a relatively benign radioactive substance (just like
tritium), all grades of uranium are “nuclear materials” subject to special regulations according
to national and international law. The use of depleted uranium projectiles in the 1991 Gulf
War therefore broke the 46 year long taboo against the intentional battle-ﬁeld use of radioactive
materials, which lasted from 1945 to 1991 [63, 64].

24As a matter of fact, reference [63] is a simple preliminary study: It would be important that a

more comprehensive study be undertaken and published.

43

•

•

•

Just as it was the case with the use of depleted-uranium weapons, it will be
possible for the proponents of FGNWs to argue that the radiological burden
due to their use could be in some way tolerable;

Many political leaders and large fractions of the public opinion may not
object to the long term radiological impact of FGNWs;

In any case, with a tritium content of about 15 mg per ton explosive equiv-
alent, there will be 15 kg of tritium in an arsenal equivalent to one million
1-ton-FGNWs,25 that is about the same tritium inventory as in one single
full-size thermonuclear reactor [65]. Acceptance of civilian fusion power
will therefore be linked to that of FGNWS.

7 Conclusion

It is difﬁcult to write a concise conclusion for this essentially scientiﬁc paper
because the military, technical, and political implications of FGNWs are so far
reaching that it would take three other papers just to discuss each of these aspects
with a minimum of rigor.

For this reason, instead of a true conclusion, there will be a list a “theses”
which are meant to summarize in a few words some of the most important points
that should be discussed in a comprehensive assessment of the prospect and im-
plications of FGNWs.

7.1 Military aspects

1. FGNWS can have yields in the 1 to 100 tons gap which today separates

conventional form nuclear weapons.

2. Compared to previous generations, FGNWs have enhanced direct coupling
to dense targets and reduced collateral effects, as well as the capability to
drive powerful “jets” and “forged fragments.”

3. FGNWs are in line with the “increased precision” and “reduced collateral

damage” trends of modern warfare.

25A FGNW arsenal equivalent to 1 Mt total yield is not unreasonable considering that a number

of weapons could have maximum yields of about 100 tons, and some up to about 1 kt.

44

4. Proponents will claim that FGNWs have a high-potential to destroy “bio-

logical and chemical” weapons, as well as future “nanorobots...”

5. The military “sweetness” of FGNWs is such that they will eventually be built
by all technologically-advanced countries, including non-nuclear weapons
States such as Japan, Germany, Brazil, etc.

7.2 Technical aspects

1. The development of FGNWs-related technologies does not require any “po-
litical decision” or “conspiracy:” The current dynamics of technology is
enough. (E.g., scientiﬁc competition, priority to “hard” technologies, ag-
gressive commercialism, priority to military or “dual” technologies, etc.)

2. Even if FGNWs could be “very far in the future,” the disarmament dilemma
is that it is precisely this “remoteness” which is taken as the excuse for
developing the technologies that will ultimately lead to their construction.

3. Apart from inertial conﬁnement fusion (ICF), the main areas of science and
technology leading to the development of FGNWs are microelectromechan-
ical engineering and nanotechnology.

4. The most promising technology for providing the high energy-density nec-

essary to trigger very compact FGNWs is antimatter.

5. As the main source of yield in FGNWs is the DT fusion reaction, large-scale
(i.e., kg level) tritium technology is required to deploy a full scale arsenal
of FGNWs. This implies that the deployment of FGNWs is linked to that of
thermonuclear fusion reactors (See Ref. [65].)

6. The main alternative source of tritium is its production by means of high-
energy particle accelerators, which is at the same time the most matured
technology for the large scale production of antimatter [66, 67].

7.3 Political aspects

1. As the United States are likely to take the lead in the development and
deployment of FGNWs, a nuclear arms race may result in which all advanced
industrialized countries (e.g., Germany, Japan, France, China, etc.) could
compete to become the second largest military power in the XXIth century.

45

2. The development of FGNWs will most likely increase the attractiveness
of previous generation nuclear weapons to technologically less-advanced
countries.

3. The most controversial aspect of DT -fusion-based FGNWs could be their
use as anti-personnel weapons against unprotected soldiers or people.

4. Finally, proponents will argue that FGNWs’s technologies may have signiﬁ-
cant medical, practical, and scientiﬁc applications. While this could be true,
one can also argue that such “spin offs” of primarily military technologies
are not sufﬁcient to justify a new major step in the arms race.

Acknowledgements

This paper is an opportunity to acknowledge the work done in the 23 years of
existence of ISRI by many people who devoted a lot of time and effort to the
scientiﬁc analysis of new types of nuclear weapons in order to open a well informed
debate on their prospect.

References

[1] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, The Physical Principles of Thermonuclear Ex-
plosives, Inertial Conﬁnement Fusion, and the Quest for Fourth Generation
Nuclear Weapons, INESAP Technical Report No.1, Presented at the 1997
INESAP Conference, Shanghai, China, 8–10 Sept. 1997, Seventh edition,
September 2000, ISBN: 3-9333071-02-X, 195 pp. Abstract available at
http://nuclearweaponarchive.org/hew/News/AnnounceReviews.html.

[2] A. Gsponer, Inertial Conﬁnement Fusion and Fourth Generation Nuclear
Weapons, Summary of an invited contribution at the 62nd Meeting of the
German Physical Society (DPG), Regensburg, 25–27 March 1998. CDROM
(DPG-FONAS, Hamburg, 1998, ISBN 3-933981-01-08) 133-152.

[3] S. Younger, Nuclear weapons in the twenty-ﬁrst century, Report LAUR-00-

2850 (Los Alamos Scientiﬁc Laboratory, June 27, 2000) 19 pp.

[4] A. Gsponer, The B61-based “Robust Nuclear Earth Penetrator” — Clever
retroﬁt or headway towards fourth-generation nuclear weapons?, Report

46

ISRI-03-08 (October, 2005) 34 pp., e-print arXiv:physics/0510052 available
in PDF format at http://www.arxiv.org/pdf/physics/0510052.

[5] M.J. Mazarr, Virtual nuclear arsenals, Survival 37 (Autumn 1995) 7–26.

[6] K. Waltz, Thoughts about virtual nuclear arsenals, The Washington Quar-

terly 20 (1997) 153–161.

[7] S. Younger, View from the nuclear weapons technology program ofﬁce,
Weapons Insider 3 (Los Alamos National Laboratory, Nov./Dec. 1996) 1–
2.

[8] Y. de Longueville, Detonique, Encyclopedia Universalis, Suppl. (1995-

[9] India opens its third reprocessing plant, Nature 395 (25 September 1998)

1996) 706–710.

316.

[10] R. Stone Plutonium ﬁelds forever, Science, 300 (23 May 2003) 1220–1224.

[11] A. Gsponer, Nanotechnology and fourth-generation nuclear weapons,
Disarmament Diplomacy, No. 67 (October/November 2002) 3–6, e-print
arXiv:physics/0509205 available in PDF format at
http://arXiv.org/pdf/physics/0509205.

[12] E.I. Moses, The grand challenge of thermonuclear ignition, Science and
Technology Review (Lawrence Livermore National laboratory, July/August
2005) 3.

[13] J.D. Lindl et al., The physics basis for ignition using indirect-drive targets
on the National Ignition Facility, Phys. Plasmas, 11 (2004) 339–491.

[14] S. Younger et al., Scientiﬁc collaborations between Los Alamos and
Arzamas-16 using explosive-driven ﬂux compression generators, Los
Alamos Science No. 24 (Los Alamos National Laboratory, 1996) 49–67.

[15] V.K. Chernyshev, High-power explosive magnetic energy sources for ther-
monuclear and physical applications (Overview), in Proc. of the 11th
Int. Conf. on High Power Particle Beams, edited by K. Jungwirth and J.
Ullschmied, Prague, 10–14 June 1996, Document AD-A318646 (Academy
of Science of the Czech Republic, Prague, 1996) ISBN 80-902250-2-0,
volume I, p.7–22.

[16] J.H. Degnan et al., Compression of plasma to megabar range using implod-

ing liner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999) 2681–2684.

47

[17] N.G. Basov, “High-explosive-driven laser”, in G. H. Miley and H. Hora,
eds., Laser Interaction and Related Plasma Phenomena, Vol. 10 (Plenum
Press, New York, 1992) p.vii.

[18] H. Backe te al., PHELIX — Petawatt High-Energy Laser for Heavy-Ion
eXperiments, Report GSI-98-10 (GSI, Darmstadt, December 1998) 60 pp.

[19] A. Gsponer, Superlaser development in Germany, INESAP Bulletin No.19

(January 2002) 79. Available at
http://www.inesap.org/bulletin19/bul19art26.htm.

[20] J. Becker, Testing the physics of nuclear isomers, Science and Technology
Review (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, July/August 2005) 24–
25.

[21] E. Cartlidge, Germany backs nuclear physics, Physics World (March

[22] E. Cartlidge, Nuclear physicists back German project, Physics World

2003) 5.

(September 2004) 11.

[23] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, The physics of antimatter induced fusion and
thermonuclear explosions, in G. Velarde and E. Minguez, eds., Proceedings
of the 4th International Conference on Emerging Nuclear Energy Systems,
Madrid, June 30/July 4, 1986 (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1987) 166–169,
e-print arXiv:physics/0507114 available in PDF format at
http://arXiv.org/pdf/physics/0507114.

[24] A. Gsponer et J.-P. Hurni, Les armes `a antimati`ere, La Recherche 17
(novembre 1986) 1440–1443. English translation: Antimatter weapons,
Bulletin of Peace Proposals 19 (1988) 444–450. Expanded version, Anti-
matter weapons (1946-1986): From Fermi and Teller’s speculations to the
ﬁrst open scientiﬁc publications, Report ISRI-86-10 (July 2005) 13 pp.,
e-print arXiv:physics/0507132 available in PDF format at
http://arXiv.org/pdf/physics/0507132.

[25] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, Antimatter induced fusion and thermonuclear
explosions, Atomkernenergie
Kerntechnik (Independent Journal on Energy
Systems and Radiation) 49 (1987) 198–203, e-print arXiv:physics/0507125
available in PDF format at http://arXiv.org/pdf/physics/0507125.

·

[26] L.J. Perkins, C.D. Orth, and M. Tabak: On the Utility of Antiprotons as
Drivers for Inertial Conﬁnement Fusion. Nucl. Fusion 44 (2004) 1097–
1117. Available in PDF format at
http://cui.unige.ch/isi/sscr/phys/Perkins-Ort-Tabak.pdf.

48

[27] M. Shmatov: The typical number of antiprotons necessary to heat the hot
spot in D-T fuel doped with U. JBIS 58 (2005) 74–81. Available in PDF
format at http://cui.unige.ch/isi/sscr/phys/Shmatov.pdf.

[28] Antiprotons encore, CERN Courier (May 1997) 1–4.

[29] K.-D. Gross et al., Proposal for an International Accelerator Facility for
research with Heavy Ions and Antiprotons, (GSI, Darmstadt, November
2001) 32 pp.

[30] T. Feder, Germany reviews big physics projects – Triggers furor over spal-

lation source, Physics Today (November 2002) 24–26.

[31] M.M. Nieto, M.H. Holzscheiter, and S.G. Turyshev, Controlled an-
tihydrogen propulsion for NASA’s future in very deep space, Los
Alamos National Laboratory report LA-UR-04-7072 (October 2004)
12 pp, e-print arXiv:astro-ph/0410511 available in PDF format at
http://www.arXiv.org/pdf/astro-ph/0410511.

[32] B.W. Augenstein: Concepts, problems, and opportunities for use of an-
nihilation energy. Prepared for the United States Air Force, RAND Note
N–2302–AF/RC, June (1985) 61 pp.

[33] A. Gsponer and J. Grinevald, CERN — La physique des particules pi´eg´ee
par l’OTAN, La Recherche, No.381 (Paris, d´ecembre 2004) 6. Available at
http://www.larecherche.fr/special/courrier/courrier381.html.

[34] J. Soltz, Creating primordial plasma — A question of quarks, Science
and Technology Review (Lawrence Livermore’s National Laboratory, Jan-
uary/February 2003) 4–9, see also page 3. Available at
http://www.llnl.gov/str/JanFeb03/Soltz.html.

[35] G.F. Chapline, M.H. Johnson, E. Teller, and M.S. Weiss, Highly excited

nuclear matter, Physical review D8 (1973) 4302–4307.

[36] A. Gsponer, Rolf Hagedorn and Edward Teller, CERN Courier (November
2003) 38. Available at http://www.cerncourier.com/main/article/43/9/18/3

[37] K. Davidson, Interstellar travel is just an antimatter of time — Energy
from particle annihilation could cut voyages by light years, San Francisco
Chronicle (Sunday, August 8, 2004) A-6. Available at
http://sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?ﬁle=/c/a/2004/08/08/MNG0984OM41.DTL

49

[38] K. Davidson, Air Force pursuing antimatter weapons — Program was
touted publicly, then came ofﬁcial gag order , San Francisco Chronicle
(Monday, October 4, 2004) A-1. Available at
http://sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?ﬁle=/c/a/2004/10/04/MNGM393GPK1.DTL

[39] Dan Brown, Angels and Demons (Pocket Star Books, 2000) 572 pp; (Corgi
Book, 2001, ISBN 0-552-15073-8) 620 pp; (Atria Books, 2005, ISBN
0-7432-7506-3) 510 pp.

[40] J. Grinevald, A. Gsponer, L. Hanouz, and P. Lehmann, La Quadrature du

CERN (Editions d’En Bas, Lausanne, 1984) 186 pp.

[41] G. Charpak and R. Garwin, Feux Follets et Champignons Nucl´eaires (Edi-

tions Odile Jacob, Paris, 1997) 383 pp.

[42] Heating in shields by neutrons, in H. Etherington, Nuclear Engineering

Handbook (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1955) 7-85 to 7-89.

[43] Heating in shields, in S. Glasstone an A. Sesonske, Nuclear Reactor Engi-

neering (Van Nostrand, New York, 1981) 673 to 679.

[44] S. Sahin et al., Private communication (October 2003).

[45] E. Teller, Guest comment: Military applications of technology — A new

turn, American Journal of Physics, 59 (October 1991) page 873.

[46] R. Cauble et al., X-ray driven ﬂyer foil experiment near 1.0 Gbar, J. Quantit.

Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer 51 (1994) 433–437.

[47] C.E. Ragan III et al., Shock compression of molybdenum to 2.0 TPa by
means of a nuclear explosion, J. Appl. Phys. 48 (1977) 2860–2870.

[48] E.N. Avrorin et al., Intense shock waves and the extreme states of matter,

Physics–Uspekhi 36 (1993) 337–364.

[49] R.F. Trunin, Shock compressibility of condensed materials in strong shock
waves generated by underground nuclear explosions, Physics–Uspekhi 37
(1994) 1123–1145.

[50] K. Baumung et al., Shock-wave physics experiments with high-power proton

beams, Laser and Particle beams 14 (1996) 181–209.

[51] L.V. Al’tshuler et al., Development of dynamic high-pressure techniques in

Russia, Physics – Uspekhi 42 (1999) 261–281.

50

[52] G. Birkhoff et al., Explosives with lined cavities, J. of Appl. Phys. 19 (1948)

563–582.

[53] Z. Fan et al., A computational method of fast simulating full-physics
process of shaped-charge, 19th International Symposium on Ballis-
tics (Interlaken, Switzerland, 7–11 May 2001) 1487-1491. Available at
http://www.tsgs.com/.ttk/symp 19/TB561487.pdf.

[54] D. Baum, Shaped charges pierce the toughest targets, Science and Tech-

nology Review (Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, June 1998).

[55] H.V. Hajek, Atom-Hohlladungen — Atomic hollow charge, Explosivstof-
fen, Nr. 5/6 (1955) 65–68. See also, A. Stettbacher, Tritium-Superbombe,
Explosivestoffe, Nr. 11/12 (1954) 151–153.

[56] A.L. Fuller and N.A. Gross, Thermonuclear detonation wave structure,

Phys. Fluids 11 (1968) 534–544.

[57] F. Winterberg, The Physical Principles of Thermonuclear Explosive De-
vices, ISBN 0-938460-00-5 (Fusion energy foundation, New York, 1981)
145 pp.

[58] M. Murphy, A new generation of munitions, Science and Technology Review
(Lawrence Livermore national laboratory, July/August 2003) 20–22.

[59] S. Glasstone and P.J. Dolan, The Effects of Nuclear Weapons (U.S. Depart-
ment of Defense and U.S. Department of Energy, 1957, third edition, 1977)
638 pp.

[60] H.A. Sandmeier, M.E. Battat, G.E. Hansen, How to calculate effects of
tactical low-yield enhanced-radiation and ﬁssion warheads, Report LA-
9434 (Los Alamos National Laboratory, October 1982) 36 pp.

[61] S. Sahin and A. Gsponer, Protection factors of modern armored tanks
against enhanced-radiation and ﬁssion nuclear warheads, Atomkern-
energie–Kerntechnik 46 (1985) 278–284.

[62] V.N. Mikhailov, interview to Komsomolskaya Pravda (4 June 1994); Russia
Minister: new nuclear weapons developing, IAEA Daily Press Review
(IAEA, Vienna, 6 June 1994); Russland plant neuen Atomwaffentyp, Die
Welt (6 Juni 1994).

[63] A. Gsponer, J.-P. Hurni, and B. Vitale, A comparison of delayed ra-
diobiological effects of depleted-uranium munitions versus fourth gen-
eration nuclear weapons, Report ISRI-02-07, Proceedings of the 4th

51

Int. Conf. of the Yugoslav Nuclear Society, Belgrade, Sep.30 - Oct.4,
2002, 14 pp, e-print arXiv:physics/0210071 available in PDF format at
http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0210071.

[64] A. Gsponer, Depleted-uranium weapons:

the whys and wherefores, in
A. Gut, B. Vitale and P. Low, Depleted Uranium (Spokesman, Notting-
ham, 2003, ISBN 0-85124-685-0) 126–158, e-print arXiv:physics/0301059
available in PDF format at http://arXiv.org/pdf/physics/0301059 .

[65] A. Gsponer and J.-P. Hurni, ITER: The International Thermonuclear Ex-
perimental Reactor and the Nuclear Weapons Proliferation Implications
of Thermonuclear-Fusion Energy Systems, Report ISRI-04-01 (February,
2004) 82 pp., e-print arXiv:physics/0401110 available in PDF format at
http://www.arxiv.org/pdf/physics/0401110.

[66] A. Gsponer, B. Jasani, and S. Sahin, Emerging nuclear energy systems and
Kerntechnik (Independent

nuclear weapon proliferation, Atomkernenergie
Journal on Energy Systems and Radiation) 43 (1983) 169–174.

·

[67] A. Gsponer, Energy ampliﬁer could have military uses, Nature 387 (1997)

226.

52

