5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
6
1
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Microscopic features of moving traﬃc jams

Boris S. Kerner 1, Sergey L. Klenov 2, Andreas Hiller 3, and Hubert Rehborn 4
1, 3, 4 DaimlerChrysler AG, REI/VF, HPC: G021, 71059 Sindelﬁngen, Germany and
2 Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Department of Physics, 141700 Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region, Russia

Empirical and numerical microscopic features of moving traﬃc jams are presented. Based on a
single vehicle data analysis, it is found that within wide moving jams, i.e., between the upstream
and downstream jam fronts there is a complex microscopic spatiotemporal structure. This jam
structure consists of alternations of regions in which traﬃc ﬂow is interrupted and ﬂow states of low
speeds associated with “moving blanks” within the jam. Empirical features of the moving blanks are
found. Based on microscopic models in the context of three-phase traﬃc theory, physical reasons for
moving blanks emergence within wide moving jams are disclosed. Structure of moving jam fronts
is studied based in microscopic traﬃc simulations. Non-linear eﬀects associated with moving jam
propagation are numerically investigated and compared with empirical results.

PACS numbers: 89.40.+k, 47.54.+r, 64.60.Cn, 64.60.Lx

I.

INTRODUCTION

Freeway traﬃc is a complex dynamic spatiotemporal
process. A huge number of traﬃc ﬂow models have been
introduced for explanations of traﬃc phenomena (see the
book [1], the reviews [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], and the confer-
ence proceedings [9, 10, 11, 12]).

In empirical freeway traﬃc observations, it has been
found that traﬃc can be either free or congested.
In
congested traﬃc, the “stop-and-go” phenomenon is ob-
served, i.e., a sequence of moving jams can appear (see
the classic papers by Edie and Foote, Treiterer et al.,
Koshi et al. [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]). A moving jam is
a localized structure propagating upstream. The jam is
spatially restricted by two jam fronts in which the speed,
density, and ﬂow rate vary sharply. Within the upstream
jam front, vehicles must decelerate to the speed in the
jam. Within the downstream jam front, vehicles acceler-
ate escaping from the jam.

Recently, from spatiotemporal analysis of empirical
data measured over many days and years on various free-
ways in diﬀerent countries, Kerner found that there are
two diﬀerent phases in congested traﬃc, synchronized
ﬂow and wide moving jam (see references in the book [1]).
Thus, there are three traﬃc phases: 1. Free ﬂow. 2. Syn-
chronized ﬂow. 3. Wide moving jam.

The fundamental diﬀerence between synchronized ﬂow
and wide moving jam is determined by the following
macroscopic spatiotemporal objective (empirical) crite-
ria, which deﬁne the phases [1]. The wide moving jam is a
moving jam that exhibits the characteristic, i.e., unique,
and coherent feature to maintain the mean velocity of the
downstream jam front, even when the jam propagates
through any other traﬃc states or freeway bottlenecks.
In contrast, synchronized ﬂow does not exhibit this char-
acteristic feature, in particular, the downstream front of
synchronized ﬂow is often ﬁxed at a freeway bottleneck.
Wide moving jam propagation through a freeway bot-
tleneck is associated with traﬃc ﬂow interruption within
the jam: Vehicles are in a stop within the jam during a
time interval, which is considerably longer than the mean

time delay in vehicle acceleration at the downstream jam
front. Thus, ﬂow interruption within wide moving jams
can be used as a microscopic criterion for distinguishing
between the wide moving jams and synchronized ﬂow in
congested traﬃc, even if single vehicle data is measured
at a single freeway location [19]. The traﬃc ﬂow inter-
ruption eﬀect discloses the physical nature of a qualita-
tively diﬀerent behavior of the wide moving jam phase in
comparison with the synchronized ﬂow phase. Moreover,
from an analysis of wide moving jams it can be assumed
that there are moving blanks within the jams: Vehicles
come to a stop at diﬀerent net distances (space gaps) to
each other at the upstream front of a wide moving jam.
Later, vehicles begin to move within the jam to cover
these blanks within the jam; as a result blanks appear
that move against the ﬂow.

It can be expected that both ﬂow interruption within
the jams and moving blanks should inﬂuence microscopic
features and characteristics of moving jams considerably.
However, a microscopic spatiotemporal structure of mov-
ing jams, in particular, the eﬀect of moving blanks as
well as microscopic features of the jam fronts have not
been understood. In this paper, based on an empirical
single vehicle data analysis the microscopic spatiotempo-
ral structure of moving jams and its microscopic features
have been found. These empirical features have been
explained using numerical simulations of a microscopic
model in the context of three-phase traﬃc theory, which
is adequate with all known empirical observations of con-
gested traﬃc [1]. The article is organized as follows. Em-
pirical and theoretical features of moving blanks within
wide moving jams are considered in Sect. II. In Sect. III,
microscopic features of the jam fronts and jam propaga-
tion are numerically studied.

II. MOVING BLANKS WITHIN WIDE
MOVING JAMS

A. Microscopic Characteristics of Moving Blanks
in Empirical Single Vehicle Data

1. Congested States in Single Vehicle Data

Single vehicle characteristics are usually obtained ei-
ther in driver experiments or through the use of detectors
(e.g., [18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28]). In the latter
case, data from a single freeway location or aggregated
data measured at diﬀerent locations are used [29].

Single vehicle data used in the article have been mea-
sured on two diﬀerent freeways in Germany. The ﬁrst
single vehicle data set has been measured on the three-
lane freeway section of the freeway A5-South at detectors
10 and 7 (Fig. 1 (a)); a detailed consideration of this free-
way section is made in [30]. For an overview of moving
jams observed in single vehicle data and used below, the
data averaged over 1-min intervals are shown in Fig. 1
(b). The second set of single vehicle data has been mea-
sured on a two-lane section of the freeway A92-West at
detectors D1 and D2 between intersections “AS Freising-
S¨ud” (I2) and “AK Neufahrn” (I3) near Munich Airport
(intersection I1: “AS Flughafen” in Fig. 1 (c)). Local
dynamics of the average speed and ﬂow rate (1-min aver-
aged data) for two typical days at which congested traﬃc
have been observed are shown in Fig. 1 (d, e).

In both freeway sections, single vehicle data are mea-
sured through the use of two sets of double induction
loop detectors. A detector set consists of two detectors
for each of the freeway lanes. A detector registers a vehi-
cle by producing a current electric pulse whose duration
∆ti is related to the time taken by the vehicle to traverse
the induction loop. This enables us to calculate the gross
time gap between two vehicles i and i+1 that have passed
the loop one after the other τ (gross)
i,i+1 . There are two detec-
tor loops in each detector. The distance between these
loops is constant. This enables us to calculate the indi-
vidual vehicle speed vi and estimate the vehicle length
di = vi∆ti as well as the net time gap (time headway)
between the vehicles i and i + 1: τi,i+1 = τ (gross)
− ∆ti.
i,i+1

2. Alternations of Flow Interruption and Moving Blanks
within Moving Jams

Within wide moving jams, i.e., between the jam fronts
regions in which ﬂow is interrupted are alternated with
moving blanks (Fig. 2). The condition for ﬂow interrup-
tion is [19]:

τmax ≫ τ (ac)
del ,

(1)

where τmax is the maximum time headway between two
vehicles within the jam and τ (ac)
is the mean time delay
del
in vehicle acceleration at the downstream jam front from

2

a standstill state within the jam. Under the condition (1),
there are at least several vehicles within the jam that are
in a standstill or if they are still moving, it is only with a
negligible low speed in comparison with the speed in the
jam inﬂow and outﬂow. These vehicles separate vehicles
accelerating at the downstream jam front from vehicles
decelerating at the upstream jam front: The inﬂow into
the jam has no inﬂuence on the jam outﬂow. Then the
jam outﬂow is fully determined by vehicles accelerating
at the downstream jam front. In the example, ﬂow inter-
ruption eﬀect occurs two times during jam propagation
through detector D10 [33] (Fig. 2 (a–g); these time inter-
vals are labeled “ﬂow interruption” in Fig. 2 (g)). The
values τmax for the ﬁrst ﬂow interruption intervals within
the wide moving jam are equal to approximately 50 s in
the left lane, 30 s in the middle line, and 80 s in the right
line. These values τmax satisfy the criterion (1) because
corresponding to empirical results τ (ac)
≈ 1.5 − 2 sec [1].
del
Whereas the ﬁrst ﬂow interruption interval appears al-
most simultaneously in all freeway lanes, the second one
occurs in the left lane earlier than in the middle and right
lanes (Fig. 2 (a–g)). In other empirical examples of wide
moving jams, the ﬂow interruption eﬀect occurs in some
of the freeway lanes only whereas in other lane(s) there is
no ﬂow interruption. It turns out that even in this case
a moving jam can be a wide moving one, i.e., the jam
propagates through a bottleneck while maintaining the
mean velocity of the downstream jam front, if the relation
τmax/τ (ac)
for the lane(s) with ﬂow interruption within
del
the jam is great enough [19]. Similar results are found
for other moving jams in single vehicle data, i.e., for the
example measured on the freeway A92-West (Fig. 1 (d)).
In other example shown in Fig. 1 (e), there are also
many moving jams during the time intervals of congested
traﬃc. The speed within two moving jams in Fig. 3 is also
very low. Nevertheless, rather than wide moving jams
these moving jams should be classiﬁed as narrow moving
jams [1, 19]. This is because there are no traﬃc ﬂow in-
terruptions within these moving jams (Fig. 3). Indeed,
upstream and downstream of the jams, as well as within
the jams there are many vehicles that traverse the induc-
tion loop detector: There is no qualitative diﬀerence in
the time-dependences of time headways for diﬀerent time
intervals associated with these narrow jams and in traﬃc
ﬂow upstream or downstream of the jams (Fig. 3 (b, c)).
This can be explained if it is assumed that each vehicle,
which meets a narrow moving jam, must decelerate at
the upstream jam front down to a very low speed within
the jam, can nevertheless accelerate at the downstream
jam front almost without any time delay within the jam:
The narrow moving jam consists of upstream and down-
stream jam fronts only. These assumptions are conﬁrmed
by single vehicle data shown in Fig. 3, in which time in-
tervals between diﬀerent measurements of time headways
and for the value 3600/τ (gross) for diﬀerent vehicles ex-
hibit the same behavior away and within the jams [19].
Thus, regardless of these narrow moving jams traﬃc ﬂow
is not discontinuous, i.e., the narrow moving jams belong

indeed to the synchronized ﬂow phase.

A comparison of the microscopic criterion (1) with the
macroscopic spatiotemporal criteria for the phases made
in [19] allows us to suggest that the moving jam in Fig. 2
for which the criterion (1) is satisﬁed is associated with
the wide moving jam phase: The jam propagates through
a bottleneck while maintaining the mean velocity of the
downstream jam front. In contrast, narrow moving jams
in Fig. 3 for which the criterion (1) is not satisﬁed are
associated with the synchronized ﬂow phase: The narrow
moving jam is caught at the bottleneck.

Between ﬂow interruption intervals within the wide
moving jam in Fig. 2, vehicles within the jam exhibit
time headways about 5 sec or longer. The latter can be
explained by moving blanks within the jam. Empirical
single vehicle data (Fig. 2) shows that when vehicles meet
the wide moving jam, ﬁrstly they decelerate at the up-
stream jam front sharply up to a standstill. As a result,
the ﬁrst ﬂow interruption interval in all lanes appears. It
can be assumed that net distances (space gaps) between
these vehicles can be very diﬀerent and the mean space
gap can exceed a minimum (safe) space gap considerably.
For this reason, later the vehicles become to decrease
these space gaps. As a result, low vehicle speed states
appear within the jam as this can be seen in Fig. 2 (a, c,
e). Consequently, due to this vehicle motion new space
gaps, i.e., blanks between vehicles occur upstream within
the jam. Then other vehicles that are upstream begin to
move within the jam covering these blanks. This lead
to occurrence of moving blanks propagating upstream
within the jam.

These assumptions are conﬁrmed by low speed states
within the jam (Fig. 2 (a, c, e)). These low speed states
within wide moving jams associated with moving blanks
are not necessarily synchronized between diﬀerent lanes.
For example, in Fig. 2 (a, c, e), in the interval 8:43–
8:44 there can be seen non-interrupted traﬃc ﬂows of
low speeds in the middle and right lanes associated with
moving blanks within the jam, whereas in the left lane
traﬃc ﬂow is interrupted. Mean time headways related
to moving blanks within the jam are usually longer (3–7
sec) than they are away from the jam in free ﬂow and in
synchronized ﬂow (Fig. 2 (h)).

3. Empirical characteristics of traﬃc phases

A comparison of average characteristics of low vehicle
speeds within a wide moving jam associated with moving
blanks (crossing and triangle points) with free ﬂow (black
quadrates), synchronized ﬂow (circles), and the line J
for the downstream jam front (line J) is presented in
Fig. 4, in which a moving averaging of vehicle platoons
of ﬁve vehicles passing the detector has been performed.
As found earlier [20, 21, 22] (see Fig. 1 in [22]), very
small density states associated with low vehicle speeds
are observed within wide moving jams (crossing points
in Fig. 4 (a, b)). Due to these “characteristic” small

3

density states within wide moving jams (crossing points
in Fig. 4 (a, b)) the ﬂow rate is usually in average an
increasing function of density in the ﬂow–density plane
(crossings plus triangle points in Fig. 4 (a)).

However, a single vehicle analysis of these small den-
sity points that has been made allows us to conclude
that these points (crossing points in Fig. 4 (a)) as well as
the related increasing function of the ﬂow rate with den-
sity associated with wide moving jams [22] result from a
large systematic error. This error is associated with error
density estimation within the jams made in [20, 21, 22].
To understand this critical conclusion, recall that due
to traﬃc ﬂow interruption within the wide moving jam
some of the time headways are very large (Fig. 2 (b, d,
f)). The use of the single vehicle data associated with
large time headways for the density estimation through
the formula ρ = q/v (q and v are the ﬂow rate and av-
erage speed) leads to very small densities with the jam.
However, during traﬃc ﬂow interruption within the jam
vehicle do not move; the real density of these standing
vehicles is very large. This is because the related mea-
sured time headways are not related to time headways
between vehicles moving in traﬃc. Thus, the single vehi-
cle data associated with the traﬃc ﬂow interruption ef-
fect within wide moving jams cannot be used for density
estimation within the jams. To estimate real vehicle den-
sity within a wide moving jam during ﬂow interruption,
the density deﬁnition (number of vehicles per a freeway
length at a given time moment), i.e., spatial averaging
should be used, rather than density estimation through
the use of the formula ρ = q/v in which the ﬂow rate and
average speed are related to time averaging of vehicles
passing a detector during a given time interval. The spa-
tial averaging (density deﬁnition) is not possible to apply,
when data is measured at detectors whose locations are
far away from each other (Fig. 1 (a)). The conclusion
about the large systematic error in density estimation
within wide moving jams is conﬁrmed by a numerical
analysis made in Sect. II B.

This analysis shows also that within wide moving jams
density estimation ρ = q/v exhibits a relative small error
during non-interrupted vehicle motion associated with
moving blanks within the jams. This is because in this
case the associated time headways are related to vehicles
moving within the jams. If only these single vehicle data
are used for density estimation, then rather than an in-
creasing function of the ﬂow rate with density (crossing
and triangle points in Fig. 4 (a)), the points for moving
blanks within the jam associated with random transfor-
mations in diﬀerent directions in the ﬂow–density plane
appear (triangle points in Fig. 4 (c, e, g)). This is as-
sociated with the physical meaning of low vehicle speed
states whose occurrence is due non-regular vehicle mo-
tion covering blanks within the wide moving jam.

In Fig. 4, points for synchronized ﬂow are related to
synchronized ﬂow states in the jam inﬂow. The speed in
these states is considerably higher than the speed within
low speed states associated with moving blanks within

the jam. For this reason, three types of points (for free
ﬂow, synchronized ﬂow, and moving blanks within the
wide moving jams) appear that are separated one from
another in the ﬂow–density and speed–density planes.
These separated traﬃc states for the three traﬃc phases
– free ﬂow, synchronized ﬂow, and wide moving jams –
are in accordance with the states on a theoretical double
Z-characteristics of three-phase traﬃc theory (see Sect.
6.4 in [1]), if low speed states within the wide moving
jam are taken into account.

However, synchronized ﬂow states can overlap states
associated with moving blanks within a wide moving jam
(Fig. 5). This is because the speed in synchronized ﬂow
states can be as low as the speed in states associated with
moving blanks within the jam. Thus, in general case
low speed states associated with moving blanks within
wide moving jams cannot be used for clear distinguishing
the synchronized ﬂow and wide moving jam phases in
congested traﬃc.

B. Numerical Simulations of Moving Blanks

In numerical simulations presented below, we use the
microscopic models and model parameters of Ref. [31,
32]. The main idea of these models is the speed adap-
tation eﬀect in synchronized ﬂow that takes place when
the vehicle cannot pass the preceding vehicle. Within a
so-called “synchronization gap”, the vehicle tends to ad-
just its speed to preceding vehicle without caring, what
the precise space gap is, as long as it is safe. Thus, there
are an inﬁnity of model steady states at each synchro-
nized ﬂow speed associated with the space gaps between
the synchronization and safe gaps, i.e., there is no fun-
damental diagram for steady state model solutions for
synchronized ﬂow in these models.
In addition, driver
time delay depends on whether a vehicle decelerates or
accelerates as well as on the vehicle speed. This enable us
to simulate driver behavior in various traﬃc conditions.
A detailed consideration of the models, their physics and
parameters can be found in Ref. [31, 32] and Sects. 16.3
and 20.2 of the book [1]. When some other model pa-
rameters are used, they are given in ﬁgure captions.

For a moving jam in Fig. 6 (a, b), the criterion (1)
is satisﬁed. Indeed, there are two regions in which ﬂow
interruption within the jam occur. The maximum time
headways (Fig. 6 (c)) associated with these ﬂow inter-
ruption eﬀects satisfy the criterion (1) (model time delay
τ (ac)
≈ 1.74 sec) in the left and right freeway lanes. As
del
a result, in accordance with the macroscopic spatiotem-
poral criteria for the wide moving jam phase, this jam
propagates through an on-ramp bottleneck while main-
taining the mean velocity of the downstream jam front.
Within the wide moving jam, between time intervals of
ﬂow interruptions there are intervals in which low speed
states associated with moving blanks (Fig. 6 (b, c)). As
can be seen from vehicle trajectories within the jam, mov-
ing blanks are related to a non-regular vehicle motion of

4

covering blanks between vehicles within the jam (Fig. 7
(a)). These moving blanks propagate upstream with a
negative velocity that is in average equal to the charac-
teristic speed of the downstream jam front. During jam
propagation, locations of moving blanks as well as their
spatial and temporal distributions exhibit complex vari-
ations within the jam, which are diﬀerent in the left and
right lanes (Fig. 7 (b, c)); these variations seem to cor-
respond to a random vehicle speed behavior within the
jam.

Due to ﬂow interruption within the wide moving jam
shown in Fig. 6 (a–c), there is a large error in density
distributions calculated through the formula ρ = q/v in
the vicinity of the jam fronts at greater density (curves
2 in Fig. 6 (d)) in comparison with density distributions
found based on the density deﬁnition (vehicles per free-
way length) (curves 1).
Indeed, curves 2 in Fig. 6 (d)
show a signiﬁcant density underestimation within mov-
ing jams. These error states (crossing points in Fig. 8 (a))
explain the systematic error in the empirical studies of
states within wide moving jams made in Ref. [20, 21, 22]
that has been illustrated in Fig. 4 (a, b) (compare error
points in Figs. 4 (a, b) and 8 (a)).

Only within the regions of moving blanks errors in den-
sity distributions calculated through the formula ρ = q/v
(curves 2 in Fig. 6 (d)) in comparison with density dis-
tributions found based on the density deﬁnition (curves
1) decrease considerably. For this reason, if error states
associated with ﬂow interruption within the jam are re-
moved, then remaining states in the ﬂow–density (Fig. 8
(b)) and speed–density planes (Fig. 8 (c)) exhibit a quali-
tative correspondence with the states within the jam cal-
culated through the density deﬁnition (Fig. 8 (d, e)) and
related to the speed and density distributions found at a
ﬁxed time moment 31.5 min (Fig. 6 (e, f)). Nevertheless,
remaining errors lead to some quantitative diﬀerences in
traﬃc state determinations within the jam based on de-
tector measurements (Fig. 8 (b, c)) and on the density
calculation through the density deﬁnition (Fig. 8 (d, e)).
In particular, there are points in the ﬂow–density plane
found in the density calculation through the density def-
inition (Fig. 8 (d)), which are related to greater density
up to the maximum jam density. These points cannot
usually be found based on traﬃc measurements at a de-
tector location (Fig. 8 (b, c)).

To understand possible scenarios of moving blanks
emergence within a wide moving jam, spontaneous jam
emergence in synchronized ﬂow of an GP at an on-ramp
bottleneck has been simulated (Fig. 9). Due to a het-
erogeneous traﬃc consisting of vehicles and long vehicles
used in these simulations, a moving jam emerges ﬁrstly
in the right lane only (t = 23 min in Figs. 9 (b, c) and 10
(a)). Then some vehicles in the right lane change to the
left lane (arrow 1 in Fig. 10 (a)). One the one hand,
this lane changing decreases speed in the left lane. On
the other hand, space gaps (blanks) between vehicles in
the right lane increase due to lane changing. Vehicles in
the right lane begin to cover these blanks (t ≈ 24 min

in Fig. 10 (a)). As a result, low speed states within the
jam appear associated with these moving blanks. Later,
subsequent lane changing of vehicles from the right to
the left lane results in an abrupt decrease in speed in the
left lane leading to jam formation in this lane (arrow 2
in Fig. 10 (a)). This causes the associated abrupt jam
front formation and moving blanks emergence (t ≈ 25
min in Figs. 9 (b, c) and 10 (a)). Thus, in this scenario
vehicle lane changing from the right to the left lane at
the upstream jam front is the main reason for moving
blanks emergence within the jam (moving blanks labeled
“blanks 1” in Fig. 9 (b)).
During subsequent

jam propagation new moving
blanks emerge (Fig. 9 (d, e)). Firstly, the upstream jam
front in the right lane is upstream of the jam front in
the left lane (t = 35 min, Fig. 9 (d, e)). Due to lane
changing of vehicles from the right to the left lane, the
front locations are synchronized each other (arrow 3 in
Fig. 10 (b)). This lane changing causes moving blanks
emergence within the jam (t = 37 min, moving blanks
labeled “blanks 2” in Fig. 9 (d)).

III. MOVING JAM FRONTS AND JAM
PROPAGATION LOOPS

Whereas within the upstream jam front vehicles de-
celerate when they met the jam, within the downstream
jam front vehicles accelerate escaping from the jam. In
simulations made on a single-lane road with an on-ramp
bottleneck (Fig. 11), a moving jam is formed in a dissolv-
ing general pattern (DGP) that emerges spontaneously
at the bottleneck. A platoon of seven vehicles is con-
sidered that is going through the moving jam and other
traﬃc states related to the DGP. Within the platoon the
density ρ is calculated at each given time moment, i.e.,
in accordance with the density deﬁnition (vehicles per
freeway length). The ﬂow rate associated with the pla-
toon is q = ρv, where v is average vehicle speed within
the platton. It turns out that traﬃc states in the ﬂow–
density and speed–density planes associated with these
speed and density within the platoon exhibit two loops la-
beled A and B in Fig. 11 (d, e). The loops are associated
with diﬀerent characteristics of the three traﬃc phases,
free ﬂow, synchronized ﬂow, and wide moving jam pass-
ing by the vehicle platoon going through the DGP (solid
curve in Fig. 11 (a)). These numerical results (Fig. 11 (d,
e)) explain empirical results of Treiterer and Myers [16]
and Treiterer [17] found in their empirical study of vehi-
cle trajectories within a moving jam, which emerged and
propagated upstream of an on-ramp bottleneck [34].

To understand these statements, note that upstream
of the bottleneck ﬁrstly synchronized ﬂow occurs. Then
a narrow moving jam emerges spontaneously in this syn-
chronized ﬂow. During jam propagation, the jam ampli-
tude grows and the narrow moving jam transforms into
a wide moving jam, i.e., an S→J transition occurs in
the synchronized ﬂow. This wide moving jam prevents

5

subsequent moving jam emergence in synchronized ﬂow
upstream of the bottleneck. As a result, the DGP ap-
pears at the bottleneck, which consists of synchronized
ﬂow upstream of the moving jam, the moving jam, and
synchronized ﬂow that is downstream of the jam and up-
stream of the bottleneck (Fig. 11 (a); see a more detailed
consideration of the physics of DGP emergence in the
book [1]).

Thus, the chosen vehicle platoon (solid curve in Fig. 11
(a)) is going ﬁrstly through free ﬂow (t < 74 min in
Fig. 11 (a, b)). Secondly, the platoon must decelerate
when it reaches synchronized ﬂow, which is upstream of
the wide moving jam. In this synchronized ﬂow, speed
decreases during the platoon propagation (74 < t < 77
min in Fig. 11 (a, b)). The associated synchronized ﬂow
states lie at lower speed and greater density in the ﬂow–
density and speed–density planes than the speed and den-
sity within the platoon in free ﬂow, respectively (curve 1
in Fig. 11 (d)). Thirdly, the platoon meets the upstream
jam front within which the vehicles must decelerate up
to the speed within the jam (this speed is almost as low
as zero; t ≈ 78.5 min in Fig. 11 (a, b)). Consequently,
the ﬂow rate and speed sharply decrease and density in-
creases (curve for the upstream jam front in Fig. 11 (d,
e)). Later, due to upstream jam propagation through the
platoon, the vehicles within the platoon can accelerate at
the downstream jam front (t ≈ 79 min in Fig. 11 (a, b)).
As a result, the ﬂow rate and speed sharply increase and
density decreases (curve for the downstream jam front in
Fig. 11 (d, e)). We see that at the upstream jam front
the ﬂow rate is greater than at the downstream front at
the same density. This is because vehicles decelerating
at the upstream jam front accept shorter time headways
than time headways of vehicles accelerating at the down-
stream jam front.

Then the platoon moves through synchronized ﬂow
downstream of the jam. In this synchronized ﬂow, the
speed is lower than in free ﬂow upstream of the jam
and downstream of the bottleneck (79 < t < 82 min
in Fig. 11 (a, b)). This platoon propagation is also as-
sociated with the synchronized ﬂow within the merging
region of the on-ramp bottleneck (Fig. 11 (a–c)). Within
this region due to the vehicle merging from the on-ramp
onto the main road time headways within the platoon
decrease. Therefore, the ﬂow rate is a sharply increas-
ing function of freeway location. For this reason, traﬃc
states in the ﬂow–density and speed–density planes asso-
ciated with the platoon, which is going through synchro-
nized ﬂow downstream of the jam, exhibit rapid ﬂow rate
growth with a slightly increasing speed. These synchro-
nized ﬂow states lie at lower speed and greater density in
the ﬂow–density and speed–density planes than the speed
and density in free ﬂow, respectively (curve 2 in Fig. 11
(d)). This growth of the ﬂow rate results in the loop
labeled A in the ﬂow–density and speed–density planes.
This loop is formed by the upstream and downstream
jam fronts together with a part of the curve 2 related to
the synchronized ﬂow downstream of the jam (Fig. 11 (d,

e)).

Later, the platoon propagates through the downstream
front of synchronized ﬂow in which the speed increases
considerably up to the speed in free ﬂow downstream of
the bottleneck (t ≈ 82.5 min in Fig. 11 (b)). Hence, traf-
ﬁc states in the ﬂow–density and speed–density planes
related to the platoon propagating through the down-
stream front of synchronized ﬂow at the bottleneck ex-
hibit rapid speed growth in the ﬂow–density and speed–
density planes (curve 3 in Fig. 11 (d)). Consequently,
the platoon propagation through synchronized ﬂow up-
stream of the jam (curve 1), through synchronized ﬂow
downstream of the jam (curve 2), as well as through the
downstream front of the synchronized ﬂow at the bottle-
neck up to free ﬂow downstream of this front (curve 3)
lead to the second loop labeled B in the ﬂow–density and
speed–density planes (Fig. 11 (d)).

Simulations show that loops’ shapes depend on a ve-
hicle platoon that is chosen. If a platoon of seven vehi-
cles is chosen, which propagates earlier through the DGP
than the platoon considered in Fig. 11 (b–e), then the
loops A and B (Fig. 12 (a, b)) are diﬀerent from those in
Fig. 11 (d, e). There are several reasons for this result.
Firstly, free ﬂow and synchronized ﬂow states upstream
and downstream of the jam within the platoon depend
on the chosen platoon considerably. Secondly, in Fig. 12
(a, b) the platoon is going through is a narrow moving
jam rather than through a wide moving one.

If another platoon of seven vehicles is chosen, which
propagates later through the DGP than the platoon con-
sidered in Fig. 11 (b–e), then the shape of the loops A
and B (Fig. 12 (c, d) is diﬀerent from those in Figs. 11
(d, e) and 12 (a, b). The ﬁrst reason for this diﬀerent
behavior is the same as those mentioned above. In ad-
dition, in this case the platoon is going through a wide
moving jam whose width is greater than the width of the
wide moving jam associated with the platoon chosen in
Fig. 11 (b–e). As a result, there are low speed states
within the jam associated with moving blanks within the
jam.

In general, due to upstream jam propagation the dis-
tance between the downstream jam front and bottleneck
location is a time function; in addition, jam characteris-
tics change over time considerably. Thus, average space
gaps and speeds within a platoon depend on the time in-
terval, when the platoon is going through a moving jam,
through synchronized ﬂows and free ﬂows upstream and
downstream of the jam. This can change both loops A
and B in Fig. 12 (a–d) associated with a vehicle platoon
going through even the same DGP appreciably. More-
over, the ﬂow rate in free ﬂow downstream of the bottle-
neck associated with a vehicle platoon can be very dif-
ferent for diﬀerent platoons. This is due to considerable
variations in space gaps between vehicles within diﬀerent
platoons after the platoons have passed the downstream
front of synchronized ﬂow at the bottleneck. This ex-
plains diﬀerent ﬂow rates in the free ﬂow associated with
three vehicles platoons in Figs. 11 (d) and 12 (a, c). Ap-

6

parently, this complex loop behavior explains very diﬀer-
ent loops A and B observed in the empirical study by
Treiterer and Myers [16] and Treiterer [17].

The loops in the ﬂow–density and speed–density planes
shown in Fig. 11 (c, d) and 12 (a–d) are associated with
measurements of the density within the vehicle platoon
in accordance with the density deﬁnition (vehicles per
freeway length). The use of the density deﬁnition is pos-
sible, if vehicle trajectories are known as this the case
in simulations presented in the article above or in the
Treiterer and Myers’s empirical observations of vehicle
trajectories [16, 17].

Unfortunately, the use of this correct procedure is not
possible to perform, when single vehicle data is measured
by a local detector on a road as this the case for the wide
In this case, the density
moving jam shown in Fig. 2.
has to be estimated through the formula ρ = q/v, in
which the ﬂow rate q and speed v are associated with
time averaging over many diﬀerent vehicle platoons of
seven vehicles passing the detector. There are two sys-
tematic errors in this case: (i) Density estimation at lower
speeds within the jam (see explanations of Fig. 6 (d) in
Sect. II B). (ii) Measured and estimated traﬃc variables
associated with diﬀerent platoons passing the detector do
not coincide with the respective traﬃc variables found for
a single vehicle platoon going through the wide moving
jam and other traﬃc phases in Fig. 11.

Apparently these errors lead to qualitative diﬀerent
empirical loops in the ﬂow–density and speed–density
planes (Fig. 12 (e)) for the jam shown in Fig. 2 in com-
parison with empirical observations by Treiterer and My-
ers [16, 17]. These conclusions are conﬁrmed by numeri-
cal simulations in which the same procedure of the den-
sity estimation through detector measurements is used
(Fig. 12 (f, g)) as those in empirical Fig. 12 (e). The
simulated loops in the ﬂow–density and speed–density
planes (Fig. 12 (f, g)) associated with traﬃc variables de-
termined at a detector location within the DGP shown
in Fig. 11 (a) are qualitatively diﬀerent from the loops
found through the use of the correct density calculation
associated with vehicle platoon propagation through the
DGP (Fig. 11 (d, e)).

IV. DISCUSSION

Based on empirical and model results presented, the

following conclusions can be made:

(i) In empirical observations and numerical simula-
tions, moving blanks that are responsible for low speed
states within a wide moving jam exhibit complex a non-
regular spatiotemporal behavior. The blanks are often
not synchronized between diﬀerent freeway lanes.

(ii) Lane changing at the upstream front of a wide mov-
ing jam can lead to large moving blanks within the jam.
(iii) Moving blanks emergence is characterized by ran-
dom changes of the upstream jam front location in some
of freeway lanes over time.

(iv) To ﬁnd correct characteristics associated with
moving blanks within wide moving jams, measurement
points related to the ﬂow interruption eﬀect within the
jams leading to a large systematic error in density es-
timation have to be removed, when wide moving jam
characteristics are calculated.

(v) In simulations, there are two loops in the ﬂow–
density plane associated with a vehicle platoon propa-
gation through a moving jam as well as through free

ﬂow and synchronized ﬂow states of traﬃc upstream and
downstream of the jam. The loops are associated with
diﬀerent characteristics of the three traﬃc phases, free
ﬂow, synchronized ﬂow, and wide moving jam passing by
the platoon. These simulation results made in the con-
text of three-phase traﬃc theory explain empirical obser-
vations of traﬃc dynamics in vehicle trajectories found
by Treiterer and Myers [16] and Treiterer [17].

7

[1] B.S. Kerner. The Physics of Traﬃc (Springer, Berlin,

enberg. Phys. Rev. E 60, 6480 (1999).

New York 2004).

[2] N.H. Gartner, C.J. Messer, A. Rathi (eds.). Special
Report 165: Revised Monograph on Traﬃc Flow The-
ory (Transportation Research Board, Washington, D.C.
1997).

[3] D.E. Wolf. Physica A 263, 438 (1999).
[4] D. Chowdhury, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider. Physics

Reports 329, 199 (2000).

[5] D. Helbing. Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 1067–1141 (2001).
[6] T. Nagatani. Rep. Prog. Phys. 65, 1331–1386 (2002).
[7] K. Nagel, P. Wagner, R. Woesler. Operation Res. 51,

[8] R. Mahnke, J. Kaupuˇzs, I. Lubashevsky, Phys. Rep. 408,

681–716 (2003).

1-130 (2005).

[9] H.S. Mahmassani (editor). Transportation and Traﬃc
Theory, Proceedings of the 16th Inter. Sym. on Trans-
portation and Traﬃc Theory (Elsevier, Amsterdam 2005)
[10] D. Helbing, H.J. Herrmann, M. Schreckenberg, D.E. Wolf
(editors). Traﬃc and Granular Flow’ 99 (Springer, Hei-
delberg 2000)

[11] M. Fukui, Y. Sugiyama, M. Schreckenberg, D.E. Wolf
(editors). Traﬃc and Granular Flow’ 01 (Springer, Hei-
delberg 2003)

[12] S.P. Hoogendoorn, S. Luding, P.H.L. Bovy, M. Schreck-
enberg, D.E. Wolf (editors). Traﬃc and Granular Flow’
03 (Springer, Heidelberg 2005).

[13] L.C. Edie, and R.S. Foote. Highway Res. Board, Proc.

Ann. Meeting 37, 334 (1958).

[14] L.C. Edie, R.S. Foote. ‘Eﬀect of Shock Waves on Tunnel
Traﬃc Flow’. In: Highway Research Board Proceedings
39 (HRB, National Research Council, Washington, D.C.
1960) pp. 492–505.

[15] L.C. Edie. Operations Research 9, 66–77 (1961).
[16] J. Treiterer, J.A. Myers. ‘The Hysteresis Phenomenon in
Traﬃc Flow’. In: Procs. 6th International Symposium on
Transportation and Traﬃc Theory. ed. by D.J. Buckley
(A.H. & A.W. Reed, London 1974) pp. 13–38.

[17] J. Treiterer. ‘Investigation of Traﬃc Dynamics by Aerial
Photogrammetry Techniques’. Ohio State University
Technical Report PB 246 094, Columbus, Ohio (1975).

[18] M. Koshi, M. Iwasaki, I. Ohkura. ‘Some Findings and
an Overview on Vehicular Flow Characteristics’. In:
Procs. 8th International Symposium on Transportation
and Traﬃc Theory ed. V. F. Hurdle, et al (University of
Toronto Press, Toronto, Ontario 1983) pp. 403.
[19] B. S. Kerner, S. L. Klenov, A. Hiller,

e-print:

physics/0507094 (2005); J. Phys. A (submitted) .

[20] L. Neubert, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider, M. Schreck-

[21] W. Knospe, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider, M. Schreck-

enberg. Phys. Rev. E 65, 056133 (2002).

[22] W. Knospe, L. Santen, A. Schadschneider, M. Schreck-

enberg. Phys. Rev. E 70, 016115 (2004).
[23] R. J. Cowan. Trans. Rec. 9, 371–375 (1976).
[24] T. Luttinen. Transportation Res. Rec. 1365 (1992).
[25] P.H.L. Bovy (editor). Motorway Analysis: New Method-
ologies and Recent Empirical Findings (Delft University
Press, Delft 1998).

[26] B. Tilch, D. Helbing, in: [10], p.333.
[27] J. Banks. Trans. Rec. B 37, 539–554 (2004).
[28] G.S. Gurusinghe, T. Nakatsuji, Y. Azuta, P. Ranjitkar,
Y. Tanaboriboon. ‘Multiple Car-Following Data Using
Real-Time Kinematic Global Positioning System’. In:
Preprints of the 82nd TRB Annual Meeting TRB Paper
No.: 03-4137 (TRB, Washington D.C. 2003).

[29] Sometimes for better statistical conclusions, traﬃc vari-
ables obtained from various days or/and many diﬀerent
locations are aggregated to a data set; this data base of
aggregated data is further used for calculation of traﬃc
ﬂow characteristics.

[30] B. S. Kerner. Phys. Rev. E 65, 046138 (2002).
[31] B.S. Kerner, S.L. Klenov, Phys. Rev. 68 036130 (2003)
[32] B.S. Kerner, S.L. Klenov, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 37

8753–8788 (2004).

[33] From a comparison of a local traﬃc dynamics measured
at D7 with the dynamics at D10 in Fig. 1 (b) it has been
found that the moving jams propagate upstream with the
mean velocity of the downstream jam fronts vg ≈ − 15.8
km/h.

[34] It must be noted that in accordance with traﬃc ﬂow
theory development in the 70’ies, Treiterer and My-
ers [16, 17] associated loops in the ﬂow–density and
speed-density relationships, which they found in obser-
vations of vehicle platoon going through a moving jam,
with “hysteresis phenomena” in traﬃc ﬂow. However,
from three-phase traﬃc theory we know now that hys-
teresis phenomena in traﬃc ﬂow are associated with the
F→S and S→J transitions as well as with diﬀerent reverse
transitions like F→J→F, S→J→S, S→J→F, or F→J→S
transitions [1]. As can be seen from simulations presented
in Fig. 11, the loops in the ﬂow–density plane are caused
by vehicle platoon propagation through diﬀerent traﬃc
ﬂow phases (free ﬂow, synchronized ﬂow, and wide mov-
ing jam), which can already be formed in traﬃc, rather
than by one of the types of the phase transitions.

8

FIG. 1: Macroscopic characteristics of empirical single vehicle data measured on the freeway A5-South (a, b) and on the freeway
A92-West (c–e): (a) – Sketch of detector arrangement of a section on the freeway A5-South. (b) – Local traﬃc dynamics (one-
minute average data) of the speed (left) and ﬂow rate (right) in three freeway lanes on December 12, 1995. (c) – Sketch of
detector arrangement on a section of the freeway A92-West. (d, e) – Local traﬃc dynamics (one-minute average data) of the
speed (left) and ﬂow rate (right) on July 17, 2000 (d) and August 23, 2000 (e) in both freeway lanes.

9

FIG. 2: Microscopic structure of wide moving jams: (a–f) – Empirical single vehicle data for speed within a wide moving jam
(a, c, e) and the associated time headways (b, d, f) in the left (a, b), middle (c, d), and right lanes (e, f) related to the example
at D10 in Fig. 1 (b). (g) – Time distributions of the value 3600/τ (gross) in the left lane. (h) – Probability for time headways in
the left lane for free ﬂow (solid curve, 6 : 20 ≤ t ≤ 6 : 40), synchronized ﬂow (dashed curve, 8 : 39 ≤ t ≤ 8 : 42); moving blanks
within the wide moving jam (dotted curve, 8 : 42 < t ≤ 8 : 44).

10

FIG. 3: Microscopic structure of narrow moving jams: Empirical single vehicle data for speed within a sequence of two narrow
moving jams in the left (left) and right lanes (right) (a) as well as the associated time distributions of time headways τ (b) and
of the value 3600/τ (gross) (c) related to Fig. 1 (e).

11

FIG. 4: Empirical characteristics of traﬃc phases: (a, b) – Traﬃc phases in the ﬂow–density (a) and speed–density (b) planes
for data in the left lane together with the line J (a) and the curve J (b) associated with the propagation of the downstream
front of the wide moving jam. (c–g) – Traﬃc phases in the ﬂow–density (c, e, g) and speed–density (d, f, h) planes for improved
data in the left (c, d), middle (e, f), and right (g, h) lanes. Moving averaging over the platoon of ﬁve vehicles is used.

12

FIG. 5: Empirical characteristics of traﬃc phases: (a, b) – Single vehicle data for speed (a) and time headways (b) for
synchronized ﬂow at D10 related to Fig. 1 (b). (c, d) – Traﬃc states averaged over ﬁve vehicles (moving average) associated
with synchronized ﬂow in (a) and with moving blanks within the jam taken from Fig. 4 (e, f) in the ﬂow–density (c) and
speed–density planes (d). Arrows in (a) show time intervals of synchronized ﬂow states used in (c, d). Middle freeway lane.

13

FIG. 6: Simulations of moving blanks within a wide moving jam propagating through an on-ramp bottleneck. (a) – Speed
in space and time on the main road. (b–d) – Single vehicle data for time dependencies of speed (b), time headways (c), and
the associated density distributions calculated through the density deﬁnition (curves 1) and the formula ρ = q/v (curves 2)
(d) at the location 8.5 km. Left and right ﬁgures (a–d) are related to the left and right lanes, respectively. In (d) for density
calculation, a moving averaging over the platoon of ﬁve vehicles is performed. To use the density deﬁnition by calculations
of curves 1 in (d), at a time moment when one of the vehicles has just been detected at the location 8.5 km the density
within a vehicle platoon is calculated. This platoon consists of the detected vehicle and two vehicles upstream and two vehicles
downstream. In contrast, calculations of curves 2 in (d) are performed as in empirical observations in Fig. 4, i.e., the ﬂow rate
q and average speed v of the platoon passing the location are used in the formula ρ = q/v. (e, f) – Speed (e) and density (f)
related to (a) as functions of distance at the time moment 31.5 min in the left and right lanes. Model for heterogeneous traﬃc
of Sect. 20.2 in [1] with 80% fast and 20% long vehicles; τ (a, j)
0 (v) = (a(j) + b(j) min(1, v/10)), j = 1,3;
a(1) = 0.565, b(1) = 0.085 for fast vehicles (j = 1), and a(3) = 0.3, b(3) = 0.18 for long vehicles (j = 3). qin = 1565, qon = 337
vehicles/h/lane. qout = 1900 and qout = 1100 vehicles/h in the left and right lanes, respectively. On-ramp location is xon =
10 km, on-ramp merging region length is Lm = 300 m. The wide moving jam is exited by local perturbations applied in both
lanes; perturbation duration T (pert) and their location ∆x(pert) downstream of the end of the on-ramp merging region are: (3
min, 1250 m).

(v) = τ /p(j)

0 (v), p(j)

del

14

FIG. 7: Microscopic characteristics of moving blanks within the wide moving jam shown in Fig. 6 (a): (a) – Vehicle trajectories
in the left (left) and right (right) lanes. (b, c) – Moving blanks at three diﬀerent locations (b) and three diﬀerent time moments
(c) in the left and right lanes. Trajectories of each 4th vehicle are shown.

15

FIG. 8: Characteristics of moving blanks within the wide moving jam shown in Fig. 6 (a) together with states of free ﬂow and
synchronized ﬂow in the ﬂow–density (a, b, d) and speed–density planes (c, e). Left and right ﬁgures are related to the left
and right lanes, respectively: (a–c) – States within the jam are determined at detector located at 8.5 km through the formula
ρ = q/v in two cases in which all states within the jam measured at the detector are shown (a) and error states are removed (b,
c). (d, e) – States within the jam are determined through the density deﬁnition (vehicles per freeway length) at time moment
31.5 min. Moving average over ﬁve vehicles in vehicle platoons is used. J (left) and J (right) are the line J (a, b, d) and the
associated curve J (c, e) for the downstream jam front in the left and right lanes, respectively.

16

FIG. 9: Simulations of moving blanks emergence: (a) – Speed in space and time within general pattern (GP) at on-ramp
bottleneck in the left (left) and right lanes (right). (b–e) – Speed (b, d) and density (c, e) determined through the use of the
density deﬁnition (vehicles per freeway length) at diﬀerent time moments associated with the GP in (a) in the left and right
lanes. qin = 1714, qon = 450 vehicles/h/lane. Model and bottleneck parameters are the same as those in Fig. 6.

17

FIG. 10: Moving blanks emergence in the GP shown in Fig. 9 (a): (a, b) – Vehicle trajectories for diﬀerent time intervals in
the left and right lanes.

18

FIG. 11: Microscopic features of moving jam propagation: (a) – Speed on the main road in time and space related to a dissolving
general pattern (DGP) that emerges spontaneously at an on-ramp bottleneck. (b) – Speed within a platoon of seven vehicles
propagating through the wide moving jam and synchronized ﬂow phases formed in the DGP; speed is averaged over the vehicle
platoon. Solid curve in (a) shows the average trajectory associated with platoon propagation. (c) – Vehicle trajectories within
the DGP in which the vehicle platoon related to (b) is marked by solid block. (d, e) – Flow–density (d) and speed–density
relationships (e) associated with the platoon of seven vehicles going through the wide moving jam and synchronized ﬂow phases
related to the DGP in (a–c). Single-lane model of identical vehicles (Sect. 16.3 of Ref. [1]). qin = 1946, qon = 345 vehicles/h.
xon = 10 km, Lm = 300 m. In (c) trajectories of each 10th vehicle are shown.

19

FIG. 12: Simulated ﬂow–density (a, c) and speed–density relationships (b, d) of two diﬀerent platoons of seven vehicles going
through the wide moving jam and other traﬃc phases within the DGP shown in Fig. 11 (a). (e) – Empirical ﬂow–density
relationships in the left and middle lanes associated with the wide moving jam in Fig. 2. (f, g) – Simulated ﬂow–density (f) and
speed–density relationships (g) associated with moving averaging of speed v and ﬂow rate q within platoons of seven vehicles
going through a virtual detector at x = 8 km within the DGP shown in Fig. 11 (a).

