1

5
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
3
1
0
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Modelling gap-size distribution of parked cars using
random-matrix theory

A.Y. Abul-Magd
Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Science, Zagazig University, Zagazig, Egypt

We apply the random-matrix theory to the car-parking problem. For this purpose,
we adopt a Coulomb gas model that associates the coordinates of the gas particles with
the eigenvalues of a random matrix. The nature of interaction between the particles is
consistent with the tendency of the drivers to park their cars near to each other and in
the same time keep a distance suﬃcient for manoeuvring. We show that the recently
measured gap-size distribution of parked cars in a number of roads in central London is
well represented by the spacing distribution of a Gaussian unitary ensemble.

PACS : 05.40; 05.20.Gg; 02.50.r; 68.43.-h
Keywords: Car parking; Coulomb gas; Gaussian unitary ensemble

1. Introduction

Random-matrix theory (RMT) [1] models quantal chaotic systems in terms of three
canonical ensembles of random matrices. The Gaussian orthogonal and symplectic en-
sembles (GOE and GSE) are used to describe time-reversal invariant systems with integer
and half-integer spins, respectively, while the Gaussian unitary ensemble (GUE) is con-
nected with systems without time reversibility. The theory was originally proposed to
describe the ﬂuctuation properties of energy spectra of atomic nuclei [2]. Bohigas et al
[3] have established that the ﬂuctuation properties of the canonical random matrices are
generic and therefore applicable for the spectral statistics of a wide variety of quantal
systems. The broad range of applicability of RMT has recently been the subject of many
excellent reviews, e.g. [4,5].

RMT is also applicable for classical one-dimensional interacting many particle systems.
Long time ago, Dyson [6] realized that eigenvalues of Gaussian random matrices do indeed
behave like charges, repelling each other with a force varying inversely with the ﬁrst power
of distance. The matrix eigenvalues describe the positions of the charged particles. He
showed that the joint eigenvalue-distribution of Gaussian matrices have exactly the same
mathematical structure as the Boltzmann factor for a one-dimensional classical Coulomb
gas. The same holds true also for other potentials. An example is the Pechukas gas [7],
where one-dimensional particles interact by a potential inversely proportional to their
mutual distance. Recently, there have been numerous fascinating applications of RMT
outside quantum chaology. Representative examples are the price ﬂuctuations in a stock
markets [8,9], the statistical properties of bus arrivals [10], the atmospheric correlations
[11] and the statistics of geometrical resonances in disordered binary networks [12].

2

The present paper proposes an application of RMT to the analysis of recent empirical
data on the gap distribution of parked cars in the streets of London [13]. These authors
could not reproduce their data using diﬀerent versions of the random parking model, in
which a car can park at any space greater than or equal to its length [14,15,16]. They
had to introduce several additional assumptions in order to achieve qualitative agreement
with the empirical results. Alternatively, we apply Dyson’s Coulomb gas model [6], which
allows for using the results of RMT. Section 2 is a brief review of the model with a special
emphasis on its relevance to real car parking. Section 3 shows a comparison between the
empirical gap-size distribution measured in Ref.
[13] and the level-spacing distribution
for GUE. The conclusion of this work is formulated in Section 4.

2. Coulomb gas model

The purpose of this section is to show that Dyson’s one-dimensional gas model is rel-
evant to the car parking problem. The model considers a gas of N point charges with
positions x1, x2, ..., xN free to move on the inﬁnite straight line
. The
potential energy of the gas is given by [1]

< x <

−∞

∞

V =

1
2

x2
i −

i
X

i<j
X

ln

xi

|

xj

.

|

−

(1)

(3)

The ﬁrst term represents a harmonic potential that attracts each charge independently
towards the coordinate origin. The second term represents an electrostatic repulsion
between each pair of charges. The logarithm function comes in if we assume the universe
to be two-dimensional. Nevertheless, the methods of the statistical physics remain valid
also for diﬀerent shapes of the particle-particle interaction. For example, Krb´alek and
ˇSeba [10] have numerically evaluated the equilibrium distributions of one dimensional gas
a with a < 2 and found that the
interacting via two body potentials vij
1/
resulting distributions belong to the same class as the Dyson case. Now, let the charged
gas be in thermodynamic equilibrium. The probability density function for the position
of the charges is given by the Boltzmann factor
−βV ,

P (x1, x2, ..., xN ) = Ce

xi
|

(2)

xj

≈

−

|

where C is a normalization constant, β = 1/kT and k is the Boltzmann constant. Sub-
stituting (2) into (1), we obtain [1,2]

P (x1, x2, ..., xN ) = C

xi

xj

β exp

−

|

1
2

β

 −

x2
k

.

!

k
X

i<j |
Y

This is exactly the joint probability density function for the eigenvalues x1, x2, ..., xN of
matrices from a GOE, GUE or GSE if β = 1, 2 or 4, respectively. Thus thus the role of
the inverse temperature in the Coulomb gas model is played by the level-repulsion power
of eigenvalues of the random matrices, which is speciﬁed by the symmetry of the ensemble
with respect to time reversibility.

RMT has elaborate methods for calculating the spectral characteristics of the three
canonical ensembles. For example, Mehta [1] expresses the nearest-neighbor spacing dis-
λn (s)], where
tribution P (s) as second derivatives of an inﬁnite product of the factors [1

−

3

(4)

(5)

(6)

xi) /D and D
λn (s) are the eigenvalues of certain integral equations. Here si = (xi+1
is the mean level separation and s is a randomly chosen si. These approaches result in
tabulated numerical values, series expansions and asymptotic expressions for the spacing
distribution. They unfortunately do not lead to closed-form expressions that can be in
the analysis of experimentally observed or numerically calculated discrete data.

−

In many cases, the empirical spacing distributions are compared to the so-called Wigner
surmise. The latter follows from the exact solution for 2
2 matrices but still presents
an accurate approximation to the exact results obtained for ensembles of large matrices.
The Wigner surmise for GUE is given by

×

P (s) =

32
π2 s2e

− 4

π s2

.

To demonstrate the accuracy of the Wigner surmise, we expand this distribution in powers
of s to obtain

P (s) =

32
π2 s2

4
π

1

−

(cid:18)

s2 +

· · ·

(cid:19)

∼= 3.242s2

−

4.128s4 +

,

· · ·

while the power-series expansion of the corresponding exact distribution [1] yields

Pexact(s) =

π2
3

s2

−

2π4
45

s2 +

· · · ∼= 3.290s2

−

4.329s4 +

.

· · ·

The question which remains to be answered is whether the Coulomb model is suitable
for the car-parking problem. We see no problem in representing cars of diﬀerent size by
point particles since we are eventually interested in the gap-size distribution. We even
dare to consider this as an advantage because the results do not involve the (average) car
length as in other formalisms. The gap distribution, when represented by Eq. (4), has
no adjustable parameters once the gaps s are measured in units of their mean size D.
Furthermore, we represent the cars by classical electrically-charged particles in the state
of thermodynamic equilibrium using the Boltzmann factor (2).This factor is obtained
from the Gibbs-Boltzmann canonical distribution by integration over the momenta of
the particles. Namely this kind of averaging over the momenta is what allows to link
the stationary parked cars with the moving gas particles. The particles are under the
inﬂuence of a conﬁning potential, which reﬂects the preference of the drivers to park their
cars close to the target of the journey. A potential consisting of a sum of a single- and
two-body terms, as in Eq. (1), seems to provide a reasonable representation for the car
parking process. The single-particle term reﬂects the general tendency of the drivers to
park their cars not too far from each other. The repulsive two-body term is meant as an
expression of the tendency of the driver to keep a distance from the other parked cars in
order to allow for parking manoeuvring. Thus, the superposition of these two potential,
which is repulsive for small gaps and attractive for the large ones, expresses the fact
that it is unlikely to see too small or too large gaps between parked car. The proposed
model may thus be viewed as a generalization of the random car parking model, in which
the simple geometric exclusion is replaced by dynamical coupling through a repulsive
potential. The correspondence between RMT and the Coulomb-gas model is technical
and based on identiﬁcation of the inverse temperature β of the gas with degree of level

4

repulsion as mentioned above. The car parking problem has no time reversal symmetry.
For this reason, we assume GUE which violates time reversibility is more suitable for the
car parking problem than the other ensembles, and set β = 2.

3. Comparison with empirical results

Rawal and Rodger [13] measured the gaps between parked cars on four connected streets
without any driveway or side streets in central London. The data were collected in the
late evening so that there were few places capable of taking additional cars. In total, 500
gaps were measured. The average gap size was 154.2 cm. Figure 1 shows by a histogram
the probability distribution function P (s), normalized to unity, for the gaps measured
by Rawal and Rogers [13]. The spacings s are deﬁned as the ratio of the gaps to their
mean value. The normalization is done in such a way that the overall surface under the
data is 1. These modiﬁcations of the original data are introduced in order to make the
comparison with the nearest-neighbor spacing distribution for GOE, which is represented
in Fig. 1 by a solid curve. We can go further by regarding the renormalized data as a
probability distribution for gaps in an ensemble of equivalent streets if the streets involved
in the experiment by Rawal and Rodger do not repesent a special case. In the opposite
case, the results of this experiment would be of low value. We can then assign a statistical
error for each gap interval equal to √ni,where ni is the number of car pairs separated by
the corresponding gap. The resulting statistical uncertainties are shown by error bars.

The empirical gap-size distribution [13] does not agree with the random car parking
model. In this model, a particle of length l is randomly deposited along a linear chain
if it ﬁnds an empty place of length greater than or equal to l. The frequency of small
gaps obtained in this model is extremely high and monotonously decreases as the gap size
increases [14]. The empirical distribution behaves in a diﬀerent way. The frequency of
small gaps are small and increases as the gap size increases until it reaches a maximum
at a gap size slightly less than the average size. In order to ﬁt the empirical distribution
Rawal and Rodger proposed two generalizations of the car-parking model, which were
called model A and model B. In model A, cars are allowed to park only if the space is
larger than l + ε, where the extra space ε give a room to manoeuvre. They obtained a
distribution that takes a nearly constant value at small gaps and then decreases after the
gap size reaches a value of approximately 0.2l. Their model B suggests that car parking
is governed by two competing mechanisms. One is from people who just park anywhere
and the other from those who maneuver to make better use of the available space. Thus,
in each time step, a car is parked in an empty space and remains with probability p, or
p, to a distance y to the nearest car with a probability
further derives, with probability 1
given by an arbitrary function f (y). Model B provides a reasonable description of the
y), which leads to the dashed curve in Fig.
data for the choice p = 0.3 and f (y) = 6y(l
1. However, the disagreement at small gap sizes is still statistically signiﬁcant.

−

−

We here show that the empirical gap size distribution of parked cars agrees with the
prediction of the Coulomb gas model as formulated in the previous Section, without any
additional assumptions. As mentioned above, GUE is meant to describe systems which
are chaotic and violate time reversibility. The car parking process has both of these two
features. The chaotic behavior is caused by the human behavior of the drivers. The

5

is an essential feature of all random adsorption processes. The
absence of reversibility.
solid curve in Fig. 1 is calculated using Eq. (4) for the spacing distribution for a GUE.
The calculation is done without any adjustable parameter. The agreement between the
predictions of RMT and the empirical data is excellent. In comparison with traditional
approaches to the car parking problem, the Coulomb gas model includes fewer gaps with
sizes tending to zero. This suggests that ”level repulsion” is an important mechanism
overlooked in the tradition car-parking process, and RMT may be useful in understanding
this process.

4. Discussion

We applied Dyson’s Coulomb gas model to the car parking problem. This model is
relevant to real car parking as it represents the tendency of the driver to keep a distance
from the nearest parked car by repulsion between gas particles and the tendency of the
divers to park their cars close to each other by the single-particle harmonic-oscillator
potential. We analyzed the empirical data on the distribution of the relative size of gaps
between parked cars, measured by Rawal and Rodger. We found an excellent agreement
between the empirical data and the spacing distribution for Gaussian unitary ensemble
of random matrices.

The signiﬁcance of the present results is that they suggest to add the random car
parking problem to the long list of systems with RMT-like ﬂuctuations. The latter is
the one-dimensional continuum version of the random sequential adsorption process, in
which particles land successively and randomly on a surface. In this model, if an incoming
particle overlaps a previously deposited one, it is rejected due to the geometrical exclusion
eﬀect. Without additional assumptions, the random sequential process cannot explain
gap size distribution as shown by Rawal and Rodger. In this respect, the Coulomb gas
model has the advantage of extending the repulsion between parked cars further than
their geometrical size. The random sequential adsorption model enjoys a wide interest in
physics, chemistry, biology and in many other branches of science and technology [17,18].
Obviously, the proposed model is no substitute for the elaborate investigations of the
random sequential absorption process. Nevertheless, the powerful methods of RMT may
be useful in understanding some aspects of this important process.

REFERENCES

1. M. L. Mehta, Random Matrices 2nd ed. ( Academic, New York, 1991).
2. C. E. Poeter, Statistical Theory of Spectra: Fluctuations (Academic, New York, 1965).
3. O. Bohigas, M. J. Giannoni, and C. Schmidt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52 (1984) 1.
4. T. Guhr, A. M¨uller-Groeling, and H. A. Weidenm¨uller, Phys. Rep. 299 (1998) 189.
5. A. D. Mirlin, Phys. Rep. 326 (2000) 259.
6. F. J. Dyson, J. Math Phys. 3, 140 (1962).
7. P. Pechukas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51 (1983) 943.
8. L. Laloux, P. Cizeau, J.-P. Bouchaud, and M. Potters, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999)1469.
9. V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, B. Rosenow, L. A. N. Amaral, and H. E. Stanley, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 83, 1471 (1999).

10. M. Krb´alek and P. ˇSeba, J. Phys. A 33 (2000) L229.

6

287.

11. M. S. Santhanam and P. K. Patra, Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001) 016102.
12. Y. Gu, K. W. Yu, and Z. R. Yang, Phys. Rev. E 65 (2002) 046129.
13. S. Rawal and G. J. Rodgers, Physica A 346 (2005) 621.
14. P. L. Krapivsky. J. Stat. Phys. 69 (1992) 135.
15. G. J. Rodgers and P. Singh, J. Phys. A 28 (1995) 767.
16. G. J. Rodgers and J. A. N. Philipe, J. Phys. A 30 (1997) 3449.
17. J. W. Evans, Rev. Mod. Phys. 65 (1993) 1281.
18. J. Talbot, G. Tarjus, P. R. Van Tessel, and P. Voit, Colloids and Surfaces A 165 (2000)

7

Figure 1.

Fig. 1. The gap size distribution for parked cars, measured by Rawal and Rodgers
[13] compared with the spacing distribution for GUE (solid curve). The dashed curve is
calculated using model B of Ref. [13]

1.0

0.8

0.6

)
s
(
P

0.4

0.2

0.0

 GUE

 Model B [13]

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

s

