5
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
6
0
1
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Backbone of a City

Salvatore Scellato1, Alessio Cardillo2, Vito Latora2 and Sergio Porta3
1 Scuola Superiore di Catania, Italy
2 Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Universit`a di Catania, and INFN Sezione di Catania, Italy and
3 Dipartimento di Progettazione dell’Architettura, Politecnico di Milano, Italy
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Recent studies have revealed the importance of centrality measures to analyze various spatial
factors aﬀecting human life in cities. Here we show how it is possible to extract the backbone of
a city by deriving spanning trees based on edge betweenness and edge information. By using as
sample cases the cities of Bologna and San Francisco, we show how the obtained trees are radically
diﬀerent from those based on edge lengths, and allow an extended comprehension of the “skeleton”
of most important routes that so much aﬀects pedestrian/vehicular ﬂows, retail commerce vitality,
land-use separation, urban crime and collective dynamical behaviours.

Centrality is a fundamental concept in network analy-
sis. The issue of structural centrality was introduced in
the 40’s in the context of social systems, where it was
assumed a relation between the location of an individual
in the network and its inﬂuence in group processes [1].
Since then, various measures have been proposed over the
years to quantify the importance of nodes and edges of
a graph, and the concept of centrality have found many
applications also in biology and technology [2, 3, 4, 5].

In economic geography as well as in regional planning,
centrality has been dominating the scene especially since
the Sixties and Seventies stressing the idea that some
places (cities, settlements) are more important than oth-
ers because they are more “accessible”, where accessi-
bility was intended as a centrality measure of the same
kind of those developed in the ﬁeld of structural soci-
ology, with the diﬀerence that the geographic nature of
elements in space was saved around a notion of metric
distance [6].
In the ﬁeld of urban design, a long-term
eﬀort has been spent in order to understand what ur-
ban streets and routes would constitute the “skeleton”
of a city, which means the chains of urban spaces that
are most important for both the connectedness, liveabil-
ity and safety at the local scale [7, 8] and its legibility
in terms of human wayﬁnding [9]; more recently, these
latter two approaches are seemingly merging together in
the ﬁrst clues of a cognitive/conﬁgurational theory [10].
After an in-depth investigation of both the topological
(dual) [11] and spatial (primal) [12, 13] graph represen-
tation of street networks, in this paper we provide a tool
for the analysis of the backbone of a complex urban sys-
tem represented as a spatial (planar) graph. Such a tool
is based on the mathematical concept of spanning trees,
and on the eﬃciency of centrality measures in capturing
the essential edges of a graph. Diﬀerently from previ-
ous applications of this same concept [14], we consider
spatial networks instead of topological ones, so that our
trees can be shown graphically on the city maps and can
serve as a support in urban design and planning; more-
over, we consider two diﬀerent kinds of edge centrality
measures, and we compare the obtained trees with the
standard spanning trees based on minimizing the total
lengths.

In our approach, cities are represented as spatial net-
works (networks embedded in the real space), i.e. net-
works whose nodes occupy a precise position in a two-
dimensional Euclidean space, and whose edges are real
physical connections [5, 15]. In such approach, 1-square
mile samples of urban street patterns selected from
Ref. [16] are transformed into spatial undirected graphs
by mapping the intersections into the graph nodes and
the roads into links between nodes [12, 13]. Here we
will focus, in particular, on the cities of Bologna and San
Francisco as examples of two diﬀerent classes of urban
street patterns, the former being a self-organized organic
network evolved over a long period of time through the
uncoordinated contribution of countless historical agents
while the latter being a mostly planned fabric built in a
relatively short period of time following the ideas of one
coordinating historical agent. Each of the two obtained
graphs is denoted as G ≡ G(N, K), where N and K are,
respectively, the number of nodes and links in the graph.
In the case of Bologna we have N = 541 and K = 773,
while in the case of San Francisco the same amount of 1-
square mile of land contains only N = 169 and K = 271
edges. The average degree < k >= 2K/N is respectively
equal to 2.71 and 3.21. This diﬀerence is due to the
overbundance of three-roads intersections with respect
to four-roads intersections in the city of Bologna. The
converse is true for the city of San Francisco, due to its
square-grid structure. See Ref. [17] for a plot of the entire
degree distributions in the two cases. The graph nodes
are characterized by their positions in the unit square
{xi, yi}i=1,...,N , while the links follow the footprints of
real streets and are associated a set of real positive num-
bers representing the street lengths, {lα}α=1,...,K. An-
other relevant diﬀerence between the two cities is cap-
tured by the edges length distribution. In Fig. 1 we plot
n(l), the number of edges of length l, as a function of
l. The edges length distribution has a single peak in
Bologna, while it has more than one peak in a mostly
planned cities as San Francisco, due to its grid pattern.
In the following, the graph representing a city is described
by the adjacency N × N matrix A, whose entry aij is
equal to 1 when there is an edge between i and j and 0
otherwise, and by a N × N matrix L, whose entry lij is

2

(2)

(3)

the value associated to the edge α ≡ (i, j), in our case
the metric length of the street connecting i and j.

[21, 22]. The information centrality of edge α is deﬁned
as the relative drop in the network eﬃciency caused by
the removal from G of the edge α [12, 19]:

Bologna
Bologna MCST

San Francisco
San Francisco MCST

0

100

200

300

400

500

l

Bologna
San Francisco

n(l)

n(l)

100
80
60
40
20
0
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

1

0.1

0.01

P(C

B
)

1

0.1

0.01

0.001

I

P(C

)

0.001

0

0.05

0.15

0.005

0.01

0.1
B

C

I

C

FIG. 1: Top panels: the length distributions for the two cities
of Bologna and San Francisco (full lines) are compared with
the length distributions of the respective betweenness-based
MCSTs (dashed lines). The quantity n(l) is deﬁned as the
number of edges whose length is in the range [l - 5 meters,
l + 5 meters]. Bottom panels: cumulative distributions of
edge betweenness C B
(right) for
Bologna (circles) and San Francisco (squares). The dashed
lines in the left panel are exponential ﬁts to the betweenness
distributions.

(left) and information C I

In a previous work [12], diﬀerent measures of node cen-
trality [18, 19], properly extended for spatial graphs, have
been investigated in the same database of urban street
patterns. Here we show how to construct spanning trees
based on edge centrality. We ﬁrst localize high central-
ity edges, namely the streets that are structurally made
to be traversed (betweenness centrality) or the streets
whose deactivation aﬀects the global properties of the
system (information centrality). Of course other deﬁni-
tions of edge centrality (as for instance range, closeness
or straightness [18]) can be used as well. The deﬁnitions
of edge betweenness and edge information we adopt are
obvious modiﬁcations of the centrality measures deﬁned
on nodes.
The edge betweenness centrality, CB, is based on the idea
that an edge is central if it is included in many of the
shortest paths connecting couples of nodes. The between-
ness centrality of edge α = 1, ..., K is deﬁned as [20]:

CB

α =

1

(N − 1)(N − 2) Xj,k=1,..,N ;j6=k6=i

njk(α)
njk

(1)

where njk is the number of shortest paths between nodes
j and k, and njk(α) is the number of shortest paths be-
tween nodes j and k that contain edge α.
The edge information centrality, CI , is a measure relat-
ing the edge importance to the ability of the network
to respond to the deactivation of the edge itself. The
network performance, before and after a certain edge is
deactivated, is measured by the eﬃciency of the graph G

CI

α =

∆E
E

=

E[G] − E[G′]
E[G]

where the eﬃciency of a graph G is deﬁned as:

E[G] =

1

N (N − 1) Xi,j=1,..,N ;i6=j

dEucl
ij
dij

and where G′ is the graph with N nodes and K − 1 edges
obtained by removing edge α from the original graph G.
An advantange of using the eﬃciency instead of the char-
acteristic path length L [24] to measure the performance
of a graph is that E[G] is ﬁnite even for disconnected
graphs.

In Fig. 1 we report the cumulative distributions of edge
betweenness and information. The cumulative distribu-
tion P (C) is deﬁned as:

P (C) =

Z

C

+∞

n(C′)
K

dC′

(4)

where n(C) is the number of edges with centrality equal
to C. The edge distributions are quite similar in the two
cities of Bologna and San Francisco. In particular, the
betweenness distributions are well ﬁtted by exponential
curves, P (CB) ∼ exp(−CB/s), with coeﬃcients respec-
tively equal to sBo = 0.020 and sSF = 0.029. Thus, for
the edge betweenness, the distributions found are simi-
lar (single-scale) to those observed for the node between-
ness. Conversely, the edge information distributions have
not a well deﬁned shape: although their decay is slower
than exponential in both Bologna and San Francisco, the
edge information distributions do not allow to diﬀeren-
tiate self-organized cities from planned ones, as it was
instead possible by means of the node information dis-
tributions [12]. This indicates that there are important
correlations in the information centrality of edges inci-
dent in the same node. This also indicates that organic
self-organized cities are diﬀerent from planned ones, more
in terms of their nodes (intersections) than of their edges
(streets), and especially about how they assign impor-
tance to such spaces.

We are ﬁnally ready to build the Maximum Centrality
Spanning Trees (MCSTs), i.e. maximum weight span-
ning trees where the edge weight is deﬁned as the central-
ity of the edge. A graph G′(N ′, K ′) is a tree if and only if
it satisﬁes any of the following four conditions: 1) G′ has
N ′ − 1 edges and no cycles; 2) G′ has N ′ − 1 edges and
is connected; 3) exactly one simple path connects each
pair of nodes in G′; 4) G′ is connected, but removing any
edge disconnects it. Given a connected, undirected graph
G(N, K), a spanning tree T is a subgraph of G which is a
tree and connects all the N nodes together. Consequently
T ≡ T (N, N −1). A single graph can have many diﬀerent
spanning trees. We can also assign a weight wα to each

edge α, which is usually a number representing how fa-
vorable (for instance how central) the edge is, and assign
a weight to a spanning tree by computing the sum of the
weights of the edges in that spanning tree. A maximum
weight spanning tree is then a spanning tree with weight
larger than or equal to the weight of every other spanning
tree of the graph. It appears evident that it is possible to
deﬁne appropriate edge weights with the aim of ﬁnding
particular structures capable of connecting every single
node of the graph while minimizing the corresponding to-
tal weight. In particular, for each city we have computed
two diﬀerent MCSTs, respectively based on betwenness
and information. The two cases are obtained by respec-
tively ﬁxing wα = CB
α and wα = CI
α, with α = 1, ..., K.
Since the two centrality measures focus on diﬀerent prop-
erties of the network, using both of them allows us to
enforce our analysis. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 2 left

Bologna

Betw MCST

Info MCST

0.015

0.05

0.1

0

0.05

0.1

0

0.05

0.1

B

C
San Francisco

B

C
Betw MCST

B

C

Info MCST

0.015

0.015

0.01

0.005

I

C

0.015

0.01

0.005

I

C

0

0

0

0

0.01

0.005

0

0

0.01

0.005

0.05

0.1

0

0.05

0.1

0

0.05

0.1

B

C

B

C

B

C

FIG. 2: Scatter plots showing the correlations between edge
betweenness and edge information in Bologna (top panels)
and San Francisco (bottom panels). Each point represents
one edge in the orginal graph (left), in the betweenness-based
MCST (center), and in the information-based MCST (right).

panels, CB and CI are correlated, although it is possi-
ble to ﬁnd edges with a low value of CB and a high CI
(and viceversa). The coeﬃcients of linear correlation are
respectively equal to r = 0.69 and r = 0.46. For the
computation of the MCSTs (and of the mLSTs) we have
used the Prim’s algorithm [25] that allows to obtain the
result in a time proportional to K log N . The MCST for
the city of Bologna contains K ′ = N − 1 = 540 links, i.e.
70% of the links of the original graph, while the MCST
for San Francisco has K ′ = 168, i.e. 62% of the links
of the original graph. Since the links have been chosen
according to their centrality values, it turns out that the
set of selected edges in the betweenness-based MCST of
Bologna (San Francisco) possesses the 86% ( 82%) of the
total betweenness centrality of the original graph, deﬁned
α [14]. Similarly, the set of selected edges in
as
the information-based MCST of Bologna (San Francisco)
possesses the 84% (95%) of the total information central-

α=1,K CB

P

3

ity. This is both due to the shapes of the centrality dis-
tributions shown in Fig. 1 and to the edge selection that
avoids, in the tree construction, the formation of cycles.
The values of CB and CI for the selected edges are shown
in the scatter plots of Fig. 2. In the case of Bologna, the
two measures of centrality have the same correlations as
in the original graph (the correlation coeﬃcients in the
MCST are rB = 0.61 and rI = 0.64). Conversely, in San
Francisco, the two variables are less correlated in the MC-
STs (rB = 0.10 and rI = 0.29) than in the original graph
(r = 0.46). In Fig. 1 (top panels) we have plotted the
edge length distributions of the betweenness-based MC-
STs (dashed lines). It is interesting to observe that, for
the city of Bologna, n(l) has the same shape both in the
original graph and in its betweenness-based MCST. This
means that, in the construction of the tree, edges with all
lengths have been removed (with same probability) from
the original graph. Conversely, in San Francisco most of
the edges not included in the betweenness-based MCST
are those with the largest length. The same result has
been found for the information-based MCSTs and seems
to be a common characteristic of other planned grid-like
cities.

In Fig.3 we compare graphically the two MCSTs with
the minimum length spanning trees [25]. In the construc-
tion of the latter, the weight wα associated to each edge
α is set to be equal to the length of the edge lα and rep-
resent the cost of the edge. A Minimum Length Spanning
Tree (mLST) is then a spanning tree with weight (cost)
smaller than or equal to the weight of every other span-
ning tree of the graph. The MCSTs obtained are diﬀerent
from the mLSTs. In the case of Bologna, the between-
ness (information) based MCST has a total length equal
to 1.15 (1.14) times the total length of the mLST, while
in the case of San Francisco this ratio is equal to 1.15
(1.07). In the case of Bologna, the MCST based on be-
tweenness (information) has 82% (75%) of the edges in
common with the mLST, while in San Francisco it has
70% (76%) of the edges in common with the mLST. It
is worth noting that the two MCSTs have 77% of the
edges in common in Bologna, whereas such a percentage
is smaller in San Francisco (66%). The graphical visu-
alization of the maximum centrality trees is of interest
for urban planners since the trees express the uninter-
rupted chain of urban spaces that serves the whole sys-
tem while maximizing centrality over all edges involved.
This method identiﬁes the backbone of a city system as
the sub-network of spaces that are most likely to oﬀer
the highest potential for the life of the urban community
in terms of popularity, safety and services locations, all
factors geographically related with central places. This is
evident in Fig. 3, where the comparison between the trees
in the two cities clearly indicates that the spatial sub-
system that keeps together a city in terms of the shortest
trip length is not the same spatial sub-system that does
it in terms of the highest centrality. It is also worth not-
ing that metric distance is also involved in the algorithms
for the calculation of centrality indices, so that all kinds

4

FIG. 3: Spanning trees of Bologna (above) and San Francisco (below). From left to right, mLSTs, betweenness-based and
information-based MCSTs

of trees considered hereby are rooted in the geographic
space. The second thing is that while the shortest length
backbone performs eﬀectively when applied to planned
urban fabrics like San Francisco, in self-organized evolu-
tionary cases like that of Bologna it does not individuates
continuous routes nor clearly distinguishes a hierarchy of
sub-systems in the network, while the highest informa-
tion and especially the highest betweenness backbones
do.
In a way, we would say that organic patterns are
more oriented to put things and people together in pub-
lic space than to shorten the trips from any origin to
any destination in the system, this latter character being

more typical of planned cities.

In conclusion, in this work we have shown that the
concept of MCST leads to a meaningful picture of the
primary sub-system of a city network, which makes it
a single component while minimizing the cost of mov-
ing around and maximizing the potential of places to
achieve social success, safety and popularity. Therefore,
the method has the potential of becoming an useful tool
in city planning and design, due to its immediate and
powerful visualization outcome.

Acknowledgment. We thank P. Crucitti for many

helpful discussions and suggestions.

[1] S. Wasserman and K. Faust, Social Networks Analysis,

(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994).

[2] R. Albert and A.-L. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47

(2002).

[3] M.E.J. Newman, SIAM Review 45, 167 (2003).
[4] R. Pastor-Satorras, A. Vespignani, Evolution and Struc-
ture of the Internet: A Statistical Physics Approach,

(Cambridge University Press, 2004).

[5] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez and D.-

U. Hwang, Phys. Rep. in press.

[6] G.A. Wilson, Complex spatial systems:

the modelling
foundations of urban and regional analysis, (Prentice
Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2000).

[7] B. Hillier and J. Hanson The social logic of space (Cam-

5

bridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1984).

[8] B. Hillier Space is the machine: a conﬁgurational theory
of architecture (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK, 1996).

[9] N. Burgess, K.J. Jeﬀery, O’Keefe J (eds.), The hippocam-
pal and parietal foundations of spatial cognition , (OUP,
Oxford, UK, 1999).

[10] A. Penn, Environment and Behavior 35, 30 (2003).
[11] S. Porta, P. Crucitti and V. Latora, Preprint

[16] A. Jacobs, Great streets (MIT Press, Boston, MA, 1993).
[17] A. Cardillo, S. Scellato, V. Latora and S. Porta, Preprint

physics/0510162

[18] V. Latora and M. Marchiori, Preprint cond-mat/0402050
[19] V. Latora and M. Marchiori, Phys. Rev. E71, 015103(R)

[20] M. E. J. Newman and M. Girvan, Phys. Rev. E69,

026113 (2004).

[21] V. Latora and M. Marchiori, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 198701

cond-mat/0411241.

physics/0504163.

[12] P. Crucitti, V. Latora and S. Porta, Preprint

[22] V. Latora and M. Marchiori, Eur. Phys. J. B32, 249

[13] S. Porta, P. Crucitti and V. Latora, Preprint
physics/0506009. In Press in Environment and Planning
B

[14] D. Kim, J.D. Noh, and H. Jeong, Phys. Rev. E70, 046126

[15] D.B. West, Introduction to Graph Theory, (Prentice Hall,

[23] I. Vragovic, E. Louis, A. Diaz-Guilera, Phys. Rev. E71,

036122 (2005).

[24] D.J. Watts and S.H. Strogatz, Nature 393, 440 (1998).
[25] T.H. Cormen, C.E. Leiserson, R.L. Rivest, C. Stein, In-
troduction to Algorithms (MIT University Press, Cam-
brdige, 2001).

(2004)

1995).

(2005).

(2001).

(2003).

