5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
8
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Generalized model for human dynamics

R. V. R. Pandya ∗
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez
Puerto Rico, PR 00681, USA

February 2, 2008

Abstract

Human dynamics model consistent with our natural ability to per-
form diﬀerent activities is put forward by ﬁrst arguing limitations of
the model suggested by Barab´asi (Nature, 435, 207-211, 2005).

Humans are capable of performing diﬀerent types of activities which ﬁll
the time available between daily routine basic activities of cleaning them-
selves, eating and sleeping. The range of activities is substantial but for
discussion I mention a few types of activities such as electronic communi-
cation, making telephone calls, meeting people and browsing internet etc
[1]. In each type of activity, many events (tasks) are performed at diﬀerent
times, e.g. e-mail reply to a received e-mail is considered as an individual
event and many such events belong to electronic communication activity.
Recent observations indicate that the distributions, of waiting time (time
taken to reply to a received message) and inter-event time between two con-
secutive emails during occurrences of many events, depart from the Poisson
distribution and have burst characteristics [1]. This fact led Barab´asi [1]
to suggest a model diﬀerent than the available models based on Poisson
processes and the model indeed captured the observed phenomenon in wait-
ing time distribution. Here ﬁrst I show weaknesses in Barabsi model and
then put forward a generalized model for proper description of dynamics of
human activities.

In Barab´asi model, each individual has a priority list with L events
(tasks) having diﬀerent priorities governed by parameters xi(i = 1, 2, , L)

∗Email: rvrpturb@uprm.edu

1

chosen from distribution ρ(x). At each time step, the event with highest
priority is executed and removed from the list and a new event is added to
the list with priority chosen from ρ(x). I elaborate now on the weaknesses of
this simple model. This model implicitly assumes that all L events belong to
a single activity (e.g. e-mail communication), implying human as servitude
and single purpose machine not having any priority at all to perform events
of activities other than e-mail reply. Also, the model suggests inter-event
time as a constant and equal to the time step, thus incapable of producing
proper inter-event time distribution for events belonging to the same activity.
In the generalized model, each individual has a priority list for M diﬀer-
ent activities, each having diﬀerent number of Lm(m = 1, 2, , M ) events and
Pm Lm = L where L is integer constant. The execution times for each event
belonging to diﬀerent M activities are represented by tm(m = 1, 2, , M ). At
initial time (t = 0) and with some ﬁxed value of L, Lm are chosen in consis-
tency with distribution ω(y) for parameters ym selected to govern diﬀerent
priorities of M activities. Within each activity m, priorities of Lm events
belonging to mth activity are governed by parameters xi(i = 1, 2, , Lm) cho-
sen from distribution ρm(x). At each time step, one of the M activities is
selected according to the distribution ω(y) and highest priority event from
the selected activity is executed and removed from the list. Subsequently
at the end of the execution time, a new event is added to the same activity
(say j) with priority chosen from corresponding distribution ρj(x). The next
time step would then be tj time apart.

This generalized multi-activity model allows presence of events from
other activities between two consecutive events of same activity which I
consider as possible explanation for observed distribution in inter-event time
belonging to the same activity. Though the model implicitly assumes that
new events from diﬀerent activities are available at every time steps, im-
plementing activation of new activities and deactivation of one or a few of
existing activities at certain stages of time can be considered as further re-
ﬁnements to the model. Least to mention, events from daily routine basic
activities can be added with certainty at appropriate time during the time
evolution of human dynamics. Lastly, a simple variant of the generalized
model can also be considered in which at each time step highest priority
event is selected for execution from all of the events L, irrespective of the
distribution of priority of diﬀerent activities. In this case there is a possibil-
ity of conﬂict when more than one event could have identical priority. The
priorities of activities can then be invoked to resolve the conﬂict.

2

References

[1] Barabsi, A,-L. Nature 435, 207-211 (2005).

3

