5
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
5
0
2
1
5
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Faulty of Physis and Applied Computer Siene, AGH University of Siene and Tehnology,

Cooperation and defetion in ghetto

Krzysztof Kuªakowski

al. Mikiewiza 30, 30059 Kraków, Poland

kulakowskinovell.ftj.agh.edu.pl

February 21, 2014

Abstrat

We onsider ghetto as a ommunity of people ruled against their will by an external

power. Members of the ommunity feel that their laws are broken. However, attempts to

leave ghetto makes their situation worse. We disuss the relation of the ghetto inhabitants

to the ruling power in ontext of their needs, organized aording to the Maslow hierarhy.

Deisions how to satisfy suessive needs are undertaken in ooperation with or defetion

the ruling power. This issue allows to onstrut the tree of deisions and to adopt the

pruning tehnique from the game theory. Dynamis of deisions an be desribed within the

formalism of fundamental equations. The result is that the strategy of defetion is stabilized

Keywords: soiophysis; phase transition; mean (cid:28)eld; deisions; needs; Maslow theory

by the estimated payo(cid:27).

PACS numbers: 89.65.-s, 64.90.+b

1 Introdution

In human history, violene is ontinuously with us, despite our optimisti belief that it is less

and less widespread. In our minds, violene of armed against disarmed people is partiularly

repulsive. However, still it happens in numerous plaes on earth. Perhaps a new element is that

all of us are more onsious of the situation, than ever before. The question is if vitims of the

violene - treated as a ommunity - an aept it. If yes, the situation will remain stable; if not,

they will answer with terror - the weapon of the weak - and the violene is expeted to spread.

Here we are going to attak this problem by soiophysial methods, i.e. by a onstrution of an

appropriate model.

As a model base, we propose the Maslow theory [1℄. Its basi assumption is that people are going

to satisfy their needs one after another, in order from most basi to most sophistiated. Our

entral question - the deision of the vitims about resistane - is to be onsidered in the ontext

of their subsequent deisions how to satisfy their needs. In other words, eah vital deision in

the situation of violene is to be made in relation to this violene.

This author imagines that the goal of this paper is twofold. First is a reonstrution of hains

of subsequent deisions of people. We apply the deision tree - a onept from the game theory

[2℄. This onept is modi(cid:28)ed here in the sense that there is only one player. Still, eah deision

selets a branh, and getting there de(cid:28)nes a new situation. In some ases, estimation of expeted

payo(cid:27)s allows to apply the pruning tehnique: as the player deides as to get larger payo(cid:27), some

branhes with very low payo(cid:27) an be a priori eliminated. The seond goal is to use the obtained

sheme to disuss the problem of violene, de(cid:28)ned above. To name the situation, we deided to

refer to a metaphor of ghetto.

Historially, "ghetto" is the area of iron foundry in Venie, where an enlosed neighborhood was

1

reated for Jews in 1516 to protet them against perseution from Roman Catholi Churh. More

reently, the term 'ghetto' is expliitly assigned to bounded areas in Warsaw, Lodz, Riga, Bu-

dapest, Cluj, Terezin and many others under Nazi rules, where Jewish people were gathered prior

to the Holoaust. In soial sienes, the meaning of the term inludes also Jewish diaspora in

early modern Europe, quarters of blak Amerian in large ities and some ethni ommunities in

Afria and East Asia [3℄. Although this meaning remains under dispute [3℄, attempts to desribe

ghettos in urrent world should at least be remarked [4, 5℄, not pretending to ompleteness. For

our purposes, two traits are to be distinguished: i) an attempt of an inhabitant of ghetto to leave

the area makes his situation worse, ii) human laws, as understood by inhabitants, are broken

by an external power. This wide de(cid:28)nition applies to refugee amps as well as settlements in

ountries ontrolled by army, as in Palestine, Tibet, Chehnya and Darfur. Although in most

ases ghettos are inhabited by ethni minorities, here we do not need to emphasize this ethni

trait.

To refer to the game theory, below we adopt the abbreviations C and D (ooperate or defet),

although maybe withdraw or resist would be more appropriate. In two subsequent setions we

introdue the model and we apply it to the ase of ghetto. Last setion is devoted to disussion.

2 The model

2.1 Hierarhy of human needs

Aording to the theory of Maslow, human needs are arranged hierarhially, from physiologial

needs, safety, belongingness, to esteem and self-atualization [1℄. People beome interested in

their safety to the extent of whih their physiologial needs are satis(cid:28)ed; being safe, they start

to struggle for belongingness, and so on. This author and maybe this reader happened to be

born in a milieu where three (cid:28)rst needs were satis(cid:28)ed from the very beginning till adulthood.

However, in numerous ases the situation is less fortuitous. More than often, a human unit has

to determine a strategy to realize his/her most basi needs in this or that way. In suh a strategy,

one of most important deision is whih limitations of human needs are to be aepted [6℄. This

problem appears to be even more ruial in ghetto, where the above mentioned limitations are

partiularly painful.

Trying to reah its needs in any milieu, a human unit has to onsider at eah step the ontext

of situation. In partiular, in ghetto the problem of any ation is if it is legal, or - in other words

- if this ation is allowed by the ruling power. This remains true when we ask about ations

took up in order to satisfy human needs at all levels. At the physiologial level, to ooperate is

equivalent to join ommon life in frames of the soiety, using money, sleeping home and eating

food bought in a market. An alternative is to look for a desolate plae in a forest or a desert, or to

form a small ommunity out of or at least at the border of, say, normal ivilization. To ontinue,

at the safety level the problem is to aept law or not. Whereas in our world of white ollars this

alternative is onentrated around payment of taxes, in ghetto the defetion an inlude riots,

guerilla or terror. At the level of belongingness, we have to selet our group of referene. Again,

in ghetto the world is sharply divided into two: "we" and "they". The power is with "them", and

the quest is to identify with whom? Further, at the level of esteem the problem is, in whih group

this esteem is looked for? Here we guess that this hoie is strongly orrelated with the previous

one, and our analysis will be simpler beause of this orrelation. Finally, reahing esteem, our

human unit tends to self-atualization. In priniple, this again an be expressed as a soial ation

direted against the power or supporting it. However, onsequenes of these deisions are usually

2

less ruial, human behavior at this level is muh more individualized and it is often a(cid:27)etive

and expressive rather than aim-oriented [7℄. That is why the level of self-atualization is di(cid:30)ult

for a soiophysial modelling.

2.2 Tree of deisions

Those who defet at the very root, i.e. at the physiologial level, plae themselves out of frames

of the soiety. It is very hard to defet publi aess to water, shops and houses. The alternative

is to live wildly in the forest. Yet this hoie happens in several plaes on Earth, where limati

irumstanes allow to do it at least temporarily and some strong obstales prevent to live in

aord with law. This kind of defetion happens in large soial sale only in soieties in strongest

risis, e.g. during a ivil war. Although these situations are of entral importane, they will be

not disussed here. In a ghetto, there is no possibility to (cid:28)ght in open way; main splitting of

human behavior happens at higher levels. Then, for the sake of our sub jet all deisions disussed

here start from C (ooperate).

In the same way we are going to omment further deisions, whih form hains as the one

presented in Table 1. This partiular hain will be denoted as CCDDD from now on. In this

notation, CD means that we disuss the deision D (at the safety level) of those who deided C

at the physiologial level.

physiology

C

safety

C

belongingness

D

esteem

D

self-atualization D

Table 1. A hain of subsequent deisions of a human unit (man or woman): defet (D) or

ooperate (C) with the power.

In Fig.1 a part of the resulting tree of deisions is shown. There, the whole branh starting

from D at the physiologial level is omitted, exept its beginning. Also, the deisions D or C at

the level of self-atualization are not shown for larity of the (cid:28)gure.

Omitting the physiologial needs, we are going to onentrate on the level of safety. A popu-

lation onsidered seleted C as their (cid:28)rst hoie, i.e. they deided to live within the ommunity

and to pro(cid:28)t its failities. Now and eah time their deision is C or D, i.e. they wonder if their

path is to be CC or CD. The probabilities of these paths depend on the expeted payo(cid:27)s. Then

the hoie these people is to deide, if they will be safer when ooperating with the power of

when defeting it.

As it was indiated by Maslow, people are able to struggle for their safety to the extent in

whih their physiologial needs are satis(cid:28)ed. Further, their searh for belongingness is limited

by their lak of safety, and so on. Maslow gives an example with numbers; an average itizen

ould have satis(cid:28)ed his suessive needs in 85, 70, 50, 40 and 10 perent, in order as in Table

1. Provided, for example, that the safety needs of somebody are not satis(cid:28)ed at all, he will not

bother about belongingness, not to speak about esteem or self-atualization. It is not lear how

the e(cid:27)orts for a need of next level depends on the satisfation of a need in a previous level; the

Maslow theory is formulated in words, not in numbers. The area is open for speulations, with

3

esteem

belongingness

safety

physiology

D

C

D

C

D

C

D

C

D

C

D

C

D

C

D

C

Figure 1: Right half of the tree of deisions. Last level (self-atualization) is not shown. Being

at the root and seleting C, one is plaed at node C; seleting D as next level one is plaed at

node CD and so on. Then, nodes at the physiology level are indexed with one label, D and C
from left to right, nodes at the safety level - by two labels (DD or CD not shown, or CD or CC

shown from left to right), and so on. At the esteem level, (cid:28)rst node from the left is indexed as

CDDD.

4

the only ondition that any proposed mathematial formulation re(cid:29)ets the above mentioned

rules. On the other hand it is obvious that the validity of any numbers we an get is limited to

statistial onsiderations. It seems that for this kind of problems, the fundamental equations [8℄

an provide a proper tool.

2.3 Mathematial formulation

From these equations, we expet to obtain the probabilities that people in a given situation (read:

at a given node of the tree) selet this or that deision. External onditions met by a given om-

munity an be introdued as the set of payo(cid:27)s αX , desribing maximal possible perentage of
satisfying needs at node X of the deision tree. As explained in the aption to Fig. 1, the node
index X is equivalent to a hain of deisions, leading to that node. The root is treated as the
hain of zeroth length. Simultaneously, αX is the maximal amount of people who are able to
struggle for satisfation of higher needs at nodes XC and XD. Both these 'maximal' deal with

a virtual ase when the payo(cid:27) is limited neither by parameters of previous nodes, nor by human

deisions at these nodes.

Keeping the above example of the hain CCDDD as an individual path, the value of satisfa-

tion sX of a human unit - member of the ommunity - at node C (at the physiologial level) is
then sC = αC . At higher level sX ful(cid:28)ls an iterative equation

sXZ = sX αXZ ,

(1)

for Z = C, D. Provided, that the set sX of satisfation of our human unit aords with

the above exemplary values given by Maslow, we obtain at (cid:28)ve suessive nodes of the path

αC = 0.85, αCC = 0.7/0.85 ≈ 0.82, αCCD = 0.5/0.7 ≈ 0.71, αCCDD = 0.4/0.5 = 0.8 and
αCCDDD = 0.1/0.4 = 0.25. These values of αX allow to reprodue via Eq. 1 the above given
exemplary hain of individual satisfations: sC = 0.85, sCC = 0.7, sCCD = 0.5, sCCDD = 0.4
and sCCDDD = 0.1.

The above vital path onsists suessive deisions, for our example CCDDD, as in Table 1.

In reality, these deisions are muh more detailed than a ooperation with or a defetion the

ruling power. Atually, the deision an be as spei(cid:28) as to marry one partiular member of a

group of revolutionists - or not to marry. However, having de(cid:28)ned our issue - to withdraw or

to resist, we are interested not as in a deision of seleting a detailed person, but - averaging

out over di(cid:27)erent possibilities - in a deision to be involved in a revolutionisti group, whih is

equivalent to satisfying some needs by the hoie D.

Averaging over individual paths, we introdue a set of average amounts of e(cid:27)ort wX at all
nodes X . Then for the physiologial level we have wC + wD = 1. The average satisfations at the
physiologial level, X = C, D, are SC = wC αC , and SD = wDαD . Considering the safety level
we take into aount that e(cid:27)orts to reah the nodes CC and CD are redued beause αC ≤ 1.
Then, wCC + wCD = wC αC , and similarly wDC + wDD = wDαD . As a rule,

The set wX is equivalent to a map of soial e(cid:27)orts, put into various ways of attempts of satisfying
the needs. At eah node, the average satisfation SX = wX αX ≤ wX . Satisfation is less or

equal than e(cid:27)ort, for individual paths as well as in the average.

wXC + wXD = wX αX .

(2)

5

The above mentioned amounts of e(cid:27)ort wX are just averages over individual seletions, mod-
erated by the limitations αX , in the same way as sX was limited. In the ase when αX = 1 for
all nodes X , the numbers wXC /wX , wXD/wX are just the probabilities of seleting C and D
from node X , respetively.

In a deterministi piture, people are expeted to selet always the nodes with larger payo(cid:27).

However, it is lear even for a physiist that in reality people have their individual preferenes,

and a ommon payo(cid:27) for everybody an be introdued only for a statistial desription. This

intuition on individual harater of payo(cid:27)s is on(cid:28)rmed by the utility theory [2℄. Working in

statistial physis, we are tempted to use some noise as a measure of, say, lak of information of

the ommunity members. Then we expet that the ratio wXC /wXD in stationary state depends
on β(αXC − αXD), where β = 0 for absolute lak of information on the payo(cid:27)s, and β is large

when the information is well aessible. From this point, it is only one step to mimi the statistial

mehanis, writing the stationary probability of seleting C from node X

p(XC)eq =

∝ exp[β(αXC − αXD)],

wXC
αX wX

and to postulate a dynami desription in the form of fundamental (or Master) equation

dp(XC, t)
dt

= −r(XC)p(XC, t) + r(XD)[1 − p(XC, t)],

where r(XC) ∝ p(XC)eq . Here, the onstant of proportionality determines the timesale of the

dynamis.

(3)

(4)

In, say, a standard soiety the information on the payo(cid:27)s is well aessible and the suessive

seletions are almost deterministi. Then, people who deide to live in a wild forest are rare

exeptions in the soiety: almost everybody selets C at the physiologial level. It is less lear if

the payo(cid:27)s for those who break law are indeed smaller than for the others. In any ase, a great

e(cid:27)ort is paid to ensure the population that sooner or later this payo(cid:27) will be strongly redued.

Beause of this e(cid:27)ort, the statistial data on the hoie of CD are usually less sure. Looking

for belongingness and needs of higher order is not diretly onneted with our issue; anyway, in

demorati systems we are partially involved into the ruling power, whih annot then be treated

as external and is maybe not entirely against our will. Summarizing this setion, this author

believes that the onept of the deision tree, as an adaptation of the Maslow hierarhy, an be

useful in many issues.

3 The ase of ghetto

As it is expeted to be lear from the de(cid:28)nition of ghetto, aepted above, the key point of

the deision tree is the node C , where ruial deision is to be taken: CC or CD. The reason

is as follows. All what we know about ghetto on(cid:28)rms that there, it is almost impossible to

satisfy the safety need. The payo(cid:27) of a useful solution CC is drastially redued with respet to

other ommunities. Examples of this painful true (cid:28)ll newspapers and TV or, even worse, remain

unknown if information is prohibited. To bring these examples here, athough justi(cid:28)ed from the

point of view of the sub jet, would drive us too far from soiophysis. Instead, let us onsider

the onsequenes for the payo(cid:27).

Imagine that the safety is strongly redued in an initially normal soiety. The reason an be

war or revolution, or other abrupt fall of the politial system. It is lear that the aessibility

6

of information deteriorates, and in this situation many people do not know what to do. What

is the payo(cid:27) if I withdraw? if I resist? who will win? what will be the onsequenes for me?

my family? my assets? and so on. As a rule, a remarkable perentage of people resist, just

beause - a physiist would say - large entropy in the system. Here we assume that (cid:28)nally some

power prevails and the information on payo(cid:27)s beomes more lear. But the above mentioned

group keeps resisting. They (cid:28)ght against the external power and its supporters - the mehanism

known too well, indeed. Relaxing to the stationary state, the system (cid:28)nds that the payo(cid:27) of the

hoie CC is redued by an expeted repression of the resisting group. The external power tries

to balane this repression by defeating the enemy (cid:28)ghters. Soon, the level of aggression of both

sides beomes equivalent; both (cid:28)nd onvenient justi(cid:28)ations.

This author believes that what an be said mathematially, an be said - although longer

- in words. Here we try the opposite way. Violene bears violene - this sentene is short. In

soiophysial language, the same ontent an be expressed as a stability of the solution of Eq. 4,

haraterized by the ondition αCC < αCD . This stability relies on the following premises: i) the
payo(cid:27) αCC is drastially lowered by the repressive ations of the resistant group, ii) struggling for
their safety, people are not motivated to selet CC instead of CD, if αCC < αCD , iii) seletion
of CD in a soial sale reinfores the resistant group. As we see, this losed irle does not rely
on a partiular hoie of the funtional dependene of the e(cid:27)ort w on the payo(cid:27) α. In fat, the

resistant group an be ompared to a nuleation enter, whih initiates the new phase. However,

the nuleation proess annot be desribed within the simplest version of the mean (cid:28)eld theory,

used here.

As a result, the whole tree beomes degenerated. For those who deided to resist, it is not

possible to look for belongingness or esteem out of the resistant group. On the other hand, even

those who selet CC are in on(cid:29)it between fear of terror and fear of blind ations of the ruling

power. Not being able to get safety, they follow the solidarity with the resistant group, whey

they look for belongingness and esteem. As a rule, when the safety is at risk, no e(cid:27)ort an be

put to struggle for higher needs. In e(cid:27)et, upper branhes disappear.

4 Disussion

Our onlusions are to be divided in three parts. First is soiophysial. Our mathematial

desription is equivalent to the mean-(cid:28)eld theory of the ferromagneti phase, where two stable

solutions oexist [9℄. This model is well established in appliations of physis to soial sienes

[10℄. It is known that the stability of the ferromagneti phase is overestimated by mean (cid:28)eld

theory; in fat, it depends on the struture. Here we are faed with a question, what is a realisti

struture of a ommunity. Muh e(cid:27)ort has been done by soiologists to advane our knowledge

on the sub jet; however, even the harateristi size of soial networks remains under dispute

[11, 12℄. On the other hand, stability of ordered Ising phase at low temperatures has been found

in omputer simulations for most of investigated strutures [13, 14, 15℄, with one-dimensional

hains and related models as an only exeption [17℄. (We note that the ondition of low temper-

ature is equivalent to large value of the unertainty fator β in our onsiderations.) For soial

appliations, the ondition of an eternal stability of the ferromagneti phase an be substituted

by a weaker ondition of appearane of long-living ordered domains. We an onlude that so-

iophysial arguments work for this hypothesis, and not against it.

7

Seond onlusion is aimed to be soiologial. The results of our analysis indiate, that when

an external power struggles for a ontrol of an isolated ommunity, the problem of safety remains

ruial. Obvious aim of the power must be: to guarantee the safety for still neutral part of the

ommunity. If this is not possible, war beomes eternal, without winners. Not so rarely, the

responsability for safety of isolated ommunities remains in hands of army, without ontrol of

ivil agenies or free press. This is preisely what eliminates the possibility of peaeful solution;

army people are trained to (cid:28)ght, not to bring safety. In soiology, the role of safety is known for a

long time: (cid:28)rst edition of the Maslow's book [1℄ appeared in 1954. The advantage of this work is

to express it in more formalized language. One ould ask if suh a formulation is worthwhile. On

the other hand, still some powerful people seem not to reognize the validity of the onlusions

of Maslow theory. Maybe they will be onvined by mathematis.

In my last word I delare to share the opinion that ghettos are shameful for human ivili-

sation. Nevertheless this respetable and rather ommon opinion, suh plaes exist, as we are

merilessly informed by free media. Some people even laim, that some of these plaes are estab-

lished to protet our laws to free life, where at the last level of the tree of deisions we an write

our soiophysial papers. If this is done without are about safety of the ghetto inhabitants, the

way is destrutive and mindless.

Aknowledgements. The author thanks Maªgorzata Krawzyk and Franis Tuerlinkx for

their kind help.

Referenes

1993.

[1℄ A. H. Maslow, Motivation and Personality, Harper and Row, New York 1987.

[2℄ P. D. Stra(cid:30)n, Game Theory and Strategy, Math. Assoiation of Ameria, Washington D.C.

[3℄ International Enylopedia of the Soial and Behavioral Sienes, N. J. Smelser and P. B.

Baltes (Eds.), Pergamin Press, London 2003.

[4℄ U. Hannerz, Soulside. Inquires into Ghetto Culture and Community, The University of

Chiago Press, Chiago 1969, 2004.

[5℄ J. Ron, Frontiers and Ghettos. State Violene in Serbia and Israel, University of California

Press, 2003.

terdam 1987.

[6℄ A. Kpi«ski, Self-portrait of a Man (in Polish), Wydawnitwo Literakie, Kraków 1993.

[7℄ M. Weber, Wirtshaft und Gesselshaft, 1922 (Polish edition: Gospodarka i spoªeze«stwo,

Wydawnitwo Naukowe PWN, Warszawa 2002)

[8℄ N. G. van Kampen, Stohasti Proesses in Physis and Chemistry, North Holland, Ams-

[9℄ K. Binder and H. Muller-Krumbhaar, Phys. Rev. B 9 (1974) 2328.

[10℄ W. Weidlih, Soiodynamis; A Systemati Approah to Mathematial Model ling in the So-

ial Sienes, Harwood Aademi Publishers, 2000.

[11℄ P. D. Killworth, E. C. Johnsen, H. R. Bernard, G. A. Shelley and C. MCarty, Soial

Networks 12 (1990) 289.

8

[12℄ P. V. Marsden, Soial Networks 25 (2003) 1.

[13℄ A. Aleksiejuk, J. Hoªyst and D. Stau(cid:27)er, Physia A 310 (2002) 260.

[14℄ B. Tadi¢, K. Malarz and K. Kuªakowski, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005) 137204.

[15℄ D. Makowie, LNCS 3305 (2004) 141 (ond-mat/0407622).

[16℄ K. Malarz, M. Zborek and B. Wróbel. TASK Quarterly 9 (2005) 475 (ond-mat/0506436)..

[17℄ M. A. Novotny and S. M. Wheeler, Braz. J. Phys. 34 (2004) 395 (ond-mat/0308602).

9

