The Latest on the Sokal Aﬀair:
Beyond Three Extremisms

Basarab Nicolescu

Theory Group, Laboratoire de Physique Nucl´eaire et des Hautes ´Energies (LPNHE)1,
CNRS and Universit´e Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris
e-mail: nicolesc@lpnhep.in2p3.fr

Abstract

After a short summary of the Sokal Aﬀair and of the point of view of Steven Wein-
berg, we discuss certain aspects of the scientist ideology present in the last book of Alan
Sokal Pseudoscience and Postmodernism: Antagonists or Fellow-Travelers?, published in
France. The danger of the three extremisms present in our time - relativist extremism, sci-
entist extremism and its mirror-image, the religious extremism - is underlined. We point
out also the necessity of a transdisciplinary dialogue between the diﬀerent disciplines as
a rampart against the fascination caused by these three extremisms.

6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
0
1
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1Unit´e de Recherche des Universit´es Paris 6 et Paris 7, Associ´ee ou CNRS

1

The Sokal aﬀair started with a hoax.

In 1994, a mathematical physicist from the
University of New York, unknown outside a closed circle of physicists, sent an article to
the journal Social Text, entitled Transgressing the Boundaries: Toward a Transformative
Hermeneutics of Quantum Gravity [1].

The text was peppered with accurate quotations by physicists such as Bohr and Heisen-
berg and philosophers, sociologists, historians of science or psychoanalysts such as Kuhn,
Feyerabend, Latour, Lacan, Deleuze, Guattari, Derrida, Lyotard, Serres or Virilio. In the
bibliography the text also listed authors such as Lupasco: the included middle being given
as an example of ”feminist logic”. Sokal’s commentary made however a number of ab-
surd assertions, creating the impression that he was perfectly attuned to postmodernism
and, in particular, to the Cultural Studies current of thinking. The journal’s editors were
delighted with the apparent adhesion of a physicist to their cause and published Sokal’s
text without hesitation, without even the slightest veriﬁcation.

Almost as soon as the article appeared in print Sokal himself revealed the hoax in a
further article published in Lingua Franca [2] and, from that moment on, buoyed by the
eﬀect the Internet, his fame was made. On a political level, Sokal wanted to show his
friends of the American left wing that a revolution or social transformation could not be
carried out based of the notion of reality as presented by philosophical relativism. Only
physics (in fact, according to Sokal’s view on what physics is) could play such a role.

This unleashed a storm of reactions on the Internet and the publication of books and
countless journal articles on the exposure of a very real problem. For some Sokal was the
apostle of Enlightenment against the post-modern obscurantists. For others he was part
of the thought police or merely a philistine imposture.

The Sokal Aﬀair had the merit of highlighting a phenomenon that is becoming increas-
ingly pervasive in contemporary culture: that of the radicalisation of relativism. Indeed,
it is evident that relativist extremism has a nefarious capacity to appropriate the language
of the exact sciences. Taken out of context, this language can then be manipulated to
say almost anything, indeed to demonstrate that everything is relative. The ﬁrst victims
of this form of deconstruction are the exact sciences that ﬁnd themselves relegated to the
rank of mere social constructs among many others, once the constraint of experimental
veriﬁcation is put into parentheses. It is, therefore, not surprising that in a few months
Alan Sokal became the hero of a community that is aware of a blatant contradiction
between its every day practices and its social and cultural representation.

Paradoxically, however, the Sokal Aﬀair served to reveal the extent of another form
of extremism namely scientist extremism, the mirror-image of religious extremism. In-
deed, Sokal’s position was supported by some notable heavyweights including the Nobel
Prizewinner Steven Weinberg, who wrote a long article in the New York Review of Books
[3].

For Weinberg ”The gulf of misunderstanding between scientists and other intellectuals
seems to be at least as wide as when C. P. Snow worried about it three decades ago”.
But what is the cause of this “gulf of misunderstanding”? According to Weinberg, one of

2

the essential conditions for the birth of modern science what the severance of the world of
physics from the world of culture. Consequently, from that moment on, any interaction
between science and culture can only be seen as detrimental. And with this, in one fell
swoop, he dismissed as irrelevant the philosophical considerations of the founding fathers
of quantum mechanics.

To some, Weinberg’s arguments caused some to smart as if from the whiﬀ of the
scientism of another century: the appeal to common sense in support the claim about the
reality of physical laws, the discovery through physics of the world as it is, the one-to-one
correspondence between the laws of physics and objective reality, the hegemony on an
intellectual level of the natural science (because we have a clear idea of what it means
for a theory to be true or false). However, Weinberg is certainly neither a positivist nor
a mechanist. He is without doubt one of the most distinguished physicists of the 20th
century and a man of broad culture, and due attention should be paid to his arguments.

Weinberg’s central idea, repeatedly pounded out like a mantra, concerns the discovery
by physics of the existence of impersonal laws, the impersonal and eternal laws which
guarantee the objective progress of science and which explain the unfathomable gulf be-
tween science and culture. The tone of the argument is overtly prophetic, as if in the name
of a strange religion without God. One is almost tempted to believe in the immaculate
conception of science. We are led to understand, therefore, that for Weinberg, what is
really at stake in the Sokal Aﬀair is the status of truth and reality. Truth, by deﬁnition,
cannot depend on the social environment of the scientist. Science is the custodian of
truth and, as such, its severance with culture is complete and deﬁnitive. There is only
one Reality: the objective reality of physics. Weinberg states unequivocally that for cul-
ture or philosophy, the diﬀerence between quantum mechanics and classical mechanics or
between Newton and Einsteins theory of gravitation is insigniﬁcant. The contempt with
which Weinberg treats the notion of hermeneutics therefore seems quite natural.

Weinberg’s conclusion comes down like a cleaver: ”the conclusions of physics may
become relevant to philosophy and culture when we learn the origin of the universe or the
ﬁnal laws of nature”, that is to say never!

In 1997, Sokal decided to write a counterargument to the famous Social Text article,
to express his actual thinking. For this he took on as a co-author, the Belgian physicist
Jean Bricmont, who was supposed to have a good knowledge of the intellectual situation
in France. The collaboration resulted in the publication of Intellectual Impostures, which
via its provoking title was intended to become a bestseller. I do not know if its hoped-for
destiny was ever attained, but the content of the book surprised by its intellectual patch-
iness and the repercussions were far beneath the resounding success of Sokal’s original
hoax. The impostors in question - most of whom are French - are Jacques Lacan, Julia
Kristeva, Luce Irigaray, Bruno Latour, Jean Baudrillard, Gilles Deleuze, Felix Guattari
and Paul Virilio.

It would be tedious to go over again, here, the nature of the “imposture”. The method
of the American and Belgian physicists was simple: sentences are removed from their
original context and then shown to be meaningless or inaccurate from the perspective

3

of mathematics or physics. For example, Lacan wrote that: “In this pleasure space
(espace de jouissance), to take something that is bounded, closed, constitutes a locus,
to speak of it is a topology” [4]. Sokal and Bricmonts commentary follows: “In this
sentence, Lacan uses four mathematical technical terms (‘space’, ‘bounded’, ‘closed’ and
‘topology’) but without paying attention to their meaning; this sentence is meaningless
from a mathematical point of view.” [5] The method used by the authors disqualiﬁes the
book and people thought that the Sokal Aﬀair was deﬁnitively closed.

But Sokal is back. He has just published in France a new book with the catchy title
Pseudoscience and Postmodernism: Antagonists or Fellow-Travelers? [6].
It is to be
noted in passing that Jean Bricmont has written or largely contributed to a third of the
book. Indeed, in the introduction, he sets the scene by quoting, in the ﬁrst lines, Jerry
Fodor: “The point of view to which I adhere [...] is scientism.”

It is undoubtedly the case that drawing comparisons between postmodernism and
pseudoscience has a certain appeal, even if Sokal concedes that he has only found a few
postmodern thinkers who rally to the cause of the pseudosciences.

The real novelty of the book is elsewhere, however, and can be found in Appendix
A entitled ‘Religion as pseudoscience”. It should be made clear, here, that Sokal is not
referring to cults or new religious movements, but to established religions : Christianity,
Judaism, Islam and Hindouism. It is, therefore, hardly surprising that Sokal points an
accusatory ﬁnger at Pope John Paul II, described by Sokal as the head of a “major
pseudoscientiﬁc cult, Catholicism” [7].

This last aﬃrmation smacks simply of defamation though it is interesting, nonetheless,
to try to understand why religion for Sokal (and Bricmont) is a pseudoscience in the same
way that astrology is.

Sokal candidly explains that “religion refers to real or alleged phenomena, or real or
alleged causal relations, which modern science views as improbable”. He goes on “that
[religion] attempts to base its aﬃrmations on a form of reasoning and system of proofs
that is far from satisfying the criteria of modern science in terms of logic and veriﬁcation”
[8]. Sokal’s epistemological error is plain to see: he assumes modern science to be the
only arbiter of truth and Reality. At no point does he entertain the idea of a plurality of
levels of Reality, with science applying to certain levels and religion to others. For Sokal
there can only be one level of Reality, a hypothesis which is epistemologically untenable
in light of what modern science has taught us.

Sokal’s attitude is strangely reminiscent of Lenins position when, in 1908, in Ma-
terialism and Empiriocriticism, he attacked the theories of physics implied the multi-
dimensional space-time, by proclaiming that the revolution could only be carried out in
four dimensions. Lenin, like Sokal, believed in the existence of a single level of Reality.
Or rather, he stuck to this belief, to justify his revolution.

It seems clear that we could ﬁnd numerous arguments to pick serious holes in the
aﬃrmations made by Sokal and his friends. But, to my mind, this approach is futile,
and going down this alley merely runs with the risk entering an interminable polemic

4

involving the parodying of the other sides position to the point of trading insults. The
three extremisms at stake here, of which religious extremism is the one which the public is
most familiar, have brought to the fore a fundamental problem that of the status of truth
and Reality and of showing us the consequences, including the political consequences of
this problem.

What we need to do at present it to go beyond these three extremisms, which are
the germ of new forms of totalitarianism. The Sokal aﬀair gives us a good opportunity
to reformulate, on a new and rigorous basis, not only the conditions for the dialogue
between the hard sciences and the humanities, but also of the dialogue between science
and culture, science and society and science and spirituality. Ultimately, the source of the
violent polemic unleashed by the Sokal Aﬀair is the considerable confusion between the
tools and the conditions of the dialogue. Sokal and his friends are right to denounce the
anarchic migration of concepts from the hard sciences to the humanities which can only
lead to a semblance of rigor and validity. But the moderate relativists are also right to
denounce the desire expressed by certain scientists to ban the dialogue between science
and culture.
Indeed, Weinberg falls prey to exactly the same form of confusion as his
contradictors. Why does he declare himself to be “against philosophy” (title of one of
the chapters of his book Dreams of a Final Theory [9])? Simply because he criticises the
tools of philosophy as not being productive in the process of scientiﬁc creation.

Are we obliged to choose between these three extremisms, as the only possible out-
come? Certainly not. Transdisciplinarity is a rampart against the fascination caused by
the three extremisms.

If there is a dialogue between the diﬀerent disciplines, it cannot be founded on the
concepts of one or other discipline but what the disciplines have in common: the Subject
itself. The Subject which, in the interaction with the Object, refuses any form of for-
malisation and which always maintains an element of irreducible mystery. The Subject
which throughout the 20th century has been considered as the Object: object of experi-
ence, object of ideologies which claimed to be scientiﬁc, object of scientiﬁc studies that
are aimed at dissecting it, formalising and manipulating it, and revealing in so doing, a
self-destructing process in the irrational struggle of the human being against himself. At
the end of the day, it is to the resurrection of the Subject that the Sokal Aﬀair sends us
a veritable transdisciplinary quest, the painstaking working out of a new art of living and
thinking.

References

[1] Alan D. Sokal, Transgressing the Boundaries: Toward a Transformative Hermeneu-
tics of Quantum Gravity, Social Text 46/47, Spring/Summer 1996, pp. 336-361.

[2] Alan D. Sokal, A Physicist Experiments with Cultural Studies, Lingua Franca 6(4),

May/June 1996, pp. 62-64.

[3] Steven Weinberg, Sokal’s Hoax, New York Review of Books 43(13), August 8, 1996.

5

[4] Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont, Impostures intellectuelles, Paris, Odile Jacob, 1997,

[6] Alan Sokal, Pseudosciences et postmodernisme : Adversaires ou compagnons de
route ?, Paris, Odile Jacob, 2005, translation from English by Barbara Hochstedt,
foreword by Jean Bricmont.

p. 27.

[5] Idem, p. 27.

[7] Idem, pp. 51 and 155.

[8] Ibid., p. 158.

[9] Steven Weinberg, Dreams of a Final Theory, New York, Pantheon Books, 1992.

6

