6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
1
1
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Learning about Knowledge: A Complex Network Approach

Luciano da Fontoura Costa
Instituto de F´ısica de S˜ao Carlos. Universidade of S˜ao Paulo,
S˜ao Carlos, SP, PO Box 369, 13560-970, phone +55 16 3373 9858,
FAX +55 16 3371 3616, Brazil, luciano@if.sc.usp.br
(Dated: 9th Oct 2005)

This article describes an approach to modeling of knowledge acquisition in terms of complex
networks and walks. Each subset of knowledge is represented as a node, and relationship between
such knowledge are represented as edges. Two types of edges are considered, corresponding to logical
equivalence and implication. Multiple conditional implications are also considered, implying that a
node can only be reached after visiting previously a set of nodes (the conditions). It is shown that
hierarchical networks, involving a series of interconnected layers containing a connected subnetwork,
provides a simple and natural means for avoiding deadlocks, i.e. unreachable nodes. The process of
knowledge acquisition can then be simulated by considering a single agent moving along the nodes
and edges, starting from the lowest layer. Several conﬁgurations of such hierarchical knowledge
networks are simulated and the performance of the agent quantiﬁed in terms of the percentage
of visited nodes after each movement. The Barab´asi-Albert and random models are considered
for the layer and interconnecting subnetworks. Although all subnetworks in each realization have
the same number of nodes, several connectivities, deﬁned by the average node degree, have been
considered. Two visiting strategies are investigated: random choice among the existing edges and
preferential choice to so far untracked edges. A series of interesting results are obtained, including
the identiﬁcation of a series of plateaux of knowledge for the case of the preferential movements
strategy.

PACS numbers: 89.75.Hc, 84.35.+i, 89.75.Fb

Knowledge must come through action. (Sophocles)

It is no good to try to stop knowledge from going for-

ward. (Enrico Fermi)

I.

INTRODUCTION

Science is the art of building good models of nature,
including science itself. This is the subject of the present
article, i.e. to revisit the problem of modeling how knowl-
edge is acquired in the new light of complex network re-
search.

Modeling involves representations of the phenomenon
of interest as well are rules relating such representations
in a dynamic way which is systematically consistent with
repetitive confrontation with experimental data. Because
of their generality, complex networks [1, 2, 3] provide a
natural and powerful resource for representing structures
of knowledge, where facts are represented as nodes and
relation/implications between facts are indicated by the
edges. Such an approach allows the process of knowledge
acquisition to be modeled in terms of walks through the
knowledge network representation. The present work de-
scribes a simple approach to knowledge acquisition based
on complex networks and random walks. In other words,
we endeavor to develop a model of knowledge acquisition
which, as expected from a useful model, can not only
reproduce known facts but also supply predictions.

The plan of the article is as follows. After revising
the main related works, focusing on random walks in
scale free networks, each of the hypotheses adopted in

our model are justiﬁed and discussed. Among other is-
sues, it is shown that hierarchical networks can naturally
guarantee absence of deadlock in multiple conditional im-
plications. Hierarchical complex networks [4] include a
series of layers, each containing a subnetwork, which are
interconnected through subnetworks.
In the proposed
model, conditional links are restricted to those between
successive layers so as to avoid deadlocks. Two types
of random walks are considered, involving random move-
ments as well as movements favoring new links. The sim-
ulations and respectively obtained results are presented
and discussed next, followed by concluding remarks and
perspectives for further developments.

small avalanches as paradigm changes, tend to take

longer times and saturate

future works: try to obtain curves of knowledge dy-
namics and compare with those obtained by the models

II. A BRIEF REVIEW OF RELATED
CONCEPTS AND DEVELOPMENTS

The subject of knowledge representation provides one
of the main issues in artiﬁcial intelligence (e.g. [5, 6]).
Several discrete structures, including graphs and trees,
have been considered for the representation of knowledge.
Of particular interest are the semantic networks, which
code each concept as a node and the several relation-
ships between such elements (e.g. proximity, precedence,
etc.) are encoded as edges. However, such structures
are mainly considered as a reference for inferences dur-
ing pattern analysis, not as a substract over which to

perform walks or explorations. The possibility to connect
nodes through logical expressions associated to nodes has
provided one of the main features of random Boolean net-
works citeGershenson:2004,Iguchi:2005. These expres-
sions have been used mainly to combine local states of
the nodes, not to control random walks. The possibility
to associate control on the ﬂow between nodes in graphs
has been adopted in Petri nets (e.g. [7]), which has been
used mainly for simulating computing and logical cir-
cuits. The subject of random walks itself correspond to
a well-developed and important area in statistical me-
chanics (e.g. [8]). The analysis of random walks in scale-
free networks has been the addressed by Tadic in [9, 10]
regarding a special type of network aimed at simulating
the Web, and by Bollt and Avraham [11] and Noh and
Rieger [12] considering recursive and hierarchical scale-
free networks, the latter being concerned with the de-
terministic type of hierarchical network proposed in [13].
Random hierarchical networks such as those considered
in the present work have been introduced in [4].

III. HYPOTHESES

Representability of Knowledge as a Network: The basic
assumption underlying the present work is that knowl-
edge can be represented as a complex network. First, it
is understood that knowledge involves a series of facts
which can be subdivided into basic subsets, which are
henceforth represented as network nodes, while relations
between such subsets are represented as edges. For
instance, the logic equivalence between two subsets of
knowledge (the ’if and only’ relation in logic), can be
represented as an undirected edge. Implications between
subsets are conveniently represented by directed edges.
The process of learning can then be modeled by walks
proceeding along the respective knowledge network.

Figure 1(a) illustrates the equivalence between two
subsets a and b of knowledge, while the example in (b) ex-
presses the fact that the knowledge in a can be inferred
from b, but not vice-versa.
It is also possible to have
hybrid situations such as those depicted in Figure 1(c),
where a can be reached from b or c, but only c can be
reached from a. In order to allow the representation of
multiple requirements imposed by simultaneous implica-
tions (i.e. the fact that a can only be reached after know-
ing b1, b2, . . . , bA, A being a positive integer) we introduce
the concept of token controlled network.

Consider the case illustrated in Figure 1(d). Here, the
subset of knowledge a can only be reached after visiting
b and c (in any order). It is also possible to have alter-
native conditions, as illustrated in Figure 1(e), where the
weights associated to the edges indicate the respective
conditional group.

Regarding the movement of agents along such networks
as they integrate the knowledge available from the nodes,
it is natural that equivalence edges can be tracked in any
direction. However, an implication edge from b and c to a

2

FIG. 1: Types of relationships between knowledge subsets
(i.e. nodes): equivalence (a); implication (b); hybrid rela-
tionship involving equivalence and implication (c); multiple
implication (d) and alternative implications (e).

is considered to be direction restrictive until a is reached
for the ﬁrst time (after visiting b and c), becoming an
’equivalence’ edge henceforth. This type of dynamics is
implemented in order to express the fact that once knowl-
edge about a is achieved, it is possible to reach any of the
conditions from that node.

Hierarchical Knowledge Networks: The indiscriminate
incorporation of the multiple conditions into a network
can easily lead to deadlocks such as that illustrated in
Figure 2. We henceforth assume that the knowledge net-
work is consistent, in the sense that all nodes should be
reachable. One way to obtain a consistent knowledge
network is to organize it hierarchiccally into H layers.
Each layer h contains a connected subnetwork (i.e. any
node in the subnetwork can be reached from any node)
which is interconnected, via conditional edges, to nodes
in layer h − 1.

FIG. 2: The indiscriminate use of multiple conditional im-
plications quickly leads to deadlocks such as that illustrated
here. The subset of knowledge in node k can never be reached
by an agent starting at i or j, as there is no connection be-
tween these two nodes.

Figure 3 illustrates a simple hierarchical knowledge
network containing three layers. For simplicity’s sake,
neither hybrid relationships nor alternative implications

are not considered henceforth. In addition, all layers are
assumed to be of the same type (e.g. random or Barab´asi-
Albert — BA) and have the same number of nodes and
average node degree. The nodes at the highest hierarchy
are called assumptions, and are the place where all the
walks start.

3

can be backtraced without any condition. The multi-
ple implication from i1, i2, . . . , iA to j is represented as
K(ip, j) = 1 and K(j, ip) = −1, p = 1, 2, . . . , A. Figure 5
The agent stores a vector ~v of visited nodes and an
individual adjacency matrix G, which are continuously
updated after each movement. The agent is granted to
know about all feasible connections emanating from the
current node i, while the feasibility of a given edge (i, j) is
decided by taking into account its list ~v of visited nodes.
More speciﬁcally, an edge will be feasible, and accessible
to the agent, in case it has already visited the required
nodes.

The movement strategies described in the two follow-
ing subsections have been considered in the reported sim-
ulations.

A. Random choice of edges

In this case, the next edge to be taken from the current
node i is drawn with the same probability between all the
feasible connections between i and all other nodes. By
feasible connection it is meant either an equivalence edge
or a conditional edge whose all conditions have already
been met.

FIG. 3: A example of simple hierarchical network of the type
considered in the present work.

B. Preferential choice of edges

The set of interconnecting networks is also of uniform
type nd have the same number of nodes and edges. These
subnetworks can be of random or BA types, deﬁning how
the subnetwork in layer h + 1 connects to the nodes in
layer h. Figure 4 illustrates how such interconnections
are understood in the present work. The layers i (Fig-
ure 4(a)), and h + 1 (Figure 4(b))are to be connected
through the interconnection subnetwork h in Figure 4(a).
Each edge (i, j) in the interconnection layer implies that
node i in layer h is connected to node j in layer h − 1 and
that node j in layer h is connected to node i in layer h−1.
The connections implemented by the three subnetworks
in Figure 4(a-c) are illustrated in Figure 4(d).

Unlike the previous case, the feasible edges which have
not yet been taken are considered ﬁrst, with uniform
probability. In case no such edges exist, the next edge is
drawn uniformly from the already tracked edges.

These two strategies aim to represent, though very
na¨ive and incompletely, two possible ways to acquire
knowledge. In the ﬁrst case, no distinction is made be-
It is as if the
tween a new or already taken relation.
researcher (i.e. the agent walking through the network)
is not choosy about revising a relationship or seeking for
new possible connections. In the second visiting scheme,
the researcher is more actively interested in exploring new
relationships, resorting to already tracked connections
only as a last resource. Intuitively, the second strategy
would seem to be more eﬀective in ﬁnding new knowl-
edge.

IV. COMPUTATIONAL IMPLEMENTATION

Knowledge networks involving the equivalence and
multiple condition relationships described above can be
conveniently represented in terms of an extended adja-
cency matrix [16] henceforth represented as K. Each
node is labeled by consecutive integer values 1, 2, . . . , N .
The equivalence between to nodes i and j is indicated
by making K(i, j) = 1 and K(j, i) = 1. The single im-
plication from node i to j is represented as K(i, j) = 1
and K(j, i) = −1. Note that such an assignement im-
plements the adopted strategy that an implication edge

V. SIMULATIONS

For simplicity’s sake, all simulations reported hence-
forth are restricted to hierarchical networks with 5 layers,
containing layer and interconnecting subnetworks with
N = 20 nodes, implying a total of 100 nodes for layers
subnetworks (arger networks involve much longer execu-
tion times). Random and Barab´asi-Albert models are
considered for layers and interconnections. The latter
are deﬁned by the number of edges m of each new added
node. Three conﬁgurations have been chosen for the BA

model: m = 1, 2 and 5. The random equivalent of a given
BA network with average node degree hki is henceforth
understood as the random network with γ = hki /(N −1).
The following conﬁgurations were addressed in the
henceforth reported simulations: (i) all layers and in-
terconnecting subnetworks are BA; (ii) all layers subnet-
works are random and all interconnecting networks are
BA; (iii) all layers subnetworks are BA and all intercon-
necting subnetworks are random; and (iv) all layers and
interconnecting subnetworks are random. In order to in-
vestigate the eﬀect of the degree of interconnectivity, each
of these conﬁgurations has been simulated for intercon-
necting subnetworks with hki = γ(N − 1).

Each of the above conﬁgurations was investigated while
considering two visiting strategies: (a) allowed edges are
chosen randomly; and (b) if available, untracked allowed
edges are selected randomly, otherwise allowed tracked
edges are selected randomly. In order to assess the eﬀect
of the conditional edges between successive layers, coun-
terparts of each considered conﬁguration interconnected
by unconditional networks have also been simulated and
had their performance quantiﬁed. Although several al-
ternative or complementary performance indices could
have been considered, for simplicity’s sake our attention
is restricted to the percentage P of visited nodes at time
instant t. The speed of knowledge acquisition can be es-
timated by taking the time derivative of this quantity,
˙P . A total of 100 realizations involving N t = 1200
i.e.
time steps have been performed.

Figure 6 shows the learning curves obtained for
P (t) considering the eight average degrees implied
by m = 1, 2, . . . , 8 for the several combinations of
layerinterconnection types of networks, presence of con-
ditional connections between layers, and consideration
of the random choice of movement. Analogous results
obtained for the conditional connections / preferential
movements; unconditional connections / random move-
ments and unconditional connections / preferential move-
ments are given in Figures 6, 7, 8 and 9.

VI. DISCUSSION

The obtained results imply a series of interesting ﬁnd-

ings, which are commented in the following:

Eﬀects of conditional interconnections Compared to
unconditional interconnections, the case of conditional
interconnections either reduce or largely has no eﬀect on
the knowledge acquisition speed. Although the fact that
conditional interconnections between layers was indeed
expect to reduce the knowledge acquisition speed, this
eﬀect has been more pronounced in the case of BA in-
terconnections. In other words, the use of BA intercon-
nections tend to have a great eﬀect in constraining the
movements from the lower to the upper layers.

Eﬀects of the type of interconnections Interconnections
through BA subnetworks have about the same eﬀect on
the knowledge acquisition as random subnetworks in the

4

case of conditional connections, but tend to substantially
enhance knowledge acquisition in the case of uncondi-
tional interconnections (see Figures 7 and 9).

Eﬀects of the density of interconnections Denser inter-
connecting subnetworks tend to decrease the knowledge
acquisition speed in all cases except for unconditional
BA interconnections, where the density of interconnec-
tions implies learning curves which are very similar (see
the left pair of graphs in Figures 7 and 9).

Presence of Plateaux The preferential movement strat-
egy deﬁned for all situations, except the cases intercon-
nected through unconditional BA subnetworks, has im-
plied a series of plateaux of knowledge acquisition along
the learning curves. These are characterized by being
preceded by a quick acquisition stage, followed by the
respective plateau. The width of such plateaux tend to
become larger as time passes. Although it is yet unclear
why such plateaux apper in the case of the preferential
movements, they seem to indicate a phase of knowledge
stagnation, corresponding to the state of dynamics of the
system where the walks proceed predominantly over al-
ready tracked edges in the previous layer, while the con-
ditional links leading to the subsequent layers are not
yet feasible. With this respect, it is possible to draw a
na¨ive analogy with a particle moving along a series of
chambers limited by successive compartments which are
progressively removed. Congruently, the plateaux tend
to become larger along time because the walks have each
time more alternatives of random movement among the
feasible edges.

The two fastest conﬁgurations involve either BA or
random layer subnetworks interconnected through un-
conditional BA subnetworks. This leads to the important
implication that, in case the conditions existing in real
knowledge networks do have BA organization, the rate
of knowledge advances would be maximized with respect
to random interdependencies.

VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

This article has presented a simple approach to knowl-
edge acquisition based on representation of knowledge
as a hierarchical complex network [4] and the model-
ing of the process of knowledge acquisition in terms of
walks along such networks. Though simple, the consid-
ered models incorporate the existence of two types of
edges implementing the logical relationships of equiva-
lence and conditional implication, including multiple ver-
sions where the access to speciﬁcs nodes are granted only
after the agent has visited speciﬁc nodes. This movement
strategy represents a possibly new mechanism for com-
plex network and random walk researches.

Two visiting strategies have been considered: at ran-
dom and preferential to still untracked edges. Simu-
lations considering several densities of connectivity be-
tween 5 hierarchical layers have been evaluated with re-
spect to conditional interconnecting networks and uncon-

ditional counterparts.

Despite the simplicity of the approach, a series of in-
teresting complex dynamics have been identiﬁed from the
learning curves, including the particularly fast knowledge
acquisition implied by unconditional BA interconnections
and the identiﬁcation of plateaux of stagnation of learn-
ing. The reported work has paved the way to several
future works,
including the quantiﬁcation of acquired
knowledge not only in terms of visited nodes, but also
tracked edges; the consideration of multiple agents [14]
which may or may not share information about their in-
dividual adjacency matrices, and the investigation of the
eﬀect of other connection densities inside each layer sub-
networks. Another relevant issue to be incorporated into
the model is the fact that the transitions from one node to
another, i.e. the inference of some subset of knowledge
from another, does not take always the same time.
It
would be therefore interesting to consider diverse distri-
butions of time-weights along the hierarchical knowledge
networks. Also interesting is the fact that the suggested
approach and models provide an interesting framework
for investigating data ﬂow architectures (e.g. [15]). This
type of computer architecture is characterized by a hier-

5

archical ﬂow of dependences between intermediate com-
puting stages, which could be conveniently modeled by
the hierarchical complex networks with multiple condi-
tional edges. As hinted by the results reported in the
current work, the model of conditional interdependencies
(i.e. random or BA) typically implied by computational
algorithms could have great impact on the overall com-
puting eﬃciency and execution time.

However, one of the most interesting points deserving
greater attention is the interpretation of the several in-
teresting dynamics observed through the reported simu-
lations. With this respect, it would be interesting to con-
sider additional measurements typically used in random
walk investigations, such as return time and correlations.
Related eﬀorts are under development and results should
be reported opportunely.

Luciano da F. Costa is grateful to FAPESP (process
99/12765-2) and CNPq (308231/03-1) for ﬁnancial sup-
port.

[1] R. Albert and A. L. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47

(2002).

[2] S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes, Advances in

Physics 51, 1079 (2002), cond-mat/0106144.

(2004).

[3] M. E. J. Newman, SIAM Review 45, 167 (2003), cond-

[9] B. Tadic, Eur. Phys. J. B 23, 221 (2001).
[10] B. Tadic, cond-mat/0310014 (2003).
[11] E. M. Bollt and D. ben Avraham, cond-mat/0409465

mat/0303516.

[4] L. da F. Costa, cond-mat/0307754 (2003).
[5] S. J. Russell and P. Norvig, Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A

modern approach (Prentice Hall, 2002).

Introduction to artiﬁcial

intelligence

[6] P. C. Jackson,
(Dover, 1985).

[7] W. Reisig, Elements of distributed algorithms: Modeling
and analysis with Petri Nets (Springer Verlag, 2001).
[8] D. ben Avraham and S. Havlin, Diﬀusion and reactions
in fractals and disordered systems (Cambridge University
Press, 2000).

[12] J. D. Noh and H. Rieger, cond-mat/0310344 (2004).
[13] E. Ravasz, A. L. Somera, D. A. Mongru, Z. N. Oltvai,

and A.-L. Barab´asi, Science 297, 1551 (2002).

[14] L. Acedo and S. B. Yuste, cond-mat/0310121 (2003).
[15] J. Silc, B. Robic, and T. Ungerer, Processor architecture:
From dataﬂow to superscalar and beyond (Springer Ver-
lag, 1999).

[16] The term weight matrix has been deliberately avoided
here because the values in the matrix are more related to
the adjacency between nodes than to weights.

6

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 4: Two layer (a,c) and one interconnecting (b) simple
subnetworks and the section of the hierarchical network re-
spectively implemented (d).

7

FIG. 5: Example of extended adjacency matrix K considering
BA layers and random interconnections. The conditional con-
nections are represented in white and the equivalence edges
in gray.

FIG. 6: The percentage of visited nodes P in terms of the time t for the conﬁguration involving random choice of edges and
conditional interconnections.

8

FIG. 7: The percentage of visited nodes P in terms of the time t for the conﬁguration involving random choice of edges and
conditional interconnections.

9

FIG. 8: The percentage of visited nodes P in terms of the time t for the conﬁguration involving random choice of edges and
conditional interconnections.

10

FIG. 9: The percentage of visited nodes P in terms of the time t for the conﬁguration involving random choice of edges and
conditional interconnections.

