6
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
4
1
1
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantifying soial vs. antisoial behavior in email networks

Luiz H. Gomes

, Luís M. A. Bettenourt

, Virgilio A. F. Almeida

2

1

2

1

Theoretial Division,

2

2

Jussara M. Almeida

and Fernando D. O. Castro

MS B284, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos NM 87545

2

Computer Siene Department

Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil

Email graphs have been used to illustrate general properties of soial networks of ommuniation

and ollaboration. However, inreasingly, the ma jority of email tra(cid:30) re(cid:29)ets opportunisti, rather

than symbioti soial relations. Here we use e-mail data drawn from a large university to onstrut

direted graphs of email exhange that quantify the di(cid:27)erenes between soial and antisoial behav-

iors in networks of ommuniation. We show that while strutural harateristis typial of other

soial networks are shared to a large extent by the legitimate omponent they are not harateristi

of antisoial tra(cid:30).

Interestingly, opportunisti patterns of behavior do reate nontrivial graphs

with ertain general harateristis that we identify. To omplement the graph analysis, whih

su(cid:27)ers from inomplete knowledge of users external to the domain, we study temporal patterns of

ommuniation to show that the dynamial properties of email tra(cid:30) an, in priniple, distinguish

di(cid:27)erent types of soial relations.

PACS numbers: 89.75.H, 89.20.Hh, 05.65.+b

The fast pae of reent progress in the quantitative

tant property of email, from the point of view of a net-

understanding of omplex networks that mediate soial

work struture, is the low ost [24℄ involved in delivering

interations has been largely due to new ways of harvest-

a message to a large group of reipients. This tends to

ing data, mainly by eletroni means. For this reason

make ommuniation between any two nodes more indis-

graphs of email ommuniation, where nodes represent

riminate, as email senders may easily send opies of a

email users and links denote messages exhanged between

message to multiple parties that play no ative role in

them, have beome important example soial networks.

the relationship between sender and reipient. As suh,

Aording to Newman, a soial network is a set of people

we may expet that networks of email may ontain nodes

or groups of people onneted through patterns of soial

with very high degree, and that degree distributions ex-

interation, whih an be represented as nodes and links,

hibit less severe or no pratial onstraints to their high

respetively, in a graph [1℄. The statistial mehanis of

degree tails. The result, as we show below, is that net-

these networks makes possible a quanti(cid:28)ation of aspets

works of email show no upper uto(cid:27) in their degree dis-

of human soial behavior and their omparison to the

tributions, whih are sale free with a small exponent

struture of interations in other omplex systems.

α, and degree orrelations that may be atypial of other

A reent study [2℄ has provided evidene for stru-

soial networks.

tural properties that are harateristi of soial graphs,

The ease with whih messages an be distributed to

but not of other omplex networks. Suh properties are

many reipients is also at the root of most opportunisti

a nontrivial lustering oe(cid:30)ient (network transitivity)

behavior involving email. In fat, there has been grow-

and the presene of positive degree orrelations (assorta-

ing interest in unovering evidene of antisoial behavior

tive mixing by degree) between adjaent nodes. More-

in online networks. Reent work addresses topis suh

over, it has been suggested that soial networks an be

as uninhibited remarks, hostile (cid:29)aming, non-onforming

largely understood in terms of the organization of nodes

behavior, group polarization, and spurious tra(cid:30) [9, 10℄.

into ommunities [2, 3, 4, 5, 6℄, a feature that an ex-

Email as a means of potential mass distribution is par-

plain, to some extent, the observed values for the luster-

tiularly assoiated with the dissemination of omputer

ing oe(cid:30)ient and degree orrelations. This observation

viruses as well as spam tra(cid:30) [11℄, that (cid:29)ood the Internet

has indeed led to the interesting suggestion that email

with unwanted messages usually ontaining ommerial

networks an be used to infer informal ommunities of

propositions or, more reently, a variety of other sams.

pratie within organizations [4℄, as well as their hierar-

This behavior, whih we all generially antisoial, dis-

hial struture [3, 4, 7℄, features that an in priniple be

plays di(cid:27)erent harateristis from other types of soial

useful for the e(cid:30)ient management of human olletive

relations for whih soial networks have been onstruted

behavior. In fat, the nature of suh hierarhies an be

and analyzed.

quanti(cid:28)ed [3, 8℄, and may be self-similar [3℄.

In all previous haraterizations of email ommunia-

Beyond these harateristis that are, at least at the

tions as networks the problem that these networks also

qualitative level, general to soial networks, there are fea-

mediate antisoial relations has not been addressed. In

tures of email graphs that are spei(cid:28). The most impor-

order to attempt to eliminate suh behaviors, as well as

2

to deal with inomplete network reonstrution, authors

undireted versions of our four networks, with expo-

have used several strategies suh as restriting the anal-

ysis of email tra(cid:30) to within the organization's domain

[3, 4, 5, 7, 12℄, taking into aount only links that dis-

nents α = 1.82 (R2 = 0.942) for the full soial network,
α = 2.03 (R2 = 0.925) for the entire antisoial network,
and α = 1.22 (R2 = 0.958) and α = 1.79 (R2 = 0.831) for

play ommuniation in both diretions [3, 5, 7℄, elimi-

the internal soial and antisoial networks, respetively.

nating nodes assoiated with very high message volumes

It is remarkable that our results are broadly onsistent

[3, 5, 7℄, and setting minimal message thresholds for a

with those of [15℄, for entirely di(cid:27)erent data. Moreover,

link to exist [4℄.

we see a tendeny for the exponent to be larger in the

Here we provide a more omplete study of email net-

ase of antisoial behavior, whih suggests that the true

works by lifting most of these restritions. Then email

soial exponent may be over estimated if the two tra(cid:30)s

networks beome direted, and the number of users and

for the antiso-

are not separated. The lower values of R2

links in our dataset is dominated by spam tra(cid:30). What

ial networks suggest that the power law model is more

is oneptually interesting about spam email is that it

adequate to represent soial networks than their antiso-

nevertheless displays quantitative graph theoretial and

ial ounterparts.

In spite of these results, the degree

dynamial harateristis that are nontrivial. Moreover,

distribution is a weak disriminator between soial and

these harateristis re(cid:29)et a ertain type of antisoial be-

antisoial behavior and is learly a(cid:27)eted by inomplete

havior that an be quantitatively haraterized and on-

knowledge of parts of the network, whih is a onsidera-

trasted to the general properties of other soial networks.

tion whenever external users are inluded. Suh lak of

To this end, we onsider the email tra(cid:30) from a depart-

knowledge results in the inorret shift of external users

ment of a large university, with about 1400 users inlud-

ing students, sta(cid:27), and administration. Email messages

to lower degree, and onsequently leads to larger esti-

mates of the exponent α. Thus both the failure to ex-

arriving at the departmental server are lassi(cid:28)ed into ei-

lude spam tra(cid:30) and the inomplete knowledge of links

ther spam or legitimate by SpamAssassin, a standard and

between external users ontribute to overestimations of

the exponent α.

widely used (cid:28)ltering software [13℄. We onstrut four

graphs representing di(cid:27)erent email networks. A soial

network is built from the legitimate messages exhanged

between all users, inluding those external to the depart-

ment that send/reeive e-mails to/from internal users.

Similarly, an antisoial network is built from the spam

messages exhanged between all users. An internal soial

network is built by onsidering internal users exlusively

involved in legitimate email ommuniation. Finally, the

internal spam tra(cid:30) [25℄ is used to build an internal an-

tisoial network. In general these networks are direted.

We also note that messages exhanged through legitimate

mailing lists, whih also involve bulk email tra(cid:30), may

exhibit antisoial harateristis. As in [14℄, aiming at

minimizing the impat of suh ommuniation patterns

in our analysis, we remove users who exhange emails

with (cid:28)fty or more other users from our internal soial

network.

Our four networks are built from a thirty-day log in-

luding 562664 messages, of whih 270491 are spam. The

set onsists of 19504 internal and 259069 external users.

Of these, 164998 external users are senders of spam, while

that number is only 721 for those internal to the domain,

most of them under fabriated identi(cid:28)ers. Also note that

the number of users in our log is orders of magnitude

larger that those inluded in several previously analyzed

datasets [15, 16℄.

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

]
x
 
=
<
X
P

[

 

]
x
 
=
<
X
P

[

 

 0

 0

Internal antisocial network
Internal social network

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

Clustering Coefficient

Antisocial network
Social network

 0

 0

 0.2

 0.4

 0.6

 0.8

 1

Clustering Coefficient

Ebel, Mielsh and Bornholdt [15℄ analyzed a similarly

FIG. 1: Distribution of the lustering oe(cid:30)ient for soial

onstruted email network, although without drawing the

and antisoial networks. a) The distribution of the lustering

distintion between spam and legitimate tra(cid:30). They

haraterized the degree k distributions for the entire
graph as a power law P (k) ∝ 1/kα
α = 1.81. For the network omposed exlusively of in-
ternal users they found a smaller exponent α = 1.32.

, with exponent

oe(cid:30)ient for the internal network. b) The distribution of

the lustering oe(cid:30)ient for the network built from messages

exhanged between all users.

Similarly, we (cid:28)nd power law degree distributions for the

high lustering oe(cid:30)ient and assortative mixing are

Next, we reall that aording to Newman and Park,

3

two graph theoretial quantities typial of soial net-

and onsequently reah on average a population of re-

works [2℄. Therefore, we investigate whether these two

ipients with muh lower degree, whih are statistially

strutural properties of email graphs an distinguish the

muh more abundant for a sale free degree distribution.

soial imprint of legitimate email ommuniation from

These qualitative expetations are well borne by our

the antisoial harateristis of spam.

Indeed, onsid-

ering the undireted versions of our networks, the av-

erage lustering oe(cid:30)ient over the internal soial net-

work is C = 0.241 ± 0.008, whereas the lustering oef-

results. Using (1) we omputed the Pearson oe(cid:30)ient r
for the four direted networks, and obtained r = −0.135
for the entire soial network, r = −0.139 for the entire
antisoial network, and r = 0.232 and r = 0.049 for

(cid:28)ient in the internal antisoial network is muh lower,

the soial and antisoial internal networks, respetively.

at C = 0.052 ± 0.006. These results ompare to the lus-
tering oe(cid:30)ient of internal domain users of C = 0.154,

Standard errors are smaller than 1%. The positive value
of r for the internal soial network is the result of an ap-

found by Ebel et al. [15℄. Considering the networks that

proximately linear orrelation between the out degree of

inlude external users, whose neighbors are only known

the sender and the in degree of the reipient. Suh sys-

inompletely, we (cid:28)nd C = 0.137±0.003 for the soial net-
work and C = 0.026 ± 0.001 for the antisoial network, in
ontrast with a C = 0.003 for the entire network of Ebel

temati orrelation aross degree is absent for the other

three networks, with the di(cid:27)erene that for the external

networks there is an average imbalane between the de-

et al. Figure 1 shows the distribution of the lustering o-

grees of senders and reipients that leads to a negative

e(cid:30)ient. All four networks ontain a signi(cid:28)ant fration

r. We onjeture that the more negative Pearson oe(cid:30)-

of their nodes with zero lustering oe(cid:30)ient, but this

ient for the external soial network is the result of the

proportion is muh higher for graphs that inlude exter-

widespread subsription to legitimate distribution lists,

nal users and/or antisoial omponents. Spei(cid:28)ally 61%
of all nodes in the entire soial network have C = 0, while
this beomes more than 81% for the entire antisoial om-
ponent. The internal soial network has only 25% of its
nodes with C = 0 ompared to 73% for the internal an-

suh as those related to news, promotions, et [26℄.

We see that the onsideration of this set of standard

network measures plaes networks of email ommunia-

tion in a unique position. On the one hand, the legitimate

omponent of a ompletely known email network shares

tisoial network. These features indiate that there are

its transitivity and positive degree orrelation properties

lear di(cid:27)erenes on average between lustering in a so-

with other soial networks. Unlike some other soial net-

ial and an antisoial omponents of email networks, but

works however its degree distribution is sale free and

also that low lustering is not a su(cid:30)ient ondition for a

haraterized by a small exponent, whih implies that,

node to be assoiated with antisoial behavior. Similarly

although the distribution remains normalizable, no (cid:28)nite

to our analysis of degree these results also indiate that

moments exists as the network size goes to in(cid:28)nity. This

the separation of the two tra(cid:30)s is important in order to

property is a diret result of the low ost of adding addi-

generate a truly soial omponent. Failure to do so will

tional reipients to a message, and makes statistial es-

result in underestimation of the average soial network

timation of degree orrelations over email networks very

transitivity.

sensitive and network size dependent, if not altogether ill

We now analyze the nature of degree orrelations be-

de(cid:28)ned.

tween nodes by omputing the orresponding Pearson

orrelation oe(cid:30)ient[17℄ r

r =

Pi jiki − M −1
i − M −1(Pi ji)2][Pi k2

Pi ji Pi′ ki′

i − M −1(Pi ki)2]

,(1)

p[Pi j2

where ji and ki are the exess in-degree and out-degree

In spite of these properties, the antisoial network built

from the exhange of spam messages, has de(cid:28)nite proper-

ties, showing negligible transitivity and strong disassor-

tative mixing. Moreover, our analysis shows that, in on-

trast to previous expetations [2℄, soial email networks

involving users that are external to the loal domain may

of the verties that the ith edge leads into and out of,

present a negative degree orrelation, presumably re(cid:29)et-

respetively, and M is the total number of edges in the

ing in part the inomplete knowledge of external links,

graph.

but also resulting from message exhanges harateristi

The expetation of assortative mixing by degree in a

of email, suh as the subsription to legitimate distribu-

soial network of email is not obvious. In fat as we ar-

tion lists.

gued above, a user's degree is a very variable property,

These di(cid:27)erenes suggest mehanisms to di(cid:27)erentiate

that an be easily hanged drastially by the inlusion

legitimate human ollaboration from opportunisti be-

of the user's address in, or by the use of, distribution

havior on the basis of network struture, and have in-

lists. This ommon use of email an reate huge im-

deed been proposed as the basis for spam detetion al-

balanes of degree between senders and reipients and

gorithms [19, 20℄. However, muh remains unsatisfatory

generate negative values for the Pearson oe(cid:30)ient of at

about the transitivity and assortative mixing measures as

least some legitimate users.

If this an be expeted of

means to haraterize patterns of human ommuniation.

the degree orrelation in the soial network, then suh

The most serious (cid:29)aw is that their estimation relies on

an e(cid:27)et should be even more pronouned in the antiso-

the knowledge of all neighbors of eah node. This is not

ial graph. There, spam senders follow the strategy of

possible beyond a small subset, orresponding to users in

inreasing their degree indisriminately and maximally,

the loal domain; a general problem of the onstrution

4

of any network. A solution to this problem is the on-

observed an be explained in terms of a queueing model

sideration of quantities that haraterize the dynamis of

whih enodes prioritization of tasks driven by human

ommuniation links between senders and reipients di-

deision making.

retly, without referene to third parties. In other words,

Although suggestive, these interesting results were ob-

it is key to investigate whether the soial and antisoial

tained for seleted senders and reeivers of email. Con-

nature of a given node an be inferred from its dynamial

sequently it remains unlear whether they hold for the

behavior, even given inomplete knowledge of the soial

general user or for aggregated groups of users. To this

network of all its neighbors.

end, we investigated the statistis of our soial and an-

We start with the simplest measure of ommuniation

tisoial tra(cid:30)s by averaging over the behavior of many

between two users: reiproity. We build a simple oe(cid:30)-

users. The (cid:28)rst obvious temporal property of email traf-

ient of preferential exhange Ei for user i as:

Ei = 1 −

Pj∈Ci [k(j → i) − k(i → j)]
Pj∈Ci [k(j → i) + k(i → j)]

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

where Ci is the set of all users that have ontat with
user i within a given time period, and k(j → i) is
the number of messages sent by user j to i. There-
fore, 0 ≤ Ei ≤ 1, with the lower end orresponding

to no message replied, and the upper end with every

message obtaining a response. This an be further av-

eraged over all users to generate network averages hEi.

Considering internal as well as external users, we (cid:28)nd

hEi = 0.03288 ± 0.00048 in the soial network, whereas a
signi(cid:28)antly lower hEi = 0.00007 ± 0.00002 is observed in
the antisoial network. Values of hEi = 0.27568±0.00830
and hEi = 0.06246 ± 0.00558 are found in the internal

(cid:28) is its non stationarity. This reates di(cid:30)ulties for any

attempt at statistial estimation. Soial email tra(cid:30) in

partiular shows large temporal variations, from night

(2)

to day, working days to weekends, and for our data set,

strong seasonality assoiated with the aademi alen-

dar. As we show below, antisoial tra(cid:30) displays weaker

non-stationarity.

The seond temporal feature of email tra(cid:30) is an im-

mediate result of the power law degree distributions de-

sribed above. The ma jority of users do not ommuniate

often with many others, but have instead low degree as-

soiated with an infrequent and often irregular usage of

email. This means that the typial email user in our data

- and, we believe, in most other large email networks -

does not show time oherene with others, nor is he/she

utilizing email under the temporal optimization pattern

suggested by Barabasi.

soial and antisoial networks, respetively. Therefore,

To irumvent some of these di(cid:30)ulties, we attempted

antisoial networks are naturally assoiated with small

to identify statistial temporal patterns of ommunia-

(but sometimes non-zero!)

reiproity, whereas soial

tion that are harateristi of the soial vs. antisoial

networks, in partiular those ontaining legitimate users

aggregated tra(cid:30)s. In so doing we average over the be-

whose behavior we know most ompletely, are assoiated

haviors of many users. Spei(cid:28)ally, we represent tem-

with the highest reiproity.

Up to this point we onentrated on the struture of

poral patterns of message arrival through the de(cid:28)nition

of a ommuniation word of size d. The dimension d is

the network of interations mediated by email messages.

the number of time intervals, or letters, in the ommu-

In its onstrution as a graph we have not paid attention

to the detailed temporal struture of message exhanges.

An interesting question then is whether the dynamial

properties of email tra(cid:30) an distinguish di(cid:27)erent types

of soial relations.

This question has reently beome a sub jet of interest.

Ekmann, Moses and Sergi [14℄ have shown that oher-

niation word. Hene, a word is represented by a vetor

W = (i1, i2, . . . , id). The simplest representation of the

tra(cid:30) is through a binary assignement, where the value

of ij is set to 1 if one or more messages were exhanged in
the orresponding time interval, or ij = 0 otherwise. We

estimate the probability for a given word to our out

of N realizations obtained from the measurement data

through simple word frequenies. The Shannon entropy

ent strutures emerge from the temporal orrelations be-

tween time series expressing short periods of intense mes-

of the tra(cid:30) is de(cid:28)ned as usual as

sage exhange between groups of users. Barabasi [21℄, on

the other hand, has shown that the distribution of time

intervals between email messages sent by a single user

H(W d) = −

p(wd

i)log2p(wd

i),

(3)

N

X
i=1

may be well desribed by a power law distribution, with

bursts of ativity alternating with long silenes.

whih is a funtion of word size d.

Both these haraterizations identify properties of le-

The representation of time series in terms of binary

gitimate email tra(cid:30) - temporal orrelations between

words is familiar from other ontexts in physis and in-

users and inter-message power law time statistis - that

formation theory, from the analysis of the time evolu-

are thought to be exlusively soial and thus not shared

tion of dynamial systems, to trains of ation potential

by the antisoial tra(cid:30) omponent. In fat intense email

in neuronal ativity or bit streams in noisy ommunia-

exhanges between small groups of users are to be ex-

tion hannels. The entropy of the distribution and its

peted in patterns of human ommuniation, reating the

variation with the word size d give us in fat some of the

orrelations observed by Ekmann, Moses and Sergi [14℄.

essential properties of the dynamial rules that generate

Barabasi in turn suggests that the power law statistis he

these dynamial patterns [22, 23℄.

To illustrate these statements onsider the simplest

statistial model that generates a binary time series sub-

jet to a given message arrival rate p. Then p an be

Social traffic
Antisocial traffic

5

 1

 2

 3

 8

 9

 10

 4

 6

 5

 7
Size of the word

letter. The fat that the entropy is proportional to the

(a) Work hours

ially simple if the temporal bin for eah letter is hosen

suh that p = 1/2, in whih ase m = 1 is maximal. This

Social traffic
Antisocial traffic

written as the probability to obtain a 1 at eah letter.

If we further assume that bits orresponding to di(cid:27)erent

letters are unorrelated then the bit value at eah letter

an be regarded as the result of an independent Bernoulli

trial.

It follows that the probability for all words of

length d with a given number n of 1s is given by the
binomial distribution P (p; n, d). Beause all words with
a given number n of 1s are equally likely, their proba-
bility is pw(p; n, d) = pn (1 − p)d−n
entropy is also easy to ompute as H(W d) = d m, where
m = −(1 − p) log2(1 − p) − p log2 p > 0 is the entropy per

. The orresponding

word length d is a diret onsequene of the assumed lak

of temporal orrelations. These expressions beome espe-

independent message model (IMM) is the maximal en-

tropy distribution for a tra(cid:30) haraterized by a message

arrival p.As suh real tra(cid:30)s must display lower entropy

relative to it.

Figure 2 shows the di(cid:27)erene between the entropy of

the independent message model and the real tra(cid:30)s, le-

gitimate and spam. We aggregated the data into two

temporal periods: work hours (i. e. the period from 8AM

to 8PM of the weekdays, exept holidays, in the log) and

remaining times whih we aggregated as non-work hours.

The di(cid:27)erene between the maximal entropy model and

)
x
(
H

 
-
 
)
x
(
M
M
H

I

)
x
(
H

 
-
 
)
x
(
M
M
H

I

 1.2

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0

 1.2

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0

 1

 2

 3

 8

 9

 10

 4

 6

 5

 7
Size of the word

the entropy of the real time series an be interpreted as

(b) Non-work hours

the temporal strutural information of eah tra(cid:30).

The results show that soial email tra(cid:30) has lower en-

FIG. 2: The variation with word size d of the di(cid:27)erene be-

tropy (higher strutural information) than antisoial traf-

tween the independent message model entropy and the en-

(cid:28) for both work and non-work periods. This di(cid:27)erene

tropy of the legitimate and spam tra(cid:30)s during work (a) and

beomes more notieable the larger the word, thus ap-

(b) non-work periods. All word probability distributions were

turing longer patterns of ommuniation and the pres-

onstruted by normalizing the time bin for eah letter word

ene of time orrelations. The di(cid:27)erene between the

independent message model, where for p = 1/2 all words

are equally likely, and the real tra(cid:30)s is that in the latter

words with many 1s are suppressed while the probabil-

so that p = 1/2

. As a result the time bin for eah letter of the

soial tra(cid:30) during work hours was set to 4s, and 11s for the

orresponding non-work period. Time bins for the antisoial

tra(cid:30) were set at 4s during work hours and 5s otherwise. The

exess urvature for large d is the result of poorer estimation

ity of words with two to three 1s separated by one to

of rare words.

three 0s is enhaned. The di(cid:27)erene between soial and

antisoial tra(cid:30)s is more subtle, with soial email tra(cid:30)

displaying a greater probability for words with an isolated

aptured graphially through the absene of de(cid:28)nite met-

message in a long stream of silene. These strutures are

ris present in other soial networks. Perhaps even more

reminisent to those found by Barabasi, but display less

diretly, antisoial email tra(cid:30) an be identi(cid:28)ed by a

de(cid:28)nitive statistial signatures. We see in general though

greater statistial simpliity (higher entropy) in tempo-

that both soial and antisoial tra(cid:30)s are not random,

ral patterns of ommuniation, typial of the fat that

and that soial email shows stronger temporal struture

eah sender/reipient relationship is not developed to be

with a high probability for long silenes and bursts of a

unique and the same shemes are used to reah many re-

few messages.

ipients indisriminately. Moreover, the ease to exhange

In summary, we have shown that the rihness of be-

email messages that leads to these opportunisti behav-

haviors in human ommuniation - both symbioti and

iors also has onsequenes for the truly soial omponent

opportunisti or antisoial - is present in the struture

of the network, whih exhibits a power law degree distri-

of networks of email ommuniation and an be quanti-

bution with a small exponent and, in some ases, small

(cid:28)ed via graph theoretial and time series analysis. Op-

or negative assortative mixing by degree. We believe

portunisti nodes display antisoial behavior that an be

that the quantitative harateristis of antisoial om-

muniation patterns observed here for email networks are

tory and the Central Bank of Brazil for support.

6

probably general to other opportunisti soial behaviors,

bound to be present in other networks of human intera-

tion.

Aknowledgments

The authors thank CNPq (Brazilian Counil for Re-

searh and Development), Los Alamos National Labora-

[1℄ M. Newman and D. Watts and S. Strogatz Pro. Natl.

Si. USA 101, 14333 (2004).

Aad. Si. USA 99, 2566-2572 (2002).

[15℄ H. Ebel, L. I. Mielsh, and S. Bornholdt, Phys. Rev. E

[2℄ M. E. J. Newman, and J. Park, Phys. Rev. E 68, 036122

66, 035103(R) (2002).

(2003).

[16℄ J. Shetty, and J. Adibi Pro. of The Eleventh ACM

[3℄ R. Guimerà, L. Danon, A. Díaz-Guilera, F. Giralt, and

SIGKDD International Conferene on Knowledge Dis-

A. Arenas, Phys. Rev. E 68, 065103(R) (2003).

overy and Data Mining, Chiago, IL, August 21-24,

[4℄ J.R. Tyler, D. M. Wilkinson, B. A. Huberman, eletroni

2005.

arXiv ond-mat/0303264.

[17℄ M. E. J. Newman, Phys. Rev. Letters 89(20), 208701

[5℄ A. Arenas, L. Danon, A. Díaz-Guilera, P. M. Gleiser, and

(2002).

R. Guimera, Eur. Phys. J. B 38, 373 (2004).

[18℄ M. E. J. Newman, Phys. Rev. E 67, 026126 (2002).

[6℄ J. M. Casado, T. Gar(cid:28)nkel, W. Cui, V. Paxson, and S.

[19℄ L. Gomes, F. Castro, L. Bettenourt, V. Almeida, J.

Savage Pro. of the 4th Workshop on Hot Topis in Net-

Almeida, R. Almeida Steps to Reduing Unwanted Traf-

works, Maryland, MD, November 14-15, 2005.

(cid:28) on the Internet (SRUTI 2005), Sponsored by USENIX,

[7℄ R. Guimerà, L. Danon, A. Díaz-Guilera, F. Giralt, and

Cambridge, MA, July 7-8, 2005

A. Arenas, J. Eonomi Behaviour & Organization (in

[20℄ P. O. Boykin and V. Royhowdhury IEEE Computer 38-

press) .

4, 61 (2005).

[8℄ A. Trusina, S. Maslov, P. Minnhagen, and K. Sneppen,

[21℄ A. L. Barabási, Nature 435, 207 (2005).

Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 178702 (2004).

[22℄ W. Bialek, I. Nemenman, and N. Tishby, Neural Com-

[9℄ B. Wellman, J. Sala(cid:27), D. Dimitrova, L. Garton, M. Gulia,

putation 13, 2409-2463 (2001).

and C. Haythornthwaite Annual Review of Soiology 22,

[23℄ J. P. Cruth(cid:28)eld, and D. P. Feldman, Santa Fe Institute

213 (1996).

tehnial report 01-02-012 (2001)

[10℄ J. G. Kossinets, and D. J. Watts Siene, 311, 5757

[24℄ In energy, time and reputation of the sender

(2006).

[25℄ Originating from and addressed to an internal user. These

[11℄ Aording to the Spamhaus Pro jet (Spamhaus.org) as

are usually the result of forged identi(cid:28)ers.

of Otober 2004 spam messages aount for about 74%

[26℄ Reall that, unlike the internal soial network, node de-

of all email tra(cid:30).

grees in our entire soial network are not onstrained,

[12℄ M. E. J. Newman, S. Forrest, and J. Balthrop, Phys. Rev.

and thus, may represent distribution lists. We veri(cid:28)ed to

E 66, 035101(R) (2002).

the extent possible, given that email user identi(cid:28)ers are

[13℄ See

the

SpamAssassin

Home

Page:

made anonymous but domains are present, that external

http://www.spamassassin.org

distribution lists are the main soure of degree imbalane

[14℄ J P. Ekmann, E. Moses, and D. Sergi, Pro. Natl. Aad.

for the external soial network.

