6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
2
0
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Nonequilibrium phase transition in the coevolution of networks and opinions

Petter Holme1, 2 and M. E. J. Newman2
1Department of Computer Science, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, U.S.A.
2Department of Physics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, U.S.A.

Models of the convergence of opinion in social systems have been the subject of a considerable amount of recent
attention in the physics literature. These models divide into two classes, those in which individuals form their
beliefs based on the opinions of their neighbors in a social network of personal acquaintances, and those in which,
conversely, network connections form between individuals of similar beliefs. While both of these processes
can give rise to realistic levels of agreement between acquaintances, practical experience suggests that opinion
formation in the real world is not a result of one process or the other, but a combination of the two. Here we
present a simple model of this combination, with a single parameter controlling the balance of the two processes.
We ﬁnd that the model undergoes a continuous phase transition as this parameter is varied, from a regime in
which opinions are arbitrarily diverse to one in which most individuals hold the same opinion. We characterize
the static and dynamical properties of this transition.

PACS numbers: 87.23.Ge, 64.60.Ak, 89.75.Fb, 89.75.Hc

I. INTRODUCTION

Simple mathematical models describing emergent phenom-
ena in human populations (14), such as voter models and mar-
ket models, have a long history of study in the social sci-
ences. It is only relatively recently, however, that physicists
have noted the close conceptual and mathematical connec-
tions between these models and traditional models of statisti-
cal physics such as spin models. Building on this realization,
there have been a number of important advances in the under-
standing of these models in the last decade or so, most notably
in the study of social networks (1; 7; 13). While the physics
community has been concerned primarily with studies of net-
work structure, there has more recently also been a substan-
tial line of investigation directed at dynamical processes on
networks, an area that has historically been of interest to soci-
ologists. One example, which has a long history in sociology
but is also well suited to study using physics methods, is the
dynamics of opinion formation in social networks. This prob-
lem highlights one of the fundamental questions in network
dynamics, namely whether dynamics controls the structure of
a network or the structure controls the dynamics.

It is observed that real social networks tend to divide into
groups or communities of like-minded individuals. An ob-
vious question to ask is whether individuals become like-

(a)

i

j

j′

(b)

i

j

FIG. 1 An illustration of our model, with vertex shapes representing
opinions. At each time step the system is updated according to the
process illustrated in panel (a) with probability φ or panel (b) with
probability 1 − φ. In (a) a vertex i is selected at random and one of
its edges (in this case the edge (i, j)) is rewired to a new vertex j′
holding the same opinion as i. In (b) vertex i adopts the opinion of
one of its neighbors j.

minded because they are connected via the network (5; 6;
9; 17; 18), or whether they form network connections be-
cause they are like-minded (10). Both situations have been
studied with physics-style models in the past, the ﬁrst using
opinion formation models (5; 9; 17), and the second using
models of “assortative mixing” or “homophily” (4; 12; 16).
Common sense, however, tells us that the distinction between
the two scenarios is not clear-cut. Rather, the real world self-
organizes by a combination of the two, the network changing
in response to opinion and opinion changing in response to
the network. In this paper we study a simple model—perhaps
the simplest—that combines opinion dynamics with assorta-
tive network formation, revealing an apparent phase transition
between regimes in which one process or the other dominates
the dynamics.

II. MODEL DEFINITION

Consider a network of N vertices, representing individu-
als, joined in pairs by M edges, representing acquaintance
between individuals1. Each individual is assumed to hold
one of G possible opinions on some topic of interest. The
opinion of individual i is denoted gi. In the past, researchers
have considered both cases where G is a ﬁxed small number,
such as a choice between candidates in a forthcoming elec-
tion (5; 17; 18), and cases in which the number of possible
opinions is essentially unlimited (6), so that G can be arbitrar-
ily large. An example of the latter might be religious belief
(or lack of it)—the number of subtly diﬀerent religious be-
liefs appears to be limited only by the number of people in the
world.

1 Although acquaintance networks are typically simple graphs, having mul-
tiedges and self-edges disallowed, we have in the interests of simplicity,
allowed multiedges and self-edges in our calculation. Since these form
only a small fraction of all edges our results will change little if we were to
remove them.

The case of ﬁxed small G has relatively simple behavior
compared to the case of arbitrarily large G, and so it is on the
latter that we focus here. We will assume that the number of
possible opinions scales in the proportion to the number of
individuals, and parameterize this proportionality by the ratio
γ = N/G. (It is possible that not all opinions will end up ex-
isting in the population. Our model allows for some opinions
to become extinct as the dynamics evolves, so that the ﬁnal
number of distinct opinions may be less than G.)

The M edges of the network are initially placed uniformly
at random between vertex pairs, and opinions are assigned to
vertices uniformly at random. We then study by computer
simulation a dynamics in which on each step of the simulation
we either move an edge to lie between two individuals whose
opinions agree, or we change the opinion of an individual to
agree with one of their neighbors. To be speciﬁc, on each step
we do the following.

1. Pick a vertex i at random. If the degree ki of that vertex
is zero, do nothing. Otherwise, with probability φ, se-
lect at random one of the edges attached to i and move
the other end of that edge to a vertex chosen randomly
from the set of all vertices having opinion gi.

2. Otherwise (i.e., with probability 1 − φ) pick a random

neighbor j of i and set gi equal to g j.

Step 1 represents the formation of new acquaintances between
people of similar opinions (5; 9; 17). Step 2 represents the
inﬂuence of acquaintances on one another, opinions becoming
similar as a result of acquaintance.

Note that both the total number of edges M in our network
and the total number of possible opinions G are ﬁxed. In the
limit of large system size, the model thus has three parameters:
the average degree ¯k = 2M/N, the mean number of people
holding an opinion γ = N/G, and the parameter φ. In our
studies, we primarily keep the ﬁrst two ﬁxed and ask what
happens as we vary the third.

III. CRITICAL SCALING OF GROUPS SIZES

The expected qualitative behavior of the model is clear.
Since both of our update moves tend to decrease the number of
nearest-neighbor vertex pairs with diﬀerent opinions, we will
ultimately reach a state in which the network is divided into
a set of separate components, disconnected from one another,
with all members of a component holding the same opinion.
That is, the model segregates into a set of communities such
that no individual has any acquaintances with whom they dis-
agree. We call this the consensus state. Furthermore, once we
reach consensus, all moves in the model involve the random
rearrangement of edges within components, and hence, in the
limit of long time, the components become random graphs
with uniform uncorrelated arrangements of their edges.

The primary interest in our model therefore is in the number
and sizes of the communities that form and in the dynamics of
the model as it comes to consensus. Let us consider the distri-
bution P(s) of the sizes s of the ﬁnal consensus communities.

2

(a)

φ = 0.04

(b)

φ = 0.458

(c)

φ = 0.96

)
s
(
P

0.01

10−4

)
s
(
P

)
s
(
P

0.01
10−4
10−6
10−8

0.01

10−4

10−6

1

10

100

s

1000

FIG. 2 Histograms of community sizes in the consensus state for
values of φ above, at, and below the critical point in panels (a), (b),
and (c) respectively. Values of the other parameters are N = 3200,
M = 6400 (giving ¯k = 4), and γ = 10. In panel (b) the distribution
appears to follow a power law for part of its range with exponent
2.9 ± 0.1, as indicated by the solid line. Numerical data are averaged
over 104 realizations for each point and binned logarithmically.

In the limit φ → 1, only updates that move edges are allowed
and hence the ﬁnal consensus state is one in which the com-
munities consist of the sets of initial holders of the individual
opinions. Since the initial assignment of opinions is random,
the sizes of these sets follow the multinomial distribution, or
the Poisson distribution in the limit of large N, with mean γ.
Conversely, in the limit φ → 0, only changes of opinion are
allowed and not edge moves, which means that the communi-
ties correspond to the initial components in the graph, which
are simply the components of a random graph. Assuming we
are in the regime ¯k > 1 in which a giant component exists
in the random graph, we will then have one giant (extensive)
community and an exponential distribution of small commu-
nities. Thus, in varying φ we go from a situation in which we
have only small communities with constant average size γ to
one in which we have a giant community plus a set of small
ones.

This is the classic behavior seen in a system undergoing a
continuous phase transition and it leads us to conjecture that
our model displays a phase transition with decreasing φ at
which a giant community of like-minded individuals forms.
In other words, there is a transition between a regime in the
population holds a broad variety of views and one in which
most people believe the same thing. We now oﬀer a variety of
further evidence to support this conjecture.

In Fig. 2 we show plots of P(s) from simulations of our
model for ¯k = 4 and γ = 10. As the ﬁgure shows, we do
indeed see a qualitative change from a regime with no giant
community to one with a giant community. At an intermedi-
ate value of φ around 0.458 we ﬁnd a distribution of commu-
nity sizes that appears to follow a power law P(s) ∼ s−α over
a signiﬁcant part of its range, another typical signature of crit-
icality. The exponent α of the power law is measured to be
2.9 ± 0.1, which is close to, but incompatible with, the value
2.5 of the corresponding exponent for the phase transition at

40

30

S
a
N

20

10

0

0

6.5

S
a
N

5.5

6

5

(a)

(b)

S
a
N

7

6

5

0.45

0.46
φ

0.47

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

φ
N = 200
N = 400

N = 800
N = 1600
N = 3200

−0.4

−0.2

0.2

0.4

0
Nb(φ − φc)

FIG. 3 Finite size scaling analysis for ¯k = 4 and γ = 10. (a) Crossing
plot used to determine the critical point φc and exponent a. We ﬁnd
φc = 0.458 ± 0.003 and a = 0.61 ± 0.08. The inset shows a blow-
up of the region around the critical point. (b) Scaling collapse used
to determine the exponent b which is found to take the value b =
0.7 ± 0.1. The data are averaged over 104 realizations for each point.
Error bars are shown where they are larger than the symbol size.

which a giant component forms in a random graph, which be-
longs to the mean-ﬁeld percolation universality class. (There
is, as we will shortly see, other evidence that the present tran-
sition is not in the percolation universality class.)

To further investigate our transition, we perform a ﬁnite size
scaling analysis in the critical region. To do this, we need
ﬁrst to choose an order parameter for the model. The obvious
choice is the size S of the largest community in the consensus
state as a fraction of system size. The arguments above sug-
gest that this quantity should be of size O(N−1) for values of
φ above the phase transition (and hence zero in the thermody-
namic limit) and O(1) below it. We assume a scaling relation
of the form

S = N−a F(cid:16)Nb(φ − φc)(cid:17),

(1)

where φc is the critical value of φ (which is presumably a func-
tion of ¯k and γ), F is a universal scaling function (bounded as
its argument tends to ±∞), and a and b are critical exponents.
To estimate φc we plot NaS against φ and tune a such that the
results for simulations at diﬀerent N but ﬁxed ¯k and γ cross at
a single point, which is the critical point. Such a plot for ¯k = 4
and γ = 10 is shown in Fig. 3(a). With a = 0.61 ± 0.08 we
obtain a unique crossing point at φc = 0.458 ± 0.003, which
agrees well with the previous rough estimate of φc from Fig. 2.
Using this value we can now determine the exponent b by
plotting NaS against Nb(φ − φc). Since F(x) is a universal
function, we should, for the correct choice of b, ﬁnd a data

3

0.75

0.5

c
φ

0.25

hki = 2

hki = 4

hki = 8

2

5

10

20

γ

40

100

FIG. 4 Values of φc as a function of γ for various ¯k obtained by ﬁnite
size scaling analyses using system sizes N = 200, 400, 800, and 1600
and 104 realizations for each size and set of parameter values. Note
that the horizontal axis is logarithmic.

collapse in the critical region. In Fig. 3(b) we show that such
a data collapse does indeed occur for b = 0.7 ± 0.1.

We have performed similar ﬁnite size scaling analyses for
a variety of other points (¯k, γ) in the parameter space and, as
we would expect, we ﬁnd that the position φc of the phase
transition varies—see Fig. 4—but that good scaling collapses
exist at all parameter values for values of the critical exponents
consistent with the values a = 0.61 and b = 0.7 found above.

Despite the qualitative similarities between the present
phase transition and the percolation transition, our exponent
values for a and b show that the two transitions are in diﬀerent
universality classes: the corresponding exponents for random
graph percolation are a = 1
3 and b = 1 respectively, which are
incompatible with the values measured above.

(a)

(b)

(c)

24

22

18

16

20

τ

τ
V

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

z
−
N
τ

10

20

15

5

0

200

3200

0

0.25

0.75

1

0.4

0.5

800
N

0.5
φ

φ

FIG. 5 Scaling of the average time τ to reach consensus. (a) Conver-
gence time as a function of system size for φ = 1. The straight line
is a ﬁt to a logarithmic form and indicates that τ ∼ log N. (b) Coef-
ﬁcient of variation of the convergence time as a function of φ. The
vertical gray line marks the position of the critical point φc = 0.458.
(c) Scaling plot used to determine the dynamical exponent z. The
crossing point falls at φ = 0.45 ± 0.02 consistent with the value of φc
obtained above. The dynamical exponent is found to take the value
z = 0.6 ± 0.1. Parameter values are ¯k = 4 and γ = 10 in all panels.
All data points are averaged over 104 realizations. Symbols are the
same as in Fig. 3. For the sake of clarity, system sizes N = 400 and
N = 1600 are omitted in (a).

IV. DYNAMICAL CRITICAL BEHAVIOR

Our model diﬀers from percolation in another important re-
spect also: percolation is a static, geometric phase transition,
whereas the present model is fundamentally dynamic, the con-
sensus arising as the limiting ﬁxed point of a converging non-
equilibrium dynamics. It is interesting therefore to explore the
way in which our model approaches consensus.

In previous studies of opinion formation models of this type
on ﬁxed networks a key quantity of interest is the average
convergence time τ, which is the number of updates per ver-
tex needed to reach consensus. If φ = 0 then τ is known to
scale as τ ∼ N as system size becomes large (17).
In the
opposite limit (φ = 1), opinions are ﬁxed and convergence
to consensus involves moving edges one by one to fall be-
tween like-minded pairs of individuals. This is a standard
sampling-with-replacement process in which the number U
of unsatisﬁed edges is expected to decay as U ∼ Me−t/M for
large times t. Thus the time to reach a conﬁguration in which
U = O(1) is t ∼ M log M, and the convergence time is this
quantity scaled by the system size N. For ﬁxed average de-
gree ¯k = 2M/N, this then implies that τ ∼ log N. This result
is conﬁrmed numerically in Fig. 5(a).

For φ close to φc we expect, experience with other phase
transitions leads us to expect critical ﬂuctuations and critical
slowing down in τ. Figure 5(b) shows that indeed there are
large ﬂuctuations in the consensus time in the critical region.
The ﬁgure shows the value of the coeﬃcient of variation Vτ
of the consensus time (i.e., the ratio of the standard deviation
of τ to its mean) as a function of φ and a clear peak is visible
around φc ≃ 0.46. To characterize the critical slowing down
we assume that τ takes the traditional scaling form τ ∼ Nz at
the critical point, where z is a dynamical exponent (11). Fig-
ure 5(c) shows a plot of τN−z as a function of φ. If the system
follows the expected scaling at φc then the resulting curves
should cross at the critical point. Although good numerical re-
sults are considerably harder to obtain in this case than for the
community sizes presented earlier, we do ﬁnd that the curves
cross at a single point if z = 0.61 ± 0.15 and φ = 0.44 ± 0.03,
the latter being consistent with our previous value of φc = 0.46
for the position of the phase transition.

V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

To summarize, we have proposed a simple model for the
simultaneous formation of opinions and social networks in a
situation in which both adapt to the other. Our model contrasts
with earlier models of opinion formation in which social struc-
ture is regarded as static and opinions are an outcome of that
pre-existing structure (2; 3; 8; 19). Our model is a dynamic,
non-equilibrium model that reaches a consensus state in ﬁnite
time on a ﬁnite network. The structure of the consensus state
displays clear signatures of a continuous phase transition as
the balance between the two processes of opinion change and
network rewiring is varied. We have demonstrated a ﬁnite size
scaling data collapse in the critical region around this phase
transition, characterized by universal critical exponents inde-

4

pendent of model parameters. The approach to the consensus
state displays critical ﬂuctuations in the time to reach consen-
sus and critical slowing down associated with an additional
dynamical exponent. The phase transition in the model is of
particular interest in that it provides an example of a simple
process in which a fundamental change in the social structure
of the community can be produced by only a small change in
the parameters of the system.

Finally, we note that for the speciﬁc example of opinion
formation mentioned in the introduction—that of choice of
religion—it is known that the sizes of the communities of
adherents of religious sects are in fact distributed, roughly
speaking, according to a power law (21). This may be a signa-
ture of critical behavior in opinion formation, as displayed by
the model described here, although other explanations, such
as the Yule process (15; 20), are also possible.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the Wenner-Gren Foun-
dations (PH) and the National Science Foundation under grant
number DMS–0234188 (MEJN).

References

[1] R. Albert and A.-L. Barab´asi. Statistical mechanics of complex

networks. Rev. Mod. Phys, 74:47–98, 2002.

[2] W. B. Arthur and D. A. Lane. Information contagion. Structural

Change and Economic Dynamics, 4:81–104, 1993.

[3] S. Bikhchandani, D. Hirshleifer, and I. Welch. A theory of fads,
fashion, custom, and cultural change as information cascades.
Journal of Political Economy, 100:992–1026, 1992.

[4] M. Bogu˜n´a, R. Pastor-Satorras, A. D´ıaz-Guilera, and A. Are-
nas. Models of social networks based on social distance attach-
ment. Phys. Rev. E, 70:056122, 2004.

[5] C. Castellano, D. Vilone, and A. Vespignani.

Incomplete or-
dering of the voter model on small-world networks. Europhys.
Lett., 63:153–158, 2003.

[6] G. Deﬀuant, F. Amblard, G. Weisbuch, and T. Faure. How can
extremism prevail? A study based on the relative agreement
interaction model. Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social
Simulation, 5:1, 2002.

[7] S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes. Evolution of Networks:
From Biological Nets to the Internet and WWW. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford, 2003.

[8] A. Gr¨onlund and P. Holme. A network based threshold model
for the spreading of fads in society and markets. Advances in
Complex Systems, 8:261–273, 2005.

Interacting Particle Systems. Springer, New

[9] T. M. Liggett.
York, 1985.

[10] J. M. McPherson, L. Smith-Lovin, and J. Cook. Birds of a
feather: Homophily in social networks. Ann. Rev. Sociol.,
27:415–444, 2001.

[11] K. Medvedyeva, P. Holme, P. Minnhagen, and B. J. Kim. Dy-
namic critical behavior of the XY model in small-world net-
works. Phys. Rev. E, 67:036118, 2003.

[12] M. E. J. Newman. Mixing patterns in networks. Phys. Rev. E,

67:026126, 2003.

[13] M. E. J. Newman. The structure and function of complex net-

works. SIAM Review, 45:167–256, 2003.

[14] T. C. Schelling. Micromotives and Macrobehavior. W. W. Nor-

ton & Company, New York, 1978.

[15] H. A. Simon. On a class of skewed distribution functions.

Biometrika, 42:425–440, 1955.

[16] B. S¨oderberg. General formalism for inhomogeneous random

graphs. Phys. Rev. E, 66:066121, 2002.

[17] V. Sood and S. Redner. Voter model on heterogeneous graphs.

Phys. Rev. Lett., 94:178701, 2005.

[18] K. Sznajd-Weron and J. Sznajd. Opinion evolution in closed

community. Int. J. Mod. Phys. C, 11:1157–1165, 2000.

5

[19] D. J. Watts. A simple model of global cascades on random
networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 99:5766–5771, 2002.
[20] G. U. Yule. A mathematical theory of evolution based on
the conclusions of Dr. J. C. Willis. Trans. R. Soc. London B,
213:21–87, 1925.

[21] D. H. Zanette and S. C. Manrubia. Vertical transmission of
culture and the distribution of family names. Physica A, 295:1–
8, 2001.

