6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
7
1
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Collective Political Opinion Formation in Nonlinear Social
Interaction

Soo Yong Kim1, Chung Hyun Park1, Kyungsik Kim2,∗
1Department of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute
of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Korea
2Department of Physics, Pukyong National University,
Pusan 608-737, Korea

Abstract

We have presented a numerical model of a collective opinion formation procedure to ex-

plain political phenomena such as two-party and multi-party systems in politics, political

unrest, military coup d’etats and netizen revolutions. Nonlinear interaction with binary and

independent decision making processes can yield various collective behaviors or collective

political opinions. Statistical physics and nonlinear dynamics may provide useful tools to

study various socio-political dynamics.

PACS number(s): 89.65.Gh, 02.50.Ey, 05.40.Jc, 05.45.Tp

Keywords: Social Interaction, Periodic oscillation, Binary choice, Political party, Bifurcation

map

Corresponding author. Tel.: +82-51-620-6354; Fax: +82-51-611-6357

∗EmailAddress: kskim@pknu.ac.kr(K. Kim)

1

1. INTRODUCTION

In social sciences, such as sociology, demography, regional sciences and economics, non-

linear social interaction between human individuals has been analyzed in detail [1 −8]. Some

examples include collective behaviors, collective political opinion formation, emergence of so-

cial dilemmas, regional migration of interactive populations, settlement formation on the var-

ious spatial scales, and market instability in non-equilibrium economics. Collective decision

making procedures and policy determination produce unstable and unpredictable outcomes,

referred to as nonlinear and chaotic behavior, in a socio-dynamic system. Evidence of this

is readily found in the ﬁeld of ﬁnancial markets. As the simplest model to explain collective

opinion formation, it is quite natural that a large class of these individual decisions may be

binary, which is similar to McCulloch-Pitts’ neuron [9], from a sociological perspective on

individual behavior. These binary strategies or choices are basic ingredients to determine

an individual’s character, the stability or health of a society, and even a ﬁnancial market’s

eﬃciency.

Opinion formation of individuals within their own political systems is a typical example

that can be examined and investigated. A political party is a political organization that

subscribes to a certain ideology and seeks to attain political power within a government.

The party’s policies often represent an aggregation of interests within the party. These

interests will inevitably vary considerably, even amongst party members. The simple case

of two political opinions corresponds to two-party systems, for example, the Democratic

and the Republican parties in the USA, where these two political parties are dominant. In

contrast, the Italian political system is a multi-party system. In a multi-party system, there

may exist two strong parties, with a third party that is electorally successful, as found in

the UK and Canada. The party may frequently come in second place in elections and pose

a threat to the other two parties, but has still never held government formally. Finland may

have an active three-party system, in which all three parties hold top oﬃce. It is very rare

2

for a country to have more than three parties who are all equally successful, and all have

an equal chance of independently forming government. In cases where there are numerous

parties, no one party often has a chance of gaining power, and parties must work with each

other to form coalition goverments. Sometimes existence of multi-parties lead to a political

spectrum where the left is associated with radical or progressive policies and the right with

conservative policies.

Statistical physics and synergetics provide us with a powerful tool to examine and study

social phenomena with nonlinear interaction, both qualitatively and quantitatively. The

physical scheme wherein the behavior of an atom is inﬂuenced by the presence of other

atoms is similar to the assumption within social science that one person’s decisions depend

on the decisions of the others. The process of going from one atom to many atoms in bulk

has much in common with the process of one individual proceeding to a social group or orga-

nization. Physics has been successful in describing macroscopic behavior using microscopic

variables, and thus the somewhat ambitious application of statistical physics to complex

social phenomena based on well-established physical formalism is not illogical.

2. Models

Let us consider a model of binary decisions made by a separate group of individuals who

maintain a common interest. The collective behavior of people deciding to vote for or against

a political party can be modeled. Each individual can make a choice w. w can be coded as

0(against) or 1(for), which can be viewed as two elements in Iching [10], i.e., yin and yang.

Yin and yang are a philosophical concept, a means to generalize two opposite principles that

may be observed in nature. The terms yin and yang are applied to express dual and opposite

qualities, for example, day and night, brightness and dimness, movement and stillness, heat

and cold, upward and downward directions, etc.

The theory of yin-yang holds that everything in nature has two opposite aspects that

3

are mainly reﬂected in their ability to struggle with, and thus control each other. Warmth

and heat can repel coldness, while coldness may lower a high temperature. The yin or yang

within any phenomena will restrict each other through competition and opposition, which

can be a binary decision made by our God in nature. In China, Japan, and Korea, it is

widely believed that the relative physiological balance in the human body will be destroyed

and disease will arise if for any reason this mutual opposition results in an excess or deﬁciency

of yin or yang.

In order to describe this dichotomy between for and against, we employed a fashion model

with social interaction [11] in this study and modiﬁed the utility function as

V = βxα(1 − x)γ − b,

(1)

(2)

where α or γ are control parameters to represent the support index of ”for’ or ’against’

opinions. β is a coupling constant that is related to a social temperature T , b is a threshold

that determines the health state of a social system, and x is the rate of binary choice, for

example pros or cons (0 < x < 1). The dynamical system of binary choice can then be

expressed as

xi+1 =

1 + exp[−βxi

1
α(1 − xi)γ + b]

In this equation, it is assumed that the process of creation or transformation of political

opinion can be modeled as a ﬂow of social interactions between people with diﬀerent opin-

ions. Due to the distribution of political opinion at any moment and of the permeability of

the people to social interaction, the individuals favor and support a speciﬁc opinion. This

model may be applied to collective political opinion formation and it is examined through

numerical experiments.

3. Numerical results

The model behaviors, which are used to deduce the decision-making procedure of col-

lective opinion in a society, are classiﬁed into three categories, stable convergence, stable

4

periodic oscillation, and unstable periodic oscillations leading to chaos. They can be inter-

preted in terms of a uniﬁcation of single dominant group opinion, two or three deﬁnite but

rival opinions in conjunction with period, and a chaotic or uncontrollable state mixed with

numerous rival opinions.

Fig. 1 shows a bifurcation map for stable convergence or bi-stability, such as two deﬁnite

’for’ or ’against’ opinions with α = 0.2, γ = 0.8, b = 3 and a varying constant β. For

β < 6.42, i.e., a high temperature region, the curve converges to a ﬁxed point. This means

that a single and uniﬁed opinion of individuals may emerge within their own political systems.

When 6.42 < β, i.e., a low social temperature region, there are two split curves, and the

iterates of all x are attracted to the 2-period cycle. This corresponds to a stability of

two independent and concrete political opinions under social temperature low enough to

excite two modes. There are two parties, such as the majority and the minority party in a

democratic political system, for example long-lasting Democratic or Republican parties in

the American political system. No other collective opinions except two independent ones or

emergent behavior of two modes can be possible in this society, which may be regarded as

politically stable and healthy due to various public opinions inﬂuenced by the mass media,

the Internet, and government or non-government organizations.

Fig. 2 also shows a bifurcation map for stable convergence, bi-stability, tri-stability,

and chaotic behavior with α = 0.5, γ = 0.5, b = 3 and varying social temperature β.

For β < 9.35, i.e., a very high social temperature region, the curve converges to a ﬁxed

point again. When β = 9.35, two curves start to appear again, and the iterates of all

x are attracted to the 2-period cycle, such as majority and minority opinions. The two

curves are subsequently divided into 4 curves and the iterates of all x are attracted to the

4-period cycle. A single majority opinion is split into two majority opinions, which can

eventually be uniﬁed back into a single majority opinion in some cases. The single minority

opinion is also split into two opinions. A window with a 3-period cycle is also detected

at approximately =18.5 on the upper tongue of the bifurcation diagram (inset in Fig. 2).

5

There exists a single intermediate opinion, a so-called third party’s opinion, in addition to

both the majority and minority opinions. The collective opinion curve can also be detected

as periodic or chaotic as an intermittency route in various social temperatures, leading to

political unrest. The chaotic behavior of collective opinions represents political chaos and

unrest due to revolutionary breakdown, war, ﬁnancial crisis, or terror. The former apparent

eternity and sudden collapse of eastern communist leaderships can be explained through this

political unrest.

One stable opinion, two rival opinions, four diﬀerent opinions, three opinions, and chaotic

states of many diﬀerent opinions occur with varying social temperature. Occurrence of

chaotic states is eventually accompanied by social development, harmony and action to

equally double political opinions. There is no cosmos without chaos.

The periodic or chaotic opinions depend on underlying political dynamics controlled by

various control parameters, α, γ, and social temperature β. The parameters may be some-

how related to the society’s political health, such as the government’s characteristics, the

relationship between the media and non-government organizations, or the Internet and the

government, people’s understanding of or activity toward democracy, and society’s collective

behavior.

4. Conclusions

It is demonstrated that collective opinion formation emerges in nonlinear interaction in

terms of unstable, periodic or even chaotic patterns of behavior. The aim of this paper is to

formulate a numerical model of opinion formation or a collective decision-making procedure

using binary and independent strategies. This binary strategy can be thought of as the two

elements yin and yang in Chinese philosophy, and produces various phenomena in nature on

many speciﬁc conditions. Nonlinear interaction can be numerically realized in terms of social

structure, information asymmetries or an information cascade in a real life social network,

6

complex electoral processes, decision making processes, etc. A combination of nonlinear

interaction and binary strategy may be the mother of various political actions or societal

behavior.

References

1983).

[1] W. Weidlich, G. Haag, Concepts and Models of Quantitative Sociology(Springer Berlin,

[2] W. Weidlich: Physics andscience: the approach of synergetics, Phys. Rep. 204, 1 (1991).

[3] S. Galam, J. Stat. Phys. 61, 943-951 (2004).

[4] S. Galam, Physica A 274, 132-139(1999).

[5] S. Galam, Physica A 320, 571-580(2003).

[6] D. Helbing, Quantitative Sociodynamics (Kluwer Academic Dordrecht, 1995).

[7] N. Durlauf, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 10582-10584 (1999).

[8] F. Schweitzer, J.A. Hoylst, Eur. Phys. J. B15, 723-732 (2000).

[9] W.S. McCulloch, W. Pitts, Bull. Math. Biophys. 5, 115-133 (1948).

[10] R. Wilhelm and C. F. Baynes, The Iching or Book of Changes (Princeton University

Press, 1977).

[11] S. Nakayama and Y. Nakamura: Physica A 337, 625-634 (2004).

7

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Fig. 1. Bifurcation map for social temperature β; α = 0.2, γ = 0.8, and b = 3.

Fig. 2. Plot of xi+1 versus xi in the case of α = 0.5, γ = 0.5, and b = 3.

8

This figure "figure1.GIF" is available in "GIF"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0603178v1

This figure "figure2.GIF" is available in "GIF"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0603178v1

