6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
5
2
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Decentralised control of
material or traﬃc ﬂows in networks
using phase-synchronisation

Stefan L¨ammer a, Hiroshi Kori b, Karsten Peters a, and
Dirk Helbing a,c

a Technische Universit¨at Dresden,
Andreas-Schubert-Str. 23, D-01062 Dresden, Germany
b Fritz-Haber-Institut der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft,
Faradayweg 4-6, D-14195 Berlin, Germany
c Collegium Budapest – Institute for Advanced Study,
Szenth´aroms´ag utca 2, H-1014 Budapest, Hungary

Abstract

We present a self-organising, decentralised control method for material ﬂows in
networks. The concept applies to networks where time sharing mechanisms be-
tween conﬂicting ﬂows in nodes are required and where a coordination of these
local switches on a system-wide level can improve the performance. We show that,
under certain assumptions, the control of nodes can be mapped to a network of
phase-oscillators.

By synchronising these oscillators, the desired global coordination is achieved. We
illustrate the method in the example of traﬃc signal control for road networks. The
proposed concept is ﬂexible, adaptive, robust and decentralised. It can be transferred
to other queuing networks such as production systems. Our control approach makes
use of simple synchronisation principles found in various biological systems in order
to obtain collective behaviour from local interactions.

Key words: synchronisation, phase-oscillators, traﬃc light control, adaptive
control
PACS: 89.65.Gh, 45.70.Vn,05.45.Xt

If you want to cite this report, please use the following reference instead:
S. L¨ammer, H. Kori, K. Peters, and D. Helbing (2006)
Decentralised control of material or traﬃc ﬂows in networks
using phase-synchronisation, Physica A 363(1) pp. 39-47

1 Introduction

Eﬃcient control of multiple material ﬂows on a system wide level is one of the
most challenging problems in complex socio-technical transportation systems.
For the majority of all material ﬂow systems, a parallel service of several inter-
secting ﬂows or conﬂicting tasks is impossible, unsafe or ineﬃcient. Alternating
exclusion of competing tasks is frequently observed at crossroads in road traﬃc
[1,2,3,4,5,6,7], in the organisation of production processes [8,9,10,11] or in com-
munication networks [12,13]. Instead of parallel processing of diﬀerent ﬂows,
a sequential processing must be organised in an optimal manner. Whereas the
setup of optimal schedules for single nodes is usually done by traditional op-
timisation techniques, the control problem on a network-wide level becomes
often practically unsolvable by these methods, especially in larger networks.
Moreover, most of the material ﬂow networks are subject to continuous de-
mand variations and unforeseen failures. Besides adaptivity and optimality,
robustness and ﬂexibility are important requirements for control concepts.
Can we learn from the stable, smooth, and eﬃcient ﬂow of nutrients and other
chemical substances in circulatory systems of biological organisms? Synchro-
nised dynamics of a population of cells often plays an important role for it
[14,15,16]. For example, our heart functions as a pump through the appropriate
synchronised dynamics of a population of cardiac cells. This synchronisation is
realised through appropriate designs of cardiac cells and their network archi-
tecture of local interactions. Another interesting example is found in amoeboid
organisms [17,18], where the rhythmic contraction pattern produces stream-
ing of protoplasm. Synchronisation phenomena have been intensively studied
for these biological systems during the last decades by means of mathemati-
cal models, in particular coupled phase-oscillator models [14,19,20,21,22]. The
great advantage of phase-oscillator models are their tractability and univer-
sality.

In the present paper, we take advantage of this tractability and propose a
decentralised control principle for material ﬂow networks with transportation
delays and setup-times, based on the phase-synchronisation of oscillatory ser-
vices at the network nodes.

1.1 Decentralised control using phase-synchronisation

Let us consider a material transport network, which is a directed graph with
of a set of nodes and links. Material can move between the nodes with a ﬁnite
velocity. Thus, any element experiences a delay tij between its departure at
one node i and its arrival at the next node j. Whereas a distinct subset of
nodes may act as a source or sink of moving material, we shall concentrate on

2

those nodes where the ﬂow of material is conserved, i.e.

qin =

qout.

X

X

(1)

P

P

qin and

qout denote the average rate of incoming and outgoing mate-
Here
rial, respectively. Each node has to organise the routing of materials arriving
through incoming links towards its outgoing links. All allowed connections be-
tween incoming and outgoing links can be described through discrete states
of the respective node. As long as such a state is ‘active’, material can ﬂow
from a subset of incoming links through the node and leave through outgo-
ing links. All other ﬂow relations are blocked. Usually the switching between
diﬀerent discrete states needs a certain time interval τ , called switching- or
setup-time. Depending on the ﬂow rates, the duration of these discrete states
may vary. Since we assume a cyclic service sequence, we can assign a periodic
motion to every switching node. Thus, a node can be modelled as a hybrid
system consisting of a phase-oscillator and a piecewise constant function M
that maps the continuous phase-angle ϕ(t) to the discrete service state s(t),
e.g. M : ϕ(t) → s(t).
The switched service of diﬀerent ﬂows leads to convoy formation processes.
This implies highly correlated arrivals at subsequent nodes, which requires
to optimise M with respect to a minimal delay of the material. Whereas the
map M can be optimised according to the actual local demand, the phase-
angle ϕ is coupled to the oscillatory system of the neighbouring nodes. Thus,
with a suitable synchronisation mechanism we can achieve a coordination of
the switching states on a network-wide level. In consequence, we suggest an
adaptive decentralised control concept consisting of two parts:

(a) Phase-synchronisation of all oscillators in the network, based on local

coupling between immediate neighbours.

(b) Mapping of phase-angles to the switching states based on local optimisa-

tion.

For the sake of concreteness, we apply our method to the control of traﬃc
lights at intersections of road networks. The rest of this paper is organised as
follows: At ﬁrst, in Sec. 2 we propose a hybrid phase-oscillator model for the
intersections of a road network. In Sec. 3 we discuss the synchronisation of
the oscillators by a suitable local coupling mechanism for arbitrary network
architectures. Finally, in Sec. 4 we show how an optimal switching of green and
red traﬃc light phases with respect to minimum delay times can be reached,
based on local adjustment and optimisation.

3

ϕ

∆ϕsetup

ϕred
s

setup

ϕ0

∆ϕsetup

setup

state 1

∆ϕ1

state s

setup

∆ϕs

ϕred
1

∆ϕsetup

Fig. 1. A single intersection adjusts the mapping of the phase-angle ϕ to the
switching states s locally. Within a complete cycle, each state s is sequentially
activated for a period ∆ϕs, during which the corresponding non-conﬂicting traﬃc
lights are set to green. While switching from one state to another, all traﬃc lights
are set to red for a period of ∆ϕsetup. The phase-angle, at which a new cycle starts,
is denoted by ϕ0.

2 Hybrid model for traﬃc light control

In the following, we introduce a hybrid oscillator model for a single traﬃc light
controlled intersection and derive an upper bound for the allowed oscillator
frequency.

2.1 Model of an intersection

An intersection in road traﬃc is given by a set of traﬃc lights l ∈ L, each
one controlling the vehicular ﬂow of a single or several lanes. If two driving
paths intersect, we call the related green lights conﬂicting. We require that
conﬂicting traﬃc lights are not set to green at the same time. In order to
increase the throughput of an intersection, non-conﬂicting traﬃc lights can be
switched collectively. Such a collective switching of a subset Ls ⊂ L of traﬃc
ligths corresponds to one discrete state s ∈ {1, 2, . . . S} of the intersection. An
explanatory sketch of this model is shown in Fig. 1.
While the phase-angle ϕ of the oscillator modelling the intersection progresses
from 0 to 2π at the rate ω, all states s are sequentially activated for some period
∆ϕs. Thus, all traﬃc lights in the subset Ls are set to green for this interval

4

∆ϕs whereas the remaining lights l ∈ L \ Ls are turned to red. Moreover, for
switching from one state to another, all traﬃc lights must be set to red for
a time-period of ∆ϕsetup(ω) = τ ω due to security reasons [1]. These intervals
correspond to a switching- or setup-time τ (see Fig. 1). In conclusion, we
obtain

S

s=1 (cid:16)
X

∆ϕsetup + ∆ϕs

= 2π.

(cid:17)

2.2 Maximum oscillator frequency

To fulﬁl the balance condition Eq. (1) we have to guarantee that the number
of vehicles arriving during a cycle at the intersection is equal to the number
of vehicles that can pass the intersection and depart.
The instantaneous vehicular ﬂow ql(ϕ) is given by the number of vehicles dnl
that ‘potentially’ arrive at traﬃc light l during (ϕ, ϕ + dϕ), which is equal to
the time-shifted ﬂow measured at a cross-section suﬃciently far upstream the
traﬃc light.
In the following we do not require any model for the dynamics of dql thus the
control concept is independent of the underlying traﬃc model. Since the traﬃc
situation usually changes slowly compared to the period of a full switching
2π
0 ql(ϕ)dϕ to be constant. The
cycle we assume the average ﬂows ¯ql = 1/2π
departure rate during green light is qmax
if there are waiting vehicles, and
R
l
ql(ϕ) otherwise. If the traﬃc light shows red, the departure rate is zero. As a
consequence, we obtain a lower bound for the green time periods ∆ϕs.

∆ϕs ≥ 2π max
l∈Ls

¯ql/qmax
l

.

l

Here ¯ql/qmax
is the utilisation of the lanes, which are served during state s. For
the signal control to function well, we require ¯ql/qmax
for some
l ∈ Ls, we have ∆ϕs = 2π, which implies that state s must be set to green all
the time in order to allow for the departure of all vehicles arriving from lane l.
In this case, our synchronisation strategy would fail to switch to other states,
while a purposeful operation of an intersection requires a switching through
all S states in one cycle.
The load of the whole intersection is determined by

l < 1. If ql = qmax

l

u =

max
l∈Ls

¯ql/qmax
l

.

S

s=1
X

5

(2)

(3)

(4)

Additionally, the conditions imposed by Eq. (3) and Eq. (2) must be satisﬁed.
This is guaranteed only if

ω ≤

2π
Sτ  

1 −

S

s=1
X

max
l∈Ls

¯ql/qmax
l

!

=: ωmax =

(1 − u) .

(5)

2π
Sτ

In other words, there exists an upper bound ωmax for the switching frequency,
determined by the amount of time which is spent on setups during a cycle
while the balance condition Eq. (1) is fulﬁlled. For an increasing load u, the
overall time for setups must be reduced relative to the duration of a cycle.
This suggests to decrease ωmax for increasing loads u. If u = 1, the maximum
frequency becomes ωmax = 0. In this case, the intersection is blocked, since
there exists no switching cycle which allows all arriving vehicles to depart.
This is the typical behaviour of all queuing systems, if the inﬂow reaches the
maximum capacity 1 . Small values of the load u allow for a higher maximum
frequency ωmax and perhaps also a higher cycle frequency ω ≤ ωmax, which is
in favour of smaller delays of vehicles. This is obvious, as the maximum delay
time of a vehicle is given by the duration of a full cycle.

3 Global coordination of intersections by synchronisation

The objective of our decentralised control method is the network wide coordi-
nation of the individual switching sequences based on a local coupling between
the intersections in the road network. By modelling each intersection i as an os-
cillator, characterised by its phase-angle ϕi and its eﬀective frequency ωi = ˙ϕ,
coordination is achieved by synchronising the oscillator network. Hereby, for
providing a common time-scale and allowing the intersections to trigger the
switching cycles right at the best time (see Sec. 4), we require a phase-locked
state where the phase-diﬀerence between neighbouring oscillators is ﬁxed [14].
Therefore, we suggest a coupling between any oscillator i = 1, 2, . . . N and its
nearest neighbours j ∈ Ni with adjustments of phases and frequencies on two
diﬀerent timescales.
At ﬁrst we consider the adaption of the phase-angle ϕi:

˙ϕi = min

ωmax
i

, Ωi(t) +

sin (ϕj(t) − ϕi(t))

=: ωi(t)

(6)

n

o

1
Tϕ

Xj∈Ni

where Ωi is the inherent frequency. As long as ωi < ωmax
, ϕi tries to adjust to
the neighbouring phase-angles ϕj. The constant Tϕ corresponds to the typical

i

1 In our case, the capacity of an intersection is determined by the maximum de-
parture rates qmax
, the switching times τ and the partition {Ls}.

l

6

time-scale for this adaption.

Beyond the phase-synchronising interaction given by sin(ϕj(t) − ϕi(t)), a sec-
ond decentralised coupling can be used to increase the inherent frequencies to
approach the possible maximum within a slow time-scale:

˙Ωi =

1
TΩ

(cid:16)

min
j∈Ni

{ωj(t)} + ∆Ω − Ωi(t)

.

(cid:17)

(7)

Here the constant parameter ∆Ω > 0 provides a linear drift towards higher
frequencies.

3.1 Synchronisation dynamics and network size

If the coupling mechanisms outlined above are applied to a network of oscil-
lators, two diﬀerent adaptive behaviours of the system can be distinguished.
Either, the system can evolve freely and increase the common frequency, i.e.
a slow frequency adaption is possible. Otherwise, the possible dynamics of the
coupled system is restricted by an intersection i0, whose maximum frequency
is reached. This requires the remaining oscillators to be frequency-locked to
ωmax
. Fig. 2 shows an example of both dynamical regimes which are discussed
i0
in the following.

(i) Frequency adaption.
As long as ωi < ωmax

i

, a synchronised solution is obtained:

ϕi(t) = ϕj(t), ωi(t) = Ωi(t),

and

(8)

˙Ωi =

∆Ω
Tω

∀i .

All oscillators have exactly the same phase-angle, while the frequencies ωi and
Ωi of all oscillators i increase linearly with time. As soon as any oscillator
reaches its maximum frequency, however, Eq. (6) is dominated by ωmax
in the
minimum function and ωi will not increase anymore. Instead, the other state
appears.

i

(ii) Frequency-locked state.
In this state, the eﬀective frequency ωi0 of the oscillator i0 with the global
minimum of all maximum frequencies is locked to ωmax
. In order
to achieve synchronisation, the eﬀective frequencies ωi of all oscillators must
become ωmax
. Under suitable conditions derived below, the frequency-locked
i0
state has the solution

i0 = mini′ ωmax

i′

ωi = ωmax

i0 = min

i′ ωmax

i′

and Ωi = ωmax

i0 + ∆Ω ∀i .

(9)

7

The drift parameter ∆Ω, which was in the previous state (i) responsible for
increasing frequencies, must now be compensated by the phase-diﬀerences.
Using Eqs. (6) and (9) leads to:

sin (ϕj(t) − ϕi(t)) = −Tϕ ∆Ω ∀i 6= i0 .

(10)

Xj∈Ni

Furthermore

N

Xi=1

Xj∈Ni

Xj∈Ni0

sin (ϕj(t) − ϕi(t)) = 0 ,

(11)

which is due to the anti-symmetry of the sin-function. Therefore, the phase-
angles of the oscillator i0 and its next neighbours j ∈ Ni0 must satisfy

sin (ϕj(t) − ϕi0(t)) = (N − 1) Tϕ ∆Ω .

(12)

Considering an arbitrary network of N oscillators, there always exists a solu-
tion for the immediate neighbours of i0 if

(N − 1) Tϕ ∆Ω ≤ 1 .

(13)

A similar condition can be derived for the second-next neighbours and so
forth, but for these, the factor in place of (N − 1) will become smaller and
smaller. Therefore, Eq. (13) gives a suﬃcient condition for the existence of a
phase-locked solution in the frequency-locked state (ii).
Equation (13) exposes an compromise between large network sizes and a fast
adapting behaviour. Increasing the network size N requires a smaller adaption
rate ∆Ω to ensure the synchronisation and vice versa.
From a given initial condition, the system always converges to the phase-locked
state (ii), see Fig. 2. It might temporarily enter the frequency adaptation state
(i), where the common frequency grows in time to approach the frequency of
the slowest oscillator. The transition between states (i) and (ii), which oc-
curs when one of the oscillators reaches its maximum frequency, is smooth.
There are no jump-like disturbances in eﬀective frequencies and phase-angles.
Once the system converges to state (ii), the synchronised frequency tightly
follows variations of the global minimum of ωmax
frequencies. The phase-
diﬀerences between neighbouring oscillators are almost constant. Thus, the
phase-synchronisation establishes a load-adaptive common framework among
the locally coupled oscillators, which can be used to coordinate the individual
switching sequences on a network-wide level.

i

8

Fig. 2. Simulation results for a regular lattice road network, where the 5 × 5 in-
tersections are deﬁned as oscillators with (a) a frequency ωi and (b) a phase-angle
ϕi. Based on a local coupling between immediate neighbours, all oscillators in the
network synchronise globally by adjusting their phase-angles mutually. Left: Start-
ing with a random initial condition, the system quickly approaches state (i) with
a steadily growing common frequency and vanishing phase-diﬀerences. Right: As
soon as the maximum possible common frequency is found (indicated by the hori-
zontal dotted line), the system enters state (ii) with a locked common frequency and
phase-diﬀerences exponentially converging towards constant values. (Tϕ = 300s, TΩ
i0 = 10−3, and N = 25)
= 60s, ωmax

i0 = 2π/60s, ∆Ω/ωmax

4 Control of periodic traﬃc ﬂows at a single intersection

The time needed by a vehicle to traverse a series of roads controlled by traf-
ﬁc lights is given by the travel times between the intersections and the de-
lay times at red lights. To minimise the overall travel time, or, to increase
the throughput of the controlled network, we shall minimise the delay times
at every intersection. According to the synchronisation concept outlined in
Sec. 3, each intersection i is provided with a phase-angle ϕi, phase-locked to
its neighbours and synchronised to a common frequency ω. Due to frequency
synchronisation in steady state, the vehicular ﬂows are basically periodic func-
tions of the phase-angle ϕi. Each intersection i may now independently adjust
its switching sequence M : ϕ(t) → s(t) based on the local arrivals of the vehi-
cles. Thus, for clarity, we neglect the index i in this section and express time
t in terms of ϕ.
We shall answer the question, where in the cycle the state s should start, to
minimise the total time that all vehicles may need to pass the intersection.
Therefore, by ϕred
s we denote the point where the subset Ls of traﬃc lights
switches to red after a green time period ∆ϕs.
The delay of a single vehicle is given by the period between its arrival ϕarr and

9

its departure ϕdep. A vehicle may arrive at the point ϕarr = ϕred
s + 2πp with
0 < p ≤ 1. Since the vehicles are not rearranged during the queuing process,
it is expected to depart at ϕdep = 2π + ϕred
s − (1 − p)∆ϕs. The resulting delay
of the particular vehicle is therefore

ϕdep − ϕarr = (2π − ∆ϕs)(1 − p) .

(14)

l∈Ls ql(ϕ) served in a
Integrating the delays of all vehicular ﬂows qs(ϕ) =
state s over a complete cycle gives the delays Ds imposed by the subset Ls of
traﬃc lights as a function of ϕred
and ∆ϕs:

P

s

Ds(ϕred

s

, ∆ϕs) =

(2π − ∆ϕs)(1 − p) qs(ϕred

s + 2πp) 2πdp.

(15)

1

Z0

Now we have to minimise the overall delay

D =

Ds

, ∆ϕs

ϕred
s
(cid:16)

(cid:17)

S

s=1
X

(16)

(17)

s

and ∆ϕs for all Ls ⊂ L we consider the

produced by an intersection during a cycle.
To identify the optimum value of ϕred
following two assumptions:
(i) The sequence of states is given, e.g. by the order of their indices s = 1 . . . S.
(ii) The periods ∆ϕs are ﬁxed and fulﬁl the conditions Eqs. (2) and (3).
Then there remains only one degree of freedom, which can be expressed by the
phase-angle ϕ0 that triggers the switching to state s = 1 (see Fig. 1). Thus,
of each state s becomes a function of ϕ0:
the end-point ϕred

s

s (ϕ0) = ϕ0 +
ϕred

∆ϕsetup + ∆ϕs′

(cid:17)

S

Xs′=1 (cid:16)

Inserting Eq. (17) into Eq. (15) and using Eq. (16) provides us with a periodic
function D(ϕ0) for the total delays D produced at the intersection given the
start-phase ϕ0. With this function, the optimal start-phase ˆϕ0 can be found as
D( ˆϕ0) = minϕ D(ϕ). The start-phase ϕ0 can be shifted to the optimal value
ˆϕ0 by an oﬀset to the input argument of the map, e.g. s = M(ϕ(t) − δϕ(t)).

By adjusting the start-phases, a mutual adaption of the start times of green-
phases at neighbouring intersections is reached. This will ensure a minimum
delay for all vehicles which have to pass the intersection. Once the optimum
ˆϕ0 is reached for two intersections, the switching sequence is repeated peri-
odically until the traﬃc situation changes and a new optimum is obtained by

10

the control concept outlined above. Under certain circumstances, it results in
emergent green waves.

5 Conclusions

In this paper we have developed a method to reach coordination among the
traﬃc lights of an urban street network. This method is based on a combi-
nation of a synchronisation resulting from local interactions and a pure local
optimisation:

(1) At each intersection, the maximum frequency is determined that allows
one to clear the queues on the incoming road sections within one switching
cycle. This frequency is given by Eq. (5) in dependence of the respective
road utilisation.

(2) The signal controls of all intersections are eventually adjusted to the
minimum of all these frequencies, based on a coupling of neighbouring
signals. A decentralised method of adjustment is described by Eq. (6).
Thereby, all intersections of the road network continuously equalise the
period of their switching cycles. Thus, the switching sequences and the
arrivals rates of the vehicles at all intersections become periodic functions.
(3) It is always tried to increase this frequency in order to reduce the waiting
times of vehicles in queues. This is reached by introducing a constant
drift, see Eq. (7).

(4) Each cycle is subdivided into diﬀerent green-phases and setup-times as
illustrated in Fig. 1. Note that, within one switching cycle, some roads
may be served several times.

(5) The optimal green-phases are obtained by minimising the objective func-
tion (16). If a periodic sequence of green lights is used, the optimisation
problem becomes a minimisation of a continuous function with a single
parameter ϕ0. In order to minimise the waiting times of vehicles during
red light, the model presented in Sec. 4 determines the optimal start-
phase ˆϕ0 of the switching sequence for each intersection.

Under suitable conditions, our concept allows for the emergence of green waves.
Let’s consider the example of a single main road with several intersections and
diﬀerent average ﬂow rates in both directions. Then, the vehicles belonging
to the highest traﬃc ﬂow will always have a green light except for the very
ﬁrst traﬃc light where the vehicles queued are bundled. The green wave will
propagate with the largest group of vehicles.

Although our method is quite promising, it has also some limitations: First,
the method for determining the maximum frequencies ωmax needs to be ex-
tended for practical application: In real traﬃc networks, it is possible that

11

the traﬃc arriving at an intersection exceeds capacity. In this case, it is not
possible to remove all waiting vehicles within one cycle. Within the framework
outlined above, the intersection would be just blocked. However, this situation
can be easily avoided by deﬁning a global minimum of the allowed switching
frequencies. If the overload situation occurs temporarily, such a minimum fre-
quency will still guarantee a stable functioning of the concept, but it can not
avoid queues that persist for more than one switching cycle. Furthermore, to
dissolve existing queues quickly and to increase the robustness with respect
to stochastic variations in the average ﬂow rates, the maximum frequencies
could be assigned a smaller value than determined by Eq. (5).
Second, the frequency of the synchronised system is likely to decrease with
growing system size, so that waiting times can become quite long. Therefore,
synchronisation cannot be the only goal in signal control. Instead, it would
make sense to break up a large synchronised system into smaller synchro-
nised clusters, which may change their shape and size in the course of time.
It would also be reasonable to change the order of green-phases sometimes in
response to diﬀerent traﬃc patterns (e.g. inbound or outbound traﬃc during
the morning and afternoon rush hours, respectively).

Nevertheless, it is useful to have a method for a self-organised coordination
of traﬃc or material ﬂows in a network, based on local interactions. The next
step will be to couple this approach with a concrete simulation of the dynamics
of material ﬂows and queue formation in the system, as proposed in Ref. [2].

In summary, the optimal switching of traﬃc lights in non-trivial road net-
works is one of the most complex material ﬂow control problems. However,
the problem in most material ﬂow networks is similar. In production and man-
ufacturing: road sections in traﬃc correspond to buﬀers in production, travel
and delay times to cycle or production times, junctions to processing units,
and diﬀerent origin-destination ﬂows in road networks to diﬀerent product
ﬂows. Thus, our approach is easily transferable to the control of production
systems or other material ﬂow networks. It is particularly suited for systems
of moderate size and load, which applies to many manufacturing systems.

Acknowledgements

We thank the participants of the Thematic Institute on Information and Ma-
terial Flows in Complex Networks for inspiring discussions, in particular Di-
eter Armbruster. D.H. and K.P. kindly acknowledge partial ﬁnancial support
from the DFG project He 2789/5-1 and the EU project MMCOMNET. S.L.
is grateful for a scholarship by the Studienstiftung des Deutschen Volkes. H.K
is grateful for ﬁnancial support by the Alexander von Humboldt foundation.

12

References

[1] M. Papageorgiou, Concise Encyclopedia of Traﬃc and Transportation Systems

(Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1991).

[2] D. Helbing, S. L¨ammer, P. Lebacque, in: C. Deissenberg, R.F. Hartl (Eds.),

Optimal Control and Dynamic Games (Springer, Dortrecht, 2005) 239.

[3] C. Diakaki, V. Dinopoulou, K. Aboudolas, M. Papageorgiou, E. Ben-Shabat,

E. Seider, A. Leibov, Transport Res. Board 1856 (2003) 202.

[4] C. Gershenson, Complex Systems, 16(1) (2005) 29.

[5] D. Robertson, R.D. Bretherton, IEEE Trans. Veh. Tech. 40(1) (1991) 1.

[6] K. Sekiyama, Y. Ohashi, JACIII 9(2) (2005).

[7] J.J. Henry, J.L. Farges,

in: J.P. Perrin (Ed.), Control, Computers,

Communications in Transportation ( Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1989).

[8] D. Helbing,

in: G. Radons, R. Neugebauer (Eds.), Nonlinear Dynamics of

Production Systems (Wiley, New York, 2004).

[9] K. Peters, J. Worbs, U. Parlitz, H.-P. Wiendahl, in: G. Radons, R. Neugebauer
(Eds.), Nonlinear Dynamics of Production Systems, (Wiley, New York, 2004).

[10] B. Rem, D. Armbruster, Chaos 13 (2003) 128.

[11] H. Chen, D.D. Yao, Fundamentals of queueing networks (Springer, New York,

2001).

[12] S. Floyd, Comput. Commun. Rev. 21(5), (1991).

[13] S.H. Low, IEEE/ACM Trans.on Netw. 11(4), (2003), 525.

[14] A. Pikovsky, M. Rosenblum, J. Kurths, Synchronization: A universal concept

in nonlinear sciences (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge) 2001.

[15] A.T. Winfree, The Geometry of Biological Time (Springer, New York, 1980).

[16] S. Camazine, J.L. Deneubourg, N.R. Franks, J. Sneyd, G. Theraulaz,

E. Bonabeau, Self-Organization in Biological Systems,
(Princeton University Press, New Jersey, 2003).

[17] T. Nakagaki, H. Yamada, T. Ueda, Biophys. Chem. 84 (2000) 195.

[18] A. Tero, R. Kobayashi, T. Nakagaki, Physica D 205 (2005) 125.

[19] I. Blekhman, Synchronization in science and technology (Asme Press, New

York, 1988).

[20] B. Ermentrout, J. Math. Biol. 15 (1991) 339.

[21] Y. Kuramoto, Chemical Oscillations, Waves, and Turbulence (Springer,

New York, 1984).

[22] S.H. Strogatz, Nature 410 (2001) 268.

13

