6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
1
1
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

String theory and the crisis in particle physics

Bert Schroer
CBPF, Rua Dr. Xavier Sigaud 150
22290-180 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
and Institut fuer Theoretische Physik der FU Berlin, Germany

December 2005

Abstract

In the ﬁrst section the history of string theory starting from its S-
matrix bootstrap predecessor up to Susskind’s recent book is critically
reviewed. The aim is to understand its amazing popularity which starkly
constrasts its ﬂeeting physical content. A partial answer can be obtained
from the hegemonic ideological stance which some of its defenders use
to present and defend it. The second section presents many arguments
showing that the main tenet of string theory which culminated in the
phrase that it represents “the only game in town” is untenable.
It is
based on a wrong view about QFT being a mature theory which (apart
from some missing details) already reached its closure.

1 An anthology of the crisis in fundamental physics

There can be no doubt that after almost a century of impressive success funda-
mental physics is in the midst of a deep crisis. Although the epicenter of the
quake which shakes its foundations is located in particle theory, its repercus-
sions are not only beginning to derail experimental particle physics and to aﬀect
adjacent areas of fundamental research, but they are also leading to a weird
philosophical fallout. One does not have to be a physicist in order to notice
that there is something strange going on if reputable people [1] are advocating
the abdication of the kind of physics, which since the time of Galilei, Newton,
Einstein and the protagonists of quantum theory has been a de-mystiﬁcation
of nature by rational mathematically formulated concepts with experimentally
veriﬁable consequences. Instead of “cogito ergo sum” the new maxim is: “I exist
and therefore my existence tells me what universe of the multiverses of solutions
of string theory I have to chose to understand my physical world“. With other
words I throw my own existence into the theory as a kind of boundary condition,
or to put it more bluntly, I am integrating myself into string theory in order to
make it a work.

1

One is used to view the exact sciences in particular particle physics as a hu-
man activity which follows an intrinsic autonomous path. The resulting knowl-
edge may have an impact on philosophy, the humanities and the development
of society, but their feedback into fundamental research in physics is generally
believed to be negligible. One of the points of this essay is to raise the question
whether such a view can be maintained in a globalized world. Here I am not
thinking primarily of the loss of moral standards in the increasing number of
falsiﬁed or plagiarized scientiﬁc results. As long as the natural sciences main-
tain the primate of veriﬁability this cannot derail its content. The danger of
derailment of particle physics is rather emanating from the hegemonic tenden-
cies of monocultures which are pursued by globalized groups within science with
an ever increasing unwillingness and inability to subject their results to critical
scrutiny. These developments have been looming in string theory for a long
time and ﬁnally found their explicit outing in a recent manifesto [1]. Before I
return to the question to what extend string theory and its new outing reﬂects
the unpleasant side of the present Zeitgeist it is helpful to review some relevant
episodes in the history of particle physics.

The beginning of relativistic particle theory is inexorably linked to Jordan’s
“Quantelung der Wellenfelder” which merged with Dirac’s multi-particle for-
malism. QFT according to Jordan draws on a parallelism to classical ﬁelds
which amounted to a quantization of the classical canonical structure of the
Lagrangian formalism. Jordan’s point of view about this was more radical than
Dirac’s because any structure which ﬁtted into the classical ﬁeld formalism was
a potential candidate for quantization, it was not necessary that it belonged to
real observed classical physics1 as initially required by Dirac. In the light of
this it is remarkable that two years after his discovery Jordan was dissatisﬁed
with the use of what he called the “classical crutches” (klassische Kruecken)
of quantization and pleaded for a more intrinsic access to the physical content
of QFT [3]. It is perhaps not accidental that this happened exactly at a time
when he realized together with Pauli that the pointlike nature of quantum ﬁelds
required by quantization are (unlike quantum mechanical observables) necessar-
ily rather unwieldy singular objects which could lead to trouble in building up
interactions by their local couplings. But Jordan’s dream of an intrinsic and
more autonomous approach remained unfulﬁlled for a long time to come, the
history of QFT between the early 1930’s and the late 40’s is characterized by
apparently incurable ultraviolet problems. This “ultraviolet crisis” led to many
speculative and “revolutionary” ideas (some of them quite weird, at least in
retrospect). As a result of the Tomonaga-Schwinger-Feynman-Dyson renormal-
ized perturbation theory and its immediate physical success in QED, these ideas
went into the dustbin of history.

Despite a formidable technical and conceptual enrichment, renormalization
was extremely conservative in terms of physical principles; it was not necessary
to introduce a single physical principle beyond the ones which were already
1In [2] it is mentioned that by the time the Goettinger group learned about Schroedinger’s

results, Jordan already had a ﬁeld quantized version.

2

(indirectly or directly) in place in the pre-renormalization setting. But with-
out renormalization theory and its successful application to QED, quantum ﬁeld
theory probably would not have been able to survive in the pantheon of physics.
However Jordan’s plea for intrinsicness was not laid to rest; rather perturbative
renormalization elevated it to a higher level. Instead of the pre-renormalization
ultraviolet problem there was the new problem which consisted in the realiza-
tion that the perturbative division into non-renormalizable and renormalizable
models was rather technical; it was based on a formal quantization procedure
which required the implementation of interactions by the recipe of coupling
pointlike free ﬁelds rather than by letting the principles which underlie QFT
determine an intrinsic way. Hence it is not possible to decide if and how this
formal division into renormalizable and nonrenormalizable models is related to
the genuine intrinsic frontier between well- and ill- deﬁned theories. What com-
plicates the situation is the fact that one could not even decide whether the
reasonably looking renormalizable family really corresponds to models which
exist in any mathematical sense so that one at least would know that the prin-
ciples allow for nontrivial realizations. The problem that particle physics most
successful theory of QED is also its mathematically most fragile has not gone
away. These problems become even worse in theories as string theory which in
the eyes of string protagonists are supposed to supersede QFT. In this case one
has in addition to the existence problem the conceptual diﬃculty of not having
been able to extract characterizing principles from ad hoc recipes.

Even though renormalization theory (despite its crucial role in arriving at
a new ultraviolet-controlled computational setting) did not really add a new
physical principle, its covariant formulation was instrumental for a profound
understanding of the particle-ﬁeld relation. It replaced the relativistic quan-
tum mechanical setting (the basis of the older textbooks of Wenzel and Heitler)
which turned out to be unsuitable for this task2. In the new setting it was possi-
ble to derive a large-time asymptotic relation which illuminated the connection
between particles and ﬁelds without invoking perturbation theory; the resulting
LSZ scattering theory was shown to be a direct consequence of the principles
[4]. The upshot of this conceptual progress was that asymptotic particle states
and the scattering matrix had the status of truly intrinsic quantities, whereas
quantum ﬁelds (apart from symmetry-generating currents) loose the aspect of
individuality which they had in classical physics before quantization; in fact
there are inﬁnitely many ways of choosing ﬁeld coordinatizations and they can
be grouped into local equivalence classes of which every (interpolating) mem-
ber ﬁeld is describing the same particles whose charge numbers and spacetime
representation invariants (mass, spin) are related to the class (i.e. the particle
state is uniquely related to the class and not to the ﬁeld). The deepening of the
ﬁeld-particle relation led also to the revival of an idea by Heisenberg (which in
its original form was discussed at some conferences shortly before the start of
2The quantum mechanical view of the particle-ﬁeld relation became problematic after Furry
and Oppenheimer observed that the presence of interactions made it impossible to obtain a
space-time separation of one ﬁeld states A(x) |0i into a one particle states and their vacuum
polarization companions.

3

the second world war) to explore the feasibility of a direct S-matrix construc-
tion without passing through a ﬁeld theory setting; in this way one expected
to obtain a non-singular and more intrinsic way to pursue particle physics. For
lack of concrete results the interest waned and only reappeared in the 1950s
and 1960s in connection with some non-perturbative conceptual advances in
the wake of renormalization theory (which were mainly driven by the issue to
make QFT ﬁt for describing strong interactions). On the one hand the adapta-
tion of the Kramers-Kronig dispersion relation to relativistic particle scattering
and the related more general interest in analytic properties of scattering ampli-
tudes and (electromagnetic) formfactors nourished the (exaggerated as it turned
out later) hope that many dynamical aspects could perhaps be understood as
consistency relations between analytic properties and reasonable assumptions
about asymptotic high- and low-energy (threshold) behavior. Initially the aims
of these investigations were quite modest in that particle physicists were already
satisﬁed when they succeeded to derive experimentally veriﬁable sum rules from
current commutation relations and analytic properties (the prototype being the
Thomas-Kuhn sum rules which played an important role in the transition from
old to new QT).

The most important post Heisenberg conceptual enrichment of S-matrix the-
ory (coming originally from Feynman’s graphical formulation of renormalized
perturbation theory) was however the “crossing property” often called (by abuse
of language) crossing symmetry. Its oﬀ-shell version is a formal property which
relates scattering graphs with other ones obtained by crossing pairs of exter-
nal lines in incoming and outgoing conﬁgurations; in certain cases it could be
veriﬁed outside perturbation theory by studying “axiomatically derived” an-
alytic behavior following from locality and positivity of energy. For on-shell
quantities as scattering amplitudes or formfactors of currents such derivations
(for those conﬁgurations for which they were possible) were quite demanding;
often on-shell crossing properties were simply postulated in order to explore
their observable consequences, leaving their derivation from the causality and
spectral principles of QFT to future progress. It is of course standard practice
to use interesting properties as working hypothesis, even if one is not yet in the
possession of a conceptual derivation3 from known principles; the only prob-
lem with that is that after the passing of time and even with better conceptual
insights and mathematical tools available, one may have forgotten about their
problematic status.

The emerging so-called “S-matrix bootstrap program”, which owed its sec-
ond life (after Heisenberg’s ﬁrst attempt) to the important but incompletely
understood crossing property, was on top of the physical fashions of the late
50’s and maintained its leading role through the 60’s. Some of its points were
quite reasonable; but the human weakness of making exaggerated promises (“a
theory of everything” except gravity) and ﬁnally the strong return of QFT in
the form of nonabelian gauge theories led to its demise. Among the few valuable
3The conjecture that on-shell crossing is a relic left by spacelike (anti)commutativity is
plausible but there exists up this date no mathematical derivation (see remarks in next sec-
tion).

4

points it contributed is the attention it drew to the fact that an on-shell approach
(if it succeeds) is not only free of ultraviolet problems but it is also manifestly
independent of the inﬁnite number of possibilities for pointlike ﬁeld coordinati-
zations (leading all to the same physics); in this sense it addressed together with
the independently emerging algebraic QFT for the ﬁrst time Jordan’s plea for
intrinsicness of the description (abandonment of classical crutches). The em-
phasis on an intrinsic description is well known in mathematics; it underlies the
invariant description of modern diﬀerential geometry which not only liberated
geometry from the use of singular coordinates, but from the use of any coordi-
natization altogether. This should be understood only as an analogy (i.e. the
use of modern diﬀerential geometry in the formulation of QFT does not make
the latter more intrinsic) because the implementation of intrinsicness in QFT
turns out to be a much more radical step than in diﬀerential geometry. But
the antagonistic bellicose tone in which the underlying bootstrap philosophy
was set against QFT (“QFT is like a mortally wounded soldier dying on the
battleﬁeld...”) undermined its credibility in the eyes of many physicists, and in
my opinion, looking at this situation in retrospect, this delayed an interesting
chance to enrich QFT by adding a new viewpoint for several decades (see next
section).

Since there was no operator formalism in which the underlying ideas (invari-
ance, unitarity, crossing, maximal analyticity) could be implemented, the prob-
lem of constructing a crossing symmetric unitary maximally analytic S-matrix
was ill-formulated. Tinkering with properties of Beta functions and their repre-
sentation in terms of Gamma functions, Veneziano was able to construct the ﬁrst
model for a crossing symmetric elastic scattering amplitude. His proposal did
not satisfy unitarity, but the realization that his on-shell prescription allowed
an auxiliary ﬁeld theoretic description in terms of a (oﬀ-shell) two-dimensional
conformal ﬁeld operators theory and that it also admitted an auxiliary presen-
tation in terms of the canonical quantization of a classical relativistic Nambu-
Goto string Lagrangian contributed signiﬁcantly to its theoretical attraction and
nourished the hope that the model can be unitarized. Its main popularity it
however enjoyed among strong interaction phenomenologists who actually (for
reasons which nowadays hardly anybody remembers) liked the idea of satisfying
crossing already with inﬁnite towers of intermediate particle states (duality =
one-particle crossing) without the participation of the multi-particle scattering
continua as required for an S-matrix coming from QFT. In conjunction with the
phenomenological use of ideas of Regge poles the emerging trajectory pictures
(mass versus spin) had a certain phenomenological charm, and although inﬁnite
particle towers cause some ﬁeld theoretic headache4, there was no reason to
reject it as a phenomenological proposal which captures some aspects of strong
interactions. and whose possible relation with the known principles could be
clariﬁed after establishing some phenomenological success.

The subject became somewhat problematic when the phenomenological in-
4Unless only a ﬁnite number of particles remain as stable objects (and inﬁnitely many are
converted to poles in the second Riemann sheet) one gets into trouble with locality (this can
be seen in the context of d=1+1 factorizing theories).

5

terpretation in terms of Regge trajectories for strongly interacting scattering
amplitudes was abandoned and a new gravitational interpretation on the level
of the Planck scale was proposed (the “Bartholomew day massacre” of the old
dual model string theory by J. Scherk et.al. 1975 in Paris). The new message
was the suggestion that string theory (as a result of the presence of spin two
and the apparent absence of perturbative ultraviolet divergencies) should be
given the status of a fundamental theory at an energy scale of the gravitational
Planck mass ∼1019eV i.e. as a true theory of everything (TOE), this time in-
cluding gravity. Keeping in mind that the frontiers of fundamental theoretical
physics (and in particular of particle physics) are by their very nature a very
speculative subject, one should not be surprised about the highly speculative
radical nature of this proposals; we know from history that some of our most
successful theories originated in this manner. What is worrisome about this
episode is rather its uncritical reception. After all there is no precedent in the
history of physics of a phenomenologically conceived idea for laboratory ener-
gies to became miraculously transmuted into a theory of everything by just
sliding the energy scale upward through 15 orders of magnitudes and changing
the terminology without a change in its mathematical-conceptual setting5. One
would have expected that a speculative idea which has lost its phenomenologi-
cal support basis and instead jumped into a conceptual “blue yonder” beyond
QFT would receive at least that amount of critical attention with which particle
theorists analyzed previous situations of apparent conceptual conﬂicts from new
proposals with established principles. After all antinomies and paradoxical sit-
uations were the source of great conceptual advances in the last century; often
the results obtained from their resolution were more important than the origi-
nal idea by itself. Unfortunately this is not what happened in the case of string
theory. The times of critical spirits of the caliber of Pauli had long passed and
the new love aﬀair between physicists and mathematicians which left its mark
in the Atiyah-Witten collaboration was more directed towards ﬁnding beauty
and harmony (between diﬀerential geometry and topology on the one side with
the artistry of the Euclidean functional integral on the QFT side) than to the
task of carrying antinomies between known structures of local quantum physics
and new speculative ideas to their breaking point. The enthusiasm about a new
golden age between mathematics and theoretical particle physics was mutual,
but I think it was based on a deep misunderstanding. Physicists were impressed
by depth of modern coordinatization free diﬀerential geometry and topology
and started to write articles in which they explained to their fellow physicists
what they have learned and how it can be used for the quasiclassical exploration
of functional integrals6. On the other hand mathematicians were impressed by
5Some geometrical enrichments came much later and did not really modify the core of the

situation.

6The euclidean functional integral representation as well as the closely related canonical
quantization are formal artistic devices which acquire a mathematical meaning in the quasi-
classical interpretation; renormalized correlation functions in strictly renormalizable theories
are however not representable in this manner (only their meaningless unrenormalized analogs
are formally consistent with functional integral representations).

6

the geometrical power of some computational tools of physicists. They begun
to look in awe at the Euclidean functional integrals and often found mathemat-
ically rigorous ways to conﬁrm conjectures suggested by these formal tools of
the physicists. Only very few mathematicians (including Vaughn Jones) were
actually aware that some of their colleagues were erecting their beautiful ediﬁces
on some of the ruins of particle physics. The interesting geometrical content of
string theory contributed to the rather uncritical support it received even from
reputable people. This in my view was the historical beginning of a mode of
free-ﬂoating discursive thinking which ﬁnally after almost 3 decades led to the
abdication of what used to be fundamental physics. As already mentioned this
erosion process had its recent outing in a semipopular anthropic manifesto by
L. Susskind.

Before looking more closely to the sociological changes which came with the
increasing popularity of string theory, it is quite instructive to analyses the ori-
gin of its somewhat confusing terminology. The historical reason why the name
“dual model” (after its interpretative paradigmatic change which allegedly in-
corporates gravity) was converted to string theory had nothing to do with its
quantum localization in space time but refers to the inﬁnite particle “tower”
mass spectrum which the canonical quantization of a free classical relativistic
string leads to; the intrinsic quantum localization of e.g. a canonical quan-
tized Nambu-Goto string is despite its classical origin not string-like but rather
pointlike (more on this see below and next section), a ﬁrst indication that the
cherished quantization parallelism between classical and quantum localization
is limited to pointlike objects. In particular those tube pictures cannot be in-
terpreted as physically string-like localized. One may justiﬁably fear that this
could create a conceptual salad in the minds of newcomers unless they are es-
pecially warned that the terminology should not be confused with the physical
content. Its more recent descendant cannot create this kind of confusion since
it receives its name M-theory just from the alphabet of big Latin letters, but far
from this being a precautionary measure for not prejudicing its frail content, one
is invited (according to Witten) to interpret M among other things as standing
for “mystery” (also matrix, mother, magic, in short a true theory of every-
thing). Interpretation like this facilitates my attempts in this essay to describe
string theory a la Susskind as a return to scholastic pre-Galilei-Newton-Einstein
re-mystiﬁcation of nature, which attaches weight to the question of how many
vacua ﬁt onto a string (alias how many angles ﬁt onto the pin of a needle).

In this essay I will argue that this crisis cannot really been understood in
terms of physics without taking into account sociological changes of the increas-
ingly globalized community of physicists who is pursuing this kind ideas. My
experience with string theoreticians is admittedly marked by a certain distance
since my underlying philosophy has basically remained “Wilsonian” in the sense
that reality in my view consists of an inﬁnitely many shells of asymptotically in-
clusive theories (like the sheets of a possibly inﬁnite onion). Perhaps somewhat
diﬀerent from Ken Wilson (I do not know his opinion on this point), I believe
that every shell can be described in conceptually complete and mathematically
rigorous way, i.e. mathematical consistency alone does not require knowledge

7

of the next layer (the unreasonable eﬃciency of mathematics in the sense of
Wigner). In fact the attempt to dump the details of the next layer into a cutoﬀ
parameter could mathematically be even counterproductive7. In other words I
believe that the 70 year old weakness of not knowing whether those objects we
talk about in QFT really exist still will be overcome, in fact I think (see remarks
in the next section) that the day when QFT will enjoy the same conceptual sta-
tus as other areas of physics is not very far; but for the time being QFT did not
reach closure.

I do not subscribe to the underlying idea of string theory that a TOE is at all
possible. In fact the idea that Einstein’s Dear Lord (the one who does not throw
dice) permits some string theorist to ﬁnd a closure to fundamental physics (so
that for the rest of all days the curiosity of humanity about its material world will
end in intellectual boredom or at best re-directed into a plumbing job for some of
the still missing details or perhaps subsumed into a branch of the entertainment
industry) appears to me outright ridiculous.
Ideas like this probably will be
cited by historians in a distant future as representing the hubris and intellectual
(not necessarily personal) arrogance of a past Zeitgeist. The best one can do to
illustrate these points is to quote statements from string theorists. One citation
by which an apparently reputable young (but apparently very immature) string
theorist8 used to sign oﬀ his contributions to discussion groups reads as follows
[5]:

Superstring/M-theory is the language in which God wrote the world.
Whenever I looked at that line (I stopped looking 3 years ago, hence I do
not know whether dictums like this still enjoys popularity) an old limerick came
to my mind. It originates from pre-war multi-cultural Prague where, after a
performance of Wagner’s Tristan and Isolde by a maestro named Motl, an art
critic wrote instead of the usual critical review in next days newspaper the
following limerick (unfortunately this cannot be translated from German to
English without a complete loss of charm):

Gehe nicht zu Motl’s Tristan
schau Dir nicht dieses Trottels Mist an,
schaﬀ dir lieber ’nen viertel Most an
und trink dir mit diesem Mittel Trost an
What a diﬀerence of this God who has to follow the logic of string theory
(perhaps because “there is no other game in town”, see next section) to Ein-
stein’s Dear Lord. Whom God allowed to have a copy of his blueprint of the
world does of course not have to bother about earthly worries of experimental
veriﬁcations; those remaining earthlings which are not in its possession, and
want to verify results of this divine theory in the old fashioned way by exper-
iments and observations will have no chance since they never can get to the
required energy scale. Even a theoretical comparison with existing principles
of quantum ﬁeld theory is not possible, because string theory is only known in
7Note that string theory, if anything, has a much worse existence problem; it is not even

possible to give an intrinsic characterization, the only thing one has are cooking recipes.

8As in the religious domain there is of course the risk of violating somebodies feeling. But

without using the freedom of expression this essay would lack substance and credibility.

8

terms of recipes which have resisted an intrinsic characterization by principles.
This situation is without precedent in the history of physics.

String theorists oﬀer their well known scale-sliding arguments to show that
Lagrangian ﬁeld theory is a low energy footnote of string theory. But those
arguments are no substitute for a structural comparison. To illustrate what is
meant by “structural” consider the somewhat analogous relation between QM
and QFT. The structural reason is that there exist relativistic ﬁeld operators
which in their one-time application to the vacuum create one particle states
without any admixture of vacuum polarization. These are the free Bose/Fermi
ﬁelds. If we would live in a (d=1+2) world of anyons and plektons (particles with
braid-group statistics) the nonrelativistic version would not be QM but rather
a quantum ﬁeld theory9 with a nonrelativistic dispersion law. The relevance
of QM to the physical world is related to the fact that particle number conser-
vation is compatible with the relativistic spin-statistics connections of Bosons
and Fermions. It has not been possible to make such structural arguments in
string theory because recipes are no substitute for principles and the fact that
one knows a lot about the principles which characterize QFT is of no help here.
For readers who want to see string-theoretic adulation in its purest form, I

recommend the article in [6] where one ﬁnds the following passage:

In the 1990s, Edward Witten and others found strong evidence that the dif-
ferent superstring theories were diﬀerent limits of an unknown 11-dimensional
theory called M-theory. These discoveries sparked the second superstring rev-
olution. When Witten named M-theory, he didn’t specify what the ”M” stood
for, presumably because he didn’t feel he had the right to name a theory which
he hadn’t been able to fully describe. Guessing what the ”M” stands for has be-
come a kind of game among theoretical physicists. The ”M” sometimes is said
to stand for Mystery, or Magic, or Mother. More serious suggestions include
Matrix or Membrane. Sheldon Glashow has noted that the ”M” might be an
upside down ”W”, standing for Witten. Others have suggested that the ”M”
in M-theory should stand for Missing, Monstrous or even Murky. According
to Witten himself, as quoted in the PBS documentary based on Brian Greene’s
”The Elegant Universe”, the ”M” in M-theory stands for ”magic, mystery, or
matrix according to taste.”

With such statements of scholastic adulation and a dash of talk-show en-
tertainment, one is almost inclined to consider the ﬁrst phrase of this article:
String theory is a model of fundamental physics whose building blocks are one-
dimensional extended objects (strings) rather than the zero-dimensional points
(particles) i.e. the standard opening mantra used by string theorists, as a light-
hearted lapsus linguae rather than a potential source of misconception. It was al-
ready mentioned before that whereas it is true that the extension of the classical
9Wilszek’s quantum mechanical (Aharonov-Bohm like dyons) anyons violate the spin statis-
tic relation for an anomalous value of the spin; one consequence of this violation is that that
the resulting multi-dyon QM does not permit a description in the second quantization Fock
space setting. True anyons however remain ﬁeld theoretical for all energies and never loose
their vaccum polarization clouds (even in the absence of genuine interactions). A formal
scale-sliding argument could easily overlook this subtle structural point.

9

Nambu-Goto string (whose canonically quantized version is the “mother” of the
string-theoretic reformulation of Veneziano’s dual model) is really a relativistic
spacetime string, this is not the case for its canonically quantized counterparts.
The only intrinsic notion of a quantum relativistic localization is that obtained
by translating this object into other positions and checking whether its commu-
tator with the original object is nonvanishing once the second would be string
shape enters the causal inﬂuence region of the ﬁrst. This test was made (even by
string theorists) and the result was negative [7][8]; the commutator is just that
of two pointlike objects localized at the center of mass points of the imagined
strings. This is not totally unexpected since the string description is strictly
auxiliary, it belongs to the cooking recipe for the construction of a particular
crossing symmetric (and at the end hopefully unitary) S-matrix and it certainly
does not have a similar conceptual physical status as the interpolating pointlike
ﬁelds of the LSZ scattering theory. Without the use of interpolating ﬁelds the
relation of the S-matrix with locality is very indirect (and has been noticed only
recently with the help of the concept of modular localization for wedge regions,
see remarks in next section). Relativistic string-localized quantum objects which
could substitute the interpolating pointlike ﬁelds and those auxiliary constructs
of string theorists are very diﬀerent concepts. Our presently best knowledge
about them may be condensed into the statement: quantum string-localized ob-
jects (example the quantum “ﬁelds” behind the zero mass inﬁnite spin Wigner
representations) do not allow a representation in terms of Lagrangian quanti-
zation and on the other hand the quantization of classical (Nambu-Goto type)
strings does not lead to quantum string localization. This may at ﬁrst sight
come as a shock even to ordinary ﬁeld theorists who expected the quantization
approach (i.e. the invocation of a parallelism with classical structures) to be of
general validity transcending the boundaries of pointlike localization. To con-
template a less singular more intrinsic description “without classical crutches”,
as Jordan did, is one thing, but to be confronted with a conceptual barrier which
prevents to view certain quantum object as a quantized version of a classical
analog is a diﬀerent and more surprising issue. String theory is build on the
supposition that geometric aspects and localization properties are maintained
by quantization even if one goes beyond pointlike ﬁelds.

There is another result, this time not referring to localization, which high-
lights the strictly auxiliary nature of the meaning of the word “string” in string
theory. It has been known that the Nambu-Goto string is an integrable sys-
tem. The inﬁnite system of conserved charges have been identiﬁed, and their
Poisson relations are known. One of the important messages coming in par-
ticular from the early work of Faddeev on integrable systems that it is easier
to arrive at the (nonperturbative) solution if one directly quantizes the closed
system of algebraic Poisson-bracket solutions between the complete system of
conserved charges. But what should be done in a situation where the intrin-
sic quantization of charges leads to results which disagree10 with the standard
10Among other things the invariant quantization of the N-G string does not distinguish any

particular spacetime dimension.

10

canonical quantization as it is the case for N-G strings? [9]. The answer is:
the dual model S-matrix construction requires the canonical quantization since
the notion of string is just a short hand computational device for re-producing
the mass tower spectrum of the dual model, the question of what is the cor-
rect quantization of a physical string may be interesting but is irrelevant in the
present context since the string of string theory is only a computational trick to
ﬁnd a Lagrangian packing for the dual model with its inﬁnite mass tower. With
other words the second quantized Nambu-Goto ﬁeld theory is a special inﬁnite
component theory

The above remarks should not be misunderstanding as a plea for a mora-
torium on speculative ideas. Particle physics needs in certain situations jumps
into the “blue yonder” and the risk that they turn out to have no experimen-
tal support and that their conceptual relation to established principles remains
obscure has to be taken. The most worrisome aspect of string theory (and to
a lesser degree with supersymmetry) is not that it turned into a fashionable
subject without an observational basis or that it is unable to clarify its con-
ceptual status with respect to the principles of QFT (which remains despite
its incompleteness the best reference point); there were fashions before (the S-
matrix bootstrap, Regge poles,...) which have attracted a lot of attentions and
also suﬀered from the same shortcomings. In the past there was enough critical
potential to prevent such a condensation along a fashionable monoculture11.
The situation has radically changed in that reputable and inﬂuential physicists
whose critical judgement could have a sobering impact on a confusing situation
give their uncritical support to these tendencies and in this way become part of
the problem. Particle physics was at its best when physicists like Pauli who were
strongly committed to the truth were at the helm of particle physics. This led
to a situation where contributions in this area are submitted to so called high
impact journals whose editorial board already consists of people who are highly
specialized on “hot subjects” (if not directly related to string theory than at
least in that spirit) but are incapable (lack of background of a general physical
culture) to evaluate anything else which does not follow these globalized lines.
The main diﬀerence is that string theory (together and in union with super-
symmetry) is the ﬁrst theory which despite of these mentioned faults managed
to survive for more than 3 decades. After such a long time the solid conceptual
grip on QFT which would be necessary to press ahead with string theory to
the breaking point in order to arrive at an enigmatic solutions of the points
of structural tensions between QFT (or bury it, as it was done with several
other failed theories before) is lost or (in case of younger string theorist) never
existed. On the other hand those quantum ﬁeld theorist who have this grip
are not motivated to look into the details of prescriptions for what they believe
could be another failed theory; in addition they know that as a result of the
sectarian ideological attitude their critical remarks would not be welcome. Par-
11An beautiful example of a critical essay against some excrescences of the S-matrix boot-
strap program and brilliant illustration of highly informative scientiﬁc polemicat its best one
ﬁnds in [10].

11

ticle physics in the past has successfully maintained its unity despite the use
of widely diﬀerent concepts and mathematical tools, but this unity is rapidly
dissipating.

There is a related sociological problem.

If an idea which promoted the
careers of many physicists is kept alive for such a long time it becomes immune
against criticism. I think nobody at this late point would seriously expect that
somebody who invested more than 3 decades into a theory which led to tens
of thousands of publications but failed to make contact with real physics will
come up and say “sorry folks this was it”?

Theories which occupy minds for such a long time escape the critical radar
screen and develop a life of their own. Unfortunately there is no prior experience
with similar problem in the past from which we could learn how to protect the
content of fundamental physics against such new tendencies. But there is no
problem to at least describe them in terms of the following 5 thesis:

1. Fundamental knowledge about particle theory and in particular about

QFT has and is being lost.

2. The research in string theory is done and marketed by globalized groups

without encountering an independent critical evaluation.

3. Newcomers to particle physics are prematurely exposed to highly specu-
lative and controversial ideas before their critical immune system had a
chance to develop through a study of concepts of QFT.

4. String theorists ignore or dismiss the enigmatic power of antinomies and
structural clashes, papers which contain theorems which do not ﬁt their
prejudices are simply ignored. The string theoretic literature consists
mainly of calculations based on certain recipes and speculations, there
is hardly any attempt to provide a conceptual framework.

5. A large number of positions in particle theory have gone to string theorists.
There are good reasons to worry that this could have negative long-lasting
ramiﬁcations for particle physics.

The case in favor of these statements is based on the following arguments.
In talking to members of the younger generation of physicists one is often
surprised that they know very little about the great conceptual achievments of
the 1950/60 post renormalization era. Although the recipes of the renormaliza-
tion technology are usually part of their working knowledge (perhaps because
it makes the string recipes more palatable), the conceptual achievments as the
derivation of time-dependent scattering theory as a consequence of causality
(LSZ, Haag-Ruelle) as well as the subtleties in the particle-ﬁeld relation remain
outside their stock of knowledge.
It seems that they have been replaced by
diﬀerential geometry (in a Euclidean setting) and such special ideas as the pos-
sible use of Calabi-Yau manifolds in particle physics. One does not have to be
old-fashioned in order to be concerned about such trends. Unfortunately those
QFT textbooks which have been written by veterans of string theory emphasize

12

this cooking book recipe of QFT. Why should somebody to whom the S-matrix
is nothing but the result of a string theory cooking recipe mention the pro-
foundly beautiful result of scattering theory being a consequence of spacetime
causality and ensuing cluster properties? This is time consumimg and could be
counterproductive for the marketing of string theory since it could undermine
conﬁdence.

In order to illustrate the second point in the above list it is helpful to recall
that in earlier times there was a clear separation between the act of creation by
the author and the critical evaluation of its content by his colleagues. Nowadays
authors are often embedded in a globalized group and they communicate an
innovative idea among members of this group before it could reach a certain
amount of maturity. This has two consequences, on the one hand the idea
becomes modiﬁed and its originally intended content may get diluted, and on
the other hand the chance that the work receives a critical evaluation from
an independent viewpoint is signiﬁcantly reduced. The likely kind of criticism
in such a setting is that of an ideological battle between two globalized groups
rather than a critical analysis of its content. Just imagine that Einstein’s general
relativity would have come into being within such a sociological environment.
Instead of struggling for years with his famous “hole problem” and thinking it
through by himself he probably would have explained it to the other members
of that imagined globalized group. The topic would have entered emails and
discussion groups and the result may have well been a total confusion for many
years to come. Another danger emanating from big groups whose interests is
focussed on the promotion of a particle physics monoculture is that they tend
to control editorial boards of so-called high impact journals and in this way
prejudice the research topics of particle physics. The easiest way to obtain a list
of “who is who” in administrating the crisis of particle physics is to look at the
editorial board of a new electronic journal as JHEP (Journal of High Energy
Physics).

The third point of the list is perhaps the most serious one. A theory which
has in more than 30 years been unable to get its relation to physics straightened
out is presented to physics students as a theory of everything which super-
sedes QFT before their critical faculties have been strengthened by learning
about the concepts and open problems of the most successful theory of par-
ticle physics. To get an impression about the extend to which the borders
between education and indoctrination have been blurred already, it is instruc-
tive to take a look an undergraduate course on string theory oﬀered at MIT
(http://ocw.mit.edu/OcwWeb/Physics/8-251Spring-2005/CourseHome/index.htm).
Let us explain the fourth thesis in the context of a concrete example. QFT
in its present state is in most cases not able to produce a convincing proof
of a conjecture about a concrete Lagrangian model. But if this model is part
of a larger class of models which can be characterized by certain structural
properties one is in a much better situation. An example is the Maldacena
conjecture about a possible connection between a special conformal theory (a
supersymmetric gauge model) and a certain gravitational anti de Sitter (AdS)
model. This conjecture has not been proven and according to our ﬁrst remark

13

it is questionable that this will ever be possible. But since the relation between
AdS-QFT and a conformal theory on its boundary is an easily established struc-
tural (model independent) fact, there is the interesting chance to come up with
a mathematical theorem about which structural property on the conformal side
implies/excludes a corresponding property on the AdS side. The rigorous result
of a structural investigation is that a standard conformal quantum ﬁeld theory
described in terms of pointlike ﬁelds (e.g. a Lagrangian QFT) corresponds on
the AdS side to a rather strange QFT which does not have suﬃciently many
degrees of freedom in order to be presentable in terms of Lagrangian pointlike
ﬁelds. Vice versa, if on starts with a standard theory on the AdS side there are
too many degrees of freedom on the conformal side so that it is again not pos-
sible to relate this structure with any kind of (gauge) Lagrangian QFT. Hence
if the Maldacena conjecture was meant to relate two standard Lagrangian ﬁeld
theories it is contradicted by a theorem. If on the other hand the conjecture
involves a string theory on the AdS side than nothing can be said because the
structural properties of string theory are unknown. So if one takes an opti-
mistic view one could assume that the conjecture is true and try to isolate the
structural property of string theory which makes this possible; I am not aware
of any such attempt. But after 30 years it is probably more realistic to believe
that structural properties as one has been able to establish from the principles
of QFT may never be available in string theory because it always may remain
a collection of prescriptions without ever leading to underlying physical princi-
ples. The lack of structural understanding may not be the result of limitations
on the part of string theorists but rather may indicate that there is no coherent
theory in the standard sense of these words behind the string prescriptions.

Among the thousands of AdS-CFT papers there are 3 which address this
problem but the string community has ignored them. I think that this is not the
result of a conscious act but a genuine loss of understanding of what structural
theorems are about. In this situation it makes almost no diﬀerence whether this
is plain ignorance or results from the kind of hubris about having a TOE at one´s
disposal; in short these are the visible marks of a profound self-created crisis in
particle physics. With acclamation (instead of critical cutting edge arguments)
it is much easier to enhance impact parameters for one’s career. The present
system of assigning high impact parameter to publication in certain journals
which support fashinable subject rewards acclamation and punishes attempts to
look for antinomies and breaking points (and thus doing research in the best of
our traditions). As mentioned before it is not diﬃcult to ﬁnd out about who
is who in the administration of the crisis in particle theory. No theory before
string theory led to such a deep schism in particle physics; not only have string
theorist problems to communicate with their more modest competitors from
loop gravity, but also those part of QFT which are of a more conceptual nature
and less suited for computational recipes for speciﬁc models (but very eﬃcient
to unravel structures of families of models) are beyond string theoretic radar
screens. In fact the unity of particle physics may already have been lost.

The last point in the list expresses concern with the future of particle physics.
Given the human nature, it is very improbable that high ﬂying string theorists

14

who enjoyed social success and recognition in their globalized group and in the
media are able to muster the intellectual modesty which one needs in order to
clean up one’s desk and start something else; it is more realistic to expect that
the present situation will continue or even aggravate.

In the past fundamental physics has proven remarkably resistent against
outside pressure, neither the Nazis nor the Stalinists were able to make its
underlying philosophy subservient to their ideologies. But its present state of
health depends crucially on whether the acting physicists are able to protect it
against certain tendencies which already dominate our life through the economic
hegemomy of globalized capitalism.
Is science loosing its autonomy and are
we reaching the end of the path which begun with Planck and Einstein? The
recent book by Susskind [1] has brought questions like this into the forefront. In
order to spare string theory the fate of becoming a kind of gigantic 20 century
phlogiston (the obsolete pre Lavoisier theory of combustion) he proposes to
change the meaning of what constitutes science and to redeﬁne of what makes
an argument scientiﬁc.

Attempts to look for sociological causes behind paradigmatic changes in
physics are not new. After the discovery of quantum mechanics P. Foreman [11]
oﬀered a sociological explanation for why these new ideas originated in war-
shattered Germany. He made the argument that the unusual new indeterminism
which originated from the probabilistic interpretation of quantum theory could
only have been thought through in the necessary radical manner by individuals
who saw their world destroyed. According to Foreman, those who were deeply
aﬀected by the gloom and doom Zeitgeist expressed in Spengler’s inﬂuential
book “the demise of the west” (which was widely red in post-war Germany) had
the best precondition for being able to contemplate a new kind of mechanics in
which acausality, indeterminism and chance played an important role.

This does not sound very palatable. Physics in war-shattered Germany
remained a strong autonomous science and QM has nothing to do with the
Spengler kind of gloom; actually the inﬂuence went occasionally in the reverse
i. misunderstandings of new developments in physics led to mis-
direction e.
leading philosophical and sociological interpretations12.
If one wants to ﬁnd
marks of the Zeitgeist in physics one should look less at the subject of research
and more to the manner in which physicist present their arguments and com-
municate their ﬁndings; in the actual sociological setting a relevant question
would be do physicist uphold their traditional auto-critical manner or do they
succumb to the forces of a neo-liberal globalized market economy where the
exploration of the entertainment value by the media promises instant reward
and recognition. String theory serves as an excellent illustration of the power
which public relation has acquired in particle physics. Its negative inﬂuence is
not just the result of its highly speculative content and its lack of observability
(which it shares with other previous fashions). More dangerous for the future
of particle physics are the attempts by its protagonists to elevate these ﬂaws
12It is well-known that Einstein disliked the terminology “relativity” because his main

achievement was to identify the invariants which are independent of the observer.

15

into a virtue and try to convince newcomers that there is no other “game in
town”. That such attempts have a chance of success is very much related to
the conceptual confusions which already started at the cradle of this theory and
became solidiﬁed as a result of its several “revolutions” during its more than
30 years of existence. The conceptual dust it left on each of its crossroads of
metamorphoses prevented a return to the many interesting open problems which
it left behind; at no time before where so many computations done on such a
muddy conceptual ground. There is of course in addition the human element of
what one may call a ”pitbull syndrome”13: after having invested almost 30 year
of their scientiﬁc life in making string theory work, its protagonists cannot let
loose anymore. As a result we have to be prepared to coexist for a long time to
come with string theory, its supersymmetry support, its noncommutative spin-
oﬀ and with whatever big Latin letters stand for. What will be the thoughts of
a physicist 100 years from now who enters a physics library (assuming that non-
electronic publications will continue) and walks along the corridors of a physics
library looking at those long shelves ﬁlled with hundred of thousands of pub-
lications on supersymmetry, string theory and related subjects? Will he have
similar thoughts as we have when we look at the great achievements 100 years
ago? Or will they be more similar to our thoughts when we look at publications
from the time of the pre-Lavoisier phlogiston theory of combustion (which was
wrong despite the fact that it explained some observations)?

Since hubris, prepotency and ignorance appear to be the hallmark of a hege-
monic new Zeitgeist and physics does not seem to be left unaﬀected, it may be
interesting to know whether there exists a contemporary analog of Spengler’s
critical socio-philosophical studies. A fundamental criticism of modernity is ex-
tremely hard because of the problem to understand how in the midst of a highly
civilized culture with impressive contributions to music, arts, literature and sci-
ence a monstrous crime of genocide can take place. This is precisely the starting
point of Theodor Adorno’s critical analysis of modernity [12]. The part which
in my view is relevant for arts and sciences is his “Dialectics of Enlightenment”
(with Max Horkheimer) his later essays on “Kant’s criticism of pure reason” as
well as on “Negative Dialectics”14. His focal point is the mechanism by which
rationality and enlightenment can turn into irrationality. Adorno illustrates his
ideas mainly in arts and philosophy, but I think that an adaptation to science
and in particular to the crisis in particle physics is possible and could shed more
light on the points raised in the present essay.

2 Is it really “the only game in town”?

A guy with the gambling sickness loses his shirt every night in a

13The pittbull is a combat dog which was bred in the UK during the second worldwar.
Below a certain threshold of incitement it has the temper of a normal dog, beyond this it is
incapable to let loose.

14These writings had an enormous impact on the postwar philosophy and sociology in Ger-
many but (probably because they use all the resources of the German language and philosophy)
they have not played a comperable role in the anglo-saxon cultural sphere.

16

poker game. Somebody tells him that the game is crooked, rigged
to send him to the poorhouse. And he says, haggardly, I know, I
know. But its the only game in town.
Kurt Vonnegut, The Only Game in Town [13]
This is a quotation from a short story by Kurt Vonnegut which Peter Woit
recently used in one of the chapters in his forthcoming book entitled “Not Even
Wrong : The Failure of String Theory & the Continuing Challenge to Unify the
Laws of Physics” (using a famous phrase by which Wolfgang Pauli characterized
ideas which either had not even the quality of being wrong in an interesting way
or simply lacked the scientiﬁc criterion of being falsiﬁable). The most prominent
string theorist who used the “no other game in town” phrase in interviews (when
asked about alternatives by science journalists) was David Gross, and of course
we do not know whether (despite his diﬀerent social conditions) he sometimes
thinks along similar lines as the Vonnegut character.

In this section I would like to convince the reader why this statement is
wrong; the sociological question why so many physicists seem to accept this
dictum was already addressed in the previous section. In order to avoid side-
tracking the reader from my main aim which is just to answer the question in
title of this section (and not to use a criticism of string theory as a pretence for
proselyting for approaches which have attracted my attention during the last
decade) I will be scarce on references; the reader wants to have more informa-
tion, it should not be too diﬃcult to track down more relevant references.

My illustrations of alternative “games” are diﬀerent from those by Peter
Woit; in particular I have less faith in diﬀerential and algebraic geometry meth-
ods in particle physics. As a result I also see the past Atiyah-Witten collabora-
tion in a somewhat diﬀerent light. On a superﬁcial level, taking Witten’s early
work (e.g. on the screening eﬀects of infrared clouds and the Kosterlitz-Thouless
phase transition) into account, I am inclined to see a negative inﬂuence more
in the opposite direction from how Woit sees it. But on a more profound level
I ﬁnd it very diﬃcult to comment on a complex relation between two such em-
inent scientist and prefer to leave the answer to historians of science, especially
since it does not contribute anything to the theme at hand.

The way out which I advocate is to revisit some old unsolved deep concep-
tual and mathematical problems which got lost in the dust on the wayside left
by several so-called revolutions. I believe that the deployment of new powerful
conceptual and mathematical tools of advanced QFT to such problems oﬀer the
best hope for superseding the present crisis. This third way15 becomes partic-
ularly important if the ﬁrst way failed (e.g. because a long-time speculative
journey into the blue yonder has led to a loss of conceptual orientation as it is
the case with string theory, or because the unreasonable eﬃciency of a high pa-
rameter description with many conceptual deﬁciencies has led into a labyrinth
i.e. the reality of the standard model) and the second path of experimental
discoveries gives no new clues (since high energy experiments are not any more
15For the present discussion the ﬁrst way denotes the speculative jump into a blue yonder
and the a posteriori justiﬁcation via conceptional and mathematical safeguarding; the second
way refers to cataclystic experimental discoveries.

17

autonomous endeavors, but have an increasing dependence on the quality of the
leading theory). This third way requires signiﬁcant theoretical resources and is
certainly more diﬃcult than that based on free-ﬂoating speculations. Its main
tool are cutting edge arguments (including gedankenexperiments) by which ap-
parent conceptual antinomies and gaps in a given setting are brought to the
breaking point so that the new structures can emerge in contrast to the existing
ones. The transition from the old quantum theory (with its strong experimental
basis) to the new QM illustrates the power of this method. The ﬁrst step is
to become aware that quantum ﬁeld theory, apart from the highly developed
technology of perturbative renormalization, has remained an largely unﬁnished
business; never mind its string theoretic caricature. Apart from some general
structural consequences of the underlying principles (TCP, spin-statistics, the
DHR theory of superselection sectors) I cannot think of any problem in QFT
which was successfully solved and really brought to a closure in the sense as
it happened a long time ago in other areas of fundamental physics e.g. QM.
The post renormalization research in QFT has left us with an enormous amount
of half-baked results even in those areas in which the theory was very success-
ful on the observational side. A third way in QFT would primarily consist in
ﬁnding an intrinsic formulation and computational methods which are not just
prescriptions but follow directly from the underlying principles.

I have already touched upon some of these questions in the previous section
when I referred to Jordan’s plea for a more intrinsic formulation of QFT without
the use of “classical crutches” and to the aborted S-matrix bootstrap approach
as a potential start for an on-shell reformulation of QFT. Let us recall here
also the Wigner 1939 characterization of particles in terms of positive energy
representations of the Poincar´e group as the ﬁrst completely intrinsic way to do
(interaction-free) quantum physics without invoking any classical parallelism.
Although it is of enormous conceptual value, it was certainly too limited for
generating widespread attention since it said nothing about how to incorporate
interactions. There was however one conceptual spike in an otherwise perfect
setting. Whereas the relation of most ﬁnite energy representations with the
Lagrangian quantization approach for free ﬁelds was understood during the
subsequent two decades in terms of intertwiners between the Wigner canonical
representations and their covariant counterparts, there were rather big positive
energy families which resisted attempts to incorporate them into a setting of
Lagrangian quantization. For the large inﬁnite spin family16 there were many
failed attempts by several generation of physicists to encode this representation
into the setting of pointlike ﬁelds which ﬁnally found their explanation in a
No-Go theorem [14]. The remaining question of what is the best (sharpest)
localization consistent with the inﬁnite helicity tower led to the new concept of
string-localization in the general setting of modular localization [15][16]. String-
localized ﬁelds are operator-valued distributions A(x, e) which ﬂuctuate in two
spatial variables where x is a d-dimensional Minkowski spacetime point event at
16For this family Wigner’s “little group” is the two-dimensional euclidean group whose
irreducible unitary representation lead to a continuous range of Casimir values corresponding
to an inﬁnite (half)integer “helicity tower”.

18

which the semiinﬁnite spacelike string starts and e is its the spacelike directional
(unit) vector which (as far as far as covariance and ﬂuctuations are concerned)
can also be viewed as a point in a d-1 dimensional de Sitter space. For the
(anti)commutator of two such ﬁelds to vanish it is not suﬃcient that the x′s
are spacelike, one string must also be outside the causal inﬂuence zone of the
other i.e.
the linear string is “visible” in the sense of quantum localization
(whereas that of a canonically quantized N-G string is ﬁctitious apart from the
localization of its centre of mass). This illustrates that it is not always the grand
design but little observations on the wayside which the caravan passed a long
time ago that lead to interesting conceptual progress.

At this point it is helpful for the reader to be reminded that there are two
important concepts of localizations in relativistic quantum theory: the Newton-
Wigner localization and modular localization. Whereas the N-W localization
results from the adaptation of the Born x-space localization probability to rel-
ativistic wave functions and connects to a position operator and associated
localization projectors and probabilities, modular localization results from the
attempt to liberate the causal localization inherent in pointlike quantum ﬁelds
from the non-intrinsic aspects of ﬁeld-coordinatization. The lack of covariance
and causality of the N-W localization17 does not have any unpleasant conse-
quences as long as one uses is in scattering theory; the fact that N-W local-
ization regains covariance for asymptotically large separation makes it in fact
indispensable for the derivation of the Poincar´e-invariant S-matrix where the
projectors and their probability interpretation is crucial. The use of N-W lo-
calization becomes however deadly wrong (superluminal acausalities) if used
for propagation over ﬁnite distances. Modular localization [16] on the other
hand does not lead to projectors and probabilities but is correct concept for
the covariant causal localization of states and operator algebras. Unlike the
Lagrangian quantization, it is capable to control situation where a coordinati-
zation by pointlike ﬁelds is impossible as in the mentioned case of the Wigner
massless helicity tower representation. In such cases the issue of local functions,
Wick polynomials, vacuum properties, an energy-momentum tensor and statis-
tical mechanics properties are suﬃciently diﬀerent from the standard pointlike
case and require new conceptual attention before deciding that such a matter is
“unnatural” or has a role to play (e.g. in the astrophysical discussion of what
constitutes black matter/energy).

There are massive Wigner representations in d=1+2 dimensions with anoma-
lous (non-halﬁnteger) spin whose associated ﬁelds have plektonic (braid group)
statistics which is inconsistent with a pointlike localization as well with an on-
shell structure. More precisely even in the “freest version” (vanishing scattering
cross section) the realization of braid group statistics requires that any oper-
ator whose one-time application to the vacuum is a state with a one-particle
component has necessarily a nonvanishing vacuum polarization cloud18 [18], in
17More generally a theory with positivity of energy does not admit a system of covariant

localization projectors.

18Only if one does not insist in the best localization which is stringlike but extends the
localization space to a (Rindler) wedge one can even in the presence of interactions create

19

other words there is no on-shell free anyon ﬁeld.. Many properties of anyons
(anyon=abelian plekton) can be seen by applying modular localization to the
Wigner representation. Using similar modular intersection ideas as in the case
of factorizing models [19], there are good reasons to expect that in due time one
will have an explicit construction of “integrable” anyons.

It is somewhat surprising that modular localization within the Wigner set-
ting also leads to new viewpoint about gauge theory. It was well known that the
covariant ﬁeld description of the Wigner theory for massless helicity one rep-
resentations relates to the electromagnetic ﬁeld strength but does not support
the introduction of pointlike vector potentials (without additional unphysical
extensions). This is very diﬀerent from the classical situation where the posi-
tivity of the quantum theoretical state space is of no relevance; in that case the
idea of a gauge principle is useful in order to select among all possible covariant
couplings of a classical vector potential the Maxwell’s classical electrodynamics
and this selection principle has a straightforward extension to the quasiclas-
sical realm of quantum particles/ﬁelds in an external vector potential. The
situation changes radically if vector potentials become quantum objects. The
standard way of handling this problem is to temporarily forget the positivity
requirement and to uphold the pointlike structure so that the usual perturba-
tive Lagrangian quantization approach could be applied. This is achieved by
artiﬁcially extending the quantum theory by adding in unphysical ghosts which
at the end of the calculation have to be removed. From the outset it is not clear
that after having done the perturbation theory in this unphysical setting one
can remove the ghosts from quantities which in classical sense would be gauge
invariant and the best formulation which makes such a descend manifest (by
formulating the physical descend as a cohomological problem) is the well known
BRST formalism of gauge theory. There is nothing to say against doing this
and getting good results for gauge invariant quantities. The problem starts if
such a BRST “catalyzer” (Ghosts are neither in the original problem of spin
one particle representations nor in the ﬁnal physical answers) is not considered
as a temporary computational trick, but becomes elevated to the status of a
fundamental physical tool.

There are two arguments against accepting such a “catalyzer”. One is that
in the quantum context one does not need a gauge principle for the purpose
of selecting between diﬀerent possibility because (diﬀerent from interactions in-
volving lower spin) unitarity and renormalizability19 already ﬁx the standard
theory without the necessity of an additional choice i.e. the other non-gauge
classical possibilities which are eliminated by the gauge principle do not oc-
cur in local quantum physics and hence there is no need for a selecting gauge
principle; to the contrary, accepting renormalizability as a principle of local

polarization-free states.

19In this argument there is an underlying tacit assumption that any quantum requirement
(even if it is presently not completely understood) is more fundamental than a classical argu-
ment i.e. quantum renormalizability explains the classical gauge principle in the quasiclassical
limit.

20

quantum physics20, The second point is of a more philosophical nature in that
the assignment of a fundamental role to the BRST formalism would go against
Heisenberg’s dictum that concepts (and if possible also computations) must be
based on observables.
In this context it is deeply satisfying that the Wigner
theory, extended by the concept of modular localization, leads to a physical
string-localized potential Aµ(x, e) in the Fock space of photons [16]. The exis-
tence of this string-like object also explains an old observation in algebraic QFT
stating that the operator algebra generated by the ﬁeld strength violates Haag
duality for toroidal spacetime regions. All these statements have extensions to
higher helicity representations and the case of helicity two, where the Wigner
covariant “ﬁeld strength” is a 4-tensor with the algebraic properties of the Rie-
mann tensor and where the string-localized “potential” is the metric 2-tensor,
is for obvious reasons particular interesting. Contrary to the ﬁeld strength, the
short distance properties of the potentials do not grow with increasing helicity.
But it is presently not known how to formulate interactions and set up a pertur-
bation theory for string-like localized ﬁelds; as expected, the formal imitation
of the standard pointlike formalism leads to infrared divergencies.

Behind all these remarks is a theory, which after the Hilbert space operator
formulation of quantum mechanics is the most impressive examples of a perfect
matching of mathematical concepts: the modular (Tomita-Takesaki) theory of
operator algebras and its unifying awe-abiding power to relate statistical me-
chanics, quantum ﬁeld theoretical localization and the local quantum physical
reason d’etre for the emergence of internal and external symmetries from gen-
eral properties of operator algebras. Whereas the Hilbert space theory was
completely in place at the time of the discovery of QM and the physicists only
had to learn it21, the development of the modular theory in the middle 60s
was a genuine give and take between physics and mathematics. In the physi-
cal side Haag, Hugenholz and Winnink in their pursuit of statistical mechanics
for open systems (i.e. directly in the inﬁnite thermodynamic inﬁnite volume
limit, bypassing quantization boxes) where the true equilibrium thermodynam-
ics becomes valid without ﬁnite volume correction terms. One of their ﬁndings
was that in the thermal state the generator of the time translation has a two-
sided symmetric spectrum and that this phenomenon is related to a symmetry
between the observable algebra and its commutant. They also identiﬁed the
so called KMS property as the characteristic thermal equilibrium property, thus
giving a fundamental signiﬁcance to an observation which in the hands of Kubo,
Martin and Schwinger was merely an analytic technical trick to avoid computing
traces for Gibbs states. On the mathematical side Tomita succeeded to push
the modular property of group algebras (associated with the relation between
20This is reasonable because any quantum selection principle, even if presently insuﬃciently

understood, is more basic than a classical principle (even if completely understood)

21It is often overlooked that it was Fritz London [20] (and not John von Neumann) who
for the ﬁrst time introduced this concepts of Hilbert space and “rotations in Hilbert space”
(unitary operators) into quantum physics. Since at that time he was an assistant at the TU
Stuttgart, he was outside the “quantum dialog” and his paper went into oblivion despite an
enthusiastic citation in Jordan’s paper on transformation theory [21].

21

right and left Haar measures) right into the heart of general operator algebras;
Takesaki extended the theory and together with Winnink (shortly after the pro-
tagonists from mathematicians and physics met at a conference 1967 in Baton
Rouge) made the relation with the physicists KMS structure whereas Connes
used this new concepts to signiﬁcantly extend the classiﬁcation of factor algebras
started by Murray and von Neumann. It took another decade before the physi-
cist Wichmann together with his young PhD student and collaborator Bisognano
discovered a geometrical aspect of that theory in the setting of localized sub-
algebras of QFT; in this case they proved that if the local algebras associated
with spacetime regions are generated by pointlike ﬁelds, then the modular data
of a wedge-localized algebra consists of the modular group being identical to the
wedge-preserving Lorentz boost and the Tomita involution being related to the
reﬂection on the edge of the wedge which (up to a π-rotation around the spatial
axis perpendicular to the edge) is implemented by the famous TCP operator of
QFT. The thermodynamical KMS aspect attributed to the Lorentz boost (upon
restriction of the vacuum state to the wedge algebra) appeared at ﬁrst sight a
bit unusual. But after Sewell was able to connect this observation with another
unexpected property namely Hawking’s thermal radiation of black holes and af-
ter Unruh analysed the gedankenexperiment involving an uniformly accelerated
observer in the ﬁeld theoretic vacuum, both situations became considerably de-
mystiﬁed by ﬁnding their common root. The following years were characterized
by a deepening of structural insight about operator algebraic modularity and
its connections with geometrical aspects of symmetry and localization (modular
localization) as well as thermal manifestation (localization thermality).

Within recent years the new framework of modular localization has entered
a new phase. Whereas until recently it mainly served to study rather general
structural properties and prove mathematical theorems for QFTs which shared
certain properties, it became clear that it containes the long sought-after con-
cepts for a new constructive approach which for the ﬁrst time in the history of
QFT does not use the quasi-classical crutches of Lagrangian quantization. One
of its ﬁrst successful tests was to ﬁll the above mentioned loopholes left by cer-
tain positive energy Wigner representation whose localization aspects cannot be
described in terms of pointlike ﬁelds and which escape Lagrangian quantization
attempts.

Another successful application of modular localization led to a profound con-
ceptual understanding of the bootstrap-formfactor construction for 2-dimensional
factorizing models. Several years after the dreams of a unique S-matrix boot-
strap came to a halt and its rests became recycled into string theory of every-
thing, some physicists made the modest observation that the S-matrix bootstrap
can be made to work for special families of two dimensional integrable models,
the so-called factorizing models. Far from being a TOE, the S-matrix boot-
strap for factorizing S-matrices turned out to be the start of something really
interesting. The simpler structure of unitarity, crossing and covariance in the
context of factorization permits not only to classify factorizing S-matrices, but
also to start a formfactor formalism which leads to a unique determination of
formfactors of a would-be QFT whose large-time asymptotic limits reproduce

22

the bootstrap S-matrix. The implementation of crossing followed the ﬁeld the-
oretic expectation (crossing as a collective eﬀect of all intermediate states) and
not the string theoretic duality (crossing solely in terms of inﬁnite one-particle
towers).

Most of these results were obtained by adding additional recipes to the LSZ
framework of scattering theory which then led to unique multiparticle form-
factors whose correctness was supported by consistency checks. These recipes
complicated however the recognition of the conceptual positioning of factoriz-
ing models within QFT, which is an important issue if one wants to use them
as a theoretical laboratory for a nonperturbative access to QFT and not just
for their own sake.
It turns out that these models are characterized by the
existence of vacuum-polarization-f ree generators (PFG) for wedge-localized al-
gebras22 whose Fourier transforms are related to Zamolodchikov-Faddeev al-
gebras. Modular localization and interaction-caused vacuum polarization are
inexorably related to causal locality i.e. to those properties which are at the
root of the sharp separation between QFT and any form of relativistic QM.
It is profoundly astonishing that the interaction-caused vacuum polarization,
which was ﬁrst noted in the standard setting of QFT way back by Furry and
Oppenheimer (and which has been the cause of conceptional complexity in the
particle-ﬁeld relation), is now returning as a central quantitative concept in the
nonperturbative intrinsic construction of models.

Although in more realistic QFTs there are no PFGs which fulﬁll the physi-
cally required operator domain properties, the idea that there is a classiﬁcation
of (non-PFG, but nevertheless constructively accessible) generators of wedge al-
gebras even in the general case is very suggestive. Such generators are non-local
in the old sense, but their purpose is not the construction of a nonlocal QFT but
rather to use the structural simplicity gained by relaxing localization23. Mod-
ular localization theory assigns a preferred role to operator algebras associated
with spatial wedge regions; in some sense which can be made precise wedge
algebras implement the best compromise between particles and ﬁelds. As in
the Lagrangian quantization approach the perturbative construction of a model
is in principle determined once one speciﬁed the Lagrangian, the QFT in the
modular localization setting is uniquely determined in terms of the structure of
its wedge algebras (the position of the wedge algebra within the algebra of all
operators, or the algebraic structure of generators). The algebras for smaller
regions (spacelike cones, double cones) are determined in terms of algebraic
intersections of wedge algebras. Unlike the Lagrangian approach there is no
place where ultraviolet divergences can occur, the worst which can happen is
that the intersection of wedge algebras associated with double cone algebras is
trivial (a multiple of the identity). In that case the expected local QFT asso-
ciated with the wedge data simply does not exist. In the Lagrangian approach
22The wedge region is the smallest region for which the existence of PFGs is compatible

with the presence of interactions.

23The Zamolodchikov-Faddeev algebra operators furnish the simplest illustration of such
wedge-algebra generators. The use of simple non-local operators for the construction of local-
ized algebras is not limited to two dimensions [17].

23

there are no credible criteria for existence, but nobody expects that Lagrangian
models with nonrenormalizable short distance behavior can be associated with
mathematically existing QFTs.

It is extremely interesting to note that modular localization unites 3 impor-

tant unsolved ideas from the past and places them into a new perspective.

• The idea that a construction which avoids correlation functions in favor of
the S-matrix and formfactors is necessarily free of ultraviolet divergencies;
this is the extension of the old S-matrix bootstrap.

• The idea of using instead of the rather singular quantum ﬁelds the local
net of spacetime-indexed operator algebras which they generate. This step
is analogous to the coordinate-independent setting achieved in modern
diﬀerential geometry. It has been advocated by Haag since the end of the
50s and as a result of a collective eﬀort over several decades it grew into
the body of what is now called algebraic QFT or Local Quantum Physics
[4].

• The spirit underlying the Wigner representation theoretical approach to
interaction-free theories. This provides an illustration of intrinsicness (no
classical crutches) in a very special context, but in contrast to algebraic
QFT, whose main use has been structural side, the Wigner classiﬁcation
of positive energy representation and the associated algebraic net in Fock
space is totally constructive. One would like to be able to carry these
ideas into the realm of interactions without being forced to introduce non-
intrinsic ﬁeld coordinatizations

In some way this could be considered as a resurrection of some ideas of the
old bootstrap S-matrix approach but now not in antagonism to the oﬀ-shell
localization concepts of QFT but rather as a new conceptional enrichment.
For two-dimensional models a rigorous criterion for the solution of the age old
problem of mathematical existence (which perturbative Lagrangian quantiza-
tion theory for known reasons cannot deliver) in form of a checkable degree
of freedom property (modular nuclearity) for wedge algebras has been formu-
lated and successfully tested for factorizing models [23]. Since the knowledge of
wedge algebras (i.e. generating operators) is known to guaranty uniqueness of
the possibly associated local QFT, it is reasonable to expect that there exists an
algebraic property related to the cardinality of degrees of freedom which secures
the nontriviality of local intersections. As in the old days where the existence of
a theory was threatened by the bad short distance behavior in the integration
over ﬂuctuations of singular pointlike ﬁeld coordinates, in the new completely
coordinatization-free and singularity-free intrinsic setting the quantum phase
space degree of properties decide whether a particular starting wedge algebra
structure leads to a QFT or not.

Perhaps it is helpful at this point to remind the reader that some of the great
theoretical discoveries of last century were made by re-thinking and re-working

24

already existing theoretical elements. In Einstein’s discovery of special relativ-
ity, the formula for Lorentz transformation and its relation to Maxwells equation
was already noticed before but its revolutionary message for a new concept of
spacetime was not seen24. The great achievment of perturbative renormaliza-
tion did not consist in discovering new principles underlying QFT, but rather
in implementing the known principles by new concepts and more appropriate
computational technics which allowed to control certain aspects of ultraviolet
divergences in terms of a more physical parametrization. Technically speaking
the old formulation of QFT which was heavily inﬂuenced by the quantum me-
chanics formalism (Wenzel, Heitler) was traded with a manifestly relativistic one
which placed the need to distinguish between Lagrangian (unrenormalized) pa-
rameters and physical ones into a clearer perspective. Although both, QM and
QFT are quantum theories, the inexorable presence of vacuum polarization and
the resulting signiﬁcant structural changes make it impossible to picture QFT
as some kind of relativistic quantum mechanics, a fact which even nowadays is
often overlooked.

Although QFT is an amazingly successful framework when it comes to
agreement with experiments, the lack of any mathematically controllable model
(apart from a special low-dimensional cases) and the absence of a comprehensive
constructive strategy which explores the underlying principles without “classi-
cal crutches” sets it apart from QM and most other area in theoretical physics.
The crucial question, which arises from the aforementioned historical remarks,
is whether a theory which has been around for more than 70 years and under-
gone already one revolutionary change of its formalism allows yet another post-
renormalization revolutionary step which would convert it into a autonomous
theory like previous theories. The existence of a radically diﬀerent formulation
which de-emphasizes ﬁeld-coordinatizations in favor of spacetime indexed alge-
bras [4] is a very strong hint in this direction25. A particularly radical result in
comparison with the standard Lagrangian setting is the possibility to describe
a full-ﬂedged QFT with all its structural richness in terms of a ﬁnite number
of “monades” i.e. copies of one unique object in a common environment such
that all physics is encoded in the relative positions of these copies. If one inter-
prets the word monade in this physical realization of Leibniz’s philosophy as the
unique (up to isomorphism) hyperﬁnite type III1 Murray von Neumann factor26,
the environment as a joint Hilbert space in which this operator algebra sits in
diﬀerent positions and if these relative positions are deﬁned in an appropriate
way in terms of modular operator algebra concepts (modular inclusions and in-
24There is a controversy among historians if Einstein who was on top of the ideas around
the turn of the 19 century may have known about these formulas perhaps unconciously. In
any case his derivation in his new spacetime interpretation is totally novel and extremely
beautiful.

25Many of the concepts (modular inclusions, modular intersections) have been developed
by H.-W. Wiesbrock [22] who, despite his amazing original work, had no chance to continue
his academic career at a time when most university positions went to string theorist.

26This algebra, which appears naturally in the setting of quantum ﬁeld theoretic localization
and the ensuing vacuum polarization, does not appear in QM and hence underlines the big
structural diﬀerences between QM and QFT.

25

tersections with a joint vacuum), then the existence of a Poincare (or conformal)
spacetime symmetry group and of a net of local algebras (generated from the
action of these symmetries on the monads) are consequences27. However such
new structural insight cannot directly be converted into new ways of classifying
and constructing models. Constructing (extended) generators of local algebras
by modular theory treads new ground and (as mentioned before) and in the
special context of factorizing models where the generators of wedge algebras
are of a particular simple kind (closely related to the Zamolodchikov-Faddeev
algebra) one already has a nice understanding about their construction in the
spacetime setting of modular localization. A particular rewarding case to test
the new algebraic concepts is the setting of chiral conformal theories. Here the
aim of present investigations is to classify and construct such theories in terms
of specialization of general principles and concepts of QFT rather than basing
constructions on mathematical structures (e.g. loop groups) which do not admit
a higher dimensional counterpart.

A recently solved interesting problem of QFT which required a conceptual
insight beyond the standard setting is the quantum adaptation of Einstein’s lo-
cal covariance principle to QFT in curved spacetime. The reason why it took
such a long time to understand this issue is that the local (patch-wise) isometric
diﬀeomorphisms of the classical theory have no straightforward implementation
on the level of quantum states (as compared to the unitarily implemented stan-
dard global spacetime symmetries as Poincare invariance of the vacuum state
in Minkowski spacetime). The standard formalism for expectation values based
on Lagrangian action functional (or any other quantization formalism) does not
separate states from operators. Only after the algebraic approach led to such
a separation one learned how to do formulate quantum local covariance [24].
From its algebraic functorial formulation in terms of a functor which relates a
category of causal manifolds with a category of certain algebras, the old prob-
lem one had with states became clear: states are dual to algebras. When one
dualizes the algebraic statement one ﬁnds that only foleii of states are invari-
ant, the quantum local covariance does not leave them individually unchanged.
The upshot of these investigations is a new way of looking at QFT: instead of
considering quantum ﬁelds on prescibed Lorentzian causally complete (globally
hyperbolic) manifolds, a ﬁeld theory model in the new setting is a functor be-
tween all causally complete manifolds and an operator algebraic category (e.g.
the Weyl algebra, the CAR algebra,....). A resulting interesting question is
whether each QFT in the old sense is extendible to one in this new sense, i.e.
whether the algebraic substrate of a QFT on Minkowski spacetime can be trans-
planted to any globally hyperbolic manifold. If one takes free ﬁeld algebras in
their operator algebraic setting (CCR, CAR) this can be shown but in a more
general context this is a very diﬃcult open problem. In the simplest case of
chiral algebras this amounts to the question whether a Moebius covariant net
27The protagonist of this deep work on modular inclusions and modular intersections had
no chance to develop an academic carreer, whereas his contemporaries who also started in
QFT, but then realized that a career in particle physics is only possible through string theory,
obtained high academic positions.

26

of algebras allows an extension to arbitrary Diﬀ(S). This is of course always
possible if one assumes that the chiral net has an aﬃliated stress energy tensor
so in order to learn something which may be helpful for higher dimensional QFT
one should like to ask for physically plausible properties of the deﬁning system
of operator algebras which insure the existence of this extension. This leads to
a rather special version of this question is whether each chiral algebra in the
sense of Moebius invariance can be extended to a theory with Diﬀ(S1) symmetry
(without assuming the existence of an energy-momentum tensor). It is evident
that if one cannot solve this simple question in this special case there will be
no chance for the more general case. There seem to be reasonable assump-
tions on modular positioning which indeed permit to generalize the derivation
of Moebius covariance to Diﬀ(S) covariance.

One interesting side result of these remarkable conceptual advances (which
remained largely unnoticed on the wayside of the great string-dominated cara-
van) is that the presently much discussed estimates of the ﬁeld vacuum contribu-
tions to the cosmological constant (more than 50 orders of magnitude too large)
are in contradiction with the aforementioned quantum version of Einstein’s local
covariance. The latter does not support the naive zero point energy counting ar-
guments as in [25] which treat the vacuum as a relativistic quantum mechanical
level system. These arguments have been uncritical used by many particle physi-
cists (example [26]). In a very interesting paper Hollands and Wald [27] show
that the local covariance setting of QFT contradicts such relativistic quantum
mechanical picture of ﬁlling momentum space levels (in agreement with similar
remarks made above) which is in harmony with the idea the momentum space
(Fourier transform) only acquires its physical interpretation through covariant
localization and not the other way around. Unfortunately the incorrect idea that
QFT is some sort of relativistic quantum mechanics is extremely widespread,
so that their arguments probably will not get the attention which they deserve.
Needless to mention that generically curved spacetime reference states which
replace the Minkowski vacuum do lead to nonvanishing expectation of the cor-
rectly (in agreement with the local covariance principle) deﬁned stress-energy
tensor. There is however a new coupling parameter involving the curvature and
within a curved spacetime setting one has to make assumptions about its nu-
merical strength. Hollands and Wald show that the problem of a theory based
on a energy-stress tensor quantized according to the requirement of local co-
variance does not lead to such gigantic values for the cosmological constant.
In fact their problem is the opposite, under reasonable assumptions about that
unknown coupling the vacuum polarization contribution comes out too small
in order to account for the astrophysical data. More reliable estimates which
could clarify whether there is a genuine problem would need a better conceptual
understanding of the local and global properties of the involved quantum states.
One can only hope that observational astrophysics maintains its autonomy and
does not go the way of some parts of experimental high energy physics in whose
evaluation boards are inﬂuenced by string theorists (who told them to measure
the manifestations of their little curled up dimensions and to look for a breaking
of Lorentz invariance).

27

The string-theorists “only game in town” claim is based on the belief that
the main content of QFT is already known. But if a theory allows for such a
radically diﬀerent conceptual setting as I have indicated in this section, it is
quite far from having reached its closure. It rather seems to call for another
post-renormalization revolutionary step before it can reach its ﬁnal form.

Foreman’s ill-fated attempt [11] to relate revolutionary changes in the quan-
tum mechanics of the 1920s to the post world war I sociological Zeitgeist and
the Weimar republic political situation was perhaps premature. A more suitable
subject for such a comparison of physics and the Zeitgeist should be provided
by the string revolution at the end of the past century. Whereas quantum
mechanics is one of physics most viable description of reality, whose unusual as-
pect of probability and chance on a fundamental level has nothing to do which
the Spengler type gloom and doom of the Weimar republic, the strong connec-
tion between characteristic features of string theory with the Zeitgeist behind
present political events is too evident to be overlooked. They both share the
same strong hegemonic spirit of insatiable ideological domination over the more
rational traditions. The “only game in town” on one side corresponds to the
lore about “weapons of mass destruction” on the other side28 and those men-
tioned string theoretic redeﬁnitions of words which originally had a well-deﬁned
intrinsic physical meaning correspond to the new deﬁnitions of words like tor-
ture or rendition, since this makes the break with the past appear less drastic
and increases acceptance by the majority.

As long as the internal democratic traditions are still intact there is some
hope that the present bellicose political confrontation may convert back to com-
promise, diplomacy and a genuine interest in other peoples cultures instead of
the hegemonic compulsion to impose one’s own way of life and political system
on others.

The crisis in particle physics, which ﬁnds its most visible outing in the hege-
mony of string theory, is of a more enduring kind. As long as some leading
physicists, including Nobel prize winners, are failing to play their natural role
as critical observers (in contrast to their more critical predecessors as Pauli who
kept particle physics in a healthy rational state), the present situation will con-
tinue and may even deteriorate. With a large number of chairs at theoretical
physics departments worldwide being occupied by string theorists I do not see
much hope. There will be many more big Latin Letters and string protegees
(of the kind mentioned in the ﬁrst section) to come, and the chance for a radi-
cal change of direction through newcomers entering particle physics will remain
extremely dim for several reasons . On the one hand the situation is conceptu-
ally and mathematically much more demanding than it was e.g. a century ago
when Einstein wrote his epoch creating 1905 papers; at that time the starting
situation was not inﬂuenced by the long reign of a confusing theory. There
were many schools of thought, but no hegemonic control of research directions
and institutions via impact indices and globalized interest groups. Nowadays
28The illustrated parallelity is of course not meant to imply that string theorist are neces-

sarily followers of the Bush administration’s policies.

28

somebody who has the capabilities and the guts to resist the lure of the string
hegemon in pursuit of his own original ideas will run a high risk to see the end
of his academic career with no old-fashioned patent oﬃce around which could
serve as a temporary shelter.

References

Intelligent Design

16/2, 198

[1] L. Susskind, The Cosmic Landscape: String Theory and the Illusion of

[2] O. Darrigol, The origin of quantized matter ﬁelds, Hist. Stud. Phys. Sci.

[3] P. Jordan, The Present State of Quantum Electrodynamics, in Talks and
Discussions of the Theoretical-Physical Conference in Kharkov (May 19.-
25., 1929) Physik.Zeitschr.XXX, (1929) 700

[4] R. Haag, Local Quantum Physics, Springer 1996

[5] http://www.lns.cornell.edu/spr/2003-12/msg0057032.html

[6] www.Wikipedia\String theory-Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

[7] E. Martinec, Class. Quant. Grav. 10, (1993) L187

[8] J. Dimock, J. Math. Phys. 41, (2000) 40

[9] D. Bahns, J.Math.Phys. 45 (2004) 4640

[10] Res Jost, TCP-Invarianz der Streumatrix und interpolierennde Felder, Hel-

vetica Physica Acta 36, (1963) 77

[11] P. Foreman, Weimar culture, causality and quantum theory1918-1927:
Adaptation by German physicists and mathematicians to a hostile intel-
lectual environment. Hist. Stud. Sci, 3:1-115

[12] click Theodor Adorno in Wikipedia: http://www.wikipedia.org/

[13] K. Vonnegut, The only Game in Town, Natural History, Winter 2001

[14] J. Yngvason, Commun. Math. Phys. 18, (1970) 195

[15] J. Mund, B. Schroer and J. Yngvason, Phys. Lett. B596, (2004) 156

[16] J. Mund, B. Schroer and J. Yngvason,

[17] D. Buchholz and S. J. Summers, String–Localized Fields in a Strongly Non-

local Model, math-ph/0512060

[18] J. Mund, Lett. Math. Phys. 43, (1998) 319

29

[19] B. Schroer, Ann. Phys. 319, (2005) 48 and previous contributions cited

therein

[20] F. London, Zeitschr. fuer Physik 40 (1926) 193

[21] P. Jordan, Zeitschr. f¨ur Physik 40, (1926) 809

[22] R. Kaehler and H.-W.. Wiesbrock, JMP 42, (2000) 74

[23] G. Lechner, An Existence Proof for Interacting Quantum Field Theories

with a Factorizing S-Matrix, math-ph/0601022

[24] R. Brunetti and K. Fredenhagen, The generally covariant locality princi-
ple – A new paradigm for local quantum physics,Commun.Math.Phys. 237
(2003) 31

[25] S. Weinberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 61, (1989) 1

[26] N. Straumann, On the Cosmological Constant Problems and the As-
tronomical Evidence for a Homogeneous Energy Density with Negative
Pressure,astro-ph/0203330

[27] Hollands and R. E. Wald, Quantum Field Theory Is Not Merely Quan-
tum Mechanics Applied to Low Energy Eﬀective Degrees of Freedom,
Gen.Rel.Grav. 36 (2004) 2595

30

