6
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
9
0
3
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Physicists in times of war

Bert Schroer
CBPF, Rua Dr. Xavier Sigaud 150
22290-180 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
and Institut fuer Theoretische Physik der FU Berlin, Germany

December 2005

Abstract

Though the majority of physicists would probably not support pre-
emptive wars, nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction would not
exist without their contributions.

Einstein’s anti-militaristic position has been well-documented and the
present essay recalls the role of some contemporary and past physicists
on this issue. The idea that the rationality of scientiﬁc thought is a
reliable antidote against supporting wars in order to achieve political or
ideological aims was neither correct in the past nor is it presently valid.
In the physics community there always existed a minority of supporters of
wars of conquest of territory, domination of people beyond the borders or
regime change. The “preemptive” war for the US hegemony in the middle
east has given the problem of “physicists in times of war” new actuality.
One of the most perplexing appologists of the agressive war of Nazi-
Germany against “the Bolshevist peril” has been Pascual Jordan whose
interesting scientiﬁc and controversial political biography is the main issue
of this essay.

1 Introductory remarks

As a result of a signiﬁcant coincidence 2005 was not only the centennial year
of Einstein’s greatest discoveries but it also marks the 60 year commemoration
of the end of the second world war, which was perhaps one of the greatest
man-made tragedy and certainly 20thcenturies darkest episode.

It is well-known that Albert Einstein, the most eminent physicist after Isaac
Newton, was also a renown anti-nationalist, anti-militarist and inﬂuential cham-
pion of liberal humanitarian causes.

In this context the fate of the physicist Herbert Jehle comes to one’s mind.
Herbert Jehle [1] was born 1907 in Stuttgart Germany as the son of General
Julius von Jehle. During his post-doc physics studies in the UK 1933-34, his
paciﬁst views brought him in contact with the Quakers. Around 1936 he declined
oﬀers to work in the German rearmament and even turned down an academic

1

position in Berlin, thus following in the footsteps of his hero Dietrich Bonhoeﬀer
who renounced his university position 2 years before in order to ﬁght full-time
the Naziﬁcation of the Lutheran church (Bonhoeﬀer was hanged in Flossenburg
just before the Americans arrived there). Jehle refused military service 1940
before a Gestapo tribunal in France and was interned in several Nazi-controlled
concentration camps in Vichy France where he barely escaped death by starva-
tion before (with the outside help of a fellow physicist and Quaker Sir Arthur
Eddington) he got in 1941 to the US. He participated in the postwar confer-
ences where Feynman presented for the ﬁrst time his ideas and calculations to a
wider public. Jehle pointed out some interesting connections between the path
integral and some of Dirac’s ideas. It is interesting to mention Jehle’s life story
in the present context because it shows that a military family background of a
person is not an insuperable obstacle in the process of recognizing that war is
one of the worst scourges of mankind.

Several physicists among the many scientist refuges from Nazi-occupied Eu-
rope left the Manhattan project and started their anti-nuclear weapon political
work as soon as Nazism was defeated. They realized that even a democratic
system could not provide any guaranty against the use of such weapons of mass
destruction but their inﬂuence was too weak to prevent their use by the po-
litical and military elite in power against civilians1. The nuclear disarmament
activities of physicists as Leo Szilard and Joseph Rotblat (the Nobel peace price
winner of 1995) contributed to an improvement of the public image of scientist
and their moral responsibility.

The theme “physicists in times of war” has gained new topicality as a result
of the US doctrine of preemptive strikes adopted by the Bush administration.
This bellicose ideology has led to the Iraq war which according to all criteria
violates international law; in addition this war contradicts all historical criteria
for the bellum justum, including the prerequisites just war in the sense of Saint
Thomas of Aquin. During the last three years while visiting many universities
in Europe and Brazil I have never met any academic person who, independent
of his political aﬃliation did not consider this as an illegal act. This in part
explains my profound disappointment when some weeks before the invasion of
Iraq my attempts to encourage my US colleagues to start a public anti-war
campaign ended in failure. When Ed Witten informed me that he is actually in
favor of a war for regime change, I painfully realized that I was still living in the
past . Evidently times had changed since my 10 year stay in the US during the
60s. In those days, as a result the cold war situation, there were no noticeable
diﬀerences in opinions on matters of peace and war in academic circles inside
and outside the US. If even somebody as Ed Witten, a champion of moderation
and of just and peaceful solutions of conﬂicts, is a supporter of the US invasion,
1Although the use of the nuclear bomb in Hiroshima and particular in Nagasaki fulﬁlls the
deﬁnition of what constitutes a terroristic act, it is not clear that a mere public demonstra-
tion of its destructive power could have led to a surrender of Japan and in this way saved
civilian lives. It is only in connection with the recent agressive hegemonial policies and the
arrogant unilateralism of the Bush administration and its double standards concerning the
nonproliferation treaty (NPT) that these old episodes again enter the present discussions.

2

the deep split of parts of the US physics community with the rest of the worlds
physics community becomes palpable. There is no satisfaction in pointing out
that the present situation of death, destruction and the still deteriorating chaos
was foreseeable and in fact predicted; because both blindness and hubris as well
as cantankerousness are not human traits one can be proud about.

The inability to see the obvious consequences of such a bellicose act reveals
a state of deep alienation with the rest of the world. There is no question that
the image of the US as a civilized member of the nations of this world has been
seriously damaged by the Iraq war and its present policies. The support these
policies still receives from some governments of Nato member states cannot hide
the fact that the majority of Europeans together with the rest of the world are
deeply disturbed by the US prepotency, hubris and genuine ignorance about the
world outside its borders. The creation of a Guantanamo Gulag, the arrogance
in the hegemonic redeﬁnition of what constitutes torture and kidnapping, the
most degrading and gruesome behavior as an occupation power has led to a
worldwide image in which the US government appears closer to represent some
sort of Nazi-“Wiederg¨anger” than a beacon of western civilization. If its aim
is to loose more sympathies and recruit more enemies, it could not have been
more eﬃcient.

The future scenario of a world-wide battle ﬁeld is already in preparation. A
recent quotation from the Pentagon’s four-yearly strategy review which sets out
a plan for prosecuting what the Pentagon describes in the preface as “The Long
War” (which replaces the ”war on terror”) reads:.

“Long duration, complex operations involving the US military, other gov-
ernment agencies and international partners will be waged simultaneously in
multiple countries round the world, relying on a combination of direct (visible)
and indirect (clandestine) approaches,” the report says. ”Above all they will
require persistent surveillance and vastly better intelligence to locate enemy ca-
pabilities and personnel. They will also require global mobility, rapid strike, sus-
tained unconventional warfare, foreign internal defence, counter-terrorism and
counter-insurgency capabilities. Maintaining a long-term, low-visibility presence
in many areas of the world where US forces do not traditionally operate will be
required.”

A poignant comment which ﬁts such ambitions came from the late Peter

Ustinov:

Terrorism is the war of the poor and war is the terrorism of the rich.
The present situation cannot be explained in terms of a spontaneous reaction
to the 9.11. terrorism. To push the world to the brink of a “war of cultures” is
not possible without the politics based on a culture of war.

It seems that the planners of the ”The Long War” are counting on a cer-
tain apathy of the civil society in the US. Indeed, looking into US media one
gets the impression that even in those publications where the actions of the
Bush administration are criticized the present situation is more thought of in
terms of some neocon nuisance (something to be mentioned in the inner pages
of newspapers, i.e. nothing to really worry about) rather than a worldwide
destabilization, . It is deeply worrisome to see the foundations of the NPT (the

3

nuclear proliferation treaty) and the struggle for nuclear disarmament of sev-
eral generations of physicists (including very prominent US physicists) is in the
process of being wrecked by the present US government. There are ominous
reports about secret activities concerning the construction of a completely new
generations of nuclear weapons. The legal or moral grounds on which the US
will continue its campaign against Teheran if it rewards a country like India
which refused to sign the NPT with nuclear armament and supports the secret
development of its own construction of a new generation of nuclear weapons
is rapidly evaporating. The clear message to the rest of the world is that of
ﬂagrant double standards; the hegemon deﬁnes his own rules and coerces the
others into obeying the existing ones (if deemed necessary even with military
threats). To understand the bad anti-US feelings this creates in the world it is
not necessary to create an extra government fact ﬁnding position for to study
and combat this phenomenon.

The idea that out of a sudden an unpleasant government with a disgusting
point of view comes to power may be convenient in avoiding to confront the
situation, but it is quite far from reality. Such changes rarely happen suddenly,
they need many smaller steps; a nation with a strong democratic traditions as
the US does not suddenly change into the role of an apologist or revisionist of
torture and kidnapping. Between its crucial role as one of the liberators of Eu-
rope and the present inglorious situation of having destroyed a country (which
against better knowledge it insinuated to be implicated in the twin tower mas-
sacre), killed an innumerable number of its citizens and permitted the pillaging
of their heritage, there are many episodes in which its soul got lost, every time
a bit more.

There are the many coups against democratically elected governments in the
Americas and the support of dictators as Samoza and Pinochet and that of death
squads in Nicaragua, San Salvador and Guatemala, the support of right-wing
paramilitary responsible for the assassination of Bishop Romero, the “collateral
damage” of several thousand killed civilians in the capture of Noriega in Panama
City, the mining of Nicaraguan harbours, the ﬁnancing of torture schools where
most of the Latin American torturers who served the US supported military
dictatorships learned their bloody trade, and last not least the CIA ﬁnancing of
the Ben Laden led Al Kaida terrorist base during the time when they directed
their throat-cutting terror against the red army in Afghanistan. As long as the
US had to contain another superpower whose methods in controlling its hemi-
sphere of inﬂuence were even worse, these discrepancies between the democratic
ideal and the undemocratic practice were irritating because they were caused
by the governments of a country which sees itself as a bulwark of freedom and
democracy. With the vanishing of the Soviet Union and the recent ascend of
the neo-conservative right in the US the situation changed completely. Double
standards with respect to the world outside the US and the substitution of the
force of the law by the law of force became the hall-mark of a neo-imperialist
unilateralism, of which the armed raid and occupation of the Iraq is the ﬁrst
bloody act with new threats already in the wing. Whereas in previous times
aggressive wars were usually started by regimes which also had a dictatorial

4

grip on power over their own population, the new situation shows that under
certain conditions democracy inside a country can coexist with criminal actions
outside its borders. In order to minimize such inconsistencies it is important to
redeﬁne certain notions of what constitutes torture (→rigorous interrogation)
and kidnapping (→rendition) in case the US government deals with foreigners
who it decides to consider as enemy combatants outside any legal protection. It
is a privilege of a hegemon to be able to do this, he only has to make sure that
his own population excepts the new deﬁnitions, the compatibility with interna-
tional law and human rights is irrelevant. Just imagine the consequences if an
US citizen would be kidnapped by a foreign secret service and ﬂown to another
country!

The present situation begs the question why the tradition of western civi-
lization and democracy is not a reliable safeguard against policies which lead to
death and destruction. Limiting one’s attention to the present disastrous poli-
cies of the worlds superpower is a too narrow Ansatz, for a profound insight it
would be necessary to embark into a critical analysis of modernity. The central
problem and the key to many other human calamities has been to understand
what civilisatory defect of modernity has led to Auschwitz. Attempts to relate
this and other calamities of mankind to a special national characters or intrinsic
badness of certain ethnic groups have shown to be a blind allay. The present
attempts of Bush and the neocons to divide people into the good guys (naturally
we) and bad guys (the others) shows that demagoguery does not stop at the
doors of democracy. We are living in a world where the oppressed of yesterday
cannot rely on a special protection against becoming the oppressors of today.

A more realistic attempt to understand this problem is to look at human na-
ture and realize that we are burdened with a potentially dangerous legacy which
we all share. Below a layer of civilization there are much older subconscious re-
gions of our brain which were important for our survival before we reached the
homo sapiens state, but which by irrational intrusions within the enlightened
rational parts of our civilized conscious may become activated and unfold its de-
structive power. Most religions have created strong tabus and commandments
against these dangerous potentialities; the Judeo-Christian-Muslim concept of
humans as fallible and sin-prone creatures is a recognition of the problem. But
in situations of unexpected danger and great social upheavals these taboos may
loose their force and people succumb to the hypnotic spell of demagogic lead-
ers. The most diﬃcult problem in avoiding human catastrophes is to strike a
delicate balance between upholding strong taboos at times when a situation is
running out of control (with the obligation to call a spade a spade) and the
comprehension afterwards that we are dealing with a general problem of the
human condition which a priori has no special relation to a particular nation,
race or culture. In relation to the problem at hand, a fundamental critique of
present neocon US policies does not constitute anti-Americanism but the alle-
gation that US-Americans have an uncorrectable craving for world-dominating
certainly would do just that.

Here the meticulous avoidance of double standards is essential. To give an
illustration how double standards have entered our everyday life one only has

5

to look at laws punishing anti-Semitism in some European countries. After
the holocaust rigorous laws have been introduced especially in Germany and
Austria (correct so), but to publish or re-print defamatory cartoons and state-
ments against the semitic majority of Arabs and Islam is protected under the
freedom of expression law (not so correct); the recent problem with anti-Arab
and anti-Muslim cartoons could have been avoided by extending the existing
laws against all kinds of defamations. Double standards actually do not prevent
anti-Semitism, in fact they are probably making an existent problem worse.

When we see the mass psychosis channeled through choreographed mass
events in e.g. old Nazi ﬁlms, we ﬁnd it hard to believe that our fellow human
beings in the past really acted in this way. Performances in the style of Mussolini
and Hitler appear to us outright ridiculous and chaplinesque and we seem to
be immune against that kind of racial ideology and propaganda for wars of
territorial extensions and domination of other races and cultures. The ascend
of the neoconservatives in the US with their fascist doctrine of preemptive wars
shows however that the belief that a democratic way of organizing society alone
can eliminate this problem is a delusion. The economic and military hegemon
only needs the support of big business, patriotic or submissive media at the start
of the war and an apathetic public; neocolonialism and high-tech wars do not
need fanatic masses. Democracy does not make the world less dangerous but at
least there is the chance of mistakes being corrected, as long as the democratic
will is not paralyzed by fear or stiﬂed by emergency laws.

It is not possible to avoid wars and stop production of weapons of mass
destruction without creating strong rules and taboos. But they are without
moral strength if their enforcement leads to double standards. The times when
physicists were in the forefront of the struggle for a world without nuclear arms
are long gone.

Perhaps the most important contribution to a post Auschwitz fundamental
analysis of modernity comes from the writings of Theodor Adorno [2]. The
part which is relevant for arts and sciences is his “Dialectics of Enlightenment”
(with Max Horkheimer), his later essays on “Kant’s criticism of pure reason”
as well as on “Negative Dialectics”2. Faced with the unfolding events of the
Holocaust in 1947, the work “Dialectics of Enlightenment” begins with the
following remarkable passage:

Enlightenment, understood in the widest sense as the advance of thought,
has always aimed at liberating human beings from fear and installing them as
masters. Yet the wholly enlightened earth is radiant with triumphant calamity.
Adorno’s focal point is the mechanism by which rationality and enlighten-
ment can turn into irrationality. He illustrates his ideas mainly in arts and
philosophy.

An essay about physicists and wars would suﬀer from a serious omission
without mentioning an eminent historical ﬁgure who has become the tragic
2These writings had an enormous impact on the postwar philosophy and sociology in Ger-
many but (probably because they use all the resources of the German language and philosophy)
they have not played a comperable role in the anglo-saxon cultural sphere.

6

epitome of a scientists support of wars of aggression. I am thinking here of Pas-
cual Jordan who was together with Born and Heisenberg one of the discoverers
of quantum theory and the main protagonist of quantum ﬁeld theory. As a
result of his bellicose and nationalistic stance he took right after the ﬁrst world
war against the treaty of Versailles, he entangled himself very much with the
Nazi ideology. As a true believer in Heraklit’s dictum “war is the father of all
things” he defended the idea that without what he considered as the cleansing
eﬀect of war, mankind is condemned to stagnation. This and his conviction
that the “Bolshevist peril” had to be eradicated drove him into the arms of the
Nazis. This ideological support remained one-sided since they never rewarded
his backing by rewarded him with a leading position in their weapons research
program as they did in many other cases. During the 30’s, after the Nazis took
power, he became increasingly isolated even within the German physics com-
munity. His publications (mainly in Zeitschrift fuer Physik3) did not receive the
same attention as his earlier papers when he still had close scientiﬁc contacts
with Born, Heisenberg, Pauli, Wigner, Klein and von Neumann. This explains
why several important contributions by Jordan which were ahead of times4 went
unnoticed. Illustrating the topic “physicists in times of war” with a controver-
sial ﬁgure from the past may lack the tension caused by witnessing an ongoing
human tragedy, but as a result of the large distance in time, the context and
the motives for a particular belligerent behavior appear in a clearer light and
are less subject to future revisions.

Jordan’s life is well-documented and serves as an interesting illustration that
even a brilliant independent scientiﬁc mind is not protected against adopting
an antihuman destructive political position. After the war he found himself
in a situation of a damaged reputation having lost the support of most of his
former friends and colleagues. This led to the unique and somewhat anomalous
situation that the co-discoverer of quantum mechanics and the protagonist of
quantum ﬁeld theory was ignored by the Nobel prize committee; instead Pascual
Jordan became the tragic “unsung hero of quantum ﬁeld theory” [3][4].

This essay continues with a short presentation of Jordan’s interesting biog-
raphy with emphasis on those points which are relevant to the theme of this
essay.

3In the words of Peter Bergmann, a publication in Z. f. Ph. after 1934 was tantamount to

a ﬁrst class burial.

4E.g. the conﬁrmation of magnetic monopole quantization by a pure algebraic argument
(using the formalism of exponential line integrals which he introduced shortly before) and the
observation of the two-dimensional Bosonization/Fermionization.

7

2 The case of Pascual Jordan, how the protag-
onist of quantum ﬁeld theory got himself en-
tangled with the NS-regime

There are not many physicists in whose biography the contradictions of human
existence, the proximity of glorious scientiﬁc achievements and disturbing hu-
man weaknesses in the face of the great catastrophe of the 20th century, are as
starkly reﬂected as in the personality of Pascual Jordan5.

Born on October 18, 1902 in Hannover of mixed German-Spanish ancestry,
he became (starting at age 22) a main architect of the conceptual and math-
ematical foundations of quantum theory and the protagonist of quantum ﬁeld
theory. Pascual Jordan owes his Spanish name to his great grandfather Pascual
Jorda, who came from the Alcoy branch (southern Spain) of the noble Jorda
family with a genealogy which can be traced back to the 9th century. After
the British-Spanish victory of Wellington over Napoleon, the family patriarch
Pascual Jorda settled in Hannover where he continued his service to the British
crown as a member of the “Koeniglich-Grossbritannisch-Hannoverschen Garde-
Husaren Regiments” until 1833. Every ﬁrst-born son of the Jordan (the n was
added later) clan was called Pascual [5].

There is no doubt that Pascual Jordan took the lead in the formulation of
the conceptual and mathematical underpinnings of “Matrix Mechanics” in his
important paper together with Max Born [6] submitted on 27. September 1925
(3 months after the submission of Heisenberg’s pivotal paper!) entitled “Zur
Quantenmechanik”. His mathematical preparation, particularly in the area of
algebra, was superb. He had taken courses at the G¨ottingen mathematics de-
partment from Richard Courant and became his assistant (helping in particular
on the famous Courant-Hilbert book on mathematical methods in physics);
through Courant he got to know Hilbert before he met the 20 year older Max
Born, the director of the theoretical physics department of the G¨ottingen uni-
versity. By that time Jordan already had gained his physics credentials as a
co-author of a book which he was writing at that time together with James
Franck [7].

After Max Born obtained Heisenberg’s manuscript, he tried to make sense
of the new quantum objects introduced therein. While he had the right intu-
ition about their relation to matrices, he felt that it would be a good idea to
look for a younger collaborator with a strong mathematics background. After
Pauli rejected his proposal (he even expressed some reservations that Born’s
more mathematically inclined program could stiﬂe Heisenberg’s powerful phys-
ical intuition), Jordan volunteered to collaborate in this problem [8][9]. Within
a matter of days he conﬁrmed that Born’s conjecture was indeed consistent.
The Born-Jordan results made Heisenberg’s ideas more concrete. Probably as
a consequence of the acoustic similarity of pq with Pascual, the younger mem-
5The original title “Pascual Jordan, Glory and...” has been changed since although the
birth of quantum theory represents one of the most glorious epochs in physics, Jordan himself
remained “the unsung hero” among the creators of that theory [3].

8

bers of the physics department (the protagonists of the “Knabenphysik”) in
their discussions often called it the Jordan relation. Max Born became Jordan’s
mentor in physics. Jordan always maintained the greatest respect for Born
which withstood all later political and ideological diﬀerences.

The year 1925 was a bright start for the 22-year-old Jordan. After the
submission of the joint work with Max Born on matrix mechanics, in which the
p-q commutation relation appeared for the ﬁrst time, there came the famous
”Dreimaennerarbeit”[10] with Born and Heisenberg in November of the same
year6, only to conclude the year’s harvest with a paper by him alone on the
“Pauli statistics”. Jordan’s manuscript contained what is nowadays known as
the Fermi-Dirac statistics; however it encountered an extremely unfortunate
fate after its submission because it landed on the bottom of one of Max Born’s
suitcases (in his role as one of the editors of the Zeitschrift fuer Physik) on the eve
of an extended lecture tour to the US, where it remained for about half a year.
When Born discovered this mishap, the papers of Dirac and Fermi were already
in the process of being published. In the words of Max Born [11][12] a quarter
of a century later: ”I hate Jordan’s politics, but I can never undo what I did to
him......When I returned to Germany half a year later I found the paper on the
bottom of my suitcase. It contained what one calls nowadays the Fermi-Dirac
statistics. In the meantime it was independently discovered by Enrico Fermi
and Paul Dirac. But Jordan was the ﬁrst”7. In Jordan’s subsequent papers,
including those with other authors such as Eugene Wigner and Oscar Klein, it
was always referred to as “Pauli statistics” because for Jordan it resulted from
a straightforward algebraization of Pauli’s exlusion principle.

From later writings of Born and Heisenberg we also know that Jordan con-
tributed the sections on the statistical mechanics (or rather kinetic gas theory)
consequences to the joint papers on matrix mechanics. This is not surprising
since the main point in his 1924 PhD thesis was the treatment of photons accord-
ing to Planck’s distribution whereas thermal aspects of matter were described
according to Boltzmann. He continued this line of research by introducing the
“Stosszahlansatz” for photons and using for electrons and atoms the Bose statis-
tics [13]8 which brought praise as well as criticism by Einstein’s and led to an
unfortunately largely lost correspondence. In the following we will continue to
mention his scientiﬁc contributions in the biographical context and reserve a
more detailed account about their scientiﬁc content to the next section.

The years 1926/27 were perhaps the most important years in Jordan’s career
in which he succeeded to impress his peers with works of astonishing original-
6Appearantly while writing up the last section on the oscillator description of radiation,
Jordan already had set his thoughts on the more daring generalization of quantizing nonrel-
ativistic matter ψ waves for the only purpose to quantize them. It apparently did not occur
to him that what he thought to be a classical theory was in fact Schr¨odinger’s formulation
of QM [4]. For some time his colleagues did not accept that something which was already a
quantum theory should be subjected to a second quantization.

7In a correspondence with Stanley Deser, Stanley added a light Near East touch by re-
marking that without Max Born’s faux pas the Fermions would have been called “Jordanons”.
8This paper was submitted simultaneously with another paper in which Jordan coined the

term “Pauli-Principle”; but the relation to statistics was only seen later.

9

ity. The key words are Transformation Theory [14][15] and Canonical Anti-
Commutation Relations [16]. With these discoveries he established himself as
the friendly competitor of Dirac on the continental side of the channel and in
its printed form one ﬁnds an acknowledgment of Dirac‘s manuscript9. As an
interesting sideline, one notes that in a footnote at the beginning of Jordan’s
paper about transformation theory Jordan mentions a “very clear and transpar-
ent treatment” of the same problem in a manuscript by Fritz London, a paper
which he received after completing his own work and which was published in
[17]. This statement of Jordan’s was not just the standard modesty of those
days, but really the truth. A glance into this largely overlooked paper conﬁrms
Jordan’s high praise; London’s version of transformation theory was by far the
most cleare and advanced of the three presentations of transformation theory10.
Most physicists are more familiar with Dirac’s notation (as the result of his
very inﬂuential textbook whose ﬁrst edition appeared in 1930). Jordan’s most
seminal contribution is perhaps his 1927 discovery of “Quantization of Wave
Fields” which marks the birth of QFT.

Pascual Jordan was brought up in a traditional religious surrounding. At
the age of 12 he apparently went through a soul-searching fundamentalist period
(not uncommon for a bright youngster who tries to come to terms with rigid tra-
ditions) in which he wanted to uphold a literal interpretation of the bible against
the materialistic Darwinism (which he experienced as a ”qu¨alendes Aergernis”,
a painful calamity), but his more progressive teacher of religion convinced him
that there is basically no contradiction between religion and the sciences. This
then became a theme which accompanied him throughout his life; he wrote
many articles and presented innumerable talks on the subject of religion and
science.

At the times of the great discoveries in quantum ﬁeld theory many of his
colleagues thought that the treaty of Versailles was unjust and endangered the
young Weimar Republic, but Jordan’s political inclination went far beyond and
became increasingly nationalistic and right-wing. These were of course not
very good prerequisites for resisting the temptations of the NS movement, in
particular since the conservative wing of the protestant church (to which he
adhered11) started to support Hitler in the 30’s; in fact the behavior of both of
the traditional churches during the NS regime belongs to their darkest chapters.
Hitler presented his war of aggression as a divine mission and considered himself
as an instrument of God’s predestination (g¨ottliche Vorsehung), while almost
9In those days papers were presented in a factual and very courteous style; however verbal
discussions and correspondences were sometimes more direct and less amiable (e.g. see some
published letters of Pauli [8][3]).

10One usually links London’s name with his work on the hydrogen molecule and his studies
of superconductivity theory and overlooks his brilliant contributions to mathematical physics.
He was the ﬁrst physicist who introduced Hilbert spaces into quantum mechanics and he had
the clearest vision about the involved operators (which he called “rotations in Hilbert space“)
and the equivalence between Heisenberg’s and Schr¨odinger’s formulations [17].

11The oldest son of the family patriarch Pascual Jorda was brought up in the Lutheran faith
of his foster mother, whereas all the other children born within that marriage were raised in
the Catholic faith.

10

all Christian churches were silent or even supportive.

Already in the late 20s Jordan published articles [12] (under a pseudonym)
of an aggressive and bellicose stance in journals dedicated to the spirit of Ger-
man Heritage; a characteristic ideology of right-wing people up to this day if
one looks at the present-day heritage foundations and their political power in
the US. It is unclear to what degree his more cosmopolitan academic peers in
G¨ottingen knew about these activities. He considered the October revolution
and the founding of the Soviet Union as extremely worrisome developments.
One reason why Jordan succumbed to the NS-lure was perhaps the idea that he
could inﬂuence the new regime; his most bizarre project in this direction was
to convince the party leaders that modern physics, as represented by Einstein
and especially the new Copenhagen brand of quantum theory, was the best an-
tidote against the “materialism of the Bolsheviks”. This explains perhaps why
he joined NS organisations at an early date when there was yet no pressure to
do so [18]. In fact he apparently thought that he could establish a link between
“the new order” of the NS state and the strange counterintuitive dynamics of
the Copenhagen interpretation and its new conquest of reality [19]. Among all
attempts to carry the power of the new quantum physics beyond its range of
validity, this was certainly the most bizarre.

He of course failed in his attempts; despite verbal support12 he gave to their
nationalistic and bellicose propaganda and even despite their very strong anti-
communist and anti-Soviet stance with which he fully agreed, the anti-semitism
of the Nazis did not permit such a viewpoint since they considered Einstein’s
relativity and the modern quantum theory with its Copenhagen interpretation
as incompatible with their anti-semitic propaganda; one can also safely assume
that the intense collaboration with his Jewish colleagues made him appear less
than trustworthy in the eyes of the regime.

Jordan’s career during the NS time ended practically in scientiﬁc isolation
at the small university of Rostock (his promotion to ﬁll von Laue’s position in
Berlin in 1944 was too late for a new start); he never received beneﬁts for his
pro-NS convictions and the sympathy remained one-sided. Unlike the math-
ematician Teichmueller, whose rabid anti-semitism led to the emptying of the
G¨ottingen mathematics department, Jordan inﬂicted the damage mainly on
himself. The Nazis welcomed his verbal support, but he always remained a
somewhat suspicious character to them. As a result he was not called upon to
participate in war-related projects (as e.g. the uranium project) and spent most
of those years in scientiﬁc isolation. This is somewhat surprising in view of the
fact that Jordan, like nobody else, tried to convince the NS regime that funda-
mental research should receive more support because of its potential weapons-
related applications; in these attempts he came closer to a “star wars” propa-
gandist of the Nazis than Heisenberg who headed the German uranium program
but never joined the party.

Jordan’s party membership and his radical verbal support in several articles
12In contrast to Heisenberg he did not directly work on any armament project but rather

did most of his military service as a meteorologist.

11

got him into trouble after the war. For two years he was without any work and
even after his re-installment as a university professor he had to wait until 1953
for the reinstatement of his full rights (e.g. to advise PhD candidates). When
his friend and colleague Wolfgang Pauli asked him after the war: “Jordan, how
could you write such things?” Jordan retorted: “Pauli, how could you read
such a thing?” Without Heisenberg’s and Pauli’s help he would not have been
able to pass through the process of de-naziﬁcation (in the jargon of those days
Jordan got a “Persilschein”, i.e. a whitewash paper) and afterwards to be re-
installed as a university professor. In Pauli’s acerbic way of dealing with such
problems: “Jordan is in the possession of a pocket spectrometer by which he
is able to distinguish intense brown from a deep red”. “Jordan served every
regime trustfully” is another of Pauli’s comments. Pauli recommended Jordan
for a position at the University of Hamburg and he also suggested that he should
keep away from politics and rather worry about his pension.

Jordan did not heed Pauli’s advice for long; during the time of Konrad Ade-
nauer and the big debates about the re-armament of West Germany he became
a CDU member of parliament. His speech problem (he sometimes fell into a
stuttering mode which was quite painful for people who were not accustomed
to him) prevented him from becoming a scientiﬁc ﬁgurehead of the CDU party.
At that time of the re-armament issue there was a manifesto by the “G¨ottingen
18” which was signed by all the famous names of the early days of the univer-
sity of G¨ottingen quantum theory, including Max Born. Jordan immediately
wrote a counter article with the CDU party’s blessing, in which he severely
criticized the 18 and claimed that by their action they endangered world peace
and stability. Max Born felt irritated by Jordan’s article, but he did not react
in public against Jordan’s opinion. What annoyed him especially were Jordan’s
attempts to disclaim full responsibility for his article by arguing that some of
the misunderstandings resulted from the fact that it was written in a hurry. But
Born’s wife Hedwig exposed her anger in a long letter to Jordan in which she
blamed him for “deep misunderstanding of fundamental issues”. She quoted
excerpts from Jordan’s books and wrote: ”Reines Entsetzen packt mich, wenn
ich in Ihren B¨uchern lese, wie da menschliches Leid abgetan wird” (pure horror
overcomes me when I read in your books how human suﬀering is taken lightly).
Immediately after this episode she collected all of Jordan’s political writings
and published them under the title: “Pascual Jordan, Propagandist im Sold der
CDU” (Pascual Jordan, propagandist in the pay of the CDU) in the Deutsche
Volkszeitung.

In the middle of the twenties the authors of the “Dreimaennerarbeit” were
proposed twice for the Nobel prize by Einstein, but understandably the support
for Jordan dwindled after the war. Nevertheless, in 1979 it was his former
colleague and meanwhile Nobel prize laureate Eugene Wigner who proposed
him. But at that time the Nobel committee was already considering second
generation candidates associated with the second phase of QFT which started
after the war with perturbative renormalization theory; there was hardly any
topic left of the ﬁrst pioneering phase which was not already taken into account
in previous awards. Jordan did however receive several other honors, including

12

the Max-Planck-medal of the German Physical Society.

Although Jordan took (along with the majority of German physicists) a
strong position against those supporting the racist “German Physics”13 and in
this way contributed to their downfall, he defended bellicose and nationalis-
tic positions and he certainly supported Hitler’s war of aggression against the
“Bolshevik peril”. The fact that he was a traditional religious person and that
several of the leading bishops in the protestant church were pro Hitler had ev-
idently a stronger eﬀect on him than his friendship with his Jewish colleagues,
who by that time had mostly left Germany (in some cases he tried to maintain
a link through correspondence).

In contrast to Pauli who contributed to the second post war phase of QFT
and always followed the ﬂow of ideas in QFT up to his early death, Jordan’s
active participation in QFT stopped around the middle of the 30s and it seems
that he did not follow the continuing development in that area. He turned his
attention to more mathematical and conceptual problems as well as to biology
[20] and psychology. His enduring interest in psychology was presumably related
to the psychological origins of his stuttering handicap which prevented him from
using his elegant writing style in discussions with his colleagues and communi-
cations with a wider audience (one should keep in mind that people at that time
had lesser tolerance with physical and psychic handicaps); this perhaps explains
in part why even in the physics community of the 30s his contributions are not
as well known as they deserve to be. In fact this handicap even threatened his
Habilitation (which was a necessary step for an academic career) in G¨ottingen.
Jordan was informed by Franck (with whom he had coauthored a book) that
Niels Bohr14 had arranged a small amount of money for Jordan which was to
be used for getting some cure of his speech problem. Wilhelm Lenz (whose
assistant Jordan was for a short time after Pauli left) suggested to go to the
famous psychologist Adler. Jordan went to Vienna, but we only know that he
attended a lecture of Schr¨odinger and criticized his wave mechanics from the
G¨ottingen point of view; there is no record of meetings with Adler.

His increasing withdrawal from the mainstream of quantum ﬁeld theory and
particle physics in the 30s may have partially been the result of his frustration
that his inﬂuence on the NS regime was not what he had expected. After the
defeat of Germany in 1945 his attempts to account for his membership in the
Nazi party as well as the diﬃcult task to make a living with the weight of his
past NS sympathies (which cost him his position as a university professor for the
ﬁrst two years after the war) seriously impeded his scientiﬁc activities, although
there is no indication that he was antisemitic (his naive attempts to inﬂuence
the NS regime to accept the work of Einstein and the Copenhagen view of QM
13It was Jordan’s opinion that nationalistic and racist views had no place in science; in
his own bellicose style of ridicule (in this case especially directed against nationalistic and
racist stance of the mathematician Bieberbach): “The diﬀerences among German and French
mathematics are not any more essential than the diﬀerences between German and French
machine guns”.

14One also should keep in mind that the interest in psychology became a “fashion” among

the Copenhagen physicists (notably Bohr and Pauli).

13

shows however that he was not able or did not want to see the true nature of
that regime).

Unlike the majority of the German population, for which the early Allied
re-education eﬀort (which was abandoned after a few years) to rid society of
aggressive militaristic and racist ideas was a huge success so that the subsequent
change of US policy in favor of re-armament of West Germany ran into serious
opposition during the Adenauer period, Jordan did not completely abandon his
militaristic and rightwing outlook. In the 50s he joined the CDU, a party which
was closer to his opinions, thus ignoring Pauli’s admonitions in favor of political
abstinence. Bellicose ideas and apologetic positions with respect to wars of
aggressions were not totally uncommon between Jordan’s contemporaries. For
the post second world war generations statements like ”a war is the normal way
to accomplish something new in history” (Jordan) hopefully did not loose any
of its outrageous content as a result that point of views like this recently led
some democratically elected governments into what they euphemistically called
a preemptive war. However it is also true that among all physicists who put
their knowledge at the disposition of martial applications, Jordan was probably
the most ineﬃcient contributor.

All the protagonists of those pioneering days of quantum physics have been
commemorated in centennials except Pascual Jordan who, as the result of the
history we have described, apparently remained a somewhat “sticky” problem
despite Pauli’s intercession by stating “it would be incorrect for West Germany
to ignore a person like P. Jordan”. His postwar scientiﬁc activities consisted
mainly in creating and arranging material support (by grants from Academies
and Industry as well as from the US Air-force) for a very successful group of
highly motivated and talented young researchers in the area of General Relativ-
ity who became internationally known (Engelbert Schuecking, Juergen Ehlers,..)
and attracted famous visitors especially from Peter Bergmann’s group (Rainer
Sachs,....). .

Jordan died in 1980 (while working on his pet theory of gravitation with
a time-dependent gravitational coupling); his post war work never reached the
level of the papers from those glorious years 1925-1930 or his subsequent rather
deep pre-war mathematical physics contributions. In the words of Silvan Schwe-
ber in his history of quantum electrodynamics, Jordan became the “unsung
hero” of a glorious epoch of physics which led to the demise of one of its main
architects.

It is however fair to note that with the exception of Max Born, Jordan’s
other collaborators, especially von Neumann and Wigner, shared the bellicose
kind of anti-communism (in their case it probably had its roots in their expe-
rience with the radical post World War I Bela Kuhn regime in the Hungarian
part of the decaying Habsburg empire). Wigner later became an ardent de-
fender of the Vietnam war. Although Jordan’s early right wing anti-communist
views apparently posed no friction during the time of his collaboration with
Wigner and von Neumann up to 1936; his membership in the Nazi party ﬁnally
damaged that relation. Nevertheless Wigner was one of the few of Jordan’s con-
temporaries who, after receiving the Nobel prize in 1963 (together with Maria

14

Goeppert-Mayer and Hans Daniel Jensen) supported the idea to honor Jordan’s
epoch-changing contributions to quantum physics notwithstanding his political
and human errors.

References

[1] Tribute

to

Professor

Emeritus

Herbert

Jehle,

http://www.gwu.edu/˜physics/jehle.htm

[2] Theodor Adorno, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia

[3] S. S. Schweber, QED and the men who made it; Dyson, Feynman,

Schwinger and Tomonaga, Princeton University Press 1994

[4] O. Darrigol, The origin of quantized matter ﬁelds, Hist. Stud. Phys. Sci.

16/2, 198

(1925) 858

[5] A. Ehlers, Biographical notes about P. Jordan, unpublished

[6] M. Born and P. Jordan, Zur Quantenmechanik, Zeitschr. f¨ur Physik 34,

[7] J. Franck and P. Jordan, Anregung von Quantenspr¨ungen durch Stoesse,

Springer Berlin 1926

[8] A. Pais, Inward Bound, Clarendon Press, Oxford University Press 1986

[9] M. Jammer, The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics,

McGraw-Hill 1966

f¨ur Physik 35, (1926) 557

1975, page 301

[10] M. Born, W. Heisenberg and P. Jordan, Zur Quantenmechanik II, Zeitschr.

[11] M. Born, Mein Leben, Nymphenburger Verlagsbuchhandlung, M¨unchen

[12] E. Sch¨ucking, Jordan, Pauli, Politics, Brecht, and a Variable Gravitational

Constant, Physics Today October 1999, page 26-31

[13] P. Jordan, ¨Uber das thermische Gleichgewicht zwischen Quantenatomen

und Hohlraumstrahlung, Zeitschr. f¨ur Physik 33, (1925) 649

[14] P. Jordan, ¨Uber eine neue Begr¨undung der Quantenmechamik, Zeitschr. f¨ur

Physik 40, (1926) 809

[15] P. Jordan, Anmerkung zur statistischen Deutung der Quantenmechanik,

Zeitschr. f¨ur Physik 41, (1927) 797

[16] P. Jordan, Zur Quantenmechanik der Gasentartung, Zeitschr. f¨ur Physik

44, (1927) 473

15

[17] F. London, Zeitschr. f¨ur Physik 40, (1926) 193

[18] Matthew Norton Wise, Pascual Jordan: quantum mechanics, psychol-
ogy, National Socialism, in: Science, Technology and National Socialism,
Monika Renneberg, Mark Walker (eds.), Cambridge 1994, 224-254

[19] J. Cornwell, Hitler’s Scientists: Science3, War and the Devil’s Pact, Viking

N4 2000

[20] Richard H. Beyler, : Targeting the organism. The scientiﬁc and cultural
context of Pascual Jordan’s quantum biology, 1932-1947, Isis, 87 (1996) 248

16

