6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
4
1
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Pair Formation within Multi-Agent
Populations ⋆

David M.D. Smith, Neil F. Johnson

Physics Department, Clarendon Laboratory, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PU, U.K.

Abstract

We present a simple model for the formation of pairs in multi-agent populations of
type A and B which move freely on a spatial network. Each agent of population
A (and B) is labeled as Ai (and Bj) with i = 1, . . . , NA (and j = 1, . . . , NB)
and carries its own individual list of characteristics or ‘phenotype’. When agents
from opposite populations encounter one another on the network, they can form a
relationship if not already engaged in one. The length of time for which any given
pair stays together depends on the compatibility of the two constituent agents.
Possible applications include the human dating scenario, and the commercial domain
where two types of businesses A and B have members of each type looking for a
business partner, i.e. Ai + Bj → Rij. The pair Rij then survives for some ﬁnite time
before dissociating Rij → Ai + Bj. There are many possible generalizations of this
basic setup. Here we content ourselves with some initial numerical results for the
simplest of network topologies, together with some accompanying analytic analysis.

Key words: Agents, competition, networks, search, populations, dynamics
PACS: 01.75.+m, 02.50.Le, 05.65.+b, 87.23.Ge

1 Introduction

The formation of pairs or ‘relationships’ between members of two distinct
populations, is a phenomenon which is of central importance in a number of
application domains: from animal and human societies through to commerce
and politics. Here we consider a simple yet highly non-trivial model of such a

⋆ We thank EPSRC (U.K.) for funding though grant EP/D001382, and the Euro-
pean Union for funding under the MMCOMNET programme.

Email addresses: david.smith@lincoln.ox.ac.uk (David M.D. Smith),

n.johnson@physics.ox.ac.uk (Neil F. Johnson).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

2 February 2008

dynamical process, in which we allow such pairs to form and break up based
on an appropriate measure of their mutual compatibility. Although there are
many possible variations and generalizations according to the particular real-
world system of interest, we content ourselves here with an analysis of the
basic model itself, both numerically and analytically.

Speciﬁcally, we consider a system comprising two populations A and B. Pop-
ulation A contains NA agents, while population B contains NB agents. All
agents are assumed to be able to move freely on a network. In future work,
we will explore the eﬀects of speciﬁc network topologies which are designed to
mimic the real-world social/business space within which such agents move, for
example scale-free or small-world networks [5]. However in the present paper,
we focus on results which are either generic to all networks or which hold for
a speciﬁc simple network.

As the agents move on the network, they will interact with each other on a
given timestep if they happen to ﬁnd themselves on the same node. Members
of each population wish to form a pair or ‘relationship’ with a member of the
other population. We allow the members of each population to have their own
list of characteristics (or equivalently, preference list or ‘phenotype’). Upon
ﬁnding each other, a given pair will stay together a ﬁnite amount of time
which depends on the similarity of their respective lists – this mimics a rela-
tionship whose duration depends on the relative compatibility of the individual
agents comprising the pair. In other words, Ai + Bj → Rij where the pair Rij
survives for some ﬁnite time before dissociating Rij → Ai + Bj. The goal of
each individual is to maximize the time it spends in a partnership. One inter-
esting application is in the human dating scenario comprising the two distinct
populations (male and female) where members of each sex are looking for a
partner with which to form a relationship.

The layout of the paper is as follows: Section 2 gives further details of the
model. Section 3 provides the main results while Section 4 presents the con-
clusions. We ﬁnd numerically that there is a highly non-linear relationship
between expected utility, the threshold for formation of a relationship, and
the degree of sophistication of the individual agents. In order to explain this
ﬁnding, we develop an analytic theory which depends on the average period
of time which an agent spends in a pair and the probability of ﬁnding a
suitable partner on the network. The agreement between the analytic results
and the numerical calculations is good, despite the fact that this problem is
more complicated than standard reaction-diﬀusion problems – in particular,
our particles (i.e. agents) have non-trivial internal degrees of freedom deriving
from their preference lists. Ae mentioned above, we focus here on a basic ver-
sion of the model although the analysis should be generalizable to any single
component network within which the agents explore.

2

Before proceeding, we comment on the diﬀerence between the present model
and the so-called ‘stable marriage problem’ [2,3]. The latter has been inves-
tigated many times in the literature, typically using a Nash Equilibrium ap-
proach to optimize the local utilities of two lists of agents which are looking
to pair up. When this equilibrium exists, any change of the state of the sys-
tem caused by an agent altering its choice, results in a worse performance for
that agent [2]. The agents try to minimize their ‘energy’ by marrying someone
who ﬁlls as many of their criteria as possible. However unlike most traditional
stable marriage analysis, we will not look at minimizing the system’s ‘energy’
[3] as a whole – our rationale being that in many real-world systems, there
is no opportunity for exchange of global information in order to optimize the
system. Instead, agents are restricted to interacting with others who occupy
the same node thereby accessing only a subset (albeit dynamic) of the whole
social network. Likewise the timescales required to explore and subsequently
optimize one’s own local utility, are not typically achievable in systems where
agents only exist for a ﬁnite time. Moreover in contrast to recent models of
business formation and/or collapse [4], the local utility of an agent in our
model who is choosing whether or not to enter a partnership, is not based on
the intrinsic value of being instantaneously single – instead it is based on the
expectation of future satisfaction.

2 Model of Pair Dynamics

We consider the agents to be moving freely on a spatial network, with each
individual placed at a random initial location. The agents undergo a random-
walk around this network, occupying a particular site at a given timestep. If
there exist one or more single agents from each population on a given node at a
given timestep, then one or more relationships might form. In particular, each
(single) agent is allowed to interact with one (single) agent chosen randomly
from the members of the opposite population who are currently on that same
site. There is no sense of optimization in this pair-formation process: as in
many real-world scenarios, the agents do not know prior to this interaction
how well-suited a potential partner might be. A pair of agents can only ﬁnd
out their ‘compatibility’ after they have interacted, and this is restricted to
once per timestep. Hence if, for example, there exist more single agents from
population A than from population B on any particular node at a given
timestep, then the number of agents which do not interact at all at that
timestep is given by this excess number of population A agents.

3

We express the compatibility of two agents Ai and Bj as follows 1 :

Cij =

ai · bj + S
2

(1)

where ai and bj are vectors representing the preference lists of agents Ai and
Bj respectively, with elements restricted to ±1, and S is the length of these
lists 2 . The compatibility Cij lies in the region 0 ≤ Cij ≤ S and is equal
to S minus the Hamming distance [7] between the two vectors. We use the
compatibility Cij to prescribe the duration of a relationship between a given
pair, in the case that the pair actually forms. Again this could be generalized to
allow for exogenous perturbations, e.g. subsequently meeting more compatible
partners – but here we shall assume that all relationships last for the assigned
duration. In particular, we here assume that the lifetime of a given pair is a
monotonically increasing function of the compatibility Cij. In principle, such
a lifetime could be generated by making the relationship a dynamic system
whereby each agent calculates a utility associated with the relationship, such as
the Cobb-Douglas [4] utility function – and an agent then chooses to leave the
pair when the descent to some equilibrium falls below some critical threshold.
In the situation whereby a particular single agent is exposed to a random
single agent from the other population, the compatibility will be binomially
distributed, C ǫ Bin(S, 1

2 ) as shown in Fig. 1.

In order to mimic real-world scenarios, we choose a game set-up whereby
agents do not enter a relationship if Cij falls below some critical level which
we call the compatibility threshold τ . The value τ could be allowed to vary
between agents and/or evolve due to past experiences, with the minimum τ
being the critical one in a given potential pair – however in this work we
focus on the case where all agents have the same τ and where τ is time-
independent. The goal of each agent is to maximize its own utility, i.e. the time
it spends in a relationship. The value associated with being in a relationship
in a given timestep is binary (see Fig. 2) with the compatibility then deciding
the duration of the relationship.

1 This deﬁnition of compatibility between agents’ preference lists is similar in con-
struction to the similarity of strategies in Binary Agent Resource games such as
the Minority Game, where strategies are represented by bit-strings of a particular
length. In particular, the similarity of strategies i and j is given by the Hamming
distance [7] between their respective bit-strings [1].
2 This setup could be generalized by assigning each agent a separate set of pref-
erences and attributes. The value assigned to the compatibility of a given pair of
agents, could then be diﬀerent for each agent in that pair. The subsequent pair-
formation rules would need to be modiﬁed to include this feature. We also note that
the notion of beauty could be introduced into the model setup, by biasing how the
preference lists are allocated at the start of the game.

4

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

compatibility C

Fig. 1. The compatibility Cij of two agents which are randomly chosen from popula-
tions A and B respectively, where A and B have uniform ‘phenotype’ distributions
(i.e. the distribution of the randomly allocated preference lists is uniform). For il-
lustration, we have used S = 12.

S  = 12 

)
y
t
i
l
i

b

i
t

a
p
m
o
C
(
b
o
r
P

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

0

U

U

1

0

1

0

in relationship

not in relationship

µ

R

µ

nR

time →

Fig. 2. The (binary) utility associated with an agent being in a relationship.

3 Numerical and Analytic Analysis of Pair Dynamics

Each agent at any given timestep can either be in a relationship (R) or not
in a relationship (nR). The expected utility per unit time for any given agent
can be expressed as the average time spent in a relationship over a given time

5

period, as shown schematically in Fig. 2. This can be written as follows:

U =

µR
µR + µnR

(2)

where µR is the expected duration of a relationship and µnR is the expected
duration of any non-relationship spell – in other words, the expected time
before successfully forging a relationship having started in the nR state. This
result is general and applies to any agent in an arbitrary network. Assuming
random interactions between agents as they wander randomly through the
network, the µR term can be calculated from the distribution of C and the
function D(C), which prescribes the relationship’s duration for a given com-
patibility. For an nR agent, the probability that it will remain in state nR for
a further timestep will be one minus the probability of successfully forging a
relationship. As such, the value µnR is governed by a geometric probability
distribution and can be calculated accordingly:

µnR =

Psuccess(1 − Psuccess)λ λ

(3)

∞

Xλ=0

Here Psuccess is the probability of an nR agent from A or B, interacting with an
nR agent from B or A and successfully forming a relationship. We can rewrite
Psuccess as the probability of interacting with a potential partner Pint and
the probability of successfully forming a relationship once a potential partner
is engaged (i.e. PR). Assuming random interactions, the latter is merely a
summation based upon the compatibilities which would allow a relationship
to happen (given the threshold τ ) and their respective likelihoods. As such,
we can write µR and µnR in terms of Pint and PR:

∞

µnR =

PintPR(1 − PintPR)λ λ

Xλ=0
1 − PintPR
PintPR

=

S
C=τ P (C) D(C)
PR

and

µR =

where

P

S

XC=τ

PR =

P (C) .

(4)

(5)

(6)

We note that the eﬀect of the movements of the agents on any particular
network, is embodied in the probability term Pint. As an example, we consider
the simplest topology of network – one node - and a simple function for the

6

C
S

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

+ β. All agents’ expected interactions are equal
pair lifetime D(C) = α
for this system, hence the mean utility over all agents will be the same and is
given by hUiagents = U. With NA = NB = N, the average time required for
meeting a potential partner by an agent who has been in state nR (because of
failing to overcome the threshold) is unity since NA = NB and all agents are
in the same place. As such, Pint = 1. Substituting Eq. 4 and Eq. 5 into Eq. 2,
the expected utility per timestep averaged over all agents can be written:

hUi =

PRµR
PRµR + 1 − PR

PR =

S

XC=τ

S

C











S

1
2 (cid:19)

(cid:18)

.

The dependence on the threshold τ will become more important for more
sophisticated agents (i.e. higher S and hence longer attribute lists) since the
likelihood of meeting a perfectly compatible agent then becomes low. This
eﬀect can been seen in Fig. 3 which indicates the highly non-linear relationship
between the average utility, the threshold τ and the level of sophistication S.

(7)

S = 5
S=10
S=15
S=20

〉

 

U

 

〈

0.5

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

0.5
τ/S

Fig. 3. The average utility hU i as a function of τ /S. This shows the importance of
τ with increasingly sophisticated populations, i.e. longer attribute lists and hence
larger S. These curves are calculated for a network comprising just a single node,
hence the interaction probability Pint = 1. Also α = 20 and β = 1.

For a more general network structure, we must calculate or infer from numeri-
cal simulations the interaction probability of those agents not in a relationship,
i.e. Pint. This term will depend on the details of how the agents move and the

7

topology of the particular network. It will also be a function of the number of
potential partners available, and hence is linked to the initial number of each
population (NA, NB) and the fraction of these who are currently in a pair. If
the agents are moving randomly on a highly-connected or crowded network,
then the interactions between particular phenotypes will be random. This will
also be true for a situation in which agents forming a pair do not physically
stick to each other, but rather roam independently throughout the lifetime of
that relationship. Under these conditions, P (C) will again be binomially dis-
tributed and the utility of the individual over time can be calculated. Again,
all agents’ expected interactions are equal so hUiagents = U.

We now consider the situation in which the time-averaged number of single
agents from each population on any node is uniform over the entire network.
This would be appropriate to networks where the degree of each node is iden-
tical (e.g. the fully connected graph). Future work will discuss relaxing this
restriction to general topologies. Speciﬁcally, we focus on two regimes: over-
crowded and undercrowded. In the overcrowded situation, there are more po-
tential partners than nodes. As each agent can only test for compatibility once
per timestep, any diﬀerence in the number of agents from each population on
a particular node at a particular time will result in a group which cannot in-
teract with a potential partner. For example, if there are 5 type-A agents and
3 type-B agents in state nR on a particular site, then 2 type-A agents will
not be able to interact with a potential partner. If there are large fractions
of the populations in state nR as compared to the number of nodes, we can
approximate the (binomial) distributions of each population on a particular
site by Normal distributions. For a total of N agents of each population, the
number in state nR will be N(1 − hUi). By integrating over the distribution
of the diﬀerence of nR agents from each population on a particular node, we
can calculate the subsequent expectation number of non-interacting agents.
On a network of n nodes, we can then write the probability of interaction for
a given agent of either population as follows [6]:

Pint = 1 −

1
2

n − 1
πN(1 − hUi) !

 

In the undercrowded regime, the probability of having more than one agent
of a given population on a particular node is small. Hence the probability of a
given agent meeting a potential partner can be described as follows (see Ref.
[6] for details):

(8)

(9)

n − 1

N (1−hU i)

Pint = 1 −

(cid:18)

n (cid:19)

8

These two approximations are only strictly valid in the limits N(1 − hUi) ≫ n
and N(1 − hUi) ≪ n respectively. However, in what follows we will show that
these expressions turn out to be reliable in practice over the wider ranges
N(1 − hUi) ≥ n and N(1 − hUi) ≤ n. Figure 4 shows the values of Pint for the
two ranges, calculated using the two respective expressions. Substituting Eq.

Fig. 4. Analytic results for the interaction probability Pint for the overcrowded and
undercrowded regimes.

9

4 into Eq. 2 yields the expected utility for agents in this type of network:

hUi =

µR
µR + 1−PintPR
PintPR

.

(10)

Comparison of Eq. 10 to the expressions for Pint (Eq. 8 and Eq. 9) results
in two sets of simultaneous equations (one set for each regime) which we can
then solve numerically for hUi for a given network.

Figure 5 shows that the results obtained using the analytic expressions do
indeed compare very well to those from numerical simulations. The numerical
simulations are performed here on a fully connected network. This positive
result gives us conﬁdence that similarly accurate results might be obtained for
more general networks. We will explore this in a future publication.

10

4 Conclusion

We have introduced and analyzed a simple model of agent interactions on a
network, using a binary utility function to describe the lifetime of a given
pair. We have focused on the speciﬁc case in which the system is in a mixed
state such that the interactions between agents are not biased. The analysis
can however be generalized to any network topology and payoﬀ function, by
considering the corresponding interaction probabilities and utility weighting.
Further provision could be made to include biased interactions (e.g. where
an individual is more likely to encounter its previous partner). If we consider
a speciﬁc agent who wants to maximize its local utility in such a situation,
changing phenotype will have no eﬀect – however a conscious decision to re-
main at a particular hub (Pint → 1) could have a dramatic eﬀect.

References

[1] Johnson, N.F., Jeﬀeries, P. and Hui, P.M., “Financial Market Complexity”,

Oxford University Press, 2003. Chapter 4.

[2] Caldarelli, G. and Capocci, A., “Beauty and Distance in the Stable Marriage

Problem”, Physica A 300, 325 (2001).

[3] Caldarelli, G., Capocci, A. and Laureti, P., “Sex-oriented stable matchings of
the Marriage Problem with correlated and incomplete information”, Physica A
299, 268 (2001).

[4] Axtell, R.L., “The Emergence of Firms in a Population of Agents”. Working

paper 99-03-019, Santa Fe Institute: Santa Fe, New Mexico (1999).

[5] Dorogovtsev, S.N. and Mendes, J.F.F., “Evolution of Networks”, Oxford

University Press, 2003.

[6] See http://maths.ox.ac.uk/∼smithdm/agentnet.pdf for more details.

[7] Weisstein, E.W., “Hamming Distance” in MathWorld – A Wolfram Web

Resource, http://mathworld.wolfram.com/HammingDistance.html

11

Fig. 5. Comparison of the values of hU i obtained from numerical simulation, to
those obtained using the analytic expressions in the overcrowded and undercrowded
regimes. The phenotype (i.e. preference list) length is S = 12. The total number of
agents from each population is N = 500, while α = 20 and β = 1. The simulation
is performed on a fully-connected graph.

12

