6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
2
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

An extension of the Hirsch index: Indexing scientiﬁc topics and compounds

M. G. Banks∗
Max-Planck-Institute f¨ur Festk¨orperforschung, Heisenbergstrasse 1, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
(Dated: February 20, 2014)

An interesting twist of the Hirsch index is given, in terms of an index for topics and compounds.
By comparing both the hb index and m for a number of compounds and topics, it can be used to
diﬀerentiate between a new so-called hot topic with older topics. This quick method is shown to
help new comers to identify how much interest and work has already been achieved in their chosen
area of research.

Keywords:

The Hirsch index “h index,”1,2 has recently been of
much scientiﬁc discussion for its use in ranking the out-
put by a given scientist. Using the Science Citation Index
(SCI) under the Web of Science (WoS) oﬀered by Thom-
son ISI (available at http://isiknowledge.com), and by
sorting the authors papers by ascending order in terms
of citations. The h index of a given author is when h
of his or hers N p papers have at least h citations each.
The corresponding remaining papers have thus ≤ h ci-
tations each. In the case where the author has a unique
name, this procedure is a very easy and fast way in or-
der to compare scientists. More importantly, it does not
fully depend on the total number of papers, N p, which
could be bolstered by conference proceedings, or the total
number of citations or signiﬁcant papers. The Hirsch in-
dex measures the cumulative impact of a scientist, which
comes mainly from the quality of the research and also
from the size of the community in which the scientist
publishes.

In this paper I give an interesting twist on the h index
and apply it further to the case of interesting topics and
compounds. It is common practice today that many so
called buzzwords are in use, in which a new person to
the ﬁeld hears the word often but is left wondering, even
what is meant by it, without much explanation about the
meaning being given. It is getting increasingly diﬃcult
for a newcomer, i.e. PhD student or undergraduate stu-
dent to unravel all this information in order to choose
a masters or PhD topic that could be interesting and
relevant for their interest and future development. Espe-
cially in solid state physics, there is much use of “com-
pound culture” where a given student works on a single
compound during a masters or PhD course. A student or
for that matter also a post-doc could have the following
questions: How much has already been done in this topic
or compound? Is it a so called “hot topic”? Will many
people be interested in the results that I obtain from
my thesis or research? In today’s wealth of information
this could be a diﬃcult question to answer without do-
ing a huge amount of initial searching in the literature.
A simple and quick, but by no means full answer could
be easily obtained by comparing the h index for topics
or compounds, which will from now on be called the “h-b
index”.

No rigorous mathematical treatment will be given here,

but it will follow from the procedures given from ref (1),
in which the h index is deﬁned, which I now assign as the
h-b index. The following linear relation of the h index
with the number of years from the ﬁrst paper published
(eq. 6 from ref (1)) is given as

h ∼ mn

(1)

With h, substituted for h-b. In this case, it is assumed
that h-b increases linearly with the number of years, n.
The gradient is thus given by m, which will vary from
topic to topic or compound to compound. This linear
relation may or may not be the case, but it is an approx-
imation for which in a large number of cases will hold.
In the case of a scientist’s name, this can be shown that
from the ﬁrst paper published until a given maximum,
in which afterwards the h index is constant. A plot of
an authors h index against number of years (n) will give
an approximate straight line3. This also holds for a com-
pound or topic search where it is generally found that
the hb index increases linearly with the number of years
since the initial discovery, until a given maximum when
it is approximately constant. Even for new expanding
topics this initial linear behavior is found.

The h-b index is found by entering a topic or compound
in the Thomson ISI Web of Science database and then
ordering the results in terms of citations, by largest ﬁrst.
The h-b index is deﬁned as above in the same manner as
the h index.

The number of years, n, is found by the year of the ﬁrst
paper published on this topic or compound until 2005. In
this manner, m is easily calculated as the ratio of h to
n. Before any results or observations are given this pro-
cedure will be discussed in terms of its legitimacy. The
database used, will in the case of topics or compounds,
search the title, keywords (incl. keywords plus) and the
abstract4. For example, for a given compound, the paper
could be about a high T c superconductor, but include
MgB2 in its abstract, in which case this paper would also
be included for an MgB2 search. Although this hinders
the results for an MgB2 search if the paper is highly ref-
erenced, this diﬃculty would occur in a limited number
of cases and would not aﬀect the result in a large way.
As it is assumed that the title and keywords would con-
tain what the paper is written for. The abstract is the

only way a result could be ambiguous, but for the large
majority of cases, the results will hold.
In the case of
compounds, searching a compound by its chemical name
or formula should in a wide range produce sound results,
as the compound name is largely unique, as in the same
way the author’s name. However, in some limited cases
another compound formula which contains the searched
formula string could be present. This is analogous to the
case of an author name that may not be unique, but for
the most cases is (for example, about 76% of the Nobel
prize winners in the last 20 years had unique names, from
ref (1)). In the case of topics, the search is more diﬃcult
and care must be taken. In the case, where I speciﬁcally
mention a topic (or compound), the exact search string
will be presented e.g. “Kondo AND lattice”. The topic
itself is not as concise as searching for compounds, due
to the more chance of the occurrence of the word rather
than a compound formula. As stated above there are
some pitfalls, however the results are nevertheless a good
ballpark estimate, of the current interest and the amount
of people working in the area, now and over the years.
Next, I will give some results of searches I have under-
taken, and then discuss possible implications in respect
of the above questions and searches.

First is the discussion of compounds. The results I
will present are to compounds that were mostly unam-
biguously identiﬁed, with no or very little “washing” out
of the h-b index.
In some cases, e.g., H2O, this string
exists in many other chemical formulas which contains
“H2O”, and thus appears many times, so it is impossi-
ble to know what the number is for only “H2O”. Most
compounds do not exhibit this feature, and some of them
are shown in table I. It should be noted that in calcu-
lating m, the year of the ﬁrst paper about the compound
was used, which in most cases is the paper of synthesis
and/or describing the crystal structure. This I believe
is nevertheless the best way of representing m, of course
the h-b index is regardless of this point.

It could be argued that using m is not a good esti-
mate of how much interest has gone into a given com-
pound, due to the fact that the starting year I chose is
probably the year of synthesis or structure determina-
tion. There could be an initial time lag where no further
experiments were carried out on the compound until a
much later date. An interesting case could be MgB2, af-
ter the discovery of superconductivity, the work into this
compound exploded, but the time between the ﬁrst paper
in 1954, gives a 40 year diﬀerence, this naturally aﬀects
its m number a great deal. In such cases a comparison of
the h-b index is necessary. However, it is not the scope
of the paper to argue what is a good starting point for
the determination of m. Some simple conclusions can be
pointed out by looking at table I. The superconductors
(e.g., V3Si, Nb3Sn, MgB2) all have large values of h-b
and m, a clear indication of the enthusiasm and large
number of scientists working in the ﬁeld of superconduc-
tivity. A comparison with research in rare earth systems
(e.g., PrPb3, TmGa3) shows that the number of people

TABLE I: h-b index for speciﬁc compounds given by a name
or chemical formula, sorted by ascending m.

Compound
PrPb3
TmGa3
Si28
CeB6
V3Si
Ni2MnGa
Nb3Sn
MgB2
CeCu2Si2
SrTiO3
GaN
C-60

h-b index
6
6
17
32
39
37
48
67
39
94
144
182

2

m
0.26
0.30
0.31
0.76
0.77
0.82
0.94
1.31
1.44
1.96
2.12
5.20

working in these compounds is much less than supercon-
ductivity (exceptions do exist, e.g., CeCu2Si2). Work in
C-60 bucky balls, is the largest that I have found to date,
with an m of 5.2 which represents this as a unique com-
pound, in which there has been a large amount of work
done.

Therefore I ﬁnd from looking at all my results from
searches carried out on compounds the following conclu-
sions.

i) 0 < m ≤ 0.5, i.e. a maximum h-b of 20 after 40
years. This represents a compound which is likely to be
of interest to the researchers in that particular ﬁeld of
research, where the ﬁeld is a smaller community.

ii) 0.5 ≤ m ≤ 2, i.e a maximum h-b of 40 after 20
years. This represents a compound that is likely to be a
hot topic area of research, where the community is very
large. Or a compound with very interesting features.

iii) m ≥ 2, i.e a minimum of h-b of 40 after 20 years.
This reﬂects a unique compound, which has far reaching
consequences rather than just in its own area of research.
It is likely to be a compound with application purposes,
or unique characteristic features.

Next, I will discuss the larger area of topics, which of
course extends much further than just the scope of solid
state physics. The searching of topics was performed in
the same manner as with the compounds above. There
are a few points of interest which should be addressed
ﬁrst.
Searching a topic would give a hit, when the
string is represented in the title, keywords or the ab-
stract. This is expected in the majority of cases to be
legitimate. If a false hit is present, this would occur in
most cases from the abstract, but its eﬀect is neglected
here. Some searches of certain topics is meaningless, e.g.
“magnetism” or “speciﬁc heat”, and would give answers
in which not much information could be extracted. How-
ever for today’s so called “hot topics” such searches could
be used. Table II shows some of the search results.

In the same way as with speciﬁc compounds, the use

TABLE II: h-b index for speciﬁc topics, search strings are
given, sorted by ascending m.

Topic
Borides
pyrochlore
Spin ﬂop
Optical lattice
Antiferroquadrupolar
amorphous silicon
Spin frustration
ferroelectricity
Spin liquid
kondo AND lattice
perovskites
spin ice
magnetoresistance
quantum information
geometrical frustration
quantum critical point
porous silicon
spin glass
Spin valve
heavy fermion
superstrings
Teleportation
quantum computation
M-theory
giant magnetoresistance
fullerenes
quantum dots
Nanowires
carbon nanotubes

h-b index
46
61
34
43
18
116
30
78
45
63
103
17
172
65
21
42
104
108
48
97
99
61
73
79
116
140
149
105
167

m
0.44
0.62
0.83
0.90
1.00
1.10
1.36
1.39
1.55
1.97
2.10
2.13
2.39
2.41
2.63
2.63
3.25
3.38
3.43
3.73
3.96
5.08
5.21
6.58
6.82
7.78
7.84
8.75
12.85

of certain keywords describing the topic, may take some
time after the initial discovery to surface in common use,
so there may also be some initial time lag, between the
true discovery, and the naming of it. However in most
cases this would only be a year at the most. Table II
shows the results of some searches for speciﬁc topics in
many areas of physics. Some of the older topics are most
likely to be found at the top of the table (as the table is
m ascending), which is likely also caused by the increas-
ing number of researchers in all ﬁelds of science over the
years. Therefore, most of the new hot topics are repre-
sented at the bottom of the table, e.g., nanowires.
In
some cases it may be more useful in order to compare
by h-b number, which of course is still modiﬁed by the
total number of people or groups in that area, but not
dependant on n, the number of years. Some more general
conclusions are now given from the searches of topics:

i) A large m (m ≥ 3) number is likely to come from

3

a topic which is a so-called “hot topic”, as a large m
number comes from the fact that the number of years is
small, while maintaining a large enough h-b number.

ii) A large h-b number (h-b ≥ 100) and a large m num-
ber (m ≥ 3) represents a topic in which there has been a
lot of research already, which was and still is a hot topic.
iii) A small m (m ≤ 2) but a large h-b number (h-b
≥ 100) probably reﬂects this as a older topic, which has
a good contribution throughout the years, which is why
the m number is low.

Of course these rules are by no means complete, but
kind of a ﬁrst approach, that one could follow, but not
adhere too. There are some topics which are revolution-
ary in some way, like carbon nanotubes or nanowires,
which have had a huge amount of work done, in a very
short amount of time.

I have presented here mainly the results for the case
of physics, and with a little more emphasis on solid state
physics.
I am sure that this would also work for any
area of science, where topics can be clearly separated
from each other.
I have discussed a lot of topics and
compounds, without talking about the physics itself. My
results are only based on a few numbers. As for the
case of a scientist, a number does not reﬂect the poten-
tial of a person. In this case, also the number does not
reﬂect the science or the interesting physics. Rather it
does reﬂect the interest in the immediate community and
further, and the amount of work which has been done.
It should be noted that using this method in order to
join a particular area of research is another question and
based on many other variables. However, this method
can be used to get a feeling of what topic or compound
is mainstream research at this present time. Therefore,
there can be some conclusions drawn without going into
the details of the speciﬁc research area, this I ﬁnd itself
is a success of this technique. With regard to the ques-
tions that I posed at the start of the article. I would now
like to answer or attempt to reason why this technique
could help a student or researcher ﬁnd his way through
topics. Regarding the question of ﬁnding out how much
research has gone into the topic already, I think this is a
useful way of ﬁnding it out, and probably represents the
best way in order to get a feeling of how much research
has already been done. The question of whether this is a
“hot topic” or not is diﬃcult to answer in a number, as
“hot topics” come from interesting physics, or interesting
features. However, what can be immediately concluded
is that a large number of people work in the area, which
in itself is a way to identify it as a “hot topic”.
In a
similar manner working in a “hot topic” area will make
your work more visible by a larger community.

Concerning Hirsch’s comments regarding membership
of a national academy or institution by comparing a
given researchers h index. An interesting point could be
made by looking at the h-b index when allocating funding
money from grants. This method could be used to com-
pare diﬀerent researchers applying for a given research
grant in the same ﬁeld. By searching for a researchers

name and topic of proposed research, then comparing the
h-b index, could give interesting results and comparative
features of already published work in the area.

In summary, I have proposed a tool to compare diﬀer-
ent topics and compounds based on the result obtained
by J. E. Hirsch1,2. I have found interesting correlations,
which can be used to give some conclusions which point
to whether this is an “older topic” or a new “hot topic”
by comparing the h-b index and m. It has been shown
that this method could help new comers to the ﬁeld, to
identify how much interest and work has already been

achieved in their chosen area of research.

4

Acknowledgments

I thank all the colleagues at the Max-Planck-Institute
for a stimulating atmosphere and discussing and criti-
cizing the idea in a concise way and giving me enough
enthusiasm in order to research the idea and publish it.

Electronic address: m.banks@fkf.mpg.de

∗
1 J. E. Hirsch, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci 102, 16569 (2005).
2 J.

available

Hirsch,

E.

http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0508025.

3 W. Marx, to be published.
4 Using Thomson ISI WoS, the abstracts are only given for

from

papers published after 1990.

