6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
9
1
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Exploring Complex Networks through Random Walks

Luciano da Fontoura Costa
Instituto de F´ısica de S˜ao Carlos. Universidade de S˜ao Paulo,
S˜ao Carlos, SP, PO Box 369, 13560-970, phone +55 16 3373 9858,
FAX +55 16 3371 3616, Brazil, luciano@if.sc.usp.br
(Dated: 12th April 2006)

Most real complex networks – such as protein interactions, social contacts, the internet – are only
partially known and available to us. While the process of exploring such networks in many cases
resembles a random walk, it becomes a key issue to investigate and characterize how eﬀectively the
nodes and edges of such networks can be covered by diﬀerent strategies. At the same time, it is
critically important to infer how well can topological measurements such as the average node degree
and average clustering coeﬃcient be estimated during such network explorations. The present article
addresses these problems by considering random and Barab´asi-Albert (BA) network models with
varying connectivity explored by three types of random walks: traditional, preferential to untracked
edges, and preferential to unvisited nodes. A series of relevant results are obtained, including the
fact that random and BA models with the same size and average node degree allow similar node
and edge coverage eﬃciency, the identiﬁcation of linear scaling with the size of the network of the
random walk step at which a given percentage of the nodes/edges is covered, and the critical result
that the estimation of the averaged node degree and clustering coeﬃcient by random walks on BA
networks often leads to heavily biased results. Many are the theoretical and practical implications
of such results.

PACS numbers: 05.40.Fb,89.75.Hc,07.05.Mh

The crew of the caravel ‘Nina’ also saw signs of land,
and a small branch covered with berries. Everyone
breathed afresh and rejoiced at these signs.

(Christopher Columbus)

I.

INTRODUCTION

Despite its relatively young age, the area of investiga-
tion going by the name of complex networks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
has established itself as a worthy relative – or perhaps
inheritor – of graph theory and statistical physics. Such
a success has been a direct consequence of the empha-
sis which has been given to structured interconnectivity,
statistical formulations, interest in applications and, as in
more recent developments (e.g. [3, 4]), the all-important
paradigm relating structure and dynamics. Yet, almost
invariably, the analyzed networks are assumed to be com-
pletely known and accessible to us.
Indeed, while so
many important problems involving completely described
networks – such as community ﬁnding (e.g. [6]) – remain
as challenges in this area, why should one bother to con-
sider incompletely speciﬁed networks?

Perhaps a good way to start making sense of this ques-
tion is by considering our future. To what restaurant are
we going tomorrow? What article will we read next?
Which mirrors will ever see our faces again? Would not
each such situation be describable as a node, while the
ﬂow of decisions among the possibilities would deﬁne
a most extraordinary personal random walking a most
complex network? Although such a dynamic network is
undoubtedly out there (or in here), we are allowed to
explore just a small portion of it at a time. And, with

basis on whatever knowledge we can draw from such a
small sample, we have to decide about critical next steps.
However, the situations involving incomplete or sampled
networks extend much further than this extreme exam-
ple. For instance, the steps along any game or maze is but
a sample of a much larger network of possibilies. Explo-
rations of land, sea and space also correspond to small
samplings of a universe of possibilities, not to mention
more ‘classical’ large networks such as those obtained for
protein interaction, social contacts and the Internet. Last
but not least, the own exploratory activities of science
are but a most complex random walk on the intricate
and inﬁnite web of knowledge [7]. In all such cases, the
success of the whole enterprise is critically connected to
the quality and accuracy of the information we can infer
about the properties of the whole network while judg-
ing from just a small sample of it. Little doubt can be
raised about the importance of such a problem, which
has received little attention, except for the investigations
by Serrano et al. on the eﬀects of sampling the WWW
through crawlers [8]. The literature about random walks
in complex networks include [9, 10, 11, 12].

The current article is about incomplete and sampled
networks and some related fundamental questions. We
start with the basic mathematical concepts, identifying
some of the most interesting related questions and per-
spectives, and proceed by illustrating what can be learnt
about random and Barab´asi-Albert networks while sam-
pling them locally in random fashion or through three
types of random walks — traditional (uniform decision
probability) and preferential to untracked edges and pref-
erential to untracked nodes).

II. BASIC CONCEPTS AND SOME
FUNDAMENTAL ISSUES

An undirected [13] complex network Γ = (Ω, E), in-
volving a set of N nodes Ω and a set V of E connec-
tions between such nodes, can be completely speciﬁed
in terms of its N × N adjacency matrix K, such that
the existence of a connection between nodes i and j im-
plies K(i, j) = K(j, i) = 1 (zero is assigned otherwise).
The degree ki of node i is deﬁned as corresponding to
the number of edges connected to that node, and the
clustering coeﬃcient cci of that node is calculated as the
number of edges between the neighbors of i and the max-
imum possible number of interconnections between these
neighbors(e.g. [3]).

An incompletely speciﬁed complex network is hence-
forth understood as any subnetwork G of Γ such that
G 6= Γ.
In this work we will restrict our atten-
tion to incomplete complex networks deﬁned by sets
of nodes and adjacent edges identiﬁed during random
walks.
Such networks can be represented as G =
((i1, V1); (i2, V2), . . . , (iM , VM )), where ip are nodes sam-
pled during the random walk through the respective list
of adjacent nodes. Note that necessarily ip+1 ∈ Vp and
that (i1, i2, . . . , iM ) corresponds to a path along Γ. It is
also interesting to consider more substantial samples of Γ,
for instance by considering not only the adjacent edges,
but also the interconnections between the neighboring
nodes of each node. Therefore, the case above becomes
G = ((i1, V1, E1); (i2, V2, E2), . . . , (iM , VM , EM )), where
Ep is the set containing the edges between the nodes in
Vp. Figure 1 illustrates a complex network (a) and re-
spective examples of incompletely speciﬁed networks ob-
tained by random walks considering neighboring nodes
(b) and the latter plus the edges between neighboring
nodes (c).

Given an incomplete speciﬁed complex network G, a
natural question which arises is: to what accuracy the
properties of the whole network Γ can be inferred from
the available sampled information? Because the estima-
tion of global properties of Γ such as shortest paths and
diameter constitutes a bigger challenge to the moving
agent, we concentrate our attention on local topological
properties, more speciﬁcally the node degree and cluster-
ing coeﬃcient averaged over the network.

Three types of random walks are considered in the
present work: (i) ‘traditional’: the next edge is chosen
with uniform probability among the adjacent edges; (ii)
preferential to untracked edges:
the next edge is cho-
sen among the untracked adjacent edges and, in case no
such edges exist, uniformly among all the adjacent edges;
and (iii) preferential to unvisited nodes: the next edge is
chosen among those adjacent edges leading to unvisited
nodes and, in case no such edges exist, uniformly among
all the adjacent edges. Note that the plausibility of the
preferential schemes depends on each modeled system.
For instance, the preference to untracked nodes implies
that the moving agent knows whether each edge leads to

2

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 1: A simple network (a) and two incompletely speciﬁed
networks obtained by a random walk considering neighboring
nodes and (b) and the latter plus the edges between adjacent
nodes (c). The gray nodes correspond to those sampled during
the random walk

a still unvisited node, though it may not know exactly
which one. It is interesting to note that the process of
sampling an existing network through a random walk can
be interpreted as a mechanism for ‘growing’ a network.

III. NODE AND EDGE COVERAGE

First we consider networks growth according to one
of the following two complex network models: (a) ran-
dom networks, where each pair of nodes has a probability
λ of being connected; and (b) Barab´asi-Albert networks
(BA), built by using the preferential attachment scheme
described in [1]. More speciﬁcally, new nodes with m
edges each are progressively incorporated into the grow-
ing network, with each of the m edges being attached to
previous nodes with probability proportional to their re-
spective node degrees. The network starts with m0 = m
nodes. Complex networks with number of nodes N equal
to 100, 200, . . . , 900 and m = 3, 4, . . . , 8 have been consid-
ered. An equivalent average degree and number of edges
was imposed onto the random networks as in [7]. A to-
tal of 200 realizations of each conﬁguration, for the three
types of random walks, were performed experimentally.
Figure 2 illustrates the ratio of tracked edges in terms

of the steps t for N = 100 and N = 300 considering
m = 3, 4, . . . , 8 and the BA network model. It is clear
from the obtained results that, as expected, the higher
the value of m, the smaller the ratio of visited edges.
Note that the increase of N also contributes to less eﬃ-
cient coverage of the edges, as expressed by the respective
smaller ratios of visited edges obtained for N = 300. For
large enough total number of steps, all curves exhibited
an almost linear initial region followed by saturation near
the full ratio of visited edges (i.e. 1).

FIG. 2: The ratio of tracked edges in terms of the steps t
for N = 100 and N = 300 considering the values of m as
presented in the legend.

Figure 3(a) shows the ‘quarter-lives’ h of the percent-
age of visited nodes in terms of the network size N with
respect to the BA network model with m = 5. This mea-
surement corresponds to the average number of steps at
which the random walk has covered a quarter of the to-
tal number of network nodes. Similar results have been
obtained for other critical fractions (e.g. half-life). Note
that, as m is ﬁxed at 5, the average degree hki of all
networks in this ﬁgure remains equal to 10 [14], being
therefore constant with N , while the average number of
edges grows as hEi = N hki /2 = 5N . Interestingly, lin-
ear dependence between the quarter-lives and N are ob-
tained in all cases.
It is also clear from these results
that the most eﬀective coverage of the nodes is obtained
by the random walk preferential to unvisited nodes, with
the random walk preferential to untracked edges present-
ing the next best performance. Figure 3(b) shows the
quarter-lives of the percentage of visited nodes for ran-
dom networks. The random walks with preference to
unvisited nodes again resulted in the most eﬀective cov-
ering strategy. The quarter-lives for the percentage of
tracked edges are shown in Figures 3(c,d) respectively to
BA (c) and random (d) network models. The best ra-
tios of covered edges were obtained for the random walk
preferential to untracked edges, with the random walk
preferential to unvisited edges presented the next best
performance. The traditional random walk resulted the
least eﬃcient strategy in all situations considered in this

3

work. Note that the three types of random walks resulted
slightly more eﬀective for node coverage in the case of the
random model than in the BA counterparts.

Further characterization of the dynamics of node cov-
erage can be obtained by considering the scaling of the
slopes of the curves of ratios of visited nodes in terms of
several values of m. Remarkably, the slopes obtained by
least mean square ﬁtting for the two types of preferential
random walks were veriﬁed not to vary with m, being
ﬁxed at 0.31 and 0.25, respectively, for the BA model
and 0.285 and 0.25 for the random networks. Figure 4
shows the log-log representation of the slopes in terms of
m obtained for the traditional random walk on BA and
random networks for m = 3, 4, . . . , 8.
It is clear from
this ﬁgure that, though the slopes tend to scale in simi-
lar (almost linear) fashion for the two types of considered
networks, the ratios of node coverage increase substan-
tially faster for the random networks.

IV. ESTIMATION OF AVERAGE NODE
DEGREE AND CLUSTERING COEFFICIENT

So far we have investigated the dynamics of node and
edge coverage in random and BA models while consid-
ering the three types of random walks. In practice, as
the size of the network being explored through the ran-
dom walks is typically unknown, the number of visited
nodes or tracked edges by themselves provide little infor-
mation about the topological properties or nature of the
networks. The remainder of the present work addresses
the estimation of measurements of the local connectivity
of networks, namely the average node degree and average
clustering coeﬃcient, obtalined along the random walks.
For generality’s sake, the estimations are henceforth
presented in relative terms, i.e. as the ratio between the
current estimation (e.g. (k(t)) and the real value (e.g.
hki). Figure 5 illustrates the curve deﬁned by the estima-
tions (k(t), cc(t)) obtained by traditional random walks
along a BA network with N = 800 and m = 5. Interest-
ingly, this curve is indeed a kind of random walk with con-
vergent limit. Such curves have been found to converge to
limiting ratios (kL, ccL) which can or not correspond to
the ideal ratios (1, 1). In the case of the curve in Figure 5,
we have (kL = 1.62, ccL = 0.88), i.e. the average node de-
gree has been over-estimated while the average clustering
coeﬃcient has been under-estimated. Through extensive
simulations, we have observed that the estimations of av-
erage node degree tended to be about twice as much as
the real value while the average clustering coeﬃcient re-
sulted about 0.9 of the real value, irrespectively of N ,
m or random walk type. Contrariwise, the estimation
of these two topological features for random networks
tended to produce stable and accurate estimation of the
average clustering coeﬃcient, while the obtained aver-
age node degree presented very small variation around
the optimal value. The substantial biases implied by the
random walk over BA networks is a direct consequence

4

FIG. 4: Loglog (Neper) representation of the slopes of the
ratios of visited nodes obtained for traditional random walks
for m = 3, 4, . . . , 8 considering BA (‘×’) and random (‘⊕’)
network models.

of the larger variability of node degree exhibited by this
model. Therefore, nodes with higher degree will tend to
be visited more frequently [15], implying over-estimation
of the average node degree and a slighted bias on the
clustering coeﬃcient.

Provided the moving agent can store all the informa-
tion obtained from the network as it is being explored,
yielding a partial map of the so far sampled structure, it
is possible to obtain more accurate (i.e. unbiased) esti-
mates of the average node degree and clustering coeﬃ-
cient during any of the considered random walks in any
type of networks by performing the measurements with-
out node repetition. However, an agent moving along
a BA network without resource to such an up to dated
partial map will have to rely on averages of the mea-
surements calculated at each step. This will cause the
impression of inhabiting a network much more complex
(in the sense of having higher average node degree) than
it is indeed the case. Going back to the motivation at the
beginning of this article, it is diﬃcult to avoid speculat-
ing whether our impression of living in a world with so
many possibilities and complexities could not be in some
way related to the above characterized eﬀects.

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

The fact that most real complex networks are only par-
tially available to us as a consequence of their sheer size
and complexity, it becomes of critical importance to un-
derstand how well these structures can be investigated by
using sampling strategies such as diﬀerent types of ran-
dom walks. The present work has addressed this issue
considering random and BA network models with vary-
ing connectivity and sizes being sampled by three types
of random walks. A series of important results have been
obtained which bear several theoretical and practical im-

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 3: The quarter-life of the percentage of visited nodes
for BA (a) and random (b), and the quarter-life of the per-
centage of visited edges for BA (c) and random (d) models,
for traditional (‘+’), preferential to untracked edges (‘×’) and
preferential to unvisited nodes (‘⊕’) random walk strategies.

5

plications. Particularly surprising is the fact that random
and BA networks are similarly accessible as far as node
and edge exploration is concerned. Actually, random net-
works tend to have their nodes and edges explored in a
slightly more eﬀective way. Also important is the char-
acterization of linear scaling with the network size of the
quarter-life of the ratio of covered nodes and edges, and
the identiﬁcation substantial biases in estimations of the
average node degree and clustering coeﬃcient in several
situations. In particular, the average node degree tend to
be estimated as being approximately twice as large as the
real value. Additional insights about the non-trivial dy-
namics of complex network exploration through random
walks can be achieved by considering other network mod-
els as well as more global topological measurements such
as shortest paths, diameters, hierarchical measurements
and betweeness centrality.

Luciano da F. Costa is grateful to CNPq (308231/03-1)

for ﬁnancial support.

FIG. 5: Curve (actually a kind of random walk) deﬁned by the
estimations (k(t), cc(t)), through traditional random walk, of
the average node degree k(t) and average clustering coeﬃ-
cient cc(t) in a BA network with N = 800 and m = 5. The
curve converges to the incorrect estimations ratios (1.62, 0.88)
instead of (1, 1).

[1] R. Albert and A. L. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47

[2] S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes, Advances in

Physics 51, 1079 (2002), cond-mat/0106144.

[3] M. E. J. Newman, SIAM Review 45, 167 (2003), cond-

(2004).

(2002).

mat/0303516.

[4] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chaves, and

D. U. Hwang, Physics Reports (2005), in press.

[5] L. da F. Costa, F. A. Rodrigues, G. Travieso, and P. V.

Boas (2005), cond-mat/0505185.

[6] M. E. J. Newman, Eur. Phys. J. B 38 (2004).
[7] L. da F. Costa, physics/0601118 (2006).
[8] M. A. Serrano, A. Maguitman, M. Boguna, S. Fortunato,

and A. Vespignani, cs.NI/0511035 (2005).

[9] B. Tadic, Eur. Phys. J. B 23, 221 (2001).
[10] B. Tadic, cond-mat/0310014 (2003).
[11] E. M. Bollt and D. ben Avraham, cond-mat/0409465

[12] J. D. Noh and H. Rieger, cond-mat/0310344 (2004).
[13] The results in this article are immediately extended to
more general networks, including directed and weighted
models.

[14] In the BA model, the average degree is equal to 2m.
[15] Actually the rate of visits to the nodes of an undirected
complex network, at thermodynamical equilibrium, can
be veriﬁed to be proportional to the node degree.

