6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
1
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Memory-Based Snowdrift Game on Networks

Wen-Xu Wang1,2, Jie Ren2, Guanrong Chen1,∗ and Bing-Hong Wang2
1Department of Electronic Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2Department of Modern Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China
(Dated: February 9, 2014)

We present a memory-based snowdrift game (MBSG) taking place on complex networks. We
found that, when a lattice is taken to be the underlying structure, the transition of spatial patterns
at some critical values of the payoﬀ parameter is observable for two models of lattices with 4 and 8
neighbors. The transition points can be obtained by local stability analysis, the analytical results are
in good accordance with simulations. In sharp contrast to previously reported results, cooperation
is promoted by the spatial structure in the MBSG. Interestingly, we ﬁgured out that the frequency
of cooperation of MBSG on both small-world and scale-free networks is a non-monotonous function
of the payoﬀ parameter. This non-trivial phenomenon indicates that giving appropriate advantages
to defectors can optimally enhance the cooperation of the system. In addition, we found that the
spatial patterns of small-world networks are broken by adding long-range connections. Our work
may shed some new light on the evolution of cooperation in networks.

PACS numbers: 87.23.Kg, 02.50.Le, 87.23.Ge, 89.65.-s, 89.75.Fb

Evolutionary game theory has been considered to be an
important approach to characterizing and understanding
the emergence of cooperative behavior in systems consist-
ing of selﬁsh individuals [1]. Such systems are ubiquitous
in nature, ranging from biological to economic and social
systems. Since it was introduced by Axelrod [2], the pris-
oner’s dilemma game (PDG) as a general metaphor for
studying the cooperative behavior has drown much atten-
tion from scientiﬁc communities. Due to the diﬃculties
in assessing proper payoﬀs, the PDG has its restriction
to a certain extent in discussing the emergence of coop-
erative behavior. This thus results in the proposal of the
snowdrift game (SG) as an alternative to the PDG. The
SG, which is equivalent to the hawk-dove game, is also
of much biological interest [3]. However, in these two
games, the unstable cooperative behavior is contrary to
the empirical evidence. This disagreement motivates a
variety of extensions of the original evolutionary games
to provide better explanations for the emergence of co-
operation.

Tit-for-tat is a prototypical strategy that can induce
the emergence and persistence of cooperation in the PDG
for ﬁnite individuals [2, 4]. The work by Nowark and
Sigmund demonstrates that a strategy of win-stay, lose-
Interest-
shift outperforms tit-for-tat in the PDG [5].
ingly, Nowark and May found that cooperative behav-
ior can result from the introduction of a simple spatial
structure [6].
In a recent paper, Hauert and Doebeli
stated that spatial net may not be a uniﬁed framework
to promote cooperation in both PDG and SG; that is, in
contrast to the PDG, the cooperative behavior is inhib-
ited by the spatial structure [7]. This surprising result
is in sharp contrast to one’s intuition, since in compari-
son with PDG, SG is in favor of cooperation. Moreover,
Szab´o et al. presented a stochastic evolutionary rule for
capturing the bounded rationality of individuals [8].

Except for the tit-for-tat strategy, the eﬀect of in-

dividual’s memory is neglected in the previous works.
We argue that players should make decisions based on
the knowledge of past records, and the historical mem-
ory of individuals plays a key role in the evolutionary
games. Therefore, in the present work, we propose a
memory-based snowdrift game in which players modify
their strategies based on their past experiences. Our
work is partially inspired by Challet and Zhang [9], who
in which agents
presented a so-called minority game,
make decisions exclusively according to the common in-
formation stored in their memory. We focus on the evo-
lutionary SG for its general representation of many social
and biological scenarios. The MBSG within diﬀerent net-
work structures, including lattices and small-world and
scale-free networks, has been studied. Simulation results
demonstrate that there exists evolutionary pattern tran-
sition on lattices, and the features of spatial patterns are
mainly determined by the payoﬀ parameter. Moreover,
the MBSG on small-world and scale-free networks shows
nontrivial properties, i.e., the frequency of cooperation
is not a monotonously decreasing function of the payoﬀ
parameter. These interesting results imply that giving
proper advantages to defectors may promote the coop-
erative behavior of real-world systems with small-world
and scale-free structural properties.

We ﬁrst brieﬂy describe the original SG model. Imag-
ine that two cars are trapped on either side of a snowdrift
and the two drivers cannot drive back home. Both drivers
have two selections, either get out of the car and start
shovelling (cooperate-C) or stay in the car (defect-D) in
any one negotiation. If they both choose C, then they
both gain the beneﬁt b of getting back home while shar-
ing the labor c of shovelling. Thus, they both get payoﬀ
R = b − c/2. If both drivers choose D, they will still be
trapped by the snowdrift and get nothing: P = 0.
If
one shovels (take C) while the other one stays in the car
(take D), then they both can get home but the defector

2

 

 

 

lattices

 

 

lattices

      

with 4 neighbors

      

with 8 neighbors

 

0.60

0.55

C

f

0.50

0.45

(a)

0.40

(b)

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

 

0.8

0.7

0.6

 

0.5

0.4

0.3

r

FIG. 1: (Color online) The frequency of cooperation fC as a
function of the payoﬀ parameter r in two-dimensional lattices
with (a) 4 neighbors and (b) 8 neighbors, respectively. The
network size is N = 10000.

pays no labor cost and gets a perfect payoﬀ T = b, while
the cooperator gets S = b − c. The ranking of the four
payoﬀ values is T > R > S > P . If costs are high, i.e.,
c > b > 0, the SG becomes the PDG. Without losing
generality, R is usually set to be 1 so that the evolution-
ary behavior of the SG can be investigated with a single
parameter, r = c/2 = c/(2b−c). Then one has T = 1+r,
R = 1, S = 1 − r, and P = 0 with 0 < r < 1. One can
see that compared with the PDG, the payoﬀ rank of the
SG favors the emergence of cooperation. However, in the
original SG, cooperation is still unstable, which results
from the highest payoﬀ of defectors.

Let us introduce the rules of the evolutionary MBSG.
Consider that N players are placed on the nodes of a cer-
tain network. In every round, each player plays the game
with all its immediate neighbors simultaneously. The to-
tal payoﬀ of each player is the sum over all its encounters.
After a round is over, each player will have the strategy
information (C or D) of its neighbors. Subsequently, each
player knows its best strategy in that round by means of
self-questioning, i.e., each player adopts its anti-strategy
to play a virtual game with all its neighbors, and cal-
culates the virtual total payoﬀ. Comparing the virtual
payoﬀ with the actual payoﬀ, each player can get its op-
timal strategy corresponding to the highest payoﬀ and
then record it into its memory. Taking into account the
bounded rationality of players, we assume that players
are quite limited in their analyzing power and can only
retain the last M bits of the past strategy information.
At the start of the next generation, the probability of
making a decision (choosing C or D) for each player de-
pends on the ratio of the numbers of C and D stored in
its memory, i.e., PC = NC
M and PD = 1 − PC ,
where NC and ND are the numbers of C and D, respec-
tively. Then, each player updates its memory and the
system evolves.

NC +ND = NC

The key quantity for characterizing the cooperative be-
havior of the system is the frequency of cooperation fC.
Firstly, we investigate the MBSG on the two-dimensional

FIG. 2: (Color online) Typical spatial patterns in two distinct
payoﬀ parameter regimes: (a) 0 < r < 0.25, (b) 0.25 < r <
0.5. The C is in red and the D is in green. A 50 × 50 portion
of the full 100 × 100 lattice with 4 neighbors is illustrated.

square lattices of four and eight neighbors, respectively.
Simulations are carried out for a population of N = 10000
In the initial state, the
individuals located on nodes.
strategies of C and D are uniformly distributed among
all the players. The memory information of each player
is randomly assigned, and we have checked that this as-
signment has no contributions to the stable evolutionary
behavior of the system. The memory length M is as-
sumed to be 7, since too long or too short the M leads to
instability of the system. Figures 1 (a) and (b) show fC
as a function of the parameter r on the lattices of four and
eight neighbors, respectively. In these two ﬁgures, three
features should be noted: (i) fC has a step structure, and
the number of steps corresponds to the number of neigh-
bors on the lattice, i.e., four steps for the four-neighbor
lattice and eight steps for the eight-neighbor lattice; (ii)
the two ﬁgures have 180◦-rotational symmetry about the
point (0.5, 0.5); (iii) for a large defector payoﬀ r, the
system still behaves in a high cooperation level with fC
slightly larger than 0.4, which is contrary to the results
reported in [7]. It indicates that the memory-based deci-
sion making of individuals can considerably promote the
cooperative behavior.

Here, we give a heuristic analysis of local stability for
the dividing points rC of diﬀerent levels. At each critical
point rC between any two levels, the payoﬀ of an individ-
ual with strategy C should equal that of the individual
with D. We assume the number of C neighbors of a given
node to be m, thus in the lattices with 4 neighbors, the
quantity of defector is 4 − m. Accordingly, we get the
local stability equation: m + (4 − m)(1 − r) = (1 + r)m,
where the left side is the payoﬀ of the given individual
with C, and the right side is the payoﬀ of the individ-
ual with D. Considering all of the possible values of m,
the critical rC is obtained as: m = 0, rC = 1; m = 1,
rC = 0.75; m = 2, rC = 0.5; m = 3, rC = 0.25; m = 4,
rC = 0. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), the simulation results
are in good accordance with the analytical results. Sub-
sequently, we study rC in the lattice with 8 neighbors
from the perspective of local stability and the analysis

0.55

0.6

 P=0.1

SW  on lattices

 

with 4 neighbors

 P=0.5

SW on lattices 

with 8 neighbors

 P=0.1

 P=0.5

(a)

(b)

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

configeration model

0.65

BA model

γ
γ

 

 =2

 

 =3

0.55

0.60

 <k>=4

 <k>=8

 

 

3

 

 

(c)

0.35

(d)

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.65

0.60

0.50

0.45

0.40

0.35

C

f

0.65

0.60

0.55

 

0.50

0.45

0.40

0.35

0.8

0.7

0.5

 

0.4

0.3

0.2

 

0.50

 

0.45

0.40

r

 

 

 

(Color online) Typical spatial patterns in four dis-
FIG. 3:
(a) 0 < r < 0.125; (b)
tinct payoﬀ parameter regimes:
0.125 < r < 0.25; (c) 0.25 < r < 0.375; (d) 0.375 < r < 0.5.
The color coding is the same as Fig. 2. A 50 × 50 portion of
the full 100 × 100 lattice with 8 neighbors is illustrated.

is consistent with simulations. Moreover, there exists a
sharp decrease of fC at rC , which may imply the chang-
ing of the evolutionary pattern of the system.

In order to gain some detailed insight into the evolution
of the system, we investigate the spatial patterns for dif-
ferent r on lattices. Figure 2 illustrates typical patterns
for two diﬀerent regimes of r values on a lattice with 4
neighbors. The patterns are statistically static and inde-
pendent of initial states. Figure 2 (a), for 0 < r < 0.25,
is a typical spatial pattern of ‘C lines’ against a back-
ground of ‘chessboard’ form, i.e., a site is surrounded by
anti-strategy neighbors. Figure 2 (b) is for the regime of
0.25 < r < 0.5. In contrast to Fig. 2 (a), ‘C lines’ are
broken in some places by D sites, and some ﬂower-like lo-
cal patterns are observed. The patterns of the other two
levels in Fig. 1 (a), i.e., the regimes of 0.5 < r < 0.75 and
0.75 < r < 1, are the patterns of Figs. 2 (b) and (a) with
C and D site exchange, respectively, which are not shown
here. Therefore, one can ﬁnd that there exist four kinds
of spatial patterns with typical features corresponding to
four levels of fC in the system. Whereafter, we study
the spatial patterns on a 8-neighbor lattice. We ﬁgure
out that each level of cooperation exhibits a unique pat-
tern and the diﬀerence between the patterns of r < 0.5
and r > 0.5 is the exchange of C and D sites. Figure 3
(a) is for the regime of 0 < r < 0.125, the D sites are
isolated and submerged into an ocean of C sites. When
r falls into the regime from 0.125 to 0.25, the situation
of two adjacent D sites occurs; however, C still takes
the majority of sites, as exhibited in Fig. 3 (b). For the

(Color online) The frequency of cooperation fC as
FIG. 4:
a function of r in (a) the SW network on a lattice with 4
neighbors for diﬀerent p; (b) the SW network on a lattice
with 8 neighbors for diﬀerent p; (c) the conﬁguration model
for diﬀerent γ; (d) the BA network for diﬀerent hki. Network
size is 10000.

regime of 0.25 < r < 0.375 (Figure 3 (c)), compared with
two former patterns, the spatial pattern shows a remark-
able distinction. D sites form zonary shapes, which are
surrounded by C sites. Figure 3 (d) is for the regime of
0.375 < r < 0.5, the pattern shows a shape of labyrinth,
and the proportion of C sites is slightly larger than that
of D sites. The patterns for the other four cooperation
levels are not shown here.

Going beyond two-dimensional lattices, we further in-
vestigate the MBSG on small-world (SW) and scale-free
(SF) networks, since these two structural properties are
ubiquitous in natural and social systems [10].
In or-
der to study the spatial patterns of SW networks, we
adopts a SW network on lattices, which is an extension
of the Watts-Strogatz SW network [11], where the links
of a regular network are randomly rewired to introduce
long-range connections. A two-dimensional lattice is ﬁrst
established with a periodic boundary condition. Then,
each node is assigned a probability p to randomly rewire
its links. Thus, parameter p controls the SW eﬀect of the
network. As shown in Fig. 4 (a), fC as a function of r
for diﬀerent p on a lattice with 4 neighbors is reported.
Comparing with the cases on regular lattices, fC shows
nontrivial non-monotonous behavior, and the number of
cooperation levels increases. The maximal value of fC
occurs approximately at r = 0.2, which is independent of
p. The main distinction for diﬀerent p is in the regime of
0.25 < r < 0.35. In parallel, we simulate the cooperation
level fC on a lattice with 8 neighbors. Comparing with
the cases on regular lattices, the same phenomenon that
the number of cooperation levels increases is observed,

4

neighbors. On the basis of local stability analysis, we
can specify dividing points rC between diﬀerent levels,
which is consistent with the simulation results. Moreover,
we found that on lattices, each cooperation level shows
a kind of typical spatial pattern, and at those dividing
points, pattern transition suddenly occurs. These ﬁnd-
ings imply that in the diﬀerent regimes of parameter r,
the systems perform considerably diﬀerent self-organized
behaviors. In sharp contrast to previously reported re-
sults, the MNSG can remarkably stimulate the emergence
and retain the persistence of cooperation. Furthermore,
the nontrivial phenomenon that fC is a non-monotonous
function of r is observed for both SW and SF networks,
which suggests that oﬀering defectors with proper prof-
its can optimally promote the cooperation. By adopting
the Conﬁguration model and the Barab´asi-Albert model,
we have also investigated the eﬀects of γ and the aver-
age degree hki on fC . Simulation results demonstrate
that hki plays the key role in the cooperation.
In the
present work, there still exists some issues that remain
unclear, such as why long-range connections lead to in-
crease of the number of cooperation levels, and why the
optimal fC exists in the systems with SW and SF struc-
tural properties. Further eﬀort is worthwhile to study
these interesting questions.

This work is funded by the Hong Kong Research
Grants Council under the CERG Grant CityU 1114/05E.

∗ Electronic address: gchen@ee.cityu.edu.cn
[1] A. M. Colman, Game Theory and its Applications in the
Social and Biological Sciences (Butterworth-Heinemann,
Oxford, 1995).

[2] R. Axelrod and W. D. Hamilton, Science 211, 1390
(1981); R. Axelrod, The Evolution of Cooperation (Basic
books, New York, 1984).

[3] R. Sugden, The Economics of Rights, Co-operation and

Welfare (Blackwell, Oxford, U.K., 1986).

[4] M. Nowak and K. Sigmund, Nature (London) 355, 250

[5] M. Nowak and K. Sigmund, Nature (London) 364, 1

(1992).

(1993).

[6] M. Nowak and R. M. May, Nature (London) 359, 826
(1992); Int. J. Bifurcation Chaos Appl. Sci. Eng. 3, 35
(1993).

[7] C. Hauert and M. Doebeli, Nature 428, 643 (2004).
[8] G. Szab´o and C. T¨oke, Phys. Rev. E 58, 69 (1998); G.
Szab´o and C. Hauert, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 118101 (2002);
G. Szab´o and J. Vukov, Phys. Rev. E 69, 036107 (2004).
[9] D. Challet and Y.-C. Zhang, Physica A 246, 407 (1997).
[10] F. C. Santos and J. M. Pacheco, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95,

[11] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, Nature (London) 393,

[12] M. Molloy, and B. Reed, Random Struct. Algorithms 6,

098104 (2005).

440 (1998).

161 (1995).

[13] A.-L. Barab´asi and R. Albert, Science 286, 509 (1999).

FIG. 5: (Color online) Typical patterns in the case of r = 0.4
for diﬀerent p in the SW network on a lattice with 8 neighbors.
A 50 × 50 portion of a full pattern is exhibited.

and the larger the value of p, the more the number of
steps, as exhibited in Fig. 4 (b).

In the following, we provide some insight into the SF
structural inﬂuence on the evolutionary cooperative be-
havior. The average degree hki and the exponent coeﬃ-
cient γ of degree distribution P (k) ∼ k−γ are two most
important statistical properties of SF networks. We ﬁrst
adopt the conﬁguration model [12], which provides a way
for tuning r by holding the SF structural feature. Fig-
ure 4 (c) shows that fC depends on r for diﬀerent γ.
Contrarily to the cases on lattices and SW networks, fC
has no step structures, but it is still a non-monotonous
function of r with a maximal value, and fC sharply de-
creases at some speciﬁc r. However, for diﬀerent γ, no
remarkable changes are observed, which indicates that γ
doesn’t play a signiﬁcant role in the evolutionary coop-
eration on SF networks. Figure 4 (d) is the simulation
result on the Barab´asi-Albert networks [13], which are
constructed by the preferential attachment mechanism.
One can ﬁnd two main diﬀerences between the two set-
tings, respectively with hki = 4 and hki = 8: (i) the
tendencies of fC for the two cases are remarkably diﬀer-
ent, (ii) the two values of r corresponding to the max-
imal fC are very diﬀerent. These ﬁndings suggest that
the average degree hki plays the key role in the system’s
cooperative behavior. Combining the results on SW and
SF networks, we conclude that the cooperation level of
the MBSG on the networks of real-world structural prop-
erties is a non-monotonous function of r, which implies
that giving proper advantages to defectors can enhance
the cooperative behavior of a system. In addition, we in-
vestigate the spatial patterns on SW networks. As shown
in Figs. 5 (a) and (b), the introduction of long-range con-
nections breaks local patterns compared with Fig. 3 (d),
and the larger the value of p, the more irregular of the
spatial patterns.
In the case of random networks, the
patterns have no prominent features.

In summary, we have investigated the MBSG on com-
plex networks. The cooperation level fC exhibits a step
structure on lattices with period boundary conditions,
and the number of steps corresponds to the number of

