Paper to be published in “Organizations and Strategies in Astronomy – Vol. 7, Ed. A. Heck, 2006, Springer, Dordrecht.”
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 6/22/04

6
0
0
2
 
r
p
A
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
4
1
4
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

ASTRONOMY, ASTROPHYSICS & SPACE PHYSICS IN GREECE

Vassilis Charmandaris1
University of Crete, Department of Physics, P. O. Box 2208, GR-71003, Heraklion, Greece
Paper to be published in “Organizations and Strategies in Astronomy – Vol. 7, Ed. A. Heck, 2006, Springer, Dordrecht.”

ABSTRACT
In the present document I review the current organizational structure of Astronomy, Astrophysics
and Space Physics in Greece. I brieﬂy present the institutions where professional astronomers are
pursuing research, along with some notes of their history, as well as the major astronomical facilities
currently available within Greece.
I touch upon topics related to graduate studies in Greece and
present some statistics on the distribution of Greek astronomers. Even though every attempt is made
to substantiate all issues mentioned, some of the views presented have inevitably a personal touch
and thus should be treated as such.
Subject headings:

1. INTRODUCTION
The framework within which astronomers – a term that
will be used rather loosely in the rest of the document to
indicate individuals performing research in Astronomy,
Astrophysics and Space Physics (AA&SP) – have been
functioning in Greece is not too diﬀerent from other Eu-
ropean countries.

As in most other countries in Europe, the educational
and research activity in Astronomy, Astrophysics and
Space Physics in Greece has been fostered within pub-
lic Universities and Research Institutes. Even though
this may change in the near future currently no private
academic or research institutions in AA&SP are operat-
ing in Greece. Thus the individuals who are employed
full time to teach or do research in AA&SP are typically
civil servants in permanent, tenure track, or ﬁxed-term
research associate positions. Currently the majority of
them (see Sect. 3, Fig. 1) are in Universities and only
a small fraction is associated with Research Institutes or
Observatories.

Up until the early 1980s the structure of the Univer-
sity system in Greece followed the German style. It was
based on “Chairs” of Professors in speciﬁc research ﬁelds
(i.e. Astronomy, Classical Mechanics, etc.). The few
astronomy Professors, typically as numerous as the cor-
responding number of university departments pursuing
research in the various areas of AA&SP, held their po-
sition until the age of retirement. They made all major
administrative decisions related to both teaching priori-
ties and research directions in their institutions. Several
junior staﬀ members did support them in these activ-
ities but those members had only marginal control and
rather limited independence to pursue their own research
directions.

The University system presently in place was put for-
ward in 1983, (with a few minor modiﬁcations over the
past ∼25 years) and has a structure similar to the cur-
rent academic system of the United States. There are two
ranks of tenure track positions: Lecturer and Assistant
Professor, and two of tenured positions: Associate Pro-

Electronic address: vassilis@physics.uoc.gr

1 Chercheur Associ´e, Observatoire de Paris, F-75014, Paris,

France

fessor and Full Professor. A minimum of three years is
required on each rank before applying for promotion the
next. Tenure is obtained upon successful evaluation after
spending three years at the level of Assistant Professor.
A university faculty can, in principle pursue his/her own
research direction, teach courses, and supervise graduate
students.

However, when this change in the academic system
took place in the early 1980’s, there was no provision on
the age distribution of the faculty to be hired. As a result
a large number of individuals who were already aﬃliated
with the universities at the time in junior level – the so-
called “Assistant” appointments, automatically obtained
tenure at the rank of Lecturer upon the completion of
their PhD. Others, who already had a PhD, were consid-
ered for tenure at higher ranks. The evaluation for this
process though was often not very strict and with criteria
based mostly on social reasons or giving a disproportional
emphasis to the teaching responsibilities of the faculty,
rather than mostly based on their research background
and potential or relevance of the ﬁeld to the future direc-
tion of modern astrophysics. In addition, since most of
the individuals who obtained these positions were past
graduate students of the same universities, there was a
disproportional hiring from “within”. This phenomenon,
known as “academic inbreeding”, was more prevalent in
the older institutions in Athens and Thessaloniki, which
had the largest number of staﬀ at the time. Even today
there are institutions in Greece where well over 70% of
their permanent staﬀ members are past alumni who did
their dissertation in the same institute and did not spend
more than a couple of years away from their alma mat-
ter before obtaining permanent positions. It is beyond
the scope of the present document to discuss this phe-
nomenon and the serious negative consequences it has
on both the quality of research performed and on the
opening of new research horizons in academic institu-
tions. We should note though that this phenomenon is
not unique to Greece, as it also appears for example in
the French academic system and in Korea2 , but it is
practically absent in the United States. Greek universi-
ties in the periphery of the country did not suﬀer much

2 See: Science 18 December 1998: Vol. 282. no. 5397

2

from this problem for two reasons. Either they had not
produced their own PhDs due to their youth as institu-
tions, or their faculty made a conscious decision to have a
broader perspective in their hiring process. For example,
in the Department of Physics of the University of Crete,
where the author is currently employed, only 1 out of the
33 faculty members obtained his PhD from this institu-
tion. All these political decisions had implications that
continue to aﬀect the evolution of Greek astronomy, and
academic system in general, well into the 21st century.

Research Institutes in Greece have a similar struc-
ture to the Universities, with also four ranks, which are
loosely indicated as Researcher-D, -C, -B and -A. Each
researcher also has to remain in a given rank for a mini-
mum of three years and tenure is obtained upon promo-
tion from Researcher-C to Researcher-B. Research Insti-
tutes can not award academic degrees and as a result
close collaboration with a University is needed in order
for a researcher to be able to co-supervise students.

Public funding for development of infrastructures, di-
rect support of research in astronomy, or fellowships to-
wards graduate studies in the ﬁeld, has been traditionally
fairly limited. Such a low level support is not restricted
to Greek astronomy but it is also the case in most dis-
ciplines. In 2004 Greece spent only 0.58% of its Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) in R&D, which brings Greece
as a nation in the last place among the 15 EU countries
in this category, a position it holds for the past 5 years.
At over the same period the European Union (EU) av-
erage was 1.95%, more than 3 times higher3. As a result
the possibilities for Greek astronomers to join large inter-
national collaborative projects, or just to obtain support
to attend scientiﬁc meetings outside Greece have been
scarce. Even though the situation has recently improved
over the past decade, and the possibilities – mostly via
the ﬁnancial and organizational support of the European
Union – are more numerous, the eﬀects of this low level
national funding can be seen in most indices quantifying
the overall astronomy scientiﬁc output from Greece. It
is worth noting that Greece, which joined the European
Union as the 10th member in 1981, is still not a member
state of the European Southern Observatory (ESO) and
only joined the European Space Agency (ESA) in 2005.

2. GOVERNING BODIES
The policies that directly aﬀect issues related to
AA&SP in Greece are determined by the Ministry of
Development, in particular the General Secretariat for
Research and Technology, and the Ministry of Educa-
tion. The ﬁrst has administrative control over the re-
search institutes and astronomy infrastructure and the
latter controls the national university system.

Greek astronomers can express their opinion or shape
policies on issues related AA&SP via the Greek National
Committee for Astronomy (GNCA) or the Hellenic As-
tronomical Society (Hel.A.S.).

2.1. The Greek National Committee for Astronomy

(GNCA)

The Greek National Committee

for Astronomy
(GNCA4) was established, by Royal Decree, as the of-

3 Source EUROSTAT in http://europa.eu.int/comm/eurostat/
4 The web page of GNCA is: http://www.astro.noa.gr/∼gnca

ﬁcial advisory committee to the Greek Government for
all matters relevant to Astronomical and Astrophysical
research, in 1957. It is the oﬃcial body, responsible for
the promotion and coordination of Astronomy in Greece
and for all matters related to international astronomi-
cal cooperation. The Minister of Development selects
the members of GNCA and appoints them for a term of
two years. Its oﬃcial seat is the National Observatory
of Athens. Since 1995, GNCA does not have its own
budget, but obtains its funding from the budget of the
General Secretariat of Research and Technology (GSRT)
of the Ministry of Development. The GNCA has the
following principal objectives:

• To co-ordinate and promote the various astronom-
ical activities in Greece, including research and ed-
ucation.

• To act as the link between the Greek astronomi-
cal community and the International Astronomical
Union (IAU), oﬃcially representing Greece in the
General Assembly of the IAU.

• To facilitate the advancement of international col-
laboration between Greek and foreign astronomers
and research groups.

Besides the IAU, GNCA has taken responsibility for
Greece’s representation to the Board of Directors of the
journal ”Astronomy and Astrophysics” (and its ﬁnancial
contributions), to the European Joint Organization for
Solar Observations (JOSO) and, recently, to the Euro-
pean Union FP6, I3, Network OPTICON (see Sect. 8).
The board of GNCA consists of ﬁve ordinary and ﬁve
substitute members. The current (2005-2007) ordinary
of
members are Prof. P. Laskarides (Chair - Univ.
Athens), Prof. T. Krimigis (Vice Chair - Academy of
Athens), Dr.
I. Daglis (Nat. Obs. of Athens), Prof.
N. Kylaﬁs (Univ. of Crete), and Prof. J.H. Seiradakis
(Univ. of Thessaloniki). The substitute members over
the same period are: Prof. S. Avgoloupis (Univ. of
Thessaloniki), Dr. E. Dara (Academy of Athens), Prof.
M. Kafatos (George Mason Univ., USA), Prof. A. Nin-
dos (Univ. of Ioannina), and Prof. J. Papamastorakis
(Univ. of Crete).

2.2. The Hellenic Astronomical Society (Hel.A.S.)
The Hellenic Astronomical Society (Hel.A.S.5) exists
for nearly 15 years and it is the major association of
professional astronomers in Greece. Its overall structure
and operation is similar to other national societies such as
the “American Astronomical Society” in the US, or the
“Soci´et´e Fran¸caise d’ Astronomie et d’Astrophysique” in
France.

Historically, the ﬁrst serious attempt to establish a Hel-
lenic Astronomical Society was undertaken in 1982 dur-
ing the XVIII General Assembly of the International As-
tronomical Union, which took place in Patras, Greece.
There, during several meetings, a dozen astronomers
gathered in order to put the foundations of the long
sought Society. The following years progress was slow
even though material necessary for setting up the frame-
work for the Society was being collected. It was much

5 The web page of Hel.A.S. is http://www.astro.auth.gr/elaset

3

Fig. 1.— Distribution of tenured and tenure track astronomers in the major research institutes in Greece. The total number of astronomers

included in this study is 107.

later, in November 1991, when Prof. P. Laskarides (Univ.
of Athens) issued the ﬁrst announcement of the 1st Hel-
lenic Astronomical Conference, that the idea of the es-
tablishment of an Astronomical Society was formally put
forward again. With the help of several colleagues Prof.
J.H. Seiradakis (Univ. of Thessaloniki) drafted the ﬁrst
Constitution for the Society. The ﬁnal version was pre-
sented to the participants of the 1st Hellenic Astronom-
ical Conference, which was held in Athens in September
1992.

During the Athens Conference, several astronomers be-
came founding members of the Hellenic Astronomical So-
ciety. A few more founding members signed the Consti-
tution during the next weeks bringing the total number
of founding members to sixty six (66). Following the
appropriate legal procedures, the Hellenic Astronomical
Society (Hel.A.S.) was recognized by the Court of Jus-
tice in Athens on May 25 1993. The appointed Council
of Hel.A.S. became aware of the verdict of the Court
of Justice in June 1993. The President of the Council,
Prof. B. Barbanis (Univ. of Thessaloniki), assisted by
the members initiated the procedure for the ﬁrst elec-
tions of Hel.A.S. In the elections, which took place on
June 2nd 1994, participated 83% of the founding mem-
bers.

According to its Constitution the Governing Council
of Hel.A.S. consists of a President, six (6) members and
three (3) auditors. The Council is elected for a two-year
term and an individual cannot serve on it for more than
two consecutive terms. The candidates for the Council
must be members of Hel.A.S. who live and work perma-
nently in Greece during the term of their candidacy and
at least 42% of them should be aﬃliated with institutions
outside the Athens metro area. The current Council,
whose mandate ends in June 2006, consists of Prof. P.

Laskarides (Univ. of Athens) as the president and Prof.
D. Hatzidimitriou (Univ. of Crete), Prof. K. Tsinganos
(Univ. of Athens), Prof. V. Geroyannis (Univ. of Pa-
tras), Prof. K. Kokkotas (Univ. of Thessaloniki) and
Prof. X. Moussas (Univ. of Athens) as members. The
auditors for the same period are Prof. E. Danezis (Univ.
of Athens), Prof. E. Mavromichalaki (Univ. of Athens)
and Dr. E. Xilouris (National Obs. of Athens)

The Hellenic Astronomical Society has been very ac-
tive and currently has 272 members, 27% of which live
and work outside Greece. It has been recognized as an
Aﬃliated Member of the European Astronomical Society
(EAS) and has established links with other international
astronomical societies. It has been organizing a major
science meeting every two years and in the summer of
1997 organized the Joint European and National Astro-
nomical Meeting (JENAM-97).

3. ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS
3.1. Human Resources in Astronomy, Astrophysics &

Space Physics

As one would expect, since more than half of the popu-
lation in Greece is concentrated in the Athens and Thes-
saloniki metro areas, most of the astronomers in Greece
are also associated with institutes located in these two
cities. This is depicted in Figure 1 where the fraction of
tenured and tenure track astronomy faculty in the major
AA&SP institutions in Greece is presented.

An additional issue, which aﬀects the current state and
has direct implications to the future of Greek astronomy,
is related to the age distribution of Greek professional
astronomers. In Figure 2, a histogram of 135 astronomers
working in Greece is presented, using the database of the
members of the Hellenic Astronomical Society, as well as
ancillary information collected by the author. The study

4

Fig. 2.— A histogram of the age distribution of astronomers in Greece in 2006. The vertical line indicates the 67th year of age which is

the current compulsory retirement age for civil servants.

was limited to individuals over the age of 30, since this
is typically the age when one is competitive for tenure
track or long term research associate positions. Some
individuals over the retirement age of 67, who are on an
emeritus-type position and/or still active, were included
in the analysis. The error on a single 5-year bin is of the
order of 5% but it is very likely that the values of bins at
ages greater than 55 are somewhat underestimated. This
is due to the fact that there are a number of individuals
who formally have a tenured astronomy positions but as
they are no longer active they were not included in the
database of Hel.A.S, on which analysis was based.

Inspection of Figure 2 clearly reveals that almost 30%
of Greek astronomers are near or over the age of 60. This
was a direct consequence of the legislative changes that
took place in Greece in the early 1980s mentioned in
Sect. 1. Furthermore, statistics over the last 10 years in-
dicate that on average there were less than 3 new tenure
track astronomy position openings per year in the coun-
try, including both universities and research institutions.
The fraction of astronomers near the age of retirement is
even larger if we were to consider only the two older uni-
versities of Athens and Thessaloniki. This implies that
within the next 5 to 10 years a large number of their
current faculty members will retire and they will have
to be replaced in a very short time scale. This will be
an interesting challenge for Greek astronomy. Will it be
possible for these institutions to ﬁnd enough, well quali-
ﬁed, candidates from the available pool of post-docs and
research associates for their needs? Will they be forced
to lower their hiring standards in order to hire faculty for
their teaching needs, or they will be able to hire with a
lower pace, being selective and identifying the key scien-
tiﬁc research areas they should be investing in? In 2016

we will know the answer to these questions!

Another topic worth touching upon is gender diversity
in Greek astronomy. At the time of writing this report
13% of the permanent or tenure track astronomy posi-
tions in Greece were held by women. This percentage is
less than in France6, which leads the way with ∼26%, or
in Italy, Russia and Spain, all above 15%, but higher than
the fraction of female astronomers in the United States
which is ∼10%. We should note though, that only re-
cently one female astronomer in Greece reached for the
ﬁrst time the highest possible academic rank (Full Pro-
fessor or Researcher A), a statistic that will hopefully
improve very soon.

3.2. Research in Astronomy, Astrophysics & Space

Physics

The latest organized eﬀort to map the research activity
in AA&SP in the various institutes in Greece took place
in 1998. Dr. E. Kontizas, as the president of GNCA at
the time, appointed an international six-member com-
mittee, chaired by Prof. Y. Terzian (Cornell Univ.,
USA), to report on the status of astronomy in Greece
and propose recommendations for the future. The re-
port7 was presented during the workshop “Astronomy
2000+: Greek Prospects for the 21st Century” which
took place at the National Observatory of Athens on
November 1998. The description presented in the fol-
lowing paragraphs draws from material included in this

6 The percentages

countries mentioned
are based on the 2003 report by Dr.
Florence Dur-
ret (Institute d’Astrophysique de Paris, France) available at:
http://www2.iap.fr/sf2a/courrier.html

other

the

for

7 The

complete

“Terzian Report”

is

available

at:

http://www.astro.noa.gr/gnca/NEWS/ca-report2000.htm

report with some modiﬁcations mostly related to changes
in the human resources of the institutes involved.

There are eight institutions in Greece with Depart-
ments or Sections devoted to teaching and research in
Astronomy and Astrophysics. Three are located in
Athens: the largest is the Section within the Department
of Physics of the National Kapodistrian University, fol-
lowed by the National Observatory of Athens, and an
astronomy Section of the national Academy of Athens.
In Thessaloniki there is a very small group within the
Faculty of Engineering (Polytechnic School) and a con-
siderably larger one within the Department of Physics
of the Aristotle University. In Crete there is a Section
of Astrophysics and Space Physics in the Department
of Physics in Heraklion, while the Universities of Patras
and Ioannina each have small Astronomy groups within
either their Physics or Engineering Departments. Some
research activity in very speciﬁc areas (i.e. cosmology
or general relativity) also exists in a few Departments
of Mathematics but the numbers of permanent staﬀ are
very small and there is no critical mass to be considered
groups.

The principal

institutions devoted to research and
technical development in space sciences is the Depart-
ment of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the
“Democritus” University of Thrace (in particular the
Laboratory of Space Electrodynamics in the Section of
Telecommunications and Space Science) and the Insti-
tute for Space Applications and Remote Sensing of the
National Observatory of Athens. Signiﬁcant research in
ground based ionospheric and atmospheric work is also
a component of the overall Astrophysics and Space Sci-
ence Section at the University of Crete. Activity relat-
ing to space science also exists in the Section of Astron-
omy, Astrophysics, and Mechanics of the University of
Athens, and at the Research Center for Astronomy in
the Academy of Athens.

In the following subsections we present a brief descrip-
tion of the various institutes in Greece hosting research
groups with active research in AA&SP. More detailed an-
nual activity reports from most institutions and groups
are being collected by the Greek National Committee for
Astronomy and they are made available from its web site
mentioned in section 2.1.

3.2.1. University of Athens
The “National & Kapodistrian” University of Athens
was founded in 1837, soon after the independence of
Greece. It was the ﬁrst University in Greece as well as
in the Balkan Peninsula and the whole eastern Mediter-
ranean region. The Department of Physics was created in
1904 and its current Section of Astronomy, Astrophysics,
and Mechanics was formed in the mid 1980s by merg-
ing the previously independent Chairs indicated in its
name. The Section is the largest in Greece and consists
of 24 tenured or tenure tract faculty. Most of them have
research interests in the area of Astronomy and Astro-
physics, while Mechanics is a rather small constituent.
The Department of Physics started a graduate school in
1994, within which the Section has its own Masters and
PhD programs with 12 graduate courses. Since January
2000 the Section also operates a 40cm Cassegrain tele-
scope within a 5m rotating dome located on the top of
the Physics building. The telescope was constructed by

5

DFM engineering (USA) has an f/3 focal ratio and it is
mainly used for educational activities.

In addition to the pursuit of astronomy, it should also
be mentioned that the faculty of the Physics Department
have been involved over many years in building a deep
sea High Energy Neutrino telescope, known as NESTOR.
Recently this eﬀort has been put under the auspices of
the National Observatory of Athens as an independent
institute for Astroparticle Physics (see Sect. 3.2.2).

3.2.2. National Observatory of Athens
The National Observatory of Athens (NOA8) was
founded in 1842 and is the oldest research institute in
Greece.
It currently consists of ﬁve institutes three of
which, the Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics, the
Institute for Space Applications and Remote Sensing and
the Institute of Astroparticle Physics – Nestor, conduct
research in AA&SP. The current director of NOA is Prof.
C. Zerefos.

The Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics has 11
permanent staﬀ scientists as well as research associates
and support personnel. Their research interests include
a variety of topics in extragalactic astronomy, observa-
tional cosmology, interstellar matter, X-ray astronomy,
and binary stars. The Institute supports the Astronom-
ical Observatory in Kryoneri as well as the new Chel-
mos Observatory where the new 2.3m “Aristarchos” tele-
scope, the largest in Greece, is located (see Sect. 4.1,
4.3). The institute is also very active in public outreach
activities, among which are the operation of a Visitor
Center and an annual summer school, which introduces
basic concepts of modern astrophysics to high-school stu-
dents since 1996. The current director of the Institute is
Prof. C. Goudis.

The Institute for Space Applications and Remote Sens-
ing has 11 tenure or tenure track research staﬀ. The ac-
tivities of the Institute encompass a wide area in Space
Research and Applications.
Its main objective is to
carry out R&D projects in these ﬁelds, which include
Remote Sensing, Telecommunications, Space and Iono-
spheric Physics. Additional activities include the sys-
tematic collection and processing of data derived from
observations made either from the earth or space as well
as the performance of autonomous studies in other spe-
ciﬁc subjects of space research and applications. The In-
stitute is equipped with satellite and ionospheric ground
stations, various RF and electronic test and measurement
equipment, as well as an advanced computing center con-
nected to international networks. The current director of
the Institute is Dr. I. Daglis.

The Institute of Astroparticle Physics – NESTOR
(Neutrino Extended Submarine Telescope with Oceano-
graphic Research) became the ﬁfth institute of the na-
tional Observatory of Athens in 2003. The institute is
leading the development of a deep-sea high energy neu-
trino telescope approximately 14km oﬀ the shore from
the town of Pylos in Peloponnese, at water depth of
4000m. NESTOR will detect the Cherenkov radiation
produced by muons traversing the water when their par-
ent neutrinos emitted from astrophysical objects, such
as X-ray binaries, black holes, or Active Galactic Nuclei,

8 More information on the National Observatory of Athens the

can be found at: http://www.noa.gr

6

interact with water. The current director of the Institute
is Prof. L. Resvanis.

3.2.3. Academy of Athens

The Academy of Athens was formally founded in 1926.
It currently has among its members two Academicians
(Prof. G. Contopoulos and Prof. T. Krimigis) with a
background and research interests in astronomy. One
of the centers of the Academy, the Research Center for
Astronomy and Applied Mathematics, consists of 11 per-
manent research staﬀ, and conducts research in solar and
space physics, cosmology, particle physics and dynamical
astronomy.

3.2.4. University of Thessaloniki

The “Aristotle” University of Thessaloniki was the sec-
ond university in Greece and it was founded in 1925.
There are two units in the University with activity in
Astronomy. The smallest, in the Polytechnic School, con-
sists of two faculty members and their research is concen-
trated mainly on ﬂare stars. The largest is the Section of
Astrophysics, Astronomy and Mechanics (AAM9) of the
Department of Physics, with 17 faculty members, sev-
eral research associates, graduate students, and support
personnel. The Section was formed in the mid-80s when
the administrative structure of the Laboratories of As-
tronomy (founded in 1943) and Mechanics changed (see
Sect. 1). The staﬀ is active in many areas of theoret-
ical and observational astrophysics, including an active
theoretical group on gravitation and general relativity,
as well as in education and public outreach.
In addi-
tion to the Stephanion Observatory (see Sect. 4.4) the
Section operates a 20cm refracting telescope (made by
Secretan, Paris) in a rotating 6m-diameter dome, which
is located within the University campus, and it is used
for educational purposes.

3.2.5. University of Crete

The University of Crete was founded in 1973 but ac-
cepted its ﬁrst students in 1978.
Its Department of
Physics was founded in 1978 and is the youngest of simi-
lar Departments in Greece. The Section of Astrophysics
and Space Physics10 has 7 faculty members as well as
several research staﬀ and graduate students. Two (2)
more tenured track astronomers, from the Foundation
for Research and Technology-Hellas and the Technical
Education Institute of Heraklion, are actively collabo-
rating with the members of the Section. Research at
the Univ. of Crete covers a broad range in theoretical
and observational problems related to both galactic and
extragalactic astrophysics. Signiﬁcant eﬀorts are being
devoted to the operations of an Ionospheric Physics lab-
oratory. Observations for several astronomical projects
are also taken at the Skinakas Observatory (see Sect. 4.2)
and others are performed using international ground and
space born telescopes. The Department has a graduate
program through which students can pursue their grad-
uate studies in astrophysics.

9 The online description of the AAM Section in Thessaloniki can

be found at: http://www.astro.auth.gr

10 The web page of the Astronomy Section in Crete can be found

at: http://www.physics.uoc.gr/en/

3.2.6. University of Thrace

The Laboratory of Space Electrodynamics (LSE) at
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering of
the “Democritus” University of Thrace is the largest
space physics group in Greece with extensive experience
in hardware development. It consists of 6 faculty, several
research associates, support personnel, and many grad-
uate and undergraduate students. The scientists are co
investigators or associated scientists on several interna-
tional spacecraft missions (e.g. Ulysses, Geotail, Cluster
II, and others), successfully funded through European
programs and bilateral collaborations with other coun-
tries, including the U.S. The LSE has designed, devel-
oped and successfully ﬂown particle experiments on a
number of Russian spacecraft, as well as component sys-
tems to instruments involving data processing units and
ASICs (Application Speciﬁc Integrated Circuits). Such
high technology hardware capability in space instrumen-
tation is rather unique within Greece. The LSE group
has expanded their activities to antennae and propaga-
tion, satellite communications, and other related areas.

3.2.7. University of Patras

The University of Patras has a Laboratory of Astron-
omy and a Section of Astronomy in the Division of The-
oretical and Mathematical Physics in the Department of
Physics. A total of nine tenured and tenure track faculty
teach courses and conduct research in a few astronomy
areas and there is an active theoretical group on celestial
mechanics.

3.2.8. University of Ioannina

This is the smallest group of Astronomy in a Depart-
ment of Physics in Greece. It has three faculty members
in the Section of Astrogeophysics, within the Department
of Physics. The staﬀ performs research mostly in so-
lar physics and in multi-wavelength observations of ﬂare
stars.

4. NATIONAL FACILITIES
The limited funding of the Greek government towards
basic and applied research has had, as a result, the small
investment in major infrastructures for astronomical fa-
cilities in Greece. This aﬀected the oldest observatories
in Greece, such as Penteli, Kryoneri and Stephanion Ob-
servatory, which have diﬃculties keeping up-to-date with
the modern developments in telescope design, aperture
size of the telescope primary mirrors, as well as the in-
strumentation available. More recent facilities, such as
Skinakas Observatory, which currently hosts the largest
operational telescope in Greece which is 1.29m in diame-
ter, are more modern and do provide high quality instru-
ments to the observers. However, they also suﬀer from
the limited national ﬁnancial support and they cannot
function as facilities that can provide access to all Greek
astronomers who may wish to use them. A major eﬀort
in improving the current situation has been the ongoing
construction of the 2.3m “Aristarchos” telescope by the
National Observatory of Athens. The telescope had its
ﬁrst light in the end of 2005 and when it becomes fully
operational, before the end of 2007, will be the largest in
Greece.

7

Fig. 3.— An optical satellite image of Greece, obtained in 2004, in which the locations of the major observatories hosting functioning
optical telescopes with a primary mirror diameter larger than 0.5m are indicated (Image courtesy of MODIS Rapid Response Project at
NASA/GSFC)

4.1. Chelmos Observatory
The site selected for the new 2.3m telescope is located
in Northern Peloponnese, on top of Chelmos mountain,
near the small town of Kalavrita approximately 150km
from Athens, with longitude: 22o13’, latitude: 37o58’
N and an elevation of 2340m. The total cost for the
project is expected to be about 5 million Euros and it
was ﬁnanced mainly by the European Union, as well as
by the General Secretariat for Research and Technology
of the Ministry of Development. The telescope named
“Aristarchos” is a Ritchey-Chrtien with a focal ratio f/8
and a 10 ﬁeld of view as well an RC-corrected ﬁeld of view
of 1degree. The telescope and dome are constructed by
Carl Zeiss (Germany).

The image scale on the focal plane is 1”=85µm and
a 1024x1024 CCD camera was the ﬁrst light instru-
ment. A medium resolution (2.5˚A- 6˚A) spectrometer
covering the range between 4270˚Aand 7730˚Aas well as
a 4096x4096 optical CCD will be the ﬁrst generation
instruments of the telescope. These will be followed
by an echelle spectrometer covering the range between
3900˚Aand 7500˚Awith a resolution of 6 km s−1, as well
as other instruments. The supervision of the telescope
construction as well as its operation are managed by the
Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics of the National
Observatory of Athens11.

11 Details on the Chelmos Observatory is available at:

4.2. Skinakas Observatory
The Skinakas Observatory12 operates as part of a sci-
entiﬁc research collaboration between the University of
Crete, the Foundation for Research and Technology-
Hellas (FORTH) and the Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Ex-
traterrestrische (MPE) Physik of Germany.

The site of the Observatory (Longitude: 24o53’57”E,
Latitude: 35o12’43”N), chosen on scientiﬁc and func-
tional grounds, is the Skinakas summit of Mount Ida
(also known as Psiloritis), at an altitude of 1750m and
a distance of 60km from Heraklion. The Observatory
has two telescopes: a Modiﬁed Ritchey-Chrtien telescope
with a 1.29m aperture (focal ratio f/7.6), which became
operational in 1995, and a 30cm telescope (focal ratio
f/3.2). The building for the small telescope was con-
structed in 1986, and observations started in 1987. The
site is one of the best in Greece with weather conditions
often permitting photometric sub-arcsecond seeing. It in-
cludes a modern guest house powered with solar arrays
and an Internet connection.

The optical system of the 1.29m telescope were manu-
factured by Carl Zeiss (Germany). The mechanical parts
were built by DFM Engineering (USA). The instrumen-
tation available includes a focal reducer, a number of op-

http://www.astro.noa.gr/ASC 2.3m/ngt main.htm

12 More information on Skinakas Observatory can be obtained

from: http://skinakas.physics.uoc.gr

8

Fig. 4.— Left: A picture of the dome of the 2.3m Aristarchos telescope at Chelmos. Right: A photograph of the telescope inside the

dome (Images courtesy of National Observatory of Athens).

Fig. 5.— An areal view of the Skinakas Observatory summit with the larger dome of the 1.29m telescope seen on the left, along with the
smaller domes the guest house facilities. The 1.29m telescope inside its dome is seen in the right (Images courtesy of the Physics Dept.,
Univ. of Crete).

tical CCD cameras, and a low resolution long slit spectro-
graph. A 1024x1024 near-IR camera and an echelle spec-
trograph will soon be available on site, along with OP-
TIMA, a fast photo-polarimeter with microsecond time
resolution intended for observations of compact objects.
Various research projects, both galactic and extragalac-
tic, mostly led by members of the Department of Physics
of the University of Crete or MPE astronomers have been
ongoing since the facilities became operational. The close
collaboration with the MPE group and the FORTH en-
gineering support has helped the astrophysics group in
Crete in keeping the telescope and the instruments in
the forefront of technology, always taking into account
the limitations in the budget.

4.3. Kryoneri Observatory
The Astronomical Station of Kryoneri13 was estab-
lished in 1972. It is located in the Northern Peloponnese,
on top of mountain Kilini at an elevation of 930m, near
the small village Kryoneri 110km from Athens (longi-
tude: 22o37’E, latitude: 37o58’N). The 1.2m Cassegrain
Coude telescope of the Astronomical Station Kryoneri,
made by Grubb Parsons Co., Newcastle, was installed
in 1975.
Its optical system consists of a paraboloidal
primary mirror of 1.23m in diameter and f/3 focal ra-
tio, and a hyperboloidal secondary mirror (31 cm). Both
mirrors are made of Zerodur. The telescope focal ratio
is f/13, its ﬁeld of view is about 40’ and the image scale
is 12.5”/mm. As with Chelmos Observatory, Kryoneri is
operated by the Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics
of the National Observatory of Athens.

4.4. Stephanion Observatory
The ﬁrst observations at the Stephanion Observatory,
in eastern Peloponnese, were undertaken in March 1967
with a guest 38cm reﬂector and a UBV photometer that
belonged to the Bergedorf Observatory of the University
of Hamburg, Germany. Since then a large number of
instruments have been hosted at the 800-m altitude ob-
servatory, which is located at longitude: 22o49’45”E, lat-
itude: 37o45’9”N, including French telescopes, for mon-
itoring satellites, and a 40cm reﬂector from the Utrecht
Observatory, Netherlands.
In June 1971, the 30-inch
(76cm) Cassegrain reﬂector of the University of Thes-
saloniki was installed at the Observatory. Until 1975,
when the 1.23m Cassegrain Coude reﬂector at Kryoneri
became operational, this was the largest telescope in
Greece.

The 30-inch reﬂector is mounted asymmetrically and
its focal ratio is f/3 for the primary hyperbolic mirror and
f/13.5 for the Cassegrain focus.
It was constructed by
Astro Mechanics, USA, a ﬁrm that has long ago discon-
tinued making astronomical instruments. The majority
of observations are carried out with a Johnson dual chan-
nel photoelectric photometer with an oﬀset guider unit
mounted in the Cassegrain focus.
It includes an RCA
1P21 and an RCA 7102 photo-multipliers, both of which
are refrigerated by dry ice. Key photometric observa-
tions of variable stars (ﬂare stars, Cepheid variables, RS
CVns, etc) have been undertaken in co-operation with
large ground or space instruments. The international

13 Additional

information on Kryoneri Observatory are at:

http://www.astro.noa.gr/ASK 1.2m/ask main.htm

9

demand for co-operative and simultaneous observations
at the Stephanion Observatory stems from the strict dif-
ferential method used for obtaining absolute, above at-
mosphere, stellar magnitudes in the international UBV
system. The error in the calibrated magnitudes obtained
is usually better than 0.02 magnitudes.

4.5. Penteli Observatory
The Astronomical Station on Penteli Mountain, just
15km from downtown Athens, was established in 1937
when it became apparent that it was necessary to move
the telescopes from the grounds of the old National Ob-
servatory in the center of Athens. In 1955 the National
Observatory of Athens accepted the donation oﬀered by
the University of Cambridge, for a 62.5cm telescope de-
signed by R. S. Newall, and constructed by the ﬁrm
Thomas Cooke & Sons in 1868. Its big tube (about 9m in
legth), the German-type equatorial mount and its weight
of about nine tons, required careful dismounting, trans-
portation and installation in a new dome that was built
in Penteli. This telescope, no longer used for research, is
still available on site today.

4.6. Eudoxos Educational Observatory
The “Eudoxos” observatory is a web-accessible com-
plex of optical and radio telescopes, founded in 1999,
whose facilities are located 16km from Argostoli, in the
Ionian island of Kefallinia at a plateau 600m below
the peak of mount Ainos (1628m). It operates a 0.6m
Cassegrain robotic telescope named after Dr. Andreas
Michalitsianos, a Greek astrophysicist who was born in
the island and had a successful career in NASA (USA)
until his early passing away. The observatory was formed
by a consortium of Greek institutes involving the Na-
tional Research Center of Physical Sciences “Democri-
tus”, the Hellenic Naval Academy, the Ministry of Edu-
cation and the Prefecture of Kefallinia and Ithaki. It is
being operated by the same consortium with the addi-
tion of the University of Athens and has already received
substantial support from the Hellenic Air Force and the
Ministry of Education. The 0.6m telescope consists of
a fully autonomous computerized optical tube assembly,
automated enclosure, GPS smart antenna for time syn-
chronization, a full set of meteorological sensors, a large
format imaging CCD camera and UBVRI wheeled photo-
metric ﬁlters, as well as a ﬂeet of peripheral instruments
currently under construction or testing. All equipment
is completely controlled by two supervisory computers,
which communicate via the Internet to the participating
secondary schools and institutions.

5. HIGH SCHOOL AND UNDERGRADUATE STUDIES IN

ASTRONOMY

The Greek secondary education system does provide
substantial training in physics and mathematics to the
students who wish to follow university studies in sciences.
Even though there is no compulsory astronomy course
in high school (only an elective introductory astronomy
course is available for high-school juniors) basic astron-
omy ideas related to the solar system, stars, galaxies,
and the formation of the universe are presented in other
courses. Since 1996 the “Society for Space and Astron-
omy” of Volos (see Sect. 7) has been organizing a very

10

successful national astronomy competition in which stu-
dents from all over Greece attending the last three years
of high school (“Lyceum” in greek) can participate. The
top students are awarded various prizes while the ﬁrst
two are invited to attend an all-expenses-paid summer
space-camp in the United States organized by NASA.
This eﬀort, mainly supported by private funds and vol-
unteer work, has helped substantially in popularizing as-
tronomy among high school students.

At the university level there is no Bachelors (BSc) de-
gree in Astronomy or Space Science in Greece. Most
individuals, who are now professionals in the ﬁeld of
AA&SP and did their undergraduate studies in Greece,
obtained their BSc degree in Physics following a four-year
program. Some, mostly theorists, have obtained their
undergraduate degrees in Mathematics or Engineering.
Even in the various Departments of Physics in Greece
though, the curriculum of the astronomy courses varies
depending on the number and research background of
the astronomy faculty. Most Physics majors in Greece
have to follow at least one compulsory junior course in
Astrophysics while some complementary topics on dy-
namical astronomy are typically covered on compulsory
sophomore and junior level courses in classical mechan-
ics and modern physics. Most Departments of Physics
oﬀer the possibility of an astronomy specialization (or
minor), even though this is not formally awarded as a
degree. Within this framework, students, who are in-
terested in astronomy, have the opportunity to attend
typically ﬁve to ten junior and senior level courses in as-
trophysics, space physics and celestial mechanics, thus
obtaining a fairly solid background if they wish to con-
tinue for graduate studies.

The level of this University astronomy training is usu-
ally very good in the theoretical and encyclopedic part
and the top students are competitive with international
standards. What the students lack sometimes is the
hands-on practical knowledge, which can only be ob-
tained with access to engineering facilities or observa-
tories. The organization of summer schools, such as the
one taking place at the University of Crete for the past
17 years, addressed to undergraduates at junior and se-
nior level, can often ﬁll this gap. There are also recent ef-
forts at various institutions, such as the Univ. of Athens,
to enhance the observational astrophysics courses with a
more organized usage of small telescopes and new instru-
ments.

6. GRADUATE STUDIES IN ASTRONOMY,

ASTROPHYSICS & SPACE PHYSICS

Graduate studies in Astronomy Astrophysics & Space
Physics leading to a Masters or a PhD degree can now
be completed in most Greek Universities. The ﬁrst
well-organized physics graduate program in Greece with
coursework, qualifying exams, and at least partial ﬁnan-
cial support for students was developed in the University
of Crete in 1984. This was soon to be followed by the
University of Athens and other institutions.

However, the system suﬀers from diﬃculties, which
again stem from the limited national funding. Less than
a handful of state fellowships for graduate studies in
AA&SP are available each year. Providing ﬁnancial sup-
port for graduate studies via European Union or national
research proposals in astronomy is very challenging both

due to limited funds available in this ﬁeld as well as due to
various bureaucratic and organizational diﬃculties. As a
result graduate students in Greece have to either work, or
rely on other means to support themselves during their
studies. This sometimes aﬀects their ability to invest the
amount of time necessary for research in order to com-
plete a very high quality PhD project.

These reasons have been pushing many of the Greek
students to go abroad for their graduate studies. The
most popular destinations are the United States, the
United Kingdom, Germany, France and The Nether-
lands. The improved facilities and competitive research
environment in those countries do provide high qual-
ity training to the students but often decrease the like-
lihood of their return to work in Greece. Recently
though, the opportunities made available by the Euro-
pean Union, mostly via the Human Capital as well as
Training and Mobility programs, have ameliorated the
situation. These new possibilities have provided the
means to establish close links between Greek and other
European institutions, which improves substantially the
training of local students thus bringing direct scientiﬁc
return to the home institution.

7. AMATEUR ASTRONOMY IN GREECE
Amateur astronomy has been ﬂourishing in Greece over
the past decade. The availability of high quality and
low cost small telescopes and the use of Internet to or-
ganize and advertise the activities of groups has greatly
helped the development in the ﬁeld. Many amateur orga-
nizations exist all over Greece. In particular one should
mention the “Hellenic Astronomical Union” which is the
society of amateur astronomers in Athens, the “Group of
friends of Astronomy” in Thessaloniki, the “Corfu Astro-
nomical Society”, and the very active “Society for Space
and Astronomy” in the city of Volos. Since 1999 the
Greek amateur astronomers have been organizing a na-
tional meeting every two years where they present their
results and discuss issues of common interest.

8. GREECE AND INTERNATIONAL ASTRONOMY

ORGANIZATIONS

Greece joined the International Astronomical Union as
a funding member in 1920. It also contributes to the sup-
port of the international refereed journal of Astronomy
& Astrophysics, which allows Greek astronomers to pub-
lish their scientiﬁc results without page charges. Since
2004 Greece also participates in OPTICON, a 19.2 mil-
lion Euro 5-year European FP6 Infrastructure Network,
which provides access to a number of medium size tele-
scope facilities around the world.

In early 2005 Greece joined the European Space
Agency (ESA) contributing to the annual budget of ESA
with ∼9 million Euros. This opens new opportunities for
Astrophysics and Space Physics both in terms of technol-
ogy development as well as in science. Over the past year
signiﬁcant organizational eﬀorts have been taking place
in order to stimulate the Greek AA&SP community so
that it will be able to capitalize on this investment and
join the rest of the western European countries in the
forefront of space technology.

9. REMARKS
I believe that it is appropriate to end this article on
the status of Greek astronomy with an optimistic note

on the many improvements we have all experienced over
the past decade. As it can be seen from the material pre-
sented in the previous sections, the environment, both re-
search and academic, for the current and next generation
of Greek astronomers is considerably better than what
our predecessors had experienced and worked through.

I must also touch upon, a subject, which was men-
tioned earlier but only brieﬂy. Unfortunately Greece
is still not a member of the European Southern Ob-
servatory, the major astronomical organization in Eu-
rope. As a result it has no access to the current Euro-
pean infrastructures of the Very Large Telescope (VLT),
nor to the development of the Atacama Large Millime-
ter Array (ALMA) nor to the design of the future ESO
projects, such as the 100m OverWhelmingly Large tele-
scope (OWL). I should stress that the report14 of the
international expert committee chaired by Prof. Terzian
(Cornell Univ.) on the status of Greek Astronomy pre-
sented in 1998 during the workshop “Astronomy 2000+:
Greek Prospects for the 21st Century” noted that join-
ing ESO should be the ﬁrst astronomy priority for the
nation. Current rough estimates indicate that the cost

14 The

complete

“Terzian Report”

is

available

at

http://www.astro.noa.gr/gnca/NEWS/ca-report2000.htm

11

for Greece to join ESO would be a one-time ∼10 mil-
lion Euros entrance fee, similar to our annual contribu-
tion to ESA, and an annual membership fee of only ∼1
million Euros. Thus, if following the recommendation
of the international expert committee, ESO were to be
our lofty astronomy goal for the present century, one can
only hope that the whole Greek community will embrace
it and with a joined eﬀort will convince the “powers that
be” to turn the wheels and make it a reality before the
end of the current decade.

This document used material from the online archives
of the Hellenic Astronomical Society, the Greek National
Committee for Astronomy, as well as from the annual
reports of the various institutes that were available on-
line. I would like to thank K. Kokkotas (Univ. of Thes-
saloniki), N. Kylaﬁs (Univ. of Crete), J.H. Seiradakis
(Univ. of Thessaloniki), K. Tsinganos (Univ. of Athens),
and E. Xilouris (National Observatory of Athens) for
making suggestions that improved this article.

