Complexities of social networks: A Physicist’s perspective

Parongama Sen
Department of Physics, University of Calcutta, 92 Acharya Prafulla Chandra Road, Kolkata 700009, India.

Preprint no:CU-Physics 02-2006

I. INTRODUCTION

A large number of natural phenomena in the universe
go on oblivious of the presence of any living being, let
alone a society. Fundamental science subjects like physics
and chemistry deal with laws which would remain unal-
tered in the absence of life. In biological science, which
deals with living beings, the idea of a society may exist
in a basic form, e.g., as food chains, struggle for exis-
tence etc., among diﬀerent species whereas present day
human society has many more layers as factors like pol-
itics, economics or psychology dictate its evolution to a
large extent.

A society of human beings can be conceived in diﬀerent
ways as it involves diﬀerent kinds of contacts. Based on a
certain kind of interaction, a collection of human beings
may be thought of as a network where the individuals
are the nodes and the links are formed whenever two of
them interact in the deﬁned way [1]. An interesting as-
pect of several such social networks is that these show
small world eﬀect, a phenomenon which has been shown
to exist in diverse kinds of networks [2]. Small world ef-
fect and other interesting features shared by real world
networks of diﬀerent nature have triggered oﬀ a tremen-
dous activity of research among scientists of diﬀerent dis-
ciplines [3–5]. Physicists’ interests in networks lie in the
fact that these show interesting phase transitions as far as
equilibrium and dynamic properties are concerned. The
tools of statistical physics come handy in the analytical
and numerical studies of networks. Also, physics of sys-
tems embedded in small world networks raise interesting
questions.

In this article we discuss the properties of social net-
works which have received much attention during recent
years. The topic of social networks is vast and covers
many aspects. Obviously, all the issues are too diﬃcult
to address in a single review and thus we have tried to
give an overview of the subject, emphasising a physicist’s
perspective whenever possible.

6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
7
0
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

asked to forward letters to speciﬁc addresses in Cam-
bridge and Boston in Massachusetts. A letter had to
be hand-delivered only through persons known on ﬁrst-
name basis. Surprisingly, it was found that on an average
six people were required for a successful delivery. The
number 6 is approximately log(N ), where N is the total
number of people in the USA. In this particular experi-
ment, if a person A gave the letter to B, A and B are said
to have a link between them. If B next hands over the
mail to C, the eﬀective “distance” between A and C is 2;
while between A and B, as well as between B and C, it is
1. Deﬁning distance in this way, Milgram’s experiments
show that two persons in a society are separated by an
average distance of six steps. This property of having a
small average distance in the society is what is known as
the small world eﬀect.

It took around thirty years to realise that this small
world eﬀect is not unique to the human society but rather
possessed by a variety of other real (both natural and
artiﬁcial) networks. These networks include social net-
works, Internet and WWW network, power grid network,
biological networks, transport networks etc.

III. TOPOLOGICAL PROPERTIES OF
NETWORKS

Before analysing a society from the network point of
view, it will be useful to summarise the topological prop-
erties characterising common small world networks.

A network is nothing but a graph having nodes as the
vertices and links between nodes as edges. A typical net-
work is shown in Fig. 1 where there are ten nodes and
ten links.

D

A

B

C

II. THE BEGINNING: MILGRAM’S
EXPERIMENTS

The ﬁrst real world network which showed the small
world eﬀect was a social network. This was the re-
sult of some experimental studies by the social psychol-
ogist, Milgram [6].
In Milgram’s experiments, various
recruits in remote places of Kansas and Nebraska were

FIG. 1. A typical network. The shortest distance from A
to C is 1 while that from A to D is 3. A,B,C form a cluster.

The shortest distance S between any two nodes A and
B is the number of edges on the shortest path from A to
B through connected nodes. In Fig. 1, the shortest path
from A to D goes through three edges and SAD = 3. The

1

diameter D of a network is the largest of the shortest dis-
tances S and in a small world network (SWN), both the
average shortest distance hSi and D scale in the same
way with N , the number of nodes in the network.

Erd¨os and R´enyi studied the random graph [7] in which
any two vertices have a ﬁnite probability to get linked.
In this network or graph, both D and hSi were found
to vary as log(N ). (This result is true when a minimum
number of edges is present in the graph so that a giant
structure is formed; if in the graph with N nodes, the
connectivity probability of any two nodes is p, a giant
structure is formed for pN > 1.)

The network of human population, or for that mat-
ter, many other networks can hardly be imagined to be
a random network, although the latter has the property
of a small average shortest distance between nodes. The
other factor which is bound to be present in a social net-
work (like the one considered by Milgram) is the cluster-
ing tendency. This precisely means that if A is linked to
both B and C there is a strong likelihood that C is also
linked to B. This property is not expected to be present
in a random network.

Let aij deﬁne the adjacency matrix of the network;
aij = 1 if nodes i and j are connected and zero other-
wise. Then one can quantify the clustering coeﬃcient Ci
of node i as

Ci = Σj16=j2

2
ki(ki + 1)

aj1j2 ,

(1)

where j1, j2 are nodes connected to i and ki = Σjaij, the
total number of links possessed by node i, also known as
its degree (for example in Fig. 1, the degree of node
A is 4). Measuring the average clustering coeﬃcient
C = 1
N ΣiCi in several networks, it was observed that
the clustering coeﬃcient was order of magnitude higher
than that of a random network with the same number of
vertices and edges. Thus it was concluded that the real-
world networks were quite diﬀerent from a random net-
work as far as clustering property is concerned. Networks
with a small value of hSi or D (O(log(N ))) together with
a clustering coeﬃcient much larger than the correspond-
ing random network were given the name small world
network. Mathematically it is possible to distinguish be-
tween a small world network and a random network by
comparing their clustering coeﬃcients.

Another type of network may be conceived in which the
clustering property is high but the average shortest dis-
tance between nodes is comparable to N . Such networks
are called regular networks and thus the small world net-
works lie in between regular and random networks.

One can ﬁnd out the probability distribution of the
number of neighbours of a node, commonly called the
degree, of a network. An interesting feature revealed
in many real world networks is the scale-free property
[8]. This means that the degree distribution P (k) (i.e.,

the probability that a node has degree k) shows the be-
haviour P (k) ∼ k−γ, implying the presence of a few
nodes which are very highly connected. These highly
connected nodes are called the hubs of the network.

It may be mentioned here that in the random graph,

P (k) has a diﬀerent behaviour,

P (k) = e−hki hkik
k!

,

(2)

where hki is the average degree of the network. P (k)
therefore follows a Poisson distribution here decaying
rapidly with k.

The above features constitute the main properties of
networks. Apart from these, many other characteristics
have been detected and analysed as research in small
world networks increased by leaps and bounds. Some
of these, e.g., closeness centrality or betweenness central-
ity were already quite familiar to social scientists [1].
Closeness centrality: The measure of the average short-
est distance of a node to the other nodes in a network is
its closeness centrality.
Betweenness centrality: The fraction of shortest paths
passing through a node is its betweenness [9,10]. The
more is the betweenness of a node, the more important
it is in the network since its absence will aﬀect the small
world property to a great extent. It is not necessarily true
that nodes with maximum degree will have the largest
closeness or betweenness centrality.
Remaining degree distribution: If we arrive at a vertex
following a random edge, the probability that it has de-
gree k is kP (k). The remaining degree distribution qk,
which is the probability that the node has k other edges,
is given by

qk =

(k + 1)P (k + 1)
ΣjjP (j)

.

(3)

Assortativity : This measure is for the correlation be-
tween degrees of nodes which share a common edge. A
straightforward measure will be to calculate the average
degree hknni of the neighbours of a vertex with degree k.
If dhknni
dk > 0, it will mean a positive correlation or assor-
tativity in the network. A negative value of the derivative
denotes disassortativity and a zero value would mean no
correlation. A more rigorous method of calculating the
assortativity is given in [11], where one deﬁnes a quantity
r as

r =

M −1Σijiki − [M −1Σi
i + k2

i ) − [M −1Σi

1
2 (j2

M −1Σi

1

2 (ji + ki)]2

1
2 (ji + ki)]2

,

(4)

where ji and ki are the degrees of the vertices connected
by the ith edge (i = 1, 2, ...., M ) and M is the total num-
ber of edges in the network. Again, high assortativity
means that two nodes which are both highly connected
tend to be linked and r > 0. A negative value of r implies

2

that nodes with dissimilar degrees are more likely to get
connected. A zero value implies no correlation of node
degrees and their connectivity.

Community structure: This is a property which is
highly important for the social networks. More often
than not we ﬁnd a society divided into a number of
communities, e.g, based on profession, hobby, religion
etc. For the scientiﬁc collaboration network, communi-
ties may be formed with scientists belonging to diﬀerent
ﬁelds of research, for example, physicists, mathemati-
cians or biologists. Within a community also, there may
be diﬀerent divisions like physicists may be classiﬁed into
diﬀerent groups, e.g., high energy physicists, condensed
matter physicists and so on.

It is clear that the properties of a network simply de-
pends on the way the links are distributed among the ver-
tices, or to be precise, on the adjacency matrix. Till now
we have not speciﬁed anything about the links. Links in
the networks may be both directed and undirected, e.g.,
in a e-mail network [12], if A sends a mail to B, we have
a directed link from A to B. Edges may also be weighted;
weights may be deﬁned in several ways depending on the
type of network. In the weighted collaboration network,
two authors sharing a large number of publication have
a link which has more weight than that between two au-
thors who have collaborated fewer times.

IV. SOME PROTOTYPES OF SMALL WORLD
NETWORKS

At this juncture, it is useful to describe a few impor-
tant prototype small world network models which have
been considered to mimic the properties of real networks.

A. Watts and Strogatz (WS) network

This was the ﬁrst network model which was successful
in reproducing the features of small diameter and large
clustering coeﬃcient of a network. The small world eﬀect
in networks of varied nature indicated a similarity in the
underlying structure of the networks. Watts and Strogtaz
[2] conjectured that the geometry of the networks have
some common features responsible for the small world
eﬀect.
In their model, the nodes are placed on a ring.
Each node has connection to k number of nearest neigh-
bours initially. With probability p, a link is then rewired
to form a random long ranged link.

At p = 0, the shortest paths scale as N and the cluster-
ing coeﬃcient of the network is quite high as it behaves as
a regular network with a considerable number of nearest
neighbours. The remarkable result was, even with p → 0,
the diameter of the network is small (O(log(N ))). The
clustering coeﬃcient on the other hand remains high even
when p 6= 0 unless p approaches unity. Thus for p → 0,

the network has a small diameter as well as high clus-
tering coeﬃcient, i.e., it is a small world network. For
p → 1, the network ceases to have a large clustering co-
eﬃcient and behaves as a random network. This model
thus displays phase transitions from a regular to a small
world to a random graph by varying a single parameter
p. Later it was shown to have mean ﬁeld behaviour in
the small world phase [13].

The degree distribution P (k) in this network, however,
did not have a power law behaviour but showed an ex-
ponential decay with a peak at hki.

B. Networks with small world and scale-free
property

Although the WS model was successful in showing the
small world eﬀect, it did not have a power law degree dis-
tribution. The discovery of scale-free property in many
real world networks required the construction of a model
which would have small world as well as scale-free prop-
erty.

Barab´asi and Albert (BA) [8] proposed an evolving
model in which one starts with a few nodes linked with
each other. Nodes are then added one by one. An in-
coming node will have a probability Πi to get attached
to the ith node already existing in the network according
to the rule of preferential attachment which means that

Πi = ki/Σki,

(5)

where ki is the degree of the ith node. This implies
that a node with higher degree will get more links as
the network grows such that it has a “rich gets richer”
eﬀect. The results showed a power law degree distribu-
tion with exponent γ = 3. While the average shortest
distance grows with N slower than log(N ) in this net-
work, the clustering coeﬃcient vanishes in the thermo-
dynamic limit. Several other network models have been
conceived later as variants of the BA network which allow
a ﬁnite value of the clustering coeﬃcient. Also, scale-free
networks have been achieved using algorithms other than
the preferential attachment rule [14] or even without con-
sidering a growing network [15].

C. Euclidean and time dependent networks

In many real world networks the nodes are embedded
on a Euclidean space and the link length distribution
shows a strong distance dependence [16–22]. Models of
Euclidean networks have been constructed for both static
and growing networks [23–31]. In static models, transi-
tion between regular, random and small world phases
may be obtained by manipulating a single parameter oc-
curring in the link length distribution [25–28]. In a grow-
ing model, a distance dependent factor is incorporated in

3

a generalised preferential attachment scheme [29–31] giv-
ing rise to a transition between scale-free and non scale-
free network.

Aging is also another factor which is present in many
evolving networks, e.g., the citation network [32,33].
Here the time factor plays an important role in the link-
ing scheme. Aging of nodes has been taken into ac-
count in a few theoretical models where the aging factor
is incorporated in the attachment probability suitably.
Again one can achieve a transition from scale-free to non
scale-free network by appropriately tuning the parame-
ters [34–36].

V. SOCIAL NETWORKS: CLASSIFICATION
AND EXAMPLES

Social networks can be broadly divided into three
classes. The social networks in which links are formed di-
rectly between the nodes may be said to belong to class
A. The friendship network is perhaps the most funda-
mental social network of class A. Other social networks
like the networks of oﬃce colleagues, e-mail senders and
receivers, sexual partners etc. also belong to this class.

The second class of social networks consist of the vari-
ous collaboration networks which are formed from bipar-
tite networks. For example, in the movie actors’ network,
two actors are said to have a link between them if they
have acted in the same movie. Similarly in the research
collaboration networks, two authors form a link if they
feature in the same paper. We classify these networks as
class B social networks. The diﬀerence between class A
and class B networks is that in class A, it is ensured that
two persons sharing a link have interacted at a personal
level while it is possible that in a collaboration act, two
collaborators sharing a link hardly know each other.

In some other social networks, which we classify as
class C networks, the nodes are not human beings but
the links connect people indirectly. Examples are citation
networks and transport networks. In a citation network,
links are formed between two papers when one cites the
other. Transport networks consist of railways, roadways
and airways networks; the nodes here are usually cities
which are linked by air, road or rail routes.

Real world data for class A networks, e.g., friendship,
acquaintance or sexual network is diﬃcult to get and
usually available for small populations [3,37,38]. Com-
munication networks like e-mail [12] and telephone [39]
networks show small world eﬀect and power law degree
distribution [3]. Datasets may be constructed artiﬁcially
also, e.g., as in [40], which shows small world eﬀect in a
friendship network.

Class B networks have been studied extensively as
many databases are available. These, in general, also
show the small world eﬀect.
In the movie actors net-
work with over 2 × 105 nodes, the average shortest path

length is 3.65. Typically in co-authorship networks, it
varies between 2 to 10. The degree distribution in these
networks can be of diﬀerent types depending on the par-
ticular database. Some collaboration networks have a
power law degree distribution, while there exist two dif-
ferent power laws regimes or an exponential cutoﬀ in the
degree distribution in other databases [41,42].

In Euclidean social networks like the scientiﬁc collab-
oration networks, links also have strong distance depen-
dence [17–19,21,22], usually showing a proximity bias.
Recently, in a collaboration network of authors of Phys-
ical Review Letters, the study of time evolution of the
link length distribution was made by Sen et al [22]. It
indicated the intriguing possibility that in a few decades
hence, scientists located at any distance may collaborate
with equal probability thanks to the communication rev-
olution.

The citation network belonging to class C is also quite
well studied.
It is an example of a directed network.
Analysis shows that the citation networks have very in-
teresting behaviour of degree distributions and aging ef-
fects [43,44,33]. While the out-degree (number of pa-
pers referred to) shows a Poisson-like distribution the in-
degree (number of citations) has scale-free distribution.
The aging phenomenon is particularly important in ci-
tation networks; older papers are less cited, barring ex-
ceptions. Studies over a long time show [33] that the
number of cited papers of age t (in years) decreases ex-
ponentially with t, while the probability that a paper
gets cited after time t of its publication, decreases as a
power law over an initial time period of typically 15-20
years and exponentially for large values of t. These fea-
tures can be reproduced using a growing network model
[36] where the preferential attachment scheme contains
an age-dependent factor such that an incoming node j
links with node i with the probability

Πij (τi, ki) =

kβ
i exp(−ατi)
Σikβ
i exp(−ατi)
where ki and τi are the degree and age of node i at that
moment.

(6)

,

Although transport networks, also belonging to class
C, do not involve human beings directly as nodes, they
can have great impact on social networks of both class
A and B types. The idea that in a railway network, two
stations are linked if at least one train stops at both, was
introduced by Sen, Dasgupta et al [45] in a study of the
Indian railway network. Some details of that study is
provided in the appendix.

VI. DISTINCTIVE FEATURES OF SOCIAL
NETWORKS

That social networks of all classes have a small diam-
eter is demonstrated in almost all real examples. Many

4

(although not all) social networks also show the scale-free
property, and the exponent for the degree distribution
generally lies between 1 and 3.

Social networks are characterised by three features:
very high values of the clustering coeﬃcient, positive as-
sortativity and community structure.

High clustering tendency is quite understandable -
naively speaking, a friend of a friend is quite often a
friend also. Again, in a collaboration network of sci-
entists, whenever a paper is written by three or more
authors, there is a large contribution to the clustering
coeﬃcient.

It is customary to compare the clustering coeﬃcients
of a real network to that of its corresponding random
network to show that the real network has a much larger
clustering coeﬃcient. Instead of a totally random model,
one could also consider a “null” model which is a network
with the same number of nodes and edges, having also
the same degree distribution, but otherwise random. The
clustering coeﬃcients in non-social networks turn out to
be comparable to that of the null model. In contrast, for
social networks, this is not true.

Let us consider the random model. Suppose two neigh-
bours of a vertex in this model have remaining degrees j
and k. Then there will be a contribution to the clustering
if these two nodes share an edge. With M edges in the
network, the number of edges shared by these two nodes
is jk/2M . Both j and k are distributed according to eq.
(3), and therefore the clustering coeﬃcient is

C =

[Σkkqk]2 =

1
2M

1
N

[hk2i − hki2]
hki3

.

(7)

For networks not large enough this will still give a ﬁnite
value. One can compare it with the small network of
the food web of organisms in Little rock lake which has
N = 72, hki = 21.0 and hk2i = 655.2, giving C = 0.47
which compares well with the actual value 0.40. It can
be shown that for the null model with degree distribution
P (k) ∼ k−γ, the clustering coeﬃcient remains ﬁnite even
for large N when γ < 7/3. The theoretical value of the
clustering coeﬃcient here is

C ∝ N (7−3γ)/(γ−1).

Assortativity in social networks is generally positive in
contrast to non-social networks. For non-social networks
like the Internet, WWW, biological networks etc., r (eq.
4) lies between -0.3 to -0.1 while for social networks like
the scientiﬁc collaboration networks or company direc-
tors, r is between 0.2 to 0.4 [11].

It has been argued that the large clustering coeﬃcient
and the positive assortativity in social networks arise
from the community structure. Since the discovery of
community structure in social networks, there has been
tremendous activity in this ﬁeld and we devote the next
section to the details of these studies.

VII. COMMUNITY STRUCTURE IN SOCIAL
NETWORKS

A society is usually divided into many groups and
again the groups may regroup to form a bigger group.
The community structure may reﬂect the self organisa-
tion of a network to optimise some task performance, for
example, in searching, optimal communication pathways
or even maximisation of productivity in collaborations.
There is no unique deﬁnition of a community but the
general idea is that the members within a community
have more connections within themselves and lesser with
members belonging to other communities.

For small networks, it is possible to visually detect the
community structure. But with the availability of large
scale data in many ﬁelds in recent times it is essential to
have good algorithms to detect the community structure.

A. Detecting communities: basic methods

A short review of the community detection methods
is available in [47], many other methods have developed
since then. Here we attempt to present a gist of some
basic and some recently proposed methods.

1. Agglomerative and Divisive methods

This is assuming that there can be more than one edge
shared by two vertices. Ignoring multiple edges, the clus-
tering coeﬃcient turns out to be [46]

C = Σjkqjqk(1 − e−jk/2M ).

Comparison with non-social networks like the Internet,
food webs, world wide webs shows that the diﬀerence
between the values obtained theoretically and the actual
ones are minimum. For social networks however, the the-
oretical values are at least one order of magnitude smaller
than the observed ones.

The traditional method for detecting communities in
networks is agglomerative hierarchical clustering [48]. In
this method, each node is assigned it own cluster so that
with N nodes, one has N clusters in the beginning. Then
the most similar or closest nodes are merged into a single
cluster following a certain prescription so that one is left
with one cluster less. This can be continued till one is
left with a single cluster.

In the divisive method, the nodes belong to a single
community to begin with. By some appropriate scheme,
edges are removed resulting in a splitting of the communi-
ties into subnetworks in steps and ultimately all the nodes

(8)

(9)

5

are split into separate communities. Both the agglomer-
ative and divisive methods give rise to what is known
as a dendogram (see Fig. 2) which is a diagrammatic
representation of the nodes and communities at diﬀer-
ent times. While in the agglomerative method one goes
from bottom to top, in the divisive method it is just the
opposite.

Girvan and Newman (GN) [49] proposed a divisive al-
gorithm in which edges are removed using the measure of
betweenness centrality (BC). Generalising the idea of BC
of nodes to BC of edges, edge betweenness can be deﬁned
as the number of shortest paths between pairs of vertices
that run along it. An edge connecting members belong-
ing to diﬀerent communities is bound to have a large
betweenness centrality measure. Hence in this method
one calculates the edge betweenness at every step and
removes the edge with the maximum measure. The pro-
cess is continued till no edge is left in the network. After
every removal of an edge, the betweenness centrality is
to be recalculated in this algorithm.

FIG. 2. A typical dendogram.

In the divisive algorithm,
one explores from top to bottom while for a agglomerative
method, one goes from the bottom to the top. The number
of communities is given by the number of intersection points
of the horizontal dashed lines with the dendogram at diﬀerent
levels. The circles represent the nodes.

2. A measure of the community structure identiﬁcation

Applying either of the above algorithms it may be pos-
sible to divide the network into communities. Even the
random graph with no community structure may be sep-
arated into many classes. One needs to have a measure
to see how good the obtained structure is. Also, the den-
dogram represents communities at all levels from a single
to as many as the number of nodes and one should have
an idea at which level the community division has been
most sensible.

In case the network has a ﬁxed well known commu-
nity structure, a quantity to measure the performance of
the algorithm for the community detection may be the
fraction of correctly classiﬁed nodes.

The other measure, known as the modularity of the
network, can be used when there is no ad hoc knowledge
about the community structure of the network. This is
deﬁned in the following way [50]. Let there be k commu-
nities in a particular network. Then eij is the fraction

6

of edges which exist between nodes belonging to commu-
nities i and j; clearly it is a k × k matrix. The trace
T r(e) = Σeii then gives the fraction of all edges in the
network that connect vertices in the same community
and a good division into communities should give a high
value of the trace. However, simply the trace is not a
good measure of the quality of the division as placing all
nodes in a single community will give trivially T r(e) = 1.
Let us now take the case when the network does not
have a community structure; in this case links will be dis-
tributed randomly. Deﬁning the row (or column) sums
αi = Σjeij, one gets the fraction of edges that connect to
vertices in community i. The expected number of fraction
of links within a partition is then simply the probability
that a link begins at i, αi, multiplied by the fraction of
links that end at a node in i, αi. So the expected number
of intra-community links is just αiαi. A measure of the
modularity is then

Q = Σi(eii − α2

i ),

(10)

which calculates the fraction of edges which connect
nodes of the same type minus the same quantity in a
network with identical community division but random
connections between the nodes. If the number of within-
community edges is no better than random, Q = 0. The
modularity plotted at every level of the bifurcation would
indicate the quality of the detection procedure and at
which level to look at to see the best division where Q
has a maximum value.

There are some typical networks to which the commu-
nity detection algorithms are applied to see how eﬃcient
it is. Most of the methods are applied to an artiﬁcial com-
puter generated graph to check its eﬃciency. Here 128
nodes are divided into four communities. Each node has
k = 16 neighbours of which kout connections are made
to nodes belonging to other communities. The quality
of separation into communities here can be measured by
calculating the number of correctly classiﬁed nodes. All
available detection algorithms work very well for kout ≤ 6
and the performance becomes poorer for larger values. A
comparative study of application of diﬀerent algorithms
to this network has been made by Danon et al [51].

A popular network data with known community struc-
ture which is also very much in use to check or com-
pare algorithms is the Zachary’s karate club (ZKC) data.
Over the course of two years in the early 70’s, Wayne
Zachary observed social interactions between the mem-
bers of a karate club at an American university [52]. He
constructed network of ties between members of the club
based on their social interactions both within and outside
the club. As a result of a dispute between the administra-
tor and the chief karate teacher the club eventually split
into two. Interestingly, not just two, but upto ﬁve com-
munities have been detected in some of the algorithms.
Community structure in jazz network has also been
In this network, musicians are the nodes and

studied.

two musicians are connected if they have performed in
the same band. In a diﬀerent formulation, the bands act
as nodes and have a link if they have at least one common
musician. This was studied mainly in [53].

The American college football network is also a stan-
dard network where community detection algorithms
have been applied. This is a network representing the
schedule of games between American college football
teams in a single season. The teams are divided into
groups or “conferences” and intra-conference groups are
more frequent than inter-conference games. The confer-
ences are the communities, so that teams belonging to the
same conference would play more between themselves.

Community detection algorithms have been applied to
other familiar social networks like collaboration and e-
mail networks as well as in several non-social networks.

B. Some novel community detection algorithms

The method of GN to detect the communities typi-
cally involves a time of the order of N 2M , where N is
the number of nodes and M the number of edges. This
is considerably slow. Several other methods have been
proposed although none of them is really ‘fast’. Some of
these methods are just variants of the divisive method of
GN (i.e., edge removal by a certain rule) and interested
readers will ﬁnd the details in references [50,54,55]. Here
we highlight those which are radically diﬀerent from the
GN method.
Optimisation methods

g=1S(g)

Newman [56] suggested an alternative algorithm in
which one attempts to optimise the splitting for which Q
is maximum. However, this is a costly programme as the
number of ways in which N vertices can be divided into
g non-empty groups is given by Stirling’s number of the
second kind S(g)
N and the number of distinct community
division is ΣN
N . It increases at least exponentially in
N and therefore approximate methods are required. In
[56], a greedy agglomerative algorithm was used. Start-
ing from the state where each node belongs to its own
cluster, clusters are joined such that the particular join-
ing results in the greatest increase in Q. In this way a
dendogram is obtained and the corresponding Q values
are calculated. Community division for which Q is max-
imum is then noted. The computational eﬀort involved
in this method is O((M + N )N ). For small networks,
the GN algorithm is better but for large networks this
optimisation method functions more eﬀectively. Appli-
cations of this method has been done for the ZKC and
the American football club networks.

Duch and Arenas [57] have used another optimisation
method which is local using extremal optimisation.
In
this local method, a quantity qr for the rth node is de-
ﬁned

qr = κi(r) − krαi(r),

(11)

where κi(r) is the number of links that a node r belonging
to a community i has with nodes in the same community
and kr is the degree of node r, αi(r) is the fraction of
edges connected to r having either or both end in the
community i. Note that qr is just the contribution to Q
(eq. (10)) from each node in the network, given a certain
partition into communities, and Q = 1
2N Σrqr. Rescal-
ing the local variables qr by kr, a proper deﬁnition for
the contribution of node r to the modularity can be ob-
tained. In this optimisation method, the whole graph is
initially split into two randomly. At every time step, the
node with the lowest ﬁtness λr = qr/kr is moved from
one partition to another. The process is repeated until
an optimal state with a maximum value of Q is reached.
After that all the inter-partition links are deleted and
the optimisation procedure applied to the resulting par-
titions. The process is continued till the modularity Q
cannot be improved anymore. Applications were made to
the ZKC, jazz, e-mail, cond-mat and biological networks.
In each case it gives a higher modularity value compared
to that of the GN method.
Spectral methods

The topology of a network with N vertices can be ex-
pressed through a symmetric N ×N matrix L, the Lapla-
cian matrix, where Lii = ki (degree of the ith node) and
Lij are equal to −1 if i and j are connected and zero oth-
erwise. The column or row sum of L is trivially zero. A
constant vector, with all its elements identical will thus
be an eigenvector of this matrix with eigenvalue zero.

(c)

(b)

(a)
FIG. 3. (a) The structure of the ﬁrst non-trivial eigenvec-
tor when there are only two communities. (b) An example of
a case with three communities, now the ﬁrst nontrivial eigen-
vector has a structure with fuzziness when the components
corresponding to two communities are pretty close (shown in
(c) When the ﬁrst two non-trivial eigen-
gray and black).
vectors are projected on a two dimensional space, the three
communities are clearly shown.

For a connected graph, the eigenvectors are non-
degenerate. Since L is real-symmetric, the eigenvectors
are orthogonal. This immediately implies that the sum
of the components of the other eigenvectors are zero as

7

the ﬁrst one is a constant one.
In case the number of
subgraphs is equal to two, there will be a clear cut bi-
furcation in the eigenvector; components of the second
(ﬁrst non-trivial) eigenvector are positive for one sub-
graph and negative for the other. This is the spectral
bisection method which works very well when only two
communities are present, e.g., in the case of the ZKC
network.

For more than two subgraphs, the distinction may be-
come fuzzy (see Fig. 3). In this case, a few methods have
been devised recently [58–60]. The eigenvectors of L with
non-zero eigenvalues are the non-trivial eigenvectors. If
there is a network structure with m communities, there
will be m − 1 nontrivial eigenvectors with eigenvalues
close to zero and these will have a characteristic struc-
ture: the components corresponding to nodes within the
same cluster have very similar values xi. If the partition
is sharp, the proﬁle of each eigenvector, sorted by com-
ponents, is step like. The number of steps in the proﬁle
corresponds to the number of communities. In case the
partition is not so sharp, and the number of nodes is high,
it is diﬃcult to arrive at a concrete conclusion by just
looking at the ﬁrst nontrivial eigenvector. The method
is then to combine information from the ﬁrst few, say D,
nontrivial eigenvectors. Consider an enlarged D dimen-
sional space where the components of these eigenvector
are projected (i.e., the coordinates of the points in this
space correspond to the values of the components of the
eigenvectors for each node). The points one gets can
now be treated as the “positions” of the nodes and nodes
belonging to the same community are clustered in this
space. Donetti and Munoz [59] used an agglomerative
method to detect communities from this D dimensional
space. The choice of D, the number of eigenvectors to be
used, is an important question here. One can ﬁx a value
of D, and ﬁnd out the optimal value of Q - the D value
corresponding to the best optimal value of Q may be the
ideal choice. It was observed that D is of the order of
the number of communities in the network.

Instead of the Laplacian matrix, one can also take an-
other matrix, X = K −A where K is the diagonal matrix
with elements kii = ΣN
j=1aij and aij the elements of the
adjacency matrix A. Here instead of zero eigenvalue,
the normal matrix X has largest eigenvalue 1 associated
with the trivial eigenvector. This matrix has been used
by Capocci et al [58] for networks with weighted edges
successfully.
It has been tested on a directed network
of word association where the method has been modiﬁed
slightly to take into account the directedness of the edges.
Methods based on dissimilarity

Two vertices are said to be similar if they have the
same set of neighbours other than each other. Exact sim-
ilarity is rare, so one can deﬁne some dissimilarity mea-
sure and ﬁnd out the communities using this measure.
One of these measures is called the Euclidean distance
discussed in [47]. Recently, another measure based on

the diﬀerences in their “perspective” was done. Taking
any vertex “i”, the distance dik to a vertex “k” can be
measured easily. Taking another node “j”, one can mea-
sure djk.
If the nodes belong to the same community,
then the diﬀerence [dik − djk]2 is expected to be small.
The dissimilarity index λij was deﬁned by Zhou [61] as

λij =

pΣk[dik − djk]2
N − 2

.

(12)

The algorithm is a divisive one involving a few intricate
steps and has been successfully applied to many net-
works.
Another local method

Bagrow and Bollt [62] have suggested a local method in
which, starting from a particular node, one ﬁnds out k(l),
the number of its lth nearest neighbours at every stage
l = 0, 1, 2, ... . By deﬁnition, k(0) = 1. The cumulative
number of degrees K (l) = Σk(l) is also evaluated here.
The ratio K (l+1)/K (l) is compared to a preassigned quan-
tity α and in case the ratio is less than α, the counting
is terminated and all nodes upto the lth neighbourhood
are listed as members of the starting node’s community.

C. Community detection methods based on physics

A few methods of detecting communities are based on

models and methods used in Physics.
Network as an electric circuit

Wu and Huberman [63] have proposed a method by
considering the graph to be an electric circuit. Suppose
it is known that nodes A and B belong to diﬀerent com-
munities. Each edge of the the graph is regarded as a
resistor and all edges have identical resistance. Let a
battery connect A and B such that the voltages at A and
B are 1 and 0 respectively. Now the graph is simply an
electric circuit with a current ﬂowing through each re-
sistor. By solving Kirchoﬀ’s equations one can obtain
the voltage at each node. Choosing a threshold value of
the voltage (which obviously lies between 0 and 1), one
then decides whether a node belongs to the community
containing A or that containing B. It is easy to see how
this method works: ﬁrst suppose that there is a node C
which is a leaf or peripheral node, i.e., connected to a
single node D. No current ﬂows through CD and there-
fore C and D have the same voltage and belong to the
same community. Next consider the case when C is con-
nected to nodes D and E. Since the resistance is same
for all edges, Vc = (VD + VE)/2. Hence if both D and
E belong to the same community (i.e., they both have
high or low voltages), C also has a comparable voltage
and belongs to the same community. If, however, VD and
VE are quite diﬀerent and D and E belong to diﬀerent
communities then it is hard to tell which community C
belongs to. This is close to reality, a node has connec-
tion with more than one community. In general, when

8

C is linked to n other nodes with voltages V1, V2, ..., Vn,
Vc = ΣVi/n. Hence if most of its neighbours belong to a
particular community, C also belongs to it. The method
works in linear time.

When it is not known initially that two nodes belong to
two diﬀerent communities, one can randomly choose two
nodes and repeat the process of evaluation of communi-
ties a large number of times. Chances that the detection
is correct is ﬁfty percent. However, this probability will
be greater than half if these two initial nodes are cho-
sen such that they are not connected. Majority of the
results would then be regarded as correct. Applications
have been made to the ZKC and the College football club
networks.
Application of Potts and Ising models:

The q state Potts model in Physics is a model in which
the spin at site i can have a value σi = 1, 2, ...., q. If two
spins interact in such a way that the energy is minimum
when they have the same value, we have the ferromag-
netic Potts model. Potts model has well known applica-
tion for graph colouring problem, where each colour cor-
responds to a value of the spin. For community detection
also, the method can be similarly applied. Reichardt and
Bornholdt [64] have used the Potts model Hamiltonian

H = −JΣi,jδσ1,σ2 + γΣq
σ

nσ(nσ − 1)
2

,

(13)

where nσ is the number of spins having spin s. Here the
ﬁrst term is the standard ferromagnetic Potts model and
in absence of the second term it favours a homogeneous
distribution of spins which minimises the ferromagnetic
term. However, one needs to have diversity and that is
incorporated by the second term.
If there is only one
community it will be maximum and if spin values are
more or less evenly distributed over all nodes it will be
minimum.

When γ is set equal to the average connection proba-
bility, then both the criteria that (a) within a community
the connectivity is larger than the average connectivity,
and that (b) the average connectivity is greater than the
inter-community connectivity, are satisﬁed. With this
value of γ and J = 1, the ground state was found out
by the method of simulated annealing. The communities
appeared as domains of equal spin value near the ground
state of the system. Applications to computer generated
graphs and biological networks were made successfully
and the method can work faster than many other algo-
rithms.

In another study by Guimer`a et al [65] in which the
Potts model Hamiltonian is used again, although in
a slightly diﬀerent form, an interesting result was ob-
tained.
It was shown that networks embedded in low-
dimensional spaces have high modularity and that even
random graphs can have high modularity due to ﬂuctu-
ations in the establishment of links. The authors argue
that like the clustering coeﬃcient, modularity in complex

networks should also be compared to that of the random
graph.

Son et al [66] have used a Ising model Hamiltonian to
detect the community structure in networks. The Ising
model is the case when the spins have only two states,
usually taken to be σ = ±1. This method can be best
understood in the context of the Zachary karate club
case. Here two members started having diﬀerence and
the club members eventually got polarised. In this case,
the authors argue, the members will try to minimise the
number of broken ties, or in other words, the breakup
of ties should be in accordance to the community struc-
ture. Thus the community structure may be found out
by simulating the breakup caused by an enforced frustra-
tion among nodes. The breakup is simulated by studying
the ferromagnetic random ﬁeld Ising model which has the
Hamiltonian

H = −

Σi,j Jijσiσj − ΣiBiσi,

(14)

1
2

where σi is the Ising spin variable for the ith node and the
spins interact ferromagnetically with strength Jij and B
is the random ﬁeld. Jij is simply equal to the elements of
the adjacency matrix, can be 1 or 0 for unweighted net-
works and equal to the weights for a weighted graph. The
ferromagnetic interaction, as in the Potts case, represents
the cost for broken bonds. The conﬂict in the network
(e.g., as raised in the ZKC) is mimicked in the system
by imposing very strong negative and positive ﬁelds for
two nodes (in the ZKC case, these nodes should corre-
spond to the instructor and administrator). The spins
with the same signs in the ground state then belong to
the same community. The method was applied to the
Zachary Karate club network and the co-authorship net-
works with a fair amount of success.
It indicated the
presence of some nodes which were marginal in the sense
that they did not belong to a community uniquely.

D. Overlap of communities and a network at a
higher level

Division of a society into communities may be done in
many ways. If the criteria is friendship, it is one, while if
it is professional relation it is another. A node in general
belongs to more than one community. If one focuses on
an individual node, it lies at the center of diﬀerent com-
munities (see Fig. 4). Within each of these communities
also, there are subgraphs which may or may not have
overlaps. Considering such a scenario, Pall`a et al [67]
developed a new concept, the “network of communities”,
in which the communities acted as nodes and the overlap
between communities constituted the links.

Here a community was assumed to consist of several
complete subgraphs (k cliques [68]) which tend to share
many of their nodes and a single node belongs to more

9

than one community. Pall`a et al [67] deﬁned certain
quantities:
(i) The membership number m which is the number of
communities a node belongs to
(ii) Size of a community ns which is the number of nodes
in it
(iii) Overlap size sα,β, the number of nodes shared by
communities α and β.
Two quantities related to the network of communities
were also deﬁned:
(i) Community degree kc - the number of communities a
community is attached to.
(ii) Clustering coeﬃcient of the community network.

A method was used in which the k cliques are ﬁrst
located and then the identiﬁcation is carried out by a
standard analysis of the clique-clique overlap matrix [68].
Identiﬁcation and the calculation of the distributions for
the quantities m, ns, sα,β and kc were done for the co-
authorship, word association and biological networks.

P

M

S

Colleagues

Hobby

Family

Friends

FIG. 4. A node (black circle) belonging to diﬀerent com-
i A particular community, e.g., the community of

munities.
colleagues, may again contain subcommunities P,M,S etc.

The community size distributions P (ns) for the dif-
ferent real networks appear to be power law distributed
(n−τ
s ) with the value of the exponent τ between −2 and
−2.6. At the node level, the degree distribution is often a
power law in many networks. Whether at a higher level,
i.e., at the community level it also has the same organisa-
tion is the important question. The degree distribution
of the communities showed an initial exponential decay
followed by a power law behaviour with the same expo-
nent τ .

The distribution of the overlap size sov and the mem-
bership number m also showed power law variations with
both the distributions having a large exponent for the
collaboration and word association networks. This shows
that there is no characteristic overlap size and that a node
can be the member of a large number of communities.

The clustering coeﬃcients of the community networks
were found out to be fairly large, e.g., 0.44 for the cond-
mat collaboration network, showing that two communi-
ties overlapping with a given community has a large prob-
ability of overlapping with each other as well.

Preferential attachment of communities

As the community degree distribution (or the size dis-
tribution) is scale-free, the next question which arises is
what happens to a new node which joins a community,
i.e., what is the attachment rule chosen for the new node
as regards the size and degree of the communities [69]?
To determine the attachment probability with respect
to any property ρ, the cumulative distributions P (ρ) at
times t and t + 1 are noted. Let the un-normalised ρ
distribution of the chosen objects during the time inter-
val t and t + 1 be wt→t+1(ρ). The value of wt→t+1(ρ∗)
at a given ρ∗ equals the number of objects chosen which
have a ρ value greater than ρ∗.
If the process is uni-
form, then objects chosen with a given ρ are chosen at a
rate given by the distribution of ρ amongst the available
objects. However, if the attachment mechanism prefers
high (low) ρ values, then objects with high (low) ρ are
chosen with a higher rate compared to the distribution
In real systems, the application of the method
P (ρ).
indicated that rather than a uniform attachment there
is a preferential attachment even at the higher level of
networks.

VIII. MODELS OF SOCIAL NETWORK

In this section we discuss some models of social net-
work which particularly aim at reproducing the commu-
nity structure and/or positive assortativity. We also re-
view some dynamical models which show rich phase tran-
sitions.

A. Static models

By static models we mean a social model where the ex-
isting relations between people remain unchanged while
new members can enter and form links and the size of the
system may grow. Examples are collaboration networks
where existing links cannot be rewired.

Newman and Park [46] have constructed a model which
has a given community division. The aim is to show
that it has positive assortativity. Here it is assumed that
members belonging to the same community are linked
with probability p similar to a bond percolation [70] prob-
lem. An individual may be attached to more than one
community, and the number of members in a community
is assumed to be a variable here.

The assortativity coeﬃcient r was calculated here in
terms of p and the moments of the distributions of m (the
number of communities to which a member belongs) and
s (the community size). The theoretical formula was ap-
plied to real systems after estimating the distributions by
detecting communities using standard algorithms. The
value of p was calculated by dividing the number of

10

edges in the network by the total number of possible
within-group edges. The theoretical value of r for the co-
authorship network turns out to be 0.145 which is within
the statistical error of the real value 0.174 ± 0.045.

Another model was proposed by Catanzaro et al [71]
to reproduce the observations of a speciﬁc database,
the cond-mat archive of preprints. This network of co-
authors was found to be scale-free with positive assorta-
tivity. In the model the preferential attachment scheme
was used with some modiﬁcation:
the new node gets
linked to an existing node with preferential attachment
but with a probability p. Two existing nodes with de-
gree k1 and k2 could also get linked stochastically with
the probability being proportional to (1 − p)f (|k1 − k2|).
f (x) was chosen to be decaying with x either exponen-
tially or as a inverse power law. It was shown that by
tuning the parameter p, one could obtain diﬀerent values
of the exponents for the degree distribution, clustering
coeﬃcient, assortativity and betweenness. The results
agree fairly well for all the quantities of the actual net-
work except the clustering coeﬃcient.

Bog˜una et al [72] have used the concept of social dis-
tance in their model. A set of quantities hi
n for the nth
individual is used to represent the characteristic features
of individuals like profession, religion, geographic loca-
tions etc. Social distance between two individuals n and
m with respect to characteristic i can be quantiﬁed by
the diﬀerence of hi
m. It is assumed that two in-
dividuals with larger social distance will have a lesser
probability of getting acquainted. If the social distance
with respect to the ith feature is denoted by di(hi
m),
then a connection probability is deﬁned as

n and hi

n, hi

ri(hi

n, hi

m) =

1
i di(hi

1 + [b−1

,

n, hi

m)]α

(15)

where α is a parameter measuring homophily, the ten-
dency of people to connect to similar people and b−1
is
a characteristic scale. The total probability of a link to
exist between the two individuals is a weighted sum of
these individual probabilities

i

r(hn, hm) = Σiwiri(hi

n, hi

m).

(16)

The degree distribution, the clustering coeﬃcient and the
assortativity (in terms of hknni) were obtained analyti-
cally for the model and also compared to simulation re-
sults. The resulting degree distribution had a cutoﬀ, the
clustering coeﬃcient showed increase with α and the as-
sortativity was found out to be positive. The model also
displayed a community structure when tested with the
GN algorithm.

In the model proposed by Wong et al [73], nodes are
distributed in a Euclidean space and the connection prob-
abilities depend on the distance separating them. Typ-
ically, a neighbourhood radius is deﬁned within which
nodes are connected with a higher probability. For cho-
sen values of the parameters in the scheme, graphs were

generated which showed community structure and small
world eﬀect.

A hierarchical structure of the society has been as-
sumed by Motter et al [74] in their model in which the
concept of social characteristics is used. Here a com-
munity of N people are assumed to have H relevant so-
cial characteristics. Each of these characteristic deﬁnes a
nested hierarchical organisation of groups, where people
are split into smaller and smaller subgroups downwards
in this nested structure (Fig. 5). Such a hierarchy is
characterised by the number l of levels, the branching
ratio b at each level and the average number g of people
in the lowest group.

b = 2

o

o o
ooo

o
o o
o
oo

o o
o
ooo

o o
ooo
o

o o o
o o ooo
o
oo o
FIG. 5. A hierarchical structure of human population ob-
tained using a single characteristic feature. People belonging
to the same lowest group (ellipse) have social distance 1 and
the distance increases as one goes up in the hierarchy. The
maximum distance in this case is l = 4.

o o
o
ooo

o o
ooo

o

Here also distance factors corresponding to each fea-
ture can be deﬁned and it is assumed that the distances
are correlated, i.e., two individuals are expected to be
diﬀerent (similar) to each other in the same degree with
respect to diﬀerent characteristics. Connection probabil-
ity decreases exponentially with the social distance and
links are generated until the number of links per person
reaches a preassigned average value. Networks belonging
to the random and regular class are obtained for extreme
values of the parameters and in between there is a wide
region in which social networks fall.

A growing model of collaboration network to simulate
the time dependent feature of the link length distribution
observed in [22] has been proposed recently by Chandra
et al [75]. Here the nodes are embedded on a Euclidean
two dimensional space and an incoming node i gets at-
tached to (a) its nearest neighbour j, (b) to the neigh-
bours of j with a certain constant probability and (c) to
other nodes with a time dependent probability. Step (a)
takes care of the proximity bias, step (b) ensures high
clustering and step (c) takes care of the fact that long
distance collaborations increase in time thanks to rapid
progress in communication. The link length distributions
obtained from the simulations are consistent with the ob-
served results and the model also gives a positive assor-
tativity.

11

B. Dynamical models

Dynamical models allow the links to change in time
whether or not the network remains constant in size.
This is close to reality as human interactions are by no
means static [76,77]. These models are applicable to cases
where direct human interactions are involved.

In Jin et al [78], the model consists of a ﬁxed number of
members and links may have a ﬁnite lifetime. Here it is
assumed that the probability of interaction between two
individuals depends on their degrees and is enhanced by
the presence of a mutual friend. A cutoﬀ in the number
of acquaintances ensures that the total number of links
has an upper bound. The strength sij of a tie between
individuals i and j is a function of the time t since they
last met; sij ∼ exp(−κt). Starting with a set of individ-
uals with no links, edges are allowed to appear with a
small value of κ close to zero. When the network satu-
rates, κ is set to a larger value and the evolution of the
network studied. The resulting network shows features
of large clustering and community structure for realistic
range of values of κ.

A somewhat similar model has been proposed by Ebel
et al [79] where new acquaintances are initiated by mu-
tual friends with the additional assumption that a mem-
ber may leave the network with probability p. All its
links are deleted in that case. The ﬁnite lifetime of links
brings the network to a stationary state which manifests
large clustering coeﬃcients, small diameter and scale free
or exponential degree distribution depending on the value
of p.

Another model which aims at forming communities is
due to Gr¨onlund and Holme [80] who construct a model
based on the assumption that individual people’s psy-
chology is to try to be diﬀerent from the crowd. This
model is based on the agent based model known as the
seceder model [81]. It involves an iterative scheme where
the number of nodes remains constant and the links are
generated and rewired during the evolution. Networks
generated by this algorithm indeed showed community
structure and small world eﬀect while the degree distribu-
tion had an apparent exponential cutoﬀ. The clustering
coeﬃcient was found to be much higher than the corre-
sponding random network while the assortativity coeﬃ-
cient r showed a positive value.

Some of the dynamic models are motivated by the
model proposed by Bonabeau et al [82] in which agents
are distributed randomly in a L × L lattice and assigned
a “ﬁtness” variable h. The agents perform random walk
on the lattice and during an interaction of agents i and
j, the probability that i wins over j is qi given by

qi =

1
1 + exp(η(hi − hj))

.

(17)

is a society with hierarchical structure.
In the model
the individuals occupy the lattice with probability p. A
phase transition is observed as the value of p is changed
(in a slightly modiﬁed model where η is replaced by σ).
Gallos [83] has shown that when a model with random
long distant connections is considered the phase transi-
tion remains with subtle diﬀerences in the behaviour of
the distribution of q.

In another variation of the Bonabeau model, Ben-Naim
and Redner [84] allow the ﬁtness variable to increase by
interactions and decline by inactivity. The latter occurs
with a rate r. The rate equation for the fraction of agents
with a given ﬁtness was solved to show a phase transition
as r is varied; with r ≥ 1, one has a society with a single
class and for r ≥ 1, a hierarchical multiple class society
can exist. In the latter case, the lower class is destitute
and the middle class is dynamic and has a continuous
upward mobility.

Individuals are endowed with a complex set of char-
acteristics rather than a single ﬁtness variable. Models
which allow dynamics of these social characteristics have
also been proposed recently. Transitions from a perfect
homogeneous society to a heterogeneous society has been
found in the works of Clemmy et al [85] and Gonzalez-
Avella et al [86].

Let each trait take any of the integral values 1, 2, ..., q.
When individuals have nearest neighbour interactions
and the initial traits follow a Poisson distribution, the
non-uniformity in the traits can drive the system to a
heterogeneous state at q = qc [87]. Klemm et al found
that on a small world network, the transition point qc
shifts towards higher values as the disorder (fraction of
long range bonds) is enhanced and the transition disap-
pears in a scale-free BA network in the thermodynamic
limit. In [86], the additional inﬂuence of an external ﬁeld
has been considered.

Shafee [88] has considered a spin glass like model of

social network which is described by the Hamiltonian

H = −Σi,k,a,bJ ab

ik sa

i sb

k − Σi,aha

i sa
i ,

(18)

where sa
is the state of the ith agent with respect to
i
trait a, J ab
ik are the interaction between diﬀerent agents
and ha
i an external ﬁeld. Zero temperature Monte Carlo
dynamics is then applied to the system. However, the
simulations were restricted to systems of very small sizes.
Results showed either punctuated equilibrium or oscilla-
tory behaviour of the trait values with time.

IX. IS IT REALLY A SMALL WORLD?
SEARCHING: POST MILGRAM

If the ﬂuctuation σ of the qi values is small, the result-
ing society is egalitarian while for large values of q, it

Although Milgram’s experiments have been responsi-
ble for inspiring research in small world networks, they

12

have their own limitation. The chain completion percent-
age was too low - in the ﬁrst experiment it was just ﬁve.
The later experiment had a little better success rate but
this time the recruit selection was by no means perfectly
random. Actually, a number of subtle eﬀects can have
profound bearing on what can be termed “searching in
small worlds”. First, although the network may have a
small world property, searches are done mainly locally -
the individual may not know the global structure of the
network that would help her or him to ﬁnd out the short-
est path to a target node. Secondly, many factors like the
race, income, family connections, job connections, friend
circle etc. determine the dynamics of the search process.
Quite a few experiments in this direction are being car-
ried out currently. Some theoretical approaches have also
been proposed for the searching mechanism.

A. Searching in small world networks

The ﬁrst theoretical attempt to ﬁnd out how a search
procedure works in a small world network was made by
Kleinberg [24] in which it was assumed that the nodes
were embedded on a two dimensional lattice. Each node
was connected to its nearest neighbour and a few short
cuts (long range connections) were also present to facil-
itate the small world eﬀect. The probability that two
nodes at an Euclidean distance l had a connection was
taken to be P (l) ∼ l−α. The algorithm used was a
“greedy algorithm”, i.e., each node would send the mes-
sage to one of its nearest neighbours, and look for the
neighbour which takes it closest to the target node. Here
the source and target nodes are random. Interestingly,
it was found that only for a special value of α = 2, the
time taken (or the number of steps) scaled as log(N ),
while for all other values it varied sublinearly with N .
This result, according to [24] could be generalized to any
lattice of dimension d and there always existed a unique
value of α = d where short paths between two random
nodes could be found out. Navigation on the WS model
[89] and a one-dimensional Euclidean network [90] agreed
perfectly with the above picture.

The above results indicate that although the network
may have small average shortest paths globally, it does
not necessarily mean that short chains can be realised
using local information only.

B. Searching in scale-free graphs

In a scale free network with degree distribution given
by P (k) ∼ k−τ , one can consider two kinds of searches,
In the latter,
one random and the other one biased.
one has the option of choosing neighbouring nodes with
higher degree which deﬁnitely makes the searching pro-
cess more eﬃcient.

Adamic et al [91] have assumed that apart from the
knowledge about one’s nearest neighbours, each member
also has some knowledge about the contacts of the sec-
ond neigbours. Using this assumption, the average search
length s in the random case is given by

Only for τ = 2, the search length is O(ln(N )2). The cor-
responding expression for the biased search, when nodes
with larger degree are used, is

s ∼ N 3(1−2/τ ).

s ∼ N 2−4/τ .

(19)

(20)

Simulations were done with random and biased search
mechanisms where a node could scan both its ﬁrst and
second neighbours. The results for τ 6= 2 indeed yielded
shortest paths which scale sublinearly with N , although
in a slower manner compared to the theoretical predic-
tions.

C. Search in a social network

A social network comprising of people whose links are
based on friendship or acquaintance can be thought of
as a network where the typical degree of each node is
k = O(103). Hence the number of second neighbours
should be of k2 and therefore, ideally in two steps one
can access 106 number of other people and the search
procedure would be complete if the order of total popu-
lation is similar. Even if the degree is one order lesser,
the number of steps is still quite small and search paths
can be further shortened by taking advantage of highly
connected individuals. However, there is a ﬂaw in this
argument as there is a considerable overlap of the set of
one’s friends and that of one’s friends’ friends.

It is expected that the participants in a real searching
procedure would like to take advantage of certain fea-
tures like geographical proximity or similarity of features
like profession and hobbies etc. In this background the
hierarchical structure of the social network is extremely
signiﬁcant (Fig. 5).

Watts et al [92] have considered a hierarchical model
in which the individuals are endowed with network ties
and identities by a set of characteristics as described in
sec. VIII A. Distance between individuals are calculated
as the height of their lowest common ancestor level in the
hierarchy.

The probability of acquaintance between two individu-
als is assumed to be proportional to exp(−αx) where α is
the measure of homophily and x the social distance. Un-
like [74], here it is assumed that the distance between two
individuals for two diﬀerent features are uncorrelated.
One can consider the minimum distance yij, the smallest
of the xij ’s corresponding to all the social features, to be
suﬃcient to connote aﬃliation.

13

It is assumed that the individual who passes the mes-
sage knows only its own coordinates, its neighours coor-
dinates and the coordinates of the target node. Thus the
search process is based on partial information, informa-
tion about social distance and network paths are both
only locally known.

In this work one important aspect of the original ex-
periments by Milgram and his coworkers was brought
under consideration, that most of the search attempts
failed but when it was successful it took only a few steps.
Introducing a failure probability p that a node fails to
carry forward the message, it is to be noted that if the
probability of a successful search of length s is r, it must
satisfy q = (1 − p)s ≥ r. This gives an upper limit for s;
s ≤ log(r)/ log(1 − p). In the simulations, the number of
traits H and α were varied keeping p = 0.25 and r = 0.05
ﬁxed (these values are in accordance with realistic values
which gives s ≤ 10.4). The values of the average number
of nearest neighbours and branching ratio were also kept
constant. A phase diagram in the H −α plane showed re-
gions where the searching procedure can be successful. It
showed that almost all searchable networks display α > 0
and H > 1. The best performance, over the largest range
of α, is achieved for H = 2 or 3. In fact the model could
be tuned to reproduce the experimental results of Mil-
gram (s ∼ 6.7).

D. Experimental studies of searching

A few projects to study searching in social networks
experimentally have been initiated recently. Dodds et al
[93] have conducted a global, Internet based social search
by registering participants online. Eighteen target per-
sons from 13 countries with varied occupation were ran-
domly selected and the participants were informed that
their task was to help relay a message to their allocated
target by passing the message to a social acquaintance
whom they considered closest to the target. One fourth of
the participants provided their personal information and
it showed that the sample was suﬃciently representative
of the general Internet using population. The partici-
pants also provided data as to on what basis he or she
chose the contacts’ name and e-mail address; in maxi-
mum cases they were friends, followed by relatives and
colleagues.

The links in this experimental network showed that
geographical proximity of the acquaintance to the target
and similarity of occupation were the two major decid-
ing factors behind their existence. Many of the chains
were terminated and not completed as in Milgram’s ex-
periment and the reason behind it was mainly lack of
interest or incentive. In total, 384 chains were completed
(nearly 100000 persons registered in the beginning). It
was also found that when chains did complete, they were
short, the average length s being 4.05. However, this is a

measure for completed chains only, and the hypothetical
estimate in the limit of zero attrition comes out to be
s = 7.

In another study, Adamic and Adar [94] derived the
social network of e-mails at HP laboratories from the e-
mail logs by deﬁning a social contact to be someone with
whom at least six e-mails have been exchanged both ways
over an approximate period of three months. A network
of 430 individuals was generated and the degree distri-
bution showed an exponential tail. Search experiments
were simulated on this network. Three criteria for send-
ing messages in the search strategy was tested in this
simulation; degree of the node, closeness to the target in
the organisational hierarchy and location with respect to
the target.

In a scale-free network, seeking a high degree node was
shown to be a good search strategy [91]. However, in
this network, which has an exponential tail, this does
not work out to be eﬀective. This is because most of
the nodes do not have a neighbour with high degree.
The second strategy of utilising the organising hierar-
chy worked much better showing that the hierarchical
structure in this network is quite appropriate. The prob-
ability of linking as a function of the separation in the
organisational hierarchy also showed consistency with an
exponential decay as in [92]. The corresponding exponent
α has a value = 0.94 and is well within the searchable
region identiﬁed in [92].

The relation between linkage probability and distance
r turned out to be 1/r in contrast to 1/r2 where the
search strategy should work best according to [24]. Using
geographical proximity as a search strategy gave larger
short paths compared to the search based on organisa-
tional hierarchy, but the path lengths were still ‘short’.

A similar experiment was conducted by Liben-Nowell
et al [95], using a real world friendship network to see
how the geographical routing alone is able to give rise to
short paths. In this simulated experiment, termination of
chains was allowed. Chain completion was successful in
thirteen percent cases with average search length a little
below 6.

X. ENDNOTE

Study of social networks has great practical implica-
tions with respect to many phenomena like spreading of
information, epidemic dynamics, behaviour under attack
etc. In these examples, the analysis of the corresponding
networks can help in making proper strategies for voting,
vaccination or defence programmes. In this particular re-
view, we have highlighted mainly the theoretical aspects
of social networks like structure, modelling, phase tran-
sitions and searching. Social networks has emerged truly
as an interdisciplinary topic during recent times and the

14

present review is a little biased as it is from the viewpoint
of a physicist.

k for larger values.

The degree distribution P (k) of the network, that is,
the distribution of the number of stations k which are
connected by direct trains to an arbitrary station was
also studied. The cumulative degree distribution F (k) =
∞
k P (k)dk for the whole IRN approximately ﬁts to an
R
exponentially decaying distribution: F (k) ∼ exp(−αk)
with α= 0.0085 (Fig. 7).

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.6

)
k
(
F

0.7

103

102

>
)
k
(

n
n
k
<

XI. APPENDIX: THE INDIAN RAILWAYS
NETWORK

The Indian railways network (IRN) is more than 150
years old and has a large number of stations and trains
(running at both short and long distances). In the study
of the IRN [45], a coarse graining was made by selecting
a sample of trains, and the stations through which these
run. The total number of trains considered was 579 which
run through 587 stations. Here the stations represent the
‘nodes’ of the graph, whereas two arbitrary stations are
considered to be connected by a ‘link’ when there is at
least one train which stops at both the stations. These
two stations are considered to be at unit distance of sep-
aration irrespective of the geographical distance between
them. Therefore the shortest distance ℓij between an ar-
bitrary pair of stations si and sj is the minimum number
of diﬀerent trains one needs to board on to travel from
si to sj. Smaller subsets of the network were also con-
sidered to analyse the behaviour of diﬀerent quantities
as a function of the number of nodes. The average dis-
tance between an arbitrary pair of stations was found
to depend only logarithmically on the total number of
stations in the country as shown in Fig. 6.

)

(

N
D

1.8

2.2

2.0

1.6

1.4

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

)
l
(
b
o
r
P

0

1

N

102

2

3

l

4

5

103

FIG. 6. The variation of the mean distance D(N ) of
25 diﬀerent subsets of IRN having diﬀerent number of
nodes (N ). The whole range is ﬁtted with a function like
D(N ) = A + B log(N ) where A ≈ 1.33 and B ≈ 0.13. The in-
set shows the distribution Prob(ℓ) of the shortest path lengths
ℓ on IRN. The lengths varied to a maximum of only ﬁve link
lengths and the network has a mean distance D(N ) ≈ 2.16.

Like other social networks, the IRN also showed a large
clustering coeﬃcient which also depends on the number
of nodes (stations). For the entire IRN, the clustering
coeﬃcient is around 0.69, the value for the correspond-
ing random graph being 0.11. The clustering coeﬃcient
as a function of the degree k of a node showed that it is
a constant for small k and decreases logarithmically with

0.5

0

20

40

60

80

100

k

FIG. 7. The cumulative degree distribution F (k) of the
IRN with the degree k is plotted on the semi-logarithmic scale.

101

100

101

102

103

k

FIG. 8. The variation of the average degree hknn(k)i of the
neighbours of a node of degree k with k in the IRN. After
some initial ﬂuctuations, hknn(k)i remains almost same over
a decade around k = 30 to 300 indicating absence of correla-
tions among the nodes of diﬀerent degrees.

The average degree hknn(k)i of the nearest neighbours
of a node with degree k is plotted in Fig. 8 to check the
assortativity behaviour of the network. This data is not
very indicative. The assortativity coeﬃcient r is there-
fore calculated using eq. (4), which gives the value r =
-0.033. This shows that unlike social networks of class A
and B, here the assortativity is negative.

[1] Wasserman S., Faust K., Social Network Analysis,

15

Cambridge University Press, 1994

[36] Basu Hajra K., Sen P., Physica A (2006) in press

[2] Watts D. J., Strogatz S. H., Nature 393 (1998) p. 440
[3] Albert R., Barab´asi, A.-L., Rev. Mod. Phys. 74

(cond-mat/0508035)

(2002) p. 47

[4] Barab´asi A.-L., Linked, Perseus, 2002
[5] Dorogovtsev S. N., Mendes J. F. F., Evolution of

Networks, Oxford University Press, 2003

[6] Milgram, S., Psychology Today 1 (1967) p. 60;
Travers J., Milgram S., Sociometry 32 (1969) p. 425

[7] Erd¨os P., R´enyi A., Publ. Math. 6 (1959) p. 290
[8] Barab´asi, A.-L., Albert R., Science 286 (1999) p. 509
[9] Freeman C., Sociometry 40 (1977) p. 35
[10] Goh K.-I., Oh E., Kahng B., Kim D., Phys. Rev. E

67 (2003) p. 017101

[11] Newman M. E. J., Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 (2002) p. 208701
[12] Ebel H., Mielsch L-I., Berholdt S., Phys. Rev. E 66

(2002) p. 035103R

[13] Barrat A., Weigt M., Eurphys. J. B 13 (2000) p. 547;
Gitterman M., J. Phys A 33 (2000) p. 8373; textscKim
B. J., Hong H, Holme P., Jeon G. S., Minnhagen P.,
Choi M. Y. Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001) p. 056135; Kim B.
J., Hong H., Kim B. J., Choi M. Y. Phys. Rev. E 66
(2002) p. 018101

[14] Huberman, B. A., Adamic L. A., Nature 401, (1999)

[37] Newman M. E. J., Phys. Rev. E 67 (2003) p. 026126
[38] Schnegg M., physics/0603005
[39] Abello. J., Paradalos P. M., Resende M. G. C.,
DIMACS Series in DIsc. Math and Theo. Comp. Sc 50
(1999) p. 119

[40] Cs`anyi G., Szendr¨oi B., Phys. Rev. E 69 (2004)

p. 036131

[41] Newman M. E. J., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98 (2001)
p. 404; Newman M. E. J., Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001)
p. 016131; p. 016132

[42] Barab´asi A.L., Jeong H., Neda Z., Ravasz E., Schu-
bert A., Vicsek T., Physica A 311 (2002) p. 590

[43] Redner S., Eur. Phys. J. B 4 (1998) p. 131
[44] Vazquez A., cond-mat/0105031
[45] Sen P., Dasgupta S., Chatterjee A., Sreeram P.
A., Mukherjee G., Manna S. S., Phys. Rev. E 67
(2003) p. 036106

[46] Newman M. E. J., Park J., Phys. Rev. E 68 (2003)

p. 036122

[47] Newman M. E. J., Eur. Phys. J. B 38 (2004) p. 321
[48] Jain A.K., Dubes R. C., Algorithms for clustering data,
Prentice Hall 1988; Everitt B. S., Cluster Analysis,
Edward Arnold 1993

p. 131

(2005) p. 036108

[15] Masuda N., Miwa H., Konno N., Phys. Rev. E 71

[49] Girvan M., Newman M. E. J., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

USA 99 (2002) p. 7821

[16] Yook S.-H., Jeong H. Barab´asi A.-L., Proc. Natl.

[50] Newman M. E. J., Girvan M., Phys. Rev. E 69 (2004)

Acad. Sci. USA 99 (2002) p. 13382

p. 026113

[17] Katz, J. S., Scientometrics 31 (1994) p. 31
[18] Nagpaul P. S., Scientometrics 56 (2003) p. 403
[19] Rosenblat T. S., Mobius M. M., Quart. J. Econ 121

[20] Gastner M. T., Newman M. E. J., cond-mat/0407680
[21] Olson G. M., Olson J. S., Hum. Comp. Inter. 15

[22] Sen P., Chandra A.K., Basu Hajra K., Das P.K.,

[23] Waxman B., IEEE J. Selec. Areas Comm, SAC 6

[24] Kleinberg J. M., Nature 406 (2000) p. 845
[25] Jespersen S., Blumen A., Phys. Rev. E 62 (2000)

[26] Sen P., Chakrabarti B. K., J. Phys. A 34 (2001)

(2004) p. 971

(2004) p. 139

physics/0511181

(1988) p. 1617

p. 6270

p. 7749.

[51] Danon L., Duch J., Diaz-Guilera A., Arenas A., J.

Stat. Mech. (2005) p. P09008

[52] Zachary W. W., J. Anthrop. Res 33 (1977) p. 452
[53] Arenas A., Danon L., Diaz-Guilera A., Gleiser P.
M., Guimer`a R., Eur. Phys. J. B 38 (2004) p. 373;
Gleiser P. M., Danon L., Adv. in Complex Syst. 6
(2003) 565

[54] Radicchi F., Castellano C., Cecconi F., Loreto
V., Parisi D., Proc Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101 (2004)
p. 2658

[55] Fortunato S., Latora V., and Marchiori M., Phys.

Rev. E 70 (2004) p. 056104

[56] Newman M. E. J., Phys. Rev. E 69 (2004) p. 066133
[57] Duch J., Arenas A., cond-mat/0501368
[58] Capocci A., Servedio V. D. P., Caldarelli G., Co-

laiori F., cond-mat/0402499

[27] Moukarzel C. F., de Menezes M. A., Phys. Rev. E

[59] Donetti L., Munoz M. A., J. Stat. Mech. (2004)

[28] Sen P., Banerjee K., Biswas T., Phys. Rev. E 66

[29] Manna S. S., Sen P., Phys. Rev. E 66 (2002) p. 066114
[30] Sen P., Manna S. S., Phys. Rev. E
68 (2003)

p. 046108

[31] Manna S. S., Mukherjee G., Sen P., Phys. Rev. E

p. 331

[32] Basu Hajra K., Sen P., Physica A 346 (2005) p. 44
[33] Redner S., physics/0407137; Redner S., Physics Today

(2004) p. 218701

[34] Dorogovtsev S. N., Mendes J. F. F., Phys. Rev. E

[35] Zhu H., Wang X., Zhu J-Y., Phys. Rev. E 68 (2003)

435 (2005) p. 814

p. P10012

[60] Donetti L., Munoz M. A., physics/0504059
[61] Zhou H., Phys. Rev. E 67 (2003) p. 061901
[62] Bagrow J. P., Bollt E. M., Phys. Rev. E 72 (2005)

[63] Wu F., Huberman B. A., Euro Phys. J. B 38 (2004)

[64] Reichhardt J., Bernholdt S., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93

[65] Guimer`a R., Sales-Pardo M., Amaral L. A. N.,

Phys. Rev. E 70 (2004) p. 025101R

[66] Son S-W., Jeong H, Noh J. D., cond-mat/0502672
[67] Palla G., Derenyi I., Farkas I., Vicsek T., Nature

[68] Derenyi I., Palla G., Vicsek T., Phys. Rev. Lett. 94

65 (2002) p. 056709

(2002) p. 037102

p. 0206104

69 (2004) p. 017102

58 (2005) p. 49

62 (2000) p. 1842

p. 058121

16

[69] Pollner P., Palla G., Vicsek T., Europhys. Lett. 73

(2005) p. 160202

(2006) 478

Physica A 217 (1995) p. 373
[83] Gallos L., physics/0503004
[84] Ben-Naim E., Redner S., J. Stat. Mech. (2005)

[70] Stauffer D., Aharony A., An Introduction to Perco-

p. L11002

lation Theory, Taylor and Francis 1994

[85] Klemm K., Egu´iluz V. M., Toral R., San Miguel

[71] Catanzaro M., Caldarelli G., Pietronero L.,

M., Phys. Rev. E 67 (2003) p. 026120

Phys. Rev. E 70 (2004) p. 037101

[72] Bogu˜n´a M., Pastor-Satorras R., D´iaz-Guilera A.,

Arenas A., Phys. Rev. E 70 (2004) p. 056122

[73] Wong L. H., Pattison P., Robins G., physics/0505128
[74] Motter A. E., Nishikawa T, Lai Y-C., Phys. Rev. E

68 (2003) p. 036105

to be published.

[76] Holme P., Europhys. Lett 64 (2003) p. 427
[77] Roth C., nlin.AO/0507021
[78] Jin E.M., Girvan M., Newman M. E. J., Phys. Rev.

[86] Gonz´alez-Avella J. C., Egu´iluz V. M., Cosenza M.
G., Klemm K., Herrera J. L., San Miguel M., cond-
mat/0601340

[87] Axelrod R., J. of Conﬂict Resolution 41 (1997) p. 203
[88] Shafee F., physics/0506161
[89] de Moura A. P. S., Motter A. E., Grebogi C., Phys.

[90] Zhu H., Huan Z-X., Phys. Rev. E 70 (2004) p. 036117
[91] Adamic L. A., Lukose R. M., Puniyani A. R., Hu-
berman B. A., Phys. Rev. E 64 (2001) p. 046135
[92] Watts D. J., Dodds P. S., Newman M. E. J., Science

[75] Chandra A. K., Basu Hajra K., Das P.K., Sen P.,

Rev. E 68 (2003) p. 036106

E 64 (2001) p. 046132

296 (2002) p. 1302

[79] Ebel H., Davidsen J., Bornholdt S., Complexity 8(2)

[93] Dodds P. S., Muhamad R., Watts D. J., Science 301

[80] Gr¨onlund A., Holme P., Phys. Rev. E 70 (2004)

[94] Adamic L. A., Adar E., Social Networks 27 (2005)

(2003) p. 827

p. 187

(2002) p. 24

p. 036108

[81] Dittrich P., Liljeros F., Soulier S., Banzhaf W.,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 (2000) p. 3205

[82] Bonabeau E., Theraulaz G., Deneubourg J.-L.,

[95] Liben-Nowell D., Novak J., Kumar R., Raghavan
P., Tomkins A., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102 (2005)
p. 11623

17

