6
0
0
2
 
y
a
M
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
7
0
5
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Eﬃciency of pair formation in a model society

Mateusz Wa´sko and Krzysztof Ku lakowski

Faculty of Physics and Applied Computer Science, AGH-UST, al. Mickiewicza 30,
30-059 Cracow, Poland

Abstract

In a recent paper a set of diﬀerential equations was proposed to describe a social
process, where pairs of partners emerge in a community. The choice was performed
on a basis of attractive resources and of random initial preferences. An eﬃciency of
the process, deﬁned as the probability of ﬁnding a partner, was found to depend on
the community size. Here we demonstrate, that if the resources are not relevant, the
eﬃciency is equal to unity; everybody ﬁnds a partner. With this new formulation,
about 80 percent of community members enter to dyads; the remaining 20 percent
form triads.

Key words: Agents, Dynamics, Marriage, Resources
PACS: 87.23.Ge

1 Introduction

Sociophysics is a new branch of the statistical and computational physics.
It can be deﬁned as an attempt to apply tools of the theoretical physics to
the social sciences. The problem, if and to which extent it is possible/allowed
to describe social processes mathematically, cannot by resolved a priori. The
arguments for the negative answer are well known in sociology, as they are
used in the discussion between the empirical and the theoretical traditions
[1]. As these arguments are continuously developed during about 200 recent
years, it seems possible that still the subject is not closed. As for the physicists,
however, mathematics is at least not worse than any other language; then the
discussion is empty. Last but not least, the empirical tradition embraces a good
part of sociology. In this ﬁeld, however, it is natural to treat the physicists
as outsiders, who ”reinvent existing tools and rediscover established empirical
results”, and who eventually will be integrated into the larger social network
community [2,3]. We imagine that as for the sociological perspective, these
notions could be applied to the sociophysics as a whole. We are not willing to
defy the integration.

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

17 February 2014

The problem to be discussed here can be strictly formulated as a set of abstract
diﬀerential equations, but its social interpretation is maybe more appealing.
The term we use: ”pair formation” means that a set of N objects, initially
random, transforms in time towards a stable state with some pairs of objects.
If no object remains unpaired, the eﬃciency of the process is 100 percent or
1.0. A fractional part of unity means that some objects are not paired, i.e.
the process is less eﬃcient. Most straightforward equivalent of the process is
when pairs of sexual partners appear in a group of young people. However, as
we are going to demonstrate, the mathematics involved does not contain an
assumption on individual diﬀerences, as for example sex.

Up to our knowledge, the problem of social pairing was discussed in Refs. [4,5].
The subject of these papers is some kind of social optimization: the task is to
ﬁnd a partner with best parameters. There, the evaluation of these parame-
ters can take into account individual needs. This algorithmic approach is well
established in the literature of the subject [6,7]. Our starting point is maybe
diﬀerent, as we base on an assumption that ﬁnal equilibrium state is devel-
oped as a result of initial preferences which are random. In this picture, the
preferences are ﬁrst followed, then rationalized ex-post. As it was formulated
by Vilfredo Pareto, people do what they believe is desirable for them [8].

In our previous paper [9], an attempt was made to evaluate the eﬃciency of
the pairing process as dependent on the size 2N of the whole group (this vari-
able was termed N in [9]). The diﬀerence between Ref. [9] and the present
work is in the details of the model equations; in words, it can be summarized
as follows. The core of the pairing process is that each group member selects
another one basing on the recources of the selected member and on its willing-
ness to share them. Further, the willingness of the selecting member to share
his own resources is reoriented in time as to give most resources to the most
generous member, just selected. In this way, a positive feedback appears be-
tween particular members and weak initial inclinations are transformed into
a monopoly on mutual feeding. Those who do not reorient quickly enough,
because their initial inclinations were ill-directed or too distributed - fail and
remain unpaired. This version of the model has been presented in Ref. [9].
The velocity α of reorientation was another parameter, and the eﬃciency was
investigated as dependent on α and N.

Within the above given terms, the goal of this work can be presented as
follows. We already know that an individual selection is based on two agents:
resources of the selected partner and his willingness to share them with the
selecting member. Now, let us eliminate the criterion of resources, with the
one of willingness left only. In other words, it does not matter any more if a
member has anything to oﬀer; the only relevant is to whom it wants to oﬀer
what he has. Then, a striking eﬀect is observed: the eﬃciency of the pairing
process becomes equal to unity. No unpaired members is left.

2

The model equations are given in the next section, together with some ex-
ample of the obtained plots. Last section contains our conclusion, aimed as
sociological - in the physical sense.

2 Model and its results

The resources of i-th unit is deﬁned as p(i) ≥ 0. It evolves according to the
following rule.

dp(i)
dt

= N 2 − [

p(i)]

2 −

[r(j, i)p(j) − r(i, j)p(i)]

N

X
i=1

N

X
j6=i

Where t is time and r(i, j) is what i-th unit indends to oﬀer to j-th one. The
matrix r(i, j) also evolves; in the model version presented in Ref. [9] it was
evolving in accord to the following rule:

dr(i, j)
dt

= α(cid:16)r(j, i)p(j) − Pk r(k, i)p(k)

(cid:17)

N − 1

whereas in the present work the latter equation is limited to

dr(i, j)
dt

= α(cid:16)r(j, i) − Pk r(k, i)
N − 1 (cid:17)

(1)

(2)

(3)

As we see, in the previous model the matrix r(i, j) (willingness matrix) evolves
in time as dependent on the resources p(i). In the second formulation this
dependence is removed.

In Fig. 1 we present an example of the results for small value of α. In the
former version of the model [9], the eﬃciency of the process for this value of
α was about 0.2. With the application of Eq.3, the eﬃciency is equal to 1.0
(100 percent) for all of our numerical evidence. As in the previous model, the
paired units get the same amounts of resources.

Surprisingly, a pair is not the only pattern which appears as the result of the
simulation. We observe also triads of two diﬀerent types; let us call them type
1 and 2. In the stable state of triad 1, one of contributing unit exchanges
resources symmetrically with the remaining two, while these two do not in-
teract with each other. As a consequence, the amount of resources of one unit
is twice larger than the amounts of the others. In triad 2, each of three units
exchanges his resources with the others; then, their amounts of resources are
equal. These triads are presented schematically in Fig. 2, together with the

3

Fig. 1. The amount of resources as dependent on time for N =10 and α=0.2.

pair. We checked that the probability that an unit enters to a triad is about
0.2, and this result seemingly does not depend on the parameters N and α.
Small numerical evidence suggests that groups larger than triads can be stable
as well, but they are rare.

3 Conclusion

Summarizing, we report a new strategy of searching a partner to exchange
resources. New element is to disregard the actual amount of resources of a
potential partner, and to take into account only his willingness to oﬀer them.
Although this strategy is obviously far from being optimal with respect of
acquired amount of resources, its advantage is that everybody is fed with
some resources in the ﬁnal state. This is the main goal of this paper.

The results of the model seem to present a nontrivial alternative for what is
considered as normal behaviour in biology. Sexual rivalization and competition
of genes - these ideas entered to a common knowledge. The price we pay - we,
living creatures - is that some less perfect units cannot pass their genetic
material to an oﬀspring. In the competitive world and in a closed group, they
just are not able to ﬁnd partners, tolerant to their weaknesses. Although in
human world all that can be changed at least in principle, the literature and
other media provide a large pile of descriptions of this situation.

Would be then of interest to modify our sexual behaviour? Truly, we do it
already. As it is described by evolutionary psychologists, once the aim is not
an oﬀspring but just sex, our demands decrease [10]. This behaviour means

4

Fig. 2. The scheme of a pair and two kinds of triads.

that our sexual needs are alienated from their biological basis. Then, they can
be used for other purposes: political, economic, social or just entertainment.
This is one of diﬀerences between animals and people.

References

1994.

[1] G. Marshall (Ed.), The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Sociology, Oxford UP

[2] L. C. Freeman, The Development of Social Network Analysis: A Study in the

Sociology of Science, Empirical Press, Vancouver, BC, 2004.

5

[3] B. H. Russell, Social Networks 27 (2005) 377.

[4] G. Caldarelli and A. Capocci, Physica A 300 (2001) 325.

[5] D. M. D. Smith and N. F. Johnson, Physica A 363 (2006) 151.

[6] J. Nash, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 36 (1950) 48.

[7] D. Gusﬁeld and R. W. Irving, The Stable Marriage Problem: Structure and

Algorithms, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts 1989.

[8] J. Szacki, History of Sociological Thought (in Polish), PWN, Warszawa 1983.

[9] J. Karpi´nska, K. Malarz and K. Ku lakowski, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 15 (2004)

1227.

Bacon, Boston 1999.

[10] D. M. Buss, Evolutionary Psychology. The New Science of the Mind, Allyn and

6

