6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
7
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
6
0
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Modeling Society with Statistical Mechanics:
an Application to Cultural Contact and Immigration

Pierluigi Contucci (contucci@dm.unibo.it)
Department of Mathematics, University of Bologna

Stefano Ghirlanda (stefano.ghirlanda@unibo.it)
Department of Psychology, University of Bologna
Group for Interdisciplinary Cultural Studies, Stockholm University

Abstract. We introduce a general modeling framework to predict the outcomes,
at the population level, of individual psychology and behavior. The framework
prescribes that researchers build a cost function that embodies knowledge of what
trait values (opinions, behaviors, etc.) are favored by individual interactions under
given social conditions. Predictions at the population level are then drawn using
methods from statistical mechanics, a branch of theoretical physics born to link
the microscopic and macroscopic behavior of physical systems. We demonstrate our
approach building a model of cultural contact between two cultures (e.g., immigra-
tion), showing that it is possible to make predictions about how contact changes the
two cultures.

Keywords: sociology, psychology, statistical mechanics, phase transitions, cultural
contact, immigration

1. Introduction

Modern society features an increasing degree of interaction between
cultures (“cultural contact”) owing to, e.g., communication technolo-
gies, immigration and other socio-political forces (Lull, 2000). In many
countries cultural contact is perceived as both an opportunity and a
threat and is related to important public issues such as immigration
management and the need to “protect” national culture (Cornelius
et al., 1994; Givens and Luedtke, 2005). Our understanding of these
phenomena is, however, limited: we cannot predict the outcome of
cultural contact, nor make plausible conjectures that can be used in
policy making. Within this context, the aim of this paper is twofold:
we ﬁrst describe a general mathematical framework for modeling social
interactions, then we make speciﬁc assumptions relevant to studying
immigration, i.e., social contact between two groups that, typically,
diﬀer both in culture and relative size.

c(cid:13) 2008 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.

QlQt070606.tex; 2/02/2008; 7:37; p.1

2

P. Contucci, S. Ghirlanda

2. General framework

2.1. A formalization of social interactions

For simplicity, we focus on a single cultural trait, which may represent
an idea, an opinion or a behavior that has two mutually exclusive forms.
A useful example to keep in mind is being in favor or against an issue
such as the death penalty, or any other issue that might be the subject
of a yes/no referendum vote. Our framework allows to consider multiple
traits without conceptual diﬀerences, although model analysis may in
general be much more diﬃcult.

We consider a population of N individuals, labeled by an index i
ranging from 1 to N . We associate to the i-th individual the variable
si, which may take values +1 or −1 representing the two possible trait
values. For instance, +1 might represent a yes vote in a referendum,
and −1 a no vote. The state of the whole population is thus encoded
in an array s of N numbers, such as s = {+1, −1, +1, . . .}.

The hallmark of social interactions is that individuals may change
their opinions or behavior owing to interactions with others. A given
couple (i, k) can in principle be in one of the four states {+1, +1},
{−1, +1}, {+1, −1} and {−1, −1}, but these outcomes, in general, do
not have the same probability. Which one is more likely will depend on
the characteristics of individuals such as their culture and personality.
Our starting assumption is that individuals have no particular bias
towards +1 or −1 opinions: what matters most is whether, by adopting
one or the other value, an individual is in agreement or disagreement
with others. There are two reasons for this assumptions. First, social
psychologists have shown that, in most cultures, agreement or dis-
agreement with others is a powerful determinant of individual opinions
and behavior, often more important than holding a particular opinion
(Bond and Smith, 1996); we will expand on this point in our model of
immigration below. Second, our framework allows to introduce biases
that favor a particular trait value, if needed. Indeed, any model in
which individuals are biased can be recast as a model with unbiased
individuals, plus an additional “force” that orients individual opinions.
Thus our starting assumption of unbiased individuals does not reduce
the generality of the framework. Again, we will make a speciﬁc example
for the case of immigration below.

To formalize these notions, we assume that individuals take on
the trait that minimizes a cost function. We deﬁne the cost Hik for
individual i to agree or disagree with individual k as

Hik(si, sk) = −Jiksisk

(1)

QlQt070606.tex; 2/02/2008; 7:37; p.2

Statistical mechanics of cultural contact

3

where Jik is a number that summarizes the nature of the interaction
between i and k, as follows. When i and k agree (sisk = 1) we have
a cost Hik = −Jik, while when i and k disagree (sisk = −1) we have
Hik = Jik. Thus whether agreement or disagreement carries the lesser
cost depends on the sign of Jik: Jik > 0 favors agreement while Jik < 0
favors disagreement. The magnitude of Jik gives how important it is for
i to agree or disagree with j. If, for instance, Jik > Jim then it is more
important for i to agree with k than with m, while Jik = 0 means that
agreement with k is not relevant to i. The signs and magnitudes of the
Jik’s become important when we consider that an individual interacts
with many others. In this case, we assume that the costs Hik relative
to each interaction sum up to a total cost Hi

Hi(si) =

H(si, sk) = −

Jiksisk

(2)

X
k

X
k

As anticipated above, we can take into account additional factors that
may inﬂuence individuals modifying equation (2) as follows:

Hi(si) = −

Jiksisk − hisi

(3)

X
k

meaning that individual i is subject to an additional “force” that fa-
vors si = 1 if hi > 0 and si = −1 if hi < 0. The quantity hi may
represent any factor that is not explicitly taken into account by the di-
rect interaction with other individuals. For instance, it may summarize
the inﬂuence of media, government campaigns or existing culture (see
below).

We can now write a population-level cost function as the sum of

individual cost functions:

H(s) =

Hi(si) = −

Jiksisk −

hisi

(4)

X
i

X
i,k

X
i

We stress that the cost function is a theoretical computational aid
to track which trait values are favored by the interactions Jik and
the external forces hi. We do not assume that individuals explicitly
compute or are aware of such costs. Rather, H(s) should be designed
so that its minima correspond to those trait values that are favored by
the mechanisms with which individuals interact.

2.2. The role of statistical mechanics

Once a cost function has been speciﬁed, it is possible to calculate
population level quantities such as the average trait value using the

QlQt070606.tex; 2/02/2008; 7:37; p.3

4

P. Contucci, S. Ghirlanda

methods of statistical mechanics, a branch of theoretical physics. Sta-
tistical mechanics was originally concerned with deriving the laws of
thermodynamics from the behaviour of atoms and molecules (Thomp-
son, 1979), but can actually be applied to understand the macroscopic
(population level) properties of any system composed of many parts
that interact according to given microscopic (individual level) rules.
More recently its methods have found application in ﬁelds as diverse as
biology (Mezard et al., 1987), neuroscience (Amit, 1989; Arbib, 2003),
economy and ﬁnance (Bouchaud and Potters, 2000) and also social
science (Durlauf, 1999). The starting point is to assign to each system
conﬁguration s a probability Pr(s) according to the Boltzmann-Gibbs
formula (Thompson, 1979)

Pr(s) =

e−H(s)
s e−H(s)

P

where the sum runs over all possible conﬁgurations of the system.1

By means of (5) a given conﬁguration is considered more or less
likely according to whether it is more or less costly: a low value of H(s)
results in a high probability of s, and vice-versa. Assigning probabilities
based on a given cost function is the heart of statistical mechanics and
is inspired by the principles of thermodynamics (see the appendix for
a short discussion, and Thompson, 1979, for a fuller treatment).

Once a probability is assigned to system conﬁgurations, it is possible
to compute the expected values of quantities of interest and to relate
them to the parameters that describe the system. For instance the
average cultural trait deﬁned by

would have an expected value given by

m(s) =

1
N X
i

si

m =

m(s) Pr(s)

X
s

Note that, while m(s) is the average trait value in a given conﬁguration,
m is the average trait value over all possible system conﬁgurations,
each one weighted according to its probability of occurrence. These
probabilities depend on the cost function H and thus on the parameters
that appear in its expression, i.e., the Jik’s and hi’s.

Rather than directly attempting to compute expected values such
as (7), statistical mechanics aims to compute the so-called free energy
of a system, deﬁned as

f = − log

−H(s)
e

X
s

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

QlQt070606.tex; 2/02/2008; 7:37; p.4

Statistical mechanics of cultural contact

5

The rationale for this strategy is that important quantities such as (7)
can be easily computed from knowledge of the free energy function, typ-
ically by taking suitable derivatives with respect to system parameters
(see appendix). The basic task of statistical mechanics is thus, after the
cost function H has been speciﬁed, to calculate the free energy function
for a given system. We stress that the form of the cost function is not
given by statistical mechanics; rather, it is the outcome of a modeling
eﬀort relative to a speciﬁc problem. We now make an example of how
one may proceed.

3. The cultural outcomes of immigration

We illustrate here the potentials of our framework considering the
impact of immigration on culture. We consider a large and a small
population, which will be referred to, respectively, as residents (R)
and immigrants (I). We let N1 be the number of residents, and N2 of
immigrants, with N1 ≫ N2 and N = N1 + N2 the total number of indi-
viduals. We are interested in how cultural contact changes the average
trait values in the two populations, with the aim of understanding the
eﬀect of one culture upon the other.

3.1. Interactions between residents and immigrants

Our main assumption regarding how residents and immigrants interact
is that people, generally speaking, tend to agree with those who are
perceived as similar to oneself and to disagree with those perceived as
diﬀerent. In social psychology this is known as the similarity-attraction
hypothesis. It has received ample support, although the details of how
we interact with others often depend on social context (Michinov and
Monteil, 2002; Byrne, 1997). We consider this assumption a general
guideline, and in modeling a speciﬁc case it can be modiﬁed without
diﬃculty. We formalize the similarity-attraction hypothesis by assum-
ing that high perceived similarity corresponds to positive values of
Jik, and low perceived similarity to negative values. Since residents
and immigrants have generally diﬀerent cultures, we may assume the
following structure for the interaction coeﬃcients Jik. We let the inter-
action between any two residents be J (1,1) > 0; the similarity-attraction
hypothesis suggests that this be a positive number, whose magnitude
reﬂects how strongly residents prefer to agree among themselves. Like-
wise, we let the interactions between immigrants be J (2,2) > 0. The
mutual interactions J (1,2) and J (2,1) should model whether residents
prefer to agree or disagree with immigrants, and vice-versa, and how

QlQt070606.tex; 2/02/2008; 7:37; p.5

6

P. Contucci, S. Ghirlanda

strongly so. If resident and immigrant cultures are very diﬀerent, the
similarity-attraction hypothesis suggests to take both J (1,2) and J (2,1)
as negative, but the best choice of values depends on the speciﬁc case
one intends to model.

Note that we are assuming that Jik depends only on population
membership and not on the particular individuals i and k (the so-
called mean ﬁeld assumption in statistical mechanics). This assumption
greatly simpliﬁes mathematical analysis but is not wholly realistic. It
can capture the average variation in interactions across population but
not the variation that exists within each population. For instance,
a more realistic assumption would be to take the Jik’s as random
variables whose mean and variance depend on population member-
ship. We plan to return on that model (which would represent the
two-population generalization of the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick model in
statistical mechanics, Mezard et al., 1987) in future studies.

When modeling interactions, a technical requirement is that the
value of the cost function be proportional to total population size N .
This guarantees that the free-energy function and important quantities
such as average trait value, equation (7), scale appropriately with N .
In our case the appropriate scaling is 1/2N , hence the interactions are:

Jik =

(9)

J (1,1)
2N

J (1,2)
2N

J (2,1)
2N

J (2,2)
2N






i, k ∈ R

i ∈ R, k ∈ I

i ∈ I, k ∈ R

i, k ∈ I

3.2. Modeling pre-existing culture

Before the two populations start to interact, residents and immigrants
are each characterized by a given average trait value, say ˜m1 and ˜m2,
respectively. We consider ˜m1 and ˜m2 as experimental data about the
beliefs or behavior of each population, which could be obtained from,
say, a referendum vote on a particular issue (e.g., the death penalty)
or from statistical sampling of the population.

That a population is characterized by a given average value ˜mi 6=
0 means that the two forms of the trait are not equally common.

QlQt070606.tex; 2/02/2008; 7:37; p.6

Statistical mechanics of cultural contact

7

Speciﬁcally, the individuals with the +1 form are N (1 + ˜mi)/2, while
N (1 − ˜m1)/2 individuals have the −1 form. Pre-existing culture, in
other words, is like a bias or force that favors one trait value over the
other. For modeling purposes, it is convenient to describe pre-existing
culture as a “cultural force” that acts to orient the opinion of otherwise
unbiased individuals. This is possible including a force term in the cost
function, as shown in (3). By standard methods of statistical mechanics
(see appendix) it is possible to show that the force term corresponding
to a particular average opinion ˜mi is

h(i) = atanh( ˜mi) − J (i,i) ˜mi

(10)

where atanh is the inverse hyperbolic tangent function. To summarize,
a model in which individuals are biased so that the average opinion is
˜mi is equivalent to a model with unbiased individuals subject to a force
given by (10).

3.3. Model analysis

So far we have speciﬁed interaction terms Jik to model cultural contact
between two populations and we have introduced equation (10) to rep-
resent the pre-existing culture in the two populations. The next step is
to compute the average trait values m1 and m2 in the two populations
after immigration has taken place. The same method that allows to
derive equation (10) enables us to derive the following equations for
m1 and m2 (see appendix):

m1 = tanh (cid:16)(1 − α)J (1,1)m1 + α(J (1,2) + J (2,1))m2 + h(1)

(cid:17)

m2 = tanh (cid:16)(1 − α)(J (2,1) + J (1,2))m1 + αJ (2,2)m2 + h(2)

(cid:17)

(11a)

(11b)

where α = N2/N is the fraction of immigrants in the total population
and tanh is the hyperbolic tangent function. The values of m1 and m2
predicted by (11) depend of course on values of the J and h parameters,
and on α. We give here a qualitative description of the diﬀerent regimes
that one can observe varying these parameters. We refer to Cohen
(1974) for a proof of the following statements, in the context of an
analogous model from condensed matter physics.

The two key parameters are α, the fraction of immigrants, and the
overall scale of the interactions Jik, which we label J. If J is below a
critical value J ⋆, equation (11) has always one pair of solutions, for all
values of α. In this case the two populations are essentially merging
into a homogeneous one, with average cultural trait in between the
two initial ones—more toward one or the other according to the value

QlQt070606.tex; 2/02/2008; 7:37; p.7

8

P. Contucci, S. Ghirlanda

1.0

0.5

m

0.0

−0.5

−1.0

0.00

0.02

0.04

a

0.06

0.08

0.10

1.0

0.0

0.5
J

Figure 1. Possible outcomes of cultural contact. Average trait value in the two
populations, m = (1 − α)m1 + αm2, is plotted as a function of α (fraction of
immigrants) and J (scale of the interaction) for an interaction matrix of the form (9)
with J (i,k) = J. Before the interaction the two populations have initial trait values
of ˜m1 = 0.5 and ˜m2 = −0.5. Only the most likely outcome is plotted (see text).

of α. This regime is not surprising and corresponds to the na¨ive pre-
diction that one could have made a priori without applying statistical
mechanics.

If the interaction scale is large (J > J ⋆), however, model predictions
are highly non-trivial, suggesting that the outcome of cultural contact
can be surprising. Depending on J there are two critical values for
α: α1(J) and α2(J) that delimit qualitatively diﬀerent behavior. For
α ≤ α1(J) the resident culture dominates dominant and the immigrant
culture disappears, i.e., m2 is close to m1 irrespective of the initial value
˜m2. The converse happens when α ≥ α2(J), i.e., immigrant culture
dominates. The most interesting case occurs when α1(J) ≤ α ≤ α2(J).
In this regime (11) has two distinct solutions in which either of the two
cultures dominates. That is, both cultures may survive the immigration
process, generally with a diﬀerent probability determined by system
parameters.

The parameter values that favor the resident or immigrant culture,
have still to be worked out and will be the topic of future work.2 Here
we analyze the case in which the intensity of the interactions is uniform
both within and between groups, J (i,k) = J. This is interpreted as two
groups that do not really discriminate between themselves, so that
disagreement with any particular individual carries the same cost inde-

QlQt070606.tex; 2/02/2008; 7:37; p.8

Statistical mechanics of cultural contact

9

pendent of which group the individual belongs to. We assume, however,
that the two groups have initially a very diﬀerent average trait value:
˜m1 = 0.5 and ˜m2 = −0.5. In ﬁgure 1 we explore this system by plotting
the average trait value after the interaction, m = (1−α)m1 +αm2, for α
between 0 and 10% and for J ≥ 0.3 For J = 0 (no interaction) m is sim-
ply the weighted sum of pre-existing trait values, m = (1−α) ˜m1 +α ˜m2,
where each group contributes according to its size. As a function of
α, this is a straight line. As the interaction increases the line slowly
bends and for higher values of α we see a slight exaggeration of the
pre-existing opinion ˜m1 (the surface in ﬁgure 1 rises slightly over the
level m = 0.5). When J crosses a critical value J ⋆ ≃ 1.125, however,
a dramatic phenomenon occurs: the population undergoes a sudden
change of opinion, switching to a value of m that is closer to, and indeed
exaggerates, the initial value in the immigrant population, ˜m2 = −0.5.
Note that this sudden transition occurs for all values of α, i.e., irre-
spective of the proportion of immigrants. The solution with m closer
to m1 is still available to the system (not plotted in Figure 1), but as
J grows past J ⋆ it is less and less likely that the system remains in
such state (technically, for J < J ⋆ the solution with m ≃ ˜m1 has a
higher free-energy than the solution with m ≃ ˜m2 and thus becomes
metastable, allowing ﬂuctuations to cause a transition between the two
solutions). Thus, according to this model, to prevent dramatic changes
in resident culture, it would do little to restrict immigration (the eﬀect
of α is small in the graph). Rather, one should concentrate in reducing
the scale of the interaction J, i.e., the strength of attitudes within and
between groups.

4. Discussion

Attempts to apply mathematical-physics methods to social sciences
have appeared in the litterature since the pioneering work of Galam
et al. (1982). In this paper we have focused on statistical mechanics as a
tool to bridge the gap from individual-level psychology and behavior to
population-level outcomes. Our framework prescribes that researchers
build a cost function that embodies knowledge of what trait values
(opinions, behaviors, etc.) are favored by individual interactions under
given social conditions. The cost function, equation (4), is deﬁned by
a choice for the interactions Jik and the ﬁelds hi that represent so-
cial forces inﬂuencing individual opinions and behavior. This modeling
eﬀort, of course, requires speciﬁc knowledge of the social issue to be
modeled. After a cost function has been speciﬁed, the machinery of sta-

QlQt070606.tex; 2/02/2008; 7:37; p.9

10

P. Contucci, S. Ghirlanda

tistical mechanics can be used to compute population-level quantities
and study how they depend on system parameters.

We have demonstrated our framework with an attempt to under-
stand the possible outcomes of contact between two cultures. Even the
simple case we studied in some detail the model suggests that cultural
contact may have dramatic outcomes (ﬁgure 1). How to tailor our
framework to speciﬁc cases, and what scenarios such models predict, is
open to future research.

Acknowledgements

We thank F. Guerra for very important suggestions. I. Gallo, C. Giar-
dina, S. Graﬃ and G. Menconi are acknowledged for useful discussion.

Notes

1 In physical applications, the parameter β (inverse temperature) usually mul-
tiplies H in (5). Here, as in other applications of statistical mechanics such as
combinatorial optimization (Mezard et al., 1987), we include β in H itself as an
overall scale factor.

2 As noted above, Cohen (1974) has studied a formally identical model arising
from a condensed-matter problem, but there the hi’s were free parameters, while
here they are determined in terms of the J (i,i) and the ˜mi through (10).

3 The maximum admissible value for J is given by the condition that (10) has a
stable solution, corresponding to the assumption that each culture is in equilibrium
before cultural contact. This condition yields J / 1.3.

References

Press.

Press, 2 edition.

Press.

Amit, D.: 1989, Modeling brain function, Vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University

Arbib, M. A.: 2003, The Handbook of Brain Theory and Neural Networks. MIT

Bond, R., Smith, P. B.: 1996, ‘Culture and conformity: A meta-analysis of studies
using Asch’s (1952b,1956) line judgment task’. Psychological Bulletin 119, 111–
137.

Bouchaud, P., Potters, M.: 2000, Theory of ﬁnancial risks. Cambridge University

Byrne, D.: 1997, ‘An overview (and underview) of research and theory within the
attraction paradigm’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 14, 417–431.
Cornelius, W. A., P. L. Martin, and J. F. Holliﬁeld (eds.): 1994, Controlling
Immigration: A Global Perspective. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

QlQt070606.tex; 2/02/2008; 7:37; p.10

Statistical mechanics of cultural contact

11

Durlauf, S. N.: 1999, ‘How can statistical mechanics contribute to social science?’.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A. 96, 10582–10584.
Galam, S., Gefen, Y., Shapir, Y.: 1982, ‘Sociophysics: a mean ﬁeld model for the

process of strike’. Journal of Mathematical Sociology 9, 1–13.

Givens, T. and A. Luedtke: 2005, ‘European Immigration Policies in Comparative
Persepctive: Issue Salience, Partisanship and Immigrant rights’. Comparative
European Politics 3, 1–22.

Cohen, E.G.D.: 1973, Tricritical points in metamagnets and helium mixtures. in Fun-
damental Problems in Statistical Mechanics, Proceedings of the 1974 Wageningen
Summer School. North-Holland/American Elsevier.

Lull, J.: 2000, Media, communication, culture. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Mezard, M., G. Parisi, and M. A. Virasoro: 1987, Spin Glass Theory and Beyond.

Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.

Michinov, E. and J.-M. Monteil: 2002, ‘The similarity-attraction relationship revis-
ited: divergence between aﬀective and behavioral facets of attraction’. European
Journal of Social Psychology 32, 485–500.

Thompson, C.: 1979, Mathematical Statistical Mechanics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton

University Press.

Appendix

A. Model solution

It is a standard result of statistical mechanics (Thompson, 1979) that
the free energy function of a system deﬁned by a cost function of the
form

H(s) = −

sisk − h

si

(12)

J
2N X
i,k

X
i

is obtained for the value of m that minimizes the function

F (m) = −

m2 − hm +

J
2

1 + m
2

log

1 + m
2

+

1 − m
2

log

1 − m
2

(13)

The minimization of this function with respect to m yields the con-
dition (10) which relates m and h and the Hamiltonian parameters.
The structure of the free energy (13) admits the standard statistical
mechanics interpretation as a sum of two contributions: the internal
energy (the average of the cost function)

U (m) = H = −

m2 − hm

(14)

J
2

minus the entropy

S(m) = −

Pr(s) log Pr(s) = −

X
s

1 + m
2

log

1 + m
2

−

1 − m
2

log

.

1 − m
2
(15)

QlQt070606.tex; 2/02/2008; 7:37; p.11

12

P. Contucci, S. Ghirlanda

One can indeed show that the distribution function (5) may be deduced
from the second principle of thermodynamics i.e. as the distribution
for which the entropy is minimum at an assigned value of the cost
function (Thompson, 1979). Equation (11) is obtained similarly from
the representation of the free energy of the two population system as
the minimum of the function

F (m1, m2) = −(1 − α)2J (1,1) m2

2 − α2J (2,2) m2
2
2
−α(1 − α)(J (1,2) + J (2,1))m1m2

1

−(1 − α)h1m1 − αh2m2
+(1 − α)[+ 1+m1
log 1+m1
2 + 1−m2
+α[+ 1+m2

2
log 1+m2

2

2

2 + 1−m1

log 1−m1

]

2

2
log 1−m2

]

2

(16)

The minimum condition yields (11).

QlQt070606.tex; 2/02/2008; 7:37; p.12

