6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
3
2
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Impact of External Events on the Emergence of Collective
States of Economic Sentiment

Martin Hohnisch, Dietrich Stauﬀer and Sabine Pittnauer∗

this version: June 25, 2006

Abstract

We investigate the impact of the environment (i.e. the impact of socio-political and

socio-economic exogenous events) on the emergence of ordered phases of locally inter-

acting individual economic sentiment variables (consumer conﬁdence, business conﬁ-

dence etc.). The sentiment ﬁeld is modeled as a (non-critical) Ising ﬁeld with nearest-

neighbor interactions on a (two-dimensional) square lattice. The environment is mod-

eled as an external “ﬁeld of events”, randomly ﬂuctuating over time, stochastically

impacting the Ising ﬁeld of individual variables. The external events can be frequent

or rare, have a lasting impact or a non-lasting impact. The ﬁeld is not homogeneous, as

individual actors might fail to perceive external events. We ﬁnd that if events are suﬃ-

ciently “strong” and/or perceived by a suﬃciently large proportion of agents, collective

states of pessimism/optimism can not occur, even for strong inter-agent interactions.

Keywords: consumer sentiment, consumer conﬁdence, endogenous vs. exogenous dynamics, local

interactions, social interactions

∗Address: Stauﬀer: Institute of Theoretical Physics, University of Cologne, Z¨ulpicher Str. 77, D-50923
K¨oln (e-mail: stauﬀer@thp.uni-koeln.de); Hohnisch: Experimental Economics Laboratory and Research

Group Hildenbrand, Department of Economics, University of Bonn, Adenauerallee 24-42, D-53113 Bonn (e-

mail: Martin.Hohnisch@uni-bonn.de); Pittnauer: Experimental Economics Laboratory and Research Group

Hildenbrand, Department of Economics, University of Bonn, Adenauerallee 24-42, D-53113 Bonn (e-mail:

Sabine.Pittnauer@uni-bonn.de);

1

Introduction

There has recently been renewed interest among economists in the impact of “economic

sentiment” (which has a well-deﬁned meaning in particular surveys of business sentiment of

managers and of consumer sentiment) on individual and aggregate economic activity [21, 6,

18]. While economic sentiment is considered as a relevant indicator among practitioners [14]

– as the available surveys of both investor and consumer sentiment are frequently cited in the

business press and other media reporting [8] – traditional economic modeling is concerned

with other, more deﬁnite types of expectations (income expectations, price expectations),

and there is much less agreement among theorists in what way – if at all – the rather vague

notion of economic sentiment should enter economic modeling.

According to Social Psychology, opinion formation is the more likely to be socially-driven

the less the individual who has to form an opinion (in our case an expectation) is in a position

to do so in a rational and informed manner [10]. But as studies in the human perception of

complex dynamic systems suggest [12] (as well as does common sense), the consequences of

events which become known daily can hardly be anticipated correctly by a typical consumer,

given the limited perception he has about the functioning of the economy (which – arguably

– even specialists lack). Therefore, it appears natural to conclude that formation of economic

sentiment is prone to social inﬂuence.

Accordingly, there has emerged a literature on social processes of economic sentiment

formation [11, 16]. Models may focus on the sentiment variables only (such as the above

cited), or they may include the link to economic variables, such as macroeconomic output,

savings etc (see [9, 22, 23] for some attempts in this direction). However, a common property

of this literature so far is that it is concentrated on the endogenous dynamics of sentiment

variables (i.e. the dynamics resulting from social interactions) while neglecting the role of

the environment which provides an external exogenous driving force. This despite that socio-

economic systems clearly cannot be separated from the broader socio-political environment.

It is a rather trivial observation that, for instance, economic traders react as much to the

news coming from the broader geo-political environment as to the behavior/advice of others.

In fact, there has been much interest recently in a more general issue of disentangling

endogenous and exogenous dynamics in complex systems [3, 20]. In a related direction, but

with a much simpler underlying model, the aim of our present study is to investigate the

impact of the environment on the emergence of ordered phases of an interactions-driven

ﬁeld of individual economic sentiment variables. We abstain in the present paper from

2

explicitly modeling the link to economic variables and instead concentrate on the interplay

of endogenous and exogenous inﬂuences (but we do so also because the way to model such

a link is not obvious, as it is not yet understood at the behavioral level).

2 The model

With the above described motivation, we assume that economic sentiment is a socially-

inﬂuenced individual attitude. Following previous work on social interactions [7, 2, 4], we

let the standard Ising model on a two-dimensional square lattice with nearest-neighbor in-

teractions represent the socially-driven component (endogenous dynamics) of economic sen-
timent.1 Individual states “−1” and “+1” correspond to pessimism and optimism, respec-
tively, of the economic actors. The variable xi denotes the economic sentiment of agent i. It

is well-known that for suﬃciently strong interactions between agents (letting aside any exter-

nal inﬂuences) there exist on the inﬁnite lattice two phases of the system [5] (“coordination

states” in economic terms), with the economic actors being either predominantly pessimistic

or predominantly optimistic, respectively. These phases emerge (in an appropriate sense)

already in a large enough ﬁnite system [15].

The events aﬀecting consumer sentiment (“the environment”) are modeled as realization

of a random variable B with the possible realizations b (“positive” event), or −b (“negative”

event), or 0 (no event). We assume that only some fraction p of all economic agents perceives

an event, while the fraction 1 − p ignores it. We introduce a variable ǫi, such that ǫi = 1

represents the situation that agent i perceives the event and ǫi = 0 otherwise. We assume

that perception of the events is independently distributed among agents.

According to principles of Statistical Physics, the following energy function determines

the behavior of the model

E(x) = −

xixj − B X

ǫixi,

i

J
2 X

i,j

(1)

1We must point out the limitations of our basic model: ﬁrst, social interaction structures are hardly as
simple as a square lattice, yet we are not aware of empirical investigations on network structures for our

type of interactions, while network structures found in other types of social interactions [1] may not apply

to our context [19]. Second, interactions need not be symmetrical with respect to the individuals involved,

as is the case in our model. Third, the individual states of economic sentiment should be more rich, possibly

even continuous. However, we do believe that the Ising model provides a ﬁrst-approximation to the type of

systems we aim to analyze.

3

where the summation extends over all nearest neighbors i, j in a ﬁnite subset of the lattice,

and J > 0 characterizes interaction strength. To justify the use of the Statistical Physics

approach we should remark, that the above approach is merely a representation of a system

characterized by family of conditional probabilities

P r(Xi = xi|Xj = xj, i 6= j) =

exp(−βE(x)),

(2)

1
Z

in a heat bath, and is suﬃciently general.2 The parameter β characterizes the strength of
the noise aﬀecting the system.

3 Results

In the present paper we are interested in equilibrium states of the above speciﬁed model

of economic sentiment. In Monte-Carlo Statistical Physics equilibrium states are obtained

from an appropriate algorithm (which might be interpreted as a stochastic dynamics of

the system) deﬁned by an updating rule for individual sites (particular instances are the

so-called Glauber, Metropolis and heat-bath algorithm). In the present paper we use the

heat-bath algorithm. We consider the following speciﬁcations of the process Bt representing

the environment (see Figure 1): external events can be frequent (time scales of the Ising ﬁeld

and the external ﬁeld are comparable) (top), lasting but rare, (e.g. the environment may

change (from b to −b ore vice versa) only once in ten updates of all individual variables) and

rare transitory (shocks, see Figure 1 bottom).

Our results are summarized in Figure 2. The curves depict phase boundaries, i.e. param-

eter values which separate areas in the parameter space (in our case the fraction p of agents
perceiving the event3 and event “strength” b) in which collective states (ordered phases) oc-
cur or do not occur. In Figure 2, ordered phases do not occur in the areas which contain the

upper right corner of the depicted parameter space. Thus we ﬁnd that in our model collective

states of pessimism/optimism do not occur if events are not too weak and/or are considered

by a suﬃciently large proportion of agents. This is due to a “competition” between the social

mechanism tending to produce coordination, and the disorder of the external environment.

2For the case of a ﬁnite parameter set, the fact that any Random Field has a Gibbsian representation
with an energy function E (see Equation 2) is usually referred to as Cliﬀord-Hammersley Theorem. For the

inﬁnite case, such equivalence holds if the interdependence of variables is “suﬃciently local” see [13] for a

thorough treatment of these issues.

3Clearly, for large enough systems this fraction equals the probability p.

4

B
b

−b

B
b

−b

B
b

−b

t

t

t

Figure 1: Time-patterns of the process Bt representing the environment: time scales of the

Ising ﬁeld and the external ﬁeld are comparable (top), lasting but rare events (middle) and

rare transitory events (shocks) (bottom).

It is quite intuitive that a widespread perception of external events destroys endogenous col-

lective states: the disorder of the environment then prevails over the tendency to herding in

economic sentiment. Because events are ﬂuctuating, a greater “strength” of events may also

prevent the emergence of ordered phases, ceteris paribus. But since our model allows for only

two states of individual sentiment, we can not analyze whether events of greater “strength”

make states with strongly positive or strongly negative collective economic sentiment more

likely.

5

p
 
n
o
i
t
r
o
p
o
r
p

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0

 0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1  1.2  1.4  1.6  1.8  2

event strength b

Figure 2: Phase diagram of our sentiment model; collective states exist for parameter vectors

below a boundary curve, but do not exist for parameter vectors above; the curves are as fol-

lows: (+) frequent events, T /Tc = 0.99, (×) frequent events, T /Tc = 0.9; (∗) rare persistent

events, T /Tc = 0.9, (sq.) shocks T /Tc = 0.9

4 Discussion

States of “collective pessimism” – if this social phenomenon indeed occurs – might be detri-

mental to the eﬃciency of allocation of economic resources. Indeed, “explanations” to that

eﬀect can often be heard in public discussion about economic policy. We believe that such

arguments are relevant despite the lack of proper theoretical foundations, and the present

paper is an exploratory step towards formulating relevant models. Our basic result has a

clear economic intuition: attendance to news reduces the prevalence of collective economic

sentiment. This result appears to suggest that our model might be a useful starting point,

though the present paper does not cover several important issues. In particular, the role

of the graph structure of the underlying network should be investigated. Also, we have not

speciﬁed the actual “transmission mechanism” of economic sentiment into economic variables

6

necessary for a welfare analysis of the impact of collective economic sentiment.

A more general problem lies in the fact that what we called environment is only in

part exogenous, as the economy itself produces relevant news which are interpreted by the

decision-makers – but not necessarily in a correct way. For instance, prolonged investor pes-

simism might lead to a reduction of GDP, which in turn negatively aﬀects investor sentiment.

Such collective expectational eﬀects turning real economic forces have been qualitatively de-

scribed by Keynes [17], but are largely neglected in modern economic theory. The present

model does not include such a feedback from real variables to economic sentiment (see [23]

for an attempt in this direction) and only deals with the feedback between sentiments.

References

286,

[1] Barab‘asi, A. and Albert, R. (1999), Emergence of scaling in random networks, Science

[2] Brock, S. and Durlauf W. (2001), Interactions-Based Models, in: Handbook of Econo-

metrics, Volume 5, Chapter 54, pp. 3297-3380, Edited by J.J. Heckman and E. Leamer,

Elsevier Science B.V.

[3] F. Deschatres and D. Sornette (2005), The Dynamics of Book Sales: Endogenous versus

Exogenous Shocks in Complex Networks, Phys. Rev. E 72, 016112

[4] Cont R. and Bouchaud J.P. (2000), Herd Behavior and Aggregate Fluctuations in Fi-

nancial Markets, Macroeconomic Dynamics, 18, 221-235.

[5] Dobrushin, R.L. (1968), The description of a random ﬁeld by means of conditional

probabilities and conditions of its regularity, Theor. Prob. Appl. 13, 197-224.

[6] Dominitz, J. and Mansky F.M. (2004), How Should We Measure Consumer Conﬁdence,

Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(2), 51-66.

[7] F¨ollmer H. (1974), Random Economies with Many Interacting Agents, Journal of Math-

ematical Economics 1, 51-62.

[8] The Economist (2001), The Kiss of Life, April 21.

[9] T. Erez, M. Hohnisch, and S. Solomon (2005), Statistical economics on multi-layered

variables, Economics: complex windows, Eds. M. Salzano and A. Kirman, p.201.

[10] Festinger L.(1954), A Theory of Social Comparison, Human Relations (7), pp. 117-140.

7

[11] Foster J. and Flieth, B. (2002), Interactive expectations, Journal of Evolutionary Eco-

[12] Funke, J. (1992), Wissen ¨uber dynamische Systeme: Erwerb, Repr¨asentation und An-

nomics, 12(4), 375-395.

wendung. Berlin: Springer.

[13] Georgii, H.-O. (1986) Gibbs Measures and Phase Transitions, De Gruyter.

[14] Greenspan A. (2002), Remarks to the Bay Area Council Conference, California, January

11.; available at www.federalreserve.gov

[15] Kinderman, and Snell, L. (1980), Introduction to Markov Random Fields, Norton.

[16] Hohnisch M., Pittnauer, S., Solomon, S. and Stauﬀer, D. (2006), Socioeconomic inter-

action and swings in business conﬁdence indicators, Physica A 345, 646.

[17] Keynes J. M. (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, Hart-

court, Brace, New York.

[18] Ludvigson, S.C. (2004), Consumer Conﬁdence and Consumer Spending, Journal of

Economic Perspectives 18(2) p.29-50.

[19] Schnegg, M. (2006), Reciprocity and the Emergence of Power Laws in Social Networks,

International Journal of Modern Physics C 17.

[20] Sornette, D. (2005), Endogenous versus exogenous origins of crises, in: Extreme Events

in Nature and Society, S. Albeverio, V. Jentsch and H. Kantz (editors), Springer.

[21] Souleles, N. S. (2004), Expectations, Heterogeneous Forecast Errors, and Consumption:

Micro Evidence from the Michigan Consumer Sentiment Surveys, Journal of Money,

Credit and Banking, 36(1), 39-72.

[22] Westerhoﬀ, F. (2005): Consumer behavior and ﬂuctuations in economic activity. Ad-

vances in Complex Systems, 8, 209-215.

[23] Westerhoﬀ, F. and M. Hohnisch (2005), A note on interactions-driven business cycles,

Working Paper, University of Osnabr¨uck.

8

