6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
1
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Analysis and Synthesis of the Distribution of Consonants over Languages:
A Complex Network Approach

Monojit Choudhury and Animesh Mukherjee and Anupam Basu and Niloy Ganguly
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
{monojit,animeshm,anupam,niloy}@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in

Abstract

Cross-linguistic similarities are reﬂected
by the speech sound systems of languages
all over the world.
In this work we try
to model such similarities observed in the
consonant inventories, through a complex
bipartite network. We present a systematic
study of some of the appealing features of
these inventories with the help of the bi-
partite network. An important observation
is that the occurrence of consonants fol-
lows a two regime power law distribution.
We ﬁnd that the consonant inventory size
distribution together with the principle of
preferential attachment are the main rea-
sons behind the emergence of such a two
regime behavior. In order to further sup-
port our explanation we present a synthe-
sis model for this network based on the
general theory of preferential attachment.

1 Introduction

lines of

research suggest
get
reﬂected
inventories of

Sound systems of the world’s languages show
Any arbitrary set
remarkable regularities.
of consonants and vowels does not make up
language.
the sound system of a particular
that cross-
Several
in
linguistic
the
similarities
consonant and vowel
the lan-
guages all over
the world (Greenberg, 1966;
Pinker, 1994; Ladefoged and Maddieson, 1996).
Previously it has been argued that
these
are the results of certain gen-
similarities
eral
perceptual
(Lindblom and Maddieson, 1988),
contrast
(Martinet, 1968;
feature
economy
and
Boersma, 1998;

Clements, 2004)

like maximal

principles

robustness
(Jakobson and Halle, 1956;
Chomsky and Halle, 1968). Maximal percep-
tual contrast between the phonemes of a language
is desirable for proper perception in a noisy
environment. In fact the organization of the vowel
inventories across languages has been satisfac-
torily explained in terms of the single principle
of maximal perceptual contrast (Jakobson, 1941;
Wang, 1968).

in consonant

the structure of consonant

There have been several attempts to rea-
son the observed patterns
in-
ventories since 1930s (Trubetzkoy, 1969/1939;
Lindblom and Maddieson, 1988; Boersma, 1998;
Flemming, 2002; Clements, 2004), but unlike the
case of vowels,
in-
ventories lacks a complete and holistic explana-
tion (de Boer, 2000). Most of the works are con-
ﬁned to certain individual principles (Abry, 2003;
Hinskens and Weijer, 2003) rather than formulat-
ing a general theory describing the structural pat-
terns and/or their stability. Thus, the structure of
the consonant inventories continues to be a com-
plex jigsaw puzzle, though the parts and pieces are
known.

In this work we attempt to represent the cross-
linguistic similarities that exist in the consonant
inventories of the world’s languages through a
bipartite network named PlaNet (the Phoneme
Language Network). PlaNet has two different sets
of nodes, one labeled by the languages while the
other labeled by the consonants. Edges run be-
tween these two sets depending on whether or not
a particular consonant occurs in a particular lan-
guage. This representation is motivated by similar
modeling of certain complex phenomena observed
in nature and society, such as,

• Movie-actor network, where movies and

edge

actors constitute the two partitions and
that
an
a particular actor acted in a particular
movie (Ramasco et al., 2004).

them signiﬁes

between

• Article-author network, where the edges de-
note which person has authored which arti-
cles (Newman, 2001b).

• Metabolic network of organisms, where the
corresponding partitions are chemical com-
pounds and metabolic reactions. Edges run
between partitions depending on whether a
particular compound is a substrate or result
of a reaction (Jeong et al., 2000).

the

Modeling of complex systems as networks
has proved to be a comprehensive and emerging
way of capturing the underlying generating
mechanism of
(for a review
such systems
and their generation
on complex networks
see (Albert and Barab´asi, 2002; Newman, 2003)).
There have been some attempts as well
to
model
intricacies of human languages
through complex networks. Word networks
based on synonymy (Yook et al., 2001b), co-
occurrence (Cancho et al., 2001), and phonemic
edit-distance
examples
(Vitevitch, 2005)
of such attempts. The present work also uses
the concept of complex networks to develop a
platform for a holistic analysis as well as synthesis
of the distribution of the consonants across the
languages.

are

In the current work, with the help of PlaNet we
provide a systematic study of certain interesting
features of the consonant inventories. An impor-
tant property that we observe is the two regime
power law degree distribution1 of the nodes la-
beled by the consonants. We try to explain this
property in the light of the size of the consonant
inventories coupled with the principle of preferen-
tial attachment (Barab´asi and Albert, 1999). Next
we present a simpliﬁed mathematical model ex-
plaining the emergence of the two regimes. In or-
der to support our analytical explanations, we also
provide a synthesis model for PlaNet.

The rest of the paper is organized into ﬁve sec-
tions. In section 2 we formally deﬁne PlaNet, out-
line its construction procedure and present some

1Two

regime

power
in
observed
been
(Cancho et al., 2001),

have
law
of
syntactic
also
words
network of mathematics
collaborators (Grossman et al., 1995), and language diversity
over countries (Gomes et al., 1999).

distributions

networks

Figure 1: Illustration of the nodes and edges of
PlaNet

studies on its degree distribution. We dedicate sec-
tion 3 to state and explain the inferences that can
be drawn from the degree distribution studies of
PlaNet. In section 4 we provide a simpliﬁed the-
oretical explanation of the analytical results ob-
tained. In section 5 we present a synthesis model
for PlaNet to hold up the inferences that we draw
in section 3. Finally we conclude in section 6 by
summarizing our contributions, pointing out some
of the implications of the current work and indi-
cating the possible future directions.

2 PlaNet: The Phoneme-Language

Network

We deﬁne the network of consonants and lan-
guages, PlaNet, as a bipartite graph represented as
G = hVL, VC, Ei where VL is the set of nodes la-
beled by the languages and VC is the set of nodes
labeled by the consonants. E is the set of edges
that run between VL and VC. There is an edge e ∈
E between two nodes vl ∈ VL and vc ∈ VC if and
only if the consonant c occurs in the language l.
Figure 1 illustrates the nodes and edges of PlaNet.

2.1 Construction of PlaNet

typological

stud-
(Lindblom and Maddieson, 1988;

Many
ies
Ladefoged and Maddieson, 1996;
Hinskens and Weijer, 2003) of
in-
ventories have been carried out in past on the
UCLA Phonological Segment Inventory Database
(UPSID) (Maddieson, 1984). UPSID initially
had 317 languages and was later extended to
the major
include 451 languages covering all

segmental

language families of the world.
In this work
we have used the older version of UPSID com-
prising of 317 languages and 541 consonants
(henceforth UPSID317), for constructing PlaNet.
Consequently, there are 317 elements (nodes) in
the set VL and 541 elements (nodes) in the set
VC. The number of elements (edges) in the set E
as computed from PlaNet is 7022. At this point
it is important to mention that in order to avoid
any confusion in the construction of PlaNet we
have appropriately ﬁltered out the anomalous and
the ambiguous segments (Maddieson, 1984) from
it. We have completely ignored the anomalous
segments from the data set (since the existence
of such segments is doubtful), and included the
ambiguous ones as separate segments because
there are no descriptive sources explaining how
such ambiguities might be resolved. A similar
approach has also been described in Pericliev and
Vald´es-P´erez (2002).

2.2 Degree Distribution of PlaNet

The degree of a node u, denoted by ku is deﬁned as
the number of edges connected to u. The term de-
gree distribution is used to denote the way degrees
(ku) are distributed over the nodes (u). The de-
gree distribution studies ﬁnd a lot of importance in
understanding the complex topology of any large
network, which is very difﬁcult to visualize oth-
erwise. Since PlaNet is bipartite in nature it has
two degree distribution curves one corresponding
to the nodes in the set VL and the other corre-
sponding to the nodes in the set VC.

Fig-
Degree distribution of the nodes in VL:
ure 2 shows the degree distribution of the nodes
in VL where the x-axis denotes the degree of each
node expressed as a fraction of the maximum de-
gree and the y-axis denotes the number of nodes
having a given degree expressed as a fraction of
the total number of nodes in VL .

It is evident from Figure 2 that the number of
consonants appearing in different languages fol-
low a β-distribution 2 (see (Bulmer, 1979) for ref-
erence). The ﬁgure shows an asymmetric right

2A random variable is said to have a β-distribution with
parameters α > 0 and β > 0 if and only if its probability mass
function is given by

f (x) =

Γ(α + β)
Γ(α)Γ(β)

xα−1

(1 − x)β−1

Figure 2: Degree distribution of PlaNet for the set
VL. The ﬁgure in the inner box is a magniﬁed
version of a portion of the original ﬁgure.

skewed distribution with the values of α and β
equal to 7.06 and 47.64 (obtained using maximum
likelihood estimation method) respectively. The
asymmetry points to the fact that languages usu-
ally tend to have smaller consonant inventory size,
the best value being somewhere between 10 and
30. The distribution peaks roughly at 21 indicating
that majority of the languages in UPSID317 have a
consonant inventory size of around 21 consonants.

Degree distribution of the nodes in VC:
Fig-
ure 3 illustrates two different types of degree dis-
tribution plots for the nodes in VC; Figure 3(a)
corresponding to the rank, i.e., the sorted order of
degrees, (x-axis) versus degree (y-axis) and Fig-
ure 3(b) corresponding to the degree (k) (x-axis)
versus Pk (y-axis) where Pk is the fraction of
nodes having degree greater than or equal to k.

Figure 3 clearly shows that both the curves have
two distinct regimes and the distribution is scale-
free. Regime 1 in Figure 3(a) consists of 21 con-
sonants which have a very high frequency (i.e.,
the degree k) of occurrence. Regime 2 of Fig-
ure 3(b) also correspond to these 21 consonants.
On the other hand Regime 2 of Figure 3(a) as well
as Regime 1 of Figure 3(b) comprises of the rest
of the consonants. The point marked as x in both
the ﬁgures indicates the breakpoint. Each of the
regime in both Figure 3(a) and (b) exhibit a power
law of the form

y = Ax−α

for 0 < x < 1 and f (x) = 0 otherwise. Γ(·) is the Euler’s
gamma function.

In Figure 3(a) y represents the degree k of a node

interpreted as the tendency of a language to choose
a consonant that has been already chosen by a
large number of other languages. We posit that it is
this preferential property of languages that results
in the power law degree distributions observed in
Figure 3(a) and (b).

Nevertheless there is one question that still re-
mains unanswered. Whereas the power law distri-
bution is well understood, the reason for the two
distinct regimes (with a sharp break) still remains
unexplored. We hypothesize that,
Hypothesis The typical distribution of the conso-
nant inventory size over languages coupled with
the principle of preferential attachment enforces
the two distinct regimes to appear in the power
law curves.
As the average consonant
inventory size in
UPSID317 is 21, so following the principle of
preferential attachment, on an average, the ﬁrst
21 most frequent consonants are much more pre-
ferred than the rest. Consequently, the nature of
the frequency distribution for the highly frequent
consonants is different from the less frequent ones,
and hence there is a transition from Regime 1 to
Regime 2 in the Figure 3(a) and (b).

Support Experiment:
In order to establish that
the consonant inventory size plays an important
role in giving rise to the two regimes discussed
above we present a support experiment in which
we try to observe whether the breakpoint x shifts
as we shift the average consonant inventory size.
Experiment: In order to shift the average con-
sonant inventory size from 21 to 25, 30 and 38
we neglected the contribution of the languages
with consonant inventory size less than n where
n is 15, 20 and 25 respectively and subsequently
recorded the degree distributions obtained each
time. We did not carry out our experiments for
average consonant inventory size more than 38 be-
cause the number of such languages are very rare
in UPSID317.
Observations: Figure 4 shows the effect of this
shifting of the average consonant inventory size on
the rank versus degree distribution curves. Table 2
presents the results observed from these curves
with the left column indicating the average inven-
tory size and the right column the breakpoint x.
The table clearly indicates that the transition oc-
curs at values corresponding to the average conso-
nant inventory size in each of the three cases.
Inferences: It is quite evident from our observa-

Figure 3: Degree distribution of PlaNet for the set
VC in a log-log scale

corresponding to its rank x whereas in Figure 3(b)
y corresponds to Pk and x, the degree k. The val-
ues of the parameters A and α, for Regime 1 and
Regime 2 in both the ﬁgures, as computed by the
least square error method, are shown in Table 1.

It becomes necessary to mention here that such
power law distributions, known variously as Zipf’s
law (Zipf, 1949), are also observed in an extraor-
dinarily diverse range of phenomena including
the frequency of the use of words in human lan-
guage (Zipf, 1949), the number of papers scien-
tists write (Lotka, 1926), the number of hits on
web pages (Adamic and Huberman, 2000) and so
on. Thus our inferences, detailed out in the next
section, mainly centers around this power law be-
havior.

3 Inferences Drawn from the Analysis of

PlaNet

In most of the networked systems like the society,
the Internet, the World Wide Web, and many oth-
ers, power law degree distribution emerges for the
phenomenon of preferential attachment, i.e., when
“the rich get richer” (Simon, 1955). With refer-
ence to PlaNet this preferential attachment can be

Regime
Regime 1
Regime 2

Figure 3(a)

Figure 3(b)

A = 368.70
A = 12456.5

α = 0.4
α = 1.54

A = 1.040
A = 2326.2

α = 0.71
α = 2.36

Table 1: The values of the parameters A and α

nant, which is chosen by a language if it has pre-
viously chosen zero, one, two, or at most 20, but
not all of the ﬁrst 21 consonants. Therefore, the
probability of the 22nd consonant being chosen is,

P (22) = p

pi(1 − p)

21−i

20

i=0  
X

21
i !

where

21
i !

 

pi(1 − p)

21−i

denotes the probability of choosing i consonants
from the ﬁrst 21.
In general the probability of
choosing the n+1th consonant from the hierarchy
is given by,

P (n + 1) = p

pi(1 − p)n−i

20

Xi=0  

n
i !

Figure 5 shows the plot of the function P (n) for
various values of p which are 0.99, 0.95, 0.9, 0.85,
0.75 and 0.7 respectively in log-log scale. All the
curves, for different values of p, have a nature sim-
ilar to that of the degree distribution plot we ob-
tained for PlaNet. This is indicative of the fact that
languages choose consonants from the hierarchy
with a probability function comparable to P (n).

Owing to the simpliﬁed assumption that all
the languages have only 21 consonants, the ﬁrst
regime is a straight line; however we believe a
more rigorous mathematical model can be built
taking into consideration the β-distribution rather
than just the mean value of the inventory size that
can explain the negative slope of the ﬁrst regime.
We look forward to do the same as a part of our fu-
ture work. Rather, here we try to investigate the ef-
fect of the exact distribution of the language inven-
tory size on the nature of the degree distribution of
the consonants through a synthetic approach based
on the principle of preferential attachment, which
is described in the subsequent section.

5 The Synthesis Model based on

Preferential Attachment

Albert and Barab´asi (1999) observed that a com-
mon property of many large networks is that the

Figure 4: Degree distributions at different average
consonant inventory sizes

Avg. consonant inv. size
25
30
38

Transition
25
30
37

Table 2: The transition points for different average
consonant inventory size

tions that the breakpoint x has a strong correlation
with the average consonant inventory size, which
therefore plays a key role in the emergence of the
two regime degree distribution curves.

In the next section we provide a simplistic math-
ematical model for explaining the two regime
power law with a breakpoint corresponding to the
average consonant inventory size.

4 Theoretical Explanation for the Two

Regimes

Let us assume that the inventory of all the lan-
guages comprises of 21 consonants. We further as-
sume that the consonants are arranged in their hier-
archy of preference. A language traverses the hier-
archy of consonants and at every step decides with
a probability p to choose the current consonant. It
stops as soon as it has chosen all the 21 conso-
nants. Since languages must traverse through the
ﬁrst 21 consonants regardless of whether the pre-
vious consonants are chosen or not, the probability
of choosing any one of these 21 consonants must
be p. But the case is different for the 22nd conso-

repeat

for j = 1 to 317 do

if there is a node Lj ∈ VL with at least
one or more consonants to be chosen
from VC then

Compute Vj = VC-V (Lj), where
V (Lj) is the set of nodes in VC to
which Lj is already connected;

end

for each node i ∈ Vj do

P r(i) =

ki + ǫ
(ki

′ ∈Vj
i

′ + ǫ)

P
where ki is the current degree of
the node i and ǫ is the model
parameter. P r(i) is the
probability of connecting Lj to i.

end

end

Connect Lj to a node i ∈ Vj
following the distribution P r(i);

until all languages complete their inventory
quota ;

Algorithm 1: Algorithm for synthesis of
PlaNet based on preferential attachment

a high P r(i). The above process is repeated until
all Lj ∈ VL get connected to exactly kj nodes in
VC. The entire idea is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Figure 6 shows a partial step of the synthesis pro-
cess illustrated in Algorithm 1.

Simulation Results:
Simulations reveal that for
PlaNetsyn the degree distribution of the nodes be-
longing to VC ﬁt well with the analytical results
we obtained earlier in section 2. Good ﬁts emerge
for the range 0.06 ≤ ǫ ≤ 0.08 with the best being
at ǫ = 0.0701. Figure 7 shows the degree k versus
Pk plots for ǫ = 0.0701 averaged over 100 simula-
tion runs.

The mean error3 between the degree distribu-
tion plots of PlaNet and PlaNetsyn is 0.03 which
intuitively signiﬁes that on an average the varia-
tion in the two curves is 3%. On the contrary, if
there were no preferential attachment incorporated
in the model (i.e., all connections were equiprob-

3Mean error is deﬁned as the average difference between

the ordinate pairs where the abscissas are equal.

Figure 5: Plot of the function P (n) in log-log
scale

vertex connectivities follow a scale-free power
law distribution. They remarked that two generic
mechanisms can be considered to be the cause
of this observation: (i) networks expand contin-
uously by the addition of new vertices, and (ii)
new vertices attach preferentially to sites (vertices)
that are already well connected. They found that
a model based on these two ingredients repro-
duces the observed stationary scale-free distribu-
tions, which in turn indicates that the develop-
ment of large networks is governed by robust self-
organizing phenomena that go beyond the particu-
lars of the individual systems.

Inspired by their work and the empirical as well
as the mathematical analysis presented above, we
propose a preferential attachment model for syn-
thesizing PlaNet (PlaNetsyn henceforth) in which
the degree distribution of the nodes in VL is
., L317} have
known. Hence VL={L1, L2, .
degrees (consonant inventory size) {k1, k2, .
.,
k317} respectively. We assume that the nodes in
the set VC are unlabeled. At each time step, a
node Lj (j = 1 to 317) from VL tries to attach itself
with a new node i ∈ VC to which it is not already
connected. The probability P r(i) with which the
node Lj gets attached to i depends on the current
degree of i and is given by

.

.

P r(i) =

ki + ǫ
(ki

′ ∈Vj
i

′ + ǫ)

P

where ki is the current degree of the node i, Vj
is the set of nodes in VC to which Lj is not al-
ready connected and ǫ is the smoothing parameter
which is used to reduce bias and favor at least a
few attachments with nodes in Vj that do not have

• Propose analytical explanations for the two
regime power law curves (obtained from
PlaNet) on the basis of the distribution of the
consonant inventory size over languages to-
gether with the principle of preferential at-
tachment,

• Provide a simpliﬁed mathematical model to

support our analytical explanations, and

• Develop a synthesis model for PlaNet based
on preferential attachment where the conso-
nant inventory size distribution is known a
priori.

We believe that the general explanation pro-
vided here for the two regime power law is a fun-
damental result, and can have a far reaching im-
pact, because two regime behavior is observed in
many other networked systems.

Until now we have been mainly dealing with the
computational aspects of the distribution of conso-
nants over the languages rather than exploring the
real world dynamics that gives rise to such a distri-
bution. An issue that draws immediate attention is
that how preferential attachment, which is a gen-
eral phenomenon associated with network evolu-
tion, can play a prime role in shaping the conso-
nant inventories of the world’s languages. The an-
swer perhaps is hidden in the fact that language is
an evolving system and its present structure is de-
termined by its past evolutionary history. Indeed
an explanation based on this evolutionary model,
with an initial disparity in the distribution of con-
sonants over languages, can be intuitively veriﬁed
as follows – let there be a language community
of N speakers communicating among themselves
by means of only two consonants say /k/ and /g/.
If we assume that every speaker has l descendants
and language inventories are transmitted with high
ﬁdelity, then after i generations it is expected that
the community will consist of mli /k/ speakers and
nli /g/ speakers. Now if m > n and l > 1, then for
sufﬁciently large i, mli ≫ nli. Stated differently,
the /k/ speakers by far outnumbers the /g/ speak-
ers even if initially the number of /k/ speakers is
only slightly higher than that of the /g/ speakers.
This phenomenon is similar to that of preferen-
tial attachment where language communities get
attached to, i.e., select, consonants that are already
highly preferred. Nevertheless, it remains to be
seen where from such an initial disparity in the dis-
tribution of the consonants over languages might

Figure 6: A partial step of the synthesis process.
When the language L4 has to connect itself with
one of the nodes in the set VC it does so with the
one having the highest degree (=3) rather than with
others in order to achieve preferential attachment
which is the working principle of our algorithm

Figure 7: Degree distribution of the nodes in
VC for both PlaNetsyn, PlaNet, and when the
model incorporates no preferential attachment; for
PlaNetsyn, ǫ = 0.0701 and the results are averaged
over 100 simulation runs

able) then the mean error would have been 0.35
(35% variation on an average).

6 Conclusions, Discussion and Future

Work

In this paper, we have analyzed and synthesized
the consonant inventories of the world’s languages
in terms of a complex network. We dedicated the
preceding sections essentially to,

• Represent the consonant inventories through

a bipartite network called PlaNet,

• Provide a systematic study of certain impor-
tant properties of the consonant inventories
with the help of PlaNet,

have originated.

In this paper, we mainly dealt with the occur-
rence principles of the consonants in the invento-
ries of the world’s languages. The work can be fur-
ther extended to identify the co-occurrence likeli-
hood of the consonants in the language inventories
and subsequently identify the groups or commu-
nities within them. Information about such com-
munities can then help in providing an improved
insight about the organizing principles of the con-
sonant inventories.

References

[Abry2003] C. Abry. 2003. [b]-[d]-[g] as a universal
triangle as acoustically optimal as [i]-[a]-[u]. 15th
Int. Congr. Phonetics Sciences ICPhS, 727–730.

[Adamic and Huberman2000] L. A. Adamic and B. A.
Huberman. 2000. The nature of markets in the
World Wide Web. Quarterly Journal of Electronic
Commerce 1, 512.

[Albert and Barab´asi2002] R. Albert

and A.-L.
Barab´asi. 2002. Statistical mechanics of complex
networks. Reviews of Modern Physics 74, 47–97.

[Barab´asi and Albert1999] A.-L. Barab´asi and R. Al-
bert. 1999. Emergence of scaling in random net-
works. Science 286, 509-512.

[de Boer2000] Bart de Boer. 2000. Self-Organisation
in Vowel Systems. Journal of Phonetics, Elsevier.

[Boersma1998] P. Boersma. 1998. Functional Phonol-
ogy. (Doctoral thesis, University of Amsterdam),
The Hague: Holland Academic Graphics.

[Bulmer1979] M. G. Bulmer.
Statistics, Mathematics.

1979. Principles of

[Grossman et al.1995] J. W. Grossman and P. D. F. Ion.
1995. On a portion of the well-known collaboration
graph. Congressus Numerantium, 108, 129-131.

[Hinskens and Weijer2003] F. Hinskens and J. Weijer.
2003. Patterns of segmental modiﬁcation in conso-
nant inventories: a cross-linguistic study. Linguis-
tics.

[Jakobson1941] R. Jakobson. 1941. Kindersprache,
Aphasie und allgemeine Lautgesetze, Uppsala,
Reprinted in Selected Writings I. Mouton, The
Hague, 1962, pages 328-401.

[Jeong et al.2000] H. Jeong, B. Tombor, R. Albert, Z.
N. Oltvai, and A. L. Barab´asi. 2000. The large-
scale organization of metabolic networks. Nature,
406:651-654.

[Jakobson and Halle1956] R. Jakobson and M. Halle.
1956. Fundamentals of Language, The Hague:
Mouton and Co.

[Ladefoged and Maddieson1996] P. Ladefoged and I.
Maddieson. 1996. Sounds of the Worlds Languages,
Oxford: Blackwell.

[Lindblom and Maddieson1988] B. Lindblom and I.
Maddieson. 1988. Phonetic Universals in Conso-
nant Systems. In L.M. Hyman and C.N. Li, eds.,
Language, Speech, and Mind, Routledge, London,
62–78.

[Lotka1926] A. J. Lotka. 1926. The frequency distri-
bution of scientiﬁc production. J. Wash. Acad. Sci.
16, 317-323.

[Maddieson1984] I. Maddieson.

1984. Patterns of

Sounds, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

[Martinet1968] A. Martinet. 1968. Phonetics and lin-
guistic evolution. In Bertil Malmberg (ed.), Manual
of phonetics, revised and extended edition, Amster-
dam: North-Holland Publishing Co. 464–487.

[Cancho et al.2001] Ferrer i Cancho and R. V. Sol´e.

2001. Santa Fe working paper 01-03-016.

[Newman2001b] M. E. J. Newman. 2001b. Scientiﬁc
collaboration networks. I and II. Phys. Rev., E 64.

[Chomsky and Halle1968] N. Chomsky and M. Halle.
1968. The Sound Pattern of English, New York:
Harper and Row.

[Newman2003] M. E. J. Newman. 2003. The structure
and function of complex networks. SIAM Review 45,
167–256.

[Clements2004] N. Clements.

Features and
Sound Inventories. Symposium on Phonological
Theory: Representations and Architecture, CUNY.

2004.

[Flemming2002] E. Flemming. 2002. Auditory Rep-
resentations in Phonology, New York and London:
Routledge.

[Pericliev and Vald´es-P´erez2002] V. Pericliev, R. E.
Vald´es-P´erez. 2002. Differentiating 451 languages
in terms of their segment inventories. Studia Lin-
guistica, Blackwell Publishing.

[Pinker1994] S. Pinker. 1994. The Language Instinct,

New York: Morrowo.

[Gomes et al.1999] M. A. F. Gomes, G. L. Vasconcelos,
I. J. Tsang, and I. R. Tsang. 1999. Scaling relations
for diversity of languages. Physica A, 271, 489.

[Greenberg1966] J. H. Greenberg. 1966. Language
Universals with Special Reference to Feature Hier-
archies, The Hague Mouton.

[Ramasco et al.2004] Jos´e J. Ramasco, S. N. Dorogovt-
sev, and Romualdo Pastor-Satorras. 2004. Self-
organization of collaboration networks. Physical Re-
view E, 70, 036106.

[Simon1955] H. A. Simon. 1955. On a class of skew
distribution functions. Biometrika 42, 425-440.

[Trubetzkoy1969/1939] N. Trubetzkoy. 1969. Prin-
(English translation of
ciples of phonology.
Grundz¨uge der Phonologie, 1939), Berkeley:
University of California Press.

[Vitevitch2005] M. S. Vitevitch. 2005. Phonological
neighbors in a small world: What can graph theory
tell us about word learning? Spring 2005 Talk Series
on Networks and Complex Systems, Indiana Univer-
sity, Bloomington.

[Wang1968] William S.-Y. Wang. 1968. The basis of
speech, Project on Linguistic Analysis Reports, Uni-
versity of California at Berkeley. Reprinted in The
Learning of Language, ed. by C. E. Reed, 1971.

[Yook et al.2001b] S. Yook, H.
Barab´asi. 2001b. preprint.

Jeong and A.-L.

[Zipf1949] G. K. Zipf.

1949. Human Behaviour
and the Principle of Least Effort, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA.

