6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
5
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
3
1
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

February 2, 2008 7:41 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperIJMPC

International Journal of Modern Physics C
c(cid:13) World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company

Modeling the Co-occurrence Principles of the Consonant Inventories:
A Complex Network Approach

Animesh Mukherjee, Monojit Choudhury, Anupam Basu and Niloy Ganguly

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur–721302
{animeshm, monojit, anupam, niloy}@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in

Received Day Month Year
Revised Day Month Year

Speech sounds of the languages all over the world show remarkable patterns of co-
occurrence. In this work, we attempt to automatically capture the patterns of co-
occurrence of the consonants across languages and at the same time ﬁgure out the na-
ture of the force leading to the emergence of such patterns. For this purpose we deﬁne
a weighted network where the consonants are the nodes and an edge between two nodes
(read consonants) signify their co-occurrence likelihood over the consonant inventories.
Through this network we identify communities of consonants that essentially reﬂect their
patterns of co-occurrence across languages. We test the goodness of the communities and
observe that the constituent consonants frequently occur in such groups in real languages
also. Interestingly, the consonants forming these communities reﬂect strong correlations
in terms of their features, which indicate that the principle of feature economy acts as
a driving force towards community formation. In order to measure the strength of this
force we propose an information theoretic deﬁnition of feature economy and show that
indeed the feature economy exhibited by the consonant communities are substantially
better than those if the consonant inventories had evolved just by chance.

Keywords: Consonants; complex network; community structure; feature economy; feature
entropy.

PACS Nos.: 89.75.-k, 89.75.Fb

1. Introduction

Sound inventories of the world’s languages show remarkable regularities. Any ran-
domly chosen set of consonants and vowels does not make up the sound inventory
of a particular language. In fact one of the earliest observations about the con-
sonant inventories has been that consonants tend to occur in pairs that exhibit
strong correlation in terms of their featuresa 25. In other words, consonants have
a tendency to form groups or communities that eﬀectively reﬂect their patterns of

aIn linguistics, features are the elements, which distinguish one phoneme from another. The fea-
tures that distinguish the phonemes can be broadly categorized into three diﬀerent classes namely
the manner of articulation, the place of articulation and phonation. Manner of articulation spec-
iﬁes how the ﬂow of air takes place in the vocal tract during articulation of a phoneme whereas

1

February 2, 2008 7:41 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperIJMPC

2 Mukherjee et al.

Table 1. The table shows four plosives two
of which are voiced, and, the other two are
voiceless. It also indicates the two diﬀerent
places of articulation (dental and bilabial) for
these plosives. If a language has in its con-
sonant inventory any three of the four en-
tries of this table, then there is a higher
than average chance that it will also have
the fourth entry of the table in its inventory.

plosive
dental
bilabial

voiced
/d/
/b/

voiceless
/t/
/p/

co-occurrence across the languages of the world. In order to explain these trends,
feature economy was proposed as the basic organizing principle of the consonant
inventories 10,17. According to this principle, languages tend to maximize the com-
binatorial possibilities of a few distinctive features to generate a large number of
consonants. Stated diﬀerently, a given consonant will have a higher than expected
frequency in inventories in which all of its features have distinctively occurred in
other sounds. The idea is illustrated, with an example, through Table 1. Although
there have been several attempts to explain the observed co-occurrence patterns 7
through linguistic insights 3, as far as our knowledge goes there has been no work
to identify the communities of consonants algorithmically.

In this work, we propose a method to automatically capture the patterns of co-
occurrence of the consonants across languages and at the same time quantify the
driving force leading to the emergence of such patterns. For this purpose, we deﬁne
the “Phoneme-Phoneme Network” or PhoNet, which is a weighted network where
the consonants are the nodes and an edge between two nodes (read consonants)
signify their co-occurrence likelihood over the consonant inventories. We conduct
empirical studies of PhoNet and analyze it from the perspective of a social network
where consonants exhibit community structures. Recently, several complex phe-
nomena observed in the social, biological and physical worlds have been modeled as
networks, which provides a comprehensive view of their underlying organizational
principles. See 1,18 for a review on modeling and analysis of such networked systems.
There have been some attempts as well to model the intricacies of human languages
through complex networks. Word networks based on synonymy 27, co-occurrence 4,
and phonemic edit-distance 26 are examples of such attempts. As a matter of fact,
the distribution of the consonants across languages have also been modeled as a
complex bipartite network in 6, but the study is limited to the occurrence of the
consonants and not their co-occurrence.

This article is organized as follows: Section 2 formally deﬁnes PhoNet and out-

place of articulation speciﬁes the active speech organ and also the place where it acts. Phona-
tion describes the activity regarding the vibration of the vocal cords during the articulation of a
phoneme.

February 2, 2008 7:41 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperIJMPC

Modeling the Co-occurrence Principles of Consonant Inventories

3

lines its construction procedure. In section 3 we employ the extended Radicchi et
al. 22 algorithm, to ﬁnd the communities in PhoNet. In section 4 we test the
goodness of the communities and observe that the constituent consonants of these
communities frequently occur in such groups in real languages also. Interestingly,
the consonants forming these communities reﬂect strong correlations in terms of
their features, which points to the fact that feature economy binds these commu-
nities. In order to quantify feature economy we propose an information theoretic
approach in section 5. In the same section we show that the feature economy exhib-
ited by the consonant communities obtained from PhoNet are indeed substantially
better than those, if the consonant inventories had evolved just by chance. We also
show that the number of languages in which the consonants of a community occur
together increases with increasing feature economy. Finally we conclude in section 6
by summarizing our contributions, pointing out some of the implications of the
current work and indicating the possible future directions.

2. PhoNet: The Phoneme-Phoneme Network

We deﬁne PhoNet as a network of consonants, represented as G = h VC , E i where
VC is the set of nodes labeled by the consonants and E is the set of edges occurring
in PhoNet. There is an edge e ∈ E between two nodes, if and only if there exists
one or more language(s) where the nodes (read consonants) co-occur. The weight
of the edge e (also edge-weight) is the number of languages in which the consonants
connected by e co-occur. The weight of a node u (also node-weight) is the number
of languages in which the consonant represented by u occurs. In other words, if a
consonant ci represented by the node u occurs in the inventory of n languages then
the node-weight of u is assigned the value n. Also if the consonant cj is represented
by the node v and there are w languages in which consonants ci and cj occur
together then the weight of the edge connecting u and v is assigned the value w.
Figure 1 illustrates this structure by reproducing some of the nodes and edges of
PhoNet.

2.1. Construction of PhoNet
Many typological studies 11,14,15 of segmental inventories have been carried out in
past on the UCLA Phonological Segment Inventory Database (UPSID) 16. UPSID
initially had 317 languages and was later extended to include 451 languages cov-
ering all the major language families of the world. In this work we have used the
older version of UPSID comprising of 317 languages and 541 consonants (henceforth
UPSID317), for constructing PhoNet. Consequently, the set VC comprises of 541 el-
ements (nodes) and the set E comprises of 34012 elements (edges). At this point it
is important to mention that in order to avoid any confusion in the construction of
PhoNet, we have appropriately ﬁltered out the anomalous and the ambiguous seg-
ments 16 from it. In UPSID, a segment has been classiﬁed as anomalous if any of the
following conditions holds: the segment is (1) rare (very low frequency), (2) occurs

February 2, 2008 7:41 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperIJMPC

4 Mukherjee et al.

Fig. 1. A partial illustration of the nodes and edges in PhoNet. The labels of the nodes denote the
consonants represented in IPA (International Phonetic Alphabet). The numerical values against the
edges and nodes represent their corresponding weights. For example /k/ occurs in 283 languages;
/kw/ occurs in 39 languages while they co-occur in 38 languages.

only in loans, (3) is existent only in underlying forms, (4) is derivable from other
segments, or (5) obscure in description. We have completely ignored the anoma-
lous segments from the data set. Ambiguous segments are those for which UPSID
provides insuﬃcient information. For example, the presence of both the palatal-
ized dental plosive and the palatalized alveolar plosive are represented in UPSID as
palatalized dental-alveolar plosive. In absence of any descriptive sources explaining
how such ambiguities might be resolved, we have decided to include them as distinct
segments. A similar treatment of anomalous and ambiguous segments has also been
described in Pericliev and Vald´es-P´erez 20. Figure 2 presents a partial illustration
of PhoNet as constructed from UPSID317.

3. Identiﬁcation of Community Structures

There is a large volume of literature suggested by computer scientists, physi-
cists as well as sociologists that speaks about identifying communities in a net-
work 8,12,13,19,21,22. This is mainly because, the ability to ﬁnd communities within
large networks in some automated fashion could be of considerable use. Communi-
ties in a web graph for instance might correspond to sets of web sites dealing with
related topics 8, while communities in a biochemical network might correspond to
functional units of some kind 12.

In this work we attempt to identify the communities appearing in PhoNet by
extending the Radicchi et al. 22 algorithm for weighted networksb. The algorithm of
Radicchi et al. (applied on unweighted networks) counts, for each edge, the number

bWe have tried a few other community ﬁnding algorithms but this algorithm performs slightly
better. Moreover, we found it easier to extend this algorithm to weighted networks.

February 2, 2008 7:41 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperIJMPC

Modeling the Co-occurrence Principles of Consonant Inventories

5

Fig. 2. A partial illustration of PhoNet. All edges in this ﬁgure have an edge-weight greater than
or equal to 50. The number on each node corresponds to a particular consonant. For instance,
node number 508 corresponds to /g/ whereas node number 540 represents /k/.

of loops of length three it is a part of and declares that edges with very low counts
as inter-community edges.

Basis: Edges that run between communities are unlikely to belong to many short
loops, because to complete a loop containing such an edge there needs to be another
edge that runs between the same two communities, and such other edges are rare.

Modiﬁcation for Weighted Network: Nevertheless, for weighted networks,
rather than considering simply the triangles (loops of length three) we need to
consider the weights on the edges forming these triangles. The basic idea is that
if the weights on the edges forming a triangle are comparable then the group of
consonants represented by this triangle highly occur together rendering a pattern
of co-occurrence while if these weights are not comparable then there is no such
pattern. In order to capture this property we deﬁne a strength metric S for each of
the edges of PhoNet as follows. Let the weight of the edge (u,v), where u, v ∈ VC ,
be denoted by wuv. We deﬁne S as,

S =

wuv
qPi∈VC −{u,v} (wui − wvi)2

(1)

February 2, 2008 7:41 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperIJMPC

6 Mukherjee et al.

if qPi∈VC −{u,v} (wui − wvi)2 > 0 else S = ∞. The denominator in this expression

essentially tries to capture whether or not the weights on the edges forming triangles
are comparable. If the weights are not comparable then this denominator will be
high, thus reducing the overall value of S . PhoNet may be then partitioned into
clusters or communities by removing edges that have S close to zero.

In this algorithm we have neglected the edges in PhoNet that are connected to
nodes having very low or very high node-weights since they are either insigniﬁcantc
or assortatived (see 18 for a reference) respectively. Henceforth we will refer to this
version of PhoNet as PhoNetred. The entire idea is summarized in Algorithm 1. Fig-
ure 3 illustrates the clustering process. We can obtain diﬀerent sets of communities
by varying the threshold η. As the value of η decreases, new nodes keep joining the
communities and the process is similar to hierarchical clustering 23. Figure 4 shows
a dendrogram, which illustrates the formation of the community of the consonants
/ã/, /ú/, /ï/, /í/ and /õ/ with the change in the value of η.

Fig. 3. The process of community formation

cWe have neglected nodes with node-weight less than 5 since these nodes correspond to consonants
that occur in less than 5 languages in UPSID317 and the communities they form are therefore
statistically insigniﬁcant.
dWe have neglected nodes with node-weight greater than 130. These nodes correspond to conso-
nants that occur in more than 130 languages in UPSID317 and therefore they co-occur with almost
every other consonant. Hence the strength metric S is likely to be high for an edge connecting
nodes (read consonants) with high node-weights. This edge (owing to its high strength) might
then force two otherwise disjoint communities to form a single community. For instance, we have
observed that since the consonants /m/ and /k/ are very frequent, the nodes corresponding to
both of them have a high node-weight and consequently the edge between them also has a high
edge-weight. The strong link between /m/ and /k/ then forces the respective bilabial and velar
communities to merge into a single community.

February 2, 2008 7:41 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperIJMPC

Modeling the Co-occurrence Principles of Consonant Inventories

7

Input: PhoNetred
repeat

for each edge (u,v) do

Compute
S =

wuv
q P i∈VC −{u,v} (wui−wvi)2

if qPi∈VC −{u,v} (wui − wvi)2 > 0 else S = ∞;

end

Redeﬁne the edge-weight for each edge (u,v) by S;

Remove edges with edge-weights less than or equal to a threshold η;
Call this new version of PhoNet, PhoNetη;

Find the connected components in PhoNetη;
η = η

δ where δ is the diminishing factor;

until Phonetη gets fully connected ;

Algorithm 1: Algorithm for ﬁnding communities based on edge strength

Table 2. Consonant communities

Community
/t/, /d/, /n/

/w

/, /j

/, /m

/

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

/ã/, /ú/, /ï/, /í/, /õ/

Features in Common
dental
retroﬂex
laryngealized

Fig. 4. The dendrogram illustrates how the retroﬂex community of /ã/, /ú/, /ï/, /í/ and /õ/ is
formed with the change in the value of η

Some of the example communities obtained from our algorithm are noted in
Table 2. In this table, the consonants in the ﬁrst community are dentals, those in the
second community are retroﬂexes, while the ones in the third are all laryngealized.

February 2, 2008 7:41 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperIJMPC

8 Mukherjee et al.

Languages

4. Evaluation of the Communities based on their Occurrence in

In the earlier section we have mainly described the methods of extracting the conso-
nant communities from PhoNet. In this section we look into the languages included
in UPSID317 and inspect whether or not the consonants forming the communities
in PhoNet actually occur in such groups.

For this purpose we ﬁrst arrange the consonants forming a community C, of size
N , in an ascending order of their frequency of occurrence in UPSID317. We associate
a rank R with each of the consonants in C where the least frequency consonant gets
a rank R = 1, the second least gets a rank R = 2 and so on. Starting from rank R
= 1 we count how many of the consonants in C, occur in a language L ∈ UPSID317.
Let the number of such consonants be M . We deﬁne the occurrence ratio OL of the
community C for the language L to be

OL =

M
N − (Rtop − 1)

(2)

where Rtop is the rank of the highest ranking consonant that is found in L. The
denominator of this ratio is N −(Rtop−1) instead of N since it is not mandatory for a
language to have a low frequency member of a community if it has the high frequency
member; nevertheless if the language already has the low frequency member of the
community then it is highly expected to also have the high frequency membere 7.
The average occurrence ratio Oav for the community C can be obtained as follows,
Oav = PL∈UP SID317 OL

(3)

Loccur

where Loccur is the number of languages in UPSID317 that have at least one or
more consonants occurring in C. Figure 5 shows the average Oav of the communi-
ties obtained at a particular threshold η versus the threshold η. The curve clearly
shows that the average Oav of the communities obtained from our algorithm for
η > 0.3 is always more than 0.8. This in turn implies that on an average the
communities, obtained at thresholds above 0.3, occur in more than 80%f of the lan-
guages in UPSID317. At thresholds below 0.3 the average Oav falls gradually since
giant components start forming and the probability of all the consonants in the
giant component occurring together in languages is very low. Hence the community
structures obtained from our algorithm are true representatives of the patterns of
co-occurrence of the consonants across languages.

eFor instance let the community C be formed of the consonants /kw/, /kh/ and /k/ as shown in
Figure 1. When we inspect the language L it is not necessary for it to have /kw/ or /kh/ if it has
/k/ in its inventory; nevertheless it is highly expected that if it already has /kw/, it should also
have /k/ and /kh/ in its inventory.
f The expectation that a randomly chosen set of consonants representing a community of size
between 2 to 5, occurs in a language, is 70% whereas the same is 89% for the communities observed
in PhoNet.

February 2, 2008 7:41 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperIJMPC

Modeling the Co-occurrence Principles of Consonant Inventories

9

Fig. 5. Average Oav of the communities obtained at a particular threshold η versus the threshold
η

5. Feature Economy: The Binding Force of the Communities

In the earlier sections we have mainly focused ourselves to the detection and eval-
uation of the communities emerging from PhoNet. In this section we attempt to
explore whether or not the driving force, which leads to the emergence of these
communities, is feature economy. For this reason we introduce a quantitative mea-
sure of feature economy. The basic idea is borrowed from the concept of entropy in
information theory 24.

For a community C of size N let there be pf consonants, which have a particular
feature f (where f is assumed to be boolean in nature) in common and qf other
consonants, which lack the feature f . Thus the probability that a particular conso-
nant chosen uniformly at random from C has the feature f is pf
N and the probability
that the consonant lacks the feature f is qf
N ). If F be the set of all features
present in the consonants in C then feature entropy FE can be deﬁned as

N (=1– pf

FE =

(−

log

−

log

pf
N

pf
N

qf
N

qf
N

)

X
f ∈F

(4)

The process of computing the values of FE for two diﬀerent communities of conso-
nants is illustrated in Figure 6.

FE is essentially the measure of the minimum number of bits that are required
to communicate the information about the entire community C through a channel.

February 2, 2008 7:41 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperIJMPC

10 Mukherjee et al.

Fig. 6. The process of computing the value of FE for the two diﬀerent communities C1 and C2

Thus, the lower the value of FE, the better it is in terms of information transmission
overhead. To have more information conveyed using a fewer number of bits, max-
imization of the combinatorial possibilities of the features used by the constituent
consonants in the community C is needed. This is precisely the prediction made
by the principle of feature economyg. In fact, it is due to this reason that in Fig-
ure 6, FE exhibited by the community C1 is better than that of the community C2,
since in C1 the combinatorial possibilities of the features is better utilized by the
consonants than in C2.

Figure 7 illustrates, for all the communities obtained from the clustering of
PhoNet, the average feature entropy exhibited by the communities of a particular
sizeh (y-axis), versus the community size in log scale (x-axis).

We next investigate whether or not the communities obtained from PhoNet are
better in terms of feature entropy than they would have been, if the consonant
inventories had evolved just by chance. For this purpose we construct a random
version of PhoNet and call it PhoNetrand.

Construction of PhoNetrand: For each consonant c let the frequency of occur-
rence in UPSID317 be denoted by fc. Let there be 317 bins each corresponding to a
language in UPSID317. fc bins are then chosen uniformly at random and the conso-
nant c is packed into these bins. Thus the consonant inventories of the 317 languages
corresponding to the bins are generated. PhoNetrand can be then constructed from

gThe lower the feature entropy the higher is the feature economy.
hLet there be n communities of a particular size k picked up at various thresholds. The average
n
feature entropy of the communities of size k is therefore 1
i=1 FEi where FEi signiﬁes the feature
entropy of the ith community.

n P

February 2, 2008 7:41 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperIJMPC

Modeling the Co-occurrence Principles of Consonant Inventories

11

Fig. 7. Curves showing average feature entropy of the communities of a particular size versus the
community size (in log scale) for PhoNet and P hoN etrand.

these new consonant inventories similarly as PhoNet. The method is summarized
in Algorithm 2.

for each consonant c do
for i = 1 to fc do

Choose one of the 317 bins, corresponding to the languages in
UPSID317, uniformly at random;

Pack the consonant c into the bin so chosen if it has not been already
packed into this bin earlier;

end

end

Construct PhoNetrand, similarly as PhoNet, from the new consonant
inventories (each bin corresponds to a new inventory);

Algorithm 2: Algorithm to construct PhoNetrand

We apply Algorithm 1 in order to ﬁnd the communities appearing in PhoNetrand.
The average feature entropy for the communities of a particular size (y-axis), versus
the community size in log scale (x-axis) are shown in Figure 7 (along with the curve
for PhoNet). A closer inspection of the curves immediately makes it clear that the
average feature entropy exhibited by the communities of PhoNet are substantially
better than that of PhoNetrand especially when the community size remains less

February 2, 2008 7:41 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperIJMPC

12 Mukherjee et al.

Fig. 8. Average feature entropy of the communities obtained at threshold η versus the threshold
η for both PhoNet and PhoNetrand

than 15. As this size increases, the diﬀerence in the average feature entropy of the
communities of PhoNet and PhoNetrand gradually diminishes. This is because, the
community then comprises of almost all the nodes of PhoNet which are also the
nodes of PhoNetrand. Hence the average feature entropy exhibited by the respective
giant components of PhoNet and PhoNetrand is close and this closeness increases
with the increase in the size of the giant component.

Figure 8 (showing the average feature entropy of the communities for diﬀerent
values of η in the y-axis versus the threshold η in the x-axis) further strengthens
the fact that feature entropy exhibited by the communities occurring in PhoNet
are substantially better than those occurring in PhoNetrand. It clearly shows that
the average feature entropy of the communities, obtained at all thresholds greater
than 0.2, are signiﬁcantly lower in case of PhoNet than in PhoNetrand. Below this
threshold, gradually the average feature entropy of the communities of PhoNet and
PhoNetrand come closer, until they are identical. Another important observation
is that the communities of PhoNetrand do not emerge at thresholds greater than
0.8. This points to the fact that strong patterns of co-occurrence would not have
surfaced if the consonant inventories had just evolved by chance.

The above results not only validate our deﬁnition of feature entropy but is also
indicative of the fact that the community structures observed in PhoNet are not
arbitrary and are true representatives of feature economy claimed to be observed
across languages. In fact, the argument can be further validated by looking into
the languages recorded in UPSID317 and examining whether or not the consonants
forming the communities in PhoNet occur in these languages so as to minimize

February 2, 2008 7:41 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperIJMPC

Modeling the Co-occurrence Principles of Consonant Inventories

13

Fig. 9. Average occurrence ratio (Oav) versus the feature entropy of the communities. Each point
corresponds to a single community

feature entropy.

Figure 9 shows the scatter plot of the average occurrence ratio of the communi-
ties obtained from PhoNet (y-axis) versus the feature entropy of these communities
(x-axis). Each point in this plot corresponds to a single community. The plot clearly
indicates that the communities exhibiting lower feature entropy have a higher av-
erage occurrence ratio. For communities having feature entropy less than or equal
to 3 the average occurrence ratio is never less than 0.7 which means that the con-
sonants forming these communities occur together on an average in 70% or more
of the world’s languages. As feature entropy increases this ratio gradually decreases
until it is almost close to 0 when feature entropy is around 10. This again attests
the fact that the driving force behind the formation of these communities is the
principle of feature economy and languages indeed tend to choose consonants in
order to maximize the use of the distinctive features, which are already available in
their inventory.

6. Conclusions and Discussions

In this paper we have explored the co-occurrence principles of the consonants, across
the inventories of the world’s languages. Firstly, we have presented an automatic
procedure to capture the co-occurrence patterns of the consonants across languages.
It is important to mention here that this automation also provides an algorithmic
deﬁnition of natural classes 5 of phonemes (Table 1 is a natural class of plosives).
This is signiﬁcant because there is no single satisfactory deﬁnition of such natural
classes in literature 9. The communities that we obtained from PhoNet are such

February 2, 2008 7:41 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperIJMPC

14 Mukherjee et al.

natural classes and we can derive them just by regulating the threshold of our
algorithm.

Secondly, in order to quantify feature economy we have introduced the notion
of feature entropy. This quantiﬁcation immediately allows us to validate the expla-
nation of the organizational principles of the sound inventories in terms of feature
economy, provided by the earlier researchers.

Some of our important ﬁndings from this work are,

• The patterns of co-occurrence of the consonants, reﬂected through commu-
nities in PhoNet, are observed in 80% or more of the world’s languages;
• Such patterns of co-occurrence would not have emerged if the consonant

inventories had evolved just by chance;

• The consonant communities that maximize feature economy tend to occur
more frequently (70% or higher number of times) in the languages of the
world.

Until now we have emphasized on the fact that feature economy is the driving
force behind the formation of consonant communities. An issue which draws atten-
tion is that how such a force might have originated. One possible reason could be
due to certain general principles like maximal perceptual contrast 15 and articula-
tory ease 2,15 and ease of learnability 2. For instance, maximal perceptual contrast,
which is desirable between the phonemes of a language for proper perception of each
individual phoneme in a noisy environment, would try to reduce feature economy
(since better perception calls for use of a larger number of distinctive features). On
the other hand, ease of learnability, which is required so that a speaker can learn a
language with minimum eﬀort, tries to increase feature economy (since learnability
increases if there are only a few distinctive features to be learnt). It would be inter-
esting to see how the quantiﬁcation of feature economy can help us in understanding
the interplay, between these principles, that goes on in shaping the structure of the
consonant inventories. We look forward to do the same as a part of our future work.

References

441–465.

Row.

1. R. Albert and A.-L. Barab´asi. 2002. Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Reviews

of Modern Physics 74, 47–97.

2. Bart de Boer. 2000. Self-organisation in Vowel Systems. Journal of Phonetics, 28(4),

3. P. Boersma. 1998. Functional Phonology. (Doctoral thesis, University of Amsterdam),

The Hague: Holland Academic Graphics.

4. R. Ferrer i Cancho and R. V. Sol´e. 2001. Santa Fe working paper 01-03-016.
5. N. Chomsky and M. Halle. 1968. The Sound Pattern of English, New York: Harper and

6. M. Choudhury, A. Mukherjee, A. Basu, and N. Ganguly. 2006. Analysis and Synthe-
sis of the Distribution of Consonants over Languages: A Complex Network Approach.
Proceedings of COLING-ACL, Sydney, Australia.

February 2, 2008 7:41 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperIJMPC

Modeling the Co-occurrence Principles of Consonant Inventories

15

7. N. Clements. 2004. Features and Sound Inventories. Symposium on Phonological The-

ory: Representations and Architecture, CUNY.

8. G. W. Flake, S. R. Lawrence, C. L. Giles, and F. M. Coetzee. 2002. Self-organization

and Identiﬁcation of Web communities. IEEE Computer, 35, 66–71.

9. E. Flemming. 2005. Deriving Natural Classes in Phonology. Lingua, 115(3), 287–309.
10. A.W. de Groot. 1931. Phonologie und Phonetik als Funktionswissenschaften. Travaux

du Cercle Linguistique de, Prague 4, 116–147.

11. F. Hinskens and J. Weijer. 2003. Patterns of Segmental Modiﬁcation in Consonant

Inventories: A Cross-linguistic Study. Linguistics, 41, 6.

12. P. Holme, M. Huss, and H. Jeong. 2003. Subnetwork Hierarchies of Biochemical Path-

ways. Bioinformatics 19, 532–538.

13. B. W. Kernighan and S. Lin. 1970. An Eﬃcient Heuristic Procedure for Partitioning

Graphs. Bell System Technical Journal, 49, 291–307.

14. P. Ladefoged and I. Maddieson. 1996. Sounds of the Worlds Languages, Oxford: Black-

well.

15. B. Lindblom and I. Maddieson. 1988. Phonetic Universals in Consonant Systems. In
L.M. Hyman and C.N. Li, eds., Language, Speech, and Mind, Routledge, London, 62–78.

16. I. Maddieson. 1984. Patterns of Sounds, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
17. A. Martinet 1955. `Economie des Changements Phon´etiques, Berne: A. Francke.
18. M. E. J. Newman. 2003. The Structure and Function of Complex Networks. SIAM

Review 45, 167–256.

19. M. E. J. Newman and M. Girvan. 2004. Finding and Evaluating Community Structure

in Networks. Phys. Rev. E 69, 026113.

20. V. Pericliev and R. E. Vald´es-P´erez. 2002. Diﬀerentiating 451 Languages in Terms of

their Segment Inventories. Studia Linguistica, 56(1), 1–27.

21. A. Pothen, H. Simon, and K.-P. Liou. 1990. Partitioning Sparse Matrices With Eigen-

vectors of Graphs. SIAM J. Matrix Anal. Appl., 11, 430–452.

22. F. Radicchi, C. Castellano, F. Cecconi, V. Loreto, and D. Parisi. 2003. Deﬁning and

Identifying Communities in Networks. PNAS, 101(9), 2658–2663.

23. J. Scott. 2000. Social Network Analysis: A Handbook, Sage, London, 2nd edition.
24. C. E. Shannon and W. Weaver. 1949. The Mathematical Theory of Information, Ur-

bana: University of Illinois Press.

25. N. Trubetzkoy. 1930. Die Phonologische Systeme. TCLP, 4, 96–116.
26. M. S. Vitevitch. 2005. Phonological neighbors in a small world: What can graph theory
tell us about word learning? Spring 2005 Talk Series on Networks and Complex Systems,
Indiana University, Bloomington.

27. S. Yook, H. Jeong and A.-L. Barab´asi. 2001b. preprint.

