On the gap between an empirical distribution and an exponential

distribution of waiting times for price changes in a ﬁnancial

APS/123-QED

market

Naoya Sazuka∗

Sony Corporation,

4-10-18 Takanawa Minato-ku,

Tokyo, 108-0074 Japan

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Abstract

We analyze waiting times for price changes in a foreign currency exchange rate. Recent empirical

studies of high frequency ﬁnancial data support that trades in ﬁnancial markets do not follow a

Poisson process and the waiting times between trades are not exponentially distributed. Here we

show that our data is well approximated by a Weibull distribution rather than an exponential

distribution in a non-asymptotic regime. Moreover, we quantitatively evaluate how much an em-

pirical data is far from an exponential distribution using a Weibull ﬁt. Finally, we discuss a phase

transition between a Weibull-law and a power-law in the asymptotic long waiting time regime.

PACS numbers: 89.65.Gh

6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗Electronic address: Naoya.Sazuka@jp.sony.com

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

It seems natural to assume that trades in ﬁnancial markets arrive according to a Poisson

process and the waiting times, which are the time intervals between trades, follow an expo-

nential distribution [1, 2]. However, on the other hand, recent empirical studies [3, 4, 5, 6]

observed that the waiting time distribution is non-exponential in diﬀerent markets. There-

fore, in order to understand market behavior quantitatively and systematically, it would be

important to check validity of the exponential distribution hypothesis.

In this paper, we test validity of the exponential distribution hypothesis of waiting times

for price changes using a real market data. Then we evaluate a gap quantitatively between

an empirical distribution of waiting times and an exponential distribution.

In order to

measure the gap, we introduce a more general distribution which includes an exponential

distribution as a special case.

It is desirable that the distribution can quantify the gap

using a small number of parameters. That is, by ﬁtting such a distribution to a real market

data, we would like to determine how much an empirical data is far from an exponential

distribution through the parameters. For this purpose, one of the good example is a Weibull

distribution [7]. A Weibull distribution is often used to model the time to failure and

described by two parameters m and α as follows.

P.D.F.

f (t) =

0 ≤ t < ∞, α > 0, m > 0

m
α (cid:18)

t
α(cid:19)

m−1

exp

−

(cid:20)
m

t
α(cid:19)

(cid:20)

(cid:18)

(cid:21)

m

t
α(cid:19)

(cid:18)

(cid:21)

C.D.F F (t) = 1 − exp

−

(1)

(2)

1.5

m=0.5

fHtL

2

1

0.5

m=2

m=1

2

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

t

3

FIG. 1: Probability density functions of the Weibull distribution for diﬀerent m’s with α = 1

where α is the scale parameter and m is the shape parameter. Since the distribution shape

is characterized by only one parameter m, we focus on the parameter m in the following.

FIG. 1 shows some of probability density functions for diﬀerent m’s such as m = 0.5, 1, 2.

As is clear from FIG. 1 and equation (1), a Weibull distribution is reduced to an exponential

distribution when m = 1. Consequently, we can evaluate the gap by examining how much

the estimated value m is far from 1. Therefore, the purpose of this paper is to test validity

of the exponential distribution hypothesis using a real market data and measure the gap

quantitatively between an empirical distribution and an exponential distribution by ﬁtting

a Weibull distribution to the data.

It should be noted that we focus on a non-asymptotic regime for relatively short waiting

times, since almost all events occur in this regime. We discuss the asymptotic behavior for

long time regimes in Section 4.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we explain our data and test the expo-

nentianl hypothesis of waiting times. In Section 3, by ﬁtting a Weibull distribution to the

empirical data, we measure concretely the gap between the empirical data and an exponen-

tial distribution in two diﬀerent ways. In Section 4, we discuss the asymptotic behavior for

long waiting time regime. Finally, we present our conclusions in Section 5.

II. ANALYSIS OF WAITING TIMES FOR PRICE CHANGES

A. Data

In this paper, we analyze Sony bank USD/JPY rate as a real market data. Sony bank

rate is that the Sony bank [8] oﬀers to their customers on their online foreign exchange

trading service via the internet. The Sony bank rate depends on the market rate, but not

customers’ order. If the market rate changes by 0.1 yen and over, the Sony bank rate is

updated to the market rate. Conversely, if the market changes by less than 0.1 yen, the

Sony bank does not move and keep the previous rate. In other words, Sony bank rate is

produced by ﬁltering market rate using the sort of window with the width of ±0.1 yen. In

principle, the Sony bank rate is provided while the market is open. Currently, about 130,000

customers use this service. Our data set is about 31,000 data for the period of September

2002 to May 2004. According to the update rule, the mean time intervals between price

3

changes of the Sony bank rate (∼20 minutes) [9] is longer than the one of the market rate

(∼ 7 seconds).

B. Waiting times for price changes

A waiting time ti between ith price change and i + 1th price change is deﬁned as follows.

ti = si+1 − si

(3)

where si is the time when ith price change occurs. First of all, we plot a survival function

of waiting time P (≥ t) = 1 − F (t), which is the cumulative probability of the waiting times

greater or equal to t seconds, on a semi-log scale in FIG. 2. It shows that the waiting time for

price changes is not exponentially distributed. If the distribution is exponential as is widely

assumed, the data should be roughly on a straight line on the semi-log scale. However, we

observe that the plotted data in FIG. 2 is not a straight line. The right panel of FIG. 2 shows

that the gap is already visible in the very short waiting times regime. This fact is consistent

with recent empirical evidence observed in diﬀerent markets [3, 4, 5, 6]. Thus, we ﬁnd that

the non-exponential waiting time distribution appears not only in market rate but also in

the data has been sampled by ﬁltering market rate using the window with the width of ±0.1

yen. The non-exponential waiting time distribution also means that the arrival process for

price change is not a Poisson process.

FIG. 2: the semi-log plot of the survival function of waiting time P (≥ t) and a ﬁtted exponential

distribution (a straight line).

However, this semi-log plot of the cumulative probability P (≥ t) is not enough to evaluate

the gap quantitatively between an empirical distribution and an exponential distribution. As

4

we explained in the previous section, we now quantify the gap by ﬁtting a Webull distribution

to the data. In particular, we check the gap visually by a Weibull paper analysis.

III. THE GAP BETWEEN EMPIRICAL AND EXPONENTIANL DISTRIU-

TIONS

A. Weibull paper analysis

A Weibull paper analysis is often used to check a Weibull model assumption. A Weibull

cumulative distribution function can be rewritten as

ln ln

1
1 − F (t) (cid:19)

(cid:18)

= m ln t − m ln α.

(4)

Y = ln ln (1/ (1 − F (t))) = ln ln(1/P (≥ t)) is a linear function of X = ln t with a slope m.

Namely, the data from a Weibull distribution are plotted on a straight line on Weibull paper.

As a special case, the slope is 1 when the data follow an exponential distribution. Therefore,

the slope m of the line on Weibull paper is a quantitative indicator which enable us to

evaluate the gap. In FIG. 3, our data is roughly on a straight line with the estimated slope

m ≃ 0.59, which is apparently diﬀerent from exponential distribution with m = 1. It shows

that the waiting time distribution of the Sony bank USD/JPY rate is well approximated by

a Weibull distribution with m = 0.59, rather than an exponential distribution.

FIG. 3: A Weibull plot of the Sony bank USD/JPY rate. The straight line is the estimated Weibull

distribution with m = 0.59.

5

B. Divergence measurements

The gap can be also discussed by using divergence measurements. In the previous section,

we showed the empirical waiting time distribution is approximated by a Weibull distribution.

Thus, we replaced the gap between an exponential distribution and the empirical data with

the gap between an exponential distribution and a Weibull distribution. However, in this

section, we actually measure both of them by considering a gap between two distributions as

a divergence measurement. For example, we calculate Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence and

Hellinger distance. These two divergence measurements between the empirical distribution

P and a model distribution Q are written respectively

KL divergence =

P (t) ln (P (t)/Q(t))

Helliger distance =

2 (P (t) − Q(t))

.

2

tmax

Xt=1
tmax

Xt=1

KL divergence Hellinger distance

Q=Weibull

Q=exponential

0.19

0.49

0.21

0.36

(5)

(6)

TABLE I: KL divergence and Hellinger distance between empirical distribution P and a model

distributon Q (tmax = 50, 000).

TABLE I gives KL divergence and Hellinger distance when Q is the ﬁtted Weibull dis-

tribution with m = 0.59 and the ﬁtted exponential distribution. Both divergence measure-

ments show that the Weibull distribution is closer than the exponential distribution to the

empirical distribution. Especially, Hellinger distance which is a distance metric shows that

the diﬀerence is about 1.7 times. This fact correponds to the result in the previous section

that the Weibull distribution is a better approximation than exponential distribution.

As a result, we conclude that the gap can be evaluated by two diﬀerent methods which

are a Weibull paper analysis and divergence measurements. This is a main result of this

paper.

6

IV. PHASE TRANSITION BETWEEN A WEIBULL-LAW AND A POWER-LAW

Let us close this paper with a discussion on asymptotic behavior of waiting times. In

previous sections, we showed that a Weibull distribution is a better approximation of waiting

times in a non-asymtiotic regime rather than an exponential distribution. However, accu-

rately the Weibull ﬁt is not so good in the very short waiting time limit and the very long

waiting time limit in FIG 3. It could have diﬀerent behavior in those two time regimes. In

this section, we discuss asymptotic behavior in long time limit which is one of two regimes.

We ﬁnd that the cumulative probability distribution P (≥ t) of waiting times greater or
equal to ∼18,000 seconds (= 5 hours) well expressed by a power-law P (≥ t) ∼ t−α with

exponent α ∼ 3.67. Consequently, we ﬁnd that the behavior changes from a Weibull-law to

a power-law at some point tc ∼ 18, 000. The phase transition is well observed in the Weibull

paper for the asymptotic regime and the semi-log scale of P (≥ t) in FIG. 4. It should be

noted that the number of data for the power-law regime is only 0.3%, which is almost an

outlier, of total number of waiting times. Since such long waiting times hardly ever happen,

we focused on the Weibull ﬁt regime in previous sections.

FIG. 4: The left panel is a Weibull paper in the asymptotic region and the right panel is the semi-

log plot of the survival function of waiting time P (≥ t). Both shows the clear transition between a

Weibull-law and a power-law. The thick line is the empirical data and the thin line is the Weibull

distribution with m=0.59 and the dashed line is the power funciton with α=3.67.

Similar behavior was reported for the waiting time distribution of BUND futures traded

at LIFFE [6]. They showed that the waiting time distribution is a good agreement

with the Mittag-Leﬄer function which interpolates between the stretched exponential

7

exp{−(γt)β/Γ(1 + β)} for short time regime to the power-law (γt)−β/Γ(1 − β) for long

time.

It is interesting that even the Sony bank rate which is ﬁltered market rate ﬁrstly

moves out from a range of ±0.1 yen still have similar property to the market rate itself.

However, the exponent values and transition point are diﬀerent from our case. Our expo-

nent value changes from m ≃ 0.59 for a Weibull-law regime to α ≃ 3.67 for a power-law

regime, whereas, the Mittag-leﬄer ﬁt for BUND futures can be expressed by a single expo-

nent β ≃ 0.95 for both regimes. Moreover, our exponent value m ≃ 0.59 for non-asymptotic

regime is smaller than β ≃ 0.95 for BUND data and our transition point tc ∼ 18,000 seconds

is larger than tc ∼ 100 seconds for BUND futures. This could be caused by the window

eﬀect which is the sampling method of the Sony bank rate from the market rate. By this

sampling method, the waiting times of the Sony bank rate become longer than the one of the

market rate on average. The cumulative distribution function of the Weibull distribution

with m < 1 decays slower for t > α as m decreases, in other words, there are more long

waiting times for t > α as m decreases.

On the other hand, the behavior diﬀers from a Weibull ﬁt in short time limit is not

resolved. One possible reason is measurement errors but there might be other possible

distributions that decay faster than the Weibull distribution. The Mittag-Leﬄer ﬁt also can

not capture the empirical data for short time limit [6].

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we showed that the waiting time distribution of the Sony bank USD/JPY

rate is non-exponential. The result is consistent with the recent empirical evidence [3, 4, 5, 6]

of market rate. It is interesting that the non-exponential waiting time distribution appears

not only in the market rate but also in the Sony bank rate which is ﬁltered market rate

using the window with the width of ±0.1 yen.

We also showed that the empirical data is well approximated by a Weibull distribution

in a non-asymptotic regime, which includes almost all events. Then we measured the gap

quantitatively between an empirical waiting time distribution and an exponential distribu-

tion by using a Weibull paper analysis and divergence measurements. Finally, we found

that the phase transition between a Weibull-law and a power-law in long time asymptotic

regime. It should be noted that the events in a power-law regime is only 0.3% of the total

8

events.

In addition, the window eﬀect of the Sony bank rate is can be regarded as the ﬁrst

passage time problem. Further analysis of waiting times in this direction will be reported

in our forthcoming article [10].

Acknowledgments

I would like to appreciate Shigeru Ishi, President of the Sony bank, for kindly providing

the Sony bank data and useful discussions. Stimulating discussions with Jun-ichi Inoue of

Hokkaido University is acknowledged.

[1] D. Easley, R. Engle, M. O’Hara and L. Wu, AFA 2002 Atlanta Meeting.

[2] N. T. Chan and C. Shelton, Technical Report AI-MEMO 2001-2005, MIT, AI Lab (2001).

[3] M. Raberto, E. Scalas and F. Mainardi, Physica A. 314 (2002), 749.

[4] E. Scalas, T. Kaizoji, M. Kirchler, J. Huber and A Tedeschi, Physica A. 366 (2006), 463.

[5] T. Kaizoji and M. Kaizoji, Physica A. 336 (2004), 563.

[6] F. Mainardi, M. Raberto, R. Gorenﬂo and E. Scalas, Phyica A. 287 (2000), 468.

[7] B. S. Everitt, The Cambridge Dictionary of Statistics, Cambridge University Press (1998).

[8] http://moneykit.net

[9] N. Sazuka, Eur. Phys. J. B. 50 (2006), 129.

[10] J. Inoue and N. Sazuka, in preparation.

9

