6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
0
1
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Virtual volatility

A. Christian Silva ∗ , Richard E. Prange
Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742-4111,
USA

Abstract

We introduce the concept of virtual volatility. This simple but new measure shows
how to quantify the uncertainty in the forecast of the drift component of a random
walk. The virtual volatility also is a useful tool in understanding the stochastic
process for a given portfolio. In particular, and as an example, we were able to iden-
tify mean reversion eﬀect in our portfolio. Finally, we brieﬂy discuss the potential
practical eﬀect of the virtual volatility on an investor asset allocation strategy.

Key words: Volatility, Investments, Mean return, Predictability, Mean reversion

1 Introduction

Return on investment is a central concept for investors. We here consider
the simplest case of buying and holding a stock which, to make things easy,
has no dividends or stock splits during the holding period. We assume a buy
and hold strategy which ends at a horizon time T later. In this paper, we are
primarily interested in horizon times T of the order of a year. [We do not treat
the important issue of diversiﬁcation and correlations between the returns of
diﬀerent stocks. To some extent, this can be treated by considering the entire
portfolio in place of a single stock.]
The return can be deﬁned as

RT,t = ln(ST +t/St)

(1)

where St is the cost of the stock per share at time t in the buy transaction,
and ST +t is the amount to be realized per share at the time T + t of the selling

∗ Present address: EvA Funds, 456 Montgomery St, 8th ﬂoor, San Francisco, CA
94104

Email addresses: silvaac@evafunds.com (A. Christian Silva),

prange@glue.umd.edu (, Richard E. Prange).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

22 September 2013

transaction. This is easy enough to calculate after the transactions are history.
That result is called the historical return.

Some idea of what the return is expected to be when the decision is made
to buy or not buy the stock is essential however. The problem is to predict,
ex ante, the stock price at a time in the future. It is universally accepted that
there is a stochastic component to the changes in price. This leads inexorably
to the idea that the best that can be hoped for is a prediction of the probability
distribution [PDF] of returns at time T + t, which we call pt(R
It is
fairly generally accepted that for most stocks the distribution is likely to be
more or less bell-shaped, with a ‘center’ parameter and a ‘width’ parameter.
‘Skewness’ and ‘fatness of tail’ parameters are also interesting but shall not
concern us here.

T ).

|

We arrive at the conclusion, as many others have done, that for horizon
times of a year, this distribution of returns can be taken to be normal, [log-
normal for the stock], at least as a reasonable starting point. This means that
the main two parameters are the width and the center parameter. The latter
is generally taken to be the expected or mean return, which we deﬁne as

µT = Et(RT ) =

dR R pt(R

T )

Z

|

The width σT is usually determined from vT = σ2
bution

T , the variance of the distri-

vT = Et

[RT −

(cid:16)

µT ]2

(cid:17)

[An equivalent and perhaps more popular deﬁnition of the ‘mean return’ is ˜µT ,
deﬁned as ˜µT = ln (E (ST +t/St)) . If the PDF is lognormal, ˜µT = µT + 1
2vT .]
The dependence of the PDF on t emphasizes that the distribution is that
predicted at time t. This PDF is exceptionally important because it is the one
that is acted on by the investor. It is conditional on past history, including the
price St as well as all other information and theory that the investor is able
to bring to bear. Thus, in a sense there is a diﬀerent PDF for every investor.
Of course, it’s probably true that only a small fraction of investors think in
terms of PDF’s. What follows is in the nature of advice to those few investors
on how to improve systematically their PDF’s.

The expected return is also called the drift. The latter terminology comes
from the random walk model discussed further below. The parameter σT is one
among several distinct deﬁnitions of the volatility. The volatility is almost
always, in spite of cogent criticisms, taken to be practically synonymous with
the concept of risk. It is obviously a sort of inverse predictability, the larger
the volatility, the less the horizon price is predictable. The whole point of this
paper is to discuss this volatility and its relationship to the concept of drift.
This class of distributions of stock prices in the future must be sharply
distinguished between somewhat similar distributions in common use. One
example is the unconditional distribution of Lo and Wang, [1],LW, which ‘ﬁxes’

(2)

(3)

2

the parameters, (including µ and σ) at their ‘true’ values. [Quotes are as in
LW]. Another is the ‘risk neutral world’ PDF used in option pricing theory,
which is usually stated to be the distribution of the price of the underlying
stock at the future time t + T, with the drift parameter ˜µT replaced by the
risk-free return rT. We think, that there is an explicit formula for what to
use as the option pricing volatility parameter giving a result σBS related to
the Black-Sholes theory [2,3,4]. Closely related to this is the risk free world
distribution in which the volatility parameter is the ‘implied’ volatility, σI
extracted from empirical option prices [4]. The implied volatility in eﬀect
incorporates a number of corrections to that of Black-Sholes. Although these
volatilities are correct for option pricing purposes, we show that neither of
these volatilities is correctly used as the standard deviation of pt(R

T ).

Suppose we have the daily price history of a single stock over a year. Assume
for the sake of argument that this history is generated by a Monte Carlo
program with constant parameters, whose numerical values are in the range
expected for stocks, but we don’t know the parameters (Fig. 1). The exercise is
to estimate the parameters from the data. We will argue that we can determine
the width parameter σBS fairly well from the data of a single year.

RT ±

From a single year’s data, the best we can do to estimate the expected return
σBS, which will get the sign wrong fairly often (Fig. 1). It is
is µT ≈
certainly known that it is impossible to measure the historical mean drift very
well. Decades of data would be needed, even on the dubious assumption that
the drift and other parameters are constant over those decades[5]. Predicting
the expected return parameter is even harder. It is nevertheless routine to act
as if the drift parameter is ‘ﬁxed’ at its ‘true’ value.

|

To obtain the parameters of the yearly distribution, the Monte Carlo for
a year could be run many times. This is something that cannot be done for
an actual security. If the program were for a standard random walk, as is
assumed for simplicity by Black-Sholes and the eﬃcient market hypothesis,
that would determine µT and it would be found that the yearly width is σBS.
If the program were for a mean reverting Ornstein-Uhlenbeck [OU] process the
result would be a width σOU < σBS, and the result would depend on another
parameter γ, the rate of reversion to the mean. We estimate crudely below
that γ−1 is of the order of 1 year for actual stocks. Other stochastic models
are by no means ruled out empirically.

The main, albeit quite intuitive, result of this paper is as follows: Clearly,
since one doesn’t know the drift very well, one should make some sort of
average over the reasonable predictions of that parameter. This leads to a
systematic result: the volatility of a predicted stock price, as deﬁned by Eq.(3)
is greater than the volatility of the unconditional distribution, and also greater
than the volatilities σBS or σI. We call this enhanced volatility σT , as above,
1.42) σBS. We call this 25-50%
and we estimate empirically that σT ≈
enhancement, the virtual volatility, which comes, not because of a stochastic
process, but because of our inability to predict or even measure accurately,
the mean return. In other words, this is not the standard deviation of any

(1.26

−

3

Simulated and real stock time series, µ = 10% and σ = 30% per year
2
10

Geometric Brownian motion 

OU process 

e
c
i
r

P

1
10

0
10
0

RSH, 1990 to 1998 

Geometric Brownian motion 

OU process 

1

2

3

5

6

7

8

4
Years

Fig. 1. Stock price time series for simulated and one real stock (RSH, Radio Shack)
with similar mean return and volatility of σ = 0.3 and µ = 0.1 per year. The smallest
time step for the simulation is 1 day. The solid black line represent the mean drift of
0.1 per year. Note that it is not possible to extract the correct mean return by simply
looking at one t simulated time series. Therefore it is questionable to assume that RSH
comes from a random process presenting 10% mean return. All we can say is that RSH
had a realized return of 10% for the period in question. It is also diﬃcult to distinguish
between diﬀerent stock process. For comparison we present 2 simulated processes. One
is the traditional geometrical Brownian motion, the second is an OU process with a
target price of 15 dollars after 1 year. Both are similar if we look at few time series.

given process, but rather that of an ensemble of processes, an ensemble which
is virtual because it exists only in our heads.

Finally we point out a remarkable and often overlooked consequence to

investors of the existence of the virtual volatility.

4

2 Theoretical and Empirical Distributions of Returns

In the stock market, where every day billions of dollars generate gigabytes of
data, one might think that reasonable empirical estimates of the distribution
of such a fundamental quantity as the return would be commonplace. This
is true, but only for short horizon times. For example, suppose T = 1 hour.
It is then plausibly assumed that, except for stochastic processes, the return
during each hour is the same. So, one could let t in Eq.(1) run over each hour
for a couple of years to obtain a large number of exemplars. The hourly mean
return is in one sense known very well. Namely, it is much smaller than the
hourly volatility. However, it not known well enough to use it to estimate very
well the annual mean return, even on the assumption that the hourly return
is constant.

Of course, one should not really include every hour, just every trading hour.
Or perhaps the returns during the ﬁnal hour of each trading day, or maybe
the last hour on Fridays or before holidays could be examined. These are con-
ditional distributions, all hourly, which are known to be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
from one another. It is for some purposes quite acceptable to average over all
the constraints (except for not including nontrading hours).

It is known that for short horizons, up to a week, say, that the shape of the
empirical returns depends signiﬁcantly on T. At minutes, there are power law
tails and signiﬁcant correlation between successive minutes [6,7,8]. At hours
or days, the main part of the return is approximately exponential, with little
apparent correlation between one day and the next. At still longer times the
return distribution evolves in the direction of normality [6,7,8]. However, for
these longer times, quarters, years, decades, one should not in general assume
that all the underlying parameters are constant for a given stock for a suﬃcient
length of time that an empirical distribution obtained from the time series of
a single stock is well deﬁned. Certainly, for horizons much longer than a year,
the supposition that the parameters are constant is hard to justify.

The reason for this trend to normality is of course the Central Limit Theo-
rem. There are many small reasons for the changes in price of a stock. These
reasons have fairly short time scale parameters. In the course of a year, the
ﬂuctuations with short time characteristics get averaged out.

To make progress, one needs to invoke some theory. We assume that the
stock follows a generalized random walk with ﬁnite time increment ∆t. It is
usual in academic economic theory to take ∆t as an inﬁnitesimal, in order
to connect to the beautiful theory of stochastic diﬀerential equations, but, as
we have just seen, there is much going on at short times that only indirectly
aﬀects the yearly behavior. So we think of ∆t as being some interval like a
day, short compared with T, but long enough to minimize intraday eﬀects.

Let st = Rt+∆t −

Rt ≈
thing like Brownian motion, or a random walk,

(St+∆t −

St) /St = ∆St/St. Then we assume some-

st = µt∆t + σt∆t1/2Wt.

(4)

5

Here Wt is a random number of mean zero and unit variance. The daily drift
µt∆t is small, and for our purposes nonstochastic, but it can be a function of
time and past history. The daily standard deviation σt∆t1/2 can be constant,
time dependent, or even mean reverting stochastic with correlations [8], but
we assume that maximum correlation times for the daily volatility are such
that most of the eﬀects of volatility ﬂuctuations are averaged out over times
of order a year. We assume that (µt∆t)2 << σ2
[This is based on the
estimate that the drift for a year is typically in the range 10-20%, while the
volatility for a year is 20-40%. Let ∆t be about 1/252 years. Then [.15/252]2 =
10−4 = .32/252.] This is a very fundamental inequality. It says
4
that at short times, ∆t
a day, the drift is so small that for most purposes
it can be neglected.

10−7 << 4

t ∆t.

×

≈

×

≈

The usual Black-Sholes theory of option pricing takes µt and σt as con-
stants. This is unnecessary and we can consider them to be time dependent
[1]. We adopt units of time such that ∆t = 1 and then T is large, e. g. one
252 trading days. Theory shows that the distribution of RT,0 = ΣT −1
t=0 st
year
Σσ2
is then normal with drift parameter Σµt = T ¯µ and width parameter
t .
The Black-Sholes price is based on hedging. Then there is a natural ‘short’
time which disappears in the continuous version of the theory. This funda-
mental short time is the interval between rehedgings. If this time is too short,
transaction costs become excessive. If it is too long, the expansion given below
breaks down. Although it is in reality more complicated, assume for simplicity
that the time between rehedging is ∆t = 1 day. The dealer sells an option
and maintains a hedge. Let the number of hedge shares owned between time
t, t + 1, be φt. Assume the risk free rate is zero, as it is known how to re-
store it to the formulas by a trick at the end. Invoking the usual no-arbitrage
condition, the change in value of the hedge of the dealer from time t to time
t + 1, but just before rehedging, is equal to the change in his obligation to the
buyer, i.e. to the change of the fair value or price C(St,t) of the option. Thus,
using a Taylor expansion to calculate the change of price we have

q

∆Stφt = C(St+1, t + 1)

C(St, t)

∆St

−

≈

∂C
∂St

+

1
2

∆S2
t
S2
t

S2
t

∂2C
∂S2
t

+

∂C
∂t

+ ...

Black-Sholes make the ‘delta’ hedge φt = ∂C/∂St, and choose the option
BSS2∂2C/∂S2, where
price C(S, t) as solution of the equation ∂C/∂t =
obviously the ‘constant’ σ2
BS/T should be given by

2T σ2

−

1

σ2
BS = Σt∆S2

t /S2

t = Σ(µt + σtWt)2

Σσ2

t = T σ2
t

≈

(5)

if T is large, and µt is small in the sense above. Note that for large T, σ2
T.
Also, the ‘miracle’ has happened, the option price does not depend on the drift
parameter.

BS ∝

Furthermore, the future Black-Sholes volatility, (for T

one year), is
rather well predicted by the historical data. The Black-Sholes volatility (di-
vided by the horizon time) is and should be, an average ‘daily’ volatility, daily

≈

6

because of the ‘daily’ rehedging, and not necessarily the width of the distribu-
tion at time T, predicted by Eq. (4). Therefore, one has rather good statistics,
since there are many days until time T + t is reached. However, if µt is some
‘known’ simple function of t, which maintains the smallness constraints, Eq.(4)
does predict a width σBS.

Let us next suppose that µt has a mean reversion property. Namely, let
us suppose that µt ‘points’ to some future price goal SG(t + 1/γ), at a time
1/γ in the future. It points in the sense that Steµt/γ = SG(t + 1/γ) or µt =
ln St), Suppose that SG(t) = SGeµt. Then, Eq.(4) becomes
γ(ln SG −
st =

µt)∆t + µ + σt√∆tWt

(6)

γ(ln St −
−

ln SG −

which is a simple trending Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. It has three drift re-
lated parameters, µ, SG, and γ. Both SG and µ are diﬃcult to extract from
the data on a single stock. Let

µt.

qt = ln St/SG −
t << σ2
Note that one expects
t
if γ
1/250, i.e. γ is an inverse year. Thus, the Black-Sholes option price is
not changed if the underlying process is mean reverting rather than a random
walk, and is again determined by the average daily variance [1,9].

σt/√γ so that for this process µ2

qt| ≈
|

t ≈

γσ2

(7)

≈

1

1

OU

2 σ2

e−γT

e−γT

OU = σ2
BS

The volatility of the future distribution predicted by the OU process has a
diﬀerent value, however. It is given by σ2
/γT. There is also
a negative correlation between successive returns, EOU ((RT,t −
µT ) (RT,t−T −
(cid:16)
[1]. [These results are easily obtained by use of an explicit
1
−
s=−∞σse−γ(t−s)Ws, which can be approximated as a stochas-
solution for qt = Σt
(cid:17)
(cid:16)
tic integral. Because we don’t know SG, we don’t know the value of q0 at time
t = 0 even if we know the price S0 at that time. Setting the lower limit in
the sum far into the past makes q0 a stochastic quantity and supplies a sort
of average over SG. The results are diﬀerent if SG and S0 are known.]

−

−

(cid:17)

Another model with some plausibility is one in which the drift is constant
for a while, probably of order a year, then in a short time of a month or two
jumps to a new constant. This process would have to be mean-reverting also.
Since it requires even more parameters and is not well worked out, we do not
discuss it further.

3 Averaging over predicted mean returns

Our idea is to assume an underlying random walk or trending OU process,
where the chief unknown parameter is the expected return µt. If we knew this
parameter, the PDF would be log normal with the width dependent on the
process. Our recommendation to the subset of investors who try to estimate a
stock’s future PDF, is that they average somehow over reasonable predictions

7

µT )) =

of the expected return, which will result in a distribution that is wider than
the underlying widths σBS,or σOU.

There are many schemes utilized to predict the future course of stocks.
There are at least three general methodologies. Value investors believe that
such underlying factors as earnings, book value, cash ﬂow, can be predicted
and can be theoretically converted into a target price for the stock. Most
research and commercial forecasting schemes like this are based on factor
betting in the spirit of Fama and French [10,11,13,12]. These schemes tend to
predict target prices, which are related to the underlying ‘intrinsic value’ of
the stock.

Another methodology is that of technical investing. Its proponents believe
that various shapes of stock price history graphs give buy or sell signals. It is
diﬃcult to turn this into a prediction of the drift parameter.

One well documented version of technical investing is trend following or
momentum investing [13,14]. In that case it is assumed that what happened
to the stock in the recent past is likely to continue for a while.

A third technique tries to take advantage of mean reversion. For example,
one looks over a cross section of stocks and invests in those for which the
recent returns have been unusually low. A value version is that one chooses
stocks whose book to price ratio, say, is unusually high, in the expectation
that the price will rise to bring the ratio down to more normal values [16].

It is apparent that not many of these techniques actually attempt to predict
the expected return. In any case, it is not easy to extract such predictions from
the published reports of analysts. The exception is momentum investing which
assumes the actual return of the recent past can be used to predict the future
[13,14].

We still face the fundamental diﬃculty, stressed above, that for a given
name, it is not possible to have enough exemplars of year-long price histories to
determine the parameters. We must therefore go to a cross-sectional approach.
Assume that we can choose a large number of similar names, which for the
present purpose diﬀer only by their mean drift and volatility[7]. If they are
mean reverting, we assume their mean reversion parameters γ are similar.

To compare one name with another, we normalize the returns. A natural

ﬁrst guess is the t- or Student statistic,

RT,Stud =

¯µT

RT,t −
σBS,T,t

(8)

where RT,t = ln(ST +t/St) is the T horizon return, the volatility is that mea-
sured over the period t, t + T, and ¯µ is the ‘known’ average drift parameter.
If the returns are normal, the distribution of the statistic of Eq.(8) will be a
Student distribution with T degrees of freedom. For large T, this is nearly a
normal distribution with zero mean and unit width.

However, we want to make a prediction based on history to time t, so we
replace the volatility in the denominator by the historical volatility. [Other

8

P(R

) for 16 different 2 year random combinantions of names

T,norm

0
10

)

m
r
o
n
,
T

R
P

(

 
,
n
o
i
t
c
u
f
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

−1

10

−2

10

10

−3
−4

−3

−2

−1

1

2

3

4

R

0
T,norm

Fig. 2. Empirical PDF for 304 names from the S&P500 where the correlation between
names is removed. Two random years are chosen for each name. Diﬀerent random
choices result in slightly diﬀerent PDFs. The solid black line represents the best ﬁt
gaussian. The mean is approximately zero and the standard deviation is 1.30
0.04.
We estimate the virtual volatility to be of the order of 26% to 34%.

±

approximations for σBS work well also.]

Most importantly, we replace ¯µT by an estimate which has a distribution.
Namely we replace ¯µT by the guess of the momentum investor, ¯µT
RT,t−T =
ln(St/St−T ). The result is a statistic which in eﬀect averages the predictions
of the drift as a momentum investor would do,

→

Rn

T,norm =

Rn

Rn
T,t −
σn
BS,t−T

T,t−T

.

(9)

We add a label n giving the name of the stock. Our interpretation of this statis-
tic is that its width estimates the enhancement factor above the empirically
known σn
BS for the group of stocks due to the virtual volatility eﬀect.

9

To illustrate this empirically, we take ten years of daily data ending Oct.22
2002 of a 408 stock subset of the S&P500. The subset was of stocks present
in the S&P over the chosen time-span. [We have tried other time periods and
other subsets with very similar results, including data that spans for 16 years
from Jan. 1990 to Jan. 2006.] The data was downloaded from Yahoo [15]. We
deliberately wanted to have rather similar stocks, in this case rather large and
actively traded companies, so that a cross sectional analysis has meaning.

One possible problem with the set of stocks we chose is that there is known
to be considerable temporal correlation between stock price changes. Since
studying the eﬀects of correlation between names is not our interest here, we
chose, for each name, three two year periods, at random, from the data. In
other words, we took T = 252 in Eq.(9) and t was chosen at random in the
interval Oct 1993-Oct 2001. This gives a sample of size 1224 from which to
estimate the distribution.

−

The distribution is normal with essentially zero mean and a width (stan-
dard deviation) about 1.26
1.34 (Fig. 2). The normality of this distribution
is consistent with the argument that year-in-the-future stock price distribu-
tions are lognormal. The zero mean is evidence that yearly past returns are
unbiased predictors of yearly future returns. The width, 1.26-1.34, says that
the volatility σT of a given stock, a year in the future, is, on average, 26% -
34% greater than the empirical historical volatility for that stock. The reason
for this increase in width or decrease in predictability is that we don’t know
the ‘true’ drift parameter, but have eﬀectively averaged it as a momentum
investor would.

4 Mean Reversion

This result is the main result of this paper. However, the statistic deﬁned
by Eq.(9) has some nice features, even without the virtual volatility interpre-
tation. This is especially true when T is large enough that ﬂuctuations in the
empirically obtained denominator can be ignored or taken into account as a
perturbation. One virtue, in contrast to the standard regression techniques
used to study mean reversion, is that the double diﬀerence structure of the
numerator of the statistic Eq.(8) is independent of drift parameters, known or
unknown, if they are constant.

Let us assume ﬁrst, that the 1224 samples are generated by a random walk
of Eq.(4) with constant drift parameters µn, i. e. constant over two years for
each choice of name and time interval. In each exemplar we may add and
subtract the correct (even though unknown) µn,t in the numerator to ﬁnd
that such a random walk statistic theoretically has mean zero and variance
two. In other words, a standard ensemble of random walks, but with unknown
drift parameters, leads to a virtual volatility enhancement of √2
42%.
[Because of small ﬂuctuations in the denominator, it is actually slightly larger.]
Real stocks are therefore more predictable than the random walk with con-

−

≈

1

10

Table 1
1. The empirical estimate of the ratio of standard deviation of normalized log returns
to the Black Sholes volatility, as a function of time horizon. 2. The rate of reversion
to the mean calculated from the empirical estimate on the assumption that the stocks
follow a simple trending OU process.

T(quarters)

1/3

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

σT /σBS
γ−1(years)

1.49

1.37

1.32

1.26

1.33

1.35

1.37

1.46

1.49

**

7.7

2.4

1.15

1.3

1.2

1.3

**

**

stant but unknown parameters itself. The reason is that real stocks are mean
reverting [16,17,18]. Some argue that mean reversion contradicts the idea of
market eﬃciency, therefore it is sometime termed an anomaly [16].

Suppose we assume that the stocks of Eq.(9) are mean reverting with the
simple Ornstein-Uhlenbeck trending process. We take the reversion rate γ
constant over all time and all names. We also assume constant but unknown
drift µn and ﬁxed price target Sn
G for each two year interval and name. The
numerator of Eq.(9) can be expressed in terms of the normalized parameter
qt, Eq.(7), without needing to know the drift and target price. The result is:

var(RT,norm) =

(1

e−γT )
−
γT

"

1

2 +
h

#

(cid:16)

−

e−γT

(cid:17)i

(10)

The ﬁrst square bracket is the ratio of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck variance of Rn
t±T
to the Black-Sholes volatility-squared of the same quantity. The parenthesis in
the second square bracket comes from the negative correlation between history
year and predicted year, as is characteristic of mean reversion.

From the numerical result for actual S&P stocks, we can conclude that an
average γ−1 is about 1.1 - 1.3 years for T = 1 year, that is, the target price
is a little above 1 year in the future. Assuming the same OU process applied
to Fama and French results[17], we arrive at 1.9 to 3.1 years for small cap
stocks and 4.3 to 7.2 years for large cap. Conversely our results indicate a
correlation of one year returns of -0.32 (Fama and French ﬁnd an insigniﬁcant
correlation for one year returns). Our results are not in agreement with Fama
and French, however we do not try to compare both. We have used diﬀerent
samples, diﬀerent time periods and moreover we have assumed a very simple
mean reversion model. We are only drawing the attention to the order of
magnitude agreement we have achieved with a very crude model. If one takes
seriously the OU model and formula 10, then the virtual volatility eﬀect is
enhanced, namely the actual width σT ≈
of Eq.(9) for diﬀerent values of T. The results are given in Table 1.

However, real stocks are not so simple. Consider the empirical distribution

1.5σOU , for T = 1 year.

The notation ** means that the simple OU process cannot give the result.
Indeed, we can conclude that although the stocks are mean reverting, there is
considerably more structure than found in the simplest OU process.

Since mean reversion is not the main subject of this paper, we conﬁne our-

11

selves to a simple, qualitative explanation of the table as follows. There is
more than one time scale of stock price temporal correlation. In addition to
the negative correlation at longer time [16,17], there is a shorter time positive
correlation at horizons of order week-month [6,16,18].

At still longer horizons, we suggest that the approximation that the drift µt
is constant breaks down. If the drift is diﬀerent for Rt+T and RT −t, there is a
positive addition to the variance. Thus, ˙σT /σBS has a minimum. In fact, for
horizons of 7 and 8 quarters, the mean of RT,norm becomes distinctly negative.
That means that the mean drift at the earlier time is on average greater than
the mean drift at the later time. In other words, the returns earlier in the
period were greater than the returns later in the period. Certainly for the
market as a whole, during this period prices ﬁrst went up during the ’90’s and
turned over at about year 2000.

5 Investment consequences of the virtual volatility

We have just recounted arguments that the expected return parameter for a
given stock or portfolio is not known very well and its value is not agreed on by
market participants. We do not discuss the consequences of this for such con-
cepts as the ‘eﬃcient frontier’ of modern portfolio theory [MPT] [3,19,20,21].
We argued that one way of thinking about this lack of knowledge and agree-
ment on the expected return is that the PDF of future price distributions is
wider than usually assumed, something like 1.3σBS. What are some of the
consequences for investors? Since volatility is equated to risk in typical text-
book ﬁnance, we see that stocks are risker by 30% than we thought they
were. A favorite single number that tries to summarize how well a portfo-
lio is going to perform, in the risk-return sense, is the ex ante Sharpe ra-
rT ) /σT . This number tries to balance the risk, deﬁned as
tio, Sr = (µT −
the volatility, with the return in excess of the risk free return. Obviously,
it is reduced by 30% or so as compared with the ratio using the volatil-
ity σBS. Going a bit beyond this is MPT, which uses of the utility func-
tional U(I0) = I0(µT −
T . Here A is the investor’s risk aversion
parameter. Minimizing U with respect to the investment amount, I0, gives
I0 = (µT −
T which means that an investor using this MPT utility,
would invest a factor 1.7 less because of the virtual volatility eﬀect. The utility
itself is changed to U = 1
2A Sr2, so the utility of the investment is reduced by
the same rather signiﬁcant factor.

rT ) /Aσ2

2 AI 2

0 σ2

rT )

−

1

It must be admitted that very few investors, (probably including Sharpe)
know their personal value of the risk aversion parameter A, so, all that needs to
be done is to have everyone decrease their A by a factor 1.7, in other words,
become less risk averse than they had thought, and nothing would change.
Thus, even though the previous calculation (without the virtual volatility
eﬀect) is in several textbooks, it is doubtful that it has much eﬀect on live
investors.

12

Nevertheless, it is clear and in agreement with intuition and standard lore,

that additional uncertainty makes an investment less attractive.

There are, however, other ways of investing in stocks or indices than just
buying them. One of the simplest is investing in calls on the underlying stock.
In this paper we conﬁne ourselves to pointing out the following. The expected
excess gain, as predicted at the time of making the investment, for the strategy
of buying a call at price CK and holding it until expiration at a time T + t in
the future, is given by

Here I0 is the amount invested, ST +t is the price of the underlying at expira-
tion, and K is the strike price. The expectation

Et[G] = I0erT

K)+

Et

(ST +t −
CKerT

(cid:16)





(cid:17)

−

1





∞

E

(ST t −

h

K)+

=

i

ZK

dS(S

K)pt(S, ˜µT , σT )

−

(11)

(12)

where pt(ST +t, ˜µT , σT ) is the ex-ante, predicted, log-normal distribution of
ﬁnal stock price that we have just discussed. The Black-Sholes call price [2,4],
(approximately CK), is given by the same formula, Eq. (12) with p replaced by
the risk neutral world distribution, p(ST +t, rT, σBS). The actual call price is
subject to various small corrections that are summarized by the replacement
of σBS by the implied volatility σI. Thus E(G) vanishes if ˜µT = rT and σT =
σI.[Note that Eq.(11) for K = 0 gives the gain from buying the underlying
when CK=0 is the price of the stock, St.]

The expected gain is an increasing function of three parameters. The ﬁrst,
obviously, is the drift parameter ˜µT . The second is the strike price K. Both the
numerator and denominator in Eq.(11) decrease with increasing K, but the
denominator decreases faster. [For options very much out of the money, CK
is so small as predicted by Black-Sholes that the buy-sell option price spread
starts to dominate.] The result is that somewhat out-of-the-money calls on
stocks with projected good returns have considerably higher expected return
than does the underlying itself, even if the volatility σT is mistakenly kept at
σI.

The third parameter is the virtual volatility σT . As σT increases, the ex-
pected return increases. The expected ﬁnal call value of Eq.(12) increases, the
more so for out of the money calls. The cost CK is independent of predictions
of the future return. The wider virtual tails of p(ST , ˜µT , σT ) on the up side
increase the return, while the losses coming from low side tails are limited to
the cost of the call. The virtual volatility eﬀect thus increases the expected
return on call buying, without much increasing the prospect of losses. Sim-
ilarly, if the actual distribution has fatter tails than the log-normal that we
have assumed, it also raises the expected return without increasing much the
prospect of losses. In fact, for out-of-the-money calls, there is a signiﬁcant

13

expected gain even if the return ˜µT vanishes.

There is some empirical evidence which tends to support these ideas [22,23].
That work of course has nothing to do with prediction. It did however ﬁnd
one month)
that the historical mean returns on certain rather short term (
calls was impressively high, the more so for out of the money calls.

≈

A complete analysis requires a discussion of risk or utility in call-buying, a
situation for which the ‘risk = volatility=standard deviation’ formulation of
traditional MPT is far from adequate [24,25]. We defer this discussion to a
future publication. However, for those investors who are mainly averse to losing
too much money, [as opposed to being averse to both upside and downside
uncertainty equally,] it is quite clear that the virtual volatility eﬀect as applied
to calls increases the desirability of call buying, contrary to the outcome when
purchase of the underlying is contemplated.

In other words, this is a case where certain rational investors can and should

regard uncertainty and inability to predict correctly as GOOD!

We thank V. M. Yakovenko for several suggestions. We thank J-P. Bouchaud

for pointing out Ref. [16].

References

[1] A. W. Lo and J. Wang, Implementing option pricing models when asset returns

are predictable. The Journal of Finance, 50, 87 (1995).

[2] F. Black and M. Scholes, The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. Journal

of Political Economy, 81, 637 (1973).

[3] Z. Bodie, A. Kane and A. J. Marcus,Investments (McGraw-Hill, New York,

2002).

York, 1998).

168 (1995).

[4] T. Bjork, Arbitrage theory in continuous time (Oxford University Press, New

[5] F. Black, Estimating espected return. Financial Analysis Journal, Jan-Feb,

[6] J.Y. Campbell, Andrew W. Lo and A. C. MacKinley, The econometrics of

ﬁnancial markets (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1997).

[7] P. Gopikrishnan, V. Plerou, L. A. N. Amaral, M. Meyer, and H. E. Stanley,
Scaling of the distribution of price ﬂuctuations of individual companies. Phys.
Rev. E 60, 6519 (1999).

[8] A.C. Silva, R. E. Prange and V. M. Yakovenko, Exponential distribution of
ﬁnancial returns at mesoscopic time lags: a new stylized fact. Physica A, 344
227 (2004).

[9] B. Grundy, Option prices and the underlying asset’s return distribution. The

Journal of Finance, 46, 1045 (1991).

14

[10] E. F. Fama and K. R. French, The cross-section of expected stock returns. The

Journal of Finance, 47, 427 (1992).

[11] J. L. Davis, E. F. Fama and K. R. French, Characteristics, Covariances, and
Average Returns: 1929 to 1997. The Journal of Finance, 55, 389 (2000).

[12] http://www.barra.com/products/model.aspx

[13] M. Cooper, R. C. Gutierrez,Jr. and B. Marcum, On the predictability of stock

returns in real time. The Journal of Business, 78, 460 (2005).

[14] N. Jagadeesh and S. Titman, Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers:
Implications for Stock Market Eﬃciency. The Journal of Finance, 48, 65 (1993).

[15] http://biz.yahoo.com/opt/

[16] W. F. M. De Bondt and R. H. Thaler, Anomalies: A mean-reverting walk down

wall street. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 3 189 (1989).

[17] E. F. Fama and K. R. French, Permanent and temporay components of stock

prices. The Journal of Political Economy, 96, 246 (1988).

[18] A. W. Lo and A. C. MacKinlay, Stock Market prices do not follow random walks:
evidence from a simple speciﬁcation test. The Review of Financial Studies, 1,
41 (1988).

[19] H. M. Markowitz, Portfolio selection. J. Finance 7,77 (1952).

[20] H. Levy and H. M. Markowitz, Aproximating expected utility by a function of

mean and variance. American Economic Review, 69 308 (1979).

[21] C. Huang and R. H. Litzenberger,

Foundations for ﬁnancial economics (Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1988).

[22] J.D. Coval and T. Shumway, Expected option returns. The Journal of Finance

61, 983 (2001).

[23] R. J. Rendleman Jr, Optimal long-run option investment strategies. Financial

Management 10, 61 (1981).

[24] P. Carr and D. B. Madan, Optimal positioning in derivative securities.

Quantitative Finance 1, 19 (2001).

[25] P. H. Dybvig and J. E. Ingersoll, Jr, Mean-variance theory in complete markets.

The Journal of Business 55, 233 (1982).

15

