6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
1
2
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Opinion dynamics and synchronization
in a network of scientiﬁc collaborations

Alessandro Pluchino* a, Stefano Boccaletti b, Vito Latora a,
Andrea Rapisarda a

aDipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Universit´a di Catania,
and INFN sezione di Catania, Via S. Soﬁa 64, I-95123 Catania, Italy
b CNR-Istituto dei Sistemi Complessi, Largo E. Fermi, 6, 50125 Florence, Italy

Abstract

In this paper we discuss opinion dynamics in the Opinion Changing Rate (OCR)
model, recently proposed in Ref. [1]. The OCR model allows to study whether and
how a group of social agents, with a diﬀerent intrinsic tendency (rate) to change
opinion, ﬁnds agreement. In particular, we implement the OCR model on a small
graph describing the topology of a real social system. The nodes of the graph are
scientists partecipating to the Tepoztl´an conference, celebrating Alberto Robledo’s
60th birthday, and the links are based on coauthorship in scientiﬁc papers. We study
how opinions evolve in time according to the frequency rates of the nodes, to the
coupling term, and also to the presence of group structures.

1 Introduction

In the last years there has been an increasing interest in statistical physics
for interdisciplinary applications. Not only biology, economy and geology, but
also soft sciences [2] like sociology or cognitive sciences have been involved.
An eﬀort in this sense has also been advocated in order to strengthen the sci-
entiﬁc aspect of these disciplines [3]. At the same time, the study of complex
networks, concerning both their structure and their dynamics, has seen an
explosive evolution [4,5,6]. This ﬁeld is probably only in its infancy and will
likely reinforce the interdisciplinary new directions of contemporary statisti-
cal physics. Within this scenario, many sociophysics papers have been pub-
lished and new models have been proposed for studying in particular opinion

∗

Corresponding author: alessandro.pluchino@ct.infn.it

Preprint submitted to Elsevier Science

2 February 2008

dynamics and consensus formation [7,8,9,10,11,12]. Although in many cases
such models oﬀer at the moment an oversimpliﬁed description of a real social
system, they can be hopefully very useful in the long term. In this paper we
discuss opinion formation mechanisms, and in particular we study the imple-
mentation on a real social network of a recently proposed model, the Opinion
Changing Rate (OCR) model [1]. The latter is a modiﬁed version of the Ku-
ramoto model [14,15,16] adapted to the social context. The OCR model allows
to explore the possible role of synchronization in the process of opinion for-
mation. In previous works we have considered a group of fully coupled agents
with a diﬀerent natural tendency (rate) to change opinion. Here we extend the
study to a system of agents on a small graph representing a real social network,
namely the network of scientiﬁc collaborations among statistical physicists in
which Alberto Robledo is involved.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we review the main features
of the OCR model. In section 3 we explain how the network has been con-
structed. There we study its structural properties with particular attention to
the subdivision in community structures and we discuss the results of numeri-
cal simulations of the the OCR model on the network. Conclusions are drawn
in section 4.

2 The Opinion Changing Rate (OCR) model

Many of the most popular opinion formation models have the limitation of not
taking into account the individual inclination to change, a realistic feature of
any individual. In fact each one of us changes idea, habits, style of life or way
of thinking in a diﬀerent way, with a diﬀerent velocity. There are conserva-
tive people that strongly tend to maintain their opinion or their style of life
against everything and everyone. There are more ﬂexible people that change
ideas very easily and follow the current fashions and trends. Finally, there are
those who run faster than the rest of the world anticipating the others. These
diﬀerent tendencies can be interpreted as a continuous spectrum of diﬀerent
degrees of natural inclination to changes.
In a recent paper [1] we showed how such a personal inclination to change,
randomly distributed in a group of individuals, can aﬀect the opinion dynam-
ics of the group itself. Switching from the question ”Could agents with initial
diﬀerent opinions reach a ﬁnal agreement?” into the more realistic one ”Could
agents with a diﬀerent natural tendency to change opinion reach a ﬁnal agree-
ment?”, we introduced a new idea, the natural opinion changing rate, that is
very similar to the characteristic frequency of an oscillator. In such a way, one
can treat consensus as a peculiar kind of synchronization (frequency locking)
[13], a phenomenon which has been very well studied in diﬀerent contexts by
means of the Kuramoto model[14,15,16].

2

The Kuramoto model of coupled oscillators is one of the simplest and most
successful models for synchronization. It is simple enough to be analytically
solvable, still retaining the basic principles to produce a rich variety of dy-
namical regimes and synchronization patterns. The most interesting feature
of the model is that, despite the diﬀerence in the natural frequencies of the
oscillators, it exhibits a spontaneous transition from incoherence to collective
synchronization beyond a certain threshold of the coupling strength [16]. The
existence of such a critical threshold for synchronization is very similar to
the consensus threshold found in the majority of the opinion formation mod-
els. Thus we modiﬁed the Kuramoto model in order to study synchronization
mechanisms in consensus formation. In our model each oscillator represents
an agent corresponding to a node of a given network and the topology of the
network ﬁxes the neighborhood Ki of every agent. The dynamics of a system
of N individuals is governed by the following set of diﬀerential equations:

˙xi(t) = ωi +

α sin(xj − xi)e−α|xj −xi|

i = 1, . . . , N

(1)

σ
ki

X
j∈Ki

where xi(t) is the opinion of the ith agent at time t. Here the opinions have a
very general meaning and can represent the style of life, the way of thinking
or of dressing etc, thus they can be usefully represented by means of unlimited
real numbers xi ∈] − ∞ + ∞[ ∀i = 1, ..., N. Opinions interact by means of the
coupling term, where σ is the coupling strength and ki is the degree (i.e. the
number of ﬁrst neighbors) of each agent. The exponential factor in the coupling
term, tuned by the parameter α, ensures that opinions will not inﬂuence each
other any longer when the reciprocal distance exceeds a certain threshold.
This is perhaps the most remarkable feature of the OCR model with respect
to the Kuramoto model, since it allows the system to reach an asymptotic
stationary state where the conﬁguration of opinions does not vary any longer.
The parameter α appears also as a factor of the sine in the coupling term and
simply rescales the range of the coupling strenght. 1 We typically adopted
the value α=3, which ensures a consistent behavior of the exponential decay.
Finally, the ωi’s - corresponding to the natural frequencies of the oscillators in
the Kuramoto model - represent here the so-called natural opinion changing
rates (ocr ), i.e. the intrinsic inclinations of the agents to change their opinions.
For this reason we called our model: the Opinion Changing Rate (OCR) model
[1]. The values ωi’s, which do not depend on time, are distributed in a uniform
random way with an average ω0. In this way we can simulate the behaviour of
both conservative individuals, characterized by small values of ωi (< ω0), and
more ﬂexible people, with high values of ωi (> ω0). Agents going against the
mainstream can be also simulated, by choosing negative values for their ocr.

1 Please notice that, due to a misprint, this factor α before the sine term is missing
in formula (7) of ref.[1]

3

1,1

1

0,9

0,8

0,7

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p
 
r
e
d
r
o
 
R
C
O

INCOHERENT
PHASE

PARTIALLY
SYNCHRONIZED
PHASE

SYNCHRONIZED
PHASE

Fully connected network
Tepotzlan network

0,5

1

1,5

2

2,5

3,5

4

4,5

5

5,5

6

3
σ

Fig. 1. Phase diagram of the OCR model. The order parameter is reported as
a function of the coupling constant for a fully connected system of N = 1000
agents (full line) and for the scientiﬁc collaboration network under investigation
(full circles). In the latter case, an average over 100 realizations was performed. See
text for further details.

In Ref.[1], we studied the opinion dynamics of the OCR model considering a
fully connected network. The numerical simulations were performed typically
with N = 1000 agents and with a uniform distribution of the initial individual
opinions xi(t = 0) in the range [-1,1]. The natural ocr ωi were taken from a
uniform distribution in the range [0,1]. By solving numerically the set of or-
dinary diﬀerential equations (1) as a function of the coupling strength σ, we
observed a transition from an incoherent phase (for σ < σc), in which people
tend to preserve diﬀerent opinions according to their natural rate ωi, to a
partially synchronized phase, where people share a small number of opinions,
and, ﬁnally, to a fully synchronized one (for σ >> σc) in which all the people
change opinion with the same rate and share a common social trend. In order
to measure the degree of synchronization of the system, we adopted an order
parameter related to the standard deviation of the opinion changing rates and
j=1( ˙xj(t) − ˙X(t))2, where ˙X(t) is the average over
deﬁned as R(t) = 1 − q
˙xj(t). From such a deﬁnition it follows that R = 1 in the
all individuals of
fully synchronized phase and R < 1 in the incoherent or partially synchronized
phase.
In Fig.1 we report as a full line the asymptotic (stationary) value R∞ of the
order parameter as a function of σ for a fully connected system, as reported in
Ref.[1]. A phase transition occurs at σc ∼ 1.4. A further analysis of the model
showed that in the region 1.5 < σ < 2.5 (belonging to the partially synchro-
nized phase) an equilibrium between conservative and progressist components
(a sort of bipolarism) can be observed. Conversely, out of this window, the
system rapidly reaches a ﬁnal conﬁguration consisting in many small opinion
clusters (anarchy) or in a single large cluster (complete consensus). More-
over, starting the system with all the agents sharing the same opinion and
for σ ∼ 1.5, one observes an interesting kind of metastability: even though
we are in the partially synchronized phase, the system relaxes to the par-

1
N P

N

4

Fig. 2. The graph of the Tepoztl´an Network (TN). The graph under investigation is
inspired to Alberto Robledo’s scientiﬁc collaboration network. The graph is made
of N = 49 scientists and K = 117 links (between couples of scientists) representing
the existence of coauthored publications. The graph shows a clear division in 6
communities (groups G1, G2, G3, G4, G5 and G6), as indicated by the six squares
reporting the results of the GN algorithm [17]. See text for more details.

tially synchronized state only after a metastable regime, where the opinions
remain synchronized. The duration of such a metastable regime was observed
to diverge when the value of σ approaches 1.62.

5

Table 1
List of the six groups G1, G2, G3, G4, G5 and G6 of the Tepoztl´an Network, as
resulting from the GN algorithm for the detection of community structures [17].
The groups are the same as those indicated by dashed squares in Fig. 2. See text
for details.

Group 1 (G1) Bukman, Hernandez-Saldana, Indekeu, Majoral, Moyano,

Group 2 (G2) Abe, Anteneodo, Borland, Gell-Mann, A.Plastino, A.R.Plastino,

Rajagopal, Tamarit, Thurner, Tirnakli, Tsallis

Group 3 (G3) Andronico, Baldovin, Caruso, Crucitti, Latora, Pluchino,

Group 4 (G4) Barr´e, Bouchet, Dauxois, Campa, Giansanti, Mukamel, Ruﬀo,

Robledo, Widom

Rapisarda, Tadic

Stella, Yamaguchi

Group 5 (G5) Cohen, Beck, Rizzo, Swinney

Group 6 (G6)

J.Andrade, Coniglio, Dawson, Franzese, Havlin, Herrmann,

Leyvraz, Mantegna, Sciortino, Stanley

3 The OCR model on a real network of scientiﬁc collaboration

In this section we study the dynamical evolution of the OCR model on the
topology of a real social network, namely the network of scientiﬁc collabora-
tions shown in Fig.2. Such a network is made of N = 49 nodes and K = 117
links. The nodes of the network represent some of the people who attended the
Tepoztl´an conference, celebrating Alberto Robledo’s 60th birthday, including
also other scientists who collaborate with them. For this reason we named it
the Tepoztl´an Network (TN). The graph has been constructed by using in-
formation on coauthored scientiﬁc publications from the cond-mat archive at
arXiv.org and from the web engine Google scholar. The resulting graph is sim-
ple and unweighted [6]. In fact, a link between node i and node j indicates that
the two respective agents share at least one scientiﬁc preprint or co-editorship,
which reveals the existence of a scientiﬁc collaboration. Of course some links
could be likely missing, but it is not very important here if such a network is
fully realistic or not. Actually what we want to do is to see how groups of col-
laborating people ”sharing the same opinion” or the same scientiﬁc interests
evolve in time according to the natural tendency to change opinion (i.e. the
natural ocr ) of their members, the topology of the network and the strength
of interaction σ.
In order to ﬁnd the best modular division of the nodes of the graph into
groups or communities (i.e. subsets of nodes which are more densely linked
when compared to the rest of the network), we have used the Girvan-Newman

6

(GN) algorithm for the detection of community structures [17]. This is a hi-
erarchical divisive algorithm, based on the progressive removal of the edges
with the highest score of betweenness, the latter being a measure of the frac-
tion of shortest paths that are making use of a given edge. The GN algorithm
produces a hierarchical tree of communities starting with a single community
including all the nodes of the graph, and ending into a set of N communities
of isolated nodes. But which of these nested subdivisions describes the real
community structure of the network ?
To answer this question it was introduced the so-called modularity Q [17], a
variable that quantiﬁes the degree of correlation between the probability of
having an edge joining two sites and the fact that the sites belong to the same
community. Actually, given an arbitrary network and an arbitrary partition
of that network into n communities, it is possible to deﬁne a n × n size matrix
e whose elements eij represent the fraction of total links starting at a node
in partition i and ending at a node in partition j. Clearly the sum of any
row (or column) of e, namely ai =
Pj eij, corresponds to the fraction of links
connected to i. For a random network, that does not exhibits any community
structure, the expected value of the fraction of links within partitions would
be simply the probability that a link begins at a node in i, ai, multiplied
by the fraction of links that end at a node in i, ai. So the expected number
of intra-community links is just aiai. On the other hand, we know that the
real fraction of links exclusively within a partition is eii. So, we can compare
the two directly and sum over all the partitions in the graph, thus obtaining
exactly the deﬁnition of modularity:

Q ≡

(eii − a2
i )

.

X
i

(2)

It is easy to see that if we take the whole network as a single community, or
if the network is a random one, we get the minimum value Q = 0; on the
other hand, values approaching the maximum value Q = 1 indicate strong
community structure. In practice, however, Q never reaches the value 1 and,
for networks with an appreciable subdivision in classes, it usually falls in the
range [0.2,0.7].
If we apply such a method to the Tepoztl´an network, we ﬁnd that the best
subdivision is the one in six groups G1, G2, G3, G4, G5 and G6 shown in Fig.2.
This division has the considerable modularity value of Q = 0.534. We report
the detailed list of the members of the six groups in Table 1. It is noticeable
that such a subdivision reproduces quite well (even if not exactly) the real
scientiﬁc groups of the Tepoztl´an collaboration network, at least according to
our perception. Thus in the following we will adopt it in order to characterize
clusters of agents sharing the same opinion in the context of the OCR model.
Now let us integrate model (1) numerically over the TN.
In this case the x(t)’s become the opinions of the N = 49 agents of the
TN at time t and the ω’s represent their natural ocr. Of course it would be

7

diﬃcult to hazard any hypotesis about the conservative or progressist natural
inclinations of the TN people, thus we will randomly choose the ω’s from a
uniform distribution ωi ∈ [−0.5, 0.5]. Finally, as already pointed out before,
Ki and ki represent, respectively, the neighborhood and the degree of node
i-th.
First of all, starting from a uniform distribution on opinions into [−1, 1], we
have veriﬁed that also in this case a transition from an homogeneous phase
toward a synchronized one occurs around the critical value σc ∼ 1.4 of the
strength of interaction. Such a behavior is visible in Fig.1, where we plot
with full circles the order parameter R∞ versus σ for the OCR model on the
Tepoztl´an network, averaged over 100 realizations and compared with that one
obtained for the fully connected network (full line) discussed before. Notice
that, in the TN case, the transition is smoother and the curve ﬂuctuates
more than the other one. This is due to the small number of nodes of the
collaboration network, N=49, if compared to that one of the fully connected
system, N=1000. In the next paragraph we will see that a narrow window
1.5 < σ < 2.5 inside the partially synchronized phase results to be the most
interesting region of the diagram.

3.1 Evolution of an initial state of synchronized opinions

In Fig.3 we show the time evolution of the Tepoztl´an network community for
σ = 2.0 and for an initial state with all the members sharing the same opinion
xi(0) = 0 ∀ i. The natural ocr have been randomly chosen again in the range
ωi ∈ [−0.5, 0.5]. In panels (a) and (b) we plot the evolution of the opinions and
of the opinion changing rates over 100 time steps (please notice that the uni-
formly distributed natural ocr ωi represent also the initial conditions for the
ocr variables ˙xi(t)). We can see that, after an initial short metastable transient
in which both the opinions and the opinions changing rates stay synchronized
(in fact R(t) ∼ 1, as shown in panel (f)), the system rapidly clusterizes with
a branching process strongly aﬀected by the topology of the network. The re-
spective asymptotic stationary conﬁgurations of clusters are shown in panels
(d) and (e). Finally, in panel (c) the step-by-step modularities Q for both the
opinion clusters conﬁgurations (dashed line) and the ocr clusters conﬁgura-
tions (full line) are also reported. From the value Q = 0 that characterizes
the metastable conﬁguration with only one large cluster, both modularities
increase to a value Q ∼ 0.44 in the asymptotic stationary state (d)-(e). It is
important to notice that these two ﬁnal conﬁgurations, since they are time
invariant, must necessarily consist of the same number of clusters (even if ar-
ranged in a diﬀerent order) with the same people inside, otherwise they would
be dynamically unstable.

The interesting result of the simulation is that the clusters of panel (d)-(e)

8

Fig. 3. Dynamical time evolution of groups synchronization in the OCR model on
the Tepoztl´an Network for σ = 2.0 (one realization). Starting from a metastable
synchronized initial condition in the opinion space, panel (a), groups are sponta-
neously formed with components similar to that ones of the previous ﬁgure. In panel
(b) the corresponding ocr time evolution is plotted. The modularity Q(t) deﬁned
in eq. (2) is plotted vs time in panel (c) for the opinions (dashed line) and ocr (full
line). In (d) and (e) the asymptotic cluster distribution of panels (a) and (b) are
plotted respectively. Finally in panel (f) the time evolution of the order parameter
R is plotted. See text for furtther details.

show a good overlap with the real communities of the Tepoztl´an network shown
in Fig.2. This can be veriﬁed comparing the groups’ structure of Table 1 with
that one reported in Table 2, representing the ﬁnal clusters conﬁguration of
the ocr plotted in panel (e). In correspondence of each group in Table 2 the ocr
value of the cluster is reported, together with the ocr of each member of the
cluster itself (notice that the ocr of each cluster is rather close to the average
of the ω’s of its members). It is important to stress that people in each ﬁnal
cluster, evidently due to the strong inﬂuence of the network topology on the
mutual interactions, manage to maintain synchronized opinions despite their
diﬀerent natural inclinations ωi (see panel (a)). On the other hand, during the
branching evolution people with similar ωi tend to merge together in the same
cluster while people with very diﬀerent ωi tend to escape from a given cluster
(see panel (b)). The competition between these two opposite eﬀects can ex-
plain why some of the groups well distinct in Table 1, merge in Table 2 (e.g.

9

Table 2
Asymptotic clusters conﬁguration shown in panel (e) of Fig.3

Group 1 (0.49)

Sciortino(0.49)

Group 2 (0.43) Abe(0.49), Campa(0.42), Rajagopal(0.38), Tirnakli(0.28)

Group 3 (0.28) Andronico(-0.28), Baldovin(0.34), Caruso(-0.20), Crucitti(0.21),

Latora(0.40), Pluchino(0.32), Rapisarda(0.34), Tadic(0.41),

Beck(0.07), Cohen(0.40), Rizzo(0.08), Swinney(0.42)

Group 4 (0.23)

Bukman(0.17), Indekeu(0.36), Widom(0.47), Stella(0.19),

Dawson(-0.07), A.R.Plastino(0.15), Mukamel(0.26)

Group 5 (-0.08) Barr´e(-0.07), Bouchet(0.01), Dauxois(0.28), Giansanti(-0.12),

Ruﬀo(-0.16), Yamaguchi(0.12)

Group 6 (-0.17)

J.Andrade(-0.46), Coniglio(-0.11), Franzese(-0.32), Havlin(-0.04),

Herrmann(-0.21), Leyvraz(-0.37), Mantegna(0.21), Stanley(-0.21)

Group 7 (-0.20) Anteneodo(-0.20), Borland(-0.24), Gell-Mann(-0.23),

Tamarit(-0.40), Thurner(-0.30), Tsallis(-0.19),

Hernandez-Saldana(-0.28),Majoral(-0.27),

Moyano(-0.03), Robledo(-0.17)

Group 8 (-0.48) A.Plastino(-0.48)

G1-G2 or G3-G5), why new groups come up (see Group 2 in Table 2) and why
agents with a very high absolute value of ω run alone at the extremes of the
ocr range. Consequently the resulting modularity of the asymptotic clusters
conﬁguration shown in Table 2 (Q ∼ 0.44) is smaller than the modularity of
the ”real” conﬁguration (Q = 0.53).
We checked that even if the details of the simulation of Fig.3 change for dif-
ferent runs with diﬀerent random realizations of ωi ∈ [−0.5, 0.5], and the ﬁnal
modularity can vary too, the global picture described before remains quali-
tatively the same, provided that the interaction strength would stay around
σ = 2.0. For values noticeably higher or lower than 2.0 the system, respec-
tively, either remains synchronized forever or quickly esplodes in very small
clusters.

3.2 Evolution of the coauthorship groups in the opinion space

In this subsection we want to explore what happens if we start the system
with six diﬀerent clusters of synchronized opinions corresponding to the six
real communities of the Tepoztl´an network, in order to see how the OCR

10

Fig. 4. Time evolution of the OCR model on the Tepoztln collaboration network. In
the opinion space (a) the agents start into six synchronized groups corresponding
to the six communities of Table 1, from G1 - at the bottom with x(0)=5 - to G6 -
at the top with x(0)=30 - (see also Table 3). On the other hand, the agents’ natural
rates (i.e. the initial conditions in panel (b)) are randomly chosen. See caption of
the previous ﬁgure and text for further details.

dynamics aﬀects the stability of the groups. Of course also in this case the
details of the simulations will depend on the initial distribution of the ω’s. But,
again, we are mainly interested in studying the global picture emerging from
the dynamical competition between the diﬀerent natural ocr of the agents
in each group and the opinion constraints imposed by the topology of the
network.
In the simulation shown in Fig.4 we set again σ = 2. Then we chose, for each
one of the six groups of Table 1, a diﬀerent initial opinion, common for all
its members, while the natural rates ω’s were randomly selected in the range
[−0.2, 0.2]. The initial opinion of each group is reported in Table 3. Like in
the previous section, in panels (a) and (b) of Fig.4 we show the time evolution
of the opinions xi(t) and the opinion changing rates ˙xi(t), while in panel (c)
the respective modularities are plotted. Finally, in panels (d) and (e), we show
the asymptotic clusters conﬁguration for both the opinions and the ocr, and
in panel (f) the time behavior of the order parameter R(t) is reported.

Let us follow the time evolution of the opinion clusters in panel (a) of Fig.4

11

Table 3
Initial position of the six real groups in the opinion space, see panel (a) of Fig.4

G1: x(0)=5 -

Bukman, Hernandez-Saldana, Indekeu, Majoral, Moyano,

G2: x(0)=10 - Abe, Anteneodo, Borland, Gell-Mann,A.Plastino, A.R.Plastino,

Rajagopal, Tamarit, Thurner, Tirnakli, Tsallis

G3: x(0)=15 - Andronico, Baldovin, Caruso, Crucitti, Latora, Pluchino,

G4: x(0)=20 - Barr´e, Bouchet, Dauxois, Campa, Giansanti, Mukamel, Ruﬀo,

Robledo, Widom

Rapisarda, Tadic

Stella, Yamaguchi

G5: x(0)=25 - Cohen, Beck, Rizzo, Swinney

G6: x(0)=30 -

J.Andrade, Coniglio, Dawson, Franzese, Havlin,

Herrmann, Leyvraz, Mantegna, Sciortino, Stanley

Table 4
Final positions and conﬁgurations of the clusters in panel (d) of Fig.4

Group 1:

Bukman(0.07), Hernandez-Saldana(-0.11), Indekeu(0.15),

x(200)=5.05 Majoral(-0.10), Moyano(-0.01), Robledo(-0.07), Widom(0.19),

Abe(0.20), Anteneodo(-0.08), Borland(-0.09), Gell-Mann(-0.09),

A.Plastino(-0.19), A.R.Plastino(0.06), Rajagopal(0.15),

Tamarit(-0.16), Thurner(-0.12), Tirnakli(0.11), Tsallis(-0.07)

Group 2:

J.Andrade(-0.18), Coniglio(-0.05), Dawson(-0.03),Franzese(-0.13),

x(200)=21.95 Havlin(-0.01), Herrmann(-0.08), Leyvraz(-0.14), Mantegna(0.08),

Sciortino(0.20), Stanley(-0.08)

Group 3:

Andronico(-0.11), Baldovin(0.13), Caruso(-0.08), Crucitti(0.08),

x(200)=31.02 Latora(0.16), Pluchino(0.12), Rapisarda(0.14), Tadic(0.17)

Barr´e(-0.02), Bouchet(0.00), Dauxois(0.11), Giansanti(-0.04),

Mukamel(0.10), Ruﬀo(-0.06), Stella (0.07), Yamaguchi(0.05)

Group 4:

Cohen(0.16), Beck(0.02), Rizzo(0.03), Swinney(0.17)

Group 5:

Campa(0.16)

x(200)=43.54

x(200)=52.33

12

along 200 time steps. One can see that groups G1 and G2 merge at t ∼ 120,
due to their initial position and to their similar average ocr. Almost imme-
diately a fast agent (Campa, with ω = 0.16) leaves the group G4 and goes
ahead to its natural ocr, resisting alone until the end of the simulation (see
next Table 4). Meanwhile, what remains of G4 merges with G3 at t = 38,
and at t = 120 the new resulting group survives to the collision with group
G6, already survived to previous superpositions with G5 and Campa around
t = 50. On the other hand, looking to panel (b), the opinion changing rates fol-
low a more pronounced branching evolution, where the agents rearrange their
ocr until a ﬁnal stationary state is reached. However, as previously stressed,
the asymptotic conﬁgurations shown in panels (d) and (e) must be the same.
Notice that the two main rearrangements in panel (b), around t ∼ 50 and
t ∼ 120, correspond to the main cluster collisions in panel (a) and also to the
sudden falls of modularity in panel (c).
In Table 4 we report the detailed composition of the asymptotic opinion clus-
ters of panel (d), together with their position in the opinion space. Comparing
it with the starting conﬁguration of Table 3, we see that the real groups of
the Tepoztl´an network are quite stable, at least for σ = 2, despite the random
choice of the natural changing rates of their members. Apart from one agent
of group G4, and apart from a couple of fusions (G1-G2 and G3-G4), the
structure of the groups seems to have been preserved by the dynamics, sur-
viving to various collisions in the opinion space. This is conﬁrmed by the ﬁnal
modularity Q = 0.51, not much smaller then the original one Q = 0.53, and
also by the constant behavior of the order parameter in panel (f). Changing
the initial distribution of ocr, the evolution of the each member can change,
but the qualitative behaviour is the same.

4 Conclusions

In this paper we have discussed opinion dynamics in a real social network,
by considering the OCR model introduced in ref.[1]. In particular we have in-
vestigated a network of scientiﬁc coauthorship, inspired to Alberto Robledo’s
collaborations. The results demonstrate that the topology of the network is
a fundamental ingredient in the opinion dynamics and in the evolution of
the composition of scientiﬁc groups. The use of the OCR model seems very
promising for studying the dynamics of opinion formation. Further analysis
with diﬀerent kinds of networks are in order to draw more deﬁnitive conclu-
sions.

13

5 Acknowledgements

We would like to dedicate this paper to Alberto Robledo, wishing him a long
and very productive continuation of his brilliant academic career.

Two of us (A.P.) and (A.R.) would like to thank the organizers for the warm
hospitality and the ﬁnancial support.

References

(2005)

[1] A.Pluchino, V.Latora and A.Rapisarda Int. J. Mod. Phys. C, 16, No.4, 515-531

[2] L.D.Kiel, E.Elliot Chaos theory in the social sciences The University of
Michigan Press (1996) L.Tesfatsion, Economic agents and markets as emergent
phenomena, PNAS, vol.99 (2002) 7191-7192 J.M.Epstein and R.Axtell, Growing
Artiﬁcial Societies (1996) MIT Press, Cambridge MA W.B.Arthur, S.N.Durlauf
and D.A.Lane, The Economy as an Evolving Complex System II, Addison-
Wesley, Reading, MA, vol. XXVII R. Axelrod, J. Conﬂict Resolut. 41, 203
(1997). S. Fortunato, On the Consensus Threshold for the Opinion Dynamics
of Krause-Hegselmann, cond-mat/0408648 at www.arXiv.org, to appear in Int.
J. Mod. Phys. C 16, issue 2 (2005).

[3]

In praise of soft science Editorial (2005), Nature, 435(7045), 1003.

[4] R. Albert and A.-L. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47 (2002).

[5] M.E.J. Newman, SIAM Review 45, 167 (2003).

[6] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez and D.-U. Hwang, Phys. Rep.

424, 175 (2006) and refs. therein.

[7] D.Stauﬀer, Sociophysics Simulations (2003) in ’Computer Simulations’, Co-
published by the IEEE CS and the AIP D.Stauﬀer, Sociophysics Simulations
II: Opinion Dynamics (2005) arXiv:physics/0503115

[8] R. Hegselmann and U. Krause, Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social

Simulation 5, issue 3, paper 2 (jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk) (2002).

[9] K. Sznajd-Weron and J. Sznajd, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 11, 1157 (2000). G.
Deﬀuant, D. Neau, F. Amblard and G. Weisbuch, Adv. Complex Syst. 3, 87
(2000). S. Galam, Physica A 336 (2004) 49 and refs. therein.

[10] E. Ben-Naim, P. Krapivsky and S. Redner, Physica D 183, 190 (2003).

[11] A.T.Bernardes, D.Stauﬀer and J.Kertsz, Eur.Phys.J. B 25, 123-127 (2002)
M.C.Gonzales,A.O.Sousa and H.J.Herrmann, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C, 15, No.1, 1-
13 (2004) D.Stauﬀer, Montecarlo simulations of the Sznajd model, J.of Artiﬁcial
Societies and Social Simulations (2002) vol.5, no.1

14

[12] S.Fortunato, V.Latora, A.Pluchino and A.Rapisarda International Journal of
Modern Physics C 16, 1535 (2005) and A. Pluchino, V.Latora, A. Rapisarda,
Eur. Phys. Journ. B 50 (2006) 169.

[13] S. Boccaletti, J. Kurths, D.L. Valladares, G. Osipov and C.S. Zhou, Phys. Rep.

366, 1 (2002).

[14] Y. Kuramoto, in it International Symposium on Mathematical Problems in
Theoretical Physics, Vol. 39 of Lecture Notes in Physics, edited by H. Araki
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1975).

[15] Y. Kuramoto, Chemical Oscillations, Waves, and Turbulence (Springer, Berlin,

1984).

[16] S. H Strogatz, Physica D, 143 1 (2000).

[17] M. Girvan and M. E. J. Newman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 7821 (2002).

M.E.J. Newman and M. Girvan Phys. Rev. E, 69, 026113 (2004).

15

