6
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
0
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the relation between structural diversity
and geographical distance among languages:
observations and computer simulations

Eric W. Holman, Christian Schulze, Dietrich Stauﬀer & Søren Wichmann

Abstract

Since the groundbreaking work of Nichols (1992) it has been clear that the

use of typological databases for making inferences regarding linguistic prehistory

could potentially have much to oﬀer. The recent availability of larger typological

databases such as Haspelmath et al. (2005) has brought the linguistics commu-

nity closer to having a solid, empirical foundation for making actual claims about

prehistoric migrations, deep genealogical relationship, and patterns of areal lin-

guistic interaction. Nevertheless, still more data are needed, and more than any-

thing a number of methodological problems need to be adressed. These problems,

which are the focus of this paper, include the following. How might we go about

distinguishing diﬀusion from genealogical inheritance when looking at structural

similarities among languages? For how long may we expect to continue to see a

diﬀerence between traces of relatedness and traces of diﬀusion? What eﬀects do

factors such as speed of migration, the time depth of interaction among a certain

set of languages or the rate of diﬀusion have on the similarities among initially

related languages on the one hand and initially unrelated languages on the other?

These questions will be addressed from two perspectives. The ﬁrst perspective is

an empirical one, where observations primarily derive from analyses of the data of

Haspelmath et al. (2005). The second perspective is a computational one, where

simulations are drawn upon to test the eﬀects of diﬀerent parameters on the devel-

opment of structural linguistic diversity. The results suggest that there is indeed

some hope that we may derive new empirical insights regarding linguistic prehis-

tory by drawing upon typological data. We do not, however, make any speciﬁc

1

empirical claims in this paper, but instead concentrate our eﬀorts on methodology.

Keywords

Spatial autocorrelation, computer simulation, isolation by distance, areal typology

1 Introduction

This paper investigates the relationship between typological similarity and

geographical distance among languages. Because of the eﬀect of diﬀusion

(transfer of structural features among languages due to contact among speak-

ers) it is expected that we should observe the phenomenon known among

population geneticists as ISOLATION BY DISTANCE (IBD), that is, a rela-

tion where increased geographical distance results in greater diﬀerences—in this

case among languages. This relationship is expected to obtain whether or not the

languages in question are related. Nevertheless, while an IBD-eﬀect is expected

to occur universally, the eﬀect might be enhanced or diminished by diﬀerent fac-

tors such as initial similarity among language (henceforth domination) vs. initial

non-similarity (henceforth fragmentation), rates of diﬀusion, rates of internal lan-

guage change, speed of migration, and perhaps other factors. How do these various

factors aﬀect the relationship between structural similarity and geographical dis-

tance? For instance, should we expect that languages which are related tend to

be as diﬀerent from one another as languages that are not related at great geo-

graphical distances? Should we expect that the relationship between structural

diﬀerences and geographical distance among the languages in a family tend not

to be distinguishable from the relationship between structural diﬀerences and ge-

ographical distance among languages that are not related if, for whatever reason,

the former languages have suﬀered more diﬀusion, migration or internal change?

2

Another set of questions which this paper will be concerned with is to what

extent qualitatively diﬀerent typological datasets may have an eﬀect on our ability

to discern the footprints of language history. More speciﬁcally, we shall investigate

whether it makes a diﬀerence when one uses binarily as opposed to ternarily or

quarternarily etc. encoded features and we shall also look at whether or not it has

an eﬀect on one’s results whether the values of the features used stand in a gradual

relationship to one another or not (illustrative examples and more clariﬁcation of

this issue will be given below).

The problem area will be introduced by means of empirical examples produced

by comparing structural diversity among languages of Eurasia, Africa, and the New

World as a function of geographical distance. These examples, which merely serve

as an illustration of the types of diﬀerences in distributions that the typologist is

likely to encounter, are introduced in the following section. Because of limitations

in the data the examples can merely serve as illustrations of how actual empirical

distributions might look like; they do not suﬃce to serve as actual case stories of

how aspects of prehistory may be inferred from linguistic data. The remainder of

the paper presents various computer simulations from which distributions which

are in some respects similar to the empirical examples are be predicted to occur.

By varying the parameter settings we investigate the two sets of questions raised

in the above paragraphs.

To our knowledge, computer simulations have never before been used to answer

the speciﬁc questions raised here regarding the relationship between structural

diﬀerences and geographical distances, nor have they been used to investigate

the properties of typological datasets. Nevertheless, a small but growing number

of researchers have drawn upon computer simulations and mathematical models

to investigate other aspects of linguistic evolution, including the development of

linguistic diversity (Abrams and Strogatz 2003, Sutherland 2003, Patriarca and

3

Lepp¨anen 2004, Mira and Paredes 2005, Schulze and Stauﬀer 2005, Wang and

Minnett 2005, Kosmidis et al. 2005, Schw¨ammle 2005, Oliveira et al. 2006a-b,

Pinasco and Romanelli 2006), the development of taxonomic dynamics (Wichmann

et al. 2006), language change (Nettle 1999a, Niyogi 2002, 2004; Prevost 2003,

Baxter et al. 2006), and the evolution of language structure (Cangelosi and Parisi

2002, Nowak et al. 2002, Christiansen and Kirby 2003, Wang et al. 2004, de Boer

2006, Niyogi 2006). As regards the investigation of empirical correlations between

linguistic diﬀerences and geographical distance there are precursors in the ﬁeld

of dialectometry, which was initiated by S´eguy (1973) and developed further in

many subsequent works, including Goebl (1984, 2005), Nerbonne et al. (1996),

and Kretzschmar (1996).

2 Empirical examples: distributions of lan-

guage diversity in Africa, Eurasia, and the

New World

The data drawn upon in this section are provided by The World Atlas of Language

Structures (Haspelmath et al. 2005, henceforth WALS). WALS contains 138 maps

showing the distribution of diﬀerent phonological, lexical, and grammatical fea-

tures for a sample of languages that varies in size among maps from roughly 100

to 1200 languages. The present study draws on 134 of the 138 features, exclud-

ing features that involve redundant data. Each feature has anywhere from two to

nine discrete values. The total number of languages from which data are drawn in

WALS is 2560. The present study excludes pidgins, creoles, and sign languages,

leaving 2488 languages. The classiﬁcation used in WALS, which we also adopt

here, represents an attempt to follow the views taken by the majority of special-

4

ists and results in 205 families and isolates. The families are deﬁned on the basis

of inheritance, and languages in diﬀerent families have no generally acknowledged

common ancestor. In order to investigate diﬀusion as distinct from inheritance, the

present study includes all possible pairwise comparisons of languages in diﬀerent

families, and no comparisons of languages in the same family.

The diﬀerence between languages in diﬀerent families as a function of the geo-

graphical distance between the languages was measured in the following way. For

each pair of languages, their distance was calculated from the latitudes and lon-

gitudes in the WALS database, where the location of each language is deﬁned as

a spot somewhere near the center of the region where the language is spoken (see

Comrie et al. 2005: 7 for more detail). Pairs of languages were then grouped

according to distance in ranges such as 0-500 km, 500-1000 km, 1000-2000 km,

etc. For each of the 134 features, the average diﬀerence between the paired lan-

guages in a group was deﬁned as the number of pairs with diﬀerent values of the

feature, divided by the number of pairs for which feature was attested in both

languages. These proportions were averaged across the 134 features and expressed

as a percentage to represent the overall diﬀerence of the language pairs in a group.

Figure 1 plots diﬀerence as a function of mean distance, separately for languages

in Africa, the New World, and Eurasia.

All three curves show a clear eﬀect of diﬀusion. Diﬀerence is least between

languages less than 1000 km apart, and then increases with increasing distance.

Superimposed on this general trend are some possible diﬀerences among the curves.

For languages less than about 5 000 km apart, the curve for the New World sug-

gests greater diﬀerences between languages than do the other curves. For languages

more than about 5 000 km apart, the curves for Africa and the New World appear

to approach asymptotes, while the curve for Eurasia continues to rise, but increas-

ingly less so the larger the distance. Despite diﬀerences, all three curves show the

5

Differences in Eurasia (+), Americas (x) and Africa (*)

%
 
n
i
 
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d

 64

 62

 60

 58

 56

 54

 52
 50

 48

 46

 44

 0

 2000  4000  6000  8000  10000  12000  14000

geographical distance in km

Figure 1: The relationship between geographical distance in km and typo-

logical similarity in Africa, the New World, and Eurasia

eﬀects of isolation by distance (IBD). This term, which we borrow from popula-

tion genetics, was deﬁned by Wright (1943) and refers to situations where large

genetic correlations are found among spatially proximal populations and drop oﬀ

smoothly as the distances among the populations decrease. Discussion and exam-

ples are found in Epperson (2003:14-25). One illustrative example is the study

by Sokal and Menozzi (1982) of diﬀerent allele frequencies for HLA blood group

loci in European and Middle East populations. Large autocorrelations were found

within a range of approximately 700 km, lesser positive values within an approx-

imate 700-1 400 km range and negative values beyond this range. A notion from

geography which is similar to IBD in biology is ‘TOBLER’S FIRST LAW OF GE-

OGRAPHY, which states that “everything is related to everything else, but near

6

things are more related than distant things” (Tobler 1970). For linguistics, Ner-

bonne and Kleiweg (forthcoming) deﬁne what they call ‘THE FUNDAMENTAL

DIALECTOLOGICAL POSTULATE’ as follows: “Geographically proximate va-

rieties tend to be more similar than distant ones”. Their Figure 1, which is very

similar to our Figure 1, illustrates how diﬀerences among dialects depends on dis-

tance (similar curves have been published by S´eguy 1973 and Goebl 1984). This

principle or postulate, then, is equivalent to IBD, but we shall use the latter term

because it has a longer history of use.

It is appropriate at this point to introduce some hedges about the diﬀerences

among the three curves. For conventional statistical tests, the units of analysis

must be independent of each other. Language families are obviously not inde-

pendent with respect to diﬀusion between them; moreover, the 134 features are

not independent either, because some are known to be related to each other while

others may also be related even if the implicational relations have not yet been

discovered by typologists. Consequently, it is not clear whether the relatively small

percentages that separate the curves are statistically signiﬁcant. We must there-

fore restrict ourselves to presenting these examples as possible examples of diﬀerent

relationships between structural diﬀerence and geographical distance. As we shall

see, some support for the hypothesis that they are, indeed, possible examples is pro-

vided by computer simulations. Taken together, the suggestive empirical data and

the simulations about to be presented provide suﬃcient motivation for going on to

consider various ways to explain such presumably possible distributions. Whether

Figure 1 adequately reﬂects diﬀerences among languages in diﬀerent parts of the

world is a question which cannot be approached until more language data and a

statistically better supported understanding of typological dependencies become

available. This may well take several years.

7

3 Diﬀerences in IBD-eﬀects and their possi-

ble causes

3.1

Intuitive/common-sensical explanations

Looking at the examples in Figure 1 and assuming, for the sake of the argument,

that it adequately reﬂects diﬀerences among these three parts of the world, how

might we then explain such diﬀerences? The following are some factors that intu-

itively could be involved in producing the diﬀerences in the curves.

Diﬀerences in diversity. If the Americas were populated by a single wave of

migration, as a growing body of genetic evidence suggests (most recently Stone

and Stoneking 1998, Silva Jr. et al. 2002, Tarazona-Santos and Santos 2002,

Zegura et al. 2004) then all New World languages might share a single ancestor or

descend from relatively similar languages. At the time when the migration would

have taken place, the Eurasian languages would already have suﬀered thousands

of years of diﬀerentiation. If such a relatively recent shared ancestry of New World

languages obtains, it seems likely that these languages, even at great geographical

distances, could be more similar than Old World languages spoken similarly large

distances apart. This whole scenario, however, seems to be belied by the African

languages, which, at any distance, are more similar than the New World languages.

On the other hand, there might also be an eﬀect pulling in the opposite direction of

less diversity which starts to set in when a continent is fully populated (cf. Nettle

1999b).

Rate of migration. Leaving aside Africa for the moment, we could compare

the curves for the New World and Eurasia. We do not know how long it took

until the Americas were populated. The archaeological evidence tells conﬂicting

histories. On the one hand, the migration of paleo-indians is supposed to have

8

involved Beringia, on the other hand the earliest archaeological evidence for hu-

man presence comes from caves in South America. Nevertheless, it seems likely

that the migration went relatively fast. A fast migration into a territory which

was presumably previously not occupied might account for the diﬀerence at large

distances between the curves for New World and Eurasia.

More similarity at short distances in the Old World areas of Africa and Eura-

sia might be a symptom of sedentism. When farming is the prevalent subsistence

pattern people tend to migrate less. At short distances people belonging to dif-

ferent ethnic groups would therefore enter into prolonged contact.

Inversely, if

the dominating means of subsistence is hunter-gathering, the same geographical

places would not witness contact taking place among certain ethnic groups for very

long periods at a time. Diﬀerent groups would acquire new neighbors at relatively

short intervals. Therefore, at short distances languages would be less similar in

hunter-gatherer societies than in farmer societies. If this hypothesis is correct and

if it is correct that there are signiﬁcantly more hunter-gatherers in the New World

than in Eurasia and Africa, then we have an explanation for the diﬀerences in the

three curves at 0-5 000 km.

Rate of diﬀusion. Possibly languages in the Americas tend to show less diﬀu-

sion (i.e., less transfer of features from one language to the other) than languages

in the Old World, for one or the other reason. We could imagine, for instance,

that the group(s) who were successful in initially populating the New World were

endogamous. If there was just one group initially it would actually have had to

be endogamous because there would not be any other group from which to pull

marriage partners. Endogamy could have continued to be a prevailing trait among

Native Americas for enough time that an eﬀect of more diﬀerences among New

World languages at short distances (0-5 000 km) compared to areas of the Old

World might obtain (this argument is due to Cecil H. Brown, in personal commu-

9

nication, 2006).

These various thought experiments lead us to doubt that there will be simple

and monolithic explanations for diﬀerences among linguistic IBD-eﬀects. Instead,

they suggest that a variety of factors could aﬀect the types of distributions that we

have been looking at. Factors that pull in the same direction may be diﬃcult to

tease apart, and it may be diﬃcult to judge what the relative impacts of factors that

pull in opposite directions are. It is therefore doubtful that at present we are going

to make any progress in the study of linguistic IBD-eﬀects from initially analyzing

empirical data, even if the ultimate goal is to understand real-world situations

similar in kind to the ones that are vaguely reﬂected in the data producing Figure

1. We instead turn to computer simulations which will allow us to look at diﬀerent

factors that might possibly aﬀect linguistic IBD-distributions in isolation from one

another. The following subsection presents a computational model suitable for such

an investigation and subsequently we present the results of the implementation of

this model.

ses

3.2 Computational model for testing diﬀerent hypothe-

In previous studies applying computer simulations to problems of language evolu-

tion diﬀerent models have been developed. The ‘VIVANE MODEL’ (Oliveira et al

2006a-b) simulates the ﬁrst occupation of a large continent by human beings who

initially all speak one language, and the growing diversity of languages during this

colonization. However, languages in that model were simply numbered consecu-

tively, preventing a simulation of structural diﬀerences shown empirically in Figure

1. The language learning model of Nowak et al (2002) has a similar disadvantage.

The computer models of Abrams and Strogatz (2003) (followed by Patriarca and

10

Lepp¨annen 2004 and Pinasco and Romanelli 2006), of Kosmidis et al. (2005), and

of Schw¨ammle (2005) deal with relatively few languages, not with the thousands

reﬂected in Figure 1. Thus we modify the ‘SCHULZE MODEL’ (Schulze and

Stauﬀer 2005, 2006) (also used by Te¸sileanu and Meyer-Ortmanns 2006). Since

readers of the present paper may not know this model or may not have easy access

to the physics literature we describe it in some detail in the following.

A large square lattice is occupied by people speaking one language each. Each

language (or grammar) is characterized by F features, each of which can take Q

diﬀerent integer values from 1 to Q. Mostly we use F = 8. For the simplest binary

case Q eﬃcient bit-string algorithms have been used in the past, allowing larger F ,

but for the present purposes we vary Q up to 9 and thus use only simpler programs

(written in Fortran and available as langpotts26.f from stauﬀer@thp.uni-koeln.de).

Initially, only the top line of the lattice is occupied, and all others are empty.

The people in the top line either all speak the same language (“dominant” start)
or each one independently selects randomly one of the QF possible languages

(“fragmented” start). Mainly, what we are interested in is to study the diﬀerences

between fragmented and dominant initialization. (For dominance, the one initial

language has the integer part of (1 + Q)/2 for all its features, i.e. the central value

for odd Q).

For each time step (human generation), each occupied lattice site i can change

its features and that of its neighbours following four probabilities p, q, r, s for four

diﬀerent processes i to iv:

i) Shift (r): If a fraction x of people in the whole population speaks the language
of site i, then site i shifts with probability (1−x)2r to the language of one of its four

lattice neighbours, randomly selected. (If this site is still empty, the new language

is that used for the initialization, i.e. either the dominant one or a randomly

11

selected one.) This shift takes into account the tendency of humans to give up

speaking minority languages.

ii) Change (p): Each of the F features is randomly changed with probability

p. For zero diﬀusion probability (see next process) this change is to a randomly

selected value for unordered features and to the old value ±1 for ordered features;

see section 4 for this distinction. (If in the ordered case the new value would be 0

or Q + 1, the old value is kept for this feature.) This change describes the language

changes from one generation to the next.

iii) Diﬀusion (q): In the case of diﬀusion, with probability q the new value is

taken is taken during the change of process ii from one of the four lattice neigh-

bours, selected randomly and independently for each of the F features. In this

way it is simulated how a language may take over traits from other languages. (If

this neighboring site is still empty no diﬀusion takes place.)

iv) Migration (s): Each of the four nearest neighbours (North, East, South and

West) is checked, and nothing happens if it is already occupied. If it is empty, then

with probability s it becomes occupied, with the same language features as on the

original site i. This original site i remains occupied. Migration, then, simulates the

peaceful colonization of uninhabited territory by an expansion of the population.

In earlier papers published in physics journals, the ﬁrst three processes were

respectively denoted by the terms ‘ﬂight’, ‘mutation’, and ‘transfer’, while pro-

cess iv, which was not introduced in earlier papers, presumably would be called

‘diﬀusion’ there.

The diﬀerences between languages on the top line and those on the lattice line

separated by d lattice spacings are calculated in two diﬀerent ways for the ordered

and the unordered features, discussed in Section 4 below: as the average number

of features which are diﬀerent (unordered case), and as the average sum of the

12

absolute diﬀerences in the features (ordered case). For binary features, Q = 2,

this distinction vanishes. (In both cases we average only over occupied sites.)

The Schulze model and its variants were simulated without migration in several

publications (mostly reviewed in Schulze and Stauﬀer 2006), as a function of the

three probabilities p, q, r and the total population N . For r ≃ 1 and large but

ﬁnite N a sharp phase transition was found between fragmentation and dominance:

Either the system ends up fragmented, when each possible language is spoken by

about the same number of people (if the population is not large enough, then

a roughly random selection of all possible languages is spoken). Otherwise the

system ends up dominated by one language spoken by the majority while the

others mostly speak minor variants of this dominating language. Both ﬁnal states,

fragmentation or dominance, can be reached either from random fragmentation or

from dominance. If we start with one person whose oﬀspring lets the population

grow up to a ﬁnal stationary value, we necessarily start with dominance, and if

we also end with dominance, we may have a maximum of the number of spoken

languages at some intermediate time (Schulze and Stauﬀer 2005) as in Nettle

(1999b). In the p − q−plane, one ﬁnds a transition line separating fragmentation

(large p, small q) from dominance (small p, large q). If instead we select r ≪ 1,

ﬁnal dominance may become impossible. In the present simulation of L × L square

lattices, the population is N = L2 and should be compared with the possible
number QF of languages. Perhaps for N → ∞ also the time which dominance

needs to emerge from fragmentation goes to inﬁnity; thus mathematical limits

should be considered with caution.

13

Standard case F=8, Q=5, p=0.5, q=0.9, r=0.9, s=0.5

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d
 
e
g
a
u
g
n
a

l

 1

 0.1

 0.01

 0

 2

 4

 6

 8

 10

geographical distance

Figure 2: A simulation using standard parameter settings. Legend: + =

fragmentation, x = dominance.

3.3 Results of the implementation of the model

A simulation using standard parameter settings is shown in Figure 2. Here and

in the following ﬁgures we show the result after 70 iterations, when the results no

longer change systematically. Only the topmost 10 lines of the 10001 × 100001

lattice are analyzed, comparing pairs of sites with the ﬁrst one in the top line

and the second one at distance d exactly below the ﬁrst.

(The values remain

constant also for longer distances up to 30.) We start from fragmentation (+)

and dominance (x). (For fragmentation, already after 5 iterations the results no

longer change.) For larger diﬀusion q ≃ 1 instead of 0.9, the initially fragmented

population would have changed later into one dominated by only one language, cf.

Schulze and Stauﬀer (2006) and Stauﬀer et al. (2006). We assume that features

14

are ordered and measure diﬀerences between languages accordingly (see Section 4

below for more detail).

The standard parameter settings, then, are:

internal language change: p = 0.5

diﬀusion: q = 0.9

language shift r = 0.9

migration: d = 0.5

number of features F = 8

number of feature values (states, choices) Q = 5

Since at present we do not know how to translate empirical data into expected

absolute probabilities for language change, diﬀusion, language shift and migra-

tion, all the values that we operate with should be looked upon as highly abstract.

The same goes for the results of measuring structural diﬀerences and geographical

distances. Nevertheless, a comparison of the empirical data with the results of the

computer simulations suggests that a simulated distance of 2 roughly corresponds

to a real-world distance of 5 000 km. As suggested by Figure 1 as well as an aver-

age over all of the world’s languages (not shown here) this is the distance at which

there tends to cease to be a signiﬁcant inverse correlation between distance and

structural similarity among languages of diﬀerent families. With one exception

(see Figure 4) all the simulations for the corresponding distance of ≈2 similarly

show a weakening of the correlation.

An important result of the simulations shown in Figure 2 is that a diﬀerence

between initial fragmentation and initial domination continues to be preserved over

long distances, even if this diﬀerence is diminished somewhat. This would mean

that given two situations where all else is equal, we may be able to distinguish

15

between languages sharing a common ancestor and unrelated language by means

of typological data. As we shall see, this ‘preservation of history’ does not result

from all parameter settings, but it is the rule rather than the exception.

In the following we shall vary the settings to study the eﬀects of each individual

parameter.

3.3.1 Rate of diﬀusion

Less diffusion: q=0.1 instead of 0.9

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d
 
e
g
a
u
g
n
a

l

 1

 0.1

 0.01

 0

 2

 4

 6

 8

 10

geographical distance

Figure 3: The eﬀect of varying diﬀusion rate from 0.9 (Figure 2) to 0.1 (this

ﬁgure). Legend: + = fragmentation, x = dominance.

Decreasing the rate of diﬀusion makes initially related language more diﬀerent,

but the eﬀect of such a decrease diminishes with the distance. There is hardly any

eﬀect to be seen for fragmentation, cf. Figure 3. That is, diﬀusion has a greater

eﬀect on the degree of similarities among related than among unrelated languages.

16

This is a highly interesting result which is initially somewhat counter-intuitive, but

it can nevertheless be brought to accord with the real-world situation. We know

that diﬀusion is a highly potent force in language change. Nevertheless, we also see

an immense structural diversity among the world’s languages. What could explain

this apparent discrepancy is that whereas diﬀusion may make languages that are

in contact with one another more similar, these regional similarities contribute to

inter-regional diversity. It is possible to change from initial fragmentation to domi-

nation, but that requires the diﬀusion rate to be 0.999, as witnessed by simulations

not shown here.

The structural diversity of initially similar languages is apparently more sen-

sitive to the degree of diﬀusion than that of initially dissimilar languages. This is

because when we start with fragmentation, we start with a random distribution

and also end up with a nearly random distribution. When we start from dominance

we start from a completely ordered distribution and induce changes leading to a

nearly random distribution. That involves a greater diﬀerence in the distribution.

3.3.2 Rate of migration

We have tried to vary the migration probability to 0.1 and let the simulation run

for 200 iterations to get stationary results. This has is virtually no eﬀect. The

curves are so similar that no diﬀerence can be made out visually although there are

minor diﬀerences in the data. Possibly this lack of an eﬀect relates to the set-up

of the simulation where only members of fully-occupied lattice lines are compared.

3.3.3 Rate of language shift

A simulation where the rate of language shift was varied from 0.9 to 0.5 showed that

this has no eﬀect in the case of initial fragmentation. Although more language shift

should reduce the number of languages, it does not aﬀect the overall structural

17

diversity as measured in the total number of diﬀerences among language pairs.

It stands to reason that, in the extreme case where the world’s population was

divided up into, say, speakers of Chinese and English, the diﬀerences among these

two languages might still correspond to the average diﬀerences among the current

languages of the world. The rate of language shift does seem to have a small eﬀect

in the case of dominance. With more shift, the oﬀspring of an initially uniform

language become more similar, but this eﬀect evaporates at large distances. Again,

this is intuitively obvious. As in the case of the standard parameter settings the

curves continue to be distinct at large distances. Given the high degree of similarity

with Figure 2 we do not show the graph here.

3.3.4 Rate of language change

Figure 4 shows that reducing the rate of language change has no eﬀect when initial

fragmentation obtains, but has a drastic eﬀect in the case of initial domination. In

the former situation the eﬀects of language changes, whether there are many or few,

will tend to cancel one another out. In the latter situation internal language change

is a major contributor to diversity. We have seen in 3.3.1 that the diﬀusion rate

also aﬀects initially similar languages, but only a small eﬀect was found although

we varied the probability from a low of q = 0.1 to a high of q = 0.9. Again, the real-

world situation supports these results, which initially are perhaps surprising: given

that there is a lot of structural diversity among the world’s languages, internal

change has to be a strong factor since it has apparently continued to outweigh

the combined eﬀects of language change and diﬀusion from the beginning of the

evolution of language several tens of thousand years ago to this very day. (This is

not to say that we may forever continue to see the amount of diversity that we see

today.)

18

Less change: p=0.1 instead of 0.5

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d
 
e
g
a
u
g
n
a

l

 1

 0.1

 0.01

 0

 2

 4

 6

 8

 10

geographical distance

Figure 4: The eﬀect of varying the rate of language change from 0.5 (Figure

2) to 0.1 (this ﬁgure). Legend: + = fragmentation, x = dominance.

3.3.5 The transitional eﬀect of a fully populated lattice

Up to this point we have seen that a diﬀerence between initial domination and

fragmentation is preserved for large geographical distances. In Figure 5 we show

what happens at many time steps when the lattice becomes fully populated. This

is the point where the lowermost curve, which indicates the number of occupied

sites, no longer increases. Initially, as we have also seen in the previous graphs,

both fragmented and dominant start go asymptotically towards inﬁnity; here this

eﬀect is shown by a line in the plot because we sum over the diﬀerences among

the languages rather than showing averages. Then, at the transition point of com-

plete occupation the initially diﬀerent languages immediately reach a maximum

of diﬀerences. At the same point, the initially similar languages rapidly increase

19

Occupied (+); differences: frag.(line), dom.(x)

s
n
o

i
l
l
i

m
 
n
i
 
s
r
e
b
m
u
n

 700

 600

 500

 400

 300

 200

 100

 0

 0

 200

 400

 600

 800

 1000

time

Figure 5: Results of a simulation showing the behavior up until the total
70012 or 49 million sites of the lattice are occupied and continuing for some

200 time steps beyond (yet more iterations did not result in further changes).

The lower curve shows the number of occupied sites, the upper two curves

the sum over all diﬀerences, summed over all occupied sites. The standard

parameter settings, described in section 3.3, were used.

their diﬀerences and soon reach the same maximum as the initially diﬀerent lan-

guages. From there on, nothing new happens: the systems have entered into

equilibria. From this we can conclude that the overall diﬀerence between initial

fragmentation and initial domination ceases to become preserved when all people

are surrounded by neighbours with which to interact.

A plot of the diﬀerences by distance as done in the previous ﬁgures indicates

that for t = 1 500, when the whole lattice is occupied, the curves for initial frag-

mentation and initial domination agree, as would be expected. There is the usual

IBD-eﬀect, producing a rise in diﬀerences up to a distance of 2 and continuing but

ﬂattening out beyond this point. This is eﬀect is due to diﬀusion and shift among

20

neighboring sites.

In the implementation of the lattice only immediate neighbors are allowed to

interact, but in real life people may interact over relatively large distances in thinly

populated areas. This means that the full occupation is a realistic description for

the situation in many parts of the world.

4 Fingerprints of language history seen through

qualitatively diﬀerent datasets

The data from WALS that were used to produce the examples in Figure 1 involves

a mixture of qualitatively diﬀerent encodings. Features can have from 2 to 9 values

and for some there is an internal relationship among these values while for others

there is no such relationship.

An example of a binary feature is the presence vs. absence of future as an in-

ﬂectional category (Dahl and Velupillai 2005). The linguistic typological database

developed at the Max Planck Institute for Pscholinguistics in Nijmegen, which

was drawn upon by Dunn et al. (2005), consists exclusively of binary features. An

example of a WALS feature having nine values is the way that the plural category

of nouns is expressed (Dryer 2005). Thus, the plural can be expressed by means of

(1) a preﬁx, (2) a suﬃx, (3) stem change, (4) tone, (5) a mixture of the preceding,

(6) reduplication, (7) a separate word, or (8) a clitic; ﬁnally, (9) some languages

do not have a nominal plural category.

When there is an internal relationship among the values we shall use the term

‘ordered feature’. An example of an ordered feature is the inventory of vowel

qualities (Maddieson 2005). In Maddieson’s formulation of this feature, 2-4 vowels

count as ‘small’, 5-6 as ‘average’, and 7-14 as ‘large’. Thus there are three values.

21

Presumably a language does not change its inventory of vowels directly from small

to large but has to pass through a stage where the inventory is average. The

same would hold for a change in the opposite direction. This feature, then, is

(probably) ordered. The expression of the plural, in contrast, is largely unordered

in the sense that a language can mostly change from having any of the possible

values to any other. For instance, a language can just as easily go from not

having a plural to having either a preﬁx or a tone expressing the plural. We say

“largely unordered” because a language may be unlikely, for instance, to go from

having no plural to having a mixture of diﬀerent types of plural (value 5). It is

typical for the WALS features that it is not always easy to decide whether they are

ordered, semi-ordered or unordered. The feature involving velar nasal consonants

(Anderson 2005) may serve as an example of this indeterminacy. Some languages

do not have a velar nasal (i.e., the “ng”-sound of English thing), others may have

such a sound but not in the beginning of words (as in English), and yet others may

allow a velar nasal in the beginning of the word (this is common in, for instance,

languages of Africa, South-East Asia or aboriginal Australia). For languages that

allow ﬁnal consonants it is rare to ﬁnd cases where an initial velar nasal is allowed

but not a ﬁnal one. Thus, if a language goes from not having a velar nasal to

allowing velar nasals word-initially we might expect that in most cases it would

ﬁrst pass through a stage where it only had word-ﬁnal velar nasals (that is, if

the language allows ﬁnal consonants). But this is far from certain and would

require more investigation. The example, then, serves to illustrate that classifying

WALS features into ordered vs. unordered is an idealization. In reality, order is

a matter of degree that would have to be determined by studying how often any

pair of values of a given feature co-occur at genealogical language groups with

a short history of diﬀerentiation. By this method, which has been explored by

Michael Cysouw (personal communication, 2006), we could develop an idea about

22

the changes among feature values that are more likely to take place and thus

determine to what degree a feature is ordered. To produce Figure 1, the WALS

data were treated as unordered.

In the present context we are interested in studying the eﬀects of diﬀerent

numbers of feature values on the outcome of historical linguistic investigations and

we also want to know more about the eﬀects of ordered vs. unordered features.

For the latter investigation we must necessarily assume that a clean distinction

between the two can be made, that is, we assume that the features used are of an

ideal type.

For an unordered feature any diﬀerence in values will count as 1, whereas for

an ordered feature a diﬀerence is counted as the absolute diﬀerence between the

two values. For instance, for the feature of vowel inventory sizes mentioned above,

a diﬀerence between value 1 (small inventory) and value 3 (large inventory) counts

as 2 diﬀerences, whereas a diﬀerence between value 1 and 2 or value 2 and 3 both

count as 1 diﬀerence.

4.1 Features having two vs. more than two values

In Figure 6 we show the diﬀerential behavior of binary as opposed to many-valued

features. The curves for initial fragmentation and initial domination narrow in on

one another for Q = 2; this means that it will get harder to discern a diﬀerence

between related and unrelated languages in binary descriptions. For 3 ≤ Q ≤ 9 we

merely see a parallel shift since the absolute diﬀerences may increase for increasing

Q as opposed to binary ones. Thus, the curves for Q = 3 and Q = 9 are similar

to those for Q = 5 shown in Figure 2, but the curves for Q = 3 lie lower than the

curves for Q = 5 and those for Q = 9 lie higher.

23

Less choices: Q=2 instead of 5

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d
 
e
g
a
u
g
n
a

l

 1

 0.1

 0.01

 0

 2

 4

 6

 8

 10

geographical distance

Figure 6: The eﬀect of using binary features (here) as opposed to many-

valued ones (Figure 2). Legend: + = fragmentation, x = dominance.

4.2 Ordered vs. unordered features

Given that ordered features encode more information it is to be expected that such

features will preserve the history of the initial diﬀerence between dominance and

fragmentation better than unordered ones. Figure 7 is nevertheless an important

demonstration of the validity of these expected results. It should be compared to

Figures 2-4, but in particular to Figure 2, which has the same parameter settings

except that the latter involves ordered features.

24

Less order: ordered instead of unordered

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d
 
e
g
a
u
g
n
a

l

 1

 0.1

 0.01

 0

 2

 4

 6

 8

 10

geographical distance

Figure 7: The eﬀect of using unordered (this ﬁgure) as opposed to ordered

features (Figures 2-4). Legend: + = fragmentation, x = dominance.

4.3 Conclusions regarding diﬀerent results for diﬀer-

ent encodings of data

Sections 4.1-2 have shown that the linguist who wants to infer ancient language

situations from current distributions of typological data cannot blame it on diﬀu-

sion, language shift, migration or language change if languages that are known to

share a common ancestry nevertheless look equally dissimilar at large geographical

distances. Rather, the choice of typological features and the way that they are

encoded is expected to be responsible. These two factors, are to a large extent, al-

though not entirely, under the linguist’s control. Diﬀerent typological databases in

existence may serve to illustrate the range of choices. The database collected under

the auspices of the Pioneers of Island Melanesia project (PIM) of the Max Planck

25

Institute for Psycholinguistics in Nijmegen, i.e. the dataset drawn upon for Dunn

et al. (2005), consists entirely of binary features (which are also, by deﬁnition, un-

ordered). The database respresented by WALS represents a mixture of everything

from binary to 9’ary features, a few of which may be interpreted as ordered, some as

unordered, and others as semi-ordered. Finally, the Autotyp database constructed

by Balthasar Bickel and Johanna Nichols (http://www.uni-leipzig.de/∼autotyp/)

has as many values as the researcher feels necessary for capturing all important

diﬀerences among functionally related categories. This set of values can be merged

to fewer values if such a reduction is opportune for a given purpose. It is also pos-

sible to modify the number of feature values in WALS and the PIM data. The

former dataset can be recast as binary features, each representing the presence

or absence of a given feature value. By the opposite approach, the binary PIM

features that pertain to related linguistic categories and have mutually exclusive

distributions could be recast as many-valued features. Thus, much is up to the

researcher. A linguist cannot decide to make a feature which does not exhibit any

ordered behavior ordered. But unordered features can be excluded to strengthen

the utility of the dataset for the purpose of making historical inferences.

5 General conclusions

When looking at diﬀerent parts of the world it is found that typological similarities

among languages strongly depend on geography. This dependency is not surpris-

ing, but the correlation between typological diﬀerences and geographical distance

has nevertheless not previously been studied systematically. Known among biol-

ogists as isolation by distance, the dependency has been investigated intensively

within genetics for well over half a century. While geneticists began emplying

computer simulations to study IBD-eﬀects more than a quarter of a century ago,

26

this is the ﬁrst linguistic study to use such a strategy.

Empirical data drawn from Haspelmath et al. (2005) suggest that the amount

of diﬀerences among languages may vary for diﬀerent regions even if the overall

IBD pattern is similar. For this reason we set out to investigate how such diﬀer-

ences in the curves might come about. Our computer simulations indicate that

diﬀusion may cause languages to become more similar. This is hardly surprising,

but a less trivial ﬁnding was that the eﬀect is stronger among languages which

share a common ancestor than among unrelated languages. Migration apparently

contributes little to diﬀerences in diversity, although the particular set-up we have

chosen for the simulation may be partly responsible for this result. Language shift

has a no eﬀect for unrelated languages and only a small eﬀect for related ones.

Similarly the eﬀect of language change is only noticeable for related languages.

Here, however, the eﬀect is quite drastic. Thus, for related languages diﬀusion,

language shift, and the rate of internal change may all aﬀect the degree of diversity,

whereas unrelated languages should show similar curves for IBD in diﬀerent parts

of the world given that nothing seems to aﬀect these distributions.

Returning to our initial empirical example, we might, then, want to infer that

the apparent greater overall similarity at large distances among the languages

of the Americas when compared to diﬀerent parts of the Old World potentially

could be due to descent from a common ancestor or from languages that were

similar in structure. If the languages of the Americas were as diverse at the time

of the settlement of the continents as the languages of the Old World, we would

not expect this diﬀerence, since neither rates of language change, language shift,

migration or diﬀusion were found to have much eﬀect on the degree of diversity

among languages that start out as being diﬀerent. Nevertheless, given limitations

in the data and the preliminary nature of our computational investigations we do

not wish to state this as more than a very weak hypothesis to be investigated in

27

future work. Instead, we wish to focus the readers’ attention on the methodological

results.

An important ﬁnding was that the overall diﬀerence in diversity between re-

lated (or similar) and unrelated (diﬀerent) languages is preserved at large ge-

ographical distances, at least up to the point where migration and population

expansion has resulted in a fully populated area. It is not clear exactly just how

fully populated an area must be to be equivalent to the fully populated lattice in

our simulations. Thus, it is not certain whether we can expect to ﬁnd areas in the

world that are not fully populated in the sense of the simulations. Nevertheless we

expect that for at least some areas it should be possible to verify empirically that

related languages may be more similar than unrelated ones at large geographical

distances, i.e. that ‘history is preserved.’

This preservation of history, we also found, is to a great extent dependent on the

quality of the data. At large geographical distances, binary or unordered features

will obscure the diﬀerences between related and unrelated languages, making them

look equally dissimilar. This is an important methodological lesson for linguists

wishing to make inferences about language history using typological data—an

approach which is becoming increasingly more popular in historical linguistic re-

search.

Computer simulations are a useful tool for making one’s assumptions explicit,

testing hypotheses, and making predictions about real-world behavior. They do

not simply substitute for and illustrate a hypothesis, but represent datasets in their

own right. Simulated data need to be interpreted just like “real” data. Thus, the

ﬁnal word on the relation between structural diversity and geographical distance

among languages is not said in this paper. We expect that other researchers will

challenge our interpretations and hope that our ﬁndings may be tested by means of

alternative simulation models and by attempts to verify or falsify the predictions

28

by means of empirical investigations.

Correspondence addresses

Eric W. Holman

Christian Schulze

E-mail: cs@thp.uni-koeln.de

Dietrich Stauﬀer

E-mail: stauﬀer@thp.Uni-Koeln.DE

Søren Wichmann (corresponding author)

Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095-

1563, USA. E-mail: Holman@psych.ucla.edu

Institute for Theoretical Physics, Cologne University, D-50923 K¨oln, Germany.

Institute for Theoretical Physics, Cologne University, D-50923 K¨oln, Germany.

Department of Linguistics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology,

Deutscher Platz 6, D-04103 Leipzig, Germany (preferred address) & Languages

and Cultures of Indian America (TCIA), PO Box 9515, 2300 RA Leiden, The

Netherlands. E-mail: wichmann@eva.mpg.de

Acknowledgements

Author names are given in alphabetical order. Holman was responsible for plotting

the data in Figure 1, sparking oﬀ the inquiry, Wichmann suggested the subsequent

research strategy and did most of the write-up, and Stauﬀer is responsible for the

computer simulations, using a model proposed by Schulze. We thank Cecil H.

Brown for extensive discussions of many of the issues touched upon here and

29

Brigitte Pakendorf for making us aware of the concept of isolation by distance in

biology.

References

Abrams, Daniel and Steven H. Strogatz (2003). Modelling the dynamics of lan-

guage death. Nature 424: 900.

Anderson, Gregory D. S. (2005). The velar nasal (η). In: Haspelmath et al. (eds.),

42-45.

Baxter, G. J., R. A. Blythe, W. Crost, and A. J. McKane. (2006). Utterance

selection model of language change. Physical Review E 73, article no. 046118.

Cangelosi, A. and D. Parisi (2002). Simulating the Evolution of Language. Berlin:

Springer-Verlag.

ford: Oxford University Press.

Christiansen, Morten and Simon Kirby (eds.) (2003). Language Evolution. Ox-

Comrie, Bernard, Matthew S. Dryer, David Gil, and Martin Haspelmath (2005).

Introduction. In: Haspelmath et al. (eds.). 1-8.

Dahl, ¨Osten and Viveka Velupillai (2005). Tense and aspect. In: Haspelmath et.

al (eds.), 266-281.

de Boer, Bart (2006). Computer modelling as a tool for understanding language

evolution. In: Gontier, Nathalie, Jean Paul van Bendegem, and Diederik Aerts

(eds.), Evolutionary Epistemology, Language and Culture: A Non-Adaptationist

Systems Theoretical Approach, 381-406. Dordrecht: Springer.

Dryer, Matthew S. (2005). Coding of nominal plurality. In: Haspelmath et al.

(eds.), 138-141.

30

Dunn, Michael J., Angela Terrill, Geer P. Reesink, Robert A. Foley, and Stephen

C. Levinson (2005). Strutural phylogenetics and the reconstruction of ancient

language history. Science 309: 272-275.

Epperson, Bryan K. (2003). Geographical Genetics. Princeton and Oxford: Prince-

ton University Press.

Goebl, Hans (1982). Dialektometrische Studien. Anhand italoromanischer und

galloromanischer Sprachmaterialien aus AIS und ALF. 3 vols. T¨ubingen: Niemeyer.

Goebl, Hans (2005). Dialektometrie (Art. 37), in: K¨ohler, Reinhard, Gabriel Alt-

mann, and Rajmund G. Piotrowski (eds.), Quantitative Linguistik/Quantitative

Linguistics. Ein internationales Handbuch/An International Handbook (Hand-

bcher zur Sprach- und Kommunikationswissenschaft, vol. 27), 498-531. Berlin,

New York: de Gruyter.

Haspelmath, Martin, Matthew Dryer, David Gil, and Bernard Comrie (eds.) (2005).

The World Atlas of Language Structures. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Kosmidis, Kosmas, John M. Halley, and Panos Argyrakis (2005). Language evo-

lution and population dynamics in a system of two interacting species. Physica A

353: 595-612.

14-17.

Kretzschmar, William A. (1996). Quantitative areal analysis of dialect features.

Language Variation and Change 8: 13-39.

Maddieson, Ian (2005). Vowel quality inventories. In: Haspelmath et al. (eds.),

Mira, J. and A. Paredes (2005).

Interlinguistic simulation and language death

dynamics. Europhysics Letters 69.6: 1031-1034.

Nerbonne, John, Wilbert Heeringa, Erik van den Hout, Peter van der Kooi, Simone

Otten, and Willem van de Vis (1996). Phonetic distance between Dutch dialects.

31

In: Durieux, Gert, Walter Daelemans, and Steven Gillis (eds.), Proceedings of

CLIN ’95, 185-202. Antwerpen.

Nerbonne, John and Peter Kleiweg (forthcoming). Toward a dialectological yard-

stick. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics.

Nettle, Daniel (1999a). Using social impact theory to simulate language change.

Lingua 108: 95-117.

Nettle, Daniel (1999b). Linguistic diversity of the Americas can be reconciled

with a recent colonization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the

U.S.A. 96: 3325-3329.

University of Chicago Press.

Nichols, Johanna (1992). Linguistic Diversity in Space and Time. Chicago: The

Niyogi, Partha (2002). The computational study of diachronic linguistics.

In:

Lightfoot, David (ed.), Syntactic Eﬀects of Morphological Change, 351-365. Cam-

bridge: Cambridge University Press.

Niyogi, Partha (2004). Phase transitions in language evolution. In: Jenkins, Lyle

(ed.), Variation and Universals in Biolinguistics, xxx-xxx. xxxx: Elsevier Press.

Niyogi, Partha (2006). The Computational Nature of Language Learning and Evo-

lution. Cambridge & London: The MIT Press.

Nowak, M. N. Komarova, and Partha Niyogi (2002). Computational and evolu-

tionary aspects of language. Nature 417: 611-617.

Oliveira, Viviane M. de, Marcelo A. F. Gomes, and Ing Ren Tsang (2006a). The-

oretical model for the evolution of linguistic diversity. Physica A 361: 361-370.

Oliveira, Viviane M. de, Paulo R. A. Campos, Marcelo A. F. Gomes, and Ing Ren

Tsang (2006b). Bounded ﬁtness landscapes and the evolution of the linguistic

diversity. Physica A 368: 257-261.

32

Patriarca, Marco and Teemu Lepp¨anen (2004). Modeling language competition.

Physica A 338: 296-299.

Physica A 361: 355-360.

Pinasco, J. P. and L. Romanelli (2006). Coexistence of languages is possible.

Pr´evost, Nathalie. 2003. The physics of language: towards a phase transition of

language change. PhD dissertation, Simon Fraser University.

Schulze, Christian and Dietrich Stauﬀer (2005). Monte Carlo simulation of the rise

and fall of languages. International Journal of Modern Physics C 16: 781-787.

Schulze, Christian and Dietrich Stauﬀer (2006). Computer simulation of language

competition by physicists. In: Chakrabarti, B. K., A. Chakraborti, and A. Chat-

terjee (eds.), Econophysics and Sociophysics: Trends and Perspectives. Weinheim:

WILEY-VCH Verlag.

Schw¨ammle, V. (2005). Simulation for competition of languages with an ageing

sexual population. International Journal of Modern Physics C 16.10: 1519-1526.

S´eguy, Jean (1973). Atlas linguistique et ethnographique de la Gascogne, vol. 6.

Notice explicative. Paris: Centre national de la recherche scientiﬁque.

Silva Jr., Wilson A., Sandro L. Bonatto, Adriano J. Holanda, Andrea K. Ribeiro-

dos-Santos, Beatriz M. Paix˜ao, Gustavo H. Goldman, Kiyoko Abe-Sandes, Luis

Rodriguez-Delﬁn, Marcela Barbosa, Maria Luiza Pa¸c´o-Larson, Maria Luiza Petzl-

Erler, Valeria Valente, Sidney E. B. Santos, and Marco A. Zago (2002). Mitochon-

drial genome diversity of Native Americans supports a single early entry of founder

populations into America. American Journal of Human Genetics 71: 187-192.

Sokal, Robert R. and Paolo Menozzi (1982). Spatial autocorrelations of HLA

frequencies in Europe support demic diﬀusion of early farmers. The American

Naturalist 119: 1-17.

33

Stauﬀer, Dietrich, Suzana Moss de Oliveira, Paulo Murilo C. de Oliveira, Jorge

S. S´a Martins (2006). Biology, Sociology, Geology by Computational Physicists.

Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Stone, A. C. and Mark Stoneking (1998). mtDNA analysis of a prehistoric Oneota

population: implications for the peopling of the New World. The American Jour-

nal of Human Genetics 62: 1152-1170.

Sutherland, William J. (2003). Parallel extinction risk and global distribution of

languages and species. Nature 423: 276-279.

Tarazona-Santos, Eduardo and Fabr´ıcio R. Santos (2002). The peopling of the

Americas: a second major migration? The American Journal of Human Genetics

70: 1377-1380.

C 17: 259-278.

Te¸sileanu, Tiberiu and Hildegard Meyer-Ortmanns (2006). Competition among

languages and their Hamming distances. International Journal of Modern Physcis

Tobler, Waldo. 1970. A computer movie simulating urban growth in the Detroit

region. Economic Geography, 46: 234-240.

Wang, William S.-Y., J. Y. Ke, and James W. Minett (2004). Computational stud-

ies of language evolution. In: Huang, C. R. and W. Lenders (eds.), Computational

Linguistics and Beyond, 65-106. Institute of Linguistics, Academia Sinica.

Wang, William S. Y. and James W. Minett (2005). The invasion of language:

emergence, change and death. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 20.5: 263-296.

Wichmann, Søren, Dietrich Stauﬀer, F. Welington S. Lima, and Christian Schulze.

2006. Modelling linguistic taxonomic dynamics. Submitted to Transactions of the

Philological Society.

Wright, Sewall (1943). Isolation by distance. Genetics 28: 114-138.

34

Zegura, Stephen L., Tatiana M. Karafet, Lev A. Zhivotovsky, and Michael F. Ham-

mer (2004). High-resolution SNPs and microsatellite haplotypes point to a single,

recent entry of Native American Y chromosomes into the Americas. Molecular

Biology and Evolution 21: 164-175.

35

