6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
9
2
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Automati Trading Agent. RMT based Portfolio Theory and

Portfolio Seletion

∗

Maªgorzata Snarska, Jakub Krzyh

M. Smoluhowski Institute of Physis, Jagellonian University, 30-059 Craow, Reymonta 4,

Poland

Portfolio theory is a very powerful tool in the modern investment theory. It is helpful

in estimating risk of an investor's portfolio, whih arises from our lak of information,

unertainty and inomplete knowledge of reality, whih forbids a perfet predition

of future prie hanges. Despite of many advantages this tool is not known and

is not widely used among investors on Warsaw Stok Exhange. The main reason

for abandoning this method is a high level of omplexity and immense alulations.

The aim of this paper is to introdue an automati deision - making system, whih

allows a single investor to use suh omplex methods of Modern Portfolio Theory

(MPT). The key tool in MPT is an analysis of an empirial ovariane matrix. This

matrix, obtained from historial data is biased by suh a high amount of statistial

unertainty, that it an be seen as random. By bringing into pratie the ideas of

Random Matrix Theory (RMT), the noise is removed or signi(cid:28)antly redued, so

the future risk and return are better estimated and ontrolled. This onepts are

applied to the Warsaw Stok Exhange Simulator http://gra.onet.pl. The result

of the simulation is 18% level of gains in omparison for respetive 10% loss of the

Warsaw Stok Exhange main index WIG.

Keywords: Random Matrix Theory, Gaussian Filtering, Portfolio Optimiza-

tion

1. Portfolio theory - setting the stage

Investments in stok seurities like shares, urrenies or di(cid:27)erent types of deriva-

tives are generally treated as very risky. Ability to predit future movements in

pries (prie hanges) allows one to minimize the risk.

Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT) refers to an investment strategy that seeks to on-

strut an optimal portfolio by onsidering the relationship between risk and return.

MPT suggests that the fundamental issue of apital investment should no longer

be to pik out dominant stoks but to diversify the wealth among many di(cid:27)erent

assets. The suess of investment does not purely depend on return, but also on the

risk, whih has to be taken into aount. Risk itself is in(cid:29)uened by the orrelations

between di(cid:27)erent assets, thus the portfolio seletion proess represents Let us brie(cid:29)y

remind several key tools and onepts, that MPT uses, i.e. the Markowitz's Model,

whih is ruial in further analysis.

∗

snarskath.if.uj.edu.pl

jakubkrzyh.art.pl

(1)

2

snarska printed on February 2, 2008

1.1. Elementary de(cid:28)nitions and the Markowitz's Model

The e(cid:30)ient portfolio theory was (cid:28)rst introdued by Harry M.Markowitz in 1952

[8℄. He deided not to analyze the return, risk and volatility of single stoks in a

portfolio, but onsidering portfolio (groups of shares) as a whole. In order to manage

this problem, he introdued a simple statistial measure - orrelation, whih links up

the hanges in pries of an individual assets with all other hanges in prie of assets

in a given portfolio.

1.1.1. Constrution of an e(cid:30)ient portfolio of multiple assets

Consider T quotations of the i -th stok and introdue a vetor of returns
ri,1 ,where ri,t , t = 1, . . . , T is the observed realization of a random variable ri .Denote
Si(t) - time series of pries for a ertain stok i. Then

and ln is a natural logarithm. Then the expeted return of a single asset is given by

If additionally N denotes the number of assets in a portfolio, then w is a vetor of

weights (ratio of di(cid:27)erent stoks in a portfolio). We have to then impose a budget

onstraint

where 1 is a vetor of ones. If additionally ∀i wi ≥ 0 the short sell is exluded.
Denoting R as a vetor of expeted returns of single stoks, we see, that an expeted

return of a whole portfolio is a linear ombination of returns of assets in a portfolio

ri,t = ln Si(t + 1) − ln Si(t)

Ri = E(ri) = ˆri = ¯ri =

ri,t

1
T

T

t=1
X

wi = wT · 1 = 1

N

i=1
X

Rp =

wi · Ri = wT · R

N

i=1
X

To alulate the risk of a given portfolio we introdue a ertain metri of interde-

pendene between di(cid:27)erent random variables. The most natural one is the statisti

measure - ovariane covi,j , whih expresses the interdependene of variables ri,t and
rj,t in all observed disrete times t = 1, . . . , T .

covi,j =

(ri,t − Ri) · (rj,t − Rj) ⇔

MT M = Cov

1
T

1
T

T

t=1
X

Now we are ready to de(cid:28)ne the variane of a portfolio as

p = wT · Cov · w
σ2

1.1.2. Optimization of a Portfolio

We an alulate the return and risk of any given portfolio. Now we have to (cid:28)nd

and hoose the e(cid:27)etive portfolios. Sine it is the quadrati programming problem,

it will be done in two steps

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

snarska

printed on February 2, 2008

3

1. First; the portfolio with minimal risk of all possible portfolios will be seleted

(the return rate is equal to zero, ie Rp = 0)

2. Seondly; we will (cid:28)nd the minimum variane portfolio among portfolios of arbi-

trary hosen return rate (Rp = µ) and then (cid:28)nd the e(cid:30)ient frontier iteratively

Minimal Risk Portfolio

We have to (cid:28)nd the vetor of weights w. In order to do it we need to know per-

fetly the ovariane matrix

1

. Let f is the funtion of risk, depending of portfolio

omposition

f (p) = σ2

p = wT · Cov · w

with linear onstraint (3)

wT · 1 = 1

Our task is to minimize the funtion f under the linear onstraint (3). This an be

done in a onvenient way by using the method of Lagrange multipliers. We get the

Lagrange funtion in a form:

F (w, λ) = wT · Cov · w + λ(wT · 1 − 1)

Standard methods of (cid:28)nding the minimum of a multivariate funtion with a boundary

ondition lead to the system of N + 1 equations with N + 1 unknown quantities

2 · Cov · w + λ · 1 = 0
wT · 1 = 1

(

Minimal Variane Portfolio

Seond task ontains one more restrition, that the expeted return of a portfolio p

have to obey:

Rp = wT · R = µ

Then the Lagrange funtion reads:

F (w, λ, γ) = wT · Cov · w + λ(wT · 1 − 1) + γ(wT · R − µ)

(11)

whih gives us

2 · Cov · w + λ · 1 + γ · R = 0
wT · 1 = 1
wT · R = µ






In this ase we have to deal with the system of N + 2 equations with N + 2 unknown

quantities, whih is solvable in general ase.

2. Covariane Matrix and Portfolio Constrution

Covariane Matrix plays an important role in the risk measurement and portfolio

optimization. Modern Portfolio Theories assume, that ovarianes or equivalently

orrelations between di(cid:27)erent stoks are perfetly known and an exatly be derived

from the past data. In pratie it is quite opposite. Empirial Covariane Matries,

built from historial data enlose suh a high amount of noise, that at (cid:28)rst look they

1

This is a very strong assumption, sine as we shall see later, ovariane matrix derived from

empirial data ontains a high amount of noise and statistial unertainty.

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(12)

4

snarska printed on February 2, 2008

an be treated as random. This means, that future risk and return of a portfolio

are not well estimated and ontrolled. Only after the proper denoising proedure is

involved, one an onstrut an e(cid:30)ient portfolio using Markowitz's result.

In this setion we will brie(cid:29)y explain how using the RMT one an redue the bias of

the empirial Covariane Matrix.

2.1. Gaussian Correlated Variables

Suppose now, that the returns from di(cid:27)erent stoks are Gaussian random vari-

ables. The joint probability distribution funtion an be then written as:

PG(M1, M2, . . . , MN ) =

1
(2π)N det Cov

· exp

−

Mi · (Cov−1

ij ) · Mj

(13)

1
2

i,j
X





where (Cov−1

ij ) is the element of the inverse ovariane matrix.

p

It is well known result, that any set of orrelated Gaussian random variables an

always be deomposed into a linear ombination of independent Gaussian random

variables. The onverse is also true, sine the sum of Gaussian random variables

is also a Gaussian random variable.

In other words, orrelated Gaussian random

variables are fully haraterized by their ovariane (or orrelation) matrix.





2

2.1.1. Covariane estimator:

The simplest way to onstrut the ovariane matrix estimator for Gaussian ran-

dom variables is to deal with historial time series of returns. The empirial ovari-

ane matrix of returns ri,t an be then expressed through the equation (4)

2.2. RMT based data (cid:28)ltering and denoising proedure- the shrinkage method

For any pratial use of Modern Portfolio Theory, it would be neessary to obtain

reliable estimates for ovariane matries of real-life (cid:28)nanial returns (based on his-

torial data).Thus a reliable empirial determination of a ovariane matrix turns out

to be di(cid:30)ult. If one onsiders N assets, the ovariane matrix need to be determined
from N time series of length T ≫ N . Typially T is not very large ompared to N

and one should expet that the determination of the ovarianes is noisy. This noise

annot be removed by simply inreasing the number of independent measurement of

the investigated (cid:28)nanial market, beause eonomi events, that a(cid:27)et the market

are unique and annot be repeated. Therefore the struture of the matrix estimator

is dominated by 'measurement' noise. From our point of view it is interesting to

ompare the properties of an empirial ovariane matrix Cov to a purely random

matrix, well de(cid:28)ned in the sense of Random Matrix Theory [5℄. Deviations from the

RMT might then suggest the presene of true information.

2.2.1. Gaussian (cid:28)ltering

We will assume here that the only randomness in the model omes from the

Gaussian Probability Distribution. In order to desribe the (cid:28)ltering proedure we

will (cid:28)rst summarize some well known universal properties of the random matries.

2

orrelated variables

This is not true in general ase, when one needs to desribe the interdependene of non Gaussian

snarska

printed on February 2, 2008

5

2.2.2. RMT preditions for behaviour of eigenvalues

Let M denotes N × T matrix, whose entries are i.i.d. random variables, whih
are normally distributed with zero mean and unit variane. As N, T → ∞ and
while Q = T

N is kept (cid:28)xed, the probability density funtion for the eigenvalues of the

Wishart matrix

is given by (Mar£enko, Pastur [7℄)

˜Cov = 1

˜M · ˜MT

T

ρ(λ) =

Q
2πσ2 ·

(λmax − λ) (λ − λmin)
λ

p

for λ suh that λmin ≤ λ ≤ λmax where λminand λmax satisfy

λmax
min = σ2

(1 +

± 2

1
Q

1
Q

)

r

(14)

(15)

2.2.3. Standard denoising proedure and the shrinkage method:

To remove noise we need (cid:28)rst to ompare the empirial distribution of the eigen-

values of the ovariane matrix (4) of stoks (in our ase for Warsaw Stok Exhange

shares) with theoretial predition given by ((14) -"Wishart Fit"), based on the as-

sumption that the ovariane matrix

is random.

˜Cov = 1

˜M · ˜MT

T

Fig. 1. Histogram of eigenvalues for the WIG stoks from 29.01.1999 till 17.01.2003 with

Wishart (cid:28)t

If we look losely at Fig. 1 we an observe, that there are several large eigenvalues

(the largest one is labeled as the market one, sine it onsists the information about

all the stoks in the market i.e.

is losely related to the WIG index), however the

greater part of the spetrum is onentrated between 0 and 0.002 (i.e. The Wishart-

(cid:28)t ). We believe, that behind this Random part of the spetrum there exists single

eigenvalue, whih arries nontrivial and useful information. Exploiting the knowledge

from Linear Algebra,we may rewrite our ovariane matrix Cov as:

Cov = U · D · UT

(16)

Here D is a diagonal matrix of eigenvalues of the original matrix Cov and U is a

matrix whose olumns are normalized eigenvetors orresponding with proper eigen-

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

6

snarska printed on February 2, 2008

values. Furthermore U ful(cid:28)lls the equation:

The trae is onserved, so we write:

Using the (17) and yli properties of the trae we get

U · UT = 1 = U · U−1

Tr(Cov) = Tr(U · D · UT)

Tr(D) = Tr(Cov)

Following the fat, D is a diagonal matrix of eigenvalues one an deompose its trae

in the following way:

Tr(Cov) = Tr(D) =

λi +

λj

i
X

j
X

where λi ∈ [λmin, λmax] is a set of eigenvalues that are predited by (14) λj ∈
[λ1, λmin) ∪ (λmax, λN ] is set of these eigenvalues, whih do not obey the RMT on-

ditions. If we now replae

i λi by one eigenvalue ζ , we get

P

ζ = Tr(Cov) −

λj

j
X

This results in squeezing the Random part of the spetrum to a single degenerated

eigenvalue. The diagonalized matrix has now only several eigenvalues.

2.3. Covariane Matrix Reonstrution

Due to noise - removing proedures we know exatly the eigenvalues of the real

ovariane matrix. But sine we have no knowledge of the original ovariane ma-

trix, we do not have enough knowledge of it's eigenvetors. The familiarity with of

eigenvalues is not su(cid:30)ient to (cid:28)nd the ovariane matrix.

After applying the denoising proedure we will reonstrut the ovariane matrix

using the diagonalized matrix with some eigenvalues shrinked and matries of eigen-

vetors alulated for non-shrinked ovariane matrix.

This reonstruted and unbiased Covariane Matrix is used as an initial Covariane

Matrix in Markowitz Model desribed above. The new model itself is a part of au-

tomati investing algorithm desribed in the next setion. The results are presented

in the last setion.

3. An Overview of the System - Automati Investing Algorithm

The Automati Trading Agent is a lient- server appliation for managing stok

portfolios without involving user interferene. It onsists of three main parts: Vir-

tual Agent, Data Colletor and User Interfae. Clients running the System on their

workstations are able to monitor a stream of data (information about the state of a

portfolio) from the ATA server using their web browsers. This part of appliation

is ontrolled by the User Interfae. In addition to di(cid:27)erent standard portfolio man-

agement tools ATA system inludes several RMT - based tehniques for building an

optimal portfolio with the noise e(cid:27)et minimized.The system is designed not only

to help a single lient hoose the right, optimal portfolio with a user-de(cid:28)ned level of

snarska

printed on February 2, 2008

7

risk and expeted return, but also to diminish user engagement in stok data and

information analysis. One the strategy is (cid:28)xed, lient is able to monitor the fu-

ture hanges in the portfolio; the rest inluding portfolio optimization, data piking,

sending requests and buy / sell orders is done by a deision system - Virtual Agent.

Fig. 2. The Arhiteture of the System

3.1. Database module and Data Col letor

This part of the program is responsible for assembling and managing the stok

data.It also veri(cid:28)es the database in aordane with the assets available for the

transation platform.

3.1.1. Database

The data are stored on the server as (cid:28)les with daily quotations in a separate

folder. Any ompany is represented by a text (cid:28)le, whose name is the ompany's

ISIN number. Eah (cid:28)le onsist of two olumns - one representing the dates and the

seond orresponding daily losing pries.

3.1.2. Data Colletion

Data olletor is a separate program run by the server eah trading day, one hour

after the daily quotations are losed. It downloads the urrent quotation from stok

exhange data vendors (in our ase http://www.parkiet.om) and writes it down

into the database.

The matrix of stoks, whih will be used in further portfolio analysis, is then (cid:28)lled

with the data from the database.The algorithm loads all pries of seurities for a

ertain time window from the previously de(cid:28)ned folder.

3.1.3. Corretions Module

Data are sometimes orrupted during the transfer or from 'measurement' reasons

(i.e. there is no quotation for the ertain stok and the Stok Exhange is unable

to state the losing prie). This result in imperfet and inomplete information and

zeros in initial time series. The number of (cid:28)les may also vary, beause it re(cid:29)ets the

list of assets, whih are urrently available for trading.

This part of the program wathes and ontrols the orretness of the (cid:28)les, the entries

in the database and the number of (cid:28)les.

3.2. Virtual Agent

Virtual Agent is a spei(cid:28) deision-making system. It's input are urrent and

historial stok exhange information and data form the database. On output it

8

snarska printed on February 2, 2008

generates spei(cid:28) requests and orders to transation platform. In our ase it is the

Stok Exhange Game struture, based on the WARSET trading system.

Information onversion and data analysis is done one hour after WSE the session

is losed. All new daily data are inorporated in the database and then optimal

deision is taken and the sell/ buy request, whih will be aomplished the next day,

The Virtual Agent build it's resolutions on the E(cid:27)etive Portfolio Theory and Ran-

is sent.

dom Matrix Theory.

3.2.1. Covariane Matrix Module

This part of the systems o(cid:27)ers various types of ovariane matrix estimators,

whih are used in solution of Markowitz's problem. The module's default setting

is the simplest Gaussian estimator (4), but this an be modi(cid:28)ed by the user. The

Covariane Matrix Module is responsible for building a raw matrix from the data

and also for reonstruting it after the denoising proedure.

3.2.2. Denoising and Filtering Module

The Module ontrols the diagonalization proess, whih uses the LU deompo-

sition , i.e. alulation of eigenvalues and eigenvetors. The eigenvetors are stored

in the system and the eigenvalues are used to redue the degrees of freedom of the

ovariane matrix, as it is predited by RMT. Default denoising proedure is the

standard one, introdued by [1℄.

3.2.3. Portfolio optimization

This module is a separate program, whih solves the Markowitz's problem and

(cid:28)nds the optimal portfolio and then sends buy / sell order. Before any request is

sent, Virtual Agent veri(cid:28)es it's own deisions using several riteria. The simplest one

is to hek, whether the osts of the predited transation are not higher, than the

realized portfolio. If they are, then Agent sends hold request on the whole portfolio.

Suh a portfolio orretion is usually done one a month.

. The orretion means to

3

(cid:28)nd one again the portfolio with (cid:28)xed level of return and risk aepted, regarding

all the new quotations sine the last aomplished orretion.

3.2.4. Correted Portfolio:

We have to ompare two separate portfolios: the 'old' one, whih pattern is

stored on the remote transation platform with the 'new' one, reated using the

inorporated quotations. The next step is to determine an abstrat portfolio as a

result of subtrations between the examined portfolios.

Let n is the vetor of weights of the new portfolio, and s denotes the same vetor

for the old portfolio, then the weights of a orretion one are:

w = n − s

(22)

If a omponent of w is < 0 the sell request is sent, and obviously for wi > 0 system
performs a buy order.wi = 0 means system holds that ertain asset and it's share in

a portfolio does not hange.

3

The frequeny of orretion, like all other key parameters an be inreased by the user

snarska

printed on February 2, 2008

9

3.2.5. Transation osts:

Eah hange in a portfolio is harged with brokerages (Table: 1). To ompensate

this e(cid:27)et we need to sell slightly more individual stoks, than it arises from our

analysis. The reverse e(cid:27)et has to be applied to buy request.

3.3. Communiation and Reporting Modules - User interfae

3.3.1. Communiation Module

The ommuniation module allows the Virtual Agent to onnet to the Game

platform and plae appropriate orders. This module is a separate sript, onstruted

to be independent of the trading platform. This gives the possibility to replae the

Simulator used in the testing period by the real trading platform.

3.3.2. Reporting Module

The User Interfae plays the role of the reporting module.

It's external part,

aessible for the user is the web page (myriaria.if.uj.edu.pl). Here the in-

vestor an follow present information on aounts, the gains and losses (cid:28)gures and

the history of all hanges, investment strategies and deisions taken. The system

user has also a possibility to hange the key parameters of the program, suh as in-

vestment strategy (hoie of the level of risk aepted) and the frequeny of portfolio

orretions.

3.4.1. C# Language

3.4. Implemented tehnologies

The ATA is ompletely written in C# language, hosen beause of multi-platform

advantage. The programs may be written in one environment and then run under

any platform i.e. Windows and Linux.

the default environment for the ATA is

linux server, but the programming proess was made under Windows, so the multi-

platform ability is a must.

Another important advantage of the language is the intuitive onstrution of math-

ematial formulas and the preision of alulations far beyond the popular C++

language, whih in our ase is ruial.

3.4.2. Linux Tools

The Data Colletor is a BASH shell sript, run by Cron daemon, every (cid:28)xed num-

ber of days. The sript also uses Wget to e(cid:30)iently ollet the data via FTP/HTTP.

The AWK , SED and GREP allow the sript very easily to explore and analyze high

amounts of data.

3.4.3. HTML, PHP, CSS

The user interfae is prepared as the website. The PHP sripts run by the www

server Apahe, allow the reation of dynami HTML websites, where the ontent

hanges frequently. The proper view of the website in any internet viewer is ontrolled

by the CSS.

10

snarska printed on February 2, 2008

4. Warsaw Stok Exhange Simulator and ATA implementation results

Here we present the results of the whole proedure desribed above. For our

researh we have hosen the Warsaw Stok Exhange simulator available via the

world world wide web url http://gra.onet.pl, as a testground.

4.1. Rules of the game

There are several steps and rules a user must adhere and exeute to properly use

the simulator. First of all, the system needs to reognize us as its' users, possessing

so alled onet_id. Thus the primary step is to register oneself in the onet system, by

(cid:28)lling out a simple form. Using onet_id one may now log on http://gra.onet.pl

to reate our (cid:28)rst aount, with 40000 PLN as an initial sum of money for every

aount. The number of aounts a single user may open is not limited and the

money an be arbitrarily invested. Sharing more than one aount number, one is

able to hek di(cid:27)erent investment strategies.

This game at like a real stok exhange and brokerage house. We have to start

with buy order - hoose (cid:28)nanial instruments, whih we want to buy and speify

their quantity and prie limits. If there are no onstraints on prie, then the order

is realized at any prie. All quotations are delayed 20 minutes, to give the same

hane to the players who annot follow the quotations in real time. All orders are

anelable, also with 20 minutes delay.Eah user also has to pay transation osts as

in Table 1

Value of order

Height of brokerage

≤ 500 PLN
500(cid:21)2500PLN
2500(cid:21)10000PLN
≥ 10000PLN

10 PLN
10PLN +1, 5% over 500 PLN
40PLN +1% over 2500 PLN
115PLN +0, 75% over 10000 PLN

Table 1. Costs and Commission (soure: http://gra.onet.pl/nowa/prowizje.asp)

We have onstruted a ertain portfolio, after our buy order is being aomplished.

Now we need to deide, what shares we need to buy / sell / hold to minimize the

risk and maximize the return. To win an exellent rank and high gains, one need to

be involved and follow the prie hanges permanently. Most of the steps one need

to exeute, exept the hoie of the aepted level of risk, an be done automatially

by espeially programmed virtual agent.

The WIG index inorporates about 120 stoks, whih make about 80% of all

4.2. Data Seletion and Analysis

assets quoted during ontinuous trading. From our point of view, it is interesting to

examine the onnetions (i.e. orrelations) between these stoks.

In order to ondut further researh and improve the e(cid:27)etiveness of our algorithm,

we (cid:28)rst need to identify and hoose a stable period in the eonomy. We have related

it with the period of the lowest volatility of the WIG index. We have started with

the onversion of absolute hanges of the WIG time series S(t) to the relative ones

aording to

G(t) =

S(t + 1) − S(t)
S(t)

(23)

snarska

printed on February 2, 2008

11

Fig. 3. Changes in WIG index during the period from 1991 till 2004

Then for a (cid:28)xed time window width T = 990 quotations, the volatility of the time

Fig. 4. Flutuations of relative WIG hanges

series G(t) was alulated:

σ(t0) =

G(t0 + i) − G(T )

(24)

i=0 (cid:16)
X
where G(T ) is the average G(t) over the whole time window T .This results an be

(cid:17)

T

1
T − 1

v
u
u
t

2

presented on the diagram: It is easy to notie, that (cid:28)rst few years of quotations are

Fig. 5. Volatility hanges in time for a (cid:28)xed window length

determined by a relatively high volatility. That is why the period from 29.01.1999
to 17.01.2003 was hosen in further analysis and tests.

Another problem we have enountered during the analysis of historial data, was the

inomplete information about some of 120 stoks, whih may result in the in(cid:28)nities
in relative hanges G(t), when the lak of information was replaed by zeros in the
original S(t) time series

. The separate 'zeros' were extrapolated from the future

4

4

'Zeros'appear when one is unable to settle the prie of an individual stoks, see Zibie (2003)

12

snarska printed on February 2, 2008

and previous relative hanges of a given time series. In the ase, if more information

is lost in the way, one is unable to predit the further pries then this stok is not very

examined in further researh. For the (cid:28)xed period of 990 days we have hosen then
100 stoks and we have alulated the average standard deviation of prie hanges
hσi = 0, 4767 and average orrelation of returns between stoks hcorriji = 0, 0657

Fig. 6. Logarithmi prie hanges(on the left) and orrelations (on the right) for WIG

ompanies

4.3. Simulation on the historial data and it's results

The next step in testing our system is to hek how it works when the input and

output data are historial. The seleted time period was divided into parts. We have

assumed, that the initial value of a portfolio is 40000 PLN. We have used here a time
window with variable width T . The analysis started with T = 139 days. Every day,
the T - dimension of the matrix M was inreased by one, until the (cid:28)nal T = 849

days.

The number of available stoks N = 100 and the average number of stoks seleted
45. Every 316 days the orretion was made. The portfolio went to the roof on 151
day with 56443, 61 PLN a a result. (This is 140% of the initial value).
The portfolio went to the (cid:29)oor with 35042, 66 PLN after (cid:28)rst 27 days.
The result of the investment after 849 days yields 47185, 86 PLN ,whih means the
18% gains ompared to the 10% WIG downfall.

Fig. 7. The Results of The Simulation on a Portofolio's Balane. Vertial lines indiate the

orretion

snarska

printed on February 2, 2008

13

Conlusions and Future Work

The aim of this paper was to introdue a simple RMT based mehanism, ating

like an virtual trader in a portfolio seletion and optimization proess.Imposing the

results from Random Matrix Theory our program redues the statistial noise and

gives a better estimation of future risk and return for a ertain portfolio.However, in

this paper only the simplest version of the programm was presented. An improvement

of the program, whih adopt it's deisions to the all information available will be the

part of our future work. From our point of view, an interesting for further analysis is

the hypothesis, that there exist also time orrelations between di(cid:27)erent shares. This

fat might be useful in the detetion of buy/ sell signals.

REFERENCES

[1℄ J.P.Bouhaud, M.Potters, Theory of Finanial Risk. From Statistial Physis to Risk

Management 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 2003

[2℄ Z. Burda, A. Görlih, A. Jarosz, J.Jurkiewiz, Signal and Noise in Correlation Matrix,

http://arxiv.org/pdf/ond-mat/0305627

[3℄ S.Chan, The Impat of Transation Costs on Portfolio Optimization, Bahelor Thesis,

[4℄ E.J.Elton, M.J.Gruber, Modern Portfolio Theory and Investment Analysis 6th ed.,

Erasmus University, 2005

Wiley, New York 2002

[5℄ T.Guhr, A.Müller - Groeling, H.A.Weidenmüller, Random matrix theories in quantum

physis: ommon onepts, Phys. Rep. 299 (1998)

[6℄ L.Laloux, P.Cizeau, J.P.Bouhaud and M. Potters, Noise Dressing of Finanial Corre-

lation Matries, http://arxiv.org/pdf/ond-mat/9810255/

[7℄ V.A. Mar£enko, L.A. Pastur, Distribution of eigenvalues for some setes of random

matries, Math USSR Sbornik, 1: 457 -483 (1967)

[8℄ Harry M.Markowitz ,Portfolio Seletion, The Journal of Finane, Volume 7 No. 1, pp.

[9℄ Markus Rudolf, Algorithms for Portfolio Optimization and Portfolio Insurane,Verlag

77-91 (1952)

Paul Haupt, Bern, Stuttgart, Wien

