6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
4
1
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Universalism versus particularism through ESS lenses

∗

Maria Nawojczyk†

Faculty of Applied Social Sciences, AGH University of Science and Technology,
Al. Mickiewicza 30, PL-30059 Cracow, Poland

The cultural variation of economic activity is wide and multidimen-
sional.
In my presentation I will refer to the analyses of the culture of
capitalism provided by Alfons Trompenaars and Charles Hampden-Turner.
According to them there are seven processes and related dilemmas which
are important in analyzing the construction of a cultural system of econ-
omy. I will focus only on one of them, universalism versus particularism.
Using the database of Trompenaars and Hampden-Turner I will show how
this dilemma was solved by managers from diﬀerent European countries.
That will be starting point for my analysis of universalism-particularism
attitudes of respondents of European Social Survey (ESS). I will be partic-
ularly interested in veriﬁcation of hypothesis on the place of Poland on the
mosaic of European cultures of capitalism.

PACS numbers: 89.65.–s

1. Introduction

Globalization was initially presented as a process of “simple” homoge-
nization of the market economy. At ﬁrst its economic and political dimen-
sions were underlined, but later, during last several years, a growing number
of scholars have come to see the cultural dimension as an important phe-
nomenon. They have concentrated here, however, on the Americanization
of the world economy [3, 4]. On the other hand, it should be stressed that
the students of macro-economy no longer question the heterogeneity of cul-
tures of capitalism. Particularly after the fall of socialism, which resulted in
the withering away of a viable alternative or competition to the capitalist

∗ Presented at the 2nd Polish Seminar on Econo- and Sociophysics, Cracow, 21-22

April 2006
† maria@list.pl

(1)

2

FENS˙Nawojczyk printed on February 2, 2008

system, discussion of the disadvantages of capitalism and its heterogeneity
became even more vivid than before [5, 6, 7].

At the same time, there has been a signiﬁcant shift in theoretical re-
ﬂection on these phenomena.
In the social sciences, the strong inﬂuence
of postmodernism results in a growing stress on the analysis of heterogene-
ity as such, on the studying of the speciﬁc rather than the general, and
on interdisciplinary research. On the other hand, contemporary economic
analysis, with its strong neo-institutional current [8], draws on psychology
and sociology.

Since the late 1980s the “new economic sociology” [9, 10] has been a
very dynamic current attempting to unify sociological and economic tradi-
tions, and has proven itself to be a fruitful approach to research. In 1985
Mark Granovetter proposed the analysis of the embeddedness of economic
processes in social structure, and his article became very inﬂuential, serving
perhaps as a “program manifesto” for this current of thought. It opened
the road to a number of interesting studies which brought a broader, more
diverse view of the socio-economic realm.

These new studies went in several interesting directions, like, for instance
a) attempts to bridge the gap between sociological and economic method-
ologies [11, 12], b) an analysis of economic phenomena through the under-
lying social value systems [13, 14, 15], and the most inspiring for me, c) an
approach stressing the cultural background of economic activities [16, 17].
The latter has, in sociology, its classic antecedence in works of Max Weber
[18, 19] and Thorstein Veblen [20].

Theories of post-industrial society [21, 22] have also proven very insight-
ful. I would particularly stress the concepts of “ﬂexibility” and “learning
organizations”, as well as the concept of knowledge as a signiﬁcant factor in
social and economic development. These theories have marked a new way
of looking at the economic processes taking place within a social structure
and a culture [23, 24, 25, 26, 27].

These sociological conceptions of economic organizations, as well as of
culturally determined processes of doing business and managing, have found
their application in the ﬁeld of intercultural management [1, 2, 28, 29].
Scholars employing this method of analysis draw upon classics (including
the modern classics) of sociology [18, 30, 31, 32, 33] and of social and cultural
anthropology [34, 35].

In the light of all these analyses, there is no doubt that today the concept
of capitalism is, culturally speaking, heterogeneous [36, 37], and that we
have to do with at least three diﬀerent patterns of capitalism: Anglo-Saxon,
German and Asian. The German model, also called continental European, is
internally heterogeneous as well and its homogenization is a painful process,
very well visible in the problems with continuous integration of the European

FENS˙Nawojczyk

printed on February 2, 2008

3

Union. All these patterns of cultures of capitalism have emerged in the
centuries-long process of evolution, and have taken shape in a “natural”
way, slowly building relatively coherent legislative and cultural systems.

Thus the cultural variation of economic activity is wide and multidimen-
sional. There are also diﬀerent methodological approaches to the relations
between culture and economy in which culture can be treated once as an
independent variable and another time as a dependent variable. On this sim-
ple binomial relation one can superimpose various levels of social analysis:
macro-, mezzo- or micro. The thus established models could be further ana-
lyzed from sociological, economic, organizational, anthropological or mixed
perspectives. Because of rising interest in these issues one can ﬁnd exam-
ples of each of the above mentioned approaches. Like in every relatively
new ﬁeld of research, there are still more questions then answers. The text
presented below is meant to participate in this discussion. So, within it,
there are also more questions than answers. To articulate these questions, I
choose as an example the analyses of the culture of capitalism provided by
Alfons Trompenaars and Charles Hampden-Turner [1, 2].

2. The model

I will start my analysis with a short presentation of the assumptions
in Trompenaars’ and Hampden-Turner’s model. Economic institutions are
the basic level of their analysis, so their primary interest is in the culture
of organization, as well as in intercultural management.
Institutions are
constituted by people, and the most important stratum for economic insti-
tutions is the managerial level. Therefore, their attitudes and their cultural
values are the subject of research for Trompenaars and Hampden-Turner.
Managers are inﬂuenced by the culture of the society within which they
were socialized, but when shaping the organizations of their institutions
and the relations between them, these managers also inﬂuence the culture
of the whole society. So the authors are regularly switching between levels
of analysis, from the attitudes of individual managers, to the roles oper-
ating within organizations, and to the “culture of economy” as such. The
interactions between these levels are neither clear nor simple and they leave
too much opportunity for unjustiﬁed generalizations. However, this way of
reasoning, even if not very precise, can be attractive and stimulating.

In order to understand how cultural values inﬂuence the choices made by
people in the economic ﬁeld, we must ﬁrst distinguish which processes are, in
this particular ﬁeld, signiﬁcant for the entire system, and then examine their
cultural dimensions. There are seven such processes and related dilemmas
which are important in analyzing the construction of a cultural system of
economy. The approach presented below was earlier applied by Charles

4

FENS˙Nawojczyk printed on February 2, 2008

Hampden-Turner and Alfons Trompenaars in their studies of international
managers [2].

Particularism vs. universalism. The process of setting and using rules
and standards to regulate economic activities on the macro-social level
(economy), as well as on the micro-social level (individual enterprise),
is very important. The eﬃciency of an economic system depends on
the ability to set universal rules while still taking exceptions into ac-
count. Thus, some societies will more likely try to put everything
under the control of general rules and others will be more willing to
treat every situation as exceptional. The practice of economic be-
havior will reﬂect the particular solutions of this cultural dilemma
between universalism and particularism.

Analysis vs. synthesis. Progress in any sphere depends on the ability to
learn. This is based on the capacity to deconstruct and reconstruct,
and reﬂects the cultural ability to think analytically or synthetically.
As a result, economic processes can be organized into a series of de-
tailed functions to be fulﬁlled (analysis) or into a single new scheme
(synthesis).

Individualism vs. collectivism. Every economic activity is based on in-
dividual initiative, entrepreneurship and on one’s drive to achieve cer-
tain goals. At the same time, the interests of groups, of the enterprise
and of the whole economic system have to be taken into account. Thus,
there is a constant cultural tension between individualism and collec-
tivism. Depending on which of the two social values is dominating,
the deﬁnitions of economic institutions and their functions will diﬀer.
This variation is particularly visible in human resources management
(personal policy, beneﬁts, evaluation etc.).

Internal vs. external control. In order to achieve certain goals the in-
dividual or group must make decisions. The question is whether they
make decisions based on their own judgement, vision and responsi-
bility or whether they take into account some external factors. The
cultural dilemma is to what extent the majority of society is likely to
be internally or externally controlled.

Time sequential vs. synchronic. Being successful in the market requires
not only making the right decisions but also making them at the right
time. The ﬁnal eﬀect can be achieved through sequence of steps, or
by synchronizing many processes at the same time. This cultural ap-
proach to time is reﬂected in the organization of economic processes.

FENS˙Nawojczyk

printed on February 2, 2008

5

Ascribed status vs. achieved status. Economic activity is realized by
economic institutions that have a hierarchical structure. The rules of
moving up in this structure are important for the development and
stability of the organization. In cultures which stress achieved status,
organizations are more ﬂexible in economic activity but they have
problems with management stability. In cultures that stress ascribed
status, economic activity is less dynamic but management is more
stabile.

Democracy vs. hierarchical structure. The structure of an economic
organization eﬀects not only managers but also every other partici-
pant. There are democratic organizations, where more participants
are involved in decision making processes and there are very hierar-
chical organizations based on giving and following orders.

Using a methodological approach characteristic for the economy, with
a tendency toward model building and based on the dimensions presented
above, we can construct two opposite ideal cultures of capitalism, obvi-
ously simplifying the actual variety of situations. One of these would be
characterized by universalism, an analytic way of thinking, individualism,
a linear approach to time, internal control, stress on achieved status and
democracy. The American model of capitalism would be an example of
this ideal type. The other ideal type would be characterized by particu-
larism, a synthetic way of thinking, collectivism, a synchronic approach to
time, external control, and stress on ascribed status and hierarchy. The
Japanese model would be an example of this second ideal type. Between
these poles there is a spectrum of various combinations of the dimensions
presented above. These combinations have examples ﬁrst and foremost in
European models of capitalism. Using the concept of embeddedness taken
from economic sociology Hampden-Turner and Trompenaars made detailed
descriptions of these models looking within historical, political and cultural
contexts for explanations of each particular cultural dilemma. Therefore,
we ﬁnd in their books references to “national character” as an explanation
of individual behavior. This solution could be questioned for two reasons.
First, it leads to the strengthening of national stereotypes. Second, in the
history of nearly every society one can ﬁnd examples where a set of com-
pletely contradictory values were nurtured. The mentioned kind of analysis
can be considered as speculation or as stimulation for further discussion. I
will treat it as a stimulating speculation. I will focus only on one of them,
universalism versus particularism.

6

FENS˙Nawojczyk printed on February 2, 2008

3. The managers attitudes

Using the database of Trompenaars and Hampden-Turner I will show
how this dilemma was solved by managers from diﬀerent European coun-
tries. Follow Hampden-Turner and Trompenaars I will present two stories
which served them as a measures of particularism-universalism dilemma.

You are drinking beer with your
friend who is responsible of safety
at work during his duty hours. One
employee become injured. You have
to testify and you are the only wit-
ness. What right has your friend to
expect you to protect him?

You are manager of a big com-
pany’s department. One of your em-
ployee with personal problems you
are aware of is constantly delayed
at work. What right has your em-
ployee to expect his fellow workers
to cover him from you?

A. My friend has a deﬁnite right
as a friend to expect me to tes-
tify to protect him.

A. He has a deﬁnite right to
expect his fellow workers to
cover him.

B. He has some right as a friend
to expect me to testify to pro-
tect him.

B. He has some right to expect
his fellow workers to cover
him.

C. He has no right as a friend to
expect me to testify to protect
him.

C. He has no right to expect his
fellow workers to cover him.

Percentage of C answers for both stories among the managers from dif-

ferent European countries:

(ﬁrst story)
Germany
Sweden
UK
Belgium
France

90
89
82
67
53

(second story)
Germany
Sweden
UK
Belgium
France

94
91
84
57
43

As above results shows, universalists are more common in Protestant
cultures — Germany, Sweden, UK. Predominantly Catholic cultures are
more particularistic — France, Belgium. These results are based only on
analysis of one social stratum — managers, and they are not representative
sample of the whole society. But they are obviously very important social

FENS˙Nawojczyk

printed on February 2, 2008

7

group and analyzing economic behavior we can treat managers as “culture
carriers”.

4. The index

That will be starting point for my analysis of universalism-particularism
In the data of
attitudes of respondents of European Social Survey [38].
ESS I have found three variables which can be treating as indicators of
particularistic or universalistic attitudes of respondents. The distributions
of these variables are presented below.

I. If you want to make money, you can’t always act honestly.

II. You should always obey law even if it means missing good opportuni-

1. Agree strongly
2. Agree
3. Neither agree or disagree
4. Disagree
5. Disagree strongly

ties.

1. Agree strongly
2. Agree
3. Neither agree or disagree
4. Disagree
5. Disagree strongly

1. Agree strongly
2. Agree
3. Neither agree or disagree
4. Disagree
5. Disagree strongly

7.5%
27.8%
18.4%
32.8%
13.5%

16.3%
48.1%
22.8%
11.0%
1.7%

2.3%
18.7%
21.8%
42.2%
15.0%

III. Occasionally alright to ignore law and to do what you want.

Based on these variables I made simple index which rage from 3 (the
most particularistic attitudes) to 15 (the most universalistic attitudes). Its
distribution is shown in Fig. 1.

On average European respondents are more likely universalist than par-
ticularist (the average total mean 10.2). The ESS was conducted in 24
European countries. The diﬀerences between countries in the mean level of
analyzed attitudes range from 9.3 for Belgium (9.5 for Ukraine and 9.7 for
Poland — three most particularistic countries) to 11.1 for Portugal (11.0
for Norway and 10.9 for France — three most universalistic countries).

The results of this simple analysis are mostly coherent with other re-
search ﬁndings eg mentioned above Trompenaars and Hampden-Turner con-
clusions. However, there are two surprising cases — France and Portugal

8

FENS˙Nawojczyk printed on February 2, 2008

Fig. 1. Histogram of index.

(see Figs. 2 and 3). Both are predominantly Catholic countries with man-
agers of particularistic attitudes rather, here with the highest score on uni-
versalistic pole of the index — Portugal and the third highest score on it
— France. Judging from the shape of a frequency polygon (presented on
the ﬁgures below) there might be diﬀerent explanations embedded in social
structure for both countries. It will require further analysis to ﬁnd causes
of these discrepancies but this task goes beyond presented text.

5. A case of Poland

I will be particularly interested in the place of Poland on the mosaic of
European cultures of capitalism. Polish culture of capitalism is particular-
istic rather than universalistic (see Fig. 4). More speciﬁcally I would say
that the dilemma between universalism and particularism in Polish culture
has been solved in such a way that Poles accept and understand univer-
salistic rules as long as they concern theoretical issues. When it comes to
practice they prefer more particularistic solutions. In the everyday life in
Poland we can ﬁnd plenty of examples of disobeying universalistic rules
and regulations due to the “exceptional character” of cases. This is a more
common situation than obeying the law. These attitudes towards legal reg-
ulations and formal institutions (e.g. state, company, or contracts) can also

FENS˙Nawojczyk

printed on February 2, 2008

9

Fig. 2. Frequency polygon of Portugal.

Fig. 3. Frequency polygon of France.

10

FENS˙Nawojczyk printed on February 2, 2008

be shaped by some historical experiences (e.g. lack of independence during
partition time and the communist system). Because of this, formal institu-
tions are still perceived as a part of “outside” world, created from above.
Thus regulations are not serving citizens but controlling them [39]. Polish
particularism is also described as familiarism [39] which divides the world
between a friendly small circle of family and friends and a larger, alien, out-
side part. This division has consequences in social relations and attitudes
toward work.

Fig. 4. Frequency polygon of Poland.

However, emergence of Polish culture of capitalism will occur, most prob-
ably, within the framework of the European Union. This will inﬂuence both
the direction and the scope of changes in the Polish economy. As the experi-
ence of the EU shows, the process of integration does not mean uniﬁcation.
In the enlarged EU, the cultural diﬀerences and interests will still have to
be managed on the supranational level, as well as on the level of individual
companies investing in foreign places. In order to manage these diﬀerences
successfully, knowledge from the presented kind of research will be very
useful.

REFERENCES

FENS˙Nawojczyk

printed on February 2, 2008

11

[1] A. Trompenaars, Ch. Hampden-Turner, Riding the Waves of Culture,

McGraw-Hill, New York 1998.

[2] Ch. Hampden-Turner, A. Trompenaars, The Seven Cultures of Capitalism,

Anchor, Doubleday, New York 1993.

[3] D. Held, et al., Global Transformations, Polity Press, Cambridge 1999.
[4] H-P. Martin, H. Schumann, Die Globalisierungsfalle, Rowohlt., Reinbek 1996.
[5] M. Albert, Capitalism Against Capitalism, Whurr Publishers, London 1993.
[6] E. N. Luttwak, Turbo-capitalism. Winners and losers in the global economy,

1998, (Polish edition) Wydawnictwo Dolno´sl¸askie, Wroc law 2000.

[7] L. C. Thurow, The Future of Capitalism, 1996, (Polish edition) Wydawnictwo

Dolno´sl¸askie, Wroc law 1999.

[8] D. C. North, Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance,

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1990.

[9] R. Swedberg (ed.), Explorations in Economic Sociology, Russell Sage Founda-

tion, New York 1993.

[10] N. J. Smelser, R. Swedberg (eds.), Handbook of Economic Sociology, Princeton

University Press and Russell Sage Foundation, New York 1994.

[11] J. S. Coleman, Am. J. Soc. 94, 95 (1988)
[12] J. S. Coleman, A Rational Choice Perspective on Economic Sociology (in:)

Smelser and Swedberg 1994, pp. 166-180.

[13] E. Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics, Harvard University Press, Cam-

bridge Mass. and London 1993.

[14] R. M. Coughlin (ed.), Morality, Rationality, and Eﬃciency: New Perspective

in Socio-Economics, M. E. Sharpe, London 1991.

[15] A. Etzioni, The Moral Dimensions: Toward a New Economics, The Free Press,

[16] P. DiMaggio, Culture and Economy (in) Smelser and Swedberg 1994, pp. 27-

New York 1988.

57.

[17] S. Zukin, P. DiMaggio (eds.), Structure of Capital: The Social Organization

of the Economy, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1990.

[18] M. Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, Charles Scrib-

ner’s Sons, New York 1958.

[19] M. Weber, Economy and Society. An Outline of Interpretive Sociology, Two
Volumes, edited by Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich, University of California
Press, Berkeley et al. 1978.

[20] T. Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class. The Challenging Analysis of Social
Conduct that Ironically Probes Miused Wealth and Conspicuous Consumption,
A Mentor Book, 1958

[21] D. Bell, The Coming of Post-Industrial Society, Basic Books, New York 1973.
[22] A. Touraine, The Post-Industrial Society, Wildwood Press, New York 1974.
[23] F. Block, Post-Industrial Possibilities: A Critique of Economic Discourse,

University of California Press, Berkeley 1990.

12

FENS˙Nawojczyk printed on February 2, 2008

[24] M. Carnoy et al., The New Global Economy in the Information Age, Pennsyl-

vania State University Press, University Park 1993.

[25] S. Lash, J. Urry, Economies of Signs and Space, SAGE Publications, London

1994.

1991.

1968.

[26] A. Toﬄer, Future Shock, Random House, New York 1970.
[27] A. Toﬄer, Power Shift. Knowledge, Wealth, and Violence at the Edge of the

21st Century, Bantam Books; New York et al. 1990.

[28] Ch. Hampden-Turner, Charting the Corporate Mind, Basil Blackwell, Oxford

[29] G. Hofstede, Cultures and Organizations. Software of the Mind, McGraw-Hill,

New York 1997.

[30] D. McClelland, The Achieving Society, Van Nostrand, New York 1950.
[31] R. K. Merton, Social Theory and Social Structure, The Free Press, New York

[32] T. Parsons, The Social System, Free Press, New York 1951.
[33] D. Riesman, The Lonely Crowd, Yale University Press, New Haven 1966.
[34] C. Geertz, The Interpretation of Cultures, Basic Books, New York 1973.
[35] E. T. Hall, The Silent Language, Anchor Press, New York 1959.
[36] D. Bell, The Cultural Contradictions of Capitalism, Heinemann, London 1979.
[37] J. D. Sachs, Reforms in Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union in
Light of East Asian Experience, Harvard Institute for Economic Development,
Cambridge Mass. 1995.

[38] R. Jowell and the Central Co-ordinating Team, European Social Survey
2004/2005: Technical Report, London: Centre for Comparative Social Sur-
veys, City University; 2005.

[39] J. Kochanowicz, M. Mira, Pol. Soc. Rev. 4, 343 (2003).

