6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
4
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
3
2
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

August 11, 2013 12:42 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

namazi

International Journal of Modern Physics C
c(cid:13) World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company

STATISTICAL PROPERTIES OF ONLINE AUCTIONS

ALIREZA NAMAZI

ANDREAS SCHADSCHNEIDER

Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Universit¨at zu K¨oln
50937 K¨oln, Germany
{an,as}@thp.uni-koeln.de

Received August 11, 2013
Revised Day Month Year

We characterize the statistical properties of a large number of online auctions run on
eBay. Both stationary and dynamic properties, like distributions of prices, number of bids
etc., as well as relations between these quantities are studied. The analysis of the data
reveals surprisingly simple distributions and relations, typically of power-law form. Based
on these ﬁndings we introduce a simple method to identify suspicious auctions that could
be inﬂuenced by a form of fraud known as shill bidding. Furthermore the inﬂuence of
bidding strategies is discussed. The results indicate that the observed behavior is related
to a mixture of agents using a variety of strategies.

Keywords: Complex systems; emergent behaviour; socio-economic systems; auctions

1. Introduction

The Internet has triggered new forms of commerce. Not only has it become possible
to order almost every product comfortably from your home, but also diﬀerent forms
of trading have become popular. Here especially the success of online auction sites
is remarkable. Through the Internet participation in auctions is no longer just for
a minority, but allows millions of consumers all over the world to buy and sell
almost any kind of product. Nowadays, auction sites rank very high in the number
of visitors, and also in the average time spent per visit.

Understanding the interactions between users is not only interesting from an
economic point of view. Surprisingly, despite the success of econophysics1,2, only
very few studies of the statistical properties of online auctions by physicists exist3,4.
Ref. 3 focused on properties of agents (i.e. bidders and sellers) in auctions, e.g. the
number of agents participating or the frequency of bids placed. It was found that on-
line auctions can be considered as complex systems that exhibit emergent behaviour.
In Ref. 4, the relation between diﬀerent agents was investigated by analyzing the
structure of the interaction network resulting from online auctions.

Online auctions are conducted in a diﬀerent way than the standard English
auction which usually ends when nobody is willing to bid higher (”soft close”). In

1

August 11, 2013 12:42 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

namazi

2 Alireza Namazi, Andreas Schadschneider

contrast, online auctions end at a ﬁxed time known to all agents (”hard close”).
Any agent oﬀering an item at an online auction house like eBay ﬁrst has to specify
the starting time, starting price and duration of the auction. Each new bid placed
by another agent has to exceed the currently listed price by a preset increment.
Agents can either bid incrementaly by placing a bid that corresponds to the current
price plus the minimal acceptable increment, or take advantage of proxy bidding.
In proxy bidding an agent indicates the maximum price he/she is willing to pay
for the given item (proxy price), which is not disclosed to other bidders. Each time
a bidder places a new bid, the auction house makes automatic bids for the agent
with an active proxy bid a, outbidding the last bid with a ﬁxed increment until the
proxy price is reached. The agent with the highest bid wins.

Due to the proxy system eBay auctions are very similar to second price
auctions5. The winner (buyer) does not pay a price corresponding to his actual
winning bid. Instead the ﬁnal price is determined by the second highest bid, plus
the preset increment.

From a physics point of view the development of a simple microscopic model for
online auctions appears to be quite challenging. In contrast to most other processes
it is essential that the dynamics ends at a certain time and that this fact is known to
all the agents. As we will show below, this is clearly reﬂected in the empirical data.
We will not deal with the problem of modelling here, but instead try to determine
the generic statistical properties of online auctions empirically. These data might
then be used in order to test the validity of model approaches.

eBay keeps a detailed record of the bidding history that is publicly available.
Bidding agents are distinguished by a unique user name. This allows to study the
dynamics of the bidding process in a quantitative way. In this paper, we analyze
and characterize the statistical properties of online auction data. We focus on the
properties of the auctions and especially the relations between various quantities
(price, number of bids placed etc.). Furthermore we also study the dynamics of the
bidding process, not only the stationary properties after the end of the auction.
This allows interesting insights into the strategies used by the agents participating
in the auction.

2. Data collection

For our investigation we have used two major sets of auction data from eBay Ger-
many (www.ebay.de) that allow us to focus on various properties in more detail.
Many of our results are found to be valid for both data sets.

The ﬁrst set (DB-1) comprises data collected from auctions running on March
22, 2004. We focus on auctions with the label ”OVP” b in the title, indicating a
new product. The data comprises 173,315 auctioned items, grouped in 9904 subcat-

aNote that at most one active proxy bid can exist at any time.
bAbbreviation for ’Originalverpackung’, meaning ’original wrapping’ or ’sealed’.

August 11, 2013 12:42 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

namazi

Statistical Properties of online auctions

3

egories by eBay. 262,508 distinct agents bidding on items and 43,500 sellers oﬀering
auctioned items are identiﬁed.

The second set (DB-2) are data collected over 10 months in the subcategories
”web projects” and ”websites & domains”. The auctions involve 11,145 agents bid-
ding on 52,373 items.

The data set DB-1 allows to study auctions where the majority of products has
a well-deﬁned value (e.g. market price) for all agents. In contrast, the set DB-2
comprises items where the value can be diﬀerent for diﬀerent agents.

3. Statistical analysis

Using these data one ﬁnds that the distribution of the total number of bids placed
by a given agent follows a power-law for both data sets. The total number of distinct
items oﬀered by a given agent (as seller) also follows a power-law distribution.

However, ﬁrst we have examined distributions of static properties (i.e. properties
at the end of an auction). A good qualitative agreement with the results of Ref. 3
is observed. E.g. the distributions of the distinct number of agents nagent simulta-
neously bidding on a certain item and the total number of bids nbids received for
an item both follow exponential distributions P (n) ∼ exp(−n/n0), where n0 = 6.5
for nbids and n0 = 2.9 for nagent. This is in agreement with Ref. 3, where the values
n0 = 5.6 for nbids and n0 = 2.5 for nagent for eBay and n0 = 10.8 for nbids and
n0 = 7.4 for nagent for eBay Korea were obtained.

The activity of

individual agents as bidder or seller follows power-law
distributions6. One can ﬁnd that the distribution of the total number of bids placed
by the same agent, denoted by nbids, follows a power law

where γ = 1.9.

In order to quantify the bidding process we deﬁne a dimensionless variable that

we call return ̺. It is the relative increase of the submitted bid b:

P (nbids) ∼ n

−γ
bids,

̺ =

b − pcurrent
pcurrent

,

(1)

(2)

where pcurrent is the current or listed price just before the bid is placed. In analogy
to the quantity used in ﬁnancial markets1,2 it measures relative changes. Very
large values of the return are usually generated by the ﬁrst submitted bid, if the
bidder follows the recommendations of eBay and submits the maximum price (s)he
is willing to pay. The distribution of ̺ is found to follow a power law for almost
three orders of magnitude with exponent −2.44 (Fig. 1). The form of the distribution
appears to be quite stable even for diﬀerent time spans of the bid submission6.

Although the bids are correlated, the returns show only very short-ranged corre-
lations. By computing the correlation function cij = h̺i̺ji − h̺ii h̺ji of the returns
(indices i denote the chronological order of arriving bids; averaging is done over

August 11, 2013 12:42 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

namazi

4 Alireza Namazi, Andreas Schadschneider

1

0.1

x
 
f

o

 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0.01

0.001

0.0001

1e-05

1

10

100
Return

1000

10000

Fig. 1. The cumulative probability distribution of returns ̺ follows a power law with exponent
−1.44.

all auctions) one ﬁnds that oﬀ-diagonal terms cij with i 6= j are very small6. This
result is rather surprising and we have currently no simple explanation.

One of the interesting questions is the functional dependence of the price on
other dynamic parameters such as number of bids. Several studies7,8,9 investigate
the inﬂuence of static parameters like the ending time (which day of the week,
on which daytime), start price, reputation of the seller etc. Much less is known
(quantitatively) about relations between dynamic parameters.

We have determined the dependence of the price on other dynamic parameters.
For the relation between the ﬁnal price pﬁnal and number of bids nbid placed on the
item a power law is found:

hpﬁnali ∝ nα

bid,

(3)

where α = 1.58 for the data set DB-2 and α = 1.53 for the data set DB-1 (Fig. 2).
This functional dependence seems to be universal and independent of the sub-
categories or time intervals used for data collection6. Especially there seems to be
no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two data sets DB-1 and DB-2.

Empirically we ﬁnd that the distribution of the ﬁnal price for ﬁxed total number
of bids is well described by a log-normal distribution6. A possible explanation uses
the observation that the returns ρi are almost uncorrelated. Assuming b = Pn in
(2), the price Pn after the n-th bid is given by a multiplicative process of the form
Pn = (̺n + 1)Pn−1. Since the returns ̺n are found to be uncorrelated, ln(Pn) =

August 11, 2013 12:42 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

namazi

Statistical Properties of online auctions

5

1000

Mon Mar 22 2004
Tue Mar 23 2004
Wed Mar 24 2004

e
c
i
r

P

 
l
l

e
S

100

10

1

1

10
Number of Bids

100

Fig. 2. Relation between ﬁnal price hpﬁnali (in Euro, for starting price 1 Euro) and number of
bids nbid for diﬀerent days based on subsets of DB-1. The straight line is a power-law ﬁt with
exponent α = 1.53.

Pn

i=1 ln(̺i + 1) converges to a Gaussian distribution for large n.
In the following we discuss a possible origin of systematic deviations from the

average behaviour described above, namely fraud.

3.1. Shill bidding

It is not uncommon that certain agents try to manipulate the sell price of the items
they oﬀer. Therefore we distinguish two diﬀerent types of bidding behaviour: 1)
All bidders try to keep the price as low as possible; 2) At least one bidder tries
to push the price higher. The second type of behaviour is known as shill bidding.
Shill bidding (also known as ”bid padding”) is the deliberate use of secondary
registrations, aliases, family members, friends, etc. to artiﬁcially drive up the price
of an item. This is strictly forbidden by eBay10, but nevertheless happens quite
frequently. Usually this sort of manipulation can be identiﬁed only after the auction
has ended because the whole purpose of shill bidding is increasing the price without
winning in the end! Shill bidding occurs mostly in auctions of products that do not
have a well-deﬁned value, e.g. market price.

We have tried to identify this sort of manipulation through the statistical prop-
erties. Indeed, successful shill bidding leads to auctions which show clear devia-
tions from the observed simple statistical laws. To quantify this we have deﬁned

August 11, 2013 12:42 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

namazi

6 Alireza Namazi, Andreas Schadschneider

a conﬁdence interval based on the assumption that the price follows a log-normal
distribution (see inset in Fig. 3). The variance σ2 of the Gaussian distribution of
the logarithm of prices with a ﬁxed number of bids characterizes the conﬁdence
interval which is indicated in Fig. 3 by the two straight lines with slopes 1.32 and
1.92, respectively.

We have performed two tests by a) investigating the statistical properties of
auctions identiﬁed e.g. from discussion forums 11 as shill bidding, and b) by checking
whether randomly chosen auctions outside the conﬁdence interval of the price-bid
relationship show indications of shill bidding. Both tests require an extensive amount
of work, e.g. the investigation of the trading history of the seller over a long time
or monitoring eBay discussion forums11. Fig. 3 shows a comparison between these
shill-auctions and the average behaviour of all auctions (DB-1 and DB-2), clearly
indicating systematic deviations.

For test a) we have chosen 9 auctions that clearly have been identiﬁed as ma-
nipulated by shill bidding, e.g. through information from discussion forums11. Only
after that we have investigated the bidding history of these auctions in more detail.
Fig. 3 shows that all of those, except for one, are clearly outside the conﬁdence
interval. For test b) 10 auctions outside the conﬁdence interval have been chosen
randomly. These have been checked thoroughly for indications of shill bidding. This
also required investigating other auctions by the same seller etc. In this way we
have found a clear indication for shill bidding in 7 of the 10 auctions.

The results of the tests indicate that it would be suﬃcient to check the suspicious
auctions (i.e. those outside of the conﬁdence interval) in more detail. This would
reduce the complexity of detecting manipulations drastically. Furthermore these
deviations usually can be observed even before the end of the auction. Monitoring
the current price as function of the number of submitted bids up to the time of
observation, one can check whether this price is inside or outside of the conﬁdence
interval in Fig. 3. In the latter case, a high current price is an indication that bidders
should be cautious (although it is no proof of shill bidding).

3.2. Bid submission times
Second price auctions were originally introduced by Vickrey5 to make everyones
bidding strategy independent of strategies used by the other bidders. It could be
shown that late bidding or bidding with a price less than one is willing to pay
are not optimal strategies. Using game theory based models16,17,18,19, it seems
hard to understand why bidders bid more than once. We analysed the collected
data and found that bidders prefer to bid close to auction ending times. Fig. 4
shows the cumulative distribution of bid submission times as a function of the time
remaining until the end of the auction. Two regimes with exponential behaviour can
be observed related to the most common auction lengths of 7 and 10 days. Both parts
are well described by P (∆t) ∼ exp(−∆t/T0) with T0 = 68.94 h. Close to the end
of the auctions so-called sniping leads to an algebraic distribution P (∆t) ∼ (∆t)−γ

August 11, 2013 12:42 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

namazi

Statistical Properties of online auctions

7

Fig. 3. Distribution of sell prices as function of the number of bids placed. Only auctions with
a starting price of 1 Euro are considered. Gray dots correspond to the average sell price for
ﬁxed number of bids. The broken lines specify the conﬁdence interval (one standard deviation)
determined from a log-normal ﬁt (see inset). This is shown for nbid = 20 in the inset. For other
values of nbid very similar results are obtained. Black dots indicate auctions identiﬁed as shill
bidding using the criteria of Refs. 12-14 (test a). Triangles denote auctions that have been tested
for possible shill bidding (test b). For black triangles strong indications for shill bidding have
been found, whereas auctions corresponding to white triangles are unsuspicious. Light-gray and
dark-gray colours denote regimes with high or low probability of shill bidding, respectively.

with γ = 1.1. Sniping is a special bidding strategy where the agent tries to submit
a winning bid just before an auction closes in order to prevent other bidders from
outbidding the sniper or driving the price higher. In fact, game-theoretic arguments
show that sniping can be advantageous19, e.g. to avoid bid wars or auction fraud
due to shill bidding.

Surprisingly, the distribution of bid submissions times is qualitatively very sim-
ilar both data sets DB-1 and DB-2. Although the scales in the exponential part
diﬀer slightly (T0 = 68.94 h for DB-2 and T0 = 90.09 h for DB-1), the exponents
of the algebraic part are almost identical. From earlier investigations16 one could
have expected a qualitative diﬀerence between the two data sets.

4. Discussion

eBay online auctions can be considered as strongly correlated processes. Correlations
are due to inﬂuences of standard market prices, supply and demand mechanisms

August 11, 2013 12:42 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

namazi

8 Alireza Namazi, Andreas Schadschneider

Fig. 4. Cumulative distribution of bid submission times as a function of the time remaining until
the end of the auction (for DB-2). Two regimes with exponential behaviour can be observed related
to the most common auction lengths of 7 and 10 days (i.e. 168 and 240 hours). Both parts are well
described by P (∆t) ∼ exp(−∆t/T0) with T0 = 68.94 h. Close to the end of the auctions sniping
leads to an algebraic distribution P (∆t) ∼ (∆t)−γ with γ = 1.1. The data set DB-1 shows a very
similar behaviour with T0 = 90.09 h and γ = 1.15 (Ref. 6).

within eBay auctions and seller’s feedback information available for any visitor of
the site15. We have shown several emerging properties, which could be seen as
an evidence of complexity. The generic statistic behavior of agents leads to a very
simple relation between price and number of bids. As an application we have found
that a kind of fraud known as shill bidding leads to signiﬁcant deviations from the
average behaviour.

Economic theories have mainly used game theoretic methods to describe
auctions16,17,18,19. These are based on the assumption of rational agents using
speciﬁc bidding strategies, like evaluation (placing one’s true value, usually early in
the auction), unmasking (bidding as long as someone else is the highest bidder, e.g.
to determine the highest bid), or incremental bidding (placing minimum acceptable
bids). Our results indicate that eBay can be regarded as a complex system con-
sisting of a mixture of agents using diﬀerent strategies. In future work we intend
to determine the inﬂuence of the rationality of the agents (in the sense of game
theory).

As mentioned in the introduction, to our knowledge so far no microscopic

August 11, 2013 12:42 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

namazi

Statistical Properties of online auctions

9

stochastic model for the description of online auctions exists. Most approaches use
game theoretical methods which focus on the eﬀects of diﬀerent strategies. Our
empirical data indicate that a model needs to take into account that a mixture
of agents with diﬀerent strategies exists which is responsible for the observed be-
haviour. This can be seen most clearly in the distribution of bid submission times. In
order to take into account the hard close of online auctions a naive approach would
use dynamical rules which are itself time-dependent, which would be a challenge for
theoretical studies of the model.

We thank Axel Ockenfels and Maya Paczuski for helpful discussions.

Acknowledgments

References

versity Press, 2000).

Cambridge, 2000)

1. R.N. Mantegna and H.E. Stanley, An Introduction to Econophysics (Cambridge Uni-

2. J.P. Bouchaud and M. Potters, Theory of Financial Risks (Cambridge University Press,

3. I. Yang, H. Jeong, B. Kahng, and A.-L. Barabasi, Phys. Rev. E. 68, 016102 (2003).
4. J. Reichardt, S. Bornholdt, physics/0503138
5. W. Vickrey, J. Finance 16, 8 (1961)
6. A. Namazi, Dissertation, Universit¨at zu K¨oln (2005)
7. M. I. Melnik and J. Alm, Jrl. Industrial Economics 50(3), 337 (2002)
8. D. Lucking-Reiley, D. Bryan, N. Prasad, and D. Reeves: Pennies from ebay: The de-
terminants of price in online auctions, Technical report, University of Arizona (2000)
9. W. Jank and G. Shmueli: Dynamic Proﬁling of Online Auctions Using Curve Cluster-

ing, unpublished (2005)

10. pages.ebay.com/help/community/shillBidding.html
11. answercenter.ebay.de (keywords: ”shill”, ”pusher”)
12. www.darlingtontown.co.uk/hintsntips/ Shill bidding on eBay.shtml (2004)
13. www.ukauctionhelp.co.uk/shill.php (2004)
14. www.basestealer.com/shilling.html (2004)
15. M. Melnik and J. Alm, Jrl. Indust. Econ. 50(3), 337 (2002).
16. A. E. Roth and A. Ockenfels, Am. Econ. Rev. 92, 1093 (2002)
17. A. E. Roth and A. Ockenfels, Games and Economic Behavior 92, 1093 (2005)
18. R. T. Wilcox, Marketing Letters 11, 363 (2000)
19. S. Barbaro and B. Bracht, www.staff.uni-mainz.de/barbaro/node5.html

