A Physical Unit for Value - Econophysics as Arbiter between

Energy Advisor, Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Aﬀairs SECO

Finance and Economics

Steivan Deﬁlla∗

(Dated: September 25, 2013)

Abstract

Finance and accounting often ignore money illusion, whereas economics treats it by using con-

sumer baskets for making multilateral purchasing power comparisons between currencies. Such

baskets are variable socio-economic phenomena and their use as numeraire (= value or real price

unit) creates inconsistency as it confuses a measurement unit with a measurement result. Econo-

physics could do better and deﬁne a physical value unit in the Standard International (SI = metric)

format based upon the exergetic (= objective) value of Planck Energy (1956.1 MJ). Planck units

form a natural system of units that is independent of culture or civilization. We deﬁne a new value

unit named walras (Wal) in honour of the economist L. Walras. By chance, one Wal is equal to

the annual real cost of physiological energy consumption of the Sleeping Beauty, i.e. of a reference

person at minimal activity. This corresponds to the annual minimum real cost of life. This pilot

research uses oﬃcial disaggregated Swiss Producer and Consumer Price Index data and estimates

the hedonic walras price (HWP), quoted in Swiss francs in 2003, and its inverse, the physical (=

objective) purchasing power (PhPP) of the Swiss franc in 2003.

PACS numbers: 01.80.+b, 06.20, 89.65.Gh

Keywords: Numeraire, exergy, Planck energy, physical purchasing power (PhPP), robust hedonic regression

6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
8
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

1. THE ANECDOTE OF THE CHEATED CHEATER

A baker once went to the judge to complain that the farmers chunks of butter were smaller

and smaller every year, which according to him meant that the farmer was cheating and

should be ﬁned. Questioned by the judge, the farmer replied that he has not noticed any

change and that he was obliged to use the bakers bread loafs as counterweights for setting

the weight of his chunks of butter as he had no other counterweights, and that if anyone was

any cheating, it was the baker.

This anecdote illustrates not only the chaos of measurement units prior to their stan-

dardized deﬁnitions, but also the fact that such deﬁnitions serve both a commercial and a

scientiﬁc purpose. The judge, enquiring about this weight unit problem as a scientist, would

today have an easy task resolving it. He could however not resolve an analogous value unit

problem (value being understood here as real price), as no standardized deﬁnition of a value

unit (numeraire, real price unit) exists yet. From the metrological point of view it is not

the diversity of currencies but their variability that constitutes the problem: The meter can

coexist with the inch, as long as it does not have a variable exchange rate against the inch

and does not lose a certain percentage of its length every year.

Finance and accounting still ignore the variability of the money unit to a large extent.

Financial statements and accounts are held in nominal currencies, income taxes are paid

on nominal income, VAT on nominal prices, dividends calculated on the basis of nominal

proﬁts, ﬁnes stated as nominal amounts. For ﬁnance, money counts more than anything

else, money is the numeraire. In terms of the above anecdote, the accountant is the farmer,

as he does not notice any drift in time. For the accountant, the optimal strategy to get rich

would be to print money. The hyperinﬂation in Germany after World War I has disproved

that strategy, as it made Germany really poor, albeit astronomically high nominal GDP

ﬁgures. Fisher[1] and Keynes[2] called this view money illusion. The more recent theory of

value by Debreu [3], however, ignores money illusion again.

2. CONSUMER BASKET ILLUSION AND INDEX INCONSISTENCY

In contrast, economics considers the consumer basket as numeraire. This allows calcu-

lating real exchange rates, also called purchasing power parities (PPP) between currencies,

2

and inﬂation, i.e. loss of purchasing power in a given time span, where from real prices, real

income, real proﬁts, real GDP, real taxes and real ﬁnes can be computed. The consumer

basket is not an ideal numeraire because it is not unique. In fact each individual has his

own consumer basket. Economics understands the composition of each individual consumer

basket as the result of constrained optimization, e.g. cost minimization under production

constraint or utility maximization under budget constraint, cf. e.g. pp. 400 ss. of [4]. These

optimization results depend on relative prices and are therefore measurement results of sub-

jective valuation of goods and services and of individual or subjective purchasing power of

money, but not a measurement unit for objective value.

For getting rid of individual basket variation, economics uses the aggregate basket as

numeraire. Even the aggregate world basket varies however in its composition in time as

a function of technological innovation, relative prices, global economic development level,

global average income and global income distribution, global ethnic composition and global

climate change. Furthermore, individual items undergo quality change in time[5]. Only the

sum of all world baskets over all the years is constant, but it is known only at the End of

History. This shows that the aggregate basket approach is either not practicable or, if it is,

it confuses a measurement unit for objective value with a measurement result of collective

or aggregate valuation of goods and services, i.e. with aggregate purchasing power of money,

which is an average. Any average is highly dependent on the data of its constitutive set.

This confusion can be called consumer basket illusion. In practice, no national statistics

authority has ever calculated national inﬂation on the basis of the world basket. The choice

of the basket remains to some extent a political one. Neither does the purchasing power

parity (PPP) calculation of the World Bank inspire suﬃcient conﬁdence to the World Bank

for using it to calculate its Members’ quotas.

This lack of conﬁdence may also have its root in the fact that the ideal multilateral

index method does not exist. The bilateral Laspeyres index[6] e.g. has been shown to

considerably overstate inﬂation and understate deﬂation (i.e. this method is not reversible,

it is systematically bullish). The Boskin Commission Report[7] has concluded that the

Laspeyres index overestimated the annual US inﬂation during the past decades by 1.1 percent

per year due to four sources of upward bias: Substitution bias, quality bias, new product bias

and outlet bias. This explains why it is often being used as stock exchange index. Similarly,

the bilateral Paasche index[8] is systematically bearish. The bilateral Fisher index[9] does

3

not have systematic bias but fails nonetheless to be transitive, i.e.

to create a unique

consistent cardinal ordering of countries in a multilateral context. This means it is sensitive

to the choice of a base country and base year.

The above problems arise if the indices are applied as star indices. A star index has a

ﬁx base year or base country. For inﬂation, chain indices have become increasingly popular.

They have no base year and link a year only with its immediate neighbors. Thus they yield a

seemingly unique year-on-year inﬂation, whose cumulation over many years gives however a

diﬀerent inﬂation from the corresponding star index over the same period. For international

comparisons, chain indices are not appropriate, because countries are not naturally ordered

in a chain. A great number of multilateral indices have therefore been proposed[10] [11];

some with a claim to be transitive. The literature on axiomatic and economic approaches

to index number calculations[12] [13] shows however that in reality, they all have at least

one major problem: Either the ordering they create is sensitive to the choice of the base

country or the base year, or it is sensitive to the inclusion of further countries or years, or it

is sensitive to the inclusion of further goods and services, or it is sensitive to the speciﬁcation

of the utility or production function the indices implicitly imply.

In terms of the above anecdote, the economist is the baker. He has the advantage over

the farmer that his bread conserves better in time than the farmers butter. Possibly he uses

the farmers butter chunks as weight standards for his bread size. But he produces many

diﬀerent bread sizes, depending on demand. Each month he keeps one loaf of each size as

reference. This leaves him with too many weight units, each giving diﬀerent measurement

results. Since Walras[14], economists believe that any good or service can be chosen as

numeraire. Less understandable are economists’ opinions that deﬁning a standardized value

(or real price) unit is useless.

3. NECESSARY PROPERTIES OF THE CORRECT NUMERAIRE CHOICE

Econophysics is ideally placed to play the role of the judge or the scientist in the above

anecdote. Due to the abstract nature of value, the conceptual challenge is however greater

than for usual physical problems. The 18th century Rationalists (Spinoza, Leibnitz) doubted

that value was at all objective and measurable (“value judgement” as opposed to measur-

able and objective fact). While subjective value clearly exists, econophysics must start

4

identifying the kind of value that is objective and measurable and deﬁne a correspond-

ing value unit and a so-called axiometric measurement procedure. The term axiometry

has sometimes been used for designating exact inﬂation measurement[15]. The Ancient

Greeks had a similar controversy about the phenomenon of light. Pythagoras and Euclid

believed that light was of anthropogenic origin, coming out of the eye and touching the

objects. For them, the sensation of sight was similar to the one of touch. With this belief,

it would have been impossible to deﬁne a measurement unit for light intensity. Modern

physics has reversed the light ﬂow direction and resolved the unit problem by deﬁning a

Standard International (SI = metric) unit: The candela (cd) is the luminous intensity, in
a given direction, of a source that emits monochromatic radiation of frequency 540 ∗ 1012

hertz and that has a radiant intensity in that direction of 1/683 watt per steradian, cf.
http : //www.bipm.f r/en/si/sibrochure/chapter2/2 − 1/candela.html. This unit has been

deﬁned on the basis of an objective physical phenomenon precisely in order to measure the

intensity of a subjective sensation by the human eye.

This physical paradigm may be replicated for deﬁning objective and measurable value.

The human eye corresponds in economics to the markets, and the light it receives to the real

income. The physical paradigm reverses the ﬂow direction of value: Value, even subjective

value, is originally not of anthropogenic origin, but comes into markets as primary value

from outside, carried by one or more of the goods or services available on a market, from

where it reaches economic agents who experience it as subjective value. The 18th century

Physiocrats[16] had a similar view.

The success story of physical methods lies in the ﬁxity and precision of its measurement

units. The better the units, the better the instruments, and the better the results.

In

physics, the same measurement units are valid for all the theories and models. Imagine a

downhill skier coming with near light speed such that his subjective time and distance both

diﬀer from the time and distance of a ﬁx observer. The deﬁnitions of the meter and the

second do not change between the skier and the observer. In the relativistic case it would

however be necessary to consider the ﬁx observer as reference for measuring the performance

of all the moving skiers. Only his clock is invariant to any of the skiers’ performances and

can be called objective. Economics is a competitive process (or a game for real income)

whose inputs (goods and services used as factors or raw material inputs) are valued as a

function of their contributive performance in that real income generating process. Objective

5

value is performance or productivity in that process. A physical concept of productivity

has been deﬁned as catalytic activity. The corresponding SI unit is called katal, deﬁned as

mol/s. But it still remains for econophysics to deﬁne which good or service is an economic

numeraire that is invariant to the individual or aggregate performance of economic agents

and hence objective. An ideal numeraire choice has to satisfy the following criteria:

1) The numeraire must be a scalar. Weighted consumer baskets or vector type numeraires

are always measurement results and do not produce unique consistent multilateral orderings

of the countries’ real incomes, as the futile search for ideal multilateral indices shows.

2) The numeraire must have a unique objective value in a reference environment. In par-

ticular, its objective value in the reference environment must be diﬀerent from its production

cost and its market price and also be diﬀerent from any subjective, collective or aggregate

valuation.

large.

3) The numeraire must not have quality variations that inﬂuence its value. This excludes

the choice of labour as numeraire, as the quality variation of one labour hour is extremely

4) The numeraire must not have a zero market price. If it had a zero market price, it

could not be used for dividing nominal prices (division by zero). This excludes taking some

natural resources such as air, water and subsoil natural resources as numeraire.

5) The numeraire must be a one-time consumable. Only one-time consumables may have

a unique objective value in a reference environment. The objective value of durables (e.g.

real estate) is not unique (it depends on how the agents use them) and not known before

the end of their life cycle (e.g. for real estate in the inﬁnitely far future). This criterion also

excludes the choice of gold as numeraire.

6) The numeraire should not be a man-made product, which might disappear if it

is not produced any more.

Such a numeraire will have a limited temporal and geo-

graphic validity. This is the main limitation of the Big Mac numeraire, cf.

http :

//www.economist.com/markets/Bigmac/Index.cf m, which would satisfy all the other cri-

teria.

7) The numeraire must be present in all (or at least in higher) living organisms, as value

results from the drive of biological organisms to acquire resources.

In physical science there exists one concept that satisﬁes all the above criteria. It comes

from engineering and is called exergy. It is almost unknown in physics, but is of central

6

importance for deﬁning value. The term has ﬁrst been proposed by Z. Rant[17]. Exergy
(noted A, available work) is deﬁned as A = E −TaS. E stands for total energy and Ta for the

environmental equilibrium temperature, S for entropy. For the engineer, exergy is the process

(or objective) value of energy, its theoretically maximum work available in an environment

of temperature Ta. Exergy gives the thermodynamic quality of energy as a function of the

environment. It is a one-time consumable, contrary to energy that is conserved in time and

to entropy that is increasing in time in a closed system. In the deﬁnition of exergy, entropy

is taken with negative sign as negentropy. The term TaS called anergy. If Ta is ﬁx, anergy is

increasing in time, proportionally to entropy. For a comprehensive bibliography on exergy

see http : //exergy.se/.

The exergy concept combines the ﬁrst and the second thermodynamic principles. This

diﬀerentiates an exergetic numeraire from a negentropic numeraire that would only use the

second thermodynamic principle. Geogescu-Roegen[18] concentrated on the second principle

only. Internal energy is an intrinsic state function, whereas exergy has in common with e.g.

colour and value to be extrinsic : The exergy of substances depends on their physical and

chemical environment, just as colours of objects depend on the colour of the incoming light

source, and the value (and price) of goods and services depends on the value (and price)

of competing goods, on the real (and nominal) purchasing power of buyers, but also on the

physical and chemical environment (a fridge is of little value to the Eskimos). Marx erred

in his belief that value was intrinsic to goods (in centrally planned economies such as in the

former Soviet Union, the price of the goods used to be engraved in the good). But also the

so-called intrinsic value of bonds is an error of terminology; not even money has an intrinsic

value, in spite of a face value being printed on it. The value of money is called purchasing

power and is an extrinsic quantity that depends on the supply and velocity of money and

on what goods and services money eﬀectively buys (quantity theory of money)[19].

In practice, the exergy of combustible goods available on the market is determined by

their gross caloriﬁc value (GCV), measured experimentally by combustion in the calorimet-

ric bomb in pure oxygen at high pressure (40 bar). The procedure is deﬁned in several

international standards: ISO standard 1928:1995 for solid fuels, the DIN 51900-1:2000-04

standard for liquid fuels. The net caloriﬁc value (NCV) and the exergetic value (EXV) are

both calculated from GCV by subtracting latent heat of vapour for NCV and by making

all the other latent heat corrections for EXV, depending on the chosen equilibrium environ-

7

ment. The main problem of EXV is the deﬁnition of a reference environment that must be

in physical and chemical equilibrium[20][21]. Several attempts have been made to describe

an earth-like equilibrium[21]. In one heavy-handed calculation, Diederichsen[22] determines

the equilibrium by minimizing the Gibbs potential over all the phases of the 17 most com-

mon elements and 971 most common compounds of the terrestrial atmosphere, hydrosphere

and lithosphere. He cannot ﬁnd any earth-like equilibrium without appropriate parame-

terization; the earth is not in equilibrium. This can be remedied by setting the reference

temperature Ta equal to 2.7 K, the temperature of the cosmic microwave background radi-
ation. At this reference temperature, the Carnot factor (T − Ta)/T of commercial energy

products, showing their degree of reversibility, is higher than 0.99, limiting the diﬀerence

between energy and exergy to less than 1 percent. Exergy is then practically identical to

energy as understood in daily life.

Widespread is the belief that value is a function of rarity. How rare is exergy? The

total energy of the Universe remains constant and it can therefore naturally be set to 0, as

Stephen Hawkins proposed on p. 111 of[23]. In contrast, the total exergy of the Universe

is positive and decreasing. At Ta equal to 2.7 K, it is practically identical to the total mass

and the total radiation of the Universe. Exergy is the potential fuel of the Universe. It is

the most common thing in the Universe. This is why one can call physical purchasing power

(PnPP) the one computed on the basis of an exergetic numeraire. Things are very diﬀerent

on the earth where Ta ﬂuctuates around 288 K, which creates a Carnot factor of around

0.3 for most commercial energy products and hence a much higher irreversibility. On earth,

technically controllable exergy of desired quality is a relatively rare good. A proof of the

rarity of exergy on earth is also the fact that some people starve. This rarity is a decreasing

function of the level of technical and economic development.

Exergy is the thermodynamic or extrinsic quality of energy in a given environment. Be-

sides that, commercial energy has many intrinsic qualities. Each energy product that diﬀer-

entiates itself from similar products by at least one physical or chemical characteristic has its

own intrinsic quality. The eﬀect of such quality diﬀerences between products on price can be

analyzed by using so-called hedonic regression. The term hedonic has ﬁrst appeared in[24].

Hedonic regressions and are ever more used also in exact inﬂation measurement (axiome-

try), especially for estimating quality change[25]. They can also be used for explaining price

changes between specimens of a large variety of models as function of their main character-

8

istics (characteristics model)[26][27]. Hedonic regressions yield product-neutral parameters,

in our case a product-neutral hedonic numeraire price and its inverse, a product-neutral

physical (or objective) purchasing power (PhPP) of money.

4. NECESSITY OF A DISTINCTIVE BASE UNIT FOR VALUE

After having shown the basic communality of value with exergy, namely its extrinsic

character, it is important to show an essential diﬀerence. Exergy is consumed in the economic

process, whereas value is increased or added. This increase is the result of three factors: An

increase of the quantity of each product (quantitative growth), an increase in the quality of

ﬁnished products (qualitative growth, e.g. more negentropy in goods), and an increase of the

number of diﬀerent products (growth of consumer basket size, greater variety or diversity).

The advantage of the exergetic numeraire is that it easily allows evaluating all three types of

economic growth, while the consumer basket numeraire deliberately hides the growth of the

consumer basket size and has great diﬃculties with treating quality change, i.e. correctly

separating qualitative growth from inﬂation.

The following demonstration shows that exergy cannot be chosen directly as numeraire.

Instead, a new value unit must be deﬁned in terms of exergy and this value unit must be

chosen as numeraire.

Assume that exergy was chosen as numeraire.

In that case all real wealth would be

expressed as nominal wealth divided by the hedonic exergy price, i.e. measured e.g.

in

[USD] and divided by [USD/J], which reduces to [J] as money cancels out:

Any one of the three above forms of real economic growth would violate the ﬁrst and second

thermodynamic principles, increasing energy and exergy inside the economy without a cor-

responding input. Any other scalar material numeraire (e.g. a Gold or Big Mac numeraire)

would violate the mass conservation law. Value is not gold nor Big Macs nor exergy. In-

stead, the exergetic numeraire expresses real wealth as exergy value equivalent. With that

deﬁnition, economic growth does not violate any physical laws or principles. There could be

no simpler demonstration that value is not reducible to any other scalar physical quantity,

just as temperature is not reducible to energy and light intensity is not reducible to power.

[USD]
[USD/J]

= [J]

9

If value is not reducible, then the value unit cannot be deﬁned as a derived unit in terms

of a formula, but necessitates a distinctive base unit in language form, similar to the other

base units of the metric (= SI) system (meter, kilogram, second, ampere, kelvin, mole and

candela).

Now we choose the quantity of exergy in the deﬁnition of the value unit. The least
arbitrary choice corresponds to the Planck energy, q¯hc5/G, equalling 1956.1 MJ. Planck
proposed the Planck units in 1899 and called them natural units as they are “constant for

all times and all civilisations, even for non-human ones”[28]. They are deﬁned as square

roots of the fundamental physical constants G, c, ¯h and k. Their most up to date CODATA

values can be found at http : //physics.nist.gov/cuu/index.html. The Planck energy is

the only Planck unit of human scale. Planck units simplify theoretical physics. With the

Planck unit c=1, Einsteins famous mass equivalence of energy becomes numerically E = m,

i.e. the Planck energy is numerically equal to the Planck mass, but mass and energy remain

distinct concepts. With the unit k=1, the average energy per particle per degree of freedom

is numerically equal to half the corresponding temperature. With k=1, information and

statistical entropy diﬀer numerically only by a factor ln2.

As for the name of the new value unit, one can follow the practice of the metric (= SI)

system, which names units in honour of scientists who have made outstanding contributions

in their respective research ﬁeld. It is proposed that the new metric value unit be named in

honour of the economist Leon Walras (1834 - 1910) who has been the ﬁrst to write a complete

multi-equation model of general equilibrium and has proved that there exists exactly one

numeraire at equilibrium. The proposed name and deﬁnition of the new metric value unit

are as follows:

1 walras (Wal) is the value of 1956.1 MJ of exergy in an environment at equilibrium

temperature of 2.7 K.

In Romance languages and in English, the abbreviation Wal reminds of value.

The use of the Planck energy in the deﬁnition of the new value unit can be justiﬁed on

pragmatic grounds, too. Consumer basket comparisons are valid only for the transaction

size corresponding to the standard quantity of the basket components. Quantity discounts

10

TABLE I:

The Planck energy =

¯hc5/G

p

= 543 kWh electricity

= 1956.1 MJ

= 1 year lamp burning at 62 Watt

= 52 l (= 43 kg) diesel oil

= 59 l (= 44 kg) gasoline

= Slightly more than one car tank

= Slightly more than 1/3 barrel of oil

= 60 l (= 55 kg) olive oil

= 60 - 90 kg hard coal

= 117 kg sugar

= 150 - 200 l wood cuts

and non-constant returns to scale are evidence that money might be non-linear in value.

A transaction of 1000 USD might not have the same value as 10 transactions of 100 USD.

For this reason, the hedonic regression in this research uses transactions as observations.

This guarantees the validity of the results for all observed transaction sizes, but the results

might be non-linear and call for the deﬁnition of a standard transaction size for comparing

currencies. This transaction size should be of the same order of magnitude as commercial

transactions. By chance the Planck energy, equalling 1956.1 MJ, satisﬁes this criterion

reasonably well. TABLE I gives some commercial energy equivalents of the Planck energy.

The Planck energy is also equivalent to 1 year of uninterrupted energy consumption at

a rate of 1280 kcal per day. This can be compared with the human metabolic rate, which

depends on the four factors: Gender, age, weight and activity of the person. A consumption

of 1280 kcal per day corresponds to the Resting Metabolic Rate (RMR) of a person of

female gender, of the age category 18 - 30, weighing about 53 kg, at rest; cf. Appendix

on p. 134 of[29]. For this category, the daily kcal consumption C is given by the equation

C = 14.7W + 496, where W is the weight in kg. The Sleeping Beauty perfectly matches the

description of this category. The Planck energy can be interpreted as her annual minimum

physiological energy consumption. A value of one walras equals the value of this amount

of energy, i.e. her annual minimal real cost of life. This physiological minimum is many

times lower than the social minima of various countries or the average cost of living used as

measurement unit in inﬂation indices.

Hereafter we summarize the provisional results of the estimation of the Hedonic Walras

Price (HWP) in Switzerland in 2003 and of its inverse, the Physical Purchasing Power

(PhPP) of the Swiss Franc in 2003. The results are provisional because only one country

11

and year have been studied yet. Both the hedonic Walras price (HWP) quoted in CHF and

its inverse, the physical purchasing power PhPP of the CHF are quasi linear in transaction

size. HWP at transaction size of 1 Wal was 102.35 CHF per Wal in 2003. In terms of the

physiological interpretation, this means that the annual minimum real cost of life (i.e. of

physiological energy consumption) of the Sleeping Beauty, if bought in one transaction, was

102.35 CHF in 2003. We propose to take the HWP of the Swiss franc in 2003 as conventional

standard denominator transforming nominal 2003 wealth, expressed in CHF, to real wealth.

The resulting dimension of real wealth is the Wal:

[CHF ]
[CHF/W al]

= [W al]

Conversely, the PhPP of the Swiss franc at transaction size of 1 Wal was 0.01 Wal / CHF

in 2003. The PhPP of the Swiss franc in 2003 is proposed as the conventional standard

proportionality factor transforming nominal CHF 2003 wealth to real wealth, which again

has the dimension Wal:

[CHF ] ∗ [W al]
[CHF ]

= [W al]

With this convention, all nominal prices, including the price data set underlying this

research can be transformed to real prices. This convention also allows keeping real private,

public and national accounts in terms of Wal. The real per capita GDP of Switzerland in

2003, estimated from nominal per capita income divided by HWP, amounts provisionally

to 577 Wal per person per year, interpreted as 577 times the biological minimum real cost

of life if acquired in transactions of size 1 Wal. Econophysics authors studying the physics

of income distribution[30][31] have found an analogy between the average annual per capita

income of an economy and the temperature of a gas. The present contribution substantiates

this analogy: If the income is taken as real annual per capita income and expressed in Wal per

person per year, it is directly proportional to energy (expressed in MJ) with proportionality

factor 1956.1 MJ / Wal per person per year. The temperature of a gas, expressed in K,

is known to be proportional to energy (expressed in J), too, with proportionality factor
k/2 = 0.6903252E − 23J/K per particle per degree of freedom. Thus, the analogy between

real income and temperature consists of the fact that they are both proportional to energy.

12

5. CONCLUSION

We have begun this article with the anecdote of the cheated cheater. We could just as

well have started it with the anecdote of the orchestra having no standard for musical pitch

and whose musicians were told that an invisible hand automatically produces the missing

standard and tunes their instruments while they are playing. This is to show that neither

quantitative empirical sciences like physics or economics nor fair games like the real income

game nor artistic works like a piece of music can exist without a priori reference units.

All these units must be of physical nature in order to guarantee their invariance. This

contribution will hopefully strengthen conﬁdence in ﬁnance and economics and show the

new role of econophysics in bringing them together.

APPENDIX: HEDONIC REGRESSION

The model underlying the estimation of the Hedonic Walras Price (HWP) and its inverse,

the Physical Purchasing Power (PhPP) is the so-called covariance model, cf. p. 254 of[32]. It

regresses transaction prices P on the corresponding quantity of numeraire V, on other metric

variables or characteristics Cj and on one dummy variable Dj for each energy product:

P = α0 + αV V + α1C1 + α2C2 + ... + αkCk + αk+1D1 + ... + αk+pDp + ε

The above model can be called price model, as the transaction price is the dependent variable.

A dual form of this model exists, regressing the transaction numeraire V on the transaction

price P, with Cj and Dj as other covariates:

V = β0 + βP P + β1C1 + β2C2 + ... + βkCk + βk+1D1 + ... + βk+pDp + δ

The dual model can be called value-model, as the numeraire is the dependent variable. The

primal and the dual models are related as follows:

V =

(P − α0 − α1C1 − α2C2 − ... − αkCk − αk+1D1 − ... − αk+pDp − ε)

1
αV

In the primal model, the marginal or hedonic walras price (HWP), which is our primal

quantity of interest, is given by

p′
V =

∂P
∂V

(C1, C2, ..., Ck, D1, ..., DP )

13

Sometimes this marginal price is called marginal value[33] or implicit price, characteristics

price, hedonic price or “shadow price” [5]. The dual model naturally gives the physical

purchasing power (PhPP) of the currency, which is our dual quantity of interest. It is given

by

v′
P =

∂V
∂P

(C1, C2, ..., Ck, D1, ..., DP )

In the general non-linear case, PhPP is the inverse of the HWP only if V is monotonous in

P and vice versa. In this case, one can estimate both models and retain whichever gives a
better statistical ﬁt. In linear models, p′

V is given by αV and v′

P by βP with αV = 1/βP .

The estimation of HWP and PhPP of the Swiss Franc in 2003 has been carried out on

the basis of 24’249 disaggregated energy price observations from the Swiss Federal Statistics

Oﬃce’s Consumer Price Index (CPI) and Producer Price Index (PPI) surveys for 2003.

The meta-information of the CPI and PPI includes deﬁnitions of the consumer categories

(for electricity, gas and district heating, e.g.

for gas: 1000 kWh/year, 20’000 kWh/year,

50’000 kWh/year, 100’000 kWh/year, 500’000 kWh/year) and quantity bands (for heating

oil) to which the observed prices apply. Transaction sizes have been constructed for all

the metric variables (P, V and the mass M) on the basis of this meta-information and of

experimental fuel tests[34] (for liquid fuels) or of publicly available information (for all the

other energy products). Transaction sizes of grid bound energies (electricity, gas, district

heating) are calculated for a standard contract duration (the same for all), which can be

varied for improving statistical ﬁt. Duration of 1 day has given the best ﬁt. Hence it would

in principle be possible to estimate a daily HWP and PhPP. For the cases where prices do

not depend on transaction size (e.g. motor fuels and wood products), a single transaction

size per product has been assumed. The provisionally best model is:

lnV = γ0 + γP lnP + γM lnM + γ1D1 + ... + γ6D6 + η

In order to allow the natural log to be taken for all observations of all metric variables, all

electricity transactions have been given a symbolic mass corresponding to the mass of one

electron, independent of transaction size. The names of the co-variates, their coeﬃcients’

values, standard errors and respective t-ratios are given in TABLE II.

TABLE II orders the energy products by their quality, from district heating (lowest) to

electricity (highest, having no mass).

In the non-linear model, only the massless energy

can be chosen as reference category. This provisionally best model is part of the class of

14

Co-variate

Mean value

Standard error

t-ratio

Constant (= electricity)

Ln of Price

Ln of Mass

District Heating (Dummy)

Car Fuel (Dummy)

Extra Light Heating Oil (Dummy)

Raw Wood (Dummy)

Gas ( Dummy)

Dry Wood (Dummy)

0.0993

0.0016

0.0019

0.1446

0.1344

0.1394

0.1430

0.1348

0.1435

27.8

637

76.6

-70.5

-75.3

-68.9

-65.6

-64.1

-56.4

Transaction Size (Wal)

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

1’000

HWP (CHF / Wal)

101.06

101.71

102.35

103.00

103.66

104.32

PhPP (Wal / CHF)

0.010

0.010

0.010

0.010

0.010

0.010

models with adjusted R2 = 99.5. Among these, this model is the one with the least number

of predictors, i.e. with the coarsest grouping of dummy variables, so that only 6 from

originally 15 of them remain. Hence, this model has 6 + 1 = 7 product categories. After

having removed the logarithms, these results allow stating the provisional correspondence

between transaction size, the hedonic numeraire price HWP and the physical purchasing

power PhPP, all with respect to the reference category electricity, as shown in TABLE III.

The regression results of the present pilot study are provisional. The standard gross

caloriﬁc value (GCV) has been taken as proxy for the exergetic value (EXV) at 2.7 K. Only

energy prices have been taken, neglecting food and animal feed prices. The provisional

model, limited to one country and one year, is based upon ordinary least squares (OLS)

regression, as it reasonably well satisﬁes the corresponding hypotheses. The deﬁnitive model

will have to be robust with respect to outliers, valid for many countries and years, and has

therefore to be based upon robust regression.

TABLE II:

2.76385

0.997256

0.143162

-10.2020

-10.1222

-9.60717

-9.38472

-9.18417

-8.09755

TABLE III:

15

∗ steivan.defilla@seco.admin.ch; this research is a personal view and does not reﬂect the

position of SECO. Acknowledgements: Hans Wolfgang Brachinger (University of Fribourg),

Daniel T. Spreng, (Center for Energy Policy and Economics, ETH Zurich), Swiss Federal

Statistics Oﬃce and SECO, Bern.

[1] I. Fisher, The Money Illusion (1928).

bridge University Press, 1936).

[2] J.-M. Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (Macmillan Cam-

[3] G. Debreu, Theory of Value, an Axiomatic Analysis of Economic Equilibrium, Cowles Foun-

dation Monograph 17 (Yale University Press, 1959).

[4] A. C. Chiang, Fundamental Methods of Mathematical Economics (Mc Graw Hill, 1984), 3rd

ed.

[5] R. A. Pollak, Journal of Public Economics 20, 25 (1983).

[6] E. Laspeyres, Jahrb¨ucher f¨ur Nationaloekonomie und Statistik (1871).

[7] M. J. Boskin et al., Tech. Rep., US Senate Finance Committee (1996), URL http://www.

ssa.gov/history/reports/boskinrpt.html.

[8] H. Paasche, Die Geltentwertung zu Halle a. S. in den letzten Decennien dieses Jahrhunderts

(Pl¨otz, Halle a. S., 1875).

[9] I. Fisher, The Making of Index Numbers: A study of their varieties, tests and reliability (1922).

[10] R. Summers and A. Heston, Quarterly Journal of Economics pp. 327 – 368 (May 1991).

[11] P. Neary, American Economic Review 94 (2004).

[12] E. W. Diewert, National Bureau fo Economic Research, Working Paper Nb. 5559 (1996).

[13] R. J. Hill, American Economic Review 94 (2004).

[14] L. Walras, El´ements d’´economie politique pure, ou th´eorie de la richesse sociale (1874, pub-

[15] C. M. Walsh, The problem of estimation (P. S. King and Son, London, 1921).

[16] F. Quesnay, Tableau ´economique (1758).

[17] Z. Rant, Forschung des Ingenieur-Wesens 22, 36 (1956).

[18] N. Georgescu-Roegen, The Entropy Law and the Economic Process (Harward University Press,

lished 1877).

1971).

16

[19] I. Fisher, The Purchasing Power of Money: Its determination and relation to credit, interest

and crises (1911).

[20] J. Ahrends, VDI Forschungsheft, VDI-Verlag, D¨usseldorf (1977).

[21] J. Ahrends, Energy 5, 667 (1980).

[22] C. Diederichsen, Fortschritt-Ber. VDI-Reihe 19 (1991).

[23] S. Hawkins, Theory of everything, the origin and fate of the Universe (New Millennium Press,

2002).

1971).

[24] A. T. Court, in The Dynamics of Automobile Demand (General Moors Corporation, New

York, 1939), pp. 99 – 117.

[25] Z. Griliches, in Price indexes and quality change, Studies in new methods of measurement,

edited by Z. Griliches (Harward University Press, 1971).

[26] K. J. Lancaster, Journal of Political Economy pp. 132 – 157 (1966).

[27] K. J. Lancaster, Consumer Demand: A New Approach (Columbia University Press, New York,

[28] M. Planck, Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 5, 479 (1899).

[29] L. A. Smolin and M. B. Grosvenor, Nutrition: Science and Applications (Saunders College

Publishing, Orlando, Florida, 2000), 3rd ed.

[30] A. Dragulescu and V. M. Yakovenko, Physica A 299 (2001).

[31] J. Mimkes and Y. Aruka, in Econophysics of Wealth Distribution, edited by B. K. C. A. Chat-

terjee, S. Yarlagadda (Springer, 2005), Econophysics-Kolkata I.

[32] R. S. Pindyck and D. L. Rubinfeld, Econometric models and economic forecasts (Mc Graw

Hill, 1988), 7th ed.

[34] E. M. P. EMPA (1999), pr¨ufbericht.

[33] R. C. Feenstra, National Bureau fo Economic Research, Working Paper Nb. 5061 (1995).

17

