Ghosts, Vampires and Zombies
Cinema Fiction vs Physics Reality
Costas J. Efthimiou1 and Sohang Gandhi2

Abstract

6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
5
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
5
0
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

We examine certain features of popular myths regarding ghosts, vampires and zombies as they
appear in ﬁlm and folklore. We use physics to illuminate inconsistencies associated with these
myths and to give practical explanation to certain aspects.

1

Introduction

Perhaps for many, ghosts, vampires, zombies and the like are no more than Hollywood fantasy. How-
ever, increasingly these movies have come to reﬂect popularly held pseudoscientiﬁc beliefs. For in-
stance, the movie “White Noise,” starring Michael Keaton, is based on the new trend among paranor-
malists — Electronic Voice Phenomena (EVP). The occult underground in both America and Europe
is witnessing a trendy rise in vampirism and belief in voodoo zombieﬁcation which is widespread in
many parts of South America and Africa. Further, paranormal depictions in the media, especially
television and Hollywood, have a deﬁnite inﬂuence on the way people think about paranormal claims
([Sparks 1998, Sparks 2006] and references therein).

In this article we point out inconsistencies associated with the ghost, vampire and zombie mytholo-
gies as portrayed in popular ﬁlms and folklore, and give practical explanations to some of their features.
We also use the occasion as an excuse to teach a little about physics and mathematics.

Of course the paranormalist or occultist could claim that the Hollywood portrayal is a rather
unsophisticated and inaccurate representation of their beliefs, and thus the discussion we give hear
is moot. However, if they are to change their deﬁnition each time we raise issue, then all that they
are really arguing is that there exists something out there which may be given the name ‘ghost’, for
instance. Surely, no skeptic could argue with this.

2 Ghosts

2.1 Sudden Colds

It has become almost a Hollywood cliche that the entrance of a ghostly presence be foreshadowed by
a sudden and overwhelming chill (see, for example, “The Sixth Sense”, starring Bruce Willis). In fact,
sharp temperature drops are very commonly reported in association with supposed real-life encounters
with ghosts or poltergeists. This feature of supposed ghost sightings lends itself naturally to physical
explanation.

The famous Haunted Gallery at Hampton Court Palace near London, UK, is reputedly stalked by
the spirit of Catherine Howard, who was executed on 13 February, 1542, by Henry VIII. Visitors to the
room have described hearing screams and seeing apparitions in the gallery. A team of ghost-busting
psychologists, led by Dr Richard Wiseman of Hertfordshire University, installed thermal cameras and
air movement detectors in the gallery. About 400 palace visitors were then quizzed on whether they
1C.J. Efthimiou is a theoretical physicist at the University of Central Florida (UCF). He is the advisor of the local
Campus Freethought Alliance (CFA) chapter which he helped to establish at UCF. Address: Department of Physics,
UCF, 4000 Central Florida Blvd, Orlando, FL 32816. costas@physics.ucf.edu

2S. Gandhi has just received his BS in physics with honors. Among his many awards, he has been a Goldwater scholar
and an NSF fellow and was selected for the 2006 all-USA third team. He has served as the president of the CFA chapter
at UCF. In fall 2006, he will be a graduate student in physics at Cornell University.

1

could feel a “presence” in the gallery. More than half reported sudden drops in temperature and some
said they sensed a ghostly presence. Several people claimed to have seen Elizabethan ﬁgures.

Before moving on to an explanation, we will need to outline the concept of heat. When a ‘warm’
object is placed next to a ‘cool’ object (see ﬁgure 1) energy will begin to ﬂow from the warmer body,
causing it to cool, to the cooler body, causing it to warm. This energy, which is being transferred
between the two objects due to their diﬀerence in temperature, is called heat. Note that an object is
never said to ‘possess’ any amount of heat. Heat is only deﬁned through transfer. For instance, no
matter how high one turns their stove, it never possesses any degree of heat. In the instance where
someone suddenly touches the stove, however, there is there occurrence heat — it is the energy ﬂowing
from the stove to that person’s hand.

Figure 1: Heat always moves from a hotter object to a colder object. Picture is borrowed from
[Kirkpatrick & Francis 2007].

As heat continues to be transferred from the warmer body to the cooler one in ﬁgure 1, and
the warmer body’s temperature continues to drop while the cooler body’s temperature climbs, there
comes a point when the two bodies are at the same temperature. At this point heat ceases to ﬂow
between the two object since neither is the hotter one and heat has no deﬁnite direction in which to
be transferred. This condition is called thermal equilibrium.

In our stove example, heat was transferred via conduction — the exchange of heat through direct
contact. There are two other modes by which heat may be transferred. These two modes involve
the exchange of heat by two objects which are separated by some distance. If these two objects are
emersed in a ﬂuid (Earth’s atmosphere for example), then the warmer body may provide heat to the
ﬂuid in its immediate vicinity. This warmer ﬂuid will then tend to rise thus coming in contact with
a cooler body above. There may also be a lateral current in the ﬂuid, thus allowing the heated ﬂuid
to aﬀect a cooler body to the side. This type of heat transfer, by an intermediary ﬂuid, is called
convection.

Figure 2: Convection currents in a ﬂuid. Picture is borrowed from [Bolemon].

2

In ﬁgure 2(a) we give an example of what is known as convection currents. Suppose that the right
wall is kept warm and the left wall is kept cool. Then air in contact with the right wall will tend to
gain heat and then rise while air in contact with the left wall will tend to loose heat and then sink.
The circular ﬂow that then forms is called a convection current. Air cycles around a loop picking
up some heat at the right wall, dropping it oﬀ at the left wall, and then coming back around again.
Actually, the air current pattern will be somewhat more complicated then what we just described.
There will be all kinds of smaller cycles and eddies embedded in some complex pattern as in ﬁgure
2(b). The overall ﬂow, however, will be as in ﬁgure 2(a).

The third mode of heat transfer allows for exchange between two separated objects even if they
are in a total vacuum. How can two objects exchange heat if there is no mater in between them? The
answer is radiation. The thermal energy of a body is expressed in the ‘jiggling’ of its various constituent
particles. As electrically charged particles within a body jiggle about, they produce electromagnetic
waves. When these waves hit another body, they cause the particles in that body to jiggle even more
than they were before and thus the body heats up. Since hotter bodies produce more of this radiation,
there will be more radiation from the hotter body falling upon the cooler body than radiation from
the cooler body falling upon the hotter body. Thus, overall, the hotter body will be loosing heat while
the cooler body will be gaining heat. We will not be too concerned with this particular mechanism
for heat exchange here.

Returning to the Haunted Gallery at Hampton Court Palace, Dr Wiseman’s team reported [BBC 2001]

that the experiences could be simply explained by the gallery’s numerous concealed doors. These el-
derly exits are far from draught-proof and the combination of air currents which they let in cause
sudden changes in the room’s temperature. In two particular spots, the temperature of the gallery
plummeted by up to 2◦C (3.6◦F). “You do, literally, walk into a column of cold air sometimes,” said
Dr Wiseman. “It’s possible that people are misattributing normal phenomena... If you suddenly feel
cold, and you’re in a haunted place, that might bring on a sense of fear and a more scary experience.”
The rumor that ‘cold spots’ are associated with ghosts seems to be a myth created by the construction
of old building and the vivid imagination of people.

But how could a few degrees drop in temperature explain the dramatic chills described so many
in ghostly accounts? First oﬀ, what we sense as cold is not correlated to temperature so much as
to the rate at which heat is being transferred from our body to the environment. For instance, even
in a temperate pool, one feel a very sharp chill when one ﬁrst enters. A moderate draft containing
condensed moisture could cause a very sharp sensation of cold. Secondly, we are all aware of the
‘tall-tale’ eﬀect. Memories tend to become distorted and exaggerated. It is exactly this reason why
scientists tend not to rely on unchecked eyewitness accounts.

2.2 The Inconsistency of the Notion of Material-lessness

Popular myth holds that ghosts are material-less. For instance in the movie “Ghost” (starring Patrick
Swaze, Demi Moore, Whoopi Goldberg), the recently deceased main character tries desperately to
save his former lover from a violent intruder. His attempts grant him no avail, as at each lunge he
passes right through the perpetrator. It is interesting, however, that he was able to walk up the stairs
just previous to this. In fact, this is a common feature of the ghost myth. Ghosts are held to be able to
walk about as they please, but they pass through walls and any attempt to pick up an object or aﬀect
their environment in any other way leads to material-less ineﬃcacy — unless they are poltergeists, of
course!

Let us examine the process of walking in detail. Now walking requires an interaction with the
ﬂoor and such interactions are explained by Newton’s Laws of Motion. Newton’s ﬁrst law is the law
of inertia. It states that a body at rest will remain at rest until acted upon by an external force.

3

Figure 3: Two stills taken from the movie “Ghost”. I the left still the ghost goes through a door. In
the right still, the ghost — which follows a burglar in his girlfriend’s home — looses his balance as he
ascends the staircase and falls on the stairs.

Therefore, a person cannot start walking unless a force, applied by some body other than herself, is
acting upon her. But where is the force coming from? The only object in contact with the person
while walking is the ﬂoor. So, the force moving a person during walking is coming from the ﬂoor. But
how does the ﬂoor know to exert a force when the person wants to start walking and stop exerting it
when the person wants to stand? Actually, there is no magic here. The person actually tells the ﬂoor.
She tells the ﬂoor by using Newton’s third law.

Newton’s third law says that if one object exerts a force on another object, then the second object
exerts a force, that is equal but oppositely directed, on the ﬁrst object — hence “for each action there
is an equal but opposite reaction.” Thus when the skate-boarder in ﬁgure 4 pushes on the wall, the
wall pushes right back on her, causing her to accelerate oﬀ to the left.

Figure 4: An example of Newton’s third law known as action-reaction law. Picture is borrowed from
[Bolemon].

Thus walking goes like this (see ﬁgure 5): The person wanting to do the walking must remain at
rest unless a force acts on her. She gets the ﬂoor to apply a force on her by applying a backward force
on the ﬂoor with her foot. She keeps repeating this action, alternating feet. The point is that for the
ghost to walk, it must be applying forces to the ﬂoor. Now the ﬂoor is part of the physical universe.
Thus the ghost has an aﬀect on the physical universe. If this is so, then we can detect the ghost via
physical observation. That is, the depiction of ghosts walking, contradicts the precept that ghosts are
material-less.

So which is it? Are ghosts material or material-less? Maybe they are only material when it comes

4

Figure 5: Forces acting on the feet of a person while walking. Picture is borrowed from [Bolemon].

to walking. Well then we must assume that they can’t control this selective material-lessness, otherwise
Patrick Swayze would have saved his girlfriend in “Ghost.” In this case, we could place stress sensors
on the ﬂoor and detect a ghost’s presence. Maybe they walk by some other supernatural means. Well
why can’t they use this power to manipulate objects when they want to? Even more, it seems strange
to have a supernatural power that only allows you to get around by mimicking human ambulation.
This is a very slow and awkward way of moving about in the scheme of things. In any case, you’d
have to go to some lengths to make this whole thing consistent.

Incidentally, the reader may have noticed that we skipped a law in our discussion. We heard about
the ﬁrst law and the third law. Newton’s second law of motion is that the acceleration of an object —
the rate at which it speeds up — is proportional to the force applied, the constant of proportionality
being the mass. We didn’t need this law for our discussion but mention it for completeness.

3 Vampires

Anyone who has seen John Carpenter’s “Vampires” or the movie “Blade” or any of the host of other
vampire ﬁlms is already quite familiar with how the legend goes. The vampires need to feed on human
blood. After one has stuck his fangs into your neck and sucked you dry, you turn into a Vampire
yourself and carry on the blood sucking legacy. The fact of the matter is, if vampires truly feed with
even a tiny fraction of the frequency that they are depicted to in the movies and folklore, then the
human race would have been wiped out quite quickly after the ﬁrst vampire appeared.

Let us assume that a vampire need feed only once a month. This is certainly a highly conservative
assumption given any Hollywood vampire ﬁlm. Now two things happen when a vampire feeds. The
human population decreases by one and the vampire population increases by one. Let us suppose
that the ﬁrst vampire appeared in 1600 AD. It doesn’t really matter what date we choose for the
ﬁrst vampire to appear; it has little bearing on our argument. We list a government website in the
references [US Census] which provides an estimate of the world population for given any date. For
January 1, 1600 we will accept that the global population was 536,870,911.3 In our argument, we had
at the same time 1 vampire.

We will ignore the human mortality and birth rate for the time being and only concentrate on the
eﬀects of vampire feeding. On February 1st, 1600 1 human will have died and a new vampire born.
This gives 2 vampires and (536, 870, 911 − 1) humans. The next month there are two vampires feeding
3It may seem odd to the reader that we have speciﬁed the population with so much precision — we have a number
in the one-hundred millions and have speciﬁed it all the way down to the ‘one’s place’ (...911). We chose the particular
value for convenience. The actual estimated population in the 17th century is 562 ± 17 millions. Beyond mathematical
simpliﬁcation, our choice has little impact on the argument to follow. If we were to report any number in the range of
possible values for the population in year 1600, the end result of our calculations below would be essentially the same.

5

Month Vampire Population Human Population Month Vampire Population Human Population

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

1
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
2048
4096
8192
16384

536870911
536870910
536870908
536870904
536870896
536870880
536870848
536870784
536870656
536870400
536869888
536868864
536866816
536862720
536854528

16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

32768
65536
131072
262144
524288
1048576
2097152
4194304
8388608
16777216
33554432
67108864
134217728
268435456
536870912

536838144
536805376
536739840
536608768
536346624
535822336
534773760
532676608
528482304
520093696
503316480
469762048
402653184
268435456
0

Table 1: Vampire and human population at the beginning of each month during a 29 month period.

and thus two humans die and two new vampires are born. This gives 4 vampires and (536, 870, 911−3)
humans. Now on April 1st, 1600 there are 4 vampires feeding and thus we have 4 human deaths and
4 new vampires being born. This gives us 8 vampires and (536, 870, 911 − 7) humans.

By now the reader has probably caught on to the progression. Each month the number of vampires

doubles so that after n months have passed there are

vampires. This sort of progression is known in mathematics as a geometric progression — more
speciﬁcally it is a geometric progression with ratio 2, since we multiply by 2 at each step. A geometric
progression increases at a very tremendous rate, a fact that will become clear shortly. Now all but
one of these vampires were once human so that the human population is its original population minus
the number of vampires excluding the original one. So after n months have passed there are

2 × 2 × . . . × 2
|
{z
}
n times

n
= 2

n
536, 870, 911 − 2

+ 1

humans. The vampire population increases geometrically and the human population decreases geo-
metrically.

Table 1 above lists the vampire and human population at the beginning of each month over a
29 month period. Note that by month number 30, the table lists a human population of zero. We
conclude that if the ﬁrst vampire appeared on January 1st of 1600 AD, humanity would have been
wiped out by June of 1602, two and half years later.

All this may seem artiﬁcial since we ignored other eﬀects on the human population. Mortality
due to factors other then vampires would only make the decline in humans more rapid and therefore
strengthen our conclusion. The only thing that can weaken our conclusion is the human birth rate.
Note that our vampires have gone from 1 to 536,870,912 in two and a half year. To keep up, the human
population would have had to increase by the same amount. The website [US Census] mentioned
earlier also provides estimated birth rates for any given time. If you go to it, you will notice that the

6

human birth rate never approaches anything near such a tremendous value. In fact in the long run,
for humans to survive, our population must at leat essentially double each month! This is clearly way
beyond the human capacity of reproduction.

If we factor in the human birthrate into our discussion, we would ﬁnd that after a few months, the
human birthrate becomes a very small fraction of the number of deaths due to vampires. This means
that ignoring this factor has a negligibly small impact on our conclusion. In our example, the death
of humanity would be prolonged by only one month.

We conclude that vampires cannot exist, since their existence contradicts the existence of human
beings. Incidently, the logical proof that we just presented is of a type known as reductio ad absurdum,
that is, reduction to the absurd. Another philosophical principal related to our argument is the truism
given the elaborate title, the anthropic principle. This states that if something is necessary for human
existence, then it must be true since we do exist. In the present case, the nonexistence of vampires
is necessary for human existence. Apparently, whomever devised the vampire legend had failed his
college algebra and philosophy courses.

4 Zombies

The zombie legends portrayed in movies such as “Dawn of the Dead” or “28 Days Later” follow a
similar pattern to the vampire legends. Once you are bitten by zombies, while you may manage to
escape immediate death, you will eventually die and turn into a zombie yourself. Thus, this particular
type of zombie legend suﬀers the same ﬂaw that we pointed out for the vampire legend previously. We
still have some more work to do, however. There exists a second sort of zombie legend which pops its
head up throughout the western hemisphere — the legend of ‘voodoo zombieﬁcation’. This myth is
somewhat diﬀerent from the one just described in that zombies do not multiply by feeding on humans
but come about by a voodoo hex being placed by a sorcerer on one of his enemy. The myth presents
an additional problem for us: one can witness for them self very convincing examples of zombieﬁcation
by traveling to Haiti or any number of other regions in the world where voodoo is practiced.

We describe the particular case of Wilfrid Doricent4, an adolescent school boy from a small village
in Haiti. One day Wilfred had become terribly ill. He was experiencing dramatic convulsions, his
body had swelled tremendously and his eyes had turned yellow. Eight days latter, Wilfred appeared
to have died. This was conﬁrmed by not only by the family and family friends present but also by the
local medical doctor who could detect no vital signs. Wilfred’s body appeared to show bloating due
to rigor-mortis and gave oﬀ the foul stench of death and rot. His body was buried soon thereafter.

Some time afterward, the weekly village cock-ﬁght was interrupted as an incognizant ﬁgure ap-
peared. The villagers were shocked as they gazed upon the exact likeness of Wilfred. The arrival was
indeed Wilfred as his family veriﬁed by noting scars from old injuries and other such details. Wilfred,
however, had lost his memory and was unable to speak or comprehend anything that was spoken to
him. His family had to keep him in shackles so that he wouldn’t harm himself in his incoherent state.
It appeared that Wilfred’s body had risen from death leaving his sole in the possession of some voodoo
sorcerer. Word of Wilfred’s ‘zombieﬁcation’ spread quickly throughout the village. It was believed
that Wilfred’s uncle, a highly feared voodoo sorcerer who had been engaged in a dispute over land
with Wilfred’s family, was the culprit. Wilfred’s uncle was later charged with zombieﬁcation, a crime
in Haiti equivalent to murder.

Is this truly a case of supernatural magic? To answer this question, we turn our attention to a
4We claim no major originality in the presentation of what follows — except in collecting the material from the
sources and arranging it as seen. Doricent’s case is nicely described in the documentary [Clark 2002]. The relation
between zombies and TTX was ﬁrst noticed by the Harvard ethnobotanist Wade Davis in 1982.

7

Figure 6: Wilfrid Doricent, the zombie, with his parents.

highly toxic substance called tetrodotoxin (TTX). Bryan Furlow gives a nice overview [Furlow 2001]
of TTX’s eﬀects blended with a headlining news story:

At ﬁrst the US federal oﬃcers thought they had stumbled upon a shipment of heroin.
The suspicious package they intercepted last year [2000], en route from Japan to
a private address in the US contained several vials packed with a white crystalline
powder. But on-the-spot tests revealed that it was no narcotic. It took a while for
forensic scientists at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California to
identify a sample, and what they found was alarming. The powder turned out to be
tetrodotoxin (TTX): one of the deadliest poisons on Earth.
Gram for gram, TTX is 10,000 times more lethal than cyanide... This neurotoxin has a
terrifying modus operandi—25 minutes after exposure it begins to paralyze its victims,
leaving the brain fully aware of what’s happening. Death usually results, within hours,
from suﬀocation or heart failure. There is no antidote. But if lucky patients can hang
on for 24 hours, they usually recover without further complications...
The Livermore team estimated that to extract the 90 milligrams of TTX discovered
by the Feds, you’d need between 45 and 90 kilograms of puﬀer ﬁsh livers and ovaries—
the animal’s most deadly tissues. No one knows what use its intended recipient had
in mind...

Figure 7: Puﬀer ﬁsh.

TTX is found in various sea creatures and, in particular, in the species of puﬀer ﬁsh. Puﬀer ﬁsh
are a delicacy in Japan known as ‘fugu’ where only trained and licensed individuals prepare it by
carefully removing the viscera. Of course, despite the care taken in preparation, about 200 cases of
puﬀer ﬁsh poisoning are reported per year with a mortality rate 50%. The symptoms of the poisoning
are as follows [US FDA]:

8

The ﬁrst symptom of intoxication is a slight numbness of the lips and tongue, ap-
pearing between 20 minutes to three hours after eating poisonous puﬀer ﬁsh. The
next symptom is increasing paraesthesia in the face and extremities, which may be
followed by sensations of lightness or ﬂoating. Headache, epigastric pain, nausea, di-
arrhea, and/or vomiting may occur. Occasionally, some reeling or diﬃculty in walking
may occur. The second stage of the intoxication is increasing paralysis. Many vic-
tims are unable to move; even sitting may be diﬃcult. There is increasing respiratory
distress. Speech is aﬀected, and the victim usually exhibits dyspnea, cyanosis, and
hypotension. Paralysis increases and convulsions, mental impairment, and cardiac ar-
rhythmia may occur. The victim, although completely paralyzed, may be conscious
and in some cases completely lucid until shortly before death. Death usually occurs
within 4 to 6 hours, with a known range of about 20 minutes to 8 hours.

Sometimes however, a victim pronounced dead, is lucky enough to wake up just before his funeral
and report to his bewildered family that he was fully conscious and aware of his surroundings through-
out the entire ordeal. Therefore, TTX has the unusual characteristic that if a nonlethal dose is given,
the brain will remain completely unaﬀected. If just the right dose is given, the toxin will mimic death
in the victim, whose vitals will slow to an immeasurable state, and whose body will show signs of
rigor-mortis and produce the odor of rot. Getting such a precise dose would be rare for the case of
fugu poisoning, but can easily be caused deliberately by a voodoo sorcerer, say, who could slip the
dose into someone’s food or drink.

Figure 8: Fr`ere Dodo, ex-voodoo priest, conﬁrms that the recipe used to make the drug for zombieﬁ-
cation includes a powder derived from the puﬀer ﬁsh.

The secrets of zombieﬁcation are closely guarded by voodoo sorcerers. However, Fr`ere Dodo, a
once highly feared voodoo sorcerer who is now an Evangelican preacher and ﬁrm denouncer of the
voodoo faith, has revealed the process. It turns out that zombieﬁcation is accomplished by slipping
the victim a potion whose main ingredient is powder derived from the liver of a species of puﬀer ﬁsh
native to Haitian waters.

Well, we now have an explanation for how Wilfred could have been made to seem dead, even under
the examination of a doctor. However, we have already said that the TTX paralysis was unlikely to
have aﬀected his brain. How does one account for Wilfred’s comatose mental state? The answer
is oxygen deprivation. Wilfred was buried in a coﬃn in which relatively little air could have been
trapped. Wilfred’s story probably goes something like this: Slowly, the air in Wilfred’s coﬃn began to
run out so that by the time he snapped out his TTX-induced paralysis, he had already suﬀered some
degree of brain damage. At this point his survival instincts kicked in and he managed to dig himself
out of his grave — graves tend to be dug shallow in Haiti. He probably wondered around for some
time before ending up back at the village.

9

Figure 9: Brain scan of W. Doricent. The doctor points to legions in the ventricular system of the
right frontal cone.

Neuropsychiatrist Dr. Roger Mallory, of the Haitian Medical Society, conducted an MRI of zom-
bieﬁed Wilfred’s brain. He and his colleagues found legions of the type normally associated with
oxygen starvation. It would seem that zobieﬁcation is nothing more then a skillful act of poisoning.
The bodily functions of the poisoned person suspend so that he appears dead. After he is buried alive,
lack of oxygen damages the brain. If the person is unburied before he really dies from suﬀocation,
he will appear as a soulless creature (‘zombie’) as he has lost what makes him human: the thinking
processes of the brain.

5 Conclusion

We have examined the science behind three of the most popular pseudoscientiﬁc beliefs encountered
in Hollywood movies. We have shown two of them — the idea of ghosts and vampires — to be
inconsistent and contradictory to simple facts. For the third — the idea of zombies — we have made
no attempt to deny that it relies on real cases. However, we have reviewed evidence showing that the
concept is a misrepresentation of simple criminal acts.

Popular belief in these myths is an indication of a lack of critical thinking skills in our society.
With simple arguments one can easily discredit the validity of such claims. We thus ﬁnish with the
following quote by Carl Sagan [Sagan 1979]:

Both Barnum and H.L. Mencken are said to have made the depressing observation that no one
ever lost money by underestimating the intelligence of the American Public. The remark has
worldwide application. But the lack is not intelligence, which is in plentiful supply; rather, the
scarce commodity is systematic training in critical thinking.

References

[BBC 2001] Palace Ghost Laid

to Rest,

BBC News,

Thursday,

29 March,

2001,

http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk/1249366.stm.

[Bolemon] Jay Bolemon, A Window to Our World, 2003.

[Clark 2002] Episode Zombies—The Living Dead? from the Arthur Clarke’s Mysterious Universe,

DVD, American Home Treasures 2002.

[Furlow 2001] Bryant Furlow, The freelance poisoner, New Scientist, issue 2274, 20 January 2001.

10

[Kirkpatrick & Francis 2007] Larry D. Kirkpatrick, Gregoy E. Francis, Physics, a world

view, 6th ed., Thomson 2007.

Group 1979, p. 58.

[Sagan 1979] Carl Sagan, Boca’s Brain: reﬂections on the romance of science, Ballantine Publishing

[Sparks 1998] Glenn G. Sparks, Paranormal Depictions in the Media: how do they aﬀect what

people believe?, Skeptical Inquirer, July/August 1998, p. 35.

[Sparks 2006] Glenn G. Sparks, Media Eﬀects Research: A basic overview, 2nd ed., Thomson 2006.

[US Census] U.S. Census Bureau, http://www.census.gov.

[US FDA] U.S. Food & Drug Administration, http://vm.cfsan.fda.gov/%7Emow/chap39.html

11

