6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
8
1
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A STRONG FACTOR FOR THE
REDUCTION OF INEQUALITY

Diego Sa´a 1
Copyright c(cid:13)2006

Abstract

The inequality is computed through the so-called Gini index. The
population is assumed to have the variable of interest distributed ac-
cording to the Gamma probability distribution. It is proved that the
Gini index is reduced dramatically when the population is grouped.
The number of individuals in the groups is the relevant parameter, but
this number does not need to be very large in order to obtain a very
substantial reduction of inequality. A new index to measure inequality
is proposed, which is simply the entropy of the Gamma distribution.

PACS :
87.23.Ge Dynamics of social systems
02.50.-r Probability theory, stochastic processes, and statistics
65.50.+m Thermodynamic properties and entropy

Keywords: econophysics, thermodynamics, probability distributions, Gini

index, inequality, entropy

1. INTRODUCTION
The Gamma probability distribution is a powerful and ﬂexible distribu-
tion that applies with absolute precision to a great variety of problems and
systems in thermodynamics, solid state physics, economics, etc.

The present author has suggested [9] that this distribution should replace,
in particular, the Planck distributions, used to describe the blackbody radi-
ation distribution, as well as the Maxwell velocity distribution for ideal gases.

Also, in the area of econophysics, the Gamma distribution should replace
proﬁtably all of the other distributions currently used, such as the following

1Escuela Polit´ecnica Nacional. Quito – Ecuador. email: dsaa@server.epn.edu.ec

1

(some of them are the same one and are instances of the Gamma distribu-
tion): Gibbs, negative exponential or simply exponential, Boltzmann, log-
normal, power law, Pareto-Zipf, Erlang and Chi-squared. Simulations and
applications using the Gamma distribution [1], [7], [8], [10], have shown that
the Gamma distribution better ﬁts the actual distribution of the variable of
interest.

In the present paper the author develops the formula to compute the Gini
index corresponding to some variable distributed in a population according
to the Gamma probability distribution.

2. THE GINI INDEX

The Gini index, Gini ratio or Gini coeﬃcient, is probably the most well-
known and broadly used measure of inequality used in economic literature.

The Gini index derives from the Lorenz Curve. To plot a Lorenz curve,
order the observations from lowest to highest on the variable of interest, such
as income, and then plot the cumulative proportion of the population on the
X-axis and the cumulative proportion of the variable of interest on the Y-axis.

If all individuals have the same income the Lorenz curve is a straight
diagonal line, called the line of equality. If there is any inequality, then the
Lorenz curve falls below the line of equality. The total amount of inequality
can be summarized by the Gini index, which is the proportion of the area
enclosed by the lines of equality and the Lorenz curve divided by the total
triangular area under the line of equality.

In the ﬁgure below, the diagonal line represents perfect equality. The
greater the deviation of the Lorenz curve from this line, the greater the in-
equality. The Gini index is double the area between the equality diagonal
and the Lorenz curve. The minimum value of the Gini can be zero (perfect
equality) and the greater can be one (the case when a single member of the
population holds all of the variable). [4]

2

Figure 1: The Gini index

3. THE GAMMA DISTRIBUTION

The author of this paper has proposed [9] that the Gamma distribution
seems to be the correct distribution of blackbody energy radiation, money
and other variables from comparable continuous systems.

The Gamma probability distribution function (pdf ) [9] has the form

P (p, λ, x) =

λp · xp−1
Exp(λ · x) · Γ(p)

The parameters of this distribution are called the shape parameter (p)

and the scale parameter (λ).

The Gamma function satisﬁes:

(1)

(2)

This expression is the equivalent, for the Gamma distribution, of the

Γ(p) =

xp−1e−xdx

∞

Z
0

3

partition function deﬁned in classical thermodynamics for the Boltzmann
distribution.

The incomplete Gamma function Γ(p, λ · x), used in the following, has a
similar integrand, and the only diﬀerence is that the lower limit of integration
is λ · x instead of zero.

If the value of the variable p is particularized to an integer value then

this distribution converts into the Erlang distribution.

If the variable p has the value 1, the Gamma distribution converts into the
negative exponential distribution, also called Boltzmann, Gibbs, Boltzmann-
Gibbs or simply exponential law.

In the area of econophysics, the use of the so-called Pareto or power law
distribution is very common, although it is obvious that it is not a probability
distribution (where the sum or integral of probabilities is equal to the unity)
because its integral does not converge. It should be proﬁtably replaced by
the Gamma distribution with the proper parameters.

The average of a quantity x distributed according to the Gamma distri-

bution is

As a result, if we keep the average of x equal to the unity then p must
be equal to λ. Nevertheless the larger the values of p = λ the smaller the
variance since this is given by:

The maximum of the Gamma distribution is at the position

xmax =

= hxi −

p − 1
λ

1
λ

(3)

(4)

(5)

hxi =

p
λ

σ2 =

p
λ2

4

4. INCOME OF GROUPS OF EARNERS

Dragulescu and Yakovenko [2] compute the distribution of the combined
income of two earners and get the following formula, which they ﬁnd in
excellent agreement with the income data of the USA population. They
assume that the income r of two earners is the sum of the individual incomes:
r =r 1+r 2. Hence, the total income pdf, P2(r), is given by the convolution

P2(r) =

P1(x) · P1(r − x)dx =

(6)

r
R2 e−r/R

r

Z
0

where the individual incomes r 1 and r 2 are assumed to be uncorrelated
and to have exponential distributions of the form: P 1 (r)=e −r /R/R, where R
is the average income of the population.

As is well known, the exponential distribution, also called Boltzmann
or Gibbs distribution, is a special case of the Gamma distribution when
the parameter p is equal to 1. Whereas the resulting expression (6) is a
Gamma distribution with parameter p=2. This expression describes the
income distribution of a population of groups of two earners.

By generalizing this idea and maintaining constant the scale parameter
λ we can verify that the convolution of two Gamma distributions, with re-
spective shape parameters p1 and p2, produces another Gamma distribution
with shape parameter p1+p2 :

P (p1 + p2, λ, r) =

P (p1, λ, x) · P (p2, λ, r − x)dx

r

Z
0

P (p1 + p2, λ, r) =

λp1+p2
Γ(p1 + p2)

rp1+p2−1e−λ·r

(7)

If we interpret the shape parameter p as the number of earners then equa-
tion (7) simply says that the income distribution of the sum of incomes of
two groups, with respective number of earners p1 and p2, is given by the
(Gamma) income distribution of the sum of earners. The parameters p can
have any positive real values.

5

5. THE GINI INDEX OF GROUPED EARNERS

The horizontal axis of the Lorenz curve, x (r ), represents the cumulative
fraction of population with income below r, and the vertical axis y(r ) repre-
sents the fraction of income this population accounts for.
The respective values for these fractions is given by the following formulas
[3]:

x(r) =

P (p, λ, r′)dr′ = 1 −

r

Z
0

y(r) =

r

∞

0 r′ · P (p, λ, r′)dr′
0 r′ · P (p, λ, r′)dr′ = 1 −
R
R

Γ(p, λ · r)
Γ(p)

Γ(p + 1, λ · r)
Γ(p + 1)

(8)

(9)

Then, replacing (8) and (9) into the following integral, we get the Gini

index for the Gamma probability distribution:

G = 2 ·

(x(r) − y(r)) · dr

(10)

1

Z

0

Whose result is:

G(p, λ) =

− 2

2
λ

Γ(p, λ)
Γ(p)

+ 2

Γ(p + 1, λ)
λ · Γ(p)

+ 2

Γ(p + 1, λ)
Γ(p + 1)

− 2

Γ(p + 2, λ)
λ · Γ(p + 1)

(11)

Now, if we instantiate the parameter p to 1, this formula gives the Gini
index for the exponential distribution (which is not a constant as Dragulescu
computes in [3]). It simpliﬁes to:

G(1, λ) =

− 2 · e−λ ·

2
λ

1 +

(cid:18)

1
λ (cid:19)

(12)

This is the Gini distribution for one earner and for any value of the pa-

rameter λ.

Let us compute the Gini for the Gamma distribution for a few earners
(integer values of the parameter p), assuming that the parameter λ is the

6

unity.

The following table shows the Gini index corresponding to each value of p
between 1 and 5, and the proportion of the ﬁrst Gini relative to the second,
etc.

p Gini(p)

1
2
3
4
5

52.848
16.060
3.798
0.732
0.119

Proportion
Gini(p)/Gini(p+1)
3.29
4.23
5.19
6.16

Table1. Gini index as a function of the number of earners (p)

This table shows a dramatic reduction of the Gini index of more than 36
points when the number of earners passes from 1 to 2 and of more than 12 ad-
ditional points when the number of earners rises from 2 to 3. The proportion
between the Gini index corresponding to a given number p of earners and
the following, p+1, grows steadily as the number of earners grows; however
this increase is marginal, regarding the reduction of the number of eﬀective
Gini points, for more than 5 earners.

It is important to know this mechanism for the reduction of inequality.
But, of course, the next more important issue would be how to form the
groups and achieve the redistribution, of the individual income of each one
of the individuals that constitute the group of earners, among all of them.
This point is addressed very brieﬂy here and should be addressed more deeply
by other investigators.

The persons that constitute the groups must be selected randomly from
the entire population, which is assumed to have a Gamma probability distri-
bution of the income. Otherwise I would prefer to “share my wealth” with
Gates and Rockefellers.

More seriously, the ﬁnancial institutions, welfare, non-governmental orga-
nizations, etc. should prefer to ﬁnance and help groups instead of to partic-

7

ular individuals. There already are many forms of organizations in the world
that procure this kind of behavior, such as cooperatives, kibbutz, comunas
(from common), families, etc., which have demonstrated to be a very good
mechanism for the redistribution of the income and consequent reduction of
poverty and inequality.

6. ENTROPY OF THE GAMMA DISTRIBUTION

The entropy of the Gamma distribution was deﬁned by the present author

in other paper [9] in the form:

S(p, λ, x) = 1 −

Γ(p, λ · x)
Γ(p)

(13)

where p and λ are the shape and scale parameters of the Gamma distri-
bution and x is the variable being distributed. Note that this expression is
identical to (8).

Expression (13) is the deﬁnition of the “non-extensive” entropy, in the
sense that it does not have units and is precisely the cumulative distribu-
tion function (CDF) of the Gamma probability distribution. The incomplete
Gamma function alone, which is the numerator in this expression, can be
considered as the corresponding “extensive entropy”.

Litchﬁeld [5] compares several measures of inequality and exposes, fol-
lowing Cowell, that any a member of the Generalized Entropy (GE) class of
inequality measures satisﬁes ﬁve axioms, which we now try to apply to the
Gamma entropy:

The Pigou-Dalton Transfer Principle. An income transfer from a poorer
person to a richer person should register as a rise (or at least not as a fall)
in inequality and an income transfer from a richer to a poorer person should
register as a fall (or at least not as an increase) in inequality.

This axiom does not apply, since the Gamma distribution is obtained from
an equilibrium equation among actors with diﬀerent incomes. Any transfer
between them should maintain the Gamma distribution and hence also the
equilibrium. The entropy of the Gamma distribution does not depend on the
individual incomes but on the complete statistical distribution.

8

Income Scale Independence. This requires that the inequality measure be

invariant to changes in scale as happens say when changing currency unit.

The Gamma distribution passes this test because the parameter λ works

as an average that suppresses any additional factor in the variable x.

Principle of Population. This principle requires inequality measures to
be invariant to replications of the population: merging two identical distri-
butions should not alter inequality.

Again, the Gamma distribution is a statistical distribution and therefore

is not aﬀected by the number of individuals in the population.

Anonymity. This axiom, sometimes also referred to as ‘Symmetry’, re-
quires that the inequality measure be independent of any characteristic of
individuals other than their income.

The Gamma distribution satisﬁes this axiom trivially.

Decomposability. This requires overall inequality to be related consis-
tently to constituent parts of the distribution, such as population sub-groups.
For example if inequality is seen to rise amongst each sub-group of the pop-
ulation then we would expect inequality overall to also increase.

The Gamma distribution satisﬁes this axiom through the Gini index as-
sociated with the Gamma distribution, as was proved in section 5. The
parameter p of the Gamma entropy also takes into account the number of
members in the groups, but with a more compact expression.

7. CONCLUSIONS

The analysis shown in section 4 proves that the Gamma entropy solves the
so-called Gibbs’ paradox. Current Physics assumes that the entropy should
not change as a result of mixing two amounts of identical gases. In the present
paper it has been proved that this assumption does not hold when we use
non-extensive deﬁnitions of entropy, such as the cumulative or normalized
Gamma entropy. It is also doubtful that the entropy will not change for the
extensive case.

For example, in his “Thermodynamics Lecture Notes” [6], Prof. Profes-
sor Donald B. Melrose, Director, RCfTA and Head of Theoretical Physics,
School of Physics, University of Sydney says: “It follows that the entropy

9

increases in this case and it is not diﬃcult to see that the entropy change as a
result [of] mixing is always positive. If they [the gases] are identical then the
change in entropy must be zero and yet the calculation seems to imply that
there is a change in entropy. This is referred to as the Gibbs paradox. There
is no simple physical resolution of the Gibbs paradox within the framework
of classical statistical mechanics.”

It is clear that the entropy associated with the distribution (7), which
is the distribution of the combined income of two earners, is given by the
Gamma entropy with parameter (p1 +p2 ), whereas the income distributions
of the each one of the earners have associated individual Gamma entropies
with respective parameters p1 and p2. Therefore, the entropy associated
with the sum of a certain variable belonging to two or more actors must
change even though the actors were identical. The original entropies are re-
covered if, for the studied variable, the individual incomes of the actors are
again considered independently.

In both cases the population is the same but the values for the studied
variable are diﬀerent. The diﬀerent income values depend on the grouping
of individuals and on the corresponding averaging of the variable.

The non-extensive entropy computed for groups with the same number
of individuals must not change for a new population obtained combining two
populations that have the same statistical properties. The statistical (non-
extensive) properties of the combined population, such as average temper-
ature, are conserved; however, the corresponding extensive properties, such
as the total energy or money of the system and even the particular values
corresponding to each particle or individual of the population, necessarily
change.

References

[1] Bhattacharya, Mukherjee & Manna. Detailed simulation results for some
wealth distribution models in Econophysics. arXiv: physics/0504161 v1,
Apr 2005.

10

[2] Dragulescu, Adrian &Yakovenko, Victor. Statistical Mechanics of
Money, Income, and Wealth: A Short Survey. arXiv: cond-mat/0211175.
Nov. 2002.

[3] Dragulescu, Adrian. Applications Of Physics To Economics And Fi-
nance: Money, Income, Wealth, And The Stock Market. arXiv: cond-
mat/0307341 v2, 16 Jul. 2003.

[4] Hale, Travis. The Theoretical Basics of Popular Inequality Measures.

University of Texas Inequality Project.
http://utip.gov.utexas.edu/tutorials/theo basic ineq measures.doc

[5] Litchﬁeld, Julie A. Inequality: Methods and Tools. March 1999.

http://www.worldbank.org/poverty

[6] Melrose, Donald B. Lecture 2: Maxwell Distribution:

Ideal Gases.

http://ckw.phys.ncku.edu.tw/public/pub/WebSources/Melrose/
www.physics.usyd.edu.au/rcfta/thermo.html

[7] Patriarca, Chakraborti & Kaski. Gibbs versus non-Gibbs distributions

in money dynamics. Physica A 340 (2004) 334-339. Elsevier.

[8] Patriarca, Chakraborti & Germano. Inﬂuence of saving propensity on
the power law tail of wealth distribution. arXiv: physics/0506028 v1,
Jun 2005.

[9] Sa´a, Diego. On An Improvement Of The Planck Radiation Energy Dis-
tribution. In: http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0603117 v3, Jul 2006.

[10] Scafetta, Picozzi & West. A trade-investment model for distribution of

wealth. Physica D 193 (2004) 338-352. Elsevier.

11

