6
0
0
2
 
g
u
A
 
2
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
1
2
8
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Comparison of gain-loss asymmetry behavior for stocks and indexes

Magdalena Za luska-Kotur
Institute of Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Aleja Lotnik´ow 32/46, 02–668 Warsaw, Poland

Krzysztof Karpio
Department of Econometrics and Informatics, Warsaw Agricultural University,
ul Nowoursynowska 166, 02-787 Warsaw, Poland,
Institute for Nuclear Studies, ul. Ho˙za 69, 00-681 Warsaw, Poland

Arkadiusz Or lowski
Department of Econometrics and Informatics, Warsaw Agricultural University,
ul Nowoursynowska 166, 02-787 Warsaw, Poland
Institute of Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Aleja Lotnik´ow 32/46, 02–668 Warsaw, Poland

Investment horizon approach has been used to analyze indexes of Polish stock market. Optimal
time horizon for each return value is evaluated by ﬁtting appropriate function form of the distribu-
tion. Strong asymmetry of gain-loss curves is observed for WIG index, whereas gain and loss curves
look similar for WIG20 and for most of individual companies stocks. The gain-loss asymmetry for
these data, measured by the coeﬃcient, that we postulated before [1], has opposite sign to this for
WIG index.

Statistical analysis of market indexes becomes source of detailed knowledge about character and relations between
economical processes [2, 3, 4]. Recently invented investment horizon analysis [5, 6, 7, 8, 9] is an approach based on
the inverse statistics. This type of analysis deals with the distribution of time distances between chosen moment and
moment when given return value is obtained for the ﬁrst time. Such time distance measured in the random walk
problem is called the ﬁrst passage time. The statistics of the ﬁrst passage time for the classical random walk is given
by the distribution

p(t) = a

exp(

2
a
t )
−
√πt3/2

,

where a is a distance that we want to reach. When we treat asset prices S(t) as the random process, returns at time
∆t). Hence to get distribution of times for given return value we will use variable
∆t are measured as ln S(t)
s(t) = ln S(t). After taking a logarithm of data we subtract trend d(t) of the data, thus getting data s ˜=s
d(t). The
mean trend is calculated as moving average over 100 points.

ln S(t

−

−

−

In the inverse statistics we begin with histograms of investment horizons, that are build up by starting with at
diﬀerent moments in the index history, and measuring time that is needed to obtain assumed return value for the
ﬁrst time. We have one histogram for each return value. When we try to describe investment horizon distribution
by (1) it appears that the ﬁt is poor. The low time branch has too small values. Other type distribution has been
postulated [8]

p(t) =

ν
Γ( α−1
ν )

β2(α−1)
(t

t0)α exp

(

{−

t

−

β2

−

)ν

,

}

t0

where α, β, ν and t0 are parameters of this distribution. Now, both (1) and (2) decay for large t as

≈
which has been checked for data from diﬀerent markets [8, 10]. From (2) we can evaluate the value t of maximal
probability

p(t)

tα,

tmax = t0 + β2(

ν
α + 1

)1/ν ,

which actually has been used as ﬁtting parameter.

Summing up the procedure we follow for each studied data we have: ﬁnd time horizon distribution for given return
value, ﬁt (2) and obtain tmax. We repeat the procedure for each return value separately, and ﬁnally we plot tmax vs
ρ for positive and for negative values of ρ. If our process was ideal random process two curves plotted in such a way

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

2

FIG. 1: WIG investment horizon distribution calculated for return values ρ = 0.06 - closed squares and ρ = −0.06 - open
triangles.

FIG. 2: Optimal investment horizon plotted as a function of absolute return value for WIG. Data for ρ > 0 are marked by
squares, and for ρ < 0 by triangles. Dashed lines show average slope of gain and loss curves.

would lie on a one curve, with slope equal to 2.0. As it has been shown before for DIJA that is not true [6, 7]. Slope
of curves is actually smaller, as it has been shown, moreover there is an asymmetry: gain curve goes above loss one
[7, 9].

We have shown, that the asymmetry of histograms for gain-loss return values is also present when data for Polish
index WIG are analyzed [1]. An example of such distribution is shown in Fig 1. There is however one basic diﬀerence
between results for WIG and for DJIA. Asymmetry of WIG is opposite to that noticed in the case of DJIA. In the
ﬁrst case histogram for gain data is closer to the axis, and has maximum at lower value than histogram for loss
data. Such situation is typical for all analyzed return values, which can be seen in Fig 2, where tmax vs
plot is

ρ
|

|

3

shown. We have analyzed indexes for several East European market [1], and found the same behavior for all of them.
At the same time Austrian ATX follows tendency observed for DJIA. It seems, that “general rule” saying that it is
much more diﬃcult to gain that to lose money applies only to developed markets, whereas for emerging markets the
opposite is true. Is it also true for stocks of individual companies that are components of WIG? In other words the
question is whether WIG behavior is a simple sum of individual stocks behavior. We calculated gain-loss curves for
several main companies. Some results are shown in Fig. 3 We can see that both gain and loss curves lie at the almost
same curve. It means, that index WIG does not behave as a simple sum of individual stocks. Let us analyze our
results further and ﬁnd linear approximations of gain and loss curves. In Ref. [1] we deﬁned the asymmetry measure
γ , where γ and γ′ are slopes of ﬁts to gain and loss curves respectively. For all studied East European indexes
κ = γ
parameter κ was negative. For stocks of companies above we have κ = 0.42, 0.1, 0 and 0.3 in the same order as above:
Best, Budimex, DzBank, and Eldorado. Thus not only we cannot see any signiﬁcant diﬀerence between gain and loss
curves, but also their slope are in the reverse order, when compared to WIG. Stocks for other companies behave in
similar way. Moreover curves plotted for index WIG20 in Fig 4 look like simple sum of these for individual companies
with κ = 0.1.

−

Hence what is the reason, that WIG is so diﬀerent? It is calculated in diﬀerent way, it contains more companies,
and that can lead to correlated behavior of its elements. Such possible correlations would explain strange time vs
return dependence of gain-loss curves for the emerging market indexes. Is the above explanation convincing enough?
This and related problems will be undertaken in a forthcoming paper.

[1] K. Karpio, M. A. Zauska-Kotur, A. Or lowski, submitted to Physica A.
[2] R.N. Mantegna, H. E. Stanley, An introduction to Econophysics: Correlations and Complexity in Finance, CUP, Cam-

[3] N F Johnson, P Jeﬀeries, and P M Hui, Financial Market Complexity, Oxford University Press, 2003.
[4] J P Bouchard and M Potters, Theory of Financial Risks:

from Statistical Physics to Risk Management, Cambridge

bridge, England, 2000.

University Press, 2000.

[5] M.H. Jensen, A. Johansen, F. Petroni, and I. Simonsen, Physica A 340, 678 (2004).
[6] M.H. Jensen, A. Johansen, and I. Simonsen, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 17, 4003 (2003).
[7] M.H. Jensen, A. Johansen, and I. Simonsen, Physica A 324, 338 (2003).
[8] I. Simonsen, M.H. Jensen, and A. Johansen, Europ. Phys. J B 27, 583 (2002).
[9] M.H. Jensen, A. Johansen, I. Simonsen, and F. Petroni, Physica A 340, 678(2004).
[10] W.X. Zhou, W.K. Yuan, Physica A 353, 433 (2005).

4

5

FIG. 4: Optimal investment horizon plotted as a function of absolute return value for WIG20. Data for ρ > 0 are marked by
squares, and for ρ < 0 by triangles. Dashed lines show average slope of gain and loss curves.

