6
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
4
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
1
1
9
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the Dynamics of the h−index in Complex Networks with Coexisting Communities

Luciano da Fontoura Costa
Instituto de F´ısica de S˜ao Carlos. Universidade de S˜ao Paulo,
S˜ao Carlos, SP, PO Box 369, 13560-970, phone +55 16 3373 9858,
FAX +55 16 3371 3616, Brazil, luciano@if.sc.usp.br
(Dated: 9th Sep 2006)

This article investigates the evolution of the h−index in a complex network including two com-
munities (in the sense of having diﬀerent features) with the same number of authors whose yearly
productions follow the Zipf’s law. Models considering indiscriminate citations, as well as citations
preferential to the ﬁtness values of each community and/or the number of existing citations are pro-
posed and numerically simulated. The h−indices of each type of author is estimated along a period
of 20 years, while the number of authors remains constant. Interesting results are obtained including
the fact that, for the model where citations are preferential to both community ﬁtness and number
of existing citations per article, the h−indices of the community with the largest ﬁtness value are
only moderately increased while the indices of the other community are severely and irreversibly
limited to low values. Three possible strategies are discussed in order to change this situation. In
addition, based on such ﬁndings, a new version of the h−index is proposed involving the automated
identiﬁcation of virtual citations which can provide complementary and unbiased quantiﬁcation of
the relevance of scientiﬁc works.

PACS numbers: 89.75.Hc,01.75.+m,01.00.00,01.30.-y,07.05.Mh

‘The only factor becoming scarce in a world of abun-

dance is human attention.’ (Kevin Kelly, Wired)

I.

INTRODUCTION

It all started in darkness and mystery. In the begin-
nings of humankind, explanation of the world and predic-
tion of the future lied deep into the impenetrable realm
of sorcerers and medicine men. Except for the extremely
rare initiated, the inner ambiguous workings of divina-
tion and sorcery were jealously guarded. Similar secrecy
was observed through much of the subsequent history of
humankind, including the age of oracles in the classical
world and alchemy all through the middle ages. ‘Knowl-
edge’ was not for everybody, it was the power source of a
few. Ultimately, the value of those practices did not stem
from their eﬀectiveness, but emanated from all types of
symbology, dogmas, metaphors and ambiguities.

With time, some light was shed, and part of hu-
mankind ﬁnally realized the value of confronting expla-
nations and predictions with reality, through experimen-
tations. That such a basic fact would take such a long
time to be inferred provides a lasting indication of the
inherent limitations of human nature. Be that as it may,
the value of experiments ﬁnally established itself, from
the renaissance up to the present day. Such an essential
change was accompanied by another important fact:
it
became progressively clearer that once widely dissemi-
nated, new ﬁndings acted in order to catalyze still more
discoveries. The popularization of printing techniques
contributed substantially to implementing this new phi-
losophy, being steadily crystalized into an ever growing
number of books, and then journals and WWW ﬁles. One

of the immediate consequences of the ﬁrst scientiﬁc pa-
pers was the respectively unavoidable citations. Today,
citations and impact factors (calculated by taking into
account citations, as well as other indicators) are widely
used, to the happiness of some and chagrin of others, for
quantifying the quality and productivity of researchers,
groups, institutions and journals.

Scientiﬁc indices [1] are now regularly applied in or-
der to decide on promotions, grants and identiﬁcation of
scientiﬁc trends. In this way, science became, to a large
extent, driven by scientometry. However, it is important
not to forget the initial purpose of scientiﬁc publishing of
fostering dissemination of high quality knowledge and re-
sults for the beneﬁt of humankind. One important point
to be born in mind refers to the fact that all existing
scientiﬁc indices are biased in some speciﬁc way. For
instance, the total number of articles published by a re-
searcher is not necessarily related to its productivity un-
less their age (or seniority) is taken into account. At the
same time, the number of citations received by a work
or author is also relative, because this number can de-
pend on joint-authorship, the speciﬁc area, or even be
a consequence of some error in the original work. Yet,
though not perfect, scientiﬁc indices do provide some
quantiﬁcation of the productivity and quality of papers,
researchers, institutions and even countries and conti-
nents. The common sense approach, given the unavoid-
able limitations of the indices, is not to dismiss them,
but to try to identify their faults so that they can be fur-
ther improved. And, little wonder, the best bet is to use
science to improve the scientiﬁc indices.

It is a positive sign of our age that relatively great
eﬀort, reﬂected in a growing number of related publica-
tions (e.g. [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]), that
science has indeed been systematically used for studying
and enhancing scientiﬁc indices. One of the most inter-

esting recent developments was Hirsh’s proposal of the
h−index [9]. Having sorted the articles of a researcher
in decreasing order of citations, the h value can be im-
mediately obtained as the position h along the sequence
of articles just before the number of citations become
smaller than h. Several are the advantages of such an
index [2, 9, 12] with respect to other more traditional
indicators, including the fact that the h−index does not
take into account the citation tail (i.e. works with few
citations) and is more robust than the total number of
citations per author in the form of sporadic joint publica-
tions with famous researchers [19]. However, the h−index
has also been acknowledged by Hirsh to be potentially
biased by factors such as the number of authors and
the speciﬁc scientiﬁc area [9]. Several additional spe-
ciﬁc shortcomings of the h−index have been identiﬁed
and eﬀorts have been made at their respective correction
(e.g. [3, 4, 5, 7]). Yet, the h−index is indeed an in-
teresting alternative which deserves continuing attention
aimed at possible further reﬁnements. Growing atten-
tion has also been focused on the dynamical aspects of
the evolution of the h =index (e.g. [6]) as well as the joint
consideration of the evolution of author and articles net-
works (e.g. [8]). Another interesting trend is the compar-
ison of the h−index with more standard scientometrics
indicators including peer judgements (e.g. [4, 13]).

The total number of publications of an author can be
roughly estimated from the h−index as CT = ah2 [9],
where a is a constant empirically found to lie between
3 and 5.
In other words, though not precise, this re-
lationship explains a good deal about the source of the
greater stability of this measurement when compared to
the traditional total number of citations CT . At the same
time, the above relationship is not perfect, otherwise the
h−index would be but a transformed version of the total
number of citations. Another interesting measurement
proposed by Hirsch [9] is the m−index, deﬁned by the
linear model h ∝ mn, where n is the number of subse-
quent ages (usually years). Therefore, m corresponds to
the approximate (mean or instant) rate of increase of the
h−index with time. An m−index of 3 obtained for a re-
searcher, for instance, suggests that his h−index tends
to increase 30 times after 10 years.

Several related investigations, including Hirsh’s orig-
inal work [9], assume that the articles tend to receive
a ﬁxed number of citations c along time. While it
would be possible to consider a time window for cita-
tions, it is also interesting to take into account preferen-
tial citation rules such as in complex networks research
(e.g. [14, 15, 16, 17]). According to this model, nodes
which have many connections (e.g. citations) tend to at-
tract more connections, giving rise to the ‘rich get richer’
paradigm. Another important aspect which has been rel-
atively overlooked is the presence of communities in the
scientiﬁc world (e.g. [16, 17]). Several are the possible ori-
gin for such communities, including the area of research,
language of publication, age, style, among many others.
The present work reports an investigation on the simu-

2

lated dynamics of the h−index considering variable num-
ber c of citations received per article, deﬁned by preferen-
tial attachment. As such, this work represents one of the
ﬁrst approaches integrating h−index and complex net-
works. However, we believe its main contributions to lie
elsewhere, mainly in the consideration of the two com-
munities [20], henceforth abbreviated as A and B, with
distinct ﬁtness values and under the realistic dynamics of
preferential attachment, as well as the assumption that
the number of papers published by each author follows
the Zipf’s law (e.g. [18]). These two communities produce
articles with respective ﬁxed ﬁtness indices fA and fB. In
order to reﬂect some inherent diﬀerence between the two
communities – e.g. as a consequence of the researcher
age, writing style, language or speciﬁc area (more likely
combinations of these) – we impose that fA = 2fB, i.e.
the articles in community A are inherently twice as much
more citable than those produced by the other commu-
nity. Note that any of the above criterion can be used to
separate the citation networks into 2 or more subgraphs,
e.g. by establishing respective thresholds [21]. It is also
important to emphasize at the outset that the presence
of these two (or more) communities is assumed rather
than taken for granted. The same can be said about
the possible origin of the ﬁtness diﬀerence. It is hoped
that the present work can provide subsidies for the even-
tual identiﬁcation of such distinct communities from the
perspective of the observation of the h−indices of the
respective authors.

The considered simulated dynamics extends over 20
years. Because of computational restrictions, the num-
ber of authors is limited to 78 which, under the Zipf’s law,
implies a total of 302 papers per year. Each article is as-
sumed to yield the ﬁxed number of w citations to other
works, self-citations included. For simplicity’s sake, the
number or papers published per year by each author, as
well as the number of authors, are also considered ﬁxed,
which is not a great drawback given the relatively short
period of the simulation (i.e. 20 years). Despite its un-
avoidable simpliﬁcations, the suggested model provides
a number of remarkable results and trends,
including
bleak perspectives for the community with smaller ﬁtness
(B), which are identiﬁed and discussed. A brief discus-
sion is also provided concerning possible strategies to be
adopted by community B in order to improve its overall
h−indices. Based on the simulation results, the proposal
for yet another enhanced version of the h−index, based
on the identiﬁcation of virtual citations in terms of the
number of shared main features of each work (e.g. reve-
labed by statistics or artiﬁcial intelligence), is outlined.
The article starts by deﬁning the model and follows by
presenting the results obtained considering two values of
w and uniform/preferential attachment. Considerations
are made regarding possible means to change the situa-
tion of community B as well as for the proposal of a new
version of the h−index. The work concludes by summa-
rizing the main ﬁndings and suggesting perspectives for
future works.

II. THE MODELS

The number of articles published by year by each au-
thor i, henceforth y(i), is assumed to follow the Zipf’s
distribution [18], i.e.

p(y) = cyβ,

(1)

where p(y) is the distribution probability of y and β
and c are real parameters. We deﬁne the speciﬁc form
its parameters) by establishing the
of this relation (i.e.
two extremity points (y, p(y)) and (1, m) and (s, 1) of the
respective distribution. In other words, we assume that
m authors publish only one paper per year and only one
author publishes s papers per year. Therefore, we have
that

c = m,
β = −log(m)/log(s)

(2)
(3)

It is henceforth assumed that m = 15 and s =
30.
In addition, we have to sample from this dis-
tribution. Without great loss of generality, we chose
y = (1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 15, 30) and consequently obtain p(y) =
(15, 9, 6, 4, 2, 2, 1). In other words, 15 authors publish one
article per year, 9 authors publish 2 articles per year, and
so on. This leads to N A = 39 authors and a total of 151
yearly articles. Such a conﬁguration is assumed for the
two considered communities A and B, implying a grand
total of 78 authors and 302 papers per year.

In order to represent the citations network, we adopt a
directed network (i.e. a digraph) deﬁned as Γ = (V, Q),
where V is the set of N vertices (or nodes) representing
the articles and Q is the set of E edges (or links) connect-
ing the nodes (i.e. the citations). Note that both V and
Q vary along the 20 considered years. A citation from an
article j to another article i is represented as (j, i) and
stored into the adjacency matrix K as K(i, j) = 1 (a null
entry is imposed otherwise). The number of citations re-
ceived by each article i is immediately given in terms of
the respective indegree of the respective node, i.e.

k(i) =

K(i, r)

(4)

N

X
r=1

Although presenting identical structure as far as the
number of authors and respective number of articles pub-
lished per year are concerned, the ﬁtness of the articles
produced by community A can be considere to be twice as
large as those published by community B, i.e. fA = 2fB.
We henceforth assume thatfB = 1. These values are used
in order to bias the establishment of the links during the
simulations as explained below.

The growth of the citation network is performed in
yearly terms. Four dynamics are considered for compar-
ison purposes: (i) UNI – uniform; (ii) PREFF – prefer-
ential to community ﬁtness; (iii) PREFC – preferential

3

to existing article citations; and (iv) DBPREF – prefer-
ential to community ﬁtness and existing citations, each
of which is described in the following. Though all models
considered in this article do not include a citation time
window, this is not a great shortcoming given the rela-
tively short period of the simulation (i.e. 20 years).

In the UNI model, each of the 301 articles added each
year are assumed to cite exactly w articles randomly cho-
sen among those published from the previous to the cur-
rent year. We consider two situations, deﬁned by w = 5
and 20. The PREFF model is similar to the UNI scheme,
but now the new citations take into account the commu-
nities ﬁtness. As a consequence, articles from community
A become twice as much likely to be cited than those from
community B. The PREFC model is also preferential,
but here each of the w citations per article is performed
preferentially to the number of existing citations of each
article published from the beginning to the current year.
This model is therefore similar to the Barab´asi-Albert
model (e.g. [14, 15, 16, 17]), except that the indegrees (i.e.
number of citations) are not updated during the year, but
only at its end. Finally, the DBPREF model is doubly
preferential, to both existing citations and communities.
More speciﬁcally, a list is kept where the identiﬁcation
of each article is entered a total number of times corre-
sponding to the value of its incoming citations multiplied
by the community ﬁtness (i.e. fA = 2 for community A
and fB = 1 for community B). New citations are then
chosen by random uniform selection among the elements
in the above list. Each of the conﬁgurations was run 50
times in order to provide statistical representativeness,
while the h−index and total number of citations per au-
thor NT were calculated for each author at each year.

III. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Figure 1)(a) shows the evolution of the h−indices for
the seven considered types of authors (i.e. those publish-
ing y = (1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 15, 30) articles per year have similar
dynamics and are averaged together) in community A or
B under the UNI dynamics while assuming w = 5. The
analogue results obtained for the PREFF dynamics for
communities A and B are given in Figures 1(c) and (e),
respectively. Figures 1(b,d,f) give the respective results
obtained for w = 20. It is clear from Figure 1 that the
h−indices of all types of authors tend to increase mono-
tonically with time, though at diﬀerent rates. Actually,
as revealed after some elementary reasoning, all citations
will tend to increase linearly with the years. This is a di-
rect consequence of the adopted undiscriminate citation
scheme: in principle, any author will receive a ﬁxed aver-
age number of citations per year (equal to w). Therefore,
the h−indices will be roughly proportional to the square
root of the years. In addition, the h−indices of each type
of author will directly reﬂect its yearly production.

Because of the linear rate of increase of the citations
per type of author, this model has little interest, except

for providing a comparison standard for the other models
considering citations preferential to the number of cita-
In particular, note that in the case of identical
tions.
community ﬁtness values (shown in (a) for w = 5 and
(d) for w = 20), the evolution of the h−indices would not
be too diﬀerent from those obtained for diﬀerent ﬁtness
values (shown in (b-c) for w = 5 and (e-f) for w = 20).
For instance, the most productive author in community
A would reach an h−index of 13 after 20 years in case
the two communities were identical and an h−index of 18
after that same period in case its community had twice
as much ﬁtness as community B. In other words, the
diﬀerent ﬁtness values have relatively little eﬀect on the
relative evolution of the h−indices.

Figure 2)(a) shows the evolution of the h−indices for
the seven considered types of authors in communities A
or B under the PREFC dynamics while assuming w = 5.
The analogue results obtained for the DBPREF dynam-
ics for the A and B are given in Figures 2(c) and (e),
respectively. Figures 1(b,d,f) give the respective results
obtained for w = 20. Recall that all these simulations
consider citations preferential to the current total among
citations of each article (‘rich get richer’). All curves
are characterized by a non-linear portion along the ﬁrst
years, followed by nearly linear evolution. Also, as in the
indiscriminate case, the h−indices of the 7 types of au-
thors tend to reﬂect their yearly production. As could
be expected, the standard deviations for all cases tend to
increase with the author type productivity.

Let us ﬁrst discuss the situation arising for w =
5. Note that a pronouncedly sharper increase of the
h−indices is veriﬁed along the ﬁrst 4 or 5 years for the
most productive author types for this value of w. When
no distinction is made between the ﬁtness values of the
two communities (i.e. model PREFF ) – see Figure 2(a),
the h−indices of the 7 types of authors tend to evolve
steadily until reaching, at year 20, the conﬁguration
shown in line 1 of Table I. Now, in the case of diﬀerent ﬁt-
ness values for the two communities (model DBPREF ),
the evolution of the h−indices is much steeper for com-
munity A (Fig. 2a) than for community B (Fig. 2b). The
h−indices harvested after 20 years by the 7 types of au-
thors in communities A and B in this case would be like
those given in lines 2 and 3 of Table I, respectively. The
ratio between the h−indices of communities A and B with
diﬀerent ﬁtness values and the h−index values in the case
of equal ﬁtness are given in lines 4 and 5, respectively, in
Table I.

Strikingly, while the diﬀerent ﬁtness of community
A contributes to moderate increase ratios varying from
1.174 to 1.402, the eﬀect is catastrophic for community
B, with respective ratios varying from 0.56 to 0.37. The
reason for such a dynamics is that, with the progress
of the years, the articles in community A become ever
more cited and competitive, deviating most of the cita-
tions that would be otherwise established within com-
munity B. This is a situation where, though the rich do
not get so much richer, the poor becomes irreversibly

4

6.6

7.4

5.3

4.3

4.6
5.4
2.6

line AT1 AT2 AT3 AT4 AT5 AT6 AT7
7.0
1
8.7 11.5 16.4 19.2 26.1
8.2 10.5 14.2 21.5 25.9 36.6
2
9.7
3.5
3
1.174 1.171 1.207 1.235 1.311 1.349 1.402
4
0.56 0.50 0.49 0.46 0.40 0.39 0.37
5
9.1 11.7 16.6 25.6 32.6 50.7
6
9.9 13.3 18.1 29.5 38.2 58.9
7
8
6.9 11.0 14.7 21.8
4.2
1.052 1.088 1.137 1.090 1.152 1.172 1.162
9
0.50 0.46 0.44 0.42 0.43 0.45 0.43
10

5.8
6.1
2.9

5.2

TABLE I: The h−indices of the 7 types of authors after 20
years and respective ratios. See text for explanation. Each of
the author types i is identiﬁed as AT i.

poorer as the preferential eﬀect will continue until virtu-
ally no citation take place yearly inside community B. An
even more acute situation would have been observed in
the likely case that the ﬁtness of community A increased
with its overall growing h−indices. As is visible in Fig-
ure 2(e), this same eﬀect will slightly contribute to level
the h−index values among the individuals in community
B.

The situation for w = 20 is largely similar to that
discussed above for w = 5, with the following diﬀerences.
First, a short plateau of h−index values appear along the
ﬁrst years, especially for the most productive authors in
the cases of equal ﬁtness (Figure 2b) and for commu-
nity A with diﬀerent ﬁtness (Figure 2d). The relative
increase of the h−indices observed with respect to the
equal ﬁtness case (i.e. the ratios between the lines 7 and
8 with line 6, respectively) are given in lines 9 and 10.
Now, while minimal increase ranging from 1.052 to 1.162
is obtained for community A in the case of diﬀerent ﬁt-
ness values, the ratio for community B varies from 0.50
to 0.43. In addition, the exhaustion of the citations in-
side community B is now clearly visible in the saturation
of the h−indices in Figure 2(f).

IV. STRATEGIES FOR IMPROVING
INDIVIDUAL h−INDICES

Given the largely unfair dynamics identiﬁed for the au-
thors in community B, it becomes interesting to consider
by which means this situation could be, at least partially,
improved. Of course, in case the ﬁtness diﬀerence were
a direct consequence of the quality of the publications
in community B, the immediate answer would be that
the authors in that community should try to improve
their standards or be doomed indeed. However, in case
the diﬀerences of ﬁtness have a more arbitrary and biased
origin, it becomes justiﬁable to consider means to correct

5

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

(e)

(f)

FIG. 1: The h−indices for the seven considered types of authors obtained for any of the two communities with the UNI model
(a) and the indices obtained for communities A (c) and B (e) while considering the PREFF (b) model for w = 5. The analogue
results obtained for w = 20 are given in (b) and (d,f)

the situation. The following three possibilities, which are
by no means exhaustive, could be considered:

A bit more attention from the richer: Authors
in community A tries to cite those in B more frequently.
The main advantage of this solution is that the authors
in community A would just loose a little bit, while those
in B would gain a lot with respect to the even ﬁtness
situation. After all, citations should be based only on
the inherent quality and contribution of each work.

Collaborative strategy: Authors in B participate as
co-authors with community A. Although such a practice
would tend to enhance the h−index values in community
B, such an increase would be limited by the high resilience
of the h-index with respect to such initiatives.

A bit more attention among the poorer: In this
case, the authors in community B would pay greater at-
tention to the work of their colleagues, trying to reduce
the diﬀerent ﬁtness eﬀect on the preferential citations.
Again, this should reﬂect the inherent quality and con-
tributions of each work.

V. TOWARDS MORE COMPREHENSIVE
CITATION INDICES

Although creative proposals such as the h−index and
enhanced variations do provide interesting advantages for
measuring the signiﬁcance of scientiﬁc publishing, they
can still be biased by several factors including the pres-
ence of communities with varying citation ﬁtness which,
as shown in the previous section, can lead to critical sit-
uations. It would be interesting, in the light of the ob-
tained results, to consider some possible modiﬁcations
and enhancements to the h−index, as addressed in the
following.

First, we have to go back to the reasons why cita-
tions exist after all, which include mainly: (a) establish
the context of the research; (b) provide additional infor-
mation about the adopted concepts and methods; and
(c) compare methodologies or results. However, all such
cases can be conveniently uniﬁed into the following cri-
terion:

• Citations should included in order to com-
plement the work in question. As such, all
citations should be directly related to the
main aspects developed in each new article.

Now, it happens that the relationship between any two
articles can be automatically inferred, to some degree of
accuracy, by using artiﬁcial intelligence methods com-
bined with the ever increasing online access to hight qual-
ity scientiﬁc databases and repositories. One of the sim-
plest approaches involves counting how many keywords
are shared by any pair of articles. In order to deﬁne the
direction of the citations (actually its causality), the new
article would be naturally linked to older entries in the
databases. The number of implied citations would natu-
rally vary with the comparison methodology and adopted

6

thresholds, but would nevertheless provide a less arbi-
trary and complete means for getting more comprehen-
sive and less biased citations from which the respective
h−index could be calculated. Actually, after some fur-
ther reﬂection it becomes clear that such a citation sys-
tem allows a series of additional advantages, including:

1. Inherently linked to bibliographical

re-
search: One of the preliminary steps in every ar-
ticle is to perform a reasonably complete research
on existing related works, the so-called bibliograph-
ical search. It would be interesting to use the same
system(s) for both bibliographical search and au-
tomatic citations, ensuring consistency.

2. More substantive evaluation: Provided good
journals (e.g. with reasonable impact factor) are
considered for the databases, the quality of the
cited works would be at least partially assured. In-
deed, a given article could be more likely to be read
and evaluated by referees of a good journal than
by an eventually hassled author seeking for con-
textual references. After all, citations are known
sometimes to include copies from references in re-
lated previous articles (e.g. [8]).

3. Avoidance of personal biases: Because the vir-
tual citations would be established from databases
while considering objective keywords, no space is
left for any eventual personal biases.

4. Quantiﬁcation of the quality of the work:
With the advance of more sophisticated intelligent
computer systems, it will become possible to have
the automatic citation system to try to quantify
several important qualities of an article, including
originality, clarity, grammar, and even fraud detec-
tion.

It can not be said that automatic citation can be eas-
ily accomplished ro that it will be fully precise from the
beginning, but certainly it can provide a second, comple-
mentary, indication to be taken into account jointly with
more traditional scientometric indices. At the same time,
the continuing advances of multivariate statistics and ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence will contribute to achieving ever more
intelligent and versatile automatic citation and indexing
systems.

VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE
WORKS

In order any artiﬁcial process can be improved, it is im-
perative to quantify its performance in the most objective
and unbiased way as possible. Scientiﬁc citations – prop-
erly normalized by area, number of authors and always
under the auspices of common sense – are no exception
to this rule. Since the ﬁrst printed scientiﬁc and techni-
cal works, authors and readers have been involved in an

7

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

FIG. 2: The h−indices for the seven considered types of authors obtained for any of the two communities with the PREFC
model (a) and the indices obtained for communities A (c) and B (e) while considering the DBPREF (b) model for w = 5. The
analogue results obtained for w = 20 are shown in (b) and (d,f).

ever evolving complex system of citations aimed at con-
textualizing and complementing each piece of reported
research. Though indicators such as the total number of
published articles per author, the total number of cita-
tions, or the citations per article, amongst many others,
have been systematically used for promotions, grants and
identiﬁcation of scientiﬁc trends, there is still no perfect
index. Recently introduced by Hirsch [9], the h−index
presents a series of interesting advantages over more tra-
ditional indicators, as well as some speciﬁc shortcomings
which have been progressively addressed.

At the same time as scientometrics progresses healthly
and inexorably, it is important to stick to the original
aims of scientiﬁc publication, namely the dissemination
of new ﬁndings in order to foster even further develop-
In order to complement and enhance reported
ment.
works, it is essential to provide signiﬁcant and unbiased
citations which can properly contextualize and comple-
ment each piece of work. Primarily, each citation is
an acknowledgement of a previous work, contributing to
its signiﬁcance and recognition of the respective author.
However, because scientometrics increasingly determines
the course of science, it is critically important to always
revise and improve the respective indices.

The present work has addressed the dynamical evolu-
tion of the h−index considering a limited period of time
(20 years) in a citation network involving two commu-
nities whose number of authors follow a particular con-
ﬁguration of Zipf’s law. Other distinguishing features
of the reported models include the consideration of cita-
tions preferential to an inherent value of ﬁtness assigned
to each community as well as to the existing number of
citations. Although the number of papers published by
year by each author remains constant, two diﬀerent num-
ber of citations emanating from each article (i.e. w = 5
and 20) were considered separately.

Four types of models were considered in simulations
involving 50 realizations of each conﬁguration. Linear
increase of citations was observed for the two models in-
volving indiscriminate citations and citations preferen-
tial to the community ﬁtness only. The two more real-
istic situations assuming the citations to be preferential
to the current number of citations of each paper, espe-
cially the model where the citations were also preferential
to the community ﬁtness values, yielded particularly in-
terestin results. When compared to the evolution of the
h−indices of the two communities evolving with citations
preferential only to the number of citations, the model

8

involving citations also preferential to the communities
ﬁtness values showed that the authors in community A
experienced moderate increase in the h−indices while the
indices of the authors in community B suﬀered severe re-
duction. It should be recalled that the presence of coex-
isting communities is but a hypothesis, to be eventually
conﬁrmed through additional experimental work.

Having identiﬁed such trends in multiple-community
systems of citations, we brieﬂy discussed three strate-
gies which could be adopted in order to compensate for
the diﬀerent ﬁtness values. In addition, an improved ap-
proach has been outlined which can provide complemen-
tary characterization of the signiﬁcance and productivity
of the production of authors or groups. More speciﬁcally,
it has been suggested that statistical andartiﬁcial intelli-
gence methods be used in order to identify virtual cita-
tions from each new work to other previous works stores
in databases while taking into account the overlap of key
features (e.g. key words, main contributions, etc.) be-
tween the new and previous works. A number of further
advantages have been identiﬁed for this approach.

Future extensions of the present work include the con-
sideration of larger number of authors, coexistence of
more than two communities, as well as the investigation
of possible border eﬀects implied by the relatively small
size of the adopted networks. It would also be interesting
to perform simulations taking into account longer peri-
ods of time, citation time windows (e.g. no citations to
articles older than a given threshold), and the progressive
addition and retirement of authors.

Scientometrics corresponds to a peculiarly interesting
circular applicaton of science to improve itself through
the proposal of ever more accurate and unbiased indices
and measurements. While the advances of computing
have implied an inexorably increasing number of articles
and new results, it is suggested that they also hold the
key – in the form of artiﬁcial intelligence – to proper
quantiﬁcation of scientiﬁc productivity and quality. After
all, as hinted in the quotation at the beginning of this
work, if human attention is becoming so scarce, perhaps
automated digital attention can at least provide some
complementation.

Luciano da F. Costa is grateful to CNPq (308231/03-1)

and FAPESP (05/00587-5) for ﬁnancial support.

[1] E. Garﬁeld, Science 178 (1972).
[2] P. Ball, Nature 436 (2005).
[3] P. A. Batista, M. G. Campitely, O. Kinouch, and A. S.

Martinez (2007), arXiv:physics/0509048.

[4] L. Bornmann and H.-D. Daniel, Scientometrics 5 (2005).
[5] A. Sidiropoulos, D. Katsaros, and Y. Manolopoulos

[6] L. Egghe (2006), to appear.
[7] L. Egghe, ISSI Newsletter 2 (2006).
[8] K. Boerner, J. T. Maru, and R. L. Goldstone, Proc. Natl.

[9] J. E. Hirsch, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102 (2005),

Acad. Sci. 101 (2004).

arXiv:physics/0508025.

(2005), arXiv:cs;DL/0607066.

[10] S. B. Popov,

Proc. Nat. Acad.

Sci.

(2005),

physics:0508113.

[11] C. W. Miller (2006), cond-mat/0608183.
[12] B. Cronin and L. Meho, J. Am. Soc. Inform. Sci. Techn.

57 (2006).

(2002).

[13] A. F. J. van Raan (2005), physics/0511206.
[14] R. Albert and A. L. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47

[15] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, and
D.-U. Hwang, Physics Reports 424, 175 (2006), cond-
mat/0303516.

[16] M. E. J. Newman, SIAM Review 45, 167 (2003), cond-

mat/0303516.

[17] L. da F. Costa, F. A. Rodrigues, G. Travieso, and P. R. V.

Boas (2006), cond-mat/0505185.

[18] M. E. J. Newman (2004), cond-mat/041004.

9

[19] Though an author may have harvested as many as 1000
citations from a single jointly written article, this entry
alone will imply an h−index equal to 1

[20] It should be observed that the term community is used in
this work in order to identify two subsets of nodes which
share some features (i.e. ﬁtness), rather than in the sense
of being more interconnected one another than with the
remainder of the network.

[21] For instance, if age is to be considered as a parameter,
community A could be obtained by selecting those nodes
(and respective edges) corresponding to authors older
than T years, with the remainder nodes deﬁning com-
munity B.

