6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
7
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
2
1
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Self-organization of the Sound Inventories:
Analysis and Synthesis of the Occurrence and Co-occurrence Networks of Consonants

APS/123-QED

Animesh Mukherjee,∗ Monojit Choudhury,† Anupam Basu,‡ and Niloy Ganguly§
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

The sound inventories of the world’s languages self-organize themselves giving rise to similar cross-
linguistic patterns. In this work we attempt to capture this phenomenon of self-organization, which
shapes the structure of the consonant inventories, through a complex network approach. For this
purpose we deﬁne the occurrence and co-occurrence networks of consonants and systematically study
some of their important topological properties. A crucial observation is that the occurrence as well
as the co-occurrence of consonants across languages follow a power law distribution. This property
is arguably a consequence of the principle of preferential attachment.
In order to support this
argument we propose a synthesis model which reproduces the degree distribution for the networks
to a close approximation. We further observe that the co-occurrence network of consonants show a
high degree of clustering and subsequently reﬁne our synthesis model in order to incorporate this
property. Finally, we discuss how preferential attachment manifests itself through the evolutionary
nature of language.

PACS numbers: 89.75.-k, 89.75.Fb

I.

INTRODUCTION

Sound inventories of human languages show a consid-
erable extent of symmetry. This symmetry is primarily a
reﬂection of the self-organizing behavior that goes on in
shaping the structure of the inventories [32]. It has been
postulated previously that such a self-organizing behav-
ior can be explained through the principles of functional
phonology, namely, maximal perceptual contrast [26], ease
of articulation [11, 26], and ease of learnability [11].
These explanations are an outcome of the macroscopic
level [4] of analysis, and are quite commonly used by
traditional linguists [12, 18, 20, 26, 38]. Of late, it has
been shown that even in the microscopic level [4], the
emergent behavior of the vowel inventories in particu-
lar, can be satisfactorily explained through multi-agent
simulation models [11]. However, instances of such mod-
eling either in the micro or in the mesoscopic levels [4]
to demonstrate the organizational principles of the con-
sonant inventories, are absent in literature.

In this work we present a mesoscopic model, grounded
on the theories of complex networks (for a review see [3,
31]), in order to capture the self-organizing principles of
the consonant inventories. We call our model mesoscopic
since it does not make use of the functional properties of
the macro level for explaining the structure of the con-
sonant inventories; nor does it incorporate microscopic
interactions between the speakers of a language (usually
modeled through linguistic agents [11]), in order to repro-

∗Electronic address: animeshm@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in
†Electronic address: monojit@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in
‡Electronic address: anupam@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in
§Electronic address: niloy@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in

duce this structure. We rather base our model on slightly
coarse grained components like languages and conso-
nants, and study the interactions between and within
them respectively.
In order to capture these interac-
tions we deﬁne two networks namely, PlaNet [17] or
the Phoneme Language Network and PhoNet [29] or
the Phoneme Phoneme Network. PlaNet is a bipar-
tite network which has two sets of nodes, one labeled by
the languages while the other by the consonants. Edges
run between the nodes of these two sets depending on
whether or not a particular consonant occurs in a par-
ticular language. On the other hand, PhoNet is the one-
mode projection [42] of PlaNet onto the consonant nodes.
Hence PhoNet is a weighted unipartite network of con-
sonants where an edge between two nodes signiﬁes their
co-occurrence likelihood over the consonant inventories.
The construction of PlaNet, and subsequently PhoNet,
are motivated by similar modeling of various complex
phenomena observed in nature and society, such as,

• Movie-actor network, where movies and actors con-
stitute the two partitions and an edge between
them signiﬁes that a particular actor acted in a par-
ticular movie [35]. In the corresponding one-mode
projection onto the actor nodes, any two actors are
connected as many times as they have co-acted in
a movie.

• Article-author network, where the edges denote
which person has authored which articles [30]. In
this case the one-mode projection onto the author
nodes comprises of a pair of authors connected as
many times as they have co-authored a paper.

• Metabolic network of organisms, where the corre-
sponding partitions are chemical compounds and
metabolic reactions. Edges run between partitions
depending on whether a particular compound is a

substrate or result of a reaction [22]. In this case
the one-mode projection onto the chemical com-
pounds comprises a pair of compounds connected
by as many edges as they have co-participated in a
metabolic reaction.

Modeling of the complex systems referred above as net-
works has proved to be a comprehensive and emerging
way of capturing the underlying generating mechanisms
of such systems [3, 31]. In this direction there have been
some attempts as well to model the intricacies of human
languages through complex networks. Word networks
based on synonymy [41], co-occurrence [14], and phone-
mic edit-distance [39] are examples of such attempts. The
present work also uses the concept of complex networks
to develop a platform for a holistic analysis as well as
synthesis of the distribution of the consonants across the
languages.

In the current work we present some of the exciting
properties of the consonant inventories through the anal-
ysis as well as synthesis of PlaNet and PhoNet. A sig-
niﬁcant property we observe is that the consonant nodes
in PlaNet as well as PhoNet have a power law degree
distribution with an exponential cut-oﬀ. This property
is arguably a consequence of the principle of preferen-
tial attachment [5].
In order to support this argument
we present a synthesis model for PlaNet which generates
the degree distribution of the consonant nodes and mim-
ics the real data to a very close approximation. However,
though the degree distributions of the empirical and the
synthesized PlaNet match closely, their one-mode projec-
tions (the empirical and the synthesized PhoNet) seem to
diﬀer especially in their clustering coeﬃcients [40]. The
clustering coeﬃcient of the empirical PhoNet is substan-
tially higher than that of the synthesized version, indi-
cating that consonants tend to frequently occur in co-
hesive groups or communities [29]. We therefore modify
the synthesis model and allow triad (i.e., fully connected
triplets) formation. As a consequence of this modiﬁca-
tion the degree distributions of PlaNet and PhoNet as
well as the clustering coeﬃcient of PhoNet match their
respective synthesized versions with a very high accuracy.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In sec-
tion II we formally deﬁne PlaNet and PhoNet and outline
their construction procedure. We also present some in-
teresting studies pertaining to the structural properties
of PlaNet as well as PhoNet in the same section. In sec-
tion III we propose a synthesis model for PlaNet based on
the principle of preferential attachment. We also identify
some necessary reﬁnements in the synthesis model (in or-
der to improve upon the average clustering coeﬃcient of
PhoNet) and subsequently extend it to incorporate these
reﬁnements in the same section. Finally we conclude in
section IV by summarizing our contributions, pointing
out some of the implications of the current work and in-
dicating the possible future directions.

2

FIG. 1: Illustration of the nodes and edges of PlaNet.

II. DEFINITION, CONSTRUCTION AND
ANALYSIS OF PLANET AND PHONET

In this section we formally deﬁne PlaNet and PhoNet
followed by a description of their construction procedure.
We also present some interesting studies pertaining to the
topological properties of these networks.

A. Deﬁnition

Deﬁnition of PlaNet: We deﬁne PlaNet (the net-
work of consonants and languages) as a bipartite graph
G = hVL, VC , Ei where VL is the set of nodes labeled by
the languages and VC is the set of nodes labeled by the
consonants. E is the set of edges that run between VL
and VC . There is an edge e ∈ E between two nodes vl ∈
VL and vc ∈ VC if and only if the consonant c occurs in
the language l. Figure 1 illustrates the nodes and edges
of PlaNet.

Deﬁnition of PhoNet: PhoNet, which is the one-
mode projection of PlaNet (projection taken on the con-
sonant nodes), can be deﬁned as a network of consonants
represented by a graph G = h VC , E i where VC is the set
of nodes labeled by the consonants and E is the set of all
the edges in G. There is an edge e ∈ E between two nodes,
if and only if there exists one or more language(s) where
the nodes (read consonants) co-occur. The weight of the
edge e (also edge-weight) is the number of languages in
which the consonants connected by e co-occur. Figure 2
presents a partial illustration of PhoNet.

B. Construction

Construction of PlaNet: Many typological stud-
ies [21, 24, 26] of segmental inventories have been carried
out in past on the UCLA Phonological Segment Inven-
tory Database (UPSID) [27]. UPSID records the sound
inventories of 317 languages covering all the major lan-
guage families of the world. In this work we have used
UPSID comprising of these 317 languages and 541 conso-
nants found across them, for constructing PlaNet. Con-

3

FIG. 2: A partial
illustration of the nodes and edges in
PhoNet. The labels of the nodes denote the consonants rep-
resented in IPA (International Phonetic Alphabet). The nu-
merical values against the edges and nodes represent their
corresponding weights. For example /k/ occurs in 283 lan-
guages; /kw/ occurs in 39 languages while they co-occur in
38 languages.

sequently, there are 317 elements (nodes) in the set VL
and 541 elements (nodes) in the set VC . The number of
elements (edges) in the set E as computed from PlaNet
is 7022. At this point it is important to mention that
in order to avoid any confusion in the construction of
PlaNet we have appropriately ﬁltered out the anomalous
and the ambiguous segments [27] from it. In UPSID, a
segment has been classiﬁed as anomalous if its existence
is doubtful and ambiguous if there is insuﬃcient infor-
mation about the segment. For example, the presence
of both the palatalized dental plosive and the palatal-
ized alveolar plosive are represented in UPSID as palatal-
ized dental-alveolar plosive. According to popular tech-
niques [34], we have completely ignored the anomalous
segments from the data set, and included the ambiguous
ones as separate segments because there are no descrip-
tive sources explaining how such ambiguities might be
resolved.

Construction of PhoNet: Once PlaNet is con-
structed as described above, we can easily construct
PhoNet by taking an one-mode projection of PlaNet
onto the consonant nodes. Consequently, the set VC for
PhoNet comprises of 541 elements (nodes) and the set E
comprises of 34012 elements (edges).

C. Degree Distribution

The degree of a node u, denoted by ku is deﬁned as
the number of edges connected to u. The term degree
distribution is used to denote the way degrees (ku) are
distributed over the nodes (u).

1. Degree Distribution of PlaNet

FIG. 3: Degree distribution of PlaNet for the set VL. The
ﬁgure in the inner box is a magniﬁed version of a portion of
the original ﬁgure.

set VL and the other corresponding to the nodes in the
set VC .

Degree distribution of the nodes in VL: Figure 3
shows the degree distribution of the nodes in VL where
the x-axis denotes the degree of each node expressed as
a fraction of the maximum degree and the y-axis denotes
the number of nodes having a given degree expressed as
a fraction of the total number of nodes in VL.

Figure 3 indicates that the number of consonants ap-
pearing in diﬀerent languages follow a β-distribution [43]
(see [13] for reference) which is right skewed with the
values of α and β equal to 7.06 and 47.64 (obtained us-
ing maximum likelihood estimation method) respectively.
This asymmetry in the distribution points to the fact
that languages usually tend to have smaller consonant
inventory size, the best value being somewhere between
10 and 30. The distribution peaks roughly at 21 (which
is its mode) whereas the mean of the distribution is 22
indicating that on an average the languages in UPSID
have a consonant inventory of 22 [28].

Degree distribution of the nodes in VC : Figure 4
illustrates the degree distribution plot for the nodes in
VC in log-log scale. In this ﬁgure the x-axis represents
the degree (k) and the y-axis represents Pk, where Pk is
the fraction of nodes having degree greater than or equal
to k.

Figure 4 clearly shows that the curve follows a power
law distribution with an exponential cut-oﬀ. The cut-
oﬀ point is indicated by the letter x in the ﬁgure. We
ﬁnd that there are 22 consonant nodes which have their
degree above the cut-oﬀ range. However, the remaining
consonant nodes of PlaNet exhibit a power law degree
distribution of the form

y = Ax−γ

(1)

Since PlaNet is bipartite in nature it has two degree
distribution curves one corresponding to the nodes in the

The values of the parameters A and γ in both the ﬁgures,
as computed by the least square error method, are noted

4

FIG. 4: Degree distribution of PlaNet for the set VC in a
log-log scale. The letter x denotes the cut-oﬀ point.

FIG. 5: Degree distribution of the nodes in PhoNet in a log-
log scale. The letters x and y denote the cut-oﬀ points.

in Table I.

2. Degree Distribution of PhoNet

Since PhoNet is a weighted network, we report the
distribution of the weighted degree of its nodes. The
weighted degree k for a node i can be deﬁned as [7],

k =

wij

X
∀j

(2)

where j is a neighbor of i in the network and wij is the
weight of the edge connecting the nodes i and j. Figure 5
shows the degree distribution curve for PhoNet in log-log
scale. In this ﬁgure the x-axis represents the weighted
degree (k) and the y-axis represents Pk, where Pk is the
fraction of nodes having degree greater than or equal to
k. Interestingly, the degree distribution of the nodes in
PhoNet show two diﬀerent cut-oﬀ points marked by the
letters x and y in the ﬁgure along with a power law re-
gion spanning from x to y. Through inspection we ﬁnd
that there are 15 consonants above the cut-oﬀ x which
indicates that these consonants co-occur very frequently
exhibiting an assortative nature [29, 31]. On the other
hand, the degree distribution of the nodes up to the cut-
oﬀ point y is approximately a straight line indicating that
the rate of change of Pk with respect to k is quite slow in
this region. The reason behind this behavior is that there
are only a negligibly small fraction of nodes that exist in
this region which, causes almost no increase in the cu-
mulative fraction Pk. However, the rest of the consonant
nodes (spanning from the point y to the point x) show
a power law degree distribution of the form speciﬁed in
equation 1. Table I reports the values of the parameters
A and γ.

In most of the networked systems like the society,
the Internet, the World Wide Web, and many oth-

ers, power law degree distribution emerges for the phe-
nomenon of preferential attachment, i.e., when “the rich
get richer” [36]. With reference to PlaNet and PhoNet
this preferential attachment can be interpreted as the
tendency of a language to choose a consonant that has
been already chosen by a large number of other lan-
guages. In order to validate the above argument, in sec-
tion III, we present a synthesis model based on preferen-
tial attachment (where the distribution of the consonant
inventory size is known apriori) that mimics the occur-
rence and co-occurrence distributions of the consonant
nodes to a very close approximation.

D. Clustering Coeﬃcient

The weighted clustering coeﬃcient (in the one-mode

projection PhoNet) for a node i is deﬁned as [7],

ci =

1

(cid:16)P∀j wij (cid:17) (ki − 1)X

∀j,l

(wij + wil)
2

aijailajl

(3)

where j and l are neighbors of i; ki represents the plain
degree of the node i; wij , wjl and wil denote the weights
of the edges connecting nodes i and j, j and l, and i and l
respectively; aij, ail, ajl are boolean variables indicating
whether or not there is an edge between the nodes i and j,
i and l, and j and l respectively. This coeﬃcient is a mea-
sure of the local cohesiveness that takes into account the
importance of the clustered structure on the basis of the
amount of traﬃc or interaction intensity actually found
on the local triplets. The parameter ci in equation 3
counts for each triplet formed in the neighborhood of the
vertex i, the weight of the two participating edges of the
vertex i. The normalization factor (cid:16)P∀j wij (cid:17) (ki − 1)
accounts for the weight of each edge times the maximum
possible number of triplets in which it may participate,
and it ensures that 0 ≤ ci ≤ 1. Consequently, the

TABLE I: The values of the parameters A and γ.

Parameter
A
γ

Figure 4
2326.2
2.36

Figure 5
41.26
0.89

5

in the next section that mimics the empirical data to a
high precision.

III. SYNTHESIS MODEL BASED ON
PREFERENTIAL ATTACHMENT

In this section we present a synthesis model for the
PlaNet (henceforth PlaNetsyn) based on preferential at-
tachment where the distribution of the consonant inven-
tory size is assumed to be known a priori. Let VL =
{L1,L2,...,L317} have cardinalities (consonant inventory
size) {k1,k2,...,k317} respectively. We assume that the
consonant nodes (VC ) of PlaNetsyn are unlabeled (i.e.,
they are not labeled by a set of articulatory/acoustic
features [29] that characterizes them). We next sort the
nodes L1 through L317 in ascending order of their cardi-
nalities. At each time step a node Lj, chosen in order,
preferentially attaches itself with kj distinct nodes (call
each such node Ci) of the set VC . The probability P r(Ci)
with which the node Lj attaches itself to the node Ci is
given by,

P r(Ci) =

di

α + ǫ
(di

′ α + ǫ)

′

∈V

′
C

Pi

(5)

′

where, di is the current degree of the node Ci, V
C is
the set of nodes in VC that are not already connected to
Lj and ǫ is the smoothing parameter which facilitates at-
tachments to consonant nodes that have a degree close or
equal to zero. The above process is repeated until all the
language nodes Lj ∈VL get connected to kj consonant
nodes. Algorithm 1 summarizes the synthesis process
and Figure 7 illustrates a partial step of this process.

Algorithm 1: The synthesis process

Input: Nodes L1 through L317 sorted in the ascending
order of their cardinalities;
for t = 1 to 317 {

Choose (in order) a node Lj with cardinality kj;
for c = 1 to kj {

Connect Lj to a node Ci ∈ VC to which it is not
already connected, following the distribution,

P r(Ci) =

di

α + ǫ
(di

′ α + ǫ)

′

∈V

′
C

Pi

C is the set of nodes in VC to which Lj

′

where V
is not yet connected;
}

}

FIG. 6: Degree versus clustering coeﬃcient for the nodes of
PhoNet in log-log scale. The bold line shows the average
binned distribution with bin sizes expressed in powers of 2.

average weighted clustering coeﬃcient is given by,

cav =

1
N

N

X
i=1

ci

(4)

where, N is the number of nodes in PhoNet.

The value of cav for PhoNet is 0.89 which indicates a
huge clustering among the nodes of the network. This
is primarily due to the fact that in PhoNet the conso-
nant nodes tend to occur highly in cohesive groups or
communities as shown by Mukherjee et al. [29]. In or-
der to further investigate how the clustering coeﬃcient
is related to the weighted degree of the nodes of PhoNet
we plot the degree-dependent clusterings in Figure 6 in
log-log scale. The ﬁgure shows a scatter plot as well as
an average binned distribution with bin sizes expressed
as powers of 2. It is quite interesting to observe that like
many other social networks [33] in this case also the clus-
tering is substantial (very close to one) for vertices with
small degrees and gets lower with an increasing k. This
is because the more neighbors a consonant node has the
less probable it will be for those neighbors to co-occur
in the same language and hence be connected with each
other.

The power law degree distributions observed for both
PlaNet and PhoNet are indicative of the presence of pref-
erential attachment in the organization of the consonant
inventories. We are however interested in estimating the
amount of preferential attachment involved to get an ac-
curate view of the underlying dynamics guiding the for-
mation of the consonant inventories. This can be best
understood through a synthesis model which, we present

6

FIG. 7: A partial step of the synthesis process. When the
language L4 has to connect itself with one of the nodes in
the set VC it does so with the one having the highest degree
(=3) rather than with others in order to achieve preferential
attachment which is the working principle of our algorithm.

As we shall see shortly, the aforementioned preferen-
tial attachment based model is able to explain the distri-
bution of the consonants over languages reasonably well.
However, at this point it would be worthwhile to mention
the reason behind sorting the language nodes in ascend-
ing order of their cardinalities. With each consonant is
associated two diﬀerent frequencies; a) the frequency of
occurrence of a consonant over languages or the type fre-
quency, and b) the frequency of usage of the consonant in
a particular language or the token frequency. Researchers
have shown in the past that these two frequencies are
positively correlated. Nevertheless, our synthesis model
based on preferential attachment takes into account only
the type frequency of a consonant and not its token fre-
quency. If language is considered to be an evolving sys-
tem [25] then both of these frequencies, in one generation,
should play an important role in shaping the inventory
structure of the next generation.

In the later stages of our synthesis process when the
attachments are strongly preferential, the type frequen-
cies span over a large range and automatically guarantee
the token frequency (since they are positively correlated).
However, in the initial stages of this process the attach-
ments that take place are random in nature and therefore
the type frequencies of all the nodes are roughly equal. At
this point it is the token frequency (absent in our model)
that should discriminate between the nodes. This error
due to the loss of information about the token frequency
in the initial steps of the synthesis process can be min-
imized by allowing only a small number of attachments
(so that there is less spreading of the error). This is
primarily the reason why we sort the language nodes in
the ascending order of their cardinalities so that there

FIG. 8: Degree distribution of the nodes in VC for PlaNetsyn,
PlaNet, as well as when the model incorporates no preferential
attachment; for PlaNetsyn, ǫ = 0.5, α = 1.44, and the results
are averaged over 100 simulation runs.

are only a few random connections in the initial steps
resulting in minimum error propagation.

Apart from the ascending order, we have also simu-
lated the model with descending and random order of the
inventory size. The degree distribution obtained by con-
sidering ascending order of the inventory size, matches
more accurately than in the other two scenarios.

Simulation Results: Simulations reveal that for
PlaNetsyn the degree distribution of the nodes belong-
ing to VC ﬁt well with the empirical results we obtained
earlier in section II. Good ﬁts emerge for the range
0.4 ≤ ǫ ≤ 0.6 and 1.4 ≤ α ≤ 1.5 with the best
being at ǫ = 0.5 and α = 1.44. Figure 8 shows the degree
k versus Pk plots averaged over 100 simulation runs.

The mean error[44] between the degree distribution
plots of PlaNet and PlaNetsyn is ∼ 0.01. The match
degrades as we reduce the value of α to 1 (linear pref-
erential attachment) where the mean error is 0.03. The
match further degrades as we continue to reduce the value
of α and is worst for α = 0 (i.e., there is no preferential
attachment incorporated in the model and all connec-
tions are equiprobable) where the mean error is as high
as 0.35.

After having studied the properties of PlaNetsyn as
discussed above, we now construct PhoNetsyn from
PlaNetsyn in the approach outlined in section II. Next,
the degree distribution as well as the clustering coeﬃcient
of PhoNetsyn is compared with that of PhoNet. Figure 9
illustrates the degree k versus Pk plot for PhoNetsyn
(along with that of PhoNet).
It is clear from the ﬁg-
ure that the degree distribution curves for PhoNet and
PhoNetsyn are qualitatively similar, although there is a
signiﬁcant amount of quantitative diﬀerence between the
two (mean error ∼ 0.45). Moreover, the average clus-
tering coeﬃcient c
av of PhoNetsyn (0.44) diﬀers largely
from that of PhoNet (0.89).

′

7

the distribution P r(Ci)) to only the neighbors of Ci (to
which Lj is not already connected) with a probability pt.
Consequently, Lj connects itself preferentially to the non-
neighbors of Ci (to which Lj is not already connected)
with a probability (1-pt). Accordingly, the neighbor set
of Ci gets updated.

The entire idea mentioned above is summed up in Al-
gorithm 2. Figure 10 shows a partial step of the synthesis
process illustrated in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2: The reﬁned synthesis process
Input: Nodes L1 through L317 sorted in the ascending
order of their cardinalities;
for t = 1 to 317 {

Choose (in order) a node Lj with cardinality kj;
Connect Lj to a node Ci ∈ VC to which it is not yet
connected, following the distribution,

P r(Ci) =

di

α + ǫ
(di

′ α + ǫ)

′

∈V

′
C

Pi

C is the set of nodes in VC to which Lj is

′
where V
not already connected;
for c = 2 to kj {

Connect Lj with a probability pt to a neighbor
(to which Lj is not already connected) of the node
Ci from its neighbor list following the distribution
P r(Ci); and,
Connect Lj with a probability (1-pt) to a non-
neighbor (to which Lj is not already connected)
of the node Ci following the distribution P r(Ci);
Accordingly, expand the neighbor list of Ci;
}

}

A. Estimation of Model Parameters

The reﬁned model discussed in Algorithm 2 involves
three diﬀerent parameters namely pt, α, and ǫ. Thus at
this point it becomes necessary to ﬁgure out how these
model parameters interact and thereby inﬂuence the re-
sults. For this purpose we perform simulations of the
model for diﬀerent values of pt (in the range [0.7,0.95]),
α (in the range [1.1,1.5]), and ǫ (in the range [0.2,0.4]) and
study the pairwise relationships between errors that show
up in (1) the degree distribution of PlaNetsyn, (2) the
degree distribution of PhoNetsyn, and (3) the average
clustering coeﬃcient of PhoNetsyn.

Figure 11 shows that the mean error between the de-
gree distribution of PlaNet/PlaNetsyn is negatively cor-
related to that of PhoNet/PhoNetsyn. Each point on
the plot indicates a certain combination of the values of
pt, α, and ǫ. Some of the non-dominating [2] points are
indicated by black circles in the ﬁgure.

Moreover, the mean error between the degree distribu-
tion of PlaNet/PlaNetsyn is also negatively correlated to
the error [45] between the average clustering coeﬃcient

FIG. 9: Degree distribution of the nodes of PhoNetsyn and
PhoNet in log-log scale.

Due to this large deviation from the real data, our syn-
thesis model needs to be reﬁned so that it not only mim-
ics the degree distribution of PlaNet but also reproduces
the degree distribution as well as the average clustering
coeﬃcient of PhoNet. The primary reason for this devi-
ation in the results is that the high degree of clustering,
observed in PhoNet, is not taken into account by our
synthesis model. Such a high clustering is a consequence
of the fact that apart from preferential attachment there
is some other force governing the structure of the conso-
nant inventories. Mukherjee et al. [29] reports that this
force tends to bind a set of consonants in cohesive groups
which essentially leads to the emergence of a pattern of
co-occurrence (resulting in high clustering) among them.
Therefore, in order to boost up the clustering coeﬃ-
cient we reﬁne the model to allow the formation of triads
(i.e., fully connected triplets). This technique has been
used by several models in the past [35], which has led
to increased clustering, closer to what is found in real
networks. The reﬁnement can be achieved in our model
by having a language node Lj attach to some node Ci ∈
VC if it has already attached itself to a neighbor of Ci.
Two consonant nodes C1 and C2 are neighbors if a lan-
guage node (other than Lj) attaches itself to both C1
and C2 in an earlier step of the synthesis process. This
phenomenon leads to the formation of a large number of
triangles and/or triads in the one-mode projection which
in turn is expected to yield a higher clustering coeﬃcient.
In this model we denote the probability of triad forma-
tion by pt. At each time step a language node Lj (chosen
from the set of language nodes sorted in ascending order
of their degrees) makes the ﬁrst connection to some con-
sonant node Ci ∈ VC (Lj is not already connected to Ci)
preferentially following the distribution P r(Ci) (speciﬁed
in equation 5). For the rest of the (kj -1) connections the
language node Lj attaches itself preferentially (following

8

FIG. 10: A partial step of the synthesis process. If the language node L4 (which has degree 3) has the initial connection a1 (due
to preferential attachment) then according to the synthesis model the following connections would be a2 and a3 respectively in
that order. This series of connections increases the co-occurrence by allowing formation of triads in the one-mode projection.
The bold line in the ﬁgure indicates the edge that completes the triad.

FIG. 11: The correlation of the mean error between
the degree distribution of PlaNet/PlaNetsyn with that of
PhoNet/PhoNetsyn. Each point on the plot indicates a cer-
tain combination of the values of pt, α, and ǫ. Some of the
non-dominating points are indicated by the black circles.

FIG. 12: The correlation of the mean error between
the degree distribution of PlaNet/PlaNetsyn with that of
PhoNet/PhoNetsyn. Each point on the plot indicates a cer-
tain combination of the values of pt, α, and ǫ. A few of the
non-dominating points are marked by the black circles.

of PhoNet/PhoNetsyn. Figure 12 illustrates this nega-
tive correlation. In this case again each point on the plot
indicates a certain combination of the values of pt, α,
and ǫ. Some of the non-dominating points are marked

Further, the mean error between the degree distribu-
tion of PhoNet/PhoNetsyn and the error between the av-
erage clustering coeﬃcient of PhoNet/PhoNetsyn do not
show a direct dependence on one another (so that their

by black circles in the ﬁgure.

9

eﬀects could be assumed to be proportional), even though
they are not strictly negatively correlated.

1. Combining the Objective Functions

In a multi-objective scenario as discussed above, the
most common technique, reported in literature [2], to ar-
rive at a solution is to look for trade-oﬀs rather than a
single point that optimizes all the objective functions.
One of the popular ways for such a trade-oﬀ is to com-
bine (usually linearly) the objective functions together to
result in a single objective function. In similar lines, we
deﬁne the error E which is the average of the mean er-
ror (say ME) between degree distribution of PlaNet and
PlaNetsyn, the mean error (say M
E) between the degree
distribution of PhoNet and PhoNetsyn, and the error (say
CE) in the average clustering coeﬃcient of PhoNet and
PhoNetsyn. In other words,

′

′

E =

E + CE(cid:17)

1
3 (cid:16)ME + M
It is to be noted that there can be multiple other ways of
combining the above three errors and equation 6 is just
one of them. Having deﬁned the error E, we perform a
detailed study of the parameter space in order to compute
the minimum value of E.

(6)

We simulate the above synthesis model with diﬀerent
values of α ranging from 1.1 to 1.5 (in steps of 0.1) and
pt ranging from 0.70 to 0.95 (in steps of 0.05) and com-
pute the error E in each case. Figure 13 shows the three
dimensional plot with pt in the x-axis, α in the y-axis
and E in the z-axis for three diﬀerent values of ǫ which
are 0.2, 0.3 and 0.4 respectively. We do not report the
results for α > 1.5 since at larger values of α the error
E continuously keeps on rising mainly due to gelation
(a condition where a single dominant “gel” node is con-
nected to all other nodes) [35]. Moreover, a reasonable
amount of triad formation can only take place at higher
values of pt and hence we do not report the results for
pt < 0.70. Further, we do not choose larger values of
ǫ since it is a smoothing parameter. The ﬁgure clearly
shows that in our inspection range the minimum error
(E = 4.1%) is achieved when the values of pt, α and ǫ
are 0.8, 1.3 and 0.3 respectively. We have also empir-
ically observed that these parameters are stable in the
sense that a slight perturbation in them brings only a
negligible change in the results.

B. Simulation Results

We plug in the best values (corresponding to minimum
E) of the parameters pt, α and ǫ as obtained in the ear-

2. Experiment to Compute the Minimum Error

FIG. 13: The error E for diﬀerent values of the parameters pt,
α and ǫ. The letter z indicates the point where E is minimum.

lier section in Algorithm 2 to synthesize PlaNetsyn and
subsequently PhoNetsyn. The results of this simulation
are provided below.

Figure 14 shows the degree distribution of the con-
sonant nodes of PlaNetsyn in comparison with that of
PlaNet. The mean error between the two distributions is
0.04 approximately and is therefore a deterioration from
the earlier result. This is mainly due to the trade-oﬀ
involved in the deﬁnition of E. Nevertheless, the aver-
age clustering coeﬃcient of PhoNetsyn in this case is 0.85
as compared to 0.89 of PhoNet. Moreover, in this pro-
cess the mean error between the degree distribution of
PhoNetsyn and PhoNet (as illustrated in Figure 15) has
got reduced dramatically from 0.45 to 0.03.

The above results equivocally indicate that for a good
choice of the parameters (described earlier) the reﬁned
version of the synthesis model not only reproduces the
degree distribution of PlaNet but also the degree dis-
tribution as well as the average clustering coeﬃcient of
PhoNet to a very close approximation.

10

size distribution is known a priori,

• Reﬁne the synthesis model so that it not only mim-
ics the degree distribution of the consonant nodes
of PlaNet as well as PhoNet but also reproduces
the clustering coeﬃcient of PhoNet to a very close
approximation.

.

Until now we have been mainly dealing with the com-
putational aspects of the distribution of consonants over
the languages rather than exploring the real world dy-
namics that gives rise to such a distribution. Language is
a constantly changing phenomena and its present struc-
ture is determined by its past evolutionary history. The
sociolinguist Jennifer Coates remarks that this linguis-
tic change occurs in the context of linguistic heterogene-
ity. She explains that “.
linguistic change can be
.
said to have taken place when a new linguistic form,
used by some sub-group within a speech community, is
adopted by other members of that community and ac-
In this process of language
cepted as the norm.” [15].
change (at the microscopic level), consonants belonging
to languages that are more prevalent among the speak-
ers in one generation have higher chances of being trans-
mitted to the speakers of languages of the subsequent
generations [1, 10]. In the mesoscopic level this hetero-
geneity in the choice of the consonants manifests itself
as preferential attachment. Further, if two consonants
largely co-occur in the languages of one generation, it
is highly likely that they will be transmitted together
in the languages of the following generations [10]. The
aforementioned phenomenon is what is reﬂected through
the formation of triads discussed in the earlier section. It
is interesting to note that whereas triad formation among
consonants takes place in a top-down fashion as a conse-
quence of language change over linguistic generations, the
same happens in a social network in a bottom-up fashion
where actors come to know one another through other ac-
tors and thereby slowly shape the structure of the whole
network. Moreover, unlike in a social network where a
pair of actors can regulate (break or acquire) their rela-
tionship bonds, if the co-occurrence bond between two
consonants breaks due to pressures of language change
it can be never acquired again [46]. Such a bond breaks
only if one or both of the consonants are completely lost
in the process of language change and is never formed in
future since the consonants that are lost do not reappear
again. In this context, Darwin in his book, The descent
of man [19], writes “A language, like a species, when once
extinct never reappears.”

Although the directions of growth in a social network is
diﬀerent from the networks discussed in this paper, both
of them target to achieve the same conﬁguration. It is
mainly due to this reason that the principle of preferential
attachment along with that of triad formation is able
to capture the self-organizing behavior of the consonant
inventories.

FIG. 14: Degree distribution of PlaNetsyn along with that of
PlaNet in log-log scale. The values of the parameters pt, α
and ǫ are 0.8, 1.3 and 0.3 respectively.

FIG. 15: Degree distribution of PhoNetsyn along with that of
PhoNet in log-log scale. The values of the parameters pt, α
and ǫ are 0.8, 1.3 and 0.3 respectively.

IV. CONCLUSIONS, DISCUSSION AND
FUTURE WORK

In this paper we have analyzed and synthesized the
consonant inventories of the world’s languages through a
complex network approach. We dedicated the preceding
sections for the following,

• Propose complex network representations of the
consonant inventories, namely PlaNet and PhoNet,

• Provide a systematic study of some of the impor-
tant structural properties of PlaNet and PhoNet,

• Develop a synthesis model for PlaNet based on pref-
erential attachment where the consonant inventory

In this paper we have mainly dealt with the unlabeled
synthesis (since the consonant nodes are unlabeled in our

synthesis model) of the occurrence and co-occurrence net-
works of consonants. However, the work can be further
extended in the directions of a labeled synthesis of the

consonant networks (and hence consonant inventories).
We look forward to accomplish the same as a part of our
future work.

11

[1] D. M. Abrams and S. H. Strogatz. 2003. Modelling the

dynamics of language death. Nature 424, 900.

[2] A. Abraham, L. C. Jain and R. Goldberg. 2005. Evolu-
tionary multiobjective optimization: Theoretical advances
and applications, Springer–Verlag.

[3] R. Albert and A.-L. Barab´asi. 2002. Statistical mechanics
of complex networks. Reviews of Modern Physics 74, 47–
97.

[4] P. Arhem, H. A. Braun, M. T. Huber and H. Liljenstrom.
2004. Micro-Meso-Macro: Addressing complex systems
couplings, World Scientiﬁc.

[23] J. Ke, M. Ogura and W. S-Y Wang. 2003. Modeling
evolution of sound systems with genetic algorithm. Com-
putational Linguistics 29(1), 1–18

[24] P. Ladefoged and I. Maddieson. 1996. Sounds of the

worlds languages, Oxford: Blackwell.

[25] D. Lightfoot. 1999. The development of language: Ac-
quisition, change and evolution, Oxford: Blackwell.
[26] B. Lindblom and I. Maddieson. 1988. Phonetic universals
in consonant systems. Language, Speech, and Mind, 62–
78, Routledge, London.

[27] I. Maddieson. 1984. Patterns of sounds, Cambridge Uni-

[5] A.-L. Barab´asi and R. Albert. 1999. Emergence of scaling

versity Press, Cambridge.

in random networks. Science 286, 509-512.

[6] A.-L. Barab´asi, H. Jeong, Z. N´eda, E. Ravasz, A. Schu-
bert and T. Vicsek. 2006. Evolution of the social network
of scientiﬁc collaborations. arXiv:cond-mat/0104162
[7] A. Barrat, M. Barth´elemy, R. Pastor-Satorras and A.
Vespignani. 2004. The architecture of complex weighted
networks. PNAS 101, 3747–3752.

[8] G. J. Baxter, R. A. Blythe, W. Croft and A. J. McK-
ane. 2006 Utterance selection model of language change.
Physical Review E 73, 046118.

[28] I. Maddieson. 1999. In search of universals. Proceedings of
the XIVth International Congress of Phonetic Sciences,
2521-2528.

[29] A. Mukherjee, M. Choudhury, A. Basu and N. Gan-
guly. 2006. Modeling the co-occurrence principles of
the consonant inventories: A complex network approach.
arXiv:physics/0606132 (preprint).

[30] M. E. J. Newman. 2001. Scientiﬁc collaboration net-

works. Phys. Rev. E 64.

[31] M. E. J. Newman. 2003. The structure and function of

[9] D. N. S. Bhatt. 2001 Sound Change, Motilal Banarsidass,

complex networks. SIAM Review 45, 167–256.

New Delhi.

[32] P. Oudeyer. 2006. Self-organization in the evolution of

[10] J. Blevins. 2004. Evolutionary phonology: The emergence

speech, Oxford University Press.

of sound patterns, Cambridge University Press.

[11] B. Boer. 2000. Self-organisation in vowel systems. Jour-

nal of Phonetics 28(4), 441–465.

[12] P. Boersma. 1998. Functional phonology, Doctoral thesis,
University of Amsterdam, The Hague: Holland Academic
Graphics.

[13] M. G. Bulmer. 1979. Principles of statistics, Mathemat-

[14] F. Cancho and R. V. Sol´e. 2001. The small-world of
human language. Santa Fe working paper 01-03-016.
[15] J. Coates. 1993. Women, men and language, London:

ics.

Longman.

[33] M. Peltom¨aki and M. Alava. 2006. Correlations in bi-
partite collaboration networks. Journal of Statistical Me-
chanics: Theory and Experiment, Issue 1, 01010.

[34] V. Pericliev and R. E. Vald´es-P´erez. 2002. Diﬀerentiat-
ing 451 languages in terms of their segment inventories.
Studia Linguistica 56(1), 1–27.

[35] J. J. Ramasco, S. N. Dorogovtsev and R. Pastor-Satorras.
2004. Self-organization of collaboration networks. Phys-
ical Review E 70, 036106.

[36] H. A. Simon. 1955. On a class of skew distribution func-

tions. Biometrika 42, 425-440.

[37] D. Stampe. 1973. A dissertation on natural phonology,

[16] N. Chomsky and M. Halle. 1968. The sound pattern of

PhD dissertation, University of Chicago.

English, New York: Harper and Row.

[17] M. Choudhury, A. Mukherjee, A. Basu and N. Ganguly.
2006. Analysis and synthesis of the distribution of con-
sonants over languages: A complex network approach.
Proceedings of COLING–ACL, Sydney, Australia.
[18] N. Clements. 2004. Features and sound inventories. Sym-
posium on Phonological Theory: Representations and Ar-
chitecture, CUNY.

[38] N. Trubetzkoy. 1969. Principles of phonology. (English
translation of Grundz¨uge der Phonologie, 1939), Berke-
ley: University of California Press.

[39] M. S. Vitevitch. 2005. Phonological neighbors in a small
world: What can graph theory tell us about word learn-
ing? Spring 2005 Talk Series on Networks and Complex
Systems, Indiana University, Bloomington.

[40] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz. 1998. Collective dynamics

[19] C. R. Darwin. 1871. The descent of man, and selection

of small-world networks. Nature 393, 440-442.

in relation to sex, London: John Murray.

[20] E. Flemming. 2002. Auditory representations in phonol-

ogy, New York and London: Routledge.

[21] F. Hinskens and J. Weijer. 2003. Patterns of segmental
modiﬁcation in consonant inventories: A cross-linguistic
study. Linguistics 41, 6.

[22] H. Jeong, B. Tombor, R. Albert, Z. N. Oltvai, and A. L.
Barab´asi. 2000. The large-scale organization of metabolic
networks. Nature 406, 651-654.

[41] S. Yook, H. Jeong and A.-L. Barab´asi. 2001. unpublished.
[42] From a bipartite network, one can construct its unipar-
tite counterpart, the so-called one-mode projection onto
actors, as a network consisting solely of the social actors
as nodes, two of which are connected by an edge for each
social tie they both participate in. For example, two con-
sonant nodes in the one-mode projection are connected as
many times as they have co-occurred across the language
inventories.

[43] A random variable is said to have a β-distribution with
parameters α > 0 and β > 0 if and only if its probability
mass function is given by,
f (x) = Γ(α+β)
for 0 < x < 1 and f (x) = 0 otherwise. Γ(·) is the Euler’s
gamma function.

Γ(α)Γ(β) xα−1(1 − x)β−1

[44] Mean error is deﬁned as the average diﬀerence between
the ordinate pairs (say y and y
) where the abscissas are
equal. In other words if there are N such ordinate pairs

′

then the mean error can be expressed as P

′

|

|y−y
N

12

′
av |

[45] The error in the average clustering coeﬃcient is expressed

′
where cav and c
av are the average clustering

as |cav −c
cav
coeﬃcients of PhoNet and PhoNetsyn respectively.
[46] There is a very little chance of reformation of the bond
only if by coincidence the speakers learn a foreign lan-
guage which has in its inventory one of the consonants
lost (from the inventory of the native language of the
speaker) in the process of language change.

