Proceedings Title IAU Symposium
Proceedings IAU Symposium No. xxx, 2007
A.C. Editor, B.D. Editor & C.E. Editor, eds.

c(cid:13) 2007 International Astronomical Union
DOI: 00.0000/X000000000000000X

The United Nations Basic Space Science
Initiative: The TRIPOD concept

M. Kitamura1, D. Wentzel2, A.A. Henden3, J. Bennett4, H.M.K.
Al-Naimiy5, A.M. Mathai6, N. Gopalswamy7, J. Davila8, B.
Thompson9, D.F. Webb10,
and H.J. Haubold11 †
1National Astronomical Observatory, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-8588, Japan

2University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742-2421, USA
email: d.wentzel@worldnet.att.net
3American Association of Variable Star Observers, 25 Birch Street, Cambridge, MA 02138,
USA
email: arne@aavso.org
43015 10th St., Boulder, CO 80304, USA
email: jeﬀrey.bennett@comcast.net
5College of Arts and Sciences, Sharjah University P.O. Box, 27272 Sharjah, United Arab
Emirates
email: alnaimiy2@yahoo.com
6Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Pala Campus, Arunapuram P.O. Box, Pala-686574,
Kerala, India
email: mathai@math.mcgill.ca
7NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA
email: gopals@ssedmail.gsfc.nasa.gov
8NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA
email: joseph.m.davila@nasa.gov
9NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA
email: barbara.j.thompson@nasa.gov
10AFRL/VSBXS and ISR, Boston College, 29 Randolph Road, Hanscom AFB, MA
01731-3010, USA
email: David.Webb.ctr@hanscom.af.mil
11United Nations Oﬃce for Outer Space Aﬀairs, Vienna International Centre, A-1400 Vienna,
Austria
email: hans.haubold@unvienna.org

Abstract. Since 1990, the United Nations is annually holding a workshop on basic space science
for the beneﬁt of the worldwide development of astronomy. Additional to the scientiﬁc beneﬁts
of the workshops and the strengthening of international cooperation, the workshops lead to the
establishment of astronomical telescope facilities through the Oﬃcial Development Assistance
(ODA) of Japan. Teaching material, hands-on astrophysics material, and variable star observing
programmes had been developed for the operation of such astronomical telescope facilities in an
university environment. This approach to astronomical telescope facility, observing programme,
and teaching astronomy has become known as the basic space science TRIPOD concept. Cur-
rently, a similar TRIPOD concept is being developed for the International Heliophysical Year
2007, consisting of an instrument array, data taking and analysis, and teaching space science.

Keywords. United Nations, international cooperation, basic space science, TRIPOD, astro-

† Presented the invited paper on behalf of the United Nations Oﬃce for Outer Space Aﬀairs

1

6
0
0
2
 
t
c
O
 
9
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
1
0
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

2

Kitamura et al.

nomical telescope facility, observing programme, teaching astronomy, International Heliophysi-
cal Year 2007

1. Introduction

Research and education in astronomy and astrophysics are an international enterprise
and the astronomical community has long shown leadership in creating international
collaborations and cooperation: Because (i) astronomy has deep roots in virtually every
human culture, (ii) it helps to understand humanity’s place in the vast scale of the
universe, and (iii) it teaches humanity about its origins and evolution. Humanity’s activity
in the quest for the exploration of the universe is reﬂected in the history of scientiﬁc
institutions, enterprises, and sensibilities. The institutions that sustain science; the moral,
religious, cultural, and philosophical sensibilities of scientists themselves; and the goal of
the scientiﬁc enterprise in diﬀerent regions on Earth are subject of intense study (Pyenson
and Sheets-Pyenson 1999).

The Decadal Reports for the last decade of the 20th century (Bahcall, 1991) and the
ﬁrst decade of the 21st century (McKee and Taylor, 2001) have been prepared primarily
for the North American astronomical community, however, it may have gone unnoticed
that these reports had also an impact on a broader international scale, as the reports can
be used, to some extend, as a guide to introduce basic space science, including astronomy
and astrophysics, in nations where this ﬁeld of science is still in its infancy. Attention is
drawn to the world-wide-web sites at http://www.seas.columbia.edu/∼ah297/
un-esa/ and http://www.unoosa.org/oosa/en/SAP/bss/index.html, where the TRIPOD
concept is publicized on how developing nations are making eﬀorts to introduce basic
space science into research and education curricula at the university level. The concept,
focusing on astronomical telescope facilities in developing nations, was born in 1990 as a
collaborative eﬀort of developing nations, the European Space Agency (ESA), the United
Nations (UN), and the Government of Japan. Through annual workshops and subsequent
follow-up projects, particularly the establishment of astronomical telescope facilities, this
concept is gradually bearing results in the regions of Asia and the Paciﬁc, Latin America
and the Caribbean, Africa, and Western Asia (Wamsteker et al. 2004).

2. United Nations Oﬃce for Outer Space Aﬀairs (UNOOSA)

In 1959, the United Nations recognized a new potential for international cooperation
and formed a permanent body by establishing the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space (COPUOS). In 1970, COPUOS formalized the UN Programme on Space Ap-
plications to strengthen cooperation in space science and technology between developing
and industrialized nations.

The overall purpose of the programme ”Peaceful Use of Outer Space” is the pro-
motion of international cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space for economic,
social and scientiﬁc development, in particular for the beneﬁt of developing nations. The
programme aims at strengthening the international legal regime governing outer space
activities to improve conditions for expanding international cooperation in the peaceful
uses of outer space. The implementation of the programme will strengthen eﬀorts at the
national, regional and global levels, including among entities of the United Nations sys-
tem, to increase the beneﬁts of the use of space science and technology for sustainable
development.

Within the secretariat of the United Nations, the programme is implemented by the

Basic Space Science TRIPOD

3

Oﬃce for Outer Space Aﬀairs. At the inter-governmental level, the programme is imple-
mented by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, which addresses scientiﬁc
and technical as well as legal and policy issues related to the peaceful uses of outer space.
The Committee was established by the General Assembly in 1959 and has two subsidiary
bodies, the Legal Subcommittee and the Scientiﬁc and Technical Subcommittee. The di-
rection of the programme is provided in the annual resolutions of the General Assembly
and decisions of the Committee and its two Subcommittees.

As part of its programme of work, the Oﬃce provides secretariat services to the Com-
mittee and its subsidiary bodies and implements the United Nations Programme on Space
Applications. The activities of the Programme on Space Applications are primarily de-
signed to build the capacity of developing nations to use space applications to support
their economic and social development.

In its resolution 54/68 of 6 December 1999, the United Nations General Assembly
endorsed the resolution entitled ”The Space Millennium: Vienna Declaration on Space
and Human Development”, which had been adopted by the Third United Nations Con-
ference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III), held in
July 1999. Since then, the focus of the work undertaken by the Oﬃce under this pro-
gramme has been to assist the Committee in the implementation of the recommendations
of UNISPACE III.

In October 2004, the United Nations General Assembly reviewed the progress made
in the implementation of the recommendations of UNISPACE III and, in its resolution
59/2, endorsed the Committee’s Plan of Action for their further implementation. The
Plan of Action, contained in the report of the Committee to the Assembly for its review
(A/59/174), constitutes a long-term strategy for enhancing mechanisms to develop or
strengthen the use of space science and technology to support the global agendas for
sustainable development. The report also provides a road map to make space tools more
widely available by moving from the demonstration of the usefulness of space technology
to an operational use of space-based services.

In its report, the Committee noted that in implementing the Plan of Action, the
Committee could provide a bridge between users and potential providers of space-based
applications and services by identifying needs of Member States and coordinating inter-
national cooperation to facilitate access to the scientiﬁc and technical systems that might
meet them. To maximize the eﬀectiveness of its resources, the Committee adopted a ﬂexi-
ble mechanism, action teams, that takes advantage of partnerships among its secretariat,
Governments, and intergovernmental and international non-governmental organizations
to further implement the recommendations of UNISPACE III.

At its forty-ninth session, held in June 2006, the Committee had before it for its
consideration the proposed Strategic Framework for the Oﬃce for Outer Space Aﬀairs
for the period 2008 - 2009, as contained in document (A/61/6 (Prog.5)). The Committee
agreed on the proposed strategic framework.

The expected accomplishments and the strategy reﬂected in the strategic framework
proposed by the Oﬃce for Outer Space Aﬀairs for the period 2008-2009 (A/61/6) are
aimed at achieving increased international cooperation among Member States and in-
ternational entities in the conduct of space activities for peaceful purposes and the use
of space science and technology and their applications towards achieving internationally
agreed sustainable development goals.

In brief, the three expected accomplishments of the Oﬃce are: (a) greater understand-
ing, acceptance, and implementation by the international community of the legal regime
established by the United Nations to govern outer space activities; (b) strengthened ca-
pacities of countries in using space science and technology and their applications in areas

4

Kitamura et al.

related, in particular, to sustainable development, and mechanisms to coordinate their
space-related policy matters and space activities; and (c) increased coherence and syn-
ergy in the space-related work of entities of the United Nations system and international
space-related entities in using space science and technology and their applications as tools
to advance human development and increase overall capacity development. The estab-
lishment and operation of Regional Centres for Space Science and Technology, aﬃliated
to the United Nations
(http://www.unoosa.org/oosa/en/SAP/centres/index.html),
as well as workshops on basic space science
(http://www.unoosa.org/oosa/en/SAP/bss/index.html)
and the International Heliophysical Year 2007
(http://www.unoosa.org/oosa/en/SAP/bss/ihy2007/index.html)
are part of the accomplishments of the Oﬃce.

3. Oﬃcial Development Assistance (ODA) of the Government of

Japan

In conjunction to the workshops, to support research and education in astronomy,
the Government of Japan has donated high-grade equipment to a number of develop-
ing nations (Singapore 1987, Indonesia 1988, Thailand 1989, Sri Lanka 1995, Paraguay
1999, the Philippines 2000, Chile 2001) within the scheme of ODA of the Government of
Japan (Kitamura 1999). Here, reference is made to 45cm high-grade astronomical tele-
scopes furnished with photoelectric photometer, computer equipment, and spectrograph
(or CCD). After the installation of the telescope facility by the host country and Japan,
in order to operate such high-grade telescopes, young observatory staﬀ members from the
host country have been invited by the Bisei Astronomical Observatory for education and
training, sponsored by the Japan International Cooperation Agency [JICA] (Kitamura
1999, Kogure 1999, Kitamura 2004, UN document A/AC.105/829). Similar telescope fa-
cilities, provided by the Government, were inaugurated in Honduras (1997) and Jordan
(1999).

The research and education programmes at the newly established telescope facilities
focus on time-varying phenomena of celestial objects. The 45cm class reﬂecting telescope
with photoelectric photometer attached is able to detect celestial objects up to the 12th
magnitude and with a CCD attached up to the 15th magnitude, respectively. Such results
have been demonstrated for the light variation of the eclipsing close binary star V505
Sgr, the X-ray binary Cyg X-1, the eclipsing part of the long-period binary eps Aur, the
asteroid No.45 Eugenia, and the eclipsing variable RT CMa (Kitamura 1999).

Also in 1990, the Government of Japan through ODA, facilitated the provision of

planetariums to developing nations (Kitamura 2004; Smith and Haubold 1992).

4. Observing with the Telescopes: Research

In the course of preparing the establishment of the above astronomical telescope fa-
cilities, the workshops made intense eﬀorts to identify available material to be used in
research and education by utilizing such facilities. It was discovered that variable star
observing by photoelectric or CCD photometry can be a prelude to even more advanced
astronomical activity. Variable stars are those whose brightness, colour, or some other
property varies with time. If measured suﬃciently carefully, almost every star turns out
to be variable. The variation may be due to geometry, such as the eclipse of one star by

Basic Space Science TRIPOD

5

a companion star, or the rotation of a spotted star, or it may be due to physical pro-
cesses such as pulsation, eruption, or explosion. Variable stars provide astronomers with
essential information about the internal structure and evolution of the stars. The most
preeminent institution in this speciﬁc ﬁeld of astronomy is the American Association of
Variable Star Observers. The AAVSO co-ordinates variable star observations made by
amateur and professional astronomers, compiles, processes, and publishes them, and in
turn, makes them available to researchers and educators.

To facilitate the operation of variable star observing programmes and to prepare a
common ground for such programmes, the AAVSO developed a rather unique package
titled “Hands-On Astrophysics” which includes 45 star charts, 31 35mm slides of ﬁve
constellations, 14 prints of the Cygnus star ﬁeld at seven diﬀerent times, 600,000 mea-
surements of several dozen stars, user-friendly computer programmes to analyze them,
and to enter new observations into the database, an instructional video in three segments,
and a very comprehensive manual for teachers and students (http://www.aavso.org/).
Assuming that the telescope is properly operational, variable stars can be observed,
measurements can be analyzed and sent electronically to the AAVSO.

The ﬂexibility of the “Hands-On Astrophysics” material allows an immediate link to
the teaching of astronomy or astrophysics at the university level by using the astronomy,
mathematics, and computer elements of this package. It can be used as a basis to involve
both the professor and the student to do real science with real observational data. After a
careful exploration of “Hands-On Astrophysics” and thanks to the generous cooperation
of the AAVSO, it was adopted by the above astronomical telescope facilities for their
observing programmes (Mattei and Percy 1999, Percy 1991, Wamsteker et al. 2004).

The AAVSO is currently undertaking a massive eﬀort to translate its basic Visual
Observing Manual into many languages such as Spanish and Russian, to make this basic
material available in the native language of any developing nation. The AAVSO is actively
pursuing translations in Arabic and Chinese so as to have versions available in all the
oﬃcial United Nations languages.

5. Teaching Astrophysics: Education

Various strategies for introducing the spirit of scientiﬁc inquiry to universities, includ-
ing those in developing nations, have been developed and analyzed (Wentzel 1999a). The
workshops on basic space science were created to foster scientiﬁc inquiry. Organized and
hosted by Governments and scientiﬁc communities, they serve the need to introduce or
further develop basic space science at the university level, as well as to establish adequate
facilities for pursuing a scientiﬁc ﬁeld in practical terms. Such astronomical facilities are
operated for the beneﬁt of the university or research establishment, and will also make
the results from these facilities available for public educational eﬀorts. Additional to the
hosting of the workshops, the Governments agreed to operate such a telescope facility
in a sustained manner with the call on the international community for support and
cooperation in devising respective research and educational programmes.

Organizers of the workshops have acknowledged in the past the desire of the local
scientiﬁc communities to use educational material adopted and available at the local
level (prepared in the local language). However, the workshops have also recommended
to explore the possibility to develop educational material (additional to the above men-
tioned “Hands-On Astrophysics” package) which might be used by as many as possible
university staﬀ in diﬀerent nations while preserving the speciﬁc cultural environment
in which astronomy is being taught and the telescope is being used. A ﬁrst promising
step in this direction was made with the project “Astrophysics for University Physics

6

Kitamura et al.

Courses” (Wentzel 1999b, Wamsteker et al. 2004). This project has been highlighted at
the IAU/COSPAR/UN Special Workshop on Education in Astronomy and Basic Space
Science, held during the UNISPACE III Conference at the United Nations Oﬃce Vienna
in 1999 (Isobe 1999). Additionally, a number of text books and CD-ROMs have been
reviewed over the years which, in the view of astronomers from developing nations, are
particularly useful in the research and teaching process: Bennett et al. 2007, for teaching
purposes and Bennett, 2001, Lang, 1999, 2004 reference books in the research process.

As part of the 15th anniversary celebrations of the Hubble Space Telescope, the Eu-
ropean Space Agency has produced an exclusive, 83-minute DVD ﬁlm, entitled ”Hubble
– 15 Years of Discovery”. The documentary also mentions the role of the Hubble Space
Telescope project in facilitating some of the activities of the United nations Oﬃce for
Outer Space Aﬀairs, particularly processing of Hubble imagery as part of the educa-
tion and research activities of the UN-aﬃliated Regional Centres for Space Science and
Technology and the workshops on basic space science. The Hubble DVD was distributed
world-wide, through the Oﬃce, as a unique educational tool for astronomy and astro-
physics.

6. International Heliophysical Year 2007: A World-Wide Outreach

Programme

In 1957 a programme of international research, inspired by the International Polar
Years of 1882-83 and 1932-33, was organized as the International Geophysical Year (IGY)
to study global phenomena of the Earth and geospace. The IGY involved about 66,000
scientists from 60 nations, working at thousands of stations, from pole to pole to obtain
simultaneous, global observations on Earth and in space. The ﬁftieth anniversary of IGY
will occur in 2007. It was proposed to organize an international programme of scientiﬁc
collaboration for this time period called the International Heliophysical Years (IHY) in
2007 (http://ihy2007.org/). Like IGY, and the two previous International Polar Years,
the scientiﬁc objective of IHY is to study phenomena on the largest possible scale with si-
multaneous observations from a broad array of instruments. Unlike previous international
years, today observations are routinely received from a vast armada of sophisticated in-
struments in space that continuously monitor solar activity, the interplanetary medium,
and the Earth. These spacecraft together with ground level observations and atmospheric
probes provide an extraordinary view of the Sun, the heliosphere, and their inﬂuence on
the near-Earth environment. The IHY is a unique opportunity to study the coupled
Sun-Earth system. Future basic space science workshops will focus on the preparation of
IHY 2007 world-wide, particularly taking into account interests and contributions from
developing nations.

Currently, in accordance with the United Nations General Assembly resolution 60/99,
the Scientiﬁc and Technical Subcommittee of the UNCOPUOS is considering an agenda
item on the IHY 2007 under the three-year work plan adopted at the forty-second session
of the Subcommittee
(http://www.unoosa.org/oosa/en/SAP/bss/ihy2007/index.html).

A major thrust of the IHY 2007 is to deploy arrays of small, inexpensive instruments
such as magnetometers, radio antennas, GPS receivers, all-sky cameras, etc. around the
world to provide global measurements of ionospheric, magnetospheric, and heliospheric
phenomena. This programme is implemented by collaboration between the IHY 2007
Secretariat and the United Nations Oﬃce for Outer Space Aﬀairs. The small instrument
programme consists of a partnership between instrument providers and instrument host
nations. The lead scientist or engineer provides the instrumentation (or fabrication plans

Basic Space Science TRIPOD

7

for instruments) in the array; the host nation provides manpower, facilities, and oper-
ational support to obtain data with the instrument, typically at a local university. In
preparation of IHY 2007, this programme has been active in deploying instrumentation,
developing plans for new instrumentation, and identifying educational opportunities for
the host nation in association with this programme
(http://ihy2007.org/observatory/observatory.shtml;
UN document A/AC.105/856). Currently, a TRIPOD concept is being developed for the
International Heliophysical Year 2007, consisting of an instrument array, data taking and
analysis, and teaching space science.

7. Remark

In 2006, 27 November - 1 December, the Indian Institute of Astrophysics will host the
second UN/NASA Workshop on the International Heliophysical Year and Basic Space
Science in Bangalore, India (http://www.iiap.res.in/ihy/). In 2007, 11-15 June, the Na-
tional Astronomical Observatory of Japan, Tokyo, will host a workshop on basic space
science and the International Heliophysical Year 2007, co-organized by the United Na-
tions, European Space Agency, and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
of the United States of America, and will use this opportunity to commemorate the co-
operation between the Government of Japan and the United Nations, as highlighted in
this article, since 1990.

References

Bahcall, J., The Decade of Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics, National Academy
Press, Washington D.C., 1991; and Astronomy and Astrophysics: Panel Reports, National
Academy Press, Washington D.C., 1991.
Bennett, J., On the Cosmic Horizon: Ten Great Mysteries for the Third Millennium
Astronomy, Addison Wesley Longman 2001.
Bennett, J., Donahue, M., Schneider, N., and Voit, M., The Cosmic Perspective, Addison
Wesley Longman Inc., Menlo Park, California, Fourth Edition, 2007; CD-ROMs and a
www site, oﬀering a wealth of additional material for professors and students, speciﬁcally
developed for teaching astronomy with this book and upgraded on a regular basis are
also available: http://www.masteringastronomy.com/.
Haubold, H.J., “UN/ESA Workshops on Basic Space Science: an initiative in the world-
wide development of astronomy”, Journal of Astronomical History and Heritage 1(2):105-
121, 1998; Space Policy 19:215-219, 2003.
Isobe, S., Teaching of Astronomy in Asian-Paciﬁc Region, Bulletin No. 15, 1999.
McKee, C.F. and Taylor, Jr., J.H., Astronomy and Astrophysics in the New Millennium,
National Academy Press, Washington D.C., 2001; and Astronomy and Astrophysics in
the New Millennium: Panel Reports, National Academy Press, Washington D.C., 2001;
see also G. Brumﬁeld, Wishing for the stars, Nature 443(2006)386-389.
Kitamura, M., “Provision of astronomical instruments to developing countries by Japanese
ODA with emphasis on research observations by donated 45cm reﬂectors in Asia”, in
Conference on Space Sciences and Technology Applications for National Development:
Proceedings, held at Colombo, Sri Lanka, 21-22 January 1999, Ministry of Science and
Technology of Sri Lanka, pp. 147-152.
Kitamura, M., ”Aiding astronomy in developing nations: Japanese ODA”, Space Policy,
20:131-135, 2004.

8

Kitamura et al.

Kogure, T., “Stellar activity and needs for multi-site observations”, in Conference on
Space Sciences and Technology Applications for National Development: Proceedings,
held at Colombo, Sri Lanka, 21-22 January 1999, Ministry of Science and Technology of
Sri Lanka, pp. 124-131.
Lang, K.R., Astrophysical Formulae, Volume I: Radiation, Gas Processes and High En-
ergy Astrophysics, Volume II: Space, Time, Matter and Cosmology, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin 1999.
Lang, K.R., An education curriculum for space science in developing countries, Space
Policy 20:297-302, 2004.
Mattei, J. and Percy, J. R. (Eds.), Hands-On Astrophysics, American Association of
Variable Star Observers, Cambridge, MA 02138, 1998;
http://www.aavso.org/.
Percy, J.R. (Ed.), Astronomy Education: Current Developments, Future Cooperation:
Proceedings of an ASP Symposium, Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series
Vol. 89, 1991.

Pyenson, L. and Sheets-Pyenson, S., Servants of Nature: A History of Scientiﬁc Institu-
tions, Enterprises, and Sensibilities, W.W. Norton & Company, New York, 1999.
Smith, D.W. and Haubold, H.J. (Eds.): Planetarium: A Challenge for Educators, United
Nations, New York 1992; available in Japanese, English, Spanish, and Slovak languages.
UN document A/AC.105/829: Report on the Twelfth United Nations/European Space
Agency Workshop on Basic Space Science, Beijing, China, 24-28 May 2004, United Na-
tions, Vienna 2004.
UN document A/AC.105/856: Report on the United Nations/European Space Agency/National
Aeronautics and Space Administration of the United States of America Workshop on the
International Heliophysical Year 2007, Abu Dhabi and Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates,
20-23 November 2005, United Nations, Vienna 2005.
Wamsteker, W., Albrecht, R., and Haubold, H.J. (Eds.): Developing Basic Space Science
World-Wide: A Decade of UN/ESA Workshops, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht
2004.
Wentzel, D.G., “National strategies for science development”, Teaching of Astronomy in
Asian-Paciﬁc Region, Bulletin No. 15, 1999a, pp. 4-10.
Wentzel, D.G., Astroﬁsica para Cursos Universitarios de Fisica, La Paz, Bolivia, 1999b,
English language version available from the United Nations in print and electronically at
http://www.seas.columbia.edu/∼ah297/un-esa/astrophysics; printed version also con-
tained in Wamsteker at al. 2004.

