6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
8
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Eﬀects of Mass Media and Cultural Drift in a
Nonequilibrium Model for Social Inﬂuence

Karina I. Mazzitello,1, 2 Juli´an Candia,1, 3 and V´ıctor Dossetti1
1Consortium of the Americas for Interdisciplinary Science and Department of
Physics and Astronomy, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA
2CONICET and Departamento de F´ısica, Facultad de Ingenier´ıa,
Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata, Mar del Plata, Argentina
3Department of Physics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA

In the context of an extension of Axelrod’s nonequilibrium model for social inﬂuence, we study
the interplay and competition between the cultural drift, represented as random perturbations, and
mass media, introduced by means of an external homogeneous ﬁeld. Unlike previous studies [J. C.
Gonz´alez-Avella et al, Phys. Rev. E 72, 065102(R) (2005)], the mass media coupling proposed
here is capable of aﬀecting the cultural traits of any individual in the society, including those who
do not share any features with the external message. A noise-driven transition is found: for large
noise rates, both the ordered (culturally polarized) phase and the disordered (culturally fragmented)
phase are observed, while, for lower noise rates, the ordered phase prevails. In the former case, the
external ﬁeld is found to induce cultural ordering, a behavior opposite to that reported in previous
studies using a diﬀerent prescription for the mass media interaction. We compare the predictions of
this model to statistical data measuring the impact of a mass media vasectomy promotion campaign
in Brazil.

PACS numbers: 87.23.Ge, 89.20.-a, 05.50.+q

The non-traditional application of statistical physics
to many problems of interdisciplinary nature has been
growing steadily in recent years. Indeed, it has been rec-
ognized that the study of statistical and complex sys-
tems can provide valuable tools and insight into many
emerging interdisciplinary ﬁelds of science [1, 2, 3]. In
this context, the mathematical modeling of social phe-
nomena allowed to perform quantitative investigations
on processes such as self-organization, opinion formation
and spreading, cooperation, formation and evolution of
social structures, etc (see e.g. [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]).
In particular, a model for social inﬂuence proposed by
Axelrod [13, 14], which aims at understanding the for-
mation of cultural domains, has recently received much
attention [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21] due to its remarkably
rich dynamical behavior.

In Axelrod’s model, culture is deﬁned by the set of
cultural attributes (such as language, art, technical stan-
dards, and social norms [14]) subject to social inﬂuence.
The cultural state of an individual is given by their set
of speciﬁc traits, which are capable of changing due to
In the original
interactions with their acquaintances.
proposal, the individuals are located at the nodes of a
regular lattice, and the interactions are assumed to take
place between lattice neighbors. Social inﬂuence is de-
ﬁned by a simple local dynamics, which is assumed to
satisfy the following two properties: (a) social interac-
tion is more likely taking place between individuals that
share some or many of their cultural attributes; (b) the
result of the interaction is that of increasing the cultural
similarity between the individuals involved.

By means of extensive numerical simulations, it was
shown that the system undergoes a nonequilibrium phase
transition separating an ordered (culturally polarized)

phase from a disordered (culturally fragmented) one,
which was found to depend on the number of diﬀer-
ent cultural traits available [15]. The critical behavior
of the model was also studied in diﬀerent complex net-
work topologies, such as small-world and scale-free net-
works [18]. These investigations considered, however,
zero-temperature dynamics that neglected the eﬀect of
ﬂuctuations.

Following Axelrod’s original idea of incorporating ran-
dom perturbations to describe the eﬀect of cultural drift
[13], noise was later added to the dynamics of the sys-
tem [17]. With the inclusion of this new ingredient, the
disordered multicultural conﬁgurations were found to be
metastable states that could be driven to ordered sta-
ble conﬁgurations. The decay of disordered metastable
states depends on the competition between the noise
rate, r, and the characteristic time for the relaxation
Indeed, for r . T −1, the pertur-
of perturbations, T .
bations drive the disordered system towards monocul-
tural states, while, for r & T −1, the noise rates are large
enough to hinder the relaxation processes, thus keeping
the disorder. Since T scales with the system size, N , as
T ∼ N lnN , the culturally fragmented states persist in
the thermodynamic limit, irrespective of the noise rate
[17].

More recently, an extension of the model was proposed,
in which the role of mass media and other mass exter-
nal agents was introduced by considering external [19]
and autonomous local or global ﬁelds [20], but neglecting
random ﬂuctuations. The interaction between the ﬁelds
and the individuals was chosen to resemble the coupling
between an individual and their neighbors in the original
Axelrod’s model. According to the adopted prescription,
the interaction probability was assumed to be null for in-

dividuals that do not share any cultural feature with the
external message.
In this way, intriguing, counterintu-
itive results were obtained: the inﬂuence of mass media
was found to disorder the system, thus driving ordered,
culturally polarized states towards disordered, culturally
fragmented conﬁgurations [19].

The aim of this work is to include the eﬀect of cultural
drift in an alternative mass media scenario. Although
still inspired in the original Axelrod’s interaction, the
mass media coupling proposed here is capable of aﬀect-
ing the cultural traits of any individual in the society,
including those who do not share any features with the
external message.

For noise rates below a given transition value, which
depends on the intensity of the mass media interactions,
only the ordered phase is observed. However, for higher
levels of noise above the transition perturbation rate,
both the ordered (culturally polarized) phase and the
disordered (culturally fragmented) phase are found. In
the latter case, we obtain an order-disorder phase dia-
gram as a function of the ﬁeld intensity and the number
of traits per cultural attribute. According to this phase
diagram, the role of the external ﬁeld is that of inducing
cultural ordering, a behavior opposite to that reported in
Ref. [19] using a diﬀerent prescription for the mass media
interaction. In order to show the plausibility of the sce-
nario considered here, we also compare the predictions
of this model to statistical data measuring the impact of
a mass media vasectomy promotion campaign in Brazil
[22].

The model is deﬁned by considering individuals located
at the sites of an L × L square lattice. The cultural
state of the i−th individual is described by the integer
vector (σi1, σi2, ..., σiF ), where 1 ≤ σif ≤ q. The di-
mension of the vector, F , deﬁnes the number of cultural
attributes, while q corresponds to the number of diﬀerent
cultural traits per attribute. Initially, the speciﬁc traits
for each individual are assigned randomly with a uniform
distribution. In a similar way, the mass media cultural
message is given by the integer vector (µ1, µ2, ..., µF ).
Their components are chosen randomly within the range
1 ≤ µf ≤ q, but remain ﬁxed in time [19]. The intensity
of the mass media message relative to the local interac-
tions between neighboring individuals is controlled by the
parameter M (0 ≤ M ≤ 1). Moreover, the parameter r
(0 ≤ r ≤ 1) is introduced to represent the noise rate [17].
The model dynamics is deﬁned by iterating a sequence
of rules, as follows: (1) an individual is selected at ran-
dom; (2) with probability M , he/she interacts with the
mass media ﬁeld; otherwise, he/she interacts with a ran-
domly chosen nearest neighbor; (3) with probability r, a
random single-feature perturbation is performed.

The interaction between the i−th and j−th indi-
viduals is governed by their cultural overlap, Cij =
PF
f =1 δσif ,σjf /F , where δkl is the Kronecker delta. With
probability Cij , the result of the interaction is that of
increasing their similarity: one chooses at random one
of the attributes on which they diﬀer (i.e., such that

2

1

0.8

0.6

2

L

 
/

x
a
m

S

0.4

0.2

0
10

-6

M=0
M=1x10
M=5x10
M=1x10

-3

-3

-2

-5

10

-4
10
r

-3

10

-2

10

FIG. 1: Order parameter, Smax/L2, as a function of the noise
rate, r, for diﬀerent values of the mass media intensity M ,
as indicated. The number of diﬀerent cultural traits per at-
tribute is q = 40. The lines are guides to the eye.

σif 6= σjf ) and sets them equal by changing the trait
of the individual selected in ﬁrst place. Naturally, if
Cij = 1, the cultural states of both individuals are
already identical, and the interaction leaves them un-
changed.

The interaction between the i−th individual and the
mass media ﬁeld is governed by the overlap term CiM =
(PF
f =1 δσif ,µf + 1)/(F + 1). Analogously to the prece-
dent case, CiM is the probability that, as a result of the
interaction, the individual changes one of the traits that
diﬀer from the message by setting it equal to the mes-
sage’s trait. Again, if CiM = 1, the cultural state of the
individual is already identical to the mass media mes-
sage, and the interaction leaves it unchanged. Notice
that CiM > 0; thus, the mass media coupling used here
is capable of aﬀecting the cultural traits of any individual
in the society, including those who do not share any fea-
tures with the external message. As commented above,
this diﬀers from the mass media interaction proposed in
Ref. [19], which was given by C′

f =1 δσif ,µf /F .

iM = PF

As regards the perturbations introduced in step (3),
a single feature of a single individual is randomly cho-
sen, and, with probability r, their corresponding trait is
changed at random.

In the absence of ﬂuctuations, the system evolves to-
wards absorbing states, i.e., frozen conﬁgurations that
are not capable of further changes. For r > 0, instead,
the system evolves continuously, and, after a transient
period, it attains a stationary state. In order to charac-
terize the degree of order of these stationary states, we
measure the (statistically-averaged) size of the largest ho-
mogeneous domain, Smax [15, 17]. The results obtained
here correspond to systems of linear size L = 50 and a
ﬁxed number of cultural attributes, F = 10, typically
averaged over 500 diﬀerent (randomly generated) initial

3

3
-

0
1

 
/
 

M

3.0

2.6

2.2

1.8
0

ordered phase

1

0.8

2

L

/

0.6

x
a
m

S

 
,

N

v

0.4

0.2

0

0

disordered phase

vasectomy data (Ref. [22])
model results (this work)

20

40

80

100

60

q

6

12
time [months]

18

24

FIG. 2: Phase diagram showing the separation between the
ordered (culturally polarized) phase and the disordered (cul-
turally fragmented) phase, for the noise rate r = 10−3. The
dashed line is a guide to the eye. Typical snapshot conﬁgura-
tions of both phases are also shown, where the cultural state
corresponding to the external message is indicated in white.

FIG. 3: Comparison of model predictions (solid line) to sta-
tistical data (symbols) measuring the impact of a mass media
vasectomy promotion campaign in Brazil [22]. The number
of vasectomies per month, Nv, has been normalized and com-
pared to the model’s order parameter, Smax/L2, while the
time scales have been matched by setting 1 month = 500
MCS. The shaded region indicates the time window in which
the mass media campaign was performed.

conﬁgurations.

Figure 1 shows the order parameter, Smax/L2, as a
function of the noise rate, r, for diﬀerent values of the
mass media intensity. The number of diﬀerent cultural
traits per attribute is q = 40. As anticipated, for small
noise rates, the perturbations drive the decay of disor-
dered metastable states, and thus the system presents
only ordered states with Smax/L2 ≈ 1. As the noise rate
is gradually increased, the competition between charac-
teristic times for perturbation and relaxation processes
sets on, and, for large enough noise rates, the system be-
comes completely disordered. This behavior, which was
already reported in the absence of mass media interac-
tions [17], is here also observed for M > 0. As we consider
plots for increasing values of M , the transition between
ordered and disordered states takes place for increasingly
higher levels of noise. Indeed, this is an indication of the
competition between noise rate and external ﬁeld eﬀects,
thus showing that the external ﬁeld induces order in the
system.

Figure 2 shows the order-disorder phase diagram as a
function of the ﬁeld intensity and the number of traits
per cultural attribute, for the noise rate r = 10−3. The
transition points correspond to Smax/L2 = 0.5. For the
M = 0 case, noise-driven order-disorder transitions were
found to be roughly independent of the number of traits
per cultural attribute, as long as q & 10 [17]. Here, we
observe a similar, essentially q−independent behavior for
M > 0 as well. Typical snapshot conﬁgurations of both
regions are also shown in Figure 2, where the transition
from the (small-M ) multicultural regime to the (large-
M ) monocultural state is clearly observed. A majority
of individuals sharing the same cultural state, identical to

the external message, is found within the ordered phase.
For smaller noise rates, r . 10−4, the system is ordered
even for M = 0, and hence only the monocultural phase
is observed.

In order to gain further insight into the interplay and
competition between cultural drift and mass media ef-
fects,
let us now consider the external message being
periodically switched on and oﬀ. Starting with a ran-
dom disordered conﬁguration and assuming a noise level
above the transition value for the M = 0 case, we ob-
serve a periodical behavior: the system becomes ordered
within the time window in which the ﬁeld is applied,
while it becomes increasingly disordered when the mes-
sage is switched oﬀ. A cycle representing this behavior
is shown by the solid line in Figure 3, which corresponds
to r = 1.5 × 10−4, M = 10−2, and q = 40.

Moreover, we can compare this behavior to statisti-
cal data measuring the impact of a mass media vasec-
tomy promotion campaign in Brazil [22]. Symbols in
Figure 3 correspond to the number of vasectomies per-
formed monthly in a major clinic in S˜ao Paulo, spanning
a time interval of 2 years. The shaded region indicates
the time window in which the mass media campaign was
performed. The promotion campaign consisted of prime-
time television and radio spots, the distribution of ﬂyers,
an electronic billboard, and public relations activities. In
order to allow a comparison to model results, vasectomy
data have been normalized by setting the maximal num-
ber of vasectomies measured equal to unity, while the re-
lation between time scales has been chosen conveniently.
In the model results, time is measured in Monte Carlo

steps (MCS), where 1 MCS corresponds to L2 iterations
of the set of rules (1)-(3). For the comparison performed
in Figure 3, we assumed that 1 month corresponds to 500
MCS. Although the model parameters and scale units
were arbitrarily assigned, it is reassuring to observe that
a good agreement between observations and model re-
sults can be achieved. Indeed, the steep growth in the
number of vasectomies practiced during the promotion
campaign, as well as the monotonic decrease afterwards,
can be well accounted for by this model.

In summary, we have studied, in the context of an ex-
tension of Axelrod’s nonequilibrium model for social in-
ﬂuence, the interplay and competition between cultural
drift and mass media eﬀects. The cultural drift is mod-
eled by random perturbations, while mass media eﬀects
are introduced by means of an external ﬁeld.

A noise-driven order-disorder transition is found.
In
the large noise rate regime, both the ordered (cultur-
ally polarized) phase and the disordered (culturally frag-
mented) phase can be observed, whereas in the small
noise rate regime, only the ordered phase is present.
In the former case, we have obtained the corresponding
order-disorder phase diagram, showing that the external
ﬁeld induces cultural ordering. This behavior is oppo-
site to that reported in Ref. [19] using a diﬀerent pre-
scription for the mass media ﬁeld, which neglected the
interaction between the ﬁeld and individuals that do not

4

share any features with the external message. The mass
media coupling proposed in this work, instead, is capa-
ble of aﬀecting the cultural traits of any individual in the
society.

In order to show the plausibility of the scenario con-
sidered here, we have compared the predictions of this
model to statistical data measuring the impact of a mass
media vasectomy promotion campaign in Brazil. A good
agreement between model results and measured data can
be achieved. The observed behavior is characterized by
a steep growth during the promotion campaign, and a
monotonic decrease afterwards. We can thus conclude
that the extension of Axelrod’s model proposed here con-
tains the basic ingredients needed to explain the trend of
actual observations.

We hope that the present ﬁndings will contribute to
the growing interdisciplinary eﬀorts in the mathematical
modeling of social dynamics phenomena, and stimulate
further work.

Acknowledgments

We acknowledge useful and stimulating discussions
with M. G. Cosenza and V. M. Kenkre. This work was
supported by the NSF under grant no. INT-0336343.

[5] A. T. Bernardes, D. Stauﬀer, and J. Kert´esz, Eur. Phys.

Phys. Rev. E 67, 045101(R) (2003).

[1] W. Weidlich, Phys. Rep. 204, 1 (1991).
[2] W. Weidlich, Sociodynamics: a Systematic Approach to
Mathematical Modelling in the Social Sciences (Harwood
Academic Publishers, Amsterdam, 2000).

[3] S. M. de Oliveira, P. M. C. de Oliveira, and D. Stauﬀer,
Non-Traditional Applications of Computational Statisti-
cal Physics (B.G. Teubner, Stuttgart, 1999).

[4] K. Sznajd-Weron and J. Sznajd, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C

[6] D. H. Zanette, Phys. Rev. E 65, 041908 (2002).
[7] M. Kuperman and D. H. Zanette, Eur. Phys. J. B 26,

11, 1157 (2000).

J. B 25, 123 (2002).

387 (2002).

310, 260 (2002).

[12] J. Candia, cond-mat/0610097.
[13] R. Axelrod, J. Conﬂict Res. 41, 203 (1997).
[14] R. Axelrod, The Complexity of Cooperation (Princeton

University Press, Princeton, 1997).

[15] C. Castellano, M. Marsili, and A. Vespignani, Phys. Rev.

[16] D. Vilone, A. Vespignani, and C. Castellano, Eur. Phys.

Lett. 85, 3536 (2000).

J. B 30, 299 (2002).

[17] K. Klemm, V. M. Egu´ıluz, R. Toral, and M. San Miguel,

[18] K. Klemm, V. M. Egu´ıluz, R. Toral, and M. San Miguel,

Phys. Rev. E 67, 026120 (2003).

[19] J. C. Gonz´alez-Avella, M. G. Cosenza, and K. Tucci,

Phys. Rev. E 72, 065102(R) (2005).

[8] A. Aleksiejuk, J. A. Holyst, and D. Stauﬀer, Physica A

[20] J. C. Gonz´alez-Avella et al, Phys. Rev. E 73, 046119

[9] M. C. Gonz´alez, A. O. Sousa, and H. J. Herrmann, Int.

J. Mod. Phys. C 15, 45 (2004).

[21] M. N. Kuperman, Phys. Rev. E 73, 046139 (2006).
[22] D. Lawrence Kincaid et al, International Family Planning

[10] M. C. Gonz´alez, P. G. Lind, and H. J. Herrmann, Phys.

Perspectives 22, 169 (1996).

(2006).

Rev. Lett. 96, 088702 (2006).

[11] J. Candia, Phys. Rev. E 74, 031101 (2006).

