6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
7
1
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Network eﬀects in service usage

G´abor Szab´o1, 2 and Albert-L´aszl´o Barab´asi1, 2
1Center for Complex Network Research and Department of Physics, University of Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
2Center for Cancer Systems Biology and Department of Cancer Biology,
Dana–Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Genetics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

While there is ample evidence that social and communication networks play a key role during
the spread of new ideas, products, or services, network eﬀects are expected to have diminished
inﬂuence in the stationary state, when all users are aware of the innovation, and its usage pattern
is determined mainly by its utility to the user. Here we study four mobile phone-based services
available to over six million subscribers, allowing us to simultaneously monitor the communication
network between individuals and the time-resolved service usage patterns. We ﬁnd that usage highly
correlates with the structure of the communication network, and demonstrate the coexistence on
the same social network of two distinct usage classes, network eﬀects being responsible for the
quantiﬁable diﬀerences between them. To test the predictive power of our theory, we demonstrate
that traditional marketing techniques are ineﬀective in permanently boosting service adoption, and
propose a hub-based incentive mechanism that has the potential to enhance usage for one of the
two service classes.

Thanks to electronic communications that oﬀer virtu-
ally instantaneous information access, awareness of some
products and services, such as iPod, MySpace, RAZR,
and ringtones, have swept the population within a few
Innova-
months, resulting in millions of active users.
tion diﬀusion studies oﬀer a rather complete conceptual
picture of this adoption process, capturing how an in-
novation spreads from early adopters to the laggards
along the links of the social and communication network
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Yet, all innovations eventually reach a
saturated state, in which there is complete awareness of
its beneﬁts, and practically all those who could ﬁnd the
innovation useful have adopted it. The social network,
that plays a key role during the spreading process [7],
is not expected to impact this saturated state, as only
the utility of the product or service to the individual
user determines its day-to-day usage. This leaves open a
question of major conceptual and practical importance:
could the underlying social and communication network
play a role in the usage of innovations? Here we show
that this is indeed the case: the ties between individuals
signiﬁcantly impact the usage patterns of many services.

Today our ability to study innovation diﬀusion and
usage patterns is enhanced by the fact that virtually all
electronic communications and purchasing events leave
digital signatures [8, 9, 10]. Yet, advances are still lim-
ited by the fact that we need to simultaneously track
both social interactions and service usage patterns, which
requires the merging of various proprietary databases,
a procedure limited by signiﬁcant technical and legal
roadblocks, as well as legitimate conﬁdentiality concerns.
Given that mobile carriers must track for billing purposes
each call users place or receive, eﬀectively recording the
underlying social network, and regularly introduce in-
novative phone-based services, they oﬀer unprecedented
opportunities to explore the detailed dynamics of service
usage [11]. Here we capitalize on this opportunity, study-
ing the role of the social network in the usage patterns

of four mobile phone-based services, available to over a
quarter of mobile phone users in a country. We ﬁrst show
that service usage is characterized by detectable dyadic
eﬀects, indicating that if a user uses a speciﬁc service in a
regular fashion, her phone-based contacts will also use it
regularly. Yet, despite this dyadic eﬀect, we ﬁnd that the
four services cluster into two distinct classes, document-
ing the coexistence on the same social network of two
rather diﬀerent usage patterns. We develop an analytical
theory, rooted in diﬀusion models used regularly to model
spreading eﬀects in physical sciences [12, 13, 14] and the
spread of computer and biological viruses [15, 16, 17] to
predict the role of the social network in service usage, and
demonstrate that it accurately describes the observed us-
age dynamics. To test the predictive power of the pro-
posed quantitative framework, we explore the impact of
advertising on service usage, showing that for the stud-
ied services advertising has no long-term impact, a pre-
diction that is directly supported by real data. Finally,
we propose that hub-based incentives could be used to
permanently boost service usage, but they are eﬀective
for one service class only, illustrating the practical im-
portance of identifying the right class to which a service
belongs to.

The dataset studied by us records all calls initiated by
over 6 million customers of a mobile phone company, al-
lowing us to represent each phone number, replaced by a
hash code to guarantee anonymity, as a node in the com-
munication network. The undirected links between users
represent voice calls or short messages, the two most
widespread mobile phone-based communication services,
resulting in approximately 10 million links each month.
The call data spans a period of over a year, and is aggre-
gated into intervals of two weeks, each record identifying
the call’s origin, destination, and the type of service used
by the user. We focus on four services: Email, whose
users can send and receive emails from their cell phones;
WAP, that gives the user the opportunity to browse Web

sites; Chat, that allows users to exchange short messages
anonymously; and MyFriends, which allows a group of
registered users to contact all other members of the group
at once.

To characterize the service usage we ﬁrst measured the
number of active users for each service for over a year-
long period. We ﬁnd that the number of users who have
used the service at least once from the beginning of our
observational period increases monotonically (Fig. 1a–
d ), suggesting the presence of a classical adoption pro-
cess, during which each month new users adopt each ser-
vice. Yet, the number of individuals who use the ser-
vice in a two-week interval is largely independent of time
(Fig. 1a–d ). Therefore, these services have swept the
current user base and reached a saturated or endemic
state before the beginning of our observational period.
The increasing cumulative user number is not an evi-
dence of a continued adoption process, but indicates that
the saturated state hides a highly dynamic equilibrium,
where the adopters use each service only sporadically. In-
deed, the percentage of users that use the same service in
two consecutive months is relatively small (37% for Chat,
30% for Email, 47% for WAP, and 33% for MyFriends).
Thus, in contrast with the traditional subjects of innova-
tion diﬀusion studies, where once an individual accepts
an innovation she is considered an adopter for the rest of
the study, mobile phone-based services display a highly
volatile usage pattern, with users entering and exiting
the user base in large numbers in each two week period
[18]. This may be rooted in the fact that these services
are billed only for the air-time occurred during their us-
age, thus turning the speciﬁc service on or oﬀ does not
require additional ﬁnancial commitments. Thus the only
lock-in incentives are utility or network-based: a service
may be indispensable for an individual or there may be
network externalities, resulting from peer pressure by so-
cial contacts towards its use.

The fundamental hypothesis of all adoption studies
is that information externalities play a crucial role in
the spreading process: a given innovation spreads along
the social links through advice, inﬂuence, or persuasion
[1, 2, 3]. Yet, in the saturated state, when the user base
is largely aware of the beneﬁts of an innovation, social
ties cease to exert a role as information source, thus us-
age should be mainly utility-based. To establish if per-
sonal contacts aﬀect the usage pattern we determined the
probability ρi that two users that communicate with each
other use the same service Si. By itself ρi is not informa-
tive, as with probability ρrand
i any two individuals
may also use the same service, where pi represents the
fraction of mobile phone users that adopted Si. Thus
a better measure of the role of personal recommenda-
tion is ρi/ρrand
. We ﬁnd that for Chat and MyFriends
ρi/ρrand ≫ 10, while for Email and WAP ρi/ρrand ≈ 2
(see Fig. 7 in the Supporting Text ), evidence of a dyadic
eﬀect. Therefore, users that know each other are more
likely to use the same service than expected based on a
random adoption model. Thus the impact of the com-

= p2

i

i

2

munication ties is not limited to the adoption phase, but
it also aﬀects the day-to-day usage of services.

i (d) = ρN
i (d) and ρN

To check if service usage shows eﬀects beyond the
dyads, so that most members of a community tend to
adopt the same service, we determined the fraction ρU
i (d)
of users of service Si among individuals d links away from
a user of Si. For reference we also measure the fraction
ρN
i (d) of users in the vicinity of an individual that has
not adopted Si. If adopters do not segregate into com-
munities, then ρU
i (d). Indeed, we ﬁnd that for
Email and WAP ρU
i (d) largely overlap for most
d values (Fig. 1 e and f ), and the observed diﬀerence be-
tween them at small d is relatively small, suggesting ei-
ther the absence of compact user communities or at most
weak local aggregation of users. In contrast, for Chat and
MyFriends ρU
i (d) is one to two orders of magnitude larger
than ρN
i (d) for small d (Fig. 1 g and h), indicating that
the vicinity of a user has a signiﬁcantly higher density of
users than the vicinity of a non-user. To illustrate the
presence or absence of a community-based segregation
we visualized the adoption patterns in selected neighbor-
hoods for Email and Chat. We ﬁnd that Email is used
uniformly across communities, with no apparent corre-
lation between the underlying community structure and
service usage (Fig. 2a).
In contrast, Chat users have
the tendency to form compact communities, so that in
a given community either almost everybody or almost
nobody uses Chat (Fig. 2b).

If service usage is driven by communication with so-
cial contacts, high-degree individuals should more likely
use a given service than small-degree individuals. While
the role of hubs and connectors in innovation diﬀusion
is well documented [1, 2, 3, 19], in the absence of suﬃ-
cient statistics the functional dependence of the adoption
rate on the degree remains unknown. Furthermore, it is
unclear if such degree-dependent eﬀects should emerge
in the usage patterns as well. Therefore, we determined
the usage rate among users with degree k, ﬁnding that
for each service the probability that an individual uses a
given service increases with her degree (Fig. 1i–l ). For
example, the likelihood that an individual with 100 con-
tacts uses Chat is more than two orders of magnitude
higher than for an individual with one or two contacts.
In summary, the empirical results indicate that a com-
mon feature of all four services is that they reached
a highly dynamic saturated state, characterized by a
degree-dependent usage. Yet, there are also signiﬁcant
diﬀerences between them, suggesting the existence of two
adoption classes: Chat and MyFriends display a strong
community-based segregation and high dyadic eﬀects, in
contrast with Email and WAP, that are characterized by
weaker dyadic eﬀect and the apparent absence of com-
pact user communities. Thus for each service we observe
correlations between the structure of the underlying com-
munication network and the likelihood of service usage
by individual users.

A methodological challenge in understanding service
usage is that we do not know why an individual uses a

speciﬁc service: is she persuaded by an acquaintance, or
inﬂuenced by non-social factors, such as service utility,
an advertisement, or a newspaper article? Furthermore,
an individual can be persuaded to use a service by an
acquaintance that she never contacts through her mobile
phone. To account for these ambiguities, we grouped all
individuals in two categories: connected (“c”) individu-
als are those that are in phone contact with at least one
user of service Si, thus have a chance to be inﬂuenced by
an acquaintance, and isolated (“i”) individuals represent
those that have no user of Si among their phone contacts,
thus can be inﬂuenced only by external factors, such as
mass media or acquaintances they do not call [20]. Fur-
thermore, we will call an individual a user if during a
one month interval she used service Si, and a potential
user if she did not use the service during the month-long
period, but could potentially become a user in the fu-
ture. Therefore, we distinguish between four categories
of individuals, isolated and connected potential users, as
well as isolated and connected users, the number of k-
degree individuals at time t in each category being given
by N i
k(t), respectively. For a
given service the changes in the number of isolated and
connected adopters with degree k can be written as

k(t) and U c

k(t), N c

k(t), U i

∂U i
k(t)
∂t
∂U c
k(t)
∂t

= µkN i

k(t) − ηkU i

k(t)

= {λk[1 + Θ(t)(k − 1)] + µk} N c

k(t)

−ξkU c

k(t),

where µk is the rate at which a potential user becomes
an user due to external inﬂuence, and ηk (ξk) represents
the rate at which isolated (connected) users stop using
the service [21], going from users to potential users. For
connected potential users λk gives the rate at which they
turn users as a result of the inﬂuence of one of their
user contacts, and Θ(t) is the probability that a user’s
randomly chosen link points to a user, given by [15, 16,
17]

k′P (k′)
hki

Uk′ (t)
N P (k′)

,

Θ(t) =

k′
X

where the ﬁrst term in the product is the probability of
ﬁnding a degree-k′ individual at the end of a randomly
chosen link if the degree distribution of the communica-
tion network is P (k), and the second term is the probabil-
ity that this individual is an user, Uk′ (t) = U i
k′ (t),
and N is the number of individuals in the network. The
time evolution of the number of potential users is given
by

k′ (t)+U c

∂N i
k(t)
∂t
∂N c
k(t)
∂t

= −

= −

∂U i
k(t)
∂t
∂U c
k(t)
∂t

− Πk(t)

+ Πk(t),

where Πk(t) is the rate at which isolated potential users
If degree
acquire user neighbors, becoming connected.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

3

correlations are absent, we can assume that any non-
user neighbor with degree k′ turns user at the same rate
∂Uk′ (t)
k′ (t). Accord-
∂t

Nk′ (t) , where Nk′ (t) = N i

k′ (t) + N c

1

ingly, for isolated potential users with degree k

Πk(t) = N i

k(t) k

k′
X

k′P (k′)
hki

∂Uk′ (t)
∂t

1
Nk′ (t)

.

(6)

Next we show that Eqs. (1)–(3) with the closures pro-
vided by (3)–(6) accurately predict the dynamics of the
observed service usage pattern.

The input of (1) and (3) are the time-independent
adoption functions µk, ηk, λk, and ξk, which quantify
the response of the user base to the service. These
adoption functions were measured using a self-consistent
method described in the Supporting Text, and are shown
in Fig. 2c–j. The measurements were performed for two
intervals ten months apart, ﬁnding in both cases the
same functional form (see the ﬁlled and empty symbols in
Fig. 2c–j ), supporting our starting hypothesis that the
adoption functions are time-independent. To test the
predictive power of the proposed analytical model, we
numerically integrated Eqs. (1)–(3), starting with the ini-
tial condition in which no users are present at time t = 0.
The integration predicts that the number of users rapidly
increases followed by saturation (Fig. 3a–d ). Most im-
portant, in the saturated state (1) and (3) reproduce not
only the total number of users, but also the detailed k-
dependence of all user categories (Fig. 3e–h). The inspec-
tion of the adoption functions and the analytical model
suggests the existence of two classes of services, that we
discuss separately below.

Individual Services: The most striking common fea-
ture of Email and WAP is the fact that for both services
µk ≫ λk (Fig. 2 c and d ), i.e. external inﬂuence, such as
mass media and advertisements, dominate over personal
persuasion. Furthermore, for these two services ηk ≈ ξk,
indicating that there is little diﬀerence in the probability
that an isolated or a connected user suspends the service.
For µk ≫ λk and ηk = ξk Eqs. (1)–(3) reduce to

∂Uk(t)
∂t

= µk [N P (k) − Uk(t)] − ηkUk(t),

(7)

where Uk(t) denotes the total number of users with de-
gree k. In the stationary state Eq. (7) predicts that

Uk(t → ∞)
N P (k)

=

1
1 + ηk
µk

,

(8)

i.e. the adoption rate is determined only by µk and ηk.
As shown in Fig. 1 i and j, the prediction (8) is in good
agreement with the measured k-dependent adoption rates
for Email and WAP.

Cooperative Services: In contrast with the individual
services, for Chat and MyFriends λk ≫ µk, so the inﬂu-
ence of social contacts is more important than external
inﬂuence. Furthermore, for these services ηk ≫ ξk (Fig. 2
i and j ), implying that isolated users are more likely to

abandon the service than connected ones. Thus Eq. (8)
is not expected to hold, but the integration of (1)–(3)
correctly reproduces the k-dependent adoption rates ob-
served in the real data (Fig. 3 g and h). The emergence of
communities observed for Chat and MyFriends is also a
consequence of the functional form of the adoption func-
tions. Indeed, with high λk, if an individual has two or
more user neighbors, his or her likelihood of adoption in-
creases, enhancing the pressure on the members of the
same community to adopt the same service. At the same
time ηk ≫ ξk leads to a preferential discontinuation by
isolated individuals, leading to the observed virtual ab-
sence of users in communities in which users do not domi-
nate, and leaving usage intact only in communities where
most individuals use the same service.

Therefore, the empirically observed two distinct usage
patterns can be reduced to the relative strength of λk
and µk, quantifying the user base’s attitude to a speciﬁc
service. Indeed, Chat and MyFriends facilitate alterna-
tive ways of communication between individuals, thus
they are subject to network externalities [22, 23]: the
value of a service to a given user increases if her acquain-
tances also adopt the service, responsible for the observed
λk ≫ µk relation. Isolated users do not experience such
peer pressure, thus are more likely to drop the service
than users surrounded by users, responsible for the fact
that ηk ≫ ξk. In contrast, we ﬁnd that Email and WAP
have no immediate impact on the user’s social contacts.
This is obvious for WAP, whose main purpose is to pro-
vide Web access, thus does not require the cooperation of
other users to be useful. The fact that Email is an indi-
vidual service is highly paradoxical, however, given that
Email is a communication service, just like Chat. There
is a major diﬀerence, though: Chat is an entirely phone-
based service, thus it is useless unless the phone contacts
of a user also adopt it. In contrast, for Email the mo-
bile phone serves only as an interface, which allows the
user to communicate with all those who use electronic
mail, either using the phone or a computer (which is the
far most common case) to access it. Thus there is no
need for all phone-based acquaintances of a user to adopt
Email in order to make it useful for an individual phone
user. Therefore, when it comes to mobile phone usage,
Email is not subject to network externalities [22, 23] and
increasing returns [24], having the characteristics of an
individual rather than a cooperative service.

While the continuum theory proposed above provides
an accurate description of the observed usage patterns,
it is of value only if it oﬀers predictions of practical im-
portance. For many services and products that are bene-
ﬁcial to a user base, a question of paramount importance
emerges: how can one enhance service usage? The stan-
dard ways are advertisements and incentives, increasing
awareness of the service and boosting the user base. Such
measures are costly and therefore can be used only for a
limited duration. They are fueled by the belief that once
users become familiar with a service, they will likely con-
tinue its usage. Yet, next we show that in the saturated

4

regime such approaches are ineﬀective: once the incen-
tive is removed, the number of users returns to the pre-
incentive value. Indeed, Eq. (8) predicts that the num-
ber of users depends only on ηk and µk for individual
services. Incentives can temporarily increase the adop-
tion rate (µk) and decrease the dropout rate (ηk, ξk), but
once they are discontinued, the number of users (Uk(t))
returns to their pre-incentive value. To see if this result
applies to all services, we used numerical simulations (see
Supporting Text ) with the adoption functions of Fig. 2c–j
as input, ﬁnding that if we artiﬁcially doubled the num-
ber of users, the usage returns to its original value for
both individual and cooperative services (see Fig. 4a).
The ﬁnal evidence comes from two services, providing
collect calls and text message storage, available to the
same user base as the four services studied above. These
services were promoted by campaigns that started after
they have reached saturation. As Fig. 4 c and d show, the
campaigns have resulted in more than a ﬁve-fold increase
in the number of users, but both services returned to
their saturation value once the campaigns ended. Taken
together, we ﬁnd that once the saturated regime has been
reached, traditional methods for boosting the consumer
base are only eﬀective for a limited time. Yet, next we
show that for cooperative services one can exploit the in-
timate knowledge of the communication network to de-
sign cost-eﬀective incentives.

Highly connected individuals or hubs exert dispropor-
tional inﬂuence over the user base [25]. Therefore, if each
user with degree exceeding kc is given permanent free us-
age of service Si, increasing their likelihood of adoption
(µk) and a decreasing their dropout rate (ηk and ξk), such
diﬀerentiated incentives will result in higher saturation
values (see Fig. 4 e and f ). Indeed, those who received
the incentive will increase usage, an eﬀect that applies
to both individual and cooperative services. However,
due to the signiﬁcant λ term for cooperative services,
increased usage by hubs will also enhance the usage of
their acquaintances, an eﬀect which will be negligible for
individual services. The question is, will this second, per-
suasion induced eﬀect make the incentive potentially cost
eﬀective, recovering the cost of providing free permanent
usage for all hubs? To answer this we determined the im-
pact of the incentive by calculating the ratio between the
number of new users (the diﬀerence ∆ between the pre-
and post-incentive saturation values) and the number of
hubs Nh(k ≥ kc) that have been provided the incentive.
As Fig. 4b shows, we ﬁnd that the impact increases with
kc, indicating that the larger the degree of the hubs the
incentives were given to, the larger their potential impact.
For individual services (λ = 0), however, the impact is
negligible and has only weak dependence on kc (Fig. 4b).
If one factors in the potential cost of the incentives, we
ﬁnd that hub-oriented permanent incentives could bene-
ﬁt cooperative services, given that for these the impact
increases with kc, thus for any incentive cost there will be
a kc value for which the lost revenue on the hubs can be
recovered by the increased revenue from the users that

have adopted under the inﬂuence of the hubs. However,
for individual services a hub-based incentive would likely
be a losing proposition: the revenue lost from the heavy
usage of the hubs cannot be recovered from the increased
usage of their contacts, as for these services the impact
of persuasion is negligible.

In summary, while informational externalities, captur-
ing the spread of information about a given service be-
tween acquaintances, are expected to play an important
role in the adoption of innovations, their role is dimin-
ished in the saturated regime, where awareness of the
beneﬁts of a given service are widely known. We would
expect, therefore, that social network eﬀects should cease
to correlate with service usage. Here we provide direct
evidence of the contrary: for all services social network
aﬀects can be detected, even in the stationary state. The
magnitude of this eﬀect is service-dependent, however,
leading to the coexistence on the same social network

5

of two distinct classes of services. We ﬁnd that services
characterized by strong dyadic and community eﬀects are
driven by network externalities, making the use of a ser-
vice more valuable for a user if it is used by its acquain-
tances as well. Most importantly, we ﬁnd that successful
interventions into service usage require a detailed under-
standing of the interplay between the structure of the
underlying communication network and the usage mech-
anism. There is no one-size ﬁts all advertising strategy:
for a given innovation some strategies are guaranteed to
fail, while strategies based on the quantitative knowledge
of the spreading mechanism are more likely to succeed.
Finally, our approach oﬀers a coherent framework for un-
derstanding service usage in an environment where both
the social network and service usage can be monitored,
potentially opening new avenues for research into social
diﬀusion and human dynamics.

[1] Rogers, E. M. (2003) Diﬀusion of Innovations, 5th edi-

[21] Parthasarathy, M. & Bhattacherjee, A. (1998) Informa-

of Innovations (Hampton Press, Cresskill, NJ).

[23] Katz, M. L. & Shapiro, C. (1985) American Economic

tion Systems Research 9, 362–379.

[22] Farell, J. & Saloner, G. (1985) Rand Journal of Eco-

nomics 16, 70–83.

Review 75, 424–440.

August, 101–109.

566, 55–67.

[24] Arthur, W. B. (1996) Harvard Business Review July-

[25] Valente, T. W. & Davis, R. L. (1999) Annals AAPSS

tion (Free Press, New York).

[2] Bass, F. M. (1969) Management Science 15(5), 215–227.
[3] Valente, T. W. (1995) Network Models of the Diﬀusion

[4] Mahajan, V. & Peterson, R. A. (1985) Models for Inno-
vation Diﬀusion (Quantitative Applications in the Social
Sciences) (SAGE Publications, Beverly Hills, CA).
[5] Helbing, D., Treiber, M. & Saam, N. J. (2005) Phys. Rev.

E 71, 067101.

[6] Guardiola, X., D´ıaz-Guilera, A., P´erez, C. J., Arenas, A.

& Llas, M. (2002) Phys. Rev. E 66, 026121.

[7] Brancheau, J. C. & Wetherbe, J. C. (1990) Information

Systems Research 1, 115–143.

[8] Eckmann, J.-P., Moses, E. & Sergi, D. (2004) Proc. Natl.

Acad. Sci. USA 101, 14333–14337.

[9] Ebel, H., Mielsch, L.-I. & Bornholdt, S. (2002) Phys. Rev.

E 66, 035103.

[10] Barab´asi, A.-L. (2005) Nature 435, 207–211.
[11] Vesa, J. (2005) Mobile Services in the Networked Econ-

omy (IRM Press, Hershey).

[12] Havlin, S. & ben Avraham, D. (1987) Adv. Phys. 36,

695–798.

[13] Di Matteo, T., Aste, T. & Gallegati, M. (2005) Eur.

Phys. J. B 47, 459–466.

[14] Bettencourt, L. M. A., Cintr´on-Arias, A., Kaiser, D. I. &
Castillo-Ch´avez, C. (2006) Physica A 364, 513–536.
[15] Barth´elemy, M., Barrat, A., Pastor-Satorras, R. &
Vespignani, A. (2005) J. Theor. Biol. 235 275–288.
[16] Pastor-Satorras, R. & Vespignani, A. (2001) Phys. Rev.

Lett. 86, 3200–3203.

[17] Pastor-Satorras, R. & Vespignani, A. (2004) Evolution
and Structure of the Internet: A Statistical Physics Ap-
proach (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge).
[18] Keaveney, S. M. & Parthasarathy, M. (2001) Journal of

the Academy of Marketing Science 29, 374–390.

[19] Coleman, J., Katz, E. & Menzel, H. (1957) Sociometry

[20] Lekvall, P. & Wahlbin, C. (1973) Swed. J. of Economics

20 253–270.

75, 362–377.

6

FIG. 1: Characterizing service adoption patterns. (a–d) The number of users for each service in two week intervals (circles,
continuous), indicating that usage has reached a stationary value. The cumulative number of users (squares, dashed) represent
all those who have used the service at least once since the beginning of our observational period. (e–h) The fraction of users
at distance d from a service user (blue, continuous) or non-user (green, dashed), averaged over 100 randomly chosen users
(non-users). The horizontal line indicates the expectation based on random adoption (p2
i ). (i-l) Adoption rates in function of
the user degree k. Filled symbols stand for call data aggregated over a one-month period, while empty ones denote a one-month
period 10 months later. The solution of Eq. (8), valid for Email and WAP, is shown as a solid line.

7

FIG. 2: A local neighborhood of the communication network of telephone contacts. (a), (b) In both ﬁgures each node
corresponds to an individual (mobile phone number), two individuals being connected if they talked or sent short messages
to each other during a one-month period. The network was drawn by selecting an individual, and displaying all nodes within
distance four from her. To illustrate service usage on this network, Email users are colored red in (a), while in (b) Chat users
are shown in red. Note that while Email users are scattered uniformly, Chat users form compact communities. (c–f ) The
degree-dependent adoption functions characterizing the adoption of services thanks to external inﬂuence (µk) and the inﬂuence
of service users with direct contact to the user (λk) (see Supporting Text). For each adoption function we show the results of
two independent measurements (ﬁlled and empty symbols), made 10 months apart (the two intervals denoted by the upper
indices in the legends), indicating that the functional form of the adoption functions is time-independent. The vertical shifts
represent ﬂuctuations in the coverage (see Fig. 1a–d ), and do not aﬀect our results. (g–j) Adoption functions capturing the
service suspension by isolated (ηk) or connected (ξk) users, again measured for two diﬀerent time intervals.

8

FIG. 3: Predicted and measured adoption rates. (a-d) The growth of the adoption rates (fraction of all users that use the
speciﬁc service) as predicted by the integration of Eqs. (1)–(2). The adoption rate of isolated (connected) users is shown as
triangles (squares), and the sum of the two, corresponding to the total rate of adoption, as circles. (e-h) The predicted adoption
rates for one month using Eqs. (1)–(6) and the adoption functions in Fig. 2c–j, with solid lines, and the actual measurements
with symbols. The fraction of isolated users is shown as triangles, that of connected ones with squares, and the sum of the two
with circles.

9

FIG. 4: The impact of advertising and targeted interventions on the number of service users. (a) The changes in the number of
users after it was doubled by a short-term eﬀect, such as advertising, for Email and Chat. (b) The gain in the number of users
∆ in the stationary states (see e and f ), normalized by the number of subscribers who have been oﬀered permanent incentives
(N (k ≥ kc)). The continuous curve corresponds to Chat, while the dashed one has the same parameters as Chat, but with
λk = 0. (c), (d) The number of service users for two services, for which the provider has boosted the number of users using
advertising and incentives. (e) The changes in the number of adopters for Chat after hub-based incentives were initiated at
t = 50, by decreasing in half ηk and ξk for hubs with degree over 5, 10, and 15, for the three curves from the top to bottom,
respectively. (f ) Number of adopters as in e, with the adoption function λk set to 0 at the beginning of the simulation, to
mimic the impact of the lack of personal persuasion.

Supporting Text for “Network eﬀects in service usage”

G´abor Szab´o and Albert-L´aszl´o Barab´asi

10

I. DATASETS

Based on the call records of a mobile telephone opera-
tor with residential subscribers, we performed our study
on data comprising communication spanning 14 months,
starting April 15, 2004. We neglected calls whose desti-
nation or origin was outside the company, which left us
with approximately 5.5 million nodes in the call network
for each month. The links between nodes were deﬁned by
initiated voice calls and short messages (SMS), the two
most common services with origin and destination in-
formation. While these are directed by nature, we made
the communication graph undirected, yielding more than
10 million links for one month. The call data are aggre-
gated into intervals of two weeks, each record showing the
caller, the callee, the type of the communication, and its
frequency during the two weeks. For call graphs, we accu-
mulated two of the datasets together such that two users
are linked if they communicated at least once during the
two weeks (see Table I for the time intervals). While
the overwhelming majority of individuals only use voice
calls for communications, it was possible to identify users
of the studied services based on additional ﬁelds present
in the datasets or by checking the callee ﬁeld for unique
service numbers that need to be dialed to use the service.

II. MEASURING THE ADOPTION
FUNCTIONS µk, ηk, λk, AND ξk

While Eqs. (1) and (2) are continuous in time, in or-
der to be able to measure the adoption functions, we
need to consider their discretized versions, given that the
datasets for service usage are aggregated for periods of
two weeks. Therefore, we write the discretized adoption
equations as

∆ui

∆uc

k − ui,−
k(Tcomp, Tref ) = ui,+
∗
kni
= µ
k − uc,−
k(Tcomp, Tref ) = uc,+
k
∗
∗
k} nc
kunn
k + µ
= {λ

k
k(Tref ) − η

(9)

∗
kui

k(Tref )

k(Tref ) − ξ

(10)
k(Tref ),

∗
kuc

k, ni
k, N i

k, and nc
k, and N c

k, uc
where we denoted with ui
k the measured
values of the variables U i
k, U c
k, respectively.
Tref and Tcomp denote two time frames with data for both
service usage and the communication map between the
subscribers. The network of social contacts was measured
with respect to Tref : two individuals were considered to
be acquaintances if they called or sent a short message
to each other in the Tref time period. An isolated (“i”)

k, η∗

k, λ∗

k, and ξ∗

FIG. 5: Schematic representation of the mobile phone users’
network. Users of a service are shown on the bottom. The
estimation of the adoption functions µ∗
k is
based on two time windows of 4 weeks each with a 2-week
overlap, represented by the two gray boxes (Tref and Tcomp,
respectively). Users only in Tref but not in Tcomp allow us
to determine the terms in Eqs. (10)–(11), responsible for the
temporary suspension of the service, i.e. −η for isolated dis-
continuation and −ξ for connected discontinuation. Individ-
uals who are users in Tcomp only (they were not users before
Tcomp) are responsible for the gain in the rate equations, i.e.
the µ and λ terms for isolated and connected new users, re-
spectively.

individual was an individual without a service user in
the immediate neighborhood in Tref , while a connected
(“c”) individual had at least one user among its acquain-
tances. A schematic representation of the measurement
procedure is shown in Fig. 5.

We ﬁrst focus on Eq. (10), which describes the change
in the number of isolated users with degree k during the
Tcomp time interval, ∆ui
k(Tcomp, Tref ), where the refer-
ence social network and usage data was taken from Tref .
The change is the result of a gain in users due to isolated
adoption (ui,+
k ), and a loss of these through isolated ser-
vice abandoning (ui,−
k ), both of which can be experimen-
tally measured: ui,+
is the number of new isolated users
in Tcomp with degree k who were not users during Tref ,
and ui,−
gives the number of isolated users in Tref who
in turn abandoned the service in Tcomp. Since these pro-
cesses are precisely what µ∗
k aim to capture, we
can determine the two adoption functions using

k and η∗

k

k

∗
k =
µ

∗
k =
η

ni

ui,+
k
k(Tref )
ui,−
k
ui
k(Tref )

,

(11)

(12)

11

k(Tref ) and ni

Connected potential users in Tref (nc

where ui
k(Tref ) are the number of isolated
users and non-users with degree k in Tref , respectively.
k(Tref )) are also in-
ﬂuenced to adopt by interpersonal communication, apart
from external channels. Also, connected users (uc
k(Tref ))
may also abandon the service, allowing us to measure the
two other adoption functions λ∗

k and ξ∗
k:

0
10

k

−5

10

N

∗
λ
k =

∗
ξ
k =

"

uc,−
k
nc
k(Tref )
uc,−
k
uc
k(Tref )

,

∗
− µ
k

/unn
k

#

(13)

(14)

where unn
is the measured average exposed degree for
k
connected potential users, i.e. the average number of user
neighbors for degree-k connected individuals (note that
unn
k ≥ 1), and it is approximated by 1 + Θ(t)(k − 1) in
the rate equation (2).

The observation periods used in this article are shown
in Table I; both Tref and Tcomp span one month, and they
overlap by two weeks. On one hand, the overlap was
necessary, because we wished to make Tref and Tcomp
long enough so that considerable adoption can be ob-
served, and the longest consecutive time frame for which
we have communication data is one and a half months.
On the other hand, it demonstrates that the choice of Tref
and Tcomp is arbitrary, as long as the adoption functions
are understood to refer to the chosen time window span
and the relative shift between Tcomp and Tref . There-
fore, the adoption functions shown in Fig. 2c–j describe
adoption and abandoning probabilities for individuals ob-
served during one month, with respect to the next month
two weeks into the future. The adoption rates also have
to be measured accordingly, as has been done in Fig. 2c-j
for Tref of the 2005 data (see also Table I).

The interpretation of the adoption functions is the fol-
lowing: an individual who at least once uses the ser-
vice during the one-month observation period is called
an user. If we were able to monitor service usage con-
tinuously in time, the number of users at any point in
time would follow a continuous curve. The number of
users at time t, in this case, would give the number of
individuals who used the service in the one-month period
surrounding t. Since service usage is provided to us in
two-week intervals, we can only sample this function at
discrete intervals, such as Tref and Tcomp. While at any
point in time the adoption functions µk, ηk, λk, and ξk
would be calculated as the slope of their respective func-
tions giving the number of new users or abandonings, we
are in eﬀect approximating them by the slope of the line
connecting the discrete sampled values.

III. TIME INDEPENDENCE OF THE
ADOPTION FUNCTIONS

A fundamental assumption of our modeling framework
is that the adoption functions µk, λk, ηk and ξk are time-

−10

10

0
10

1
10

2
10

3
10

k

FIG. 6: The degree distributions of the two call networks in
the reference time windows of Fig. 2c–j, respectively. Data
from April 2004 are shown in green, and those from February
2005 in blue. Logarithmic binning was applied to the raw
data, as shown by the larger dots. A function of the form
−γ was ﬁtted to the data points (thick red line), with
A(k+k0)
parameters k0 = 9.3 and γ = 6.1. The distributions overlap
to a high degree, indicating the time-independent nature of
P (k).

independent, and they characterize the user base’s atti-
tude to a speciﬁc innovation. Thus it is crucial to test
if this time independence is indeed true in the available
dataset. For this we have measured the adoption rates
and the adoption functions independently for two diﬀer-
ent time intervals that are ten months apart from each
other (see Table I). The results of the measurements ob-
tained for the ﬁrst interval are shown as ﬁlled symbols in
Fig. 1i–l and Fig. 2c–j, respectively, while those from the
second interval are shown as empty symbols. As one can
notice, the functional forms of the adoption curves re-
main unchanged in time. The only noticeable systematic
diﬀerence is the vertical shifts in the curves, while leaving
the functional form unchanged. These vertical shifts are
a simple consequence of the ﬂuctuations in the service
usage observed in Figs. 1a–d. These measurements thus
validate our assumption that the only signiﬁcant time
dependence comes in the number of users, as described
by Eqs. (1)–(2), and at those time scales the adoption
functions can be taken to be time independent.

IV.

INTEGRATING THE RATE EQUATIONS

Once the adoption functions have been measured, it
was possible to predict the time evolution of the number
of users by numerically integrating the rate equations
(1)–(8), using the measured adoption functions µk, ηk,
λk, and ξk. As input we took the degree distribution of
the social network at Tref , which is rather stable in time
as Fig. 6 indicates. We set an initial condition in which
we had no service users in the system at t = 0, i.e. U i
k(t =

Adoption functions in Fig. 2c–j

Tref

Tcomp

social network

ﬁlled symbols
empty symbols

4/15/2004–5/15/2004 5/1/2004–6/1/2004 4/15/2004–5/15/2004
2/15/2005–3/15/2005 3/1/2005–4/1/2005 2/15/2005–3/15/2005

TABLE I: The observation periods chosen for the measurement of the adoption functions, as shown in Fig. 2c–j. The fourth
column shows the period in which the network of social contacts was measured.

12

mined the number of users in the system. We then
changed the states of the same number of randomly cho-
sen non-users so that they became users, thus simulating
that the service usage was artiﬁcally increased by a fac-
tor of two as a result of the campaigns. After this, we let
the system relax and reach equilibrium again (Fig. 4a).
To study the eﬀect of targeted campaigns, at t = 50 we
halved the adoption functions ηk and ξk for every person
with a degree greater or equal to the preset critical degree
kc, thus simulating a permanent change in the behavior
for these individuals: they would be less likely to abandon
services than before. We then allowed the system to reach
the stationary state again.

In addition, where mentioned, we repeated the sim-
ulations several times and averaged the time-dependent
adoption rates or other quantities to minimize the eﬀect
of ﬂuctuations.

k(t = 0) = N c

k(t = 0) = 0, and N i

0) = U c
k(t = 0) = Nk,
where Nk denotes the number of individuals with degree
k. We chose a suﬃciently small value for the time step
(∆t = 0.1), and by Euler integration we determined the
adoption rates for the desired range in time.

V. NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS

The continuum theory (1)–(2) represents an approxi-
mation to the real spreading process: it cannot account
for all the details of the community formation process, so
when services start to percolate (higher coverages) it will
likely result in deviations from the real process. There-
fore, to test the validity of the model, as well as the im-
pact of advertisements (which in the short term result in
high service adoption levels) we have carried out numer-
ical simulations of the usage of the services on the social
network of Tref
in 2004. For this, we ﬁtted power laws
of the form AkB on the adoption functions of Fig. 2c–j
using a least-squares ﬁt, and used them as the empirical
adoption functions in the simulations. For example, for
Chat, the following ﬁts were used (see Fig. 2c–j, straight
lines):

µk = 0.0013k0.2942
−0.0115
ηk = 0.3751k
λk = 0.0053k0.0174
ξk = 0.3038k

−0.2789.

We then initialized every individual in the network to be
a non-user of the service, and we implemented a Monte-
Carlo simulation using as input a close approximation
to the empirically measured adoption functions. In ev-
ery time step we updated each individual’s service usage
state by comparing the appropriate adoption function
value to a randomly drawn number from a uniform dis-
tribution between 0 and 1. Thus for isolated (connected)
users ηk (ξk), and for isolated (connected) potential users
µk (λk) was used according to their degree. We used par-
allel update to keep track of the changes in the states of
individuals.

To simulate the eﬀect of campaigns and advertise-
ments, upon reaching saturation at t = 50, we deter-

i2
p

 
/
 
ρ

i

3
10

2
10

1
10

0
10

Email

WAP

Chat MyFriends

FIG. 7: The probability ρi that a link connects two service
users, divided by the random expectation p2
i when every in-
dividual in the system adopts with the same probability pi.
pi is the overall measured penetration of the service.

