6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
9
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
8
0
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Should there be more women in science and engineering?

Mathieu Bouville∗
Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, Singapore 117602
(Dated: February 21, 2014)

Many people hold this truth to be self-evident, that there should be more female students in
science and engineering. However, the proposed arguments are generally vague and unsatisfactory,
they motivate more than they really justify. An eﬃcient and ethical solution requires that women
want to major in science and engineering. However, this is only a contingent win–win situation, not
an ethical necessity. Since women may not be able to choose freely their ﬁeld, policies have been
designed to motivate more females to major in science and engineering. These outreach programs
are not as ethical as most believe: there is a great risk to replace a problem with its symmetric.

Keywords: female students, higher education, university, ethics, policy, outreach programs, minority students

I.

INTRODUCTION: THE DEAD HORSE

The low rate of

You must have seen this more times than you care to
remember. It is one of the most basic and most overused
routines in comedies...
— So Bob, give me the key.
— I thought you had it.
— No, she gave it to you.
— [etc.]
Everybody can see it coming and ﬁnds this plot lame and
unrealistic. It turns out that it does happen in real life.
female enrollment in science and
engineering is an important higher education policy
issue. Consequently, how to get more female students
in engineering is discussed to great lengths. Why this
should be done, on the other hand, is often taken for
it should
granted. No precise justiﬁcation is needed:
be done “for a variety of practical and moral reasons”.1
Authors typically mention an argument, say that it
has been widely used (probably implying that it must
therefore be valid), and move on; for instance, “a lot of
people argue for diversity in terms of fairness [ . . . ] but
that’s not my argument.”2 Some arguments can even be
obviously incoherent, e.g. “With the predicted shortage
of engineers by the year 2000, employers cannot be
satisﬁed with anything less than the very best engineers
available”.3 The fact that little or no reference to the
literature is provided is not taken as a hint that, perhaps,
none exists.

Everybody is so sure that asking whether there should
be more women in science and engineering would be
beating a dead horse that nobody really cared to check
whether the horse was actually dead.

thousands of people, one must make sure that they have
strong foundations. To this end, we examine the validity
of the proposed justiﬁcations. Since they are not always
stated explicitly and clearly, we often have to ﬁrst render
them explicit.

A. Diversity

The argument of diversity is widely used to justify a
greater enrollment of minorities in universities: “aﬃr-
mative action policies are justiﬁed because they ensure
the creation of the racially and ethnically diverse student
bodies essential to providing the best possible educa-
tional environment for students, white and minority
alike.”4 That is, diversity is a win–win scenario.
If
students do not have a chance to come in contact with
minorities, they will have a more limited view on many
intellectual and social subjects because they miss a “wide
exposure to the ideas and mores of students as diverse as
this Nation of many peoples”.5

However, this argument cannot be extended to the
under-representation of women since both sexes are
typically present amongst one’s parents and siblings and
schools are generally coeducational: although everybody
one knows may be of the same social class, race, religion,
etc. one has always lived in a ‘sexually diverse’ envi-
ronment.6 Increasing female enrollment would therefore
not have the same beneﬁcial consequence as increasing
minority enrollment. (For the idea that diversity is good
for companies, see Sec. II F).

B. Fairness

II. JUSTIFICATIONS

There is a general agreement that it is important to
increase female enrollment in science and engineering and
several possible justiﬁcations have been proposed. Since
this idea and the consequent policies are so important
and can aﬀect so deeply the lives of tens or hundreds of

“A lot of people argue for diversity in terms of
fairness.”2 Typically, one just alludes to fairness and
expects everybody to bow. There seems to be no need
to clarify what one means by ‘fair’ nor in what a higher
female enrollment would be fair. The existence of rather
idiosyncratic interpretations (e.g. to Moskal 7 fair means
“economic rewards” — as in ‘a fair share of the booty’ ?)
shows that the meaning of the word is not self-evident.

‘Fair’ is very often (not just in this context) used in a
loose way, as a synonym of ‘moral’ or ‘good’. However,
‘we should do what is fair’ then means ‘we should do
what is good’, i.e. ‘we should do what we should do’. Of
course, one cannot disagree with this tautology, but it is
obviously of no help: it does not give us any clue as to
what we should concretely do.

Another way to construe ‘fairness’ is to say that science
and engineering being superiorly good, everybody should
‘have a piece of it’. This is true for instance of freedom,
justice, higher education, etc. Yet, this requires that
these ﬁelds be indeed superior. Based on some criteria
they may be, but then one needs to show that these
criteria are intrinsically superior to any other (with the
risk of an inﬁnite regression). Moreover, most ﬁelds
are probably convinced of their own superiority (like
most religions are convinced that they are the one true
religion) and there is no reason to assume that science
and engineering are right and everybody else is wrong.
The objective superiority of science and engineering
remains to be proven.

C. The fair expectations

The meaning of ‘should’ is not any less trouble than
that of ‘fair’: one must ask what ‘there should be more
women in science and engineering’ really means. The low
enrollment of women in science and engineering might
be a symptom that women do not have fair access to
science and engineering. However, here ‘should’ is not
a recommendation nor an order (unlike in ‘you should
wash your hands before you eat’), instead it means ‘how
come there are not more women?’.

Let us consider a simple analogy. We had two bottles
of champagne and drank one, therefore there should be
one left. Here ‘should’ obviously has to do with a rational
expectation based on the circumstances: it would not be
immoral if it turned out that no champagne was left,
it would be illogical.
If expectation and reality clash,
something must be wrong with the premise: maybe we
drank the second bottle or we had only one bottle to
begin with.
It would be silly to say that since there
should remain a bottle and none is to be found, we should
go buy another one to solve the problem. This would be
solving the wrong problem. The way to solve the problem
is to examine the premises (how many bottles there were,
how much was drunk, etc.).

Likewise,

‘based on fairness, there should be more
women in science and engineering’ means that one ex-
pected more women. Since there is a discrepancy between
expectation and reality, something must be wrong with
the premise,
In this
case, female enrollment is only a tool to measure fairness
(a tool which may be diﬃcult to calibrate since there
may be other reasons for this low female enrollment, e.g.
women may prefer non-scientiﬁc disciplines). Increasing
female enrollment for its own sake would be like buying

i.e. something may not be fair.

2

another bottle to replace the missing one: it would solve
the wrong problem (unless one can show that female
enrollment should be increased for its own sake, but this
would be a diﬀerent justiﬁcation).

D. Money

Another typical argument is that “the compensation
in science-related ﬁelds is often higher than that of other
ﬁelds. By not participating in science-related ﬁelds,
women are barred from the economic rewards of these
ﬁelds.”7 However, if money were all that matters, why
would there be engineering schools at all, given that
an engineering professor could make more money in
industry? “Clearly, if monetary incentives were enough,
current starting salaries would have already ﬁxed the
problem.”2 Apparently, women do not pick a ﬁeld trying
to maximize their income. This is consistent with
studies which show that women are more likely to stress
interpersonal factors (e.g. helping others), whereas men
tend to value money and status more.8,9 Are women who
do not insist on getting “economic and social power”10
wrong or did they simply make a choice based on what
they wanted, not on what patriarchy told them to want?

E. The true nature of engineering

Another argument based on a perk of engineering is
often mentioned by Wulf 2, president of the U. S. National
Academy of Engineering (NAE): the positive impact of
engineering on society and the possibility to help others.
This may indeed be more appealing to women.

However, studies show that scientiﬁc careers are seen
as more likely to result in better income and status
and less likely to fulﬁll interpersonal goals than other
careers.8,11 This is essentially the diagnosis drawn by
Wulf 2: “the central problem of our declining enrollments,
particularly among women and minorities, is our dull
image, an incorrect image — an image that ignores the
existential joys of engineering”.

Will communication solve the recruiting problem?
Communication can be of help only if the context is not
too adverse. No amount of advertising will increase the
sales of Hummers in the poorest countries of the world
or in places where they are abhorred as megalomaniac
anti-environment juggernauts. In order to determine if,
were they to know its ‘true nature’, women would enroll
in engineering one needs more knowledge on the reasons
why they choose a given career path (to which Sec. III A
is dedicated).

F. Contribution to the economy

A consequentialist argument is often used: having
more women in engineering is good because the conse-

quence for society and economy is good. This is a major
argument for Wulf 2: “by failing to attract a diverse
engineering work force, we diminish what engineering can
contribute to society, and society pays an opportunity
cost.” Is this argument suﬃcient, on its own?

In a way, this seems altruistic: women can contribute
to the economy. This argument does not aim at moti-
vating women (unlike the previous one) by telling them
why they want to be engineers. Instead, it treats people
as mere means: women should not become engineers
for their own sake but for some external reason (e.g.
the economy). Should women not want to contribute
to the economy by enrolling in engineering? Are they
selﬁsh if they do not? Let us look at a simple analogy.
Due to their small size, children can be more eﬃcient
workers than adults in some cases; the economy would
therefore beneﬁt from some child labor. Are children
selﬁsh because they refuse to contribute to the economy?
If one refuses to exploit children, can one treat women in
a similar fashion?

Let us look at some major ethical theories. According
to (the second formulation of) Kant’s categorical impera-
tive, you should “act in such a way that you always treat
humanity, whether in your own person or in the person
of any other, never simply as a means, but always at
the same time as an end.”12 To utilitarians, good means
maximizing the happiness of the greatest number.13 A
variant called negative utilitarianism instead purports
to minimize evil/harm.14 In both cases, if women do
not want to become engineers, having more of them in
the ﬁeld cannot be deemed good: it will do them harm
and will decrease their happiness while increasing that
of others only marginally. Preference utilitarians see
the good as the fulﬁllment of a person’s preferences.15
Obviously from this point of view women’s choice is the
only acceptable argument.

The argument of the economic beneﬁt achieves the
great ﬁt of getting to agree (against it) ethical views
which seldom do so. Be it from a Kantian or a utilitarian
viewpoint, this argument must be rejected if women do
not want to study science nor engineering, i.e. it is not a
suitable argument on its own. At most it can provide
a motivation for colleges of engineering to have more
women, but not a justiﬁcation.

G. Demographics and the need for engineers

Obviously technology plays an ever increasing role in
society and economy. In order to meet the demand, the
number of engineering graduates must increase. Since
females and minorities are under-represented, they oﬀer
great potential sources of engineers.

This argument can have two interpretations.

It can
be seen as similar to the previous one, considering
that women are just pawns to be transferred from one
department to another based on labor needs. Then,
there exists an obvious risk of tyranny of ‘duty’ towards

3

others; one should always be wary of a dictatorship of the
common good, enforced against every individual will.

On the other hand, the need for engineers can be seen
as an explanation. Demographics would explain why the
number of women in science and engineering increases,
i.e. it would provide concrete reasons. Yet, it would not
justify this increase (i.e. provide ethical reasons).

H. Justiﬁcations of diﬀerent natures

As we have seen, justiﬁcations found in the literature
for a greater female enrollment in science and engineering
are rather disappointing.
It is generally assumed that
the reasons are numerous, self-evident, compelling, etc.
Asking the question explicitly is thus unnecessary (or
even wrong — politically incorrect).

Some will probably claim that the arguments studied
here are misrepresentations. This may be true. However,
is a
the nature of the justiﬁcations is often unclear:
greater income a matter of fairness7 or of motivation?2
Is the need for engineers justiﬁcation or explanation?
Clariﬁcation often required modiﬁcation/mind-reading,
which may look like misrepresentation.

Several arguments refer to an objective or general
good. As we have already said, women cannot always
contribute to the general good the way some authors
may believe. Some arguments are not moral in nature:
they may explain but not justify. Arguments such as
economy and demographics are, on their own, insuﬃcient
to pretend that women have a duty to go to engineering.
They are only motivations for engineers, engineering
schools, etc. to try to get more females to engineering,
not objective justiﬁcations for it. Other arguments
(such as money or helping others) aim at showing that
women should want to go to engineering. However, these
arguments are futile unless women are actually capable of
doing so and they are weak if there exist more compelling
reasons not to major in a science-related ﬁeld. We must
therefore determine what women actually want to do.

Economy, demographics, money, and helping others
are not ethical justiﬁcations. These arguments are merely
motivations: what they say is that it would be good
for engineering/women if there were more females in
science and engineering. They cannot claim that there
should be more women. These arguments are thus much
weaker than their proponents believe. An argument such
as fairness could a priori have provided such a moral
justiﬁcation. However, we showed that it in fact did not.

III. FREEDOM OF CHOICE

A. How women choose a career

A possible explanation for low female enrollment would
be an intrinsically lower competence in mathematics and
science compared to males. However, a meta-analysis of

more than one hundred studies showed that the diﬀerence
in mathematical performances between male and female
students is small.16 Moreover, which sex performs better
depends on which speciﬁc aspect of mathematics is
tested.
If women do not lack the necessary skills then
the shortage of women is likely due to their decision to
choose a diﬀerent ﬁeld.

Steele 17 studied the impact on the actual performance
of women of what they thought they could achieve. Male
and female subjects were given a task and were told
that men typically performed better at this task. As
a result, male subjects indeed outperformed females.
When, on the other hand, they were told that in past
experiments there was no diﬀerence of performance, the
female subjects performed as well as the men.

One will thus not be surprised that a major factor in
career choice is the diﬀerence of expectations for men
and women.6 Studies show that parents18 and teachers19
typically have lower expectations in math for girls com-
pared to boys. Students themselves generally consider
mathematics to be a masculine ﬁeld.16 “While empirical
support for actual gender diﬀerences in mathematical
competence is weak, the belief of male mathematical su-
periority itself is widely dispersed in American culture.”6
Furthermore, when males are generally believed to
perform better at a given task, both men and women
tend to use more lenient standards to evaluate them.20
Consequently, boys and girls of equivalent skill will not
be regarded as performing equally well. This reinforces
the feeling of female students that they cannot do as
well as the boys. The inferiority of female students then
becomes a self-fulﬁlling prophecy.

B. The role of women in their own lives

Women do not intrinsically lack the skills necessary
to major in science-related ﬁelds. They are not really
uninterested either. The situation is less clear-cut and
less static: they become unable to want. But are they
victims or do they decide to give up? While external
events may reduce their freedom, they cannot annihilate
it. Only women themselves can take this last step,
only they can deny their freedom to decide on their
future.21 Therefore, women too have a responsibility in
what happens to them22 and they cannot regain the
‘possibility’ to major in a science-related ﬁeld if they do
not decide so. It is not something that will happen to
them, every individual woman must make it happen.

I expect that most people would argue against this
(or simply ignore the argument altogether) as it seems
that “popular rhetoric now avoids blaming girls for not
choosing science but instead blames institutions”.23 How-
ever, if women were purely victims then both successes
and failures would be imposed upon them. That is, they
would have no responsibility for their shortcomings, but
they could not claim to have any merit either.

C. Outreach programs

4

We have addressed the issue of women in engineering
ﬁrst from the point of view of engineering and then from
that of women. The two points of view which seemed
antagonistic now agree. No reason to get more women in
science and engineering can be morally acceptable unless
they want to be in science and engineering. The only
eﬃcient way to get more women in science and engineer-
ing is if they want to be in science and engineering. The
needs of engineering —as some sort of supernatural entity
or as engineering schools or technological companies—,
economy, demographics, etc. do not bind women, but
may be (selﬁsh but eﬃcient) motivations for having more
women in science and engineering.

The research mentioned in Sec. III A points to a belief
of women that they cannot be good scientists or good
engineers. It is not that science is not interesting, it just
seems out of reach. Policies aiming at increasing the
number of women in engineering therefore include some
form of outreach program towards K–12 girls.

D. Science is not a cult

the

What

self-
exactly would happen without
censorship described in Sec. III A is unclear. Obviously,
more women would choose to major in science and
engineering. However, it is not possible to tell which
women really do not want to study science and which
ones ‘unknowingly want’ to. One cannot cut corners
and assume that every girl actually wants to become
an engineer ‘deep down’. Any policy regarding female
enrollment must aim at a happy match between a person
and a career.

Zywno et al. 3 found that 57% of the surveyed girls
who had attended their summer camp and were currently
enrolled at a university were in engineering and 35% in
other science-related ﬁelds. This proves that outreach
programs are wrong. At least Immanuel Kant would
argue this way since, according to (the ﬁrst formulation
of) his categorical
imperative, you should “act only
according to that maxim by which you can at the same
time will that it would become a universal law.”12 If these
programs were a universal law, under 10% of women
would major in non-scientiﬁc ﬁelds. This would create
an even greater disorder than the problem one meant to
solve.

The implicit idea seems to be that more is necessarily
better and that having 100% of girls major in engineering
would be a complete victory. On the contrary, it would be
the proof that the programs failed. Indeed, one must keep
in mind that the reason why these outreach programs
were created in the ﬁrst place was that the number of
females in science and engineering was artiﬁcially low,
due to the impossibility for girls to freely choose a career
in these ﬁelds. However, the camps seem to lead to

the opposite extreme: an impossibility for girls to freely
choose against a career in science or engineering.

To their credit, those involved in outreach programs
can be quite eager to share their love for science and
engineering. However, trying to cancel out a negative
bias is very diﬀerent from preaching the engineering
gospel and actively converting girls. The girls’ choice
must be a free and personal one. It should not be dictated
by anyone: manipulating a girl towards science is not
any more acceptable than manipulating her away from
it. Outreach programs must therefore make sure that
they do not violate the right of the girls to choose freely.
The line may be blur and elusive but one must keep in
mind that it is always there and should not be crossed.

5

More qualitative data would shed some light on the
eﬀect of outreach programs. For instance,
it would
be very interesting to know whether the retention rate
of
female college students who participated in such
programs is greater (for instance because they are more
motivated/self-conﬁdent) or lower (perhaps engineering
was not as they saw in camp) than that of other female
students. It would also be interesting to know how the
discrepancy between a girl’s actual capabilities and her
assessment of them is aﬀected by outreach programs and
how girls compare to boys, before and after participating
in such programs.

IV. CONCLUSION

E. The purpose precedes the evaluation

Measuring success in terms of number of partici-
pants who eventually enroll in science and engineering
(or calling outreach programs a “successful recruitment
strategy”3 when female enrollment is high) de facto
equates more with better. Either the precise aim of these
programs is not clear and they are unlikely to fulﬁll it
(as Seneca pointed out, “there is no favorable wind for
he who knows not where he goes”) or the largest female
enrollment possible is actually the purpose. But then
they must show how this purpose is good for the women
concerned.

Obviously, assessing the match between a (possibly
unexpressed) preference and a career is not as straight-
forward as assessing enrollment. Just as obviously, one
should never set a goal just based on how easily success
can be evaluated.

Many in science and engineering hold this truth to
be self-evident, that there should be more women in
the ﬁeld. We have discussed six commonly proposed
justiﬁcations. They are generally vague and, when made
explicit and seriously scrutinized, they appear to be
motivations (for engineering or for women) rather than
real justiﬁcations. We showed that no eﬃcient and
morally acceptable solution can exist unless women want
to study science and engineering. However, this is only a
contingent win–win situation, not an ethical necessity.

Outreach programs have been devised to increase
female enrollment. However, their precise goal is unclear.
Perhaps they try to allow every woman to freely choose
a ﬁeld, but then how to measure success? This is a moral
dream but a practical nightmare. If they aim at drawing
always more women to science and engineering, they
likely violate the right of the students to freely choose
a career. Trading Scylla for Charybdis is not a solution.

Electronic address: m-bouville@imre.a-star.edu.sg

∗
1 R. M. Felder, G. N. Felder, M. Mauney, C. E. Hamrin, and

E. J. Dietz, J. Eng. Educ. 84, 151 (1995).

2 W. A. Wulf, The Bridge 28 (1998).
3 M. S. Zywno, K. A. Gilbride, P. D. Hiscocks, J. K. Waalen,
and D. C. Kennedy, IEEE Trans. Educ. 42, 364 (1999).
4 P. Gurin, E. Dey, S. Hurtado, and G. Gurin, Harvard Educ.

Rev. 72, 330 (2002).

5 U. S. Supreme Court Justice L. Powell, Regents of the

University of California v. Bakke (1978).

6 S. J. Correll, Am. J. Sociol. 106, 1691 (2001).
7 B. M. Moskal, in 30th ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education

Conference (2000).

8 J. S. Eccles, Psychol. Women Quart. 18, 585 (1994).
9 H. M. Lips, J. Vocat. Behav. 40, 62 (1992).
10 S. G. Brainard and L. Carlin, J. Eng. Educ. 87, 369 (1998).
11 C. Morgan, J. D. Isaac, and C. Sansone, Sex Roles 44, 295

(2001).

12 I. Kant, Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten [The

Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals] (1785).

13 J. Bentham, The Principles of Morals and Legislation

(1789).

14 K. R. Popper, The Open Society and its Enemies (Rout-

ledge, London, 1945).

15 P. Singer, Practical Ethics (Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, 1993), 2nd ed.

16 J. S. Hyde, E. Fennema, M. Ryan, L. A. Frost, and

C. Hoop, Psychol. Women Quart. 14, 299 (1990).

17 C. M. Steele, Am. Psychol. 52, 613 (1997).
18 J. E. Jacobs and J. S. Eccles, Educational Researcher 14,

20 (1985).

19 National Science Foundation, Women, Minorities and
Persons with Disabilities in Science and Engineering: 1994
(National Science Foundation, Arlington, VA, 1994).

20 M. Foschi, Social Psychol. Quart. 59, 237 (1996).
21 J.-P. Sartre, L’ ˆEtre et le N´eant [Being and Nothingness]

22 S. de Beauvoir, Le Deuxi`eme Sexe [The Second Sex]

(Gallimard, 1943).

(Gallimard, 1949).

23 J. Fry, http://www.arxiv.org/physics/9908063 (1999).

