Community structure and ethnic preferences in school friendship

networks

M. C. Gonz´alez,1, 2 H.J. Herrmann,3, 2 J. Kert´esz,4 and T. Vicsek5

1Institute for Computational Physics, Universit¨at Stuttgart,

Pfaﬀenwaldring 27, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany

2Departamento de F´ısica, Universidade Federal do Cear´a, 60451-970 Fortaleza, Brazil

3IfB, HIF E12, ETH H¨onggerberg, CH-8093 Z¨urich, Switzerland

4Instiute of Physics, Budapest University of Technology and Economics,

H-1111 Budafoki ´ut. 8., Budapest, Hungary

5Biological Physics Ressearch Group of HAS, E¨otv¨os Lor´and University,

H-1117, Pazmany P. S´et´any 1A, Budapest, Hungary

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

Abstract

Recently developed concepts and techniques of analyzing complex systems provide new insight

into the structure of social networks. Uncovering recurrent preferences and organizational principles

in such networks is a key issue to characterize them. We investigate school friendship networks from

the Add Health database. Applying threshold analysis, we ﬁnd that the friendship networks do

not form a single connected component through mutual strong nominations within a school, while

under weaker conditions such interconnectedness is present. We extract the networks of overlapping

communities at the schools (c-networks) and ﬁnd that they are scale free and disassortative in

contrast to the direct friendship networks, which have an exponential degree distribution and are

assortative. Based on the network analysis we study the ethnic preferences in friendship selection.

The clique percolation method we use reveals that when in minority, the students tend to build

more densely interconnected groups of friends. We also ﬁnd an asymmetry in the behavior of black

minorities in a white majority as compared to that of white minorities in a black majority.

6
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
7
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
8
6
2
1
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers:

Keywords:

1

Social structures in schools are subject to intense investigations for many obvious reasons.

Schools visited by major part of the population form social systems, which are well deﬁned

units enabling to study relationships, networking and processes in a condensed way. The

relationships of adolescents show remarkable peculiarities, they are inﬂuenced by family

backgrounds and, at the same time, they are precursors of the future society. The problems of

spreading sexually transmitted diseases, of drug abuse or of delinquency among adolescents

and young adults are closely related to their social embedding in the schools and so are their

racial/ethnic preferences.

The investigation of patterns of friend selection is a major source of our knowledge on

social structures in schools [1]. Mapping out the friendship networks based on questionnaires

have been a successfull approach in this respect, where the existence and intensity of dyadic

connections are identiﬁed using nominations of the students [2, 3, 5, 7]. It is known that sex

and race/ethnicity are two primary characteristics on which students base their selections

of friends [1] and here we would like to focus on the latter.

Desegregation of schools as a function of the racial diversity has been a topic of analysis

in multi-ethnic countries in Western Europe [7, 10] and the USA [4, 5, 6]. These studies

suggested that the way schools are organized could aﬀect the level of racial friendship segre-

gation. In recent studies of friendship networks p∗ and related models [8, 9] were successfully

used to identify how some of the attributes of the network members are correlated with their

inclinations in choosing group relationships. However, as the measures of segregation are

still under discussion [? ],and even racial classiﬁcation schemes seem problematic [12], we

think it useful to approach this problem from a diﬀerent angle, namely to apply concepts

and results from the science of complex networks [13, 14, 15].

These results include the quantitative characterization of hierarchical ordering [16, 17],

new, eﬃcient methods of community detection [18, 19, 20, 40], even of overlapping ones [39]

and pointing out relations between functionality and weights of the links in the network

[22, 23]. Successful eﬀorts have been made to analyze complex networks, including social

ones, within this new framework [28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33].

Our aim here is to present an analysis of friendship networks in schools based on the

representative US National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Healt, [24]).

First we carry out a topological study and apply threshold analysis [25] in order to identify

the network which is most appropriate for our further investigation. In contrast to earlier

2

work, our study focuses on the communities instead of the dyadic links. Interestingly, we

uncover that the properties of the direct friendship network are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from

the network of the next hierarchical level, namely the network of communities.

Friendship networks

The friendship networks presented here are constructed from the in-school questionnaires

of the Add-Health [24] friendship nomination study from the period 1994-1995, in which

90118 students participated. The analyzed data are limited to students who provided in-

formation from schools with response rates of 50% or higher. Every student was given a

paper-and-pencil questionnaire and a copy of a list with every schoolmate. Weighted dyadic

links were generated based on the number of sheared activities. Weights were in the range

from 1, meaning the student nominated the friend without reporting any activity, to 6 mean-

ing that the student nominated the friend and reported participating in all ﬁve activities

with (him/her).

The structure ﬁles contain information on 75871 nodes divided in 84 networks (schools).

In most of the analyzed samples of schools the majority of the population is white, however,

there are signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations. In particular, the ratios of the races in the total popula-

tion is the foolowing: White:0.59, Black:0.14, Hispanic:0.13, Asian:0.04 and Other:0.1. In

Figs. 1a-b, we visualize the friendship networks for two schools with pajek[34]. Fig. 1a is

a characteristic sample of the 84 schools, we call it here School 1. In this school the great

majority of the population is white (70%), which contrasts to a non-characteristic sample,

School 2, visualized in Fig. 1(b), where blacks (40%) are overrepresented with respect to

the average. Nodes represent students, with colors indicating their race. A link is drawn

between nodes if at least one of the student nominates the other like a friend. The spatial

distribution of the nodes corresponding to the diﬀerent grades, placed counter clockwise,

starting with the 7th grade at lower right corner and ending with the 12th grade. Visual

inspection of the intergrade links already tells that there is a separation between the upper

grades (high school) and the lower grades (middle school). While the partition according

to the grades was introduced ”by hand” the separation of colors within the 6 groups is not

artiﬁcial; the apparent clustering of nodes according to the same color is due to the fact that

they are more densely interconnected.

3

0.8
G(wc)/N
0.6

1

0.4

0.2

6
Σs

2

ns

4

2

0

(a)

(b)

(c)

0
0 1 2 3 4 5
wc

0 1 2 3 4 5
wc

FIG. 1: (a)-(b) Networks of friendships from Schools 1 and 2 (respectively). Nodes represent
students, with colors indicating their race. Spatial distribution of nodes corresponds to the diﬀerent
grades, placed counter clockwise, from 7th to 12th grade.(c) Left: G/N fraction of sites in the
largest connected component G for the networks with mutual links only (circles) and networks
with mutual and not mutual links (squares) versus threshold weight wc. Only links with average
weight in both directions w ≥ wc are kept. Right: Second moment of the normalized number of
clusters excluding the largest component for the same analysis as in the left part.

Role of weights and directionality

Checking mutuality in a whole-network study [35] gives some insight into the reliability

of the answers given to the questionnaires. In an ideal case both participants of a dyadic

relationship should name each other with the same weight. We apply threshold analysis to

measure the inﬂuence of weights and directionality in the links. In order to analise the role

of the weights we take an average over all schools.

First, we analyze the network formed only by mutual links, i.e., mutual nominations,

which should have the more reliable information about, stronger relations or tight friendships

inside the networks. We introduce the mean of the weight in both directions to characterize

the weight of each link (w). We examine diﬀerent thresholds of (wc) for creating links, i.e., a

link is created only if there is a mutual link and w ≥ wc. The values of the weights go from

1 to 6, the weakest possible restriction is w = 1, which includes any mutual link present

in the network. In the left part of ﬁgure 1c (circles) we present the calculations of G/N,
the fraction of nodes that belong to the largest cluster vs. wc. On the right side, Ps s2ns,
the second moment of the normalized number of clusters ns of size s (excluding the largest

cluster) is presented. Interestingly, when considering only mutual connections G is roughly

half of the population, and the network is split in various components.

4

Next we make the threshold analysis by considering the network as follows: A link is

formed if at least one nomination exists, and (w > wc); the weight w of a link is taken again as

the mean of the weights in both directions with the extension that for the direction into which

the nomination does not exist, zero is taken. For this case, we ﬁnd a transition as a function

of wc: The population is disconnected into many clusters for wc > 2 while a giant component

occurs for wc ≤ 2. This eﬀect is shown on both sides of Figs.1c (red squares). We have

found that only the weakest threshold criterium and dropping the requirement of mutuality

leads to a spanning giant component. This ﬁnding harmonizes with the ﬁnding [36] that

applying strong criteria for constructing friendship networks leads to a network instability

while with weak criteria the network turns out to be stable.

In our further analysis of community detection we assume that a dyadic link exists if any

of the corresponding students nominates the other, and we do not consider any threshold for

the weight. Imposing the minimum restriction possible for the creation of a link allows us to

search for communities in the interconnected giant component and to uncover preferences

in the social relationships between the students.

Networks of communities (c-networks)

The social network reﬂects the structure of the society. Therefore it carries information

about the building bricks, the communities. However, it is a highly non-trivial task to

extract this information from the network itself. Communities are vaguely deﬁned as groups

of vertices that have a high density of edges within them, with a lower density of edges

between the groups [37, 38]. The recently introduced method of community detection, the

“clique percolation method” [39, 40] seems particularly appropriate to handle this problem

because it enables overlapping communities, which are typical for the social networks. Two

communities overlap, if they share at least one member. In most of the friendship groups

there are members, who simultaneously belong to more than one such group. This feature

is known as aﬃliation (see, e.g., [8] in the social networks literature and is an aspect of large

networks which is on one hand very important, while it has not been satisfactorily addressed

by the recently developed (prior to the k-clique percolation approach) network clustering

methods.

A k-clique is a fully connected subgraph containing k nodes. A k-clique community is

5

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 2: C-networks of 3-clique communities at School 1 ((a)) and School 2 ((c)). Compared to the
corresponding c-networks of 4-clique communities ((b) and (d) respectively). The color is assigned
according to the race of the majority of nodes in the community. The node size is proportional
to the square root of the number of nodes in the community. Although, each community can
have students from diﬀerent races, we assign to it the color of the majority of the members of the
community.

deﬁned as a group of k-cliques that can be reached from each other through a series of

adjacent k-cliques sharing k − 1 nodes. After determining the k-clique communities, it turns

out that there are nodes which belong to more than one community. Using these shared

nodes one can construct the c-network of communities, where the communities themselves

constitute the c-nodes and the shared nodes of the original network form the c-links between

them. In the following we analyze the c-network of communities based on the friendship

networks of the schools.

Fig. 2 shows the c-network of k-clique communities extracted from the friendship networks

of school 1 and school 2. Figs. 2a and c is based on 3-clique communities of friendship

6

networks of School 1 (Fig. 1a) and school 2 (Fig. 1c), respectively. In turn, Figs. 2b and d

are based on 4-clique communities extracted from the same schools. The area of the circles

represents the number of nodes within the community and each node color is related to a

race.

A comparison of Figs 2a-c with Figs 2b-d shows that there is a dramatic diﬀerence between

the c-networks based on 3-clique or 4-clique communities. For the 3-clique communities we

see in both schools complex c-networks with rich, interconnected structures, which include

the great majority of the students, while the c-networks of 4-clique communities are rather

sparse (less than 20% of the students belong to them) and the structures are fragmented.

It has been suggested [39] that the optimal value of k for uncovering the community struc-

ture in a network is the largest one which still assures percolation, i.e., interconnectedness.

In contrast to other studied networks [39], like protein networks or collaboration networks,

where the optimal value for detecting communities was k = 4 or 5, we have found that

triads are the optimal elementary cliques for the high school friendship networks. Although

it is shown here only for schools 1 and 2, our ﬁnding is generally valid for the whole data

set. This is a new manifestation of the well known fact that triads play an eminent role

in interpersonal relations [42, 43], which is also reﬂected in the high value of the average

clustering coeﬃcient [48] of social networks[44].

Although we obtain the richest community structure for k = 3, it is worth having a look

at the c-networks based on the more cohesive 4-cliques. For k = 3 already the relatively less

densely connected friendship circles show up in the analysis, while for k = 4 only the more

strongly interconnected groups (in which each member is part of at least one 4-clique) are

found by the method. One of the interesting aspects of such a study is that on the level of

more cohesive groups (k = 4) the number of communities becomes balanced even for cases

when the ratio of the sizes of the ethnic groups is far from unity (and, correspondingly, on

the level of less cohesive groups, e.g., for k = 3, the students who are in majority, have much

larger friendship circles). From here (see Figs. 2b and d) we conclude that when in minority,

the students tend to form stronger ties, thus, the number of more densely interconnected

communities becomes over-represented compared to what happens in the k = 3 case.

7

0

10

-1

10

-2

10

-3

10

-4

10

-5

10

0

10

P(k)

C(k)

<kn>(k)

(d)

(e)

m

1
10

0
10
P(m)
-2

10

-4

10

0
10
0
10
ov

P(s

)
-2

10

-4

10

(a)

Comms.
Friendship

(b)

(c)

1

10

k

2

10

0

10

1

10

k

2

10

0

10

1

10

k

2

10

0
10

ov

1
10

s

2
10

FIG. 3: Diﬀerent network properties averaged over the complete dataset of schools, for the commu-
nity networks (circles) and for friendship networks (squares): (a) Cumulative degree distribution.
(b) Degree-dependent clustering coeﬃcient. (c) Average degree of the nearest neighbor. (d)
Cumulative distribution of the membership number (m) and of (d) the overlap size (sov) for the
community networks.

Statistical properties of the c-networks

In the following we statistically characterize the structure of the friendship networks and

of the extracted c-networks based on 3-clique communities, where averages will be taken

over all 84 schools in the data set.

The cumulative degree distribution P (n) is deﬁned as the fraction of nodes having degree

larger than n. In Fig. 3a we show P (n) for the friendship networks and compare it with the

cumulative degree distribution of the c-networks of communities. The distribution for the

friendship networks rapidly decreases, indicating that these networks have a characteristic

degree. This corresponds to the natural cutoﬀ in the number of friends, in accordance with

the results reported for another friendship network [33]. Interestingly, the degree distribution

of the c-networks is much broader, and can be well ﬁtted by a scale free, power-law function
of the form ∼ n−γ with γ ≈ 1.5. It is known that such scale free networks emerge from growth

processes where an eﬀective preferential attachment, i.e., a ”rich get richer” mechanism is at

play [13]. Scale free c-networks have already been seen before [41], but the transition from

the rapidly decaying degree distribution in friendship network to the scale freeness of the

c-networks is a relevant characteristic of social community formation and should be taken

into account for the formulation of models of large social networks [29].

8

The degree distribution provides information about the dyadic relations while the clus-

tering coeﬃcient characterizes the triads. The local clustering coeﬃcient (Ci) of a vertex i

with degree ni, is deﬁned as the ratio of the number of triangles connected to it and all the

possible number of triangles (ni(ni − 1)/2). The mean degree-dependent clustering coeﬃ-

cient is the average of the local clustering over all vertices with degree n. This quantity is

analyzed for the two types of networks and presented in Fig. 3b. For the friendship networks

C(n) varies slightly with n for most of the observed n-range; decaying rapidly only for larger

degrees. Again, C(n) for the c-network is much broader than for the friendship network and
can be reasonably ﬁtted by a power law C(n) ∼ n−α, with α ≈ 2.8. This kind of dependence

of the clustering coeﬃcient as an inverse power of the node degree, can be signature of a

hierarchical structure of the networks [45, 46, 47].

Social networks are known to be assortative, i.e., high degree nodes are linked with

enhanced probability. The statistical analysis of this eﬀect relies on the degree ˜n(n) of nearest

neighbors averaged over all nodes of degree n. For assortative (disassortative) network ˜n(n) is

a monotonously increasing (decreasing) function of n. As expected, the friendship networks

turn out to be assortative (see Fig. 3c), but in contrast to networks with scale free degree

distribution (e.g., collaboration networks), ˜n(n) has also a cutoﬀ due to the rapid decay in

the degree distribution. On the other hand, the c-networks are disassortative, i.e., ˜n(n) can
be approximated by a power law with a negative exponent, ˜n(n) ∼ n−β, with β ≈ 1.1.

We also calculate the membership (m) of each student, which is the number of com-

munities that the students belongs to. Fig. 3d displays the cumulative distribution of the

membership number P (m), which shows that on average, each student belongs to a limited

number of communities (less than 5). In turn, any two communities can share sov nodes,

which deﬁnes the overlap size between these communities. Fig. 3e shows the average of the

overlap distribution for all the schools, which is well ﬁtted by a power law with the expo-

nent 2.9. We can conclude that students belong to at most 4 diﬀerent clique-communities

inside the School, and that there is no characteristic overlap size in the networks (except of

that given by their ﬁnite size). Absence of characteristic membership number and overlap

size have been observed in other social and biological networks but not in their randomized

versions [39]. Additionally, the clustering coeﬃcient, hCi for friendship networks and for

community networks both have a similar average value near 0.3, which is larger than an

equivalent random graph with the same number of nodes and links.

9

(a)

2
P/<Pr>
1
1/2

1/3

1/4

1

(b)

Whites
Blacks
Hispanics
Asians

40
Z
20

0

-20

-40

4

2

order

3

4

1

2

order

3

FIG. 4: Measuring preferences of inter-racial connections r − r′. P (r, r′) is the relative frequency
of directed links from Whites (full green line), Blacks (dotted black line), Hispanics (dashed red
line) and Asians (dashed-dotted yellow line) to each of the races r′ = W (circles), B (squares),
H (diamonds), and A (triangles). Racial preferences manifest themselves as systematic deviations
of the ratio P (r, r′)/Pr(r, r′) from 1, Pr is the corresponding relative frequency in the randomized
samples. (a) P/Pr in decreasing order from 1 to 4, for the nominations made from r to r′. (b)
The corresponding Z-scores. The combination of (a) and (b) reveals relations r − r′ that are
signiﬁcantly absent. The results are the average over the 84 School networks.

Ethnic preferences

Racial/ethnic preferences in friendship selection contain crucial information about the

level of segregation, which constitutes one of the major sources of social conﬂicts. Quantify-

ing such concepts as preferences or segregation and to work out the appropriate measurement

protocols are highly non-trivial tasks in a strongly inhomogeneous society (see [12? ]).

We use the following quantitative method to measure ‘preferential’ nominations as a

function of the attributes of the students. A nomination can be considered preferential, if

pairs of nodes with given attributes are signiﬁcantly more recurrent within the empirical

networks than those in their randomized versions.

In the studied sample of friendship

networks, we ﬁnd the dominant appearance of quantitatively preferential nominations among

students of the same race, as a manifestation of homophily present in each grade and common

to each racial group from all schools. Here we present in detail the measure of preferences

in the School networks as a function of the race known for the nodes, without separating

the information by grade. The same method can, of course, be used to measure preferences

in any attributes.

In each directed network we identify the frequency of the 25 possible race dyads, formed

10

from the 5 races attributed to the nodes. To focus on those dyads that are signiﬁcantly

recurrent, we compare the real network to suitably randomized networks.

The randomized networks have the same single node characteristics as those the real

networks: Each node in the randomized network keeps its race and the same number of

incoming and outgoing edges as the corresponding node has in the real network. For ran-

domizing the networks we employ a Markov-chain algorithm, based on starting with the real

network and repeatedly swapping randomly chosen pairs of connections (A → B, C → D

is replaced by A → D, C → B) until the network is randomized [31, 32]. Switching is

prohibited if either of the connections A and D or C and B already exist. Thus the degree

of each node is preserved.

In Fig. 4 we present results for the main 4 races identiﬁed at the schools: white, black,
hispanic and asians. For each race r, we calculate the relative frequency P (r, r′) directed links
r → r′, to a node with race r′. The presented results are the average over the 84 schools. The

comparison to randomized networks compensates for the eﬀects of diﬀerences in the amount

of each race population. Racial preferences manifest themselves as systematic deviations
of the ratio P (r, r′)/ < Pr(r, r′) > from 1. The common behavior for each racial group is

to nominate friends of the same race (intra-ethnic nominations) more likely than students

from any of the other race (inter-ethnic nominations). In Fig. 4a, we present P/ < Pr > in

decreasing order from 1 to 4, for the nominations made for each race r (denoted by diﬀerent
line styles and colors) the race of the nominated nodes r′ (indicated by diﬀerent symbols).

Not only the preference for intra-ethnic nominations becomes clear from this plot, but also

that symmetrically some inter-ethnic nominations are found 4 times less often than in the

randomized versions, e.g., those from asians ↔ blacks and blacks ↔ whites. In Fig. 4b, we

characterize the signiﬁcance of the deviations by the Z-scores, deﬁned as:

Z(r, r′) ≡

P (r, r′)− < Pr(r, r′) >
σr(a, a′)

,

(1)

where σr(r, r′) is the standard deviation of < Pr(r, r′) > calculated from 100 realizations of
randomized networks. The combination of these two plots reveals relations r ↔ r′ that are

signiﬁcantly absent.

Next, we illustrate how the measured quantity P (r, r′)/ < Pr(r, r′) >, can be used to

obtain certain characteristics of the friendship selection preference as a function of the racial

11

100
P/Pr|(w,w)
10

1
P/Pr|(b,w)
0.1

-0.5

0.1(fb)

(a)

-0.6

1.2(fb)

100
P/Pr|(b,b)
10

1
P/Pr|(w,b)
0.1

-0.5

0.1(fb)

(b)

fb

0.01

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

0.001

0.01

0.1

0.01

1

FIG. 5: The ratio of the relative frequencies (P/Pr) vs.
fraction of the minority, i.e. black
population (fb). (a)For white → white and white → black nominations. (b) For black → black
and black → white nominations. P/ < Pr > can be ﬁtted by a negative power law of the form
−α
, with α = 0.6. For black ↔ black nominations and α = 0.5 for black ↔ white nominations.
f
b
This shows that although heterogeneity decreases the relative frequency of b ↔ b , it does not favor
inter-ethnic relations b ↔ w.

composition of the schools. In the following, we focus on the relations of two ethnic groups:

blacks (b) and whites (w). In Fig. 5 we represent the obtained value of P/ < Pr > vs. the

fraction of the minority (fb), i.e. students of the black population in each school network.

Figure 5a shows the values for the nominations from whites, intra-ethnic w → w and inter-

ethnic w → b. Equivalently, Fig. 5b shows the corresponding nominations from blacks b → b

and b → w. These ﬁgures show a sample of 64 schools which have at least 0.2% of any of

both races (white and black).

We have observed that intra-ethnic nominations occur equally or more frequently than in

the randomized networks (P/ < Pr >≥ 1), while inter-ethnic nominations are less likely to

occur (P/ < Pr >< 1), and these results do not depend on the total size of the population,

N (not shown). When we plot the same quantities as a function of the fraction of the

minority it is possible to extract some relevant tendencies from the entire sample. Note

that P/ < Pr > vs. fb, for b → b is greater than 1 and tends to 1 only when fb ∼ 1

(top of Fig. 5b), just for such values P/ < Pr > of w → w is then considerably greater

than 1 (top of Fig. 5a). These ﬁgures show that both races present the following behavior:

When the population of a given race, is majority (fraction f ∼ 1), then their intra-ethnic

12

nominations resemble those of the randomized networks P/ < Pr >∼ 1, but when they

represent a minority (f ≪ 1) such populations tend to make intra-ethnic nominations of

friends (P/ < Pr >≫ 1).

In contrast to the intra-ethnic relations, the inter-ethnic nominations are non-symmetric

with respect to the composition. This is clearly shown in 5a) and b). It is natural that

the b → w and w → b follow the same pattern. However, in case of symmetric behavior

the limes fb → 1 and fbto0 should be similar. Instead, we see a monotonous dependence of
P/ < Pr > which can be well ﬁtted by a negative power-law of the form f α

b , with α ∼ 0.5.

The ﬁgures 5a) and b) indicate that when blacks are in a small minority, the frequency of

the inter-ethnic relations correspond to an almost perfect desegregation, while in the other

extreme, when whites are in a small minority, extremely strong segregation occurs. Our

results suggest the following picture: Both whites and blacks show increasing homophily as

their get into minorities. However, blacks as a small minority in a white majority get more

integrated than the other way around. This result points toward the ﬁnding that the increase

of racial heterogeneity does not necessarily favor the inter-ethnic nominations among the

increasing minority and the race of the majority, but may have the opposite eﬀect [5].

Conclusions

In this article we have applied network concepts and tools to investigate the social struc-

ture of schools. We used the Add Health data base [24] which contains - among others

- detailed data about friendship nominations, race, age, gender, etc. We have ﬁrst ana-

lyzed the weighted friendship network where the weight of a link between students i → j

corresponds to the number of sheared activities of i with j as nominated by i. We have

found striking asymmetries in the nominations and concluded that the community struc-

tures can be best uncovered if the underlying networks are chosen with the weakest criteria

(one nomination in either direction already results in a link).

We have presented the statistical properties of these networks. The community struc-

ture was studied by means of k-clique percolation and the c-network of communities was

constructed using overlap generated links. The optimal clique size was found to be k = 3

in agreement with the special role of triads in social interactions. While the friendship net-

works show the expected assortativity and their degree distribution have a sharp cutoﬀ, the

13

c-networks are disassortative and they have a scale-free degree distribution.

Finally, we presented a statistical analysis of ethnic preferences in friendship selection
based on a comparison of the relative frequencies of r −r′ links as compared to a randomized

reference system. We have analyzed the preference order of the four major ethnic groups.

Furthermore we concluded that very small black minorities in a white majority have better

balanced inter-ethnic relations than a small white minority in a black majority. This could

be related to the non-trivial eﬀect of increasing ethnic heterogeneity on desegregation.

This research has been supported by grants OTKA TO49674 and K60456. MCG thanks

DAAD for ﬁnancial support. HJH thanks the Max Planck Prize.

[1] J.L. Epstein (1986) in Process and outcome in peer relationships Eds.: EC Mueller, CR Cooper

(Academic Press Orlando) Chapter 6 (p. 129)

[2] S. Hansell (1985) Social Forces. 63(3), 698

[3] D.D. Brewer and C.M. Webster (1999) Social Networks 21 361.

[4] K. Joyner, G. Kao (2000) Social Science Quarterly, 81(3), 810-825.

[5] J. Moody (2001) Am. Jour. of Soc. 107(3), 679.

[6] G. Kao, K. Joyner (2004) Sociological Quarterly, 45(3), 557-573

[7] C. Baerveldt, M.A.J. Van Duijn, L. Vermeij and D.A. Van Hemert (2004) Social Networks 26

[8] S. Wassermann, K. Faust (1994) “Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications”, Cam-

55.

bridge University Press.

[9] C.J. Anderson, S. Wassermann and B. Crouch (1999) Social Networks 21 37.

[10] C. Baerveldt, R. Van Rossem, M. Vermande, F. Weerman (2004) Connections 26(1) 11.

[11] J. Moody, (2001) Social Networks 23(3), 261.

[12] D.R. Harris (2002) In J. Perlmann and M. C. Waters (Eds.), The New Race Question: How

the Census Counts Multiracial Individuals. (pp. 62-101) New York: Russell Sage.

[13] R. Albert and A.-L. Barabasi (2002) Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47-97

[14] MEJ Newman (2003) SIAM Rev. 45, 167

[15] S.N. Dorogovtsev, J.F.F Mendes (2003) Evolution of Networks, ¿From Biological Nets to the

Internet and WWW, Oxford UP

14

[16] E. Ravasz, A-L. Barabasi (2003) Phys.Rev. E 67, 026112

[17] A. Trusina, S. Maslov, P. Minnhagen, K. Sneppen, Kim (2003) Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 178702

[18] M. Girvan and M. E. J. Newman (2002) PNAS 99, 7821

[19] J. Reichardt, S. Bornholdt, Stefan (2004) Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 218701

[20] F. Radicchi, C. Castellano, F. Cecconi, V. Loreto, D. Parisi, (2004) PNAS 101, 2658-2663

[21] A. Barrat, M. Barthelemy, R. Pastor-Satorras, A. Vespignani PNAS 101, 3747

[22] J.-P. Onnela, J. Saramaki, J. Kertesz, K. Kaski (2005) Phys. Rev. E 71, 065103

[23] A. Barrat, M. Barthelemy, A. Vespignani (2004) Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 228701

[24] This research uses the public-use dataset from Add Health, a program project designed by J.

Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris, and funded by a grant from the

National Institute of Child Health and Human Developtment (P01-HD31921). For data ﬁles

from Add Health contact Add Health, Carolina Population Center, 123 W. Franklin Street,

Chapel Hill, NC 27516-2524, http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth

[25] J.-P. Onnela, K. Kaski and J. Kert´esz (2004) Eur. Phys. J. B 38, 353

[26] I. Jansson (1999) Social Networks 21 339.

[27] I. Jansson (1997) Social Networks 19 285.

[28] V. Colizza, A. Flammini, M. A. Serrano and A. Vespignani (2006) Nature Physics 2 110-115.

[29] M.C. Gonzalez, P.G. Lind, H.J. Herrmann (2006) Phys.Rev.Lett. 96, 088702.

[30] M.A. Porter, P.J. Mucha, M.E.J. Newman and C.M. Warmbrand (2006), PNAS 102 7057-

7062.

[31] R. Milo, S, Itzkovitz, N. Kashtan, R. Levitt, S. Shen-Ohrr, I. Ayzenshtat, M. Scheﬀer and U.

Alon (2004) Science 303, 1538.

[32] S. Maslov, K. Sneppen (2002) Science 296, 910.

[33] L.A.N. Amaral, A. Scala, M. Barth´el´emy, and H.E. Stanley (2000) PNAS 97, 11149-11152.

[34] http://vlado.fmf.uni-lj.si/pub/networks/pajek/

[35] P.W. Marsden (2005) In: P.J. Carrington, J.Scott, S. Wassermann (Eds.): Models and Meth-

ods in Social Network Analysis (Cambridge UP)

[36] R. B. Cairns, M.-C. Leung, L. Buchanan, B. D. Cairns (1995) Child Development, 66(5)

1330-1345

[37] J. Scott (2000) Social Network Analysis: A Handbook 2nd edn (Sage, London).

[38] B.S. Everitt (1993) Cluster Analysis 3rd edn (Edward Arnold, London)

15

[39] G. Palla, I. Der´enyi, I. Farkas, and T. Vicsek (2005) Nature 435, 814-818.

[40] I. Der´enyi, G. Palla, and T. Vicsek (2005) Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 160202.

[41] P. Pollner, G. Palla and T. Vicsek (2006) Europhys. Lett 73 478-484.

[42] Fritz Heider (1958) Psychology of Interpersonal Relations Lawrence Erlbaum Associates (Mah-

wah, NJ)

[43] Z. Szvetelszky (2004) Everyone is the third (in Hungarian) (Alibi, Budapest)

[44] DJ Watts and SH Strogatz (1998) Nature, 393, 440-442.

[45] E. Ravasz and A-L. Barab´asi (2003) Physical Review E 67, 026112.

[46] G. Szab´o, M.J. Alava and J. Kert´esz (2003) Physical Review E 67, 056102.

[47] E. Song, S. Havlin, H.A. Makse (2005) Nature 433 392.

[48] The clustering coeﬃcient of a node is the ratio of the linked neighboring nodes to the total

number of neighbor pairs. This quantity will be discussed later in the paper.

16

