6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
3
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
2
1
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ranking Scientiﬁc Publications Using a Simple Model of Network Traﬃc

Dylan Walker1,2, Huafeng Xie2,3, Koon-Kiu Yan1,2, Sergei Maslov2
1Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, New York, 11794, USA
2Department of Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science,
Brookhaven National Laboratory,
Upton, New York 11973, USA
3New Media Lab, The Graduate Center, CUNY,
New York, NY 10016, USA
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

To account for strong aging characteristics of citation networks, we modify Google’s PageRank
algorithm by initially distributing random surfers exponentially with age, in favor of more recent
publications. The output of this algorithm, which we call CiteRank, is interpreted as approximate
traﬃc to individual publications in a simple model of how researchers ﬁnd new information. We
develop an analytical understanding of traﬃc ﬂow in terms of an RPA-like model and optimize
parameters of our algorithm to achieve the best performance. The results are compared for two
rather diﬀerent citation networks: all American Physical Society publications and the set of high-
energy physics theory (hep-th) preprints. Despite major diﬀerences between these two networks, we
ﬁnd that their optimal parameters for the CiteRank algorithm are remarkably similar.

Due to their rapid growth and large size, many in-
formation networks have become untenable to navigate
without some sort of ranking scheme. This is particu-
larly evident in the example of the World Wide Web, a
network of pages connected by hyperlinks. A successful
solution to the problem of ranking the Web is Google’s
PageRank algorithm [1]. Another class of information
networks that could beneﬁt from such a ranking method
are citation networks. These networks are comprised of
scientiﬁc publications connected by citation links.

Current methods of ranking publications based on the
total number of citations received are rather crude. They
are too “democratic” in treating all citations as equal
and ignoring diﬀerences in importance of citing papers.
One of the advantages of Google’s PageRank algorithm
is that it implicitly accounts for the importance of the
citing article in a self-consistent fashion. Authors of [2]
proposed using the PageRank algorithm to improve the
formula used to calculate the impact factor of scientiﬁc
journals. In [3] some of us directly applied this algorithm
to individual papers published in all American Physical
Society journals. This allowed us to discover a set of
highly inﬂuential papers (“scientiﬁc gems”) that would
be undervalued based on just their number of citations.
However, there exist signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the
World Wide Web and citation networks that suggest a
modiﬁcation of the original PageRank algorithm. The
most important diﬀerence is that, unlike hyperlinks, ci-
tations cannot be updated after publication. This makes
aging eﬀects [4, 5] in citation networks much more pro-
nounced than in the WWW. The other consequence is
the inherent time-arrow present in the topology of cita-
tion networks, due to the constraint that a paper may
only cite earlier works. This signiﬁcantly alters the spec-
tral properties of the adjacency matrix which lie at the
heart of the PageRank algorithm. In particular, the ab-
sence of directed loops means that the adjacency matrix

can have only zero eigenvalues.

The success of the PageRank algorithm can be at-
tributed, in part, to its ability to capture the behavior
of people randomly browsing the network of web pages.
Indeed, the PageRank of a given web page can be inter-
preted as the predicted traﬃc (quantiﬁed e.g., by the rate
of downloads) for that page if every WWW user follows a
random path of (on average) 1/α hyperlinks starting from
a randomly selected webpage. The assumption that a
typical web-surfer starts at a randomly selected webpage
might be not completely unreasonable for the WWW,
but it needs to be modiﬁed for citation networks. As all
of us know, researchers typically start “surﬁng” scientiﬁc
publications from a rather recent publication that caught
their attention on a daily update of a preprint archive or
a recent volume of a journal. Thus a more realistic model
for the traﬃc along the citation network should take into
account that researchers preferentially start their quests
from recent papers and progressively get to older and
older papers with every step.

In this work we introduce the CiteRank algorithm, an
adaptation of the PageRank algorithm to citation net-
works. Our algorithm simulates the dynamics of a large
number of researchers looking for new information. Ev-
ery researcher, independent of one another, is assumed
to start his/her search from a recent paper or review and
to subsequently follow a chain of citations until satisﬁed.
Explicitly, we deﬁne the following two-parameter CiteR-
ank model of such a process, allowing one to estimate
the traﬃc Ti(τdir, α) to a given paper i. A recent paper
is selected randomly from the whole population with a
probability that is exponentially discounted according to
the age of the paper, with a characteristic decay time of
τdir. At every step of the path, with probability α the
researcher is satisﬁed and halts his/her line of inquiry.
With probability (1 − α) a random citation to an adja-
cent paper is followed. The predicted traﬃc, Ti(τdir, α),

to a paper is proportional to the rate at which it is vis-
ited if a large number of researchers independently follow
such a simple-minded process.

While we interpret the output of the CiteRank algo-
rithm as the traﬃc, its utility ultimately lies in the ability
to successfully rank publications. High CiteRank traﬃc
to a publication denotes its high relevance in the context
of currently popular research directions, while the PageR-
ank number is more of a “lifetime achievement award” [3].
It is fruitful to compare the CiteRank traﬃc to a paper,
Ti, with the more traditional method of ranking publica-
tions, the number of citations received. Indeed, the two
are highly correlated; a result easily understood on the
basis that the larger the number of citations a paper has,
the more likely it will be visited by a researcher via one
of the incoming links.

However, the more reﬁned CiteRank algorithm sur-
passes the conventional ranking, by number of citations,
in its characterization of relevancy on two accounts. Like
the original PageRank algorithm [1][2], in CiteRank, the
popularity of papers is calculated in a self-consistent fash-
ion: The eﬀect of a citation from a more popular paper
is greater that that of a less popular one. A citation from
a paper that is “highly visible” will contribute more to
the visibility of the cited paper. Furthermore, the age of
a citing paper is intrinsically accounted for. The eﬀect
of a recent citation to a paper is greater than that of an
older citation to the same paper. New citations indicate
the relevancy of a paper in the context of current lines of
research.

An algorithmic description of the aforementioned
model can be understood as follows. The transfer ma-
trix associated with the citation network is Wij = 1/kout
if j cites i and 0 otherwise, where kout
is the out-degree
of the jth paper. Let ρi, the probability of initially se-
lecting the ith paper in a citation network, be given by
ρi = e−agei/τdir . The probability that the researcher will
encounter a paper by initial selection alone is given by
~ρ. Similarly, the probability of encountering the paper
after following one link is (1 − α)W · ~ρ. The CiteRank
traﬃc of the paper is then deﬁned as the probability of
encountering it via paths of any length:

j

j

~T = I · ~ρ + (1 − α)W · ~ρ + (1 − α)2W 2 · ~ρ + · · ·

(1)

Practically, we calculate the CiteRank traﬃc on all pa-
pers in our dataset by taking successive terms in the
above expansion to suﬃcient convergence (< 10−10 of
the average value).

In order to assess the viability of this ranking scheme
and to select optimal parameters (τdir, α), we need a
quantitative measure of its performance on real cita-
tion networks. Two real citation networks are evaluated.
Hep-th: An archive snapshot of the “high energy physics
theory” archive from April 2003 (preprints ranging from
1992 to 2003). This dataset, containing around 28,000
papers and 350,000 citation links, was downloaded from
[6]. Physrev: Citation data between journals published

2

by the American Physical Society [7]. This dataset con-
tains around 380,000 papers and 3,100,000 citation links
ranging from 1893 to 2003.

Of course, evaluating the performance of any ranking
scheme is a delicate, but often necessary, matter. One
way to select the best performing α and τdir is to optimize
the correlation between the predicted traﬃc, Ti(τdir, α)
and the actual traﬃc (e.g., downloads). Unfortunately,
the actual traﬃc data for scientiﬁc publications are not
readily available for these networks. However, it is rea-
sonable to assume that traﬃc to a paper is positively
correlated with the number of new citations it accrues
over a recent time interval, ∆kin. For lack of better in-
tuition we ﬁrst assume a linear relationship between ac-
tual traﬃc and number of recent citations accrued. This
corresponds to a simple-minded scenario in which every
researcher downloading a paper will, with a small proba-
bility, add it to the citation list of the manuscript he/she
is writing [8]. In order to compare CiteRank with actual
citation accrual, we constructed an historical snapshot of
the networks. In both cases, the most recent 10 percent
of papers are pruned from the network. The CiteRank
traﬃc, Ti, of the remaining 90 percent of the papers is
then evaluated and correlated with their actual accrual
of new citations, ∆kin, originating at the most recent 10
percent of papers. It is important to note the qualitative

A

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

α

2

4

6

B

8

10

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

2

4

10

12

14

6
8
τ
(year)
d

FIG. 1: The Pearson (linear) correlation coeﬃcient between
the number of recent citations accrued (∆kin) and CiteRank
traﬃc (Ti) is calculated over the parameter space of the Cit-
eRank model for the hep-th (A) and physrev (B) network.
Both networks exhibit peaks in correlation coeﬃcient in the
α-τdir plane. The highest correlation is achieved for α = 0.48,
τdir = 1 year in the hep-th network and α = 0.50, τdir = 2.6
years, in the physrev network.

and quantitative diﬀerences between the two citation net-
works considered. The Physical Review citation network
(physrev) is comprised of a large number (∼ 400,000) of
peer-reviewed publications acquired over a period close
to a hundred years. The high-energy physics archive
citation network (hep-th) is comprised completely of a

much smaller number (∼ 28000) of electronically sub-
mitted publication preprints, with no associated form of
peer review. Despite these signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the
nature of the networks considered, the general features of
their correlation contours are outstandingly similar. In
both cases, a single sharp peak in correlation is evident
for particular values of the parameters. The value of the
optimal parameters for both networks are:

hep-th: α = 0.48, τdir = 1 year

physrev: α = 0.50, τdir = 2.6 years

Remarkably, the value of α is nearly the same for two
rather diﬀerent networks considered here and is in agree-
ment with that proposed in [3] on purely empirical
grounds. The diﬀerence in optimal parameter τdir for
these networks is in agreement with the common-sense
expectation of faster response time (and hence faster ag-
ing of citations) in preprint archives compared to peer-
reviewed publications. Another feature of Fig.
1 is
that, in both networks, large values of the correlation
coeﬃcient are concentrated along a diagonally-positioned
ridge. In other words, the best choice of α for a given τdir
seems to rise linearly with τdir, a behavior that will be
revisited later in this text. The resultant CiteRank traﬃc
and corresponding ranking for the two citation networks
can be accessed here [9].

While the correlation contour plots shown in Fig. 1
are a promising indication that the CiteRank model of
traﬃc provides a good zero-order approximation to the
actual traﬃc along a citation network, they are to some
extent predicated on the assumption of a linear relation-
ship between actual traﬃc and ∆kin. One might readily
ask how this model fares in the absence of such an as-
sumption. While the assumption of a linear relationship
may be unreasonable, a positive, monotonic relationship
between these quantities is certainly expected. There is a
statistical correlation method precisely adapted for such
a situation, namely, the Spearman rank correlation. Un-
der this relaxed correlation measure, only the rank of Ti
are correlated with the rank of ∆kin. Numerical changes
in Ti that do not lead to reordering have no eﬀect on the
value of the rank correlation coeﬃcient. Another ratio-
nale for using rank correlations is that our ultimate goal
is ranking publications, not modeling the traﬃc. Thus,
we are currently not interested in individual Ti’s, but
only in their relative values. Spearman correlation con-
tour plots are constructed for both networks and shown
in Fig. 2. The optimal values for both networks are:

hep-th: α = 0.31, τdir = 1.6 year

physrev: α = 0.55, τdir = 8 years

These results roughly conﬁrm the prediction of α ∼ 0.5
from Fig. 1, however there is a more appreciable discrep-
ancy in τdir between linear and rank correlation for both
networks.

In both panels of Fig. 1, over a broad range of parame-
ters, the optimal value of α(τdir) for a given value of τdir

A

2

4

6
B

8

10

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

α

α

3

0.55

0.5

0.45

0.4

0.35

0.6

0.55

0.5

0.45

2

4

10

12

14

8
6
τ
(year)
d

FIG. 2: The Spearman rank correlation coeﬃcient between
recent citations accrued (∆kin) and CiteRank traﬃc (Ti) for
the hep-th (A) and physrev (B) network. Both networks ex-
hibit similar behavior. There are more extended regions of
good correlation relative to the linear correlation contours of
ﬁg. 1. This broadening is expected as a consequence of the
more relaxed correlation measure. The highest rank corre-
lation occurs for α = 0.31, τdir = 1.6 years, in the hep-th
network and α = 0.55, τdir = 8 years, in the physrev net-
work.

is positively correlated with τdir. This is an indication
that these two parameters are entangled. In fact, this is
to be expected as it is some admixture of the two param-
eters which leads to the exposure of a given paper to the
researcher. An intuitive picture of this entanglement can
be understood in terms of the penetration depth, which is
a measure of how far back in time a random surfer follow-
ing rules of the CiteRank algorithm is likely to get. The
penetration depth is aﬀected by both τdir - the average
age of the initial paper at which he/she started follow-
ing the chain of citations, and 1/α - the mean number of
steps on this chain of citations. For small τdir and large
α, the penetration depth is small, implying that only very
recent papers receive traﬃc. On the other hand, for large
τdir and small α, the penetration depth is very large, in-
dicating that most of the traﬃc is directed towards older
papers.

To better understand how α and τdir inﬂuence the age
distribution of CiteRank traﬃc, we performed the fol-
lowing quantitative analysis. Let Ttot(t) denote the to-
tal CiteRank model traﬃc to papers written exactly t
years ago. As described by Eq. 1, two distinct pro-
cesses contribute to Ttot(t). The ﬁrst is the “direct” traf-
ﬁc Tdir(t) due to the initial selection of papers in this
age group, which is proportional to exp(−t/τdir) [11].
The second is the “indirect” traﬃc Tind(t) arriving via
one of the incoming citation links. The latter is given by

0

10

−2

10

−4

10

−6

10

c
i
f
f
a
r
t
 
 
f
o

 
 

n
o
i
t
c
a
r
f

∞

t Ttot(t′)Pc(t′, t)dt′, where Pc(t′, t) is
Tind(t) = (1 − α) R
the fraction of citations originating from papers of age
t′ that cite papers of age t.
It should be noted that
Pc(t′, t) is an empirical distribution and, as such, is a
measured property of the citation network under consid-
eration. According to [5] and our own ﬁndings, Pc(t′, t)
is reasonably well approximated by the exponential form
1
τc exp(−(t′ − t)/τc). Taking the Fourier transform of the
equation Ttot(t) = Tdir(t) + Tind(t), we have

Ttot(ω) = Tdir(ω) + (1 − α)Ttot(ω)Pc(ω).

(2)

This equation is similar, in spirit, to the well-known ran-
dom phase approximation [10]. Solving Eq. 2 for Ttot(ω)
and taking the inverse Fourier transform, yields

Ttot(t) ∼ (τc−τdir) exp(−t/τdir)+(1−α)τdir exp(−αt/τc).
(3)
Thus, the traﬃc arriving at the subset of papers of age t is
given by the superposition of two exponential functions.
We are now in a position to better understand what de-
termines the optimal values of α and τdir. Open circles
in Fig. 3 show the age distribution of the number of re-
cently acquired citations, ∆kin, for papers in the physrev
dataset. The approximate CiteRank traﬃc, given by Eq.
3, is also displayed. It is calculated using the empirically
determined value τc = 8 years, optimal τdir = 2.6 years
and three values of α = 0.2, 0.5 and 0.9. As one would
expect, the proﬁle of h∆kini vs t best agrees with the Cit-
eRank plot for the optimal value α = 0.5 [13]. Fig. 3 also
provides some clues to the positive correlation between
near-optimal choices of α and τdir, visible as diagonal
“ridges” in Fig. 1A and B. Indeed, if the value of α is
chosen to be large, the contribution from the second term
is diminished; the use of a larger value of τdir could par-
tially compensate for the loss of CiteRank traﬃc to older
papers, and would thus be in reasonably good agreement
with the ∆kin data.

Another encouraging observation is that, like Eq. 3,
the age distribution of recently acquired citations shown
in Fig. 3 has two regimes characterized by two diﬀerent
decay constants of about 5 and 16 years, with a crossover
point around t = 15 years. Our interpretation of this fact
is that papers are found and cited via two distinct mech-
anisms: researchers can either ﬁnd a paper directly or
by following citation links from earlier papers. For each
of these mechanisms, the probability that a given paper
is found decays with its age but the characteristic de-
cay time for the direct discovery is shorter. While very
recent papers, especially the ones altogether lacking ci-

4

tations, are for the most part discovered directly, older
papers are mostly discovered by following citation links.

The optimal values of α in the two very diﬀerent ci-
tation networks considered are remarkably close to each
other.
In both cases it appears that, on average, the
length of chains of citations followed by a typical re-
searcher is close to 1/α ≃ 2. Since this chain includes
the original starting point, the length of around 2 means

direct
citations

10

−8
0

indirect
citations

40
50
age (year)

10

20

30

60

70

80

90

FIG. 3: The age distribution of newly accrued citations ∆kin
(blue) for the physrev network. Theoretical predictions [3] for
the CiteRank traﬃc are calculated for the optimal τdir = 2.6
and three values of α = 0.2 (dot-dashed line), 0.5 (thick solid
line), and 0.9 (dashed line).
In agreement with Fig.1, the
optimal value, α = 0.5, provides the best agreement with
∆kin. All curves are normalized so that the sum of all data
points is equal to 1.

that the average cited paper is just one link away from
the starting point. This raises the disconcerting possibil-
ity that many citations may be copied directly from the
initially discovered reference. Such citation copying was
recently proven to be a very common scenario [12].

Work at Brookhaven National Laboratory was carried
out under Contract No. DE-AC02-98CH10886, Division
of Material Science, U.S. Department of Energy. We are
extremely grateful to Mark Doyle, Marty Blume, and
Paul Dlug from the Physical Review Editorial Oﬃce for
providing us with the APS citation data used in this
work. We thank S. Redner and P. Chen for helpful dis-
cussions.

[1] S. Brin and L. Page, Computer Networks and ISDN Sys-

[2] J. Bollen, M. A. Rodriguez, and H. Van de Sompel

tems, 30, 107 (1998).

cs.DL/0601030

[4] D. J. De Solla Price, Science 149, 510 (1965).
[5] S. Redner, Physics Today 58, 49 (2005)
[6] This hep-th dataset was used in the KDD Cup 2003
http://www.cs.cornell.edu/projects/kddcup/.

[3] P. Chen, H. Xie, S. Maslov, S. Redner, physics/0604130

[7] The APS journals include Phys. Rev. Series I (1893-

5

1912), Series II (1913- 1969), and Series III (1970-
present). This latter series includes the ﬁve topical sec-
tions: Phys. Rev. A, B, C, D, and E. Also included are
Phys. Rev. Lett., Rev. Mod. Phys., and Phys. Rev. Spe-
cial Topics, Accelerators and Beams.

[8] It should be noted that we make no attempt to model

network growth in this paper.

[9] http://cmth.bnl.gov/~maslov/citerank/
[10] J. Jensen, A. Mackintosh, Rare Earth Magnetism: Struc-
tures and Excitations, 155, Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1991.

[11] Precisely speaking Tdir(t) in the CiteRank model is given
by Np(t) – the number of papers of age t – multiplied

by the exponential probability of selection exp(−t/τdir).
Since Np(t) itself often has approximately exponential
form with time constant τp, τdir used in the follow-
ing equations should be “renormalized” to ˜τdir = τdir ·
τp/(τp + τdir). However, τp is usually rather large (∼ 28
years in the PhysRev network). Thus except for very
large τdir’s this renormalization can be safely ignored.
[12] M.V. Simkin, V.P. Roychowdhury, Complex Syst. 14,

269 (2003).

[13] The apparent disagreement in the tail involves profound
dips due to the World War II and I [5], which of course
cannot be explained by any theoretical model.

