APS/123-QED

Topology and Evolution of Technology Innovation Networks

Sergi Valverde1, Ricard V. Sol´e1,2, Mark A. Bedau3,4 and Norman Packard2,4
1 ICREA-Complex Systems Lab, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Dr. Aiguader 80, 08003 Barcelona, Spain
2Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, New Mexico 87501, USA
3Reed College, 3203 SE Woodstock Blvd., Portland 97202, USA
4ProtoLife, Parco Vega, Via della Liberta 12, Marghera 30175, Venice, Italy

The web of relations linking technological innovation can be fairly described in terms of patent
citations. The resulting patent citation network provides a picture of the large-scale organization
of innovations and its time evolution. Here we study the patterns of change of patents registered
by the US Patent and Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO). We show that the scaling behavior exhibited
by this network is consistent with a preferential attachment mechanism together with a Weibull-
shaped aging term. Such attachment kernel is shared by scientiﬁc citation networks, thus indicating
an universal type of mechanism linking ideas and designs and their evolution. The implications for
evolutionary theory of innovation are discussed.

6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
0
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

PACS numbers: 87.23.Kg

I.

INTRODUCTION

Innovation takes place both in nature and technology
[1]. Either through symbiosis [2], tinkering [3] or de-
sign [4, 5] new functional structures and artifacts are ob-
tained. Such new entities often result from the combina-
tion of predeﬁned designs or building blocks, although a
completely new solution can also emerge. This is the case
for example of the replacement of vacuum tube technol-
ogy by semiconductors. However, the majority of techno-
logical (and evolutionary) changes take place by means of
a progressive path of change. Such steady and successful
transformation of designs is largely based on an extensive
combination and reﬁnement of existing designs.

A surrogate of the ways in which innovations take place
in time is provided by patent ﬁles. Patents are well-
deﬁned objects introducing a novel design, method or
solution for a given problem or set of problems. Addi-
tionally, they indicate what previous novelties have been
required to build the new one. In order to gain insight
into the global organization of the patterns of innovation
and their evolution in technology, here we study a very
large data base including all USPTO patents from 1975
to 2005 [6].

As it occurs with the fossil record for evolution, the
record of patents through time provides us with the op-
portunity of seeing how new inventions emerge and how
they relate to previous ones. A given patent will typi-
cally require new solutions and previously achieved re-
sults. Looking at how patents link to each other is the
simplest way of having a large scale picture of the pat-
terns and processes associated to the collective dynam-
ics of innovation unfolds [7, 8]. Many interesting ques-
tions can be formulated in relation to this: what is the
global organization of interactions among innovations?
Is this a repeatable pattern? How are similar classes of
innovations related among them? Do these patterns re-
spond to history-dependent rules or are instead describ-
able by means of simple models? These questions are
addressed here and it is shown that a standard statisti-

FIG. 1: From (a) to (f), evolution of a patent subset re-
lated to computed tomography. The hub in the center corre-
sponds to the precursor invention by G. Hounsﬁeld (US patent
3778614).

cal physics approach provides a good picture of how these
webs emerge.

The paper is organized as follows:

in section II the
data set analysed is presented. In section III the topo-
logical trends exhibited by the patent citation network
are discussed under the light of a model of graph growth
with aging (section IV). In section V our basic results are
summarized and its implications outlined.

II. PATENT CITATION NETWORKS

Previous studies have measured the value of an inno-
vation by means of the analysis of patent citations, i.e.,
the rate of receiving new citations. However, innovation
is an elusive notion that is diﬃcult to measure properly

and existing measures provide limited insight [7]. It is a
diﬃcult task to ﬁnd useful indicators for the value of in-
novations. In this context, we introduce patent citation
networks as an appropriate approach to the global anal-
ysis of the process of technological innovation. Recent
work in complex networks provides several models that
describe or reproduce structural features of natural and
artiﬁcial evolving systems. Here, we will show how inno-
vation can be described as a process of network growth
following some speciﬁc rules.
In particular, our model
provides a rigorous statistical test to assess the balance
between patent importance and patent age, i.e., Price’s
”immediacy factor” [7].

The set of patents and their citations describes a (so-
called) patent citation network G. The patent network
belongs to the general class of citation networks, which
includes the scientiﬁc citation network. Here, nodes
vi ∈ G represent individual patents and the directed link
(vi, vj) indicates that patent vi is a descendent of patent
vj. In order to illustrate the power of the network ap-
proach, we have re-analyzed the evolution of a well-know
patent dataset. Figure 1 shows the time evolution for
the subset of patents in Computer Tomography (CT),
from 1973 to 2004. A smaller subset of this dataset was
analysed in [13]. The ﬁgure indicates that some patents
receive much more citations than others. In particular,
the hub at the center corresponds to the very ﬁrst patent
in CT associated with its invention by G. Hounsﬁeld.

Interestingly, the network analysis reveals some other
patterns that cannot be easily recovered by other means.
For instance, in ﬁgure 1 we can appreciate the modu-
lar organization of the CT patents. Here we have used
Clauset et al. algorithm [14] to detect community struc-
ture in large networks. Roughly speaking, topological
modules are deﬁned as groups of nodes having more
links among them than with other elements in the graph.
Thus, patents belonging to the same module share a com-
mon color. Although we have not explored this problem
in detail, direct inspection of the networks shown in ﬁgure
1 reveals that the modular structure seems to correlate
well with shared functional traits. As an example, the
white module involves several related patents associated
with X-ray tomography.

Beyond speciﬁc patterns of patent evolution, here we
aim to detect universal trends in the global evolution
of the US patent system. The patent citation network
(PCN) analyzed here has N = 2801167 nodes and L =
18053661 links. Its time evolution from 1976 to 2005 is
shown in ﬁgure 2. The number of patents at a given time
t scales as a power law:

2

FIG. 2: Time evolution of the number of patents N (t) in
the USPTO dataset from 1973 to 2004.
Inset: Cumulative
number of patents on a log-log scale, showing a scaling N (t) ∼
tθ.

cal features of this network can be explained by using an
appropriate attachment kernel describing how successful
patents become more linked and how this preferential at-
tachment decays with age.

III. DISTRIBUTION OF PATENT CITATIONS

Citations are often interpreted as indicators of inno-
vation size or economic value [? ]. The distribution of
innovation size (deﬁned as the number of citations to a
patent) is skewed [8, 11, 12]. However, there is an on-
going discussion about the particular nature of this dis-
tribution.
In particular, there is no general agreement
whether it follows a log-normal or Pareto distribution
[12, 15] . Still, there are common patterns like the ex-
istence of some extreme values, which is consistent with
a power-law tail. We report similar features in the in-
degree distribution studied here (see below).

The in-degree distribution Pi(k) is equivalent to the
so-called distribution of number of patent citations. Fig-
ure 3A shows the in-degree distribution for the patent
citation network in 2004. Notice that Pi(k) is neither
exponential nor a simple power law.
Instead, we have
found that an extended power-law form ﬁts the in-degree
distribution very well:

N (t) ∼ tθ

(1)

with an exponent θ = 1.45 ± 0.06. Some recent papers
have explored the patent citation datasets at diﬀerent
levels, including a graph theoretical approach on a large
scale [9] or involving a more speciﬁc case study, such as
fuel cell research [10]. Here we will show that the statisti-

Pi(k) ∼ (k + k0)

−γ

(2)

where k0 = 19.46 ± 0.22 and γ = 4.55 ± 0.04. This ex-
tended power-law reduces to a power-law when k ≫ k0
and it degenerates to an exponential distribution for
k ≪ k0. The extended power-law distribution has been

related to a mixed attachment mechanism [18]. How-
ever, here we will show that this explanation does not
apply for the patent citation network. Instead, we pro-
pose that the extended power-law form for the in-degree
distribution stems from a combination of both preferen-
tial attachement and aging [19].

The evolution of complex networks involving both pref-
erential attachment and aging has been extensively stud-
ied. In particular, Dorogovtsev and Mendes (DM) deter-
mined analytically the scaling properties of the resulting
networks [19]. In the DM model, the rule of attachment
scales now as:

3

Π(k, τ ) ∼ kτ

−α

(4)

where τ = t − i indicates the age of the i − th node and
the exponent α (which is positive) weights how fast is the
aging aﬀecting the likelihood of attachment. Extensions
of this attachment probability kernel include accelerated
growth with Π(k, τ ) ∼ kβτ −α and exponential aging ker-
nel Π(k, τ ) ∼ kexp(−τ α) [18].

Finally, some models of scientiﬁc citation networks
take into account the simultaneous evolution of author
and paper networks [21].
In these models, the rule of
attachment behaves as:

Π(ki, τ ) ∼ kβ

i τ α−1e

α

−

τ
τ0 ”

“

(5)

when the time-dependent component follows a Weibull
form. Here, τ0 controls the rightward extension of the
Weibull curve. As τ0 increases, so does the probability
of citing older papers.On the other hand, small values
of τ0 indicate strong aging that favors recently published
patents [21]. Here we choose the simplest assumption
(preferential attachment β = 1) and consider the aging
function in eq. 5. Consequently, the average connectivity
of the i − th patent at the time t evolves according to the
following equation:

FIG. 3:
(A) The in-degree distribution for the patent ci-
tation network follows an extended power-law distribution,
−γ . Three distributions are displayed for three
Pi(k) ∼ (k+k0)
diﬀerent time windows, namely 1984 (leftmost), 1992 (center)
and 2002 (rightmost). (B) The in-degree distribution for the
subset of patents displayed in ﬁg.1 f (for computer tomog-
raphy) is roughly approximated by a scale free distribution.
The leftmost point indicates the central hub in ﬁg.1.

IV. EVOLUTION

Lets us assume that every patent has a unique iden-
tiﬁer 0 < i < t. Our model starts at time t = 0 when
there is only one patent in the network. From this initial
network, we add a new patent i at every time step that
references m previous patents. Two main forces drive
the evolution of the patent citation network. First, it is
natural to assume that the number of patent citations
(i.e., incoming links) is a surrogate of its relevance [? ].
Useful patents are more likely to receive further citations
than marginal inventions. Thus, the probability of receiv-
ing new citations should be proportional to the current
number of citations. This rule parallels the preferential
attachment mechanism of network growth [20]. Under
this rule new elements entering the system connect with
other nodes with a probability Π(k) that is proportional
to its degree, i.e.,

∂k(i, t)
∂t

=

mk(i, t)f (t − i)
t
0 k(u, t)f (t − u)du
R

(6)

where m is the number of links introduced at each step
(m = 1 is the DM model). Now we address the follow-
is the above equation consistent with the
ing question:
patent network evolution? In the following, we will esti-
mate the form of the attachment kernel (and the corre-
sponding α, β and τ0 parameters) for the patent citation
data.

First, we consider system size N as our time index
instead of real time t. This way we avoid any bias due
to the pattern of non-linear growth (1 and attach to the
standard formulation of network models. Then, eq. (6)
becomes:

Π(k) ∼ k

(3)

However, old patents tend to be less relevant in the con-
text of recent innovations: attachment rates decay as the
patent losses value. In particular, patents are released to
the public domain after some ﬁnite period of exploitation.

∂k(i, N )
∂N

=

mk(i, N )f (N − i)
t
0 k(u, t)f (N − u)du
R

(7)

Using ∂k/∂N = (∂k/∂t)(∂t/∂N ) and the time-

dependent scaling N (t) = Atθ, we have:

∂k(i, N )
∂N

=

1
θ

(cid:18)

N (t) − A)

1
θ −1

∂k(i, t)
∂t

(cid:19)

(8)

Now the whole time interval N is partitioned into
N/∆N time slots comprising the same number ∆N ≪ N
of patents. Here, N ≈ 2.8 million patents corresponding
to the time interval 1976-2005. The s − th time slot has
the same number of new ∆N = 105 patents.

4

FIG. 5: Estimation of the attachment rule for the patent
citation network at T1 = 2003. (a) Preferential attachment
function ﬁts a scaling-law g>(k) ∼ kβ+1 with β = 1. Each
curve corresponds to nodes having the same age. (b) Fitting
for the aging function f (τ ) predicts the Weibull distribution
described in the text with α ≈ −1.45. Each curve corresponds
to nodes having the same in-degree (k = 1 for white balls
and k = 5 for solid balls) . For every curve we have used
T0 = T1 − 1.

FIG. 4: The normalized attachment kernel Π(k, τ ) ∼ g(k)f (τ )
determined numerically for the patent citation network at
T0 = 2002.

To measure the attachment rule Π(ki, τ ) we monitor
to which old patent new patents link, as a function of
in-degree ki and age τ (recall that here τ is measured in
number of time slots). We have assumed that attachment
is the product of a preferential attachment function g(k)
and an aging function f (τ ):

Π(k, τ ) ∼ g(k)f (τ )

(9)

Following [22], we study the citation process in a rel-
atively short time frame (a time slot ∆N ). The large
number of nodes in the system (in the order of 106 nodes)
ensures that we will gather suﬃcient samples to recover
the attachment kernel. We divide the evolution of the
system in three stages: (i) the system before slot T0, (ii)
the system between slots T0 and T1 = T0 + 1 and (iii)
the system after T1. When a T1 node joins the system
we record the age τ and the in-degree k of the T0 node
to which the new node links. We count all the citations
made by new nodes between T1 and T1 + 1. The number
of citations received by nodes T0 from T1 nodes normal-
ized by the in-degree frequency P (k) is an approximation
to the attachment kernel (see ﬁg. 4).

Using our dataset, we have estimated that g(k) ∼ kβ
and found β = 1, which further validates our assump-
5A). Notice
tion of preferential attachment (see ﬁg.
that in our ﬁttings we have used the cumulative func-
k
0 g(k)dk to reduce the noise level. On
tion g>(k) =
the other hand, ﬁg. 5B shows the Weibull distribution,
R
which ﬁts very well the aging function f (τ ):

−α
f (τ ) ∼ ατ
0

τ α−1e

α

−

τ
τ0 ”

“

(10)

with an exponent α ≈ −1.45 and τ0 ≈ 40. An obvious
advantage of using the Weibull form is that in naturally
includes as limit cases both exponential and Gaussian
distributions.

The common structure of the aging term found here
and in the network of paper citations [21] suggests that
common patterns of organization and evolution might
be shared. The paper citation graph, obtained by look-
ing at the list of references included in each paper, is in
fact close to the basic rules deﬁning the patent citation
graph. In both cases, cross-links are associated to some
underlying set of features which are shared by patents or
papers. As it occurs with the patent case, new papers
are based on previous ones providing the background re-
quired to build a new idea. On the other hand, as new
ideas and concepts develop into well-deﬁned areas, they
will tend to attach less to more generic or older works.

Additionally, the observed modular organization which
might also contribute to deviate from the simple power-
law attachment assumed in previous theoretical studies.
What seems clear is that there might be some univer-
sal trends canalizing the growth of innovation networks,
whether scientiﬁc or technologic.

V. DISCUSSION

The patterns of innovation emerging in our society are
the outcome of an extensive exchange of shared informa-
tion linked with the capacity of inventors to combine and
improve previous designs. Even very original inventions
are not isolated from previous achievements. A patent
can be identiﬁed as an object which needs a minimum
amount of originality to be considered as truly diﬀerent
from previous patents. Moreover, to be obtained, it must
properly refer to related patents in a fair way. Such con-
straints make this system specially interesting since we
can wisely conjecture that it represents the expansion of
real designs through some underlying technology land-
scape. These designs can be just small improvements or
large advances. Our analysis provides a quantitative ap-
proach to this evolving structure using the approach of
statistical physics.

We have shown that the underlying rules of network
change for our system reveal a mixture of preferential
attachment favouring a rich-gets-richer mechanism to-
gether with an aging term weighting the likelihood of cit-
ing old patents. As the network grows, recent patents will
tend to cite recent designs (since innovation is likely to
involve redeﬁning recent inventions) and be less likely to
link to old patents. The consequence of this, as predicted
by previous mean ﬁeld models (refs) is that the expected
scaling law in the degree distribution associated to pref-

5

erential attachment kernels will be modiﬁed in signiﬁcant
ways. Here we have shown that the network of patents,
deﬁned by using the indegree as a surrogate of patent rel-
evance, scales as P (k) ∼ (k + k0)−γ with γ > 4. This is
not far from previous predicted scaling laws (DM) asso-
ciated to preferential attachment and power law aging (i.
e. f (t) ∼ t−α which predict P (k) ∼ k−γ(α) (with γ ∼ 4
for α ∼ 0.5). However, the humped shape of our aging
term (as described by the Weibull distribution) makes
necessary to modify these approximations.

As a ﬁnal point in our discussion, it is worth noting
that we have strong correlations among patents indicat-
ing a complex organization in modules. As shown by
the example in ﬁgure 1, together with the nonlinearities
associated with the attachment rules, there is some un-
derlying community structure in the patent network that
deserves further exploration. The emergence of modules
is a natural consequence of the specialized features shared
by related patents. But it might also reveal the structure
of the innovation landscape itself: new patents related to
previous ones can also be understood as improved so-
lutions that explore the neighborhood of previous solu-
tions. This view would provide a quantitative picture of
the topology of technology landscapes [23, 24]. Such an
evolutionary interpretation in terms of ﬁtness functions
will be explored elsewhere.

Acknowledgments

We thank Vincent Anton and Marti Rosas-Casals for
useful discussions. This work has been supported by
grants FIS2004-05422, by the EU within the 6th Frame-
work Program under contract 001907 (DELIS), by the
James McDonnell Foundation and by the Santa Fe Insti-
tute.

[1] Erwin, D. H. and Krakauer, D. Science 304, 1117 (2004)
[2] Margulis, L. and Fester, R. (eds.), Symbiosis as a source

[12] Scherer, F. M., Ann. d’Economie Stat. 49/50, 495

of evolutionary innovation. MIT Press (1991).

[13] Trajtenberg, M., RAND Journal of Economics, 21(1),

(1998).

172 (1990).

[3] Jacob F., Science 196, 1161 (1977).
[4] Sol´e, R.V., Ferrer-Cancho, R., Montoya, J. M. and

Valverde, S., Complexity, 8, 20 (2002).

E70 066111 (2004).

[5] Lienhard, J. H. How invention begins. Oxford U. Press

(2006).

[6] US

Patent
(http://www.uspto.gov/)

and

Trademark

Oﬃce

[7] Jaﬀe, A. B., and Trajtenberg, M., Patents, Citations
and Innovations: A Window on the Knowledge Economy,
MIT Press (2002).

[8] Kuznets, S., in Nelson, R. R., (eds), The Rate and Direc-
tion of Incentive Activity: Economic and Social Factors,
Princeton U. Press (1962).

[9] Csardi, G. et al., http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0508132.
[10] Verspagen, B. Eindhoven Center for Innovation Studies,

[14] Clauset, A., Newman, M. E. J. and Moore, C. Phys. Rev.

[15] Harhoﬀ, D., Scherer, F.M., and Vopel, K., in Grand-
strand, O., (ed.) The Economics of the Patent System,
Routledge (2003).

[16] Dorogovtsev, S. N. & Mendes, J. F. F., Evolution of Net-
works: From Biological Nets to the Internet and WWW,
Oxford University Press, New York (2003).

[17] Ball, P., Critical Mass: How one thing leads to another,

Arrow Books, (2004).

[18] Shao, Z.-G., Zou, X.-W., Tan, Z.-J., and Jin, Z.-Z., J.

Phys. A: Math. Gen. 39, 2035 (2006).

[19] Dorogovtsev, S.N., and Mendes, J. F. F., Phys. Rev. E.

62, 1842 (2000).

Working Paper 05.11 (2005).

[11] Scherer, F. M., Am. Econ. Rev., 55, 1097 (1965).

[20] Barabasi, A.-L., and Albert, R., Science, 286, 509 (1999).
[21] Borner, K., Maru, J. T., and Goldstone, R. L., PNAS,

[22] Jeong, H., N´eda, and Barab´asi, Europhys. Lett. 61, 567

[24] Kauﬀman, S. A. Investigations. Oxford U. Press (2000).

Press (1995).

101, 5266 (2004).

(2003).

[23] Kauﬀman, S. A. At home in the universe. Oxford U.

6

