6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
7
9
1
2
1
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Some recent attempts to simulate the Heider
balance problem

Krzysztof Ku lakowski

Faculty of Physics and Applied Computer Science, AGH
University of Science and Technology, al. Mickiewicza 30,
30-059 Krak´ow, Poland
E-mail: kulakowski@novell.ftj.agh.edu.pl
February 18, 2014

Abstract

The Heider balance is a sociological problem of a division of a com-
munity into hostile groups, where all interpersonal relations within the
groups are friendly and all relations between the members of diﬀerent
groups are hostile. Here we trace how the research of the process of
attaining the Heider balance has moved during last ten years from a
psycho-social to a computational problem.

PACS numbers: 87.23.Ge, 07.05.Tp
Keywords: social networks, sociophysics, computer simulation

1 Introduction

Who is enemy and who is friend? The skill to distinguish them was one of
most basic in the evolution of the human race, and still it is helpful. If the
surrounding world can be divided into two compact sets of friends and of
enemies, the situation is clear. However, often our friend is also a friend of
our enemy; can we trust him? Then we suﬀer from a cognitive dissonance,
what makes our life harder. To regain comfort, we are able to sacriﬁce a
friendship or sometimes a common sense; we are also able to believe to a
politician just because he claims he also believes in our worths. Then, the
Heider balance can concern people, ideas and media.

The problem has been formulated by Fritz Heider (born 111 years ago) in
1944 [1, 2] in terms of local triads. Assigning a positive or negative (friendly
or hostile) sign to a reciprocated relation between each two of the triad
members, we get three signs. Basically, there are four possibilities: (+,+,+),
(+,+,-), (-,+,-) and (-,-,-) ; for the sake of this discussion we have no reason
to distinguish (+,+,-) and (+,-,+) etc. Two conﬁgurations are balanced: in
(+,+,+) everybody likes everybody and there is only one group, in (-,+,-) one

1

person is hostile to the remaining pair of friends. Two other conﬁgurations
are unbalanced:
in (+,+,-) there is one hostile relation between two triad
members, still connected by friendship with the third person. In (-,-,-) all
relations are hostile, and it is somewhat non-logic for everybody why the
remaining two - both abominable - dislike each other.

As it was recognized by mathematicians [3], the attaining of Heider bal-
ance in local triads brings heavy consequences. Provided that relations exist
between each two members, it appears that the whole set of people is divided
into two hostile groups. In other words, the cognitive dissonance is removed
not only in local triads, but globally. The relations, friendly within each
group, become hostile outside; removing the cognitive dissonance of individ-
ual persons happens to be irrevocably disfunctional for the community. This
statement is the content of what is known as the structure theorem [3]. It
was generalized in Ref. [4] to include the (-,-,-) conﬁguration as a balanced
one; in this case more than two hostile groups can appear.

Although the stationary state is mathematically determined, it is far from
obvious how the social system evolves towards the balanced state. Within
the social psychology, most natural approach is the participating observation;
after some months, a report can be written with careful analysis of sequence
of events, supported by personal characteristics of the group members. In
mathematical modelling, the group members are transformed into nodes of a
graph, and the interpersonal relations - into links. Obviously, the sociophysi-
cists with their computer simulations and phase transitions spontaneously
aggregate into mathematical sociology, stretching in this way the deﬁnition
of social sciences over its former boundaries.

The aim of this text is to facilitate this invasion even further. To achieve
this, simple computational motifs are selected from some recent works on the
Heider balance. These motifs are listed below as subsequent sections. Some
questions seem to be shared by more than one approach:
Is the balance
always attained? What is the nature of its attaining? How to slow it down
or stop? What is the role of the group size? Is the ﬁnal state unique? If not,
what it depends on?

2 More than two clusters

The problem set in Ref. [5] is to look for a partition of the network as close as
possible to the given distribution of positive and negative signs of the links.
The input data is a network of N nodes and some directed links R between
them. The procedure is a random walk in the state space of the partitions.
During the search, the number k of clusters remains ﬁxed. The ﬂowchart is

2

as follows:
1. For given value of k select randomly a partition C of the graph nodes into
k clusters.
2. Find in the original network R the number Nn of negative links within
the clusters of C and the number Np of positive links between the clusters of
C. The work function is WR(C) = Nn + Np.
3. Select randomly a neighbour C ′ of the partition C, obtained either by
moving a node from one subset to another, or by interchanging two nodes
from diﬀerent subsets. Find the work function WR(c′).
4. If W (C ′) < W (C), accept C ′ as a current partition C.
5. Repeat steps 3 and 4 many times.
[5], an example of N = 18 nodes (see below) required
As reported in Ref.
a dozen of runs of the algorithm, each of 5500-6800 repetitions of steps 3
and 4. Applying the algorithm, one can obtain a set of partitions C(k)
which give minimal values of the work function. The output value of k
is where the work function gets its minimal value. However, as pointed
by the authors of Ref.
[5], it is possible that the partitions found are not
optimal; this thread is particularly relevant for large networks, which cannot
be investigated exhaustively. Also, even an optimal solution is not necessarily
unique.

As an example, the authors discuss the Sampson monastery data [6] on
the relationships between 18 young monks. These relationships were mea-
sured by Sampson at three consecutive times T2, T3 and T4. (the measure-
ment at T1 was done before a new group of monks appeared and therefore
these results were not relevant for further analysis). Each time, the monks
were asked to indicate names of three others which they liked most and three
which they disliked most. The relations at three times were written into three
relation matrices as 3,2,1 and -3,-2,-1 respectively. These data are conversed
to ±1. Obviously, the values of most links remained zero. The procedure
given above, when applied to the matrices, gave the results as follows: each
time, the number of clusters k = 3 gave minimal values of the work func-
tion. Further, the partition obtained at T2 as unique was consistent with
the psychological observation done by Sampson. Further, this partition was
reproduced when analysing the data at T3 and T4. The value of the work
function calculated for these optimal solution(s) decreased in time almost
twice.

The calculation was repeated when taking into account the value of the
links, not only their signs. This modiﬁcation was introduced via weights of
the links in the work function. The only diﬀerence in the results was that
the data for T4 gave two partitions; one the same as before and one slightly
modiﬁed. As indicated by the authors of Ref. [5], in general valued or signed

3

links make a diﬀerence; however, in the investigated case the results appeared
to be particularly robust.

3 Role of individuals reconsidered

More recently, an attempt was made to include the actions of individual net-
work members to the process [7]. The method of the calculations is discussed
in two stages. At ﬁrst, the authors describe the multi-thread aspect of the
model. The algorithm includes the decisions of the network members: each
agent tends to change the links directed from his node to his neigbours in
such a way as to reduce imbalance. To do this, one can modify the link state,
which can be negative, zero (no link) or positive. These individual decisions
are supported by a global process where a balanced network is found as close
as possible to the current conﬁguration [5]. This information is sent to all
agents and serves as a guide in the case of ambiguities; still, as indicated
many times by the authors of Ref. [7], the ﬁnal state obtained by the algo-
rithm varies from one realization to another, even if the initial state of the
networks was the same.

Although in the description of their method the authors clearly diﬀer
between the multiple thread model and the discrete event simulation model,
the algorithm applied joins features of both. The idea of the discrete event
simulation model is that instead of working in real time, it modiﬁes the states
of the links sequentially one by one. The sequence order is determined by
the algorithm as well; once a future modiﬁcation appears, it is inserted into
the priority queue. Once the structure is balanced both for individuals and
for the whole network, the calculation is stopped.

Main calculations of Ref. [7] are described in Section 4. The parameters
of the calculations are: the group size n (from 3 to 10), the initial probability
p of a negative link in the network, and the communication method. The list
of the possible methods includes four items: i) dyadic method, where only
a neighbour joined by the modiﬁed link is informed, ii) tell-friends method,
to inform only neighbours joined with the informer by positive ties, iii) tell-
acquaintances method, to inform all neigbours, iv) broadcast communication,
to inform all the network. These methods provide diﬀerent amount of infor-
mation for the agents about the actual state of the network; therefore we
get the diﬀerences in the percentages of agents which perceive the network
as balanced. Other measured quantities are: the number of decisions of the
agents needed to reach a stationary state, the level of the group imbalance,
measured by a number of links necessary to be changed to get a balanced
state, and the number of clusters in the ﬁnal partition, obtained or most

4

close to the stationary state.

Some of the results can be seen as obvious, as for example the number of
steps to get equilibrium increases with the system size. On the other hand,
the same quantity shows a maximum with the percentage of links which are
initially negative; this result has no clear explanation. Also, the level of
imbalance decreases with the same percentage, what seems to be a counter-
intuitive result. In the discussion, the authors refer to several sociological
threads, which could not be reﬂected in their simulation. In particular they
indicate, that in a society the process of attaining balance is usually pre-
ceded by a development of reciprocity and transitivity of human relations
[8]. Although the latter reference deals also with the Heider mechanism, the
simulation does not play important role in that text; therefore we do not
discuss it here. We only mention that the text reviews yet another set of
sociometric data (pseudo-fraternity data) of Newcomb [9, 10].

In summary, the authors state that any limitation of the simulation to
individual decisions of the group members, although possible, ”denies the
social aspect of the balance processes”.
Instead, they call for a a model,
in which ”both social choice mechanisms and the group partitioning process
are part of an actor’s cognitive processing.” More extensive discussion of
sociological principles of modelling networks can be found in [10]. However,
this discussion deals with the conceptual formulation of the theory rather
than with its mathematical or algorithmic formulation. Anyway, it seems
that the text [7] triggered oﬀ research on the dynamics of the process.

4 Monte Carlo dynamics

Despite the above mentioned warnings, a numerical proof that the balancing
process can be guided exclusively by individual decisions appeared in the
same year 2003 [11]. The authors investigated the dynamics of attaining the
balance state. They explained their motivation as follows: It is clear from
the structure theorem, that a balanced system is in an equilibrium, but how
we know that it ever attains this state? To deal with this dynamics, two
simulations are reported in Ref. [11].

For the ﬁrst one, the starting conﬁguration of the network is represented
by a random symmetric matrix of zeros and ±1 as the matrix elements.
These elements represent no relation, positive or negative relation respec-
tively. Then, one triad after another is inspected if it is balanced or not. If
the product of three bond signs is negative, the sign of one bond, randomly
selected from the three, is changed.
If a triad has one null relation, it is
corrected as to create a balanced triad. If there is more null relations, the

5

triad remains unchanged. In this way the authors inspected some thousands
of networks of 9, 16 and 25 nodes, each with 300 iterations. As the result,
they got that all investigated samples evolved to the balanced state where at
most two subgroups emerged. All bonds within each subgroup were positive,
and all bonds between subgroups were negative. Next, the size of the larger
group was usually larger when most bonds were positive in the initial state.
When most bonds were negative in the initial state, the sizes of two obtained
groups were approximately equal. According to the authors, this particular
results could be a mathematical artifact. Next result was that a relatively
small amount of negative relations in the initial state produced a splitting. In
general, the sizes of the emerging subroups varied from a sample to a sample
even if the initial proportions of the negative to positive to null bonds were
the same.

To investigate this particular result more thoroughly, the second simu-
lation was designed. By controlling the set of subsequent pseudorandom
numbers, the authors were able to investigate an inﬂuence of the initial state
and of the order of selecting triads to repair on the ﬁnal state. The simula-
tion was performed for two cases: i) in the presence of null links in the initial
state, and ii) for the fully connected initial state. In the case i) both initial
conﬁguration and the order of triads were found to be relevant. In the case
ii), however, the order of the triads to balance was found to inﬂuence neither
the size of the obtained subgroups, nor even their content. In other words,
the same nodes appeared in the same subgroups in the ﬁnal state, whatever
was the order of investigated triads.

This result is very particular, as one easily can ﬁnd an example when this
order does matter. Not to deal with a single triad, let us consider the case
of four nodes, each connected with each. If initially all links are negative, all
triads are to be balanced. The sequence of decisions can be, for example, as
follows: triad 124, link 12 changed to be positive; triad 234, link 23 changed
to be positive; triad 134, link 13 changed to be positive. We obtained a
balanced state 123 vs 4. Simple permutation of nodes (234, 34 changed; 231,
31 changed; 214, 14 changed) gives a balanced state 134 vs 2; and so on.
We have to conclude, that for some reasons no such example appeared in
the reported simulations, although each initial state was checked with 300
diﬀerent orderings.

Despite this question mark, the formulation of the problem given in Ref.
[11] opened a way for continuators. We will return to it in Sections 6 and 7.

6

5 Detecting communities

The Heider balance can also be seen as a member of a broad class of problems
of detecting communities. This subject is much too wide to be reviewed here.
However, at least Refs. [12, 13] should not be omitted, as they deal with two
sets of experimental data relevant to our subject.

Ref.

[12] reports a thorough analysis of the attendance register on 14
informal social meetings of 18 women in Natchez, Mississippi, in 1930’s. In
principle, the correlation between the attendance of particular women allows
to separate out two cliques. However, there are several possible methods
of this analysis, and the results remain ambiguous. Twenty one diﬀerent
methods were applied to these data, and the results were compared to each
other. Obviously, there is no argument that any clique appeared there, and
the ladies could be surprised or even angry if they knew how their behaviour
is interpreted. Then, the only criterion to evaluate this or that method is
the criterion of mutual accordance of the results. In this way, a method is
supposed to be the best if its result agrees with the largest number of results
In this competition, direct observation performed
of the other methods.
in 1930’s by ﬁve etnographers appeared to be somewhat less eﬃcient. Six
other methods got the highest rank. An earliest (1972) systematic method
was just to minimize uncertainty due to departures from some prescribed
division. This approach gave an optimal division. Other equally succesful
methods (1991-2001) relied mostly on algebraic eigendecomposition or on an
application of the genetic algorithm in the space of divisions, to maximize
e.g. correlation between some ideal division and the observed data.

Some of these methods allowed to reproduce not only the division, but
also the leaders of two ”opponent” groups. This evaluation was also the
subject of a more recent work [14], which refers to the network model of
the community. Once the system is driven to attain the Heider balance, the
centrality index is evaluated for each node as the appropriate component of
the eigenvector of the connectivity matrix to the largest eigenvalue. If the
sign is changed of the connectivity matrix elements between two blocks and
of the eigenvector components for one of the block, the eigenequation remains
true. Then, the value of the positive (negative) component of the eigenvector
indicates the position of a given node in hierarchy in ﬁrst (second) block or
group. The connection of the centrality index to the position in the social
hierarchy is not new; Ref.
[14] shows how this connection looks like in the
state of the Heider balance.

Other index of position of a node in the network is the betweenness - the
level of contributing in the transport of an information between other nodes,
[13], three deﬁnitions of
hence the term: ”how one is between”.

In Ref.

7

the betweenness are proposed. First deﬁnition (shortest-path betweenness)
is based on the calculation of the shortest paths between each pair of nodes
in the network. For each link, the betweenness is calculated as the number
of shortest paths which run along the link. Second index (random-walk
betweenness) counts how many random walkers pass through a given link.
To evaluate the third kind (current-ﬂow betweenness) one has to ﬁnd the
current along each link, when the source and sink are placed sequentially
at each pair of nodes. Assuming that some kind of sink is present also in
the case of random walk, Newman proved that the second and the third
deﬁnition are equivalent [13, 15]. After evaluating the index calculated with
one of these methods, the link with the largest betweenness is cut. Then the
betweenness of all remaining links are calculated again, and so on - until two
groups appear.

This algorithm was applied in Ref.

[13] to the example known as the
Zachary karate club. As described in [13], Zachary investigated social rela-
tions between 34 members of a karate club at an American university [16].
Zachary was able to write down these relations in the form of the 34 × 34
connectivity matrix, indicating who contacts with whom. During this re-
search, a conﬂict appeared between the administrator and the teacher, and
the club happened to divide into two groups. This division, i.e. the content
of both groups, was reproduced by the calculation of the authors of Ref. [13]
exactly when the random-walk betweenness was used. The calculation of the
shortest-path index misclassiﬁed only one node of the graph.

6 Continuous dynamics

As long as the relations between nodes are described with discrete variables,
the results do depend on the order in which the unbalanced triads are re-
paired. A simple example of this dependence was demonstrated in Section 4.
This ambiguity is removed if we use a set of diﬀerential equations, one equa-
tion for each link; then all relations evolve simultaneously. Such a set was
proposed in [17], namely dxij/dt = gij Pk xikxkj, where xij = xji describes
a symmetric relation between i and j, and the factor gij = 1 − (xij/R)2
assures that xij remains ﬁnite. In a fully connected network, the sum is per-
formed over all nodes k diﬀerent than i and j. Initial values of xij are drawn
randomly from the range (xm − ǫ, xm + ǫ). As a default, xm was set to be
zero. The departure from the balanced state was measured as the number
Ng of unbalanced triads. The calculations were performed for networks up
to N = 500 nodes.

As the result of the simulation, the state of the Heider balance was

8

achieved in all investigated cases. Typically for N > 100 the curve Ng(t),
initially ﬂat, decreased abruptly to zero at some time τ ∝ N −1/2. Near to
this time moment, the time dependence of xij also changed from a slow and
seemingly random changes within the initial range (−ǫ, +ǫ) to almost imme-
diate jumps to the limit values ±R. We remind that the deﬁnition of the
balanced state takes into account only the signs of xij, and not their absolute
values. Then the result on the ﬁnal polarization of opinions to ±R could be
treated as a supplementary information. In Ref. [17], this polarization was
compared to variations of public opinion in Poland on the vetting law in
1999.

Within the same approach [18], the phase transition was found at xm =
0.036 from the state of two ﬁnal clusters to one cluster with all x’s positive.
Other parameters were: N=100, ǫ=0.5, R=5.0. The time of getting equilib-
rium was found to have a maximum at xm = 0. This result was analogous
to the ﬁnding of [7]. Finally, the calculation scheme was applied in Ref. [19]
to two examples described above: the case of women of Natchez [12] and the
case of the Zachary karate club [16]. In the ﬁrst case, the calculation was
done with the initial values of xij equal to the correlations matrix calculated
for the attendance of the women on their meetings. The ﬁnal division was
the same as obtained by the six best methods, reported by Freeman in Ref.
In the second case, the result reproduced exactly the ’experimental’
[12].
partition, as observed by Zachary [16].

Recently, an attempt was made [20] to generalize the continuous descrip-
tion by an inclusion of asymmetric relations, i.e. for the case when xij 6= xji.
In some cases, long-living pseudoperiodic behaviour of xij(t) was found, with
the probability which increased with the number of nodes. During this kind
of the system evolution, the number of the unbalanced triads remains pos-
itive. Although the numerical simulation does not allow to state that in
a given case the Heider balance will never be attained, the observed times
to getting this balance are sometimes surprisingly long. The histogram of
this times seems to display a fat-tail behaviour at least for N=3, where a
relatively good statistics could be obtained.

7 Stable unbalanced states

The dynamics of getting the balanced state was investigated also very re-
cently in Refs.
[21, 22]. Numerical simulations was only a part of this
extensive study, largely devoted to the constructed rate equations. As the
present report is devoted to simulations, here we extract only a small part
of this work. The algoritm diﬀers between triads ∆j with j negative links,

9

then triads ∆0 and ∆2 are balanced, ∆1 and ∆3 are not balanced. If a ran-
domly selected triad is ∆3, one of its edges is changed and we get ∆2; if it is
∆1, it is transformed into ∆0 with probability p or into ∆2 with probability
1 − p. Alternatively, another version of the algorithm is used with the addi-
tional condition that the overall number of unbalanced triads cannot increase
during the simulation. In this case, some ”jammed” stationary states are ob-
served where the balance is not attained. These states can be compared to
local minima of energy in a complex energy landscape; the role of energy is
played by the number of unbalanced triads.

The authors obtained several numerical results which agree with their
In particular, the time to obtain the balanced
theoretical considerations.
state depends on the network size in diﬀerent way for p < 0.5, p = 0.5 and
p > 0.5. The probability of the jammed state is found to decrease with the
system size. A phase transition is observed from two balanced clusters to
one in the ﬁnal state, for the initial probability of positive links ρ0 ≈ 0.65.
Theoretical prediction is that the transition should appear at ρ0 = 0.5. For
ρ0 = 0, the two obtained clusters are more or less equal. This result reminds
[11], and therefore does not depend on a particular
the ﬁndings of Ref.
algorithm.

In conclusions, the authors refer to important historical coalitions in his-
tory of Europe in 1872-1907. Another example is the relationships among
major cultures (African, Hindu, Islamic, Japanese, Latin America, Sinic and
Western), inspired by the fameous Huntington theory on the clash of civ-
ilizations. Also, the authors indicate ways of further research in the ﬁeld:
indiﬀerent interactions, continuous-valued interactions, asymmetric interac-
tions, acceptance of triads ∆3 as balanced. At least some of these points are
already met by the followers in Refs. [23, 24], where the analogy is exploited
between the unbalanced networks and the frustrated spin glasses.

8 Summary

The list of approaches, provided above, can be treated as a set of exercises for
students, who would like to work in the interdisciplinary area. If this attitude
is more widespread, some methods and results can enter to the common
knowledge as a useful starting point. Example giving, let us mention the
case of a fully connected graph and all links negative as the initial state.
Once we expect that the Heider balance will be attained, it follows from
the symmetry of the problem that the appearing groups will be more or less
of the same size. What seemed to be an artiﬁcial result in Ref. [11], seems
natural two years later [21]. Another example is the application of the genetic

10

algorithm, mentioned in Ref. [12]. Once it is obvious that there is more than
one solution of the problem, its formulation in terms of optimization methods
is not a surprise. This is an argument to teach students of sociology not only
programming, but also methods of artiﬁcial intelligence.

Having passed this short tour, we can ask if there is something new in the
physicist’s view on the Heider balance? At a ﬁrst glance, the answer is no.
The list of mathematical methods reviewed of Freeman [12] contains already
an application of the genetic algorithm, and the agent-based modelling was
not founded by the physicists. One could imagine, that the ironic statement
of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe on mathematicians [25] applies well to what
the sociophysics brings to sociology. However, extracting irony out from
this sentence, we are left with the message with a strong optimistic charge.
The optimism is in the possibility of reformulation of a social theory in the
new language; in this case it is the language of statistical physics. And we
know that new language constructs new reality. It seems that what we do
in sociophysics is just preparing the way for new, completely diﬀerent and
maybe more succesful methods.

Acknowledgements. Thanks are due to Dietrich Stauﬀer for his posi-

tive stimulation.

References

(1944) 358-374.

Sons, New York 1958.

[1] F. Heider, Social perception and phenomenal causality, Psychol. Rev. 51

[2] F. Heider, The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations, John Wiley and

[3] F. Harary, R. Z. Norman and D. Cartwright, Structural Models: An
Introduction to the Theory of Directed Graphs, John Wiley and Sons,
New York 1965.

[4] J. A. Davis, Clustering and structural balance in graphs, Human Rela-

tions 20 (1967) 181-187.

[5] P. Doreian and A. Mrvar, A partitioning approach to structural balance,

Social Networks 18 (1996) 149-168.

[6] S. F. Sampson, A novitiate in a period of change: An experimental and
case study of social relationships, PhD Thesis, Cornell University, 1968.

11

[7] N. P. Hummon and P. Doreian, Some dynamics of social balance pro-
cesses: bringing Heider back into balance theory, Social Networks 25
(2003) 17-49.

[8] P. Doreian, R. Kapuscinski, D. Krackhardt and J. Szczypula, A brief
history of balance through time, J. Math. Sociology 21 (1996) 113-131.

[9] T. M. Newcomb, Interpersonal balance, in Theories of Cognitive consis-
tency: A source book, edited by R. Abelson, E. Aronson, W. McGuire,
T. M. Newcomb, M. Rosenberg and O. Tannenbaum, Rand McNally,
Chicago 1968, p. 28-51.

[10] P. Doreian, Event sequences as generators of social network evolution,

Social Networks 24 (2002) 93-119.

[11] Z. Wang and W. Thorngate, Sentiment and social mitosis: implications
of Heider’s balance theory, Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Sim-
ulation vol. 6, no. 3 (2003) (http://jass.soc.surrey.ac.uk/6/3/2.html)

[12] L. C. Freeman, Finding Social Groups: A Meta-Analysis of the Southern
Women Data, in R. Breiger, K. Carley and P. Pattison (eds.): Dynamic
Social Network Modeling and Analysis, The National Academies Press,
Washington 2003.

[13] M. E. J. Newman and M. Girvan, Finding and evaluating community

structure in networks, Phys. Rev. E 69 (2004) 026113.

[14] Ph. Bonacich and P. Lloyd, Calculating status with negative relations,

Social Networks 26 (2004) 331-338.

[15] M. E. J. Newman, A measure of betweenness centrality based on random

walks, Social Networks 26 (2004) 39-54.

[16] W. W. Zachary, An information ﬂow model for conﬂict and ﬁssion in

small groups, J. Anthropological Research 33 (1977) 452-473.

[17] K. Ku lakowski, P. Gawro´nski and P. Gronek, The Heider balance - a

continuous approach, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 16 (2005) 707-716.

[18] P. Gawro´nski, P. Gronek and K. Ku lakowski, The Heider balance and

social distance, Acta Phys. Pol. B 36 (2005) 2549-2558.

[19] P. Gawro´nski and K. Ku lakowski, Heider balance in human networks,

AIP Conf. Proc. 779 (2005) 93-95.

12

[20] P. Gawro´nski and K. Ku lakowski, A numerical trip to social psychology:
long-living states of cognitive dissonance, submitted (physics/0611276).

[21] T. Antal, P. L. Krapivsky and S. Redner, Dynamics of social balance of

networks, Phys. Rev. E 72 (2005) 036121.

[22] T. Antal, P. L. Krapivsky and S. Redner, Social balance of networks:
the dynamics of friendship and enmity, presented at Dynamics on Com-
plex Networks and Applications, Dresden, Germany, Feburary 2006
(physics/0605183).

[23] F. Radicchi, D. Vilone, S. Yoon and H. Meyer-Ortmanns, Reducing
frustration in spin systems: social balance as an XOR-SAT problem,
(physics/0608031).

[24] F. Radicchi, D. Vilone and H. Meyer-Ortmanns, Universality class of

triad dynamics on a triangular lattice, (physics/0610868).

[25] Mathematicians are like Frenchmen: whatever you say to them they
translate into their own language and forthwith it is something entirely
diﬀerent.

13

