7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
0
3
0
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Interplay between topology and dynamics in the World Trade Web

D. Garlaschelli,1 T. Di Matteo,2 T. Aste,2 G. Caldarelli,3 and M. I. Loﬀredo4
1Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Siena, Via Roma 56, 53100 Siena ITALY
2Department of Applied Mathematics, Research School of Physical Sciences and Engineering,
Australian National University, Canberra ACT 0200 AUSTRALIA
3CNR-INFM and Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Roma “La Sapienza”, P.le Aldo Moro, 00183 Roma ITALY
4Dipartimento di Scienze Matematiche ed Informatiche,
Universit`a di Siena, Pian dei Mantellini 44, 53100 Siena ITALY

We present an empirical analysis of the network formed by the trade relationships between all
world countries, or World Trade Web (WTW). Each (directed) link is weighted by the amount of
wealth ﬂowing between two countries, and each country is characterized by the value of its Gross
Domestic Product (GDP). By analysing a set of year-by-year data covering the time interval 1950-
2000, we show that the dynamics of all GDP values and the evolution of the WTW (trade ﬂow
and topology) are tightly coupled. The probability that two countries are connected depends on
their GDP values, supporting recent theoretical models relating network topology to the presence
of a ‘hidden’ variable (or ﬁtness). On the other hand, the topology is shown to determine the GDP
values due to the exchange between countries. This leads us to a new framework where the ﬁtness
value is a dynamical variable determining, and at the same time depending on, network topology in
a continuous feedback.

I.

INTRODUCTION

II. DATA SET AND DEFINITIONS

The globalization process of the economy is highlight-
ing the relevance of international interactions between
world countries. The world economy is evolving towards
an interconnected system of trading countries which are
highly heterogeneous in terms of their internal activity.
As many other socioeconomic and ﬁnancial systems with
heterogeneous interacting units, the global economy ex-
hibits complex structure and dynamics, and can there-
fore be studied exploiting the tools of modern statistical
mechanics.

A role of primary importance is played by the network
of import/export relationships between world countries,
or World Trade Web (WTW in the following). Recent
empirical studies [1, 2, 3, 4] have focused at the WTW
as a complex network [5, 6, 7] and investigated its ar-
chitecture. A range of nontrivial topological properties
have been detected [1, 2, 3, 4] and found to be tightly
related to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP in the fol-
lowing) of world countries [3, 4]. On the other hand,
the economic literature has recently dealt with the study
of the GDP per capita across countries, looking for pat-
terns and trends displayed by it. Some of these results
have pointed out that the GDP per capita displays com-
plex dynamical behaviour and a power-law distribution
across countries [8, 9].

In the present work we extend these analyses and ad-
dress the above points simultaneously. In particular, we
are interested in determining empirically the eﬀects that
the WTW topology and the GDP dynamics have on each
other.

The results of the present work are based on the em-
pirical analysis of a large data set [10] reporting the an-
nual values of the population size pi(t) and of the GDP
per capita zi(t) of each world country i for each year t
from 1948 to 2000, together with the annual amount of
money fij(t) ﬂowing from each country i to each coun-
try j due to exports from j to i between 1950 and 2000.
Trade, population and GDP ﬁgures are evaluated at the
end of each year. Since in the following we are inter-
ested in a simultaneous study of GDP and trade data for
each country, we restrict our analysis to the time interval
1950-2000 when both sources of information are avail-
able. We therefore set our initial time to t0 = 1950. Our
main interest is the total economic activity of each coun-
try, therefore we multiply each GDP per capita zi(t) by
the population size pi(t) of the corresponding country to
obtain the total GDP wi(t) ≡ zi(t)pi(t) of that country.
Trade data are expressed in current U.S. dollars (that
is, in terms of the value $t of one U.S. dollar in the re-
ported year t), while GDP data are available in current as
well as in 1996 U.S. dollars ($1996). The use of a standard
reference money unit such as $1996 factors out the eﬀects
of inﬂation and allows a comparison between ﬁgures cor-
responding to diﬀerent years. Therefore in the following
we rescale the trade data corresponding to each year t
to 1996 dollars. This means that wi(t) will represent the
real GDP of country i. A curve of the time dependence
of the ratio r(t) ≡ $t/$1996 of the value of current U.S.
dollars to their 1996 reference value is shown in ﬁg. 1.
In what follows, both fij(t) and wi(t) will be expressed
in millions of 1996 U.S. dollars (M$1996).

The number N (t) of world countries is monotonically
increasing in time during the considered time interval,
and it grows from N (1950) = 86 to N (2000) = 190. This
means that the WTW is a growing network.
In ﬁg. 2

FIG. 1: Temporal evolution of the ratio r(t) ≡ $t/$1996 from
t = 1950 to t = 2000.

representing the number of countries to which i exports
and from which i imports respectively.

activity is therefore given by

Fi(t) ≡ f in

i (t) − f out

i

(t)

We ﬁnally deﬁne the adjacency matrix elements as

aij (t) ≡

1 if fij(t) > 0
0 if fij(t) = 0

(cid:26)

and the in-degree kin
try i at time t as

i (t) and out-degree kout

i

(t) of a coun-

kin
i (t) ≡

aji(t)

kout
i

(t) ≡

aij(t)

N (t)

Xj=1
N (t)

Xj=1

2

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

III. GDP: DEFINITION AND EMPIRICAL
PROPERTIES

The Gross Domestic Product wi of a country i is de-
ﬁned as (see for example www.investorwords.com) the
“total market value of all ﬁnal goods and services pro-
duced in a country in a given period, equal to total con-
sumer, investment and government spending, plus the
value of exports, minus the value of imports”. In other
words, there are two main terms contributing to the ob-
served value of the GDP wi of a country i: an endogenous
term Ii (also konwn as internal demand ) determined by
the internal spending due to the country’s economic pro-
cess and an exogenous term Fi determined by the trade
ﬂow with other countries. The above deﬁnition can then
be rephrased as

wi(t) ≡ Ii(t) + Fi(t)

(7)

where Fi(t) is deﬁned by eqs.(1), (2) and (3). The above
deﬁnition anticipates that the GDP is strongly aﬀected
by the structure of the WTW. The characterization of
the interplay between the GDP dynamics and the WTW
topology is the main subject of the present work. Be-
fore addressing this issue in detail, we ﬁrst report in this
section some empirical properties of the GDP.

A fundamental macroeconomic question is: how is the
GDP distributed across world countries? To address this
point we consider the distribution of the rescaled quantity

FIG. 2: Temporal evolution of the number of world countries
N (t) from t = 1950 to t = 2000.

we plot the time evolution of N (t). The reason for the
increase of N (t) between 1960 and 1990 is mainly due
to the declaration of independence of several countries,
while the steep increase around 1990-1992 is due to the
origin of many separate states from the former Soviet
Union.

The total trade value of exports and imports by i
to/from all other countries will be denoted by f in(t) and
f out(t) respectively, and it can be expressed as

f in
i (t) ≡

fji(t)

f out
i

(t) ≡

fij(t)

N (t)

Xj=1
N (t)

Xj=1

xi(t) ≡

wi(t)
hw(t)i

(1)

(2)

where hwi ≡ wT /N is the average GDP and wT (t) ≡
N (t)
i=1 wi(t) is the total one. In ﬁg. (3) we report the

cumulative distribution
P

(8)

(9)

ρ>(x) ≡

ρ(x′)dx′

∞

Z
x

The net amount of incoming money due to the trading

3

IV. EFFECTS OF THE GDP ON THE WTW

In a recent work [3] it was shown that the topology of
the WTW, which is encapsulated in its adjacency ma-
trix aij deﬁned in eq.(4), strongly depends on the GDP
values wi. Indeed, the problem can be mapped onto the
so-called ﬁtness model [11, 12] where it is assumed that
the probability pij for a link from i to j is a function
p(xi, xj) of the values of a ﬁtness variable x assigned to
each vertex and drawn from a given distribution. The
importance of this model relies in the possibility to write
all the expected topological properties of the network
(whose speciﬁcation requires in principle the knowledge
of the N 2 entries of its adjacency matrix) in terms of only
N ﬁtness values. Several topological properties includ-
ing the degree distribution, the degree correlations and
the clustering hierarchy were shown to be determined by
the GDP distribution [3]. Moreover, an additional un-
derstanding of the WTW as a directed network comes
from the study of its reciprocity [13], which represents
the strong tendency of the network to form pairs of mu-
tual links pointing in opposite directions between two
vertices. In this case too, the observed reciprocity struc-
ture can be traced back to the GDP values [14]. All
these results were also shown to be robust in time and
to be displayed by all snapshots of the WTW [4]. In this
section we summarize and further extend these analyses.
Combining the results presented in refs.[3, 13, 14], the
probability that at time t a link exists from i to j (aij =
1) is empirically found to be

pt[xi(t), xj (t)] =

α(t)xi(t)xj (t)
1 + β(t)xi(t)xj (t)

(12)

where xi is the rescaled GDP deﬁned in eq.(8) and the
parameters α(t) and β(t) can be ﬁxed by imposing that
the expected number of links

Lexp(t) =

pt[xi(t), xj (t)]

(13)

Xi6=j

equals its empirical value [3]

L(t) =

aij (t)

Xi6=j

(14)

and that the expected number of reciprocated links [13,
14]

L↔

exp(t) =

Xi6=j

pt[xi(t), xj (t)]pt[xj(t), xi(t)]

(15)

equals its observed value [3, 4, 13, 14]

L↔(t) =

aij(t)aji(t)

(16)

Xi6=j

This particular structure of the WTW topology can be
tested by comparing various expected topological prop-
erties with the empirical ones. For instance, we can com-
pare the empirical and the theoretical plots of vertex de-
grees (at time t) versus their rescaled GDP xi(t) [3]. Note

FIG. 3: Normalized cumulative distribution of the relative
GDP xi(t) ≡ wi(t)/hwi(t) for all world countries at four dif-
ferent snapshots.
Inset: the same data plotted in terms of
the rescaled quantity yi(t) ≡ wi(t)/wT (t) = xi(t)/N (t) for
the transition region to a power-law curve.

for four diﬀerent years in the time interval considered.
The right tail of the distribution roughly follows a
straight line in log-log axes, corresponding to a power-
law curve

ρ>(x) ∝ x1−α

(10)

with exponent 1 − α = −1, which indicates a tail in the
GDP probability distribution ρ(x) ∝ x−α with α = 2.
This behaviour is qualitatively similar to the power-law
character of the per capita GDP distribution [8, 9].

Moreover, it can be seen that the cumulative distribu-
tion departs from the power-law behaviour in the small
x region, and that the value x∗ where this happens is
larger as time increases. However, if xi(t) is rescaled to

yi(t) ≡

wi(t)
wT (t)

=

xi(t)
N (t)

(11)

then the point y∗ = x∗/N ≈ 0.003 where the power-law
tail of the distribution starts is approximately constant
in time (see inset of ﬁg. 3). This suggests that the tem-
poral change of x∗ is due to the variation of N (t) aﬀect-
ing hw(t)i and not to other factors. This is because the
temporal variation of N (t) aﬀects the average-dependent
quantities such as x: note that, while for a system with a
ﬁxed number N of units wT would be simply proportional
to the average value hwi, for our system with a varying
number of countries the two quantities can be very dif-
ferent. In particular, the average values of the quantities
of interest may display sudden jumps due to the steep
increase of N (t) rather than to genuine variations of the
quantities themselves.

4

ρ(x) [11]. The same is true for any other expected topo-
logical property [11, 12]. This shows very clearly that the
WTW topology crucially depends on the GDP distribu-
tion ρ(x) shown in ﬁg.3.

FIG. 4: Plot of the rescaled degrees versus the rescaled GDP
at four diﬀerent years, and comparison with the expected
trend.

that since pt[xi(t), xj (t)] is symmetric under the exchange
of i and j, at any given time the expected in-degree and
the expected out-degree of a vertex i are equal (and this
is indeed observed in real data, as we now show). We
simply denote both by kexp

, which can be expressed as

i

kexp
i

(t) =

Xj6=i

pt[xi(t), xj (t)]

(17)

Since the number of countries N (t) increases in time,
we deﬁne the rescaled degrees ˜ki(t) ≡ ki(t)/[N (t) − 1]
that always represent the fraction of vertices which are
connected to i (the term −1 comes from the fact that
there are no self-loops in the network, hence the maxi-
mum degree is always N − 1). In this way, we can easily
compare the data corresponding to diﬀerent years and
network sizes. The results are shown in ﬁgs.4 for vari-
ous snapshots of the system. The empirical trends are
in accordance with the expected ones. Then we can also
compare the cumulative distribution P exp
> (˜kexp) of the
expected degrees with the empirical degree distributions
> (˜kout). The results are shown in ﬁg.5.
> (˜kin) and P out
P in
They conﬁrm a good agreement between the theoretical
prediction and the observed behaviour.

Note that the accordance with the predicted behaviour
is extremely important since the expected quantities are
computed by using only the N GDP values of all coun-
tries, with no information regarding the N 2 trade val-
ues. On the other hand, the empirical properties of the
WTW topology are extracted from trade data, with no
knowledge of the GDP values. The agreement between
the properties obtained by using these two independent
sources of information is therefore surprising. Also note
that all the sums in eqs.(13), (15) and (17) can be rewrit-
ten in terms of integrals involving only pt[xi(t), xj (t)] and

FIG. 5: Cumulative degree distributions of the WTW for
four diﬀerent years and comparison with the expected trend.

V. EFFECTS OF THE WTW ON THE GDP

The above results show that the GDP and its distribu-
tion determine many topological properties of the WTW.
As we anticipated, eqs.(3) and (7) suggest that the oppo-
site is also true, since the GDP is determined by the ﬂow
matrix fij representing the WTW as a weighted network.
Understanding the detailed dependence of the GDP on
the WTW is an intriguing but diﬃcult problem that is
currently unsolved. Here we suggest a ﬁrst step towards
its solution by proposing a possible framework to be fur-
ther explored in the future.

The way the structure of the WTW aﬀects the GDP
through eq.(7) is twofold: ﬁrstly,
its topology deter-
mines which are the nonzero entries of the adjacency ma-
trix aij(t) and therefore of fij(t); secondly, the nonzero
weights fij(t) themselves determine wi(t) quantitatively
through eq.(3). From the study of dynamical processes
on complex networks it is now understood in general
that the former, purely topological aspect has a primary
qualitative impact on the collective dynamical behaviour,
while the latter has mainly a quantitative eﬀect on the
dynamics. Now we show an example of the crucial role of
the topology in a paradigmatic case which also turns out
to be a good candidate for the modeling of our system.
Interestingly, the eﬀects of a nontrivial network topol-
ogy on the dynamics of wealth exchange has been ad-
dressed theoretically in a series of papers [15, 16, 17, 18].

In these works, the exchange of wealth is modeled
through a stochastic process taking place on an under-
lying network of agents. The most general choice which
has been proposed [17] for such a process is the following
evolution rule for the wealth wi of the i-th agent (with
i = 1, N ):

wi(t + 1) = wi(t) + ξi(t) + ηi(t)wi(t) +

+

[Jji(t)wj (t) − Jij(t)wi(t)]

(18)

Xj

where wi(t) denotes the wealth of agent i at time t, ξi(t)
is an additive noise term, ηi(t) is a multiplicative noise
term, and Jij (t) represents the fraction of agent i’s wealth
being transferred to agent j. The above model is there-
fore the combination of an additive and of a multiplica-
tive stochastic process occurring at discrete time steps
among the N agents.
It is general enough to suspect
that the combined dynamics of the GDP and the WTW
can be captured successfully by it. We now discuss how
the results presented in the literature can be exploited to
gain insight into this problem.

For the above model to be fully deﬁned, one needs
to specify the probability distribution for the stochastic
variables ξi(t) and ηi(t) as well as the matrix elements
Jij (t). Several choices have been explored in the litera-
ture. The most studied case is the purely multiplicative
one where ξi(t) ≡ 0 and ηi(t) is a Gaussian noise term
[15, 16, 18]. The opposite, purely additive case where
ηi(t) ≡ 0 and ξi(t) is a Gaussian variable has also been
considered [17]. The choices for Jij(t) in all cases assume
the following dependence on the adjacency matrix aij (t)
of the underlying network:

Jij (t) = qij(t)aij (t) =

qij(t) if aij(t) = 1
if aij(t) = 0
0

(cid:26)

(19)

i

[16] and qij = q/kout

The role of qij(t) is to distribute the wealth coming out
from i among its neighbours.
If all agents deliver the
same fraction of their wealth to each of their neighbours,
the choice qij = q/N with constant q is used [15, 18].
The choices qij = q/kin
[17] are
j
instead considered if the total wealth respectively re-
ceived or delivered by each agent is a ﬁxed fraction q of
its wealth, which is equally distributed among its neigh-
bours. The main point is then the speciﬁcation of aij (t),
on which also qij (t) depends. Here the crucial role of
the topology emerges. Several choices has been explored,
but in all cases assuming that the topology is held ﬁxed:
aij(t) = aij. In the purely multiplicative case ξi(t) ≡ 0 it
was shown [15] that on fully connected graphs (aij = 1
∀i, j) the rescaled wealth xi ≡ wi/hwi eventually ap-
proaches a stationary distribution displaying a power-law
tail with exponent determined by q and by the variance
of the distribution of the multiplicative term ηi(t). Note
that in this case all the above choices for qij become
equivalent since ki = N − 1 ≈ N . This also implies that
Jij (t) = q/N ∀i, j. The fully connected case is there-
fore a prototypic example showing that, irrespective of

5

the details, the wealth distribution approaches a power-
law curve. The opposite possibility is that of an empty
graph where all vertices are disconnected from each other:
aij = 0 ∀i, j. This clearly implies that Jij (t) = 0 ∀i, j. In
the purely multiplicative case, this model is easily shown
to generate a log-normal wealth distribution since log wi
is a sum of independent identically distributed random
variables, eventually approaching a Gaussian distribution
as ensured by the Central Limit Theorem. Therefore this
is the opposite paradigmatic case where, irrespective of
the model details, the wealth distribution displays a log-
normal form.

Interestingly, many empirical wealth and income dis-
tributions display a mixed shape with a power-law tail in
the large wealth region and a diﬀerent behaviour (which
in some cases is log-normal-like) for the small wealth
range [17, 19, 20]. This kind of behaviour is also dis-
played by the GDP distribution across world countries
as shown in ﬁg.3. Since all real networks fall somewhere
in between fully connected and empty graphs, it is in-
teresting to ask whether the observed mixed shape of
wealth distributions can be accounted for by the topo-
logical properties of the underlying network. This has
stimulated the exploration of the model deﬁned in eq.(18)
in the case of a nontrivial topology [16, 17, 18]. Remark-
ably, in the case of purely additive noise on scale-free
networks [17] and of purely multiplicative noise on het-
erogeneous networks with varying link density [18], the
wealth distribution has been shown to approach a shape
very similar to the observed one.

The above results allow to ﬁgure out a likely mecha-
nism for the GDP evolution driven by the WTW struc-
ture. Combining eqs.(1,2,3,7) yields the explicit deﬁni-
tion of GDP in terms of the import/export terms:

wi(t) = Ii(t) +

[fji(t) − fij(t)]

(20)

Xj

It is instructive to compare the above expression with
the model deﬁned in eq.(18). First of all, note that the
GDP is evaluated and publicly released quarterly as the
main indicator of the overall economic activity of a coun-
try. Based on the trend exhibited by the GDP at the
end of each period, each country plans suitable measures
to adjust its economic activity during the following pe-
riod. This means that the GDP evolves through discrete
timesteps in a way similar to the update rule deﬁned in
eq.(18). Then, note that the internal demand Ii(t) is an
endogenous term that does not depend on the GDP of
other countries, while instead the trade values fij(t) may
depend on both wi(t) and wj(t). Therefore the evolu-
tion of wi(t) must be the combination of an endogenous
and an exogenous dynamics. Finally, it is reasonable to
suspect that, due to the multiplicative character of the
economy (each country reinvests the income of the pre-
vious period in the internal activity as well as in the
trade relationships), the dependece of both the internal
demand Ii(t) and the trade matrix fij(t) on the GDP
values is linear as in eq.(18) with ηi(t) 6= 0. Therefore we

conjecture that a model similar to eq.(18) may capture
the basic properties of the dynamics of the GDP driven
by the WTW structure. This possibility will be explored
in detail in future papers.

Of course, in a realistic model for the coupled GDP
and WTW evolution, the strong assumption of a ﬁxed
topology (aij (t) = aij) that has been so far used in the
literature must be relaxed, and the time-dependence of
the interaction matrix Jij (t) in eq.(18) fully exploited.
On the other hand, we showed that the topology of the
WTW is at each timestep well predicted by the knowl-
edge of the values {wi}i as evident from eqs.(12,13,15,17).
Therefore the evolution of aij(t) is not independent from
the GDP values, and it should instead contain an explicit
dependence on them. This dependence should then be
plugged into the term Jij (t) in eq.(18). Viewed from the
point of view of network theory, this property leads us to
a novel framework where the network is shaped at each
timestep by the set of ﬁtness values [11], which in turn
evolve in a topology-dependent way through a stochas-
tic dynamics similar to that in eq.(18). The extension of
the current ﬁtness formalism to take these evolutionary
aspects into account is an intriguing problem to address
in the future.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

6

the empirical properties of the GDP distribution across
world countries can be traced back to the underlying
dynamical process of wealth exchange among countries,
which is mediated by the WTW. The emerging picture
is that of a discrete process where at each timestep
the GDP distribution is determined by the WTW as
a weighted network, and at the same time the WTW
topology is also determined by the GDP values. We
have thus suggested the need for a theoretical framework
where the network topology is determined by some hid-
den quantity, which is in turn an evolving variable (and
not simply a quenched one) whose dynamics is coupled
to the topology. The present work provides robust
empirical evidence for such a framework, highlighting
the need to further develop current models in order
to take evolutionary aspects into account. We have
proposed a paradigmatic class of stochastic models for
the ﬁtness variable that may suggest a possible way to
integrate the dynamics with the topology. The present
work represents a basis for a future understanding of
the details of this interplay in the case of the world
economy.
Such an improved framework would give
predictive results on extremely important issues such
as the economic power and interdependence of world
countries, but also on many other problems in social
science and biology where formally similar mechanisms
are at work.

In the present work we have reported a range of
empirical results and theoretical arguments highlighting
the interplay between the dynamics of the GDP and
the topology of the WTW. The topological properties
of the trade network have been shown to be determined
by the GDP of all world countries. On the other hand,

Acknowledgments

TDM and TA wish to thank the partial support by ARC
Discovery Projects: DP03440044 (2003), DP0558183
(2005) and COST P10 “Physics of Risk” project and
M.I.U.R.-F.I.S.R. Project “Ultra-high frequency dynam-
ics of ﬁnancial markets”.

[1] Ma ´A. Serrano and M. Bogu˜n´a, Phys. Rev. E 68,

[12] V. D. P. Servedio, G. Caldarelli and P. Butt`a, Phys. Rev.

015101(R) (2003).

[2] X. Li, Y. Y. Jin and G. Chen, Physica A 328, 287 (2003).
[3] D. Garlaschelli and M. I. Loﬀredo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,

E 70, 056126 (2004).

268701 (2004).

[13] D. Garlaschelli and M. I. Loﬀredo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,

188701 (2004).

(2005).

(2002).

1079 (2002).

(2004).

(2002).

[4] D. Garlaschelli and M. I. Loﬀredo, Physica A 355, 138

015101(R) (2006).

[5] R. Albert and A.-L. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47

(2000).

[6] S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes, Adv. Phys. 51,

[7] M. E. J. Newman, SIAM Review 45, 167 (2003).
[8] C. Di Guilmi, E. Gaﬀeo and M. Gallegati, Economics

Bulletin 15, 1 (2003).

[9] R. Iwahashi and T. Machikita, Economics Bulletin, 6, 1

113 (2004).

[10] K. S. Gleditsch, Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 46, 712

370, 49 (2006).

[14] D. Garlaschelli and M. I. Loﬀredo, Phys. Rev. E 73,

[15] J. P. Bouchaud and M. M´ezard, Physica A 282, 536

[16] W. Souma, Y. Fujiwara, H. Aoyama, cond-mat/0108482.
[17] T. Di Matteo, T. Aste and S. T. Hyde, in The Physics
of Complex Systems (New Advances and Perspectives)
p.435, eds. F. Mallamace and H.E. Stanley (IOS Press,
Amsterdam, 2004).

[18] D. Garlaschelli and M. I. Loﬀredo, Physica A 338(1-2),

[19] F. Clementi, T. Di Matteo and M. Gallegati, Physica A

[20] A. Banerjee, V. M. Yakovenko and T. Di Matteo, Physica

A 370, 54 (2006).

[11] G. Caldarelli, A. Capocci, P. De Los Rios and M. A.

Mu˜noz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 258702 (2002).

