7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
1
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
4
3
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Growing Trees in Internet News Groups and
Forums

B. Kujawski1,2, J. Ho lyst2 and G. J. Rodgers1

1 Department of Mathematical Sciences, Brunel University, Uxbridge;
Middlesex UB8 3PH; UK
2 Faculty of Physics, Warsaw University of Technology, Koszykowa 77, 00-622
Warsaw; Poland

Abstract. We present an empirical study of the networks created by
users within internet news groups and forums and show that they organ-
ise themselves into scale-free trees. The structure of these trees depends
on the topic under discussion; specialist topics have trees with a short
shallow structure whereas more universal topics are discussed widely and
have a deeper tree structure. For news groups we ﬁnd that the distribu-
tion of the time intervals between when a message is posted and when it
receives a response exhibits a composite power-law behaviour. From our
statistics we can see if the news group or forum is free or is overseen by a
moderator. The correlation function of activity, the number of messages
posted in a given time, shows long range correlations connected with the
users’ daily routines. The distribution of distances between each message
and its root is exponential for most news groups and power-law for the fo-
rums. For both formats we ﬁnd that the relation between the supremacy
( the total number of nodes that are under the node i, including node i)
and the degree is linear s(k) ∼ k, in contrast to the analytical relation
for Barab´asi-Albert network.

1 Introduction

One of the most important features of the internet is the opportunity it oﬀers
people to exchange opinions with one another. Now anyone can participate in a
discussion or debate on-line and the global reach of the internet allows a single
persons opinion to be shared with people from all over the world. Thus each of
us can now be a source of information, not only for our relatives and friends, but
for the whole world. We can oﬀer our opinion to a very wide range of people and
receive feedback on this opinion. Thus internet discussions are potentially impor-
tant in helping to shape people’s opinions and behaviour and in the spreading of
ideas and information. In this way the internet is a medium which is very diﬀer-
ent to traditional media such as newspapers, radio and television. The use of the
internet has lead to an explosion of interest within other academic disciplines
in phenomena such as social contagion, viral marketing and stealth marketing.
Despite this importance, scientiﬁc research into internet discussions has been
rather limited.

2

Bernard Kujawski et al.

There have only been a few scientiﬁc papers examining internet discussion
networks. Makowiec and Bykowska [1] considered the three most popular blog
web pages in Poland. They provided an analysis of the network structure of blogs
and gave a sociological explanation to the results. In related work, Zhongbao and
Changshui [2] examined the network properties of bulletin board systems (BBS),
which are similar to the news groups examined in this paper. They [2] studied
a network in which edges were between users, and were able to identify distinct
communities within the network of users. BBS and users networks were also
studied by Goh et al. [3], who found intercommunities and intracommunities
with diﬀerent topological properties. The intercommunity was a homogenous
system, in which members all knew each other, while intercommunities were
characterised by a power law degree distribution. Capocci et al. [4] investigated
the largest internet encyclopedia, Wikipedia. A bow-tie-like, scale-free structure
with almost neutral mixing was found. Only small and medium nodes exhib-
ited linear preferential attachment. Valverde and Sol´e [5] focused on technology
development communities, such as open source communities, by looking at e-
mail exchanges. Non-local growth rules based on a betweenness centrality model
were examined and compared with the empirical data. The temporal properties
of e-mail exchange groups were studied by Barab´asi [6].

Internet forums and news groups are similar to BBS networks, but in contrast
to previous work [1–3, 5], here we place an edge between messages and focus on
the network of ideas or opinions posted by users, rather than networks between
the users themselves. In this way we obtain tree like networks with a central
topic, the root node, and the surrounding threads.

In the last few years these has been much work characterising the topology
of real networks [7–13]. This work has shown that our world is more complex
than we had originally imagined and has lead to the development of the idea
of a complex network. The most signiﬁcant result arising from these studies is
that a power-law degree distribution appears to be very common in real complex
networks.

In this paper we examine empirically a variety of basic structural and tem-
poral properties of the internet discussion networks that are created by internet
users. The paper is organised as follows. In the next section we introduce the
diﬀerent types of internet discussions, and describe the scope of our empirical
study. In Section 3 we describe our results, both topological and temporal, before
summarising our ﬁndings in the ﬁnal Section.

2 Types of internet discussions

Almost all internet discussions take place through the medium of forums. Most
internet information portals, on subjects such as politics, accidents, sport, etc...,
include forums as part of their web site. New topics are introduced to these
forums on a daily basis. Some portals give people ﬁxed forums to discuss common
topics such as love, work and sport. Users cannot put un-moderated messages
into these forums; most forums have a person or computer program - a moderator

Growing Trees in Internet News Groups and Forums

3

- that acts as a referee for the comments posted, and rejects posts that are
deemed unsuitable.

Another type of internet discussion are news groups. These are run on servers
that normally contain an enormous number of ﬁxed topics. To become a mem-
ber of a news group one needs a computer program - a client of the news group.
Nowadays all e-mail programs like Microsoft Outlook or Mozilla Firefox have
such a client. The connection to the server is controlled by the administrator of
a server. Some servers are designed for anyone and others themed for a group
of people like students at a university, employees of a company, etc. The ad-
ministrator of a server can block access to the server for people that break its
rules.

A third popular medium of internet discussion is a blog. There are a number
of websites where people can establish their own blog, which usually takes the
form of a diary of their day-to-day life. Other people can discuss the blogs and
express their opinions about them to other readers or the owners of the blogs
themselves. The bloggers are usually able to place links to other blogs, which are
either on a topic related to their blogs or of general interest to them, on their
website. These links create a network of blog owners [1].

2.1 Typical construction of internet discussions

For a news group and an internet forum the topic of the discussion is a root node.
The threads that initiate new discussions are connected directly to the root node.
When people contribute to a forum they can either write a commentary on a
previous opinion or start a new thread. Every message is indexed by the name
of the author, its place in the hierarchy and its time of posting. In this paper
we treat each message as a node. We create a link between a message and a
responding or answering message. This procedure creates a tree-like structure.
Fig. 1 shows a typical structure of a small internet discussion.

We have investigated the network structure and temporal properties of 3

forums and 15 news groups, whose data was collected from two sources:

– The internet forum on the web site www.onet.pl
– The news groups on the server news.student.pw.edu.pl

In the case of news groups the people who can contribute to a discussion
is limited by the fact that only computers inside the university’s network are
allowed to login. Because of this only students and academic staﬀ have access
to these discussions and there are around 30, 000 of them each year. We did not
measure the number of active users of these news groups, but we suppose that
there are less than 5, 000.

The internet forum on www.onet.pl is part of the largest polish news portal,

which is used by around 50% of all polish internet users.

Almost all internet discussions that we have collected, were created at dif-
ferent time. However for internet forums the period of collected data is between
2001 − 2005 and for news groups the period is 2002 − 2005.

4

Bernard Kujawski et al.

Fig. 1. (a) The typical structure of an internet discussion. The black lines show links
between messages and the responses to them. (b) The tree-like structure of the small
news group Physic, N = 220 nodes.

3 Empirical results

We study empirically a number of properties of real internet discussions. Our
networks are trees and consist of messages, not users, so we are unable to study
properties such as the clustering coeﬃcient or to deﬁne communities. Similarly
it would be fruitless to study node mixing or the betweenness centrality, which
were studied in [1–3, 5]. Thus, the structural properties we examine are the de-
gree distribution, the average and maximal distance, the distribution of distances
between messages and their root nodes and the average supremacy [19] of each
node as a function of degree. The temporal properties we examine are the dis-
tribution of time between a message being posted and there being a response to
it, the activity time series and its correlation function. With the temporal prop-
erties we distinguish between network time; time in which one message is posted
in one time step and message i is added at time i, and real time; the actual
time that messages were posted in our experimental data. Where appropriate
we present results for both an internet forum and a news group, for the largest
and most representative examples.

3.1 Degree distribution

All the networks we examined were found to have power law degree distributions

p(k) ∼ k

−γ.

(1)

Table 1 lists the topics of these discussions, their size N , the exponent γ of
their power law degree distribution, the maximal distance Rmax from the root
node, the ratio of the number of threads n1 over the total number of messages N
and ﬁnally the average distance of all nodes in the network from the root node
< r >.

Growing Trees in Internet News Groups and Forums

5

The internet forums generally have a lower exponent γ than the news groups.
In particular, the exponents for forums are in the range 3.28 < γ < 4.24 and for
news groups 3.90 < γ < 5.84.

Fig. 2 shows a typical degree distribution for the forums and the news groups.
The networks have few nodes with high degree, even for the larger networks, with
only 7 networks having a maximum degree kmax > 30. For the news groups the
largest degree is around 20.

Fig. 2. The degree distribution for the internet forum Poland in the EU (a) and the
news group Humor (b). The exponents γ are γ = 3.53 for forum Poland in the EU (a)
and γ = 3.90 for news group Humor (b).

In all networks we examined the number of nodes with degree 1 was similar to
the number of nodes with degree 2, that is p(1) ≈ p(2). This seems to be because
people like to argue and preferentially create chain structures in threads, and also
because people also sometimes respond to their own messages. This behaviour
creates more nodes with degrees k = 2, k = 3, etc... and shifts the degree
distribution towards higher values of k.

3.2 Time interval distribution T (τ )

Internet users visit news portals to update themselves on the recent news, and
some of them will discuss this news in a forum. In most cases they will only
discuss the very latest news, and only very interesting topics will be discussed
by users over a long period of time. The same rule applies for messages, only
interesting or very controversial opinions are discussed for a long time period.
This is why messages age very quickly and are soon forgotten. The inﬂuence of
aging is the reason for the large exponent γ in these networks and for the lack
of nodes with large degree.

There have been a number of attempts to model the eﬀect of aging, see for
instance, [15–18]. The fundamental quantity in these models is π(k, t, τ ), the rate
of attaching a new node to a node of degree k and age τ at time t. All these
models assume that π(k, t, τ ) a separable function of the degree and the age of

6

Bernard Kujawski et al.

the node. In particular, Dorogovtsev and Mendes [16, 17] modelled this aging by
assuming that incoming nodes are linked to a node with degree k and age τ with
rate π(k, t, τ ) = A(τ )k, where A(τ ) is some aging function, given by

A(τ ) ∼ τ

−β.

(2)

They found that the degree distribution of this network remained power law,
p(k) ∼ k−γ in the large time limit but with an exponent γ that strongly depends
on the exponent β in the aging function [16].

Unfortunately, A(τ ) is not easily measured empirically, as attempts to verify
that some real networks were grown by preferential attachment without aging
clearly illustrate [20]. Instead, we have measured a related quantity, [21], the
time interval distribution. This is the distribution of times between a message
and a response, for all the internet discussions. More precisely, where a message
j, posted at real time tj, receives a response i at real time ti, we have studied both
the distribution of the real time interval τ = ti − tj, T (τ ) and the distribution
of network time interval i − j. The distribution T (τ ) is related to the degree
distribution at time t, p(k, t) via

T (τ ) =

w(k, t, τ )p(k, t)dkdt

Z

(3)

where w(k, t, τ ) is the probability that a node of degree k at time t waits
another τ timesteps before gaining an edge. This latter function contains, im-
plicitly, two temporal processes, the natural waiting time for a new edge which
exists in all growing network models, plus the eﬀect of the aging identiﬁed and
modelled in [15–18]. However, for 1 << τ << t, we expect that the eﬀect of the
former will be exponential in τ on T (τ ) whereas if there is appreciable aging,
this will manifest itself as a fat tail in T (τ ) for large τ .

In fact our results for real time show that in an internet news group mes-
sages age and have a power law T (τ ). In Fig. 3 we show that the time interval
distribution

T (τ ) ∼ [τ + τ0]

−δ.

(4)

The positive slope of the curve in Fig. 3a for small time intervals results from
the presence of the moderator in the forum www.onet.pl. The moderator has to
check each message and this takes some time. Fig. 3b shows that Eq. (4) gives
a good approximation to the empirical measurements.

In Fig. 4 we show the time interval distribution in network time and this
merits two observations. Firstly, there is a change in the time interval distri-
bution. For all news groups (but not for the forums) we obtained time interval
distributions with two regimes of aging. For each news group there is a charac-
teristic, cross-over time interval tc after which messages start aging faster. This
characteristic time is diﬀerent for each network.

Secondly, the shape of time interval distribution for internet forum is not
eﬀected by a moderator and exactly follows Eq. (4). This means that for small

Growing Trees in Internet News Groups and Forums

7

Fig. 3. The time interval distribution in real time for (a) the forum Poland in the EU
and (b) the news group Humor. The exponent δ = 1.25 for (a) and δ = 1.33 for (b).
The real time unit is 1 minute.

Fig. 4. The time interval distribution in network time for (a) the forum Poland in the
EU and (b) the news group Humor. The shape of Fig. (a) follows Eq. (4) with δ = 1.37.
Fig. (b) is described by composite power laws with exponents δ = 1.1 and δ = 2.18.

8

Bernard Kujawski et al.

time intervals messages age slower and for large intervals faster but the change
is smooth and without the critical point observed in news groups.

The power law behaviour of the time interval distribution was studied by
Barab´asi [6] for an e-mail exchange group. By simulating the types of activity
of internet users, it was shown that only the burst activity results in power law
distributions, A(τ ) ∼ τ −δ, where δ = 1. Fig. 4b shows that for small network
time intervals the index δ is close to 1. For all news groups δ ∈ (1.0, 1.5). Because
of the moderator the results for internet forums are disturbed, however the value
of δ = 1.37 is still close to 1 (Fig. 4a).

We also studied the relationship between the network time interval and the
real time interval. Of course these are related by the fact that the activity n(ti),
which is the number of messages that were posted in time t satisfying ti < t <
ti+1, can be approximated by n(ti) ≈ (i − j)/(ti − tj). Our empirical results show
that, as would be expected, on average the relation is linear with

n(ti)(ti − tj) ∼ ǫ(i − j)
with ǫ = 1.04 ± 0.02 for the internet forum Poland in the EU Fig.5a and ǫ =
0.96 ± 0.02 for the news group Humour Fig.5b.

(5)

Fig. 5. The average value of the real time interval multiplied by the activity as a
function of the network time interval for (a) the forum Poland in the EU and (b) the
news group Humor.

3.3 Activity

We deﬁne the activity of a news group as the number of messages posted in a
given time interval. In Fig. 6 we show the activity time series and the distribution
of activity for the discussion forum Poland in the EU. Here we have measured
the number of messages posted in one hour. As one can see, there is a variation
of activity over a wide range of scales.

The peak, in which 898 messages were posted in a single hour, corresponds
to the time when Poland was voting in the accession referendum to the EU. This

Growing Trees in Internet News Groups and Forums

9

Fig. 6. The activity time series (a) and the activity distribution function (b) for the
forum Poland in the EU.

hiatus can be seen in the activity distribution, corresponding to the points to the
right in Fig. 6b, away from the main curve. We examined the distribution of ac-
tivity for all our news groups, and found that all the distributions were fat-tailed,
with distributions that ranged from power-law to Kohlrausch, ∼ exp(−τ a), with
0 < a < 1.

We have measured the correlation function C(τ ∗) of the activity time series,

n(t), deﬁned by

∗

C(τ

) =

[n(ti)− < n >][n(ti + τ

)− < n >]

∗

(6)

imax

Xi=0

where ti = t0i and < n > is the mean number of messages posted per time t0
over the whole time series. We studied t0 = 1hour and t0 = 1day.

All the internet discussions indicate a correlation for τ ∗ = 24 hours, which
shows the daily routine of the internet discussion users (see for instance Fig.
7b). We also found a weak correlation for news groups on the time scale of one
week, which is probably connected to the higher activity over a weekend. This
is somewhat less pronounced, as Fig. 7a illustrates. Some news groups also show
correlations for very long times, for instance for τ ∗ equal to 180, 270 and 365
days. These were seen in news groups that are only used by students and these
long correlations are connected the academic holiday and semester structure.
There is an interesting correlation for τ ∗ = 12 hours in the forum Poland in
the EU. This correlation is generated by the before-after work activity of the
discussion users.

3.4 The distance distribution D(r)

D(r) is the distribution of the number of edges, between each node in the network
and its root node. For all the networks the maximum distances are small. Almost
all the news groups exhibit an exponential D(r), such as that illustrated for the
news group Electronics in Fig. 8b. Of the news groups, only Humor has a distance
distribution close to a power law.

10

Bernard Kujawski et al.

Fig. 7. The correlation function C(τ
news group Humor, with a time step t0 = 1 hour.

∗

) for (a) the forum Poland in the EU and (b) the

The distance distributions for forums are modiﬁed by the software used to
manage the forum, which only allows a maximum distance of r = 13. A message
that somebody wants to post to a message with r = 13 is added to previous the
message with r = 12. This results in the large value of D(13) seen in Fig 8a.
Nevertheless, despite this limitation the distance distributions can show power
law behaviour, as Fig. 8a illustrates.

Fig. 8. The distance distribution D(r) for (a) the forum Poland in the EU and (b)
the news group Electronics. The distribution for the forum has a power law behaviour
−υ with exponent υ = 1.73 and the distribution for news group has an
D(r) ∼ r
exponential behaviour.

The ratio n1/N (Table 1) shows how many threads are created as a fraction
of all posted messages. A small value indicates that internet users are focused on
the existing threads and they are prone to continuing the previous discussions.
Large values show that there is almost no discussion, users place an oﬀer or
question and expect only answer to them. A related parameter that describes
a discussion is the average distance from the root node < r > (Table 1). For
small value of < r > the discussion is not engaging and users probably just

Growing Trees in Internet News Groups and Forums

11

Fig. 9. The ratio of the number of threads n1 to the total number of messages N as a
function of the average distance from the root < r >. The curve is ﬁtted an exponential
function f (< r >) ∼ e

−<r>/<r0>, where < r0 >≈ 1.58.

exchange information. For large < r > vigorous discussions are taking place.
The ratio n1/N describes the behaviour of the internet users and the average
distance < r > describes the topological consequences of this behaviour. There is
a functional dependance between them and Fig. 9 demonstrates this. The values
of n1/N and < r > show the kind of discussion we examined, technical, where
people are interested only in exchanging goods, information and look for help or
theoretical, where people introduce ideas, share opinions and argue with others.
A good example are two news groups Games and Games.CS. The Games news
group is a general discussion about games, where < r > is rather small. The
news group Games.CS is dedicated to only one game fans, Counter Strike and
its value of < r > is much higher than for Games news group, which suggests
that the fans are more strongly engaging within the discussion.

3.5 The supremacy function s(k)

The supremacy si of node i is deﬁned as the total number of all nodes that are
not older than i and can be linked to it by a directed path (including the node
i). For tree-like networks this means that the supremacy si of node i is the total
number of nodes that are under the node i, including node i. In other words
the supremacy si is the total number of nodes in the sub-tree started by node i.
The supremacy function s(k) is the average supremacy of all nodes of degree k.
In [19] it was shown that for the Barab´asi - Albert model [14],

where m is a number of links created by an incoming node, and for trees,

when m = 1

s(k) =

m+1

m

m + 1 (cid:18)

k
m (cid:19)

+

1
m + 1

s(k) =

k2 +

1
2

1
2

.

(7)

(8)

12

Bernard Kujawski et al.

Fig. 10. Average supremacy s(k) against degree k for (a) the forum Poland in the EU
and (b) the news group Humor. (a) and (b) both follow linear functions with slopes
1.19 and 1.41 respectively.

For each network we measured the average value s(k) for a particular degree
k. Fig. 10 shows that for the internet discussions relation s(k) is not s ∼ k2, but
relation is linear s ∼ k. The result s ∼ k2, obtained for Barab´asi - Albert model,
which does not include aging of nodes. This suggests that the linear dependence
between supremacy s and degree k could be triggered by the aging of nodes.

4 Summary

Internet discussions are tree-like networks, whose degree distributions are de-
scribed by a power law function. The networks are growing in time and because
the posted messages become out of date naturally, the nodes are aging. For
news groups the distribution of the network time interval between a message
and a response has two scaling regimes. The small time interval regime probably
corresponds to responses within one session of the discussion, from people cur-
rently on-line, what corresponds with the burst activity studied in [6], and the
behaviour for large time intervals is generated by messages posted later by new
users arriving on-line. For the internet forums the time interval distribution is
described by T (τ ) ∼ [τ + τ0]−δ and shows a smooth behaviour.

The time correlations within the activity time series show that the activity of
internet discussion users is integrated with users‘ daily routines on both 12 and
24 hour scales (Fig. 7). These measurements could help us to deﬁne an optimal
time of operation for people interested marketing goods or services to internet
users.

The distance distribution exhibits exponential character for most news groups,
which means that discussions are not deeply embedded within larger tree struc-
tures. The results for internet forums on www.onet.pl show the intervention of
the software employed, which only allows a maximum distance r = 13 in its
forums. However the distance distributions for these groups exhibit a power law
behaviour. These results can be understood by considering the topics of these
discussions. The news groups contain mostly contain closely deﬁned, themed,

Growing Trees in Internet News Groups and Forums

13

discussions which are often very technical and frequented by experienced users.
Consequently answers are very short and directly address the problem. Thus,
the average distance < r > is small. In contrast, the internet forums have a
wide range of the users, who usually want to discuss and argue with others. This
attitude towards discussion creates large and deep tree structures.

Internet discussions are an important source of data within social sciences.
They allow the study of the topology of social connections and their temporal
statistics [1–5]. Our study are focused on the growing trees of messages, whose
structure and temporal statistics,as we have shown, are related to the subject of
the discussion and the day-to-day activities of users. Investigating the emerge,
aging and dying of topics in discussion networks should yield data on people’s
interests - what people like reading or commenting on. This should give insight
into the real dynamics of people’s opinion change and exchange.

Acknowledgement

This work was supported by two EC programmes, the Marie Curie Early Stage
Training NET-ACE (MEST-CT-2004-6724) and the NEST project CREEN (FP6-
2003-NEST-Path-012864).

14

Bernard Kujawski et al.

References

1. D. Makowiec and B. Bykowska, Acta Physica Polonica B 36, 2435 (2005).
2. K. Zhongbao and Z. Changshui, Phys. Rev. E 67, 036117 (2003).
3. K.-I. Goh, Y.-H. Eom, H. Jeong, B. Kahng and D. Kim, Phys. Rev. E 73, 066123

(2006).

4. A. Capocci, V. D. P. Servedio, F. Colaiori, L. S. Buriol, D. Donato, S. Leonardi and

G. Caldarelli, Phys. Rev. E 74, 036116 (2006).

5. S. Valverde and R. V. Sol´e, arXiv:physics/0602005 (2005).
6. A.-L. Barab´asi, Nature 435, 207 (2005)
7. R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Barab´asi, Nature 401, 130 (1999).
8. L. A. Adamic and B. A. Huberman, Science 287, 2115 (2000).
9. M. Faloutsos, P. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos, ACM SIGCOMM ’99, Comput. Com-

mun. Rev. 29, 251 (1999).

10. M. E. J. Newman, S. H. Strogatz, and D. J. Watts, Phys. Rev. E 64, 026118 (2001).
11. D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, Nature 393, 440 (1998).
12. F. Liljeros, C. R. Edling, L. A. N. Amaral, H. E. Stanley, and Y. Aberg, Nature

411, 907 (2001).

13. A. Broder, R. Kumar, F. Maghoul, P. Raghavan, S. Rajalopagan, R. Stata, A.

Tomkins, and J. Wiener, Comput. Netw. 33, 309 (2000).
14. A.-L. Barab´asi and R. Albert, Science 286, 509 (1999).
15. L.A.N. Amaral, A. Scala, M. Barthelemy, and H. E. Stanley, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

97, 11149 (2000).

16. S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes, Phys. Rev. E 62, 1842 (2000).
17. S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes, Phys. Rev. E 63, 056125 (2001).
18. H. Zhu, X. Wang, and J.-Y. Zhu, Phys. Rev. E 68, 056121 (2003).
19. J. Ho lyst, A. Fronczak, and P. Fronczak, Phys. Rev. E 70, 046119 (2004).
20. H. Jeong, Z. Neda and A.-L. Barab´asi, Europhys. Lett. 61, 567 (2003).
21. K. B. Hajra and P. Sen, Physica. A 346, 44 (2005).

Growing Trees in Internet News Groups and Forums

15

Table 1

N

No. Topic of discussion
Onet Forums
43027 3.53 13 0.118 4.127
1 Poland in the EU
2 Opinions of Poles
36479 3.28 13 0.103 4.062
3 Situation in Middle East 47075 3.37 13 0.048 5.701

γ rmax n1/N < r >

News groups

1 Trade
2 Politics
3 Humor
4 Oﬀ-topics
5 Linux
6 Pillory
7 Games
8 Games.CS
9 Programming
10 Music
11 Campus.Riviera
12 Campus.Ustronie
13 Electronics
14 Windows
15 Film

44266 5.23 24 0.517 1.905
11706 5.52 46 0.078 7.041
52525 3.90 76 0.204 3.534
21940 4.71 51 0.188 4.153
11049 4.87 25 0.208 3.234
40495 4.70 62 0.132 5.299
34080 5.37 30 0.293 2.811
18976 4.46 25 0.162 3.698
14560 5.50 25 0.261 2.948
12461 5.49 20 0.359 2.481
15431 5.08 33 0.326 2.821
31170 5.10 26 0.317 2.897
28199 5.75 18 0.364 2.329
13684 5.84 32 0.210 3.575
32923 5.16 20 0.306 2.783

Table 1. We measured 19 internet discussions, 4 from the internet forum www.onet.pl
and 15 news groups from the server news.student.pw.edu.pl. The columns contain the
name of the discussion, the number of nodes N , the exponent γ of the power law
degree distribution and the maximum distance Rmax from the root node. Next column
contains number of threads n1 over all messages N and the last the average distance
from the root node < r >.

