Proximity Networks and Epidemics

Zolt´an Toroczkai a,b,∗, Hasan Guclu b

aDepartment of Physics, University of Notre Dame, 225 Nieuwland Science Hall,
Notre Dame, IN, 46556
bCenter for Nonlinear Studies, Theoretical Division, MS B258, Los Alamos
National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, 87545

Abstract

Disease spread in most biological populations requires the proximity of agents. In
populations where the individuals have spatial mobility, the contact graph is gener-
ated by the “collision dynamics” of the agents, and thus the evolution of epidemics
couples directly to the spatial dynamics of the population. We ﬁrst brieﬂy review
the properties and the methodology of an agent-based simulation (EPISIMS) to
model disease spread in realistic urban dynamic contact networks. Using the data
generated by this simulation, we introduce the notion of dynamic proximity net-
works which takes into account the relevant time scales for disease spread: contact
duration, infectivity period and rate of contact creation. This approach promises to
be a good candidate for a uniﬁed treatment of epidemic types that are driven by
agent collision dynamics. In particular, using a simple model, we show that it can
can account for the observed qualitative diﬀerences between the degree distributions
of contact graphs of diseases with short infectivity period (such as air-transmitted
diseases) or long infectivity periods ( such as HIV).

Key words: epidemics, social networks, spatial dynamics, agent-based modeling,
scale-free network
PACS: 87.23.Cc, 87.23.Ge, 89.75.-k

7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
3
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
5
2
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +001 574 631 2618
Email address: z.t@nd.edu (Zolt´an Toroczkai).
URL: http://cnls.lanl.gov/∼toro (Zolt´an Toroczkai).

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

2 February 2008

1 Introduction

Epidemics is the disease of the crowds. It is the process where a certain state
of an individual is transferred to other individuals by transport through a
medium connecting the agents such that eventually a ﬁnite fraction of the to-
tal population possesses that state. In particular, if that state is an infectious
illness, epidemics can have major negative consequences on a population, and
thus the development of prevention and mitigation methods gain a crucial im-
portance. In order to develop eﬃcient strategies for prevention and mitigation,
however, one must understand the process of disease spread for the particu-
lar population in question. There has been considerable work devoted in the
past to the so-called compartmentalized models [1,2,3,4] where the individuals
are assigned one of the ﬁnite number of compartments corresponding to their
health state (such as Susceptible, Infected, and Recovered/Removed) com-
bined with a uniform mixing model for the disease transfer process for the in-
dividuals within each compartment. The fate of epidemics in this framework is
described by a set of coupled ordinary diﬀerential equations. While such an ap-
proach is capable of producing reliable high level predictions for some diseases
(such as inﬂuenza) it cannot provide detailed information about non-aggregate
variables, which is crucial for developing eﬃcient targeted vaccination and
quarantine strategies. Most recently, however, there has been considerable ef-
fort invested [5,6,7,9,10] in agent-based or individual based approaches which
build in-silico microscopic models of the population along with its dynamics.
After a statistical validation with real data, the agent-based framework is then
used as a test-bed for a number of diﬀerent scenarios for epidemics spread and
some of the possible vaccination and quarantine strategies. Although this can
be a useful tool for aiding decision making, it is much less amenable to theo-
retical analysis, the simulation itself being a complex system on its own right.
Essentially, an agent-based model is a learning system [11] whose structure and
parameters are set such that it reproduces the statistics of real world data.
Through the generalizing power of this system then one hopes to gain reliable
insight into data-scarce regions of the phase space. Since the level of detail
in agent-based modeling can be arbitrarily high, this approach, however, has
the promise of giving speciﬁc, high resolution answers to questions like: “Does
vaccinating teachers and children between ages 2 and 12 have more impact on
slowing disease spread than vaccinating cashiers? Which buildings should be
closed in order to stop disease spread?”, etc. To understand the sensitivities
in an agent-system for disease spread, and perhaps draw some more general
conclusions, one has to build minimalist models for analyzing the data pro-
duced by such large-scale simulations. This paper presents a simple framework
for understanding some of the topological features of dynamic disease contact
graphs, using data produced by a particular agent-based simulation, EPISIM
[5,6,7,8], developed at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL).

2

In this article we shall conﬁne ourselves to the case where disease is transferred
through a contact process between two individuals. Here contact is understood
in a fairly loose sense, only requiring that the two individuals be in the spatial
proximity of each other. The proximity distance required for disease spread
is certainly disease dependent, ranging from actual physical contact (such
as in the case of sexually transmitted diseases) through a couple of feet to
conﬁnement in a building with common ventilation system (airborne diseases).

Another aspect that we will be considering is the mobility of agents. In contrast
with, for example, the spread of viruses on computer networks which can
be considered as a ﬂow process on a static structure, most populations are
composed of mobile agents. As a result, the contact network resulting from the
“collision dynamics” of the agents is itself a dynamic entity. This is especially
an important aspect for human populations in dense urban areas. Currently,
urbanization is in an explosive stage [12]: the number of megacities (with over
ten million habitants) is estimated to increase from 14 in 1995 to 21 cities by
2015. By 2030 it is estimated [12] that over 60 percent of the world’s population
will live in cities. For example, the population of S˜ao Paolo (Brazil), the world’s
third most populated city, has grown from a population of 265,000 to 18 million
in the last 100 years. Almost half of S˜ao Paolo’s habitants were not born
there [12]. Large cities act like “magnets” for people living in rural areas or
smaller cities (especially true in Third World countries), since over half of the
gross domestic product in most countries is made of industrial and commercial
activities taking place in these cities [12], and thus they represent hopes for
prosperity. A recent mathematical model of aggregation accounting for this
eﬀect, was introduced by Leyvraz and Redner [13]. Under such circumstances
the problem of disease spread, due to the dense nature of the contact fabric
among people in cities becomes of real concern.

In the following we present a brief description of agent-based modeling using
EPISIM as an example. We recall some of the topological properties of the
contact network obtained by this simulation for the case of Portland, OR.
The key observation that we will be addressing in this paper refers to the
connectivity distribution of the people-people contact graph which seems to be
rather diﬀerent from other measurements of contact graphs such as the sexual
contact network measured by Liljeros et. al. [14,15]. We will then propose
a framework that can account for these diﬀerences in a unifying manner. We
conclude by discussions on the limitation of the model and possible extensions.

2 An agent-based approach to epidemics

The Transportation Analysis and Simulation System (TRANSIMS) [16,17,18,19,20]
developed at LANL is an agent-based, cellular-automata model of traﬃc in a

3

particular urban area (the ﬁrst model was for Portland, OR, USA). TRAN-
SIMS decomposes the transportation planning task using three diﬀerent time
scales. A large time-scale associated with land use and demographic distri-
bution is employed to create activities for travelers (activity categories such
as work, shopping, entertainment, school, etc.). Activity information typically
consists of requests that travelers be at a certain location at a speciﬁed time,
and includes information on travel modes available to the traveler. This is
achieved by creating a synthetic population and endowing it with demograph-
ics matching the joint distributions given in the U.S. census data. The syn-
thetic households are built by also using survey data from several thousands
of households, which are observations made on the daily activity patterns of
each individual in the household. These activity patterns are associated with
synthetic households with similar demographics. The locations are estimated
taking into account observed land use patterns, travel times and transporta-
tion costs. The intermediate time-scale assigns routes and trip-chains to satisfy
the activity requests. This is done by feeding the estimated locations into a
routing algorithm to ﬁnd minimum cost paths through the transportation in-
frastructure consistent with constraints on mode choice [19,20]. The third and
shortest time-scale is associated with the actual execution of trip plans in the
road network. This is done by a cellular automata simulation [17,18] through
a detailed representation of the urban transportation network. The simulation
resolves the traﬃc induced when everyone tries to execute their plans simul-
taneously resolving distances down to 7.5 meters and times down to 1 second.
It provides an updated estimate of time-dependent travel times for each edge
in the network, including the eﬀects of congestion, which it feeds then to the
router and location estimation algorithms, which produce new plans. This
feedback process continues iteratively until it converges to a quasi - steady
state in which no one can ﬁnd a better path in the context of everyone else’s
decisions. The resulting traﬃc patterns compare well to observed traﬃc. The
entire process estimates the demand on a transportation network using census
data, land usage data, and activity surveys. More information and including
availability of the software can be obtained from Ref. [16].

EPISIM [5,6,7,8] is actually one of the applications of TRANSIM and it is
built on top of that. Diseases such as colds, ﬂu, smallpox or SARS, are trans-
mitted through air between two agents, if they spend long enough time in
the proximity of each other, or in building with closed air ventilation. This
means, that we can assume that the majority of the infections will take place
in locations, like oﬃces, shopping malls, entertainment centers, mass transit
units (metros, trams, etc.). Thus, by tracking the people in our TRANSIMS
virtual city, we can generate a bipartite contact network, or graph, formed by
two types of nodes, namely people nodes and locations nodes. In the case of
Portland, there are about 1.6 million people nodes and 181,000 location nodes
and over 6 million edges between them. These are huge graphs, representing
considerable challenges for the measurement of their properties.

4

k

l

8 am

6 pm

Fig. 1. An example for how directed edges are deﬁned in the location-location graph:
k and l denote two locations, k is an oﬃce while l is a nearby caﬀe. The horizontal
axis is time and the thick lines denote the presence of a person p at that location.
This diagram could stand for: p was at k during mid-morning hours, then it went
to l for lunch, then back to k and then somewhere else (to doctor’s appointment)
then back to k then somewhere else, etc.

Let us denote by L the set of locations and by P the set of people. The people
and locations are indexed by integers, called person-id and location-id. The
vertex set of a graph G will be referred to as V (G) while the edge set will
be referred to as E(G). The degree of a vertex v ∈ V (G) is the number of
edges incident on v. The activities in the EpiSIMs graphs have a time-periodic
character. However, on average, people typically resume their activity patterns
after 24 hours and thus graphs corresponding to diﬀerent week-days a similar
to one another. The time labels to be deﬁned below are measured time intervals
for a duration of 24 hours and the graphs deﬁned also refer to this 24 hour
period. The temporally resolved bi-partite graph of people and locations is
denoted as (GP L, β), where the only edges present are between individuals and
the locations they visit. The vertex set is deﬁned as V (GP L) = P ∪ L. An edge
e ∈ E(GP L) is deﬁned by the ordered pair (p, l) where p ∈ P is the person-id of
the individual and l ∈ L is the location-id of the location which it visited. β(e)
signiﬁes a time label associated with the edge e ∈ E(GP L), and it is deﬁned as
the set of non-overlapping time intervals β(e) = β(p, l) = {I (1)(e), I (2)(e), ...},
given by I (j)(e) = I (j)(p, l) = [t(j)
in and
“out-time” t(j)
out to and from l of p. The reason for a number of diﬀerent time
intervals is that the same person can visit several times the same location
during a day (such as oﬃce - lunch - oﬃce, etc.). If two intervals I(e) and
I(e′) are non-overlapping, then we deﬁne I(e) < I(e′), iﬀ tout(e) ≤ tin(e′). We
consider two other types of contact networks: the people-people graph, denoted
by (GP , π), and the location-location graph, (GL, λ). In GP , an individual
u ∈ P is represented by one vertex. There is an edge e = (u, v) ∈ E(GP ) if
the individuals u, v ∈ P have come into contact, i.e., if ∃ eu, ev ∈ E(GP L) and
l ∈ L, such that eu = (u, l), ev = (v, l) and β(eu) ∩ β(ev) 6= 0. The time label
associated with this edge therefore is calculated by π(e) =
Sl∈L β(eu) ∩ β(ev),
composed of intervals of time when they have shared the same location (any)
during a day.

out(e)] between the “in-time” t(j)

in (e), t(j)

The location-location graph (GL, λ), is a directed graph, where every vertex
represents a location from L, and a directed edge e ∈ E(GL) is deﬁned by the
ordered pair e = (k, l), k, l ∈ L, if there is at least one person p ∈ P going from
k to l anytime during the day, see for an example Figure 1. Naturally, since a

5

person can be in a single location at a given time instant, β(p, k) ∩ β(p, l) = 0
(k 6= l). Thus e = (k, l) is an edge from k to l, if ∃ I (j)(p, k) ∈ β(p, k) and
I (m)(p, l) ∈ β(p, l) such that I (j)(p, k) < I (m)(p, l) and for ∀ I(p, n) ∈ β(p, n)
with ∀ n ∈ L \ {k, l}, either I(p, n) < I (j)(p, k) or I (m)(p, l) < I(p, n). An
entrance time of p at l coming from k, is obviously t(m)
in (p, l). Since this is
a continuous time, discrete event process, these entrance times into location
l of people coming directly from location k during a day, can be ordered
into a set λ(k, l) = λ(e), which forms the weight label of edge e in E(GL).
We are interested in entrance times to a location because this way we are
able to record when an infection enters a location and thus the time after
which possible infections can occur for people visiting that location. Figure

-2

10

-3

10
(k)

-4

10

PGp

-5

10

-6

10

1

10

100

1000

10000

k

Fig. 2. Degree distribution of the people-people contact network GP (see text for
deﬁnition) in EPISIM Oregon data. The measurement of the degree distribution
is done one a single instance of the GP (and thus GP L) graph. The contact time
threshold used was one hour. There are 5788 points in the data set and kmax = 8368.
The slopes of the straight lines are 1.13 and −0.58, respectively.

2 shows the measured degree distribution of the people-people contact graph
Gp keeping only those edges which come from time-stamp overlaps of at least
one hour. As one can see the degree distribution has an exponential cut-oﬀ
(at about k = 700) and a peak, not reminiscent of pure power-law (scale-free)
networks. Although the curve seems to have power-law behavior portions of
it, nothing really can be concluded based on this data, since this behavior
is only about over one decade. The exponential cut-oﬀ is a must, because
an individual cannot be in contact with O(N) other people during a day.

6

The graph integration interpretation that we will present in the next section,
however, identiﬁes some key ingredients that might be responsible for the
shape of this distribution.

3 Proximity networks

Some of the most diﬃcult questions in epidemics concern the spatio-temporal
dynamics, as opposed to looking at disease spread as a percolation process
on ﬁxed structures. Ref. [21] is a most recent attempt studying epidemics
as a branching process building eﬀective contact graphs with scale-free and
small-world behavior. This paper illustrates that the details of the dynamics
can have drastic eﬀects on disease spread by creating contact graphs with
heterogeneous structures.

As we have seen from the EpiSim example above, the true contact graph is a
dynamic structure with temporal behavior that can be encoded as time-stamps
associated with edges. If one neglects the time-stamps, the graph obtained is
the maximum contact graph, showing which individuals came in contact at
all, during a day. On the other hand, at every instant, the graph of contacts
is a set of disconnected small graph clusters showing which individuals are
in contact right at that moment. Naturally, the maximum contact graph is
much denser than the instantaneous contact graphs. Due to the mobility of
the individuals, the contacts are changing, and if one would like to know who
was in contact with whom over a period of time, we need to integrate or
collapse the instantaneous contact graphs in that time period. If our goal is to
produce an eﬀective contact graph for a particular disease, so that the disease
spread can be treated as a ﬂow process on this eﬀective graph, we need to
collapse the instantaneous contact graphs over the typical infectivity period
of an individual. For the sake of brevity we shall refer to the eﬀective integrated
contact graph as the proximity network of the disease. In case of aerial-born
diseases like SARS and smallpox the infectivity period is on the order of several
days, while for some sexually transmitted diseases, like HIV, it is much longer,
and can be on the order of years. In the former case the maximum degree of
a node is relatively small (constant compared to the system size) bounded by
the number of contacts an agent can possibly make in a short period of time
(days), whereas in the latter case the number of accumulated contacts (and
thus the number of possibly infected people) can be very large. In this latter
case is when we expect to have scale-free behavior for the degree distribution of
the contact graph. Indeed, several measurements on the distribution of sexual
interactions in human populations [14,15] seems to conﬁrm this expectation.
In the remainder of this article we show a very simple model for proximity
networks which can capture some of these observations, in particular the scale-
free character.

7

Let us denote the instantaneous contact graph at instant t by G(t). The time-
integrated graph, or proximity graph G(T ) is given by the union of all edges
of the instantaneous graphs from time 0 to time T . In other words, if A(t) =
{aij(t)} is the adjacency matrix of G(t), the adjacency matrix A(T ) of G(T )
is given by:

aij(T ) =

aij(t)

t=T

_
t=0

(1)

(2)

(3)

where a∨b = 0 if and only if a = 0 and b = 0, otherwise a∨b = 1, a, b ∈ {0, 1}.
The dynamics of the integrated network is determined by the dynamics of the
contact making process between pairs of agents i and j. Depending on the
nature of the potentially disease transmitting contacts the matrix elements
aij(t) might be subject to “exclusion constraints”. For example, in the case of
sexual contacts, the instantaneous graphs are made of a collection of dimers
Pj,j6=i aij ≤ 1, i = 1, ..., N
and/or isolated nodes. This induces the constraint
on the matrix elements of G(t). For diseases spread by air, the transmission
usually happens in locations which have a limited capacity. Assuming that all
agents within a location can be infected if at least one of them is infectious
(for example due to shared ventilation system), the contact graph within a
location is a clique. The constraints imposed on the instantaneous adjacency
matrix A(t) can be thus be formulated as:

(1 − aik)aijajk = 0 ,

for all

aij ≤ K ,

for all

X
j,j6=i

i, j, k ∈ 1, ..., N
i ∈ 1, ..., N

where K is the maximum clique size (maximum location capacity). The ﬁrst
of these equations is a necessary and suﬃcient condition for a graph to be
the disjoint union of cliques and the second limits the size of the cliques to
K. Equation (2) expresses the fact that all connected triplets must form a
triangle (if i and j are connected and j and k are connected, then i and k
are connected as well - transitivity). In the physics network literature the
alternative formulation of the same condition is that the clustering coeﬃcient
of G(t) is unitary.

Here we will not consider a full theory of dynamic proximity networks, that
will be developed elsewhere. Instead, we introduce the most simplistic model
of network growth which still reproduces the qualitative features of the obser-
vations in the beginning of this section.

The probability pij(T ) that nodes i and j are connected in the proximity
graph at time T increases for larger values of T . Assuming a uniform link
generation picture, the probability that in the next step a potentially disease

8

spreading connection/contact takes place between agents i and j is written
as ρgigj where the weight gi quantiﬁes the “gregariousness” of agent i, its
propensity to generate new links. Note that this model does not explicitly
resolve the exclusion constraints (2)-(3). One can think of the parameter ρ
eﬀectively incorporating the spatial information, which should be resolved in
spatial models for contact dynamics. The probability that after T steps nodes
i and j are connected is given by:

pij(T ) = 1 − (1 − ρgigj)T , T ≥ 1 .

(4)

The parenthesis in (4) represents the probability of nodes i and j not con-
necting in one step, and its T -th power is for non-connection during all steps.
One minus this probability is obviously the connection probability during any
of the steps 1, 2, ...., T . According to this, highly gregarious people will more
likely be connected to each other than less gregarious. They will also get con-
nected earlier than others. ρ is a parameter which makes ρgigj ≤ 1, but at
this point is a free parameter. If we want to stay close to the claim that in one
step a node does not accumulate more links than it is allowed by the exclusion
conditions, we need to consider ρ to be a small number. If all nodes have the
same gregariousness parameter g then we recover a growing binomial random
graph model and the degree distribution of the proximity graph will always
stay a Poisson distribution with a parameter that grows exponentially with
time until the graph becomes a complete graph. This is certainly expected,
given that there is no heterogeneity in the mixing among agents.

There are certainly many possible, more realistic extensions to our model, in
particular making the gregariousness coeﬃcients time dependent and taking
into account more explicitly the exclusion constraints. Time dependent gre-
gariousness coeﬃcients would correspond to cases where, for example, there is
an increasing cost of adding a link (because it involves traveling further away)
or the health state of the agent (e.g., infected or not) can modify their ability
to generate new links. Here we will only study the case where these coeﬃcients
are time-independent.

Under what conditions for the gregariousness distribution of a population
will we observe power-law (scale-free) degree distributions for its proximity
network? One expects that populations where all individuals have similar gre-
gariousness values no power-law should be observed for the degree distribution
of G(T ), whereas heterogeneous distributions for gi would likely generate dis-
tributions with a power-law regime in them. The expected degree of node i in
G(T ) is:

di(T ) =

pij(T ) =

h1 − (1 − ρgigj)T

i

N

X
j=1

N

X
j=1

(5)

9

P
k

kP

kP

kP

10

Fig. 3. Degree distributions of the proximity network for various distributions of
the gregariousness. a) constant g, (b) exponential distribution for g, (c) and (d)
power-law g. All networks have N = 104 nodes.

Pj gj)gi, i.e, it is directly
For small ρ, ρT ≪ 1, this is simply di(T ) ≃ ρT (
proportional to its gregariousness coeﬃcient. This certainly makes sense in a
social context since more gregarious people will have on average more con-
tacts than others. In this limit (small ρ, and not too large T values, such
that ρT ≪ 1) our model is similar to the Chung Lu model [22] of random
power-law graphs with expected degree sequences. The diﬀerence is that in
our case the gi-s are random variables drawn independently from a given
distribution, while in the Chung Lu model the node weights are prescribed
functions of their index. In the small ρ limit initially the graph will form dis-
connected clusters, but it does not strictly obey the exclusion conditions. As
time goes on the links accumulate on the proximity network and one can ob-
tain a regime where depending on the gregariousness distribution, scale-free
contact networks emerge. If the agents are not removed from the system, but
keep accumulating contacts, eventually a ﬁnite network will reach the com-
plete graph limit and stop there. If the infectivity period is ﬁnite, however,
the network will reach a steady state structure characteristic to the population
dynamics and the disease. This might be scale-free, homogeneous, or anything

in between.

Going back to the EPISIM contact network data we notice that this simplistic
model (see Fig. 3) reproduces qualitatively some of the key features shown
in Fig. 2. Although the EPISIM distribution has a sharp, exponential cut-
oﬀ, it shows a tendency of forming a power-law tail before the cut-oﬀ just
as in our model. In addition, it seems that the low-k tail shows a similar
power-law tendency, also in qualitative accordance with the data generated
by our simplistic model, see Fig. 3(d). With this model we can also generate
distributions (not shown) with small (including sub-unitary) exponents for the
power-law regime followed by a sharp cut-oﬀ, matching closer the distribution
in Fig. 2.

4 Conclusions

We presented the basis of a framework to account for the dynamics of contacts
in epidemic processes, through the notion of dynamic proximity graphs. By
varying the integration time-parameter T , which is the period of infectivity one
can give a simple account for some of the diﬀerences in the observed contact
networks for diﬀerent diseases, such as smallpox, or AIDS. Our simplistic
model also seems to shed some light on the shape of the degree distribution
of the measured people-people contact network from the EPISIM data.

We certainly do not claim that the simplistic graph integration model [Eq. (4)]
above is a good model for dynamic contact graphs. It only contains the es-
sential ingredients for such processes to produce a qualitative agreement with
some observations. We expect that further reﬁnements and extensions to this
picture, in particular deriving the link-probabilities in the dynamic proxim-
ity graph from more realistic contact dynamics should improve the agreement
between models and data.

Acknowledgements

The authors thank for support from the National Nuclear Security Adminis-
tration of the U.S. Department of Energy at Los Alamos National Laboratory
under Contract No. DE-AC52-06NA25396, and S. Eubank, for useful discus-
sions and availability of data.

11

References

[1] J.D. Murray, Mathematical Biology II, 3rd ed. Springer (2004).

[2] L. Edelstein-Keshtet, Mathematical Models in Biology, SIAM (2005).

[3] F. Bauer, C. Castillo-Ch´avez, Mathematical Models in Population Biology and

Epidemiology Springer, (2001).

[4] R.M. Anderson, R.M. May, Infectious Diseases in Humans, Oxford University

[5] G. Chowell, J.M. Hyman, S. Eubank and C. Castillo-Ch´avez, Phys. Rev. E, 68,

Press, Oxford, (1992).

066102 (2003).

[6] S. Eubank, H. Guclu, V.S. Anil Kumar, M.V. Marathe, A. Srinivasan, Z.

Toroczkai and N. Wang, Nature 429, 180 (2004).

[7] C. Barrett, S. Eubank, and M. Marathe, in Interactive Computing: A New
Paradigm, eds. D. Goldin, S. Smolka, and P. Wegner, Springer, Berlin (2006),
pp. 353.

[8] C. Barrett, S. Eubank, M. Marathe, H. Mortveit, A. Srinivasan, and N.
Wang, Proc. 15th annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, New
Orleans, 718 (2004).

[9] S. Riley, N.M. Ferguson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 12637 (2006).

[10] V. Colizza, A. Barrat, M. Barthelemy and A. Vespignani, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

USA 103, 2015 (2006).

(2006).

[11] N. Gilbert et.al. Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation 9(2)

[12] E. Zwingle, Natl. Geogr. Mag. 202 70-99 (2002).

[13] F. Leyvraz, S. Redner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 068301 (2002).

[14] F. Liljeros, C.R. Edling, L.A.N. Amaral, H.E. Stanley, Nature 411, 907 (2001).

[15] R.M. Anderson, R.M. May, Nature 333, 514 (1988).

[16] http://transims.tsasa.lanl.gov, http://www.transims.net

[17] K. Nagel, Phys. Rev. E 53, 4655 (1996).

[18] K. Nagel, P. Stretz, M. Pieck, S. Leckey, R. Donnelly, and C.L. Barrett,

Technical Report LA-UR-97-3530 (1997).

[19] C.L. Barrett, R. Jacob and M.V. Marathe, SIAM J. Comp. 30, 809 (2001).

[20] C. Barrett, K. Bisset, R. Jacob, G. Konjevod, M. V. Marathe, in Proceedings of
the European Symposium on Algorithms, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Springer, 126 ( 2002).

12

[21] A. Vazquez, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 038702 (2006).

[22] F. Chung Graham, L. Lu, Annals of Combinatorics 6, 125 (2002).

13

