7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
8
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
2
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Dynamical aﬃnity in opinion dynamics modelling

Franco Bagnoli1, Timoteo Carletti2, Duccio Fanelli3, Alessio Guarino4, Andrea Guazzini1
1. Dipartimento di Energetica and CSDC, Universit`a di Firenze,
and INFN, via S. Marta, 3, 50139 Firenze, Italy
2. D´epartement de Math´ematique, Universit´e Notre Dame de la Paix, 8 rempart de la vierge B5000 Namur, Belgium
3.Theoretical Physics, School of Physics and Astronomy,
University of Manchester, M13 9PL, Manchester, United Kingdom
4. Universit´e de la Polyn´esie Francaise, BP 6570 Faa’a, 98702, French Polynesia
(Dated: February 9, 2014)

We here propose a model to simulate the process of opinion formation, which accounts for the
mutual aﬃnity between interacting agents. Opinion and aﬃnity evolve self-consistently, manifesting
a highly non trivial interplay. A continuous transition is found between single and multiple opinion
states. Fractal dimension and signature of critical behaviour are also reported. A rich phenomenol-
ogy is presented and discussed with reference to corresponding psychological implications.

PACS numbers: 87.23.Ge Dynamics of social systems. 05.45.-a Nonlinear dynamics and nonlinear dynamical
systems.

The paradigms of complex systems are nowadays be-
ing applied to an ample spectrum of interdisciplinary
problems, ranging from molecular biology to social sci-
ences. The challenge is to model the dynamical evolution
of an ensemble made of interacting, microscopic, con-
stituents and infer the emergence of collective, macro-
scopic, behaviours that are then eventually accessible
for direct experimental inspection. Statistical mechan-
ics and non–linear physics provide quantitative tools to
elucidate the key mechanisms underlying the phenom-
ena under scrutiny, often resulting in novel interpretative
frameworks. Agent-based computational models have
been widely employed for simulating complex adaptive
systems, in particular with reference to sociophysics ap-
plications. Within this context, opinion dynamics has
recently attracted a growing interests clearly testiﬁed by
the vast production of specialised contributions [1]. Pe-
culiar aspects of its intrinsic dynamics make opinion for-
mation a rich ﬁeld of analysis where self-organisation,
clustering and polarisation occur.

Opinion dynamics models can be ideally grouped into
two large classes. The ﬁrst deals with binary opinions:
agents behave similarly to magnetic spins and just two
states are allowed (up or down) [2]. Here social actors
update their opinions driven by a social inﬂuence pres-
sure, which often translates into a majority rule. Al-
ternatively, opinions can be schematised with continuous
variables, the latter being dynamically evolved as a re-
sult of subsequent interactions among individuals. In the
[3] model agents adjust their
celebrated Deﬀuant et al.
opinion as a results of random binary encounters when-
ever their diﬀerence in opinion is below a given thresh-
old. The rationale behind the threshold ansatz reﬂects
humans’ natural tendency to avoid conﬂicting interests
and consequently ignore the perception of incompatibil-
ity between two distant cognitions. In this respect, the
threshold value measures the average openness of mind
of the community.

In real life, the diﬀerence in opinion on a debated issue
is indeed playing a crucial role. However, the actual out-
come of an hypothetic binary interactions also relies on a
number of other factors, which supposedly relate to the
quality of the inter-personal relationships. Mutual aﬃn-
ity condensates in fact past interactions’ history and con-
tributes to select preferential interlocutors for future dis-
cussions. Previous attempts aimed at incorporating this
eﬀect resulted in static descriptions, which deliberately
disregarded aﬃnity’s self-consistent evolution [4]. In this
Letter we take one step forward by proposing a novel for-
mulation where the aﬃnity is dynamically coupled to the
opinion, and consequently updated in time. Moreover,
aﬃnity translates in a social distance, a concept that is
here introduced to drive preferential interactions between
aﬃne individuals. Macroscopically, the system is shown
to asymptotically organise in clusters of agents sharing a
common opinion, whose number depends on the choice
of the parameters involved. Interestingly, a continuous
transition is identiﬁed that separates the mono-clustered
from the fragmented phase. Scaling laws are also found
and their implications discussed. Most importantly, our
proposed theoretical scenario captures the so-called cog-
nitive dissonance phenomenon, a qualitatively well docu-
mented theory in psychology pioneered by Leon Festinger
in 1956 [5].

Consider a population of N agents, each bearing at
time t a scalar opinion Ot
i ∈ [0, 1]. Moreover, let us in-
troduce the N × N time dependent matrix αt, whose ele-
ments αt
ij are bound to the interval [0, 1]. Such elements
specify the aﬃnity of individual i vs. j, larger numbers
being associated to more trustable relationships. Both
the opinions vector and the aﬃnity matrix are randomly
initialized at time t = 0. At each time step t, two agents,
say i and j, are selected according to a strategy that we
shall elucidate in the forthcoming discussion. They in-
teract and update their characteristics according to the
following recipe [8]:

Ot+1
= Ot
i
αt+1
ij = αt

i − µ∆Ot
ij + αt

αt
ij Γ1
ij
(cid:0)
ij[1 − αt
ij ]Γ2 (∆Oij )

(cid:1)

where the functions Γ1 and Γ2 respectively read:

Γ1

1
2 (cid:2)
Γ2 (∆Oij ) = − tanh(β2(|∆Ot

tanh(β1(αt

αt
ij
(cid:0)

=

(cid:1)

ij − αc)) + 1

(cid:3)
ij | − ∆Oc))

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

i − Ot

ij = Ot

Here, ∆Ot

j, while αc, ∆Oc are constant
parameters. For the sake of simplicity we shall consider
the limit β1,2 → ∞, which practically amounts to replace
the hyperbolic tangent, with a simpler step function pro-
ﬁle. Within this working assumption, the function Γ1
is 0 or 1, while Γ2 ranges from -1 to 1, depending on
the value of the arguments. Γ1 and Γ2 act therefore as
eﬀective switchers. Notice that, for αc → 0, equation
scheme [3]. To clarify
(1) reduces to Deﬀuant et al.
the ideas inspiring our proposed formulation, we shall
focus on speciﬁc examples. First, suppose two subjects
meet and imagine they confront their opinions, assumed
to be divergent (|∆Oij | ≃ 1). According to Deﬀuant’s
model, when the disagreement exceeds a ﬁxed threshold,
the agents simply stick to their positions. Conversely,
in the present case, the interaction can still result in
a modiﬁcation of each other beliefs, provided the mu-
tual aﬃnity αt
ij is larger than the reference value αc. In
other words, individual exposed to conﬂicting thoughts,
have to resolve such dissonance in opinion by taking one
of two opposite actions: If αt
ij < αc, the agent ignores
the contradictory information, which is therefore not as-
similated; when instead the opinion is coming from a
trustable source (αt
ij > αc), the agent is naturally in-
clined to seek consistence among the cognitions, and con-
sequently adjust its belief. The mechanism here outlined
is part of Festinger’s cognitive dissonance theory [5]: con-
tradicting cognitions drive the mind to modify existing
beliefs to reduce the amount of dissonance (conﬂict) be-
tween cognitions, thus removing the feeling of uncom-
fortable tension. The scalar αij schematically accounts
for a larger number of hidden variables (personality, at-
titudes, behaviours,..), which are non trivially integrated
in an abstract aﬃnity concept. Notice that the matrix αt
is non symmetric: hence, following a random encounter
between two dissonant agents, one could eventually up-
date his opinion, the other still keeping his own view.
A dual mechanism governs the self-consistent evolution
for the aﬃnity elements, see equation (2). If two people
gather together and discover to share common interests
(|∆Ot
ij | < ∆Oc) they will increase their mutual aﬃnity
(αt
ij → 1). On the contrary, the fact of occasionally fac-
ing diﬀerent viewpoints (|∆Ot
ij | > ∆Oc), translates in a
reduction of the aﬃnity indicator (αt
ij → 0). The logistic
contribution in equation (2) conﬁnes αt
ij in the interval
[0, 1]. Moreover, it maximises the change in aﬃnity for

2

pairs with αt
ij ≃ 0.5, corresponding to agents which have
not come often in contact. Couples with αt
ij ≃ 1 (resp. 0)
have already formed their mind and, as expected, behave
more conservatively.

Before turning to illustrate the result of our investi-
gations, we shall discuss the selection rule here imple-
mented. First the agent i is randomly extracted, with
uniform probability. Then we introduce a new quantity
dij, hereafter termed social distance, deﬁned as [9]

ij = ∆Ot
dt

ij (1 − αt

ij )

j = 1, ..., N

j 6= i. (5)

The smaller the value of dt

ij the closer the agent j to i,
both in term of aﬃnity and opinion. A random, normally
distributed, vector ηj(0, σ) of size N − 1 is subsequently
generated, with mean zero and variance σ, and added to
the social distance to obtain a new social metric Dη
ij =
dt
ij + ηj (0, σ). Finally, the agent j which is closer to
i in term of the obtained social metric Dη
ij is selected
for interaction. Notice that σ plays the role of a social
temperature and set the level of mixing in the community.
Notably, for any value of σ, it is indeed possible that
agents initially distant in the unperturbed social space
dt
ij mutually interact: their chances to meet increasing
for larger values of the social temperature.

Numerical simulations are performed and the dynam-
ical evolution of the system monitored. Qualitatively,
asymptotic clusters of opinion are formed, whose num-
ber depends on the parameters involved. The individ-
uals that reach a consensus on the question under de-
bate are also characterised by large values of their re-
ciprocal aﬃnity, as clearly displayed in Figure 1. The
ﬁnal scenario results from a non trivial dynamical inter-
play between opinion and aﬃnity: the various agglomer-
ations are hence diﬀerent in size and, centred around dis-
tinct opinion values, which cannot be predicted a priori.
The dynamics is therefore signiﬁcantly more rich, and
far more realistic, than that arising within the frame-
work of the original Deﬀuant et al. scheme [3], where
cluster number and average opinions are simply related
to the threshold amount. Notice that, in our model, the
aﬃnity enters both the selection rule and the actual dy-
namics, these ingrendients being crucial to reproduce the
observed self-organization.

To gain quantitative insight into the process of opinion
formation, we run several simulations relative to diﬀer-
ent initial realizations and recorded the ﬁnal (averaged)
number of clusters, Nc, as function of the social temper-
ature σ, for diﬀerent values of the critical parameter αc.
Results of the numerics are reported in Figure 2. All
the curves are collapsed together plotting Nc as function
of the rescaled quantity (σαc)−1/2. A continuous phase
transition is identiﬁed, above which the system is shown
to asymptotically fragment in several opinion clusters.
The proposed scaling is sound in term of its psychologi-
cal interpretation: as previously discussed, when αc gets

3

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

bution of opinion diﬀerences. First, we focused on the
single-clustered phase (main plot in Figure 3) and cal-
culated the fractal dimension in the (O, t) plane, a pa-
rameter that relates to the geometrical aspects of the dy-
namical evolution. A standard box-counting algorithm is
applied, which consists in partitioning the plan in small
cells and identifying the units visited by the system tra-
jectory. In this speciﬁc case, the space (O, t) is mapped
into [0, 1]×[0, 1], and covered with a uniform distribution
of squares of linear size l. The number of ﬁlled box Nb is
registered and the measure repeated for diﬀerent choices
of l. In particular we set l = 2−nb, where nb = 1, 2, ...
For each nb, Nb is plotted vs. l, in log-log scale (see in-
set of Figure 3): A power-law decay is detected, whose
exponent γ ≃ 1.57, quantiﬁes the fractal dimension. The
orbits are also analyzed in the multi-clustered regime and
similar conclusion are drawn. In addition, every single
cluster is isolated and studied according to the above
procedure, leading to an almost identical γ.
In Figure
4 we also report the probability distribution function of
δO = |Ot+1
i|. δO measures the rate of change of
individuals’ opinion. A power-law behaviour is found, an
additional sign of system’s criticality.

i − Ot

0

0.2

i

n
o
n
p
O

i

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

n/N

0

0.1

0.2

t
n
e
g
A

20

40

60

80

100

0

0.5

1.5

1
Time

2
x 10 4

20

40

60

80

100

Agent

FIG. 1: Left: Typical evolution of the opinion versus time,
i.e. number of iterations. Right plot: Final aﬃnity matrix.
Here σ = 0.02, ∆Oc = 0.5, αc = 0.5.
Initial opinion are
(random) uniformly distributed within the interval [0, 1]. α0
ij
is initialised with uniform (random) values between 0 an 0.5.
Here, β1 = β2 = 1000.

small the agents tend to resolve the dissonance that they
are occasionally facing, by going for the drastic option,
i.e. rejecting the contrasting belief. This of course would
favour the fragmentation of the population, a tendency
that can be counter-balanced by adequately enhancing
the social mixing, which in turn amounts to increase the
value of σ ∝ α−1
. Notice that our system shares many
similarities with granular media, that have been shown
to display analogous self-organization features. This en-
tails the possibility of addressing the observed structures
formation within a purely statistical mechanics setting,
where the balance between competing eﬀects is esplicitly
modelled [6].

c

FIG. 2: Average number of clusters as function of the
rescaled quantity (σαc)−1/2. A phase transition is found at
−1/2 ≃ 1.1. Above the transition, histograms of the
(σαc)
number of clusters are computed and enclosed as insets in
the main frame: symbols refer to the numerics, solid lines are
ﬁtted interpolation. Here, ∆Oc = 0.5. The variables O0
i and
α0
ij are initialised as described in the caption of Figure 1.

Aiming at further characterising the process of conver-
gence we have also analysed the following indicators: the
fractal dimension of the orbits topology and the distri-

FIG. 3: Main plot: typical evolution in the mono-clustered
−nb in log-log scale. For the choice
phase. Inset: Nb vs. l = 2
of the parameters refer to the caption of Figure 2

Finally, working in the relevant mono-clustered regime,
we also performed a dedicated campaign of simulations
to estimate the convergence time, T σ
c (αc), i.e. the time
needed to completely form the cluster under scrutiny.
The experiments are conducted ﬁxing the social temper-
ature σ, and allowing αc to span the relevant interval
[0, αmax], where αmax = maxi,j α0
In Figure 5
the rescaled convergence time T σ
c (0) is plotted
as function of αc, for various choices of σ. All the dif-
ferent curves nicely collapse together, revealing an in-
teresting positive correlation between the relative con-
vergence time and the threshold αc. Again, this ﬁnding
is certainly bound to reality: when αc increases, indi-
viduals stick more rigidly to their opinion and changes

ij [10].
c (αc)/T σ

4

4

σ

c

)
0
(

T

 
/
 
)
 

c

2

α
 
(

σ

c

T

 σ = 0.3
 σ = 0.5
 σ = 0.7
 σ = 0.9

FIG. 4: Histogram of δO, as follows from the numerics, plot-
ted in log-log scale (symbols). The solid line represents a
power-law ﬁt.

happen only when encounters among neighbours occur.
Instead, when reducing αc large jumps in opinion are
allowed which dynamically translate in a more eﬀective
mixing, hence faster convergence. To make this argument
more rigorous, introduce µ′ = µ[tanh(β1(αt
ij −αc))+1]/2.
A reduced dynamical formulation can obtained by aver-
aging out the dependence on αi,j in (1), thus formally
decoupling it from eq.
(2). This is accomplished, at
ﬁxed i, as follows:

′
< µ

> = µ

Γ1(αt

ij )ft(αt

ij )dαt
ij

(6)

Z

αmax

≃ µ

≃ µ

Z
0
αmax − αc
αmax

Γ1(α0

ij )f0(α0

ij )dα0

ij

where in the last passage we made use of the fact that
β1 → ∞ and f0(α0
ij ) = 1/αmax as it follows from the
normalisation condition. The function ft(·) (resp. f0(·)
) represents the aﬃnity distribution of agents j versus
i, at time t (resp. at time zero). Within this simpliﬁed
scenario, the time of convergence scales as 1/ < µ′ > [7]
and therefore expression (7) immediately yields to:

0

0.1

0.3

0.2

 α

c

c (αc)/T σ

FIG. 5: Rescaled convergence time T σ
c (0) is plotted
as function of αc. Diﬀerent symbols refer to diﬀerent values of
the social temperature σ, see legend. The dashed line stands
for the theoretical prediction (7). The solid line is a numeri-
cal ﬁt based on equation (7), where αmax is replaced by the
eﬀective value αef f = 0.66 (see main text for further details).

In this Letter we introduced a new model for studying
the process of opinion formation. This novel interpreta-
tive framework allows us to account for the aﬃnity, an ef-
fect of paramount importance in real social systems. The
model here proposed captures the essence of the cogni-
tive dissonance theory, a psychological construction elab-
orated by L. Festinger in the late 50s. Numerical investi-
gations are carried on and reveal the presence of a phase
transition between an ordered (single clustered) and a
disordered (multi-clustered) phase. Evidence of critical
behaviours is provided, and the role of diﬀerent param-
eters elucidated. We ﬁrmly believe that our formulation
represents a leap forward in social system modelling, thus
opening up new perspectives to reinforce the ideal bridge
with the scattered psychology community.

T σ
c (αc)
T σ
c (0)

=

αmax
αmax − αc

Relation (7) is reported in Figure 5 (dashed line) and
shown to approximately reproduce the observed func-
tional dependence. A good agreement with direct simu-
lations is found for small αc. It however progressively de-
teriorates for larger αc, due to non-linear contributions.
The latter can be incorporated into our scheme by re-
placing αmax in eq. (7) with an eﬀective value αef f , to
be determined via numerical ﬁt (solid line in Figure 5).
Such a value accounts for the system tendency to popu-
late the complementary domain 1 − αmax and results in
an excellent agreement with the simulated data.

(7)

[1] D. Stauﬀer and M. Sashimi, Physics A 364, 537, (2006);
A. Pluchino et al. Eur. Phys.J. B 50, 169 (2006); A.
Baronchelli et. al. preprint cond-mat/0611717.

[2] K. Sznajd-Weron, J. Sznajd, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 11,

1157 (2000).

[3] G. Deﬀuant et al. Adv. Compl. Syst. 3, 87 (2000).
[4] Nowak et al., Developmental Review, 25, Issues 3-4,

(2005), 351–385.

[5] L. Festinger and J.M. Carlsmith, Journal of Abnormal

and Social Psychology, 58, 203-210 (1959).

[6] E. Ben-Naim, P.L. Krapivsky, Journ. Phys. A: Math Gen.
38, 417-423 (2005); M. Tarzia et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., 95
078001 (2005).

[7] T. Carletti et al., Europhys. Lett. 74, 222 (2006).
[8] The evolution of the quantities Oj (t) and αij (t) is
straightforwardly obtained by switching the labels i and

j in the equations.

[9] The aﬃnity can mitigate the diﬀerence in opinion, thus
determining the degree of social similarity of two individ-
uals. This observation translates into the analytical form
here postulated for dt

ij.

[10] If αc > αmax the system is initially experiencing a lethar-

gic regime: none of the selected pair of agents fullﬁlls the
condition that would enable to updated their opinions.
The system is therefore freezed in the initial state and
eventually moved forward due to unphysical changes in
aﬃnity driven by eq. (2)

5

