6
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
0
3
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
0
0
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Growing networks under geographical constraints

R. Xulvi-Brunet1,2 and I.M. Sokolov2
1School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
2Institut f¨ur Physik, Humboldt Universit¨at zu Berlin, Newtonstraße 15, D-12489 Berlin, Germany
(Dated: today)

Inspired by the structure of technological networks, we discuss network evolution mechanisms
which give rise to topological properties found in real spatial networks. Thus, the peculiar structure
of transport and distribution networks is fundamentally determined by two factors. These are the
dependence of the spatial interaction range of vertices on the vertex attractiveness (or importance
within the network) and on the inhomogeneous distribution of vertices in space. We propose
and analyse numerically a simple model based on these generating mechanisms which seems, for
instance, to be able to reproduce known structural features of the Internet.

PACS numbers: 05.50.+q, 89.75.Hc

Technological networks, such as transportation or com-
munication networks, are man-made networks designed
for transport of resources between sites distributed over
a certain geographical area [1]. Depending on the type of
network, the resources can be information, wares, elec-
tricity, or persons, and the geographical area range from
a small region to the whole world. Examples of techno-
logical networks are, among others, the Internet [2, 3],
the airline [4, 5, 6] and railway [7, 8] networks, and the
electric power grid [4, 9]. The Internet consists of a set
of routers linked by optical ﬁbre or other type of physi-
cal connection, and it turned into an indispensable tool
to get information from and about whatever part of the
world. The airline network, which principal function is to
transport persons and wares, has all the airports of the
world as vertices of the network, and the corresponding
nonstop scheduled ﬂights connecting the airports as its
edges. Electric power grids, on the other hand, are sets
of generators, transformers, or substations connected by
high-voltage transmission lines.

The most prominent feature of these technological net-
works is that they are embbeded in a real physical space,
with vertices having well-deﬁned positions. This is not
the case of other types of networks, such as citation or
biochemical networks, in which the position of vertices
has no physical meaning (see [1, 10, 11, 12] for general
reviews).
In many communication and transportation
networks, the cost of establishing long-range connections
between distant spots is usually higher than the cost of
establishing short-range connections. This is clear for
networks such as the Internet or the railway network,
where establishing a long-range conection is obviously
expensive because long channels need a larger infrastruc-
ture. For electric power grids, the connection cost be-
tween farther spots is even higher, given that in long
high-voltage lines a large amount of energy is lost during
the transmission.

This dependence of the connection cost on the distance
is one of the most prominent mechanisms governing the

evolution of technological networks, and it is determinant
for understanding their structure. As a consequence of
that, for example, not all connections between vertices
are equally probable; neighbouring vertices tend to con-
nect to each other with larger probability than distant
ones. This, in turn, is the origin of some of their more
characteristic properties.

The most important quantities designed for capturing
network’s structure are the degree distribution, the av-
erage distance between the vertices, and the mean and
local clustering coeﬃcients. The degree distribution P (k)
gives the probability that a randomly selected vertex of
the network has degree k, i. e., that it is connected to
k other diﬀerent vertices. Most technological networks
exhibit degree distributions that decay as a power-law
P (k) ∼ k−γ,
i.e., they exhibit a scale-free character.
However, power grids or railway networks, in which long-
range connections practically do not exist, typically show
exponential degree distributions [8, 9]. The average path
length l is deﬁned as the mean distance between each
two vertices in the network, where the distance between
any two vertices is deﬁned as the number of edges along
the shortest path connecting them. Finally, the cluster-
ing coeﬃcients measure the local tendency of vertices to
form highly connected clusters. The clustering coeﬃcient
of a vertex is deﬁned as the ratio between the number of
connections existing among its nearest topological neigh-
bours -the vertices which are connected through an edge
with it- and the maximal number of edges which can exist
among them. The mean and the local clustering coeﬃ-
cients, C and C(k), are the averages of the clustering
coeﬃcients over all vertices of the network, and over all
vertices of degree k, respectively.

Large mean clustering coeﬃcients and average path
lengths of many technological networks can be under-
stood taking into account their growth mechanisms.
Thus, the fact that vertices tend to link to their “phys-
ical” neighbours yields a large probability that, given a
vertex in the network, its “topological” neighbours are

also connected between themselves. That typically gives
rise to large values of mean clustering coeﬃcient. On
the other hand, since distant vertices tend to be poorly
connected between themselves, shortest paths connecting
farther nodes are usually long, and pass through many
vertices in between. Statistical measures of the lengths of
connections conﬁrm that the large part of edges in most
transportation and distribution networks are short-range
connections [6].

The distance between the vertices is an important pa-
rameter in the modelling of transportation networks, but
the “cost-distance” dependence is not the only mech-
anism responsible for their structure.
In general, the
structure of technological networks is both a function
of what is geographically feasible and what is techno-
logically desirable. For reasons of eﬃciency, some long-
range connections are typically always present, in spite
in many cases, connecting two dis-
of their high cost:
tant vertices trough a long necklace of neighbouring ver-
tices slows down the global transport in the network and
makes it ineﬃcient. Long-range connections are observed
both in the Internet and the Airline network [6]. Ad-
ditionally, when long-range connections exist, they usu-
ally link the highly connected vertices of the network
[2, 6]. That is not surprising.
If a telecommunication
company or an airline decides to make a big investment
in creating a long-range transport channel, it typically
wants to link sites which are somehow important and
well-connected (depending on the type of network, they
can be technological, touristic or commercial spots), so
that the amount of information or wares which will be
exchanged between them compensates the expense.

Networks embedded in a metric space with distance-
dependent connection probabilities are called spatial or
geographical networks [12]. In the past few years several
models have been proposed in order to study their struc-
tural properties [2, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37].
Most of them combine the preferential attachment mech-
anism [38], which is widely accepted as the probable ex-
planation for power law degree distributions seen in many
networks, and distance eﬀects. The last typically lead to
a deviation from the scale-free behaviour when the dis-
tance constraints are suﬃciently strong. Almost all these
studies have focused on the eﬀects of geography on the
degree distribution, ignoring other important character-
istics. These are, however, of primary interest. Thus,
in a exhaustive study of the Internet [3] Vazquez and
collaborators found not only that it is a scale-free net-
work, but also that the local clustering coeﬃcient C(k)
and the nearest neighbours’ average function knn fall as
power-law functions with exponents −0.75 and −0.5, re-
spectively. On the other hand, Gastner and Newman
[6] showed that strong geographical constraints tend to
produce networks with an eﬀective network dimension d
close to d ≃ 2. These new quantities are essential when
measuring such important features as degree-degree cor-
relations and the hierarchy [3] and planar [6] characters

2

of networks.

In this paper we propose several network evolving
mechanisms which are able to develop spatial networks
that exhibit most of the features found in real technologi-
cal systems, i.e. reproducing correct values for C(k), knn
and d. The basic properties of our generating principles
are:

i) The knowledge of any given vertex about the net-
work is limited to a certain (Euclidean) neighbourhood
of the vertex (a property of locality). Each vertex is
“aware” of the characteristics of all vertices belonging to
its neighbourhood, but not of the characteristics of the
rest of the vertices of the network.

ii) The range of this physical neighbourhood is gov-
erned by a cost function which establishes the importance
of the geographical constraints. As the connection cost
grows, the range of the neighbourhood decreases.

iii) As usual, the network grows by adding vertices and
edges. At each time step, new vertices are added and
connected to the system; additionally, new edges may be
set between vertices already existing in the network.

iv) Preferential attachment condition. Vertices try to
connect to vertices of large degree - the more attractive
ones - lying within their neighbourhood.

Apart from these requirements (already considered e.g.

in Ref. [19]), we add two new ingredients:

v) The interaction cost governing the range of each
neighbourhood depends on the attractiveness of the ver-
tex associated; the larger is the vertex attractiveness the
larger its interaction range.

vi) The probability that a new vertex appears in an
isolated area, geographically far from the rest of the ver-
tices, is smaller than the probability that the new vertex
appears close to an already existing vertex. (Regarding
to this last point, a similar idea has recently been pro-
posed by Kaiser and Hilgetag [25]). In addition, vertices
cannot appear too close to each other.

The last two conditions are inspired by the properties
of technological networks. While condition v) is obvi-
ously a consequence of the fact that the degree of im-
portant vertices in the network grow faster the “richer”
they already are (preferential attachment), there is also
another reason. It is also because they extend their “ten-
tacles” more far away. Condition vi) mirrors the fact that
vertices do not appear over a geographical area at ran-
dom. Consider, for instance, the Internet and the elec-
tric power grid. When a power plant is constructed in a
region too far from civilisation, the plant supplies elec-
tricity to the buildings close to it, but no high-voltage
transmission lines link the station to the grid of the
civilised world if the distance is large; the plant usually
remains isolated. (In fact, electric power plants are not
constructed far from civilisation. The inhabitants of iso-
lated regions usually use small generators for personal
use. The station is constructed only when civilisation
comes to the region.) In the Internet, routers concen-
trate in towns, rather than in deserted areas. That is
quite natural, people live and work in towns! Conse-

quently, new Internet accesses tend to appear in towns,
in the vicinity of other already existing accesses. Fur-
thermore, the more industrialised is the town, the more
rapidly the number of Internet accesses grows. On the
other hand, we must also take into account, that vertices
do not appear extremely close to each other. Thus, con-
structing two big power stations in close vicinity to one
another (for example, one kilometre apart) is not rea-

sonable; it is cheaper to build one bigger station which
supplies electricity to the entire area. It also is not com-
mon for a family house to have two routers, since one
router can supply Internet to all computers in the house.
Therefore, we assume that there are certain areas, not too
far but also not too close to the existing vertices, where
new vertices will more probably arise than in others.

(a1)

(b1)

(c1)

3

(a2)

(b2)

(c2)

1

P (k)

-1

10

-2

10

0.5

0.1

C(k)

1

P (k)

-1

10

-2

10

0.5

0.1

C(k)

1

P (k)

-1

10

-2

10

0.5

0.1

C(k)

-3

10

1

1

10

k

2

10

-3

10

1

1

10

k

2

10

-3

10

1

1

10

k

2

10

(a3)

(b3)

(c3)

2

1

10

k

2

10

2

1

10

k

2

10

2

1

10

k

2

10

FIG. 1: (a1), (b1), and (c1): graphical representations of the models (a), (b), and (c), respectively. The three networks have
1000 vertices; their size is L = 1881 (a1), L = 1982 (a2), and L = 1982 (a3). Note that all edges of network (a1) are short-range
connections, while in network (c1) edges connecting distant vertices do exist. (a2), (b2), and (c2): Degree distribution of the
networks represented in (a1), (a2), and (a3), respectively. Models (b) and (c) are scale-free. The slope of the straight lines are
-2.24 (b2) and -2.95 (c2). (a3), (b3), and (c3): Local clustering coeﬃcient C(k) of the networks represented in (a1), (a2), and
(a3), respectively. The behaviour of C(k) follows power laws for three models. The slope of the straight lines are -0.40 (a3),
-0.46 (b3) and -0.58 (b3). Notice the double logarithmic scales in all graphs.

These basic ideas can be implemented in very diﬀerent
ways giving rise to diﬀerent growth models. Consider, for
instance, the preferential attachment prescription. One
has to decide whether the attachment probability de-
pends linearly on the degree, as in the Barab´asi-Albert
construction [38], or whether it must follow another law.
One also has to decide about the interaction’s depen-
dence on distance and on vertex attractiveness. More-
over, the probability of the appearance of a new vertex
at position r can be a complex function involving the po-
sitions of all already existing vertices in the network, or
depending only on the position of the vertices closer to
the point.

The appropriate implementation of a determined pat-
tern depends obviously on the particular geographical
system that we attempt to model. Numerical simulations
show that diﬀerent (but similarly oriented) prescriptions
produce models showing qualitatively the same behav-
ior. This fact supports the general value of the principles
proposed. Since we are not yet intending to studying any
particular real-world network, but are interested only in
capturing some general features of spatial systems, we
will adopt here the simplest realization of the guiding
prescriptions.

We start from a preselected area in a two-dimensional
Euclidean plane. In this area, we place at random mo
vertices, so that the distance between any two of these
initial vertices is larger than a given rmin, the minimum
distance that will separate vertices in the network. Since
the mo vertices are placed at random, the order of mag-
nitud of separation between them depends on the size
of the preselected area. Now we let our network grow
around these initial vertices. At each time step a new
vertex with m1 proper links is added to the network and
connected to m1 vertices already present. Additionally,
once the new vertex is attached, m2 new edges are dis-
tributed among all the vertices of the network. In both
cases, vertices and edges are added to the network only
if the geographical constraints allow for the addition.

Our geographic constraints are deﬁned by the two char-
acteristic distances rmin and rmax, which deﬁne a ring
area around a point. At each step we choose at random
a vertex of the preexisting network. From this point, us-
ing polar coordinates, we put a new vertex at a position
given by a radius r and an angle φ picked up at random
from homogeneous distributions rmin ≤ r ≤ rmax and
φ ∈ ]0, 2Π]. If this new vertex happens to be at a dis-
tance smaller than rmin from some preexisting one, the
selection is rejected and a diﬀerent old vertex is chosen.
Note that this prescription does not give an homogeneous
distribution in space when rmax → ∞ and rmin → 0, but
essencially means that smaller distancies to the choosen
vertex are preferred.

In order to connect the new vertex to the system, we
consider the nodes of the network within the circle of ra-
dius rmax from the newly introduced one n. This circular
area around the new node is considered to be its physical
neighborhood. If the number of vertices in the neighbor-

4

hood is smaller than m1, the newly introduced vertex is
connected to all of them; if their numer exceeds m1 than
it is connected to exactly the m1 ones with higher degree.
Note that the fact that the range of the neighbourhood
is precisely rmax ensures that a new node is connected to
at least one old one.

The second process, consisting of the addition of new
edges between vertices, works in a similar way. We ran-
domly choose a vertex v of the network, and then, from
the vertices that belong to its physical neighbourhood
but are not yet connected to it, we choose the m2 ver-
tices having larger degree and connect v to them. Here,
however, the interaction range rv of the neighbourhood
of v is governed by the function

rv = rmax + βkv

γ ,

(1)

where kv is the degree of vertex v, and β and γ are non-
negative tuning parameters whose function is basically
to deﬁne the area which a vertex “sees” depending on its
importance (degree) within the network. In case that the
number of vertices that belong to the neighbourhood of
v, and that are not yet connected to it, is q < m2, then
only q edges are added to the network. Note that the
eﬀects of geography disappear when rmax → ∞.

Let us comment on some aspects of the model. First,
vertices are not distributed at random over the area of
study, but their distribution depends on the “history”
of the network. New vertices appear in the vicinity of
the vertices already present in the network. Second, the
interaction range of a vertex is a function of its attractive-
ness, or importance in the network. If a vertex increases
its importance in the network, then its interaction range
grows. (Here, we do not take into account the fact that
old vertices can remain obsolete with time.) Third, we
impose the following preferential attachment condition:
connect to the more attractive vertex of the network that
you can “see”.

Extensive numerical simulations conﬁrm that this sim-
ple model is able to reproduce many of the properties of
spatial networks. In the present study we restrict our-
selves to two sets of values for the parameters of the
model. The ﬁrst one, which includes three diﬀerent spa-
tial cases, illustrates the impact of the cost-distance di-
chotomy on network structure. We consider the follow-
ing values: m1 = 1, m2 = 1, rmin = 500 m.u., and
rmax = 1000 m.u. (where m.u. stands for an arbitrary
“metric unit”). The fact that we impose rmax = 2 · rmin,
i. e., that rmax is only twice rmin, indicates that in this
case we deal with networks for which the cost of new
vertices establishing long-range connections is very high.
Additionally, we choose m0 = 7, and a radius of 14000
m.u. for our initially preselected disc-area, within which
the m0 = 7 initial vertices may be placed at random.
The three cases we distinguish are: Case (a), β = 1 and
γ = 1.4, corresponding to a spatial network in which the
geographical constraints are extremely important (in this
case long-range connections are practically inexistent);
Case (b), β = 1.5 and γ = 2.3, an intermediate case;

5

3
10

2

10
fN

1
10

15

10
hki

5

0

0

1

10

L

10

20

30

40

50

L

FIG. 2: N (L) as a function of the L. From bottom to top,
models a, b, and c. The black straight line correspond to a
network of dimension 2. The results are used to estimate the
dimension of the three spatial networks considered (see text
for more details). Notice the double logarithmic scales of the
picture.

FIG. 3: Layer average degree, hkiL, as a function of shell
number L. The curve with the highest peak corresponds to
model c, the intermediate one and the ﬂat one to models b,
and a, respectively.

Case (c), β = 2 and γ = 4, for which vertices of high
degree are allowed to establish long-range connections.
The selected values of parameters are certainly arbitrary
and are adopted in order to illustrate the eﬀects of the
distance-cost-dependence. In eﬀect, for β = 0, the result-
ing network is practically a tree, since no edges can be
placed between old vertices, while for very large β and γ
a “winner-takes-all” phenomenon emerges, in which al-
most all vertices are connected to one super-hub with an
enormous degree.

Figure 1 compares the results of simulations corre-
sponding to these three cases. To be able to draw the
resulting networks, we consider small graphs with only
1000 vertices (numerical simulations indicate that the
structure does not signiﬁcantly change as the order of
the networks grows). Panels a1, b1, and c1 show the ef-
fects of the selective growth of the interaction range with
the degree of vertices: For systems where long-range con-
nections are highly expensive (model a), even the most
important vertices of the network are connected only to
a few close neighbours. As the cost of establishing long-
range interactions decreases, connections between distant
vertices in the network begin to appear, in particular, be-
tween high degree vertices (models b and c).

The degree distribution evidently changes as the ge-
ographical constraints are gradually loosened. Thus,
model a shows a degree distribution which decays ap-
proximately exponentially (panel a2); no vertices of high
degree can be found. The degree distributions of mod-
els b and c, however, exhibit well-deﬁned power law tails
(in spite of the small order of the networks considered):
P (k) ∼ k−2.25 (panel b2) and P (k) ∼ k−2.95 (panel c2).
The corresponding local clustering coeﬃcients also show

a behaviour very close to that found in real networks
(see panels a3, b3, and c3). All three models exhibit
power law behaviours for C(k): C(k) ∼ k−0.40 (panel a3),
C(k) ∼ k−0.46 (panel b3), and C(k) ∼ k−0.58 (panel c3).
In addition, the mean clustering coeﬃcient C of these
spatial models is always quite large, about C ≃ 0.33
for all three of them. The number of triangles (cycles
of length three) in the network is, however, 668 (model
a), 1593 (model b), and 1341 (model c). On the other
hand, the average path length decreases as the amount
of long-range connections grows from l = 20.18 (model
a)to l = 8.83 (model b) and l = 5.01 (model c). This
result is quite natural, and shows the transition from a
quasi-planar graph with a structure quite similar to a
lattice (model a) to a typical complex network structure
found in most geographical networks (models b and c).

Making use of the eﬀective dimension d, Gastner
and Newman showed that, networks where geograph-
ical eﬀects are extreme are essentially planar graphs
(i.e., they can be drawn on a map without any edges
crossing). The eﬀective dimension can be deﬁned as
d = limL→∞ log N (L)/ log L, where N (L) is the average
number of vertices which can be found within a distance
of L steps or less from a vertex. In ﬁnite networks no
limit L → ∞ can be taken, but good results for d can
be achieved by plotting log N (L) against log L for the
central vertices of the network and measuring the slope
of the resulting line (of course, far away of the saturation
region corresponding to exhausting of the network). Cen-
tral vertices are those vertices of the network that have
minimum eccentricity, being deﬁned as the maximum dis-
tance from the vertex to any other vertex in the network.
(Note that central vertices are sometimes deﬁned as the
vertices having larger “betweenness centrality”, as in [5].
We use, however, the classical deﬁnition from the graph

30

¯knn

10

4

1

1

10

j

2

10

FIG. 4: Analysis of the degree-degree correlations of the
three models considered. Nearest neighbours’ average func-
tion knn(j) against j. From bottom to top, models a, b, and
c. Note that models b and c exhibit dissortative mixing, while
model a is slightly assortative.

theory.)

Figure 2 shows on double logarithmic scales how N (L)
behaves as a function of L. From bottom to top the
curves correspond to model (a), the critical behaviour
N (L) ∼ L2, model (b), and model (c). We see that the
eﬀective dimension of model a is certainly smaller than
two, which is not a surprize provided that model a creates
practically a planar graph. The dimensions of models b
and c -which are obviously not planar graphs- are larger
than two. The diﬀerence between the three models at
N (L = 1) is due to the fact that central vertices are
usually the more connected ones of the network.

Tomographic studies reveal interesting details too. To-
mography deals with the study of the structure of lay-
ers which surround a given vertex (the root) in the
network [39, 40, 41]. The principal motivation for ex-
amining the tomography of a network results from its
importance for understanding the spreading phenomena
taking place in networks. We concentrate here on the
layer average degree hkiL = Pk kPL(k), where PL, the
degree distribution in shell L,
is deﬁned as PL(k) =
(Pr NL,r(k))/(Pk,r NL,r(k)), with NL,r(k) being the
number of vertices of degree k in layer L for root r. The
study of hkiL for the three networks considered shows a
peak whose height decreases as the cost of establishing
long-range connections grows (ﬁg. 3). The results indi-
cate that the mean degree hkiL=1 increases rapidly as the
number of long-range connections and hubs in the net-
work grows. On the other hand, the average shell degree
decreases rapidly for more distant layers, L > 1. This
interesting result shows that vertices with large degrees
are rapidly exhausted in this type of networks, which has
especial importance when dealing with spreading phe-
nomena, like spreading of information or infections. Note

6

that this result has important eﬀects on epidemiological
properties: vertices of large degree are rapidly aﬀected
by the spreading of an infection. On the other hand,
in a network like that of model (a) the propagation of
any spreading agent will be similar to the propagation
on a lattice: the spreading agent will primarily reach the
nearest physical neighbours.

In ﬁgure 4 we show the correlation properties of these
three models. Degree-degree correlations are determined
by the probability function Eij, which gives the proba-
bility that a randomly selected edge connects one ver-
tex of degree i to another of degree j. Thus, a net-
work is said to be degree-degree uncorrelated if Eij =
(2−δij)iP (i)jP (j)/hii2, which only means that the prob-
ability that an edge connects to a vertex of a certain de-
gree k is independent from whatever vertex is attached
to the other end if the edge. Otherwise, the network is
said to be degree-degree correlated. Most real networks
are correlated, and usually exhibit either “assortative”
or “dissortative” mixing [42]. Assortativity means that
high-degree vertices attach preferably to other highly
connected vertices, i. e., with a larger probability than
in uncorrelated networks; on the other hand, dissorta-
tivity stands for when high-degree vertices tend to con-
nect to low-degree vertices, and vice versa. Thus, a very
useful quantity for measuring the correlation’s degree of
a network is the nearest neighbours’ average function
knn(j), which expressed in terms of Eij, can be writ-
ten as knn(j) = (Pi i(1 + δij)Eij )/(Pi(1 + δij )Eij). It
takes the constant value knn(j) = hj2i/hji if no type of
degree-degree correlation exist, while it is a decreasing
(increasing) function if dissortative (assortative) mixing
is present. In the picture we plot knn(j) as a function of
j. The lowest curve, corresponding to model (a), shows
then that the network is slightly assortative. This feature
of model (a) is due to the fact that the areas containing
a large density of vertices usually contain a large density
of edges (see Figure 1, a1), corresponding probably to
important areas of the space; and vice versa, the areas
containing a small density of vertices also contain a small
density of edges. On the other hand, models (b) and (c),
in which the geographical constraints are not so strong,
present dissortative mixing. Interestingly, for both mod-
els knn(j) falls with j following power laws of the form
knn(j) ∼ j−ι, just like happens in real networks.

Model (a) reproduces quite well the properties of those
systems where vertices and edges are embedded in the
two-dimensional physical space, like, for example, electric
power grids or road networks. However, none of the three
models considered above is suitable for characterising
world-scale systems such as the Internet or the network of
airline routes. The reason is that, in such large-scale sys-
tems, vertices are usually not uniformly distributed in the
region under study (as occurs in our preceding models,
see pictures 1 a1, b1, and c1), but they concentrate in a
number of technological areas distributed over the world.
Thus, a more realistic model for describing such systems
must take into account that in large-scale geographical

7

(b)

(c)

1
10

k

2

10

(a)

1

-1

10

-2

10

P (k)

-3

10

1

1

C(k)

0.1

2

10

¯knn

1
10

1

2

1
10

k

2

10

30

10

hki

3

1
1

(d)

30

20

hki

10

(e)

0

0

3

L

7

8

1
10

j

2
10

2

4

L

6

FIG. 5: (a): Graphical representation of a small network (N = 1000 and L = 1985) corresponding to model (d). Note that
vertices concentrate in certain areas of the space, and that the long-range connections of the network link end-vertices of large
degree. (b): Degree distribution of model (d). (c): Degree-dependent clustering coeﬃcient C(k) of the model. (d): nearest
neighbours’ average function knn as function of the degree j. Note that P (k), C(k), and knn fall oﬀ as power law functions.
(e): Average degree, hkiL, as a function of shell number L. From hkiL=1 the average degree decays interestingly following a
power law (inset of the picture).

networks there usually exist many “desert” regions lying
between the areas where vertices can be found in abun-
dace. Such a pattern is easy to construct by varying the
ratio between rmax and rmin in our model. This aspect
blanc blanc blanc blanc blanc blanc blanc blanc blanc

is actually considered by our second selection of parame-
ters. As we will see next, inhomogeneous distribution of
vertices in space inﬂuences quantitatively the statistical
properties of networks.

Let us thus consider a larger ratio for rmax/rmin, for
example, rmax = 5 · rmin.
(Note that the change in
the ratio rmax/rmin modiﬁes not only the distribution
of vertices in space, but also makes cheaper the cost of
establishing connections for new vertices, since the neigh-
bourhood of a new vertex will, in comparison, contain
more vertices.) The values of the parameters for this
model (model d) are now the following: m0 = 7, m1 = 1,
m2 = 1, rmin = 200 m. u., rmax = 1000 m. u., β = 2
and γ = 3. As before, the initial area, where the m0 = 7
vertices are randomly placed, has a radius of 14000 m.
u. and the order of the network is N = 1000. Figure 5
(a) shows this network in the two-dimensional Euclidean
space: The model simulates perfectly the tendency of ver-
tices to concentrate in diﬀerent areas having a high den-
sity of vertices (as if these areas were urban centres, i.e.,
cities, or city agglomerations), which are linked through
long-range connections which join vertices of large de-
gree, usually belonging to diﬀerent geographical commu-
nities.

The properties of this last construction are especially
interesting, since they reproduce many structural proper-
ties found in the Internet. Thus, the degree distribution
of the model follows a power law P (k) ∼ k−2.42 (panel
b of ﬁgure 5). The mean clustering coeﬃcient is large.
For our small network C ≃ 0.7. The degree-dependent
clustering coeﬃcient C(k) decays as a power law function
C(k) ∼ k−0.97 (panel c of the Figure). The decay of C(k)
gets however slower for networks of larger size N . The av-
erage path length is very small, l = 3.74 for the parame-
ters as in Figure 5, and numerical simulations with larger
networks indicate a small-world behaviour. In addition,
the network shows dissortative mixing: the nearest neigh-
bours’ average function knn decreases as knn(j) ∼ j−0.52

8

(see Fig. 5 d). The coincidence of these properties with
the ones of the Internet is astonishing: Let us now remind
that i) the degree distribution of the Internet follows a
power law with exponent γ ≃ −2.5, ii) the local cluster-
ing function C(k) behaves as C(k) ∼ k−0.75, and iii) knn
decreases with j following the function knn(j) ∼ j−0.5 [3].
Finally, in Figure 5 we plot (e) the average degree hkiL as
a function of shell number L, corresponding to the study
of tomography. We see again that hubs are found only a
few steps away from any vertex, and interestingly, that
hkiL drops as a perfect power law from L = 1 on (see
inset of the Figure; note the double logarithmic scales).

To conclude, we introduce several network-generating
mechanisms taking into account the constraints that ge-
ography impose on the evolution of large-scale network
systems in physical space. We suggest that two proper-
ties are determinant for the structure of such geographi-
cal networks: the fact that the spatial interaction range of
vertices depends on the vertex attractiveness and the fact
that that vertices are not randomly distributed in space.
Simple implementations of these mechanisms show that
the essential diﬀerence between “strong geographical”
networks, such as electric power grids, and “weak geo-
graphical” networks, such as the Internet or the airline
network, could be the cost (economical or technologi-
cal) of establishing long-range connections. On the other
hand, inhomogeneous distribution of vertices in large-
scale networks seems certainly to be a relevant generat-
ing element of their hierarchical character. In any case,
the agreement of our results with the properties found
in real networks suggest that the mechanisms proposed
may play a key role in the evolution and structure of
networks.

[1] M. E. J. Newman, SIAM Rev. 45, 167 (2003).
[2] S.-H. Yook, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Barab´asi, PNAS 99,

13382 (2002).

[3] A. V´azquez, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Vespignani,

Phys. Rev. E 65, 066130 (2002).

[4] L. A. N. Amaral, A. Scala, M. Barth´elemy, and H. E.
Stanley, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 11149 (2000).
[5] R. Guimer`a, S. Mossa, A. Turtschi, and L. A. N. Amaral,

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 7794 (2005).

[13] R. Xulvi-Brunet and I. M. Sokolov, Phys. Rev. E 66,

026118 (2002).

[14] S. S. Manna and P. Sen, Phys. Rev. E 66, 066114 (2002).
[15] J. Jost and M. P. Joy, Phys. Rev. E 66, 036126 (2002).
[16] A. F. Rozenfeld, R. Cohen, D. ben-Avraham, and S.

Havlin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 218701 (2002).

[17] C. P. Warren, L. M. Sander, and I. M. Sokolov, Phys.

Rev. E 66, 056105 (2002).

[18] J. Dall and M. Christensen, Phys. Rev. E 66, 016121

[6] M. T. Gastner and M. E. J. Newman, Eur. Phys. J. B

(2002).

49, 247 (2006).

[7] V. Latora and M. Marchiori, Physica A 314, 109 (2002).
[8] P. Sen, S. Dasgupta, A. Chatterjee, P. A. Sreeram, G.
Mukherjee, and S. S. Manna, Phys. Rev. E 67, 036106
(2003).

[9] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, Nature 393, 440 (1998).
[10] R. Albert and A.-L. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47

[19] M. Barth´elemy, Europhys. Lett. 63, 915 (2003).
[20] C. Andersson, A. Hellervik, K. Lindgren, A. Hagson, and

J. Tornberg, Phys. Rev. E 68, 036124 (2003).

[21] P. Sen and S. S. Manna, Phys. Rev. E 68, 026104 (2003).
[22] S. S. Manna and A. Kabak¸cio˘glu, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen.

[23] C. Herrmann, M. Barth´elemy, and P. Provero, Phys. Rev.

36, 279 (2003).

E 68, 026128 (2003).

Havlin, Physica A 330, 107 (2003).

(2002).

1079 (2002).

[11] S.N. Dorogovtsev and J.F.F. Mendes, Adv. Phys. 51,

[24] D. ben-Avraham, A. F. Rozenfeld, R. Cohen, and S.

[12] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, and D.-

[25] M. Kaiser and C.C. Hilgetag, Phys. Rev. E 69, 036103

U. Hwang, Phys. Rep. 424, 175 (2006).

(2004).

9

[26] K. Yang, L. Huang, and L. Yang, Phys. Rev. E 70,

[34] P. Crucitti, V. Latora, and S. Porta, Phys. Rev. E 73,

[27] J. P. K. Doye and C. P. Massen, Phys. Rev. E 71, 016128

[28] L. Huang, L. Yang, and K. Yang, Europhys. Lett. 72,

Rev E 73, 066107 (2006).

036125 (2006).

[35] Y. Roudi and A. Treves, Phys. Rev. E 73,061904 (2006).
[36] A. Cardillo, S Scellato, V. Latora, and S. Porta, Phys.

[37] M. T. Gastner and M. E. J. Newman, Phys. Rev. E 74,

015102 (2004).

(2005).

144 (2005).

[29] J. J. S. Andrade, H. Herrmann, R. F. S.Andrade, and L.

016117 (2006).

R. da Silva, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 018702 (2005).

[30] A. Barrat, A., M. Barth´elemy, and A. Vespignani, J. Stat.

[38] A.-L. Barab´asi, and R. Albert, Science 286, 509 (1999).
[39] T. Kalisky, R. Cohen, D. ben-Avraham, and S. Havlin.

[31] N. Masuda, H. Miwa, and N. Konno, Phys. Rev. E 71,

[40] R. Xulvi-Brunet, W. Pietsch, and I. M. Sokolov, Phys.

Mech. P05003 (2005).

036108 (2005).

(2006).

[32] Y. Hayashi and J. Matsukubo, Phys. Rev. E 73, 066113

[33] Y. Hayashi, IPSJ Digital Courier, Vol. 2, 155 (2006).

Lect. Notes Phys. 650, 3 (2004).

Rev. E 68, 036119 (2003).

[41] E. Volz, arXiv:physics/0509129 (2005).
[42] M. E. J. Newman, Phys. Rev. E 67, 026126 (2003).

