7
0
0
2
 
n
a
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
8
1
1
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Phase transitions in social networks

Piotr Fronczak, Agata Fronczak and Janusz A. Ho lyst
Faculty of Physics and Center of Excellence for Complex Systems Research,
Warsaw University of Technology, Koszykowa 75, PL-00-662 Warsaw, Poland
(Dated: February 2, 2008)

We study a model of network with clustering and desired node degree. The original purpose of
the model was to describe optimal structures of scientiﬁc collaboration in the European Union. The
model belongs to the family of exponential random graphs. We show by numerical simulations and
analytical considerations how a very simple Hamiltonian can lead to surprisingly complicated and
eventful phase diagram.

PACS numbers: 89.75.-k, 02.50.-r, 05.50.+q

I. INTRODUCTION

During the last years, there has been noticed a sig-
niﬁcant interest in the ﬁeld of complex networks and a
lot of interdisciplinary initiatives have been taken aiming
at investigations of these systems [1, 2, 3, 4]. In paral-
lel with empirical studies of real world networks [5, 6],
theoretical models [7, 8, 9] and abstractive mathematical
tools [10, 11] have been developed in order to under-
stand complex mechanisms hidden behind the network
functionality.

Among many studied network models like random
graphs [12], or growing networks [7] there exists a class
of models, called exponential random graphs, which has
attracted an attention of the physics community just re-
cently. The class was ﬁrst studied in the 1980s by Holland
and Leinhardt [13], and later has been developed exten-
sively by Strauss and others [14, 15, 16, 17]. The idea
diﬀused from social statistics communities to physical so-
ciety in recent years, when a number of physicists have
made theoretical studies of speciﬁc models belonging to
this family [9, 18, 19, 20, 21].

Exponential random graph model is deﬁned to be not a
single network but a set of possible networks (ensemble).
The probability of a particular graph G in this ensemble
is proportional to e−H(G), where

H(G) =

θimi(G),

(1)

X
i

and H(G) is called graph Hamiltonian, mi is a collection
of graph observables that reﬂect relevant constraints on
studied graph properties and θi is the set of ﬁelds conju-
gate to mi.

A variety of graph Hamiltonians has been studied so
far including simple random graphs [9], a network with
reciprocity [9], the so-called two-star model [21], Strauss’s
model of a network with clustering [22], and others. The-
oretical analysis of exponential random graph models has
been developed by a number of authors. In most of cases
linear models can be solved exactly in the limit of large
system size. For nonlinear Hamiltonians mean-ﬁeld the-
ory and perturbation theory [9, 19, 20] have been applied

in order to ﬁnd phase transitions in the network struc-
tures.

In this paper we would like to show how a very sim-
ple Hamiltonian can lead to surprisingly complicated and
eventful phase diagram where wealth of structural phase
transitions can not be forecast at ﬁrst glance. Due to
complexity of observed structures our methodology is
mostly concentrated on Monte Carlo simulations. A sim-
ple mathematical apparatus is also expounded in order
to reveal details of the observed phenomena. The men-
tioned calculations, although not so powerful, allow to
understand when and why a particular transition occurs.

II. MOTIVATION AND MODEL DESCRIPTION

The model is deﬁned on network that is composed of
N nodes and L links, where each node acts as a single
scientist or a single scientiﬁc group and a link between
two nodes means that there exist scientiﬁc collaboration
between them.

The original purpose of the model was to describe op-
timal structures of scientiﬁc collaboration in the Sixth
Framework Programme for Research and Technological
Development (FP6), which is the European Union ac-
tion aiming to stimulate and support scientiﬁc activities
conducted at national and international level. One of
main purposes of the European Commission ﬁnancing
scientiﬁc projects in FP6 was to strengthen co-operation
between project partners [23]. In their proposal, appli-
cants had to show that one of the aims of the planned
project is intensiﬁcation of co-operation between partic-
ipants. They also had to argue that without such an
interaction a goal of the project will be not achieved.
The most popular observable which allows to measure
eﬀects of the co-operation in social network is clustering
coeﬃcient introduced by Watts and Strogatz in 1998 [24].
The clustering coeﬃcient ci of a single node i is the pro-
portion of the number of links between the nodes within
its neighborhood e divided by the number of links that

could possibly exist in the neighborhood

ci =

2e
ki(ki − 1)

,

(2)

where ki represent degree of the considered node. If ki <
2 then ci = 0. The global clustering coeﬃcient C is just
an average of ci over all nodes.

The other obvious purpose of the funded project is to
achieve the highest possible productivity. In our model
productivity of each scientist i (or local scientiﬁc group)
depends on the number of collaborators ki. The more
collaborators work with a given scientist, the more pa-
pers/ideas the scientist can produce. On the other hand,
however, a large number of collaborators means the ne-
cessity of parallel concentration on diﬀerent scientiﬁc
threads which leads to the decrease of productivity. In
consequence, productivity pi of a single project partici-
pant can be modelled by a logistic-like equation

pi = ki(1 −

ki<h≈ kie−ki/h,

)

(3)

ki
h

where h is an optimal (desired) number of collaborators
(note that the highest productivity occurs for ki = h).
Although one could expect that in reality h should be
described by a kind of the Lotka distribution [25], here we
concentrate on the simplest case where h is the same for
all elements of the system. Productivity P of the whole
network is just an average over all N nodes normalized
to unity

P =

e
N h X

i

pi.

(4)

Hamiltonian of the described model can be written as

follows:

H(G) = −θP (G) − αC(G).

(5)

Monte Carlo procedure is deﬁned by the following al-
gorithm: we choose randomly two nodes and try remove
(add) existing (non existing) link between them. If the
change leads to the decrease of the initial system energy
E0, i.e. ∆E = Em/p − E0 < 0, where Em/p is the system
energy after link removal/addition, we accept such a re-
placement. Otherwise, when ∆E ≥ 0, we accept it with
the probability e−∆E, i.e. we apply typical Metropolis
algorithm.

III. ANALYTICAL CONSIDERATIONS

In order to show a large variety of structural transitions
observed in networks described by the Hamiltonian (5),
in our Monte Carlo simulations we have decided to ﬁx
one parameter α = 109, and check behavior of the system
as a function of the second parameter θ. At the moment

2

please note, that since one may think of parameters α and
θ as inverse temperatures our choice of the large value
of α corresponds to low temperature limit in classical
thermodynamics, and makes the considered system less
susceptible to random eﬀects. Further in the paper, the
assumption of large α allows us to estimate the critical
value of θ from the simple condition ∆E = 0, which
means that the stability of the initial stable structure is
no longer preserved and a new network conﬁguration can
emerge.

Fig. 1 shows possible scenarios of structural transitions
in our model. Arrows represent directions of changes of
the control parameter θ given α = 109. As one can see the
number of possible transition paths is impressive. Later
we show that the path chosen by the system depends
mainly on the network size N . Moreover, beside simple
paths like ABCA or ABEF GHA there may exist much
more complicated paths like ABEF GHIDF GHA, i.e.
we have to change parameter θ from +∞ to −∞ and
backward from −∞ to +∞ two or more times to return
to the same structure we started!

To ﬁnd critical value of the parameter θ at which a
particular structural transition occurs one has to ana-
lyze change in energy ∆E induced by link addition or
removal taking into consideration currently existing net-
work structure. As an example let us analyze transition
A − B. The structure A corresponds to regular random
graph, where node degree distribution is given by the
delta function P (k) = δ(k − h). In this structure produc-
tivity is maximal P = 1, whereas the number of trian-
gles contributing to the clustering coeﬃcient is negligible
small C ≃ 0 (assuming that graph is sparse i.e. h ≪ N
that is sociologically justiﬁed). The transition takes place
when for a particular value of the parameter θ energet-
ically favorable is to add a link which creates the ﬁrst
triangle (i.e. a decrease of productivity is suﬃciently re-
warded with an increase of clustering). The described
situation is schematically presented in Fig. 2a. Energies
corresponding to both structures depicted in the ﬁgure
are respectively given by

E0 = −θ · 1 − α · 0,
Ep = −θ h(N − 2)he−1 + 2(h + 1)e− h+1

h

e
N h

i

(6)

−α h

4
N h(h+1) +

2

N h(h−1) i .

First, inserting the values of energy into the condition
∆E = Ep − E0 = 0, and next expanding exponential
functions in Taylor series up to the second order one gets
the critical value of the control parameter for the consid-
ered transition A − B

θA−B ≈

2(h + 1)(3h − 1)α
h2

.

(7)

As one can see the transition does not depend on the
system size N .

C

D

E

3

A

H

F

G

H

B

I

0

θ

FIG. 1: (Color online) Diagram representing possible transitions between network conﬁgurations as a function of parameter
θ. Gray arrows means that the conﬁguration D is composed of two other conﬁgurations (C and E), and the two parts of the
system follow diﬀerent paths. The ﬁgure shows networks with diﬀerent sizes N just to emphasize particular character of a
given conﬁguration.

Much more complicated system behavior is observed
when the control parameter θ crosses zero and becomes
negative (see Fig. 1). Productivity contribution to en-
ergy changes sign and all nodes having at the moment
degree k = h turn out to be in unstable conﬁguration (see
schematic explanation given in Fig. 3). For such nodes
when decrease in clustering is suﬃciently rewarded by
decrease in undesirable productivity the stable conﬁgu-
ration B will be destroyed: some nodes will decrease their
degrees whereas others will increase them (cf. Fig. 2b).
As one can see in Fig. 1 the considered network may
follow one of three paths resulting in one of three conﬁg-
urations C, D, or E.

Unfortunately, due to probabilistic character of the
Monte Carlo procedure it is hard to calculate analytically
which direction of changes will be taken by the system of
a given size N . To check what is really happened during
the transition we perform numerical simulations, results
of which are summarized in Fig. 4. The ﬁgure shows a
fraction of isolated nodes as a function of N . As one can
see for small system sizes degrees of all nodes drop to zero
and the system transforms into the empty graph (conﬁg-

uration E in Fig. 1). Above some critical value of N a
part of nodes condensate together and a fully connected
subgraph accompanied by isolated nodes appears (con-
ﬁguration D in Fig. 1). Finally in the thermodynam-
ical limit all nodes condensate and the complete graph
emerges (conﬁguration C in Fig. 1).

Here, we have to stress that conﬁgurations C and E
are rather purely theoretical and can not appear in real
In the case E, it is connected with the fact
systems.
that in the conﬁguration B a small number of nodes with
degree larger than h can exist what helps to create nodes
with maximal degree during the transition. Nevertheless,
since the conﬁguration D is in fact composed of the two
remaining conﬁgurations C and E, it is still instructive
to analyze them.

Now, let us analyze the transition C −A, i.e. transition
from the complete graph to the regular random graph.
Because one can not add a link to the complete graph
the only situation to analyze is removal of a link. The
described situation is schematically presented in Fig. 2c.

-θP

-θP

a

b

c

d

Q

e

h

i n k

l

r e m o v e  

add link

Q

h

h

h

h

w

h

h

h

h-1

h

w-1

h

h

FIG. 2: (Color online) Schematic situations occurring during
particular transitions used for considerations performed in the
text. a) transition A − B; b) transition B − D; c) transition
C − A; d) transition E − F ; e) transition H − A.

A simple calculation gives

E0 = −θN (N − 1)e− N −1
− α,
h + 2(N − 2)e− N −2
Em = −θ h(N − 2)(N − 1)e− N −1

e
N h

h

h

e
N h

i

−α h1 −

2

N (N −1) i ,

which leads to

θC−A ≈

eN/hh2α
N 2

(8)

(9)

in the limit of large N . As one can see this transition de-
pends on the system size N , and in the thermodynamical
limit N → ∞ the critical value θC−A tends to inﬁnity.

Now, let us discuss the behavior of the system if the ini-
tial conﬁguration is E (i.e. the empty network). The ﬁrst

FIG. 3: (Color online) Productivity contribution to energy
for θ > 0 (upper ﬁgure) and for θ < 0 (lower ﬁgure) as a
function of node degree k. The later situation shows that to
decrease energy some nodes will reduce their degree (destroy-
ing existing clusters) and others will increase it (connecting
two clusters together).

)
0
=
k
(
N

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

10

 

100

N

 h=5 B-D
 h=6 B-D
 h=7 B-D
 h=5 I-D

FIG. 4: Number of nodes with degree k = 0 as a function
of system size N . Three thin curves represent a transition
B − D, while a thick one represents a transition I − D. The
thick curve shows that for the same value of the parameter h
the number of isolated nodes is lower after transition I − D
than after transition B − D.

4

k

k

 

1000

transition E−F occurs when the parameter θ equals zero.
Since the productivity does not inﬂuence energy of the
system at this point, links can appear randomly (they do
not increase energy so they are acceptable in the Monte
Carlo procedure). First triangles appear in the network
and the clustering coeﬃcient increases. Such a dynam-
ics leads to the conﬁguration in which fully connected
subgraph is surrounded by a number of peripheral nodes
with degree k = 2 (conﬁguration F in Fig. 1). Because of
complicated situations in intermediate time steps a rig-
orous analytical explanation of the transition E − F is
beyond our abilities. Nevertheless, below we analyze a
simpliﬁed situation, which allows one to understand why
the transition occurs.

Thus, let us consider a fully connected subgraph with
an additional node Q having b links (see Fig. 2d). Just
like before, one can analyze what happens with the clus-
tering coeﬃcient if we add (remove) one link. Fig. 5
shows the solution of this problem when size of the fully
connected subgraph is NF = 20. For a given b clustering
coeﬃcient of the considered structure is marked by the
thick line. Thin lines show a new clustering coeﬃcient
after addition (circles) or removal (triangles) of one link.
At the beginning, let us assume that we have b < 10.
To increase clustering coeﬃcient we have to remove one
link which leads to the conﬁguration with b − 1 links at-
tached to the peripheral node Q. Further, it is easy to see
that the process will follow towards removing next links
belonging to Q until the node will have only two links.
The node degree can not drop below kQ = 2, because
for kQ < 2 local clustering coeﬃcient cQ suddenly drops
from 1 to 0 which drastically decreases global clustering
coeﬃcient of the whole structure. On the other hand, if
we assume that b > 10, then energetically favorable is to
add another b + 1 link to the node Q. Again, one can see
that the node Q will try to connect to all other nodes,
i.e. the node Q becomes a member of the fully connected
subgraph.

Starting from the conﬁguration F if one further in-
creases θ the productivity P starts to matter. It means
that above some critical value of this parameter an addi-
tion of the third link to one out of peripheral nodes with
degree k = 2 can compensate energy lost coming from de-
crease of the clustering coeﬃcient. The same reasoning
explains successive network reorganizations when adding
next links (up to k = h) to peripheral nodes is energeti-
cally favorable.

At the moment, let us note that nodes belonging to
the fully connected subgraph in the conﬁguration F have
diﬀerent degrees. Their degrees are composed of NF − 1
mutual links and links coming from peripheral nodes with
degree k = 2 (the peripheral links are randomly dis-
tributed among the nodes creating the fully connected
subgraph). It means that in a ﬁnite system there always
exists a node with the largest degree. It is easy to check
that addition of a new link to this node makes cluster-

0.978

C

0.977

0.976

0.975

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

)
k
(
N

 original (b links)
 addition (b+1 links)
 removal (b-1 links)

5

 

 

10

b

60

50

40

 

30

20

10

0

8

9

11

12

FIG. 5: Clustering coeﬃcient C for the system depicted in
Fig. 2d. Arrows show evolution of the system (addition or
removal of successive links).

 

 

k=2

k=3

 

node with
max degree

0

20

40

60

80

100 120

0

20

40

60

80

100 120

k

k

FIG. 6: Schematic node degree distribution before and af-
ter transition F − G. The node with the highest degree is
exaggerated to show its dynamics during the transition.

ing coeﬃcient of the whole structure worse in the least
way. It means that above a certain value of θ new links
are added to this node making its degree rapidly grow-
ing. Fig. 6 shows in a schematic way the node degree
distribution below and at the critical value of θ for the
transition.

As we have described above, if one further increases
the control parameter θ the peripheral nodes suddenly
increase their degrees from k = 3 to k = 4.
It gener-
ates a similar mechanism as described in the previous
paragraph, i.e. consecutive node with the largest degree
(expect the one which has already increased its degree
to N ) stepwise increases its connectivity. The network
conﬁguration arising along the transition corresponds to
the conﬁguration G presented in Fig. 1.

Another crucial point in the system evolution is the
transition G − H, where the fully connected subgraph is
destroyed in the similar manner as the complete graph
in the transition C − A. After the transition G − H our
network consists of several hubs and a large number of
loosely connected peripheral nodes.

The conﬁguration H is presented twice in Fig. 1 in

 

40

w

 link removal
 link addition

h

wc

 

D P

0.2

0.1

0.0

-0.1

-0.2

0

20

60

80

FIG. 7: Change of productivity in the star-like structure de-
picted in Fig. 2e as a function of degree of the central highly
connected node w, for h = 10.

order to show two possibilities of the system evolution:
it can be stable when θ → ∞, or hubs can be destroyed,
and the transition H −A takes place. To analyze stability
of the conﬁguration H is enough to consider a simpliﬁed
structure presented in Fig. 2e (note that the simpliﬁed
star-like structure neglects eﬀects of clustering which may
occur in the original conﬁguration H). In such a struc-
ture, change of productivity resulting from addition or
removal of a single link between the hub with a large
degree w and one of peripheral nodes with degree h (as
we have already stated the maximal connectivity of the
peripheral nodes along the transition path F − G − H is
k = h) is presented in Fig. 7

h

(cid:2)

he−1 + we− w
P0 =
Pm = h(h − 1)e− h−1
Pp = h(h + 1)e− h+1

e
N h ,

(cid:3)

h + (w − 1)e− w−1
h + (w + 1)e− w+1

h

h

e
N h ,
e
N h .

i

i

(10)

A given process (link addition or removal) occurs only if
the change of productivity is positive. It means that if w
is small the only possibility is to add a new links. When
h < w < wc (c.f. Fig. 7) links can only be removed. It
means that degree of the hub should decrease from w to h,
and the transition H − A takes place. On the other hand,
when w > wc, both processes (addition and removal of
links) are no longer possible. It means that the system
remains in the stable conﬁguration H. Unfortunately,
because the analysis neglects clustering it does not allow
us to calculate the precise critical value of θH−A.

Finally, let us analyze the transition H − I (Fig. 1),
which occurs when starting from the stable conﬁgura-
tion H one decreases the control parameter θ. On the
basis of our previous considerations one can predict that
the conﬁguration I emerges when the input of clustering
coeﬃcient to the system energy crosses a critical value.
In a similar way like during the transition A − B nodes

6

with low degrees have tendency to form triangles. On
the other hand, however, because hubs are stable (we
have shown it in the previous paragraph) instead of many
separated clusters like in the conﬁguration B the system
evolves towards the stable conﬁguration I.

If the parameter θ is suﬃciently negative the conﬁgura-
tion I is destroyed just like the conﬁguration B, and the
mechanism of this transition is the same: which conﬁgu-
ration (C,D, or E) appears depends on the system size N
(c.f. thick dotted curve in Fig. 4). The only diﬀerence is
that for a given N the number of isolated nodes is lower
in comparison with the transition B − D.

As we have stated before, in fact, our system in the
conﬁguration D consists of two conﬁgurations C and E.
It means that at least to some value of the parameter θ
the part of the system that is equivalent to conﬁguration
E follows a path D − F − G − H, and the second part,
equivalent to the conﬁguration C, follows the path C −A.
At some point, up to now separated parts of the network
combine together. In ﬁgure 1, in order to make the whole
picture as clear as possible, we marked paths accessible
for these two components of the conﬁguration D by gray
arrows.

Let us also notice that a path our system follows can
be really complicated. For example, let us consider a
network in the conﬁguration A. After transitions A −
B − D the number of isolated nodes is high, which allows
to create hubs with very high degrees w > wc as a result
of the transition F − G. It means that the conﬁguration
H is stable, and the system follows the path H − I − D.
Now, the number of isolated nodes is much lower (see Fig.
4). Their number is often too small to once more time
create hubs with degrees w > wc during the transition
F −G. Thus, after a series of transitions D−F −G−H the
system returns to the initial state A. It means, that the
return to the same state is possible after a complicated
path A − B − D − F − G − H − I − D − F − G − H − A,
in which the chain of transitions D − F − G − H − I may
be repeated several times.

Finally, we have to stress that a part of phase transi-
tions we observed are visible only in ﬁnite size systems,
i.e. if the system is large enough a particular phase tran-
sition can change its character and can lead to develop-
ment of diﬀerent structure. Although usually physicists
use term phase transition in the context of systems in
thermodynamical limit, our delinquency can be justiﬁed
because the model we study has been proposed to social
systems where the number of elements is always limited.

IV. DISCUSSION

As we have presented in the previous section our sim-
ple model is characterized by a surprisingly complicated
and eventful phase diagram with plenty of metastable
states. Nevertheless, since the model was sociologically

DYSONET
STREP

BIOPHOT
STREP

GIACS
CA

Other STREPs

CREEN
STREP

COAST
STREP

ONCE-CS
CA

GENNETEC
STREP

MMCOMNET
STREP

Other STREPs

7

Of course there are projects which take support from
both coordination actions because aims of both CA’s are
slightly diﬀerent. Let us stress that the above picture is
very simpliﬁed. The main simpliﬁcation is that CA’s are
represented by single nodes in Fig. 8, which is evidently
not true - coordination actions are projects consisting of
many participants as well as STREPs.

Finally, the last comment. A careful reader can ask
what could be the interpretation of negative value of the
control parameter θ. In fact, it corresponds to the situa-
tion where groups composed of small number of partici-
pants are undesirable. The sociological explanation (al-
though not connected with scientiﬁc collaboration) can
be expressed as follows: or you commune with one global
social group or you will be separated, which can be rec-
ognized as the fascist ideology.

FIG. 8:
(Color online) Schematic view on network of EU
projects. Two highly connected coordination actions are sur-
rounded by a plenty of small research projects.

V. CONCLUSIONS

motivated, let us discuss the observed network conﬁgu-
rations in the context of scientiﬁc collaboration.

First, the conﬁguration B seems to be the easiest to
interpret. If each node represents scientiﬁc group then
we see here separated projects consisting of several sci-
entiﬁc groups where each group collaborate with each
other. The realism of the situation can be questionable
since real projects can be composed of diﬀerent number
of participants, but let us remind that in the model we
have assumed that the optimal number of collaborators
h is ﬁxed for all groups. To make the model more real-
istic we should draw the parameter from the Lotka-like
distribution [25], but it would certainly complicate ob-
tained results and at the moment we were much more
interested in the description of the observed structural
phase transitions.

The second conﬁguration which seems to reﬂect real-
world observations is the conﬁguration I. Fig. 8 shows
the real (although simpliﬁed) case of EU projects be-
ing currently in progress. Let us explain that complex
systems research in Europe is funded through two Eu-
ropean Commission actions: NEST (New and Emerg-
ing Science and Technology, and FET-IST (Future and
Emerging Technology Information Society Technology)
[23]. It is mainly being done through small projects called
STREPS (Strategic Targeted Research Projects). Apart
from them the European Commission is currently fund-
ing two Coordination Actions to support complex sys-
tems science: ONCE-CS (funded by IST-FET) and GI-
ACS (funded by NEST). In Fig. 8 they are presented
as main nodes which serve as knowledge transfer units
between particular projects. Part of projects funded
mainly by NEST collaborate with GIACS, and projects
funded mainly by IST-FET are supported by ONCE-CS.

In this paper we have presented a model of social col-
laboration. Although the model is expressed by a sim-
ple Hamiltonian the richness of observed structural phase
transitions is impressive. Most of them we can only an-
alyze qualitatively and further studies have to be per-
formed to clarify reasons for which a given structure ap-
pears. We uncover many aspects of the studied model
but in fact much more questions arise during our inves-
tigations.

Although simpliﬁcations of the model do not allow to
render in detail the real-world space of scientiﬁc projects,
we have shown that some conﬁgurations formed in the
system remind existing structures of European projects.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Authors wish to thank Krzysztof Suchecki and Julian
Sienkiewicz for fruitful discussions and insightful com-
ments. JH acknowledges a ﬁnancial support from the
State Committee for Scientiﬁc Research in Poland (Grant
No. 134/E-365/6.PR UE/DIE239/2005-2007). P.F. ac-
knowledges a support from the EU Grant CREEN FP6-
2003-NEST-Path-012864. A.F. acknowledges ﬁnancial
support from the Foundation for Polish Science (FNP
2006).

[1] S. Bornholdt and H.G. Schuster, Handbook of Graphs and

networks, Wiley-Vch (2002).

[2] S.N. Dorogovtsev and J.F.F. Mendes, Evolution of Net-

works, Oxford Univ.Press (2003).

[3] R. Albert and A.L. Barab´asi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74 47

(2002).

8

(1986).

(1996).

(2004).

[4] S.N. Dorogovtshev and J.F.F. Mendes, Adv.Phys. 51

[15] O. Frank and D. Strauss, J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 81, 832

[5] M. Faloutsos, P. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos, Comput.

[16] S. Wasserman and P. Pattison, Psychometrika 61, 401

1079 (2002).

Comun. Rev. 29, 251 (1999).

[6] M.J. Barber, A. Krueger, T. Krueger, and T. Roediger-

[17] C. Anderson, S. Wasserman, and B. Crouch, Soc. Net-

Schluga, Phys. Rev. E 73, 036132 (2006)

[7] A.L. Barab´asi and R. Albert, Science 286, 509 (1999).
[8] M. Bogu˜nn´a and R. Pastor-Satorras, Phys. Rev. E 68,

works 21, 37 (1999).

[18] J. Park and M.E.J. Newman, Phys. Rev. E 70, 066146

036112 (2003).

(2004).

[9] J. Park and M.E.J. Newman, Phys. Rev. E 70, 066117

69, 026106 (2004).

[10] M.E.J. Newman, S.H. Strogatz, and D.J. Watts, Phys.

70, 026106 (2004).

Rev. E 64, 026118 (2001).

[21] G. Palla, I. Dernyi, I. Farkas, and T. Vicsek, Phys. Rev.

[20] Z. Burda, J. Jurkiewicz, and A. Krzywicki, Phys. Rev. E

[19] Z. Burda, J. Jurkiewicz, and A. Krzywicki, Phys. Rev. E

[11] A. Fronczak, P. Fronczak, and J. A. Ho lyst, How to
Calculate Main Characteristics of Random Uncorrelated
Networks, AIP Conf. Proc. No. 776 (AIP, New York,
2005), p. 52.

[12] P. Erdos and A. R´enyi, Publ. Math. Inst. Hung. Acad.

[13] P. W. Holland and S. Leinhardt, J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 76,

Sci. 5, 17 (1960).

33 (1981).

[14] O. Frank, J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 76, 58 (1981).

[22] J. Park and M.E.J. Newman, Phys. Rev. E 72, 026136

E 69, 046117 (2004).

(2005).

[23] Information about FP6 and EU funding can be found
in the brochure The 6th Framework Programme in brief
availaible at www.cordis.lu.

[24] D.J. Watts and S.H. Strogatz, Nature, 393, 4 (1998).
[25] A.J. Lotka, J. Wash. Acad. Sci., 16, 317 (1926).

