E-mail: s.zhou@adastral.ucl.ac.uk

S. Zhou1 and R. J. Mondrag´on2
1Department of Computer Science, University College London
Ross Building, Adastral Park, Ipswich, IP5 3RE, United Kingdom
2Department of Electronic Engineering, Queen Mary, University of London
Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS, United Kingdom

7 Structural constraints in complex networks
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
2
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
9
0
2
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract. We present a link–rewiring mechanism to produce surrogates of a network
where both the degree distribution and the rich–club connectivity are preserved. We
consider three real networks, the AS–Internet, the protein interaction and the scientiﬁc
collaboration. We show that for a given degree distribution, the rich–club connectivity
is sensitive to the degree–degree correlation, and on the other hand the degree–degree
correlation is constrained by the rich–club connectivity. In particular, in the case of
the Internet, the assortative coeﬃcient is always negative and a minor change in its
value can reverse the network’s rich–club structure completely; while ﬁxing the degree
distribution and the rich–club connectivity restricts the assortative coeﬃcient to such a
narrow range, that a reasonable model of the Internet can be produced by considering
mainly the degree distribution and the rich–club connectivity. We also comment on
the suitability of using the maximal random network as a null model to assess the
rich–club connectivity in real networks.

In graph theory the degree k is deﬁned as the number of links a node has. The
distribution of degree P (k) provides a global view of a network’s structure and is one of
the most studied topological properties. Many complex networks are scale–free because
they exhibit a power-law degree distribution, i.e. P (k) ∼ k−γ, γ > 1 [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
A more complete description of a network’s structure is obtained from the joint degree
distribution P (k, k′) [9, 10, 11], which is the probability that a randomly selected link
connects a node of degree k with a node of degree k′. The degree distribution can be
obtained from the joint degree distribution: P (k) = (¯k/k)
Pk′ P (k, k′), where ¯k is the
average degree.

PACS numbers: 89.75.-k, 89.75.Da, 89.75.Fb, 89.20.Hh, 82.39.Rt, 87.23.Ge, 05.70.Ln

1. Introduction

The joint degree distribution characterises the degree correlation [12, 13] between
two nodes connected by a link. But in practice P (k, k′) can be diﬃcult to measure, in
particular for a ﬁnite–size and scale–free network [14]. Nevertheless the degree–degree

Structural constraints in complex networks

correlation can be inferred from the average degree of the nearest neighbours of k-degree
nodes [10, 15, 16], which is a projection of the joint degree distribution given by

2

(1)

knn(k) =

¯k

Pk′ k′P (k, k′)
kP (k)

.

If the nearest-neighbours average degree knn is an increasing function of k then the
i.e. high–degree
network is assortative, where nodes tend to attach to alike nodes,
nodes to high–degree nodes and low–degree nodes to low–degree nodes. If knn(k) is a
decreasing function of k then the network is disassortative, where high–degree nodes tend
to connect with low–degree nodes. A network’s degree–degree correlation, or mixing
pattern, can also be summarised by a single scalar called the assortativity coeﬃcient α,
−1 ≤ α ≤ 1 [12],

α =

L−1

Pj>i kikjaij − hL−1
i + k2

2(k2

1

2

1

2 (ki + kj)aiji

Pj>i

2 ,

(2)

L−1

Pj>i

j )aij − hL−1
where L is the total number of links, ki, kj are the degrees of nodes i and j, and aij is an
element of the network’s adjacency matrix, where aij = 1 if nodes i and j are connected
by a link otherwise aij = 0 [17]. For an uncorrelated network α = 0, for a assortative
network α > 0 and for a disassortative network α < 0.

2 (ki + kj)aiji

Pj>i

1

In some scale–free networks the best connected nodes, rich nodes, tend to be very
well connected between themselves. A rich–club is the set of nodes R>k with degrees
larger than a given degree k. The connectivity between members of the rich–club is
measure by the rich–club connectivity [18], which is deﬁned as the ratio of the number
of links E>k shared by the nodes in the set R>k to the maximum possible number of
links that the rich nodes can share,

φ(k) =

E>k
|R>k| · (|R>k| − 1)/2

=

1

|R>k| · (|R>k| − 1) X
i,j∈R>k

aij,

(3)

where |R>k| is the number of nodes in the set R>k [17, 19]. The rich–club connectivity
as a function of the degree is a global property of a network.
It describes the
interrelationship between subsets of nodes. The rich–club connectivity is a diﬀerent
projection of the joint degree distribution [19],

φ(k) =

kmax
kmax
k′
k+1 R
R

|R>k| ·
kmax
k+1 P (k′)dk′] · [N
R

P (k′, k′′)dk′′dk′
k+1 P (k′)dk′ − 1]
R

kmax

,

[N

(4)

where N is the total number of nodes and kmax is the maximum degree in the network.
The rich–club connectivity, the nearest-neighbours average degree and the assortative
coeﬃcient are not trivially related.

Our motivation here is twofold. First to study if the description of a network using
P (k) and φ(k) produces a reasonable model of a real network. We consider three real
networks, the AS-Internet, the protein interaction and the scientiﬁc collaboration. Our
approach is, from a real network, to create surrogate networks with the same P (k),

Structural constraints in complex networks

3

Figure 1. The four end nodes of a pair of links can be reconnected in three
wiring patterns: (a) assortative wiring, where one link connects the two nodes with
larger degrees and the other link connects the two nodes with smaller degrees; (b)
disassortative wiring, where one link connects the node with the highest degree with
the node with the lowest degree and the other link connects the two remaining nodes;
and (c) neutral wiring.

or even the same φ(k), as the original network, and then compare properties of the
surrogates with the original network. Second, we are interested in the properties of the
surrogates, in particular the maximal random case of a network, as it has been used as
a ‘null model’ to assess network properties.

2. Link Rewiring Algorithms

We create surrogate networks by using the link rewiring algorithms [20, 21].

2.1. Maximal Cases I: Preserving P (k)

The broad degree distribution P (k) is an important characteristic for complex networks
and it should be preserved by any link rewiring process [22]. Figure 1 shows that
four nodes with degrees k1 > k2 > k3 > k4 can be connected by two links in three
possible wiring patterns. One can see that reconnecting a pair of links from one wiring
pattern to another preserves the degree of individual nodes and therefore preserves the
degree distribution P (k). It is possible to obtain diﬀerent kind of surrogate networks
by rewiring links in the following ways.

• Maximal random case I : randomly choose a pair of links and swap two of their

Structural constraints in complex networks

4

end nodes. This is equivalent to reconnect the four end nodes using a wiring pattern
chosen at random. The process is repeated for a suﬃciently large number of times.
• Maximal assortative case I : reconnect a pair of links in the assortative wiring
pattern (see ﬁgure 1(a)) and repeat the process until all link pairs are assortative
wired.

• Maximal disassortative case I : similarly, reconnect all pairs of links using the

disassortative wiring pattern (see ﬁgure 1(b)).

2.2. Maximal Cases II: Preserving Both P (k) And φ(k)

It is possible to modify the link-rewiring process such that the rich–club connectivity
is preserved as well. For a given degree k the rich–club connectivity φ(k) depends on
the number of links E>k shared by the nodes belonging to the set R>k. Any rewiring
between nodes belonging to R>k, or between nodes outside R>k, will not change E>k
hence φ(k) will remain the same. As shown in ﬁgure 1, E>k1, E>k2, E>k3 and E>k4 in
the disassortative wiring (ﬁgure 1(b)) and the neutral wiring (ﬁgure 1(c)) are the same,
because the link e1 only and always belongs to E>k4, and the other link e2 only and
always belongs to E>k3 and E>k4. This means that when reconnecting a pair of links
between the disassortative wiring and the neutral wiring, φ(k) remains unchanged for
all degrees. This allow us to obtain a diﬀerent set of maximal cases for a network while
preserving both the network’s P (k) and φ(k).

• Maximal random case II : if a chosen pair of links are assortatively wired, they
are discarded and a new pair of links is selected; otherwise the four end nodes are
reconnected using either the disassortative wiring or the neutral wiring at random.
• Maximal assortative case II : if a pair of links are not assortatively wired, the
four nodes are reconnected using the neutral rewiring, which will produce a more
assortative mixing than using the disassortative wiring. The process is repeated for
all pairs of links.

• Maximal disassortative case II : if a pair of links that are not assortatively
wired, the four nodes are reconnected using the disassortative wiring. The process
is repeated for all pairs of links.

3. Results

Table 1 describes the data sets and some of their topological properties. Figure 2(a)
shows that the three networks have a power–law decay in P (k). The degree distribution
of the Internet is well approximated by P (k) ∼ k−γ, γ ≃ 2.24 [?], and it exhibits
a fat tail where the maximum degree, kmax = 2070, is larger than the power–law
cut–oﬀ degree kcut = 1573. The degree distribution of the protein interaction and
the scientiﬁc collaboration deviates from a strict power-law and have short tails.
Figure 2(b) shows that the scientiﬁc collaboration exhibits the assortative mixing

Structural constraints in complex networks

5

[5, 15, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27]

Table 1. Three real networks considered are:
(a) the Internet network at the
from data collected
autonomous system (AS) level
in which nodes represent Internet service providers and links
by CAIDA [28],
connections among those;
(b) the protein interaction network [6, 29] of the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (http://dip.doe-mbi.ucla.edu/); and (c) the scientiﬁc
collaboration network [30, 31], in which nodes represent scientists and a connection
exists if they coauthored at least one paper in the archive. The three networks contain
multiple components. In this paper we study the giant component of the networks.
We show the following properties: the number of nodes N and links L in the giant
component, the average degree ¯k = 2L/N , the power–law exponent γ by ﬁtting P (k)
with k−γ for degrees between 6 (the average degree) and 40, the maximum degree
kmax, the power–law cut–oﬀ degree kcut = N 1/(γ−1) [9], the assortative coeﬃcient
α, the rich–club connectivity φ(k>40) between nodes with degrees larger than 40, the
rich–club exponent θ obtained by ﬁtting φ(k) with kθ for degrees between 6 and 40,
the size of rich–club clique nclique, the average shortest path length ℓ, and the average
shortest path length expected in a random graph ℓ∗ = ln N/ ln ¯k [9].

Number of nodes N
Number of links L
Average degree ¯k
Power–law exponent γ
Maximum degree kmax
Power–law cut–oﬀ degree kcut
Assortative coeﬃcient α
Rich–club connectivity φ(k>40)
Rich–club exponent θ
Rich–club clique nclique
Average shortest path length ℓ
Expected in a random graph ℓ∗

Internet

9,200
28,957
6.3
2.24
2,070
1,573
−0.236
26.8%
1.52
16
3.1
5.0

Protein
interaction
4,626
14,801
6.4
2.14
282
1,641
−0.137
6.4%
0.97
0
4.2
4.5

Scientiﬁc
collaboration
12,722
39,967
6.3
2.90
97
145
0.161
7.1%
1.94
0
6.8
5.1

behaviour, which is common in social networks. The Internet and protein interaction
exhibit the disassortative mixing behaviour, which is typical for technological and
biological networks. The mixing behaviours are also conﬁrmed by evaluating the
assortative coeﬃcient of the networks (see α in table 1). Figure 2(c) shows that the three
data sets exhibit diﬀerent rich–club structures. Rich nodes in the disassortative Internet
are signiﬁcantly more tightly interconnected with each other than in the assortative
scientiﬁc collaboration. Only the Internet contains a rich–club clique where the top 16
richest nodes are fully connected with each other (see nclique in table 1). One can see
that an assortative network does not always exhibit a strong rich-club structure, neither
Indeed high-degree
does a disassortative network always lack a rich-club structure.
nodes have very large numbers of links and only a few of them are enough to provide

Structural constraints in complex networks

6

Figure 2. Topological properties of the Internet, the protein interaction and the
scientiﬁc collaboration networks: (a) the degree distribution, P (k); (b) the nearest-
neighbours average degree of k-degree nodes, knn(k); and (c) the rich–club connectivity
as a function of degree, φ(k).

the connectivity to other high-degree nodes, whose number is anyway small [5].

A relevant metric of a network is the average shortest path length ℓ between
all nodes. As shown in table 1 the average shortest path length in the Internet is
signiﬁcantly smaller than the average shortest path length expected in a random graph
with the same network size. The Internet is so small [32] because it exhibits both a strong
rich-club structure and a strong disassortative mixing behaviour. While members of the
rich-club are tightly interconnected with each other and they collectively function as a
‘super’ traﬃc hub for the network, the disassortative mixing ensures that the majority
of the network nodes, peripheral low-degree nodes, are always near the rich-club core.
Thus a typical shortest path between two peripheral nodes consists of three hops, the
ﬁrst hop is from the source node to a member of the rich-club, the second hop is
between two club members and the ﬁnal hop is to the destination node. One can see
that a combination of the degree-degree correlation and the rich-club connectivity can
also explain the distribution of the hierarchical path [33] and the short cycles [20] in a
network.

Figure 3 shows the range of the assortative coeﬃcient α obtained by the link
rewiring algorithms preserving the degree distribution (case I ) against that preserving
both the degree distribution and the rich–club connectivity (case II ). The maximal
random case of a real network is averaged over 40 surrogate networks, each of which is
obtained by repeating the appropriate link rewiring process for 1000 × L times, where
L is the total number of links in the network.

For case I preserving P (k), the maximal random rewiring of the protein interaction
and the scientiﬁc collaboration almost decorrelates the networks, and the assortative and
disassortative rewiring can produce surrogate networks in the range from assortative to
disassortative. This is in contrast to the Internet, where the maximal random case is

Structural constraints in complex networks

7

Figure 3. Range of the assortative coeﬃcient α of the three networks under study
obtained by the link rewiring algorithms preserving P (k) (case I ) comparing with
that preserving both P (k) and φ(k) (case II ). The inset shows the enlargement for
the Internet. The standard deviation for a maximal random case is smaller than the
symbol representing it.

almost as disassortative as the original data. In fact all the surrogate networks produced
by rewiring the Internet are disassortative, the assortative coeﬃcient is always negative
and its value is restricted to a very small range. This behaviour of the Internet is due
to the restriction of having a ﬁnite network that has a power–law decay in its degree
distribution and that the maximum degree is larger than the cut–oﬀ degree [9, 14].

For case II preserving both P (k) and φ(k), the range of α is narrower than case I
when only ﬁxing P (k). This result conﬁrms the analytical analysis by Krioukov and
Krapivsky [34] that the rich–club connectivity constrains a network’s degree–degree
correlation. In the case of the Internet, the assortative coeﬃcient is restricted to a even
smaller range. This observation suggests that a reasonable model of a real network
can be produced by modelling the degree distribution and the rich–club connectivity,
e.g. the Positive-Feedback Preference (PFP) model [27, 35, 36] of the Internet.

Figure 4 shows the rich–club connectivity of the three networks each compared with
their three maximal cases I obtained by preserving P (k). The rich–club connectivity
changes dramatically due to the rewiring. For all the maximal assortative networks there
is a notable increase of φ(k) throughout all degrees and all contain a fully connected rich–
club clique which consists nodes with degrees larger than 78, 48 and 46 for the Internet,
the protein interaction and the scientiﬁc collaboration respectively. For all the maximal
disassortative networks there is a complete collapse of the rich–club structure such that
there is no single link shared between nodes with degrees larger than 23. This suggests
that two networks with the same degree distribution can have very diﬀerent rich–club
connectivity. In other words the degree distribution does not constrain the rich–club

Structural constraints in complex networks

8

Figure 4. Rich–club connectivity φ(k) of (a) the Internet, (b) the protein interaction,
and (c) the scientiﬁc collaboration, comparing with the three maximal cases I obtained
by preserving P (k).

connectivity. The rich–club connectivity is sensitive to the change of a network’s degree–
degree correlation. For the Internet, a minor change in the assortative coeﬃcient
within the narrow range of α ∈ (−0.218, −0.275) could reverse the rich–club structure
completely. This highlights the importance to measure the rich–club connectivity when
evaluating a network model.

4. Discussion

The maximal random network obtained by preserving P (k) has been used to discern
whether the existence of an interaction between two proteins is due to chance or not [6].
To do such, the probability that two nodes share a link in the protein interaction network
is compared against the probability that the same two nodes will share a link in the
maximal random network. The maximal random network is used as a null model because
in this case it is almost a decorrelated network (see ﬁgure 3).

Recently the maximal random network has also been used as a null model to detect
the origin of the rich–club connectivity in real networks [19]. The argument is that if
the rich–club connectivity of the original network is the same as that of the maximal
random network then the rich–club connectivity was created by chance, otherwise there
was an ‘organisational principle’ responsible for the existence (or the lack) of the rich–
In the case of the Internet, the original network‡ and the maximal
club structure.
random network have similar rich-club connectivity (see red and short dashed line in
ﬁgure 4(a)), then the conclusion in Ref. [19, 38] was that ‘hubs in the Internet ... are not
tightly interconnected ’ and ‘the Internet does not have an oligarchic structure whereas,
for example, scientiﬁc collaborations do’. However, as shown in ﬁgure 2(c), the Internet
does contain a well connected rich-club core and we do not need more statistical analysis
to support this observation.

‡ The Internet data set used in [19] was collected by the Route Views project [37].

Structural constraints in complex networks

9

To understand the problem of using the maximal random network of the Internet
as a null model, one need to realise that the maximal random network in this case is
not an uncorrelated network. On the contrary it is a strongly correlated network and is
almost as dissasortative as the Internet. Rich nodes in both the original network and
the maximal random network are tightly interconnected, and the similarity between the
rich–club connectivity of the two networks does not implies that the Internet lacks a
rich-club structure.

Notice that the maximal random network for the Internet with P (k) and φ(k) both
ﬁxed becomes more dissasortative than the original network (and more dissasortative
than the maximal random network with only P (k) ﬁxed, see inset in ﬁgure 3). This
suggests that the rich–club structure depends strongly on the nature of the degree–
degree correlation and it was not formed by chance. This strong dependence on the
tail of the degree distribution (kmax) and the degree–degree correlation has also been
noted in the estimates of large cliques that appear in random scale–free networks [39].
A more detail analysis of the null–model of the rich–club connectivity will be published
elsewhere.

5. Conclusions

The rich–club connectivity and the degree–degree correlation describe the global
structure of a network from diﬀerent perspectives. We show that for a given degree
distribution, the rich–club connectivity is sensitive to the degree–degree correlation,
and on the other hand the degree–degree correlation is constrained by the rich–club
connectivity.
In particular for the case of the Internet, the assortative coeﬃcient
is always negative and a minor change in its value can reverse the network’s rich–
club structure completely;
if ﬁxing both the degree distribution and the rich–club
connectivity, the assortative coeﬃcient is restricted to such a narrow range that a
reasonable model of the Internet can be produced by considering mainly the degree
distribution and the rich–club connectivity.

We also clarify some misinterpretations that have appeared in the literature which
use the maximal random case as a null model to assess the rich-club connectivity in real
networks. We remark that some care is needed to avoid reaching misleading conclusions,
in particular when studying the Internet.

Acknowledgments

We thank A. Vespignani and V. Colizza for sharing the data sets of the protein
interaction and scientiﬁc collaboration networks. We also thank CAIDA for providing
the data set of the Internet AS graph. SZ is partially funded by the UK Nuﬃeld
Foundation under grant no. NAL/01125/G, and RJM is partially funded by the UK
EPSRC under grant no. EP/C520246/1.

Structural constraints in complex networks

10

References

74:47–97, 2002.

2003.

[1] A. Barab´asi and R. Albert. Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science, 286:509, 1999.
[2] R. Albert and A. L. Barab´asi. Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Rev. Mod. Phys.,

[3] M. E. J. Newman. The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM Review, 45:167–256,

[4] S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes. Evolution of Networks - From Biological Nets to the

Internet and WWW. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003.

[5] R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani. Evolution and Structure of the Internet - A Statistical

Physics Approach. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004.

[6] S. Maslov and K. Sneppen. Speciﬁcity and stability in topology of protein networks. Science,

[7] S. Wasserman and K. Faust. Social Network Analysis. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,

296(5569):910–913, 2002.

1994.

[8] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, and D.-U. Hwang. Complex networks: Structure

and dynamics. Physics Reports, 424:175–308, 2006.

[9] S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes. Evolution of networks. Adv. Phys., 51(1079), 2002.
[10] S. N. Dorogovtsev. Networks with given correlations. http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0308336v1.
[11] P. Mahadevan, D. Krioukov, K. Fall, and A. Vahdat. Systematic topology analysis and generation
In Proc. of SIGCOMM’06, pages 135–146. ACM Press, New York,

using degree correlations.
2006.

[12] M. E. J Newman. Assortative mixing in networks. Phys. Rev. Lett., 89(208701), 2002.
[13] M. E. J. Newman. Mixing patterns in networks. Phys. Rev. E, 67(026126), 2003.
[14] M. Bogu˜n´a, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Vespignani. Cut-oﬀs and ﬁnite size eﬀects in scale-free

[15] R. Pastor-Satorras, A. V´azquez, and A. Vespignani. Dynamical and correlation properties of the

networks. Eur. Phys. J. B, 38:205–210, 2004.

internet. Phys. Rev. Lett., 87(258701), 2001.

[16] A. V´azquez, M. Bogu˜n´a, Y. Moreno, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Vespignani. Topology and

correlations in structured scale-free networks. Phys. Rev. E, 67(046111), 2003.

[17] L. da F. Costa, F. A. Rodrigues, G. Travieso, and P. R. Villas Boas. Characterization of complex

networks: A survey of measurements. http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0505185.

[18] S. Zhou and R. J. Mondrag´on. The rich-club phenomenon in the Internet topology. IEEE Comm.

Lett., 8(3):180–182, March 2004.

[19] V. Colizza, A. Flammini, M. A. Serrano, and A. Vespignani. Detecting rich-club ordering in

complex networks. Nature Physics, 2:110–115, 2006.

[20] S. Maslov, K. Sneppenb, and A. Zaliznyaka. Detection of topological patterns in complex networks:

correlation proﬁle of the internet. Physica A, 333:529–540, 2004.

[21] R. Xulvi-Brunet and I. M. Sokolov. Reshuﬄing scale-free networks: From random to assortative.

Phys. Rev. E, 70(066102), 2004.

[22] M. E. J. Newman, S. H. Strogatz, and D. J. Watts. Random graphs with arbitrary degree

distributions and their applications. Phys. Rev. E, 64(026118), 2001.

[23] M. Faloutsos, P. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos. On power–law relationships of the Internet topology.

Comput. Commun. Rev., 29:251–262, 1999.

[24] A. V´azquez, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Vespignani. Large-scale topological and dynamical

properties of Internet. Phys. Rev. E, 65(066130), 2002.

[25] Q. Chen, H. Chang, R. Govindan, S. Jamin, S. J. Shenker, and W. Willinger. The Origin of
In Proc. of INFOCOM 2002, pages 608–617.

Power Laws in Internet Topologies (Revisited).
IEEE Computer Society, Washington D.C., 2002.

[26] P. Mahadevan, D. Krioukov, M. Fomenkov, B. Huﬀaker, X. Dimitropoulos, K. Claﬀy, and
A. Vahdat. The Internet AS-level Topology: Three Data Sources and One Deﬁnitive Metric.

Structural constraints in complex networks

11

[27] S. Zhou and R. J. Mondrag´on. Accurately modelling the Internet topology. Phys. Rev. E,

Comput. Commun. Rev., 36(1):17–26, 2006.

70(066108), December 2004.

[28] The Cooperative Association For Internet Data Analysis. http://www.caida.org/.
[29] V. Colizza, A. Flammini, A. Maritan, and A. Vespignani. Characterization and modeling of

protein–protein interaction networks. Physica A, 352:1–27, 2005.

[30] M. E. J. Newman. Scientiﬁc collaboration networks. I. Network construction and fundamental

[31] M. E. J. Newman. Scientiﬁc collaboration networks. II. Shortest paths, weighted networks, and

results. Phys. Rev. E, 64(016131), 2001.

centrality. Phys. Rev. E, 64(016132), 2001.

[32] R. Cohen and S. Havlin. Scale-free networks are ultrasmall. Phys. Rev. Lett., 90(058701), 2003.
[33] A. Trusina, S. Maslov, P. Minnhagen, and K. Sneppen. Hierarchy measures in complex networks.

Phys. Rev. Lett., 92(17), 2004.

[34] D. Krioukov and P. Krapivsky. Power Laws as a pre-asymptotic regime of the PFP Model.
http://www.caida.org/publications/presentations/2006/isma0605_dima/, 2006.
[35] S. Zhou. Understanding the evolution dynamics of Internet topology. Phys. Rev. E, 74(016124),

2006.

[36] S. Zhou, G.-Qiang Zhang, and G.-Qing Zhang. The Chinese Internet AS-Level Topology.

http://arxiv.org/abs/cs.NI/0511101.

[37] Route Views Project, University of Oregon, Eugene. http://www.routeviews.org/.
[38] L. A. N. Amaral and R. Guimer`a. Lies, damned lies and statistics. Nature Physics, 2:75–76, 2006.
[39] G. Bianconi and M. Marsili. Emergence of large cliques in random scale-free networks. Europhys.

Lett., 74(4):740, 2006.

