7
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
9
6
0
2
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Would Bohr be born if Bohm were born before Born?

Hrvoje Nikoli´c
Theoretical Physics Division, Rudjer Boˇskovi´c Institute,
P.O.B. 180, HR-10002 Zagreb, Croatia
e-mail: hrvoje@thphys.irb.hr

October 20, 2013

Abstract

I discuss a hypothetical historical context in which a Bohm-like deterministic
interpretation of the Schr¨odinger equation could have been proposed before the
Born probabilistic interpretation and argue that in such a context the Copenhagen
(Bohr) interpretation would probably have never achieved great popularity among
physicists.

Is this the real life
Is this just fantasy
Caught in a landslide
No escape from reality

Freddie Mercury, “Boh(e)mian Rhapsody”

1 Introduction

The Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics (QM) was the ﬁrst interpretation
of QM that achieved a signiﬁcant recognition among physicists.
It was proposed very
early by the fathers of QM, especially Bohr and Heisenberg. Later, many other inter-
pretations of QM were proposed, such as statistical ensemble interpretation, Bohm (pilot
wave) interpretation, Nelson (stochastic dynamics) interpretation, Ghirardi-Rimini-Weber
(spontaneous collapse) interpretation, quantum logic interpretation, information theoretic
interpretation, consistent histories interpretation, many-world (relative state) interpreta-
tion, relational interpretation, etc. All these interpretations seem to be consistent with
experiments, as well as with the minimal pragmatic “shut-up-and-calculate interpreta-
tion”. Nevertheless, apart from the minimal pragmatic interpretation, the Copenhagen
interpretation still seems to be the dominating one. Is it because this interpretation is the

1

simplest, the most viable, and the most natural one? Or is it just because of the inertion
of pragmatic physicists who do not want to waste much time on (for them) irrelevant
interpretational issues, so that it is the simplest for them to (uncritically) accept the in-
terpretation to which they were exposed ﬁrst? I believe that the second answer is closer
to truth. To provide an argument for that, in this essay I argue that if some historical
circumstances had been only slightly diﬀerent, then it would have been very likely that
the Bohm deterministic interpretation would have been proposed and accepted ﬁrst, and
consequently, that this interpretation would have been dominating even today. (In fact, if
the many-world interpretation taken literally is correct, then such an alternative history
of QM is not hypothetical at all. Instead, it is explicitly realized in many branches of the
whole multi-universe containing a huge number of parallel universes. A similar remark is
true for the consistent-histories interpretation as well.) For the sake of easier reading, in
the next section I no longer use the conditional, but present an alternative hypothetical
history of QM as if it really happened, trying to argue that such an alternative history
was actually quite natural.1 Although a prior knowledge on the Bohm deterministic in-
terpretation is not required here, for readers unfamiliar with this interpretation I suggest
to read also the original paper [1] or a recent pedagogic review [2].

2 An alternative history of quantum mechanics

When Schr¨odinger discovered his wave equation, the task was to ﬁnd an interpretation of
it. The most obvious interpretation – that electrons are simply waves – was not consistent
because it was known that electrons behave as pointlike particles in many experiments.
Still, it was known that electrons also obey some wave properties. What was the most
natural interpretation of that? Of course, the notion of “naturalness” is highly subjective
and strongly depends on personal knowledge, prejudices, and current paradigms. At that
time, classical deterministic physics was well understood and accepted, so it was the most
natural to try ﬁrst with an interpretation that maximally resembles the known principles
of classical mechanics. In particular, classical mechanics contains only real quantities, so it
was very strange that the Schr¨odinger equation discrabes a complex wave. Consequently,
it was natural to rewrite the Schr¨odinger equation in terms of real quantities only. The
simplest way to do this was to write the complex wave function ψ in the polar form
ψ = Reiφ and then to write the complex Schr¨odinger equation as a set of two (coupled)
real equations for R(x, t) and φ(x, t). However, such a simple mathematical manipulation
did not immediately reveal the physical interpretation of R and φ. Fortunately, a physical
interpretation has revealed very soon, after an additional mathematical transformation

φ(x, t) =

S(x, t)
¯h

,

where S is some new function. The Schr¨odinger equation for ψ rewritten in terms of
R and S turns out to look remarkably similar to something very familiar from classical
mechanics. One equation looks similar to the classical Hamilton-Jacobi equation for the
function S(x, t), diﬀering from it only by a transformation

1Remarks concerning the actual history of QM are given in footnotes.

V (x, t)

V (x, t) + Q(x, t),

→

(1)

(2)

2

where V is the classical potential and

Q

≡ −

¯h2
2m

2R
R

.

∇

The other equation turns out to look exactly as the continuity equation

∂ρ
∂t
R2, with the Hamilton-Jacobi velocity

(ρv) = 0

∇

+

for the density ρ

≡

S
v = ∇
m

.

(3)

(4)

(5)

Thus, at that moment, the most natural interpretation of the phase of the wave function
seemed to be a quantum version of the Hamilton-Jacobi function that determines the
velocity of a pointlike particle. But what was ρ? Since one of the equations looks just
as the continuity equation, at the beginning it was proposed that ρ was the density
of particles. That meant that the Schr¨odinger equation described a ﬂuid consisting of
a huge number of particles. The forces on these particles depended not only on the
classical potential V , but also on the density ρ through the quantum potential (3) in
which R = √ρ.2

Although the interpretation above seemed appealing theoretically, it was very soon
realized that it was not consistent with experiments. It could not explain why, in experi-
ments, only one localized particle at a single position was often observed. Thus, ρ could
not be the density of a ﬂuid. It seemed that ρ (or R) must be an independent continuous
ﬁeld, qualitatively similar to an electromagnetic or a gravitational ﬁeld, that, similarly to
an electromagnetic or a gravitational ﬁeld, inﬂuences the motion of a particle. But why
does ρ satisfy the continuity equation, what is the meaning of this? They could not an-
swer this question, but they were able to identify a physical consequence of the continuity
equation. To see this, assume that one studies a statistical ensemble of particles with the
probability distribution of particle positions equal to some function p(x, t). Assume also
that, for some reason, the initial distribution at t = 0 coincides with the function ρ at
t = 0. Then the continuity equation implies that

p(x, t) = ρ(x, t)

(6)

at any t. But why should these two functions coincide initially? Although nobody was
able to present an absolutely convincing explanation, at least some heuristic arguments
were found, based on statistical arguments.3 This suggested that, in typical experiments,
ρ could be equal to the measured probability density of particle positions.
Indeed, it
turned out that such a prediction agrees with experiments. Since this prediction was
derived from the natural assumption that each particle has the velocity determined by
(5), it was concluded that experiments conﬁrm (5). Thus, this interpretation became
widely accepted and received the status of an “orthodox” interpretation.4

2Such an interpretation was really proposed already in 1926 [3].
3These arguments might have looked similar to those in [4, 5].
4In reality, this interpretation is known today as the Bohm interpretation, while the status of an

“orthodox” interpretation is enjoyed by a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent interpretation.

3

However, not everybody was satisﬁed with this interpretation. In particular, Born ob-
jected that there was no direct experimental evidence for the particle velocities as given by
(5), so this assumption was questioned by him. As an alternative, he proposed a diﬀerent
interpretation. In his interpretation, the equality (6) was a fundamental postulate. Thus,
he avoided a need for particle velocities as given by (5). However, his interpretation has
not been widely accepted among physicists. The arguments against the Born interpreta-
tion were the following: First, this ad hoc postulate could not explain why the probability
density was given by ρ. Second, a theory in which the probabilistic interpretation was
one of the fundamental postulates was completely against all current knowledge about
fundamental laws of physics. The classical deterministic laws were well established, so it
was more natural to accept a deterministic interpretation of QM that only slightly diﬀers
from classical mechanics. Third, it was observed that if one used the arguments of Born
to argue that QM is to be interpreted probabilistically, then one could use analogous
arguments to argue that even classical mechanics should be interpreted probabilistically,5
which seemed absurd.

Although the Born purely probabilistic interpretation was not considered very appeal-
ing, mainly owing to the overwhelming mechanicistic view of physics of that time, it was
appreciated by some positivists that such an interpretation should not be excluded. The
Born interpretation was quite radical, but still acceptable as a possible alternative. How-
ever, one version of the Born interpretation was much more radical, in fact too radical
to be taken seriously. This new interpretation was suggested by Bohr. In fact, Bohr was
already known in the physics community by proposing the famous Bohr model of the
hydrogen atom, in which electrons move circularly at discrete distances from the nucleus.
Now a much better model of the hydrogen atom (the one based on the Schr¨odinger equa-
tion and particle trajectories that it predicts) was known, so the Bohr model was no longer
considered that important, although it still enjoyed a certain respect. Since the model by
which Bohr achieved respect among physicists was based on particle trajectories, it was
really a surprise when Bohr in his new interpretation proposed that particle trajectories
did not exist at all. But this was not the most radical part of his interpretation. The
most radical part was the following: he proposed that it did not even make sense to talk
about particle properties unless these properties were measured. An immediate argument
against such a proposal was the well-established classical mechanics, in which particle
properties clearly existed even without measurements. Bohr argued that there was a sep-
aration between the microscopic quantum world and the macroscopic classical world, so
that the measurement-independent properties made sense only in the latter. However,
Bohr never explained how and where this separation took place. In his interpretation,
he introduced no new equation. His arguments were considered pure philosophy, not
physics. Thus, it is not a surprise that his interpretation has never been taken seriously.
His interpretation was soon forgotten. (Much later it was found that the mechanism of
decoherence through the interaction with the environment provides a sort of dynamical
separation between “classical” and “quantum” worlds, but this separation was not exactly
what Bohr suggested.6)

Another prominent physicist who criticized the orthodox interpretation of QM was

5Such arguments might have looked similar to those in [6].
6For a review of the theory of decoherence with emphasis on the interpretational issues, see [7].

4

Einstein. He liked the determinism of orthodox QM, but there was something else that was
bothering him. According to the orthodox interpretation, entangled spacially separated
particles communicate instantaneously. He argued that this is in contradiction with his
theory of relativity, because he derived that no signal can exceed the velocity of light.
Orthodox quantum physicists admitted that this is a problem for their interpretation,
but soon they have found a solution. They observed that the geometric formulation of
relativity does not really exclude superluminal velocities, unless some additional properties
of matter are assumed. Thus, they introduced the notion of tachyons7, hypothetical
particles that can move faster than light and still obey the geometrical principles of
relativity. Einstein admitted that tachyons are consistent with relativity, but he objected
that this is not suﬃcient to solve the problem of instantaneous communication. If the
communication is instantaneous, then it can be so only in one reference frame. This means
that there must be a preferred reference frame with respect to which the communication
is instantaneous, which again contradicts the principle of relativity according to which all
reference frames should enjoy the same rights. At that time orthodox quantum physicists
understood relativity suﬃciently well to appreciate that Einstein was right. On the other
hand, the theory of relativity was also suﬃciently young at that time, so that it did not
seem too heretic to modify or reinterpret the theory of relativity itself. It was observed
that with a preferred foliation of spacetime speciﬁed by a ﬁxed timelike vector nµ one
can still write all quantum equations in a relativistic covariant form. It was also observed
that, by using an analogy with nonrelativistic ﬂuids, relativity may correspond only to a
low-energy approximation of a theory with a fundamental preferred time.8 Thus, it was
clear that the preferred foliation of spacetime does not necessarily contradict the theory
of relativity, provided that the theory of relativity is viewed as an eﬀective theory.

As quantum physics made further progress, it became clear that many theories that
were considered fundamental at the beginning turned out to be merely eﬀective theories.
This reinforced the dominating paradigm according to which relativity is also an eﬀective,
approximative theory. Nevertheless, some relativists still believed that the principle of
relativity was a fundamental principle. Consequently, they were not satisﬁed with the
orthodox interpretation of QM that requires a preferred foliation of spacetime. Instead
they were trying to interpret QM in a completely local and relativistic manner. To do
that, they were forced to introduce some rather radical views of nature. In one way or
another, they were forced to assume that a single objective reality did not exist.9 How-
ever, such radical interpretations were not very appreciated by the mainstream physicists.
It did not seem reasonable to crucify one of the cornerstones not only of physics but of
the whole science (the existence of objective reality) just to save one relatively new the-
oretical principle (the principle of locality and relativity) for which there existed good
evidence that it could be only an approximative principle.10 Therefore, the deterministic
interpretation of QM survived as the dominating paradigm, while the probabilistic rules
of QM, used widely in practical phenomenological calculations, were considered emergent,
not fundamental. In fact, it has been found that, in some cases, the probabilistic rules
cannot be derived in a simple way, so that one is forced to use the fundamental fully

7In reality, tachyons have been introduced in physics somewhat later, see [8].
8See, e.g., [9].
9Many of the current interpretations of QM mentioned in the introduction are of this form.
10String theory also contains evidence against locality at the fundamental level, see, e.g., [10, 11].

5

deterministic theory explicitly.11

3 Conclusion

In this paper, I have argued that, in the context of scientiﬁc paradigms that were widely
accepted when the Schr¨odinger equation was discovered, it was much more natural to
propose and accept the Bohmian deterministic interpretation than the Copenhagen in-
I have also argued that, if that had really happened, then the Bohmian
terpretation.
interpretation (or a minor modiﬁcation of it) would have been a dominating view even
today. In other words, the answer to the allegoric tongue-twisting question posed in the
title of this paper is – probably no! This, of course, does not prove that the Bohmian
interpretation is more likely to be correct than some other interpretation. But the point
is that it really seems surprising that the history of QM chose a path in which the Copen-
hagen interpretation became much more accepted than the Bohmian one. I leave it to
the sociologists and historians of science to explain why the history of QM chose the path
that it chose.

This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of the Republic of
Croatia.

Acknowledgments

References

[1] D. Bohm, “A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of “hidden
variables”. I,” Phys. Rev. 85 (2), 166-179 (1952); D. Bohm, “A suggested interpre-
tation of the quantum theory in terms of “hidden variables”. II,” Phys. Rev. 85 (2),
180-193 (1952).

[2] R. Tumulka, “Understanding Bohmian mechanics: A dialogue,” Am. J. Phys. 72 (9),

1220-1226 (2004).

[3] E. Madelung, Z. Phys. 40, 322-326 (1926).

[4] D. D¨urr, S. Goldstein, and N. Zangh`ı, “Quantum equilibrium and the origin of ab-

solute uncertainty,” J. Stat. Phys. 67, 843-907 (1992).

[5] A. Valentini, “Signal-locality, uncertainty, and the subquantum H-theorem,” Phys.

Lett. A 156, 5-11 (1991).

[6] H. Nikoli´c, “Classical mechanics without determinism,” Found. Phys. Lett. 19, 553-

[7] M. Schlosshauer, “Decoherence, the measurement problem, and interpretations of

quantum mechanics,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 1267-1305 (2004).

566 (2006).

11See, e.g., [12, 13].

6

[8] O. M. P. Bilaniuk, V. K. Deshpande, and E. C. G. Sudarshan, ““Meta” relativity,”
Am. J. Phys. 30 (10), 718-723 (1962); O. M. P. Bilaniuk and E. C. G. Sudarshan,
“Particles beyond the light barrier,” Physics Today 22 (5), 43-51 (1969).

[9] M. Visser, “Acoustic black holes: horizons, ergospheres, and Hawking radiation,”

Class. Quant. Grav. 15, 1767-1791 (1998).

[10] G. T. Horowitz, “Spacetime in String Theory,” New J. Phys. 7, 201 (2005).

[11] N. Seiberg, “Emergent Spacetime,” hep-th/0601234.

[12] H. Nikoli´c, “Relativistic quantum mechanics and the Bohmian interpretation,”

Found. Phys. Lett. 18, 549-561 (2005).

[13] H. Nikoli´c, “Cosmological constant, semiclassical gravity, and foundations of quan-

tum mechanics,” gr-qc/0611037.

7

