7
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
6
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
5
0
2
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

Advances in Complex Systems
c(cid:13) World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company

Rediscovering the Co-occurrence
Principles of Vowel Inventories:
A Complex Network Approach

Animesh Mukherjee, Monojit Choudhury, Anupam Basu, Niloy Ganguly

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur

Shamik RoyChowdhury

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Heritage Institute of Technology, Kolkata

Received (received date)
Revised (revised date)

In this work, we attempt to capture patterns of co-occurrence across vowel systems and at
the same time ﬁgure out the nature of the force leading to the emergence of such patterns.
For this purpose we deﬁne a weighted network where the vowels are the nodes and an edge
between two nodes (read vowels) signify their co-occurrence likelihood over the vowel
inventories. Through this network we identify communities of vowels, which essentially
reﬂect their patterns of co-occurrence across languages. We observe that in the assortative
vowel communities the constituent nodes (read vowels) are largely uncorrelated in terms
of their features and show that they are formed based on the principle of maximal
perceptual contrast. However, in the rest of the communities, strong correlations are
reﬂected among the constituent vowels with respect to their features indicating that
it is the principle of feature economy that binds them together. We validate the above
observations by proposing a quantitative measure of perceptual contrast as well as feature
economy and subsequently comparing the results obtained due to these quantiﬁcations
with those where we assume that the vowel inventories had evolved just by chance.

Keywords: Vowels; complex network; community structure; feature entropy.

1. Introduction

Linguistic research has documented a wide range of regularities across the sound
systems of the world’s languages [2, 5, 12, 13, 17, 18]. Functional phonologists argue
that such regularities are the consequences of certain general principles like maximal

1

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

2 Mukherjee et al.

perceptual contrasta [12], ease of articulationb [2, 14], and ease of learnabilityc [2]. In
the study of vowel systems the optimizing principle, which has a long tradition [9, 25]
in linguistics, is maximal perceptual contrast. A number of numerical studies based
on this principle have been reported in literature [12, 13, 21]. Of late, there have been
some attempts to explain the vowel systems through multi agent simulations [2] and
genetic algorithms [10]; all of these experiments also use the principle of perceptual
contrast for optimization purposes.

An exception to the above trend is a school of linguists [3, 6] who argue that per-
ceptual contrast-based theories fail to account for certain fundamental aspects such
as the patterns of co-occurrence of vowels based on similar acoustic/articulatory
featuresd observed across the vowel inventories. Instead, they posit that the ob-
served patterns, especially found in larger size inventories [3], can be explained only
through the principle of feature economy [7, 16]. According to this principle, lan-
guages tend to maximize the combinatorial possibilities of a few distinctive features
to generate a large number of sounds.

The aforementioned ideas can be possibly linked together through the example
illustrated by Figure 1. As shown in the ﬁgure, the initial plane P constitutes of a set
of three very frequently occurring vowels /i/, /a/ and /u/, which usually make up
the smaller inventories and do not have any single feature in common. Thus, smaller
inventories are quite likely to have vowels that exhibit a large extent of contrast in
their constituent features. However, in bigger inventories, members from the higher
planes (P ′ and P ′′) are also present and they in turn exhibit feature economy. For
instance, in the plane P ′ comprising of the set of vowels /(cid:3)
i/, /(cid:3)a/, /(cid:3)u/, we ﬁnd
a nasal modiﬁcation applied equally on all the three members of the set. This is
actually indicative of an economic behavior that the larger inventories show while
choosing a new feature in order to reduce the learnability eﬀort of the speakers.
The third plane P ′′ reinforces this idea by showing that the larger the size of the
inventories the greater is the urge for this economy in the choice of new features.
Another interesting facet of the ﬁgure are the relations that exist across the planes
(indicated by the broken lines). All these relations are representative of a common

aMaximal perceptual contrast, is desirable between the phonemes of a language for proper per-
ception of each individual phoneme in a noisy environment
bEase of articulation requires that the sound systems of all languages are formed of certain uni-
versal (and highly frequent) sounds.
cEase of learnability is required so that a speaker can learn the sounds of a language with minimum
eﬀort.
dIn linguistics, features are the elements, which distinguish one phoneme from another. The fea-
tures that describe the vowles can be broadly categorized into three diﬀerent classes namely the
height, the backness and the roundedness. Height refers to the vertical position of the tongue rel-
ative to either the roof of the mouth or the aperture of the jaw. Backness refers to the horizontal
tongue position during the articulation of a vowel relative to the back of the mouth. Rounded-
ness refers to whether the lips are rounded or not during the articulation of a vowel. There are
however still more possible features of vowel quality, such as the velum position (e.g., nasality),
type of vocal fold vibration (i.e., phonation), and tongue root position (i.e., secondary place of
articulation).

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

Rediscovering the Co-occurence Principles of Vowel Inventories

3

Fig. 1. The organizational principles of the vowels (in decreasing frequency of occurrence) indicated
through diﬀerent hypothetical planes.

linguistic concept of robustness [6] in which one frequently occurring vowel (say /i/)
implies the presence of the other (and not vice versa) less frequently occurring vowel
i/) in a language inventory. These cross-planar relations are also indicative
(say /(cid:3)
of feature economy since all the features present in the frequent vowel (e.g., /i/)
i/). In summary, while the basis
are also shared by the less frequent one (e.g., /(cid:3)
of organization of the vowel inventories is perceptual contrast as indicated by the
plane P in Figure 1, economic modiﬁcations of the perceptually distinct vowels
takes place with the increase in the inventory size (as indicated by the planes P ′
and P ′′ in Figure 1).

In this work we attempt to corroborate the above conjecture by automatically
capturing the patterns of co-occurrence that are prevalent in and across the planes

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

4 Mukherjee et al.

illustrated in Figure 1. We also present a quantitative measure of the driving forces
that lead to the emergence of such patterns and show that the real inventories are
signiﬁcantly better in terms of this measure than expected. In order to do so, we
deﬁne the “Vowel-Vowel Network” or VoNet, which is a weighted network where
the vowels are the nodes and an edge between two nodes (read vowels) signify
their co-occurrence likelihood over the vowel inventories. We conduct community
structure analysis of diﬀerent versions of VoNet in order to capture the patterns of
co-occurrence in and across the planes P , P ′ and P ′′ shown in Figure 1. The plane P
consists of the communities, which are formed of those vowels that have a very high
frequency of occurrence (usually assortative [19] in nature). We observe that the
constituent nodes (read vowels) of these assortative vowel communities are largely
uncorrelated in terms of their features and quantitatively show that they indeed
exhibit a higher than expected level of perceptual contrast. On the other hand,
the communities obtained from VoNet, in which the links between the assortative
nodes are absent, corresponds to the co-occurrence patterns of the planes P ′ and
P ′′. In these communities, strong correlations are reﬂected among the constituent
vowels with respect to their features and they indeed display a signiﬁcantly better
feature economy than it could have been by random chance. Moreover, the co-
occurrences across the planes can be captured by the community analysis of VoNet
where only the connections between the assortative and the non-assortative nodes,
with the non-assortative node co-occurring very frequently with the assortative one,
are retained while the rest of the connections are ﬁltered out. We also show that
these communities again exhibit a signiﬁcantly higher feature economy than feasible
by chance.

This article is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the experimental setup in
order to explore the co-occurrence principles of the vowel inventories. In this section
we formally deﬁne VoNet, outline its construction procedure, present a community-
ﬁnding algorithm, and also present a quantitative deﬁnition for maximal percep-
tual contrast as well as feature economy. In section 3 we report the experiments
performed to obtain the community structures, which are representative of the co-
occurrence patterns in and across the planes discussed above. We also report results
where we measure the driving forces that lead to the emergence of such patterns
and show that the real inventories are substantially better in terms of this measure
than those where the inventories are assumed to have evolved by chance. Finally,
we conclude in section 4 by summarizing our contributions, pointing out some of
the implications of the current work and indicating the possible future directions.

2. Experimental Setup

In this section we systematically develop the experimental setup in order to inves-
tigate the co-occurrence principles of the vowel inventories. For this purpose, we
formally deﬁne VoNet, outline its construction procedure, describe a community-
ﬁnding algorithm to decompose VoNet to obtain the community structures, and

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

Rediscovering the Co-occurence Principles of Vowel Inventories

5

Fig. 2. A partial illustration of the nodes and edges in VoNet. The labels of the nodes denote the
vowels represented in IPA (International Phonetic Alphabet). The numerical values against the
edges and nodes represent their corresponding weights. For example /i/ occurs in 393 languages;
/e/ occurs in 124 languages while they co-occur in 117 languages.

deﬁne the metrics required in order to explore the co-occurrence principles of the
observed communities.

2.1. Deﬁnition and Construction of VoNet

Deﬁnition of VoNet: We deﬁne VoNet as a network of vowels, represented as G
= h VV , E i where VV is the set of nodes labeled by the vowels and E is the set of
edges occurring in VoNet. There is an edge e ∈ E between two nodes, if and only if
there exists one or more language(s) where the nodes (read vowels) co-occur. The
weight of the edge e (also edge-weight) is the number of languages in which the
vowels connected by e co-occur. The weight of a node u (also node-weight) is the
number of languages in which the vowel represented by u occurs. In other words,
if a vowel vi represented by the node u occurs in the inventory of n languages then
the node-weight of u is assigned the value n. Also if the vowel vj is represented
by the node v and there are w languages in which vowels vi and vj occur together
then the weight of the edge connecting u and v is assigned the value v. Figure 2
illustrates this structure by reproducing some of the nodes and edges of VoNet.

Construction of VoNet: Many typological studies [5, 8, 11, 14, 17, 18] of
segmental inventories have been carried out in past on the UCLA Phonological
Segment Inventory Database (UPSID) [15]. Currently UPSID records the sound
inventories of 451 languages covering all the major language families of the world.
In this work we have therefore used UPSID comprising of these 451 languages and
180 vowels found across them, for constructing VoNet. Consequently, the set VV
comprises of 180 elements (nodes) and the set E comprises of 3135 elements (edges).
Figure 3 presents a partial illustration of VoNet as constructed from UPSID.

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

6 Mukherjee et al.

Fig. 3. A partial illustration of VoNet. All edges in this ﬁgure have an edge-weight greater than
or equal to 15. The number on each node corresponds to a particular vowel. For instance, node
number 72 corresponds to /

i/.

(cid:3)

2.2. Finding Community Structures

We attempt to identify the communities appearing in VoNet by the extended Radic-
chi et al.
[20] algorithm for weighted networks as introduced by us in an earlier
article [17]. The basic idea is that if the weights on the edges forming a triangle
(loops of length three) are comparable then the group of vowels represented by this
triangle highly occur together rendering a pattern of co-occurrence while if these
weights are not comparable then there is no such pattern. In order to capture this
property we deﬁne a strength metric S for each of the edges of VoNet as follows.
Let the weight of the edge (u,v), where u, v ∈ VC , be denoted by wuv. We deﬁne
S as,

S =

wuv
qPi∈VC −{u,v} (wui − wvi)2

(1)

if qPi∈VC −{u,v} (wui − wvi)2 > 0 else S = ∞. The denominator in this expression

essentially tries to capture whether or not the weights on the edges forming triangles
are comparable (the higher the value of S the more comparable the weights are).
The network can be then decomposed into clusters or communities by removing
edges that have S less than a speciﬁed threshold (say η).

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

Rediscovering the Co-occurence Principles of Vowel Inventories

7

At this point it is worthwhile to clarify the signiﬁcance of a vowel community.
A community of vowels actually refers to a set of vowels which occur together in
the language inventories very frequently. In other words, there is a higher than
expected probability of ﬁnding a vowel v in an inventory which already hosts the
other members of the community to which v belongs. For instance, if /i/, /a/
and /u/ form a vowel community and if /i/ and /a/ are present in any inventory
then there is a very high chance that the third member /u/ is also present in the
inventory.

2.3. Deﬁnition of the Metrics

Once the communities are obtained through the algorithm discussed earlier the next
important task is to analyze them so as to capture the binding force that keeps them
together. For this purpose, we need to have a quantitative measure for perceptual
contrast as well as feature economy. In order to establish that the above forces really
play a role in the emergence of the communities, we also need to compare and show
that the communities are much better in terms of this measure than it would have
been if the vowel inventories had evolved by chance. In the rest of this section we
detail out the metric for quantiﬁcation as well as the metric for comparison.

2.3.1. Metric for Quantiﬁcation

For a community C of size N let there be pf vowels, which have a particular feature f
(where f is assumed to be boolean in nature)e in common and qf other vowels, which
lack the feature f . Thus, the probability that a particular vowel chosen uniformly
at random from C has the feature f is pf
N and the probability that the vowel lacks
N (=1– pf
the feature f is qf
N ). If F be the set of all features present in the vowels in
C then feature entropy FE can be deﬁned as
pf
N

FE =

pf
N

qf
N

qf
N

log

log

(2)

(−

−

)

X
f ∈F

FE is essentially the measure of the number of bits that are required to communi-
cate the information about the entire community C through a channel.

Capturing Perceptual Contrast: If C comprises of a set of perceptually dis-
tinct vowels, then larger number of bits should be required to communicate the
information about C over the transmission channel since in this case the set of
features that constitute the vowels are more in number. Therefore, the higher the
perceptual contrast the higher is the feature entropy. The idea is illustrated through
the example in Figure 4. In the ﬁgure, FE exhibited by the community C1 is higher
than that of the community C2, since the set of vowels in C1 are perceptually more

eThere are 28 such boolean features that are found across the vowel systems recorded in UPSID.

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

8 Mukherjee et al.

Fig. 4. FE for the two diﬀerent communities C1 and C2. The letters h, f, b, r, u, l, and n stand
for the features high, front, back, rounded, unrounded, and nasalized respectively.

distinct than those in C2.

Capturing Feature Economy: To have more information conveyed using a
fewer number of bits, maximization of the combinatorial possibilities of the features
used by the constituent vowels in the community C is needed, which is precisely the
prediction made by the principle of feature economy. Therefore the lower the feature
entropy the higher is the feature economy. In fact, it is due to this reason that in
Figure 5, FE exhibited by the community C1 is lower than that of the community
C2, since in C1 the combinatorial possibilities of the features is better utilized by
the vowels than in C2.

2.3.2. Metric for Comparison

For the purpose of the comparison as discussed earlier, we construct a random
version of VoNet, namely VoNetrand. Let the frequency of occurrence for each vowel
v in UPSID be denoted by fv. Let there be 451 bins each corresponding to a language
in UPSID. fv bins are then chosen uniformly at random and the vowel v is packed
into these bins. Thus the vowel inventories of the 451 languages corresponding to
the bins are generated. In such randomly constructed inventories the eﬀect of none
of the forces (perceptual contrast or feature economy) should be prevalent as there
is no strict co-occurrence principle that plays a role in the inventory construction.
Therefore these inventories should show a feature entropy no better than expected

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

Rediscovering the Co-occurence Principles of Vowel Inventories

9

Fig. 5. FE for the two diﬀerent communities C1 and C2. The letters h, f, b, r, u, l, and n stand
for the features high, front, back, rounded, unrounded, long, and nasalized respectively.

by random chance and hence can act as a baseline for all our experiments reported
in the following section. VoNetrand can be then constructed from these new vowel
inventories similarly as VoNet. The method for the construction is summarized in
Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1. Algorithm to construct VoNetrand
for each vowel v
{

for i = 1 to fv
{

}

Choose one of the 451 bins, corresponding to the languages in UPSID,
uniformly at random;
Pack the vowel v into the bin so chosen if it has not been already
packed into this bin earlier;

}
Construct VoNetrand, similarly as VoNet, from the new vowel inventories (each bin
corresponds to a new inventory);

3. Experiments and Results

In this section we describe the experiments performed and the results obtained from
the analysis of VoNet. In order to ﬁnd the co-occurrence patterns in and across the

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

10 Mukherjee et al.

Fig. 6. The frequency (y-axis) versus rank (x-axis) curve in log-log scale illustrating the distribution
of the occurrence of the vowels over the language inventories of UPSID.

planes of Figure 1 we deﬁne three versions of VoNet namely VoNetassort, VoNetrest
and VoNetrest′ . The construction procedure for each of these versions are presented
below.

Construction of VoNetassort: VoNetassort comprises of the assortativef nodes
having node-weights above 120 (i.e, vowels occurring in more than 120 languages
in UPSID), along with only the edges inter-connecting these nodes. The rest of the
nodes (having node-weight less than 120) and edges are removed from the network.
We make a choice of this node-weight for classifying the assortative nodes from the
non-assortative ones by observing the distribution of the occurrence frequency of
the vowels illustrated in Figure 6. The curve shows the frequency of a vowel (y-axis)
versus the rank of the vowel according to this frequency (x-axis) in log-log scale. The
high frequency zone (marked by a circle in the ﬁgure) can be easily distinguished
from the low-frequency one since there is distinct gap featuring between the two in
the curve.

Figure 7 illustrates how VoNetassort is constructed from VoNet. Presently, the

number of nodes in VoNetassort is 9 and the number of edges is 36.

Construction of VoNetrest: VoNetrest comprises of all the nodes as that of
VoNet. It also has all the edges of VoNet except for those edges that inter-connect

f The term “assortative node” here refers to the nodes having a very high node-weight.

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

Rediscovering the Co-occurence Principles of Vowel Inventories

11

Fig. 7. The construction procedure of VoNetassort from VoNet.

the assortative nodes. Figure 8 shows how VoNetrest can be constructed from VoNet.
The number of nodes and edges in VoNetrest are 180 and 1293g respectively.

Construction of VoNetrest′ : VoNetrest′ again comprises of all the nodes as
that of VoNet. It consists of only the edges that connect an assortative node with a
non-assortative one if the non-assortative node co-occurs more than ninety ﬁve per-
cent of times with the assortative nodes. The basic idea behind such a construction
is to capture the co-occurrence patterns based on robustness [6] (discussed earlier in
the introductory section) that actually deﬁnes the cross-planar relationships in Fig-
ure 1. Figure 9 shows how VoNetrest′ can be constructed from VoNet. The number
of nodes in VoNetrest′ is 180 while the number of edges is 114h.

We separately apply the community-ﬁnding algorithm (discussed earlier) on each
of VoNetassort, VoNetrest and VoNetrest′ in order to obtain the respective vowel
communities. We can obtain diﬀerent sets of communities by varying the threshold
η. A few assortative vowel communities (obtained from VoNetassort) are noted in
Table 1. Some of the communities obtained from VoNetrest are presented in Table 2.
We also note some of the communities obtained from VoNetrest′ in Table 3.

gWe have neglected nodes with node-weight less than 3 since these nodes correspond to vowels that
occur in less than 3 languages in UPSID and the communities they form are therefore statistically
insigniﬁcant.
hThe network does not get disconnected due to this construction since, there is always a small frac-
tion of edges that run between assortative and low node-weight non-assortative nodes of otherwise
disjoint groups.

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

12 Mukherjee et al.

Fig. 8. The construction procedure of VoNetrest from VoNet.

Fig. 9. The construction procedure of VoNetrest′ from VoNet.

Tables 1 , 2 and 3 indicate that the communities in VoNetassort are formed based
on the principle of perceptual contrast whereas the formation of the communities in
VoNetrest as well as VoNetrest′ is largely governed by feature economy. We dedicate
the rest of this section mainly to verify the above argument. For this reason we

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

Rediscovering the Co-occurence Principles of Vowel Inventories

13

Table 1. Assortative vowel communities. The contrastive features separated by slashes (/) are
shown within parentheses. Comma-separated entries represent the features that are in use from
the three respective classes namely the height, the backness, and the roundedness.

Community
/i/, /a/, /u/
/e/, /o/

Features in Contrast
(low/high), (front/central/back), (unrounded/rounded)
(higher-mid/mid), (front/back), (unrounded/rounded)

Table 2. Some of the vowel communities obtained from VoNetrest.

Community

/

/

i

(cid:3)

(cid:3)a

/, /
:/, /(cid:3)a

/, /
:/, /(cid:3)u

(cid:3)u

/(cid:3)

i

:/

/i:/, /u:/, /a:/, /o:/, /e:/

Features in Common
nasalized
long, nasalized
long

Table 3. Some of the vowel communities obtained from VoNetrest′ . Comma-separated entries
represent the features that are in use from the three respective classes namely the height, the
backness, and the roundedness.

Community

i

/

(cid:3)

/i/, /
/a/, /(cid:3)a/
/u/, /(cid:3)u/

Features in Common
high, front, unrounded
low, central, unrounded
high, back, rounded

present a detailed study of the co-occurrence principles of the communities obtained
from VoNetassort, VoNetrest, and VoNetrest′ . In each case we compare the results
with those of VoNetrand obtained from Algorithm 1.

3.1. Co-occurrence Principles of the Communities of VoNetassort

We apply the community-ﬁnding algorithm (discussed earlier) on VoNetrand in order
to obtain the assortative communities similarly as outlined for VoNet. Figure 10
illustrates, for all the communities obtained from the clustering of VoNetassort and
its random version, the average feature entropy exhibited by the communities of a
particular sizei (y-axis) versus the community size (x-axis).

A closer inspection of Figure 10 immediately reveals that the feature entropy
exhibited by the communities of VoNetassort is higher as compared to the random
version of the same. The two curves ﬁnally intersect due to the formation of a
single giant component, which is similar for the real and the random edition of
VoNetassort. Nevertheless, the data points that appear on these curves are fairly

iLet there be n communities of a particular size k picked up at various thresholds. The average
feature entropy of the communities of size k is therefore 1
FEi where FEi signiﬁes the feature
entropy of the ith community.

n
n P
i=1

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

14 Mukherjee et al.

Fig. 10. Curves showing the average feature entropy of the communities of a particular size versus
the community size for VoNetassort as well as its random counterpart.

less in number and hence Figure 10 alone is not suﬃcient enough to establish that
the communities in VoNetassort are formed based on the principle of perceptual
contrast. Another possible way to investigate the problem would be to look into
the co-occurrence principles of the smaller vowel inventories (of size ≤ 4) since they
mostly comprise of the members belonging to the assortative vowel communities.
Table 4 for instance, shows the number of occurrences of the members of the com-
munity formed by /i/, /a/, and /u/, as compared to the average occurrence of
other vowels, in the inventories of size 3 and 4. The ﬁgures in the table points to
the fact that the smaller inventories can be assumed to be good representatives
of the assortative vowel communities. We therefore compare the average feature
entropy of these inventories as a whole with their random counterparts (obtained
from Algorithm 1). Figure 11 illustrates the result of this comparison. The curves
depict the average feature entropy of the vowel inventories of a particular size (y-
axis) versus the inventory size (x-axis). The two diﬀerent plots compare the average
feature entropy of the inventories obtained from UPSID with that of the randomly
constructed ones. The ﬁgure clearly shows that the average feature entropy of the
vowel inventories of UPSID is substantially higher for inventory size 3 and 4 than
that of those constructed randomly.

The results presented in Figures 10 and 11 together conﬁrms that the assorta-
tive vowel communities are formed based on the principle of maximal perceptual
contrast.

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

Rediscovering the Co-occurence Principles of Vowel Inventories

15

Table 4. Frequency of occurrence of the members of the community /i/, /a/, and /u/, as compared
to the frequency occurrence of other vowels, in smaller inventories. The last column indicates the
average number of times that a vowel other than /i/, /a/, and /u/ occurs in the inventories of
size 3 and 4.

Inv. Size No. of Invs. Occ. /i/ Occ. /a/ Occ. /u/ Avg. Occ. other vowels
21
24

12
11

3
3

23
25

15
19

3
4

Fig. 11. Curves showing the average feature entropy of the vowel inventories of a particular size
versus the inventory size. The two diﬀerent plots compare the average feature entropy of the
inventories obtained from UPSID with that of the randomly constructed ones.

3.2. Co-occurrence Principles of the Communities of VoNetrest

In this section, we investigate whether or not the communities obtained from
VoNetrest are better in terms of feature entropy than they would have been, if
the vowel inventories had evolved just by chance. We construct the random edi-
tion of VoNetrest from VoNetrand and apply the community-ﬁnding algorithm on
it so as to obtain the communities. Figure 12 illustrates, for all the communities
obtained from the clustering of VoNetrest and its random version, the average fea-
ture entropy exhibited by the communities of a particular size (y-axis) versus the
community size (x-axis). The curves in the ﬁgure makes it quite clear that the av-
erage feature entropy exhibited by the communities of VoNetrest are substantially
lower than that of their random counterpart (especially for a community size ≤ 7).
As the community size increases, the diﬀerence in the average feature entropy of

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

16 Mukherjee et al.

Fig. 12. Curves showing the average feature entropy of the communities of a particular size versus
the community size for VoNetrest as well as its random counterpart.

the communities of VoNetrest and its random version gradually diminishes. This is
mainly because of the formation of a single giant community, which is similar for
the real and the random versions of VoNetrest.

The above result indicate that the driving force behind the formation of the
communities of VoNetrest is the principle of feature economy. It is important to
mention here that the larger vowel inventories, which are usually comprised of the
communities of VoNetrest, also exhibit feature economy to a large extent. This
is reﬂected through Figure 11 where all the real inventories of size ≥ 5 have a
substantially lower average feature entropy than that of the randomly generated
ones.

3.3. Co-occurrence Principles of the Communities of VoNetrest′

In this section we compare the feature entropy of the communities obtained from
VoNetrest′ with that of its random counterpart (constructed from VoNetrand). Fig-
ure 13 shows the the average feature entropy exhibited by the communities of a
particular size (y-axis) versus the community size (x-axis) for both the real and the
random version of VoNetrest′ . The curves in the ﬁgure makes it quite clear that the
average feature entropy exhibited by the communities of VoNetrest′ are substan-

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

Rediscovering the Co-occurence Principles of Vowel Inventories

17

Fig. 13. Curves showing the average feature entropy of the communities of a particular size versus
the community size for VoNetrest′ as well as its random counterpart.

tially lower than that of the random ones. This result immediately reveals that it
is again feature economy that plays a key role in the emergence of the communities
of VoNetrest′ .

4. Conclusion

In this paper we explored the co-occurrence principles of the vowels, across the
inventories of the world’s languages. In order to do so we started with a concise
review of the available literature on vowel inventories. We proposed an automatic
procedure to capture the co-occurrence patterns of the vowels across languages. We
also discussed the notion of feature entropy, which immediately allows us to validate
the explanations of the organizational principles of the vowel inventories furnished
by the earlier researchers.

Some of our important ﬁndings from this work are,

• The smaller vowel inventories (corresponding to the communities of

VoNetassort) tend to be organized based on the principle of maximal per-
ceptual contrast;

• On the other hand, the larger vowel inventories (mainly comprising of the
communities of VoNetrest) reﬂect a considerable extent of feature economy;
• Co-occurrences based on robustness are prevalent across vowel inventories
(captured through the communities of VoNetrest′ ) and their emergence is
again a consequence of feature economy.

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

18 Mukherjee et al.

Until now, we have mainly emphasized on analyzing the co-occurrence principles
of the vowel inventories of the world’s languages. An issue that draws attention is
how the forces of perceptual contrast and feature economy have interacted causing
the emergence of the human vowel systems. One possible way to answer this ques-
tion is by having a growth model for the network, where the growth takes place
owing to the optimization of a function (see [4] for a reference), which involves
the above forces and also accounts for the observed regularities displayed by the
vowel inventories. It would be worthwhile to mention here that though most of the
mechanisms of network growth rely on preferential attachment-based rules [1], yet
there are scenarios which suggest that additional optimizing constraints need to
be imposed on the evolving network so as to match its emergent properties with
empirical data [23, 24]. Such a growth model based on some optimization technique
can then shed enough light on the real dynamics that went on in the evolution of
the vowel inventories. We look forward to develop the same as a part of our future
work.

References

286, 509-512, (1999).

(2000).

[1] Barab´asi, A.-L. and Albert, R., Emergence of scaling in random networks, Science

[2] de Boer, B., Self-organisation in vowel systems, Journal of Phonetics, 28(4), 441–465,

[3] Boersma, P., Functional phonology, Doctoral thesis, University of Amsterdam, The

Hague: Holland Academic Graphics, (1998).

[4] Ferrer

i Cancho, R. and Sol´e, R. V., Optimization in complex networks,

arXiv:cond-mat/0111222, (2001).

[5] Choudhury, M., Mukherjee, A., Basu, A. and Ganguly, N., Analysis and synthesis of
the distribution of consonants over languages: A complex network approach, Proceed-
ings of COLING–ACL, 128–135, Sydney, Australia, (2006).

[6] Clements, N., Features and sound inventories, Symposium on Phonological Theory:

Representations and Architecture, CUNY, (2004).

[7] de Groot, A. W., Phonologie und Phonetik als funktionswissenschaften, Travaux du

Cercle Linguistique de, 4, 116–147, (1931).

[8] Hinskens, F. and Weijer, J., Patterns of segmental modiﬁcation in consonant inven-

tories: A cross-linguistic study, Linguistics, 41, 6. (2003).

[9] Jakobson, R., Kindersprache, aphasie und allgemeine lautgesetze, (Uppsala, 1941),

reprinted in Selected Writings I. Mouton, (The Hague, 1962), 328-401.

[10] Ke, J., Ogura, M., and Wang, W.S.-Y., Optimization models of sound systems using

genetic algorithms, Computational Linguistics, 29(1), 1–18, (2003).

[11] Ladefoged, P. and Maddieson, I., Sounds of the worlds languages, (Oxford: Blackwell,

[12] Liljencrants, J. and Lindblom, B., Numerical simulation of vowel quality systems: the

role of perceptual contrast, Language, 48, 839–862, (1972).

[13] Lindblom, B., Phonetic universals in vowel systems, Experimental Phonology, 13–44,

1996).

(1986).

[14] Lindblom, B. and Maddieson, I., Phonetic universals in consonant systems, Language,

Speech, and Mind, Routledge, London, 62–78, (1988).

[15] Maddieson, I., Patterns of sounds, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1984.)

February 20, 2014 16:56 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE

paperADV

Rediscovering the Co-occurence Principles of Vowel Inventories

19

[16] Martinet, A., `Economie des changements phon´etiques, (Berne: A. Francke, 1955).
[17] Mukherjee, A., Choudhury, M., Basu, A. and Ganguly, N., Modeling the co-
occurrence principles of the consonant inventories: A complex network approach,
arXiv:physics/0606132 (preprint), (2006).

[18] Mukherjee, A., Choudhury, M., Basu, A. and Ganguly, N., Self-organization of the
Sound Inventories: Analysis and Synthesis of the Occurrence and Co-occurrence Net-
works of Consonants. arXiv:physics/0610120 (preprint), (2006).

[19] Newman, M. E. J., The structure and function of complex networks, SIAM Review,

45, 167–256, (2003).

[20] Radicchi, F., Castellano, C., Cecconi, F., Loreto, V., and Parisi, D., Deﬁning and

identifying communities in networks, PNAS, 101(9), 2658–2663, (2003).

[21] Schwartz, J-L., Bo¨e, L-J., Vall´ee, N., and Abry, C., The dispersion-focalization theory

of vowel systems, Journal of Phonetics, 25, 255–286. (1997).

[22] Shannon, C. E., and Weaver, W., The mathematical theory of information, (Urbana:

University of Illinois Press, 1949).

[23] Sol´e, R. V., Pastor-Satorras, R., Smith, E. and Kepler, T., A model of large-scale

proteome evolution, Adv. Complex Syst., 5, 43–54, (2002).

[24] V´azquez, A., Flammini, A., Maritan, A., and Vespignani, A., Modeling of protein

interaction networks, Complexus, 1, 38–44, (2003).

[25] Wang, W. S.-Y., The basis of speech. Project on linguistic analysis reports, (Univer-

sity of California, Berkeley, 1968), reprinted in The Learning of Language, (1971).

