Towards a physics of evolution: Existence of gales of creative deconstruction in
evolving technological networks

Rudolf Hanel1,2, Stuart A. Kauﬀman3, and Stefan Thurner 1,∗
1 Complex Systems Research Group; HNO; Medical University of Vienna; W¨ahringer G¨urtel 18-20; A-1090; Austria
2 Institute of Physics; University of Antwerp; Groenenborgerlaan 171; 2020 Antwerp; Belgium
2 Institute for Biocomplexity and Informatics; University of
Calgary; 2500 University Dr. NW; Calgary; AB T2N 1N4; Canada

Systems evolving according to the standard concept of biological or technological evolution are
often described by catalytic evolution equations. We study the structure of these equations and ﬁnd
a deep relationship to classical thermodynamics. In particular we can demonstrate the existence
of several distinct phases of evolutionary dynamics: a phase of fast growing diversity, one of sta-
tionary, ﬁnite diversity, and one of rapidly decaying diversity. While the ﬁrst two phases have been
subject to previous work, here we focus on the destructive aspects – in particular the phase diagram
– of evolutionary dynamics. We further propose a dynamical model of diversity which captures
spontaneous creation and destruction processes fully respecting the phase diagrams of evolutionary
systems. The emergent timeseries show a Zipf law in the diversity dynamics, which is e.g. observable
in actual economical data, e.g. in ﬁrm bankruptcy data. We believe the present model is a way to
cast the famous qualitative picture of Schumpeterian economic evolution, into a quantiﬁable and
testable framework.

PACS numbers: 87.10.+e, 02.10.Ox, 05.70.Ln, 05.65.+b

I.

INTRODUCTION

Simplistically technological evolution is a process of (re)combination and substitution of existing elements to invent
and produce new goods, products or things. New things can come into existence through combining existing ones
in whole or part. The new things then undergo a ’valuation’ (selection) process based on their ’utility’ associated to
them in the context of their surroundings. The surroundings are deﬁned by all other yet existing things, and all things
which may come into existence in the foreseeable future. Another way how new things can come to being is pure
chance, such as random inventions which do not rely on pre-existing things. Biological evolution is a special case of
technological evolution (i.e. innovation), where recombination and substitution happens through sexual reproduction
and mutations.

The dynamics of systems capable of evolution have been formalized some time ago. In this context the concept of
the adjacent possible has been brought forward [1]. The adjacent possible is the set of objects that can get produced
within a given time span into the future. What can get produced in the next timestep depends crucially on the
details of the set of elements that exist now. To capture the dynamics of an evolving system which is governed by
a combination/substitution mechanism, imagine that the diversity of the system is given by a d dimensional state
vector x. Each element xi characterizes the abundance of all possible elements i. This means that the total number of
all elements that can potentially ever exist in the system are bounded from above by d [12]. Its dynamics is governed
by the famous equation

xi = αijkxjxk − xi

αljkxjxk

,

(1)

∂
∂t

(cid:88)

l

where the second term ensures normalization of x. x thus captures the relative abundances of existing elements. The
tensor elements αijk serve as a ’rule table’, telling which combination of two elements j and k can produce a third
(new) element i. The element αijk is the rate at which element i can get produced, given the elements j and k are
abundant at their respective concentrations xj and xk. Equation (1) has a long tradition; some of its special cases are
the Lotka Volterra replicators see e.g. in [2], the hypercycle [3], or the Turing gas [4]. Equation (1) has been analyzed
numerically [5, 6], however system sizes are extremely limited. In contrast to the amount of available qualitative and

∗Electronic address: thurner@univie.ac.at

7
0
0
2
 
r
a

M
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
0
1
3
0
7
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

historical knowledge on evolution [7], surprisingly little eﬀort has been undertaken to solve Eq. (1) explicitly. To
understand the dynamics of Eq. (1) more deeply and analytically it was suggested in [8] to assume three things: (i)
the focus is shifted from the actual concentration of elements xi, to the system’s diversity. Diversity is deﬁned as the
number of existing elements. An element exists, if xi > 0, and does not exist if xi = 0. (ii) For simplicity, the rule
table α is assumed to have binary entries, 0 and 1 only, (iii) the location of the non-zero entries is perfectly random.
To characterize the number of these entries the number r is introduced, which is the rule table density or the density
of productive pairs. The total number of productive pairs in the system (i.e. the number of non-zero entries in α) is
consequently given by r d.

With these assumptions, the idea in [8] was to explicitly formalize the concept of the adjacent possible, so that Eq.
(1) could be rewritten into a dynamical map whose asymptotic limit could be found analytically. The only variable
of the corresponding map is r. The initial condition, i.e., the initial size of present elements is assigned a0. The
solution of the system is the asymptotical value (t → ∞) of diversity, a∞. The amazing result of this solution, (as a
function of r and the initial condition a0) is that evolutionary systems of the type of Eq. (1) have a phase transition
in the r-a0 plane. In one of the two phases – after a few iterations – no more elements can be built up from existing
ones and the total diversity converges to a ﬁnite number (sub-critical phase). The other phase is characterized that
the advent of new elements creates so many more possibilities to create yet other elements that the system ends
up producing all or almost all possible d elements This we call the super-critical or ’fully populated’ phase. Even
though the existence of a phase transition was hypothesized some time ago in [1], it is entirely surprising that the
phase transition is mathematically of exactly the same type as a Van der Waals gas [13]. Note that this model is a
mathematically tractable variant of the so called bit-string model of biological evolution, introduced in [1].

The dynamics discussed so far assumes that a system is starting with relatively low diversity a0, which increases
over time, up to a ﬁnal asymptotic level, a∞. However, also the opposite dynamics is possible. Imagine one existing
element, say i, is removed from the system, a species is dying out, or a technical tool gets out of fashion/production.
This removal can imply that other elements, which needed i as a production input will also cease to exist, unless some
other way exists to produce them (not involving i). Note, that all the necessary information is incorporated in α.

The ﬁrst part of this paper studies the dynamics of evolutionary systems which exist in the highly populated phase,
and where δ0 elements get kicked out at the initial timestep. These defected elements may trigger others to default
as well. We demonstrate the existence of a new phase transition in the δ0-r plane, meaning that for a ﬁxed rule
density r there exists a critical value of initial defects, above which the majority of elements will die out in a cascade
of secondary defects.

The understanding of these phase diagrams teaches something about the class of dynamical systems to which the
mechanism of evolution belongs to. However, this is only part of the story: it does not yet constitute the (microscopic)
dynamics of the system [14].

In reality, the ﬁnal diversity a∞ will not be a constant, but will be subject to ﬂuctuations. The relevant parameter
will become the diversity (number of nonzero elements in x) over time, at.
In particular, there are two types of
ﬂuctuations: elements will get created spontaneously with a given rate, and existing elements will go extinct with
another rate. The second part of this work proposes a dynamical model of an evolutionary system incorporating
these spontaneous processes, compatible with their inherent phase diagrams. The model is characterized by the rule
density r, one creation and one destruction process, the latter ones modeled by simple Poisson processes. We study
the resulting dynamics and ﬁnd several characteristics typical to critical systems and destructive economical dynamics
described qualitatively by J. A. Schumpeter a long time ago [9].

II. THE CREATIVE PHASE TRANSITION

The dynamics of diversity (number of existing elements over time) has been analytically solved in [8]. To be self-
consistent in this section we review the argument: It is ﬁrst assumed that the system has a growing mode only (tensor
elements αijk are zero or one but never negative). For this situation Eq. (1) was projected onto a dynamical map,
whose asymptotic solutions can be found.

If the number of non-zero elements in x(t) is denoted by at, it was shown in [8] that the non-linear, second order

recurrence equations associated with Eq. (1) are given by

at+1 = at + ∆at

, ∆at+1 =

(cid:16)

1 −

r
d

at+1
d

(cid:17) (cid:0)a2

t+1 − a2
t

(cid:1) ,

with the initial conditions a0 being the initial number of present elements and a−1 ≡ 0, by convention. The question
is to ﬁnd the ﬁnal diversity of the system, a∞. These equations are exactly solvable in the long-time limit. For this
end deﬁne, ct ≡ ∆at+1/∆at, and look at the asymptotic behavior, c ≡ limt→∞ ct. From Eq. (2) we get

(cid:16)

c = 2r

1 −

a∞
d

(cid:17) a∞
d

.

2

(2)

(3)

3

(4)

(5)

(6)

FIG. 1: Phase diagram of the creative dynamics over the r-a0 space.

On the other hand we can estimate a∞ asymptotically by

a∞ = a0

ct =

a0
1 − c

.

∞
(cid:88)

t=0

Introducing Eq. (3) into Eq. (4) one gets a third order equation, whose solutions are the solution to the problem.
Most remarkably these solutions are mathematically identical to the description of real gases, i.e. Van der Waals gases.
As real gases our system shows a phase transition phenomenon. The corresponding phase diagram, as a function of
the model parameter r and the initial condition a0 is shown in Fig. 1.

One can make the relation to the Van der Waals gas more explicit by deﬁning, V ≡ a∞/d and τ ≡ a0/d. Using

this in Eqs. (3) and (4) gives V − τ = 2r (1 − V ) V 2. Renaming variables

leads to the famous equation,

P ≡

+

1
V

1
2rV 3

and

T ≡

τ
2rV 3

(cid:18)

P −

(cid:19)

1
V 2

V = T ,

which is exactly a Van der Waals gas of point-particles with constant (negative) internal pressure. The meaning of
’pressure’ and ’temperature’ in our context is intuitively clear.

III. THE DESTRUCTIVE PHASE TRANSITION

In the dynamics studied so far diversity can only increase due to the positivity of the elements in α. It is important
to note that in this setting the phase transition can not be crossed in the backward direction. This is because of two
reasons. First, the system forgets its initial condition a0 once it has reached the (almost) fully populated state. This
means that after everything has been produced one can not lower the initial set size any more. In terms of the Van
der Waals gas equation analogy we can not lower the ’temperature’ and we can not cross the phase transition in the
backward direction. Second, if r is a homogeneous characteristic of the system then it is also impossible to manipulate
the ’pressure’ of the system and we remain in the fully populated phase for ever.

The natural question thus arises what happens to the dynamics if one randomly kills a fraction of elements in the
fully (or almost fully) populated phase. In the case that an element k gets produced by a single pair (i, j) and one
of these – either i or j – gets killed, k can not be produced any longer. We call the random removal of i a primary
defect, the result – here the stop of production of k – is a secondary defect, denoted by SD. The question is whether
there exist critical conditions of r and a primary defect density δ0, such that cascading defects will occur.

As before we approach this question iteratively, by asking how many secondary defects will be caused by an initial
set of D0 randomly removed elements in the fully populated phase. We deﬁne the primary defect density δ0 ≡ D0/d.

The possibility for a secondary defect happening to element k requires that all productive pairs, which can produce
k, have to be destroyed, i.e. at least one element of the productive pair has to be eliminated [15]. This requires
some ’book-keeping’ of the number of elements that partially have lost some of their productive pairs due to defects.
We introduce a book-keeping set Gn of sequences gnl, Gn = {gn0, gn1, gn2, gn3, · · · }, where d gnl denotes the number
of elements that have lost l ways to be produced (i.e. productive pairs), given that initially n elements have been
eliminated.

To be entirely clear, let us introduce the ﬁrst defect. This defect will on average aﬀect 2r productive pairs in the
system, i.e., there will be 2r elements that loose one way of being produced [16]. We naturally assume d (cid:29) dδ0 (cid:29) r > 1,
and disregard the vanishingly small probability that one element looses two or more of its productive pairs by one
primary defect.

Before the ﬁrst defect we have G0 = {1, 0, 0, · · · }, meaning that there are d entities that have lost none of their
producing pairs. The ﬁrst defect will decrease this number d → d − 2r, i.e., we get 2r elements that have lost one of
their producing pairs. Consequently we ﬁnd G1 = {1 − p, p, 0, 0, · · · }, where p is deﬁned as p ≡ 2r/d. Now, defecting
the second element will aﬀect another 2r elements through their producing pairs. This time we aﬀect an element that
has lost none of its producing pairs with probability 1 − p, and with probability p we aﬀect an element that already
has lost one of its producing pairs. Iterating this idea of subsequent defects leads to the recurrence relations

gn+1 0 = gn 0 (1 − p)

and

gn+1 k = gn k + (gn k−1 − gn k) p .
(cid:18) n
k

(cid:19)

It is easy to show that gn k follows a binomial law, gn k =

pk(1 − p)n−k. The number of secondary defects after

n introduced defects, denoted by SDn, is just the number of all entities that have lost all of their (on average) r
producing pairs and can be estimated by d (cid:80)

k≥r gn k. Deﬁning

one ﬁnds the update equation for SDn by inserting (7) into (8),

Now, if d δ0 and d δ1 are the numbers of primary and secondary defects respectively, one has to identify

SDn =

gn k

,

(cid:88)

k≥r

SDn+1 = SDn + pgn r−1

.

δ1 = SDdδ0

.

This is nothing but

δ1 = p (cid:80)d δ0

n≥r gn r−1 = p (cid:80)d δ0

n≥r

pr−1(1 − p)n−r+1

.

(cid:18) n

(cid:19)

r − 1

Since we assume d (cid:29) dδ0 (cid:29) r > 1, Stirling’s approximation is reasonable, ln(n!) ∼ n ln(n) − n + 1

(cid:19)

(cid:18) n
m

∼ (cid:0) n

m

(cid:1)m

2 ln(2πn), so that the
em(2πm)−1/2, where (1 − m/n)n−m ∼ exp(−m), for n (cid:29) m.

binomial coeﬃcient is approximated by,

Further one can approximate (1 − p)n−r+1 ∼ exp(−np). Inserting these approximations into Eq. (11), and replacing
the sum by an integral one gets

Since p dδ0 = 2 r δ0, and by approximating p r ∼ 0 (for the lower limit) we rewrite the integral

and we can ﬁnally compute

with

δ1 =

pr
√
2π

(r − 1)

1

2 −rer−1

dx xr−1e−xp

.

(cid:90) d δ0

(cid:90) d δ0

r

dx xr−1e−xp ∼ p−r

dy yr−1e−y

,

r

0

(cid:90) 2rδ0

δ1 = γ(r)f (r, δ0)δr
0

,

γ(r)

= 1
r

(2r)r
√
2π

(r − 1) 1

2 −rer−1

f (r, δ0) = (cid:80)∞

n=0

1
n!

r

r+n (−2rδ0)n

.

4

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

5

(16)

(17)

FIG. 2: Phase diagram for the defect dynamics for two ways of iterating Eq. (14) described in the text.

Here f is obtained by expanding the exponential in the integral of Eq. (13) into a Taylor series.

What remains to be done is to iterate Eq. (14). There are two possible ways of doing so. In the ﬁrst iteration
scheme we think of collecting the primary and secondary defects together and assume that we would start with a new
primary defect set of size δ(cid:48)
1 − δ1, where δ(cid:48)
1
are the secondary defects associated with δ(cid:48)

0 = δ0 + δ1. The tertiary defects therefore would be estimated by δ2 = δ(cid:48)
0. This leads to the recursive scheme (A),

∆n ≡

δk

,

δn+1 = γ(r)f (r, ∆n)∆r

n − ∆n + δ1

(A).

n
(cid:88)

k=1

The second way to iterate Eq. (14) is to assume that we use the dδ1 secondary defects as primary defects on the
1 then
1. Iterating this idea

smaller (rescaled) system d(1 − δ0) so that we look at a new primary defect-ratio δ(cid:48)
has to be rescaled inversely to give the tertiary defects in the original scale, i.e. δ2 = (1 − δ0)δ(cid:48)
leads to the recurrence relation (B),

0 = δ1/(1 − δ0). The result δ(cid:48)

∆n ≡

δk

,

δn+1 = γ(r) (1 − ∆n−1)1−r f

(cid:18)

r,

δn
1 − ∆n−1

(cid:19)

δr
n

(B),

n
(cid:88)

k=1

with ∆0 ≡ 0.

The result in terms of a phase diagram of the two possible iteration schemes (A) and (B) is given in Fig. 2 (a) and
(b), respectively. The asymptotic defect size δ∞ (for t → ∞) is shown as a function of the parameters r and the initial
defect density δ0. As before a clear phase transition is visible, meaning that at a ﬁxed value of r there exists a critical
number of initial defects at which the system will experience a catastrophic decline of diversity. Unfortunately, an
analytical solution for the asymptotic iterations of Eq. (14) seems to be beyond the capabilities of the authors. It is
interesting that complete destruction of diversity (plateau in Fig. 2) not very large values of δ0 are necessary.

IV. COMBINED DYNAMICS: CREATIVE GALES OF DECONSTRUCTION

To become more realistic, since we have now established the existence of phase transitions in both the creative
and destructive regimes, and are equipped with the update equations for the respective cases Eqs. (2) and (14), it is
natural to couple these update equations and to study the combined dynamics. The relevant variable now becomes
the diversity in the system as a function of time, at. However, the question how this should be done is neither trivial
nor uniquely determined.

One realistic scenario might be that at any point in time some goods/species/elements may come into being
spontaneously and others go extinct at certain rates. First, for the introduction of new elements we introduce a
stochastic rate, χ+ > 0 of a Poisson process, so that (d − at)χ+
t new species may be expected in one time unit. Note,
that there are d − at ’un-populated’ elements in the system. These randomly created elements are elements that
did not get produced through (re)combination or substitution of existing ones, but are ’out of the blue’ inventions.
The natural time unit we are supplied with is one creative generation at → at+1. The spontaneous creation may
eventually increase the critical threshold and the system may transit into the highly diverse phase (think of this
process to randomly alter a0 in the creative update dynamics).

On the other hand there are spontaneous processes that destroy or remove species at a stochastic rate, χ− > 0
t new defects may be expected per time unit. It can not be assumed a priori

(Poisson process), such that about atχ−

6

FIG. 3: Time series and time increment distribution of the coupled dynamics for a ﬁxed r = 5 and ﬁxed Poissonian rates η and
χ±. The variable varied is a0 = 0.02, 0.056, and 0.1. Red lines are ﬁts to power laws with slopes γ, and a Poissonian resembling
the creative driving noise in (d). Note the change of scale here.

that the iterative accumulation of secondary defects in the system, as described above, operates at the same time
scale as the spontaneous or the deterministic creative processes.

For making an explicit choice we may assume that during one time unit there happen ηt generations of secondary
defects, taking into account the relative ratio of innovative and secondary defect generations processed per time unit.
We assume that ηt can be modeled by a Poisson process whose rate, (cid:104)ηt(cid:105) = η becomes a parameter of the model. For
the computations below we have chosen η = 0.1.

When we look at the way secondary defects evolve in generations we are left with a culminated number of secondary
defects ∆ηt t after ηt generations and a remainder δηt t, which would have to be added to ∆ηt t in the next defect-
generation, ηt + 1 but which – by assumption – is falling into the book-keeping of the next creative-generation time
step t + 1. What we say is that during time step t → t + 1, there are ∆−at = d∆ηt,t species removed from the
system, where ∆m t = (cid:80)m−1
k=0 δk t is the cumulated ratio of secondary defect ratios δk t of defect-generation k at time
step t. The remaining defects of generation ηt have to be accounted for in the next time step together with the newly
introduced spontaneous defects, so that δ0 t+1 = at
t + δηt,t. The update of defect generations now can be performed
ηt times according to

d χ−

δm+1 t = (1 − ∆m t) γrf (r, ˜δm t)˜δr

m t

,

(18)

where we have considered the rescaling approach (B) to secondary defect generations. A similar equation can be
derived for scheme (A). For convenience of notation we write for the rescaled defect ratios, ˜δm t ≡ δm t
. If now, by
1−∆m t
coincidence, the remaining defects from the last time step and the spontaneously introduced defects are suﬃciently
many and there are enough defect-generations ηt processed in that time step, the culminating secondary defects may
lead to a break down of the system from the high to the low diversity regime.

All that is left is to insert this dynamics into the creative update equation. To do so we ﬁrst note that without
defects, ∆at depends on both at and at−1. However, due to the occurring defects at−1 will not remain what it was
when t becomes updated to t + 1, but will be decreased by the occurring defects in this time span. For this reason
it is convenient to introduce a new variable bt which takes the place of at−1 in the coupled update process. More
precisely, bt+1 ≡ at − ∆−at. For the growth condition to be well deﬁned we require at > bt, which is guaranteed by
at+1 = bt+1 + ∆+at where

∆+at ≡

(cid:16)

1 −

r
d

(cid:17) (cid:0)a2

at
d

t − b2
t

(cid:1) + (d − at)χ+

t

,

(19)

246810x 1040.030.040.050.06r=5, a0=0.02(a)246810x 10400.51atr=5, a0=0.056(b)246810x 10400.51r=5, a0=0.1(c)10!410!310!2100105!= 2.18r=5, a0=0.02(d)10!310!210!1100100105frequency!= 1.14r=5, a0=0.056(e)10!310!210!1100100105" at!= 1.06r=5, a0=0.1(f)7

is the number of deterministically (by the creative update law) and spontaneously introduced species in the creative-
generation t. This sort of coupling allows to take a look at how diversity of systems may evolve over time, driven by
the spontaneous creation and destruction processes χ±, which may reﬂect exogenous inﬂuences, while on the other
hand the average number of defect-generations η per creative generation t, and the average number of productive
pairs per species r express endogenous properties of the system, i.e. whether the defects process slow or fast (η), and
the average dependency (r) of the catalytic network.

We study the resulting timeseries for this dynamics for several values of r, a0, η, and χ±. In Fig. 3, by ﬁxing
r = 5 and the Poisson rates η, and χ± and by varying a0 from 0.01 to 0.1, we cross the creative phase transition line
from the sub-critical to the fully populated phase. At a0 = 0.056 we observe a ﬂip-ﬂop transition between the two
phases. The ﬂip-ﬂop transitions happen over very short time intervals. In Fig. 3 (b) the increment distribution of
∆at ≡ at − at−1 is shown. It is clearly seen that the distribution is power law whenever the super-critical phase is
suﬃciently populated. The Poissonian driving in the creative dynamics in the sub-critical region is clearly seen for
a0 = 0.002 in Fig. 3 (d). By power-law ﬁts to the exponents in the deconstructive regime, we observe a sign for an
existence of a Zipf law, i.e. γ ∼ 1.

V. CONCLUSION

We have shown the existence of a new phase transition in systems capable of evolutionary dynamics. Given that
the system is in its highly diverse state, the introduction of relatively little primary removal of elements can cause
drastic declines in diversity. We have further proposed a dynamical model to study timeseries of diversity in systems
governed by the evolution equation (1) under the inﬂuence of external spontaneous creation and destruction processes.
We emphasize that we strictly stick to the structure of Eq. (1) and do not discuss variants, such as the beautiful
work of [10]. In contrast they have studied a linear version (resembling catalytic equations), however with an explicit
’selection’ mechanism incorporated in a dynamic rule table.

As the main result of this present work we re-discover what J.A. Schumpeter has heuristically and qualitatively
described as creative gales of deconstruction. More importantly we are able to quantify the dynamics of such systems.
As an example destructive processes can be quantiﬁed in real world situations by bankruptcies of ﬁrms. In this context
the existence of a power law and in particular empirical evidence for a Zipf law – similar to the one resulting from
our model – has been found in [11]. As in the work of [10] we observe the importance of diﬀerent time scales in the
coupled dynamics. In our approach we have incorporated this aspect by noting that creation and destruction do not
work necessarily on the same time scales. Let us mention as a ﬁnal comment that the results do of course not only
apply to technological evolution but to any biological, social, or physical system governed by the evolution equation,
Eq. (1).

[1] S.A. Kauﬀman, The origins of order, (Oxford University Press, London, 1993).
[2] M. Nowak, Evolutionary dynamics: exploring the equations of life, (Belknap Press, Mass., 2006).
[3] M. Eigen, P. Schuster, The hypercycle, (Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1979).
[4] W. Fontana, in Artiﬁcial life II, edited by C.G. Langton, C. Taylor, J.D. Farmer, S. Rasmussen (Addison Wesley, Redwood

City, CA, 1992), pp. 159-210.

[5] J.D. Farmer, S.A. Kauﬀman, N.H. Packard, Physica D 22, 50-67 (1986).
[6] P.F. Stadler, W. Fontana, J.H. Miller, Physica D 63, 378 (1993).
[7] S.J. Gould, The structure of evolutionary theory (Harvard University Press, Cambridge Mass., 2002).
[8] R. Hanel, S.A. Kauﬀman, S. Thurner, Phys. Rev. E 77, 036117 (2005).
[9] J.A. Schumpeter, Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung, (Wien, 1911).

[10] S. Jain and S. Krishna, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5684-5687 (1998); Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 2055-2060 (2002).
[11] Y. Fujiwara, Physica A 337, 219-230 (2004).
[12] It was shown in [8] that the limit d → ∞ exists and is well deﬁned.
[13] It is maybe noteworthy that the Fisher structure (linear form of Eq. (1)) does not have such a transition, for this a

non-linear model is needed.

[14] Note an analogy here between the similarity of thermodynamics and statistical physics. The knowledge of a phase transition

of water does not imply an atomistic view of matter.

[15] On average there are r production pairs for k.
[16] Why? Since there are d r productive pairs there are 2 d r indices referring to an element involved in denoting the pairs.

Consequently there are 2 r indices on average per element.

