8
9
9
1
 
r
p
A
 
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
0
0
4
0
8
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

IFT/05/98

The Living Network of Schools
Owned by Teachers and Students

Institute of Theoretical Physics, Warsaw University
ul. Ho˙za 69, 00-681 Warsaw

April 1, 1998

Stanis law D. G lazek

Abstract

This paper describes a network of teachers and students who form a living system of education at all
levels. Organization of schools is based on new principles. One person can be a teacher in one area or activity
and a student in another. Schools are owned and governed by the teachers and students. The system is
powered at all levels equally by the will of students to learn and the will of teachers to learn and to share
their expertise with students.

We describe main processes and structural principles of the network. The key processes are the process of
learning by inquiry and the processes of design and learning by redesign. We also describe steps required to
initiate the network growth process from small scale seeds. This avoids wasting human resources and money
on a large scale. The ﬁrst step we suggest for the teams of teachers and researchers who are interested in
building the network is studying a bit of basic physics by inquiry using specially designed and well tested
materials.

The network is economically sound. We distinguish the economy of the network because we claim that
the freedom and safety of learning and teaching processes can be based only on the ﬁnancial independence
of teachers who gained their independence as a result of developing and using these processes. The system
is designed to ensure highest quality in all respects. The design described here is provided as illustration
for the underlying principles and their implications rather than as the ultimate structure. In fact, the living
network is expected to evolve and adapt eﬃciently.

CONTENTS:
1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . The lion claw and the educational trade mark
2. Structure of the network . . . . . . . . . . . . The super-conducting wiring of learning by inquiry
3. Ownership principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . The rocket riders build and share the spaceship
4. Governance principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Brain cells know their responsibilities
5. Sources of income and ﬁnance management . . . . . . . . . . . .Buy your pass to the fastest lane
6. Assessment and recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .The credit guaranteed in gold
7. Archives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . You may know what is going on
8. Preparation, design, launch, feedback and redesign . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Neverending adventure
9. Community and state support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . They line up to help
10. Seeds and timing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A sequoia seed is billions times smaller than the tree
11. Initial business proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Are you ready?
12. Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . We enable people to learn eﬀectively
13. Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Will universities lead in future?

2

4

7

8

9

10

11

11

10

11

12

12

13

1

1. INTRODUCTION

It is bad that our educational system does not teach students how to learn eﬀectively. It is bad students
are often lost and not interested in learning at school. But it is very bad that teachers at all levels get used
to thinking they cannot change much in the way they teach. First of all, we teach the way we were taught.
Secondly, it is very hard to make changes. We want to reach our students’ minds but we feel we have to do
it in the environment which we have little inﬂuence on as individuals. Most importantly, the environment is
not safe for experimentation on better ways of teaching. We know we have to complete an overwhelmingly
diﬃcult program. We know we have unacceptably short time to do so. We have little freedom to make
choices. And we will be criticized if we admit our students do not learn much. In fact, we do not even
know how bad and how little they learn, although we certainly know it is not enough. More interestingly,
we hesitate to work on measuring how much they learn. We do not have time to do that. And it would be
hard to accept to everybody in the system that our students do not learn how to think critically, how to
learn eﬀectively and how to approach new problems requiring solution. But if we admitted we do not know
how to teach eﬀectively we would question our competence and jeopardize our living.

Assuming that the overarching goal of education is to train people in learning eﬀectively so that they
are able to learn and change throughout their whole life, one is faced with the question: What needs to be
changed in our current concept of teaching? For example, it is clear that a child learns very eﬃciently when
it feels safe and when it can experiment. It can touch, taste, break and throw things, make its mother angry,
etc. The child learns from failure and pain or success and pleasure. When such learning is wisely instructed I
call it learning by inquiry. In mature form learning by inquiry is the only way humans truly learn new things
and become owners and users of what they learned. I claim teachers could learn how to teach eﬀectively if
they worked in the environment safe for experimentation and had good examples to study and patterns to
discover. Also, children will eagerly learn if guided by a teacher who feels like a lion letting cubs play with
food before showing them how to hunt. Teachers will be self-motivated to learn and to teach by inquiry if
the best sources to learn from are made available to them. One such already existing source is physics, the
most advanced science driven by inquiry. I will return to this point later.

If the freedom to learn is the prerequisite to teachers’ action, on the one hand, and the fear of rejection
when attempting new approaches originates in the fear of losing ﬁnancial security in the current system, on
the other hand, then, the way out is to create a system in which successful attempts of teaching in a better
way will be rewarded with more ﬁnancial independence for teachers. This independence is the bottom line
security condition which we do not have satisﬁed and which we have to have satisﬁed to feel free to explore.
But our safety has to result directly from our work, not from top-down orders. The reason is that the
arbitrary top-down ruling may change at any time for some reason and the temporarily existing safety will
be gone, as if the lion went away. However, if teachers and students work in a self-conscious network, which
is in control of its income and spending and which is driven by merit of the overarching goal of education
and, if teachers generate their income through their own action then, no arbitrary budget decisions could
take away from us our freedom to learn and teach by inquiry the best way we can.

In the network I envision, whenever we will see the excitement about learning new things in the eyes of
our students we will know we are making irreversible progress. We will be learning ourselves how to better
the way we teach. We will engage in the work on creating new opportunities for achieving better results
more often. We will be building our own system, and our own future. Thus, the ownership principle becomes
the basis for the overarching goal of education. We the teachers and students working in our own network
become the lions protecting our own development and future and we become the guarantors of our freedom
to learn by inquiry both the subject matters and how to teach better.

Being a teacher and observing teachers in schools of all levels one can notice that the money a teacher
earns for doing the job is not related to the depth of learning experience provided to students. On average,
teachers are not in a position to be entrepreneurial [1] in their schools and they do not pursue quests like
motivated professionals who create prosperity of their disciplines [2]. Teachers themselves do not achieve
clear results that could raise awe in students and motivate them to learning. A tired teacher at the end of
the day is supposed to check a pile of poorly done homework and accept the lack of future. Little time is left
to the teacher for personal growth, gaining respect and winning intellectual freedom. [3] The lion cub eats
well after a good hunt. Teachers eat the same no matter how well they teach. But the coupling I postulate
between the results of teaching and teacher’s income must not be confused with using greed for money to
serve educational purposes. That would certainly not work.

The money reward to teachers in contemporary society is essential for many reasons. The key one

2

is that low-paid teachers cannot teach students about achievements of the society. For they know these
achievements only second hand and only as much as can be bought using very limited and already allocated
funds. And currently even a modest attempt on the part of public school teachers to change this situation
may take away their basic income because the system is not open to experimentation. Moreover, if the
high quality teacher’s work is not steadily improving the teacher’s social status, the situation becomes the
primary example in the eyes of students for the fact that learning more with more understanding is not the
way to make one’s life complete. Students will learn to think independently from other sources and not from
the limited and helpless teachers.

But most importantly, a typical teacher is subjected to power of an arbitrary educational system and she
or he cannot teach students how to execute their rights to learn, understand, build, improve, prosper and
be happy in life.[4] No wonder teachers believe that their work environment has never permitted them to
show what they can really do.[5] In turn, no bright child wants to follow the lead to a dead end and become
a teacher. This is very bad because without the brightest talent the teachers have little chance to change
their status. There is no exception to this rule, from the lowest to highest levels of educational institutions.
Being a student and observing students one sees they do not learn at school enthusiastically. Students
are not engaged mentally in the learning processes to the extent required to learn eﬀectively.
[6] One or
two teachers impress a student sometimes but students too rarely see their school as a source of inspiration.
They are often forced to do things they consider useless. Their compliance and hard work on assignments
elevate their opinion among teachers but do not bring outcomes of clear on-line value to them. The school
does not teach us how to learn according to current needs and how to use the knowledge and skills to steadily
advance in life.[4]

This article describes principles one can use in attempting to change the educational status quo at the
beginning of 21st century. The place to start is the reader’s own workplace and neighborhood. But before the
reader gets a chance to start thinking how to go about her or his contribution to the process of redesigning
education [8] I need to describe the processes I envision. Therefore, I invent a model structure and describe
how the processes work in that structure. This article is limited to these two subjects. My aim is to show
one needs to start thinking in terms of the system processes in order to ﬁnd out how to make the overarching
goal of education a driving force.

The vital processes of learning in the system I envision involve exchange and trade of knowledge, skills,
materials and other resources such as time needed for learning and practice. The structure of the system
supports this trading. Nevertheless, I shall ﬁrst describe the structure of the system because the processes
of learning and trading occur in the structure. The structure is changing according to the needs of the
processes. Therefore, I will describe only an initially conceivable structure. In fact, it is not known that a
single stable structure may fulﬁll the needs of learning processes. [9] It is more probable that the structure
will evolve as is common to life and our civilization.[10]

It is essential to understand what kind of trading I am talking about. Teachers are perceived as hired
by the society to push knowledge that is not produced by them. Teachers are considered to be passive in
creating civilization. Teachers are supposed to pump civilization into students’ heads as if it were pumping
gas into a car. A math teacher is perceived as someone to teach addition, not as somebody to teach thinking
and learning on the example of addition. A student is perceived as a car that needs gas. Students are not
perceived as having delicate brains to be loaded with skills and checked for ﬂawless function by extremely
competent artists of human mind-crafting. The way we look at the educational system resembles dumb work
on trivial projects such as repainting white boards in color or hitting white and black keys. Students are
not seen as learning how to become artists and teachers are certainly not perceived as masters. Therefore,
teachers are denied the right to collect money as if they were creating something desirable to us by their
own minds and hands. Teachers are so used to the treatment that they seem not to see they can learn more
and become owners of a new generation school system.

But I need to warn the reader right away that a private school is not the idea I am talking about.
What I am talking about is a new profession of teaching based on serious research aiming at understanding
how to teach eﬀectively. Professional teachers form a network of experts on the subject matter and teaching
techniques. The network teachers earn more if they teach better. These teachers can say that their profession
oﬀers them multiple opportunities for personal and intellectual growth every day. And the teacher future
looks brighter the more apt a student she or he is, at all levels, from the nursery to the highest academia.

My claim is that educational systems are hard to change because teachers are not owners of their trade.
While all prospering businesses buy something, do work on the bought material and sell the result for a
higher price, or provide services using their own knowledge and ability which is thus being sold, teachers

3

are hired for a job that is considered in a way to be merely loading wagons with potatoes. The potatoes,
trucks, ramps and trains belong to us. Anybody can do the loading job. And the students leave the station
full of potatoes like wagons. We are shocked that they are not illuminated Picassos, Liszts or Pasteurs. We
demand a lot providing merely a regular pay for compliance with rules.

Teachers need motivation to transform their occupation into a profession. Current systems are such that
attempts to innovate put the regular income of a teacher in jeopardy. Trying new things is very risky because
it is not guaranteed to bring results. Nobody wants to stop teachers from trying but the system eﬀectively
forces them to quit because they get tired and burn out. There is no structure to support innovation. There
is no structure to develop innovations into elements of teaching profession and culture. And there is no way
for teachers to be fully recognized. Therefore, teachers have to ﬁnd a way to win the recognition of their
trade themselves. They need to start trading with what they possess and do.

In fact, a successful teacher is an owner of incredible gifts, someone who possesses unusual skills and
knowledge and can set a high price on services provided for students. Students can be active learners
from competent teachers. Both need freedom to build a system to function in a natural way. And a clear
suggestion for such a system to have a chance to succeed can be found in universities.

University professors are considered to be owners of their wisdom because they participate in the process
of creating science. Teachers could be seen as owners of their teaching materials and techniques if they were
creating the materials and methods they use. University students are responsible for what they spend their
parents’ money on and the same could happen with students in lower schools. Universities are populated
by a whole hierarchy of people with diﬀerent levels of knowledge and skills while at school we have only
teachers and students. A global network of schools based on the principles of a new generation university
which belongs to teachers and students is the vision I describe.

The main problem with the model invented in this article is that it is too complicated to comprehend
and judge quickly. Moreover, it is full of conﬂicts. If it could work it would only do so through a balance
of opposing forces. One can easily point out apparent inconsistencies. To explain why the described system
could work one would have to answer an unending chain of questions and the answers would stimulate new
questions. Solutions to problems showing up in the system have to be invented on-line as the whole system
grows. But what I am trying to sell is not the particular model. I am using the model to convey the idea
that the simple principle of schools owned by teachers and students immediately leads to incredibly rich
structures and provides clear criteria for distinguishing which new elements of the system might be useful
and survive and which not and die. The ownership principle opens a new way of thinking about education.
If this is understood by the reader, the rest is details that may change in time.

2. STRUCTURE OF THE NETWORK

It is important not to perceive the structure I describe as rigid and ultimately deﬁned. A living company
evolves.[10] The model example I provide here is arbitrary but it illustrates the underlying principles. The
principles themselves are not arbitrary. If the described model structure has drawbacks, including serious
ones, they should be thought of as resulting from a long evolution and one should ask the question what
processes exist in the system that can resolve these problems. The structure I describe is arbitrary because
no real process of evolution existed to create it in a natural self-correcting way. This is not a problem since
the model is only a tool to bring up relevant issues.

Every teacher and every student is a member of the network as an individual with equal rights to all other
individual members. The members form teams, classes, schools, school districts, school regions, academies
and a single society of professors of education with its own hierarchy. These subgroups have diﬀerent
responsibilities and are distinguished by the responsibilities.

The responsibility of a team is to learn an assigned (or chosen) subject. A team contains about 4 or 5
members (between 3 and 7) and exists for as long as the assignment or chosen task is not completed. There
may be 4 students in a team, or 4 teachers, or 4 professors, or a mixture thereof. Teams are formed according
to the demands of the subject they are supposed to study. A team is the basic element of the system because
it is the learning engine which delivers the result of its learning process: a report on what and how the team
learned carrying out its project, and a product the team was supposed to produce through the project.

Teams form classes of varying size according to the amount of assistance the subject matter requires.
Subjects such as ﬂoating or sinking of rigid bodies in liquids [12] can be studied in classes of 4, 8 or even
10 teams. Such an “Archimedes” class may require one to three instructors for assistance. The notion of
a class is distinguished by the notion of instructors. Since teams encounter diﬃculties when learning new

4

things and new ways of thinking they need to ask questions and verify their reasoning with instructors. The
instructors can be students, graduate students, teachers, graduate teachers, professors, graduate professors
and professors of education. It depends on the kind of class they instruct. For example, the class studying
the notion of the contexts of productive learning [6] according to modules designed in analogy to Ref. [12]
in case of physics may require instructors to become members of the teams. I will return later to the issue
of materials for teaching the context of productive learning by inquiry since in the network I envision the
context of productive learning by inquiry is a basic building element and in the current systems of education
this context is almost entirely absent.

Classes form schools. It is important to form schools in order to sustain social aspects of the learning
processes. Schools are to serve their surrounding communities. An elementary school is fairly local in this
respect while a top ranking university may have a mission of national or even global outreach. Schools are
distinguished by having a principal and a body of teachers. Schools are basic posts of the system. Schools
owned by teachers and students form a network because it is easier to operate in the network than outside of
it. The network is international because it draws on teaching and learning experiences which are published
and useful across the world.

Teachers form a school to create a body of suﬃcient expertise in the subject matters to be able to teach
and to form a setting in which their own development of skills and knowledge will be possible through sharing
duties and exchanging experiences and results. Teachers of one or more schools may form a team to learn
and work on some problem. The striking feature of the system driven by the learning of teams of various
kind is a possibility of a self-organized virtual school formed of classes of teams of teachers as a result of their
own recognition that the problem they want to study requires such structure, with a body of super-teachers
drawn from other elements of the network.

The key function the principal is responsible for is to make the school productive. The productivity is
measured by the results of students on standard tests and by the number of team reports from the school
sold on the system market. It is a big success to produce a good report which sells well.

We need to recall that a team may be composed not only of students but of teachers as well, and a team
may include people from outside the school. In that case, the team result is shared according to prescribed
rules. Consequently, the number of reports or publications or student achievements do not need to be simple
integers and instead of using special measures the school outcome is measured in terms of money: total
sales minus total investment divided by the number of school members. Details of the accounting will be
discussed later, but we need to mention three things.

One is that the team results may be highly professional and even able to solve practical community
or wider problems. Therefore, they may be copyrighted, patented or sold. For example, an outstanding
teaching material on the subject of sinking and ﬂoating, electric currents or optics, such as Ref. [12], may
be in high demand in all schools or, a local solution to the problem of child care and a computer program
needed in its administration, written by students and teachers, may have broad applications.

The other is that the standard test results of students need to be accounted for in money. Therefore,
there are tables developed of equivalence between credits and money. Credits are universal for the whole
system but they may be equivalent to more money in a better school when considered as a product and
less money in a better school when considered as an expense. This point will be further discussed in the
Section dealing with ﬁnances. Here we mention only that the accounting of schools and reviewing principal’s
performance in terms of money makes it evident that education is not a burden to the society but a source
of major income if money is properly invested. Accounting of education in terms of money also prevents
wasting public funds for education. For it is too easy to spend money without accountability while good
accounting creates responsibility.

The third thing is that details of the calculation do matter. In fact, they are essential. It is not obvious
how to evaluate results of education in terms of money. Therefore, the method is a subject of ongoing
studies. The studies are essential to the network because the education it oﬀers must be useful to the society
for the system to prosper and be actually paid as much as it aspires to. The studies feedback is critical to
long term planning and development of the evaluation rules for credits in terms of money. But the studies
are essential for many more reasons, vital to the network. Here are some examples: design and redesign of
curriculum structures, admission, examination and testing procedures, hiring policy, communication with
employers, satisfying needs of the job market through the network and longitudinal studies of alumni careers.
Therefore, the evaluation scheme is a permanent source of initiative for improving the network to better
serve the society. The details are hot subjects in the network.

School districts are formed by schools spontaneously to coordinate work and express opinions of many

5

schools in a selective and organized fashion which guarantees coherent action in defense or promotion of the
districts educational or other interests. The body of representatives is elected by schools. Therefore, the
districts are distinguished by their representatives who serve their needs. Districts are formed to contain
schools of their choice and do not have to be restricted to primary, middle or high schools only. Districts
prosper if their schools earn money.

School regions include school districts and universities. The regions are formed to allow universities and
schools to utilize their resources in producing team reports and selling them. The principal role of regions is
to provide permanent in-service learning opportunities to every member of the system on the highest possible
level. Teachers study in the region to keep abreast of the science or art they teach. University students,
graduate students and faculties study ways their research capacity can be enhanced through becoming more
useful in education, mainly through many opportunities of delegating responsibility for teaching to students.
[8]

One of the students mission becomes then to work with less educated students on their learning skills,
using the best materials available. Students who excel in teaching can pursue studies in the system and
become teachers. It takes a region to create conditions for such advanced studies. Two reasons are essential.
The region is the smallest structure whose size provides suﬃcient amount of students with talent for teaching
and becoming teachers of teachers. The region is the smallest structure that can support high quality
research. Regions are large enough to create conditions for unlimited personal growth of their members.
School regions are also useful in creating a suﬃciently stable environment to support educational processes
in the periods of setbacks.

A school region is distinguished by the board of trustees whose role is to assure healthy economy of the
region educational services. Trustees of a region are elected by the region members. The boards of trustees
use help of academies.

Academies are organizations quite independent of the team, school, district and regional structure. They
are the regional networks of experts who contribute their expertise to the region system and are recognized
by the system as such. The academies are professional organizations of providers of services to the system.
Academies recruit their members following their own rules. Academies can undertake action of their choice
driven by the need of the system. A key additional function of academies is the publication of journals.

Academies publish refereed journals on education and sell them in the system as an additional source of
income. The new striking feature of the journals is that they have subsections for learning materials which
can be bought separately and in large quantities. School teams may attempt to publish outstanding reports
in the journals. [7]

The whole network of schools of all kinds requires a body of distinguished teachers for passing judgments
on issues important to the whole system. This is a Society of Professors of Education. Members of the society
have at least 100,000 copies of educational materials sold through the system. But in order to become a
Professor of Education a candidate must have a record of working in the system for at least 25 years and
have educated at least 25 teachers who sold more than 10,000 copies each of teaching materials through
subsections in the refereed academic journals.

The network of schools is global and its international character is obvious to all members. It is clear
that translation of the academic journals plays an important role in the international contacts and learning
across the globe.

Diﬀerent countries may have districts and regions of diﬀerent sizes but no administrative superstructure
above regions is needed or allowed. There exist data banks connected in the network so that no central head-
quarters are required and still the system is perfectly conscious of its identity. Members identify themselves
by contributing to the processes of the system and by using its structures. Regions may easily cross state
boundaries for their structure is governed by the processes they support. Examples of well known existing
international network structures are Internet and VISA International [11].

Analogies exist between the school network and other essential systems in our civilization. The system of
electric power distribution is a leading example. [2] One can think of many analogies between the two systems.
Let me give you a surprising example. One may think about the contexts of productive learning as analogous
to the super-conducting wires, about the processes of learning and teaching by inquiry and circulation of
teaching materials as analogous to the electric currents and about the overarching goal of education as
analogous to the principle of optimizing the load factors. Human brains are the sources of power. The rules
of science, democracy and total quality are analogous to the Kirchhoﬀ rules. The ownership principle is
analogous to the closed circuit condition for the currents to ﬂow. The transition from the contemporary
educational systems to the networks of schools owned by teachers and students is analogous to the transition

6

from the direct to alternating current in the case of the electric power systems.

3. OWNERSHIP PRINCIPLES

The forms of ownership I describe are invented for illustration, have drawbacks and are partly contra-
dictory. Such a situation may be realistic but the model I describe is not suﬃciently studied to claim that
much. One would have to study mathematical models of the ownership structure including mechanisms
of governance, income, spending and population changes to make reasonable evaluations of the ownership
principles and I have not done such studies. Still, the ownership principles are essential to the network idea
and I oﬀer a scenario to think about.

The system that can emerge from a real trial may evolve to other forms of the ownership but it is clear
that if the system belongs to teachers and students at the beginning and grows successfully there will be little
incentive for taking the ownership away from the primary constituents. And if many systems are initiated
some ownership schemes will succeed and some will die.

Two diﬀerent forms of ownership exist in the envisioned network, one for teachers and one for students.
The need to diﬀerentiate comes from the fact that teachers support their own living (and their families’)
through the work in the system while the students’ living is supported by parents or other supporters. In
addition, there is a mechanism built in for a gradual change in the form of ownership available to students
who learn particularly easily, satisfy well deﬁned criteria and choose to make a career in the system.

Teachers own shares. Shares bring dividends. Shares cannot be bought. They can be earned. A teacher
receives a prescribed basic number of shares when when joins the system. The basic number of shares
ascribed to a job position is proportional to the time necessary for doing the job and the complexity of the
tasks. The complexity factors are tabulated and published. The basic number of shares corresponding to
a full time job of lowest complexity brings enough dividends to live if the whole system works productively
and eﬃciently. Advancing in the hierarchy of teaching positions results from the growing ability to become
responsible for more demanding jobs to which a larger basic number of shares is ascribed.

Anyone in the system can earn more shares than the basic number for her or his position by doing the job
better. In particular, one can earn shares by publishing educational materials. To give a striking example: a
cleaning staﬀ member of some school may publish a material on economic organization of eﬃcient cleaning
in schools so useful it may sell in thousands of copies. The number of shares is proportional to the number of
copies sold. Conduction of every activity in the network is evaluated in terms of shares. Every teacher knows
the number of shares in the whole system and in her or his possession. Once the yearly budget forecast
is published it is straightforward to foresee the individual basic income for the current year and everybody
can evaluate their own additional income knowing the number of shares they have in addition to the basic
number.

Students own credits. Credits have to be earned by passing standard tests and written and oral exams
and by publishing individual and team reports through the academic journals (this is independent of the
fact that producing team reports is the main source of learning experience for students). To be able to earn
a credit a student has to buy a pass for a course that leads to the credit. Students can buy passes for money.
They can also work in the system as teachers, administrative assistants or other staﬀ, earn shares and pay
for passes from their dividends. When students join the system to work as teachers their shares become
sources of dividends as for teachers.

One can disclaim shares by leaving the system. Such shares die; cease to exist. For example, when
a student ﬁnishes education in the system the number of her or his shares at that point is multiplied by
the current value of a yearly dividend per share. This says how much the student was making a year at
graduation - it tells potential employers how much they have to oﬀer the alumna or alumnus to attract
attention. In turn, students know how much they can expect on the basis of their education. The shares
of the alumni are subtracted from the total number of shares. When a teacher leaves the system her or his
shares are processed in the same way.

Possession of a large number of shares opens unlimited opportunities for personal growth and attaining
intellectual freedom. Putting the process of individual growth of teachers and students on top of other
processes and setting priorities in such a way that ownership remains in the hands of teachers and students
no matter what happens, has one key implication: teachers become vitally interested in reform since reform
as a process of redesign (cf.
[13]) is the natural way of improving their own living. At the same time
otherwise insoluble or hard problems may become less forbidding.

I give examples of problems I heard about in “Discovery” [14] and in “Reading Recovery” [15]. “Dis-

7

covery” and “Reading Recovery” are educational reforms of unusual quality, “Reading Recovery” being one
of the most advanced reform models in the world. But before I give the examples I need to explain why I
am giving these examples. Namely, I only mean to suggest that if the ownership by teachers and students
were seriously considered from the beginning then, new ways of approaching the problems could come to
mind. Because of my limited knowledge about “Discovery” (which educated several thousand teachers) and
“Reading Recovery” (which operates in about 9000 schools in the US alone and continues to grow), my
suggestions are hypothetic. However, my goal is not to tell leaders of “Discovery” or “Reading Recovery”
what they should have been or should be doing. My aim is only to show that the ownership principle implies
a new way of thinking about problems of education.

In the case of project “Discovery”, I think the ownership principles could have changed the project
recruiting scheme, proﬁles of the teacher leaders education and organization of their work, and the motivation
of teachers attending summer institutes. The institutes would have new elements in the program of great
interest for people seeking a status of independent thinkers and educators. Most importantly, however,
at the end of the project when public funds expired, the participants could be prepared to sustain their
independent network and continue to beneﬁt thousands of students without a shock of disappearing outside
support. The above conclusion may appear surprising in its simplicity. However, I recall meeting teachers,
teacher leaders and directors in the project who did not expect to be left out in the cold. Most importantly,
they found themselves rapidly developed, with broadened horizons and, ironically, unable to plainly return to
their previous roles in the existing system having no room for growth in the directions they found attractive.
In the case of “Reading Recovery”, one might suggest that teachers and teacher leaders who would own
the system could be motivated to develop their skills beyond the requirements set by leading scientists.
They could have vested interests in enhancing rather than diluting standards of their services to children
with diﬀusion of the system. The research leaders could securely develop the system if their judges were
not arbitrarily selected but were mainly the teachers and parents who know ﬁrst hand the project results
and appreciate outcomes of the longitudinal studies. Even more importantly, the research leaders of their
own self-improving system could attract new young researchers by the fact that the principle of “Reading
Recovery” approach to reading could be extended to other disciplines if enough research were done. One
direction which I consider very important is the development of materials for children having diﬃculties with
learning science, materials analogous to the McDermott’s modules on physics [12] and the reading books
in “Reading Recovery”. The projection into future would be totally unbounded and exciting. The system
could remain highly interesting to its leaders independently of false outside opinions.

4. GOVERNANCE PRINCIPLES

All schools in the network have equal rights and the same standards of excellence. For individuals, there
is a schedule of ranks based on the number of shares. People of lower rank usually pay attention to people
with higher rank because those with higher rank usually know better how to earn shares. The principles of
eﬀective teaching govern in the network.

The average number of shares per teacher in a school measures the quality of the school. Schools are also

measured by achievements of their students - the number of credits per student.

Credits are well deﬁned through common standards and other criteria, such as juror judgments. The
standard tests are built on the principle of one framework problem with varying input data which imply
diﬀerent correct output answers using the same reasoning. The tests verify understanding and reasoning.
The skill of reason is the goal of education. The correct result is of value.

Shares become worthless if students do not buy passes to earn credits. Therefore, teachers are interested in
keeping high the number of sold passes. This leads to the improvement of quality of education since students
have freedom to make choices how to use their budgets. There is no prescribed governance structure that
would need to be imposed artiﬁcially because of needs to serve other interests than the wisdom-centered
learning. [16]

Team leaders are elected within a team. Everybody can suggest a leader but it is the team who decides.
Class leaders are elected by the class. Classes can and often do bid for teachers for speciﬁc courses.
Teachers have the right to choose with which class they will work. Teachers usually prefer to choose a
bidding class with highest number of credits and shares. If there is a conﬂict without a rational solution
the right of choice and responsibility for making decision belong to the teacher who has more shares in the
system.

School principals are elected by the school teachers and students equally for a period of 5 years. There

8

is a limit of 3 such periods for a single person to be a principal.

District representatives are elected from the whole district membership in the network by all teachers
and students for 7 years to ensure continuity. Schools vote separately on a list of candidates. The number
of votes per school is equal to the number of shares owned by members of that school. One person can serve
up to 2 periods.

Region trustees are elected for unlimited time. A trustee ends her or his service only voluntarily. Can-
didates are suggested by school districts. In order to become a trustee one has to have at least ten times as
many shares as average number of shares per teacher in the region on the election day. The second condition
is that the candidate for a trustee must have worked in the system as a teacher for at least 10 years. These
conditions eliminate the situation where some important person becomes a trustee despite that this person
is fully ignorant about the system. This condition also helps to select people who are successful as teachers
and have a remarkable record of achievement outside the network.

There is a danger of lowering the price of passes to sell large numbers of them. This is easily avoided
through a feedback loop because good teachers will not work for free with too many students and such
practice dies out. On the other hand, there is an issue of the system becoming a monopoly and dictating
a too high price on the passes. Therefore, the system is built from more than one independent subsystems
of shares and credits. There is no artiﬁcial limitation on the number of such subsystems. Teachers are free
to initiate new subsystems but there is a requirement that a subsystem must be adopted by at least three
schools. To create a subsystem teachers of the schools set up a company according to the common law and
the subsystem becomes a partner in the network.

The standards of credit requirements and the educational materials are used across the board equally
in all subsystems. Shares in diﬀerent subsystems are compared using the ratio of the average number of
credits obtained by students in the subsystem during the last year per share in the subsystem. Credits are
universal because they are based on satisfying most objectively measured requirements by students while
the subsystem share value depends on the subsystem. Each subsystem share value is calculated in terms of
a universal share value for the whole system. The total number of the universal shares is equal to the sum
of numbers of the universal shares in all subsystems.

All subsystems are free to function without state or community support for students (taxes) but if they
use public money as income to pay dividends they have to comply with the general share evaluation scheme in
which the share value is deﬁned by test results for students. Testing schemes are continuously redesigned to
satisfy changing requirements of the job market and the network. The testing practice is based on verifying
thinking skills, understanding subjects and ability to learn new things, in mandatory agreement with the
overarching goal of education. That this condition is satisﬁed results from the fact that the true value of
the network to the society is precisely the supply of contexts of productive learning. In other words, the
network tests students if they purchased and acquired what they intended to when paying for the passes.

The common share evaluation system is needed by all subsystems. The subsystems want to demonstrate
eﬀectiveness and quality of the education they oﬀer. They want to attract the best students. Subsystems
compete by keeping the number of credits issued per share as high as possible to keep the share value high.
The reason standards are not reduced is that the demands for credits are universal and in check by all
constituents. The network is also being constantly evaluated from the point of view of the job market. The
market economy cures negative features in the network as it does for itself outside the network. The bonding
scheme is based on the market competition for best students and its reluctance to hire poorly educated
alumni. In turn, nobody is interested in educating students whom nobody wants to hire. Therefore, the
schools keep records of their alumni careers. There is a whole area of studies on measuring alumni careers
for meaningful comparisons.

5. SOURCES OF INCOME AND FINANCE MANAGEMENT

The system collects money for teaching students directly from the students budgets. The budget money
is provided, for example, by parents for education of their children, by a local community to pay for education
of its teachers, by state and international organizations for training of professionals or by foundations through
grants for scientists doing research in the system. Students buy passes to earn credits.

It is essential for students to administer the process of purchasing passes. This way they learn the cost of
their education and how to avoid waste of their money. The purchase of a pass to earn every single credit is
done by a student separately, in an on-line process of learning how to manage her or his education program.
The youngest students are being helped in this respect by their parents or guardians. There is a scheme of

9

reducing the responsibility of parents or guardians as students grow up. There is a system of consultants
to students and data banks for their use. Every school has its own data bank with a network connection to
help students make choices.

Students have individual budgets for their education. All students have equal access to the minimal
budget for purchasing a basic set of passes. The basic set deﬁnes the level of education guaranteed to be
available to every student in the system. Students need to raise, borrow or earn more money to cover costs
of passes to additional credits of choice for their careers. Students demonstrate their records to obtain such
funds.

The budgets for students come from states (taxes), public or private and national or international or-
ganizations of all kinds interested in educating students of all kinds, and from students themselves. But
the dominant source is the direct payment by parents or employers. In the fully operating system which is
already blended with structures of whole societies, parents and employers may temporarily deduct transfers
made to budgets of students they support. The deductions are allowed for as long as a student needs to earn
credits or until the time foreseen for earning the credits expires.

However, in the current situation such a scheme is not directly implementable since taxes are paid today
according to schedules that have nothing to do with how the tax money will be spent. In other words, we
pay taxes on what we earn and we have no direct way to say how we want our money to be spent. There is
no entry on the contemporary tax forms concerned with what we wish to provide our money for, except, for
example, church taxes in some countries. Hopefully, in a future tax forms one will ﬁnd entries for education.
Until then, what I can oﬀer in practice today is merely a seed or initial business plan for ﬁrst steps on the
way to make the educational network belong to teachers and students. This is described in next Sections
below.

The total amount of money collected by the network for a ﬁscal academic year (or semester) is divided by
the number of shares issued to date and the resulting number deﬁnes the total dividend per share. Owners
of shares decide how to use the money they receive through their shares. They form organizations in the
system to use their money. For example, each and every member of a school brings a deﬁnite amount of
money for use by the school. The sum of money of all members has to cover all expenses of the school,
including the owners income. A good teacher with many shares becomes thus a great asset to the school.
Her or his opinion about teaching practice cannot be neglected. Such teachers make the schools going.

Teachers form schools voluntarily. If they do not form schools their shares will lose value - no single
teacher is able to oﬀer a comprehensive education. The same motivates formation and existence of districts
and regions.

A highly sophisticated system of collecting payments, share accounts and copy rights is in operation. But
the system rules are simple, published and easily available. They protect rights and intellectual properties
of teachers and students, warrant creation of the contexts of productive learning and serve the overarching
goal of education.

The ﬁnancial management is not delegated to outside companies. The outside auditors are hired but

mainly to help in eliminating errors and for communication purposes with outside the network.

The network employs its own highest quality accountants who are also teachers. The accountants are
deeply aware of the network principles and serve well the network educational agenda. They teach the
network accounting to their less experienced colleagues and students. Much of the work is done by the
students as part of their credit earning in accounting and related subjects. Similar delegation of work and
responsibility is practiced in all administrative functions.

The individual shares are issued by the subsystems according to their needs and the number of shares
issued by every subsystem is decided within the subsystem. These shares are evaluable in terms of the
universal shares. The number of the universal shares in the whole network is an abstract number which
roughly equals the number of individual shares and results from the accounting rules. Thus, the individual
share brings dividends in amount comparable to a universal share. You can check what is the dividend one
gets for a single share in some school and you have an idea about the level of education the school oﬀers.

Changes in the network accounting are induced by the majority vote, on recommendation by represen-
tatives of districts, with approving opinion of the region trustees. The Society of Professors of Education is
obliged to help in assessment of proposed changes in the accounting rules used by regions.

The reason for that no monopoly can emerge is that many subsystems exist and they compete to win

their share in serving educational needs of the society.

There exist also ways of giving money to the network and specifying the money is given to a subsystem
or other unit for some purpose. The money is used then by issuing a corresponding number of new shares

10

and distributing those shares in agreement with the intention of the donor.

6. ASSESSMENT AND RECOGNITION

The bottom line in assessing the quality of work and productivity of teachers and students is the number
of credits they produce. Therefore, the credit system is a subject of continuous research, redesign, application
and feedback.
[13] The notion of a credit guaranteed in gold explains the quality of reasoning skills and
knowledge of students who earned the credit.

The award winning teachers obtain one time money prizes or a number of shares. Dividends from the

prize shares are collectible over diﬀerent periods of time; longest times for most prestigious awards.

If the number of shares grows with time and the number of students does not grow the value of a dividend
per share becomes smaller with time, and one has to earn more shares to keep the individual income rising.
No other measure than students performance on universal tests is used in assessing eﬀectiveness of
teaching. But owners of copy rights for teaching materials and patents for teaching techniques collect
royalties on their use.

Since there are diﬀerences between districts in student readiness to learn the districts must specialize in
diﬀerent levels of education. Whenever an opportunity arises for a school district to go to a higher level
the opportunity is taken because it is preferred by the job market to employ people with higher number
of credits. The credit system is such that gaining merely basic skills and knowledge cannot bring a high
number of credits. A large number of credits may be obtained only by a student who learns many skills and
subjects very well and the achieved level is veriﬁed thoroughly and trustworthy.

The protection of teachers rights to beneﬁt from selling of their teaching materials is secured by the general
patent and copyright laws. A recent example of such laws are laws prohibiting unauthorized duplication of
video tapes or compact discs and ﬁghting pirates across the world.

The highest recognition available to teachers and students is based on leadership positions they win in
their own network units. For example, a team distinguishes its leader, a school distinguishes its principal
and academies distinguish their leaders.

7. ARCHIVES

The system keeps an archive, in many copies and in a ﬂexible network of easy access. The archive is
sophisticated in its purpose, structure and availability. Highly sophisticated librarians manage the archives
and make sure no member of the system is denied access to data. The contemporary electronic libraries such
as the Los Alamos National Laboratory electronic preprint library [17] can serve as a prototype example of
the network archive.

The archive plays the role of a patent oﬃce library for educational materials, copy right guard (issuing
single authorized copies), source of information and ground for longitudinal studies (independently of the
studies conducted by the network subsystems) and the forum for research and discussion on educational
matters including the performance of the system itself.

However, the archive is not able or allowed to become a publisher or distributor of academic journals.
The publication of journals is reserved to academies in order to secure the journals high quality through the
peer review processes. Still, the archive is indispensable since it provides information the publishers cannot
provide, such as access to publications from diﬀerent publishers.

8. PREPARATION, DESIGN, LAUNCH, FEEDBACK AND REDESIGN

The leading idea of the network is that teachers and students can build a healthy and rapidly evolving
educational network if they start doing it step by step on sound economical basis. In the envisioned system,
a group of interested teachers starts from earning funds for opening a small school.

Thus, the ﬁrst step a group of teachers does is they decide they want to create their own school. The
group then gets in touch with a local network subsystem to learn about what and how one can do to begin
with. The local subsystem delegates a specialist who helps the group in identifying their goals. They draw
the ﬁrst draft of their vision, mission and business plan statements to present it to the subsystem they want
to join. The group ﬁrst investment is time and work on its own education in the already existing network.

11

This education allows the group to start building a plan how to create a new school and beyond. More about
it in Section 10.

The design, launch, collecting and analyzing data and redesign processes are gradually becoming a habit
of the group. [13] Once they succeed in setting a school in operation they begin to build partnerships with
other schools of the subsystem and learn how the network works. The feedback from the network is essential
for the new school development.

A mature school participates in the network operation without limitations. Schools of distinguished
quality beneﬁt from serving less developed schools by sharing their expertise. For example, an experienced
teacher can teach a class of colleagues how to manage their time at school more eﬀectively and, as a result,
have more time available for personal growth.
[3] Where is the time coming from? The skillful teacher
knows how to help students learn on their own, how to organize their work so that older or more experienced
students help younger or less experienced ones. The teacher knows how to set up the teams work so that
the teacher has plenty of time to think about the most interesting things to her or him. Teams of students
can easily do a lot of work which otherwise overwhelms overworked and over-stressed teachers.

9. COMMUNITY AND STATE SUPPORT

Schools of the network are so eﬀective they are eagerly welcome in local communities. It is worth for the
community and state to invest in the learning processes kept alive by the schools of the network since these
processes educate sophisticated alumni. It is essential to understand that schools never have a problem with
getting local support because they grow out of local initiatives. They also never lose state support because
no state is going to risk opinion of having no interest in the best possible education of citizens. Once a school
is formed it operates for as long as its share value is reasonable. The school grows and brings higher income
to teachers when its share value grows.

Communities are proud of the quality of their schools and press local governments for execution of

productive educational policy.

10. SEEDS AND TIMING

The envisioned network of schools owned by teachers and students is built in analogy to leaving organisms.

Life begins in small seeds, not big scale projects. We have four elements to mention in the analogy.

• A single member of the network, a teacher or a student grows from an isolated individual of limited
horizons to a member of a learning community with broad horizons and freedom to make choices.
Thus, the seeds of the network come from personal learning and growth of its members.

• A school is born and it advances through levels of professional eﬃciency. A new post of the network

emerges and supplies its strength to the whole structure, as a leaf or root of a tree.

• The whole network grows and improves its services to the society. A small size of an initial stage does
not prevent the development into an impressive structure as much as the size of a sequoia seed does
not exclude a giant forest in future.

• The core ideas evolve from the embryos such as this article to mature driving ideas for large systems
if the ideas are helpful in practice. The educational network is a seed for bigger changes in our global
civilization.

The small size of seeds is important, not accidental or resulting solely from ﬁnancial limitations. The
small size of seeds is the condition which eliminates huge errors. The hardships of life teach members of
the network how to go about developing their own schools. They are helped by the network in a number of
essential ways characteristic of productive teaching but a school must learn how to grow and become strong.
Only self-consistent and well adapting structures survive. Thus, even if the network could aﬀord ﬁnancing
large scale projects it does not do it lightly without careful studies.

It will take a long time before a reasonably mature version of the envisioned network can become a reality
and show its ability to improve and survive on the basis of eﬀective education of its members. 50 to 100
years is not a bad guess. Before that happens, contemporary groups of teachers interested in building such a

12

network must start with other enterprises in mind than creating the whole new educational system at once.
The seeds must be sown diﬀerently.

The point is following. The existing educational systems have long traditions. There exists no coun-
terexample of comparable magnitude that could substantiate claims one can do better. It is pointless to
quarrel about what is good or bad and engage in easy to create wars of opinions. Moreover, it would be
silly and immature on anybody’s part to claim knowledge of how to build a better system of education than
the existing ones to the extent that once the solution is adopted from top to bottom no problem will arise.
The principles of life do not favor concepts such as Frankenstein. Therefore, the network concept stays away
from such ideas.

In contrast, teachers and students undertaking action to address their basic needs to learn and grow
should not be met with a strong opposition. For opposing such movement cannot be supported by reason
and any such opposition would contradict the purpose of education.

The timing idea is that once a growing self-organizing network of teachers and students begins to practice
meaningful education it will be easier to found, fund and ﬁnd (3f) exemplary schools where the contexts of
productive learning [6] and learning by inquiry [12] is bread and butter.

Teachers need to prepare themselves to take initiative much earlier. One place to start with is after-school
or after-work activities for youth and adults in the local community.
[20] The author knows that physical
phenomena such as electric currents ﬂowing in a circuit of batteries, bulbs, switches and wires, or a daily
movement of the gnomon shadow on a sundial, provide opportunities for teaching how powerful is learning
by inquiry. Understanding of the solar system or laws of electricity on the basis of a conscious inquiry induces
deep changes in the learning habits. To get going, a team of teachers needs to see this happen to themselves
and their students. Then, they need to repeat the success working with new people. For example, one can
teach grandparents how to work with their grandchildren. Another viable program is a summer vacation
or holiday camp for youth or adults.
[20] It is essential that the activities are conducted by experienced
people using materials of high quality, at least as good as “Physics by Inquiry” [12]. Teachers engaging in
such initiatives become active learners of the subject matters. More importantly, they begin to learn how
they can become professionals. Teaching and learning according to principles of scientiﬁc inquiry are the
cornerstone processes in the network development and one has to begin there. The same principles are then
available for application in teaching and learning in other areas without limitation.

The initial studies must be economically sound, with direct collection of money from parents or employers.
This way ﬁrst self-organized learning teams of teachers may emerge. Otherwise they burn out. The teams
learn what is involved in the enterprise. For example, a small company is subject to many laws teachers do
not learn about in college. [19] The small scale operation is an indispensable source of knowledge for teachers
about what they can accomplish. Only those who know their trade can build a school of the network.

The key characteristic of the contemporary situation in educational systems is the lack of shared under-
standing what is the goal of education. The seed activity must focus on building a shared practical vision of
education among a team members. The remaining paragraphs in this Section describe the ﬁrst seed activity
which the founders of the network should seriously consider.

My claim is that the notions of the context of productive learning, learning by inquiry and the overarching
goal of education are not commonly understood. I have noticed in science and educational institutions that
almost never the bottom line of research and learning is put on the table as worth investigation. I have
not heard people asking seriously what and how we really want to learn and why. Such issues go beyond
the common discussion. They seem to be obvious. I claim they are too damn diﬃcult to understand so
that anybody worrying about their position cannot seriously admit ignorance in this area. The ignorance is
covered by a tendency to push in the direction which is known and safe to the individual.

The next logical step is to ask: Do we have a textbook, a module analogous to Ref. [12], and a program
which would be teaching what is the essence of productive learning by inquiry? My answer is: No. Moreover,
the non-existence of such a module for learning how to teach by inquiry clearly shows our reform eﬀorts are
weak and missing the key innovation element. I suggest that the teams interested in building the network
of schools owned by teachers and students start from creating their own versions of such modules. The
modules should then be reﬁned in the process of educating new people who join the founding teams. A new
school founding team should start from work on their school cooking-book and I claim they should start
from learning themselves what is food.

I give you another analogy which is useful here. Think about the educational system and the air trans-
portation system.[8] In the air transportation the notion of ﬂying was clear to everybody since they saw
a smallest bird in action. From Icarus to Boeing 747, all participants of whatever was being done knew

13

beyond any doubt what they have to demonstrate or see in order to say they ﬂy. In the educational system,
no analogous notion exists. The notion of ﬂight in education can be the context of productive learning by
inquiry, but it seems to be top secret now, or more probably, the notion does not even exist in the most
educators and politicians minds. I do not blame anybody. The notion is very diﬃcult to understand. You
have to combine ideas of most advanced sciences and arts, climb high up on top of them and see far enough
to come to grips with the notion of ﬂying in education to try your own wings. Talking about the design of
the wing curvature or the airplane factory management is premature when the notion of ﬂying is not known.
A school founding team needs to understand what they mean by ﬂying in education before they can start
working on their propeller.

Moreover, the majority of complaints about performance of the educational systems is not serious.[4]
Namely, the relevant people do not understand the crisis to the extent of saying: I am not doing the right
thing now, I am not teaching eﬀectively, I do not know what is the context of productive learning by inquiry,
I am unable to achieve the overarching goal of education for my students, I, in the ﬁrst place, need to start
thinking what I am doing. In other words, it is not only unclear what is ﬂying but it is also not true that
people realize they do not know what is ﬂying in education. To the contrary, most educators are convinced
they know something well enough to teach others. In fact, it often becomes comparable to teaching Little
Mermaid how to comb her hair with a fork.[18] The way one shows to somebody that something is not the
way that person thinks is following: one asks the person to make a veriﬁable prediction of the real status
of the matter in question and then one veriﬁes the prediction together with the person. If the veriﬁcation
shows the person’s prediction was false the person is shocked, becomes curious, starts thinking begins to
listen. This is teaching by inquiry. To start learning by inquiry you have to feel safe to ask questions about
what bothers you.

My punch line is here. There is a science of incomparable clarity and focus in learning by inquiry. It is
physics. Basic physics is the most transparent source of understanding what it means to learn eﬀectively.
And we already have a well tested material to study the notion of learning by inquiry in physics. This is Ref.
[12]. The ﬁrst thing to do for a team of teachers who want to understand what they are truly after if they
want to join the living network of schools is to study electric circuits or optics in the way similar to the one
from Ref. [12]. Then comes learning about what “Discovery” accomplished in Ohio and where it failed.[14]
At this point one begins to understand the value of the context of productive learning in physics and how
hard it is to create it. Then, one needs to ask what is “Reading Recovery” extending from New Zealand
to the U.S.A. and where it is going.[15] The context of productive learning by inquiry comes at this stage
more clearly into your sight. Next step is to talk to the Learning by Redesign [13] and learn by inquiry in
the context of your path about past reforms and the status of science of change. Finally, once you become
an owner of a clear notion of the context of productive learning by inquiry you can start your independent
thinking about the living network of schools owned by teachers and students. If this outline frightens you,
forget the network idea.

11. INITIAL BUSINESS PROPOSAL

The faculty member in a university who is prepared to do so might help a few colleagues to study the
notion of productive learning by inquiry and understand the beneﬁts of using the technique. A group of
faculty members could set a program for learning by inquiry in the areas they see ﬁt, at all required levels
and for all people they want to talk to. This activity could produce the ﬁrst shared notion of the purpose of
education in the faculty team.

Three school teachers and a university faculty could spend a semester preparing a one semester course
on electricity or optics by inquiry. They would have to provide their money for equipment and their time
for the work and learning. In Poland, the investment could presumably be at the level of about 150 z l per
person per month. That makes 2400 z l for 4 people in a 4 month semester with about 2 hours of studying
session and 2 hours of preparation a week. The team would learn principles of learning and teaching by
inquiry.

In a second semester, the same team could deliver a course for youth, adults, or both, to about 30 clients
for money. Each client paying 50 z l a month makes 1,500 z l per month and about 6,000 z l in four months.
Divided by 4 it gives 1,500 z l per teacher for all expenses of the course, or 375 z l per month. Suppose all the
money is spent on equipment and other expenses. One can buy a lot of nice stuﬀ for this money. The next
semester has much lower spending because a lot of the equipment is already in place, the time required is
shorter since there is experience accumulated, and the price may even go up if the ﬁrst trial creates demand

14

and the course is considerably improved. Suppose the spending is slightly higher than in the ﬁrst semester
of preparation, say 175 z l instead of 150 z l. Then, the next semester brings 200 z l per month of income per
teacher. This means the income compensating the initial money investment in one or two years.

The major product of the ﬁrst few semesters of the team work is a set of materials which allow a skillful
teacher to engage many students in a highly productive learning process. Such material can be published
and sold in the future in many copies. But what is created goes far beyond that - teachers begin to act using
their new skills and their own process of continuous learning and self-development takes oﬀ.

The question is how to move forward with the idea of founding a new school. One team is not suﬃcient.
Organization of summer camps and new courses should lead to a larger group of teachers in association with
university teachers who can conceive a mission, a vision and a plan to found the school. A breathtaking
variety of problems need solution to make this work. Business strategies are just a small part of it (for
example, see Ref. [19]). But it is hard to imagine anybody or anything will be able to stop the development.
On the contrary, with such grass root movement and solid preparation one can expect many foundations
of education to be ready to support the plan. Publishers and distributors of the teaching materials would
certainly be interested in the promotion and the widest possible use of maximal number of issues. They
would sign contracts for producing such materials.

This time my punch line is here: the university faculty trained in teaching by inquiry could start teaching
elementary science by inquiry to teachers whose participation in the program would be paid by employers
(schools, communities, institutions engaging in education of teachers, foundations). The great beneﬁt to the
university faculties is they suddenly become obviously and undeniably useful to the whole society (remember,
students have parents and it is the parents who keep the country going), irreplaceable and in high demand
for doing what they are well prepared to do subject-wise, what they enjoy to do by nature and what they
can eagerly do to raise their income without interference with their research as much and as stressfully as
teaching ineﬀectively hoards of under-prepared students interferes with their underpaid research activities at
the university. Long term beneﬁts to scientists are then obvious and not limited. Most importantly, however,
the faculty members begin to feel free to learn a completely new stuﬀ and start thinking in new dimensions.
There is an important aspect to mention in such an approach: those who learn by inquiry are ready
to tackle hard problems. They will spontaneously advance their knowledge and understanding. They will
be driven by curiosity. They will create the culture able to sustain the movement towards the network of
schools. And they will grow personally with the development of the network. The network will serve more
students and bring respect and enthusiasm to leaders of eﬀective learning. The network will continuously
need its top experts to keep it on track and going. Everybody will have to learn at new levels about new
diﬃcult matters and how to solve problems eﬃciently, bringing splendor to the educational enterprise.

New teams will be trained to become able to oﬀer training to many new teachers. The university faculty
sharing the vision will be able to help in building the network of schools owned by teachers and students and
the schools will produce students ready to study at the universities. Training of new teams will be based on
a set of meta-teaching materials on the subject matter and methods of founding new schools and developing
the network. People will not be merely hired to do all these things - they will own the network and make it
live up to their expectations. The network will become a good client of the university faculties.

12. COMMUNICATION

The key roles of communication are exchange of information within the network and informing society
about the network ability to teach, improve itself and grow. Internet-like structures may help but they will
be only tools in the processes of importance.

The most important communication process in the network is the transfer (describing, explaining, selling
and buying) of teaching materials combined with courses on teaching and learning how to use them oﬀered
by specially trained users.

The most important information sent to the society is the current dividend per share and the total number
of existing universal shares. The published numbers include also the average number of shares earned by
teachers and students in the whole system. In addition, tables of subsystem averages are published with
explanation of their meaning. The tables help students, parents, foundations etc.
in judgment of the
subsystems performance. Next, the cost of the education of a single student and the proﬁt from education
of a single student are published with explanation of how both are calculated.

15

13. CONCLUSION

There is one consequence of the educational system belonging to teachers and students at all levels that
has not been fully described yet and must be reiterated here. Namely, such a network could naturally
support basic research. Moreover, it could do so without asking for immediate industrial applications. The
new motivation comes from the fact that an educational system will not be truly useful, indispensable and
always worth investment unless it becomes an independent source of enlightenment. New discoveries could
ﬁrst apply in driving education before being used in industry. Today, we learn at schools what happens in
the world. In the new system, it would be natural for the world to eagerly learn what is being discussed at
schools - an unthinkable situation today.

While today no economic competition in scientiﬁc progress between educational systems and industries
is possible, the new system could engage in such competition. The engagement might have incredible
consequences for the speed of developing our civilization. Imagine young people learning about the current
status of our knowledge and understanding of the real world ﬁrst hand and searching for solutions to problems
without bias of employment and other commitments.

I also need to explain the opportunity the network creates for the contemporary university. The unique
opportunity lies in the leadership role the university could try to attain. But we need to remember that the
contemporary university is not an unquestionable institution that fulﬁlls its mission and may securely keep
going as it did so far. [11]

The well known problem the university faces is that freshman students are not suﬃciently educated at
schools to undertake studies of modern science. The university becomes a place to teach elementary subjects
because schools cannot fulﬁll their mission. Schools are supposed to teach so much so quickly that they
are unable to help students learn with understanding. Understanding is replaced with a mindless drill of
memory. Students become alumni who do not know how to learn new subjects. Worse, they are trained
in faking knowledge and understanding. Thus, the contemporary university must face the highly probable
possibility of becoming a high school of the 21st century and never gain the leadership position it might
dream about or believe in attaining.

The main point is not merely that the university teachers would certainly enjoy having better prepared
students as entrants (better students means better chances for prosperity of their professors). The point is
that the university may become obsolete and useless no matter how good a science it supports if the students
will not be able to study there in suﬃcient numbers. The above statement is not guaranteed to motivate
a revolution in educational paradigms.[21] But it means that universities have to help schools in changing
their practice. I give the following example.

The university works as a hierarchy of teaching and learning staﬀ from students to graduate students
to teaching assistants to postdocs to levels of professorship, and administration. Climbing the ladder is
related with achievements in science, teaching, building research teams, personal growth, gaining respect
and winning intellectual freedom without limits. Simpler tasks are delegated down the hierarchy. The most
advanced processes of study and teaching at the university are in the hands of the most talented and most
educated people. How is the school organized? There are only teachers and students, and administration.

The questions to ask at the university are the following. How would you explain the utility of your system
to school teachers if they asked? How could one implement similar principles at the school level? Why do
teachers not come to ask how to do that with their students? At the same time one could ask the following
questions at school. Why don’t you try to create a structure like in a university? Why don’t you talk about
it with the university people? Are they not helpful or plainly ignorant? The university should consider the
opportunity of helping to build and lead a living network of schools owned by teachers and students. It
could make a diﬀerence.

Acknowledgment

The author would like to thank Ken Wilson for many stimulating discussions and comments. Multiple
discussions with Seymour Sarason are gratefully acknowledged. The author beneﬁted from meetings with
Charlie Ericson, Constance Barsky and Ben Daviss. He also wishes to thank Maria Ekiel-Je˙zewska for
discussions and collaboration on teaching experiments.

16

References

[1] P. F. Drucker, Managing the Non-Proﬁt Organization, Harper Business, New York, 1990, and other

books by the same author, such as Innovation and Entrepreneurship.

[2] T. Hughes, Networks of Power: Electriﬁcation in Western Society 1880-1930, The Johns Hopkins

University Press, Baltimore, 1983.

[3] S. R. Covey, The Seven Habits of Highly Eﬀective People, Fireside, Simon & Schuster, New York, 1990.

[4] M. G. Fullan with S. Stiegelbauer, The new meaning of educational change, Teachers College Press,

New York, 1991.

[5] D. C. Lortie, Schoolteacher: a sociological study, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1975.

[6] S. B. Sarason, The Culture of the School and the Problem of Change, Allyn and Bacon, Boston, 1971;
S. B. Sarason, The Predictable Failure of Education Reform: Can We Change Course Before It’s Too
Late?, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, 1991; S. B. Sarason, Political leadership and educational failure,
Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, 1998.

[7] A contemporary example of a journal publishing useful materials is the European Journal of Physics,

see http://www.iop.org/Journals/ej.

[8] K. G. Wilson and B. Daviss, Redesigning Education, Hoyt, Boston, 1995.

[9] K. G. Wilson and C. Barsky wrote articles about successive generations of models of reforms, in analogy
to the generations of models in computer, car or airplane industries, such as Windows ’95 or DC’s and
Boeings of diﬀerent numbers. For information see Ref. [13].

[10] A. de Geus, The Living Company, Harvard Business School Press, Boston 1997.

[11] D. W. Hock, Institutions in the Age of Mindcrafting, Talk given at the Bionomics Annual Con-
ference, San Francisco, California, October 1994; send mail to info@CascadePolicy.org, see also
http://www.fastcompany.com.

[12] L. C. McDermott et al., Physics by Inquiry, Wiley, New York, 1996.

[13] Learning by Redesign, The Ohio State University, see www.physics.ohio-state.edu/∼redesign/home.

html or write to redesign@paciﬁc.mps.ohio-state.edu.

[14] Discovery - the Ohio educational reform is described in Project Discovery Annual Reports (Columbus,

Ohio: The Ohio Board of Regents, 1992 to 1996), see also Ref. [13].

[15] M. Clay, Observing Young Readers: selected papers, Heinemann, Portsmouth, NH, 1982. The Reading
Recovery system is described in C. A. Lyons, Gay Su Pinnell, D. E. DeFord, Partners in Learning,
Teachers College Press, New York, 1993.

[16] I borrow the term “wisdom-centered learning” from K. Wilson.

[17] See http://xxx.lanl.gov. Another prototype in the case of education per

se is

Abstract database
http://www.phy.nau.edu∼danmac/AAPTDB/index.html.

for

the American Journal of Physics and The Physics Teacher,

the AAPT
see

[18] “Little Mermaid”, an animated motion picture by the Disney company.

[19] W. J. Markowski, ABC small business’u, Marcus s.c.,  L´od´z, 1997.

[20] M. Ekiel-Je˙zewska, Session Materials of the Discoverers Club, Warsaw 1995-97, unpublished.

[21] T. S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1970.

17

