International Workshop on the Future of
Physics and Society
Debrecen, Hungary, 4–6 March, 1999

Workshop Summary

Raymond S. Mackintosh
Physics Department, The Open University
Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK

Abstract The Debrecen workshop was one of a number held in preparation for the
UNESCO–ICSU World Conference on Science, which will take place in Budapest, June,
1999. A report representing the views of the workshop, prepared for that conference
and containing a number of recommended actions, is included with this summary. The
workshop aﬃrmed the ongoing importance of physics for its own sake and as part of our
culture, as a key element in increasingly uniﬁed science and as an essential contributor
to the solution of environmental and energy problems. The problems faced by physics as
an activity and as an educational subject were discussed and actions for both society as
a whole and the physics community itself were put forward.

9
9
9
1
 
r
p
A
 
8
 
 
]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
3
1
0
4
0
9
9
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

June 8, 2013

Introduction

A principal function of the workshop was to submit a report making recommendations to
the UNESCO–ICSU World Conference on Science, to be held in Budapest, June, 1999.
Nevertheless, a great many important points were raised which are addressed to the
international physics community rather than to the World Conference.

This workshop summary is therefore in two parts: the ﬁrst part is exactly the report
ﬁnally submitted to UNESCO and the second is a summary of the other points raised at
the conference which were agreed to be important.

Part I: Report to the World Conference on Science

The workshop aﬃrmed three general conclusions:

Preface

1. The contribution of physics to all aspects of life, material and non-material, will be

essential for the foreseeable future.

2. Physics currently faces serious problems in the world. Many of these problems aﬀect

science in general, but a number are speciﬁc to physics.

3. Actions are needed to assure the continued health of physics research, teaching and
cultural inﬂuence. Some form of ‘contract’ between physicists and the rest of society
will be required.

We emphasise that the problems physics faces are not related to the subject matter
but to its relations with society and the perceptions of society. By ‘physics’ we include
the physical sciences in general and we aﬃrm the growth of interdisciplinary ﬁelds and
the trend for areas such as astronomy, cosmology, environmental studies and biophysics
to become ever more closely linked with all aspects of physics.

The workshop identiﬁed seven important actions. We recommend that the World
Conference on Science organised by UNESCO and ICSU consider these for inclusion in
its report “Science Agenda – Framework of Actions”. Many of them apply to other
branches of science and hence ‘physics’ could be replaced in many places by ‘science’.
Some actions, however, are speciﬁc to physics.

The list of recommended actions follows. We present in appendices some of the points
which led us to make these recommendations. The workshop expressed the view that the
experience of the many relevant professional bodies should be exploited in implementing
the recommendations.

Recommended Actions

1. Promulgate a declaration aﬃrming the vital importance of basic physical science

and the need to protect and support curiosity-led physics.

2. Aﬃrm the importance of making a substantial eﬀort to educate and inform the
public. A guideline should be established recommending that, say, 1 % of money
spent on research should be made available for public awareness.

2

3. Provide substantial support for the improvement of the teaching of physics through-

out the world, at all levels from school to university. This should involve:

• establishing guidelines for what level of scientiﬁc understanding would be ex-
pected at particular stages of school education and how much time should be
devoted to physics teaching at each level;

• monitoring these standards and defending them from external threat;
• encouraging both curricula and teaching methods to adapt to the changing

social and scientiﬁc environment.

In addition, support is required for teachers, for example by enhancing their
prestige and providing continuing education and personal development. UNESCO
should promulgate the principle that physics should be taught by persons who
have been trained to become physics teachers. Reliable information con-
cerning curricula in diﬀerent countries should be established and made widely
accessible.

4. Explore ways of establishing a recognised authoritative and impartial interna-
tional body, set up under the auspices of UN or UNESCO, to adjudicate damaging
disputes involving scientiﬁc issues. Examples of such disputes are cold fusion and a
wide range of environmental issues. The new body would investigate the extent to
which claims are based upon established science or are simply ungrounded opinion,
perhaps inﬂuenced by pressure groups. This will provide an authoritative scientiﬁc
basis for important political decisions.

5. Establish means for supporting physics within the new democracies of Europe.
This should be done by facilitating international collaboration and by encouraging
the support of physicists within their own countries. Find ways to support and
utilise for mutual beneﬁt the reservoir of advanced expertise in the former Soviet
Union.

6. Special measures should be taken to ensure the free movement of scientists. In
particular, UNESCO should encourage governments to facilitate the issuing of visas
for scientists if such are required.

7. The long-term health of physics requires the establishment of guidelines linking
R&D expenditure to GNP at a level appropriate to the economic state of each
country.
In addition, there should be guidelines and standards for coherent and
stable national science policies; these policies should be developed in close consulta-
tion with national scientiﬁc communities. UNESCO should establish a committee
to make recommendations to governments.

In addition, the workshop agreed that there are a number of measures which the physics
community itself should take. These will be publicised in due course.

3

Appendix 1: Why the contribution of physics will continue to
be essential

1. Physics is a central part of our culture and will continue to inspire many people.
Physics reveals important universal truths notwithstanding certain strands of post-
modern thought.

2. Physics will continue to underpin all science and technology for the foreseeable

future.

3. Physics is and will continue to be essential for analysing and solving urgent envi-

ronmental and energy problems.

4. Physics plays a unique educational rˆole:

Secondary school: It is recognised that other scientiﬁc disciplines more and more

require knowledge of physics.

Undergraduate: Physics is becoming recognised as providing education of great
value for many careers outside physics such as commerce, banking and medicine.
Doctoral: PhDs who go into industry are an indispensable byproduct of pure

physics research.

5. Physics is global and constitutes our best ‘anti-Babel’. Generations of physicists of
the most diverse political and cultural backgrounds have collaborated on the basis
of shared understanding and shared ideals.

6. Physics sets standards of rational thought in the face of irrationality; it upholds the

primacy of observation.

Appendix 2: Some general problems currently faced by science

1. Many people feel that science robs the world of meaning and this deeply aﬀects their
attitude to science. Science is felt by many people to be ‘cold’ and ‘alienating’.

2. Modern forms of irrationality are becoming widespread and sometimes involve out-
right opposition to scientiﬁc attitudes and even scientiﬁc knowledge. There is some-
times an unfortunate, even dangerous, political aspect.

3. There is a serious ‘authority problem’ in modern life with few people able to make
rational judgements as to who or what to believe. This is reﬂected in a widespread
relativism improperly invoking Einstein. Similarly, Heisenberg is improperly invoked
in promoting the idea that everything is uncertain anyway. The widespread ten-
dency to adopt conspiracy theories is a potentially dangerous aspect of this problem.
There is a corresponding tendency in academe in the form of social constructivism;
in extreme form this denies that science can progressively approach universal truth.

4. External pressures, sometimes commercial in nature and often exacerbated by fund-
ing problems, lead to damaging conﬂicts within subject areas. Damaging conﬂicts
also arise between subject areas, particularly under pressure of inadequate funding.

4

5. In Europe and other places there is a squeeze on industrial research as a result of

‘short-termism’.

Europe and elsewhere.

6. Science teaching and research face speciﬁc local problems, particularly in Eastern

It is precisely the nature of many of these items which makes greater support for science
an urgent matter in the modern world. The workshop also identiﬁed a series of problems
speciﬁc to physics and a report discussing these as well as some proposed measures will
be published.

Part II: Physics in the modern world:
some problems and possible solutions

The impact of the globalization on all our institutions and our value systems was a
common element in many contributions. It is clear that physics will have a key role to
play in studying and solving the global environmental and energy problems the world
will face in the coming century. Globalization was felt in another way: while some of the
problems listed below are particular to speciﬁc regions, there was nevertheless very much
common ground in the identiﬁcation of the general problems faced.

1. Some problems we face

The workshop identiﬁed many diﬃculties faced by physics as an ‘institution’ and as
a subject in schools and universities. These diﬃculties do not arise from its own subject
matter and in particular the conference aﬃrmed that the subject is certainly not ‘worked
out.’ Nevertheless, physics as an activity and as an academic subject does face problems
and some of the speciﬁc points raised were:

1. For many students, physics can seem remote from their everyday concerns. This
is true also for the general public. This is in great measure because physics is
abstract and lacks visualizable elements (particularly modern microscopic physics,
with astrophysics an exception). This presents a problem for teachers and those
communicating with the public.

2. The fact that physics is essentially mathematical also presents special problems.
While the mathematical language is a main strength of physics as a discipline, it is
a major obstacle in the way of communicating the meaning of physics to the general
public.

3. Many school science curriculums are relatively static and remote from exciting con-
temporary developments and unrelated to important contemporary issues such as
medicine, energy and the environment. This is in spite of the direct relevance of
physics to all these issues.

4. Physicists have acquired a negative image in some parts of society, not least because

of the association with nuclear weapons.

5

5. The public has no clear picture of how society has beneﬁted from physics and how

physics is essential for solving environmental and energy problems.

6. There is no ‘physics industry’ in the sense that, for example, there is a ‘chemical
industry’ and a ‘biotechnology industry’. The following two problems are, in part,
consequences of this.

7. Students in schools are unaware of the career possibilities enabled by education
in physics which exist even in countries in which high-technology industry is not
strong.

8. Physics faces problems in universities: in many places there are fewer students, and
many appear to be less able. Sometimes, multi-disciplinary courses at undergraduate
level add to the downward trend in the academic level of courses. This lowering of
standards also occurs as a result of pressure to ‘satisfy customers’. The supply
of students to do PhDs is highly susceptible to economic circumstances and many
countries frequently face a serious shortage.

9. In Europe and other places there is a squeeze on industrial research as a result of

‘short-termism’.

10. In many countries there is a squeeze on pure research and a growing requirement

for researchers to justify their work in terms of economic beneﬁts.

11. In many countries there is a serious lack of competent and enthusiastic physics

teachers.

12. Physics is particularly subject to competition from pseudo-science. This is an aspect
of the authority problem: the public is confused as it is confronted with a mixture
of information and misinformation through the media, including the Internet.

2. Hopeful factors we should ﬁnd ways to exploit

The workshop discussed solutions to these problems and also identiﬁed some hopeful signs.
Among the positive points were:

1. Politicians at the highest levels are beginning to ﬁnd that the prestige arising from
national success in pure science is of value in international negotiations. A related
fact is that, in many countries, it is success in science (along with sport) which most
arouses national pride.

2. In some countries, and potentially everywhere, there is a higher than ever interest
in popular science. This point has been emphasized by professionals in the popular
science business, and is also clear from the number of books published. (The simulta-
neously existing problems remind us that the ‘public’ is not a single undiﬀerentiated
body.)

Our defence of physics, as well as science in general, must ﬁnd ways of exploiting these
hopeful points. It was pointed out that ‘The resource of the 21st century is knowledge. . . ’
and certainly physical knowledge will be an important part of this.

6

3. Recommendations to the physics community

The workshop identiﬁed a number of areas where action by the physics community

and its friends, including those involved in teaching physics, could be of great beneﬁt:

1. Physicists should present a united front; suppress factional ﬁghting; show respect

for diﬀerent subject areas. (We are vulnerable to ‘divide and rule’.)

2. Physicists must deal responsibly with the public, avoid exaggeration, be honest and
should not infringe conventions relating to peer review and publication. (‘Going
public’ prior to peer review has been very damaging to biology, and physics has also
been harmed by it.)

3. Physicists should assume more responsibility in the issues of the global environment,
sustainable growth or equilibrium and the energy problem. Physics will have a
key role to play in ﬁnding an acceptable solution to these problems. Particular
presentations to the workshop made very clear the seriousness of the situation and
exempliﬁed the contribution of physics.

4. Facilitate improved means for scientists to advise (and enter into dialogue with)
government and other public organisations. (Interaction should be both ways and
involve the grass roots scientists.)

5. We should ﬁnd ways of using the expertise of sociologists to explore in greater
depth the cause and nature or anti-scientiﬁc feeling; this could even lead to entente
between physics and some part, at least, of the world of sociology. This could be
of great beneﬁt. An urgent problem requiring study is the way the media treat
pseudo-science in modern pluralistic societies.

6. We should ﬁnd ways to encourage industry to support long term and curiosity-led
research. Governments should be persuaded to encourage, facilitate or enforce this
(through tax laws, etc.).

7. Research should be carried out, with the participation of both scientists and econom-
ists, which shows the long term inﬂuence of scientiﬁc research on GNP. This should
be done in a way which includes such things as the contribution of the training
which is an important byproduct of pure research at PhD level.

8. Many points relating to teaching physics were mentioned, and some appear in the

‘action’ statements to UNESCO. Particular points are:

• Physics teaching must respond to changing social and also scientiﬁc circum-

stances.

• There is much value in courses which relate the important ﬁndings and per-
spectives of cosmology etc. to common human needs and aspirations. This was
demonstrated to the workshop by an account of a general course at undergrad-
uate level.

7

• Teachers should recognise the value of relating physics teaching to matters
of everyday importance, including environmental and energy issues. Teachers
should emphasise that it is everybody’s moral duty to have an elementary un-
derstanding of the physics of the threatened global environment. The abstract
aspects of physics should be moderated at the introductory level.

• There are many ‘modern physics’ topics which can be made very accessible
with imaginative teaching methods involving pupil activity. A case was put
that they can be made more accessible and more relevant than some traditional
topics if they are presented with appropriate explanations.

Evidently there is a need for continuing debate concerning the teaching of physics
in schools. There is no accepted general solution to the apparently contradictory
requirements of, on the one hand, attracting talented young people into physics and
preparing them for university level studies, and, on the other hand, teaching physics
in a way that does not repel and alienate future citizens.

9. Various points were put forward concerning means to educate and inform the public,
(the subject of a recommended UNESCO action). Points mentioned include: the
need to professionalize interaction with the media; the need for humour; demon-
strating the openness of science by letting scientiﬁc disputes be public; the virtue
of science laboratories, travelling exhibitions, science&technology weeks; the impor-
tance of the personal and biographical elements in presentations, etc.

10. Investigate and seek remedies for the anomalously low women’s participation in
physics in some countries compared to others. We should do this in the ﬁrst place
because of the human fulﬁlment and beneﬁcial productivity which is currently being
lost. There is further potential beneﬁt: the remedy may substantially improve the
public status of physics in general.

Acknowledgements

I am deeply grateful to Herwig Schopper and Rezs˝o Lovas for their thorough critique
of this summary and for saving me from embarrassing omissions. The ﬁrst section, the
report for UNESCO, was a joint submission of the three of us on behalf of the workshop.
The conference was supported by the UNESCO-Physics Action Council, the European
Physical Society, OMFB, OTKA, MTA and MAL´EV. I am personally very grateful to
the Lovases for hospitality.

8

