0
0
0
2

 

y
a
M
8
1

 

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
7
4
0
5
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Geometry of River Networks I:

Scaling, Fluctuations, and Deviations

Department of Mathematics and Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences,

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139.

Peter Sheridan Dodds†

Daniel H. Rothman‡

Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences,

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139.

(Dated: February 2, 2008)

This article is the ﬁrst in a series of three papers investigating the detailed geometry of river net-
works. Branching networks are a universal structure employed in the distribution and collection
of material. Large-scale river networks mark an important class of two-dimensional branching
networks, being not only of intrinsic interest but also a pervasive natural phenomenon. In the
description of river network structure, scaling laws are uniformly observed. Reported values of
scaling exponents vary suggesting that no unique set of scaling exponents exists. To improve
this current understanding of scaling in river networks and to provide a fuller description of
branching network structure, here we report a theoretical and empirical study of ﬂuctuations
about and deviations from scaling. We examine data for continent-scale river networks such as
the Mississippi and the Amazon and draw inspiration from a simple model of directed, random
networks. We center our investigations on the scaling of the length of sub-basin’s dominant
stream with its area, a characterization of basin shape known as Hack’s law. We generalize
this relationship to a joint probability density and provide observations and explanations of
deviations from scaling. We show that ﬂuctuations about scaling are substantial and grow with
system size. We ﬁnd strong deviations from scaling at small scales which can be explained by
the existence of linear network structure. At intermediate scales, we ﬁnd slow drifts in exponent
values indicating that scaling is only approximately obeyed and that universality remains inde-
terminate. At large scales, we observe a breakdown in scaling due to decreasing sample space
and correlations with overall basin shape. The extent of approximate scaling is signiﬁcantly
restricted by these deviations and will not be improved by increases in network resolution.

PACS numbers: 64.60.Ht, 92.40.Fb, 92.40.Gc, 68.70.+w

I.

INTRODUCTION

Networks are intrinsic to a vast number of complex
forms observed in the natural and man-made world. Net-
works repeatedly arise in the distribution and sharing of
information, stresses and materials. Complex networks
give rise to interesting mathematical and physical proper-
ties as observed in the Internet [1], the “small-world” phe-
nomenon [2], the cardiovascular system [3], force chains
in granular media [4], and the wiring of the brain [5].

Branching, hierarchical geometries make up an impor-
tant subclass of all networks. Our present investigations
concern the paradigmatic example of river networks. The
study of river networks, though more general in applica-
tion, is an integral part of geomorphology, the theory of
earth surface processes and form. Furthermore, river net-
works are held to be natural exemplars of allometry, i.e.,
how the dimensions of diﬀerent parts of a structure scale
or grow with respect to each other [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. The
shapes of drainage basins, for example, are reported to

elongate with increasing basin size [11, 12, 13].

At present, there is no generally accepted theory
explaining the origin of this allometric scaling. The fun-
damental problem is that an equation of motion for ero-
sion, formulated from ﬁrst principles, is lacking. The sit-
uation is somewhat analogous to issues surrounding the
description of the dynamics of granular media [14, 15],
noting that erosion is arguably far more complex. Nev-
ertheless, a number of erosion equations have been pro-
posed ranging from deterministic [16, 17, 18, 19] to
stochastic theories [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. Each of
these models attempts to describe how eroding sur-
faces evolve dynamically.
In addition, various heuris-
tic models of both surface and network evolution also
exist. Examples include simple lattice-based models of
erosion [17, 26, 27, 28], an analogy to invasion per-
colation [29], the use of optimality principles and self-
organized criticality [7, 30, 31], and even uncorrelated
random networks [10, 32, 33]. Since river networks are
an essential feature of eroding landscapes, any appropri-
ate theory of erosoion must yield surfaces with network

Typeset by REVTEX

structures comparable to that of the real world. Howev-
er, no model of eroding landscapes or even simply of net-
work evolution unambiguously reproduces the wide range
of scaling behavior reported for real river networks.

A considerable problem facing these theories and mod-
els is that the values of scaling exponents for river net-
work scaling laws are not precisely known. One of the
issues we address in this work is universality [10, 12].
Do the scaling exponents of all river networks belong to
a unique universality class or are there a set of classes
obtained for various geomorphological conditions? For
example, theoretical models suggest a variety of expo-
nent values for networks that are directed versus non-
directed, created on landscapes with heterogeneous ver-
sus homogeneous erosivity and so on [10, 34, 35]. Clearly,
reﬁned measurements of scaling exponents are imperative
if we are to be sure of any network belonging to a par-
ticular universality class. Moreover, given that there is
no accepted theory derivable from simple physics, more
detailed phenomenological studies are required.

Motivated by this situation, we perform here a detailed
investigation of the scaling properties of river networks.
We analytically characterize ﬂuctuations about scaling
showing that they grow with system size. We also report
signiﬁcant and ubiquitous deviations from scaling in real
river networks. This implies surprisingly strong restric-
tions on the parameter regimes where scaling holds and
cautions against measurements of exponents that ignore
such limitations.
In the case of the Mississippi basin,
for example, we ﬁnd that although our study region
span four orders of magnitude in length, scaling may be
deemed valid over no more than 1.5 orders of magnitude.
Furthermore, we repeatedly ﬁnd the scaling within these
bounds to be only approximate and that no exact, single
exponent can be deduced. We show that scaling breaks
down at small scales due to the presence of linear basins
and at large scales due to the inherent discreteness of net-
work structure and correlations with overall basin shape.
Signiﬁcantly, this latter correlation imprints upon river
network structure the eﬀects and history of geology.

This paper is the ﬁrst of a series of three on river-
network geometry. Having addressed scaling laws in
the present work, we proceed in second and third arti-
cles [36, 37] to consider river network structure at a
more detailed level. In [36] we examine the statistics of
the “building blocks” of river networks, i.e., segments of
streams and sub-networks. In particular, we analytically
connect distributions of various kinds of stream length.
Part of this material is employed in the present article
and is a direct generalization of Horton’s laws [38, 39]. In
the third article [37], we proceed from the ﬁndings of [36]
to characterize how these building blocks ﬁt together.
Central to this last work is the study of the frequency
and spatial distributions of tributary branches along the
length of a stream and is itself a generalization of the
descriptive picture of Tokunaga [40, 41, 42].

2

II. BASIN ALLOMETRY

A Hack’s law

In addressing these broader issues of scaling in branch-
ing networks, we set as our goal to understand the river
network scaling relationship between basin area a and
the length l of a basin’s main stream:

l ∝ ah.

(1)

Known as Hack’s law [11], this relation is central to the
study of scaling in river networks [12, 39]. Hack’s expo-
nent h is empirically found to lie in the range from 0.5
to 0.7 [11, 12, 13, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48]. Here, we pos-
tulate a generalized form of Hack’s law that shows good
agreement with data from real world networks.

We focus on Hack’s law because of its intrinsic interest
and also because many interrelationships between a large
number of scaling laws are known and only a small subset
are understood to be independent [12, 39]. Thus, our
results for Hack’s law will be in principle extendable to
other scaling laws. With this in mind, we will also discuss
probability densities of stream length and drainage area.
Hack’s law is stated rather loosely in equation (1) and
implicitly involves some type of averaging which needs
to be made explicit. It is most usually considered to be
the relationship between mean main stream length and
drainage area, i.e.,

hli ∝ ah.

(2)

Here, h·i denotes ensemble average and hli = hl(a)i is the
mean main stream length of all basins of area a. Typi-
cally, one performs regression analysis on log hli against
log a to obtain the exponent h.

B Fluctuations and deviations

In seeking to understand Hack’s law, we are natural-
ly led to wonder about the underlying distribution that
gives rise to this mean relationship. By considering ﬂuc-
tuations, we begin to see Hack’s law as an expression of
basin morphology. What shapes of basins characterized
by (a, l) are possible and with what probability do they
occur?

An important point here is that Hack’s law does not
exactly specify basin shapes. An additional connection to
Euclidean dimensions of the basin is required. We may
think of a basin’s longitudinal length Lk and its width
L⊥. The main stream length l is reported to scale with
Lk as

l ∝ Ld
k,

(3)

where typically 1.0 . d . 1.1, [12, 50]. Hence, we have
. All other relevant scaling laws expo-
nents can be related to the pair of exponents (d, h) which

a ∝ l1/h ∝ Ld/h

k

(a)

(b)

FIG. 1: The Full Hack distribution for the Kansas, (a),
and Mississippi, (b), river basins. For each value of a, the
distribution has been normalized along the l direction by
max l P (a, l) [49].

therefore characterize the universality class of a river net-
work [10, 39]. If d/h = 2 we have that basins are self-
similar whereas if d/h < 2, we have that basins are elon-
gating. So, while Hack’s law gives a sense of basin allom-
etry, the fractal properties of main stream lengths need

3

also be known in order to properly quantify the scaling
of basin shape.

In addition to ﬂuctuations, complementary insights are
provided by the observation and understanding of devi-
ations from scaling. We are thus interested in discerning
the regularities and quirks of the joint probability dis-
tribution P (a, l). We will refer to P (a, l) as the Hack
distribution.

Hack distributions for the Kansas river basin and
the Mississippi river basin are given in Figures 1(a)
and 1(b). Fluctuations about and deviations from scaling
are immediately evident for the Kansas and to a lesser
extent for the Mississippi. The ﬁrst section of the paper
will propose and derive analytic forms for the Hack distri-
bution under the assumption of uniform scaling with no
deviations. Here, as well as in the following two papers
of this series [36, 37], we will motivate our results with a
random network model originally due to Scheidegger [33].
We then expand our discussion to consider deviations
In the case of the Kansas river, a
from exact scaling.
striking example of deviations from scaling is the linear
branch separated from the body of the main distribu-
tion shown in Figure 1(a). This feature is less prominent
in the lower resolution Mississippi data. Note that this
linear branch is not an artifact of the measurement tech-
nique or data set used. This will be explained in our dis-
cussion of deviations at small scales in the paper’s second
section.

We then consider the more subtle deviations associated
with intermediate scales. At ﬁrst inspection, the scaling
appears to be robust. However, we ﬁnd gradual drifts in
“exponents” that prevent us from identifying a precise
value of h and hence a corresponding universality class.
Both distributions also show breakdowns in scaling for
large areas and stream lengths and this is addressed in
the ﬁnal part of our section on deviations. The reason for
such deviations is partly due to the decrease in number
of samples and hence self-averaging, as area and stream
lengths are increased. However, we will show that the
direction of the deviations depends on the overall basin
shape. We will quantify the extent to which such devi-
ations can occur and the eﬀect that they have on mea-
surements of Hack’s exponent h.

Throughout the paper, we will return to the Hack dis-
tributions for the Kansas and the Mississippi rivers as
well as data obtained for the Amazon, the Nile and the
Congo rivers.

III. FLUCTUATIONS: AN ANALYTIC FORM

FOR THE HACK DISTRIBUTION

To provide some insight into the nature of the under-
lying Hack distribution, we present a line of reasoning
that will build up from Hack’s law to a scaling form of
P (a, l). First let us assume for the present discussion of

ﬂuctuations that an exact form of Hack’s law holds:

hli = θah

(4)

where we have introduced the coeﬃcient θ which we dis-
cuss fully later on. Now, since Hack’s law is a power law,
it is reasonable to postulate a generalization of the form

P (l | a) =

1

ah Fl(cid:18) l

ah(cid:19) .

(5)

The prefactor 1/ah provides the correct normalization
and Fl is the “scaling function” we hope to understand.
The above will be our notation for all conditional prob-
abilities. Implicit in equation (5) is the assumption that
all moments and the distribution itself also scale. For
example, the qth moment of P (l | a) is

which implies

hlq(a)i ∝ aqh,

hlq(a)i = k−qh hlq(ak)i .

(6)

(7)

4

where P (l) and P (a) are the probability densities of main
stream length and area. These distributions are in turn
observed to be power laws both in real world networks
and models [7, 51, 52]:

P (a) ∼ Naa−τ

and

P (l) ∼ Nll−γ.

(11)

where Na and Nl are appropriate prefactors and the tilde
indicates asymptotic agreement between both sides for
large values of the argument. Furthermore, the expo-
nents τ and γ are related to Hack’s exponent h via the
scaling relations [12, 39]

τ = 2 − h

and

γ = 1/h.

(12)

Equations (5), (9), (10), (11), and (12) combine to give

us two forms for P (a, l),

P (a, l) = 1/a2F (l/ah) = 1/l2/hG(a/l1/h),

(13)

where x−2F (x−h) = G(x) and, equivalently, F (y) =
y−2G(y−1/h).

where k ∈ R. Also, for the distribution P (l | a) it follows
from equation (5) that

IV. RANDOM DIRECTED NETWORKS

khP (lkh | ak) =

kh

ahkh Fl(cid:18) lkh

ahkh(cid:19) = P (l | a).

(8)

We note that previous investigations of Hack’s law [12,
13] consider the generalization in equation (5). Rigon et
al. [48] also examine the behavior of the moments of the
distribution P (l | a) for real networks. Here, we will go
further to characterize the full distribution P (a, l) as well
as both P (l | a) and P (a| l). Along these lines, Rigon et
al. [13] suggest that the function Fl(x) is a “ﬁnite-size”
scaling function analogous to those found in statistical
mechanics, i.e.: Fl(x) → 0 as x → ∞ and Fl(x) → c as
x → 0. However, as we will detail below, the restrictions
on Fl(x) can be made stronger and we will postulate a
simple Gaussian form. More generally, Fl(x) should be
a unimodal distribution that is non-zero for an interval
[x1, x2] where x1 > 0. This is so because for any given
ﬁxed basin area a, there is a minimum and maximum l
beyond which no basin exists. This is also clear upon
inspection of Figures 1(a) and 1(b).

We observe that neither drainage area nor main stream
length possess any obvious features so as to be deemed
the independent variable. Hence, we can also view Hack’s
law as its inversion hai ∝ l1/h. Note that the constant of
proportionality is not necessarily θ1/h and is dependent
on the nature of the full Hack distribution. We thus have
another scaling ansatz as per equation (5)

P (a| l) = 1/l1/hFa(a/l1/h).

(9)

The conditional probabilities P (l | a) and P (a| l) are

related to the joint probability distribution as

P (a, l) = P (a)P (l | a) = P (l)P (a| l),

(10)

We will use results from the Scheidegger model [33] to
motivate the forms of these distributions. In doing so,
we will also connect with some problems in the theory of
random walks.

FIG. 2:
Scheidegger’s model of random, directed net-
works. Flow is down the page and at each site, stream
ﬂow is randomly chosen to be in one of the two downward
diagonals. Stream paths and basin boundaries are thus
discrete random walks.

Scheidegger’s model of river networks is deﬁned on a
triangular lattice as indicated by Figure 2. Flow in the
ﬁgure is directed down the page. At each site, the stream
ﬂow direction is randomly chosen between the two diag-
onal directions shown. Periodic boundary conditions are
applied in all of our simulations. Each site locally drains
an area of α2, where the lattice unit α is the distance
between neighboring sites, and each segment of stream
has a length α. For simplicity, we will take α to be unity.
We note that connections exist between the Scheideg-
ger model and models of particle aggregation [51, 53],

Abelian sandpiles [54, 55, 56] and limiting cases of force
chain models in granular media [4].

Since Scheidegger’s model is based on random ﬂow
directions, the Hack distributions have simple interpre-
tations. The boundaries of drainage basins in the model
are random walks. Understanding Hack’s law therefore
amounts to understanding the ﬁrst collision time of two
random walks that share the same origin in one dimen-
sion. If we subtract the graph of one walk from the other,
we see that the latter problem is itself equivalent to the
ﬁrst return problem of random walks [57].

Many facets of the ﬁrst return problem are well under-
stood. In particular, the probability of n, the number of
steps taken by a random walk until it ﬁrst returns to the
origin, is asymptotically given by

P (n) ∼

1
√2π

n−3/2.

(14)

But this number of steps is also the length of the basin
l. Therefore, we have

P (l) ∼

2
π

l−3/2,

(15)

where because we are considering the diﬀerence of two
walks, we use P (l) = P (n/2)|n=l. Also, we have found
the prefactor Nl = 2/π.
We thus have that γ = 3/2 for the Scheidegger model.
The scaling relations of equation (12) then give h = 2/3
and τ = 4/3. The value of h is also readily obtained
by noting that the typical area of a basin of length l is
a ∝ l· l1/2 = l3/2 = l1/h since the boundaries are random
walks.

V. AREA-LENGTH DISTRIBUTION FOR

RANDOM, DIRECTED NETWORKS

Something that is less well studied is the joint distri-
bution of the area enclosed by a random walk and the
number of steps to its ﬁrst return. In terms of the Schei-
degger model, this is precisely the Hack distribution.

We motivate some general results based on observa-
tions of the Scheidegger model. Figure 3 shows the nor-
malized distributions P (al−3/2) and P (la−2/3) as derived
from simulations of the model. Given the scaling ansatzes
for P (l | a) and P (a| l) in equations (5) and (9), we see
that P (y = la−2/3) = Fl(y) and P (x = al−3/2) = Fa(x).
Note that we have already used Hack’s law for the
Scheidegger model with h = 2/3 to obtain these distri-
butions. The results are for ten realizations of the model
on a 104 by 104 lattice, taking 107 samples from each of
the ten instances. For P (a| l), only sites where l ≥ 100
were taken, and similarly, for P (l | a), only sites where
a ≥ 500 were included in the histogram.
We postulate that the distribution P (y = la−2/3) is a
Gaussian having the form

P (l | a) =

1

√2πa2/3η

exp{−(la−2/3 − θ)2/2η2}

(16)

5

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
0

P(a l −3/2)

P(l a−2/3)

1

2

3

FIG. 3: Cross-Sectional scaling functions of the Hack
distribution for the Scheidegger model with lattice con-
stant equal to unity. Both distributions are normalized.
The right distribution is for l ﬁxed and a varying and
is postulated to be a normal distribution. The left dis-
tribution for a ﬁxed and l varying and is a form of an
inverse Gaussian [58]. The data used was obtained for
all sites with with l ≥ 100 and a ≥ 500 respectively.
Each distribution was obtained from ten realizations of
the Scheidegger model on a 104×104 lattice.

We estimate the mean of Fl to be θ ≃ 1.675 (this is
the same θ as found in equation (4)) and the standard
deviation to be η ≃ 0.321. The ﬁt is shown in Figure 3
as a solid line. The above equation agrees with the form
of the scaling ansatz of equation (5) and we now have
the assertion that Fl is a Gaussian deﬁned by the two
parameters θ and η.

Note that the θ and η are coeﬃcients for the actual
mean and standard deviation. In other words, for ﬁxed
a, the mean of P (l | a) is θa2/3 and its standard deviation
is ηa2/3. Having observed their context, we will refer to
θ and η as the Hack mean coeﬃcient and Hack standard
deviation coeﬃcient.

From this starting point we can create P (a, l) and
P (a| l), the latter providing a useful test. Since P (a) ∼
Naa−τ = Naa−4/3, as per equation (11), we have

P (a, l) =

Na
a4/3

1

√2πa2/3η

exp{−(la−2/3 − θ)2/2η2},

=

Na√2πa2η

exp{−(la−2/3 − θ)2/2η2}.

(17)

As expected, we observe the form of equation (17) to be

in accordance with that of equation (13). Note that the
scaling function F (and equivalently G) is deﬁned by the
three parameters θ, η and Na, the latter of which may
be determined in terms of the former as we will show
below. Also, since we expect all scaling functions to be
only asymptotically correct, we cannot use equation (17)
to ﬁnd an expression for the normalization Na. Equa-
tion (17) ceases to be valid for small a and l. However,
we will be able to do so once we have P (a| l) since we
are able to presume l is large and therefore that the scal-
ing form is exact. Using equation (15) and the fact that
P (a| l) = P (a, l)/P (l) from equation (10) we then have

exp{−(l/a2/3 − θ)2/2η2},

P (a| l) =

πl3/2

Na√2πa2η
exp{−(l/a2/3 − θ)2/2η2},
(a/l3/2)−2

2
Na√πl3/2
23/2a2η
Na√π
1
l3/2
23/2η
× exp{−((a/l3/2)−2/3 − θ)2/2η2}.

=

=

(18)
In rearranging the expression of P (a| l), we have made
clear that its form matches that of equation (5).
A closed form expression for the normalization factor
Na may now be determined by employing the fact that
R ∞
a=0 da P (a| l) = 1.

a=0

da P (a| l),
Na√π
da
23/2η
l3/2

1 = Z ∞
= Z ∞
× exp{−((a/l3/2)−2/3 − θ)2/2η2},
Na√3π
25/2η Z ∞

(a/l3/2)−2

a=0

=

du u1/2 exp{−(u − θ)2/2η2}, (19)
where we have used the substitution a/l3/2 = u−3/2 and
hence also l−3/2 da = (−3/2)u−5/2 du. We therefore have

u=0

Na =

25/2η

√3π (cid:20)Z ∞

u=0

du u1/2 exp{−(u − θ)2/2η2}(cid:21)−1

.

(20)
We may thus write down all of the scaling functions

Fl, Fa, F and G for the Scheidegger model:

exp{−(z − θ)2/2η2},

z−2 exp{−(z−2/3 − θ)2/2η2},
exp{−(z − θ)2/2η2}, and

(21)

(22)

(23)

Fl(z) =

Fa(z) =

F (z) =

1

√2πη
Na√π
23/2η

Na√2πη
2Na√π23/2η

G(z) =

z−2 exp{−(z−2/3 − θ)2/2η2}. (24)
Recall that all of these forms rest on the assumption
that Fl(z) is a Gaussian. In order to check this assump-
tion, we return to Figure 3. The empirical distribution

6

P (z = a/l3/2) is shown on the left marked with cir-
cles. The solid line through these points is Fa(z) as given
above in equation (21). There is an excellent match so we
may be conﬁdent about our proposed form for Fa(z). We
note that the function Fa(z) may be thought of as a frac-
tional inverse Gaussian distribution, the inverse Gaussian
being a well known distribution arising in the study of
ﬁrst passage times for random walks [57].
It is worth
contemplating the peculiar form of P (a| l) in terms of
ﬁrst return random walks. Here, we have been able to
postulate the functional form of the distribution of areas
bound by random walks that ﬁrst return after n steps.
If one could understand the origin of the Gaussian and
ﬁnd analytic expressions for θ and η, then the problem
would be fully solved.

VI. AREA-LENGTH DISTRIBUTION

EXTENDED TO REAL NETWORKS

We now seek to extend these results for Scheidegger’s
model to real world networks. We will look for the same
functional forms for the Hack distributions that we have
found above. The conditional probability distributions
pertaining to Hack’s law take on the forms

P (l | a) = 1/a−hFl(la−h) =

a−h
√2πη

exp{−(la−h−θ)2/2η2},
(25)

and
P (a| l) = l−1/hFa(al−1/h)
= l−1/h Na√2πNlη

(al−1/h)−2 exp{−((al−1/h)−h − θ)2/2η2},
(26)

and the full Hack distribution is given by

P (a, l) = a2F (la−h) = l−2/hG(al−1/h)

=

Na√2πηa2

exp{−(la−h − θ)2/2η2}.

(27)

with Na determined by equation (20). The three param-
eters h, the Hack exponent, θ, the Hack mean coeﬃ-
cient, and η, the Hack standard deviation coeﬃcient, are
in principle landscape dependent. Furthermore, in η we
have a basic measure of ﬂuctuations in the morphology
of basins.

Figures 4 and 5 present Hack scaling functions for the
Mississippi and Nile river basins. These Figures is to be
compared with the results for the Scheidegger model in
Figure 3.

For both rivers, Hack’s exponent h was determined
ﬁrst from a stream ordering analysis (we discuss stream
ordering later in Section X). Estimates of the parameters
θ and η were then made using the scaling function Fl
presuming a Gaussian form.

We observe the Gaussian ﬁt for the Mississippi is more
satisfactory than that for the Nile. These ﬁts are not

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
0

 (l a−h)
F
l

 (a l −1/h)
F
a

1

2

3

4

10

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

 (a / l 1/h)
F
a

 (l /a h)
F
l

1

2

3

7

1
8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
4

FIG. 4: Cross-sectional scaling functions of the Hack
distribution for the Mississippi. The estimates used for
Hack’s exponent are h = 0.55 and h = 0.50 respectively,
the determination of which is discussed in section VII.
The ﬁts indicated by the smooth curves to the data
are made as per the Scheidegger model in Figure 3 and
according to equations (25) and (25). The values of the
Hack mean coeﬃcient and standard deviation coeﬃcient
are estimated to be θ ≃ 0.80 and η ≃ 0.20.

rigorously made because even though we have chosen
data ranges where deviations (which we address in the
following section) are minimal, deviations from scaling
do still skew the distributions. The speciﬁc ranges used
to obtain Fl and Fa respectively are for the Mississippi:
8.5 < log10 a < 9.5 and 4.75 < log10 l < 6, and for the
Nile: 9 < log10 a < 11 and 5.5 < log10 l < 6 (areas are in
km2 and lengths km). Furthermore, we observe that the
estimate of h has an eﬀect in the resulting forms of Fl
and Fa. Nevertheless, here we are attempting to capture
the essence of the generalized form of Hack’s law in real
networks.

We then use the parameters h, θ and η and equa-
tion (26) to construct our theoretical Fa, the smooth
curves in Figures 4 and 5. As for the Scheidegger model
data in Figure 3, we see in both examples approximate
agreement between the measured Fa and the one predict-
ed from the form of Fl. Table I shows estimates of h, θ
and η for the ﬁve major river basins studied.

Given our reservations about the precision of these val-
ues of θ and η, we are nevertheless able to make qualita-
tive distinctions. Recalling that hli = θah, we see that,
for ﬁxed h, higher values of θ indicate relatively longer
stream lengths for a given area and hence longer and thin-

FIG. 5: Cross-sectional scaling functions of the Hack
distribution for the Nile. The top and right axes corre-
spond to Fa and the bottom and left to Fl. The Hack
exponent used is h = 0.50 and the values of the Hack
mean coeﬃcient and standard deviation coeﬃcient are
estimate to be θ ≃ 2.45 and η ≃ 0.50 [59].

River network
Mississippi
Amazon
Nile
Kansas
Congo

θ

η

h

0.80 0.20 0.55
1.90 0.35 0.52
2.45 0.50 0.50
0.70 0.15 0.57
0.89 0.18 0.54

TABLE I: Estimates of Hack distribution parameters
for real river networks. The scaling exponent h is Hack’s
exponent. The parameters θ and η are coeﬃcients of the
mean and standard deviation of the conditional proba-
bility density function P (l | a) and are fully discussed in
the text [60].

ner basins. The results therefore suggest the Nile, and
to a lesser degree the Amazon, have basins with thinner
proﬁles than the Congo and, in particular, the Mississippi
and Kansas. This seems not unreasonable since the Nile
is a strongly directed network constrained within a rel-
atively narrow overall shape. This is somewhat in spite
of the fact that the shape of an overall river basin is not
necessarily related to its internal basin morphology, an
observation we will address later in Section X.

The importance of θ is tempered by the value of h.
Hack’s exponent aﬀects not only the absolute measure of

stream length for a given area but also how basin shapes
change with increasing area. So, in the case of the Kansas
the higher value of h suggests basin proﬁles thin with
increasing size. This is in keeping with overall direct-
edness of the network. Note that our measurements of
the fractal dimension d of stream lengths for the Kansas
place it to be d = 1.04 ± 0.02. Therefore, d/h ≃ 1.9 < 2
and elongation is still expected when we factor in the
scaling of l with Lk.

The Nile and Amazon also all have relatively high η
indicating greater ﬂuctuations in basin shape. In compar-
ison, the Mississippi, Kansas and Congo appear to have
less variation. Note that the variability of the Kansas is
in reasonable agreement with that of the whole Missis-
sippi river network for which it is a sub-basin.

Finally, regardless of the actual form of the distribution
underlying Hack’s law, ﬂuctuations are always present
and an estimate of their extent is an important measure-
ment. Thus, the Hack mean and standard deviation coef-
ﬁcients, θ and η, are suggested to be of suﬃcient worth
so as to be included with any measurement of the Hack
exponent h.

VII. DEVIATIONS FROM SCALING

In generalizing Hack’s law, we have sought out regions
of robust scaling, discarding ranges where deviations
become prominent. We now bring our attention to the
nature of the deviations themselves.

We observe three major classes of deviations which we
will deﬁne by the scales at which they occur: small, inter-
mediate and large. Throughout the following sections we
primarily consider deviations from the mean version of
Hack’s law, hli = θah, given in equation (4). Much of
the understanding we gain from this will be extendable
to deviations for higher moments.

To provide an overview of what follows, examples of
mean-Hack distributions for the Kansas river and the
Mississippi are shown in Figures 6(a) and 6(b). Hack’s
law for the Kansas river exhibits a marked deviation
for small areas, starting with a near linear relationship
between stream length and area. A long crossover region
of several orders of magnitude in area then leads to an
intermediate scaling regime wherein we attempt to deter-
mine the Hack exponent h. In doing so, we show that
such regions of robust scaling are surprisingly limited
for river network quantities. Moreover, we observe that,
where present, scaling is only approximate and that no
exact exponents can be ascribed to the networks we study
here.
It follows that the identiﬁcation of universality
classes based on empirical evidence is a hazardous step.
Finally, the approximate scaling of this intermediate
region then gives way to a break down in scaling at larger
scales due to low sampling and correlations with basin
shape. The same deviations are present in the relatively
coarse-grained Mississippi data but are less pronounced.

8

(a)

8

9

10 11 12

a

10

7
log

(b)

4

5

6

l

0
1

g
o
l

l

0
1

g
o
l

6

5

4

3

2

7

6

5

4

3

6

7

8

9
log

10

10
a

11

12

13

FIG. 6: The mean version of Hack’s law for the Kansas,
(a), and the Mississippi, (b). The units of lengths and
areas are meters and square meters. These are calculat-
ed from the full Hack distributions shown in Figures 1(a)
and 1(b) by ﬁnding hli for each value of basin area a.
Area samples are taken every 0.02 orders of magnitude
in logarithmic space. The upper dashed lines represent a
slope of unity in both plots and the lower lines the Hack
exponents 0.57 and 0.55 for the Kansas and Mississippi
respectively. For the Kansas, there is a clear deviation
for small area which rolls over into a region of very slow-
ly changing derivative before breaking up at large scales.
Deviations from scaling are present for the lower resolu-
tion dataset of the Mississippi but to a lesser extent.

l

0
1

g
o
l

3.5

3

2.5

2

3.5

4

4.5

log

10

5
a

5.5

6

FIG. 7: The linearity of Hack’s law at small scales for
the Kansas river. The linear regime enters a crossover
region after almost 1.5 orders of magnitude in area. This
is an expanded detail of the mean Hack’s law given in
Figure 6(a) and areas and lengths are in square meters
and meters.

VIII. DEVIATIONS AT SMALL SCALES

At small scales, we ﬁnd the mean-Hack distribution to
follow a linear relationship, i.e., l ∝ a1. This feature is
most evident for the Kansas river as shown in Figure 6(a)
and in more detail in Figure 7. The linear regime per-
sists for nearly 1.5 orders of magnitude in basin area. To
a lesser extent, the same trend is apparent in the Missis-
sippi data, Figure 6(b).

Returning to the full Hack distribution of Figures 1(a)
and 1(b), we begin to see the origin of this linear regime.
In both instances, a linear branch separates from the
body of the main distribution. Since l cannot grow faster
than a1, the linear branch marks an upper bound on the
extent of the distribution in (a, l) coordinates. When
averaged to give the mean-Hack distribution, this linear
data dominates the result for small scales.

We ﬁnd this branch evident in all Hack distributions.
It is not an artifact of resolution and in fact becomes
more pronounced with increased map precision. The ori-
gin of this linear branch is simple: data points along the
branch correspond to positions in narrow sub-networks,
i.e., long, thin “valleys.” To understand the separation
of this linear branch from the main body of the distribu-
tion, consider Figure 8 which depicts a stream draining
such a valley with length and area (l1, a1) that meets a

1

9

2

 2 1

 

a1

 

   


a2

a3

FIG. 8: Origin of the linear branch in the Hack distri-
bution. The sub-basins labeled 1 and 2 depicted on the
left have areas a1 and a2 and lengths l1 and l2. These
sub-basins combine to form a basin of area a3 = a1 + a2
and main stream length l3 = max l1, l2 = l2. Since sub-
basin 1 is a linear sub-network (a valley) the pair (a1, l1)
lie along the linear branch of the Hack distribution as
shown on the right. Points along the main stream of
sub-basin 1 lie along the dashed line leading to the coor-
dinate (a1, l1). On combining with the second basin, the
jump in the resultant area creates a jump from (a1, l1 to
(a3, l2) in the main body of the Hack distribution.

stream from a basin with characteristics (l2, a2). The
area and length of the basin formed at this junction
is thus (a3, l3) = (a1 + a2, max(l1, l2)) (in the Figure,
max(l1, l2) = l2). The greater jump in area moves the
point across into the main body of the Hack distribu-
tion, creating the separation of the linear branch.

In fact, the full Hack distribution is itself comprised
of many such linear segments. As in the above example,

until a stream does not meet any streams of comparable
size, then its area and length will roughly increase in
linear fashion. When it does meet such a stream, there is
a jump in area and the trace of a new linear segment is
started in the distribution. We will see this most clearly
later on when we study deviations at large scales.

For very ﬁne scale maps, on the order of meters, we
might expect to pick up the scale of the unchannelized,
convex regions of a landscape, i.e., “hillslopes” [61]. This
length scale represents the typical separation of branches
at a network’s ﬁnest scale. The computation of stream
networks for these hillslope regions would result in large-
ly non-convergent (divergent or parallel) ﬂow. There-
fore, we would have linear “basins” that would in theory
contribute to the linear branch we observe [10]. Poten-
tially, the crossover in Hack’s law could be used as a
determinant of hillslope scale, a crucial parameter in geo-
morphology [61, 62]. However, when long, thin network
structures are present in a network, this hillslope scale is
masked by their contribution.

Whether because of the hillslope scale or linear net-
work structure, we see that at small scales, Hack’s law
will show a crossover in scaling from h = 1 to a low-
er exponent. The crossover’s position depends on the
extent of linear basins in the network. For example,
in the Kansas River basin, the crossover occurs when
(l, a) = (4 × 103m, 107m2). Since increased map resolu-
tion can only increase measures of length, the crossover’s
position must occur at least at such a length scale which
may be many orders of magnitude greater than the scale
of the map.

However, the measurement of the area of such lin-
ear basins will potentially grow with coarse-graining.
Note that for the Mississippi mean-Hack distribution,
the crossover begins around a = 106.5 m2 whereas for
the Kansas, the crossover initiates near a = 105.5 m2 but
the ends of the crossovers in both cases appear to agree,
occurring at around a = 107 m2. Continued coarse-
graining will of course eventually destroy all statistics
and introduce spurious deviations. Nevertheless, we see
here that the deviation which would only be suggested in
the Mississippi data is well conﬁrmed in the ﬁner-grain
Kansas data.

IX. DEVIATIONS AT INTERMEDIATE SCALES

As basin area increases, we move out of the linear
regime, observing a crossover to what would be consid-
ered the normal scaling region of Hack’s law. We detail
our attempts to measure the Hack exponents for the
Kansas and Mississippi examples. Rather than relying
solely on a single regression on a mean-Hack distribu-
tion, we employ a more precise technique that examines
the distribution’s derivative. As we will show, we will not
be able to ﬁnd a deﬁnite value for the Hack exponent in
either case, an important result in our eﬀorts to deter-

10

mine whether or not river networks belong to speciﬁc
universality classes.

To determine h, we consider Hack’s law (equation (4))

explicitly in logarithmic coordinates,

log10 hl(a)i = log10 θ + h log10 a.

(28)

The derivative of this equation with respect to log10 a
then gives Hack’s exponent as a function of area,

h(a) =

d

d log10 a

log10 hl(a)i.

(29)

We may think of h(a) as a “local Hack exponent.” Note
that non-constant trends in h(a) indicate scaling does not
hold. We calculate the discrete derivative as above for the
Kansas and Mississippi. We smooth the data by taking
running averages with varying window sizes of n sam-
ples, the results for n = 32 being shown in Figures 9(a)
and 9(b) where the spacing of log a is 0.02 orders of mag-
nitude. Thus, the running averages for the ﬁgures are
taken over corresponding area ranges 0.64 orders of mag-
nitude.

Now, if the scaling law in question is truly a scaling
law, the above type of derivative will ﬂuctuate around a
constant value of exponent over several orders of mag-
nitude. With increasing n, these ﬂuctuations will neces-
sarily decrease and we should see the derivative holding
steady around the exponent’s value.

At ﬁrst glance, we notice considerable variation in h(a)
for both data sets with the Kansas standing out. Fluctu-
ations are reduced with increasing n but we observe con-
tinuous variation of the local Hack exponent with area.
For the example of the Kansas, the linear regime and
ensuing crossover appear as a steep rise followed by a
drop and then another rise during all of which the local
Hack exponent moves well below 1/2.

It is after these small scale ﬂuctuations that we would
expect to ﬁnd Hack’s exponent. For the Kansas river
data, we see the derivative gradually climbs for all values
of n before reaching the end of the intermediate regime
where the putative scaling breaks down altogether.

For the Kansas show in Figure 9(a), the dashed line
represents h = 0.57, our estimate of Hack’s exponent
from simple regression on the mean-Hack distribution of
Figure 6(a). For the regression calculation, the interme-
diate region was identiﬁed from the ﬁgure to be 107 <
a < 1010 m2. We see from the smoothed derivative in
Figure 9(a) that the value h = 0.57 is not precise. After
the crossover from the linear region has been complet-
ed, we observe a slow rise from h ≃ 0.54 to h ≃ 0.63.
Thus, the local Hack exponent h(a) gradually climbs
above h = 0.57 rather than ﬂuctuate around it.

A similar slow change in h(a) is observed for the Missis-
sippi data. We see in Figure 9(b) a gradual rise and then
fall in h(a). The dashed line here represents h = 0.55,
the value of which was determined from Figure 6(b) using
regression on the range 109 < a < 1011.5 m2. The range
of h(a) is roughly [0.52, 0.58]. Again, while h = 0.55

(a)

5

6

7
log

10

8
a

(b)

9

10

11

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3
4

0.6

0.55

0.5

0.45

)
 
a
(
 
h

)
 
a
(
 

h

6

7

8

9
a

10

11

12

FIG. 9: Variation in Hack’s exponent for the Kansas,
(a), and the Mississippi, (b). The area a is in m2. The
plots are derivatives of the mean-Hack distributions given
in Figures 6(a) and 6(b). Both derivatives have been
smoothed by taking running averages over 0.64 orders
of magnitude in a. For the Kansas, the dashed line is
set at h = 0.57, Hack’s exponent estimated via simple
regression analysis for points with 107 < a < 1010 m2.
The local exponent is seen to gradually rise through the
h = 0.57 level indicating scaling is not robust. For the
Mississippi in (b), the dashed line is a Hack exponent of
0.55 calculated from regression on data in the interval
109 < a < 1011.5 m2. The local Hack exponent is seen to
gradually rise and fall about this value.

11

approximates the derivative throughout this intermedi-
ate range of Hack’s law, we cannot claim it to be a precise
value.

We observe the same drifts in h(a) in other datasets
and for varying window size n of the running aver-
age. The results suggest that we cannot assign speciﬁc
Hack exponents to these river networks and are therefore
unable to even consider what might be an appropriate
universality class. The value of h obtained by regression
analysis is clearly sensitive to the the range of a used.
Furthermore, these results indicate that we should main-
tain healthy reservations about the exact values of other
reported exponents.

X. DEVIATIONS AT LARGE SCALES

We turn now to deviations from Hack’s law at large
scales. As we move beyond the intermediate region of
approximate scaling, ﬂuctuations in h(a) begin to grow
rapidly. This is clear on inspection of the derivatives
of Hack’s law in Figures 9(a) and 9(b). There are two
main factors conspiring to drive these ﬂuctuations up.
The ﬁrst is that the number of samples of sub-basins
with area a decays algebraically in a. This is just
the observation that P (a) ∝ a−τ as per equation (11).
The second factor is that ﬂuctuations in l and a are
on the order of the parameters themselves. This fol-
lows from our generalization of Hack’s law which shows,
for example, that the moments hlqi of P (l | a) grow like
aqh. Thus, the standard deviation grows like the mean:
σ(l) = (hl2i − hli2)1/2 ∝ ah ∝ hli.

A Stream ordering and Horton’s laws

So as to understand these large scale deviations from
Hack’s law, we need to examine network structure in
depth. One way to do this is by using Horton-Strahler
stream ordering [38, 63] and a generalization of the well-
known Horton’s laws [38, 64, 65, 39, 36]. This will natu-
rally allow us to deal with the discrete nature of a network
that is most apparent at large scales.

Stream ordering discretizes a network into a set of
stream segments (or, equivalently, a set of nested basins)
by an iterative pruning. Source streams (i.e., those with-
out tributaries) are designated as stream segments of
order ω = 1. These are removed from the network and
the new source streams are then labelled as order ω = 2
stream segments. The process is repeated until a single
stream segment of order ω = Ω is left and the basin itself
is deﬁned to be of order Ω.

Natural metrics for an ordered river network are nω,
the number of order ω stream segments (or basins), ¯aω,
the average area of order ω basins, ¯lω, the average main
stream length of order ω basins, and ¯l (s)
ω , the aver-
age length of order ω stream segments. Horton’s laws

12

soon as a stream does combine with a comparable one, a
jump in drainage area occurs. Thus, we see in Figure 10
isolated linear segments which upon ending at a point
(a1, l1) begin again at (a1 + a2, l1), i.e., the main stream
length stays the same but the area is shifted.

We consider a stream ordering version of Hack’s law
given by the points (¯aω, ¯lω). The scaling of these data
points is equivalent to scaling in the usual Hack’s law.
Also, given Horton’s laws, it follows that h = ln Rl/ ln Rn
(using Ra ≡ Rn). Along the lines of the derivative we
introduced to study intermediate scale ﬂuctuations in
equation (29), we have here an order-based diﬀerence:

hω,ω−1 =

log ¯lω/¯lω−1
log ¯aω/¯aω−1

.

(31)

We can further extend this deﬁnition to diﬀerences
between non-adjacent orders:

hω,ω′ =

log ¯lω/¯lω′
log ¯aω/¯aω′

.

(32)

This type of diﬀerence, where ω′ < ω, may be best
thought of as a measure of trends rather than an approx-
imate discrete derivative.

Using these discrete diﬀerences, we examine two fea-
tures of the order-based versions of Hack’s law. First we
consider correlations between large scale deviations with-
in an individual basin and second, correlations between
overall deviations and basin shape. For the latter, we
will also consider deviations as they move back into the
intermediate scale. This will help to explain the gradual
deviations from scaling we have observed at intermediate
scales.

Since deviations at large scales are reﬂective of only a
few basins, we require an ensemble of basins to provide
suﬃcient statistics. As an example of such an ensemble,
we take the set of order Ω = 7 basins of the Mississippi
basin. For the dataset used here where the overall basin
itself is of order Ω = 11, we have 104 order Ω = 7 sub-
basins. The Horton averages for these basins are ¯a7 ≃
16600 km2, ¯l7 ≃ 350 km, and ¯L7 ≃ 210 km.
For each basin, we ﬁrst calculate the Horton averages
(¯aω, ¯lω). We then compute hω,ω−1, the Hack diﬀerence
given in equation (31). To give a rough picture of what
is observed, Figure 11 shows a scatter plot of hω,ω−1 for
all order Ω = 7 basins. Note the increase in ﬂuctua-
tions with increasing ω. This increase is qualitatively
consistent with the smooth versions found in the single
basin examples of Figures 9(a) and 9(b).
In part, less
self-averaging for larger ω results in a greater spread in
this discrete derivative. However, as we will show, these
ﬂuctuations are also correlated with ﬂuctuations in basin
shape.

FIG. 10: Hack distribution for the Mississippi plotted in
linear space. The area units a is 1012 m2 and length l is
106 m. The discreteness of the basin structure is clearly
indicated by the isolated, linear fragments. The inset is
a blow-up of the box on the main graph.

state that these quantities change regularly from order
to order, i.e.,

nω
nω+1

= Rn

and

¯Xω+1
¯Xω

= RX ,

(30)

where X = a, l or l(s). Note that all ratios are deﬁned to
be greater than unity since areas and lengths increase but
number decreases. Also, there are only two independent
l(s) [39]. Horton’s laws
ratios since Ra ≡ Rn and Rl ≡ R
mean that stream-order quantities change exponentially
with order. For example, (30) gives that lω ∝ (Rl)ω.

B Discrete version of Hack’s law

Returning to Hack’s law, we examine its large scale
ﬂuctuations with the help of stream ordering. We are
interested in the size of these ﬂuctuations and also how
they might correlate with the overall shape of a basin.
First, we note that the structure of the network at large
scales is explicitly discrete. Figure 10 demonstrates this
by plotting the distribution of (a, l) without the usual
logarithmic transformation. Hack’s law is seen to be
composed of linear fragments. As explained above in
Figure 8, areas and length increase in proportion to each
other along streams where no major tributaries enter. As

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

1
−
ω
ω

,

h

13

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

,

2
−
Ω
1
−
Ω
h

0.1

106

107

109

1010

108

aω

0.3
0

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.4
hΩ,Ω−1

FIG. 11: Diﬀerences of the stream order-based version of
Hack’s law for 104 order Ω = 7 basins of the Mississippi
(compare the continous versions given in Figure 9) The
plots are overlaid to give a sense of the increase in ﬂuctu-
ations of the local Hack exponent hω,ω−1 with increasing
order ω. The clusters correspond to ω = 1, 2, . . . , 7, mov-
ing across from left to right.

FIG. 12: A comparison of the stream order Hack deriva-
tives hΩ,Ω−1 and hΩ−1,Ω−2 for each of the 104 order Ω = 7
basins of the Mississippi. The linear correlation coeﬃ-
cient is r = −0.06 and the Spearman correlation coeﬃ-
cient is rs = −0.08. The latter has probability ps = 0.43
indicating there are no signiﬁcant correlations.

C Eﬀect of basin shape on Hack’s law

In what follows, we extract two statistical measures of
correlations between deviations in Hack’s law and overall
basin shape. These are r, the standard linear correlation
coeﬃcient and rs, the Spearman rank-order correlation
coeﬃcient [66, 67, 68]. For N observations of data pairs
(ui, vi), r is deﬁned to be

r =

PN
i=1(ui − µu)(vi − µv)
i=1(xi − µu)2PN
PN

i=1(yi − µv)2

=

C(u, v)
σuσv

,

(33)

where C(u, v) is the covariance of the ui’s and vi’s, µu and
µv their means, and σu and σv their standard deviations.
The value of Spearman’s rs is determined in the same
way but for the ui and vi replaced by their ranks. From
rs, we determine a two-sided signiﬁcance ps via Student’s
t-distribution [66].

We deﬁne κ, a measure of basin aspect ratio, as

κ = L2/a.

(34)

Long and narrow basins correspond to κ ≫ 1 while for
short and wide basins, we have κ ≪ 1
We now examine the discrete derivatives of Hack’s
law in more detail.
In order to discern correlations

between large scale ﬂuctuations within individual basins,
we speciﬁcally look at the last two diﬀerences in a basin:
hΩ,Ω−1 and hΩ−1,Ω−2. For each of the Mississippi’s 104
order Ω = 7 basins, these values are plotted against each
other in Figure 12. Both our correlation measurements
strongly suggest these diﬀerences are uncorrelated. The
linear correlation coeﬃcient is r = −0.06 ≃ 0 and, simi-
larly, we have rs = −0.08 ≃ 0. The signiﬁcance ps = 0.43
implies that the null hypothesis of uncorrelated data can-
not be rejected.

Thus, for Hack’s law in an individual basin, large scale
ﬂuctuations are seen to be uncorrelated. However, corre-
lations between these ﬂuctuations and other factors may
still exist. This leads us to our second test which con-
cerns the relationship between trends in Hack’s law and
overall basin shape.

Figure 13 shows a comparison of the aspect ratio κ and
h7,5 for the order Ω = 7 basins of the Mississippi. The
measured correlation coeﬃcients are r = 0.50 and rs =
0.53, giving a signiﬁcance of ps < 10−8. Furthermore,
we ﬁnd the diﬀerences h7,6 (r = 0.34, rs = 0.39 and
ps < 10−4) and h6,5 (r = 0.35, rs = 0.34 and ps <
10−3) are individually correlated with basin shape. We
observe this correlation between basin shape and trends
in Hack’s law at large scales, namely hΩ,Ω−1, hΩ−1,Ω−2
and hΩ,Ω−2, repeatedly in our other data sets. In some
cases, correlations extend further to hΩ−2,Ω−3.

,

5
7

h

0.65

0.6

0.55

0.5

0.45

0.4

0

0.2

0.8

1

0.6

0.4
(κ = L2/a)

log

10

FIG. 13: Correlation between trends in Hack’s law and
the aspect ratio of a basin as estimated by κ = L2/a. The
data is for the order Ω = 7 basins of the Mississippi and
the speciﬁc trend is h7,5. The correlation measurements
give r = 0.50, rs = 0.53 and ps < 10−8.

Since the area ratio Ra is typically in the range 4–5,
Hack’s law is aﬀected by boundary conditions set by the
geometry of the overall basin down to sub-basins one to
two orders of magnitude smaller in area than the over-
all basin. These deviations are present regardless of the
absolute size of the overall basin. Furthermore, the origin
of the basin boundaries being geologic or chance or both
is irrelevant—large scale deviations will still occur. How-
ever, it is reasonable to suggest that particularly strong
deviations are more likely the result of geologic structure
rather than simple ﬂuctuations.

XI. CONCLUSION

Hack’s law is a central relation in the study of river net-
works and branching networks in general. We have shown
Hack’s law to have a more complicated structure than is
typically given attention. The starting generalization is
to consider ﬂuctuations around scaling. Using the direct-
ed, random network model, a form for the Hack distribu-
tion underlying Hack’s law may be postulated and rea-
sonable agreement with real networks is observed. Ques-
tions of the validity of the distribution aside, the Hack
mean coeﬃcient θ and the Hack standard deviation coef-
ﬁcient η should be standard measurements because they
provide further points of comparison between theory and

14

other basins.

With the idealized Hack distribution proposed, we may
begin to understand deviations from its form. As with
any scaling law pertaining to a physical system, cutoﬀs in
scaling must exist and need to be understood. For small
scales, we have identiﬁed the presence of linear sub-basins
as the source of an initial linear relation between area and
stream length. At large scales, statistical ﬂuctuations
and geologic boundaries give rise to basins whose overall
shape produces deviations in Hack’s laws. Both devia-
tions extend over a considerable range of areas as do the
crossovers which link them to the region of intermediate
scales, particularly the crossover from small scales.

Finally, by focusing in detail on a few large-scale exam-
ples networks, we have found evidence that river net-
works do not belong to well deﬁned universality classes.
The relationship between basin area and stream length
may be approximately, and in some cases very well,
described by scaling laws but not exactly so. The gradual
drift in exponents we observe suggests a more complicat-
ed picture, one where subtle correlations between basin
shape and geologic features are intrinsic to river network
structure.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported in part by NSF grant EAR-
9706220 and the Department of Energy grant DE FG02-
99ER 15004.

REFERENCES

† Author

to

whom correspondence

should
be
address:
dodds@segovia.mit.edu; URL: http://segovia.
mit.edu/

addressed;

Electronic

‡ Electronic address: dan@segovia.mit.edu

[1] R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Barabasi, Nature

401(6749), 130 (1999).

[2] D. J. Watts and S. J. Strogatz, Nature 393, 440

(1998).

[3] M. Zamir, J. Theor. Biol. 197, 517 (1999).
[4] S. N. Coppersmith, C.-h. Liu, S. Majumdar,
O. Narayan, and T. A. Witten, Phys. Rev. E 53(5),
4673 (1996).

[5] C. Cherniak, M. Changizi, and D. Kang, Phys. Rev.

E 59(5) (1999).

[6] B. B. Mandelbrot, The Fractal Geometry of Nature

(Freeman, San Francisco, 1983).

[7] I. Rodr´ıguez-Iturbe and A. Rinaldo, Fractal River
Basins: Chance and Self-Organization (Cambridge
University Press, Great Britain, 1997).

[8] A. Rinaldo, I. Rodr´ıguez-Iturbe, and R. Rigon,

Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci 26, 289 (1998).

[9] P. Ball, The Self-Made Tapestry (Oxford, UK, 1998).

15

[10] P. S. Dodds and D. H. Rothman, Annu. Rev. Earth

Planet. Sci. 28, 571 (2000).

[11] J. T. Hack, U.S. Geol. Surv. Prof. Pap. 294-B, 45

(1957).

[12] A. Maritan, A. Rinaldo, R. Rigon, A. Giacometti,
and I. Rodr´ıguez-Iturbe, Phys. Rev. E 53(2), 1510
(1996).

[13] R. Rigon, I. Rodr´ıguez-Iturbe, A. Maritan, A. Gia-
cometti, D. G. Tarboton, and A. Rinaldo, Water
Resour. Res. 32(11), 3367 (1996).

Networks III: Characterization of Component Con-
nectivity (2000), submitted to PRE.

[38] R. E. Horton, Bull. Geol. Soc. Am 56(3), 275 (1945).
[39] P. S. Dodds and D. H. Rothman, Phys. Rev. E 59(5),

4865 (1999), cond-mat/9808244.

[40] E. Tokunaga, Geophys. Bull. Hokkaido Univ. 15, 1

(1966).

[41] E. Tokunaga, Geogr. Rep., Tokyo Metrop. Univ. 13,

1 (1978).

[42] E. Tokunaga, Trans. Jpn. Geomorphol. Union 5(2),

[14] H. Jaeger, S. Nagel, and R. Behringer, Rev. Mod.

71 (1984).

Phys. 68(4), 1259 (1996).

[15] L. Kadanoﬀ, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71(1), 435 (1999).
[16] T. R. Smith and F. P. Bretherton, Water Resour.

[43] D. M. Gray, J. Geophys. Res. 66(4), 1215 (1961).
[44] J. E. Mueller, Geological Society of America Bulletin

83, 3471 (1972).

Res. 3(6), 1506 (1972).

[45] M. P. Mosley and R. S. Parker, Geological Society

[17] S. Kramer and M. Marder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68(2),

of America Bulletin 84, 3123 (1973).

205 (1992).

[46] J. E. Mueller, Geological Society of America Bulletin

[18] N. Izumi and G. Parker, Journal of Fluid Mechanics

84, 3127 (1973).

283, 341 (1995).

[47] D. R. Montgomery and W. E. Dietrich, Science 255,

[19] K. Sinclair and R. C. Ball, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76(18),

826 (1992).

3360 (1996).

[20] J. R. Banavar, F. Colaiori, A. Flammini, A. Gia-
cometti, A. Maritan, and A. Rinaldo, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 78, 4522 (1997).

[21] E. Somfai and L. M. Sander, Phys. Rev. E 56(1), R5

(1997).

[22] R. Pastor-Satorras and D. H. Rothman, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 80(19), 4349 (1998).

[23] R. Pastor-Satorras and D. H. Rothman, J. Stat.

Phys. 93, 477 (1998).

[24] M. Cieplak, A. Giacometti, A. Maritan, A. Rinal-
do, I. Rodr´ıguez-Iturbe, and J. R. Banavar, J. Stat.
Phys. 91(1/2), 1 (1998).

[48] R. Rigon, I. Rodr´ıguez-Iturbe, and A. Rinalod,

Water Resour. Res. 34(11), 3181 (1998).

[49] The topography used to extract areas and stream
lengths is a composite of United States Geologi-
cal Survey three-arc-second digital elevation models
available on the Internet at www.usgs.gov. These
datasets provide grids of elevation data with hor-
izontal resolution on the order of 90 meters. The
Kansas river was analyzed directly from the data
while the Mississippi basin was studied on a coarse-
grained version with horizontal resolution of approx-
imately 1000 meters.

[50] D. G. Tarboton, R. L. Bras, and I. Rodr´ıguez-Iturbe,

[25] A. Giacometti, Local minimal energy landscapes in

Water Resour. Res. 26(9), 2243 (1990).

river networks (2000), preprint.

[51] H. Takayasu, I. Nishikawa, and H. Tasaki, Phys.

[26] H. Takayasu and H. Inaoka, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68(7),

Rev. A 37(8), 3110 (1988).

966 (1992).

[52] P. Meakin, J. Feder, and T. Jøssang, Physica A 176,

[27] R. L. Leheny, Phys. Rev. E 52(5), 5610 (1995).
[28] G. Caldarelli, A. Giacometti, A. Maritan,
I. Rodr´ıguez-Iturbe, and A. Rinaldo, Phys. Rev. E
55(5), 4865 (1997).

[29] C. P. Stark, Nature 352, 405 (1991).
[30] T. Sun, P. Meakin, and T. Jøssang, Phys. Rev. E

49(6), 4865 (1994).

[31] T. Sun, P. Meakin, and T. Jøssang, Phys. Rev. E

51(6), 5353 (1995).

[32] L. B. Leopold and W. B. Langbein, U.S. Geol. Surv.

Prof. Pap. 500-A, 1 (1962).

[33] A. E. Scheidegger, Bull. Int. Assoc. Sci. Hydrol.

12(1), 15 (1967).

[34] S. S. Manna and B. Subramanian, Phys. Rev. Lett.

76(18), 3460 (1996).

[35] A. Maritan, F. Colaiori, A. Flammini, M. Cieplak,

and J. R. Banavar, Science 272, 984 (1996).

[36] P. S. Dodds and D. H. Rothman, Geometry of River
Networks II: Distributions of Component Size and
Number (2000), submitted to PRE.

[37] P. S. Dodds and D. H. Rothman, Geometry of River

409 (1991).

[53] G. Huber, Physica A 170, 463 (1991).
[54] D. Dhar and S. N. Majumdar, J. Phys. A: Math.

Gen. 23, 4333 (1990).

[55] D. Dhar, Physica A 186, 82 (1992).
[56] D. Dhar, Physica A 263, 4 (1999).
[57] W. Feller, An Introduction to Probability Theory and
Its Applications, vol. I (John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 1968), third ed.

[58] W. Feller, An Introduction to Probability Theory and
Its Applications, vol. II (John Wiley & Sons, New
York, 1968), third ed.

[59] The data for the Nile and Congo was obtained from
the United States Geological Survey’s 30-arc-second
Hydro1K dataset which may be accessed on the
Internet at edcftp.cr.usgs.gov. Note that these
Hydro1K datasets have undergone the extra process-
ing of projection onto a uniform grid.

[60] The dataset used for the Amazon has a horizontal
resolution of approximately 1000 meters and comes
from 30 arc second terrain data provided by the

16

National Imagery and Mapping Agency available on
the Internet at www.nima.mil.

[64] S. A. Schumm, Bull. Geol. Soc. Am 67, 597 (1956).
[65] S. Peckham and V. Gupta, Water Resour. Res.

[61] W. Dietrich and D. Montgomery, in Scale Depen-
dence and Scale Invariance in Hydrology, edited by
G. Sposito (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom, 1998), pp. 30–60.

[62] W. E. Dietrich and T. Dunne, in Channel Network
Hydrology, edited by K. Beven and M. Kirkby (John
Wiley & Sons Ltd, New York, 1993), chap. 7, pp.
175–219.

35(9), 2763 (1999).

[66] W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and
B. P. Flannery, Numerical Recipes in C (Cambridge
University Press, 1992), second ed.

[67] E. L. Lehman, Nonparametrics : statistical methods
based on ranks (Holden-Day, San Francisoc, 1975).
[68] P. Sprent, Applied Nonparametric Statistical Meth-
ods (Chapman & Hall, New York, 1993), second ed.

[63] A. N. Strahler, EOS Trans. AGU 38(6), 913 (1957).

