0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

3
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
1
4
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The shock-acoustic waves generated by the earthquakes

Afraimovich E. L., Perevalova N. P., Plotnikov A. V., Uralov A. M.

Institute of Solar-Terrestrial Physics SD RAS,

p. o. box 4026, Irkutsk, 664033, Russia

fax: +7 3952 462557; e-mail: afra@iszf.irk.ru

Abstract

We investigate the form and dynamics of shock-acoustic waves generated
by earthquakes. We use the method for detecting and locating the sources of
ionospheric impulsive disturbances, based on using data from a global network
of receivers of the GPS navigation system and requiring no a priori informa-
tion about the place and time of associated eﬀects (Afraimovich et al., 2000).
The practical implementation of the method is illustrated by a case study of
earthquake eﬀects in Turkey in 1999. It was found that in all instances the
ionospheric response has the character of an N -wave. The period is 180-390
s, and the amplitude exceeds by a factor of two as a minimum the standard
deviation of background ﬂuctuations in total electron content in this range of
periods under quite and moderate geomagnetic conditions. The elevation of the
wave vector varies through a range of 20-44◦, and the phase velocity (1100-1300
m/s) approaches the sound velocity at the heights of the ionospheric F-region
maximum. The calculated (by neglecting refraction corrections) location of the
source roughly corresponds to the earthquake epicenter. Our data are consis-
tent with the present views that shock-acoustic waves are caused by a piston-like
movement of the Earth surface in the zone of an earthquake epicenter.

1

Introduction

A plethora of publications have been devoted to the study of the ionospheric response
to disturbances arising from impulsive forcing on the Earth’s atmosphere. It was
found that in many cases a high proportion of the energy of the initial atmospheric
disturbance is concentrated in the acoustic shock wave. Large earthquakes also pro-
vide the natural source of impulsive forcing. Scientiﬁc interest in this problem is
also indicated by the fact that such events can be treated as active experiments
in the Earth’s atmosphere, and they can be used in solving many problems in the
ionospheric physics, the ionospheric propagation of radio waves, the physics of at-
mospheric waves, etc.

These investigations have also important practical implications since they furnish
a means of substantiating reliable signal indications of technogenic eﬀects (among
them, unauthorized), which is necessary for the construction of an eﬀective global
radiophysical subsystem for detection and localization of these eﬀects. Essentially,
existing global systems of such a purpose use diﬀerent processing techniques for
infrasound and seismic signals. However, in connection with the expansion of the

1

geography and of the types of technogenic impact on the environment, very chal-
lenging problems heretofore have been those of improve the sensitivity of detection
and the reliability of measured parameters of the sources of impacts, based also on
using independent measurements of the entire spectrum of signals generated during
such eﬀects.

To solve the above problems requires reliable information about fundamental
parameters of the ionospheric response of the shock wave, such as the amplitude
and the form, the period, the phase and group velocity of the wavetrain, as well
as angular characteristics of the wave vector. Note that for the designating the
ionospheric response of the shock wave, the literature uses terminology incorporat-
ing a diﬀerent physical interpretation, among them the term ‘shock-acoustic wave’
(SAW) (Nagorsky, 1998). For convenience, in this paper we shall use this term
despite the fact that it does not reﬂect essentially the physical nature of the phe-
nomenon.

There is a wide scatter of the published data on the main parameters of SAWs
generated during industrial explosions and earthquakes. The oscillation period of
the ionospheric response of SAWs varied from 30 to 300 sec., and the propagation
velocity ﬂuctuated from 700 to 1200 m/s (Nagorsky, 1998; Fitzgerald, 1997; Calais
et al., 1998; Afraimovich et al., 1984; Blanc, 1989).

The lack of comprehensive, reliable data on SAW parameters is due primarily
to the limitations of existing experimental methods and detection facilities. The
main body of data was obtained by measuring the frequency Doppler shift at ver-
tical and oblique-incidence ionospheric soundings in the HF range (Nagorsky, 1998;
Afraimovich et al., 1984; Jacobson and Carlos, 1994). In some instances the sensi-
tivity of this method is suﬃcient to detect the SAW reliably; however, diﬃculties
emerge when localizing the region where the detected signal is generated. These
problems are caused by the multiple-hop character of HF signal propagation. This
gives no way of deriving reliable information about the phase and group velocities
of SAW propagation, estimating angular characteristics of the wave vector, and,
further still, of localizing the SAW source.

Using the method of transionospheric sounding with VHF radio signals from
geostationary satellites, a number of experimental data on SAW parameters were
obtained in measurements of the Faraday rotation of the plane of signal polarization
which is proportional to a total electron content (TEC) along the line connecting the
satellite-borne transmitter with the receiver (Mendillo, 1981; 1982; Li et al., 1994).
A common drawback of the above-mentioned methods when determining the
SAW phase velocity is the necessity of knowing the time of events since this velocity
is inferred from the SAW delay with respect to the time of events assuming that the
velocity is constant along the propagation path, which is quite contrary to fact.

For determining the above-mentioned reasonably complete set of SAW parame-
ters, it is necessary to have appropriate spatial and temporal resolution which cannot
be ensured by existing, very sparse, networks of ionozondes, oblique-incidence ra-
dio sounding paths, and the incoherent scatter radars. Furthermore, the creation
of these facilities involves developing dedicated equipment, including powerful radio
transmitters which contaminate the radio medium. As a result, the above systems
cannot serve as an eﬃcient basis for a global radiophysical subsystem for detec-

2

tion and localization of technogenic eﬀects which must provide a continuous, global
monitoring.

The advent and evolution of a Global Positioning System (GPS), and also the
creation on its basis of widely branched networks of GPS stations (at least 700
sites at the May 2000), the data from which are placed on the INTERNET, opened
up a new era in remote ionospheric sensing. In the immediate future this network
will undergo a substantial expansion by integration with the GLONASS positioning
system (Klobuchar, 1997).

Currently some authors have embarked on an intense development of methods
for detecting the ionospheric response of strong earthquakes (Calais and Minster,
1995), rocket launchings (Calais and Minster, 1996), and industrial surface explo-
sions (Fitzgerald, 1997; Calais et al., 1998). In the cited references the SAW phase
velocity was determined by the ‘crossing’ method by estimating the time delay of
SAW arrival at subionospheric points corresponding to diﬀerent GPS satellites ob-
served at a given time. However, the accuracy of such a method is rather low
because the altitude at which the subionospheric points are speciﬁed, is determined
in a crude way.

The goal of this paper is to describe a method for determining SAW parameters
(including the phase velocity, angular characteristics of the SAW wave vector, the
direction towards the source, and the source location) using GPS-arrays whose el-
ements can be chosen out of a large set of GPS stations of a global GPS network
(Afraimovich et al., 2000). Contrary to existing radio techniques, this method esti-
mates SAW parameters without a priori information about the location and time of
a earthquake.

Section 2 presents a description of the experimental geometry, and general infor-
mation about the earthquakes under consideration. The proposed method is brieﬂy
outlined in Section 3. Results of measurements of SAW parameters from diﬀerent
GPS arrays during earthquakes are presented in Section 4. Section 5 is devoted to
the discussion of experimental results, including analytical simulation results.

2 The geometry and general characterization of exper-

iments

This paper presents the results derived from determining the main parameters of
SAWs during two earthquakes in Turkey in 1999. In spite of the small number of
GPS stations in the earthquake area, we were able to use a suﬃcient number of
GPS stations for the implementation of the proposed method. Table ?? presents
the geographic coordinates of the GPS stations used as GPS array elements.

Fig. ?? illustrates the experimental geometry during the earthquakes in Turkey.
Heavy dots and large lettering show the location and the names of the GPS stations.
The scaling of the coordinate axes is chosen from considerations of an approximate
equality of the linear dimensions along the latitude and longitude.

Detection results on two earthquakes in Turkey (August 17, 1999, and November
12, 1999) are presented below. The information about the earthquakes, presented
below, was acquired via the INTERNET ”http://earthquake.usgs.gov”. General
information about these earthquakes is presented in Table ?? (including the time of

3

the main shock t0 in the universal time UT, the position of the earthquake epicenter,
depth, the magnitude, as well as the level of geomagnetic disturbance from the data
on Dst-variations). It was found that the deviation of Dst for the selected days was
quite moderate, which enabled the SAWs to be identiﬁed.

3 Methods of determining shock-acoustic wave charac-

teristics using GPS-arrays

The standard GPS technology provides a means for wave disturbances detecion based
on phase measurements of TEC at each of spaced two-frequency GPS receivers. A
method of reconstructing TEC variations from measurements of the ionosphere-
induced additional increment of the group and phase delay of the satellite radio
signal was detailed and validated in a series of publications (Calais and Minster,
1995, 1996; Fitzgerald, 1997). We reproduce here only the ﬁnal formula for phase
measurements

I =

1

40.308

1 f 2
f 2
2
1 − f 2
f 2

2

[(L1λ1 − L2λ2) + const + nL]

(1)

where L1λ1 and L2λ2 are additional paths of the radio signal caused by the phase
delay in the ionosphere, (m); L1 and L2 represent the number of phase rotations at
the frequencies f1 and f2; λ1 and λ2 stand for the corresponding wavelengths, (m);
const is the unknown initial phase ambiguity, (m); and nL are errors in determining
the phase path, (m).

Phase measurements in the GPS can be made with a high degree of accuracy
corresponding to the error of TEC determination of at least 1014 m−2 when averaged
on a 30-second time interval, with some uncertainty of the initial value of TEC,
however (Hofmann-Wellenhof et al., 1992). This makes possible detecting ionization
irregularities and wave processes in the ionosphere over a wide range of amplitudes
(up to 10−4 of the diurnal TEC variation) and periods (from 24 hours to 5 min).
The unit of TEC T ECU , which is equal to 1016 m−2 and is commonly accepted in
the literature, will be used in the following.

In some instances a convenient way of detecting and determining the ionospheric
response delay of the shock wave involves inferring the frequency Doppler shift F
from TEC series obtained by formula (1). Such an approach is also useful in com-
paring TEC response characteristics from the GPS data with those obtained by
analyzing VHF signals from geostationary satellites, as well as in detecting the
shock wave in the HF range. To an approximation suﬃcient for the purpose of our
investigation, a corresponding relationship was obtained by K. Davies (1969)

F = 13.5 × 10−8I ′

t/f

(2)

where I ′
t stands for the time derivative of TEC. Relevant results derived from an-
alyzing the F (t)-variations calculated for the ‘reduced’ frequency of 136 MHz are
discussed in Section 4.

The correspondence of space-time phase characteristics, obtained through tran-
sionospheric soundings, with local characteristics of disturbances in the ionosphere

4

was considered in detail
in a wide variety of publications (Bertel et al., 1976;
Afraimovich et al., 1992; Mercier and Jacobson, 1997) and is not analyzed at length
in this study. The most important conclusion of the cited references is the fact
that, as for the extensively exploited model of a ‘plane phase screen’ disturbances
∆I(x, y, t) of TEC faithfully copy the horizontal part of the corresponding distur-
bance ∆N (x, y, z, t) of local concentration, independently of the angular position of
the source, and can be used in experiments on measuring the wave disturbances of
TEC.

However, the TEC response amplitude experiences a strong azimuthal depen-
dence caused by the integral character of a transionospheric sounding. As a ﬁrst
approximation, the transionospheric sounding method is responsive only to TIDs
with the wave vector Kt perpendicular to the direction r. A corresponding condi-
tion for elevation θ and azimuth α of an arbitrary wave vector Kt normal to the
direction r, has the form

θ = arctan(− cos(αs − α)/ tan θs)

(3)

where αs is the azimuthal angle, counted oﬀ from the northward in a clockwise
direction; and θs is the angle of elevation between the direction r along Line-of-
Sight (LOS) to the satellite and the terrestrial surface at the reception site.

We used formula (3) in determining the elevation θ of Kt from the known mean

value of azimuth α by Afraimovich et al. (1998) – see Sections 3.2 and 4.

3.1 Detection and determination of the horizontal phase velocity
Vh and the direction α of the SAW phase front along the ground
by GPS-arrays

In the simplest form, space-time variations of the TEC ∆I(t, x, y) in the ionosphere,
at each given time t can be represented in terms of the phase interference pattern
that moves without a change in its shape (the solitary, plane travelling wave)

∆I(t, x, y) = δ sin(Ωt − Kxx − Kyy + ϕ0)

(4)

where δ, Kx, Ky, Ω — are the amplitude, the x- and y-projections of the wave vector
K, and the angular frequency of the disturbance, respectively; T = 2π/Ω, Λ =
2π/|K| is its period and wavelength; and ϕ0 is the initial phase of the disturbance.
The vector K is a horizontal projection of the full vector Kt.
For the SAW which have mostly the character of an N -wave (Li et al., 1994;
Calais and Minster, 1995, 1996; Fitzgerald, 1997; Calais et al., 1998), the amplitude
δ in (4) can be speciﬁed as (with an appropriate choice of the model parameters)

δ(t) = exp[−(

t − tmax

td

)2]

(5)

where tmax is the time when the disturbance has a maximum amplitude, and td is
the half-thickness of the ‘wave packet’.

At this point, it is assumed that in the case of small spatial and temporal incre-
ments (the distances between GPS-array sites are less than the typical spatial scale

5

of TEC variation, and the time interval between counts is less than the correspond-
ing time scale), the inﬂuence of second derivatives can be neglected. The following
choices of GPS-arrays all meet these requirements.

We now summarize brieﬂy the sequence of data processing procedures. Out of
a large number of GPS stations, three sites (A, B, C) are selected, the distances
between which do not exceed about one-half the expected wavelength Λ of the per-
turbation. Site B is taken to be the center of a topocentric reference frame whose
axis x is directed eastward, and the axis y is directed northward. The receivers in
this frame of reference have the coordinates (xA, yA), (0,0), (xC, yC). Such a conﬁg-
uration of the GPS receivers represents the GPS-array with a minimum number of
the required elements. In regions with a dense network of GPS sites, we can obtain
a large variety of GPS-arrays of a diﬀerent conﬁguration enabling the acquired data
to be checked for reliability; in this paper we have exploited such a possibility.

The input data include series of the ‘oblique’ value of TEC IA(t), IB(t), I(t), as
well as corresponding series of values of the elevation θs(t) and the azimuth αs(t)
of the beam to the satellite calculated using our developed CONVTEC software
program which converts the RINEX-ﬁles, standard for the GPS system, from the
INTERNET. For determining SAW characteristics, continuous series of measure-
ments of IA(t), IB(t), IC(t) are selected with a length of at least a one-hour interval
which includes the time of a earthquake.

To eliminate variations of the regular ionosphere, as well as trends introduced
by orbital motion of the satellite, a procedure is used to remove the linear trend
involving a preliminary smoothing of the initial series with the selected time window.
This procedure is best suited to the detection of the signal such as a single pulse
(N -wave) when compared to the frequently used band-pass ﬁlter (Li et al., 1994;
Calais and Minster, 1995, 1996; Fitzgerald, 1997; Calais et al., 1998). A limitation of
the band-pass ﬁlter is the delay and the oscillatory character of the response which
gives no way of reconstructing the form of the N -wave.

Series of the values of the elevation θs(t) and azimuth αs(t) of the beam to the
satellite are used to determine the location of the subionospheric point, as well as to
calculate the elevation θ of the wave vector Kt of the disturbance from the known
azimuth α (see formula (3)).

The most reliable results from the determination of SAW parameters correspond
to high values of elevations θs(t) of the beam to the satellite because sphericity
eﬀects become reasonably small.
In addition, there is no need to recalculate the
‘oblique’ value of TEC ∆I(t) to the ‘vertical’ value. In this paper, all results were
obtained for elevations θs(t) larger than 30◦.

Since the distance between GPS-array elements (from several tens of kilometers
to a few thousand kilometers) is much smaller than that to the GPS satellite (over
20000 km), the array geometry at the height hmax is identical to that on the ground.
Fig. ??a shows typical time dependencies of an ‘oblique’ TEC I(t) at the GPS-
array BSHM station near the area of the earthquake of August, 17, 1999. (heavy
curve), one day before and after the earthquake (thin lines). For the same days;
panel b shows TEC variations ∆I(t) with the removed linear trend and a smoothing
with the 5-min time window. Variations in frequency Doppler shift F (t), ‘reduced’
to the sounding signal frequency of 136 MHz, for three sites of the array (KATZ

6

BSHM GILB) for the August 17, 1999, are presented in panel c. Day numbers, GPS
station names and GPS PRN satellite numbers are indicated in all panels.

It is evident from Fig. ?? that fast N -shaped oscillations with a typical period
of about 390 s are clearly distinguished among slow TEC variations. The oscillation
amplitude (up to 0.12 T ECU ) is far in excess of the TEC ﬂuctuation intensity during
‘background’ days. Variations in frequency Doppler shift F (t) for spatially separated
sites (KATZ BSHM GILB) are well correlated but are shifted relative to each other
by an amount well below the period, which permits the SAW propagation velocity
to be unambiguously determined. A time resolution of 30 s used in our study, which
is standard for the GPS data, is not quite suﬃcient for determining small shifts of
such signals with an adequate accuracy for diﬀerent sites of the array. Therefore,
we used a parabolic approximation of the F (t)-oscillations in the neighborhood of
minimum F (t), which is quite acceptable when the signal/noise ratio is high.

With proper account of a good signal/noise ratio (larger than 1), we determine
the horizontal projection of the phase velocity Vh with the known coordinates of
array sites A, B, C from time tp shifts of a maximum deviation of the frequency
Doppler shift F (t). Preliminarily measured shifts are subjected to a linear transfor-
mation with the purpose of calculating shifts for sites spaced relative to the central
site northward N and eastward E. This is followed by a calculation of the E- and
N -components of Vx and Vy, as well as the direction α in the range of angles 0–360◦
and the modulus Vh of the horizontal component of the SAW phase velocity

α = arctan(Vy/Vx)
Vh = |VxVy|(V 2
x + V 2

y )−1/2

(6)

where Vy, Vx are the velocities with which the phase front crosses the axes x and y.
The orientation α of the wave vector K, which is coincident with the propagation
azimuth of the SAW phase front, is calculated unambiguously in the range 0–360◦
subject to the condition that arctan(Vy/Vx) is calculated having regard to the sign
of the numerator and denominator.

The above method for determining the SAW phase velocity neglects the correc-
tion for orbital motion of the satellite because the estimates of Vh obtained below
exceed an order of magnitude as a minimum the velocity of the subionospheric point
at the height hmax for elevations θs > 30◦ (Afraimovich et al., 1998).

From the delay ∆t = tp − t0 and the known path length between the launch pad
and the subionospheric point we calculated also the SAW mean velocity Va in order
to compare our obtained estimates of the SAW phase velocity with the usually used
method of measuring this quantity.

3.2 Determination of the wave vector elevation θ and the velocity

modulus Vt of the shock wave

Afraimovich et al. (1992) showed that for an exponential ionization distribution the
TEC disturbance amplitude (M ) is determined by the aspect angle γ between the
vectors Kt and r, as well as by the ratio of the wavelength of the disturbance Λ to
the half-thickness of the ionization maximum hd

7

M ∝ exp −

π2h2

Λ2 cos2 θs !
d cos2 γ

(7)

where θs is the elevation of the wave vector r.

In the case under consideration (see below), for the phase velocity of order 1 km/s
and for the period of about 200 s, the wavelength Λ is comparable with the half-
thickness of the ionization maximum hd. When the elevations θs are 30◦, 45◦, 60◦ ,
the ‘beam-width’ M (γ) at 0.5 level is, respectively, 25◦, 22◦ and 15◦. If hd is twice
as large as the wavelength, then the beam tapers to 14◦, 10◦ and 8◦, respectively.

The beam-width is suﬃciently small that the aspect condition (3) restricts the
number of beam trajectories to the satellite, for which it is possible to detect reliably
the SAW response in the presence of noise (near the angles γ = 90◦ ). On the other
hand, formula (3) can be used to determine the elevation θ of the wave vector Kt
of the shock wave at the known value of the azimuth α (Afraimovich et al., 1998).
Hence the phase velocity modulus Vt can be deﬁned as

The above values of the width M (γ) determine the error of calculation of the

elevations θ (of order 20◦ to the above conditions (Section 3.3).

Vt = Vh × sec(θ)

(8)

3.3 Determining the position and ‘switch-on’ time of the SAW

source without regard for refraction corrections

The ionospheric region that is responsible for the main contribution to TEC varia-
tions lies in the neighborhood of the maximum of the ionospheric F -region, which
does determine the height hmax of the subionospheric point. When selecting hmax, it
should be taken into consideration that the decrease in electron density with height
above the main maximum of the F2-layer proceeds much more slowly than is the
case below the maximum. Since the density distribution with height is essentially
a ‘weight function’ of the TEC response to a wave disturbance (Afraimovich et al.,
1992), it is appropriate to use, as hmax, the value exceeding the true height of the
layer hF 2 maximum by about 100 km. hF 2 varies over a reasonably wide range
(250–350 km) depending on the time of day and on some geophysical factors which,
when necessary, can be taken into account if corresponding additional experimen-
tal data and current ionospheric models are used. In all calculations that follow,
hmax = 400 km is used.

To a ﬁrst approximation, it can be assumed that it is at this altitude where the
imaginary detector is located, which records the ionospheric SAW response in TEC
variations. The ‘horizontal size’ of the detection region, which can be inferred from
the propagation velocity of the subionospheric point as a consequence of the orbital
motion of the GPS satellite (of order 50 m/s), and from the SAW period (of order
200 s — see Section 4), does not exceed 10–20 km, which is far smaller than the
‘vertical size’.

From the GPS data we can determine the coordinates Xs and Ys of the subiono-
spheric point in the horizontal plane X0Y of a topocentric frame of reference centered
on the point B(0,0) at the time of a maximum TEC deviation caused by the arrival

8

of the SAW at this point. Since we know the angular coordinates θ and α of the wave
vector Kt, it is possible to determine the location of the point at which this vector
intersects the horizontal plane X ′0Y ′ at the height hw of the assumed source. As-
suming a rectilinear propagation of the SAW from the source to the subionospheric
point and neglecting the sphericity the coordinate Xw and Yw of the source in a
topocentric frame of reference can be deﬁned as

Xw = Xp − (hmax − hw)
Yw = Yp − (hmax − hw)

sin θ

cos θ sin α

sin θ

cos θ cos α

(9)

(10)

The coordinates Xw and Yw, thus obtained, can readily be recalculated to the

values of the latitude and longitude (φw and λw) of the source.

For SAW generated during earthquakes, industrial explosions and underground
tests of nuclear devices, hw is taken to be equal to 0 (the source lying at the ground
level).

Given the coordinates of the subionospheric point and of the disturbance source,
the mean value of the SAW propagation velocity between the source and the subiono-
spheric point, and the arrival time of the SAW at this point, then within the ap-
proximation of a rectilinear propagation it is easy to determine the ‘switch-on’ delay
∆tw of the anticipated SAW source with respect to the start. This would make it
possible to obtain additional information about the SAW source which is needed to
understand the mechanism of SAW generation. The estimates of ∆tw made below
assume that the propagation velocity is taken equal to 700 m/s (see Li et al., 1994).
Note that by the ‘switch-on’ time of the source is meant here the time of a maximum
disturbance of the background state of the medium when the SAW is generated.

4 Results of measurements

Hence, using the transformations described in Section 3, we obtain the parameters
set determined from TEC variations and characterizing the SAW (see Table ??).

Let us consider the results derived from analyzing the ionospheric eﬀect of SAW
during earthquake August 17, 1999 obtained at the array (KATZ, BSHM, GILB)
for PRN 6 (at the left of Fig. ??, and line 2 in Table ??).

In this case the delay of the SAW response with respect to the time of the
earthquake is 20 min (DAY 229). The SAW has the form of an N -wave with a
period T of about 390 s and an amplitude AI = 0.12 T ECU , which is an order of
magnitude larger than TEC ﬂuctuations for background days (DAY 228, DAY 230).
It should be noted, however, that this time interval was characterized by a very low
level of geomagnetic activity (-14 nT).

The amplitude of a maximum frequency Doppler shift AF at the ‘reduced’ fre-
quency of 136 MHz was found to be 0.04 Hz. In view of the fact that the shift F is
inversely proportional to the sounding frequency squared (Davies, 1969), this corre-
sponds to a Doppler shift at the working frequency of 13.6 MHz and the equivalent
oblique-incidence sounding path of about AF = 4 Hz.

Solid curves in Fig. ?? represent the trajectories of the subionospheric points for
each GPS satellite at the height hmax=400 km. Dark diamonds along the trajectories

9

correspond to the coordinates of the subionospheric points at time tp of a maximum
deviation of the TEC (Fig. ??b and Fig. ??e). Crosses show the positions of the
earthquake epicenters. Asterisks mark the source location at 0 km altitude inferred
from the data from the GPS arrays. Numbers at the asterisks correspond to the
respective day numbers. Straight dashed lines that connect the expected source and
the subionospheric point represent the horizontal projection of the wave vector Kt.
The azimuth and elevation α and θ of the wave vector Kt whose horizontal
projection is shown in Fig. ?? by a dashed line and is marked by K1, are 154◦ and
26◦, respectively. The horizontal component and the modulus of the phase velocity
were found to be Vh = 1307 m/s and Vt = 1174 m/s. The source coordinates at
0 km altitude were determined as φw = 39.1◦ and λw = 25.9◦. The ‘switch-on’ delay
of the SAW source ∆tw with respect to the start time was 12 s.

Similar results for the array (KABR, TELA, GILB) and PRN 30 were also ob-
tained for the earthquake of November 12, 1999. They correspond to the projection
of the vector K2 in Fig. ??, the time dependencies in Fig. ?? at the right, and to line
7 in Table ??. The only point deserving mention here is that the SAW amplitude
was somewhat smaller than that for the earthquake of August 17, 1999. With an
increased level of geomagnetic activity ( -44 nT), this led to a smaller (compared
with August 17, 1999) ”signal/noise” ratio; yet this did not hinder to obtain reliable
estimates of the SAW parameters.

A comparison of the data for both earthquakes showed a reasonably close agree-
ment of SAW parameters irrespective of the level of geomagnetic disturbance, the
season, and the local time.

To convince ourselves that the determination of the main parameters of the SAW
form and dynamics is reliable for the earthquakes analyzed here, in the area of the
earthquake we selected diﬀerent combinations of three sites out of the sets of GPS
stations available to us, and these data were processed with the same processing
parameters. Relevant results (including the average results for the sets Σ), pre-
sented in Table ?? and in Fig. ?? (SAW source position), show that the values of
SAW parameters are similar, which indicates a good stability of the data obtained,
irrespective of the GPS-array conﬁguration.

The aspect condition (3), corresponding to a maximum amplitude of the TEC
response to the transmission of SAWs, was satisﬁed quite well for this geometry,
simultaneously for all stations. This is conﬁrmed by a high degree of correlation of
the SAW responses at the array elements (Fig. ??c and Fig. ??f), which made it
possible to obtain diﬀerent sets of triangles out of the six GPS stations available to
us.

5 Discussion

The data of Table ?? are quite suﬃcient to estimate the position of the disturbances
under discussion in the diagnostic diagram of the atmospheric waves. Speciﬁcally,
the values of the characteristic periods of bipolar signals, presented in Fig. ??a
and Fig. ??b, are T1 ≈ 300 s, and T2 ≈ 200 s. The wave vectors make with the
vertical the angles β1 ≈ 70◦ and β2 ≈ 50◦. At the height z ≈ 400 km, in turn,
the periods, corresponding to local frequencies of the acoustic cut-oﬀ ωa and the

10

Brent-Vaisala ωb, are: Ta = 2π/ωa ≈ 950 s, Tb = 2π/ωb ≈ 1050 s. In an isothermal
atmosphere, only harmonics with periods larger than Tb/sin β can be assigned to the
branch of internal gravity waves. This value exceeds signiﬁcantly the values of T1,2.
Furthermore, T1,2 is considerably smaller than Ta. Hence we can contend that under
conditions of the real (nonisothermal) atmosphere the disturbances under discussion
almost entirely pertain to the branch of acoustic waves.

Since in (short) acoustic waves the variation ∆N in neutral density N satisﬁes the
relation ∆N/N ≈ u/C (u is the gas velocity in the wave, and C is the local velocity of
sound), it is possible to make a lower estimate of the intensity u/C of the waves at the
expected altitudes zef f ≈ 350–400 km: ∆N/N ≈ ∆Ne/Ne ≈ ∆I/I ≈ 0.02 − 0.04.
In this estimation, the inﬂuence of the magnetic ﬁeld is omitted, and the index e
refers to electrons. The actual intensity of the acoustic wave must be higher than
the estimated value presented above.

In the case of an earthquake, the movements of the terrestrial surface are plau-
sible sources of acoustic waves. A generally known source of the ﬁrst type is the
Rayleigh surface wave propagating from the epicentral zone. The epicentral region
itself is the source of the second type. Let us discuss these possibilities.

5.1 The Rayleigh wave

The phase propagation velocity of the Rayleigh wave VR ≈ 3.3 km/s. Since VR ≫ C0,
where C0 ≈ 0.34 km/s is the sound velocity at the ground, only acoustic waves can be
emitted (Golitsyn and Klyatskin, 1967). At a suﬃcient distance from the epicenter
where the curvature of the Rayleigh wave front can be neglected, and with the proviso
that ω ≫ ωa, acoustic waves are emitted at the angle βR ≈ arcsin(C0/VR) ≈ 6◦ to
the vertical.
Rayleigh waves propagate generally in the form of a train consisting of several
oscillations whose typical period only rarely exceeds several tens of seconds. Acoustic
waves are emitted upward in the form of the same train. Because of a strong
absorption of the periodic wave, the only thing that is left over in the case of the
acoustic train at heights z ≥ 350 km is only the leading phase of compression. It
seems likely that only in the case of very strong earthquakes (Alaskian earthquake
of 1964), even at large distances from the epicenter, the disturbance (the leading
portion of the acoustic train) that remains from the acoustic train, can have at these
altitudes a duration of about 100 s, and quite an appreciable (u/C > 0.1) intensity
(Orlov and Uralov, 1987) the nonlinear acoustics approximation).

Unfortunately, the parameters of Rayleigh waves in the neighborhood of the
subionospheric points appearing in Table ?? are unknown to us. However, a most
pronounced bipolar character of the main signal (Fig. ??b and Fig. ??e), its intensity,
and its very long duration cast some doubt upon the fact that it is the Rayleigh
wave which is responsible for its origin. Such a conclusion is consistent with the
observed propagation direction of the bipolar pulse, which makes a very large angle
with the vertical: β1,2 ≈ 70–50◦ ≫ β”
Here it is taken into consideration that the acoustic ray originating from a point
on the ground at the angle of βR ≈ 6◦ now makes at the heights z = zef f an
angle β”
R > βR because of the refraction eﬀect in a standard atmospheric model:
C0/sin βR = C/sin β”
R = const = VR, C(z = zef f ) ≈ 0.9–1 km/s. And, ﬁnally, irre-

R ≈ 15–18◦.

11

spective of the atmospheric model, the phase velocity Vh (Table ??) of the horizontal
trace of there acoustic disturbance generated by the Rayleigh wave must coincide
with VR, and this is also not observed: Vh ≪ VR.

5.2 The epicentral emitter

The detection of ionospheric disturbances, which are presumably generated by a
vertical displacement of the terrestrial surface directly in the epicentral zone of an
earthquake, using the GPS probing method, is reported in (Calais and Minster,
1995). Results of the present study lend support to the above conjecture. However,
the speciﬁc formation mechanism for the disturbance itself is still unclear. An ap-
proach to solving this problem is contained in earlier work, and involves substituting
the epicentral emitter for a surface velocity point source or an explosion. In par-
ticular, the substitution of the earthquake zone for a point source turns out to be
fruitful when describing long-period internal gravity waves at a very long (thousands
of kilometers) distance from the epicenter (Row, 1967). The visual resemblance of
ionospheric disturbances at short (hundreds of kilometers) distances from the earth-
quake epicenter to disturbances from surface explosions is discussed in (Calais et al.,
1998).

It should be noted that ionospheric disturbances generated by industrial surface
and underground nuclear explosions are also visually similar. However, the genera-
tion mechanisms for disturbances are fundamentally diﬀerent in this case (Rudenko
and Uralov, 1995). The radiation source in underground nuclear tests is, as in the
case of earthquakes, the terrestrial surface disturbed by the explosion. The intensity
and spectral composition of the generated acoustic signal reveal a strong (unlike the
surface explosion) dependence on the zenith angle, and are wholly determined by
the form, size and characteristics of the movement of the terrestrial surface in the
epicentral zone of the underground explosion.

In this Section, we shall propose a model which, we hope, will help to understand
the generation mechanism for acoustic disturbances - the subject of this paper. Be-
cause of the obvious complexity of the problem formulated, and for lack of suﬃcient
data on characteristics of the movement of the terrestrial surface in epicentral zones
of earthquakes, the idealized model under discussion has an illustrative character.
The computational scheme proposed below represents a simpliﬁed variant of the
scheme used in (Rudenko and Uralov, 1995) to calculate ionospheric disturbances
generated by an underground conﬁned nuclear explosion.

5.3 The problem of radiation of the acoustic signal

For the sake of simplicity, we consider a problem having an axial symmetry about
the vertical axis z passing through the earthquake epicenter r = z = 0. The epi-
central emitter is a set of plane annular velocity sources with the speciﬁed law of
motion along the vertical U (r, t). Since our interest is with the estimation of the
characteristics of an acoustic disturbance at a suﬃcient distance from the emitter,
we take advantage of the far-ﬁeld approximation of a linear problem of radiation. In
the approximation of linear acoustics ω ≫ ωa and with no absorption present, the
gas velocity proﬁle in the wave can be estimated by the expression:

12

A

u(τ, β) =

πRC0 Z L
0 dl/C, y = rsinβ

C0

0 Z +∞

−∞

′

a(t

, r)rdrdt

′

qy2 − (τ − t′)2||τ −t′ |≤y

(11)

where τ = t −R l
A = A(z) = q C0ρ0

Cρ

acoustic ray from the point r = z = 0.
along the ray). a(t

, r) = dU (r,t)

′

dt

. Here β is the zenith angle of departure of the
l is the group path length (the distance
is the vertical acceleration of the terrestrial surface.

is the acoustic factor. ρ0, ρ stand for the air density at the
ground and at the height z, respectively, and L is a typical radius of the epicentral
emitter.
In an isothermal atmosphere where the ray trajectories are straight lines, the
quantity R = (√r2 + z2 = l) is the radius of a divergent (in the far-ﬁeld approxima-
tion) spherical wave. In this case the cross-section of the selected ray tube S∞R2. In
the real atmosphere the value of S is determined from geometrical optics equations,
and using the expression (11) requires a further complication of the computational
scheme. Nevertheless, to make estimates we shall use only the relatio (11), and, in
doing so, the value of R will be corrected.

The case β = 0 (and also l = R = z) is a special one:

u(τ, β = 0) =

A

RC0Z L

0

a(τ, r)rdr

(12)

Let us discuss the situation where all ring-type emitters ”operate” synchronously:
U (r, t) = U (t). In this case the epicentral zone is emitting as a round piston 2L in
diameter. Assume also that with a shock of the earthquake, the vertical displacement
ξ, the velocity U = dξ/dt and the acceleration a = dU/dt are time dependent, as
shown in Fig. ??a. For a rectangular velocity impulse, i.e. in the limit ∆t ≫ δt → 0
) is a delta-function), from (11) we can
(in this case aδt → ±U0δ(t
obtain

), where δ(t

′

′

u(τ, β) =

U0C0A

πRsin2β{qy2

L − τ 2||τ |≤yL −qy2

L − (τ − ∆t)2||τ −∆t|≤yL}

(13)

where yL = Lsinβ
; U0, ∆t are the amplitude and duration of the rectangular velocity
C0
impulse. In this case the vertical displacement of the terrestrial surface after the
earthquake shock is ξ0 = U0∆t. In the strict sense, the expression (13) holds true
if the condition yL ≫ δt is satisﬁed, i.e. with zenith angles β ≫ β∗ ≈ arcsin C0δt
L .
Here δt is the operation duration of the terrestrial shock at the beginning of the
movement and at the stop of the piston. When β ≈ β∗ ≪ 1 , the expression (13) and
the expression (12), in view of δt 6= 0, yield approximately identical signals. What
actually happens is that the validity of the expression (13) will break down still
earlier, and we are justiﬁed in using it only for zenith angles β > β∗∗ = arctan( L
z ) >
β∗.

The curves in Fig. ??b give an idea of the relative amplitude and form of acoustic
signals u(τ, β) in the far-ﬁeld zone of radiation of the piston 2L = 60 km in diameter.
The duration of the rectangular velocity impulse of the piston was chosen arbitrarily,
∆t = 10 s. The signals correspond to the expression (13) under the assumption of
a homogeneous, A = 1, C = C0 ≈ 0.34 km/s, atmosphere. The zenith angles are

13

β = 10◦, 20◦, 40◦, 60◦, 90◦. The spherical surface R = const serves as a reference.
The abscissa axis indicates the time τ in seconds, and the axis of ordinates indicates
the gas velocity u. In this case the amplitude of the most intense signal (β = 10◦)
is taken to be unity.

With increasing β, the amplitude of the signals umax decreases, and the duration
T increases. The leading and trailing edges of the bipolar pulses in Fig. ?? have an
equal duration ∆t. The positive part of the bipolar pulse corresponds to the com-
pression phase of the acoustic wave, and the negative part refers to the rarefaction
phase. The area of the compression phase (in coordinates u, t) equals the largest
displacement χ+ of a unit volume of the atmosphere in the direction of propagation
(along the ray) of the wave. A total area of a bipolar pulse is zero: χ+ = −χ−. For
acoustic signals, described by the expression (13), the following useful relations hold
true:

umax = U0

2AL

πRsinβqη − η2; T = 2yL + ∆t

χ+ = ξ0

AL

2πRsinβ{q1 − η2 +

1
η

arcsin η};

η =

∆t
2yL

(14)

(15)

5.4 The problem of acoustic signal propagation

The wave vectors Kt of the bipolar pulses make with the vertical the angles β1 = 70◦
and β2 = 50◦. With the adopted values of zef f = 350–400 km, the distances of
the corresponding subionospheric points from the earthquake epicenters in Fig. ??
are approximately r1 = 800 km and r2 = 600 km. The rays, constructed in the
approximation of linear geometrical acoustics (LGA) and having at the heights z =
zef f (C(z = zef f ) ≈ 0.9–1 km/s) the propagation angles β1 and β2, correspond to
the zenith angle of departure β ≈ 19–21◦ and β ≈ 15–17◦ at the level z = 0.
The fact that the values of β obtained satisfy the inequality β ≤ β∗ ≈ 25–30◦,
is reasonably good agreement with the familiar picture of rays from a ground-level
point source — the rays with β ≥ β∗ are captured by the atmospheric waveguide
z ≤ z∗ = 120 km, and only the rays emitted upward inside the solid angle Ω∗ ≈
1 sterad can penetrate to the heights z > z∗. In standard models of the atmosphere,
however, to the values of the angles β1,2(z = zef f ) there correspond the locations
of subionospheric points lying several hundreds kilometers nearer to the epicenter
compared with the experimental values of r1 ≈ 800 km and r2 ≈ 600 km. This
inconsistency can be due to two reasons.
One reason is that the value of zef f ≈ 350–400 km, which we are using, is too
low. This is supported by the detection of velocities Vt ≈ 1.2 km/s of traveling
disturbances (Table ??) which exceed markedly the sound velocity C ≈ 0.9–1 km/s
at the heights of ≈ 350–400 km. However, it seems likely that such a discrepancy
may be disregarded, in view of the errors of the measurement technique used (the
probability of an additional heating of the upper atmosphere prior to the earthquake
cannot be ruled out, however).

The increase of the actual value of zef f can also be associated with a strong
dependence (see (14), (15) and Fig. ??b) of the power of the emitted signal on
the zenith angle of departure of the ray from the earthquake epicenter. Verifying

14

this factor requires a more detailed analysis, based on particular data on vertical
movements of the terrestrial surface in the epicentral zone. Such data are unavailable
to us. Below is a discussion only of the second reason for the above-mentioned
inconsistency as a highly probable one.

The second reason may be associated with the violation of the validity conditions
of the LGA approximation at a suﬃcient distance from the source of the acoustic
disturbances under discussion. Indeed, the utilization of this approximation is justi-
ﬁed until the parameters of the medium and of the wave itself change substantially

on the size of the ﬁrst Fresnel zone dF ≈ √λl that determines the physical (trans-
verse) size of the ray. Typical wavelengths of the bipolar pulses under discussion at
the heights z = zef f are very large: λ ≈ 300–200 km. Distance l along the expected
ray is of order 900–700 km. Then dF ≈ 520–370 km, which exceeds substantially the
scales of variation of atmospheric parameters. The value of dF is actually somewhat
smaller, because the typical scale of a disturbance decreases as it approaches the
source. A violation of the LGA approximation at the above-mentioned distances
from the epicentral source occurs also for model signals β ≥ 20◦, shown in Fig. ??b.
The increasing violation of the applicability conditions of the LGA approximation
with an increase of l implies the transport of the wave energy not strictly along the
calculated rays but along the lines with a smaller curvature. With a mere estimate of
the dilution factor R in the expressions (13), (14) and (15), in mind, these lines will
be assumed to be straight when z > z∗ and to originate from an imaginary source
lying at the height z∗ ≈ 120 km above the earthquake epicenter. Such a situation
is also clearly manifested in the LGA approximation. At the heights z > z∗, at
t ≈ 600 s, for example, the surface of the wave front from the ground-level impulsive
source resembles the surface of a hemisphere centered on the point r ≈ 0, z ≈ z∗.
Ultimately the energy that arrives from below inside the solid angle Ω∗ ≈ 1 is
scattered into a solid angle Ω ≈ 2π. From the condition of conservation of wave
energy, it is possible to ﬁnd R1,2 = q Ω
1,2, when ∆z = zef f − z∗.
When using the expressions (14) (15) in the subsequent discussion, we will take the
quantity R1 rather than R, and the value of the zenith angle of departure will be
taken to be β = 20◦. These parameters approximately correspond to the generation
and propagation conditions of the signal from the ﬁrst earthquake. The typical size
of the epicentral zone of this earthquake was about 2L = 60 km (according to the
USGS data: wwwneic.cr.usgs.gov). This same value of L was used in calculating
the signals shown in Fig. ??b.

Ω∗q(∆z)2 + r2

As is evident even from Fig. ??b (thick line), the duration of the signal, having
a zenith angle of departure β = 20◦, is about 70 s. When the signal propagates in
the approximation of linear acoustics and with no absorption, its form and duration
remain unchanging, and only its amplitude does change.

In actual conditions the combined eﬀect of the nonlinear attenuation and linear
absorption factors leads to a stretching of the bipolar pulse, and to a change of its
form (we do not discuss the dispersion factor). In this case the eﬀect of the nonlin-
early factor occurs in such a manner that the integral value of χ+, (15), calculated
as an approximation of linear acoustics, remains as such in the approximation of
nonlinear acoustic as well. Moreover, taking into account the ﬁnite width ∆Tsh of
the shock front does not change this situation until ∆Tsh < T /4. The linear absorp-

15

tion factor, in turn, somewhat reduces the true value of χ+ because of the mutual
diﬀusion of the compression and rarefaction phases. Nevertheless, for a hypothetical
estimation of the earthquake parameters, we shall use the assumption about the
conservation of the value of χ+.

As is intimated by Table ??, the mean value of the T EC disturbance amplitude
after the ﬁrst earthquake is AI ≈ 0.14 T ECU at the equilibrium value of I ≈ 5
T ECU . Assuming that on the order of magnitude AI /I ≈ u/C for a maximum gas
velocity in the wave, we have an estimate of uexp ≈ 30 m/s. For the sinusoidal form of
the bipolar pulse with a duration T exp ≈ 350 s, we ﬁnd the experimental value of gas
exp = uexpT exp/π ≈ 3 km.
displacement along the direction of wave propagation: χ+
exp ≈ χ+ it is possible to estimate the vertical displacement ξ0
Using the relation χ+
of the terrestrial surface in the epicentral zone of the earthquake. For this purpose, it
seems reasonable to introduce the assumption about a short velocity impulse which
models the main earthquake shock, η ≪ 1, although the numerical value of χ+ is
virtually independent of the value of η (15). In view of the above considerations, we
then obtain:

ξ0 ≈ χ+

expπR1sinβ/(AL).

(16)

The uncertainty in the determination of ξ0 is caused both by the uncertainty of
the true values of the quantities involved in this relation and by the limitations of
the acoustic signal generation model itself. In this case, of the greatest importance
is the dependence of ξ0 on the value of the acoustic parameter A, containing the
atmospheric density ρ at the eﬀective height z = zef f which we have introduced
artiﬁcially. The employment of the MSISE90 atmospheric model (Hedin, 1991),
calculated for the location and time of the ﬁrst earthquake, gives the values of
ξ0 ≈ 60, 40 and 25 cm, with the values of zef f = 350, 400 and 450 km, respectively.
In all cases it was assumed that R1 ≈ 850√2π km, β = 20◦, L = 30 km. The
possibility of a vertical displacement of the terrestrial surface in the epicentral zone
by several tens of centimeters seems real. In particular, (Calais and Minster, 1995)
give the value of ξ0 ≈ 40 cm at the epicenter Mw=6.7 of the Northridge earthquake
(California, 1994).
As follows from the expressions (14), maximum values of displacements and of the
velocity of the neutral atmospheric species are attained directly above the earthquake
epicenter. The signal duration is minimal, and does not seem to exceed a few tens of
seconds at ionospheric heights. Since the wave vector of the disturbance is directed
predominantly upward, the method of oblique-incidence ionospheric sounding in this
case is a technique of choice for determining the waveform.

6 Conclusion

In this paper we have investigated the form and dynamics of shock-acoustic waves
(SAW) generated during earthquakes. We have developed a method of determin-
ing the SAW parameters (including angular characteristics of the wave vector and
the phase velocity of the SAW, as well as the direction toward the source) using
GPS arrays whose elements can be chosen out of a large set of the global network
GPS stations. Unlike existing radio techniques, the proposed method estimates the

16

SAW parameters without a priori information about the location and time of the
earthquake. The implementation of the method is exempliﬁed by an analysis of
ionospheric eﬀects of the earthquakes in Turkey in 1999.

It was found that, in spite of the diﬀerence of the earthquake characteristics,
the local time, the season, and of the level of geomagnetic disturbance, for both
earthquakes the ionospheric response has the character of an N -wave. The SAW
period is 180–390 s, and their amplitude of 0.2 T ECU exceeds by a factor of 2 as
a minimum the standard deviation of background ﬂuctuations of the TEC in this
range of periods under quiet and moderate geomagnetic conditions.

As has been pointed out in the Introduction, some investigators report markedly
diﬀering values of the SAW propagation velocity — by as much as several thousands
m/s, which is beyond the values of the sound velocity at the SAW propagation
heights in the atmosphere. The method proposed in this paper opens up a possibility
of determining the angular characteristics of the wave vector Kt and, accordingly,
of estimating Vt. According to our data (Table ??), the elevation of the SAW
wave vector varied within 20–44◦ , and the phase velocity of the SAW varied from
1100 to 1300 m/s. We determine the phase velocity of the equal TEC line at the
height of the ionospheric F-region maximum which makes the main contribution to
variations of the TEC between the receiver and the GPS satellite, and corresponds
to the region of maximum sensitivity of the method. Since Vt approaches the sound
velocity at these heights this makes it possible to identify the sound origin of the
TEC disturbance. The SAW source location, calculated without taking into account
the refraction corrections, approximately corresponds to the earthquake epicenter.
We hope that the study made in this paper will provide better insights into the
physical processes occurring in the Earth’s atmosphere during earthquakes. Fur-
thermore, this will make it possible to ﬁnd the more reliable signal signatures of
technogenic inﬂuences which are needed for the construction of an eﬀective global
radio subsystem for detection and localization of these inﬂuences, based on a treat-
ment of the data from the international network of two-frequency receivers of the
GPS-GLONASS navigation systems.

7 Acknowledgements

We are indebted to G. M. Kuznetsova and A. V. Tashchilin for their calculation of
the atmospheric parameters at the time of the earthquakes, as well as to E. A. Pono-
marev, V. V. Evstaﬁev, P. M. Nagorsky, N. N. Klimov, and A. D. Kalikhman for
their interest in this study, many pieces of useful advice, and active participation in
discussions. Thanks are also due to V. G. Mikhalkosky for his assistance in preparing
the English version of the manuscript. This work was done with support from both
the Russian foundation for Basic Research (grant 99-05-64753) and RFBR grant of
leading scientiﬁc schools of the Russian Federation No. 00-15-98509.

References

[1] Afraimovich, E.L., I.I. Varshavsky, B.O. Vugmeister, et al.. Inﬂuence
of surface industrial explosions on Doppler and angular characteristics of the

17

ionosphere-reﬂected radio signal, Geomagnetizm i aeronomiya, 24, 322–324 (in
Russian) 1984.

[2] Afraimovich, E.L., A.I. Terechov, M.Yu. Udodov, and S.V. Fridman.
Refraction distortions of transionospheric radio signals caused by changes in a
regular ionosphere and by travelling ionospheric disturbances, J. Atmos. Terr.
Phys., 54, 1013–1020, 1992.

[3] Afraimovich, E.L., K.S. Palamartchouk, and N.P. Perevalova. GPS ra-
dio interferometry of travelling ionospheric disturbances, J. Atmos. Terr. Phys.,
60, 1205–1223, 1998.

[4] Afraimovich E. L., E.A. Kosogorov, and A.V. Plotnikov. The detection
of the shock-acoustic waves generated during rocket launchings using GPS-
arrays. Proceedings of IV International conference ”Radiolocation, navigation
and communication”, April 22-27, part 1, 462–474, 2000.

[5] Bertel, L., F. Bertin, and J. Testud. De la mesure du contenu electronique
integre appliquee a l’observation des ondes de gravite de moyenne echelle, J.
Atmos. Terr. Phys., 38, 261–270, 1976.

[6] Blanc, E., and A.R. Jacobson. Observation of ionospheric disturbances
following a 5-kt chemical explosion. 2. Prolonged anomalies and stratiﬁcations
in the lower thermosphere after shock passage, Radio Sci., 24, 739–746, 1989.

[7] Calais, E. and J.B. Minster. GPS detection of ionospheric perturbations fol-
lowing the January 1994, Northridge earthquake, Geoph. Res. Lett., 22, 1045–
1048, 1995.

[8] Calais, E., and J.B. Minster. GPS detection of ionospheric perturbations

following a Space Shuttle ascent, Geoph. Res. Lett., 23, 1897–1900, 1996.

[9] Calais, E., J.B. Minster, M.A. Hofton, and M.A.H. Hedlin. Ionospheric
signature of surface mine blasts from Global Positioning System measurements,
Geoph. J. Int., 132, 191–202, 1998.

[10] Davies, K., Ionospheric radio waves. Blaisdell Publishing Company. A Divi-

sion of Ginn and Company, Waltham, Massachusetts-Toronto-London, 1969.

[11] Fitzgerald, T.J., Observations of total electron content perturbations on GPS
signals caused by a ground level explosion, J. Atmos. Terr. Phys., 59, 829–834,
1997.

[12] Golitsyn G.S. and V.I. Klyatskin. Vibrations in the atmosphere caused by
movements of the terrestrial surface, Izv. Akademii nauk SSSR, Fizika atmos-
fery I okeana, 111, 1044-1052, 1967.

[13] Hedin, A.E., Extension of the MSIS thermosphere model into the middle and

lower atmosphere, J. Geophys. Res., 96, 1152-1172, 1991.

[14] Hofmann-Wellenhof, B., H. Lichtenegger, and J. Collins. Global Posi-
tioning System: Theory and Practice, Springer-Verlag Wien, New York, 1992.

18

[15] Jacobson, A.R., and R.C. Carlos. Observations of acoustic–gravity waves
in the thermosphere following Space Shuttle ascents, J. Atmos. Terr. Phys., 56,
525–528, 1994.

[16] Klobuchar, J.A., Real-time ionospheric science: The new reality, Radio Sci-

ence, 32, 1943–1952, 1997.

[17] Li, Y.Q., A.R. Jacobson, R.C. Carlos, R.S. Massey, Y.N. Taranenko,
and G. Wu. The blast wave of the Shuttle plume at ionospheric heights, Geoph.
Res. Lett., 21, 2737–2740, 1994.

[18] Mendillo, M., The eﬀects of rocket launches of the ionosphere, Adv. Space

Res., 1, 275–290, 1981.

[19] Mendillo, M., Modiﬁcation of the ionosphere by large space vehicles, Adv.

Space Res., 2, 150–159, 1982.

[20] Mercier, C. and A.R. Jacobson. Observations of atmospheric gravity waves
by radio interferometry: are results biased by the observational technique, An-
nales Geophysicae, 15, 430–442, 1997.

[21] Nagorsky, P.M., The inhomogeneous structure of the ionospheric F-region
produced by rockets, Geomagnetizm i aeronomiya, 38, 100–106 (in Russian),
1998.

[22] Orlov V.V., and A.M. Uralov. Atmospheric response to the Rayleigh wave
generated by an earthquake, In: Issledovaniya po geomagnetismu, aeronomii i
ﬁzike Solntsa, Moscow: Nauka, 78, 28-40, 1987,

[23] Row R.V., Acoustic-gravity waves in the upper atmosphere due to a nuclear

detonation and an earthquake, J. Geophys. Res., 72, 1599-1610, 1967.

[24] Rudenko G. V., A.M. Uralov. Calculation of ionospheric eﬀects due to
acousticradiation from an undeground nuclear explosion, J. Atmos. Terr. Phys.,
57, 225-236, 1995.

19

%&##%"&$

17.08.99; 00:01:39 U T; 40.70 N , 29.99 E; 7.4 M w
12.11.99; 16:57:20 U T; 40.79 N , 31.11 E; 7.1 M w

D A Y  3 1 6

D A Y  2 2 9

AN KR

K 1          K 2

gilb; prn 30

N ICO

KA BR

BS HM

KA TZ

G ILB

bshm ; prn 6

TELA

RA M O

)

N

(
 
e
d
u
t
i
t
a
L

4 2

4 0

3 8

3 6

3 4

3 2

3 0

2 4

2 7

3 0

L o n g itu d e  (E )

3 3

3 6

3 9

Fig.  : Experimental geometry during the earthquakes in Turkey. Crosses

show the positions of the earthquake epicenters. Solid curves represent the tra jec-

tories of the subionospheric points for each GPS satellite at the height h

=  

max

km. Dark diamonds along the tra jectories correspond to the coordinates of the

subionospheric points at time t

of a maximum deviation of the TEC. Heavy dots

p

and large lettering show the location and the names of the GPS stations , while

lower-case letters along the tra jectories refer to station names and PRN numbers

of the GPS satellites. Asterisks mark the source location at   km altitude inferred

from the data from the GPS arrays. Numbers at the asterisks correspond to the

respective day numbers. Straight dashed lines that connect the expected source

and the subionospheric point represent the horizontal pro jection of the wave vec-

tor K

. The scaling of the coordinate axes is chosen from considerations of an

t

approximate equality of the linear dimensions along the latitude and longitude.

Table  : GPS-sites and location

Geograph.

Geograph.

N Sites

latitude

longitude

Turkey

 ANKR

	.

.	

 BSHM .

. 

 GILB

.	

.

 KABR

. 

.

 KATZ

.		

.

 NICO

.

.	

 RAMO

 .	

.

 TELA

. 

. 

1 0

5

0

0 .1 6

0 .0 0

-0 .1 6

0 .0 5

0 .0 0

-0 .0 5

         1 7 .0 8 .9 9                                         1 2 .1 1 .9 9
T u rk e y  E a rth q u a k e                      T u rk ey  E a r th q u a k e 

I(t), 1 0 1 6 m -2    a .

I(t), 1 0 1 6 m -2   
B S H M  ; P R N  6                                                   G I L B  ; P R N  3 0

1 0

F A IR

1

d .

1

D A Y  2 2 9

5

D A Y  2 2 8
D A Y  2 3 0

D A Y  3 1 5
D A Y  3 1 7

D A Y  3 1 6

29

14

0 .0 0 .2 0 .4 0 .6 0 .8

0
1 7 .0
                                                     D
I(t), 1 0 1 6 m -2
B S H M  ; P R N  6                                                    G IL B  ; P R N  3 0                 

I(t), 1 0 1 6 m -2   

1 7 .2

1 7 .4

0 .1 2

 
b .

e .

D A Y  2 2 9                                                           D A Y  3 1 6
29

0 .0 0

1

D A Y  2 2 8                                                           D A Y  3 1 5
D A Y  2 3 0                                                            D A Y  3 1 7

Y AK A

-0 .1 2

0 .0

0 .2

0 .4

0 .6

1 7 .0

1 7 .2

1 7 .4

F (t), H z                                          F (t), H z   

P R N  6                                                               P R N  3 0

c .

0 .0 3

f.

M A C 1

P R N 2 9

P R N 2 2

0 .0 0

K A T Z                                                               T E L A
B S H M                                                               G IL B
 G IL B                                                                K A B R

-0 .0 3

0 .0

0 .2
0 .4
U T , h o u r

0 .6

1 7 .0

1 7 .2

1 7 .4

U T , h o u r

Fig.  : Time dependencies of "oblique" TEC I (t) at one of the three sites

of the GPS-array in the area of the earthquakes on August  and November ,

			, on the day of earthquake (heavy curve), and one day before and one day

after the event (thin curves) | panels a, d. Panels b, e | for the same days but

the TEC variations (cid:1)I (t) with the linear trend removed and with a smoothing

with a time window of  min; panels c, f | variations of the frequency Doppler

shift F (t) "reduced" to the sounding signal frequency of  MHz, for three sites

of the arrays, days of earthquake. All panels show day numbers, GPS station

names, and PRN numbers of the GPS satellites.

D
Table  : General information about Turkey earth-

quakes

N

Epicenter

Data

(UT)

(km)

mb Ms Mw

(nT)

t

 

Depth

Magnitude

DST

  .  N, 	.		 E Aug.  			 (DAY 	)   : :	



. . .

-

  .	 N, . E Nov.  			 (DAY ) :: 

 

. . .

-

a.

U

a

d t

t

U0

d t

0

t

t

t

b.

Fig.  : a. Model time dependence (from top to bottom) of the vertical

displacement (cid:24) , the velocity U = d(cid:24)=dt and the acceleration a = dU=dt of the

terrestrial surface in the epicentral zone of the earthquake. b. Acoustic signals

u((cid:28) ; (cid:12) ) in the far-(cid:12)eld radiation zone of the piston L =   km in diameter.

The piston's velocity has the form of a rectangular impulse of a duration (cid:1)t =

  s. The signals correspond to the expression () under the assumption of a

homogeneous atmosphere; A = , and C = C

(cid:25)  : km/s. The zenith angles

 

are (cid:12) =  

;  

;  

;  

, and 	 

. The abscissa axis indicates the time (cid:28) in

(cid:14)

(cid:14)

(cid:14)

(cid:14)

(cid:14)

seconds, and the axis of ordinates indicates the gas velocity u. The amplitude of

the strongest signal (cid:12) =  

is taken to be unity.

(cid:14)

x
x
D
Table  : The parameters of shock-acoustic waves

No.

Sites

t

(cid:1)t,

T ,

A

,

A

,

(cid:18);

(cid:11);

V

,

V

,

V

,

'

;

(cid:1)t

,

p

I

F

h

t

(cid:11)

w

w

(cid:14)

(cid:14)

(cid:14)

(UT)

sec.

sec.

TECU

Hz

m/s

m/s

m/s

(cid:21)

;

sec.

w

(cid:14)

			 Aug. ; t

=  : :	 UT

 

 KABR

  :: 



 

 .

 . 

.	



	





	.



BSHM

  ::	

 

  

 .

 . 	



.

KATZ

 GILB

  ::

 	 

 .

 . 

.



 





	.



KATZ

.	

BSHM

 KATZ

  ::

  

 .	

 . 

.



 

	



	.



KABR

.

GILB



TELA

  ::

  

 .

 . 

	.	







	

.



BSHM

.

GILB

P





 .

 . 

.







 

	.	



.

			 Nov. ; t

=::  UT

 

 KABR

::

	

 

 . 

 . 

	.

	



	

 

.



BSHM

::

	

 

 . 

 . 



 .

GILB



TELA

:: 	

  	  

 . 	

 . 

.

 



 



	.



KABR

.

GILB

 GILB

::	

		

 

 . 	

 . 

	.





 



 .



BSHM

	.

TELA



P

	

	

 . 	

 . 

.









 .



	.

