0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

3
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
3
4
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The use of GPS-arrays in detecting

shock-acoustic waves generated during rocket

launchings

Afraimovich E. L., Kosogorov E. A., Perevalova N. P.,

and Plotnikov A. V.

Institute of Solar-Terrestrial Physics SD RAS,

p. o. box 4026, Irkutsk, 664033, Russia

fax: +7 3952 462557; e-mail: afra@iszf.irk.ru

Abstract

This paper is concerned with the form and dynamics of shock-acoustic
waves (SAW) generated during rocket launchings. We have developed a
method for determining SAW parameters (including angular characteris-
tics of the wave vector, and the SAW phase velocity, as well as the direction
towards the source) using GPS-arrays whose elements can be chosen out
of a large set of GPS-stations of the global GPS network. Contrary to the
conventional radio-probing tecniques, the proposed method provides an es-
timate of SAW parameters without a priori information about the site and
time of a rocket launching. The application of the method is illustrated
by a case study of ionospheric eﬀects from launchings of launch vehicles
(LV) Proton and Space Shuttle from space-launch complexes Baikonur and
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in 1998 and 1999 (a total of ﬁve launchings).
The study revealed that, in spite of a diﬀerence of LV characteristics, the
ionospheric response for all launchings had the character of an N –wave cor-
responding to the form of a shock wave, regardless of the disturbance source
(rocket launchings, industrial explosions). The SAW period T is 270–360 s,
and the amplitude exceeds the standard deviation of TEC background ﬂuc-
tuations in this range of periods under quiet and moderate geomagnetic
conditions by factors of 2 to 5 as a minimum. The angle of elevation of
the SAW wave vector varies from 30◦ to 60◦ , and the SAW phase velocity
(900–1200 m/s) approaches the sound velocity at heights of the ionospheric
F -region maximum. The position of the SAW source, inferred by neglect-
ing refraction corrections, corresponds to the segment of the LV Proton
path at a distance no less than 700–900 km from the launch pad, and to
the LV ﬂying altitude no less than 100 km. For the Space Shuttle LV the
position of the SAW source corresponds to the segment of the trajectory

1

at a distance of at least 200–500 km from the launch pad and to the LV
ﬂight altitude of at least 100 km. Our data are consistent with the exist-
ing view that SAW are generated during a nearly horizontal ﬂight of the
rocket with its engine in operation in the acceleration segment of the path
at 100–130 km altitudes in the lower atmosphere.

1 Introduction

A large number of publications, including a variety of thorough reviews (Karlov
et al., 1980; Mendillo, 1981; 1982; Nagorsky, 1998; 1999) are devoted to the
study of the ionospheric response of the shock wave produced during launchings
of powerful rockets, among them launch vehicles (LV). Scientiﬁc interest in this
problem is due to the fact that such launchings can be regarded as active experi-
ments in the Earth’s atmosphere, and they can be used in solving a wide variety
of problems in the physics of the ionosphere and radio wave propagation.

These investigations have also important practical implications since they fur-
nish a means of substantiating reliable signal indications of technogenic eﬀects
(among them, unauthorized), which is necessary for the construction of an eﬀec-
tive global radiophysical subsystem for detection and localization of these eﬀects.
Essentially, existing global systems of such a purpose use diﬀerent processing
techniques for infrasound and seismic signals. However, in connection with the
expansion of the geography and of the types of technogenic impact on the en-
vironment, very challenging problems heretofore have been those of improve the
sensitivity of detection and the reliability of measured parameters of the sources
of impacts, based also on using independent measurements of the entire spectrum
of signals generated during such eﬀects.

To solve the above problems requires reliable information about fundamental
parameters of the ionospheric response of the shock wave, such as the amplitude
and the form, the period, the phase and group velocity of the wavetrain, as well
as angular characteristics of the wave vector. Note that for the designating the
ionospheric response of the shock wave, the literature uses terminology incorpo-
rating a diﬀerent physical interpretation, among them the term ‘shock-acoustic
wave’ (SAW) — Nagorsky (1998). For convenience, in this paper we shall use
this term despite the fact that it does not reﬂect essentially the physical nature
of the phenomenon.

Published data on fundamental parameters of the SAW diﬀer greatly. Accord-
ing to a review by Karlov et al. (1980), the oscillation period of the ionospheric
response of the SAW, recorded during launchings of the Apollo mission rockets,
varied from 6 to 90 min, and the propagation velocity was in the range from 600 to
1670 m/s. The added complication is also that following the ﬁrst SAW response
arriving at the detection point, a ‘second’ wave propagating with the sound veloc-
ity at the ground level is often recorded (Karlov et al., 1980; Calais and Minster,

2

1996). A ‘third’ wave with large periods and subsonic propagation velocities is
occasionally also detected (Nagorsky, 1998; 1999). This wave is identiﬁed as an
exciting Acoustic-Gravity Wave (AGW) during a rocket launching.

There is an even greater uncertainty in the localization of the region of SAW
generation, which is necessary both for an understanding of the physical mech-
anisms of the phenomenon, and for a scientiﬁc justiﬁcation of the solution of
applied problems. Published data are discussed in more detail in Section 5, by
comparison with our obtained results.

The lack of comprehensive, reliable data on SAW parameters is due primarily
to the limitations of existing experimental methods and detection facilities. The
main body of data was obtained by measuring the frequency Doppler shift at
vertical and oblique-incidence ionospheric soundings in the HF range (Jacobson
and Carlos, 1994; Nagorsky, 1998).
In some instances the sensitivity of this
method is suﬃcient to detect the SAW reliably; however, diﬃculties emerge when
localizing the region where the detected signal is generated. These problems are
caused by the multiple-hop character of HF signal propagation. This gives no
way of deriving reliable information about the phase and group velocities of SAW
propagation, estimating angular characteristics of the wave vector, and, further
still, of localizing the SAW source.

Using the method of transionospheric sounding with VHF radio signals from
geostationary satellites, a number of experimental data on SAW parameters were
obtained in measurements of the Faraday rotation of the plane of signal polariza-
tion which is proportional to a total electron content (TEC) along the line con-
necting the satellite-borne transmitter with the receiver (Mendillo, 1981; 1982;
Li et al., 1994). A serious limitation of methods based on analyzing signals from
geostationary satellites is that their number is too small and ever decreasing with
time, and the distribution in longitude is non-uniform; this is especially true in
regard to the eastern hemisphere. Published data from incoherent scatter (IS)
radars are also scarce; as far as our knowledge goes, there is only one publica-
tion (Noble, 1990) reporting the detection of long-period (gravity) waves over the
Arecibo IS station, following the launching of the Space Shuttle LV on October 18,
1993.

A common limitation of the above-mentioned methods when determining the
SAW phase velocity is the necessity of knowing the time of a rocket launching
since this velocity is inferred from the SAW delay with respect to the launch time
assuming that the velocity is constant along the propagation path, which is quite
contrary to fact.

For determining the above-mentioned reasonably complete set of SAW param-
eters, it is necessary to have appropriate spatial and temporal resolution which
cannot be ensured by existing, very sparse, networks of ionozondes, oblique-
incidence radio sounding paths, and IS radars. Furthermore, the creation of
these facilities involves developing dedicated equipment, including powerful radio
transmitters which contaminate the radio medium. As a result, the above sys-

3

tems cannot serve as an eﬃcient basis for a global radiophysical subsystem for
detection and localization of technogenic eﬀects which must provide a continuous,
global monitoring.

The advent and evolution of a Global Positioning System, GPS, and also the
creation on its basis of widely branched networks of GPS stations (at least 600
sites at the end of 1999, the data from which are placed on the INTERNET)
opened up a new era in remote ionospheric sensing. In the immediate future this
network will undergo a substantial expansion by integration with the GLONASS
positioning system (Klobuchar, 1997). In addition, researchers have also access to
a standard software which permits them to unify a preprocessing of the data from
multichannel two-frequency GPS receivers. In this context, a major eﬀort must
go into experimental and theoretical explorations of the possibilities of detecting
technogenic perturbations of the ionosphere, as well as into the development of
appropriate algorithms and software for a reprocessing of the data from GPS
networks.

Currently some authors have embarked on an intense development of methods
for detecting the ionospheric response of strong earthquakes (Calais and Minster,
1995), rocket launchings (Calais and Minster, 1996), and industrial surface ex-
plosions (Fitzgerald, 1997; Calais et al., 1998a; Calais et al., 1998b). In the cited
references the SAW phase velocity was determined by the ‘crossing’ method by
estimating the time delay of SAW arrival at subionospheric points corresponding
to diﬀerent GPS satellites observed at a given time. However, the accuracy of
such a method is rather low because the altitude at which the subionospheric
points are speciﬁed, is determined in a crude way.

The goal of this paper is to develop a method for determining SAW parameters
(including the phase velocity, angular characteristics of the SAW wave vector, the
direction towards the source, and the source location) using GPS-arrays whose
elements can be chosen out of a large set of GPS stations of a global IGS network.
Contrary to existing radio techniques, this method estimates SAW parameters
without a priori information about the location and time of a rocket launching.
The emphasis in this paper is on the ionospheric response of the SAW which is
recorded as a ‘ﬁrst’ wave, although our developed methods make it also possible to
analyze other wave manifestations of rocket launchings. This will be the subject
of future work.

Section 2 presents a description of the geometry of experiments and general
information about the LV launchings from the Baikonur and Kennedy Space Cen-
ter (KSC) cosmodromes which are analyzed in this study. A brief account of the
proposed method is presented in Section 3. Measurements of SAW parameters
at diﬀerent GPS-arrays during rocket launchings are discussed in Section 4. Sec-
tion 5 discusses experimental results and compares them with the data reported
by other authors. It is beyond the scope of this paper to consider the physical
mechanisms of SAW generation and propagation.

4

2 The geometry and general characterization of

experiments

This paper presents the results derived from determining the key SAW param-
eters during ascents of the Proton and Space Shuttle launch vehicles (LV) from
cosmodromes Baikonur (45.6◦N, 63.3◦E) and KSC (28.5◦N, 279.3◦E) in 1998
and 1999 (a total of ﬁve launchings).

In spite of the large number of GPS stations, the selection of GPS-arrays for
detecting SAW generated during rocket launchings is made diﬃcult by the fact
that the LV ﬂight paths for both cosmodromes pass either over the Atlantic ocean
(Space Shuttle LV) or over sparsely populated regions of Kazakhstan (Proton
LV). Nevertheless, it was possible to utilize a suﬃcient number of GPS stations
in order for this method to be implemented. Table 1 presents the geographic
coordinates of the GPS stations used as GPS-array elements.

Fig. 1 portrays the geometry of experiments during Proton LV launchings
from the Baikonur cosmodrome. The dash line roughly corresponds to the hori-
zontal projection of the rocket ﬂight trajectory with orbital inclination ψ = 51.6◦
(Nagorsky, 1999). The symbol ⋄ marks the pad site. Bold dots mark the posi-
tion of GPS stations, and upper-case lettering corresponds to their names. The
scaling of the coordinate axes is selected from considerations of an approximate
equality of the linear dimensions along the latitude and longitude.

Below is a summary of results derived from detecting one standard launch-
ing (on November 20, 1998) and two abortive launchings (July 5 and Oc-
tober 27, 1999) of the Proton LV. The following information about rocket
launchings from the Baikonur Cosmodrome as extracted from the INTER-
NET sites: http//www.ﬂatoday.com; http://www.spacelaunchnews.com; and
http://www.ksc.nasa.gov. Oﬃcial data on abortive Proton LV launches on July 5
and October 27, 1999 were taken from the English version of the press release is-
sued by the Khrunichev Center which is available on: http://www.isllaunch.com.
A Proton launch vehicle failed during launch on July 5, 1999 (Day 186).
Initial analyses indicated a malfunction of the Proton’s second stage. Liftoﬀ took
place at 13:32 UT from a launch pad of the Baikonur Cosmodrome. First stage
ﬂight was normal, with second stage separation and ignition on time. Telemetry
ﬁrst reported anomalous data at approximately 280 seconds into the ﬂight, with
deviations from the planned trajectory appearing on ground tracking systems by
330 seconds. By 390 seconds the LV was 14 km below its planned trajectory.
Ground systems tracked the upper stages and payload to impact. The Proton’s
third stage, with the upper stage and its Raduga spacecraft payload, fell in the
Karaganda region of Kazakhstan.

The Proton LV was launched from a launch pad at Baikonur Cosmodrome on
October 27 (Day 300), 1999 at 16:16 UT. Based on preliminary data, failure of
one of the main second stage engines occurred 222 seconds after liftoﬀ, followed

5

by failure of all engines of the stage. The second stage together with the upper
stage and satellite fell back to earth in the Karaganda region of Kazakhstan.

In a typical Proton launch, the vehicle’s six ﬁrst-stage engines ignite 1.6 s
before liftoﬀ. Stage two ignition occurs approximately two minutes into ﬂight,
four seconds prior to jettison of the ﬁrst stage. Stage three vernier engine ignition
occurs at 330 seconds, with separation of the second and third stages taking place
3.5 s later. The stage three main engine ignition occurs 2.5 s after separation.

Unfortunately, we were unable to obtain more detailed information about the
LV launch schedule on the above days. However, for a further analysis we need
only know that these failures occurred after the second stage was in operation
longer than 200 s and 100 s for the July 5 and October 27, 1999 launches, respec-
tively.

General information regarding these launches, as well as the scheduled launch
of November 20, 1998 (Day 324) is summarized in Table 2 (including the start
time t0 of UT, the start time of LT for one of the GPS-array sites, the orbital
inclination ψ to the equatorial plane, and the level of geomagnetic disturbance
according to Dst-variation data). It was found that the deviation of Dst for the
selected days was quite moderate thus enabling the SAW to be identiﬁed.

Fig. 2 presents the experimental geometry during Space Shuttle LV launch-
ings from the KSC Cosmodrome (the designations are the same as in Fig. 1).
The Space Shuttle Discovery spacecraft (STS-90) and Space Shuttle Columbia
(STS-95) were launched on April 17 (Day 107) and on October 29 (Day 302),
respectively. General information about these launches is also summarized in
Table 2. The horizontal projection of the rocket trajectory for the October 29
launching is constructed using the INTERNET data. The level of geomagnetic
disturbance as deduced from the Dst-variation data was also found to be quite
moderate for these launches, which made it possible to reliably identify the SAW.

3 Methods of determining shock-acoustic wave

characteristics using GPS-arrays

The standard GPS technology provides a means for wave disturbances detecion
based on phase measurements of TEC at each of spaced two-frequency GPS
receivers. A method of reconstructing TEC variations from measurements of
the ionosphere-induced additional increment of the group and phase delay of the
satellite radio signal was detailed and validated in a series of publications (Calais
and Minster, 1995, 1996; Fitzgerald, 1997). We reproduce here only the ﬁnal
formula for phase measurements

I =

1

40.308

2

f 2
1 f 2
f 2
1 − f 2

2

[(L1λ1 − L2λ2) + const + nL]

(1)

6

where L1λ1 and L2λ2 are additional paths of the radio signal caused by the
phase delay in the ionosphere, (m); L1 and L2 represent the number of phase
rotations at the frequencies f1 and f2; λ1 and λ2 stand for the corresponding
wavelengths, (m); const is the unknown initial phase ambiguity, (m); and nL are
errors in determining the phase path, (m).

Phase measurements in the GPS can be made with a high degree of accuracy
corresponding to the error of TEC determination of at least 1014 −2 when aver-
aged on a 30-second time interval, with some uncertainty of the initial value of
TEC, however (Hofmann-Wellenhof et al., 1992). This makes possible detecting
ionization irregularities and wave processes in the ionosphere over a wide range
of amplitudes (up to 10−4 of the diurnal TEC variation) and periods (from 24
hours to 5 min). The unit of TEC, which is equal to 1016 −2 (T ECU) and is
commonly accepted in the literature, will be used in the following.

Fig. 3a gives a schematic representation of the transionospheric sounding ge-
ometry. The axes z, y, and x are directed, respectively, zenithward, northward
(N) and eastward (E). P — point of intersection of Line-of-Sight (LOS) to the
satellite with the maximum of the ionospheric F 2-region; S — subionospheric
point; αs —the azimuthal angle, counted oﬀ from the northward in a clockwise
direction; and θs —the angle of elevation between the direction r along LOS and
the terrestrial surface at the reception site.

In some instances a convenient way of detecting and determining the iono-
spheric response delay of the shock wave involves inferring the frequency Doppler
shift F from TEC series obtained by formula (1). Such an approach is also use-
ful in comparing TEC response characteristics from the GPS data with those
obtained by analyzing VHF signals from geostationary satellites, as well as in
detecting the shock wave in the HF range. To an approximation suﬃcient for
the purpose of our investigation, a corresponding relationship was obtained by
K. Davies (1969)

F = 13.5 × 10−8I ′

t/f

(2)

where I ′
t stands for the time derivative of TEC. Relevant results derived from
analyzing the F (t)-variations calculated for the ‘reduced’ frequency of 136 MHz
are discussed in Section 4.

The correspondence of space-time phase characteristics, obtained through
transionospheric soundings, with local characteristics of disturbances in the iono-
sphere was considered in detail in a wide variety of publications (Bertel et al.,
1976; Afraimovich et al., 1992; Mercier and Jacobson, 1997) and is not analyzed
at length in this study. The most important conclusion of the cited references
is the fact that, as for the extensively exploited model of a ‘plane phase screen’
disturbances ∆I(x, y, t) of TEC faithfully copy the horizontal part of the corre-
sponding disturbance ∆N(x, y, z, t) of local concentration, independently of the

7

angular position of the source, and can be used in experiments on measuring the
wave disturbances of TEC.

However, the TEC response amplitude experiences a strong azimuthal de-
pendence caused by the integral character of a transionospheric sounding. As a
ﬁrst approximation, the transionospheric sounding method is responsive only to
TIDs with the wave vector Kt perpendicular to the direction r. A corresponding
condition for elevation θ and azimuth α of an arbitrary wave vector Kt normal
to the direction r, has the form

θ = arctan(− cos(αs − α)/ tan θs)

(3)

We used formula (3) in determining the elevation θ of Kt from the known
mean value of azimuth α by Afraimovich et al. (1998) – see Sections 3.2 and 4.

3.1 Detection and determination of the horizontal phase
velocity Vh and the direction α of the SAW phase front
along the ground by GPS-arrays

In the simplest form, space-time variations of the TEC ∆I(t, x, y) in the iono-
sphere, at each given time t can be represented in terms of the phase interference
pattern that moves without a change in its shape (the solitary, plane travelling
wave)

∆I(t, x, y) = δ sin(Ωt − Kxx − Kyy + ϕ0)

(4)

where δ, Kx, Ky, Ω — are the amplitude, the x- and y-projections of the wave
vector K, and the angular frequency of the disturbance, respectively; T = 2π/Ω,
Λ = 2π/|K| is its period and wavelength; and ϕ0
is the initial phase of the dis-
turbance. The vector K is a horizontal projection of the full vector Kt (Fig. 3a).
At this point, it is assumed that in the case of small spatial and temporal
increments (the distances between GPS-array sites are less than the typical spatial
scale of TEC variation, and the time interval between counts is less than the
corresponding time scale), the inﬂuence of second derivatives can be neglected.
The following choices of GPS-arrays all meet these requirements.

For the SAW which have mostly the character of an N-wave (Li et al., 1994;
Calais and Minster, 1995, 1996; Fitzgerald, 1997; Calais et al., 1998), the am-
plitude δ in (4) can be speciﬁed as (with an appropriate choice of the model
parameters)

δ(t) = exp[−(

t − tmax

td

)2]

(5)

where tmax is the time when the disturbance has a maximum amplitude, and td
is the half-thickness of the ‘wave packet’. We employed this model in simulating

8

the SAW detected during Proton LV launch on July 5, 1999 (at the left of Fig. 4,
and at the right of Fig. 5).

We now summarize brieﬂy the sequence of data processing procedures. Out
of a large number of GPS stations, three sites (A,B,C) are selected, the distances
between which do not exceed about one-half the expected wavelength Λ of the
perturbation. Site B is taken to be the center of a topocentric reference frame
whose axis x is directed eastward, and the axis y is directed northward. The
receivers in this frame of reference have the coordinates (xA, yA), (0,0), (xC, yC).
Parallel lines in Fig. 3b are lines of equal TEC; the arrow indicates the direction
α of a normal to these lines, that is, the direction of the wave vector K. Such
a conﬁguration of the GPS receivers represents the GPS-array with a minimum
number of the required elements. In regions with a dense network of GPS sites,
we can obtain a large variety of GPS-arrays of a diﬀerent conﬁguration enabling
the acquired data to be checked for reliability; in this paper we have exploited
such a possibility.

The input data include series of the ‘oblique’ value of TEC IA(t), IB(t), I(t), as
well as corresponding series of values of the elevation θs(t) and the azimuth αs(t)
of the beam to the satellite calculated using our developed CONVTEC software
program which converts the RINEX-ﬁles, standard for the GPS system, from the
INTERNET (Gurtner, 1993). For determining SAW characteristics, continuous
series of measurements of IA(t), IB(t), IC(t) are selected with a length of at least
a one-hour interval which includes the start time.

To eliminate variations of the regular ionosphere, as well as trends introduced
by orbital motion of the satellite, a procedure is used to remove the linear trend
involving a preliminary smoothing of the initial series with the selected time
window. This procedure is best suited to the detection of the signal such as a
single pulse (N-wave) when compared to the frequently used band-pass ﬁlter (Li
et al., 1994; Calais and Minster, 1995, 1996; Fitzgerald, 1997; Calais et al., 1998).
A limitation of the band-pass ﬁlter is the delay and the oscillatory character of
the response which gives no way of reconstructing the form of the N-wave.

Series of the values of the elevation θs(t) and azimuth αs(t) of the beam to
the satellite are used to determine the location of the subionospheric point S
(see Fig. 3a), as well as to calculate the elevation θ of the wave vector Kt of the
disturbance from the known azimuth α (see formula (3) and Section 4.2).

The most reliable results from the determination of SAW parameters cor-
respond to high values of elevations θs(t) of the beam to the satellite because
sphericity eﬀects become reasonably small. In addition, there is no need to re-
calculate the ‘oblique’ value of TEC ∆I(t) to the ‘vertical’ value. In this paper,
all results were obtained for elevations θs(t) larger than 30◦.

Since the distance between GPS-array elements (from several tens of kilome-
ters to a few thousand kilometers) is much smaller than that to the GPS satellite
(over 20000 km), the array geometry at the height hmax is identical to that on
the ground.

9

Fig. 4a shows typical time dependencies of an ‘oblique’ TEC ∆I(t) at the GPS-
array CHUM station near the Baikonur Cosmodrome for the start day, July 5,
1999 (heavy curve), one day before and after the start (thin lines). For the same
days; panel b shows TEC variations ∆I(t) with the removed linear trend and a
smoothing with the 5-min time window. Variations in frequency Doppler shift
F (t); ‘reduced’ to the sounding signal frequency of 136 MHz, for three sites of the
array (SELE, CHUM, SHAS) for the launch day, July 5, 1999, are presented in
panel c. Day numbers, GPS station names and GPS PRN satellite numbers are
indicated in all panels. The arrows at the abscissa axis indicate the start time t0.
It is evident from Fig. 4 that fast N-shaped oscillations with a typical period
T of about 300 s are clearly distinguished among slow TEC variations. The
oscillation amplitude (up to 0.5 T ECU) is far in excess of the TEC ﬂuctuation
intensity during ‘background’ days. Variations in frequency Doppler shift F (t) for
spatially separated sites (SELE, CHUM, SHAS) are well correlated but are shifted
relative to each other by an amount well below the period, which permits the SAW
propagation velocity to be unambiguously determined. A time resolution of 30 s
used in our study, which is standard for the GPS data, is not quite suﬃcient for
determining small shifts of such signals with an adequate accuracy for diﬀerent
sites of the array (Fig. 4c). Therefore, we used a parabolic approximation of the
F (t)-oscillations in the neighborhood of minimum F (t), which is quite acceptable
when the signal/noise ratio is high. In addition, we used diﬀerent combinations
for three sites of the possible number of GPS-array sites in the area of Baikonur
and KSC Cosmodromes. Relevant results for all combinations are presented in
Table 3.

With proper account of a good signal/noise ratio (larger than 1), we determine
the horizontal projection of the phase velocity Vh with the known coordinates of
array sites A, B, C from time tp shifts of a maximum deviation of the frequency
Doppler shift F (t). Preliminarily measured shifts are subjected to a linear trans-
formation with the purpose of calculating shifts for sites spaced relative to the
central site northward N and eastward E. This is followed by a calculation of
the E- and N-components of Vx and Vy, as well as the direction α in the range
of angles 0◦–360◦ and the modulus Vh of the horizontal component of the SAW
phase velocity

α = arctan(Vy/Vx)
Vh = |VxVy|(V 2
x + V 2

y )−1/2

(6)

where Vy, Vx are the velocities with which the phase front crosses the axes x
and y. The orientation α of the wave vector K, which is coincident with the
propagation azimuth of the SAW phase front, is calculated unambiguously in the
range 0◦–360◦ subject to the condition that arctan(Vy/Vx) is calculated having
regard to the sign of the numerator and denominator.

The above method for determining the SAW phase velocity neglects the cor-
rection for orbital motion of the satellite because the estimates of Vh obtained

10

below exceed an order of magnitude as a minimum the velocity of the subiono-
spheric point at the height hmax for elevations θs > 30◦
(Afraimovich et al.,
1998).

From the delay ∆t = tp − t0 and the known path length between the launch
pad and the subionospheric point we calculated also the SAW mean velocity Va
in order to compare our obtained estimates of the SAW phase velocity with the
usually used method of measuring this quantity.

3.2 Determination of the elevation of the wave vector θ

and the velocity modulus Vt of the shock wave

Afraimovich et al. (1992) showed that for an exponential ionization distribution
the TEC disturbance amplitude (M) is determined by the aspect angle γ between
the vectors Kt and r (see Fig. 3a), as well as by the ratio of the wavelength of
the disturbance Λ to the half-thickness of the ionization maximum hd

M ∝ exp −

π2h2

d cos2 γ

Λ2 cos2 θs !

(7)

where θs is the elevation of the wave vector r.

In the case under consideration (see below), for the phase velocity of order
1 km/s and for the period of about 200 s, the wavelength Λ is comparable with
the half-thickness of the ionization maximum hd. When the elevations θs are 30◦,
45◦, 60◦ , the ‘beam-width’ M(γ) at 0.5 level is, respectively, 25◦, 22◦ and 15◦. If
hd is twice as large as the wavelength, then the beam tapers to 14◦, 10◦ and 8◦,
respectively.

The beam-width is suﬃciently small that the aspect condition (3) restricts
the number of beam trajectories to the satellite, for which it is possible to detect
reliably the SAW response in the presence of noise (near the angles γ = 90◦ ). On
the other hand, formula (??) can be used to determine the elevation θ of the wave
vector Kt of the shock wave at the known value of the azimuth α (Afraimovich
et al., 1998). Hence the phase velocity modulus Vt can be deﬁned as

Vt = Vh × sec(θ)

(8)

The above values of the width M(γ) determine the error of calculation of the

elevations θ (of order 20◦ to the above conditions (Section 3.3).

3.3 Determining the position and ‘switch-on’ time of the
SAW source without regard for refraction corrections

The ionospheric region that is responsible for the main contribution to TEC
variations lies in the neighborhood of the maximum of the ionospheric F -region,
which does determine the height hmax of the subionospheric point. When selecting

11

hmax, it should be taken into consideration that the decrease in electron density
with height above the main maximum of the F2-layer proceeds much more slowly
than is the case below the maximum. Since the density distribution with height
is essentially a ‘weight function’ of the TEC response to a wave disturbance
(Afraimovich et al., 1992), it is appropriate to use, as hmax, the value exceeding
the true height of the layer hF 2 maximum by about 100 km. hF 2 varies over
a reasonably wide range (250–350 km) depending on the time of day and on
some geophysical factors which, when necessary, can be taken into account if
corresponding additional experimental data and current ionospheric models are
used. In all calculations that follow, hmax = 400 km is used.

To a ﬁrst approximation, it can be assumed that it is at this altitude where
the imaginary detector is located, which records the ionospheric SAW response
in TEC variations. The ‘horizontal size’ of the detection region, which can be in-
ferred from the propagation velocity of the subionospheric point as a consequence
of the orbital motion of the GPS satellite (of order 50 m/s), and from the SAW
period (of order 300 s — see Section 4), does not exceed 15–20 km, which is far
smaller than the ‘vertical size’.

From the GPS data we can determine the coordinates Xs and Ys of the
subionospheric point in the horizontal plane X0Y of a topocentric frame of ref-
erence centered on the point B(0,0) at the time of a maximum TEC deviation
caused by the arrival of the SAW at this point (see Fig. 3a). Since we know the
angular coordinates θ and α of the wave vector Kt, it is possible to determine the
location of the point at which this vector intersects the horizontal plane X ′0Y ′ at
the height hw of the assumed source. Assuming a rectilinear propagation of the
SAW from the source to the subionospheric point and neglecting the sphericity
the coordinate Xw and Yw of the source in a topocentric frame of reference can
be deﬁned as

Xw = Xp − (hmax − hw)

cos θ sin α

sin θ

Yw = Yp − (hmax − hw)

cos θ cos α

sin θ

(9)

(10)

The coordinates Xw and Yw, thus obtained, can readily be recalculated to the

values of the latitude and longitude (φw and λw) of the source.

For SAW generated during earthquakes,

industrial explosions and under-
ground tests of nuclear devices, hw is taken to be equal to 0 (the source lying
at the ground level). When recording SAW produced by launchings of powerful
rockets, the region of SAW generation can lie at heights hw of order 100 km or
higher (Li et al., 1994; Nagorsky, 1998).

Using this approximation we neglect the possible refraction at the SAW prop-
agation from the source to the height hmax. In some publications (Calais et al.,
1998) this problem is solved by performing trajectory calculations using stan-
dard ‘ray tracing’ procedures and neutral atmosphere models.
In doing so,

12

‘ray tracing’ calculations were carried out from the source.
In this study it
is also possible to perform such calculations, not from the source but from the
subionospheric point (return trajectory).

It should be noted, however, that according to our data (Section 4) and to the
conclusions of some authors (Li et al., 1994; Nagorsky, 1998), the source lies at
100 km altitude at least. Thus the region of SAW generation is within the narrow
height range (90–150 km) where the sound velocity gradient is maximal (Li et
al., 1994). Within the approximation of ‘short’ waves (geometrical optics), this
condition would mean the signiﬁcance of refraction eﬀects. However, the radial
size of the region of SAW formation, like the extent of the disturbance itself which
it generated by the rocket jet, is about 30–50 km at the above-mentioned heights.
This value is comparable with the typical scale of variation of the sound velocity
with height, hence the wave is no longer a ‘short’ one, and the geometrical optics
approximation is inapplicable. One would therefore expect that the refraction
eﬀect in the neighborhood of the SAW source will be smaller than anticipated in
terms of geometrical optics.

Given the coordinates of the subionospheric point and of the disturbance
source, the mean value of the SAW propagation velocity between the source and
the subionospheric point, and the arrival time of the SAW at this point, then
within the approximation of a rectilinear propagation it is easy to determine the
‘switch-on’ delay ∆tw of the anticipated SAW source with respect to the start.
This would make it possible to obtain additional information about the SAW
source which is needed to understand the mechanism of SAW generation. The
estimates of ∆tw made below assume that the propagation velocity is taken equal
to 700 m/s (see Li et al., 1994). Note that by the ‘switch-on’ time of the source
is meant here the time of a maximum disturbance of the background state of the
medium when the SAW is generated.

4 Results of measurements

Hence, using the transformations described in Section 3, we obtain the following
parameters determined from TEC variations and characterizing the SAW: t0 —
start time; tp — time of a maximum deviation of the frequency Doppler shift
F (t); ∆t — delay of tp with respect to t0; T — SAW period; AI — TEC distur-
bance amplitude; AF — amplitude of a maximum frequency Doppler shift at the
‘reduced’ frequency of 136 MHz; α and θ — azimuth and elevation of the wave
vector Kt; Vh and Vt — horizontal component and modulus of the phase veloc-
ity; Va — mean wave velocity calculated from the delay ∆t and from the known
path-length between the launch pad and the subionospheric point; φw and λw —
latitude and longitude of the source at 100km altitude; and ∆tw — ‘switch-on’
delay of the assumed SAW source with respect to the start.

13

Corresponding values of the SAW parameters, and also site names of the
GPS-array and GPS satellite PRN numbers are presented in Table 3 for Baikonur
Cosmodrome and Table 4 for the KSC Cosmodrome.

It should be noted that the estimates of AI and AF are obtained by ﬁlter-
ing ‘oblique’ TEC series; therefore, equivalent estimates for ‘vertical’ TEC are
smaller by a factor varying from 1 to 2 depending on the elevation θs of the beam
to the satellite.

Solid curves in Figs. 1 and 2 show trajectories of subionospheric points for
each of the GPS satellites at the height hmax = 400 km. Dark diamonds along the
trajectories correspond to the coordinates of subionospheric points at the time
tp of a maximum deviation of the frequency Doppler shift F (Fig. 4c). Asterisks
designate the source location at 100 km altitude inferred from the GPS-array
data. Numbers at the asterisks refer to the corresponding day numbers and to
the ‘switch-on’ delay of the source with respect to the start time. Dashed straight
lines connecting the anticipated source with the subionospheric point show the
horizontal projection of the wave vector Kt (see Fig. 3a).

4.1 SAW parameters during Proton LV launches from

Baikonur Cosmodrome

Let us consider the results derived from analyzing the ionospheric eﬀect of SAW
during failed Proton LV launch on July 5, 1999 (line 2 in Table 2) obtained at
the array (SELE, CHUM,SHAS) for PRN14 (at the left of Fig. 4, and line 1 in
Table 3).

In this case the delay of the SAW response with respect to the start time is
12 min. The SAW has the form of an N-wave with a period T of about 300 s and
an amplitude AI = 0.5 T ECU, which is an order of magnitude larger than TEC
ﬂuctuations for background days. It should be noted, however, that this time
interval was characterized by a very low level of geomagnetic activity (11 nT).

The amplitude of a maximum frequency Doppler shift AF at the ‘reduced’
frequency of 136 MHz was found to be 0.12 Hz. In view of the fact that the shift
F is inversely proportional to the sounding frequency squared (Davies, 1969),
this corresponds to a Doppler shift at the working frequency of 13.6 MHz and
the equivalent oblique-incidence sounding path of about AF = 12 Hz.

The azimuth and elevation α and θ of the wave vector Kt whose horizontal
projection is shown in Fig. 1 by a dashed line and is marked by K1, are 153◦ and
59◦, respectively. The horizontal component and the modulus of the phase veloc-
ity were found to be Vh = 1808 m/s and Vt = 931 m/s. The source coordinates
at 100 km altitude were determined as φw = 48◦ and λw = 66◦.

The ‘switch-on’ delay of the SAW source ∆tw with respect to the start time
was 264 s. The ‘mean’ velocity of about Va = 1000 m/s, determined in a usual

14

manner from the response delay with respect to the start, was close the phase
velocity Vt.

Similar results for the array (POL2, CHUM, SHAS) and PRN09 were also
obtained for failed launch of October 27, 1999. They correspond to the projection
of the vector K2 in Fig. 1, to the time dependencies in Fig. 4 (at the right), and to
line 7 in Table 3. One can only note that the SAW amplitude was by a factor of
4–5 smaller than that for launch of July 5, 1999. At an increased level of magnetic
activity (–80 nT) this led to a smaller (compared to July 5, 1999) signal/noise
ratio, which, however, did not interfere with obtaining reliable estimates of SAW
parameters.

Fig. 5 (at the right) and line 12 of Table 3 present data for standard launch of
the Proton LV on November 20, 1998. A corresponding projection of the vector
K3 is shown in Fig. 1. A comparison of the data for standard launch November 20,
1998 and failed launches showed that SAW parameters were reasonably similar,
irrespective of the level of geomagnetic disturbance, the season, and the local
time.

4.2 SAW parameters during Space Shuttle launches from

the KSC Cosmodrome

Let us consider the results derived from analyzing the ionospheric eﬀect of the
SAW during Space Shuttle LV launch on October 29, 1998 (line 3 of Table 2)
obtained at the array (AOML, KYW1, EKY1) for PRN01 (at the left of Fig. 5,
and line 1 in Table 4).

As in the case of Proton LV launches, the delay of the SAW response with
respect to the start time is 12 min. The SAW has the form of an N-wave with a
period T of about 210 s and an amplitude AI = 0.3 T ECU (for AOML), which
is an order of magnitude larger than TEC ﬂuctuations for background ﬁelds. The
amplitude of a maximum frequency Doppler shift AF at the ‘reduced’ frequency of
136 MHz was found to be 0.07 Hz (for AOML). It should be noted, however, that
this time interval was characterized by a very low level of geomagnetic activity
(–15 nT).

The azimuth and elevation α and θ of the wave vector Kt whose horizontal
projection is shown in Fig. 2 by a dashed line and is marked by K1 are 214◦
and 34.7◦, respectively. The horizontal component and the modulus of the phase
velocity, and the mean velocity Va are similar for those of the Proton LV (see
Table 4). The source coordinates at 100 km altitude are determined as φw = 28.5◦
and λw = 284◦. The ‘switch-on’ delay of the SAW source ∆tw with respect to
the start time is 204 s.

15

4.3 Verifying the reliability of measurements of SAW pa-

rameters

To convince ourselves that the determination of the main parameters of the SAW
form and dynamics is reliable for the launches analyzed here, in the area of the
Baikonur and KSC Cosmodromes we selected diﬀerent combinations of three sites
out of the sets of GPS stations available to us, and these data were processed
with the same processing parameters. Relevant results for Baikonur (including
the average results for the sets Σ), presented in Table 3 and in Fig. 1 (SAW source
position), show that the values of SAW parameters are similar, which indicates a
good stability of the data obtained, irrespective of the GPS-array conﬁguration.
The relative position of the Proton LV ﬂight path and of the GPS-array sta-
tions suitable for SAW detection was very convenient for our experiment because
the subionospheric points of the GPS satellites were close to the portion of the tra-
jectory where the anticipated SAW source was located (Li et al., 1994; Nagorsky,
1998), and away from the launch pad. In addition, the aspect condition (3) cor-
responding to a maximum amplitude of the SAW response to the SAW passage
was satisﬁed quite well for this geometry for all array stations simultaneously.
This is conﬁrmed by a high degree of correlation of SAW responses at the array
elements (Fig. 4c), which made it possible to obtain diﬀerent sets of triangles
from the six GPS stations available to us.

Unlike he Baikonur Cosmodrome, the relative position of the Space Shuttle
LV ﬂight path and of the GPS-array stations was inconvenient for SAW detection
because the subionospheric points of the GPS satellites were near the launch pad.
As a consequence the aspect condition (3) was not satisﬁed simultaneously for all
GPS stations located near the Cosmodrome. This is especially true for stations
CCV1, CCV3 and EKY1 located in the neighborhood of the launch pad along a
direction similar to that of the LV ﬂight path. This resulted in a low degree of
correlation and a very diﬀerent amplitude of SAW responses at the array elements
(Fig. 5f). Some of the stations listed in Table 1 are too close to each other (CCV1,
CCV3; MIA1, MIA3; KYW1, KYW2) and cannot be used in mutual veriﬁcation
of the reliability of measurements. As a result, we were able to obtain, for the
October 29, 1998 launch, only two sets of triangles out of the nine GPS stations
available to us (see Table 4).

Because of the low correlation of the responses and the inconvenient GPS-
array geometry for the April 17, 1998 launch, we were also unable to obtain
reliable estimates of the SAW wave vector parameters. Therefore, we did not
plot the relevant data in Fig. 2 and limited ourselves to mentioning them in
Table 4 (lines 4 and 5).

We availed ourselves also of another method to check the data from the GPS-
array for reliability, namely, a modeling using the algorithm for calculating TEC
along the ‘receiver-satellite’ beam for a typical model of the regular ionosphere, a
disturbed SAW with speciﬁed properties described by Afraimovich et al. (1998).

16

A peculiarity of this algorithm is that it is possible to calculate TEC for a par-
ticular selected array and for a real trajectory of the satellite determined by the
initial navigational RINEX-ﬁle.

As an example, Fig. 5 (left) shows the computed data for the array (SELE,
CHUM, SHAS) and for the SAW model in the form of wave packet (5) with a pe-
riod of 240 s, the packet’s duration of 240 s, a maximum amplitude of 0.5 T ECU,
the horizontal phase velocity Vh = 1200 m/s, and the azimuth α and the elevation
θ of the wave vector Kt equal to 153◦ and 60◦, respectively. A comparison of the
parameters speciﬁed in the modeling procedure with those obtained by processing
the data of TEC I(t) model series shows that these values agree with an accuracy
no worse than 10%. Noteworthy also is a good agreement of experimental (at the
left of Fig. 4) and model (at the left of Fig. 5) TEC variations ∆I(t) and F (t)
for the array (SELE, CHUM, SHAS).

5 Discussion

Here we discuss the main results and compare them with ﬁndings reported by
other authors. Within the context of this study we deliberately pass over a
physical interpretation of our obtained results because of no information available
about the dynamics and energetics of Proton and Space Shuttle LV launches.
Our intention is to obtain more trustworthy and reliable data ensuring the new
possibilities of a global GPS monitoring.

5.1 The form of response

It was found that in spite of the diﬀerence of LV characteristics, the local time,
the season, and the level of geomagnetic disturbance, the ionospheric response for
all launches has the character of an N-wave. The SAW period T is 270–360 s, and
the amplitude exceeds the standard deviation of background TEC ﬂuctuations
in this range of periods under quiet and moderate geomagnetic conditions, by a
factor of 2–5 as a minimum.

Our measurements of the period and amplitude of the SAW response are in
good agreement with frequency Doppler shifts measured in the HF range during
Space Shuttle LV launches on February 28, 1990 and April 28, 1991 (Jacobson
and Carlos, 1994), as well as wit corresponding estimates of a maximum shift F
reported by Nagorsky (1998, 1999) for oblique HF radio path during LV launches
from Baikonur Cosmodrome. They are also similar to the estimates obtained by
Li et al. (1994) using the transionospheric VHF radio signal from geostationary
satellite MARECS-B2 during Space Shuttle LV launches on October 18, 1993
(STS-58) and February 3, 1994 (STS-60).

According to measurements reported by Calais and Minster (1996), during
Space Shuttle (STS-58) launch on October 18, 1993 two series of TEC ﬂuctuations

17

were recorded, one of which had also the form of an N-wave with a maximum
amplitude of 0.25 TECU, which is also consistent with our data.

It was pointed out in the literature that SAW of a similar form and with a sim-
ilar amplitude were detected during powerful industrial explosions (Afraimovich
et al., 1984; Jacobson et al., 1988; Blanc and Jacobson, 1989; Fitzgerald, 1997;
Calais et al., 1998a; 1998b; Nagorsky, 1998).

5.2 Angular characteristics of the wave vector, and the

phase velocity of SAW

As pointed out in the Introduction, some researchers report markedly diﬀerent
values of the SAW propagation velocity — up to several thousand m/s, which
exceeds the sound velocity at SAW propagation heights in the atmosphere. Ac-
cording to the data from a review by Karlov et al.
(1980), the propagation
velocity of the SAW ionospheric response recorded during launches of the Apollo
mission rockets, varied from 600 to 1670 m/s.

Arendt (1971) suggested that the shock wave produced by rocket ﬂight is
divided in the ionosphere at about 160 km altitude into the ion-acoustic mode
(with a velocity as high as 1.3 km/s) and a normal acoustic mode (with the
velocity of up to 500 m/s). Arendt (1971) explains the diﬀerence in propagation
velocities of the ﬁrst and second disturbances observed during Apollo-14 and
Apollo-15 launches at the same distance of 1440 km from the start site, by a
diﬀerence in atmospheric conditions and propagation paths of the waves because
of seasonal variations of the ionosphere.

Noble (1990) describes the observations of long-period waves over the Arecibo
incoherent scatter station during Space Shuttle STS-4 launch on June 27, 1982.
At a large distance from the path (up to 1000 km) the group velocity of wave
propagation was found to be 600–700 m/s.

According to GPS measurements (Calais and Minster, 1996), the SAW phase

velocity at ionospheric heights is about 1000–1300 m/s.

A common limitation of existing methods for determining the SAW phase
velocity is the need to know the launch time of the rocket since this velocity
is calculated from the SAW delay with respect to the start time assuming that
the velocity along the propagation path is constant, which is by far contrary to
fact. Furthermore, only the horizontal component of the phase velocity Vh was in
essence determined in such studies. At diﬀerent values of elevation of the wave
vector Kt, the velocity Vh corresponds to markedly diﬀering values of the modules
of the phase velocity Vt.

The use of the method proposed in this paper makes possible determining
angular characteristics of the wave vector Kt and, accordingly, estimating Vt.
According to our data (Tables 3 and 4), the elevation of the SAW wave vector
varied from 30–60◦, and the SAW phase velocity was in the range of from 900

18

to 1200 m/s. We determine the phase velocity of the line of equal TEC at the
height of the ionospheric F -region maximum which makes the main contribution
to variations in TEC between the receiver and the GPS satellite and corresponds
to the region of maximum sensitivity of the method. Since Vt approaches the
sound velocity at these altitudes (Li et al., 1994), this makes it possible to identify
the sound nature of a TEC perturbation.

5.3 The location and ‘switch-on’ delay of the SAW source

The position of the SAW source, calculated by neglecting refraction corrections,
corresponds to the segment of the LV trajectory (Figs. 1 and 2) within distances
of at least 700–900 km from the launch pad for the Proton LV and of at least
200–500 km for the Space Shuttle LV. This is consistent with the ‘switch-on’
delay ∆tw of the source which is 250–300 s for the Proton LV and 200 s for the
Space Shuttle LV. As is evident from our data, the calculated position of the
SAW source for rocket launches does not coincide with the position of the launch
pad. At the same time the source location is in reasonably good agreement with
that of horizontal projections of LV trajectories (Figs. 1 and 2).

Kaschak et al.

(1970) analyzed the data from the infra sound measuring
arrays located on the USA north-eastern coast which observed strong acoustic
signals from launch and reentry areas of the Saturn-5 LV. The authors identiﬁed
three types of signals: one includes early signals whose arrival time corresponded
to supersonic values of their velocity equal to 500–1000 m/s; the other type
represents normal signals with the group velocity approximately equal to the
normal velocity of sound propagation in the air; and the last type involves late
signals with subsonic velocities in the range of from 190 to 240 m/s. Kaschak
et al. (1970) and Balachandran et al. (1971) suggested that the so-called ‘early’
signals during rocket launches are caused by SAW which are generated during
the reentry of the ﬁrst stage at distances from the launch pad exceeding 500 km.
However, our data are in better agreement with the mechanism substantiated
by Li et al. (1994), Calais and Minster (1996), and Nagorsky (1998, 1999). They
believe that the generation of SAW occurs during a nearly horizontal travel of the
rocket with the operating engine along the acceleration segment of the trajectory,
at the lower atmospheric heights of 100–130 km. The rocket travels this segment
with supersonic velocity at 100–300 s of its ﬂight at a distance of at least 500 km
from the launch pad (see the data on the Proton LV ﬂight schedule in Section 2).
As soon as it ascends to an altitude of about 100 km, the SAW source is ‘switched
on’.

19

6 Conclusions

In this paper we have investigated the form and dynamics of shock-acoustic waves
(SAW) generated during rocket launches. We have developed a method for deter-
mining SAW parameters (including angular characteristics of the wave vector and
the SAW phase velocity, as well as the direction to the source) using the GPS-
arrays whose elements can be chosen out of a large set of GPS stations forming
part of a global IGS network. Unlike existing radio techniques, the proposed
method estimates SAW parameters without a priory information about the site
and time of rocket launch. The implementation of the method is illustrated by
analyzing ionospheric eﬀects from launches of the Proton and Space Shuttle LV
from Baikonur and KSC Cosmodromes in 1998 and 1999 (totaling ﬁve launches).

The results reported in this study suggest the following conclusions:

1. In spite of the diﬀerence of LV characteristics, for all launches the iono-
spheric response has the character of an N-wave corresponding to the form
of a shock wave,
irrespective of the type of disturbance source (rocket
launch, industrial explosion).

2. The SAW period T is 270–360 s, and its amplitude (from 0.1 to 0.5 T ECU)
exceeds the standard deviation of T ECU background ﬂuctuations in this
range of periods under quiet and moderate geomagnetic conditions by a
factor of 2–5 as a minimum.

3. The elevation of the SAW wave vector varies within 35–60◦, and the SAW
phase velocity (900–1200 m/s) approaches the sound velocity at heights of
the ionospheric F -region minimum. This makes it possible to identify the
sound nature of a TEC perturbation.

4. The position of the SAW source, calculated by neglecting refraction correc-
tions, corresponds to a segment of the Proton LV trajectory at a distance
of at least 700–900 km from the launch pad and to the LV ﬂight altitude
of at least 100 km. For the Space Shuttle LV the position of the SAW
source corresponds to the segment of the trajectory at a distance of at least
200–500 km from the launch pad and to the LV ﬂight altitude of at least
100 km.

Hopefully, our investigation would provide additional useful insights into the
physical processes occurring during ﬂights of rockets in the Earth’s atmosphere
on the acceleration segment of the trajectory. In addition, this would make it
possible to identify more reliable signal indications of technogenic eﬀects which
are necessary for constructing an eﬀective global radio subsystem for detection
and localization of these eﬀects by processing the data from an international
network of two-frequency receivers of the GPS-GLONASS navigation systems.

20

7 Acknowledgements

We are grateful to E. A. Ponomarev, V. V. Yevstaﬁev, A. M. Uralov,
P. M. Nagorsky, N. N. Klimov, and A. D. Kalikhman for their interest in this
study, helpful advice and active participation in discussions. Authors are grateful
to K. S. Palamartchouk and O. S. Lesuta for preparing the input data. Thanks
are also due to V. G. Mikhalkosky for his assistance in preparing the English
version of the manuscript. This work was done with support from the Russian
foundation for Basic Research (grants 97-02-96060 and 99-05-64753), as well as
under grant 1999 of the RF Ministry of Education (Minvuz), under direction of
B. O. Vugmeister.

References

[1] Afraimovich, E.L., Varshavsky, I.I., Vugmeister, B.O., et al., 1984. Inﬂuence
of surface industrial explosions on Doppler and angular characteristics of the
ionosphere-reﬂected radio signal. Geomagnetizm i aeronomiya, 24, 322–324
(in Russian).

[2] Afraimovich, E.L., Terechov, A.I., Udodov, M.Yu., and Fridman, S.V., 1992.
Refraction distortions of transionospheric radio signals caused by changes in
a regular ionosphere and by travelling ionospheric disturbances. Journal of
Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics, 54, 1013–1020.

[3] Afraimovich, E.L., Palamartchouk, K.S., and Perevalova, N.P., 1998. GPS
radio interferometry of travelling ionospheric disturbances. Journal of Atmo-
spheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics, 60, 1205–1223.

[4] Arendt, P.R., 1971. Ionospheric undulations following ‘Appolo–14’ launch-

ing. Nature, 231, 438–439.

[5] Balachandran, N.K., Donn, W.L., and Kaschak, G., 1971. On the propaga-
tion of infrasound from rockets: eﬀects of winds. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 50 (2), part 1, 397–404.

[6] Bertel, L., Bertin, F., and Testud, J., 1976. De la mesure du contenu elec-
tronique integre appliquee a l’observation des ondes de gravite de moyenne
echelle. Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics, 38, 261–270.

[7] Blanc, E., and Jacobson, A.R., 1989. Observation of ionospheric disturbances
following a 5-kt chemical explosion. 2. Prolonged anomalies and stratiﬁca-
tions in the lower thermosphere after shock passage. Radio Science, 24, 739–
746.

21

[8] Calais, E. and Minster, J.B., 1995. GPS detection of ionospheric perturba-
tions following the January 1994, Northridge earthquake. Geophysical Re-
search Letters, 22, 1045–1048.

[9] Calais, E., and Minster, J.B., 1996. GPS detection of ionospheric pertur-
bations following a Space Shuttle ascent. Geophysical Research Letters, 23,
1897–1900.

[10] Calais, E., Minster, J.B., Hofton, M.A., and Hedlin, M.A.H., 1998a. Iono-
spheric signature of surface mine blasts from Global Positioning System mea-
surements. Geophysical Journal International, 132, 191–202.

[11] Calais, E., Minster, J.B., and Bernard, J., 1998b. GPS, Earthquake, the

ionosphere and Space Shuttle. Physics of Earth and Planet, 105, 167–181.

[12] Davies, K., 1969. Ionospheric radio waves. Blaisdell Publishing Company. A
Division of Ginn and Company. Waltham, Massachusetts-Toronto-London.

[13] Fitzgerald, T.J., 1997. Observations of total electron content perturbations
on GPS signals caused by a ground level explosion. Journal of Atmospheric
and Solar-Terrestrial Physics, 59, 829–834.

[14] Gurtner, W., 1993. RINEX: The Receiver Independent Exchange Format

Version 2. http://igscb.jpl.nasa.gov/igscb/data/format/rinex2.txt

[15] Hofmann-Wellenhof, B., Lichtenegger, H., and Collins, J., 1992. Global Po-

sitioning System: Theory and Practice, Springer-Verlag Wien, New York.

[16] Jacobson, A.R., Carlos, R.C., and Blanc, E., 1988. Observation of iono-
spheric disturbances following a 5-kt chemical explosion. 1. Persistent os-
cillation in the lower thermosphere after shock passage. Radio Science, 23,
820–830.

[17] Jacobson, A.R., and Carlos, R.C., 1994. Observations of acoustic–gravity
waves in the thermosphere following Space Shuttle ascents. Journal of At-
mospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics, 56, 525–528.

[18] Karlov, V.D., Kozlov, S.I., and Tkachev, G.N., 1980. Large-scale distur-
bances in the ionosphere produced by rocket ﬂight with the operating engine.
Kosmicheskiye issledovaniya, 18, 266–277 (in Russian).

[19] Kaschak, G, Donn, W.L., and Fehr, U., 1970. Long-range infrasound from
rockets. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 48 (1), part 1, 12–20.

[20] Klobuchar, J.A., 1997. Real-time ionospheric science: The new reality. Radio

Science, 32, 1943–1952.

22

[21] Li, Y.Q., Jacobson, A.R., Carlos, R.C., Massey, R.S., Taranenko, Y.N., and
Wu, G., 1994. The blast wave of the Shuttle plume at ionospheric heights.
Geophysical Research Letters, 21, 2737–2740.

[22] Mendillo, M., 1981. The eﬀects of rocket launches of the ionosphere. Ad-

vances in Space Research, 1, 275–290.

[23] Mendillo, M., 1982. Modiﬁcation of the ionosphere by large space vehicles.

Advances of Space Research, 2, 150–159.

[24] Mercier, C. and Jacobson, A.R., 1997. Observations of atmospheric grav-
ity waves by radio interferometry: are results biased by the observational
technique? Annales G´eophysicae, 15, 430–442.

[25] Nagorsky, P.M., 1998. The inhomogeneous structure of the ionospheric F-
region produced by rockets. Geomagnetizm i aeronomiya, 38, 100–106 (in
Russian).

[26] Nagorsky, P.M., 1999. Analysis of the HF radio signal response to ionospehric
plasma disturbances caused by shock-acoustic waves. Izvestya VUZov Ra-
dioﬁzika, 42, 36–44 (in Russian).

[27] Noble, S.T., 1990. A large-amplitude traveling ionospheric disturbance exited
by the Space Shuttle during launch. Journal of Geophysical Research, 95,
19,037–19,044.

23

R ussian Proton

Launch: N ov. 20 1998 06:40 U T (D AY  324)
Launch: Jul. 5 1999 13:32 U T (D AY 186)
Launch: O ct. 27 1999 16:16 U T (D AY 300) 

50

48

D A Y  324
308 s.

D A Y  186
248 s.

K araganda

D A Y  300
312 s.

K2

K1

K3

SELE

KUMT

57

69

SUMK

CHUM

78

81

60

63

66

A lm a-A ta

72

75

46

44

42

40

    DAY 324
chum; prn 16

    DAY 300
chum; prn 09

POL2

SHAS

)

N

(
 
e
d
u
t
i
t
a
L

    DAY 186
chum; prn 14

Cosmodrome
    Baikonur

Longitude (E)

Fig.:ExperimentalgeometryduringlaunchesoftheProtonlaunchvehicle
fromBaikonurCosmodrome.Thedashlineroughlycorrespondstothehorizon-
talprojectionoftherocket(cid:13)ighttrajectorywithorbitalinclination.(cid:14).The
symbol(cid:5)marksthepositionofthelaunchpad.Solidlinesshowtrajectories
ofsubionosphericpointsforeachGPSsatelliteattheheighthmax=  km.
Darkboxiesalongthetrajectoriesshowthepositionofsubionosphericpointsat
thetimetpofamaximumdeviationofthefrequencyDopplershiftF.Asterisks
showthesourcepositionat  kmaltitudedeterminedusingthedatafromthe
GPS-arrays.Numbersattheasteriskscorrespondtodaynumbersandtothe
`switch-on'delayofthesourcewithrespecttothestarttime.Dashedstraight
linesconnectingtheanticipatedsourcewiththesubionosphericpointdesignate
thehorizontalprojectionofthewavevectorK.Heavydotsandupper-caseletters
markthepositionandnamesoftheGPSstations,whilelower-caselettersalong
thetrajectoriesrefertostationnamesandPRNnumbersoftheGPSsatellites.

S p ace S h uttle D iscovery (S T S -95) 

 L aunch: O ct. 29 1998 19:19 U T  (D A Y  302)

32

30

28

)

N

(
 

e
d
u
t
i
t
a
L

    K enn edy
 Space C en ter

CCV3

EKY1

K 1

276

279

288

KYW 1

282

285

AOM L

RCM 6

26

24

  DAY 302
aom l; prn 1

Longitude (E)

Fig.:ExperimentalgeometryduringlaunchesoftheSpaceShuttlelaunch
vehiclefromtheKennedySpaceCenterCosmodrome(thedesignationsarethe
sameasinFig.

Fig.:a)Schematicrepresentationofthetransionosphericsoundingge-
ometry.Theaxesz,y,andxaredirected,respectively,zenithward,northward
(N)andeastward(E).P|pointofintersectionofLine-of-Sight(LOS)tothe
satellitewiththemaximumoftheionosphericF-region;S|subionospheric
point;(cid:11)s|theazimuthalangle,countedo(cid:11)fromthenorthwardinaclockwise
direction;and(cid:18)s|theangleofelevationbetweenthedirectionralongLOSand
theterrestrialsurfaceatthereceptionsite.(cid:13)|theanglebetweenthevectorsKt
andr.b)GPS-arraygeometry.A,B,C|receiverpoinbyaboutseveraltens
ofkilometers,atwhichtwo-frequencymultichannelGPS-receiversareinstalled.
ParallellinescorrespondtolinesofequalTEC.Thearrowindicatesthevector
Kinthedirection(cid:11);N,E|northwardandeastwarddirections.

L V  "  P r o to n  "

0 5 .0 7 .9 9  (1 3 :3 2  U T )                         2 7 .1 0 .9 9  (1 6 :1 6  U T )

4 0

I(t), 1 0 1 6 m -2
I(t), 1 0 1 6 m -2
1
C H U M ; P R N  1 4                                                 C H U M ; P R N  0 9

a .                          d .

5 .0

F A IR

29

D A Y  1 8 6                                                     D A Y 3 0 0

2 0

1

14

2 .5

D A Y  1 8 5                                                                                       D A Y  2 9 9
D A Y  1 8 7                                                                                       D A Y  3 0 1

14

29

0
1 3 .0

1 3 .5

1 4 .0

1 6 .0

1 6 .5

1 7 .0

0 .0

0 .6

                                                   D
I(t), 1 0 1 6 m -2

I(t), 1 0 1 6 m -2

b .                          e .

0 .1 2

D A Y  1 8 6                                                          D A Y  3 0 0

29

0 .0

-0 .6

P R N 2 9

M A C 1

0 .0 0

0 .0 3

-0 .1 5

-0 .0 3

1

14

0 .1 5

0 .0 0

P R N 2 2

0 .0 0

-0 .1 2

YA K A

U T , h o u r

U T , h o u r

 P R N  1 4                                                                P R N  0 9

1 6 .4 1 6 .5 1 6 .6 1 6 .7

1 6 .4 1 6 .5 1 6 .6 1 6 .7

1 3 .6 1 3 .7 1 3 .8 1 3 .9

S E L E                                                                   P O L 2

  C H U M                                                                   C H U M

    S H A S                                                                     S H A S

1 3 .6 1 3 .7 1 3 .8 1 3 .9

F (t), H z                                          F (t), H z

c .                          f.

D A Y  1 8 5                                                           D A Y  2 9 9
D A Y  1 8 7                                                           D A Y  3 0 1

Fig.:Timedependenciesof`oblique'TEC(cid:1)I(t)atoneofthethreesites
oftheGPS-arrayintheareaofBaikonurCosmodromeonthedaysofProtonLV
launch(heavycurve),andonedaybeforeandonedayafterthestart(thincurves)
onJuly,		|panela,andonOctober,			|paneld;panelsb,e|
forthesamedaysbuttheTECvariations(cid:1)I(t)withthelineartrendremoved
andwithasmoothingwithatimewindowofmin;panelsc,f|variationsof
thefrequencyDopplershiftF(t)`reduced'tothesoundingsignalfrequencyof
MHz,forthreesitesofthearrays,startdays.Allpanelsshowdaynumbers,
GPSstationnames,andPRNnumbersoftheGPSsatellites.Thesmallarrows
attheabscissaaxisindicatethestarttimet .

D
L V  "  P ro to n  "

0 5 .0 7 .9 9  (1 3 :3 2  U T )                         2 0 .1 1.9 8  (0 6 :4 0  U T )

5 0

I(t), 1 0 1 6 m -2

F A IR

      D A Y  1 8 6       
C H U M ; P R N  1 4  

29

a .                          d .

C H U M ; P R N  1 6

I(t), 1 0 1 6 m -2
1

2 0
1 5
1 0
5
0

D A Y  3 23    
D A Y  3 2 5

29
D A Y  3 24

14

2 5

1

0
1 3 .5

1 3 .8

1 4 .0

6 .6 6 .8 7 .0 7 .2 7 .4

                                                   D
I(t), 1 0 1 6 m -2

I(t), 1 0 1 6 m -2

b .                          e .

0 .1 5

29

1

14

T E S T                                      D A Y  3 2 4

0 .0 0

-0 .1 5

D A Y  3 23
D A Y  3 25

YA K A

0 .6

0 .0

-0 .6

P R N 2 9

P R N 22

6 .7

7 .0

0 .2

0 .0

-0 .2

 P R N  1 6

0 .0 5

6 .7

6 .8

6 .9

7 .0

0 .0 0

-0 .0 5

T E S T                                                       C H U M

 S E L E

P O L 2

U T , h o u r

6 .8
6 .9
U T , h o u r

1 3 .6 1 3 .7 1 3 .8 1 3 .9

1 3 .6 1 3 .7 1 3 .8 1 3 .9

F (t), H z                                          F (t), H z

c .                          f.

Fig.:SameasinFig.,butintheareaofBaikonurCosmodrome,forProton
LVlaunchonNovember ,		(right).Left|SAWperturbationmodelfor
ProtonLVlaunchonJuly,			intheformofawavepacketwithaperiodof
 s,thepacket'sdurationof s,amaximumamplitudeof .TECU,the
horizontalphasevelocityVh=  m/s,theazimuth(cid:11),andtheelevation(cid:18)of
thewavevectorKtof(cid:14)and (cid:14),respectively(seeFig.attheleft).

D
"  S p ace S h uttle "

29 .10 .9 8 (1 9:19 U T )                          17.04.98 (18:19  U T )
I(t), 1 0 1 6 m -2
A O M L ; P R N  01

a.                          d .             

I(t), 1 0 16 m -2
1
A O M L ; P R N  15

2 0

F A IR

29

22

3 0

2 0

1 0

D A Y  302

1

14

D A Y 301
D A Y  303

0
1 8 .0

2 0 .0

2 2 .0

D A Y  106
D A Y  108

1 0

29

14

D A Y  107

1 8 .4

1 8 .8

0
1 8 .0

                                                   D
I(t), 1 0 1 6 m -2

b .                          e.

1 .0

I(t), 1 0 16 m -2

29

D A Y  301                                                           D A Y  106

D A Y  302                                                           D A Y  107

0 .0

D A Y  303                                                           D A Y  108

1

14

-1 .0

0 .3

0 .0

-0 .3

1 9 .4 1 9 .5 1 9 .6 1 9 .7

1 8 .4

1 8 .5

1 8 .6

M A C 1

P R N 29

-0 .1

P R N 25

0 .2 5

0 .0 0

0 .1

0 .0

-0 .2 5

I(t), 1 0 16 m -2
F (t), H z                                         F (t), H z

1 9 .4 1 9 .5 1 9 .6 1 9 .7

         P R N  1                                                                P R N  15

c.                          f.

E K Y 1                                                                   C C V 1
A O M L                                                                  A O M L
K Y W 1                                                                 K Y W 2

Fig.:SameasinFig.,butintheareaofKennedySpaceCenterCosmod-
rome,forlaunchesofAprilandOctober	,		.

U T , h o u r

U T , h o u r

1 8 .6

1 8 .4

1 8 .5

D
Table:GPSsitenamesandlocations
NSITEGeograph.
Geograph.
longitude
latitude
Kazakstan

SUMK
.		
. 
. 

SELE
.
CHUM
.
.		

POL
.	
.	
. 
.

SHAS
KUMT
.	 
.
CapeCanaveral
	.
CCV
. 
	.
. 
CCV

EKY
. 
.  
AOML
	.
.
MIA
	. 
.
MIA
	. 
.
.
.
KYW
KYW
.
.
	.
.
	RCM

Table:Commoninformationaboutrocketlaunch-
esNName
t (LT) (deg)DST(nT)
Data
ProtonNov. 		(DAY)
.
-	
: 
Proton
Jul.			(DAY)
.

:
ProtonOct.			(DAY  )
.
- 
:
-
	
 :	
ShuttleApr.		(DAY )

 :	

ShuttleOct.			(DAY )
.
-

t (UT)
 : 
:
:
:	
	:	

Table:TheparametersofShock-AcousticWaves
for"Proton"launches
'w;(cid:14)(cid:21)w;(cid:14)(cid:1)tw,
(cid:11);(cid:14)
(cid:18);(cid:14)
Vh,m/s
No.
Sites
tp
Vt,m/s
V(cid:11),m/s
(cid:1)t,
T,sec.
AI,
TECUAF,Hz
sec.
sec.
(UT)
			Jul.;t =:UT
 

SELECHUMSHAS
::
	
  



  
 .
 .
.	

	
	
.	
	



 .
  

::
SUMKPOL

 .
SELE

..

	

KUMT
::

 	


 
 .
 . 
SHAS
SELE

.
SELEKUMT::

	


.
 .
 .	
  


POL

CHUMSELESUMK:: 	

	
	 

.
 .
 .	
  
	


P
 

.	.
		
 

.
 .
 .
 

			Oct.;t =:UT
CHUMPOL
..
	
 


  
		

: :
 . 	
 . 
.

SHAS
..





.
 . 
 .
 


SUMKPOL
:	:
SHAS
SHASCHUMSUMK::
 . 
 


	

.	
 . 
  
	
..
	

..




.
 . 
 . 
 
	
 
POLCHUMSUMK::
P

.




.
 . 
 . 

		Nov. ;t = : UT;
 
..
	 
 	
 . . 	 . 
      

CHUMSELEPOL

.	
::
 . 
.
 .  . 
:: 
:: 

Table:TheparametersofShock-AcousticWaves
for"SpaceShuttle"launches
'w;(cid:14)(cid:21)w;(cid:14)(cid:1)tw,
(cid:11);(cid:14)
(cid:18);(cid:14)
Vt,m/s
V(cid:11),m/s
No.
Sites
tp
T,sec.
TECUAF,Hz
(cid:1)t,
AI,
(UT)
sec.
sec.
		Oct.	;t =	:	UT

AOML
	: :

			
.
 
 	
   
 . . . 
 . 	
.

KYW
	::
 . 
EKY
	: :	
 . 	
 
.

	 


 .
 

	: :
MIAKYW

 . 
EKY
P
 
.

.
.
 . 

 .


		Apr.;t =:	UT
	 	
 . . .
 . . . 
   
{
.

 
::	
CCV

.

RCM
:	: 	
 
:	:
  
KYW
{

 
	
	.

AOML
:	:


 
 .
 .
CCVKYW
P
{
.	

 	
 
 .
 .
 .



Vh,m/s
 

	
 
 
	 

