0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

0
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
2
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The GPS global detection of the ionospheric response to solar

ﬂares

Afraimovich E. L.

Institute of Solar-Terrestrial Physics SD RAS,

p. o. box 4026, Irkutsk, 664033, Russia

fax: +7 3952 462557; e-mail: afra@iszf.irk.ru

Abstract

This author suggests the concept of a new technology for global detection (GLOBDET) of
atmospheric disturbances of natural and technogenic origin, on the basis of phase measurements
of the total electron content (TEC) in the ionosphere using an international GPS network.
Temporal dependencies of TEC are obtained for a set of spaced receivers of the GPS network
simultaneously for the entire set of ”visible” (over a given time interval) GPS satellites (up to
5-10 satellites). These series are subjected to ﬁltering in the selected range of oscillation periods
using algorithms for spatio-temporal analysis of signals of non-equidistant GPS phased antenna
arrays which are adequate to the detected disturbance. An analysis is made of the possibilities
of using the GLOBDET when detecting the ionospheric response of solar ﬂares. In this case it is
best to make the coherent summation of the ﬁltered series of TEC. A powerful impulsive ﬂares
of July 29, 1999 and December 28, 1999 were chosen to illustrate the practical implementation
of the proposed method.

1 Introduction

The advent and evolution of a Global Positioning System, GPS, and also the creation on its basis
of widely branched networks of GPS stations (at least 700 sites at the May of 2000, the data from
which are placed on the INTERNET) opened up a new era in remote ionospheric sensing [13].
Furthermore, there exist also powerful regional networks such as the Geographical Survey Institute
network in Japan [17] consisting of up to 1000 receivers. High-precision measurements of the group
and phase delay along the line-of-sight (LOS) between the receiver on the ground and transmitters
on the GPS system satellites covering the reception zone are made using two-frequency multichannel
receivers of the GPS system at almost any point of the globe and at any time simultaneously at two
coherently coupled frequencies f1 = 1575.42 MHz and f2 = 1227.60 MHz.

The sensitivity of phase measurements in the GPS system is suﬃcient for detecting irregularities
with an amplitude of up to 10−3–10−4 of the diurnal TEC variation. This makes it possible to
formulate the problem of detecting ionospheric disturbances from diﬀerent sources of artiﬁcial and
natural origins. Anthropogenic sources of ionospheric disturbances include nuclear events, chemical
explosions, and rocket launches. Among natural sources are solar eclipses, solar ﬂares, earthquakes,
volcanoes, heavy thunderstorms, and auroral heating. Studies of these phenomena are of great
importance both for a scientiﬁc understanding of their genesis and propagation in the atmosphere

and as a tool for detecting such sources in remote regions; for instance, the GLONASS system
provides more eﬀective coverage at high latitudes [13].

Recently some authors embarked actively on the development of detection tools for the ionospheric
response of powerful earthquakes [3], rocket launches [4], and industrial surface explosions [9]; [5].
Subsequetly, the GPS data began to be used in the context of the spaced-receiver method using three
GPS stations to determine the parameters of the full wave vector of traveling ionospheric disturbances
under quiet and disturbed geomagnetic conditions [1]; [2].

The limitations of the spaced-receiver method with a minimum necessary number of receivers
(three) include their low sensitivity and inadequate spatial selectivity, and this gives no way of
exploiting the potential of a global GPS system consisting of hundreds of GPS stations. Next in
turn is the setting of a more general problem, namely, that of developing processing techniques for
the data from the GPS and GLONASS systems, based on the latest achievements in the ﬁeld of
a comprehensive spatio-temporal processing of signals, with due regard for the special features of
ionospheric disturbances, however.

The objective of this paper is to develop the concept of a global detector (GLOBDET) of at-
mosperic disturbances of natural and technogenic origins, based on phase measurements of total
electron content (TEC) in the ionosphere using the international network of two-frequency multi-
channel receivers of the GPS system - section 2. Section 3 discusses the possibilities of using the
GLOBDET method in detecting ionospheric eﬀects of solar ﬂares. Basic characteristics of such a
detector (sensitivity and time resolution) are examined in Section 4. The practical implementation
of the method is illustrated by analyzing a global ionospheric response to a powerful solar ﬂares of
July 29, 1999 and December 28, 1999 (Sections 5 and 6). Section 7 discusses the ﬁndings and
explores the possibilities of utilizing a global GPS network in detecting other kinds of atmospheric
disturbances of natural and technogenic origins.

2 Using the data from a global GPS network in the context

of the ideology of a phased antenna array

Phased antenna arrays (FAA) are extensively used in radiolocation, sonar systems, and in processing
seismic signals as systems featuring high sensitivity in signal detection and high spatial selectivity
which is necessary for localizing signal sources. There exist quite varied schemes for hardware and
software realization of FAA [6]. In general case the treatment of signals imply multiplying a complex
signal ˜A(t)i of each of the i–spaced FAA elements by a complex factor ˜Ki with the subsequent
coherent summation of the resulting products

˜S =

N

Xi=1

˜A(t)i ˜Ki

(1)

where ˜S is the result of the coherent summation; i is the FAA element number; and i=1, 2, ...N.
By specifying diﬀerent values of ˜Ki, which in each particular case depend on the conditions of the
problem being solved, it is possible to specify parameters determining the sensitivity and selectivity
of FAA.

This author suggests the concept of a global detector (GLOBDET) of atmospheric disturbances
of natural and technogenic origins, based on processing the GPS data in the FAA conﬁguration. This
concept implies that time dependencies of TEC are obtained for a set of spaced receivers of the GPS
network simultaneously for all GPS satellites ”visible” during a given time interval. These series are

subjected to ﬁltering over a selected range of oscillation periods in order to eliminate slow variations
caused by the orbital motion of the satellites and by the diurnal variation of TEC in the ionosphere.
Next, these series are processed in the nonequidistant FAA conﬁguration using them in (1) or in
other algorithms of PAA as complex signals ˜A(t)i. It is also assumed that equivalent partial antennas
of such an array are located at subionospheric points. The coordinates of these points are determined
for the selected height hmax of the F 2-layer maximum by means of standard (in the GPS system)
calculations of the azimuth α and elevation θ of the LOS between the receiver and the satellite. α
and θ are reckoned from the northward direction and from the ground, respectively.

The GPS technology provides the means of estimating TEC variations on the basis of phase
measurements of TEC I in each of the spaced two-frequency GPS receivers using the formula [11];
[4]:

I =

1

40.308

2

f 2
1 f 2
f 2
1 − f 2

[(L1λ1 − L2λ2) + const + nL]

(2)

2

where L1λ1 and L2λ2 are phase path increments of the radio signal, caused by the phase delay in
the ionosphere (m); L1, L2 is the number of full phase rotations, and λ1, and λ2, are the wavelengths
(m) for the frequencies f1 and f2, respectively; const is some unknown initial phase path (m); and
nL is the error in determination of the phase path (m).

The TEC unit, T ECU, which is equal to 1016 m−2 and is commonly accepted in the literature,

will be used throughout the text.

3 Using the GLOBDET technology in detecting the iono-

spheric response to solar ﬂares

The enhancement of X-ray and ultraviolet radiation intensity that is observed during chromospheric
ﬂares on the Sun immediately causes an increase in electron density in the ionosphere. These density
variatiuons are diﬀerent for diﬀerent altitudes and are collectively called Sudden Ionospheric Distur-
bances (SID). SID observations provide a key means for ground-based detection of solar ﬂares along
with optical observations of ﬂares and solar radio burst observations. Much research is devoted to
SID studies, among them a number of thorough reviews and monographs [16].

SID data for the F -region acquired by diﬀerent radio probing methods were used repeatedly to
estimate time variations in the X-ray and extreme ultraviolet (EUV) spectral regions and in relative
measurements of ﬂuxes in diﬀerent wavelength ranges [8]; [18]; [15]. The main body of SID data for
the Earth’s upper atmosphere was obtained in earlier detections of Sudden Frequency Deviations
(SFD) of the F -region-reﬂected radio signal in the HF range [7]; [8].

A further, highly informative, technique is the method of incoherent scatter (IS) [18]. However,
the practical implementation of the IS method requires very sophisticated, expensive equipment. An
added limitation is inadequate time resolution. Since the relaxation time of electron density in the
E- and F 1-regions is also less than 5-10 min, most IS measurements lack time resolution needed for
the study of inospheric eﬀects of ﬂares.

The eﬀect of solar ﬂares on the ionospheric F-region is also manifested as a Sudden Increase of
Total Electron Content (SITEC) which was measured previously using continuously operating radio
beacons on geostationary satellites [15]. A serious limitation of methods based on analyzing VHF
signals from geostationary satellites is their small and ever increasing with the time number and the
nonuniform distribution in longitude.

Consequently, none of the above-mentioned existing methods can serve as an eﬀective basis for
the radio detection system to provide a continuous, global SID monitoring with adequate space-
time resolution. Furthermore, the creation of these facilities requires developing special-purpose
equipment, including powerful radio transmitters contaminating the radio environment. It is also
signiﬁcant that when using the existing methods, the inadequate spatial aperture gives no way of
deducing the possible spatial inhomogeneity of the X-ray and EUV ﬂux.

According to the above concept, a global GPS network can be successfully used as a global detector
of the ionospheric response to solar ﬂares. A physical groundwork for the method is formed by the
eﬀect of fast change in electron density in the Earth’s ionosphere at the time of a ﬂare simultaneously
on the entire sunlit surface.

Essentially, the method implies using appropriate ﬁltering and a coherent processing of TEC
variations in the ionosphere simultaneously for the entire set of ”visible” (during a given time interval)
GPS satellites (as many as 5-10 satellites) at all global GPS network stations used in the analysis. In
detecting solar ﬂares, the ionospheric response is virtually simultaneous for all stations on the dayside
of the globe within the time resolution range of the GPS receivers (from 30 s to 0.1 s). Therefore, the
coherent addition of individual realizations ˜A(t)i does not require a partial phase shift (the complex
part of the term ˜Ki is zero), and the entire procedure reduces to a simple addition

˜S =

N

Xi=1

˜A(t)iKi

(3)

where ˜A(t)i represents ﬁltered TEC variations, and Ki is the amplitude weighting factor deter-
mined by the geometry of the i -beam (LOS) to the satellite. To a ﬁrst approximation, this factor is
[12].

Ki = cos(cid:20)arcsin(cid:18)

Rz

Rz + hmax

cosθi(cid:19)(cid:21)

(4)

where Rz is the Earth’s radius; hmax = 300 is the height of the F 2–layer maximum.
Reconstructing the absolute value of the ionospheric response to the solar ﬂare requires a more
accurate (than used in this paper) conversion of the ”oblique” TEC value to a ”vertical” one, espe-
cially at low values of elevations of the beam to the satellite. To do this, it is necessary not only
to eliminate, for this beam to the satellite, the ambiguity of the determination of the absolute TEC
value which arises when only phase measurements are used in the GPS system. The response can
only be estimated reliable, with the inclusion the spatially inhomogeneous ionosphere, by using all
beams to the satellite, and by applying adequate methods of spatial interpolation. This problem is
considered in a series of publications (for example, [14]) and is beyond the scope of this paper.

4 Characteristics of a global detector

The detection sensitivity is determined by the ability to detect typical signals of the ionospheric
response to a solar ﬂare (leading edge duration, period, form, length) at the level of TEC background
ﬂuctuations. Ionospheric irregularities are characterized by a power spectrum, so that background
ﬂuctuations will always be distinguished in the frequency range of interest. However, background
ﬂuctuations are not correlated in the case of beams to the satellite spaced by an amount exceeding
the typical irregularity size.

With a typical length of X-ray bursts and EUV emission of solar ﬂares of about 5-10 min, the
corresponding ionization irregularity size does normally not exceed 30-50 km; hence the condition of

a statistical independence of TEC ﬂuctuations at spaced beams is almost always satisﬁed. Therefore,
coherent summation of responses to a ﬂare on a set of beams spaced thoughout the dayside of the
globe permits the solar ﬂare eﬀect to be detected even when the response amplitude on partial
beams is markedly smaller than the noise level (background ﬂuctuations). The proposed procedure
of coherent accumulation is essentially equivalent to the operation of coincidence schemes which are
extensively used in X-ray and gamma-ray telescopes.

If the SID response and background ﬂuctuations, respectively, are considered to be the signal and
noise, then as a consequence of a statistical independence of background ﬂuctuations the signal/noise
ratio when detecting the ﬂare eﬀect is increased through a coherent processing by at least a factor
of √N , where N is the number of LOS.

The solar ﬂares of July 29, 1999 and Decevber 28, 1999 were used to illustrate the performance
of the proposed method. Fig.1a presents the geometry of a global GPS array used in this paper to
analyze the eﬀects of the July 29, 1999 ﬂare (105 stations). Heavy dots correspond to the location
of the GPS stations. The upper scale indicate the local time, LT, corresponding to 19:00 UT. The
coordinates of the stations are not given here for reasons of space.

As is evident from Fig. 1a, the set of stations which we chose out of the global GPS network
available to us, covers rather densely North America and Europe, but provides much worse coverage
of the Asian part of the territory used in the analysis. The number of GPS stations in the Paciﬁc and
Atlantic regions is even fewer. However, coverage of the territory with partial beams to the satellite
for the limitation on elevations θ > 10◦ , which we have selected, is substantially wider. Dots
in Fig. 1a mark the coordinates of subinospheric points for the height of the F 2–layer maximum
hmax = 300 km for all visible satellites at 19:00 UT for each GPS station. A total number of beams
(and subionospheric points) used in this paper to analyze the July 29, 1999 ﬂare is 622.

Fig.1b presents the geometry of a global GPS array used in this paper to analyze the eﬀects of
the December 28, 1999 solar ﬂare, (230 stations; only for the dayside). A total number of beams
(and subionospheric points) is 1200.

Such coverage of the terrestrial surface makes it possible to solve the problem of detecting time-
coincident events with spatial resolution (coherent accumulation) two orders of magnitude higher, as
a minimum, than could be achieved in SFD detection on oblique HF paths. For simultaneous events
in the western hemisphere, the correspoding today’s number of stations and beams can be as many
as 400 and 2000–3000, respectively.

It should be noted that because of the relatively low satellite orbit inclinations, the GPS network
(and to a lesser degree GLONASS) provides poor coverage of the Earth’s surface near the poles.
However, TEC measurements in the polar regions are ineﬀective with respect to the detection of
the ionospheric response to a solar ﬂare because the amplitude of background ﬂuctuations in this
case is much higher when compared with the mid-latitude ionosphere. This is partiocularly true of
geomagnetic disturbance periods. For the same reason, equatorial stations should also be excluded
from a coherent processing.

If the Earth’s ionosphere is regarded as the ﬁlling of some global detector of X-ray and EUV
emissions, then it is possible to estimate a huge volume Vdet of the potential sensitivity region of such
a detector. This volume is equal to one-half the diﬀerence of the volumes of spheres with the radii
Rz + Hmax and Rz + Hmin

Vdet = 2π[(Rz + Hmax)3

− (Rz + Hmin)3]/3

(5)

where Hmin and Hmax are the upper and lower boundaries of the absorbing layer for a given part
of the ﬂare emission spectrum. For the EUV range, Hmin = 100 km, and Hmax = 200 km [16], which

gives the volume Vdet of order 2.65 1019 m3. For the X-ray part of the spectrum, Hmin = 60 km, and
Hmax = 80 km [16], and the corresponding volume is 0.523 1019 m3.

The actual sensitivity is in fact determined by the number of beams penetrating the region of
potential sensitivity. Furthermore, solar ﬂare-induced TEC perturbations constitute but a small part
of TEC including the height range up to 1000 km. There are methods to estimate the height in the
ionosphere, but they do not come within the province of this paper.

On the one hand, GLOBDET time resolution is limited by technical capabilities of the GPS
system. Essentially, data with a time resolution of about 30 s are currently available on the INTER-
NET, which is insuﬃcient for a detailed analysis of the ﬁne structure of the SID time dependence.
Yet this limitations seems to be transient since current multichannel two-frequency GPS receivers
can operate with a time resolution of up to 0.1 s.

On the other hand, time resolution is determined by time constants of ionization and recombina-
tion processes in the ionosphere at a given height [8], [16]; these parameters can be taken into acount
when processing the data.

5 Ionospheric response to the solar ﬂare of July 29, 1999

A powerful impulsive ﬂare of July 29, 1999 was chosen to illustrate the practical implementation of
the proposed method. The thick line in Fig. 2d shows the time dependence of the X-ray emission
intensity R(t) of this ﬂare as measured by the X-telescope BATSE on satellite CGRO in 25–50 keV
range. The envelope of the dependence R(t) represents a bell-shaped pulse of about 3-min duration
with a maximum corresponding to 19:34 UT, or to about 12:00 LT in the U.S. West (Fig. 1a).
This time interval is characterized by a low level of geomagnetic disturbance (within -10 nT), which
simpliﬁed greatly the SID detection problem.

We now describe brieﬂy the sequence of GPS data processing procedures. Primary data include
series of ”oblique” values of TEC I(t), as well as the corresponding series of elevations θ(t) and
azimuths α(t) along LOS to the satellite calculated using our developed CONVTEC program which
converts the GPS system standard RINEX-ﬁles on the INTERNET [10]. The determination of SID
characteristics involves selecting continuous series of I(t) measurements of at least a one-hour interval
in length, which includes the time of the ﬂare. Series of elevations θ(t) and azimuths α(t) of the
beam to the satellite are used to determine the coordinates of subionospheric points. In the case
under consideration, all results were obtained for elevations θ(t) larger than 10◦.

Fig. 2a presents typical time dependencies of an ”vertical” TEC I(t) for the PRN03 satellite at
the CME1 station (40.4◦N; 235.6◦E) on July 29, 1999 (thick line) and for PRN21 at the CEDA
station (40.7◦N; 247.1◦E – thin line). It is apparent from Fig. 2a that in the presence of slow TEC
variations, the SID-induced short-lasting sudden increase in TEC is clearly distinguished in the form
of a ”step” as large as 0.4 T ECU.

For the same series, similar lines in panel b.

show variations of the time derivative of TEC
dI(t)/dt with the linear trend removed and with a smoothing with the 5-min time window. The
TEC time derivative is invoked because it reﬂects electron density variations which are proportional
to the X-ray or EUV ﬂux [16].

The coherent summation of dI(t)/dti realizations was made by the formula

The (normalized to N) result of a coherent summation of the S(t)-series for all beams and GPS

S(t) =

N

Xi=1

dI(t)/dtiKi

(6)

stations located mainly on the dayside is presented in panel c (thick line). A comparison of the
resulting coherent sum of S(t) with the time dependence dI(t)/dt for individual beams presented in
panel b. conﬁrms the eﬀect of a substantial increase of the signal/noise ratio caused by a coherent
processing.

It is interesting to compare, for the same time interval, the results from a coherent summation
for the dayside and nightside. The r.m.s. of the coherent sum of S(t) in panel c. for the nightside
(thin line) is an order of magnitude (as a minimum) smaller than the SID response amplitude.

A comparison of the coherent sum of S(t) with the time dependence of the X-ray emission intensity
R(t) of the July 29, 1999 ﬂare, based on the data from the X-telescope BATSE on satellite CGRO
data in 25–50 keV range (panel d), shows their high correlation and an almost total coincidence of
the form of S(t) with the R(t) pulse envelope.

It should be noted, however, that generally TEC variations S(t) are 60 s ahead of R(t). It is
pointed out in [16] that EUV emission is mostly responsible for SID in the F -region, TEC variations
are also well correlated with X-ray ﬂares. This is also conﬁrmed by simultaneous measurements of
ﬂare emission characteristics in the X-ray and EUV ranges by the Solar Maximum Mission spacecraft
[19]. It is also observed in [16] that the EUV emission ﬂare does lead (but only slightly) the X-ray
ﬂare.

6 Ionospheric response to the solar ﬂare of December 28,

1999

A powerful impulsive ﬂare of December 29, 1999 was chosen also to illustrate the practical imple-
mentation of the proposed method. The dashed line in Fig. 3d shows the time dependence of the
X-ray emission intensity R(t) of this ﬂare as measured by the X-telescope BATSE on satellite CGRO
in 25–50 keV range (thin line). The envelope of the dependence R(t) represents a bell-shaped pulse
of about 1.5-min duration with a maximum corresponding to 00:44 UT, or to about 16:00 LT in the
U.S. West (Fig. 1b). This time interval is characterized by a low level of geomagnetic disturbance
(within - 22 nT), which simpliﬁed greatly the SID detection problem. The December 28, 1999 ﬂare
was also recorded by X-ray telescope HXT on the YOHKOH satellite (Fig. 3d - thick line; in 23-33
keV range).

Fig. 3a presents typical time dependencies of an ”vertical” TEC I(t) for the PRN26 satellite at
the LEEP station (39.1◦N; 241.7◦E) on December 28, 1999 (thick line) and for PRN04 at the CHI1
station (60.2◦N; 213.3◦E – thin line). It is apparent from Fig. 3a that in the presence of slow TEC
variations, the SID-induced short-lasting sudden increase in TEC is clearly distinguished in the form
of a ”step” as large as 0.2–0.5 T ECU.

For the same series, similar lines in panel b.

show variations of the time derivative of TEC

dI(t)/dt with the linear trend removed and with a smoothing with the 5-min time window.

The (normalized to N) result of a coherent summation of the S(t)-series for all beams and GPS

stations located mainly on the dayside is presented in panel c (thick line).

A comparison of the coherent sum of S(t) with the time dependence of the X-ray emission intensity
R(t) of the December 28, 1999 ﬂare, based on the data from the X-telescopes BATSE on satellite
CGRO data in 25–50 keV range and HXT on the YOHKOH satellite in 14-23 keV range (panel d),
shows their high correlation and an almost total coincidence of the form of S(t) with the R(t) pulse
envelope.

7 Discussion and conclusions

This paper has oﬀered a brief outline of the concept of a global detector (GLOBDET) of atmospheric
disturbances, based on phase measurements of a TEC in the ionosphere which were made using
the international network of two-frequency multichannel GPS receivers. We have discussed the
possibilities of using GLOBDET method in detecting ionospheric eﬀects of solar ﬂares. A case study
of a global ionospheric response to a powerful solar ﬂares of July 29, 1999 and December 28, 1999
illustrates the new experimental potential.

The GLOBDET technology, suggested in this paper, can be used to detect small solar ﬂares; the
body of data processed is the only limitation in this case. The high sensitivity of GLOBDET permits
us to propose the problem of detecting, in the ﬂare X-ray and EUV ranges, emissions of nonsolar
origins which are the result of supernova explosions.

For powerful solar ﬂares like the one examined in this report, it is not necessary to invoke a
coherent summation, and the SID response can be investigated for each beam. This opens the way
to a detailed study of the SID dependence on a great variety of parameters (latitude, longitude,
solar zenith angle, spectral characteristics of the emission ﬂux, etc.). With current increasing solar
activity, such studies become highly challenging. In adidtion to solving traditional problems of esti-
mating parameters of ionization processes in the ionosphere and problems of reconstructing emission
parameters [16], the data obtained through the use of GLOBDET can be used to estimate the spatial
inhomogeneity of emission ﬂuxes at scales of the Earth’s radius.

The GLOBDET technology can also be used in detecting disturbances of natural and technogenic
origins accompanied by the propagation of acoustic and acoustic-gravity waves. They include such
phenomena as explosions, rocket launches, solar eclipses, the displacement of the solar terminator,
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, heavy thunderstorms, and auroral heating. Unlike solar ﬂares,
however, the response to the above-mentioned eﬀects is not time-coincident for diﬀerent beams.
Therefore, when selecting complex factors ˜Ki, it is necessary to appropriately take into account the
amplitude attenuation and the phase delay which are caused by the propagation decay and ﬁnite
velocity (sonic and subsonic in this case) of the response in the ionosphere. Furthermore, a processing
of traveling TEC disturbances implies essentially using regional rather than global GPS networks,
which reduces the sample statistic of the beams when the signal is accumulated.

8 Acknowledgments

Author is grateful to Altyntsev A. T. and L. A. Leonovich for their encouraging interest in this study
and active participations in discussions. Author is also indebted to V. V. Grechnev, E. A. Koso-
gorov, O. S. Lesuta and K. S. Palamarchouk for preparing the input data. Thanks are also due
V. G. Mikhalkovsky for his assistance in preparing the English version of the TEX-manuscript. This
work was done with support from the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant No. 99-05-64753)
and from RFBR grant of leading scientiﬁc schools of the Russian Federation No. 00-15-98509.

References

[1] Afraimovich, E. L., K. S. Palamartchouk, and N. P. Perevalova, GPS radio interferometry of

travelling ionospheric disturbances, J. Atmos. and Solar-Terr. Phys., 60, 1205–1223, 1998.

[2] Afraimovich E. L., E. A. Kosogorov, L. A. Leonovich, K. S. Palamarchouk, N. P. Perevalova,
and O. M. Pirog, Determining parameters of large-scale traveling ionospheric disturbances of
auroral origin using GPS-arrays, J. Atmos. and Solar-Terr. Phys. 61, 2000 (accepted).

[3] Calais E. and J. B. Minster, GPS detection of ionospheric perturbations following the January

1994, Northridge earthquake, Geophys. Res. Lett., 22, 1045–1048, 1995.

[4] Calais E. and J. B.Minster, GPS detection of ionospheric perturbations following a Space Shuttle

ascent, Geophys. Res. Lett., 23, 1897–1900, 1996.

[5] Calais E., M. A. H. Hedlin, M. A. Hofton, and B. J. Minster, Ionospheric signature of surface
mine blasts from Global Positioning System measurements, Geophys. J. Int., 132, 191–202, 1998.

[6] Collin R. E. Antennas and Radiowave Propagation, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1985.

[7] Davies K. Ionospheric radio waves, Blaisdell Publishing Company, A Division of Ginn and

Company, Waltham, Massachusetts-Totonto-London, 1969.

[8] Donnelly R. F, Contribution of X-ray and EUV bursts of solar ﬂares to sudden frequency devia-

tions, J. Geophys. Res., 74, 1873–1877, 1969.

[9] Fitzgerald T. J., Observations of total electron content perturbations on GPS signals caused by

a ground level explosion, J. Atmos. and Solar-Terr. Phys., 59, 829–834, 1997.

[10] Gurtner, W., RINEX: The Receiver

Independent Exchange Format Version

2.

http://igscb.jpl.nasa.gov:80/igscb/data/format/rinex2.txt, 1993.

[11] Hofmann-Wellenhof, B., H. Lichtenegger, and J. Collins, Global Positioning System: Theory

and Practice, Springer-Verlag Wien, New York, 1992.

[12] Klobuchar, J. A., Ionospheric time-delay algorithm for single-frequency GPS users, IEEE Trans-

actions on Aerospace and Electronics System, AES 23(3), 325–331, 1986.

[13] Klobuchar, J. A., Real-time ionospheric science: The new reality, Radio Science, 32, 1943–1952,

1997.

[14] Mannucci, A. J., C. M. Ho, U. J. Lindqwister, T. F. Runge, B. D. Wilson and D. N. Yuan,
A global mapping technique for GPS-drived ionospheric TEC measurements, Radio Science, 33,
565–582, 1998.

[15] Mendillo M., J. A. Klobuchar, R. B. Fritz, A. V. da Rosa, L. Kersley, K. C. Yeh, B. J. Flaherty, S.
Rangaswamy, P. E. Schmid, J. V. Evans, J. P. Schodel, D. A. Matsoukas, J. R. Koster, A. R.
Webster, P. Chin, Behavior of the Ionospheric F Region During the Great Solar Flare of August
7, 1972, J. Geophys. Res. 79, 665–672, 1074.

[16] Mitra A. P., Ionospheric eﬀects of solar ﬂares, New Delhi -12, India, 1974.

[17] Saito A., S. Fukao and S. Miyazaki, High resolution mapping of TEC perturbations with the

GSI GPS network over Japan, Geophys. Res. Lett., 25, 3079–3082, 1998.

[18] Thome G. D and L. S.Wagner, Electron density enhancements in the E and F regions of the

ionosphere during solar ﬂares, J. Geophys. Res., 76, 6883–6895, 1971.

[19] Vanderveen K., L. E. Orwig, and E. Tandberg-Hanssen, Temporal correlations between impulsive
ultraviolet and hard X-ray busts in solar ﬂares observed with high time resolution, Astrophys. J.,
330, 480–492, 1988.

80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80

D ecem b er 2 8 , 1 9 9 9 ; 0 0 :44  U T

 L a titu d e , N   

0 0              0 4                0 8                12                1 6             2 0               L T

b

0

30

6 0

90 12 0 1 50 18 0 210 2 40 2 7 0 300 3 30 360

L o n g itu d e , E

J u ly  29 , 1 9 9 9 ;  1 9 :3 0  U T

L a titu d e , N
0
20

22

2

4

6

8

10

1 2

14

1 6

18

LT

80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80

0

30

6 0

a

L o n g itu d e , E

90 12 0 1 50 18 0 210 2 40 2 7 0 300 3 30 360

Figure:GeometryoftheGPSarrayusedinthispaperwhenanalyzingthe
e(cid:11)ectsoftheJuly	,			solar(cid:13)are( stations){a.Heavydotscorrespond
tothelocationoftheGPSstations.Theupperscaleindicatesthelocaltime,
LT,correspondingto	:  UT.Dotsshowthecoordinatesofsubionospheric
pointsfortheheightoftheF{layermaximum,hmax=  kmforallsatellites
seenat	:  UTforeachoftheGPSstations.Atotalnumberofbeams(and
subionosphericpoints)is.SameasinFig.a,butfortheDecember,			
solar(cid:13)are( stations;onlyforthedayside){b.Theupperscaleindicatesthe
localtime,LT,correspondingto  :  UT.Atotalnumberofbeamsis  .

l
o
l
o
f
o
f
o
2 9  J u ly  1 9 9 9

I(t), T E C U

C M E 1 ; P R N 0 3

C E D A ; P R N 0 3

d I(t)/d t, T E C U  1 0 3s -1

C M E 1 ; P R N 0 3

C E D A ; P R N 0 3

S (t), T E C U  1 0 3s -1

a

b

c

1 .5

1 .0

0 .5

0 .0

6 .0

4 .0

2 .0

0 .0

-2 .0

3 .0

2 .0

1 .0

d

1 9 :3 0

1 9 :3 6

1 9 :4 2

0 .0

-1 .0

4 0 0 0 0

3 0 0 0 0

2 0 0 0 0

1 0 0 0 0

1 9 :4 8

R (t), re l.u n its

0
1 9 :2 4

B A T S E
2 5 -5 0  k e V

T im e , U T
                    

Figure:TimedependencesofTEConthedaysideI(t)onJuly	,			{a,
andvariationsofthetimederivativedI(t)=dtwiththelineartrendremovedand
asmothingwiththe-mintimewindow{b,forstationsCME(PRN {thick
line)andCEDA(PRN{thinline).Thenormalizedcoherentsumofvariations
oftheTECtimederivativeS(t)forallLOSforthedayside{c(thickline).For
comparison,thinlineinpanelc.showS(t)forthenightside.d{X-rayemission
intensityvariationsR(t)asdeducedfromtheX-telescopeBATSEonsatellite
CGROdatain{ keVrange.

2 8  D ecem b er 1 9 9 9

I(t), T E C U

C H I3 ; P R N 0 4

L E E P ; P R N 2 6

d I(t)/d t, T E C U  1 0 3s -1

C H I3 ; P R N 0 4

L E E P ; P R N 2 6

S (t), T E C U  1 0 3s -1

Y O H K O H
2 3 -33  ke V

3 .0

2 .0

1 .0

0 .0

4 .0

2 .0

0 .0

-2 .0

1 .5

1 .0

0 .5

a

b

c

0 :4 2

0 :4 8

0 :5 4

d

0 .0

-0 .5

5 0 0

2 5 0

0

0 :3 6

R (t), re l.u n its

T im e , U T

B A T S E
2 5 -5 0  k e V

Y O H K O H
2 3 -3 3  k eV

Figure:TimedependencesofTEConthedaysideI(t)onDecember,
			{a,andvariationsofthetimederivativedI(t)=dtwiththelineartrend
removedandasmothingwiththe-mintimewindow{b,forstationsLEEP
(PRN{thickline)andCHI(PRN {thinline).Thenormalizedcoherentsum
ofvariationsoftheTECtimederivativeS(t)forallLOSforthedayside{c(thick
line).Forcomparison,thethinlineinpaneldshowX-rayemissionintensity
variationsR(t)asdeducedfromtheX-telescopeBATSEonsatelliteCGROdata
in{ keVrange.ThicklineshowX-rayemissionvariationsR(t)asdeduced
fromtheX-raytelescopeHXTontheYOHKOHsatellitein-keV.

