0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

1
3

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
9
9
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Formation of Structure in Snowﬁelds:
Penitentes, Suncups, and Dirt Cones

M. D. Betterton

Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138

Abstract

Penitentes and suncups are structures formed as snow melts, typically
high in the mountains. When the snow is dirty, dirt cones and other
structures can form instead. Building on previous ﬁeld observations
and experiments, this work presents a theory of ablation morphologies,
and the role of surface dirt in determining the structures formed. The
glaciological literature indicates that sunlight, heating from air, and dirt
all play a role in the formation of structure on an ablating snow surface.
The present work formulates a mathematical model for the formation
of ablation morphologies as a function of measurable parameters. The
dependence of ablation morphologies on weather conditions and initial
dirt thickness are studied, focusing on the initial growth of perturbations
away from a ﬂat surface. We derive a single-parameter expression for
the melting rate as a function of dirt thickness, which agrees well with a
set of measurements by Driedger. An interesting result is the prediction
of a dirt-induced travelling instability for a range of parameters.

1

Penitentes are structures of snow or ice [1], which commonly form during the
summer on glaciers or snow ﬁelds at high altitudes (in the Andes and Himalaya). A
penitente is a column of snow, wider at the base and narrowing to a point at the tip.
The name “penitente” is a Spanish word meaning “penitent one,” and arose because
a ﬁeld of penitentes resembles a procession of monks in white robes. Penitentes range
from one to six meters high with the spacing between columns comparable to their
height (Figure 1). Smaller structures, known as suncups or ablation hollows, can
be found in lower mountains like the Rockies and the Alps (Figure 2). Suncups are
smaller, two cm to half a meter in size.

FIG. 1. Photographs of penitentes, from Post and LaChapelle [1], p. 72. Left, penitentes
on Cerro Negro, Chile. Right, ﬁeld of penitentes, north slope of Cerro Marmolejo Norte,
Chile. Note the ice-axe, approximately 80 cm high. In the picture on the left, the snow in
the hollows has completely melted, exposing the soil underneath. This is a frequent, though
not universal, feature of penitentes [2].

The ﬁrst written record of penitentes comes from Charles Darwin, who observed

them during his travels in the mountains of Chile [3].

“Bold conical hills of red granite rose on each hand; in the valleys there
were several broad ﬁelds of perpetual snow. These frozen masses, during
the process of thawing, had in some parts been converted into pinnacles
or columns, which, as they were high and close together, made it diﬃcult
for the cargo mules to pass. On one of these columns of ice, a frozen horse
was sticking as on a pedestal, but with its hind legs straight up in the
air. The animal, I suppose, must have fallen with its head downward into
a hole, when the snow was continuous, and afterwards the surrounding
parts must have been removed by the thaw.”

An extensive literature of observations and ﬁeld experiments has documented
these ablation morphologies (see [2] for many references). Ablation in this context

2

means removal of snow by melting or sublimation. This contrasts with other pro-
cesses like wind, avalanches, and rain. There is a consensus about the causes of
ablation morphologies, although some contradictory claims do exist in the literature.
For penitentes, bright sunlight and cold, dry weather are apparently required [2],
while ablation hollows can be formed in three distinct ways, with solar illumination
important in some settings. For other locations, uniform heating from the air appears
to be the key eﬀect. The eﬀect of this “sensible” heat transfer (so called because it
is easily felt with the senses) to the snow depends on whether the snow is clean or
dirty. Since many readers are likely to be unfamiliar with the glaciological literature,
I give a brief review here.

The observational evidence for sunlight-driven formation of penitentes is abun-
dant. In early work, Matthes [4] argued that a variety of ablation forms, from sun
cups a few inches in size to penitentes many feet deep, are formed by the sun. As
he pointed out, the formation of the largest penitentes requires strong and prolonged
solar radiation—the primary reason why penitentes develop only in regions with dry
summer climates. Matthes also observed that penitentes tilt toward the elevation of
the midday sun (an observation conﬁrmed by others [1,5–8]). Such tilting is strong
evidence that the sun has an important role in the development of structure, because
the direction of incident radiation provides the symmetry axis in the problem.
In
later work, Lliboutry [8] observed that incipient penitentes begin as east-west rows.
Perhaps most important, if the weather is not dominated by direct sunlight—if the
weather is cloudy [4] or very windy [4,8]—penitentes are observed to decay. In the
1930s Troll performed an experiment trying to create penitentes [7]. The exact state-
ment (reported by Lliboutry [8]) is “Troll was able to reproduce penitents in Germany
by shining an electric bulb on fresh snow during a cold, dry night.” This supports the
sunlight mechanism, although to my knowledge no controlled laboratory experiments
have investigated light-driven structure formation.

To understand qualitatively how sunlight can cause structure formation, note
that when light is reﬂected oﬀ the snow, the base of a depression receives more
reﬂected light than the neighboring peaks. This drives an instability of the surface
and the amplitude of a perturbation grows; quantifying this argument will be a main
goal of this paper. The eﬀects of reﬂections are considered imporant by several
observers [4,8,9]. This may not be the only required eﬀect. At the high altitudes
where penitentes commonly form, the air is so cold and dry that sublimation occurs
instead of melting [10], consistent with the observations that the snow in penitentes is
quite dry [4,8]. Lliboutry [8] claims that the snow in the hollows between penitentes is
soft and wet, and that temperature variations of 5-10◦ C exist between the peaks and
the troughs. This was interpreted to indicate snow sublimating from the peaks and
melting near the troughs—an eﬀect which accelerates the growth of structure, since 7
times more heat is required to sublimate a volume of snow than to melt it. Lliboutry
believes this eﬀect to be crucial for the development of the largest structures, and

3

claims that penitentes only appear at altitudes high enough that sublimation becomes
important. But other researches report results in disagreement with this [4,6].

A diﬀerent set of observations and experiments have led to a very diﬀerent claim:
that solar illumination destroys ablation morphologies, while windy weather promotes
their growth. Leighly [11] argued that heat from air (delivered by wind) leads to the
formation of ablation polygons (cf. Figure 3). Others state [12–14] that structures
do not grow in the presence of direct sunlight. Ashwell and Hannell claim [15] that
when the incident solar power is larger than the incident power from heating by wind
the hollows decay. Detailed observations, along with wind-tunnel experiments, have
been made by Takahashi and collaborators [16,17]; they conclude that structures grow
most rapidly when the air temperature and wind speed are highest [18]. When the
weather is warm and cloudy, wind mixes the air so heat is delivered at a steady rate
to the surface; the higher the temperature and wind speed, the faster the heating.

Rhodes, Armstrong, and Warren [2] suggested a resolution to this apparent contra-
diction, which I now summarize. In their view, dirt on the snow surface is the hidden
variable distinguishing the two cases. Sunlight drives formation of penitentes in clean
snow because reﬂection into hollows makes depressions in the snow surface grow.
Any source of ablation which transfers heat uniformly to the snow surface therefore
disrupts formation of structure. However, sunlight acts diﬀerently on a dirty snow
surface. Dirt decreases the amount of reﬂected light, preventing the concentration of
sunlight in the hollows. This agrees with the Rhodes et. al. observations of suncups
on Mount Olympus. The researchers noticed that when the snow surface was covered
by a layer of ash from the eruption of Mount Saint Helens, suncups did not form.
They scraped away the ash from one patch of snow and observed the formation of
sun cups on this clean snow surface.

FIG. 2. Photographs of suncups, from Post and LaChapelle [1]. Left, suncups on the
Taku Glacier, Coast Mountains, Southeast Alaska, p. 70. Right, deep suncups in Disap-
pointment Cleaver, Mount Rainier, p. 71.

4

How does dirt aﬀect snow ablation? If the dirt thickness covering the snow is
suﬃciently thick, the dirt forms an insulating layer which slows down the ablation
rate of the snow [20]. Thus dirt can have diﬀerent eﬀects, depending on thickness.
A thin layer of dirt causes faster ablation because reﬂection is inhibited. However,
suﬃciently thick dirt slows ablation. A large amount of work has looked at how
debris-covered ice or snow melts [10,15,21]; one typically ﬁnds a peak in the ablation
rate for dirt thickness around 0.5–5 cm. One nice experiment was done by Driedger
[22], who measured ablation rate as a function of ash thickness on the South Cascade
Glacier (primarily due to melting). The typical grain sizes of the ash were 0.25 to
1.0 mm diameter, and the maximum ablation rate occurred for a dirt thickness of 3
mm. The data from her measurements are shown in Figure 6. Comparison to these
data provides a test of my model, as discussed below.

As pointed out by Ball [23], small particles of dirt adhere to the snow surface.
This is true only for suﬃciently small dirt particles: the adhesive force on the particle
must be large compared to the gravitational force [15]. When adhesion to the snow
dominates, the pieces of dirt move perpendicular to the snow surface (rather than
falling straight down) as the snow ablates. Sticky dirt therefore tends to become
concentrated on the most elevated regions of the surface. (See Figure 4.) The con-
centration of dirt on melting snow can be observed in old snow piles in cities, and is
illustrated in Figure 3. This movement of dirt normal to the melting snow surface is
quantitatively well-documented in the literature (summarized in [2]). For the argu-
ments here to be correct qualitatively, the dirt need not move completely normal to
the surface—a component of motion normal to the surface is adequate.

This mechanism explains dirt-driven structure formation: as the snow ablates,
dirt becomes concentrated on the more elevated parts of the surface. The thicker dirt

FIG. 3. Photographs of dirt-driven structure, from Workman and Workman [19]. Left,
ablation hollows with dirt collected on the ridges. The structures are reportedly 12 to 18
inches high, p. 196. Right, dirt cones, approximately 20 to 40 inches high, p. 190.

5

Melting Snow Surface

FIG. 4. Motion of dirt on a snow surface. A particle adhered to the surface of the snow
moves normal to the surface (left). When particles follow such “normal trajectories,” peaks
are stable equilibria and valleys unstable equilibria (right).

forms an insulating layer on the ridges, so they ablate more slowly. The hollows thus
grow deeper. This concentration of dirt by ablation can, in extreme cases, lead to the
formation of so-called dirt cones: cones of snow or ice covered by a thick layer of dirt
[10,20,21,24]. (See Figure 3.) These structures can become quite large: Swithinbank
[24] reports a dirt cone in the Himalaya estimated to be 85 m high! Drewry [21] has
done detailed experiments on dirt cones. He concludes that the cones ultimately reach
a steady state, where the motion of dirt toward the center of the cones is balanced
by the debris sliding down the cone when the slope angle is too large.

The proposal of Rhodes, Armstrong, and Warren [2] that uniform heating causes
structure only for dirty snow does not completely resolve the disagreement about
structure formation. Some observers who advocate uniform-heating driven formation
of ablation hollows insist that dirt on the snow surface is not required [11,13,16,17].
Indeed, some photographs show ablation hollows in clean snow inside a tunnel or on
other inverted surfaces, suggesting that neither dirt nor solar illumination are nec-
essary. How can this be explained? Some have suggested that a regular pattern of
convection cells leads to the observed polygonal pattern [11,12], but a simple esti-
mate shows this cannot give the correct size structures [25]. Another suggestion is
that the structures are formed by turbulent eddies [13,16], although Takahashi [17]
later claimed that the diameters of the hollows are independent of the eddy size.
Takahashi [17] proposed that the separation of the air boundaray layer as it ﬂows
over a cusp could produce lower temperatures at the cusp, and therefore lead to
structure formation. I am not familiar with any further theoretical or experimental
consideration of the Takahashi proposal; this mechanism for structure formation will
not be considered in this paper.

Despite the extensive observations of ablation morphologies, there is a lack of
mathematical models of their growth [26]. The goal of this paper is to quantify
the primary mechanisms discussed above, and characterize the initial stages of the
instability of a ﬂat surface. We examine how reﬂection of sunlight and dirt aﬀect
structure formation. The nonlinear evolution more appropriate to penitentes will be

6

examined in a future paper.

In this paper we consider sunlight—direct and reﬂected—the primary source of
heat which leads to snow ablation. It is well-documented that radiation is the dom-
inant heat source for ablating snow [27,28], especially at high altitudes and low lati-
tudes [6]. The importance of considering reﬂected light as well as direct illumination
is supported by the observational evidence. The fraction of light reﬂected from old
snow is about 0.5 [10,27]. Therefore the amount of heat absorbed locally (and cor-
respondingly the ablation rate) can vary by up to a factor of two for diﬀerent parts
of the surface—such a large variation can have important consequences for structure
formation. Kotlyakov and Lebedeva [6] made measurements of the albedo on a glacier
with small penitentes. In a measurement averaged over surface features, ten percent
more light was absorbed when the sun was high overhead, presumably indicating the
absorption of reﬂected light in the structures.

In the presence of dirt, sensible heating from the air may be important, in addition
to sunlight.
In this paper I focus primarily on the sunlight-dominated case, and
comment on similarities and diﬀerences with sensible heat. Modifying the model to
include sensible heating is straightforward.

By forming a quantitative model, we can test whether the eﬀects considered can
explain the appearance of structure, and describe the morphologies produced. The
primary goal is to formulate the simplest model which contains the essential physics.
Ideally the theory would contain no free parameters, that is, all parameters in the
model can be calculated or measured in experiments. We also discuss which eﬀects
are left out of the simple model, and estimate how serious are the consequences for
such omissions.

The ﬁrst part of this paper addresses clean snow only. In section I we formulate
a minimal model, and carry out the analysis of the model for small perturbations.
The linear stability analysis lets us estimate the wavelength of the fastest-growing
disturbance, and determines the initial size structures that form. This analysis allows
us to make testable predictions of the conditions necessary to observe structure.

We then discuss the eﬀect of dirt and re-formulate the model to include dirt in
section II. We compare our model to the ﬁeld experiment of Driedger and ﬁnd good
agreement. Thus reassured that the theory contains the imporant physical eﬀects,
we show how dirt alters the growth of small perturbations. We show that a thin
dirt layer suppresses the reﬂection-driven instability and induces travelling dispersive
waves on the surface. In the limit of thick dirt, we demonstrate the insulation-driven
instability expected from the discussion above.

7

I. LIGHT REFLECTION ON CLEAN SNOW

The model for penitente growth we derive here contains simplifying assumptions;
we hope to capture the essential features while neglecting some eﬀects We will discuss
the assumptions and their limits of validity as the model is developed. Some of the
most important simpliﬁcations include considering the latent heat to be constant and
including only ﬁrst-order, isotropic reﬂections. We focus on a one-dimensional model
of penitentes, assuming invariance in the transverse direction, although it is straight-
forward to generalize these equations to two dimensions or to multiple reﬂections.

We consider the height of the snow surface h(x, t), and seek an equation for the

time evolution of h.

A. Snow Ablation

Heat incident on the surface leads to ablation—the height h decreases as the snow
melts or sublimates. We assume that ablated snow vanishes into the air or drains, and
therefore that the ﬂow of water along the surface and re-freezing are not important
(and similarly that other changes in the nature of the snow are unimportant). This
model can apply to either melting or sublimation. We use the term “ablation” to
refer to removal of snow in either way.

Suppose a point on the surface absorbs a power per unit horizontal area P (x).
The latent heat required to ablate a unit volume of snow is L. Combining this with
an eﬀective diﬀusive smoothing term (see below) gives the evolution equation for the
surface:

∂h
∂t

= −

P (x)

L

+ D

∂2h
∂x2 .

(1)

For clean snow, we assume that L is a constant (independent of x). This is
true when the surface temperature and humidity are approximately constant. As
discussed in the introduction, fully developed penitentes may have melting in the
hollows and sublimation in the tips—a situation which requires L to vary along the
surface. Indeed, the variation in L might be the essential eﬀect for large structures.
For small angle structures, that is, amplitude small relative to wavelength, L =
constant should be a good approximation. Later, we will include spatial variation in
the eﬀective L due to dirt on the snow surface—see section II.

The second term in equation 1 for the surface height is a simple form of the small-
scale cutoﬀ: a diﬀusive term with diﬀusion constant D. As we will see below, in the

8

absence of any smoothing term, the model can produce arbitrarily small structures.
This is clearly not realistic, because the physics at small scales will cut oﬀ the instabil-
ity. For the qualitative results here, the exact mechanism of the small-scale cutoﬀ is
not essential; the main point is that there is some minimum size structure which can
form. A natural small-scale cutoﬀ is the extinction length of sunlight, which deﬁnes
the thickness of the snow layer in which the light scattering takes place [27]. Points
on the snow surface within one extinction length are not optically independent, and
therefore such nearby points ablate at the same rate. The extinction length depends
on the density and grain structure of the snow. The typical extinction length [27,28]
for old snow (grain radius 1 mm) is of order 1 cm [29]. We will choose the diﬀusion
coeﬃcient so that the characteristic cutoﬀ length is of order the optical extinction
length. Again, remember that this term in the height equation is a simpliﬁed rep-
resentation of the small-scale physics, and any conclusions which depend sensitively
on the form of this term should be considered suspect. Note that diﬀusion of heat
through the snow might seem another natural form of the small-scale cutoﬀ; however
the gradients of temperature in the snow are not large enough for thermal diﬀusion
to stabilize short wavelengths [30].

We note here that recent work by Nodwell and Tiedje [25] considers the scattering
of light in the snowpack in quantitative detail. They ﬁnd a range of length scales where
suncups can form (both a minimum and maximum wavelength), a result which our
simpliﬁed model cannot produce.

B. Light Reﬂection

In this section we describe the reﬂection of sunlight from the snow surface. We
assume that the sunlight shines directly down (in the −z direction) and has a uniform
power per unit length I. The parameter characterizing reﬂections is the albedo α,
which denotes the fraction of light reﬂected. Thus the absorbed power per unit length
is (1 − α)I. For old snow—called ﬁrn—a typical value is α = 0.5 [10].

The reﬂecting properties of snow are diﬀerent from those of a mirror. Snow looks
white because it scatters light in many directions, as we would expect for a rough
surface. Here we treat the light using ray optics, and assume the surface reﬂects
isotropically, thus the power is distributed uniformly into π of solid angle outside the
surface. We approximate that the reﬂection occurs at the surface of the snow. (As
mentioned above, the reﬂection takes place in a layer of order 1 cm thick. We ignore
this in formulating the reﬂections, and include its eﬀects schematically through the
diﬀusive term.)

Using these properties, the total amount of light scattered from an interval around

point x1 to the interval between x and x + dx is

9

αI
π

dθ dx1,

(2)

where dθ is the angle subtended by the surface between x and x + dx (see Figure 5).

We can ﬁnd dθ in terms of the shape of the surface.

dθ =

dl
p

= |p × ds|

p

=

∆h − ∆xh′(x)
∆h2 + ∆x2

.

where we have used h′ = ∂h/∂x and

∆x = x1 − x
∆h = h(x1) − h(x)

and ds is the vector tangent to the surface

ds = dx(1, h′)

(3)
(4)

(5)

We deﬁne the vector p, which points from the point x1 to the point x. From Figure
5, we can see that

p = √∆x2 + ∆h2

(6)

Snow Surface

h(x)

n

dθ

dl

ds

p

x’

x

x + dx

FIG. 5. Schematic of the ablating snow surface. Scattering from the point x1 to the
interval between x and x + dx depends on the angle dθ. The vector p points from x1 to
x and the increment dl is normal to p such that dθ = dl/p. The vector n is normal the
surface at x and ds is the increment along the surface between x and x + dx.

10

To ﬁnd the total power reﬂected to point x, we must add up the intensity scattered

from all points x1:

Pr(x) =

αI

π Z dx1(∆h − h′(x)∆x)

∆x2 + ∆h2

(7)

The integrand in this equation is the propagator for light intensity, it describes how
the intensity is carried from one point to another on the surface; Pr(x) is the intensity
due to a single reﬂection. To include multiple reﬂections, we can write the power as
an integral equation for P .

P (x) = (1 − α)I +

α

π Z dx1P (x1)(∆h − h′(x)∆x)

∆x2 + ∆h2

(8)

This can be written as a power series in α. We will only consider single reﬂections
here, which does not introduce a large error when α is small. For old snow, a typical
value of α ≈ 0.5. Including the higher-order correction from multiple reﬂections may
be important in determining the precise details of the largest shapes.

This formula for reﬂected intensity is not complete, because it neglects the line-of-
sight constraint. Light cannot scatter from x1 to x if the path of the light ray is blocked
by another part of the surface. This requirement is a nonlinear constraint which is
diﬃcult to handle analytically but is straighforward to implement in numerics. We
typically indicate the constraint schematically, by writing “line of sight” under the
integral:

Pr(x) =

αI

π Z line of

sight

dx1(∆h − h′(x)∆x)

∆x2 + ∆h2

We can also write a necessary (but not suﬃcient) criterion for the line of sight con-
straint, when applied to local analysis within one “basin.” The two points x and x1
are within line of sight of each other when the dot product of the vector normal to the
surface and the vector p is less than 0: −n · p = ∆h − ∆xh′(x) > 0. (See Figure 5.)
Note, however, that this simple criterion will miss intermediate bumps in the surface.
In other words, the constraint may be satisﬁed but no reﬂection occurs between x1
and x because the line of sight is blocked by an intervening peak.

C. Model

The equations combining reﬂection and ablation are

∂h
∂t

αI
L I(x) + Dh′′

= −

11

(9)

where we have deﬁned the integral

I(x) =

1

π Z line of

sight

dx1 (∆h − h′(x)∆x)

∆x2 + ∆h2

.

(10)

The intensity of the sun determines a characteristic ablation rate IL−1, where L is
the latent heat per unit volume. Combining this velocity with the diﬀusion coeﬃcient
D gives a length

and time

¯ℓ =

DL

I

¯t =

DL2
I 2 .

(11)

(12)

The solar constant gives the intensity of solar radiation at the top of the atmosphere
[28] I = 1.4 × 106 erg cm−2 sec−1; we therefore choose I = 106 erg cm−2 sec−1 as
the typical value of I under bright sunny conditions. The latent heat depends on
density. Freshly fallen snow has a density of between 0.05 and 0.2 g cm−3, while
older snow that has survived one melt season has a density range of 0.4 to 0.8 g cm−3
[10,8]. Here we pick an intermediate density of 0.3 g cm−3 for our estimates. This
gives a latent heat per unit volume for melting L = 109 erg cm−3 and a melting rate
I/L = 10−3 cm sec−1 [31]. We pick D = 2.5 × 10−5 cm2 sec−1, where this choice
is made so that the most unstable wavelength is 2 cm (see below). In this case the
length scale ¯ℓ = 0.25 mm. and the time scale ¯t = 25 seconds.

For sublimating snow, the latent heat is seven times larger. this gives the slower
melting rate I/L = 1.4 × 10−3 cm sec−1, larger length scale ¯ℓ = 1.75 mm and time
scale ¯t = 1225 seconds.

We will now perform a perturbation analysis of Equations 9 to see how the size
structures formed compares to the scale ¯ℓ. We have set up the problem so that
structures will initially form on a scale roughly comparable to ¯ℓ, and expect the
perturbation analysis to give this result.

D. Quasi-Linear Regime

Here we show how an approximate linear analysis of the equations can be per-
formed. This allows us to derive the dispersion relation, which characterizes when
the system is stable or unstable. There is a fastest growing mode determined by the

12

competition between reﬂection and diﬀusion. The length scale of this mode is related
to the basic scale ¯ℓ from dimensional analysis above; we determine the prefactor here.
The results are signiﬁcant because they describe how the physical parameters aﬀect
the instability. We will argue that reﬂection favors structures on scales as small as
possible. On the other hand, the small-scale cutoﬀ limits the smallest structures
possible. Therefore we expect the fastest-growing mode to be of order the cutoﬀ size.

The reﬂection integral is scale invariant: upon rescaling x and h by the same
amount the integral I(x) is unchanged. Thus in the absence of diﬀusion, there is
no characteristic scale in the problem. Therefore a shape with aspect ratio 1—a
shape with variations in h comparable to variations in x—should have a growth rate
of order 1 (in the absence of boundary eﬀects). The integral contributes a shape
factor independent of the amplitude of the shape δ. Therefore the rate of change of
amplitude ˙δ is constant.

To examine shapes with aspect ratio far from one, we start with an aspect-ratio 1
shape, then transform x → λx and h → δh . When δ ≪ λ, we ﬁnd that the integral
scales with the basic angle δ/λ: I → δ/λI. Thus for small perturbations, we expect
a growth rate proportional to the amplitude ( ˙δ ∼ δ).

For suﬃciently small δ/λ, we treat the contribution from the reﬂection integral as
a numerical factor of order 1. Note that a sinusoidal perturbation is not an eigenshape
for small amplitudes; we do not know what the actual eigenshapes are. The dominant
contribution is the scaling with δ, and we neglect the other (slower) dependence
on position, amplitude, etc. Thus the quasilinear equation for a small-amplitude
variation in the surface h = δ sin qx eωt is approximately

I(x) ≈

q
π

δ sin qx eωt

which gives a dispersion relation

ω =

αI
πL

q − Dq2

This argument selects a fastest-growing mode with wavenumber

q∗ =

ω∗ =

αI

2πLD
(αI)2

4π2L2D

= q2

∗D

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

These equations are the dimensional analysis result, with an estimate of the prefactor
from the scaling argument. Plugging in values of typical parameters given above, we
ﬁnd the most unstable wavelength for melting λ∗ = 2π/q∗ of 2 cm, and characteristic

13

time 4000 sec. In the case of sublimation the wavelength is 14 cm and the time 2×105
sec. The choice of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient is now clear: we chose D to give a most
unstable wavelength of 2 cm. We have put in diﬀusion as a simpliﬁed representation
of the small-scale physics, and chosen its value so that the numbers make sense. It
is important to remember that because of this choice of D, the numbers calculated
here cannot be considered a prediction of the initial size structures that form. The
calculation of real interest is how this instability is changed by dirt, as discussed in
the following section.

Although it agrees well with simulations of initial growh of perturbations which
compute the reﬂected intensity at each point , we must remember that this analysis is
only quasi-linear because we do not know the eigenfunctions of the reﬂection integral,
and superposition does not hold: because the integral is nonlocal, a surface variation
with two modes of diﬀerent wavelength cannot be described by the addition of two
modes with diﬀerent q.

II. EFFECTS OF DIRT

A layer of dirt on the surface of the snow changes its properties. We model both
the optical and insulating eﬀects of dirt, and ﬁt the theory to melting data measured
by Driedger [22] . These data allow measurement of a crucial parameter in the model,
and the good agreement between theory and experiment show that we have captured
the important eﬀects of dirt. The essential features are that thin dirt speeds ablation,
because it increases absorption, while thick dirt insulates the snow, slowing ablation.
This basic behavior leads to the two diﬀerent regimes of instability [2].

Dirt looks black because it absorbs light. The presence of dirt eﬀectively decreases
the surface albedo and therefore increases the fraction of absorbed light. We assume
light has a probability of being absorbed that is constant per unit thickness of dirt.
The fraction of light not absorbed by the dirt is e−s/se [32], where s is the dirt thickness
and se the extinction length in the dirt—typically of order the characteristic dirt
particle size. Therefore dirt modiﬁes the albedo according to

αd = αe−s/se.

(17)

Note that absorption by the dirt layer is not isotropic—more light will be absorbed
near grazing incidence, decreasing the reﬂection even more. The qualitative eﬀect
of dirt remains the same however, and thus we neglect this anisotropy.
Increased
absorption through a lower eﬀective albedo hastens snow ablation.

But the dirt also slows ablation. In the presence of an insulating dirt layer, the
temperature at the surface of the snow is decreased below the ambient temperature,

14

and more heat is required to ablate a given amount of snow. Suppose an amount of
heat L is necessary to ablate a unit area of clean snow. How much additional heat is
required in the presence of a dirt layer? At steady state the temperature satisﬁes

∇2T = 0.

(18)

When the radius of curvature of the surface is large compared to the dirt thickness
(the important limit for growth of perturbations) we can treat the snow surface as
planar, leading to variations in T in the z direction only. The boundary conditions
are: At the dirt-air interface (z = 0), the temperature must be equal to the ambient
temperature. The temperature gradient at the surface due to heat ﬂux into the dirt
from the air is T ′(z = 0) = P/κ, where P is the incident power ﬂux and κ the thermal
conductivity of the dirt. Thus we ﬁnd that the temperature at the snow surface is
less than T (z = 0) by an amount ∆T = P s/κ. An extra amount of heat ∆Q = C∆T
is needed to raise the snow temperature up to its value in the absence of dirt, where
C is the heat capacity of the snow. Thus the eﬀective latent heat for a dirt thickness
s is

Ld = L +

CP s

κ

(19)

Both L and C depend on the ambient temperature T . However, the dependence is
suﬃciently weak that we can neglect it.

Combining these two eﬀects we ﬁnd that the snow ablation velocity for a ﬂat

surface covered with dirt is

m(s) =

I
L

g(s)

where g is a dimensionless function of the dirt thickness. In this model,

g(s) =

1 − αe−s/se

1 + γs(1 − αe−s/se)

where we have deﬁned the dimensionless measure of the insulating value of dirt:

γ =

seCI
Lκ

.

(20)

(21)

(22)

The non-monotonic behavior of this curve—positive slope for small s and negative
for large s—is the important qualitative result. Note that in the absence of dirt the
ablation rate is as expected:

m(s = 0) =

(1 − α)

I
L

15

(23)

Theory       
Driedger 1981

2

1.8

1.6

1

/

)
0
=
s
(
m
m
 
e
t
a
R
g
n
i
t
l
e

M

1.4

 

1.2

0.8

0

5

10

15

20
Dirt thickness s

25

30

FIG. 6. A plot of the relative ablation rate m/m(s = 0) versus dirt thickness. The
points are the data measured by Driedger [22]. The solid curve is a one-parameter ﬁt to
Equation 21, yielding the ﬁtted γ = 0.047. Note the fastest ablation occurs for dimensionless
s ≈ 3. We picked se = 1 mm from Driedger’s measurement of the dirt particle size, and
albedo α = 0.5 from other measurements [27]. We can also estimate the parameter γ (see
text). The estimate gives γ within a factor of 2 of the value obtained from this ﬁt.

A ﬁt to the data of Driedger [22] is shown in Figure 6. Driedger measured melting
rates of a ﬂat surface for diﬀerent dirt thickness. The plot shows m/m(s = 0) versus
dimensionless dirt thickness. We picked se = 1 mm from Driedger’s measurement
of the dirt particle size. Fitting the data to Equation 21 allows us to determine the
dimensionless insulation coeﬃcient γ. For α ≈ 0.5 (from other measurements [27])
the ﬁt gives γ = 0.047. We can also estimate the parameter γ using other data (see
below). The estimate gives γ close to the value obtained from this ﬁt.

This model and the experiment of Driedger are in the regime where solar radiation
is the dominant heat source. The discussion of Rhodes et. al. [2] points out that
the ablation curve changes when sensible heating is important. In fact, if radiation
is negligible the curve will monotonically decrease as the dirt thickness increases,
because light absorption eﬀects disappear in this limit. It is straightforward to adjust
the model to include other sources of heating. Measurements of the type Driedger
performed, compared to the type of model presented here, could in principle give
information on the relative importance of radiant and sensible heating.

16

A. Dynamics of Dirt

As the snow surface ablates, the dirt layer on it moves (Figure 4). We assume
the particles are suﬃciently small that the snow moves purely normal to the surface.
The sideways (x-direction) velocity of a piece of dirt is

v = − ˙hh′

(24)

The thickness of the dirt s(x) must obey a conservation equation ˙s+∇·(vs) = 0, since
we assume dirt is neither deposited on nor removed from the surface. The evolution
equation for the thickness of dirt is thus

∂s
∂t

∂
∂x

= −

(vs) = ( ˙hh′s)′

(25)

When the surface of the snow is ﬂat (h′ = 0) the velocity of the dirt v = 0. Thus the
tops of peaks and the bottoms of valleys are equilibrium points. The peaks are stable
equilibria where dirt becomes concentrated, while valleys are unstable (Figure 4).

B. Model

We now rewrite the model equations incorporating dirt. We have equations for

the height of the surface h, the dirt thickness s, and the incident power P .

− ˙h =

P (x)

L

1
1 + C
κLP s

+ Dh′′

˙s = (cid:16) ˙hh′s(cid:17)′

(26)

(27)

The only sources of heat ﬂux P we will consider are direct and reﬂected radiation.

P (x)

L

= (1 − αe−s/se)

I
L

+

αe−s/seI

πL

Z line of

sight

dx1 (∆h − h′(x)∆x)

∆x2 + ∆h2

(28)

We use the same reference ablation rate as in Section I: I/L = 10−3 cm sec−1.
However, the presence of dirt introduces a new length scale in the problem: the length
scale for light absorption by the dirt. We choose to nondimensionalize in terms of this
length, since the physically important regimes of thin and thick dirt are measured
relative to this thickness. When Driedger measured diameters of ash particles on
a glacier, 90 percent of the particles had diameters between 0.25 and 1.0 mm [22].

17

We therefore choose se = 1 mm as the order of magnitude extinction length for dirt
absorption; this choice is supported by the good ﬁt to the data.

The dimensionless timescale comes from combining the ablation rate and length
scale: ¯td = Lse/I = 100 seconds. This is the time for a depth se of snow to melt
in bright sun. Glacial debris has κ ≈ 2 × 104 erg cm−1 sec−1 ◦K [33]. This allows
us to estimate the dimensionless parameter γ = seCI/(Lκ) = 0.03. Note that the
thermal conductivity and the speciﬁc heat depend on the density, wetness, etc. The
ﬁt to Driedger’s data (Figure 6) gives a value of γ ≈ 0.047, somewhat larger than
this estimate. We interpret this as a measurement of the dirt thermal conductivity
κ, and therefore use the implied value κ = 1.3 × 104 erg cm−1sec−1 ◦K. The nondi-
mensionalized diﬀusion constant is D¯td/s2

e = 0.25.

For sublimation the time scale ¯td ≈ 700 seconds and the dimensionless diﬀusion
e ≈ 1.75; the dimensionless parameter γ similarly decreases by a factor

constant D¯td/s2
of 7.

The nondimensionalized equations are

P

+ D∇2h

1 + γP s

˙h = −
˙s = (cid:16) ˙hh′s(cid:17)′
P = r(1 − αe−s) +

αe−sr

π

Z line of

sight

dx1 (∆h − h′(x)∆x)

∆x2 + ∆h2

(29)

(30)

(31)

The dimensionless control parameters are r, the solar light intensity; and s, the initial
dirt thickness. Here we have introduced the parameter r:

r =

I
L

103 sec/cm

(32)

to examine the eﬀects of varying the light intensity away from the typical value.

C. Linear Analysis

Here we analyze the stability of equations (29–31), including eﬀects of dirt. There
are two important regimes: when the initial dirt thickness is small compared to se,
the dirt acts to modify the reﬂection-driven instability. We ﬁnd that the instability is
suppressed by the absorption of the dirt layer, exponentially in the dirt thickness. In
this regime, dirt can also a induce travelling, dispersive instability of the snow surface.
Qualitatively, this dispersion arises from the coupling of dirt motion to absorption.
Dirt migrates to the highest point on the surface—but then the thicker dirt increases

18

FIG. 7. The symmetric (left) and antisymmetric (right) modes of dirt modulation.
The antisymmetric mode is the physically important one because the symmetric mode is
unstable.

the ablation of that peak, and it ablates until it is no longer a local maximum. The
existence of these waves is an experimentally testable prediction which has not, to
my knowledge, been discussed before.

The other limit is when the dirt thickness is large compared to se. The eﬀective
albedo αe−s → 0. Therefore the dirt instability is independent of light reﬂections;
the “light” therefore acts simply as a source of heat. The instability is driven by
dirt insulating the snow. The characteristic length and time scale of the instability
depends only on the thermal properties of the dirt. Within this insulation-dominated
regime, the behavior of the instability depends on whether s ≪ 1/(γr) or s ≫
1/(γr)—see below. Thus there are three diﬀerent regimes of behavior, depending the
dirt thickness.

As mentioned above, under diﬀerent weather conditions uniform heating from the
air may be more important than radiant heating. In this case any amount of dirt slows
ablation of the snow [2], and the insulation-driven instability is the only one possible.
This can be included in the model by removing the dirt-dependent absorption of light.

We will perform a linear perturbation analysis: we assume that variations of the
dirt thickness ∆s are always small. However, the initial uniform dirt thickness so may
be large or small relative to se; this initial thickness determines the limit of instability.

D. Thin Dirt Limit

Here we consider the limit so ≪ se, meaning the initial uniform dirt thickness is

small compared to the extinction length.

There are in general two modes of dirt modulation (Figure 7): the symmetric
mode with constant thickness and the antisymmetric mode with ∆s = 2ǫ cos qx. The
symmetric mode, because it has constant thickness, it simpler to analyze. Note that
constant dirt thickness is unstable: any modulation in the dirt thickness tends to
grow.

19

1. Symmetric Mode

Because the symmetric mode has constant thickness, it insulates the snow surface
uniformly. Therefore, no thick dirt instability can arise from the symmetric mode.
But the symmetric mode aﬀects the reﬂection-driven instability. We look for solutions
of the form

h = −mt + δeωt cos qx

(33)

where m(s) is the ablation rate of a ﬂat surface covered with dirt, calculated above.
The dirt thickness so = constant. We expand the equations to ﬁrst order in δ. The
resulting dispersion relation is

ω =

αre−soq

π(1 + (1 − α)γrso)2 − Dq2.

(34)

Compare this to the clean snow dispersion relation, Equation 14. The ﬁrst term
(proportional to q) contains the factor e−so. This term decreases exponentially with
increasing dirt thickness. For so much larger than one, this term is so small that the
instability practically does not exist. The factor (1 + (1 − α)γrso)2 in the dispersion
relation results from uniform insulation by the dirt layer.

The most unstable mode q∗ is

q∗ =

αre−so

2πD(1 + (1 − α)γrso)2
∗D

ω∗ = q2

(35)

(36)

Figure 8 shows how dirt cuts oﬀ the instability, with ﬁxed light intensity r = 1. When
so ≪ 1, the wavelength is close to the wavelength in the absence of dirt. However,
the absorption of light by dirt becomes important for so > 0.1 and the wavelength
increases exponentially. As the wavelength increases, the growth rate of the instability
decreases, and the instability becomes less readily observed.

2. Antisymmetric Mode

The antisymmetric mode involves variations in the thickness of the dirt. We must
solve for the coupling between snow ablation and dirt motion. The solution is of the
form

h = −mt + δeωt cos qx
s = so + 2ǫeωt cos qx

20

(37)
(38)

10

 

λ
h
t
g
n
e
l
e
v
a
W

 

*

5

1
0
10−2

10−1
Dirt Thickness s

100

FIG. 8. Wavelength of the Reﬂection-Driven Instability. The wavelength is normalized
to the most unstable wavelength of clean snow. When so ≪ 1, the wavelength is close to
the wavelength in the absence of dirt. However, the absorption of light by dirt becomes
important for so > 0.1 and the wavelength increases rapidly. The plot is for ﬁxed solar
intensity r = 1, a typical value. Parameter values for this plot are as discussed in the text:
α = 0.5, D = 0.25, γ = 0.047.

where s is the uniform dirt thickness at t = 0. Upon linearization, Equation 30 for
the motion of dirt relates the perturbation amplitudes

ǫ
δ

=

msoq2

2ω

.

The dispersion relation, to second order in q, is

ω = [1 ± qf ]

αre−soq

2π(1 + γr′so)2 − [1 ∓

1
√f

]

Dq2

2

(39)

(40)

where f is, deﬁning w = 1/(1 + (1 − α)γrso) and recalling m = (1 − αe−so)rw is the
dimensionless melting rate as a function of dirt thickness,

f = (αre−soπ−1w2)2(1 +

4som(m2γ − αre−sow2)

(αre−soπ−1w2)2

(41)

In the limit so → 0, this dispersion relation is identical to the symmetric mode.
However, for increasing dirt thickness it contains eﬀects from the dirt modulation.
The term f can be negative, leading to an oscillatory component to ω. Thus dirt can
cause the instability to travel on the snow surface, in a region of phase space shown

21

101

r
 
t
a
e
H

100

 
t
n
e
d
i
c
n
I

10−1

Travelling
Instability 

10−2

10−1

Dirt Thickness s

100

FIG. 9. Travelling Instability in the Reﬂection-Driven Instability. Under the line, there
is an imaginary part of ω, showing the regime where travelling waves exist. The dirt
thickness is normalized so so = 1 corresponds to one extinction length; similarly, r = 1 is
a typical intensity of sunlight. For the typical solar brightness r = 1, any dirt thickness
so > 0.008 will show a travelling instability; therefore most dirty snow surfaces should show
this behavior. Parameter values for this plot are as discussed in the text: α = 0.5, D = 0.25,
γ = 0.047.

in Figure 9. For the typical solar brightness r = 1, any dirt thickness so > 0.008
will induce travelling; therefore, most dirty snow surfaces should show this behavior.
Qualitatively, this arises from the coupling of dirt motion to absorption. Dirt migrates
to the highest point on the surface—but then the thicker dirt increases the ablation
of that peak, and it ablates until it is no longer a local maximum. The positive and
negative roots in the dispersion relation correspond to left and right moving modes.
The existence of these travelling instabilities is an experimentally testable prediction.

Note that the equation is not well-behaved for f = 0. When f = 0 the terms
in the equation coupling motion of dirt to ablation vanish; the dispersion relation
reduces to the expression for the symmetric mode above.

When f is negative, we can ﬁnd the fastest growing wavelength by looking at the

real part of ω:

q∗ =

ω∗ =

αe−sor

2πD(1 + (1 − α)γrso)2
D
2

q2

∗

22

(42)

(43)

E. Thick Dirt Limit

The equations are considerably simpliﬁed in the limit of thick dirt so ≫ 1. The
eﬀective albedo αe−so → 0. Therefore the dirt instability is independent of any
reﬂections; the quasi-linearized equations are truly linear in this limit. The thick-dirt
instability is driven purely by dirt motion coupled to slower ablation under a thicker
dirt layer. This instability is the linear precursor to the dirt cones of Figure 3.

Note that if light is not an important source of heat, the “thick dirt limit” is

actually valid for all dirt thicknesses.

1

*

λ

0.5

0.25

0

100

101

102
Dirt Thickness s

103

FIG. 10. Most unstable wavelength λ∗ versus dirt thickness so, with typical heat ﬂux
r = 1. The wavelength is normalized to the most unstable wavelength of clean snow.
Comparing this ﬁgure to the thin-dirt instability, we see that when so > 1 the wavelength
will initially decrease, then increase beyond so = 20. The growth rate of this instability will
be greatest where the wavelength is smallest.

Replacing αe−so → 0, the symmetric mode disappears. The background ablation

rate m = r/(1 + γrso). The dispersion relation is, to second order in q,

√γsom3

2

D
2

q2

q −

ω = ±

(44)

Here no imaginary component to the dispersion relation is present; it is a straight-
forward linear instability with one growing mode. The most unstable wavenumber
is

q∗ =

1
2D

vuut

γr3so

(1 + γrso)3

23

(45)

For a ﬁxed value of the heat input r, the most unstable wavelength scales diﬀerently
at small and large so:

λ∗ ∼ s−1/2

o

for so ≪ 1/(γr)

∼ so for so ≫ 1/(γr)

(46)
(47)

The location of the minimum wavelength is determined by the dimensionless param-
eter γ, which represents how well the snow insulates per unit thickness. Therefore,
even for optically thick dirt so ≫ 1 there is a change in the behavior, depending on
the value of so compared to the insulation parameter. Since typically γr = 0.05, these
limits are consistent.

There is an optimal so ∼ 1/(γr) ≈ 2 cm where the wavelength is smallest. Figure
10 illustrates this: it shows the unstable wavelength vs. dirt thickness for the typical
r = 1, with the optimal so ≈ 20 ≈ 2 cm. Comparing this ﬁgure to the thin-dirt
instability, we see that when so > 1 the wavelength will initially decrease, then
increase beyond so = 20. The growth rate of this instability will be greatest where
the wavelength is smallest.

III. DISCUSSION: COMPARISON TO EXPERIMENT

This paper has presented work on a simple theory to describe the initial formation
ablation structures such as suncups, penitentes and dirt cones. We have tried to
make the model as simple as possible while including the essential physics. As we
have shown, most parameters in the equations can be calculated or measured in
experiments, allowing predictions with no free parameters. The exception is the
eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient D, which we estimate using the value for light diﬀusion.
However, we have not realistically treated the small-scale scattering of light in these
schematic results.

At this point, the only quantitative comparison between this model and experi-
ment is the prediction of ablation rate of a ﬂat snow surface, compared with the data
of Driedger in Figure 6. This measurement allows us to extract the dimensionless
constant governing dirt insulation. The good agreement indicates we have captured
the important eﬀects of dirt.

The linear stability analysis of the equations shows the two types of instability
described in the literature. The model predicts the dependence of the most unstable
wavelength and characteristic growth rate on the experimental control parameters,
predictions which could be tested. We argue that for little or no surface dirt, light
reﬂection drives the instability. This instability is exponentially suppressed by a dirt
layer, consistent with ﬁeld observations. We predict travelling modes induced by a

24

modulated dirt layer in this regime. The existence of such travelling modes is an
experimentally testable new phenomenon.

In the presence of a thick layer of dirt, our analysis ﬁnds the insulation-driven in-
stability, as expected. Here we predict an optimal dirt thickness where the instability
is most easily observed, which depends on the thermal properties of the dirt.

The visually striking structures in the ﬁeld are the larger structures: penitentes
and dirt cones. Understanding the nonlinear regime of the model presented here is
therefore of interest, and will be the subject of a future paper. The scale of both pen-
itentes and dirt cones is typically larger than the size of smaller-amplitude structures.
One way to explain this, which has been suggested from observations [8,20], is that
large structures grow at the expense of small ones. Such coarsening behavior is also
apparent in preliminary work on the nonlinear regime of the model presented here.

The most obvious problem with the results here is that we have considered vari-
ation of the surface height in only one direction. Checking whether the results are
the same for a realistic 2D surface is a necessary extension of this work. A better
understanding of the small-scale cutoﬀ is also important. In particular, we need to
understand how using diﬀerent representations of the short-scale physics aﬀect the
numerical predictions (of the fastest-growing wavelength, for example).

Because the model here is simpliﬁed, we have left out some physical eﬀects which
may be important in the experiment. Our treatment of light reﬂection considered
single reﬂections only, which may be a bad approximation with the albedo is close to
1 (large amount reﬂected). In the ﬁeld, the sun of course is not always high overhead—
the variation of the angle of incident light over the course of the day might change the
shapes. Other possibly important eﬀects which can occur in ﬁeld situations include
other sources of heat transfer to the surface, gravity, and the deposition/removal of
dirt. Better comparison with lab or ﬁeld experiments should indicate which of these
eﬀects are most important to include.

Acknowledgements: I am grateful to John Wettlaufer and Norbert Untersteiner
I thank Eric Nodwell and Tom Tiedje for discussing
for comments on this paper.
their work on this problem with me. I also wish to thank Michael Brenner, Daniel
Fisher, David Weitz, Martine Benamar, David Lubensky, and David Nelson for helpful
discussions, questions, and criticism. This work was supported by the NSF under
grant DMS9733030.

25

REFERENCES

[1] A. Post and E. R. LaChapelle. Glacier Ice. University of Washington Press,

Seattle and London, 1971.

[2] J. J. Rhodes, R. L. Armstrong, and S. G. Warren. Mode of formation of “ablation
hollows” controlled by dirt content of snow. Journal of Glaciology, 33:135–139,
1987.

[3] Charles Darwin. The Voyage of the Beagle, Chapter XV: Passage of the

Cordillera. 1836. The quotation is from the entry for March 22, 1835.

[4] F. E. Matthes. Ablation of snow-ﬁelds at high altitudes by radiant solar heat.

Transactions of the American Geophysical Union, 15:380, 1934.

[5] S. Hastenrath and B. Koci. Micro-morphology of the snow surface at the Quelc-

caya ice cap, Peru. Journal of Glaciology, 97:423, 1981.

[6] V. M. Kotlyakov and I. M. Lebedeva. Nieve and ice penitentes. Their way of
formation and indicative signiﬁcance. Zeitschrift fur Gletscherkunde und Glazial-
geologie, 10:111, 1974.

[7] C. Troll. Busserschnee in den Hochgebirgen der Erde. Petermanns Geographische

Mitteilungen, 1942. Erganzungsheft Nr. 240.

[8] Louis Lliboutry. The origin of penitents. Journal of Glaciology, 2:331–338, 1954.
[9] G. C. Amstutz. On the formation of snow penitentes. Journal of Glaciology,

3:304–311, 1958.

[10] Douglas I. Benn and David J. A. Evans. Glaciers and Glaciation. Wiley, 1998.
[11] J. Leighly. Cuspate surfaces of melting ice and ﬁrn. Geographical Review, 38:301,

1948.

[12] W. E. Richardson. Dirt polygons. Weather, 9:117, 1954.
[13] W. E. Richardson and R. D. M. Harper. Ablation polygons on snow—further

observations and theories. Journal of Glaciology, 3:25, 1957.

[14] A. Jahn and M. Klapa. On the origion of ablation hollows (polygons) on snow.

Journal of Glaciology, 7:299, 1968.

[15] I. Y. Ashwell and F. G. Hannell. Experiments on a snow-patch in the mountains

of sweden. Journal of Glaciology, 6:135, 1966.

[16] S. Takahashi, T. Fujii, and T. Ishida. Origin development of polygonal ablation

hollows on a snow surface. Low Temperature Science Series A, (31):191, 1973.

[17] S. Takahashi. A study on ablation hollows on a melting snow surface. Low Tem-

perature Science Series A, (37):13, 1978.

[18] The articles describing these experiments are in Japanese, which the author un-

fortunately does not understand.

[19] Fanny Bullock Workman and William Hunter Workman. Peaks and Glaciers of

Nun Kun. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1909.

[20] J. W. Wilson. The initiation of dirt cones on snow. Journal of Glaciology, 2:281–

287, 1953.

26

[21] D. J. Drewry. A quantitative assessment of dirt-cone dynamics. Journal of

Glaciology, 11:431–446, 1972.

[22] C. L. Driedger. Eﬀect of ash thickness on snow ablation. In P. W. Lipman and
D. R. Mullineaux, editors, The 1980 Eruptions of Mount St. Helens, Washing-
ton, Geological Survey Professional Paper 1250, pages 757–760. United States
Government Printing Oﬃce, 1981.

[23] F. K. Ball. Dirt polygons on snow. Weather, 9:322, 1954.
[24] C. Swithinbank. The origin of dirt cones on glaciers. Journal of Glaciology, 1:471,

1950.

[25] Eric Nodwell and Thomas Tiedje. Personal communication. 2000.
[26] Rhodes, Armstrong, and Warren [2] report two “initial attempts at modeling”
published in German. Currently Nodwell and Tiedje are investigating the forma-
tion of suncups (personal communication). They consider in detail the scattering
of light in the snowpack, and deduce a range of allowable suncup sizes from this.
[27] W. J. Wiscombe and S. G. Warren. A model for the spectral albedo of snow. I:

Pure snow. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 37:2712–2733, 1980.

[28] C. J. Van Der Veen. Fundamentals of Glacier Dynamics. A. A. Balkema, 1999.
[29] Note that the 1 cm extinction length comes primarily from near-infrared
wavelengths—the wavelengths of light which make the dominant contribution
to the albedo and to ablation. Shorter wavelengths of visible light can penetrate
much farther into the snow, 20 to 50 cm in old snow. See Wiscombe and Warren
[27] for a thorough discussion of these eﬀects.

[30] One might think that diﬀusion of heat through the snow can be an important
stabilizing factor. However, a simple calculation shows that this is not suﬃcient
to provide a short-wavelength cutoﬀ. I coupled temperature diﬀusion in the snow
with heat conservation on the interface, assuming constant temperature in the
air. This gives a dispersion relation with a q term from reﬂections, as in the text,

and a term proportional to −√1 + q2 from diﬀusion in the snow. As a result
of this q dependence, at short wavelengths the stabilization by heat diﬀusion is
controlled by a dimensionless parameter ∆ = (Ts − T∞)C L−1, where Ts − T∞
is the temperature diﬀerence between the surface of the snow and deep in the
snow, C is the speciﬁc heat, and L the latent heat. In order for heat diﬀusion
in the snow to stabilize short wavelengths, we must have ∆ ≥ 0.47. However,
C/L ≈ 6 × 10−3/ ◦K. Thus for a temperature diﬀerence of 10 ◦C the parameter
∆ ≈ 6 × 10−2, which is far too low to provide the cutoﬀ.
[31] If most melting takes place during four hours of the day when the sun is most
intense, this number gives 14 cm/day for the melting rate of the snow. It is useful
to compare this to the ﬁeld measurements of Kotlyakov and Lebedeva on peni-
tente formation [6]. If we divide their measurement of the total radiation received
in one day by the solar intensity at noon, we would get 3.5 hours estimated il-
lumination time. They typically found snow height decreases of 6 cm/day. Thus
our estimate may be too high, but is the correct order of magnitude. Kotlyakov

27

and Lebedeva found 1.5 m high penitentes formed in 24 days.

[32] When deﬁned this way, se is an extinction length for reﬂections, which diﬀers by

a factor of two from the transmission extinction length.

[33] Drewry [21] deduces a value of 5.6 × 104 erg cm−1 sec−1 ◦K for debris covering
dirt cones, which he compares to other measurements for sand around 2 × 104
erg cm−1 sec−1 ◦K.

28

