0
0
0
2

 
l
u
J
 

2
1

 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 

1
v
6
3
0
7
0
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ionospheric eﬀects of the solar ﬂares of

September 23, 1998 and July 29, 1999 as deduced

from global GPS network data

Afraimovich E. L., Altyntsev A. T., Kosogorov E. A., Larina N. S.,

and Leonovich L. A.

Institute of Solar-Terrestrial Physics SD RAS,

p. o. box 4026, Irkutsk, 664033, Russia

fax: +7 3952 462557; e-mail: afra@iszf.irk.ru

Abstract

This paper presents data from ﬁrst GPS measurements of global re-
sponse of the ionosphere to solar ﬂares of September 23, 1998 and July
29, 1999. The analysis used novel technology of a global detection of iono-
spheric eﬀects from solar ﬂares (GLOBDET) as developed by one of the
authors (Afraimovich E. L.). The essence of the method is that use is
made of appropriate ﬁltering and a coherent processing of variations in
total electron content (TEC) in the ionosphere which is determined from
GPS data, simultaneously for the entire set of visible (over a given time
interval) GPS satellites at all stations used in the analysis. It was found
that ﬂuctuations of TEC, obtained by removing the linear trend of TEC
with a time window of about 5 min, are coherent for all stations and beams
to the GPS satellites on the dayside of the Earth. The time proﬁle of TEC
responses is similar to the time behavior of hard X-ray emission variations
during ﬂares in the energy range 25-35 keV if the relaxation time of elec-
tron density disturbances in the ionosphere of order 50-100 s is introduced.
No such eﬀect on the nightside of the Earth has been detected yet.

1 Introduction

The enhancement of X-ray and ultraviolet radiation intensity that is observed
during chromospheric ﬂares on the Sun immediately causes an increase in electron
density in the ionosphere. These density variations are diﬀerent for diﬀerent
altitudes and are collectively called Sudden Ionospheric Disturbances (SID). SID
observations provide a key means for ground-based detection of solar ﬂares along
with optical observations of ﬂares and solar radio burst observations. Much

1

research is devoted to SID studies, among them a number of thorough reviews
and monographs [14].

Unlike eﬀects in the optical and radio ranges, ionospheric eﬀects of ﬂares
are of special interest as they constitute a response of ionospheric plasma to an
impulsive ionization.

Quantitative study of SID has two major implications at present. SID data
in the D-region that were obtained predominantly by recording amplitude and
phase characteristics of signals from LF and VLF radio stations can be the source
of information about the X-ray part of the ﬂare spectrum, as well as providing a
tool for investigating the principal chemical processes in this region.

SID data for the F -region acquired by diﬀerent radio probing methods were
used repeatedly to estimate time variations in the X-ray and extreme ultraviolet
(EUV) spectral regions and in relative measurements of ﬂuxes in diﬀerent wave-
length ranges [7]; [16]; [12]. The main body of SID data for the Earth’s upper
atmosphere was obtained in earlier detections of Sudden Frequency Deviations
(SFD) of the F -region-reﬂected radio signal in the HF range [6]; [7].

SFD are caused by an almost time-coincident increase in E- and F-region
electron densities at over 100 km altitudes covering an area with the size com-
parable to or exceding that of the region monitored by the system of HF radio
paths. A limitation of this method is the uncertainty in the spatial and altitude
localization of the UV ﬂux eﬀect, the inadequate number of paths, and the need
to use special-purpose equipment.

Another highly informative technique is the incoherent scatter (IS) method,
one of the most universal tools for ionosphere research. In [16], important infor-
mation was obtained about the height distribution of the decrease in local electron
density Ne during the ﬂares of May 21 and 23, 1967. A signiﬁcant increase of Ne
(by as much as 200 %) was recorded in the E-region, which decreased gradually
in the F-region with an up to 10-30 % increase of the height and remained dis-
tinguishable up to 300 km. Ne starts to increase initially in the E-region, while
at higher altitudes it is observed to be delayed, which is particularly conspicuous
at the F-region heights.

The Millstone Hill IS facility recorded the ﬂare of August 7, 1972 [13]. The
measurements were made in the range from 125 to 1200 km, i.e. to the alti-
tudes exceeding greatly those of all preceding observations. The increase of Ne
amounted to 100 % at 125 km altitude and to 60 % at 200 km.

Implementing the IS method requires extremely sophisticated, expensive
equipment. There are only a few IS facilities world-wide, which are concentrated
mainly in America and Europe. These systems were designed for solving a broad
gamut of scientiﬁc problems and do not provide round-the-clock observations of
ionospheric eﬀects from solar ﬂares. An added diﬃculty involves inadequate time
resolution. Currently it is common knowledge that the rise and fall time of the
solar ﬂare emission in the range 10-1030 ˚A, which has eﬀect on the ionospheric
- and F -regions, is often shorter than 5-10 min, typical of the IS method’s time

2

resolution. Since the relaxation time of electron density in the E- and F 1-regions
is also less than 5-10 min, most incoherent scatter measurements lack adequate
time resolution for studying ionospheric eﬀects of ﬂares.

The eﬀect of solar ﬂares on the ionospheric F -region is also manifested as a
Sudden Increase of Total Electron Content (SITEC) which was measured previ-
ously using continuously operating VHF radio beacons on geostationary satellites
[14]; [12].

In [12], a pioneering attempt was made to realize global observations of the
outstanding ﬂare of August 7, 1972 using 17 stations in North America, Europe,
and Africa. The observations covered a territory whose boundaries were separated
by 70◦ in latitude and by 10 hours in local time. For diﬀerent stations, the value
of dI (TEC increase) varied from 1.8 1016 −2 to 8.6 1016 −2 , or 15 − 30% of a
total electron content. These investigations revealed a latitudinal dependence of
the amount of TEC increase. The low latitudes showed a larger increase of TEC
compared with the high latitudes. Besides, the authors point out no correlation
between the value of TEC increase and the solar zenith angle.

A limitation of the SITEC method is the integral character of results which
reﬂect the electron density variation in the height range from 100 to 2000 km.
If, however, it is taken into consideration that only a few current methods en-
able ﬂare eﬀects to be recorded in the ionospheric F -region, SITEC observations
should be recognized as one of the most convenient tools for continuous observa-
tions of the F -region.

A serious limitation of methods based on analyzing VHF signals from geo-
stationary satellites is their small and ever increasing (with the time) number
and the nonuniform distribution in longitude. Hence it is impossible to make
measurements in some geophysically interesting regions of the globe, especially
in high latitudes.

Consequently, none of the above-mentioned existing methods can serve as an
eﬀective basis for the radio detection system to provide a continuous, global SID
monitoring with adequate space-time resolution. Furthermore, the creation of
these facilities requires developing special-purpose equipment, including powerful
radio transmitters contaminating the radio environment.

The advent and evolution of a Global Positioning System, GPS, and also the
creation on its basis of widely branched networks of GPS stations (at least 600
sites at the end of 1999, the data from which are placed on the INTERNET)
opened up a new era in remote ionospheric sensing.
In the very near future
this network will be extended by integrating with the Russian navigation system,
GLONASS [11]. Furthermore, there exist also powerful regional networks such as
the Geographical Survey Institute network in Japan [15] consisting of up to 1000
receivers. High-precision measurements of the group and phase delay along the
line-of-sight (LOS) between the receiver on the ground and transmitters on the
GPS system satellites covering the reception zone are made using two-frequency
multichannel receivers of the GPS system at almost any point of the globe and

3

at any time simultaneously at two coherently coupled frequencies f1 = 1575.42
MHz and f2 = 1227.60 MHz.

The sensitivity of phase measurements in the GPS system is suﬃcient for de-
tecting irregularities with an amplitude of up to 10−3–10−4 of the diurnal TEC
variation. This makes it possible to formulate the problem of detecting iono-
spheric disturbances from diﬀerent sources of artiﬁcial and natural origins. Re-
cently some authors embarked actively on the development of detection tools for
the ionospheric response of powerful earthquakes [3], rocket launches [4], and in-
dustrial surface explosions [8]; [5]. Subsequetly, the GPS data began to be used in
the context of the spaced-receiver method using three GPS stations to determine
the parameters of the full wave vector of traveling ionospheric disturbances under
quiet and disturbed geomagnetic conditions [1]; [2].

The objective of this paper is to develop a method of global detection of the
ionospheric eﬀect from solar ﬂares (GLOBDET) using the international GPS net-
work. This method would improve substantially the sensitivity and space-time
resolution of analysis when compared with the above-mentioned radio probing
methods. General information about the ﬂares being analyzed here and a de-
scription of the experimental geometry are given in Section 2. The processing
technique for the data from the GPS network and results of an analysis of the
ionospheric eﬀect from the solar ﬂares of September 23, 1998 and July 29, 1999
are outlined in Section 3. Section 4 discusses the results obtained. A modeling
of the physical processes involving ﬂare eﬀects on the ionosphere using GPS data
and, moreover, the development of methods for solving their inverse problem of
reconstructing emission characteristics using GPS data will be subject of future
research.

2 Experimental geometry, and general data on
the solar ﬂares of September 23, 1998 and
July 29, 1999

For studying the ionospheric response to the ionizing emission from solar ﬂares,
we chose relatively powerful (according to an X-ray classiﬁcation) ﬂares whose
time proﬁle was characterized by intense short-duration impulses of hard X-ray
emission. The two ﬂares selected appear in Table 1. The table also provides
information about the characteristics of the CGRO- and YOHKOH-borne X-ray
detectors, the data from which are compared with the ionospheric response to
these ﬂares in this paper.

Fig. 1 presents the geometry of a global GPS array used in this paper to
analyze the eﬀects of ﬂare 23 September 1998 (102 stations – a.) and 29 July
1999 (105 station–b.). Heavy dots correspond to the location of the GPS stations.
The coordinates of the stations are not given here for reasons of space. The upper

4

scales indicate the local time, LT, corresponding to 07:00 UT, a maximum increase
in X-ray emission intensity of the ﬂare 23 September 1998 and 19:30 UT for 29
July 1999 (see Section 3)).

As is evident from Fig.1, the set of stations which we chose out of the global
GPS network available to us, covers rather densely North America and Europe,
but provides much worse coverage of the Asian part of the territory used in the
analysis. The number of GPS stations in the Paciﬁc and Atlantic regions is even
fewer. However, coverage of the territory with partial beams to the satellite
for the limitation on elevations θ > 10◦ , which we have selected, is substantially
wider. Dots in Fig. 1c mark the coordinates of subinospheric points for the height
of the F 2–layer maximum hmax = 300 km for all visible satellites at 29 July 1999,
19:30 UT for each GPS station. A total number of beams (and subionospheric
points) used in this paper to analyze the July 29, 1999 ﬂare is 622.

Such coverage of the terrestrial surface makes it possible to solve the problem
of detecting time-coincident events with spatial resolution (coherent accumula-
tion) two orders of magnitude higher, as a minimum, than could be achieved
in SFD detection on oblique HF paths. For simultaneous events in the western
hemisphere, the correspoding today’s number of stations and beams can be as
many as 400 and 2000–3000, respectively.

Figs. 2b and 3b show the time dependencies of ﬂare emission. Time proﬁles
of soft X-ray emission were acquired by the GOES-10 satellite, the data from
which are available on the SPIDER network (marked by the symbol o). Dashes
in Figs. 2b and 3b represent values for the low-energy 1-8˚A channel. The time
proﬁle of the signal in the 0.5-4˚A channel was alike. A comparative analysis of
these series is made in Section 6.

The study was based on events, for which ﬂare emission data with a time
resolution of about one second were available. The September 23, 1998 ﬂare was
recorded by X-ray telescope HXT on the YOHKOH satellite (Fig. 3b). Operat-
ing in the ﬂare mode, the HXT telescope provides observations in four energy
channels (14-23 keV, 23-33 keV, 33-53 keV, and 53-93 keV) with a resolution of
0.5 s. The second event was observed by the BATSE spectrometer on the CGRO
satellite which is capable of recording solar X-ray emission with diﬀerent tem-
poral and spectral resolutions. This study utilized DISCLA data written in four
channels (25-50 keV, 50-100 keV, 100-300 keV, and over 300 keV) at 1.024-second
intervals.

The events are both characterized by a low level of geomagnetic disturbance

(from -10 to -20 nT), which simpliﬁed greatly the SID detection problem.

5

3 Processing of the data from the GPS network,
and results derived from analyzing the iono-
spheric eﬀect from the solar ﬂares of Septem-
ber 23, 1998 and July 29, 1999

Following is a brief outline of the global monitoring (detection) technique for
solar ﬂares (GLOBDET) as developed by one of the authors (Afraimovich E. L.)
on the basis of processing the data from a worldwide network of two-frequency
multichannel receivers of the GPS-GLONASS navigation systems.

A physical groundwork for the method is formed by the eﬀect of fast change
in electron density in the Earth’s ionosphere at the time of a ﬂare simultaneously
on the entire sunlit surface. Essentially, the method implies using appropriate
ﬁltering and a coherent processing of TEC variations in the ionosphere simulta-
neously for the entire set of ”visible” (during a given time interval) GPS satellites
(as many as 5-10 satellites) at all global GPS network stations used in the anal-
ysis. In detecting solar ﬂares, the ionospheric response is virtually simultaneous
for all stations on the dayside of the globe within the time resolution range of
the GPS receivers (from 30 s to 0.1 s). Therefore, a coherent processing of TEC
variations implies in this case a simple addition of single TEC variations.

The detection sensitivity is determined by the ability to detect typical signals
of the ionospheric response to a solar ﬂare (leading edge duration, period, form,
length) at the level of TEC background ﬂuctuations. Ionospheric irregularities
are characterized by a power spectrum, so that background ﬂuctuations will al-
ways be distinguished in the frequency range of interest. However, background
ﬂuctuations are not correlated in the case of beams to the satellite spaced by an
amount exceeding the typical irregularity size.

With a typical length of X-ray bursts and EUV emission of solar ﬂares of about
5-10 min, the corresponding ionization irregularity size does normally not exceed
30-50 km; hence the condition of a statistical independence of TEC ﬂuctuations
at spaced beams is almost always satisﬁed. Therefore, coherent summation of
responses to a ﬂare on a set of beams spaced thoughout the dayside of the globe
permits the solar ﬂare eﬀect to be detected even when the response amplitude on
partial beams is markedly smaller than the noise level (background ﬂuctuations).
The proposed procedure of coherent accumulation is essentially equivalent to
the operation of coincidence schemes which are extensively used in X-ray and
gamma-ray telescopes.

If the SID response and background ﬂuctuations, respectively, are considered
to be the signal and noise, then as a consequence of a statistical independence of
background ﬂuctuations the signal/noise ratio when detecting the ﬂare eﬀect is
increased through a coherent processing by at least a factor of √N, where N is
the number of LOS.

6

It should be noted that because of the relatively low satellite orbit inclinations,
the GPS network (and to a lesser degree GLONASS) provides poor coverage of the
Earth’s surface near the poles. However, TEC measurements in the polar regions
are ineﬀective with respect to the detection of the ionospheric response to a solar
ﬂare because the amplitude of background ﬂuctuations in this case is much higher
when compared with the mid-latitude ionosphere. This is partiocularly true of
geomagnetic disturbance periods. For the same reason, equatorial stations should
also be excluded from a coherent processing.

The GPS technology provides the means of estimating TEC variations on the
basis of phase measurements of TEC I in each of the spaced two-frequency GPS
receivers using the formula [10]; [4]:

I =

1

40.308

2

f 2
1 f 2
f 2
1 − f 2

[(L1λ1 − L2λ2) + const + nL]

(1)

2

where L1λ1 and L2λ2 are phase path increments of the radio signal, caused
by the phase delay in the ionosphere (m); L1, L2
is the number of full phase
rotations, and λ1, and λ2, are the wavelengths (m) for the frequencies f1 and f2,
respectively; const is some unknown initial phase path (m); and nL is the error
in determination of the phase path (m).

Phase measurements in the GPS system are made with a high degree of ac-
curacy where the error in TEC determination for 30-second averaging intervals
does not exceed 1014 −2, although the initial value of TEC does remain unknown
[10]. This permits ionization irregularitues and wave processes in the ionosphere
to be detected over a wide range of amplitudes (as large as 10−4 of the diurnal
variation of TEC) and periods (from several days to 5 min). The TEC unit,
T ECU, which is equal to 1016 −2 and is commonly accepted in the literature, will
be used throughout the text.

The solar ﬂare of July 29, 1999 was used to illustrate the performance of the
proposed method. Primary data include series of ”oblique” values of TEC I(t),
as well as the corresponding series of elevations θ(t) and azimuths α(t) along
LOS to the satellite calculated using our developed CONVTEC program which
converts the GPS system standard RINEX-ﬁles on the INTERNET [9]. The
determination of SID characteristics involves selecting continuous series of I(t)
measurements of at least a one-hour interval in length, which includes the time of
the ﬂare. Series of elevations θ(t) and azimuths α(t) of the beam to the satellite
are used to determine the coordinates of subionospheric points. In the case under
consideration, all results were obtained for elevations θ(t) larger than 10◦.

Fig. 4a presents typical time dependencies of an ”oblique” TEC I(t) for the
PRN03 satellite at the CME1 station on July 29, 1999 (thick line) and for PRN21
at the CEDA station (thin line). It is apparent from Fig. 4a that in the presence
of slow TEC variations, the SID-induced short-lasting sudden increase in TEC is
clearly distinguished in the form of a ”step” as large as 0.4 T ECU.

7

For the same series, similar lines in panel b.

show variations of the time
derivative of TEC dI(t)/dt with the linear trend removed and with a smoothing
with the 5-min time window. The TEC time derivative is invoked because it
reﬂects electron density variations which are proportional to the X-ray or EUV
ﬂux [14].

The dI(t)/dt variations for diﬀerent beams are well correlated over the time
interval from 19:30 to 19:39 UT. This is distinguished in a more instructive way if
series of the time derivative dI(t)/dt for all visible satellites from 105 GPS stations
are plotted on the same time scale (panel d). Time-coincident (for all beams)
dI(t)/dt variations are clearly seen; for the remaining time spans of the time
interval 19:00–20:00, UT variations of dI(t)/dt for diﬀerent sites and satellites
are not correlated and occupy the entire amplitude-time range.

The coherent summation of dI(t)/dti realizations was made by the formula

ΣdI(t)/dt =

N

Xi=1

dI(t)/dtisin(θi)

(2)

where θi is LOS elevation, i - number of LOS; i = 1, 2, ... N.
Multiplication by sin(θi) was used to convert ”oblique” TEC variations to an

”equivalent” vertical value in order to normalize the response amplitude.

The normalized to N result of a coherent summation (2) for all beams and
GPS stations located mainly on the dayside is presented in panel c. A comparison
of the resulting coherent sum (2) with the time dependence dI(t)/dt for individual
beams presented in panels b. and d. conﬁrms the eﬀect of a substantial increase
of the signal/noise ratio caused by a coherent processing.

It is interesting to compare, for the same time interval, the data on individual
beams and results from a coherent summation for the dayside and nightside.
Fig. 4e presents typical time dependencies of an ”oblique” TEC I(t) for the
PRN27 satellite at the IRKT station (thick line) and for PRN27 at the BOGO
station (thin line). Using the I(t) data it is impossible to identify any SID-induced
short-lasting sudden increase in TEC. This is also true for the time derivatives
dI(t)/dt plotted in panels f. and h. As a result, the r.m.s. of the coherent sum
(2) in panel g.
for the nightside is of the same order of magnitude as that of
background ﬂuctuations outside the SID response interval on the dayside, which
is an order of magnitude (as a minimum) smaller than the SID response amplitude
(Fig. 4c).

Consider the data processing procedure for the solar ﬂare of September 23,
1998. Fig. 5 presents the time dependencies of TEC I(t) on the dayside – a.
and dI(t) variations with the linear trend removed and smoothing with the 5-
min time window for stations IRKT (PRN01) – b; dI(t) variations for all visible
satellites from 102 GPS stations plotted on the same time scale – d. One can
clearly see simultaneous (for all GPS beams) dI(t) variations; for the remaining

8

time spans of the interval 6:30-08:00 UT selected, dI(t) variations for diﬀerent
sites and satellites are not correlated and occupy the entire amplitude-time range.
It should be noted that in this case the ratio of the amplitude of the iono-
spheric response of the ﬂare to the phase ﬂuctuation amplitude is substantially
worse than that for the ﬂare of July 29, 1999. A preliminary coherent accumula-
tion of dI(t)i-series with a subsequent diﬀerentiation, rather than diﬀerentiation
of single realizations of dI(t)i with subsequent addition of the time derivatives
seems more reasonable. The coherent summation of dI(t)i realizations was made
for this event by the formula

ΣdI(t) =

N

Xi=1

dI(t)isin(θi)

(3)

The (normalized to N) result of the coherent summation of series (3) for all
beams and GPS stations located predominantly on the dayside is presented in
panel c. Again, a comparison of the resulting coherent sum (3) with the time
dependence of dI(t) for the individual beams shown in panels b. and d. conﬁrms
the enhancement eﬀect of the signal/noise ratio beause of a coherent processing.
A similar result is also obtained by comparing (for the same time interval)
the data from individual LOS and coherent summation results for the dayside
and nightside. Fig. 5c presents typical time dependencies of an ”oblique” TEC
I(t) for the PRN14 satellite at station MAS1. The SID-induced short-lasting
sydden increasze of TEC was not possible to identify from the I(t) data. This
applies also for the dI(t)-variations with the trend removed, which are plotted in
panels f. and h. As a result, the standard deviation (SD) of the coherent sum (3)
in panel g. for the nightside is found to be of the same order o magnitude as the
backgrund ﬂuctuation SD outside the SID response range on the dayside, which
is an order of magnitude, as a minimum, less than the SID response amplitude
(Fig. 5c).

4 Discussion

A comparative analysis is made of the TEC data and X-ray emission time series
acquired by satelites.
In carrying out a comparative analysis of the TEC and
X-ray emission to ﬂares, it is necessary to eliminate the TEC trend which is not
associated with ﬂare emission. In this case the above procedure of determining the
trend that is removed by a smoothing over a 5-min interval, which is signiﬁcantly
shorter than the ﬂare emission duration, is incorrect. In Figs. 2 and 3, the trend
to be removed was therefore deﬁned as a polynomial of degree 3, approximating
the time dependence of TEC on the intervals 19:00 and 20:00 UT, and 6:00-8:00
UT, respectively. The approximation procedure neglected the TEC values during
the ﬂares (19:30-19:48 UT, and 6:40-7:24 UT).

9

First we consider a simpler ﬂare of July 29, 1999, with the X-ray emission time
proﬁle like a single impulse (dashed curve FHX T in Fig. 2b). The ﬂare is clearly
seen on the time proﬁle of TEC I(t) (Fig. 2a). As is apparent from Fig. 2b, the
response Iex(t) represents an impulse with a fast growth and a relatively slow
decline. The time variation of soft X-ray emission, obtained from the GOES data
at insuﬃciently large time intervals (marked by the symbol o in Fig. 2b) does not
contradict the behavior of the curve Iex(t).

The rise front of hard X-ray emission FHX T is steeper when compared with
the response of TEC Iex(t) , and the time of a maximum is 1.5 min ahead of the
TEC ﬂuctuation maximum. These diﬀerence are natural if account is taken of the
ﬁnite relaxation time of electron density disturbances caused by ﬂare emission.
This factor can be taken into account by convoluting the source function FHX T
with the relaxation function:

Fconv(t) =

t

Z0

FHXT(t′) exp"−  t − t′

τ !# dt′

(4)

As is evident from Fig. 2c, the growth proﬁle of TEC Iex(t) is similar to that of
the convolution Fconv when τ = 65 s. The convolution was accomplished with the
X-ray signal of the 25-50 keV (0.25-0.5 A) energy channel. At the decay phase,
the curves Fconv and Iex(t) are moving apart, which can be associated with the
contribution to the ionospheric ionization from softer emission whose time proﬁle
is similar to the GOES ﬂux proﬁle.

Short-duration disturbances on TEC dependencies, which are associated with
the ionization by ﬂare emission, are more pronounced on the time derivatives
dI(t)/dt. Fig. 2d compares the result of summation (2) of the series of the
derivatives ΣdI(t)/dt for all visible satellites from GPS stations located on the
dayside, with the derivative d/dt(Fconv) presented in Fig. 2c.
It can be seen
that the growth stage of the coherent sum ΣdI(t)/dt for the entire sunlit side
of the Earth is described adequately by the function d/dt(Fconv). Note that the
accuracy of estimating the duration τ determined from the coincidence of peaks
of the time derivatives is determined by time resolution of TEC measurements
(30 s in the case under consideration).

The ﬂare of September 23, 1998 was of a longer duration, and, despite a
somewhat higher intensity, its response was relatively small on TEC time depen-
dencies for separate paths (Fig. 3a). Nevertheless, by subtracting the polynomial
of degree 3, it was possible to identify the TEC response Iex(t) (Fig. 3b).
In
this event, the time dependence of soft X-ray emission is much diﬀerent from the
temporal behavior of the response Iex(t) which grows faster than does the GOES
signal (marked by the symbol o), attains a maximum 9 min earlier, and decreaes
much more rapidly.

The signal of hard X-ray emission FHX T (dashed line) shows a number of
peaks leading the TEC ﬂuctuations Iex(t). The convolution with the hard X-ray

10

emission signal Fconv agrees satisfactorily with the response Iex(t), with τ = 100
s. The curves in Fig. 2c are most similar for the M1 (22-35 keV) channel of
the HXT/YOHKOH X-ray telescope. The estimated τ = 100 s is conﬁrmed by
comparing the combined time derivative of TEC ΣdI(t)/dt , with the derivative
d/dt(Fconv).

A comparison of the time proﬁles of the TEC response and hard X-ray emis-
sion shows that corresponding electron density disturbances are recorded with
conﬁdence by a global GPS network. For hard X-ray emission, the highest cor-
relation is attained for photon energies of about 30 keV, with relation times τ
in the range 65-100 s. These estimates are in reasonably good agreement with
results obtained previously when analyzing the SID eﬀect [7], [14].

Unfortunately, the lack of data on UV emission of the ﬂares under investiga-
tion, the most probable ionizing factor at ionospheric heights above 100 km, gives
no way of making absolute estimates of the TEC increment and comparing them
with measured values. It is pointed out in [14] that although UV emission is es-
sentially responsible for SID in the F-region, TEC variations are also correlated
quite well with X-ray ﬂares. This is also conﬁrmed by simultaneous measure-
ments of X-ray and EUV ﬂare emission characteristics by the Solar Maximum
Mission satellite [17].

5 Conclusions

In this paper we have analyzed the ionospheric response to powerful solar ﬂares of
September 23, 1998 and July 29, 1999. The analysis is based on implementing our
new technology of a global detector of ionospheric eﬀects from solar ﬂares using
the data from the international network of two-frequency multichannel receivers
of the navigation GPS system (GLOBDET) which improves substantially the
sensitivity and space-time resolution of observations over existing radio probing
methods.

It was found that ﬂuctuations of TEC and its time derivative obtained by
removing the linear trend of TEC with a time window of about 5 min are coherent
for all stations and beams to GPS satellites on the dayside of the Earth, regardless
of the station’s location, local time and elevation of the beam to the satellite.
The time proﬁle of TEC responses is similar to the time behavior of hard X-ray
emission variations during ﬂares in the energy range 25-35 keV if we introduce the
relation time of an electron density disturbance in the ionosphere of a duration
of 50-100 s. No such eﬀect was detected on the nightside of the Earth.

The GLOBDET technology, suggested in this paper, can be used to detect
small solar ﬂares; the body of data processed is the only limitation in this case.
The high sensitivity of GLOBDET permits us to propose the problem of detect-
ing, in the ﬂare X-ray and EUV ranges, emissions of nonsolar origins which are
the result of supernova explosions.

11

For powerful solar ﬂares like the one examined in this report, it is not neces-
sary to invoke a coherent summation, and the SID response can be investigated
for each beam. This opens the way to a detailed study of the SID dependence on a
great variety of parameters (latitude, longitude, solar zenith angle, spectral char-
acteristics of the emission ﬂux, etc.). With current increasing solar activity, such
studies become highly challenging. In adidtion to solving traditional problems
of estimating parameters of ionization processes in the ionosphere and problems
of reconstructing emission parameters [14], the data obtained through the use of
GLOBDET can be used to estimate the spatial inhomogeneity of emission ﬂuxes
at scales of the Earth’s radius.

Acknowledgments

Authors are grateful to V. V.Grechnev, E. A. Kosogorov, O. S. Lesuta and
K.
S. Palamartchouk for preparing the input data. Thanks are also due
V. G. Mikhalkovsky for his assistance in preparing the English version of the
TEX-manuscript. This work was done with support from the Russian Foundation
for Basic Research (grants 97-02-96060 and 99-05-64753), GNTP ’Astronomy’ as
well as RF Minvuz Grant 1999; supervisor B.O. Vugmeister.

References

[1] Afraimovich, E. L., K. S. Palamartchouk, and N. P. Perevalova, 1998.
GPS radio interferometry of travelling ionospheric disturbances. Journal of
Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics 60, 1205–1223.

[2] Afraimovich E. L., E. A. Kosogorov, L. A. Leonovich, K. S. Palamarchuk,
N. P. Perevalova, and O. M. Pirog, Determining parameters of large-scale
traveling ionospheric disturbances of auroral origin using GPS-arrays, Ac-
cepted by Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics.

[3] Calais E. and J. B. Minster, 1995. GPS detection of ionospheric perturba-
tions following the January 1994, Northridge earthquake. Geophysical Re-
search Letters 22, 1045–1048.

[4] Calais E. and J. B.Minster, 1996. GPS detection of ionospheric pertur-
bations following a Space Shuttle ascent, Geophysical Research Letters 23,
1897–1900.

[5] Calais E., B. J. Minster , M. A. Hofton , and M. A. H. Hedlin, 1998.
Ionospheric signature of surface mine blasts from Global Positioning System
measurements. Geophysical Journal International 132, 191–202.

12

[6] Davies K. Ionospheric radio waves, 1969. Blaisdell Publishing Company, A
Division of Ginn and Company, Waltham, Massachusetts-Totonto-London.

[7] Donnelly R. F, 1969. Contribution of X-ray and EUV bursts of solar ﬂares to
sudden frequency deviations. Journal Geophysical Research 74, 1873–1877.

[8] Fitzgerald T. J., 1997. Observations of total electron content perturbations
on GPS signals caused by a ground level explosion. Journal of Atmospheric
and Solar-Terrestrial Physics 59, 829–834.

[9] Gurtner, W., 1993. RINEX: The Receiver Independent Exchange Format

Version 2. http://igscb.jpl.nasa.gov:80/igscb/data/format/rinex2.txt.

[10] Hofmann-Wellenhof, B., H. Lichtenegger, and J. Collins, Global Positioning

System: Theory and Practice, 1992. Springer-Verlag Wien, New York.

[11] Klobuchar, J. A., 1997. Real-time ionospheric science: The new reality. Radio

Science 32, 1943–1952.

[12] Mendillo M., J. A. Klobuchar, R. B. Fritz, A. V. da Rosa, L. Kersley, K. C.
J. P.
Yeh, B. J. Flaherty, S. Rangaswamy, P. E. Schmid, J. V. Evans,
Schodel, D. A. Matsoukas, J. R. Koster, A. R. Webster, P. Chin, 1974.
Behavior of the Ionospheric F Region During the Great Solar Flare of August
7, 1972, Journal Geophysical Research 79, 665–672.

[13] Mendillo M., and J. V. Evans, 1974. Incoherent scatter observations of the

ionospheric response to a large solar ﬂare. Radio Science 9, 197–203.

[14] Mitra A. P., 1974. Ionospheric eﬀects of solar ﬂares, New Delhi -12, India.

[15] Saito A., S. Fukao and S. Miyazaki, 1998. High resolution mapping of TEC
perturbations with the GSI GPS network over Japan. Geophysical Research
Letters 25, 3079–3082.

[16] Thome G. D and L. S.Wagner, 1971. Electron density enhancements in the
E and F regions of the ionosphere during solar ﬂares. Journal Geophysical
Research 76, 6883–6895.

[17] Vanderveen K., L. E. Orwig, and E. Tandberg-Hanssen, 1988. Temporal
correlations between impulsive ultraviolet and hard X-ray busts in solar ﬂares
observed with high time resolution, Astrophysical Journal 330, 480–492.

13

This figure "fig1sun.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0007036v1

Table : Parameters of the (cid:13)ares being analyzed

N

September , 		

July 	, 			



Time of maximum

soft X-ray emission, UT

 :

	:



Flare class

optical/X-ray

B/M.

N /m.

 X-ray class with thehighest HXT/YOHKOH) CGRO/BATSE

degree of correlation

m(- keV)

-  keV



Increment of electron

content, TECU

 .

 .



Relaxation time, s

  



This figure "fig2sun.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0007036v1

This figure "fig3sun.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0007036v1

This figure "fig4sun.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0007036v1

This figure "fg5sun.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0007036v1

