0
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
8
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
5
6
0
1
1
0
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A natural phenomenon that may pose a severe aircraft hazard?

Professor Emeritus, Cornell University, Ithaca NY 14853; Email: tg21@cornell.edu

Thomas Gold

There have been many serious aircraft accidents in recent years that have not had a
satisfactory explanation despite exhaustive researches, and that have certain features in
common. Those features include apparently a situation of extreme urgency and danger, so
that there was no time for the ﬂight crew to communicate details to the ﬂight controllers;
in some cases there were circumstances that seemed quite unexpected and perplexing to
the ﬂight crew, suggesting an urgent need to override the usual automated control systems
and manually put the plane into a steep dive. In several cases this was followed by actions
to avoid excessive speed that would threaten the structural integrity of the aircraft. Several
accidents have another feature in common: they occurred along the edge of the North-
Eastern American continental shelf. These include, among others, TW 800 on July 17,
1996, Swissair 111 on September 2, 1998, Egypt Air 990 on October 1999, and also the
crash of J. F. Kennedy Jr. The case of the EgyptAir crash has recently come under public
debate again as some new information has become known, and the explanation tentatively
oﬀered by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), suggesting a suicide attempt
by a co-pilot, has come under strong attack by Egyptian authorities, and does not ﬁt with
the new information.

In view of the statistically quite improbable occurrence of these accidents, it seems
prudent now to widen the search to causes that have so far not been included among
possible aircraft hazards, and that have possibly a relationship to geographical features.
Among such, the massive emission of gases from the seaﬂoor (or land surface) seems to us
most worthy of attention.

Massive sudden eruptions of gases have occurred in many locations, bursting up
through the ground both from ocean ﬂoors and from dry land. They often occur repet-
itively in the same area, and on land create what is known as ”mud volcanoes”. The
amounts of expelled material accumulated in some mud volcanoes in the last million years
are as large as 10 or 20 billion tons, and the estimates of the amounts of gas responsible
are several times larger than that. The erupting gases are usually dominated by methane.
Since methane is lighter than air, it races upwards at high speed. Many cases are known
where the gas spontaneously ignited, and ﬂames to a height of 6,000 ft have been pho-
tographed from Baku, in the active mud volcano area on the West shore of the Caspian
Sea. Much higher brief ﬂashes have been reported, up to 30,000 ft but these were too brief
to be photographed. Massive ﬂammable gas eruptions at or near times of earthquakes
(before, during or after) are reported in historical and in recent times from many parts of
the world.

Similar eruptions are indicated on the sea ﬂoors, where large areas are densely covered
with ”pockmarks”, quite characteristic circular features in the ocean mud, with diameters
of between 10 and 200 meters. These features were ﬁrst detected in the North Sea by
Dr. Martin Hovland, of Statoil, (the Norwegian oil company), overlying known gas and
oil ﬁelds. Similar ﬁelds have since been detected in many parts of the world by sonar,

again often showing a relation to underlying hydrocarbon ﬁelds, and also there showing
features of repetition of outbursts, with methane again the major component. Both in
mud volcanoes and in pockmark ﬁelds the emitted quantities of gas in any single event
may well amount to some millions of tons.

Another set of observations has now to be added:

it is the occurrence of ”mystery
clouds” in the air. Satellite photography over a ten year period revealed more than two
hundred clouds that rose up at a high speed from a small area of land or sea, forming
an expanding funnel. Temperature observations showed a much lower temperature in the
funnel cloud than in the outside air at the same height, and this implied that the rising
gas must be one that is intrinsically much lighter than air. Only methane and hydrogen
are candidates, and both are combustible. The largest such cloud on record was seen and
reported by several airline pilots ﬂying between Tokyo and Alaska, North-East of Japan,
on April 9, 1984. They described it as a mushroom cloud that reached up to 50,000 ft,
attaining a diameter of more than 200 miles.

Evidence of massive gas emissions have recently been reported by the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute, who conducted a sonar survey of the mid-Atlantic US continental
shelf edge. Along a major fault line they found many and very large pockmarks, similar
to those described by Dr. Hovland, indicating that sudden almost explosive gas eruptions
had taken place there. Also recent reports from the Province of Quebec, of frequent and
large displays of lights in the sky, clearly related to the swarm of earthquakes between
November 1988 and end of January 1989 in the region of Sanguenay and Quebec City,
leave little doubt that massive gas eruptions occurred there, with some ﬂames reaching
high into the sky. Altogether 46 such sightings were recorded in that period, some but not
all coincident with earthquake shocks. Earthquake-related lights have been well known
and reported since antiquity, and indeed one very large event involving gas ﬂames was
reported in 1663, not far from the Sanguenay region, close to the St.Lawrence River.

I had investigated in 1982 a ”near disaster” of a British Airways 747 plane ﬂying at
37,000 ft over a volcanic region of Java. All four engines stopped shortly after it had entered
a visible but tenuous volcanic cloud. After gliding down to 15,000 ft without power, and
there apparently leaving the cloud, all engines could be started again immediately. The
same sequence of events was experienced two weeks later by an Air Singapore 747 plane
over a nearby region, and many years later by a KLM ﬂight over the Aleutian Islands. A
gas lighter than air, and hence combustible, must have been responsible in all three cases,
to have carried small volcanic dust grains to these altitudes, and its combustion may have
been responsible for the engine failures that were so sharply limited to the ﬂight within
the cloud, probably due to the fuel-rich and oxygen poor mixtures of the gas adding to
the airplane fuel. Gas eruptions of volcanoes are known of either kind: eruptions of a
ground-hugging heavy gas identiﬁed as carbon dioxide, but also eruptions of a light and
ﬂammable gas, probably methane, whose density is a little more than half that of air.

With three large planes having come so close to disaster, but yet able to give a precise
account of the events, one has to take the threat of gas emission seriously. The belief
that such emissions can come only from volcanoes has been voiced, but is clearly wrong in
view of the facts already mentioned. What threats would massive gas emissions pose for
aircraft?

One eﬀect I have already described: the possibility of inducing failure of all engines.
But several other aircraft hazards have also to be considered. One is due to the great
upward speed the light gases would have, greatly in excess of the vertical speeds in ordinary
atmospheric turbulence, and structural damage to the plane or serious injuries to persons
may result from the ensuing violent vertical movement. The ignition and explosion of a
large mass of gas external to the plane may be initiated by the engine exhausts and may
be violently destructive, yet the recovered airplane skin would not show the shrapnel holes
that would be the usual signs of explosions.

Other consequences of gas emissions are the dangerous and misleading indications
that the ﬂight instruments would provide. Air speed indicators and air pressure altimeters
would give quite false and ﬂuctuating readings. The autopilots, programmed for air, may
have totally erroneous responses in the light gas, as indeed may the pilots themselves, who
would be perplexed by a situation they had never encountered or contemplated before.

A further hazard is that clouds of low density gas may not support a plane, even at
a ﬂying speed that would be amply high enough in air. This would cause a stall of the
aircraft, or be preceded by automatic stall-warning that requires the pilot to turn the nose
down into a dive, and then confront the danger of excessive speed.

Then there are the various ﬁre hazards resulting from combustible air-gas mixtures,
especially in some conﬁned spaces in the airplane where ﬂames could be supported, even if
the same gas-air mixture would readily be extinguished in the external high speed airﬂow.
That danger may be highest in cable ducts where damage could destroy the airplane control
system.

The North-Eastern coastline or edge of the continental shelf of the US and Canada,
is the northward continuation of the line whose investigation I have already mentioned.
This extension also has a history of earthquakes and gas emission from sand beaches and
water surfaces beyond the shoreline. Such emissions had not ceased around the times of
the aircraft disasters. A large number of reports were phoned in to police and emergency
services in New Brunswick and Nova Scotia on October 27, about three days before the
Egypt Air crash, stating that at 9:30 p.m. a large ﬁreball had been seen streaking across
the night sky. The details reported did not correspond to a meteorite, but included reports
of ﬂames and events much slower than those caused by meteors. A peak in the number of
reports recorded prior to an event must be taken seriously, if the number greatly exceeds
the number on other days, as was the case here. There were similar reports also before
and after the TW 800 crash. There was also a report from Swiss Air 111 of a strange smell
about three minutes before the declaration of emergency. This is particularly suggestive
of gas eﬀects, as a similar report was made in one of the near accidents over Java, where
gas certainly was involved.

We may then wish to investigate whether some features of aircraft disasters along this
region, the four disasters mentioned and several others that have also occurred along this
corridor, could have an explanation in terms of the list of hazards I have mentioned, or
others that have not yet been considered, that could be attributed to gas eruptions.

Mr. Jack Reed retired from the Sandia National Laboratory, an expert in sound
propagation, has noted that the ”loud” boom heard by many eye witnesses at the time
of the TW 800 crash on a 25 mile stretch of Long Island, nearest point to the plane 15

miles away, was far too loud to have been caused by the proposed explosion of the empty
central fuel tank. In his view a one ton bomb of TNT would have been the least required to
make such a sound at that distance. Nor would such an explosion have caused the various
external luminous phenomena that have been reported by many. Also it is doubtful that
an explosion of such a small amount of fuel vapor could have had the power to tear oﬀ the
entire front section of the fuselage. The absence of shrapnel holes in the recovered skin of
TW 800 was taken to exclude a bomb explosion inside or outside the plane. However, a
massive external gas explosion would produce no shrapnel.

The facts newly announced about the EgyptAir disaster make clear that a deliberate
dive had seemed imperative to the pilot then at the controls, and that a dangerous over-
speed situation had then arisen. After a brief recovery to level ﬂight, again a dive seemed
imperative, and the overspeed may then have destroyed the plane.

There are many steps that can be taken to ﬁnd whether the sequence of disasters
along this heavily traveled corridor may be due to gas emissions. As an immediate step
I urge the continuation of the sonar search for pockmarks on the ocean ﬂoor along this
coastline in the regions of the four disasters mentioned and others that occurred near this
geographical line, since this will have a good chance of showing whether these accidents
were indeed over locations at which strong gas outbursts had occurred. A routing change
may then be indicated as the ﬁrst step to avoid further disasters.

