1
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
6
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
1
3
0
7
0
1
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

INHOMOGENEOUS STRUCTURE OF THE
HIGH-LATITUDE IONOSPHERE AS
OBSERVED AT NORILSK

Yu. V. Lipko
Institute of Solar-Terrestrial Physics SD RAS,
p. o. box 4026, Irkutsk, 664033, Russia
fax: +7 3952 462557; e-mail: lipko@iszf.irk.ru

Abstract

In March and August/September 1995, February 1996, and in March-
April 1998, observations of the inhomogeneous structure of the high-
latitude ionosphere were carried out at Norilsk (geomagnetic latitude and
longitude are 64.2◦N and 160.4◦E, and L = 5.2). Small-scale irregularities
(with the lifetime of several seconds,and the spatial scale less than 5-7 km),
and medium-size wave irregularities(with the period of 10-50 min, and the
horizontal size of tens and hundreds of kilometres) of the ionospheric F
layer were investigated under diﬀerent geophysical conditions. A total of
300 hours of observations was recorded, including 250 reﬂections from the
F2 layer, and the other reﬂections from the sporadic E layer.

The diurnal variations of inhomogeneous structure parameters in March
and April is obtained. Dependence of some ionospheric irregularity param-
eters on geomagnetic activity is presented.

1 Introduction

It is known, that there are simultaneously irregularities of an electron concen-
tration of diﬀerent spatial and time scales in the high-latitude ionosphere [1].
The structure, dynamics, generation mechanisms of such irregularities are diﬀer-
ent. This paper is devoted to examination of small-scale irregularities (SSI) and
medium-scale travelling ionospheric disturbances (MS TID) at the high-latitude
region of Siberia. SSI are irregularities of electron concentration with spatial
scale of 0.1-10 km and time scale of several seconds [2]. The main mechanism of
generation of small-scale structure are various sorts of instability in ionospheric
plasma, associated with electric ﬁelds and currents, which are especially strong

1

in high-latitude region [3]. MS TIDs have period of 10-40 minutes, and the hori-
zontal size of tens and hundreds kilometres. They are ionospheric manifestations
of acoustic-gravity waves (AGW), generated in the lower termosphere [4].

The observations of inhomogeneous structure of an ionosphere in high lati-
tudes are carried out widely. For these purposes modern and expensive facilities
are used [5, 6, 7, 8]. However structure and dynamic of ionospheric irregulari-
ties are investigated insuﬃciently. It is explained by complexity and variability
high-latitude ionosphere. Besides there are huge areas, where the regular obser-
vations of inhomogeneous structure of the ionosphere aren’t carried out. Such
area is practically all high-latitude region of Siberia. In the sixties-seventies at
Norilsk the regular examinations of small-scale structure high-latitude ionosphere
by method D1 [9, 10, 11, 12] were carried out. The average patterns of motions
in and F-layers of the ionosphere for various seasons of year and for levels of
geomagnetic activity were obtained. The studies of MS TIDs in Norilsk were not
carried out earlier.

Norilsk integrated magnitic-ionospheric station (geomagnetic latitude and lon-
gitude 64.2◦N and 160.4◦E, L = 5.2) operated by the Institute of solar-terrestrial
physics SD RAS is the Siberian region’s unique high-latitude station admirably
equipped with an appropriate facility for investigating the ﬁne structure of the
ionosphere.

The objective of this study was to obtain average parameters both small-
scale irregularities and medium-scale TIDs depending on season, local time and
geomagnetic activity.

2 Experimental equipment and technique

The measuring facility includes a digital vertical-incidence sounding pulsed
ionosonde [13]. The facility allows to receive of a radiosignal, reﬂex from an
ionosphere, on three antennas. After analogue processing on each of three an-
tennas amplitude, SIN- and COS- components of a radiosignal, reﬂex from an
ionosphere, were obtained.

Amplitude time series were processed by both the Similar-Fading Method
(SFM) and Correlation Method (CM) [9, 11]. SFM is based on calculation of
time delays between similar changes of amplitude of the radiosignal. The SFM
allows to determinate velocity and direction of the motion of irregularities in
the ionosphere. The CM using characteristic ellipse (ellipse of anisotropy) allows
to estimate the shape, size, orientation and motion of SSI. These methods are
justiﬁed physically enough and supported by direct measuring using incoherent
scatter method. For many years ones were applied on the network of stations
(including Norilsk) to determinate parameters of small-scale irregularities. The
following parameters of small-scale irregularities were calculated: velocity vs and

2

direction αs, size of major characteristic ellipse half-axes a, degree of anisotropy
ex, lifetime of SSI T h.

SIN- and COS- components of the radiosignal are handled by phase method
[14, 15, 16]. The amplitude and phase spectrums of a signal, reﬂex from the
ionosphere, are calculated. Then time and space derivatives are determined.
They are used for estimation of direction αm and velocity vm of the motion
medium-scale TIDs. The method is applied since beginning of 70 years.
Its
adequacy is conﬁrmed by model calculations and comparison with known results.
At the high-latitude region of Siberia the phase method was used for the ﬁrst
time.

3 Experimental results

3.1 Dependence irregularity parameters on season and

local time

The observations inhomogeneous structure of the polar ionosphere were carried
out in Norilsk from March 18 to April 13, 1998. It was recorded about 160 hours
of F2-layer radio-reﬂection. Obtained data was classed into two seasons. The
division into seasons was made on base of results observations at Norilsk in the
seventies.

The ﬁrst period - equinox (March) - is characterise by high level of magnetic
activity (average summary Kp = 20) and by the most strong gradient of pressure,
which arises from the fact of space-nonuniform heating of an ionosphere by solar
radiation. This month there is a reorganisation from winter system of ionospheric
plasma circulation to summer one. The inﬂuence of solar radiation on processes of
ionisation and dynamics in the high-latitude ionosphere ampliﬁes. In the winter
the ionosphere above Norilsk practically is not irradiated by the Sun, the basic
In the summer the solar
contribution to ionisation produce auroral sources.
energy light on the large areas of the high-latitude termosphere uniformly [11].

April, according to paper [11], belongs to the second period - summer. This
month the magnetic activity considerably weakens, the role auroral processes is
reduced, the role of solar radiation ampliﬁes. The average summer Kp coeﬃcient
per day equal 15.

The observations were carried out when geophysical conditions were satis-
factory (presence of qualitative reﬂection from the ionosphere) and there were
organisation opportunities. The time intervals of observation were from 15 min-
utes to 10 hours. The interval of processing both for phase method and for
method D1 equal 40 s. The values and root-mean-square deviations (r.m.s.) of
ionosheric irregularity (SSI and MS TID) parameters were averaged over hour.
The values of direction α were calculated as the most probable values for a hour.

3

Our procedure diﬀers from one used at Norilsk earlier [11]. In the seventies
the averaging αs and vs was carried thrice: over one minute (time of a stationarity
of the high-latitude ionosphere); over interval of observation (5-6 min), and over
every hour for every season. The high-latitude ionosphere is characterised by
the high variability, thus three time averaging could give considerable error for
obtained parameters.

For March it was processed 72 hour of data (6500 intervals of processing),
received by reﬂection radiosignal from a F2-layer of the ionosphere, for April it
was processed 86 hour of data (7700 intervals). The correlation of 50 % data was
above 0.5, so these data were handled by SFM. Approximately half of these data
there was suitable for processing by method CM, since degree of anisotropy ex
was positive for these.

Fig. 1 presents the diurnal variations of medium-scale TID parameters for
March and April. The dashed vertical line on the ﬁgures marks the moment of
passage solar terminator at 100 km altitude, where the generation of acoustic-
gravity waves takes place. Fig. 1 a, e display change of average value and r.m.s.
of variations fd with time. For frequencies of sounding, which were used (from 3.2
MHz up to 4 MHz), 0.1 Hz variation fd is matched to 7-8 m/s vertical velocity of
moving of the ionospheric layer as whole, the positive value variation fd associates
with ionospheric layer going downwards, negative value - upwards. Both for
March and for April it is evident, that the peak velocity of lowering (raising) of a
layer in the sunrise and in the sundown reach 15-20 m/s, at noontime the layer as
whole does not go almost, at night the velocity of raising is considerably reduced.
The width of the Doppler spectrum δfd is present in the Fig. 1 b, f. Generally
it does not exceed value 0.5 Hz. Before sundown δfd is incremented that probably
is explain by the generation of ionospheric diﬀerent-scale irregularities during
passage of solar terminator [17].

The most probable travelling direction MS TIDs in March and April was
southward. It was maintained practically stationary values during all observation
time (Fig. 1 c, g). It is well accorded with results obtained at the other stations.
The various sources MS TIDs are given in diﬀerent papers. The analysis our data
has not allowed to allocate any source of generation MS TIDs. It is possible, as
it is speciﬁed in paper [4], the generation occurs at centre of the auroral oval.
The average velocity of travel MS TIDs vm was 50 m/s (see Fig. 1 d, h). After
sundown the considerable deviation of velocity values was observed.

Both March and April variations of parameters MS TIDs have general fea-
tures. March parameters are characterised major values r.m.s. and more abrupt
changes. It is probably associated with greater auroral activity in this period and
with major inﬂuence of solar terminator.

Fig. 2 presents the variations of parameters of small-scale irregularities in
March and April. Fig. 2 a, e presents variations of degree of anisotropy ex,
Fig. 2 b, f – variations of ”lifetime” T h. These parameters calculated using

4

ellipse of correlation with positive ex. Direction αs and velocity vs of travel were
obtained by SFM.

The degree of anisotropy ex, as it is visible from Fig. 2 a, e, is 50 %, i.e.
the irregularities extend in the ratio 2:1 between major and small half-axes of
the ellipse. There is not the preferred direction of major half-axis, but as have
shown our examinations, irregularities move across direction of major half-axis.
Assumption, that irregularities extend along magnetic ﬁeld and move across it,
does not conﬁrm in our experiments. The sizes of irregularities appreciated by the
major axis a of the correlation ellipse are 400 m in the morning and at noonday
of April, being lowered up to 200 m at the night. In March the average value of
a is 400 m. Average ”lifetime” T h of irregularities in March practically does not
vary and equal 2 s (see Fig. 2 b), in April T h raises from 1 s in the morning up
to 5 s in the evening and then T h again decreases up to 2 s (Fig. 2 f).

Fig. 2 c, g present the direction vs of travel of SSI in March and April ac-
cordingly. The light circles mark directions obtained in the seventies [10, 11,
12], black circles mark direction obtained in 1998. These directions coincide for
March. Two-vortex system with western convective jet in evening and east jet in
morning sectors obtained in the seventies, conﬁrm that the essential role is played
drift of ionisation due to electric ﬁelds created by a magnetosphere convection.
The drift of irregularities in the morning and at the noonday occur in northward
direction, it is associated with the gradient of pressure of solar terminator. In
the evening the inﬂuence of east electrojet is increased and by reason of that
the SSI move in westward direction. Then αs changes to the eastward direction.
Interpretation of the direction of ionospheric plasma drift in April it is more dif-
ﬁcult. Practically during all measured period SSI move in eastward direction.
This direction does not coincide with direction obtained in the seventies.

The average velocities of SSI travel vs are 100-150 m/s (in Fig. 2 d, h they
are designated by black circles).
It is much higher than velocities obtained in
the seventies (are designated by light circles). The considerable diﬀerences of
velocity values can be caused by the following moments. First, at the analysis
in the seventies it was used thrice averaging, that gives reduction of average
velocity. Secondly, the observations in 1998 were carried out during the phase
of solar activity growth, that, apparently, has had an eﬀect on magniﬁcation of
velocity values.

Thus, as a result of the investigation the diurnal variations of inhomogeneous

structure parameters in March and in April is obtained.

5

3.2 Dependence of parameters of ionospheric irregulari-

ties on geomagnetic activity

Fig. 3 presents dependence of ionospheric irregularity parameters on geomagnetic
activity. Geomagnetic activity was estimated by using one-minute values of the
coeﬃcient of auroral electrojet intensity AE.

Average variation of fd, as shown on Fig. 3 a, is zero, but r.m.s. fd is in-
cremented from 0.1 Hz under 50 nT to 0.25 Hz under E greater, than 350 nT.
The inﬂuence of auroral activity on δfd is well appreciable (see Fig. 3 b). There
is a considerable broadening of fd spectrum from 0.4 Hz under is smaller, than
50 nT, up to 0.8 Hz under E exceeding 350 nT. The velocity of MS TID travel
vm (Fig. 3 c) under magniﬁcation AE up to 350 nT is incremented almost three
times, from 25 m/s up to 70 m/s. Under exceeding 350 nT vm decreases.

”Lifetime” T h SSI under the increase of a level auroral activity changes in-
signiﬁcantly. As the
coeﬃcient increase up to 150 nT ex and a decrease, at
the further magniﬁcation there is an inverse process – the ex and a are incre-
mented. The velocity of travel of SSI vs grows from 110 m/s up to 190 m/s under
magniﬁcation up to 350 nT ( Fig. 3 d).

Thus, it is obvious, that auroral activity inﬂuences not only on structure
and dynamics of small-scale irregularities, that was noted earlier, but also on
behaviour medium-scale TIDs.

4 Conclusions

The following results were obtained:

1. The propagation directions and velocities of small -scale irregularities and
medium-scale TIDs are diﬀerent. Medium-scale TIDs travel predominantly
in a southward direction with velocities of 40-100 m/s. The prevailing
direction of small-scale irregularities is eastward and westward, and their
velocities lie in the range of from 100 to 200 m/s.

2. For the Norilsk region, for each season we obtained a diurnal variation of
averaged parameters of ionospheric irregularities of the frequency Doppler
shift; of the width of the Doppler spectrum; propagation directions and
velocities of medium-scale TIDs; and of the anisotropy and lifetime of small-
scale irregularities.

3. A dependence of medium-scale TID parameters on geomagnetic activity
was obtained. Auroral activity has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the frequency
Doppler shift, the width of the Doppler spectrum and on the propagation
velocity of medium-scale TIDs.

6

4. The conclusions drawn on the basis of the observations from the 1970s that
auroral activity inﬂuences the drift of small-scale ionospheric irregularities,
speciﬁcally the 1.5-2–fold increase of the velocity during the substorm, were
conﬁrmed.

5 Acknowledgements

We are indebted to V.V.Klimenko and to all staﬀ members of the Norilsk station
for assistance in conducting the experiment. Special thanks are due to E.L.
Afraimovich and G.A. Zherebtsov for useful discussions of the results.

References

Nauka, 192 p. 1986.

Nauka. 126 p. 1972.

[1] M.G. Helberg The irregularity of high-latitude ionosphere, Novosibirsk:

[2] Ya.L. Al’pert Propagation of electromagnetic waves and ionosphere, Moscow:

[3] R.T Tscnoda ”High-latitude F region irregularities: A review and synthesis,”

Rev. Geophys. 26, N 4, pp. 719-760, 1988.

[4] R.D. Hunsucker ”Atmospheric Gravity Waves Generated in the High-
Latitude Ionosphere: A Review,” Rev. geophys. and space phys. 20, N 2,
pp. 293-315, 1982.

[5] W. R. Stone (Ed.) The Review of Radio Science 1993-1996, Oxford Univer-

sity Press, 1996.

[6] W.A. Bristol, R.A. Greenwald ”Multiradar of medium-scale acoustic gravity
waves using the Super Dual Auroral Radar Network,” J. Geophys. Res. 101,
N A11, pp. 24499-24511, 1996.

[7] S.Y. Ma, K. Schlegel, J.S. Xu ”Case studies of the propagation characteristics
of auroral TIDS with EISCAT CP2 data using maximum entropy cross-
spectral analysis,” Annales Geophysicae. 16, pp. 161-167, 1998.

[8] P.J.S. Wiliams, G. Crowley, K. Schlegel et al. ”The generation and propa-
gation of atmospheric gravity waves observed during the Worldwide Atmo-
spheric Gravity-wave Study (WAGS),” J. Atmos. and Terr. Phys. 50, N 4/5,
pp. 323-338, 1988.

[9] S.F. Mirkotan, Y.W. Kushnerevsky ”Irregularity structure and movement
in the ionosphere,” Ionosphere V section of IGY program. N 12, Moscow:
Nauka, 1964.

7

[10] G. A. Zherebtsov, Yu. G. Mizun, V. S. Mingalev Physical processes in the

polar ionosphere, Moscow: Nauka, 231 p., 1988.

[11] B.A. Ferberg ”An Experimental Investigation on the Dynamic Features of
the High-Latitude Ionosphere,” Dissertation for a Cand.Sc. (Phys.Math.)
Degree, Irkutsk, Library of ISTP SD RAS, 132 p. 1980.

[12] G.A. Zherebtsov, O.M. Pirog, O.I. Razuvaev ”The structure and dynamics
of the high-latitude ionosphere,” Issledovaniya po geomagnetizmu, aeronomii
i ﬁzike Solntsa, N 75, Moscow: Nauka, pp. 165-177, 1986.

[13] B.O. Vugmeister, O.N. Boitman, Yu.V. Lipko ”The hardware-software facil-
ity on the basis of an IBM personal computer,” Radio Physics and Electron-
ics: Problems in Science and Education. Ed. by V.M. Polyakov. Proc. of a
Regional Scientiﬁc Conf. May 24-26, Irkutsk, pp. 35-39, 1995.

[14] E.L. Afraimovich Interference methods of

ionospheric radio sounding,

Moscow: Nauka, p. 563. 1982.

[15] E.L. Afraimovich ”Statistical angle-of-arrival and doppler method (SADM)
for determining characteristics of the dynamics of the transionospheric radio
signal interference pattern” Acta Geodaetica et Geophysica Hungurica 32,
pp. 461-468, 1997.

[16] E.L. Afraimovich, O.N. Boitman, E.I. Zhovty et. al. ”Dynamics and
anisotropy of travelling ionospheric disturbances as deduced from transiono-
spheric sounding data,” Radio Science 34, pp. 477-487, 1999.

[17] V.M. Somsikov ”Solar terminator and dynamic of atmosphere,” Alma-Ata:

Nauka, 192 p. 1983.

8

Figure 1: Diurnal variations of characteristics of the ionospere-re(cid:13)ected signal:

a, e { frequency doppler shift f

; b, f { width of the Doppler spectrum (cid:14)f

; and

d

d

medium-scale TID parameters: c, g { travelling direction (cid:11)

; d, h { travelling

m

velocity v

in March (a, b, c, d) and April (e, f, g, h), 1998.

m

Figure 2: Diurnal variations of small-scale irregularity parameters: a, e { degree

of anisotropy ex; b, f { lifetime T h; c, g { travelling direction (cid:11)

; d, h { travelling

s

velocity v

in March (a, b, c, d) and April (e, f, g, h), 1998. Light circles mark

s

values of (cid:11)

and v

obtained in the seventies at Norilsk.

s

s

Figure 3: Dependence of parameters of ionospheric irregularities on geomagnetic

activity: a { frequency doppler shift f

; b { width of the Doppler spectrum

d

(cid:14)f

; c { travelling velocity of medium-scale TIDs v

; d { travelling velocity of

d

m

small-scale irregularities v

.

m

