2
0
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
0
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
2
5
0
2
0
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Case Study of The Mid-Latitude GPS
Performance at Nighttime During The
Magnetic Storm of July 15, 2000

E. L. Afraimovich, O. I. Berngardt, O. S. Lesyuta, A. P. Potekhin and B. G. Shpynev

Institute of Solar-Terrestrial Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences,
664033 Post Box 4026, Irkutsk, Russia, e-mail:afra@iszf.irk.ru

Abstract

Using the geomagnetic storm of July 15, 2000 as an example, we
investigated the dependence of GPS navigation system performance
on the nightside at mid-latitudes on the level of geomagnetic distur-
bance. The investigation was based on the data from the global GPS
system available through the Internet. It was shown that the number
of GPS phase slips increases with the increasing level of disturbance
and that there is a good correlation between the rate of Dst-variation
and the frequency of slips.
It was further shown that the relative
frequency of slips has also a clearly pronounced aspect dependence.
Phase slips of the GPS signal can be caused by the scattering from
small-scale irregularities of the ionospheric E-layer. Phase slip charac-
teristics are indicative of Farley-Buneman instabilities as a plausible
physical mechanism that is responsible for the formation of geomag-
netic ﬁeld-aligned irregularities. Using simultaneous measurements of
backscatter signal characteristics from the Irkutsk incoherent scatter

1

radar and existing models for such irregularities, we estimated the or-
der of magnitude of the expected phase ﬂuctuations of the GPS signal
at a few degrees.

1 Introduction

The satellite navigation GPS system has become a powerful factor of scien-
tiﬁc and technological progress worldwide, and enjoys wide use in a great
variety of human activity.
In this connection, much attention is given to
continuous perfection of the GPS system and to the widening of the scope of
its application for solving the navigation problems themselves, as well as for
developing higher-precision systems for time and accuracy determinations.
Even greater capabilities are expected in the near future through the com-
bined use of the GPS with a similar Russian system (GLONASS). The op-
eration of the GPS is considerably aﬀected by characteristics of the medium
lying along the path of signal propagation. Because of this it is important to
analyze the GPS performance during strong geomagnetic disturbances that
change the characteristics of one of the regions having the greatest inﬂuence
on GPS signals, the ionosphere. Failures in the GPS operation in the polar
and equatorial regions are frequently discussed (in, e.g., Skone at al., 2000).
However, the presence of failures at mid-latitudes is scantily discussed in the
literature (Afraimovich et al., 2000), in spite of reasonably complete spatial
coverage and the extensive practical applications of GPS receivers just in the
mid-latitude region.

This paper considers the dependence of the time and space distribution
of phase slips (PS) of the mid-latitude GPS receivers on the nightside of the
Earth based on using data from the Irkutsk incoherent scatter (IS) radar and
time-coincident two-frequency phase measurements from the mid-latitude
GPS receivers in the Earth’s northern hemisphere obtained during the geo-
magnetic disturbance on July 15, 2000 (17-24 UT (July 15, 2000), 00-07 of
Irkutsk LT (July 16, 2000), with maximum values of Kp=9, and Dst=-325
nT) (Afraimovich et al., 2000).

2

2 Experimental layout

A preprocessing of the GPS data provided estimates of the normalized (to
a total number of observations) relative density of phase slips (RDPS). As-
certaining the reason behind the increase in the slip density was also greatly
facilitated by the intensity estimates of total electron content (TEC) vari-
ations for the same stations and time intervals determined by a standard
technique of two-frequency measurements. The acquired data were used to
derive the mean power spectrum < S2(F ) > of TEC variations - the result
of an averaging of the energy spectrum of TEC variation for each path of the
subionospheric point for all such paths. Throughout the text below, we shall
use the TEC unit TECU equal to 1016 m−2 which is generally accepted in
the literature.

We have also calculated the dependence of the RDPS as a function of line-
of-sight (LOS) azimuth and elevation from the GPS receiver to the satellite.
The azimuth was measured from the northward direction, and the elevation
from the horizontal (is approximately equal to the cotangent of the ratio of
the height of the subionospheric point to the range to it). For comparison,
the data for the magnetically quiet day of July 29, 1999 were processed,
during which the geomagnetic disturbance Dst index was on the order of -10
nT).

The Irkutsk IS radar is located at 120 km north of Irkutsk (53◦N, 104◦E);
it is a monostatic facility for probing the mid-latitude ionosphere using the
radio wave backscattering method at 154-162 MHz frequencies (Potekhin et
al., 1999). The radar includes the linearly polarized receive-transmit antenna
for making, based on the IS method (Evans, 1969), absolute measurements
of the electron density from Faraday fadings of the received signal, as well as
electron and ion temperatures and the plasma drift velocity in the ionospheric
F-region (height range 170-750 km). During geomagnetic disturbances the
radar can be used (Potekhin et al., 1999) to investigate the ionospheric E-
layer (height range 100-120 km) using data on backscatter (BS) from small-
scale irregularities extended along the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld (Haldoupis et
al., 1997).

The antenna beam of the radar is such that when investigating the iono-
spheric F-region by the IS method, the scattered signal is received by the
main lobe of the antenna beam. When investigating the E-layer by the BS
method, the signal is received by the lower sidelobes of the beam, with a

3

power attenuation on the order of 10−11 with respect to the main lobe. The
experiment under discussion involved measurements of the IS signal power,
the BS signal power, and of the plasma drift velocity.

3 Description and discussion of the GPS data

The data presented in Fig. 1 clearly show a high correlation between the
time derivative of the geomagnetic disturbance Dst-index and the number
of PS. The number of phase slips exceeds one percent in the disturbance
maximum, and the position of the maximum is closely time-coincident with
maximum absolute values of dDst/dt. The data in Fig. 1a also intimate that
on the magnetically quiet day of July 29, 1999, the number of PS decreases
by several orders of magnitude (Fig. 1a, gray line with stars), compared
with the number of PS during disturbed periods (Fig. 1a, black line). This
suggests that the phase slips of the GPS receivers are associated with an
increase of the level of geomagnetic disturbance and can be caused by phase
distortions of GPS signals as they propagate through a disturbed region of
the ionosphere that is abundant in irregularities of diﬀerent scales.

Fig. 2 presents the spectral power < S2(F ) > of TEC variations (Fig. 2a),
and the dependence of the relative density of PS P(N,E) on the position of the
subionospheric point with respect to the GPS station’s location (Fig. 2b). It
is evident from Fig. 2 that during the geomagnetic storm of July 15, 2000 (20-
22 UT) the TEC variation power increases by 1-2 orders of magnitude, both
in the low- and high-frequency parts of the spectrum. This suggests that the
slips can be caused by phase distortions of GPS signals under the inﬂuence
of small-scale irregularities (smaller than or on the order of the radius of the
Fresnel zone), the amplitude of which increases with increasing geomagnetic
disturbance level. Fig. 2b clearly shows a strong aspect dependence of the
RDPS on the position of the subionospheric point (the direction of the beam
to the satellite) - PS occur most commonly in the northward direction, at
low elevations of the ”satellite-receiver” beam (α<300).

4

4 Description and discussion of the Irkutsk

IS radar data

One of the best-known types of small-scale irregularities, the scattering of
which is characterized by a strong aspect dependence, are the geomagnetic
ﬁeld-aligned E-layer irregularities (Buneman, 1963; Farley, 1963).

Fig. 3 presents the data from the Irkutsk IS radar: the dependence of
the scattered signal power and ionospheric plasma drift velocity as functions
of time and radar range R. The measurements of the backscattered signal
power were made with respect to the IS signal level corresponding in the
ﬁgure to the 10 dB level. The drift velocity measurements were made from
the frequency Doppler shift of the scattered signal (Haldoupis, 1997).

An analysis for a similar storm of September 25, 1998 showed that the
strongest scattering occurring within the ranges of 550-1100 km corresponds
to the scattering from the geomagnetic ﬁeld-aligned ionospheric E-layer ir-
regularities (Potekhin et al., 1999). Such irregularities are usually observed
in the mid-latitude ionosphere during strong geomagnetic disturbances (Fos-
ter and Tetenbaum, 1991; Haldoupis, 1997). It is evident from Fig. 3b that
between 22 and 24 UT the drift velocity exceeded the ion-sound velocity of
250 m/s; for that reason, the necessary conditions (Buneman, 1963; Farley,
1963) for the generation of such irregularities were satisﬁed. It was shown
(Potekhin et al., 1999) that the signal that is scattered from E-layer irregu-
larities is received by the lower sidelobes of the antenna beam in the direction
northward of the radar; for that reason, the power of this BS signal is atten-
uated by 11 orders of magnitude due to the experimental geometry. The IS
signal is received by the main beam lobe; therefore, it does not undergo such
an additional attenuation.

A comparison of Fig. 3a and Fig. 1 reveals that the occurrence of an
anomalously powerful scattering from geomagnetic ﬁeld-aligned E-layer ir-
regularities, maximum values of the derivative dDst/dt and of the relative
density of phase slips of GPS receivers are time-coincident.

The relation of the scattering cross-section of irregularities to the scat-
tered signal power is deﬁned by the radar equation (Isimaru, 1978) (within
a factor that is unimportant for a further consideration):

5

(1)

(2)

(3)

Prc( ~R) = const · Ptr

G2( ~R)
R2 σ( ~R)V

where Prc and Ptr stand for the power of the scattered and sounded
signals, respectively; G is the antenna power gain in the direction of the
sounding volume; σ is the scattering section per unit volume; and V is the
sounded volume.

The radar equation (1) can be used to estimate the relative scattering
cross-section of irregularities, from which the scattering occurs (taking into
consideration that the values of R, V and Ptr are of the same order of mag-
nitude for the two diﬀerent scattering mechanisms):

σBS ∼ Prc,BS
Prc,IS

G2
IS
G2

BS

σIS.

The power of the backscattered signal Prc,BS exceeds that of the inco-
herently scattered signal Prc,IS by three orders of magnitude (PBS/PIS=103,
Fig. 3a). The antenna gain in the two cases under consideration are related
by the relation G2
BS=1011. The scattering section of the IS signal is
known (Evans, 1969): σIS ∼ 10−19 m−1 . Therefore, from (2) one can esti-
mate the scattering section of geomagnetic ﬁeld-aligned ionospheric E-layer
irregularities at the mean frequency of 154 MHz of the Irkutsk IS radar.

IS/G2

σBS ∼ 10−5m−1.

5 The possible cause of phase slips of GPS

receivers

One conceivable reason for PS of GPS receivers on the nightside can be the
phase distortions of the GPS signal caused by the scattering from small-scale
irregularities of ionospheric plasma.

The distribution P (γ) of the relative density of P, constructed as a func-
tion of the angle γ between the propagation direction of the GPS signal and
the geomagnetic ﬁeld, has a pronounce tendency for an increase in relative
density of PS as γ approaches 90◦ (Fig. 4a). This result is also in good
agreement with the feature pointed out in Section 3, the increase in the slip

6

density in the case of the northward directed LOS to the satellite at low
elevations α.

We carried out a numerical simulation of the scattering from geomagnetic
ﬁeld-aligned irregularities using the international reference model of the mag-
netic ﬁeld (IGRF) and the well-known model of irregularities (Uspensky and
Starkov, 1987) that has an approximate form:

10−|γ( ~R)−90◦|/10

σBS( ~R) = σ0e−((h( ~R)−110)/10)2

(4)
where h( ~R) and γ( ~R) are the altitude of the point ~R above ground level
(in km) and the angle with the magnetic ﬁeld (in degrees), respectively. To
obtain P (γ), the expression (1) was integrated with respect to all directions
of the vector ~R in view of (4) and the directional pattern of the Irkutsk IS
radar G( ~R). The simulation showed that the strongest scattering occurs in
the region close to the region of the experimentally observed maximum of
the RDPS (Fig. 3b, 4b). This suggests that it is the scattering from the
geomagnetic ﬁeld-aligned E-layer irregularities which causes phase slips of
GPS receivers.

Let us now estimate the level of phase distortions in terms of the pro-
posed mechanism. By approximating the scattering section of the oriented
irregularities by the experimental law ln(σBS(k1)) = a0 + a1k−2.25 obtained in
(Moorcroft, 1987), from (3) we can estimate the absolute scattering section
per unit volume at the frequency f1 = 1575.42 MHz of GPS performance:

σ1575 = σBS (cid:18)

2.25

150
1575 (cid:19)

∼ 10−8 − 10−7m−1.

(5)

In accordance with Rytov’s method (Isimaru, 1978), phase distortions
of the signal in a medium with the irregularity section σ per unit volume
and with the propagation path length L in this medium, are deﬁned by the
expression:

< ∆ϕ2 >= Lσ/2.
(6)
Taking into account the thickness of the E-layer L ∼ 104 m, it is possible

to estimate minimum phase distortions of the GPS signal:

∆ϕ ∼ 3

< ∆ϕ2 > ∼ 10−1 − 10−2rad,

(7)

q

7

taking into account the oblique propagation through the E-layer, ∆ϕ will

be still larger.

Thus, in accordance with the proposed model, phase distortions of the
signal can exceed a few degrees and lead, even in the case of such a noise-
stable system as the GPS, to phase slips with a standard pretreatment of the
GPS signal.

6 Conclusion

In this paper we have considered some of the space and time characteristics
of phase slips of mid-latitude GPS receivers on the nightside of the Earth
during the strong geomagnetic disturbance of July 15, 2000.

It has been shown that the number of PS increases with the increasing
rate of Dst-variation with the time, and has a clearly pronounced aspect
dependence - the relative frequency of phase slips is the largest in the north-
ward direction at small elevations. We have suggested a plausible mechanism
that is responsible for PS - phase distortions of the GPS signal propagating
through the ionosphere that are caused by the scattering from the geomag-
netic ﬁeld-aligned E-layer irregularities. Using the data from the Irkutsk IS
radar we have estimated the order of phase distortions of the GPS signal that
are caused by this mechanism and amounting to several degrees.

To reliably explain the night-time phase slips of GPS receivers in terms
of this mechanism alone requires a more detailed veriﬁcation of the function-
ing of GPS receivers produced by diﬀerent manufacturers, for such a level
of phase distortions, and a relevant numerical simulation of the algorithms
involved.

Refereences

Afraimovich E. L., Lesyuta O. S., and Ushakov I. I., Magneto-
spheric disturbances, and the GPS operation, LANL e-print archive,
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0009027, 2000.

Buneman O., Excitation of ﬁeld-aligned sound waves by electron streams,

Phys. Rv. Lett., V.10, 285–287, 1963.

Evans J. V., Theory and Practice of Ionosphere study by Thomson Scatter

Radar, Proc. IEEE, V. 57, 496–530, 1969.

8

Farley D. T., A plasma instability resulting in ﬁeld-aligned irregularities

in the ionosphere, J. Geophys. Res., V.68, 6083–6097, 1963.

Foster J. C., and Tetenbaum D., High resolution backscatter power obser-
vations of 440-MHz E-region coherent echoes at Millstone-Hill, J. Geophys.
Res., V.96, 1251–1261, 1991.

Haldoupis C., Farley D. T., and Schlegel K., Type-1 echoes from mid-

latitude E-region ionosphere, Ann. Geophysicae, V.15, 908–917, 1997.

Ishimaru A., Wave Propagation and Scattering in Random Media, Aca-

demic Press, 1978.

Potekhin A. P., Berngardt O. I., Kurkin V. I., Shpynev B. G., Zherebtsov G. A.,

Foster J. C., and Rich F. J., Observation of the Mid-Latitude Coherent
Echoes During the September 25,1998 Storm With the Irkutsk IS Radar,
Abstracts of XXIV GA URSI, Toronto, Canada, 441, 1999.

Moorcroft D. R., Estimates of absolute scattering coeﬃcients of radar

aurora, J. Geophys. Res., V.92, 8723–8732, 1987.

Skone S., de Jong M., The impact of geomagnetic substorms on GPS

receiver performance, Earth Planets Space, V.52, 1067–1071, 2000.

Uspensky M. V., and Starkov G. V., Polar Auroras and Radio Wave

Scattering. Leningrad: Nauka, 1987 (in Russian).

9

