2
0
0
2
 
v
o
N
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
1
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Traveling wave packets of total electron content disturbances
as deduced from global GPS network data

Afraimovich E. L., Perevalova N. P.,Voyeikov S. V.

Abstract

We identiﬁed a new class of mid-latitude medium-scale travel-
ing ionospheric disturbances (MS TIDs), viz. traveling wave packets
(TWPs) of total electron content (TEC) disturbances. For the ﬁrst
time, the morphology of TWPs is presented for 105 days from the
time interval 1998-2001 with a diﬀerent level of geomagnetic activity,
with the number of stations of the global GPS network ranging from
10 to 300. The radio paths used in the analysis total about 700000.
These data were obtained using the GLOBDET technology for global
detection and monitoring of ionospheric disturbances of natural and
technogenic origin from measurements of TEC variations acquired by
a global network of receivers of the navigation GPS system. The
GLOBDET technology was developed at the ISTP SB RAS. Using
the technique of GPS interferometry of TIDs we carried out a detailed
analysis of the spatial-temporal properties of TWPs by considering an
example of the most conspicuous manifestation of TWPs on October
18, 2001 over California, USA. It was found that TWPs are observed
no more than in 0.1-0.4% of all radio paths, most commonly during the
daytime in winter and autumn at low geomagnetic activity. TWPs in
the time range represent quasi-periodic oscillations of TEC of a length
on the order of 1 hour with the oscillation period in the range 10-20
min and the amplitude exceeding the amplitude of ”background” TEC
ﬂuctuations by one order of magnitude, as a minimum. The radius of
spatial correlation of TWPs does not exceed 500–600 km (3–5 wave-
lengths). The velocity and direction of TWPs correspond to those
of mid-latitude medium-scale traveling ionospheric disturbances (MS
TIDs) obtained previously from analyzing the phase characteristics of

1

HF radio signals as well as signals from geostationary satellites and
discrete cosmic radio sources.

1 Introduction

The unremitting interest in investigations of atmospheric acoustic-gravity
waves (AGW) over more than four decades dating back to Hines pioneering
work (Hines, 1960, 1967) is dictated by the important role played by these
waves in the dynamics of the Earth’s atmosphere. These research eﬀorts
have been addressed in a large number of publications, including a series of
through reviews (Hocke and Schlegel, 1996; Oliver et al., 1997).

AGW typically show up in the ionosphere in the form of traveling iono-
spheric disturbances (TIDs) and are detected by various radio techniques.
TIDs are classiﬁed as large- and medium-scale disturbances diﬀering by their
horizontal phase velocity which is larger (in the large-scale case) or smaller
(for the medium scale) velocity of sound in the lower thermosphere (on the
order of 300 m/s), with periods within 0.5–3.0 h and 10–40 min, respectively.
Medium-scale TIDs (MS TIDs) are observed predominantly during the day-
time hours and are associated with AGW which are generated in the lower
atmosphere. Large-scale TIDs are predominant in the night-time hours and
are closely associated with geomagnetic and auroral activity.

It is known that the sources of medium-scale AGW can include natural
processes of a diﬀerent origin: magnetic storms, auroral phenomena, weather
factors, tropospheric turbulence and jet ﬂows, the solar terminator, strong
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, as well as anthropogenic inﬂuences (rocket
launchings, explosions, nuclear tests). As a consequence the observed picture
of the electron density disturbance is essentially a net interference wave ﬁeld
of the AGW of a diﬀerent origin.
Identifying of the AGW of a deﬁnite
type from this ﬁeld is a highly involved and generally an almost intractable
problem.

The most reliable measurements of the main parameters of medium-scale
AGW (parameters of the wave vector of the AGW, spectral and dispersion
characteristics, etc.) can therefore be made only for a very rare, unusual
type of MS TIDs, i.e. quasi-periodic (monochromatic) oscillations which are
sometimes recorded as corresponding variations of the frequency Doppler
shift FD of the ionosphere-reﬂected HF radio signal (Davies and Jones, 1971;

2

Waldock and Jones, 1987; Jacobson and Carlos, 1991; Yakovets et al., 1999).
Experiments of this kind were instrumental in investigating the spatial-
temporal characteristics of MS TIDs in the form of a wave process, because
such recordings are easy to identify visually with monochromatic individual
AGW. Unfortunately, this was possible to accomplish for a very limited body
of experimental data. Thus, Jacobson and Carlos (1991) managed to identify
only a few monochromatic TIDs from their data obtained for more than 100
hours of observation.

Yakovets et al. (1999) also recorded only a few realizations of monochro-
matic TIDs for two observing periods from the winter months of 1989 and
1990. Yakovets et al. (1999) are likely to be the ﬁrst to use the term ”wave
packets” to designate the quasi-monochromatic variations of FD, and they
made an attempt to explain their origin on the basis of studying the phase
structure of the oscillations. The authors of the cited reference observed
two types of FD-variations: quasi-stochastic TIDs, and monochromatic TIDs
in the form of wave packets. They arrived at the conclusion that quasi-
stochastic TIDs are characterized by a random phase behavior, a short length
of coherence, and by a large vertical phase velocity. Wave packets show quasi-
monochromatic oscillations of FD, a larger length of coherence, and a smaller
vertical phase velocity.

Following Yakovets et al.

(1999), we chose to utilize the term ”wave
packets” by expanding it to the term ”traveling wave packets” (TWPs). The
investigation made in this paper has brought out clearly that this designation
describes most adequately the phenomenon involved.

Some authors associate the variations of the frequency Doppler shift FD
with MS TIDs that are generated during the passage of atmospheric fronts,
tornadoes, and hurricanes (Baker and Davies, 1969; Bertin et al., 1975; 1978;
Hung et al., 1978; Kersly and Rees, 1982; Stobie et al., 1983; Huang et
al., 1985). It is only in some cases that these experiments observed quasi-
monochromatic variations of FD with periods of about 10 min (Huang et al.,
1985).

Thus, in spite of the many years of experimental and theoretical studied,
so far there is no clear understanding not only of the physical origin of the
quasi-monochromatic MS TIDs but even of their morphology as well (the
occurrence frequency as a function of geographical location, time, level of
geomagnetic and meteorological activity, etc.).

To address these issues requires obtaining statistically signiﬁcant sets of

3

experimental data with good spatial resolution in order to study not only
the morphological but also dynamic characteristics of quasi-monochromatic
MS TIDs (the direction of their displacement, their propagation velocity,
and the location of the possible disturbance source). Another important
requirement implies the continuous, global character of observations, because
such phenomena are temporally highly rare and spatially random.

Such a possibility is, for the ﬁrst time, aﬀorded by the use of the inter-
national ground-based network of two-frequency receivers of the navigation
GPS system which at the beginning of 2002 consisted of no less than 1000
sites, with its data posted on the Internet, which opens up a new era of
a global, continuous and fully computerized monitoring of ionospheric dis-
turbances of a diﬀerent class. Analysis and identiﬁcation of TWPs became
possible through the use of the technology (developed at the ISTP) for global
detection and determination of parameters of ionospheric disturbances of a
diﬀerent class.

The objective of this paper is to study the morphology and spatial-
temporal properties of TWPs using the data from the global network of
GPS receivers. Section 2 provides general information about the experiment
and gives a brief description of the method of TWPs detecting. Section 3
presents our new evidence characterizing the TWPs morphology. Section 4
is devoted to a detailed analysis of the spatial-temporal properties of TWPs
by considering an example of the most pronounced manifestation of TWPs
on October 18, 2001 as observed in California, USA. The discussion of our
results compared with the ﬁndings reported by other authors is given in
Section 5.

2 General information about the experiment

and method of TWPs detecting

This paper presents, for the ﬁrst time, the morphology of TWPs for 105
days of 1998–2001, with a diﬀerent level of geomagnetic activity and with
the number of stations of the global GPS network ranging from 10 to 300.
A total number of he TEC series used in the analysis, corresponding to
the observation along a single receiver-satellite Line-of-Sight (LOS), with a
duration of each series of about 2.3 hours, exceeded 700000.

4

For a diversity of reasons, slightly diﬀering sets of GPS stations were
selected for diﬀerent events to be analyzed; however, the geometry of exper-
iment for all events was virtually identical. The stations coordinates are not
given here for reasons of space. This information may be found at the elec-
tronic address http://lox.ucsd.edu/cgi-bin/allCoords.cgi?. The global GPS
covers rather densely North America and Europe, and to a much lesser extent
Asia. GPS stations are more sparsely distributed on the Paciﬁc and Atlantic
Oceans. However, such coverage of the surface of the globe makes it possi-
ble, already today, to tackle the problem of global detection of disturbances
with hither to unprecedented spatial accumulation. Thus, in the Western
hemisphere the corresponding number of stations can reach no less than 500
already today, and the number of LOS to the satellite can be no less than
2000–3000.

The area of California, USA, is particular convenient for our investigations
because of the large number of GPS stations (no less than 300) located over
a relatively small area, which makes it possible to obtain a great variety
of GPS arrays of a diﬀerent conﬁguration for a reliable determination of the
dynamic TWPs parameters using the method of GPS interferometry of TIDs
(Afraimovich et al., 1998; 2000).

The comparison of TWPs characteristics with geomagnetic ﬁeld varia-
tions was based on using the data from the INTERMAGNET network (IN-
TERMAGNET, http://www.intermagnet.org/).

2.1 Method of processing the data from the global

network. Selection of TWPs

The standard GPS technology provides a means for wave disturbances de-
tecion based on phase measurements of TEC I0 (Hofmann-Wellenhof et al.,
1992):

I0 =

1
40.308

1 f 2
f 2
2
1 − f 2
f 2
2

[(L1λ1 − L2λ2) + const + nL]

(1)

where L1λ1 and L2λ2 are additional paths of the radio signal caused by the
phase delay in the ionosphere, (m); L1 and L2 represent the number of phase
rotations at the frequencies f1 and f2; λ1 and λ2 stand for the corresponding
wavelengths, (m); const
is the unknown initial phase ambiguity, (m); and

5

nL are errors in determining the phase path, (m).

Phase measurements in the GPS can be made with a high degree of
accuracy corresponding to the error of TEC determination of at least 1014
m−2 when averaged on a 30-second time interval, with some uncertainty of
the initial value of TEC, however (Hofmann-Wellenhof et al., 1992). This
makes possible detecting ionization irregularities and wave processes in the
ionosphere over a wide range of amplitudes (up to 10−4 of the diurnal TEC
variation) and periods (from 24 hours to 5 min). The unit of TEC, which is
equal to 1016 m−2 (T ECU) and is commonly accepted in the literature, will
be used in the following.

In some instances a convenient way for comparing TEC response charac-
teristics from the GPS data with those obtained by analyzing the frequency
Doppler shift in the HF range (Davies and Jones, 1971; Waldock and Jones,
1987; Jacobson and Carlos, 1991; Yakovets et al., 1999) is to estimate the
frequency Doppler shift FD from TEC series obtained by formula (1). To an
approximation suﬃcient for the purpose of our investigation, a corresponding
relationship was obtained by (Davies, 1969):

FD = 13.5 × 10−8I ′

t/f

(2)

t stands for the time derivative of TEC.

where I ′
Primary data include series of ”oblique” values of TEC I0(t), as well as
the corresponding series of elevations θ(t) and azimuths α(t) along LOS to the
satellite calculated using our developed CONVTEC program which converts
the GPS system standard RINEX-ﬁles on the INTERNET (Gurtner, 1993).
For TWPs characteristics to be determined continuous series of I0(t) series
of a duration of no less than 2.3 hours are chosen.

To normalize the response amplitude we converted the ”oblique” TEC to

an equivalent ”vertical” value (Klobuchar, 1986):

I = I0 × cos

arcsin
(cid:20)

Rz
Rz + hmax

cos θ

,

(cid:18)
where Rz is the Earth’s radius, and hmax = 300 km is the height of the

(cid:19)(cid:21)

(3)

F2-layer maximum.

The most reliable results from the determination of TWPs parameters
correspond to high values of elevations θ(t) of the beam to the satellite be-
cause sphericity eﬀects become reasonably small. All results in this study

6

were obtained for elevations θ(t) larger than 30◦.

To exclude the variations of the regular ionosphere, as well as trends
introduced by the motion of the satellite, we employ the procedure of re-
moving the linear trend by preliminarily smoothing the initial series with a
convenient time window.

The technology for global detection of TWPs that was developed at the
ISTP SB RAS makes it possible to select – from a large amount of experi-
mental material in the automatic mode – the TEC disturbances which can
be assigned to a class of TWPs.

The selection of TEC series which could be ascribed to a class of TWPs
was carried out by two criteria (Fig. 1). First of all, TEC variations were
selected, for which the value of the standard deviation exceeded a given
threshold ǫ (in the present case ǫ = 0.1 T ECU).

In addition, for each ﬁltered series, we veriﬁed the fulﬁllment of the
”quasi-monochromaticity” condition of TEC oscillations, for which the ratio
R of a total spectral signal power in the selected frequency band δF in the
neighborhood of a maximum value of the power Smax, to a total spectral
signal power outside the frequency band δF under consideration exceeded a
given threshold Rmin (in the present case Rmin = 2).

Fig. 1 illustrates the selection process of the TWPs. Fig. 1a gives
an example of weakly disturbed variations of the ”vertical” TEC I(t) as
recorded on July 15, 2001 at station DARW (131.13◦E; 12.8◦S; satellite num-
ber PRN05). Fig. 1b presents the dI(t)-variations that were ﬁltered from
the initial I(t)-series. Thin horizontal lines show the speciﬁed threshold ǫ.
The standard deviation of the dI(t)-variations is 0.019 T ECU, that is, does
not reach the speciﬁed threshold ǫ = 0.1 T ECU.

Fig. 1c illustrates the S(F ) spectrum of the series dI(t) from Fig. 1b.
Thin vertical lines show the boundaries of the frequency range δF . For this
spectrum R = 0.66 is smaller than the speciﬁed Rmin = 2 and, hence, the
series dI(t) does not satisfy the condition of ”quasi-monochromaticity”.

Fig. 1d, 1e and 1f plots the same dependencies as in Fig. 1a, 1b and
1c but for station TOW2 (147◦E; 19.3◦S; satellite number PRN09).
It is
evident from Fig. 1d that at the background of the slow TEC variations
there are clearly identiﬁable (unusual for background TEC disturbances)
oscillations in the form of a wave packet of a duration of about 1 hour and
with a typical period T in the range from 10 to 18 min. The oscillation
amplitude of the detected wave packet exceeds one order of magnitude (as

7

a minimum) the intensity of background TEC ﬂuctuations of this range of
periods (Afraimovich et al., 2001a).

The relative amplitude of such a response ∆I/I0 is considerable, 4 %.
As the background value of I0 we used the absolute ”vertical” TEC value of
I0(t) for the site located at 19.3◦S; 147◦E, obtained from IONEX TEC maps
(Mannucci, 1998). Since the main contribution to the modulation of the
TEC is made by the region near the ionospheric F -region peak, the relative
amplitude of the local electron density disturbance ∆N/N0 in this region can
be several times larger than ∆I/I0.

It is worthwhile to note that the two examples described above refer to the
same time interval and to the stations spaced by a distance of no more than
1900 km from one another. This suggests a local character of the phenomenon
and is in agreement with the overall sample statistic characterizing its spatial
correlation (see below).

The standard deviation of the series dI(t), shown in Fig. 1e, is 0.114
T ECU, which is larger than the speciﬁed threshold ǫ=0.1 T ECU, and this
series satisﬁes the condition for the standard deviation. Fig. 1f presents the
spectrum S(F ) of the series dI(t), shown in Fig. 1e. For this spectrum R
= 3.71, which is larger than the speciﬁed Rmin = 2, that is, in this case the
series dI(t) satisﬁes the condition of ”quasi-monochromaticity”.

Panel e shows the maximum value of the amplitude Amax of the packet

and the time tmax corresponding to this amplitude.

When the ﬁltered dI(t)-series satisﬁed the conditions described above,

such an event was recognized as TWP.

Furthermore, for each such event, a special ﬁle stored information about
the name, geographical latitude φs and longitude λs of the GPS station; the
GPS satellite PRN number; the time tmax corresponding to the maximum
value of the amplitude Amax of the TWP; the amplitude Amax; the TWP
oscillation period T ; the R ratio; and about the value of the elevation θs(t)
and the azimuth αs(t) of the LOS to the satellite calculated for the time tmax.
The sample statistic, presented below, was obtained by processing such ﬁles
for our selected value of ǫ=0.1 T ECU.

8

3 Morphology of TWPs

The method outlined above was used to obtain a series of TWPs totaling
about 1300 cases, or about 0.2% of the total number of the radio paths
considered (receiver-satellite LOS). As has been pointed out above, the radio
paths that were considered totaled over 700000. An analysis of the resulting
statistic revealed a number of dependencies of the TWPs parameters on
diﬀerent factors.

First of all, we consider the seasonal dependence of the density and am-
plitude of the TWPs (Fig. 2). Fig. 2a plots the dependence of the number
of days of observation M on the time of the year. It is evident that statis-
tically, the autumn season is represented best. Fig. 2b shows the seasonal
dependence of the number of TWPs N. Fig. 2c plots the number of TWPs
L = N/M per day as a function of time of the year. This dependence has
maxima in winter and in autumn.

The relative TWPs density D, obtained as the ratio of the number of
TWPs N to the number of receiver-satellite LOS, is presented in Fig. 2d. As
is apparent from the ﬁgure, TWPs are observed in no more than 0.1-0.4% of
the total number of radio paths, and much more frequently in winter (over
0.4%) and autumn (up to 0.3%) than in spring and summer (less than 0.1%).
Diamonds in Fig. 2d show the mean values of hAi of the maximum TWPs
amplitudes Amax for each season, and vertical lines show their standard devi-
ations. Thick horizontal line shows the threshold in amplitude ǫ=0.1 T ECU.
The most probable value of hAi with a small scatter varies around the value
0.3 T ECU, irrespective of the season.

Fig. 3d presents the normalized occurrence probability distribution of
TWPs with the speciﬁed maximum amplitude of the packet Amax. The
vertical dashed line shows the threshold in amplitude ǫ=0.1 T ECU. It was
found that the most probable value of the amplitude Am, also shown in Fig.
3d, is about 0.3 T ECU, and the half-width of the distribution is 0.2 T ECU.
As was shown by Afraimovich et al. (2001a), the mean values of the TEC
variation amplitude with the period of 20 min for the magnetically quiet and
magnetically disturbed days do not exceed 0.01 T ECU and 0.07 T ECU,
respectively. Thus the most probable value of the amplitude Am of TWPs
exceeds the mean value of the TEC variation amplitude by a factor of 4–6 as
a minimum. This estimate is consistent with the variation amplitude of the
frequency Doppler shift FD reported by Yakovets et al. (1999).

9

Fig. 3b presents the diurnal distribution P (tmax) of the times tmax corre-
sponding to the maximum value of the amplitude Amax of the wave packet
of TWPs. It is evident that most of the TWPs (about 87%) are observed
during the daytime, from about 7:00 to 16:00 of local time, LT.

Fig. 3a plots the dependence P (|Dst|) of the number of TWPs on the
values of the geomagnetic activity index Dst taken by the modulus. There is
a general tendency of the number of TWPs to increase with the decreasing
level of geomagnetic activity. Most (about 92%) of the TWPs occur when
the values of the Dst-index are smaller than 100 nT.

The availability of a large number of GPS stations in some regions of the
globe (in California, USA and West Europe, for example) makes it possible to
determine not only the temporal but also spatial characteristics of TWPs. To
estimate the radius of spatial correlation of events of this type we calculated
the number of cases where the TWPs within a single 2.3-hour time interval
were observed at any two GPS stations separated by dR. Fig. 3c presents
the histogram of values of P (dR) as a function of distance dR. It was found
that the localization of the TWPs in space is strongly pronounced. In 82%
of cases the distance dR does not exceed 500 km.

4 Traveling wave packets of total electron
content pulsations as deduced from a case
study of the October 18, 2001 event

Using the method of GPS interferometry of TIDs (Afraimovich et al., 1998;
2000), we carried out a detailed analysis of the spatial-temporal properties
of TWPs by considering an example of the most pronounced manifestation
of TWPs on October 18, 2001 over California, USA. Numerous traveling
ionospheric disturbances of the type of TWPs were recorded on that day
between 15:00 and 18:00 UT using signals from several satellites, at many
GPS stations located in California.

10

4.1 Geometry and general information about the Oc-

tober 18, 2001 experiment

The area of California within 220 − 260◦E; 28 − 42◦N is convenient for our
investigations because of a large number of GPS stations located there, which
makes it possible to obtain a great variety of GPS arrays of a diﬀerent con-
ﬁguration for determining the TID parameters and provides a means of ver-
ifying the reliability of calculated data.
It is also important that for the
above-mentioned time interval 15:18 UT and for the chosen longitude range
the local time varied from 08 to 11 LT, which reduces the level of background
TEC ﬂuctuations characteristic for the night-time.

Fig. 4 illustrates the geometry of the experiment of October 18, 2001.
Heavy dots show the GPS stations, and small dots show the position of
subionospheric points for GPS receiver-satellite LOS. Since each receiver site
observes simultaneously several (no less than four) GPS satellites, the num-
ber of radio paths far exceeds the number of stations, which enhances the
capabilities of analysis. Fig. 4a presents the entire set of GPS stations used
in the experiment. Fig. 4b and 4c show the stations and the subionospheric
points where the TEC variations revealed TWPs with an amplitude exceed-
ing the speciﬁed threshold ǫ=0.05 T ECU (Fig. 4b) and ǫ=0.1 T ECU (Fig.
4c). With the sole exception, TWPs were recorded along the paths over and,
predominantly in the north-eastward direction. As is evident from Fig. 4,
an increase of the recording threshold by a factor of two reduced the number
of recorded events by a factor of two. Stations shown in Fig. 4c were used
as the elements of the GPS arrays in calculating the TWPs parameters.

The geomagnetic situation on October 18, 2001 may be characterized
as a weakly disturbed one, which must lead to some increase of the level of
background TEC ﬂuctuations yet cannot cause large-scale changes in electron
density characteristic for a geomagnetically disturbed ionosphere.

Geomagnetic ﬁeld Dst-variations for October 18, 2001 are plotted in
Fig. 5a. In the analysis of the geomagnetic situation we used also the data
from magnetic observatory Victoria (48.52◦N; 236.58◦E) where for the time
interval of our interest a weak geomagnetic disturbance was recorded, which
implied a decrease of the horizontal component H(t) of the magnetic ﬁeld by
60 nT (Fig. 5b). There was a concurrent, small decrease of the ﬂuctuation
amplitude of the dH(t)-component in the range of periods 2-20 min (Fig.
5c). The range of variation of the geomagnetic Dst-index for the selected

11

time interval was also relatively small (no more than 20 nT), yet the period
15:30-18:00 UT showed a clearly pronounced decrease of the Dst-index coin-
ciding with the period of the decrease of the H-component of the magnetic
ﬁeld (Fig. 5a).

Fig. 5d presents the distribution N(t) of the number of TWPs detected
for that day by all stations of the global GPS system analyzed here, with
the standard deviation in excess of ǫ = 0.1 T ECU. Fig. 5e illustrates the
dynamic amplitude spectrum S(f, t) of TEC variations in the range of periods
5–60 min obtained by using the method of spatial averaging of the spectra
for the entire California region (Afraimovich et al., 2001a).

Overall, the TEC variations correlate with geomagnetic ﬁeld variations.
Between 15:00 and 19:00 UT, the enhancement of the oscillations of the H-
component was accompanied by an expansion of the spectrum and by an
increase of the TEC ﬂuctuation amplitude. The highest intensity is shown
by the TEC oscillations with periods of 12–17 min between 15:30 and 17:00
UT. The largest number of TWPs was also recorded during the same period
of time (Fig. 5d).

To check that TWPs were observed on that day somewhere else on the
globe and not only between 15 and 19 UT, we processed the data with dif-
ferent values of the threshold ǫ for the entire global GPS network.

Fig. 6 presents the sample statistic of the pulsations identiﬁed for October
18, 2001 as a function of UT and local time LT, calculated for the longitude
of 240◦E corresponding to the middle of the California region: Fig. 6a - from
TWPs with the standard deviation higher than ǫ = 0.1 T ECU obtained from
all stations of the global GPS network used in the study (copy of Fig. 5d);
Fig. 6b and Fig. 6c - same as in Fig. 6a but for ǫ = 0.05 T ECU and ǫ =
0.01 T ECU; Fig. 6d - standard deviation higher than ǫ = 0.01 T ECU for
the data from the California region only.

An analysis of the Fig. 6 data leads us to conclude that the TWPs on that
day were observed mainly in California only and only over the time interval
15–17 UT.

12

4.2 Methods of determining the form and dynamic

characteristics of TWPs

The methods of determining the form and dynamic characteristics of TIDs
that are used in this study are based on those reported in (Mercier, 1986;
Afraimovich, 1995; 1997; Afraimovich et al., 1998; 1999).

We determine the velocity and direction of motion of the phase interfer-
ence pattern (phase front) in terms of some model of this pattern, an adequate
choice of which is of critical importance. In the simplest form, space-time
variations in phase of the transionospheric radio signal that are proportional
to TEC variations I(t, x, y) in the ionosphere, at each given time t can be
represented in terms of the phase interference pattern that moves without a
change in its shape (the non dispersive disturbances):

I(t, x, y) = F (t − x/ux − y/uy)

(4)

where ux(t) and uy(t) are the velocities of intersection of the phase front of
the axes x (directed to the East) and y (directed to the North), respectively.
A special case of (4) is the most often used model for a solitary, plane

travelling wave of TEC disturbance:

I(t, x, y) = δ sin(Ωt − Kxx − Kyy + ϕ0)

(5)

2

where I(t, x, y) are space-time variations of TEC; δ(t) = exp[− ((t − tmax)/(td))

]

– the amplitude; Kx, Ky, Ω are the x- and y- projections of the wave vector
K, and the angular frequency of the disturbance, respectivly; ϕ0 is the ini-
tial disturbance phase; tmax is the time when the disturbance has a maximum
amplitude; td is the half-thickness of the ’wave packet’.

It should be noticed, however, that in real situations neither of these ideal
models (4), (5) are realized in a pure form. This is because that the AGW
that cause TIDs propagate in the atmosphere in the form of a dispersing
wave packet with a ﬁnite value of the width of the angular spectrum. But in
the ﬁrst approximation on short time interval of averaging compared to time
period of ﬁltered variations of TEC, the phase interference pattern moves
without a substantial change in its shape.

Mercier (1986) suggested a statistical method to analyze the phase in-
terference pattern. Primary data comprise time dependencies of the spa-
tial phase derivatives I ′
x(t) along the directions y and x. Method

y(t) and I ′

13

(6)

(7)

(8)

Mercier (1986) involves determining a series of instantaneous values of the
direction α(t)

α(t) = arctan(I ′

x(t)/I ′

y(t))

and constructing subsequently, on a chosen time interval, the distribution
function of azimuth P (α). The central value of α is used by Mercier as an
estimate of the azimuth of prevailing propagation of TIDs (modulo 180◦).

The other method is based on analyzing the phase interference pattern
anisotropy in the antenna array plane by determining the contrast C of the
interference pattern (Mercier, 1986). In this case the ratio Cx,y is calculated
as follows:

where X and Y are series of the transformed values of I ′

x(t) and I ′
obtained by rotating the original coordinate system (x, y) by the angle β:

y(t)

Cx,y = σX/σY ,
Cx,y = σY /σX,

if σX > σY
if σY > σX

X(t) = I ′
Y (t) = −I ′

x(t) sin β + I ′

y(t) cos β

x(t) cos β + I ′

y(t) sin β

and σX and σY are r. m. s. of the corresponding series.
Mercier (1986) showed that it is possible to ﬁnd such a value of the
rotation angle β0, at which the ratio Cx,y will be a maximum and equal to the
value of contrast C. This parameter characterizes the degree of anisotropy
of the phase interference pattern. The angle β0 in this case indicates the
direction of elongation, and the angle αc = β0 + π/2 indicates the direction of
the wave vector K coincident (modulo 180◦) with the propagation direction
of the phase front.

The method of Mercier (1986) essentially makes it possible to determine
only the anisotropy and the direction of irregularity elongation of the phase
interference pattern (modulo 180◦).

A Statistical, Angle-of-arrival and Doppler Method (SADM) is proposed
by Afraimovich (1995, 1997) for determining characteristics of the dynamics
of the phase interference pattern in the horizontal plane by measuring vari-
ations of phase derivatives with respect not only to spatial coordinates I ′
x(t)
and I ′
y(t) - proportional to the angles of arrival variations, but additionally
to time I ′
t(t) - proportional to the frequency Doppler shift variations. This

14

permits to ascertain the unambiguous orientation of α(t) of the wave-vector
K in the range 0–360◦ and determine the horizontal velocity modulus Vh(t)
at each speciﬁc in-stant of time.

Afraimovich et al.(1998, 1999) described updating of the SADM algo-
rithm for GPS-arrays (SADM-GPS) based on a simple model for the dis-
placement of the phase interference pattern that travels without a change in
the shape and on using current information about angular coordinates of the
GPS satellites: the elevation θs(t) and the azimuth αs(t). Of course, such an
approximation is acceptable only for large values of the LOS elevation θs.

The method SADM-GPS permits to determine the horizontal velocity
Vh(t) and the azimuth α(t) of TID displacement at each speciﬁc in-stant of
time (the wave-vector orientation K) in a ﬁxed coordinate system (x, y):

x(t) = u(t)/ cos α(t)
y(t) = u(t)/ sin α(t)

α(t) = arctan(uy(t)/ux(t))
t(t)/I ′
ux(t) = I ′
uy(t) = I ′
t(t)/I ′
u(t) = |ux(t)uy(t)|/(u2
Vx(t) = u(t) sin α(t) + wx(t)
Vy(t) = u(t) cos α(t) + wy(t)
Vh(t) = (V 2

x (t) + V 2

y (t))1/2

x(t) + u2

y(t))−1/2

(9)

where ux and uy are the propagation velocities of the phase front along
the axes x and y in a frame of reference related to the GPS-array; wx and
wy are the x and y projections of the velocity w of the subionospheric point
(for taking into account the motion of the satellite).

The coordinates of the subionospheric point xs(t) and ys(t) at hmax in

the chosen topocentric coordinate system vary as:

xs(t) = hmaxsin(αs(t))ctg(θs(t))
ys(t) = hmaxcos(αs(t))ctg(θs(t))

(10)

and the x- and y- components of the displacement velocity w:

wx(t) = d/dt(xs(t))
wy(t) = d/dt(ys(t))
y(t))1/2
x(t) + w2
Let us take a brief look at the sequence of data handling procedures.
Out of a large number of GPS stations, three points (A, B, C) are chosen

w(t) = (w2

(11)

15

in such a way that the distances between them do not exceed about one-
half the expected wavelength Λ of the disturbance. The point B is taken
to be the center of a topocentric frame of reference. Such a conﬁguration
of the GPS receivers represents a GPS-array (or a GPS-interferometer) with
a minimum of the necessary number of elements. In regions with a dense
network of GPS-points, we can obtain a broad range of GPS-arrays of a
diﬀerent conﬁguration, which furnishing a means of testing the data obtained
for reliability; in this paper we have taken advantage of this possibility.

The input data include series of the vertical TEC IA(t), IB(t), IC(t), as
well as corresponding series of values of the elevation θs(t) and the azimuth
αs(t) of the LOS.

Series of the values of the elevation θs(t) and azimuth αs(t) of the LOS
are used to determine the location of the subionospheric point, as well as to
calculate the elevation θ of the wave vector K of the disturbance from the
known azimuth α (see formula (12)).

Since the distance between GPS-array elements (from several tens to a
few hundred of kilometers) is much smaller than that to the GPS satellite
(over 20000 km), the array geometry at the height near the main maximum
of the F2-layer is identical to that on the ground.

Linear transformations of the diﬀerences of the values of the ﬁltered TEC
(IB − IA) and (IB − IC) at the receiving points A, B and C are used to
calculate the components of the TEC gradient I ′
y (Afraimovich et al.,
1998). The time derivative of TEC I ′
t is determined by diﬀerentiating IB(t)
at the point B.

x and I ′

The resulting series are used to calculate instantaneous values of the hor-
izontal velocity Vh(t) and the azimuth α(t) of TID propagation. Next, the
series Vh(t) and α(t) are put to a statistical treatment. This involves con-
structing distributions of the horizontal velocity P (Vh) and direction P (α)
which are analyzed to test the hypothesis of the existence of the preferred
propagation direction. If such a direction does exist, then the corresponding
distributions are used to calculate the mean value of the horizontal velocity
hVhi, as well as the mean value of the azimuth hαi of TID propagation.

As a ﬁrst approximation, the transionospheric sounding method is respon-
sive only to TIDs with the wave vector K perpendicular to the direction r
of the LOS. A corresponding condition for elevation θ and azimuth α has the
form

16

(12)

(13)

tan θ = − cos(αs − α)/ tan θs

Hence the phase velocity modulus V can be deﬁned as

V = Vh × cos(θ)

The aspect dependence (12) of the TEC disturbance amplitude is of sig-
niﬁcant importance for investigating wave disturbances. The condition (12)
imposes a constraint on the number of LOS for which a reliable detection of
TIDs at the background of noise is possible. The aspect eﬀect causes the dis-
turbance maximum to be displaced along the time axis, which can introduce
errors in determining the TID displacement if the velocity is calculated from
time delays. Furthermore, as will be shown below, the aspect eﬀect will give
rise to structures of the type of wave packets ”observed” in TEC variations,
which do not exist in the reality.

Afraimovich et al. (1992) showed that for the Gaussian ionization distri-
bution the TEC disturbance amplitude M is determined by the aspect angle
γ between the vectors K and r, as well as by the ratio of the wavelength of
the disturbance Λ to the half-thickness of the ionization maximum hd:

M(γ) ∝

hd
sin(θs)

· exp

−



πhd cos(γ)
Λ sin(θs) !

 

2



(14)


In this paper the inﬂuence of aspect eﬀects on the character of TEC
behavior and on the accuracy of the calculated parameters of TWPs was
investigated and the reliability of the determination of TWPs characteristics
was veriﬁed by modeling the wave disturbances of electron density for the
observing conditions of October 18, 2001.



Thus, on the basis of using the transformations described in this section,
for each of the GPS arrays chosen for the analysis we obtained the average
(for the time interval of about 1-2 hours) values of the following TWPs
parameters: hAIi, the amplitude of the TEC disturbance; hαi and hθi – the
azimuth and elevation of the wave vector K; hVhi and hV i – the horizontal
component and the phase velocity modulus, the contrast C, and the azimuth
of a normal to the wave front αc from the method reported by Mercier (1986).

17

4.3 Dynamic characteristics of TWP

Fig. 7a plots the typical time dependencies of TEC I(t) for GPS satellite
PRN14 for three GPS stations: BRAN, CHMS, and DUPS in California.
The three GPS sites constitute a typical GPS array, the data from which
were processed by the technique described in the preceding section. For the
same stations Fig. 7b presents the TEC variations dI(t) that were ﬁltered
from the initial series I(t) using the band-pass ﬁlter with the boundaries from
5 to 20 min.

The ﬁltered series for the period 15:00–16:00 UT show the presence of
signiﬁcant TEC pulsations of the type of single wave packet with a duration
of about one hour and with the amplitude A = 0.5 T ECU. Not only does the
range of the ﬁltered oscillations dI(t) far exceed the error of phase measure-
ments (10−3 T ECU), but it also exceeds nearly an order of magnitude the
level of background TEC variations. TEC variations from the three spatially
separated GPS stations show a high degree of similarity and have a small
time shift. This suggests that we are dealing here with the same traveling
disturbance.

Results of a calculation (using the SADM-GPS algorithm) of the mean
values of the azimuth hαi and the horizontal velocity hVhi of the disturbance
for each 30-s time interval are presented in Fig. 7c and 7d. As is evident
from the ﬁgure, this wave packet was traveling predominantly in the south-
eastward direction with the mean velocity of about 180 m/s. The scatter of
the counts is caused by the incomplete correspondence of the actual picture
of an ideal TWP model in the form of a monochromatic packet (5) and, in
particular, by the presence of background non-correlated TEC ﬂuctuations
(Afraimovich et al., 1998).

A processing of the data from the other GPS arrays in the same region
(Fig. 4c) by use of the SADM-GPS method provided distributions of the
main TWP parameters recorded on October 18, 2001 in California. The
various combinations of GPS arrays for the time interval 15–16 UT totaled
231. Statistical data show an agreement of the mean values of the calculated
parameters to within their standard deviations, which indicates a good sta-
bility of the data obtained, irrespective of the particular conﬁguration of a
GPS array.

Distributions of the mean values of the TWP parameters calculated for
each of the 231 GPS arrays are presented in panels (a – c) of Fig. 8. Accord-

18

ing to our data, the value of the horizontal propagation velocity Vh of TWP
(Fig. 8a) varies from 60 to 270 m/s, on the average, with the most probable
value 190 m/s. The TWP wavelength Λ with the mean oscillation period of
about 1000 s is on the order of 150–200 km.

An analysis of the distribution of the azimuths P (α) (Fig. 8b) shows a
clearly pronounced south-eastward direction of TWP displacement 140±20◦.
The average (for 231 GPS arrays) value of the contrast C = 7 suggests
a strong anisotropy of TWP. Fig. 8b shows also the distribution of the
azimuth of a normal to the wave front P (αc) deduced by the method of
Mercier (1986). This distribution virtually coincides with P (α), suggesting
that the TWP travel across their elongation. Thus the typical size of the
entire wave packet along the propagation direction is about 300–500 km, and
along the wave front it is as long as 1000 m.

The arrow in Fig. 4c schematically shows the wave vector K of the TWP.
The values of α and Vh, presented in Fig. 4c, correspond to the most probable
values of the propagation azimuth and the modulus of the horizontal velocity
of the TWP.

The elevation of the TWP wave vector, determined from the aspect con-
dition (12), has mostly a small positive value (Fig. 8c): i.e. the oscillation
phase propagates upward. Since the mean value of the elevation is only +10◦,
it can be assumed that TEC pulsations represent an almost horizontal wave.
Accordingly, estimations of the modulus of the phase velocity V (Fig. 8a)
give values close to the value of its horizontal projection 50–270 m/s, with
the largest probable value 180 m/s.

4.4 Modeling

In this paper the inﬂuence of aspect eﬀects on the character of TEC behav-
ior and on the accuracy of the calculated of TEC pulsations was investigated
and the reliability of the determination of the TWP characteristics was veri-
ﬁed by modeling the wave disturbances of electron density for the observing
conditions of October 18, 2001.

Our developed model of TEC measurements with the GPS interferometer
makes it possible to calculate as realistic a spatial and temporal distribution
of the local electron density Ne in the ionosphere as possible and then, using
the coordinates of the receiver sites and of the satellites, to integrate Ne
along the receiver-satellite LOS with a given step over time (Afraimovich

19

et al., 1998). As a result we obtain time series of TEC similar to input
experimental data which can be processed by the same methods as used to
process experimental data.

The ionization model takes into account the height distribution of Ne,
the seasonal and diurnal density variations determined by the zenith angle
of the Sun, as well as irregular disturbances of Ne of a smaller amplitude
and smaller spatial scales in the form of a discrete superposition of plane
traveling waves.

In this paper, with the purpose of elucidating the origin of TWP, three

types of disturbances were modeled:

a) the disturbance in the form of a single plane wave with amplitude
A1=3% in the ionization maximum, with the period T1=15 min and the
wavelength L1=172 km. The elevation of the wave θ1=10◦, and the azimuth
α1=146◦;

b) the disturbance in the form of a superposition of two plane waves with
periods T1=15 min and T2=12 min, and with the wavelengths L1=172 km
and L2=138 km. The elevations, azimuths and azimuths of the waves were
speciﬁed identical: θ1=θ2=10◦, α1=α2=146◦, A1=A2=3% of the value of Ne
in the ionization maximum;

c) the disturbance in the form of a single wave packet, with the semi-
thickness td=20 min and a maximum amplitude at the time tmax=15.5 UT.
The oscillations inside the packet had the period T1=15 min and the wave-
length L1=172 km.

Disturbance parameters were taken to be close to those obtained from
experimental data using the technique from (Afraimovich et al., 1998). TEC
pulsations were modeled with the purpose of (1) verifying the reliability of
the calculated TWP characteristics, and (2) elucidating the origin of TWP. A
detailed description of the model used is given in (Afraimovich et al., 1998).
Fig. 7 (panels e–h at the right) presents the results of calculations in
terms of the model of the TWP in the form of a single wave packet for the
BRAN, CHSM, DUPR array on October 18, 2001. Parameters of the wave
packet were taken to be close to experimental data (Fig. 7a–d). Distributions
of pulsation parameters obtained in a similar modeling of TWP for the other
California GPS arrays are presented in Fig. 8 (panels d–f at the right).

Fig. 7 illustrates a good similarity of the experimental and model TEC
variations I(t), dI(t) and the dependencies Vh(t) and α(t). Noteworthy is
the weaker inclination of the model TEC I(t) (Fig. 7e) when compared with

20

the experimental one (Fig. 7a). This is because for the sake of simplicity
and for illustrative purposes, diurnal variations in ionization in the model are
proportional to the cosine of the zenith angle of the Sun. In actual conditions
the dependence is more complicated, which gives a faster temporal growth
of the TEC. because the trend is removed in the subsequent discussion and
only the relative TEC variations dI(t) are considered, the above-mentioned
diﬀerence in the behavior of the model and experimental TEC will not aﬀect
results obtained.

A comparison of the TEC disturbance parameters speciﬁed in the model
with the corresponding values obtained following a processing by formulas of
the SADM-GPS method shows a relatively good agreement of these values.
The azimuth of the wave vector of TWP was taken to be α = 146◦, and
the mean value of the azimuth calculated by the SADM-GPS method is
146.2◦ (Fig. 7g, and Fig. 8e); the horizontal velocity was speciﬁed equal to
180 m/s, the calculated mean value of the velocity was 207.5 m/s (Fig. 7h,
and Fig. 8d); the elevation in the model was θ = 10◦, and the most probable
value of the calculated elevation was 10◦ (Fig. 8f). The azimuth of TWP
propagation determined by the SADM-GPS method was also close to the
azimuth values calculated by analyzing the contrast of the phase interference
pattern (Mercier, 1986) – Fig. 8b, e. All this demonstrates the validity of the
SADM-GPS technique and conﬁrms the reliability of the TWP parameters
obtained using this technique.

Let us now consider the possible mechanisms that are responsible for the
formation of structures of the type of pulsations in observed TEC variations.
The recorded TEC pulsation represents a single wave packet with a duration
of about 60 min, the oscillation period inside the packet of 12–15 min, and
with the amplitude exceeding the level of background ﬂuctuations by a factor
of 2–5 (Fig. 7b). Structures of such a type can be produced in TEC variations
in diﬀerent ways.

If a monochromatic wave with a period of about 15 min (the period of ob-
served TEC variations) propagates in the ionosphere, then TEC oscillations
of the type of pulsations could be produced through the aspect eﬀect. Fig.
9a, d illustrates such a situation. Panels a and d present the ﬁltered TEC
series obtained by modeling a single plane wave under diﬀerent conditions
of its observation. At the BRAN site (Fig. 9a) the elevations of the PRN14
satellite are close to 90◦, and the wave vector of the disturbance is perpen-
dicular to the receiver-satellite LOS throughout the observing period. This

21

is indicated by the character of the theoretical dependence M(γ) calculated
by formula (14) for this LOS: M(γ) is close to 1 over the entire observing
interval (Fig. 9c). Waves disturbances of the TEC close to the speciﬁed
monochromatic wave are therefore observed along the BRAN–PRN14 LOS.
At the BRU1 site for PRN05, the detection conditions for disturbances
are signiﬁcantly worse. In this case for the ﬁrst half an hour the wave prop-
agates virtually along the LOS (M(γ) < 0.3, Fig. 9f), and at the end of the
observing interval he BRU1–PRN15 LOS is perpendicular to the propagation
direction of the wave but has low elevations (M(γ) > 1, Fig. 9f). Owing to
this, TEC variations show an increase in the oscillation amplitude from 0 to
0.7 T ECU – there arises a feature resembling a wave packet that was absent
in the initial speciﬁed model of the wave. However, as is evident from the
ﬁgure, in this case the increase in the TEC variation amplitude has an almost
linear character while the experiment (Fig. 7b) shows a nonlinear amplitude
modulation.

An investigation of the character of the aspect dependence for all GPS
arrays that were used in this study, showed that in 97% of cases (including
those shown in Fig. 7b) the situation is realized, which is depicted in Fig.
9c, i.e. M(γ) is close to 1 throughout this observing interval. Considering all
that has been said above, one can draw the conclusion that the recorded TEC
pulsations are indeed caused by the propagation of an actual wave packet of
a local density disturbance in the ionosphere rather than resulting from the
recording conditions.

Another possibility of the production of a TWP is the combination of
two or several monochromatic waves with close periods propagating in the
ionosphere (Yakovets et al., 1999). We modeled the propagation of two quasi-
horizontal waves with periods T1=15 min and T2=12 min by identical ampli-
tudes, velocities and directions of propagation. The resulting TEC variations
along two LOS: BRAN–PRN14, and BRU1–PRN05, with the trend removed,
are presented in Fig. 9b and 9e, respectively.

As would be expected, there arise amplitude-modulated TEC oscillations
with the modulation period of about T = T1T2
T2−T1 =60 min. The period is close
to the length of the wave packet recorded experimentally; however, a simple
superposition of two waves gives not one but a whole chain of wave packets.
In the case where the aspect eﬀect aﬀects little the character of TEC vari-
ations (Fig. 9c) these packets have, in addition, diﬀerent amplitudes as well
(Fig. 9b). A phase change of the combined waves aﬀects little the picture pre-

22

sented here by altering the form and position of the amplitude minimum only
slightly. The aspect dependence in Fig. 9f, however, introduces an additional
modulation into the recorded signal - there occurs a signiﬁcant enhancement
of one of the chain’s packets (Fig. 9e), and the picture approaches what is
observed experimentally in Fig. 7b.

Nevertheless, it cannot be believed that the observed single TWPs are
the result of the aspect eﬀect. Firstly, in the case of the aspect modulation,
because of the slow(nearly linear) change of the amplitude, not one but at
least two wave packets are observed. Secondly, as has been pointed out above,
the character of the aspect dependence in most cases of TWP recordings was
such that it aﬀected little the amplitude of disturbances. To obtain the closets
TEC oscillations to those observed experimentally we had to introduce an
artiﬁcial modulation, i.e. the amplitude of the initial monochromatic wave of
the disturbance Ne was speciﬁed not constant but it had a time dependence
in the form of a Gaussian function. It is such a model of TEC variations that
is shown in Fig. 7f.

5 Discussion of results

Sequences of wave packets similar to the ones shown in Fig. 6 at the left, were
recorded in frequency Doppler variations with the multifrequency Doppler
ionosonde at Almaty (Yakovets et al., 1999). The recordings of the frequency
Doppler shift presented clearly show chains of wave packets (on the average,
2–3 wave packets with the record length of about 8 hours). The duration
of the wave packets averaged 90 min, and the oscillation period in a packet
averaged 16 min.

The authors of the cited reference observed two types of FD-variations:
quasi-stochastic TIDs, and monochromatic TIDs in the form of wave packets.
They concluded that quasi-stochastic TIDs are characterized by a random
behavior of the phase, a small length of coherence, and by a large vertical
phase velocity. Wave packets show quasi-monochromatic oscillations, a larger
length of coherence, and a smaller vertical phase velocity.

Our estimate of the radius of spatial correlation (on the order of several
hundred kilometers) is in reasonably good agreement with the data reported
by Yakovets et al. (1995).

Yakovets et al. (1999) argued that the observed wave packets are the

23

superposition of the direct and ground-reﬂected wave whose source lies in the
troposphere. The analysis made in this paper did not conﬁrm the validity of
such an explanation for the October 18, 2001 TWP.

By comparing our detected TEC pulsations with the data from (Yakovets
et al., 1999; Hines, 1960; Waldock and Jones, 1984; Francis, 1974) as well
as with the ﬁndings of our modeling, it can be assumed that in the atmo-
sphere there exists an additional amplitude modulation mechanism for wave
processes which make sit possible to obtain TEC oscillations in the form of
a single wave packet. Francis (1974), by considering the auroral electrojet
to be the source of TIDs, showed that upon propagating through the atmo-
sphere into the F -region, the ground-reﬂected waves acquire the properties
of a wave packet. On the basis of the dispersion relation Hines (1960) and
Waldock and Jones (1984) showed that TIDs that are associated with a tro-
pospheric jet ﬂow occur in the F -region in the form of a wave packet with
quasi-monochromatic oscillations, the period of which is a function of incli-
nation angle of the wave vector during the propagation of the wave from the
source to the place of observation in the F -region.

Our data on the TWP displacement velocity and direction correspond
to those of mid-latitude medium-scale traveling ionospheric disturbances
(MS TIDs) obtained previously in the analysis of phase characteristics of
HF radio signals (Kalikhman, 1980; Afraimovich, 1982; Waldock and Jones,
1984; 1986; 1987; Jacobson and Carlos, 1991), as well as signals from ﬁrst-
generation navigation satellites (Spoelstra, 1992), geostationary satellites
(Afraimovich et al., 1997b; Jacobson et al., 1995) and discrete space radio
sources (Mercier, 1986; 1996; Velthoven et al., 1990).

6 Conclusion

Main results of this study may be summarized as follows:

1. The most of the TWPs are observed during the daytime in no more than
0.1-0.4% of the total number of radio paths, most commonly in winter
and autumn in a weakly disturbed or quiet geomagnetic situation. The
distance between any two GPS stations where the TWPs within a single
2.3-hour time interval were observed does not exceed 500 km.

24

2. TWPs in the time range represent quasi-periodic oscillations of TEC of
a length on the order of 1 hour with the oscillation period in the range
10–20 min and the amplitude exceeding the amplitude of ”background”
TEC ﬂuctuations by one order of magnitude, as a minimum and is 0.3
T ECU.

3. The dynamical parameters of the TWP observed on October 18, 2001
over California, USA were determined. The TWP traveled with the
elevation θ = 10◦ and the azimuth α = 146◦. Its mean velocity hV i =
180 m/c corresponds to the velocity of medium-scale AGW.

4. It is probably that TWP origins are medium-scale AGW.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are indebted to Dr A.S. Potapov for participating in discussions. We
thank O.S. Lesyuta for help in organizing the experiment. We are also grate-
ful to V.G. Mikhalkovsky for his assistance in preparing the English version
of the manuscript. This work was done with support under RFBR grant
of leading scientiﬁc schools of the Russian Federation No. 00-15-98509 and
INTAS grant No. 99-1186 as well as Russian Foundation for Basic Research
grants No. 01-05-65374, 00-05-72026.

References

[1] Afraimovich E. L. Interference methods of ionospheric radio sounding.

Moscow: Nauka, 1982, 198 p.

[2] Afraimovich, E. L., A. I. Terekhov, M. Yu. Udodov, and S. V. Fridman,
Refraction distortions of transionospheric radio signals caused by changes
in a regular ionosphere and by travelling ionospheric disturbances, J. At-
mos. and Terr. Phys., 54, 1013–1020, 1992.

[3] Afraimovich. E. L. Dynamics and anisotropy of traveling ionospheric dis-
turbances as deduced from transionospheric sounding data. - Statistical
angle-of-arrival and doppler method (SADM). Preprint ISTP, 1995, N5-
95, 54p.

25

[4] Afraimovich E. L. Statistical angle-of-arrival and doppler method
(SADM) for determining characteristics of the dynamics of the transiono-
spheric radio signal interference pattern. Acta Geod. Geoph. Hung., 1997,
V.32, N3-4, 461–468.

[5] Afraimovich E. L., Boitman O. N., Zhovty E. I., Kalikhman A. D. and
Pirog T. G. Dynamics and anisotropy of medium-scale traveling iono-
spheric disturbances as deduced from transionospheric sounding data. Acta
Geod. Geoph. Hung., 1997, V.32, N3-4, 301–308.

[6] Afraimovich, E. L., K. S. Palamartchouk, and N. P. Perevalova, GPS
radio interferometry of travelling ionospheric disturbances, J. Atmos. and
Solar-Terr. Phys., 60, 1205–1223, 1998.

[7] Afraimovich, E. L., K. S. Palamartchouk, and N. P. Perevalova, Statistical
angle-of-arrival and doppler method for GPS interferometry of TIDs, Adv.
of Space Res., 26, N6, 1001–1004, 2000.

[8] Afraimovich E. L., Kosogorov E. A., Lesyuta O. S., Yakovets A. F.,
Ushakov I. I. Geomagnetic control of the spectrum of traveling ionospheric
disturbances based on data from a global GPS network. Ann. Geophys., 19,
N 7, 723–731, 2001.

[9] Baker D.M., and Davies K., F2-region acoustic waves from severe

weather. J. Atmos. Terr. Phys. 31, 1345–1352, N 11, 1969.

[10] Bertin F., Testud J., Kersley L., Medium scale gravity waves in the iono-
spheric F-region and their possible origin in weather diturbances. Planet
Space Sci. 23, 493–, 1975.

[11] Bertin F., Testud J., Kersley L. and Rees P.R., The meteorological jet
stream as a source of medium scale gravity waves in the thermosphere: an
experimental study. J Atmos. Terr. Phys. 40, 1161–1183, N 10–11, 1978.

[12] Davies, K., Ionospheric radio waves. Blaisdell Publishing Company. A
Division of Ginn and Company, Waltham, Massachusetts-Toronto-London,
1969.

[13] Davies K. and J.E. Jones. Three-dimensional observations of traveling

ionospheric disturbances. J.Atmos.Terr.Phys., 33, 39–46, 1971.

26

[14] Francis, S. H., A theory of medium-scale traveling ionospheric distur-

bances, J. Geophys. Res., 79, 5245, 1974.

[15] Gurtner, W. (1993) RINEX: The Receiver Independent Exchange For-
mat Version 2. http://igscb.jpl.nasa.gov:80/igscb/data/format/rinex2.txt.

[16] Hines, C. O., Internal atmospheric gravity waves at ionospheric heights,

Can. J. Phys., 38, 1441, 1960.

[17] Hines, C. O. and Reddy, C. A. On the Propagation of Atmospheric
Gravity Waves through Regions of Wind Shear. J. Geophis. Res. 72, 1015-
1034, 1967.

[18] Hocke, K., and K. Schlegel, A review of atmospheric gravity waves and
traveling ionospheric disturbances: 1982-1995, Ann. Geophys., 14, 917–
940, 1996.

[19] Hofmann-Wellenhof, B., H. Lichtenegger, and J. Collins, Global Posi-
tioning System: Theory and Practice, Springer-Verlag Wien, New York,
1992.

[20] Hung R.G., T. Phan, and R.E. Smith, Observation of gravity waves
during the extreme tronodo outbreak of 3 April 1974, J. Atmos. Terr.
Phys., 40, 831–, 1978.

[21] Huang Yinn-Nien, Cheng Kang, and Sen-Wen Chen. On the detection of
acoustic-gravity waves generated by typhon by use of real time HF Doppler
frequency shift sounding system, Radio sc., 20, N4, 897–906, 1985.

[22] Jacobson, A.R., R.C. Carlos. A study of apparent ionospheric mo-
tions associated with multiple travelling ionospheric disturbances. J. Atm.
Terr.Phys., 53, 53–62, 1991.

[23] Jacobson, A. R., R. C. Carlos, R. S. Massey, and G. Wu, Observations of
traveling ionospheric disturbances with a satellite-beacon radio interferom-
eter: Seasonal and local time behavior, J. Geophys. Res., 100, 1653–1665,
1995.

[24] Kalikhman A. D. Medium-scale traveling ionospheric disturbances and
thermospheric winds in the F-region. J. Atmos. Sol. Terr. Phys., 42, 697-
703, 1980.

27

[25] Kersly L. and Rees P.R., Tropospheric gravity waves and their possi-
ble association with medium-scale travelling ionospheric disturbances. J.
Atmos. Terr. Phys. 44, 147–, 1982.

[26] Klobuchar, J. A., Ionospheric time-delay algorithm for single-frequency
GPS users, IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronics System,AES
23(3), 325–331, 1986.

[27] Mannucci A. J., Ho C. M., Lindqwister U. J. et al. A global mapping
technique for GPS-drived ionospheric TEC measurements, Radio Science,
33, 565–582, 1998.

[28] Mercier, C. Observations atmospheric gravity waves by radiointerfero-

metry, J. Atmos. and Terr. Phys., 48, 605–624, 1986.

[29] Mercier, C., Some characteristics of atmospheric gravity waves observed

by radio-interferometry, Ann. Geophys., 14, 42–58, 1996.

[30] Oliver, W. L., Otsuka Y., Sato M.,Takami T., and Fukao, S. A clima-
tology of F region gravity waves propagation over the middle and upper
atmosphere radar. J. Geophys. Res. 102, 14449-14512, 1997.

[31] Spoelstra, T. A. Th. Combining TIDs observations: NNSS and radio

interferometry data. J. Atmos. Terr. Phys., 54, 1185–1195, 1992.

[32] Stobie J.G., Einaudi F. and Uccellini L.W., A Case Study of Gravity
Waves-Cunvective Storms Interaction: 9 May 1979. J. Atmos. Sci. 40,
2804–, 1983.

[33] Velthoven, P.F.J., C. Mercier, and H. Kelder, Simultaneous observations
of travelling ionospheric disturbances by twodimensional radio interferom-
etry and the diﬀerential Doppler technique applied to satellite signals, J.
Atmos. Terr. Phys., 52, 305–312, 1990.

[34] Waldock, J. A., and T. B. Jones, The eﬀect neutral winds on the pro-
pogation of medium-scale atmospheric gravity waves at mid-latituds, J.
Atmos. and Terr. Phys., 46, 217, 1984.

[35] Waldock, J. A., and T. B. Jones, HF Doppler observations of medium-
scale traveling ionospheric disturbances at mid-latitudes, J. Atmos. Sol.
Terr. Phys., 48, 245–260, 1986.

28

[36] Waldock J.A. and T.B. Jones. Source regions of medium-scale travelling
ionospheric disturbances observed at mid-latitudes. J. Atmos.Terr.Phys.,
49, 105–114, 1987.

[37] Yakovets, A.F., M. Z. Kaliev, and V. V. Vodyannikov, An experimental
study of wave packets in travelling ionospheric disturbances, J. Atmos.
and Terr. Phys., 45, 629, 1999.

29

1 2
1 0
8
6
4
2
0

0 .4

0 .2

0 .0

- 0 .2

- 0 .4

0 .0 1 0

0 .0 0 8

0 .0 0 6

0 .0 0 4

0 .0 0 2

0 .0 0 0

1 5 .0 7 .2 0 0 1

I(t), T E C U

a

I(t), T E C U

G

D A R W , P R N 0 5

T O W 2 , P R N 0 9

4

5

6

4

5

6

d I(t), T E C U

d I(t), T E C U

E

+ e

-

H

A m a x

+

-

4

5
T im e , U T

6

4

5
T im e , U T

6

S (F ), T E C U

S (F ), T E C U

S m a x

F

0 .1 0

S m a x

I

tm a x

d F

d F

0

1

2
F , m H z

3

4

0

1

2
F , m H z

3

4

1 2
1 0
8
6
4
2
0

0 .4

0 .2

0 .0

- 0 .2

- 0 .4

0 .0 5

0 .0 0

Figure 1: An illustration of the seletion of TWPs: a { typial I (t) series

ontaining no TWP; b and  { (cid:12)ltered dI (t)-series and its spetrum S (F ).

Panels d, e and f { same but for the I (t)-series ontaining TWP. Shown in

panels a and d are the station names and GPS satellite numbers. Levels of

limitation in TWP amplitude (cid:15) are shown in panels b and e by horizontal

lines. Boundaries of the range of frequenies ÆF used in the analysis are

shown in panels  and f by vertial lines. Panel e shows the maximum value

of the amplitude A

and the time t

orresponding to this amplitude.

max

max

The arrows in panels  and f indiate the maximum values of the amplitude

spetra S

.

max

e
e
e
a

b

c

d
0 .8

0 .6

0 .4

0 .2

0 .0

U
C
E
T

 
,

>
A
<

M
4 0

3 0

2 0

1 0

0

N
1 0 0 0

8 0 0

6 0 0

4 0 0

2 0 0

0

D , %
0 .5

2 4

1 6

8

0

0 .4

0 .3

0 .2

0 .1

0 .0

W in te r

S p rin g

S u m m e r

A u tu m n

W in te r           S p r in g           S u m m e r         A u tu m n

L , re l. u n its
3 2

W in te r           S p rin g           S u m m e r        A u tu m n

W in te r           S p rin g           S u m m e r        A u tu m n

Figure 2: Seasonal dependene of the density and maximum amplitude of

TWPs: a { number of days M of observation versus time of the year; b {

number of TWPs N ;  { mean number of TWPs per day L = N=M . d {

relative TWP density D obtained as the ratio of the number of TWPs N to

the number of reeiver-satellite LOS. Diamonds in panel d show the mean

values of hAi of the maximum amplitudes A

for eah season, and vertial

max

lines show their standard deviations. The thik horizontal line shows the

threshold in amplitude ((cid:15) = 0.1 T EC U ).

e
c

d R , k m

d
A m =  0 .3  T E C U

)
|
t
s
D

|
(
P

)

 

x
a
m

 
t
(
P

1 2 0

1 0 0

8 0

6 0

4 0

2 0

0

9 0

7 5

6 0

4 5

3 0

1 5

0

N  =  1 3 2 0
n  =  7 3 7 6 8 1

a

b

8 0 0

6 0 0

)

R
d
(
P

4 0 0

2 0 0

0

0 .2 0

0 .1 5

0 .1 0

0 .0 5

0 .0 0

)

 

x
a
m
A

(
P

0

5 0

2 0 0

2 5 0

0

4 0 0

8 0 0

1 2 0 0 1 6 0 0 2 0 0 0

1 5 0

1 0 0
|D st|, n T

0

4

1 6

2 0

2 4

0 .0

8

1 2
T im e, L T

0 .4

0 .8
A m a x, T E C U

1 .2

1 .6

Figure 3: Statisti of TWPs: a { dependene of the number of TWPs on

the modulus of the Dst-index; b { diurnal distribution P (t

) of the times

max

t

orresponding to the maximum amplitude A

of the wave paket of

max

max

the TEC disturbane;  { histogram P (dR) of the number of ases where

TWPs within one 2.3-hour time interval were observed at any two GPS

stations, with the distane dR between them; d { distribution P (A

) of

max

the maximum amplitude A

of TWP. The vertial dashed line in panel d

max

shows the threshold in amplitude (cid:15) = 0.1 TECU. Panel a shows the number

N of the deteted TWPs, and the total number n of reeiver-satellite LOS.

Panel d shows the most probable maximum amplitude A

.

m

e
This figure "fig4.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arXiv.org/ps/physics/0211046v1

T
n
 
,
t
s
D

3 0

2 0

1 0

T
n
 
,
)
t
(

H

T
n
 
,
)
t
(

H
d

8 0
6 0
4 0
2 0
0

4
2
0
-2
-4

1 2 0

)
t
(

N

8 0

4 0

0

]
+
P

(cid:3)
(cid:15)
I

2

1

O c to b e r  1 8 , 2 0 0 1 .

0

3

6

9

1 2

1 5

1 8

2 1

2 4

V IC T O R IA  ( 4 8 .5 2 0 N , 2 3 6 .5 8 0 E )

0

3

6

9

1 2

1 5

1 8

2 1

2 4

2 - 2 0  m in

0

3

6

9

1 2

1 5

1 8

2 1

2 4

0

3

6

S (f .t)

9

1 2
T im e , U T

1 5

1 8

2 1

3

6

9

1 2

1 5
T im e , U T

1 8

2 1
T , m in

a

b

c

d

2 4

e
1 0 1 4m -2
3 .7

7
1 0
1 5
6 0

2 .5

1 .6

0 .8

0 .0

Figure 5: Geomagneti (cid:12)eld Dst-variations (a) Otober 18, 2001. H (t)-

variations of the horizontal omponent of the geomagneti (cid:12)eld as reorded at

station Vitoria (236.58

E ; 48.52

N ) { b. dH (t)-variations of the horizontal

Æ

Æ

omponent of the geomagneti (cid:12)eld, (cid:12)ltered from the series H (t) in the range

of periods of 2{20 min { . d { distribution N (t) of the number of TWP

deteted on that day for all stations of the global GPS network used in

the analysis, with the standard deviation higher than (cid:15) = 0.1 T EC U ; e {

dynami amplitude spetrum of TEC variations in the range of periods of

5{60 min obtained through a spatial averaging of the spetra for the entire

California region (220{260

E ; 28{42

N ).

Æ

Æ

O c to b e r  1 8 , 2 0 0 1

)
t
(

N

1 4 0

)
t
(

N

1 4 0

2 8 0

2 1 0

7 0

0

2 8 0

2 1 0

7 0

0

2 8 0

2 1 0

7 0

0

2 8 0

2 1 0

7 0

0

)
t
(

N

1 4 0

)
t
(

N

1 4 0

  0   0  -  3 6 0   0  E
- 8 0   0  - + 8 0   0  N
 =  0 .1  T E C U

  0   0  -  3 6 0   0  E
- 8 0   0  - + 8 0   0  N
 =  0 .0 5  T E C U

  0   0  - 3 6 0   0  E
-8 0   0  - + 8 0   0  N
 =  0 .0 1  T E C U

2 2 0   0  -  2 6 0   0  E  
  2 8   0  -  4 2   0  N
 =  0 .0 1  T E C U

0

2

4

6

8

1 0

1 2

1 4

1 6

1 8

2 0

2 2

2 4

0

2

4

6

8

1 0

1 2

1 4

1 6

1 8

2 0

2 2

2 4

0

2

4

6

8

1 0

1 2

1 4

1 6

1 8

2 0

2 2

2 4

a

b

c

d

0

2

4

6

8

1 6

1 8

2 0

2 2

2 4

1 0

1 2
T im e , U T

1 4

1 6      1 8      2 0      2 2       0        2        4        6        8      1 0      1 2      1 4      1 6

T im e , L T  ( 2 4 0   0  E )

Figure 6: Number N (t) of TWP of Otober 18, 2001 as a funtion of UT and

loal time LT, alulated for the longitude of 240

E , orresponding to the

Æ

middle of the California region: a { from TWPs with the standard deviation

higher than (cid:15) = 0.1 T EC U obtained for all stations of the global GPS network

used in the analysis (opy of Fig. 5d); b and  { same as in a but for (cid:15) =

0.05 T EC U , and (cid:15) = 0.01 T EC U ; d { with the standard deviation higher

than (cid:15) = 0.01 T EC U aording to the data from the California region only

(220{260

E ; 28{42

N ).

Æ

Æ

e
e
e
e
I ( t) , T E C U
3 0

%5$1
&+06
’836

E x p e r im e n t

M o d e l

I ( t) , T E C U
3 0

%5$1
&+06
’83%

351(cid:20)(cid:23)

7(67
351(cid:20)(cid:23)

d I ( t) , T E C U

d I ( t) , T E C U

, (cid:176)

, (cid:176)

V h , m /s

V h, m /s

a

b

c

d

2 0

1 0

0

0 .5

0 .0

-0 .5

3 6 0

2 7 0

1 8 0

9 0

0

8 0 0

6 0 0

4 0 0

2 0 0

0

2 0

1 0

0

0 .5

0 .0

- 0 .5

3 6 0

2 7 0

1 8 0

9 0

0

8 0 0

6 0 0

4 0 0

2 0 0

0

e

f

g

h

1 5
T im e , U T

1 6

1 5
T im e , U T

1 6

Figure 7: Time dependenies of the initial I (t) { panels a, e and (cid:12)ltered

dI(t) { b, f TEC series; diretions (cid:11) of the wave vetor K { , g and of the

modulus of the vertial veloity V

of TWP { d, h, determined for the GPS

h

array (BRAN, CHMS, DUPS) using the SADM-GPS method. Panels a { d

present the experimental data, and panels e { h show the alulated data for

the TWP model in the form of a single wave paket.

a
a
E x p e rim e n t                                                 M o d e l

P ( V )

D

3(cid:11)9(cid:12)

G

9

9K

9(cid:15)(cid:3)P(cid:18)V

3 6 0
E

6$’0(cid:16)*36

%\(cid:3)FRQWUDVW

,

F

3 0

2 0

1 0

0

2 0 0

1 5 0

1 0 0

5 0

0

2 0 0

1 0 0

0

1 2 0

2 4 0

0

1 2 0

2 4 0

aP ( (cid:12)

a3(cid:11) (cid:12)

9(cid:15)(cid:3)P(cid:18)V

3 6 0
H

0

1 2 0

2 4 0

3 6 0

0

1 2 0

2 4 0

3 6 0

qP ( (cid:12)

3(cid:11)q (cid:12)

,

I

3 0

2 0

1 0

0

2 0 0

1 5 0

1 0 0

5 0

0

2 0 0

1 0 0

0

-9 0 -4 5

0

4 5

9 0

-9 0 -4 5

0

4 5

9 0

q ,

0

q ,

Figure 8: Distributions of the TWP parameters as determined by the SADM-

GPS method: a, d { modulus (line 1) and horizontal omponent (line 2) of

the TWP phase veloity; b, e { azimuth (line 1); , f { elevation of the

TWP wave vetor. Panels b and e present also the distributions of the TWP

propagation azimuth alulated from the ontrast (line 2). Panels a { 

present the experimental data, and panels d { f show the alulated data for

the TWP model in the form of a single wave paket.

a
a
G,(cid:11)W(cid:12)(cid:15)(cid:3)7(&8

%5$1(cid:3)(cid:3)351(cid:20)(cid:23)

G,(cid:11)W(cid:12)(cid:15)(cid:3)7(&8

%58(cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:3)351(cid:19)(cid:24)

G,(cid:11)W(cid:12)(cid:15)(cid:3)7(&8

G,(cid:11)W(cid:12)(cid:15)(cid:3)7(&8

0

F

0

D

E

0 .5

0 .0

-0 .5

1 .0

0 .0

-1 .0

1 .5

1 .0

0 .5

0 .0

0 .5

0 .0

-0 .5

1 .0

0 .0

-1 .0

1 .5

1 .0

0 .5

0 .0

G

H

I

1 5
7LPH(cid:15)(cid:3)87

1 6

1 5
7LPH(cid:15)(cid:3)87

1 6

Figure 9: Time dependenies of the (cid:12)ltered dI (t) TEC series, alulated for

the TID model in the form of a single plane wave (a, d) and in the form of a

superposition of two plane waves (b, e). Panels (, f) present the theoretial

dependenies of the TEC response amplitude M(t). On the left { alulations

for the GPS PRN14 satellite at the BRAN site; on the right { for the PRN05

satellite at the BRU1 site.

