2
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
1
1
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
4
0
2
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Degradation of signals and operation failures of

radio engineering satellite systems during

geospace disturbances accompanied by abrupt

changes in the geomagnetic ﬁeld

E. L. Afraimovich

Institute of Solar-Terrestrial Physics SD RAS,

p. o. box 4026, Irkutsk, 664033, Russia,

e-mail: afra@iszf.irk.ru

Abstract

During strong magnetic storms, the errors of determination of the range,

frequency Doppler shift and angles of arrival of transionospheric radio signals

exceeds the one for magnetically quiet days by one order of magnitude as a

minimum. This can be the cause of performance degradation of current satellite

radio engineering navigation, communication and radar systems as well as of

superlong-baseline radio interferometry systems. The relative density of phase

slips at mid-latitudes exceeds its mean value for magnetically quiet days at least

by the order of 1 or 2, that makes a few percent of the total density of GPS

observations. Furthermore, the level of phase slips for the GPS satellites located

at the sunward side of the Earth was 5-10 times larger compared to the opposite

side of the Earth.

1 Introduction

With the development of progress, our civilization is becoming increasingly dependent

on technological navigation and radar systems whose performance is to a certain extent

governed by geospace conditions. In an eﬀort to pave the way for tackling the issues

of vulnerability of technological systems, the US National ”Space Weather” program

was developed (http://www.ofcm.gov/nswp-ip/text/cover.htm).

Radio engineering satellite systems (RESS), with their ground-based and space-

borne support facilities, are ﬁnding ever-widening application in various spheres of

human activity. They are able to provide global coverage, accuracy, continuity, high

reliability and meet a number of other requirements imposed when tackling a broad

spectrum of engineering problems. However, the use of RESS also implies new (and,

in some cases, more stringent) requirements dictated by the need to ensure safety

and economical eﬃciency of the operation of ground-based and airborne facilities, as

well as to solve special problems (observation, aerophotography, searching and rescue

of distressed transport vehicles and people). This applies equally for performance of

Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) as well as for very-long-baseline radio

interferometers (VLBI) (Thompson et al., 1986).

Degradation of transionospheric radio signals and operation failures during geospace

disturbances constitute a crucial factor of space weather inﬂuence on SRNS perfor-

mance (along with other factors such as spacecraft surface charging, nonuniform satel-

lite drag, breakdowns of satellite electronics by high-energy particles, etc.).

One of the most dramatic examples of the RESS - GPS (Hofmann-Wellenhof et al.,

1992) that has embodied many modern achievements at the interface of many sciences

and technologies, has currently become a powerful factor of worldwide scientiﬁc and

technical progress and is widely used in quite various realms of human activity.

In

this connection, much attention is given to continuous perfection of the GPS system

and to the widening of the scope of its application for solving the navigation problems

themselves, as well as for developing higher-precision systems for time and accuracy

determinations. Even greater capabilities are expected in the near future through the

combined use of the GPS with a similar Russian system GLONASS (Kharisov et al.,

1998).

The broad prospects aﬀorded by the use of positioning systems through the use of

the SRNS dictate the need for a detailed study of the parameters of the satellite naviga-

tion systems themselves, including the reliability of their operation and noise immunity,

especially when operated in extreme conditions (for instance, during large geomagnetic

disturbances). To carry out such investigations requires considerable hardware, soft-

ware and ﬁnancial expenses incurred by the setting up of the necessary testing grounds

for large sets of GPS-GLONASS receivers of diﬀerent types, and for the development

of dedicated software-hardware capabilities and facilities for data processing.

Meanwhile a global network of two-frequency multichannel GPS receivers is cur-

rently in operation, the data from which with a temporal resolution of 30 s are posted in

a centralized fashion on the SOPAC server (ftp://lox.ucsd.edu) in a standard RINEX

format (Gurtner, 1993) and made available for analysis and usage on the Internet.

This network is being constantly expanded, and by January 2002 it consisted of more

than 1000 registered GPS receivers, and the SOPAC server contain data of round-the-

clock measurements from the receivers spanning a period of more than ﬁve years. The

database, obtained in this way, represents unique material.

Using two-frequency multichannel receivers of the global navigation GPS system, at

almost any point on the globe and at any time simultaneously at two coherently-coupled

frequencies f1 = 1575.42 MHz and f2 = 1227.60 MHz, highly accurate measurements

of the group and phase delays are being underway along the line of sight (LOS) between

the receiver on the ground and the transmitters on-board the GPS system satellites

which are in the zone of reception.

These data, converted to values of total electron content (TEC), are of consider-

able current use in the study of the regular ionosphere and of disturbances of natural

and technogenic origins (solar eclipses, ﬂares, earthquakes, volcanoes, strong thun-

derstorms, auroral heating, nuclear explosions, chemical explosion events, launches of

rockets). We do not cite here the relevant references for reasons of space, which account

for hundreds of publications to date.

These prospects make the use of the global GPS network attractive for the im-

plementation of the above-mentioned research, for preliminary accumulation of the

sample statistic, as well as for carrying out analyses and modelings with the purpose of

studying the GPS-GLONASS. All this would make it possible to optimize the expen-

ditures incurred by the creation of research grounds and by tests, as well as to obtain

preliminary results virtually without any expenses for acquisition of equipment.

Of special interest from the scientiﬁc and practical standpoint within the ”Space

Weather” program is the development of a new (based on the latest achievements)

geospace monitoring technology and the analysis of the whole set of ionospheric dis-

turbances of natural and technogenic origin.

The ideology and automated software complex GLOBDET for global GPS detection

and monitoring of ionospheric disturbances has been developed at the ISTP SB RAS.

GLOBDET makes it possible to automate the acquisition, ﬁltering and pretreatment

process of the GPS data received via the Internet (Afraimovich, 2000a).

This technology is being used to detect, on a global and regional scales, iono-

spheric eﬀects of strong magnetic storms (Afraimovich et al., 1998b; 2002e), solar

ﬂares (Afraimovich, 2000a; Afraimovich et al., 2001f), solar eclipses (Afraimovich et

al., 2002d), launches of rockets (Afraimovich et al., 2001e), earthquakes (Afraimovich

et al., 2001g), etc.

The global GPS detector distinguishes from previously available ionospheric ra-

dio sounding facilities by the continuity of observations, high spatial and temporal

resolution and high sensitivity, as well as by standardization and adaptability of data

processing. The global GPS detector can also be used as a tester of the transionospheric

radio channel of propagation of signals from space-based radio-engineering systems and

space radio sources.

The objective of this paper is to demonstrate - on the basis of using the GLOBDET

technology - how ionospheric disturbances during magnetic storms contribute to the

degradation of signals and failures of the GPS system.

2 General information about the database used

This study relies on the data from the global network of receiving GPS stations available

on the Internet (Fig.1). As is evident from Fig.1, the receiving sites are relatively dense

on the territory of North America and Europe, and less as dense in Asia. Fewer stations

are located on the Paciﬁc and Atlantic.

Such coverage of the terrestrial surface by GPS receivers makes it possible, already

at the present time, to address the problem of a global investigation of ionospheric

disturbances and their consequences with a very large spatial accumulation.

Thus, in the Western hemisphere the corresponding number of stations is as large

as 500, and the number of LOS’s to the satellite is at least 2000...3000. This provides a

number of statistically independent series at least two orders of magnitude higher than

would be realized by recording VHF radio signals from ﬁrst-generation geostationary

satellites or low-orbit navigation satellites - TRANSIT (Gershman et al., 1984).

This study is based on using the data from a global network of GPS receiving

stations available from the Internet (http://lox.ucsd.edu). For a number of reasons,

slightly diﬀering sets of GPS stations were chosen for the various events under investi-

gation; however, the experimental geometry for all events was virtually identical. The

analysis used a set of stations (from 160 to 323) with a relatively even distribution

across the globe. For reasons of space, we do not give here the stations coordinates.

This information may be obtained from http://lox.ucsd.edu/cgi-bin/allCoords.cgi?.

The analysis involved four days of the period 1999-2000, with the values of the

geomagnetic ﬁeld disturbance index Dst ranging from 0 to -295 nT and Kp from 3 to

9. The maximum values of the geomagnetic ﬁeld disturbance index Dstmax and Kpmax

are listed in Table 1.

The statistic of the data used in this paper for mid-latitudes and for each of the days

under examination is characterized by the information in Table 1 about the number of

stations used m and number of LOS’s n.

3 Inﬂuence of the ionosphere on transionospheric

radio signal characteristics

The performance of modern global satellite radio navigation systems that utilize the

”Earth-Space” radio wave propagation channel is limited considerably by the inﬂu-

ence of the geospace environment. Furthermore, the main contribution comes from

systematic ionospheric eﬀects of radio wave propagation: the group and phase delay,

the frequency Doppler shift, and the rotation of the plane of polarization (Faraday

eﬀect). In many instances the degree of manifestation of the above eﬀects has only a

weak dependence on the local distribution of electronic density in the ionosphere but

is directly correlated with the value of total electron content (TEC) along the radio

signal propagation path (Goodman and Aarons, 1990).

In undisturbed geospace conditions the main contribution to the formation of the

above-mentioned ionospheric eﬀects is made by the regular TEC component. It under-

goes periodic regular variations (seasonal-diurnal, latitudinal, and longitudinal) and is

relatively accurately predictable. A variety of TEC models have been developed to

date, which are intended to cancel out the ionospheric inﬂuence on the performance

of the modern GLONASS and GPS in geomagnetically quiet and weakly disturbed

conditions (Afraimovich et al., 2000b; Klobuchar, 1986).

The situation with geomagnetically disturbed geospace is more complicated. The

irregular TEC component makes a substantial contribution in this case. The amplitude

of random TEC variations with a period from a few minutes to several hours in con-

ditions of geomagnetic disturbances can make up as much as 50% of the background

TEC value (Basu et al., 1988; Bhattacharrya et al., 2000; Ho et al., 1996; Shaer et

al., 1997; Warnart, 1995). Furthermore, the amplitude and phase ﬂuctuation range of

signals from navigation satellites (NS) at the reception point can exceed the designed

level corresponding to the uninterrupted operation of GPS receivers.

This leads to the degradation of the determination accuracy of a current location

of stationary and mobile users of GPS. Furthermore, there might occur a break-down

in tracking the NS signal in phase (code) one of the working frequencies and, hence,

a failure in the determination of the coordinates in the one- or two-frequency mode

(Scone and Jong, 2000; 2001; Coster et al., 2001; Afraimovich et al., 2002c).

The key characteristic of the ionosphere that determines the variation of radio wave

parameters is the integral (total) electron content (TEC) I(t) or its derivatives (with

respect to time and space) I

t, I

x and I

y along the propagation path (Davies, 1969;

′

′

′

Kolosov et al., 1969; Yakovlev, 1985; Goodman and Aarons, 1990; Afraimovich et al.,

1992; Yakubov, 1997).

TEC variations may be arbitrarily classiﬁed as regular and irregular. Regular

changes (seasonal, diurnal) - for the magnetically quiet mid-latitude ionosphere at

least - are described by models providing relative accuracy of TEC prediction in the

range 50...80%. Irregular changes (variations) are associated with ionospheric irregu-

larities of a diﬀerent nature, the spectrum of which has a power law character (Gajlit

et al., 1983; Gershman et al., 1984; Yakubov, 1997).

TEC variations introduce proportionate changes of the signal phase ϕ(t, x, y) =

k1I(t, x, y), which gives rise to measuring errors of the range σD = k2dI, the frequency

Doppler shift of the signal σf = k3I

t, and the angles of arrival of the radio wave σαx =

′

′

k4I

x and σαy = k4I

y, because the last four quantities are proportional to the time

′

and space derivatives of the phase. Furthermore, the maximum value of the measuring

error of angular deviations can be deduced using the relation σα = k4

(I ′

x)2 + (I ′

y)2.

q

The coeﬃcients k1 −

k4 are inversely proportional to the signal frequency fc or

to its square (Davies, 1969; Kravtsov et al., 1983; Goodman and Aarons, 1990). A

calculation uses a Cartesian topocentric coordinate system with the axis x pointing

eastward E, and the axis y pointing northward N.

Investigations of phase ﬂuctuations of transionospheric signals have been and are

carried out using radio beacons on satellites with circular and geostationary orbits

(Komrakov and Skrebkova, 1980; Livingston et al., 1981; Gajlit et al., 1983). The

trouble with these measurements is that temporal and spatial resolution is low, and

continuity and global coverage of observations are unavailable.

The use of the international ground-based network of two-frequency receivers of the

GPS opens up new avenues for a global, continuous, fully computerized monitoring of

phase ﬂuctuations of signals and associated errors of RESS performance.

Some research results on the prediction and estimation of radio signal ﬂuctua-

tions and errors of RESS performance caused by them were reported in earlier work

(Afraimovich and Karachenschev, 2002b).

Below we give an outline of the techniques used in this study and illustrate their

application in the analysis of ionospheric eﬀects. The overall sample statistic of errors

σD, σf and σα is presented for diﬀerent geomagnetic conditions. To ease comparison

with other research results reported in (Gajlit et al., 1983; Kravtsov et al., 1983), the

errors σD, σf and σα are calculated for the working frequency of 300 MHz.

4 Analysis of the measuring errors of the range,

Doppler frequency and angles of arrival of the

radio wave caused by changes in the regular

ionosphere

Recently a number of authors (Wilson et al., 1995; Mannucci et al., 1998; Schaer

et al., 1998; and others) have developed a new technology for constructing Global

Ionospheric Maps (GIM) of TEC using IONEX data from the international IGS-GPS

network. The GIM technology and its uses have been reported in a large number of

publications (Wilson et al., 1995; Mannucci et al., 1998).

The standard IONEX format is described in detail in (Schaer et al., 1998). There-

fore, we will not give a detailed description of the GIM technology for reasons of space

but limit ourselves only to the information required for the presentation of our method.

Two-hour TEC maps are easily accessible to any user, which are calculated by several

research groups in the USA and Europe and are availabe on the Internet in the stan-

dard IONEX format (ftp://cddisa.gsfc.nasa.gov/pub/gps/products/ionex). It is also

possible to obtain 15-min maps if necessary.

Fig.2 is a schematic representation of a single elementary GIM cell. The cell nodes
are designated as a, b, c, d. The cell size (5◦ in longitude and 2.5◦ in latitude) is

determined by the IONEX ﬁle standard. For simplifying the transformations to an
approximation suﬃcient for our problem for latitudes not exceeding 60◦, the cell can

be represented as a rectangle with the sides de and dn.

It is easy to overcome this

limitation by complicating to a certain extent the transformations allowing for the

sphericity; however, we do not present them in this report.

The linear size of the rectangular cell in latitude is independent of the latitude and
is de = 279 km; the linear size in longitude depends on the latitude, and for 40◦N it is

dn = 436 km.

For each time t, for the nodes a, b, c, d from the IONEX ﬁle the values of vertical

TEC are known - Ia, Ib, Ic, Id.

The determination of the range D by the phase method is based on measuring the

phase diﬀerence ϕ between the received signal and the reference signal formed in the

receiver. Such a measurement can be made at the intermediate or carrier frequency of

the signal. In this case:

where c is the propagation velocity of radio waves in a free space.

Generally the quantity ϕ for the transionospheric propagation may be regarded as

the sum of two components (Afraimovich et al., 1998a):

D = c

ϕ
2 π fc

×

ϕ = ϕs+∆ϕ

(1)

(2)

where ϕs is the main component associated with a change of the distance between

the signal source and the receiver.

Analysis of the measuring errors of the range, Doppler frequency and angles of

arrival of the radio wave caused by changes in the regular ionosphere investigations

of global phase variations of radio signals and their inﬂuence on the operation of

RESS ought to take into account the proportionate relationship between phase (phase

derivative) changes of the transionospheric signal and corresponding TEC variations

(Kravtsov et al., 1983; Goodman and Aarons, 1990):

∆ϕ = 8.44

10−7

Ia(b,c,d)
fc

+ ϕ0

×
where fc is the radio wave frequency (Hz); Ia(b,c,d) is the TEC measured at the
points a, b, c, and d (1016 el/m2); and ϕ0 is the initial phase (Spoelstra and Kelder,

×

(3)

1984).

By way of example we now analyze the errors of measurement of the range σD,

the frequency Doppler shift σf and the angle of arrival of the radio wave σα using the

IONEX data and the method that was developed at the ISTP SB RAS (Afraimovich

and Karachenschev, 2002b).

proportional to ∆ϕ:

The change of the range that is introduced by the ionosphere (ionospheric error) is

σD = c

∆ϕ
2 π f

×

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Upon substituting (3) into (4), we can obtain the expression for determining the

measuring error of the range σD introduced by the ionosphere:

c

8.44

σD =

×

10−7

dI

×

×
2 π f 2
c

= 4.48

dI

×

As is seen from (5), the error σD is directly proportional to the TEC variation dI

and inversely proportional to the carrier frequency squared.

Using the values of the spatial derivatives of TEC I

x and I ′
t makes it possible to uniquely obtain - for each instant of

y and of the derivative of

′

′

TEC with respect to time I

time - the values of errors of determination of the angle of arrival σα and the frequency

Doppler shift σf by formulas (Kravtsov et al., 1983; Goodman and Aarons, 1990):

σα =

1.39

102

×
f 2
c

× q

(I ′

x)2 + (I ′

y)2

σf =

1.34

10−7

×
fc

′

I
t

×

In the simplest case, the values of the derivatives for the selected cell of the map

can be obtained using TEC increments for the four cell nodes and for two times t1 and

t2 = t1 + dt:

′

∆I

Ib1 + Ic2 −
Ib1 + Ic2 −
Ia1 + Ic2 −
Ic1 + Ia2 −
Where necessary, the spatial derivatives can be estimated by taking into account

Ia1 + Ib2 −
Ia1 + Ib2 −
Ib1 + Id1 −
Ib1 + Id1 −

Ic1 + Id2 −
Ic1 + Id2 −
Ib2 + Id2 −
Ib2 + Id2 −

∆I = (Ia2 −
t = (Ia2 −
x = (Ic1 −
y = (Ia1 −

Ic2)/4dn

Ia2)/4de

Id1)/4dt

Id1)/4

∆I

∆I

(8)

′

′

the TEC values in adjacent nodes of the map, and the time derivative (with a time res-

olution of IONEX maps no worse than 15 min) can be inferred by averaging increments

for several successive time counts.

The procedures (5), (6) and (7) are performed for all cells of the selected spatial

range and for the selected time interval of the day. One variant of data representation

implies a full exploitation of the IONEX format with the diﬀerence that, rather than

the values of TEC and the error of TEC determination (Schaer et al., 1998), are entered

into the corresponding cells of the map values of error σD, σf and σα.

By way of example, it is appropriate to give the results derived from analyzing the

regular part of the spatial-temporal TEC variations for a relatively magnetically quiet

day of July 29, 1999 (with the largest deviation of the Dst-index of -40 nT ) and for the

magnetically disturbed day of April 6, 2000 (with the largest deviation of the Dst-index

of -293 nT ).

Fig.3 a, b, c portrays the maps of the errors σD, σf and σα obtained on the basis

of ﬁles in the IONEX format for the magnetically quiet day of July 29, 1999 in the
geographic coordinate system in the range of longitudes -120◦ ... -60◦ E and latitudes
20◦ ... 70◦ N. Fig.3 d, e, f, respectively, characterizes the values of σD, σf and σα

for the magnetically disturbed day of April 6, 2000. The ﬁgure also shows the time

interval 19-21 UT, for which the analysis was carried out. Contours show the values of

errors of phase measurements in units, respectively, of σD - ”m” (meters), σf - ”Hz”

(Hertz), and σα - ”arcmin” (minutes of arc). The vertical calibrated scale shows the

maximum and minimum values of the corresponding errors.

The above maps are a pictorial rendition of the behavior dynamics of the errors σD,

σf and σα in the spatial and temporal ranges selected. Noteworthy is a considerable

diﬀerence of the maps for the magnetically quiet and disturbed days. As is evident

from Fig.3, gradients of spatial distribution of the errors during disturbances increase

more than an order of magnitude when compared to the quiet period, which would

lead to a degradation of RESS performance.

5 Analysis of the irregular errors σD, σf and σα

Our analysis of the irregular component of the errors was based on using raw data

in the form of series of TEC values for selected receiving sites as well as values of

elevations Θs(t) and azimuths αs(t) to visible satellites that were calculated using a

specially developed program, CONVTEC, to convert RINEX-ﬁles (standard ﬁles for

the GPS system) available from the Internet (Afraimovich et al., 1998a).

Fig.4 presents the geometry of transionospheric radio sounding. The axes z, y, x

are pointing, respectively, to the zenith, the north N, and to the east E; P is the

point of intersection of the LOS to the satellite (the line connecting the satellite to

the radio signal receiver) with the ionospheric F2 region peak; S is the subionospheric

point (projection of the point P onto the terrestrial surface).

The GPS technology provides the means of estimating TEC variations on the basis

of phase measurements of TEC I in each of the spaced two-frequency GPS receivers

using the formula (Hofmann-Wellenhof et al., 1992):

I0 =

1
40.308

1 f 2
f 2
2
f 2
2

f 2
1 −

[(L1λ1 −

L2λ2) + const + nL],

(9)

where L1λ1 and L2λ2 are phase path increments of the radio signal, caused by the

phase delay in the ionosphere (m); L1 and L2 are the number of full phase rotations,

and λ1 and λ2 are the wavelengths (m) for the frequencies f1 and f2, respectively;

const is some unknown initial phase path (m); and nL is the error in determination of

the phase path (m). Phase measurements in the GPS can be made with a high degree
of accuracy corresponding to the error of TEC determination of at least 1014 m−2

when averaged on a 30-second time interval, with some uncertainty of the initial value

of TEC, however (Hofmann-Wellenhof et al., 1992). For deﬁniteness sake, we bring

the TEC variations into the region of positive values with the minimum value equal to

0 by adjusting the constant term const in equation (9). The TECU (Total Electron
Content Units), which is equal to 1016 m−2 and is commonly accepted in the literature,

will be used throughout the text.

Primary data include series of ”oblique” values of TEC Io(t), as well as the corre-

sponding series of elevations θ(t) and azimuths α(t) along LOS to the satellite calculated

using our developed CONVTEC program which converts the GPS system standard

RINEX-ﬁles on the Internet (Gurtner, 1993). Series of the values of elevations θ(t) and

azimuths α(t) of the beam to the satellite were used to determine the coordinates of

subionospheric points, and to convert the ”oblique” TEC Io(t) to the corresponding

value of the ”vertical” TEC I(t) by employing the technique reported by (Klobuchar,

1986):

maximum.

I = I0 ×

cos

arcsin
(cid:20)

(cid:18)

Rz
Rz + hmax

cosΘs(cid:19)(cid:21)

,

(10)

where Rz is the Earth’s radius, and hmax=300 km is the height of the F2-layer

All results in this study were obtained for elevations Θs(t) larger than 30◦.

To analyze the errors σD, σf and σα that are cased by the irregular component of

TEC variation, we make use of the relations for the respective regular errors (5), (6) and

(7). The diﬀerence in the analysis of irregular errors implies a diﬀerent (compared with

the IONEX technique) method of determining the values of TEC and its derivatives

(Afraimovich and Karachenschev, 2002b).

The phase diﬀerences ∆ϕx,y along the axes x and y are proportional to the values

of the horizontal components of TEC gradient GE = I
To calculate the components of the TEC gradient I ′

x and GE = I
x and I ′

′

′

y.

y are used linear trans-

formations of the diﬀerences of the values of the ﬁltered TEC (IB

IA) and (IB

IC)

−

−

at the receiving points A, B and C (Afraimovich et al., 1998a):

yA(IB

′

I

x =

IC)
−
xAyC

−
−

yC(IB
xCyA

IA)

;

−

xC(IB

′

I

y =

IA)
−
xAyC

−
−

IC)

xA(IB
xCyA

−

(11)

where xA, yA, xC, yC are the coordinates of the sites A and C in the topocentric

coordinate system. When deriving (11) we took into account that xB = yB = 0, since

site B is the center of topocentric coordinate system.

The time derivative of TEC I ′

t is determined by diﬀerentiating I(t) at the point B.

The procedures of (5), (6) and (7) are performed for all groups of three GPS stations

of the selected spatial range and for satellites visible from these stations, as well as for

the selected time interval of the day.

Fig.5 presents the results derived from analyzing the irregular component of the

errors σD, σf and σα in the form of ﬂuctuation spectra of the range, Doppler frequency

and angles of arrival of radio waves.

With the purpose of improving the statistical reliability of the data, we used the

spatial averaging technique for spectra within the framework of a novel technology

(Afraimovich et al., 2001a). The method implies using an appropriate processing of

TEC variations that are determined from the GPS data, simultaneously for the entire

set of GPS satellites (as many as 5–10 satellites) ”visible” during a given time interval,

at all stations of the global GPS network used in the analysis.

Individual spectra of the errors σD, σf and σα were obtained by processing contin-

uous series of I(t) measurements of a duration no shorter than 2.5 hours. To eliminate

errors caused by the regular ionosphere, as well as trends introduced the motion of

satellites, we used the procedure of removing the linear trend by preliminarily smooth-

ing the initial series with the selected time window of a duration of about 60 min.

Fig.5 shows the overall character of the TEC variations dI(t) that were ﬁltered from

TEC series obtained from measurements of the phase diﬀerence between two coherently

coupled signals from the GPS system (Hofmann-Wellenhof, 1992) for the magnetically

quiet day of July 29, 1999 (panel a, at the left) and a major magnetic storm of July

15, 2000 (panel e, at the right). Furthermore, the panels show the station names and

locations, as well as GPS satellite numbers (PRN). In this paper we are using the term

PRN (pseudo random noise) to designate the satellite number (Hofmann-Wellenhof et

al., 1992).

As is evident from the ﬁgure, the intensity dI(t) during the disturbance even at

such low latitudes is increased an order of magnitude as a minimum. This is reﬂected

on logarithmic amplitude spectra lgS(F ) of TEC ﬂuctuations and their derivatives

(left-hand scale in the ﬁgures) and of the ﬂuctuations of σD, σf and σα, converted

to the working frequency of 300 MHz (right-hand scale) which are represented on a

logarithmic scale (panels b, c, d, f , g, h).

The logarithmic amplitude spectrum lgS(F ) obtained by using a standard FFT

procedure. Incoherent summation of the partial mplitude spectra lgS(F )i of diﬀerent

LOS was performed by the formula:

lg

S(F )

h

i

= lg 




n

Pi=1

S(F )i

n







(12)

where i is the number of LOS; i = 1, 2, ... n.

As a consequence of the statistical independence of partial spectra, the signal/noise

ratio, when the average spectrum is calculated, increases due to incoherent accumula-

tion at least by a factor of √n, where n is the number of LOS.

Fluctuation spectra from the magnetically quiet day of July 29, 1999 are shown by

the thin line in panels f , g, h (Fig.5) for comparison with the spectra from the disturbed

day. The range of ﬂuctuation periods is shown in bold type along the abscissa axis in

panels d and h. Panels b and f show also the number n of GPS arrays composed of

three stations, the data from which are used to estimate the spatial derivatives of TEC

(Afraimovich et al., 2001a).

Spectra of phase ﬂuctuations have a power law character with the values of the

slopes ν, shown in panels b, c, d, f , g, h. The slope of spectrum is determined by the

slope of the ﬁtted straight line (thin black line in panel b of Fig.5). These results are

in reasonably good agreement with data reported in Komrakov and Skrebkova, 1980;

Livingston et al., 1981; Gajlit et al., 1983; Kravtsov et al., 1983; Gershman et al., 1984;

Yakubov, 1997).

6 The method of GPS phase slips estimates

The study of deep, fast variations in TEC caused by a strong scattering of satellite

signals from intense small-scale irregularities of the ionospheric F 2-layer at equatorial

and polar latitudes has a special place among ionospheric investigations based on using

satellite (including GPS) signals ( Aarons, 1982; Basu et al., 1988; Aarons et al., 1996,

1997; Pi et al., 1997; Aarons and Lin, 1999; Bhattacharrya et al., 2000; Shan et al.,

2002). The interest to this problem as regards the practical implementation is explained

by the fact that as a result of such a scattering, the signal undergoes deep amplitude

fadings, which leads to a phase slip at the GPS working frequencies (Skone and Jong,

2000, 2001).

A limitation of the cited references is the fact that they use, as input data, essentially

the values of TEC determined from the phase diﬀerence L1

L2 (see below). For

−

that reason, fatal phase slips that totally prohibit measurements of continuous TEC

variations, are excluded from the sample statistic reported in the cited references.

In this section we inquire into the question: What is the statistic of fatal phase

slips, and how it depends on the various geophysical factors (the level of geomagnetic

disturbance, the latitudinal and diurnal dependencies)?

The purpose of a preprocessing of the GPS data is to obtain slip density estimates

in measuring the phase diﬀerence L1

L2, and slips of phase measurement at the

−

fundamental frequency L1. Ascertaining the cause of the increase in slip density was

also greatly facilitated by estimating the TEC variation intensity for the same stations

and time intervals.

Towards this end, we have also obtained normalized distributions of LOS elevations

and azimuths, for which slips of measurements of the phase diﬀerence L1

L2 and

−

phase L1 slips were recorded for the time interval of our interest.

The GPS technology provides the means of estimating TEC variations on the basis

of phase measurements of TEC I in each of the spaced two-frequency GPS receivers

using the formula (9).

6.1 The relative density of diﬀerence phase L1

L2 slips and

−

of phase L1 slips

We hold ﬁxed a slip of the phase diﬀerence L1

L2 in the case where the modulus of

−

the TEC increment for a time interval of 30 s (which is a standard one for the GPS

data placed on the Internet), exceeds the speciﬁed threshold of order, for example,

100-200 TECU. A slip of phase L1 is also ﬁxed in a similar manner but with a much

larger threshold and with due regard for the time varying distance to the satellite.

Thus we point out that it is the fatal slips which totally prohibit the determination

of the increment of TEC from the measures value of the phase diﬀerence L1

L2. At

−

the same time there can be numerous phase slips whose absolute value is smaller than

the threshold which we selected. Such slips that accompany TEC variations of only

a few TECU, are caused by ionospheric irregularity eﬀects, and have been thoroughly

studied in a large number of publications (Basu et al., 1988; Aarons et al., 1996, 1997;

Pi et al., 1997; Aarons and Lin, 1999; Bhattacharrya et al., 2000).

As a result of a pretreatment of the RINEX-ﬁles, we have the number S of phase

slips within a single selected time interval dT =5 min, as well as the corresponding

number M of observations that is required for normalizing the data. These data for

each of the GPS satellites were then averaged for all the stations selected in order to

infer the mean density of observations M(t) and the mean density of phase slips S(t).

In the middle of the observed satellite pass, the density of observations M(t) averages

10

1 (30-s counts); at the beginning and end of the pass it can decrease because the

±

time intervals of observation of a given satellite at elevations larger than that speciﬁed

do not coincide at diﬀerent stations. Subsequently, we calculated the mean relative

density of phase slips P (t)=S(t)/M(t), %. Furthermore, the daily mean value of the

relative number of phase slips

P

that was averaged over all GPS satellites and stations

was useful for our analysis.

h

i

As would be expected the mean observation density M(t) for a single satellite

exhibits a diurnal variation that is determined by the satellite’s orbit, and varies over

the range from 0 to 8.

6.2 Estimation of the TEC variation intensity

We have used the series I(t), containing neither slips of the phase diﬀerence L1

L2

−

nor gaps of counts, to estimate the TEC variation intensity for the same sets of stations

and time intervals as used in estimating the phase slip density.

To exclude the variations of the regular ionosphere, as well as trends introduced by

the motion of the satellite, we employ the procedure of removing the linear trend by

preliminarily smoothing the initial series with a selected time window of a duration of

about 60 min. In a subsequent treatment, we use the standard deviation of the TEC

variations dI(t), thus ﬁltered, as an estimate of the TEC variation intensity A (see

Section 4).

Fig.6a gives an example of a typical weakly disturbed variation in ”vertical” TEC
I(t) for station WES2 (42.6◦N, 288.5◦E); satellite number PRN10 on July 15, 2000 for

the time interval 14:00-16:00 UT, preceding the onset of a geomagnetic disturbance

near the WES2 station. For this same series, Fig.6b presents the dI(t) variations that

were ﬁltered out from the I(t) series (rms of dI(t) is smaller then 0.2 TECU).

Strong variations in TEC variation intensity occurred near station WES2 literally

within 6 hours. Fig.6e and Fig.6f presents the dependencies I(t) and dI(t) for station

WES2 for the time interval 20:00-22:00 UT (PRN23). As is evident from the ﬁgure,

the TEC variations increased in intensity at least by a factor of 30 when compared

with the time interval 14:00–16:00 UT (Fig.6a and Fig.6b).

6.3 Conditions and limitations of a data processing

Slips of phase measurements can be caused by reception conditions for the signal in

the neighborhood of the receiver (interference from thunderstorms, radiointerferences),

which is particularly pronounced at low elevations θ. To exclude the inﬂuence of

the signal reception conditions, in this paper we used only observations with satellite
elevations θ larger than 30◦.

Since we are using a global averaging of the number of phase slips for all LOS’s and

stations, as a consequence of the uneven distribution of stations the proportion of mid-

latitude stations of North America and, to a lesser extent, of Europe is predominant

(see above). At the same time the number of stations in the polar region of the northern

hemisphere and in the equatorial zone was found to be quite suﬃcient for a comparative
80◦N;

analysis. To compare the results, we chose 3 latitude ranges: high latitudes 50

−

mid-latitudes 30

50◦N; and equatorial zone 30◦S–30◦N.

−

We selected also the data according to the types of two-frequency receivers, with

which the GPS global network sites are equipped (the relevant information is contained

in the initial RINEX format).

7 Results derived from analyzing the relative den-

sity of phase slips

7.1 Magnetically quiet days

Fig.7 plots the local time LT-dependence of the relative mean slip density P (t) obtained
360◦E irrespective of

by averaging the data from all satellites in the latitude range 0

−

the type of GPS receivers for the magnetically quiet days of July 29, 1999 (at the left)

and January 9, 2000 (at the right). The local time for each GPS station was calculated,

based on the value of its geographic longitude. The number n of satellite passes used

to carry out an averaging is marked in all panels.

As is evident from Fig.7b, the phase slips on a magnetically quiet day at mid-

latitudes have a sporadic character. The daily mean value of the relative density of

phase slips

P

, averaged over all GPS satellites and stations, was 0.017 % for the

magnetically quiet day of July 29, 1999. Similar data were also obtained for high

h

i

latitudes (Fig.7a).

In the equatorial zone, however, even on a magnetically quiet day, the density of

phase slips exceeds the latitudinally mean value of P (t) at least by a factor of 15,

and shows a strongly pronounced LT-dependence, with a maximum value of 1.52 %

(Fig.7c).

of

P

h

i

For the other magnetically quiet day of January 9, 2000, however, the mean value

at mid-latitudes was already larger 0.06 % (Fig.7e). For the diurnal P (t)-

dependence on January 9, 2000, one can point out the irregularity of the mean density

of phase slips as a function of local time LT.

7.2 Magnetic storms of April 6 and July 15, 2000

A totally diﬀerent picture was observed on April 6, 2000 during a strong magnetic

storm with a well-deﬁned SSC.

Fig.8 presents the measured variations of the H-component of the geomagnetic ﬁeld
at station Irkutsk (52.2◦N; 104.3◦E –a, e), and Dst (b, f - thick line) during major

magnetic storms on April 6, and July 15, 2000. The SSC times 16:42 UT and 14:37

UT are shown by a vertical bar.

mean slip density P (t) obtained for the territory of North America (200

Fig.8d (thick line) presents the variations of the UT-dependence of the relative
300◦E) at
50◦N by averaging the data from all satellites. In this case, with

mid-latitudes 30

−

−

the purpose of achieving a clearer detection of the eﬀect of the magnetic storm SSC

inﬂuence on the P (t)-dependence, we chose only those GPS stations which were on

the dayside of the Earth at the SSC time (North America region). Noteworthy is a

well-deﬁned eﬀect of an increase in the density of phase slips that occurred after SSC.

A maximum mean slip density Pmax=2.4 % is attained 3-4 hours after an SSC. The
360◦E)

same values, averaged over all observed satellites and mid-latitude stations (0

−

but as a function of local time LT, are plotted in Fig.9b.

First of all, it should be noted that the relative density of phase slips P (t) exceeds

that for magnetically quiet days by one (when compared with January 9, 2000) or

even two (when compared with July 29, 1999) orders of magnitude, and reaches a few

percent of the total observation density. The mean value of

for this storm is 0.67

%, which is by a factor of 40 larger than that of

P

for July 29, 1000, and by a factor

P

h

i

h

i

of 10 larger than that for January 9, 2000.

It was also found that the averaged (over all satellites) level of phase slips for the

GPS satellites on the subsolar side of the Earth is by a factor of 10 larger than that

on the opposite side of the Earth (Fig.9b).

Similar dependencies with a maximum slip density Pmax=3.37 % and a sharply

pronounced diurnal dependence were also obtained for equatorial latitudes (Fig.9c).

On the other hand, although the high latitudes show a 10-fold growth of

P

as against

h

i

a magnetically quiet day, no LT-dependence is observed (Fig.9a ).

A similar result conﬁrming all of the above-mentioned features of the April 6, 2000

storm was also obtained for the other magnetic storm of July 15, 2000 (see the universal

time UT dependence in Fig.8h and the local time LT dependencies of the relative mean

density of phase slips P (t) obtained by averaging the data from all GPS satellites, in

Fig.9d, e, f.

The mean value of

for this storm at mid-latitudes is 0.34 %, which is also in

P

h

i

appreciable excess of the level of phase slips for magnetically quiet days (Pmax=4 %).

The eﬀect of an increase in the density of phase slips after SSC is clearly pronounced

for this storm as well (Fig.8h, thick line; see below).

These results are in reasonably good agreement with data reported by Coster et al.

(2001). This authors presented the regional GPS mapping of storm enhanced density

during the July 15-16 2000 geomagnetic storm and found, that the Millstone GPS

receiver ASHTECH Z-12 lost (and then regained) lock on all satellites between 15.85

and 16.00 LT (20.40–14.00 UT).

7.3 Correlation of the increase in slip density and TEC vari-

ation intensity

It is known that equatorial latitudes are characterized by strong scintillations of the

transionospheric signal caused by the scattering from F 2-region ionization irregularities

(Aarons, 1982; Basu et al., 1988; Aarons et al., 1996, 1997; Pi et al., 1997; Aarons and

Lin, 1999; Bhattacharrya et al., 2000).

Since during the active phase of the magnetic storm the mid-latitude ionosphere

becomes increasingly inhomogeneous, it might be anticipated that a similar mechanism

is able to cause appreciable scintillations of the GPS signal at mid-latitudes as well.

To verify this hypothesis, we determined the dependencies A(t) of the TEC variation

intensity obtained for the same set of stations as in the case of P (t).

The dependencies A(t) as a function of UT (Fig.8d, h - dashed line) and LT (Fig.9b,

e– dashed line) presented below by averaging (over all GPS satellites and stations) the

standard deviation of the variations dI(t) (Afraimovich et al., 2001a).

In Fig.8h, the dashed line represents the dependence A(t) of the TEC variation

intensity obtained for all satellites and for the territory of North America at mid-
50◦N during the magnetic storm of July 15, 2000. As is apparent from

latitudes 30

−

this ﬁgure, the dependence A(t) correlates quite well with the UT-dependence of the

relative mean slip density P (t) calculated from the same set of stations as in the case

of A(t).

A similar result on the UT-dependence was also obtained for a major magnetic

storm of April 6, 2000 (Fig.8d, dashed line). A correlation of the increase in slip

density and in TEC variation intensity is shown as clearly by the LT-dependencies

A(t) for the magnetic storms of April 6 and July 15, 2000, presented in Fig.9b, e

(dashed line).

The fact was found that the growth of the level of geomagnetic activity is accompa-

nied by the growth of total intensity A(t) of TEC variations in the range of 20-60 min

periods (traveling ionospheric disturbances, TIDs); however, it shows correlation not

with the absolute level of Dst, but with the value of the time derivative of Dst (the

maximum correlation coeﬃcient reaches 0.94 – Fig.8b, f, dashed line). The derivative

d(Dst)/dt was obtained from the dependence Dst(t) (Fig.8b, f, dashed line). The delay

of the TID response about 2 hours is consistent with the guess that TIDs are generated

in auroral regions, and propagate equator-ward with approximate velocity of 300-400

m/s (Hocke and Schlegel, 1996; Oliver et al., 1997; Afraimovich et al., 1998b; 2002e).

7.4 The dependence of the slip density of phase measure-

ments L1

L2 and L1 on the type of GPS receivers

−

We have carried out an analysis of the dependence of the density of fatal slips on the

type of GPS receivers; furthermore, we have veriﬁed slips for which of the channels (L1

or L2) are the cause of slips in measurements of the phase diﬀerence L1

L2.

−

The sample statistic of phase slips for the main types of two-frequency receivers

(ASHTECH, TRIMBLE, AOA), installed at the global GPS network sites, is presented

in Fig.10 and Fig.11.

An analysis of slips in measuring the phase diﬀerence L1

L2 and of the phase L1

−

was carried out for the magnetic storms of April 6, and July 15, 2000.

Fig.10 plots the UT-dependencies of the relative mean slip density P (t) of phase

measurements of L1

obtained by averaging the data from all satellites in the longitude range 200

L2 (at the left) and phase measurements of L1 only (at the right)
300◦E

−

−

at the mid-latitudes 30

50◦N for major magnetic storm on April 6, 2000.

The data from Fig.10a suggest that for the ASHTECH receivers, the slip density

of phase measurements at two frequencies L1

L2 is by a factor of 5-20 smaller than

−

that for the other types of receivers. These estimates are only slightly exceeded by the

slip density for the TRIMBLE receivers (Fig.10b). The AOA receivers are the most

susceptible to slips of L1

L2 measurements (Fig.10c). The mean and maximum values

of P (t) exceed the respective values for the ASHTECH receivers during the magnetic

−

−

storm of April 6, 2000, at least by a factor of 10-20.

Fig.11 plots the UT-dependencies of the relative mean slip density P (t) of phase

measurements of L1

−

L2 (at the left) and phase measurements of L1 only (at the right)
360◦E at

obtained by averaging the data from all satellites in the longitude range 0
the equatorial zone 30◦S–30◦N for major magnetic storm on April 6, 2000.

−

The statistic of the L1

L2 slips for the AOA and TRIMBLE receivers diﬀer almost

−

not at all from the data for mid-latitudes. For the ASHTECH receivers, however, the

density of slips in the equatorial zone was found to be little lower when compared with

the AOA receivers.

On the other hand, the level of slips of L1 phase measurements at the fundamental

GPS frequency (Fig.8d, h and Fig.10 and Fig.11, at the right) is at least one order of

magnitude lower than that in L1

L2 measurements.

−

The corresponding dependencies P (t) as a function of universal time UT on the

dayside for the magnetic storms of April 6 and July 15, 2000, are plotted in Fig.8c

and g, respectively. Although the level of the slips is lower by one order of magnitude

(as compared to P (t) for L1

L2 - panels d and h), the fundamental frequency L1

−

does show an increase in the relative density of slips in the main phase of the magnetic

Similar results of a comparison of the level of L1

L2 and L1 slips for diﬀerent

types of GPS receivers were also obtained for the magnetic storm of July 15, 2000.

This leads us to conjecture that the slips of L1

L2 measurements are most likely

to be caused by the high level of slips of L2 phase measurements at the auxiliary

frequency. According to our data, these slips are observed at equatorial latitudes under

quiet conditions as well, and at mid-latitudes they increase with increasing geomagnetic

−

−

storm.

activity.

This means that relatively long-term (about 10 years) data from the global GPS

network equipped with several hundred older-generation commercial receivers cannot

be exploited in full measure to obtain data on TEC variations, based on a standard

processing of the phase diﬀerence L1

L2. This limitation is legitimate for the pe-

−

riod of the main phase of the magnetic storm and of the dayside ionosphere which is

characterized by fast, profound TEC variations.

7.5 Determination of TEC variations at the fundamental fre-

quency L1

Some way out of the situation would be by exploiting the method (Afraimovich et al.,

1998a) for determining TEC variations using only the data on the pseudo-range C and

phase measurements at the fundamental frequency L1. In this study the concerned

method was tested with the database mentioned in Table 1.

For testing purposes, time intervals were chosen with no data gaps and slips of

phase slip measurements of both L1

L2 and L1.

−

Phase changes at frequencies f1 and f2 may be represented as the sum of diﬀerent

components φΣ = φs +φ+φ0, where φs = 2πC/λ is the fundamental component caused
10−7I/f

by a change of the distance D to the satellite it follows its orbit; φ = 8, 42

∗

is the ionospheric component proportional to TEC at LOS between the receiver and

the satellite (Spoelstra and Kelder, 1984); and φ0 is the initial phase. To subtract φs,

it is possible to use current information about the pseudorange C for each satellite

(Hofmann-Wellenhof et al., 1992).

For the sake of comparison with the dI(t) variations obtained using the standard

TEC measurement technique described in Section 3, from data on the phase diﬀerence

L1

L2 (Fig.6b, thick lines), dashed lines plot the variations of the ”vertical” TEC

value obtained by measuring the L1 phase and ﬁltered oﬀ (as is done for the data on

L1

L2) by removing the trend with the 60-min time window. It is evident from the

ﬁgure that the diﬀerence of the dI(t) dependencies from each other does not exceed

in magnitude the value 0.1 TECU, and is more pronounced only for the quiet period

−

−

14:00-16:00 UT.

For the disturbed time interval 20:00-22:00 UT (Fig.6f), the corresponding de-

pendencies are virtually similar and are not distinguishable. Fig.6 presents also the

distributions P (δ) of the standard deviation δ of TEC variations obtained in phase

measurements at two frequencies L1

L2 and at the fundamental frequency L1. Pan-

−

els c, d, g and h show the time intervals and the number n of satellite passes, over

which the averaging was performed.

During the quiet period 10:00-12:00 UT on April 6 and July 15, 2000 (Fig.6c, g),

the most probable value of δ was 0.04 and 0.05 TECU, and was nearly twice as large

as the corresponding value for the same time interval on the magnetically quiet day

of July 29, 1999. Furthermore, the mean values of δ were by a factor of 1.2-1.5 larger

than the most probable ones. For the disturbed period 20:00-22:00 UT (Fig.6d, h), the

most probable value of δ remained virtually unchanged; however, the mean values of

δ now were larger than the most probable ones by a factor of 2-3. This is indicative of

a more signiﬁcant discrepancy between results of a calculation of the dI(t) variations

from L1

L2 and L1.

−

Thus the standard deviation of the TEC variations obtained in phase measurements

at two frequencies L1

L2 and at the fundamental frequency L1 does not exceed 0.1

−

TECU, which makes this method useful for strong disturbance conditions where slips

at the auxiliary frequency L2 are observed. Of course, this method is appropriate for

solving only those problems, for which it will suﬃce to single out the TEC variations,

and is unsuitable for calculating the absolute value of TEC.

8 Discussion and Conclusions

The main results of this study may be summarized as follows:

1. We found that during strong magnetic storms, the errors of determination of

the range, frequency Doppler shift and angles of arrival of transionospheric radio

signals exceeds the one for magnetically quiet days by one order of magnitude as

a minimum. This can be the cause of performance degradation of current satel-

lite radio engineering navigation, communication and radar systems as well as

of superlong-baseline radio interferometry systems (Afraimovich and Karachen-

schev, 2002b).

2. We have detected a dependence of the relative density of phase slips in some

GPS receivers on the disturbance level of the Earth’s magnetosphere during major

magnetic storms (Afraimovich et al., 2000c; 2001b; 2001c; 2001d; 2002a). During

strong magnetic storms, the relative density of phase slips at mid latitudes exceeds

its mean value for magnetically quiet days at least by the order of one or two,

and reaches a few percent of the total density of observations. Furthermore, the

level of phase slips for the GPS satellites located at the sunward side of the Earth

was 5-10 times larger compared with the opposite side of the Earth.

3. The level of slips of L1 phase measurements at the fundamental GPS frequency

is at least one order of magnitude lower than that in L1

L2 measurements. The

−

slips of L1

L2 measurements are most likely to be caused by the high level of

−

slips of L2 phase measurements at the auxiliary frequency (Afraimovich et al.,

2000c; 2001b; 2001c; 2001d; 2002a).

As an alternative, Afraimovich et al. (2001b; 2001d) have developed and tested

a new method for determining TEC variations using only data on the pseudo-

range and phase measurements at fundamental frequency L1. The standard

deviation of the TEC variations which were obtained in phase measurements at

two frequencies, L1

L2, and at fundamental frequency L1, does not exceed 0.1

−

TECU, which permits this method to be used in strong disturbance conditions

when phase slips at auxiliary frequency L2 are observed.

4. However, the reason for the slips themselves can include several factors: the

inﬂuence of additive interferences in the case of a low signal/noise ratio, the

signal scattering from electron density irregularities, and the inadequate response

of GPS receivers of some types to fast changes in daytime TEC at the auxiliary

frequency L2. Let us analyze these factors separately.

5. The lower signal/noise ratio at L2 is primarily due to the fact that the L2 power at

the GPS satellite transmitter output is on 6 dB of magnitude smaller compared

with the fundamental frequency f1 using C/A code (ICD-200, 1994; Langley,

1998). Similar correlations of the eﬀective radiated power of L1 (30 watt) and

L2 (21 watt) signals are also characteristic for the Russian GLONASS system

(Kharisov et al., 1998).

Phase slips at L2 can also be caused by the lower signal/noise ratio when use

is made of commercial noncoded receivers for the frequency L2, with which the

global GPS network stations are equipped. These receivers have no access to

the military ”Y” code, and have to use the noncoded or semi-noncoded mode of

reception. As a consequence, the signal/noise ratio at the frequency L2 is, at

best, by 13 dB lower compared to the mode of fully coded reception.

Thus the diﬀerence in signal powers at L1 and L2 for commercial receivers can

become larger than 10 dB, which can lead to an increase of the level of L2 slips

because of the inﬂuence of additive interferences. Diﬀerent types of GPS receivers

respond to this diﬀerently; on the whole, however, the picture of the dependence

on the local time, latitude range, and on the level of geomagnetic activity remains

suﬃciently stable.

6. However, the deterioration of the signal/noise ratio with an increase of the level

of geomagnetic disturbance is possible if this is accompanied by an enhancement

of the proportion of the signal scattered from ionospheric electron density irreg-

ularities. This involves also an increase of the number of phase slips; for a more

powerful L1 signal, however, the density of slips is an order of magnitude smaller

than that for the less powerful L2 signal.

The high positive correlation between the growth of the density of phase slips

P (t) and the intensity of ionospheric irregularities A(t) during geomagnetic dis-

turbances as detected in this study points to the fact that the increase is slips

P (t) is caused by the scattering of the GPS signal from ionospheric irregularities.

Nevertheless, the presence of the daytime maximum in the diurnal density dis-

tribution of fatal slips and of the TEC variation amplitude is inconsistent with

existing data on the night-time intensity maximum of equatorial scintillations of

transionospheric signals (Aarons, 1982; Aarons et al., 1996, 1997; Pi et al., 1997;

Aarons and Lin, 1999). Besides, the level of slips at mid-latitudes was found to

be unusually high.

This would suggest that the reason for the increase in density of fatal phase slips

during geomagnetic disturbances is that the type of GPS signal scattering from

ionospheric irregularities is diﬀerent from that causing signal scintillations in the

case of the scattering from F region irregularities at the local night-time in the

equatorial zone.

The probable phenomenon that is responsible for the phase slips would be the ef-

fect of a strong resonance backscatter of the signal from ﬁeld-aligned irregularities

in the E-region of ionosphere (Foster and Tetenbaum, 1991). Such a scattering

can lead to strong signal fadings, and even to a particle screening of the ”GPS

satellite - receiver” propagation path.

Using the geomagnetic storm of July 15, 2000 as an example, Afraimovich et al.

(2001c) investigated the dependence of GPS navigation system performance on

the nightside at mid-latitudes on the level of geomagnetic disturbance. It was

shown that the number of GPS phase slips increases with the increasing level of

disturbance and that there is a good correlation between the rate of Dst-variation

and the frequency of slips. It was further shown that the relative frequency of slips

has also a clearly pronounced aspect dependence. Phase slips of the GPS signal

can be caused by the scattering from small-scale irregularities of the ionospheric

E-layer. Phase slip characteristics are indicative of Farley-Buneman instabili-

ties as a plausible physical mechanism that is responsible for the formation of

geomagnetic ﬁeld-aligned irregularities (Foster and Tetenbaum, 1991). Using si-

multaneous measurements of backscatter signal characteristics from the Irkutsk

incoherent scatter radar (Kurkin et al., 1999) and existing models for such ir-

regularities, Afraimovich et al., (2001c) estimated the order of magnitude of the

expected phase ﬂuctuations of the GPS signal at a few degrees.

7. The increase in density of fatal slips during geomagnetic disturbances on the

dayside can also be caused by limitations of the design and adjustment of the

receivers used in the analysis, rather than the GPS signal scattering from iono-

spheric irregularities. An increase in slip density can be caused in this case by

an inadequate response of GPS receivers of some types (such as AOA Turbo

Rogue) to fast changes in daytime TEC at the auxiliary frequency L2. This ef-

fect prevents the identiﬁcation of slips caused by phase ﬂuctuations induced by

the scattering from electron density irregularities. Unfortunately, we are unaware

of any consistent investigation of this kind or published data lending support to

such a point of view.

Of course, phase measurements are more sensitive to equipment failures and

to various interference aﬀecting GPS ’satellite-receiver” channel when compared

with group delay measurements which are directly used for navigation purposes.

Therefore, it is necessary to have a monitoring of the errors of determining the

position of stationary sites of the global GPS network, based on the data in the

RINEX-format available from the Internet, and to analyze these series in conjunc-

tion with the data on the conditions of the near-terrestrial space environment.

Afraimovich et al.

(2002c) found, that the rms error of positioning accuracy

increases in the case where two-frequency GPS receivers of three main types

(Ashtech, Trimble, and AOA) are in operation. For Ashtech receivers (unlike

AOA and Trimble) there is also a clear correlation between the slip density of

the one- and two-frequency modes of positioning and the level of geomagnetic

disturbance.

As a result of our investigations, it has become clear that ionospheric disturbances

during magnetic storms contribute to signal degradation and GPS system malfunc-

tions not only at the equator and in the polar zone but also even at mid-latitudes.

However, the question of the causes and the particular mechanisms of this inﬂuence

remains largely open. The major objective of future research is to study the physical

mechanisms of multi-scale total electron density variations in the ionosphere during

geomagnetic disturbances of geospace that are accompanied by signal degradation and

malfunctions of satellite radio engineering systems.

Such investigations must have a comprehensive character, with the maximum pos-

sible involvement of experimental ionospheric monitoring facilities (digisondes, inco-

herent scatter radars, chirp-ionosondes, etc.).

We are aware that this study has revealed only the key averaged patterns of this

inﬂuence, and we hope that it would give impetus to a wide variety of more detailed

investigations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors are grateful to V.A. Karachenschev, O.S. Lesuta, S.V. Voeykov and I.I.

Ushakov for their active participation in investigations. The author are also indebted

to E.A. Kosogorov, and O.S. Lesuta for preparing the input data. Thanks are

also due V.G. Mikhalkovsky for his assistance in preparing the English version of the

TEXmanuscript. This work was done with support from the Russian Foundation for
Basic Research (grants 00-05-72026 and 02-05-64570) and from RFBR grant of leading

scientiﬁc schools of the Russian Federation 00-15-98509.

References

70(4), 360–378, 1982.

26851–26862, 1996.

[1] Aarons, J. Global morphology of ionospheric scintillations. Proceedings of the IEEE,

[2] Aarons, J., Mendillo, M., Kudeki, E., and Yantosca, R. GPS phase ﬂuctuations

in the equatorial region during the MISETA 1994 campain. J. Geophys. Res., 101,

[3] Aarons, J., Mendillo, M., and Yantosca, R.,. GPS phase ﬂuctuations in the equa-

torial region during sunspot minimum. Radio Sci., 32, 1535–1550, 1997.

[4] Aarons, J., and Lin, B. Development of high latitude phase ﬂuctuations during the

January 10, April 10-11, and May 15, 1997 magnetic storms. J. Atmos. Terr. Phys.,

61, 309–327, 1999.

[5] Afraimovich, E. L., A. I. Terekhov, M. Yu. Udodov, and S. V. Fridman, Refraction

distortions of transionospheric radio signals caused by changes in a regular ionosphere

and by travelling ionospheric disturbances, J. Atmos. and Terr. Phys., 54, 1013–1020,

1992.

[6] Afraimovich, E. L., Palamartchouk, K. S. and Perevalova, N. P., GPS radio inter-

ferometry of travelling ionospheric disturbances. J. Atmos. and Solar-Terr. Phys.,

60, N. 12, 1205–1223, 1998a.

[7] Afraimovich, E.L., E.A. Kosogorov, L.A. Leonovich, K.S. Palamarchouk, N.P.

Perevalova, and O.M. Pirog. Determining parameters of large-scale traveling iono-

spheric disturbances of auroral origin using GPS-arrays. J.Atm. Terr. Phys., 62, N7,

553–565, 1998b.

[8] Afraimovich E.L., The GPS global detection of the ionospheric response to solar

ﬂares. Radio sci., 35, N6, 1417–1424, 2000a.

[9] Afraimovich, E.L., Chernukhov, V.V., Demyanov, V.V. Updating the ionospheric

delay model for single-frequency equipment of users of the GPS. Radio Sci., 35(1),

257–262, 2000b.

[10] Afraimovich, E.L., Lesyuta, O.S., Ushakov, I.I. Magnetospheric disturbances, and

the GPS operation. LANL e-print archive, http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0009027,

2000c.

723–731, 2001a.

[11] Afraimovich, E. L., Kosogorov, E. A., Lesyuta, O. S., Yakovets, A. F.,

Ushakov, I. I., Geomagnetic control of the spectrum of traveling ionospheric dis-

turbances based on data from a global GPS network. Ann. Geophys., 19, N. 7,

[12] Afraimovich, E.L., Lesyuta, O.S., and Voeykov, S.V. GPS phase slips on L1-L2

and L1 frequencies during geomagnetic disturbances. Proceedings of International

Beacon Satellite Symposium, June 4-6, 2001, Boston College, Institute for Scientiﬁc

Research, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA, 191–195, 2001b.

[13] Afraimovich, E.L., Berngardt, O.I., Lesyuta, O.S., Potekhin, A.P., and Sh-

pynev, B.G. A Case Study of The Mid-Latitude GPS Performance at Nighttime

During The Magnetic Storm of July 15, 2000. Proceedings of International Bea-

con Satellite Symposium, June 4-6, 2001, Boston College, Institute for Scientiﬁc

Research, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA , 408–412, 2001c.

[14] Afraimovich, E.L., Lesyuta, O.S., Ushakov, I.I., and Voeykov, S.V. Geomagnetic

storms and the occurrence of phase slips in the reception of GPS signals. Annals of

Geophysics, 45(1), 55–71, 2001d.

[15] Afraimovich, E.L., E.A. Kosogorov, N.P. Perevalova, and A.V. Plotnikov. The use

of GPS-arrays in detecting shock-acoustic waves generated during rocket launchings.

J.Atm. Solar-Terr. Phys., 63, N18, 1941–1957, 2001e.

[16] Afraimovich, E.L., A.T. Altyntsev, E.A. Kosogorov, N.S. Larina, and L.A.

Leonovich. Ionospheric eﬀects of the solar ﬂares of September 23, 1998 and July

29, 1999 as deduced from global GPS network data. J.Atm. Solar-Terr. Phys., 63,

N17, 1841–1849, 2001f.

[17] Afraimovich, E.L., N.P. Perevalova, A.V. Plotnikov and A.M. Uralov. The shock-

acoustic waves generated by the earthquakes. Annales Geophysicae, 19, N4, 395–409,

2001g.

[18] Afraimovich, E.L., Lesyuta, O.S., and Ushakov, I.I. Geomagnetic disturbances,

and the GPS operation. Geomagnetism and Aeronomy, 42(2), 220–227, 2002a.

[19] Afraimovich E.L., Karachenschev V.A. Testing of the transionospheric ra-

diochannel using data from the global GPS network. LANL e-print archive,

http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/02100048, 2002b.

[20] Afraimovich E.L., Demyanov V.V., Kondakova T.N. Degradation of GPS

performance in geomagnetically disturbed conditions. LANL e-print archive,

http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/physics/0211015, 2002c.

[21] Afraimovich, E.L., E.A. Kosogorov and O.S. Lesyuta. Eﬀects of the August 11,

1999 total solar eclipse as deduced from total electron content measurements at the

GPS network. J. Atm. Solar-Terr. Phys., 64/18, 1915–1923, 2002d.

[22] Afraimovich, E. L., Ashkaliev, Ya. F., Aushev, V. M., Beletsky, A. B., Vodyan-

nikov, V. V., Leonovich, L. A., Lesyuta, O. S., Mikhalev, A. V. and Yakovets, A.

F. Radio and optical observations of large-scale traveling ionospheric disturbances

during a strong geomagnetic storm of 6-8 April 2000. J. Atm. Solar-Terr. Phys.,

64/18, p.1971-1983, 2002e.

[23] Basu Santimay, MacKenzie E., and Basu Sunanda. Ionospheric constraints on

VHF/HUF communications links during solar maximum and minimum periods. Ra-

dio Sci., 23, 363–378, 1988.

[24] Bhattacharrya, A., Beach, T. L., Basu, S., and Kintner, P. M. Nighttime equatorial

ionosphere: GPS scintillations and diﬀerential carrier phase ﬂuctuations. Radio Sci.,

35, 209–224, 2000.

[25] Coster, A.J., Foster, J.C., Erickson, P.J., Rich, F.J. Regional GPS Mapping of

Storm Enhanced Density During the July 15-16 2000 Geomagnetic Storm. Proceed-

ings of International Beacon Satellite Symposium, June 4-6, 2001, Boston College,

Institute for Scientiﬁc Research, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA, 176–180, 2001.

[26] Davies, K., Ionospheric Radio Waves. Blaisdell, Waltham, Mass., 1969.

[27] Foster J.C. and Tetenbaum D., High resolution backscatter power observations

of 440-MHz E-region coherent echoes at Millstone-Hill. J. Geophys. Res. 96, 1251–,

1991.

1983.

1996.

1986.

[28] Gajlit, T. A., Gusev, V. D., Erukhimov, L. M., Shpiro, P. I., Spectrum of the phase

ﬂuctuations at the ionosphere sounding. Izv. Vuzov. Radioﬁzika, 26, N. 7, 795–801,

[29] Gershman, B. N., Erukhimov, L. M. and Yashin, Yu. Ya. Wave Phenomena in the

Ionosphere and Space Plasma. Moscow: Nauka, 1984, p. 392.

[30] Goodman, Dj. M., Aarons, J. Ionospheric Eﬀects on Modern Electronic System.

Proceedings of the IEEE, 78(3), 512–528, 1990.

[31] Gurtner, W. RINEX: The Receiver Independent Exchange Format Version 2,

http://igscb.jpl.nasa.gov/igscb/data/format/rinex2.txt, 1993.

[32] Hocke, K., and K. Schlegel, A review of atmospheric gravity waves and traveling

ionospheric disturbances: 1982-1995, Ann. Geophys., 14, 917–940, 1996.

[33] Hofmann-Wellenhof, B., Lichtenegger, H. and Collins, J., Global Positioning Sys-

tem: Theory and Practice. it Springer-Verlag, New York, 1992, p.327.

[34] Ho, C.M., Mannucci, A.J., Linqwister, U. J. et al. Global ionosphere perturbations

monitored by the worldwide GPS network. Geophys. Res. Lett., 23(22), 3219–2222,

[35] Interface

Control

Document,

ICD-200c,

1994.

http://www.navcen.uscg.mil/pubs/gps/icd200/.

[36] Langley, R. B. GPS for Geodesy. Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg, New York,

Barcelona, Budapest, Hong Kong, London, Milan, Paris, Singapore, Tokyo, 1998.

[37] Kharisov, V. N., Perov, A. I., and Boldin, V. A. The Global Satellite Radio Nav-

igation GLONASS System. Russia, Moscow: IPRZhR, 1998.

[38] Klobuchar, J. A., Ionospheric time-delay algorithm for single-frequency GPS users,

IEEE Transactions of Aerospace and Electronic System, AES, 23, N. 3, 325–331,

[39] Kolosov, M. A., Armand, N. A. and Yakovlev, O. I. The Propagation of Radio

Waves in Space Communication. Moscow: Svyaz, 1969, p. 155.

[40] Komrakov, G. P., Skrebkova, L. A., Study of parameters of ionospheric irregulari-

ties by the ”Interkosmos-Kopernik 500” satellite. Ionosfernie issledovaniya, Moscow:

Sovetskoe radio, 30, 49–52, 1980.

[41] Kravtsov, A. Yu., Feizulin, Z. I. and Vinogradov, A. G. The Propagation of Radio

Waves Through the Earth’s Ionosphere. Moscow: Radio i svyaz, 1983, p. 224.

[42] Kurkin V. I., Potekhin A. P., Shpynev B. G., Zarudnev V. E. and Zherebtsov

G. A.,. Study of September 25, 1998 storm eﬀects in the mid-latitude ionosphere

using the Irkutsk Incoherent Scatter Radar. XXIV GA URSI (Abstracts). Toronto,

Canada,, 441, 1999.

2421–2428, 1981.

[43] Livingston, R. C., Rino, C. L., McClure, J. P., Hanson, W. B., Spectral charac-

teristics of medium-scale equatorial F region irregularities, J. Geophys. Res., 86,

[44] Mannucci, A. J., Wilson, B. D., Yuan, D. N., Ho, C. M., Lindqwister, U. J.

and Runge, T. F., A global mapping technique for GPS-drived ionospheric TEC

measurements. Radio Sci., 33, 565–582, 1998.

[45] National Space Weather Program. The Implementation Plan. 1997. Washington,

DC, http://www.ofcm.gov/nswp-ip/text/cover.htm.

[46] Oliver, W. L., Otsuka Y., Sato M.,Takami T., and Fukao, S. A climatology of F

region gravity waves propagation over the middle and upper atmosphere radar. J.

Geophys. Res., 102, 14449-14512, 1997.

[47] Pi, X., Mannucci, A. J., Lindgwister, U. J., and Ho, C. M. Monitoring of global

ionospheric irregularities using the woldwide GPS network. Geophys. Res. Lett., 24,

2283–2286, 1997.

[48] Shaer et al. Global and Regional Ionospheric model using GPS double diﬀerence

phase observable. IGS worksh. Proc. 77–91, 1997.

[49] Schaer, S., Gurtner, W. and Feltens, J., IONEX: The IONosphere Map EXchange

Format Version 1. Proceeding of the IGS AC Workshop, Darmstadt, Germany,

February 9-11; Editor J.W.Dow, 233–247, 1998.

[50] Shan, S.J., Lin, J.Y., Kuo, F.S. et al. GPS phase ﬂuctuation observed along the

American sector during low irregularity activity months of 1997-2000. Earth, Planets

and Space, 54(2), 141–152, 2002.

[51] Skone, S., and M. de Jong, The impact of geomagnetic substorms on GPS receiver

performance. Earth, Planets and Space, 52, 1067–1071, 2000.

[52] Skone, S. and M. de Jong, Limitations in GPS receiver tracking performance

under ionospheric scintillation. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, Part A, 26/6-8,

613–621, 2001.

[53] Spoelstra, T. A., Kelder, H., Eﬀects produced by the ionosphere on radio interfer-

ometry. Radio Sci., 19, pp. 779–788, 1984.

[54] Thompson, R., Moran, J. and Swenson, Dj. Interferometry and Synthesis in Radio

Astronomy. John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1986.

[55] Warnart, R. The study of the TEC and its irrigularities using a regional network

of GPS stations. IGS worksh. Proc. 249–263, 1995.

[56] Wilson, B. D., Mannucci, A. J. and Edwards, C. D., Subdaily northern hemisphere

maps using the IGS GPS network. Radio Sci., 30, 639–648, 1995.

[57] Yakovlev, O. I. The Propagation of Radio Waves in Space. Moscow: Nauka, 1985,

[58] Yakubov, V. P. Doppler Very-Long-Baseline Interferometry. Tomsk: Vodolei, 1997,

p. 214.

p. 246.

Table 1: Statistics of experiments for mid-latitudes

N

Date

number m

n

%

%

nT

K p

max

Day

Dst

,

hP i

P

,

max

max

1

29.07.1999

210

160

1653

0.017

0.17

-40

3

2

9.01.2000

009

323

4330

0.06

0.27

-13

{

3

6.04.2000

097

243

1949

0.67

2.4

-293

8

4

15.07.2000

197

306

4114

0.34

4

-295

9

This figure "fig1sl.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0212046v1

G

(cid:23)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:24)(cid:3)1
(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:24)(cid:3)(

GQ (cid:21)(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:3)NP

(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:19)

D

K
W
U
R
1

(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)

P
N
(cid:3)
(cid:15)
\

(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:19)

(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:19)

E

(cid:19)

 (cid:23)(cid:19)(cid:3)1
(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:19)(cid:3)(

(cid:19)

(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:19)

(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:19)

(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:19)

(cid:23)(cid:19)(cid:19)

(cid:24)(cid:19)(cid:19)

[(cid:15)(cid:3)NP(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(DVW
(cid:3)(cid:3)GH (cid:23)(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:3)NP

F

 (cid:23)(cid:19)(cid:3)1
(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:24)(cid:3)(

Figure 2: Geometry of an elementary GIM cell. Nodes of the cell are denoted

a, b, c, and d. The cell size is determined by the values of d

= 279 km and

n

of d

dependent on the cell's location latitude.

e

This figure "Fig3sl.jpg" is available in "jpg"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/physics/0212046v1

z

To GPS Satellite

P

r

,s

.s

hmax

y, N

x, E

Figure 4: Schematic representation of the transionospheric sounding geom-

etry. The axes z , y and x are directed, respectively, zenithward, northward

(N ) and eastward (E ). P { point of intersection of Line-of-Sight (LOS )

to the satellite with a horizontal plane at the height of the maximum of the

ionospheric F

{ region h

; S { subionospheric point; and (cid:2)

, (cid:11)

{ azimuth

2

max

s

s

and elevation of the direction r along LOS to the satellite.

(cid:3)-XO\(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:28)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)-XO\(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)

Z

(cid:19)(cid:3)

(cid:22)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:26)(cid:3)
1(cid:30)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:28)(cid:3)
&26$(cid:15)(cid:3)351(cid:19)(cid:23)

(cid:19)(cid:3)(

(cid:19)(cid:3)

(cid:22)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:25)(cid:3)
1(cid:30)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:26)(cid:3)
%/<7(cid:30)(cid:3)351(cid:21)(cid:22)

(cid:19)(cid:3)(

H

-10

2 0

2 1
7LPH(cid:15)(cid:3)87

2 2

I

-4

-3

)(cid:19)(cid:3)

-2

-4

-3

-2

Q (cid:21)(cid:24)(cid:26)
u =- 1.87

1

0

-1

1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5

-2

-3

-4

-5

-6

-5

-6

-7

-8

U
C
E
T

 
,
)
t
(
I
 

d

U
C
E
T

 
,
)
F
(
S

 
g
l

s
/

U
C
E
T

 
,
)
F
(
S

 
g
l

m

/

U
C
E
T

 
,
)
F
(
S

 
g
l

1 0

1 1
7LPH(cid:15)(cid:3)87

1 2

E

G,

’

’
OJ(cid:3)6(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:11))(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:12)(cid:3)

Q (cid:20)(cid:23)
u =- 1.95

G,(cid:18)GW

I

1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4

F

(cid:16)(cid:21)

(cid:16)(cid:22)

(cid:16)(cid:23)

(cid:16)(cid:24)

G

(cid:16)(cid:22)

(cid:16)(cid:23)

(cid:16)(cid:24)

P

(cid:3)
(cid:15)
(cid:12)
)
(cid:11)
6
(cid:3)
J
O

]
+
P

(cid:3)
(cid:15)
(cid:12)
)
(cid:11)
6
(cid:3)
J
O

Q
L
P
F
U
D
(cid:3)
(cid:15)
(cid:12)
)
(cid:11)
6
(cid:3)
J
O

10

0

1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5

-2

-3

-4

-5

-6

-5

-6

-7

-8

u =- 0.98

u =- 0.84

(cid:16)(cid:23)

(cid:16)(cid:22)

(cid:16)(cid:21)

(cid:16)(cid:23)

(cid:16)(cid:22)

(cid:16)(cid:21)

K

G,(cid:18)G[

u =- 1.13

u =- 1.0

-4.0 -3 .5 -3.0 -2 .5 -2.0

OJ(cid:3))(cid:15)(cid:3)=p

-4.0 -3 .5 -3.0 -2 .5 -2.0

OJ(cid:3))(cid:15)(cid:3)=p

(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:25)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:23)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)7(cid:15)(cid:3)PLQ(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:25)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:23)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)7(cid:15)(cid:3)PLQ

(cid:20)
(cid:19)
(cid:16)(cid:20)
(cid:16)(cid:21)
(cid:16)(cid:22)
(cid:16)(cid:23)

J

(cid:16)(cid:21)

(cid:16)(cid:22)

(cid:16)(cid:23)

(cid:16)(cid:24)

(cid:16)(cid:22)

(cid:16)(cid:23)

(cid:16)(cid:24)

s
s
a
s
s
e

f

2 2

g

h

1 0
8
6
4
2
0

0 .3
0 .2
0 .1
0 .0
-0 .1
-0 .2
-0 .3

5 0

0

3 0

1 5

0

a

b

1 6

c

d

3 0

2 0

1 0

1 0

0

5

0

-5

-1 0

0

6 0

3 0

0

I(t), T E C U

     W E S 2
Ju ly 1 5 , 2 0 0 0

I(t), T E C U

    W E S 2
Ju ly 1 5 , 2 0 0 0

d I(t), T E C U

d I(t), T E C U

1 4

1 5
T im e, U T

1 0 0

P (  )

2 0

2 1
T im e, U T

P (  )

1 0 0
A p ril 6 , 2 0 0 0                                       Ju ly  1 5 , 2 0 0 0
1 0 -1 2  U T                                             1 0 -1 2  U T
n = 3 5 8                                                   n = 2 2 7

5 0

P (  )

P (  )

A p ril 6 , 2 0 0 0                                       Ju ly  1 5 , 2 0 0 0
2 0 -2 2  U T                                             2 0 -2 2  U T
n = 1 7 7                                                   n = 3 8 0

0 .0

0 .1

0 .2

, T E C U

0 .3

0 .0

0 .1
0 .2
 , T E C U

0 .3

Figure 6: Time dependencies of the "vertical" TEC I (t), measured at station

WES2 { a) prior to the onset of the geomagnetic disturbance of July 15, 2000,

and at station WES2 thereafter { e). The dI (t) variations (cid:12)ltered from the

I (t) series by removing the trend with a 60-min window for this stations {

b); f ). For comparison, the dashed line in panels b and f plots the dI (t)

variations calculated from values of the pseudo-range C 1 and of the phase

L1. Distributions P ((cid:14) ) of the standard deviation (cid:14) of the TEC variations

obtained in phase measurements at two frequencies L1 (cid:0) L2 and at the L1

only { c, d, g, h.

d
d
d
d
d
d
Ju ly 2 9,1999                               Jan u ary 9, 2000
                             0-36 0 0  E

1 .0

P (t), %

1 .0

P (t),%

d

n= 7 65

5 0 -80  0  N

n = 1 1 09

a

b

P (t) ,%

P (t),%

3 0 -5 0  0  N
0 .2
n = 16 5 3                                                          n = 43 3 0

P (t),%

3 .0

c
3 0 0  S  - 3 0  0  N
n = 87 9                                            n = 69 4

P (t),%

2 .0

e

f

0 .5

0 .0

0 .3

0 .1

0 .0

1 .0

0 .0

0 .5

0 .0

0 .3

0 .2

0 .1

0 .0

3 .0

2 .0

1 .0

0 .0

(cid:14)

0

6

1 2

1 8

2 4

0

6

1 2

1 8

2 4

T im e, L T

T im e, L T

Figure 7: Local time LT-dependence of the relative mean slip density P (t),

obtained by averaging the data from all GPS satellites in the longitude range

0 (cid:0) 360

E irrespective of the type of GPS receivers for the magnetically quiet

days of July 29, 1999 (at the left), and January 9, 2000 (at the right): a, d {

high latitudes 50 (cid:0) 80

N; b, e { mid-latitudes 30 (cid:0) 50

N; and c, f { equatorial

(cid:14)

(cid:14)

zone 30

S-30

N.

(cid:14)

(cid:14)

A p ril 6 , 2 0 0 0                        J u ly  1 5 , 2 0 0 0

H (t), n T

a
Irk u tsk                                                Irk u tsk

H (t), n T

e

S S C

S S C

D st, n T

D st, n T

b
d D st/d t, n T /h o u r
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6

f
d D st/d t, n T /h o u r
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6

P (t), %

c

P (t), %

g

L 1

3 0 0  - 5 0 0  N

L 1

3 0 0 - 5 0 0  N

2 0 0 0  - 3 0 0 0  E

0 .5

2 0 0 0  - 3 0 0 0  E

P (t),% ;    A (t), T E C U

P (t),% ;    A (t), T E C U

L 1 -L 2

L 1 -L 2

1 .0
n = 1 3 0 2                                               n = 2 5 4 6

3 0 0
2 0 0
1 0 0
0
-1 0 0
-2 0 0
-3 0 0
-4 0 0

1 0 0

0

-1 0 0

-2 0 0

-3 0 0

1 .0

d
1 .5

0 .0

4 .0

2 .0

0 .5

0 .0

0 .0

h

1 .0

0 .5

0 .0

2 0 0
1 0 0
0
-1 0 0
-2 0 0
-3 0 0
-4 0 0

1 0 0

0

-1 0 0

-2 0 0

-3 0 0

1 .0

0 .5

0 .0

3 .0

2 .0

1 .0

0 .0

0

6

1 2
T im e , U T

1 8

2 4

0

6

1 2
T im e , U T

1 8

2 4

Figure 8: Variations of the H -component of the geomagnetic (cid:12)eld record at

station Irkutsk { a), Dst { b), thick line, and the dependence of the time

derivative d(Dst(t))=dt { b, dashed line, during the magnetic storm of April

6, 2000. The UT-dependence of the relative mean L1 (cid:0) L2 slip density P (t)

{ d, thick line. For comparison, the panel c) plots the relative mean L1

slip density P (t). The same dependencies for a magnetic storm of July 15,

2000 - e, f, g, h. The SSC times 16:42 UT and 14:37 UT are shown by a

vertical bar. For comparison, the dashed line in panels d and h plots the

dependencies A(t) of the TEC variation intensity obtained for the same set

of stations as in the case of P (t).

A p ril 6 , 2 0 0 0                            J u ly  1 5 , 2 0 0 0
                 3 0  - 5 0 0  N ; 0  - 3 6 0 0  E
P (t),%

P (t),%
a                                  d

2 .0

n = 9 2 0                                                   n = 1 3 5 6

5 0 -8 0 0  N  

P (t),%  ; A (t), T E C U

b                                  e
P (t),%  ; A (t), T E C U
3 0 -5 0 0  N

0 .8

1 .5

n = 1 9 4 9                                                 n = 4 1 1 4

P (t),%

c                                  f

P (t),%

2 .0

3 0 0  S -3 0 0  N

n = 7 8 3                                                n = 8 9 2

1 .0

0 .0

1 .0

0 .0

0 .4

0 .8

0 .0

0 .0

0 .6

0 .4

0 .2

0 .0

3 .0

1 .5

0 .0

3 .0

1 .5

0 .0

5 .0

2 .5

0 .0

0

6

1 2

1 8

2 4

0

6

1 2

1 8

2 4

T im e , L T

T im e , L T

Figure 9: Same as in Figure 3, but for the magnetic storms on April 6 (at

the left) and July 15, 2000 (at the right) at mid latitudes. For comparison,

the dashed line in panels b and e plots the dependencies A(t) of the TEC

variation intensity obtained for the same set of stations as in the case of P (t).

        A p ril 6 , 2 0 0 0
 3 0 -5 0 0 N ; 2 0 0 -3 0 0 0 E

L 1 -L 2                                           L 1

a                                     d
P (t),%

P (t),%

A S H T E C H

n = 5 9 5                                                n = 8 1 7

P (t),%

b                                     e
P (t),%

T R IM B L E

n = 6 0 6                                                n = 1 7 2 1

P (t),%

c                                     f
P (t),%

A O A

n = 5 4 6                                                n = 6 5 0

0 .4 0

1 .0 0

0 .5 0

0 .0 0

0 .3 5
0 .3 0
0 .2 5
0 .2 0
0 .1 5
0 .1 0
0 .0 5
0 .0 0

0 .6 0

0 .2 0

0 .0 0

1 .5 0

1 .0 0

0 .5 0

0 .0 0

2 .2 5

1 .5 0

0 .7 5

0 .0 0

8 .0 0

4 .0 0

0 .0 0

0

6

1 2
T im e , U T

1 8

2 4

0

6

1 2
T im e , U T

1 8

2 4

Figure 10: UT-dependencies of the relative mean slip density P (t) of L1 (cid:0) L2

phase measurements (at the left) and phase measurements of L1 only (at

the right) for a ma jor magnetic storm of April 6, 2000 (ASHTECH { a, d,

TRIMBLE { b, e, and c, f { AOA receivers).

           A p ril 6 , 2 0 0 0
3 0 0 S  - 3 0  0 N ; 0 0 - 36 0 0 E
L 1 -L 2                                           L 1

a                                    d
P (t),%

P (t),%

A S H T E C H

n = 2 3 9                                             n = 3 0 8

P (t),%

b                                     e
P (t),%

T R IM B L E

n = 9 6                                             n = 1 0 8

P (t),%

c                                    f
P (t),%

A O A

n = 4 0 8                                             n = 4 0 8

1 .0 0

0 .5 0

0 .0 0

1 .0 0

0 .5 0

0 .0 0

0 .8 0

0 .6 0

0 .4 0

0 .2 0

0 .0 0

4 .0 0

2 .0 0

0 .0 0

4 .0 0

2 .0 0

0 .0 0

4 .0 0

2 .0 0

0 .0 0

0

6

1 2
T im e, U T

1 8

2 4

0

6

1 2
T im e, U T

1 8

2 4

Figure 11: Same as in Figure 10, but at the equatorial zone 30

S-30

N.

(cid:14)

(cid:14)

