2
0
0
2
 
c
e
D
 
5
2
 
 
]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
6
9
0
2
1
2
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Submarine Landslides and Local Tsunami Waves (Corinthos Gulf, Greece)

L.I.Lobkovskya, G.A.P apadopoulosb, I.A.Garagashc, O.R.Kozyrevd, and R.Kh.M azovad
(a) Institute of Oceanology, Russian Academy of Science, Moscow, Russia
(b) Institute of Geodynamics, National Observatory of Athens, Athens, Greece
(c)Institute of Physics of Earth, Russian Academy of Science, Moscow, Russia
(d) Nizhny Novgorod State Technical University, Nizhny Novgorod, Russia

It is considered a problem of submarine sediment slide which generates the surface water waves. To
simulate numerically the landslide motion it is used the method which permits to take into account
detailed rheological properties of slide body constituents. The numerical simulation of landslide-
generated surface water waves is performed on the basis of nonlinear shallow water equations. It
is studied a landslide behavior for two values of maximal friction angle. The detailed comparison
of landslide dynamics and evolution of landslide-generated surface water waves during sliding is
performed. Also, the evolution of dipolar water wave generated in the beginning of sediment sliding
is studied. It is obtained that this dipolar wave is then transformed in two wave groups: crest and
trough coming seaward and trough accompanied by crest coming to the shoreline. The second wave
group leads ﬁrstly to sea recession from the beach and only then to large runup (tsunami wave with
ﬁrst negative phase).

Large water waves produced by submarine land-
slides were observed in many regions of the world
for last 50 years (local tsunamis) ( see, e.g.
[1]).
For numerical simulation of landslide-generated
tsunami there were proposed a number of mod-
els, main of which are a rigid-body model and
viscous (visco-plastic) model (for review, see, e.g.
[2]). First model, because of its speciﬁcs, over-
estimates the water surface response to the sub-
marine perturbation while second model underes-
timates it. To simulate adequately the landslide-
induced tsunami it is necessary to use methodics
which take into account the both detailed struc-
ture of landslide body and mechanical characteris-
tics of slide-body constituents during sliding (see,
e.g.[3]). The character of disconsolidation of con-
stituents in sediment surface layer appears to be
a key factor which controls the localization pro-
cess of the plastic strain and thus the slope insta-
bility. The model numerical simulation of sliding
process at the continental slope was carried out for
a number of slope parameters. In particular, such
simulation of landslide induced tsunami was per-
formed for parameters of Corinthos Gulf, Greece
(see ﬁg.1, 2) where in 7 February 1963 it was ob-
served a damaging tsunami wave formed without
any seismic events: mass of unconsolidated sedi-
ments slumped into the sea water around of the
local river [4]. It is considered layer-by-layer slid-
ing of upper part of elastically-plastic sediment
layer on the slope surface which is formed dur-
ing the landslide process.
It is proposed a dis-
tinct interface between water and landslide body
with water density ρw(x, z) = const, and landslide
density is a function of coordinate ρs = ρs(x, z)
(see, ﬁg.1). The coordinate origin is taken at the
coastline, with x-axis at the undisturbed seawa-
ter level and directed seaward and with z-axis di-
rected upward. In the ﬁg.1 z = −h(x, t) is a vari-

FIG. 1: Model scheme for simulation of tsunami wave
generated by moving submarine landslide

able depth of seawater, z = −h(x, 0) = −hs(x, 0)
is a submarine slope proﬁle before initial action
(t = 0). D(x, t) is a landslide body thickness:
h(x, t) = hs(x, t) − D(x, t). The shape of seawa-
ter surface z = η(x, t),
η(x, 0) = 0. At simu-
lation it was used explicit ﬁnite-diﬀerence scheme
which permits to simulate the nonlinear behavior
of pore saturated sediments under conditions of
plastic ﬂow above yield stress. Also, possible ini-
tial action at the process (adequate to some seis-
mic action) was taken into account (see ﬁg.2, where
it is presented a geometrical scheme for numerical
simulation of landslide (ﬁg.2a) under the action of
earthquake with moderate size magnitude (equiv-
alent to slumping volume 57.000m3 in Corinthos
Gulf), ﬁg.2b).

It was used a layered model of sediments rested
on relatively rigid base. For each layer there were
taken a layer density, shear modulus, bulk mod-
ulus, cohesion, maximal friction angle, and ten-
sile strength. At the ﬁrst stage, it was made the
simulation of initial, preliminary stressed state of
slope with sediments formed under action of its

2

FIG. 2: a) Simulation scheme of submarine slope; up-
per layer is an elastically-plastic sediment mass rested
on elastic base; b) Change of base velocity during
earthquake with duration 6sec and frequency 3Hz;
maximal velocity is equal to 0.2m/sec corresponding
to earthquake magnitude equal 6

own weight and saturation with the water under
sea pressure. At the second stage, it was taken into
account the rheological eﬀect of decrease sediment
mass strength above yield stress, pore saturation
of sediment mass and possibility of landslide-mass
liquefaction under conditions of a seismic or any
external action. And ﬁnally, it was performed nu-
merical simulation of surface water waves (evolu-
tion and runup) on the basis of nonlinear system of
shallow water equations with using of constructed
explicit diﬀerence scheme with fulﬁlled stability
conditions. Dynamical interaction between land-
slide motion and surface waves was taken into ac-
count via continuity equation. The results are con-
sistent with those in conventional (rigid-body and
viscous-ﬂuid) model and agree qualitatively with
natural data. So, it was really observed the sea
recession (ﬁrst negative tsunami wave) in the re-
gion of estuary of the local river in Corinthos Gulf,
Greece where coastal strip have been slumped into
the sea water (see above).

In the work there are presented results of numer-
ical simulation for two values of maximal friction
angle φs : 20o and 32o (see below).
In ﬁg.3a, b
there are presented a picture of successive posi-
tion of landslide surface for several times with 10
sec interval (dashed curves) calculated for maxi-
mal friction angle φs: 20o and 32o, respectively.
Solid line corresponds to initial landslide shape
(t = 0). At given values of parameters in the
case φs = 20o,
landslide comes only ﬁnite dis-
tance, equal to 1200m. The duration of sliding
process may be determined from the time instant

FIG. 3: Evolution of submarine slope surface shape
o
o
.
; b) φs = 32
during landslide movement: a) φs = 20

o
FIG. 4: Shear strain distribution at φs = 20
10 sec; b) t = 40 sec.

a) t =

when velocity of forefront reaches zero, and is near
50 sec. Maximal velocity of landslide forefront in
this case is reached at near 40 sec and its value is
near 6m/sec. In contrast, rear part of the landslide
shifts to lower x. In the case φs = 32o, landslide
comes only near 750 m (ﬁg. 3b) and its maximal

velocity is essentially lower though it is reached
also at near 40 sec.

In ﬁg. 4a, b there are presented a shear strain
distribution in landslide body for maximal friction
angles φs = 20o for time 10 sec and 40 sec, re-
spectively. From numerical results, it’s seen that
in the case φs = 20o landslide forefront reaches
level of horizontal bottom, and horizontal region
near shoreline disappears so that landslide is plane
In the case of φs = 32o land-
up to shoreline.
slide don’t reach a horizontal bottom level so that
landslide shape is plane only in the middle part of
slope, and horizontal region near shoreline persists
(see, [1]).

For numerical simulation of landslide-generated
surface water waves it was used a system of shallow
water nonlinear equations with taking into account
the friction and Coriolis force

+ u

+ v

= −g

∂η
∂x

− r
H

upu2 + v2 + f v,

∂u
∂t

∂v
∂t

∂u
∂x

∂v
∂z

∂u
∂z

∂v
∂x

+ v

+ u

= −g

∂η
∂z

− r
H

vpu2 + v2 − f u,
(1)

where x, z are real space coordinates, t is the time,
u(x, t), v(x, t) are velocity vector components, η is
the surface elevation amplitude relative to undis-
turbed state, g is a gravity acceleration, H(x, t) =
h(x, t) + η(x, t) is a total depth, (h is a depth mea-
sured from undisturbed seawater level), r is a bed
friction coeﬃcient, f is a Coriolis force parameter.
Surface water waves were in fact generated by
moving submarine landslide because of continuity
equation in the form

∂(h + η)
∂t

= − ∂
∂x

((h + η)u) − ∂
∂z

((h + η)v)

(2)

To solve the system numerically it was used a
scheme constructed in analogy with those used in
one-dimensional case. Numerical simulation pro-
cess was based on splitting of diﬀerence operator:
equations on x and z are integrated separately at
two semi-steps in time. It was used a space dis-
persed pattern for diﬀerent presentation of vari-
ables. Th avoid the appearance of numerical in-
stability problem and necessity to use a ﬁltration
scheme it was applied a method with ﬁrst order in
time scheme. The Cartesian coordinate system is
taken so that total depth is positive in the region
of liquid phase and is equal to zero at the phase
interface (η = −h). So, negative values of H indi-
cate to solid phase (beach). To localize the bound-
ary it was used a linear extrapolation procedure.
Since it is known that upstream oriented schemes
are usually stable then it was used a conventional

3

FIG. 5: Surface water wave generation by submarine
landslide (maximal friction angle is φs = 20o).

procedure for advective terms of equations of mo-
tion and continuity. The procedure is based on
choosing of direction of space discretization.

In ﬁg.5 it is presented an evolution of surface wa-
ter waves (upper curves) generated by moving sub-
marine landslide (lower curves) for the case of max-
imal friction angle φs = 20o. The numbers near
upper curves (surface waves) correspond to those
near lower curves (position of landslide). There
arise two distinct wave groups: crest and trough
moving seaward, and second trough moving to a
beach. It is seen that wave crest velocity is notice-
ably higher than that of landslide forefront. The
picture is consistent with results of numerical sim-
ulation in conventional models (rigid body, viscous
ﬂuid, visco-plastic ﬂuid).

In ﬁg.6 there is presented an evolution of
landslide-induced surface water waves correspond-
ing to maximal friction angle φs = 20o with time
step 10 seconds. In the beginning, it is generated
a dipolar wave with trough oriented to a beach.
This dipolar wave moves in the deep water derec-
tion. But soon an additional crest in the region of
the trough appears which moves to a beach. Such
recession of the sea water indeed was observed in
the region where landslide occurs which phenom-
ena leads to anomalous tsunami with ﬁrst negative
phase [6, 7](depressive wave).

In conclusion, in contrast to kinematic method,
complete solution of problem with stress strained
state of slope at seismic action gives the possibil-
ity to estimate the distribution of residual strain
and displacement in overall sediment volume with
taking into account its possible liquefaction and
disconsolidation [5]. Numerical code FLAC, in
contrast to ﬁnite element method realizes an ex-
plicit ﬁnite diﬀerence scheme for solution of three-
dimensional (3D) problems in continuum mechan-
ics that permits one to simulate nonlinear behavior
of pore saturated mass under conditions of plastic
ﬂow above yield stress. For calculations, material

4

was divided to polyhedral elements in the limit of
grid corresponding to shape of calculated object.
Each element behaves itself according to action of
applied forces and edge’s restrictions. The grid is
frozen in material and moves together with it be-
ing undergone to ﬁnite strain and displacement.
Explicit Lagrange scheme of calculations guaran-
tees an accurate simulation and material ﬂow. A
key factor to control the process of localization
of plastic strain and related instability is a char-
acter of constituents composing the surface sedi-
ment layer. The essence of this phenomena is that
straining of real sediment layer after reaching of
destruction point is continued at decreasing stress,
i.e.
it occurs decrease of limit of strength at in-
crease of strain up to stress reaches some ﬁnite
or residual level. Process of sediment mass slid-
ing is essentially determined by friction angle. Ac-
cording to experiments, submarine sediments are
disconsolidated when reaching maximal strength.
Firstly, sediment mass is strained elastically but
when limit condition τ = τs = ccosφs − σsinφs is
fulﬁlled it begins to move. In result, friction angle
decreases from the peak value φ = φs in the maxi-
mal strain point, and it is established a new equi-
librium state at the level τ = τk = ccosφk −σsinφk
at residual value φ = φk [5]. Moreover, strength
decrease of sediment mass during the development
of plastic strain at static action is a key factor to
control a slope stability. In the case of neglecting of
the eﬀect of sediment mass strength decrease slope
displacements remains to be small which fact leads
to mistake conclusions. And for further agree-
ment of numerical simulation results with natural
data it is necessary to attract the detailed data
about inner structure of sediment formations in
landslide dangerous regions of slopes and landslide
constituent properties.

This work was supported in part by the Russian
Foundation for Basic Research (Grant No. 01-05-
64548).

FIG. 6: Evolution of surface water waves generated by
submarine landslide (maximal friction angle is φs =
o
20

).

[1] Garagash I.A., Lobkovsky L.I., Kozyrev O.R., and
Mazova R.Kh. Generation and run-up of tsunami
wave under moving of submarine landslide //
Okeanologiya 2003 (in press).

[2] Fine I.V., Rabinovich A.B., Kulikov E.A., Thom-
son R.E., and Bornhold B.D. Numerical mod-
elling of landslide-generated tsunamis with applica-
tion to the Skagway Harbor tsunami of November 3,
1994 // in: Proc. of Int.Conf.on Tsunamis, Paris,
France. 1998. 212-243.

[3] Mulder T., and Alexander J. The physical character
of suaqueous sedimentary density ﬂows and their
deposits // Sedimentology. 2001. 48, 269-299.
[4] Koutitas C.G., and Papadopoulos G.A. Numerical
simulation of the aseismically induced tsunami of 7
February 1963 in the western Corinthos Bay // in:

Proc of Int.Conf.on Tsunamis, Paris, France. 1998,
248-254.

[5] Garagash I.A., and Lobkovsky L.I. Geomechanical
estimation of landslide processes and their monitor-
ing at the Black Sea slopes in connection with the
realization of the ”Blue Flow” project // in Proc.of
6th Int. Scientiﬁc and Industrial Conference ” Mod-
ern Metods and Tools for Oceanological Research”,
Moscow, Russia, 2000, 5-15.

[6] Pelinovsky E.N., and Mazova R.Kh. Exact analyti-
cal solution of nonlinear problems of tsunami wave
runup on slopes with diﬀerent proﬁles // Natural
Hazards. 1992. 6, 227-249.

[7] Soloviev S.L., and Mazova R.Kh.On inﬂuence of
sign of leading tsunami wave on runup height on
the coast, Sci.Tsunami Hazards 1994, 12, 25-31

